ELEMENTS OF CRITICISM.

VOLUME III.

EDINBURGH: Printed for A. MILLAR, London; AND A. KINCAID and J. BELL,
Edinburgh. MDCCLXII.

ELEMENTS OF CRITICISM.
CHAP. XIX. COMPARISONS.
COMPARISONS, as observed above Chap. 8.
, serve two different purposes: When addressed to the understanding, their
purpose is to instruct; when to the heart, their purpose is to give pleasure.
With respect to the latter, a comparison may be employed to produce various
pleasures by different means. First, by suggesting some unusual resemblance or
contrast: second, by setting an object in the strongest light: third, by
associating an object with others that are agreeable: fourth, by elevating an
object: and, fifth, by depressing it. And that comparisons may produce various
pleasures by these different means, appears from what is said in the chapter
above cited; and will be made still more evident by examples, which shall be
given after premising some general observations.

An object of one sense cannot be compared to an object of another; for such
objects are totally separated from each other, and have no circumstance in
common to admit either resemblance or contrast. Objects of hearing may be
compared, as also of taste, and of touch. But the chief fund of comparison are
objects of sight; because, in writing or speaking, things can only be compared
in idea, and the ideas of visible objects are by far more lively than those of
any other sense.

It has no good effect to compare things by way of simile that are of the same
kind, nor to contrast things of different kinds. The reason is given in the
chapter cited above; and the reason shall be illustrated by examples. The first
is a resemblance instituted betwixt two objects so nearly related as to make
little or no impression. This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew,
They join, they thicken, and the assault renew;
Unmoved th'embody'd Greeks their fury dare,
And fixed support the weight of all the war;
Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
They tugg, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
One foot, one inch, of the contended field:
Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
Iliad, xii. 505. Another from Milton labors under the same defect. Speaking
of the fallen angels searching for mines of gold: A numerous brigade hastened:
as when bands
Of pioneers with spade and pick-ax armed
Forerun the royal camp to trench a field
Or cast a rampart.


The next shall be of things contrasted that are of different kinds. Queen.
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformed and weak? Has Bolingbroke deposed
Thine intellect? Has he been in thy heart?
The lion, dying, thrusts forth his paw,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o'erpower'd: and will thou, pupil-like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility?

Richard II. act 5. sc. 1. This comparison has scarce any force. A man and a
lion are of different species; and there is no such resemblance betwixt them in
general, as to produce any strong effect by contrasting particular attributes
or circumstances.

A third general observation is, That abstract terms can never be the subject
of comparison, otherwise than by being personified. Shakespeare compares
adversity to a toad, and slander to the bite of a crocodile; but in such
comparisons these abstract terms must be imagined sensible beings.

I now proceed to illustrate by particular instances the different means by
which comparison can afford pleasure; and, in the order above established, I
shall begin with those instances that are agreeable by suggesting some unusual
resemblance or contrast: Sweet are the uses of Adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in her head.

As you like it, act 2. sc. 1. Gardener. Bolingbroke has seized the wasteful
King.
What pity is it that he had not so trimmed
And dressed his land, as we this garden dress,
And wound the bark, the skin of our fruit trees;
Lest, being over proud with sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself.
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear, and he to taste
Their fruits of duty. All superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste and idle hours have quite thrown down.

Richard II. act 3. sc. 7. See, how the Morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun;
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimmed like a yonker prancing to his love.

Second Part Henry VI. act 2. sc. 1. Brutus. O Cassius, you are yoked with a
lamb,
That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.

Julius Caesar, act 4. sc. 3. Thus they their doubtful consulations dark
Ended, rejoicing in their matchless chief:
As when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds,
Ascending, while the North Wind sleeps, overspread
Heaven's cheerful face, the lowering element
Scowls over the darkened landscape, snow, and shower;
If chance the radiant sun with farewell sweet
Extend his ev'ning-beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
Paradise Lost, book 2.

The last exertion of courage compared to the blaze of a lamp before
extinguishing, Tasso Gierusalem, canto 19. st. 22. As the bright stars, and
milky way,
Showed by the night, are hid by day:
So we in that accomplished mind,
Helped by the night, new graces find,
Which, by the splendour of her view
Dazzled before, we never knew.
Waller.

None of the foregoing similes, as it appears to me, have the effect to add any
luster to the principal subject; and therefore the pleasure they afford, must
arise from suggesting resemblances that are not obvious: I mean the chief
pleasure; for undoubtedly a beautiful subject introduced to form the simile
affords a separate pleasure, which is felt in the similes mentioned,
particularly in that cited from Milton.

The next effect of a comparison in the order mentioned, is to place an object
in a strong point of view; which I think is done sensibly in the following
similes. As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
From side to side the trembling balance nods,
(While some laborious matron, just and poor,
With nice exactness weighs her woolly store),
Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
Each equal weight; nor this nor that descends:
So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
With fates prevailing, turned the scale of fight.
Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
Iliad, b. xii. 521. Ut flos in septis secretis nascitur hortis,
Ignotus pecori, nullo contusus aratro,
Quem mulcent aurae, firmat sol, educat imber,
Multi illum pueri, multae cupiere puellae.
Idem, cum tenui carptus defloruit ungui,
Nulli illum pueri, nullae cupiere puellae.
Sic virgo, dum intacta manet, dum cara suis; sed
Cum castum amisit, polluto corpore, florem,
Nec pueris jucunda manner, nec cara puellis.
Catullus. The imitation of this beautiful simile by Ariosto, canto 1. st. 42.
falls short of the original. It is also in part imitated by Pope Dunciad, b. 4.
l. 405.
. Lucetta. I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
But qualify the fires extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.

Julia. The more thou damm'st it up, the more it burns:
The current, that with gentle murmur glides,
Thou know, being stopped, impatiently does rage;
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with the enameled stones
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage.
And so by many winding nooks he strays
With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
Then let me go, and hinder-not my course;
I Will be as patient as a gentle stream,
And make a pastime of each weary step
Till the last step have brought me to my love;
And there I Will rest, as, after much turmoil,
A blessed soul does in Elysium.

Two Gentlemen of Verona, act 2. sc. 10. -- She never told her love,
But let concealment, like a worm in the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought;
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at Grief.

Twelfth-Night, act 2. sc. 6. York. Then, as I said, the Duke, great
Boling-broke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed,
Which his aspiring rider seemed to know,
With slow but stately pace, kept on his course:
While all tongues cried, God save thee, Boling-broke.

Duchess. Alas! poor Richard, where rides he the while?

York. As in a theater, the eyes of men,
After a well-grac'd actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious:
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on Richard; no man cried, God save him!
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home;
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head;
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience;
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steeled
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted;
And barbarism itself have pitied him.

Richard II. act 5. sc. 3. Northumberland. How does my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so wo-be-gone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him, half his Troy was burned;
But Priam found the fire, ere he his tongue:
And I my Percy's death, ere thou report'st it.

Second Part Henry IV. act 1. sc. 3. Why, then I do but dream on sov'reignty,
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he will lave it dry to have his way:
So do I wish, the crown being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keep me from it,
And so (I say) I Will cut the causes off,
Flattering my mind with things impossible.

Third Part Henry VI. act 3. sc. 3. -- Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more.

Macbeth, act 5. sc. 5. O thou Goddess,
Thou divine Nature! how thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! they are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
(Their royal blood inchaf'd) as the rud'st wind,
That by the top does take the mountain-pine,
And make him stoop to the vale.

Cymbeline, act 4. sc. 4. The sight obtained of the city of Jerusalem by the
Christian army, compared to that of land discovered after a long voyage,
Tasso's Gierusalem, canto 3. st. 4. The fury of Rinaldo subsiding when not
opposed, to that of wind or water when it has a free passage, canto 20. st. 58.

As words convey but a faint and obscure notion of great numbers, a poet, to
give a high notion of the object he describes with regard to number, does well
to compare it to what is familiar and commonly known. Thus Homer Book 2. l. 111.
compares the Grecian army in point of number to a swarm of bees. In another
passage Book 2. l. 551.
he compares it to that profusion of leaves and flowers which appear in the
spring, or of insects in a summer's evening. And Milton, -- As when the potent
rod
Of Amram's son in Egypt's evil day
Waved round the coast, up called a pitchy cloud
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind,
That over the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like night, and darkened all the land of Nile:
So numberless were those bad angels seen,
Hovering on wing under the cope of hell,
'Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding fires.
Paradise Lost, book 1. Such comparisons have, by some writers See Vidae
Poetic. lib. 2. l. 282.
, been condemned for the lowness of the images introduced: but surely without
reason; for, with regard to numbers, they put the principal subject in a strong
light.

The foregoing comparisons operate by resemblance; others have the same effect
by contrast: York. I am the last of Noble Edward's sons,
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first;
In war, was never lion raged more fierce;
In peace, was never gentle lamb more mild;
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou have; for even so looked he,
Accomplished with the number of thy hours.
But when he frowned, it was against the French,
And not against his friends. His noble hand
Did win what he did spend; and spent not that
Which his triumphant father's hand had won.
His hands were guilty of no kindred's blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
Oh, Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

Richard II. act 2. sc. 3.

Milton has a peculiar talent in embellishing the principal subject by
associating it with others that are agreeable, which is the third end of a
comparison. Similes of this kind have, beside, a separate effect: they
diversify the narration by new images that are not strictly necessary to the
comparison: they are short episodes, which, without distracting us from the
principal subject, afford great delight by their beauty and variety: He scarce
had ceased, when the superior fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield,
Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orb
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views
At evening from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands,
Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe.
Milton, b. 1. -- Thus far these, beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread commander. He, above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower; his form had yet not lost
All her original brightness, nor appeared
Less than archangel ruined, and the excess
Of glory obscured: as when the sun new-risen
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams; or from behind the moon
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs.
Milton, b. 1. As when a vulture on Imaus bred,
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of lambs, or yeanling kids,
On hills where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams,
But in his way lights on the barren plains
Of Sericana, where Chinese drive
With sails and wind their cany wagons light:
So on this windy sea of land, the fiend
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey.
Milton, b. 3. -- Yet higher than their tops
The verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung:
Which to our general sire gave prospect large
Into this nether empire neighboring round.
And higher than that wall, a circling row
Of goodliest trees laden with fairest fruit,
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,
Appeared, with gay enameled colors mixed,
On which the sun more glad impressed his beams
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
When God has show'r'd the earth; so lovely seemed
That landscape: and of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambic, off at sea North-east winds blow
Sabean odor from the spicy shore
Of Arabie the Blessed; with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a league,
Cheered with the grateful smell, old Ocean smiles,
Milton, b. 4. With regard to similes of this kind, it will readily occur to
the reader, that when the resembling subject or circumstance is once properly
introduced in a simile, the mind passes easily to the new objects, and is
transitorily amused with them, without feeling any disgust at the slight
interruption. Thus, in fine weather, the momentary excursions of a traveller
for agreeable prospects or sumptuous buildings, cheer his mind, relieve him
from the langour of uniformity, and without much lengthening his journey in
reality, shorten it greatly in appearance.

Next of comparisons that aggrandize or elevate. These make stronger
impressions than any other sort; the reason of which may be gathered from the
chapter of grandeur and sublimity, and, without reasoning, will be evident from
the following instances. As when a flame the winding valley fills,
And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills,
Then over the stubble up the mountain flies,
Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
This way and that, the spreading torrent roars;
So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores.
Arou^d him wide, immense destruction pours,
And earth is deluged with the ^anguine showers.
Iliad xx. 569. Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,
Over slaughtered heroes, and over rolling steeds.
As when avenging flames with fury driven
On guilty towns exert the wrath of Heaven,
The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly,
And the red vapors purple all the sky.
So raged Achilles: Death, and dire dismay,
And toils, and terrors, filled the dreadful day.
Iliad xxi. 605. Methinks, King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock,
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.

Richard II. act. 3. sc. 5. I beg peculiar attention to the following simile,
for a reason that shall be mentioned. Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
The close-compacted legions urged their way:
Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
A rock's round fragment flies with fury born,
(Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends)
Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
Still gathering force, it smoaks; and urged amain,
Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
There stops -- So Hector. Their whole force he proved,
Resistless when he raged; and when he stopped, unmoved.
Iliad xiii. 187. The image of a falling rock is certainly not elevating See
chap. 4.
. Yet undoubtedly the foregoing image fires and swells the mind. It is grand
therefore, if not sublime. And that there is a real, though delicate
distinction, betwixt these two feelings, will be illustrated from the following
simile. So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On the proud crest of Satan, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his shield
Such ruin intercept. Ten paces huge
He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee
His massy spear upstaid; as if on earth
Winds under ground or waters forcing way
Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat
Half sunk with all pines.
Milton, b. 6.

A comparison by contrast may contribute to grandeur or elevation, not less
than by resemblance; of which the following comparison of Lucan is a remarkable
instance. Victrix causa diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. Considering that the
Heathen deities possessed a rank but one degree above that of mankind, I think
it scarce possible, by a single expression, to elevate or dignify more one of
the human species, than is done by this comparison. I am sensible, at the same
time, that such a comparison among Christians, who entertain juster notions of
the Deity, would justly be reckoned extravagant and absurd.

The last article mentioned, is that of lessening or depressing a hated or
disagreeable object; which is effectually done by resembling it to any thing
that is low or despicable. Thus Milton, in his description of the rout of the
rebel-angels, happily expresses their terror and dismay in the following
simile. -- As a herd
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged
Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And crystal wall of heaven, which opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
Into the wasteful deep; the monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of heaven.
Milton, b. 6. In the same view, Homer, I think, may be defended, in comparing
the shouts of the Trojans in battle, to the noise of cranes Beginning of book 3.
, and to the bleating of a flock of sheep Book 4. l. 498.
: and it is no objection, that these are low images; for by opposing the noisy
march of the Trojans to the silent and manly march of the Greeks, he certainly
intended to lessen the former. Addison Guardian No. 153.
, imagining the figure that men make in the sight of a superior being, takes
opportunity to mortify their pride by comparing them to a swarm of pismires.

A comparison that has none of the good effects mentioned in this discourse,
but is built upon common and trifling circumstances, makes a mighty silly
figure: "Non sum nescius, grandia consilia a multis plerumque causis, ceu magna
navigia a plurimis remis, impelli Strada de bello Belgico.
."

By this time I imagine the different purposes of comparison, and the various
impressions it makes on the mind, are sufficiently illustrated by proper
examples. This was an easy work. It is more difficult to lay down rules about
the propriety or impropriety of comparisons; in what circumstances they may be
introduced, and in what circumstances they are out of place. It is evident,
that a comparison is not proper upon every occasion; a man in his cool and
sedate moments, is not disposed to poetical flights, nor to sacrifice truth and
reality to the delusive operations of the imagination; far less is he so
disposed, when oppressed with cares, or interested in some important
transaction that occupies him totally. The region of comparison and of all
figurative expression, lies betwixt these two extremes. It is observable, that
a man, when elevated or animated by any passion, is disposed to elevate or
animate all his objects: he avoids familiar names, exalts objects by
circumlocution and metaphor, and gives even life and voluntary action to
inanimate beings. In this warmth of mind, the highest poetical flights are
indulged, and the boldest similes and metaphors relished It is accordingly
observed by Longinus, in his treatise of the Sublime, that the proper time for
metaphor, is when the passions are so swelled as to hurry on like a torrent.
. But without soaring so high, the mind is frequently in a tone to relish
chaste and moderate ornament; such as comparisons that set the principal object
in a strong point of view, or that embellish and diversify the narration. In
general, when by any animating passion, whether pleasant or painful, an impulse
is given to the imagination; we are in that condition wonderfully disposed to
every sort of figurative expression, and in particular to comparisons. This in
a great measure is evident from the comparisons already mentioned; and shall be
further illustrated by other examples. Love, for example, in its infancy,
rousing the imagination, prompts the heart to display itself in figurative
language, and in similes: Troilus. Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we?
Her bed is India, there she lies, a pearl:
Between our Ilium, and where she resides,
Let it be called the wild and wandering flood;
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, our convoy, and our bark.

Troilus and Cressida, act 1. sc. 1. Again, Come, gentle Night; come, loving
black-brow'd Night!
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him, and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine,
That all the world shall be in love with Night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.

Romeo and Juliet, act 3. sc. 4. The dread of a misfortune, however imminent,
involving always some doubt and uncertainty, agitates the mind, and excites the
imagination: Wolsey. -- Nay, then, farewell;
I Have touched the highest point of all my greatness,
And from that full meridian of my glory
I haste now to my setting. I shall fall,
Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
And no man see me more.

Henry VIII. act 3. sc. 4.

But it will be a better illustration of the present head, to give examples
where comparisons are improperly introduced. I have had already occasion to
observe, that similes are not the language of a man in his ordinary state of
mind, going about the common affairs of life. For that reason, the following
speech of a gardener to his servants, is extremely improper. Go bind thou up
you dangling apricocks
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an executioner,
Cut off the heads of too-fast-growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
All must be even in our government.

Richara II. act 3. sc. 7. The fertility of Shakespeare's vein betrays him
frequently into this error. There is the same impropriety in another simile of
his: Hero. Good Margaret, run thee into the parlour;
There shall thou find my cousin Beatrice;
Whisper her ear, and tell her, I and Ursula
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her; say, that thou overheard'st us:
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter; like to favorites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it.

Much ado about nothing, act 3. sc. 1. Rooted grief, deep anguish, terror,
remorse, despair, and all the severe dispiriting passions, are declared
enemies, perhaps not to figurative language in general, but undoubtedly to the
pomp and solemnity of comparison. Upon this account the simile pronounced by
young Rutland under terror of death from an inveterate enemy, and praying
mercy, is unnatural: So looks the pent-up lion over the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks insulting over his prey,
And so he comes to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threat'ning-look.

Third part Henry VI. act 1. sc. 5. Nothing appears more out of place, or more
aukwardly introduced, than the following simile. Lucia. -- Farewell, my Portius,
Farewell, though death is in the word, for-ever!

Portius. Stay, Lucia, stay; what do thou say, for-ever?

Lucia. Have I not sworn? If, Portius, thy success
Must throw thy brother on his fate, farewell:
Oh, how shall I repeat the word for-ever!

Portius. Thus, over the dying lamp the unsteady flame
Hangs quivering on a point, leaps off by fits,
And falls again, as loath to quit its hold.
-- Thou must not go, my soul still hovers over thee,
And cannot get loose.

Cato, act 3. sc. 2. Nor does the simile which closes the first act of the same
tragedy, make its appearance with a much better grace; the situation there
represented, being too dispiriting for a simile. A simile is improper for one
who dreads the discovery of a secret machination. Zara. The mute not yet
returned! Ha! 'twas the King,
The King that parted hence! frowning he went;
His eyes like meteors rolled, then darted down
Their red and angry beams; as if his sight
Would, like the raging Dog Star, scorch the earth,
And kindle ruin in its course.

Mourning Bride, act 5. sc. 3. A man spent and dispirited after losing a
battle, is not disposed to heighten or illustrate his discourse by similes:
York. With this we charged again; but out! alas,
We bodg'd again; as I have seen a swan
With bootless labor swim against the tide,
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah! hark, the fatal followers do pursue.
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury.
The sands are numbered that make up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.

Third part Henry VI. act 1. sc. 6. Far less is a man disposed to similes who
is not only defeated in a pitched battle, but lies at the point of death
mortally wounded. Warwick. -- My mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows,
That I must yield my body to the earth,
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the ax's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle;
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree,
And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.

Third part Henry VI. act 5. sc. 3. Queen Katharine, deserted by the King and
in the deepest affliction upon her divorce, could not be disposed to any
sallies of imagination: and for that reason, the following simile, however
beautiful in the mouth of a spectator, is scarce proper in her own. I am the
most unhappy woman living,
Shipwrecked upon a kingdom, where no pity,
No friends, no hope! no kindred weep for me!
Almost no grave allowed me! like the lily,
That once was mistress of the field, and flourished,
I Will hang my head and perish.

King Henry VIII. act. 3. sc. 1.

Similes thus unseasonably introduced, are finely ridiculed in the Rehearsal:
Bays. Now here she must make a simile.


Smith. Where Is the necessity of that, Mr Bays?


Bays. Because she is surprised; that is a general rule; you must ever make a
simile when you are surprised; it is a new way of writing.




A comparison is not always faultless, even where it is properly introduced. I
have endeavored above to give a general view of the different ends to which a
comparison may contribute. A comparison, like other human productions, may fall
short of its end; and of this defect instances are not rare even among good
writers. To complete the present subject, it will be necessary to make some
observations upon such faulty comparisons. I begin with observing, that nothing
can be more erroneous than to institute a comparison too faint: a distant
resemblance or contrast, fatigues the mind with its obscurity instead of
amusing it, and tends not to fulfill any one end of a comparison. The following
similes seem to labor under this defect: Albus ut obscuro deterget nubila coelo
Saepe Notus, neque parturit imbres
Perpetuos: sic tu sapiens finire memento
Tristitiam vitaeque labores
Molli, Plance, mero.
Horace, Carm. l. 1. ode 7. -- Medio dux agmine Turnus
Vertitur arma tenens, et toto vertice supra est.
Ceu septem surgens sedatis amnibus altus
Per tacitum Ganges: aut pingui flumine Nilus
Cum refluit campis, et jam se condidit alveo.
Aeneid ix. 28. Talibus orabat, talesque miserrima fletus
Fertque refertque soror: sed nullus ille movetur
Fletibus, aut voces ullas tractabilis audit.
Fata obstant: placidasque viri Deus obstruit aures.
Ac veluti annoso validam cum robore quercum
Alpini Boreae, nunc hinc, nunc flatibus illinc
Eruere inter se certant; it stridor; et alte
Consternunt terram concusso stipite frondes:
Ipsa haeret scopulis: et quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice in tartara tendit.
Haud secus assiduis hinc atque hinc vocibus heroes
Tunditur, et magno persentit pectore curas:
Men's immota manet, lacrymae volvuntur inanes.
Aeneid iv. 437. K. Rich. Give me the crown. -- Here, cousin, seize the crown,
Here, on this side, my hand; on that side, thine.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well,
That owes two buckets, filling one another;
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen and full of water;
That bucket down, and full of tears, am I;
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

Richard II. act 4. sc. 3. King John. Oh! Cousin, thou art come to set mine eye;
The tackle of my heart is cracked and burnt;
And all the shrowds wherewith my life should sail,
Are turned to one thread, one little hair:
My heart has one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered.

King John, act 5. sc. 10. York. My uncles both are slain in rescuing me:
And all my followers, to the eager foe
Turn back, and fly like ships before the wind,
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.

Third Part Henry VI. act. 1. sc. 6. The latter of the two similes is good. The
former, because of the faintness of the resemblance, produces no good effect,
and crowds the narration with an useless image.

The next error I shall mention is a capital one. In an epic poem, or in any
elevated subject, a writer ought to avoid raising a simile upon a low image,
which never fails to bring down the principal subject. In general, it is a
rule, that a grand object ought never to be resembled to one that is
diminutive, however delicate the resemblance may be. It is the peculiar
character of a grand object to fix the attention, and swell the mind: in this
state, it is disagreeable to contract the mind to a minute object, however
elegant. The resembling an object to one that is greater, has, on the contrary,
a good effect, by raising or swelling the mind. One passes with satisfaction
from a small to a great object; but cannot be drawn down, without reluctance,
from great to small. Hence the following similes are faulty. Meanwhile the
troops beneath Patroculus' care,
Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
As wasps, provoked by children in their play,
Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,
In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,
Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage;
All rise in arms, and with a general cry
Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny:
Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,
So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms.
Iliad xvi. 312. So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all over)
Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
(Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
Untamed, untir'd, he turns, attacks and stings.
Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
And sent his soul with every lance he threw.
Iliad xvii. 642. Instant ardentes Tyrii: pars ducere muros,
Molirique arcem, er manibus subvolvere saxa;
Pars aptare locum tecto, et concludere sulco.
Jura magistratusque legunt, sanctumque senatum.
Hic portus alii effodiunt: hic alta theatris
Fundamenta locant alii, immanesque columnas
Rupibus excidunt, scenis decora alta futuris.
Qualis apes aestate nova per florea rura
Exercet sub sole labor, cum gentis adultos
Educunt foetus, aut cum liquentia mella
Stipant ^et dulci distendunt nectare cellas,
Aut onera accipiunt venientum, aut agmine facto
Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent.
Fervet opus, redolentque thymo fragrantia mella.
Aeneid i. 427. To describe bees gathering honey as resembling the builders of
Carthage, would have a much better effect. Tum vero Teucri incumbunt, et
littore celsas
Deducunt toto naves: natat uncta carina;
Frondentesque ferunt remos, et robora sylvis
Infabricata, fugae studio.
Migrantes cernas, totaque ex urbe ruentes.
Ac veluti ingentem formicae farris acervum
Cum populant, hyemis memores, tectoque reponunt:
It nigrum campis agmen, praedamque per herbas
Convectant call angusto: pars grandia trudunt
Obnixae frumenta humeris: pars agmina cogunt,
Castigantque moras: opere omnis semita fervet.
Aeneid. iv. 397.

The following simile has not any one beauty to recommend it. The subject is
Amata the wife of King Latinus. Tum vero infelix, ingentibus excita monstris,
Immensam sine more furit lymphata per urbem:
Ceu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo,
Quem pueri magno in gyro vacua atria circum
Intenti ludo exercent. Ille actus habena
Curvatis fertur spatiis: stupet inscia turba,
Impubesque manus, mirata volubile buxum:
Dant animos plagae. Non cursu segnior illo
Per medias urbes agitur, populosque feroces.
Aeneid. vii. 376. This simile seems to border upon the burlesque.

An error opposite to the former, is the introducing a resembling image, so
elevated or great as to bear no proportion to the principal subject. The
remarkable disparity betwixt them, being the most striking circumstance, seizes
the mind, and never fails to depress the principal subject by contrast, instead
of raising it by resemblance: and if the disparity be exceeding great, the
simile takes on an air of burlesque; nothing being more ridiculous than to
force an object out of its proper rank in nature, by equalling it with one
greatly superior or greatly inferior. This will be evident from the following
comparisons. Fervet opus, redolentque thymo fragrantia mella.
Ac veluti lentis Cyclopes fulmina massis
Cum properant: alii taurinis follibus auras
Accipiunt, redduntque: alii stridentia tingunt
Era lacu: gemit impositis incudibus Aetna:
Illi inter sese magna vi brachia tollunt
In numerum; versantque tenaci forcipe ferrum.
Non aliter (si parva licet componere magnis)
Cecropias innatus apes amor urget habendi,
Munere quamque suo. Grandaevis oppida curae,
Et munire favos, et Daedala fingere tecta.
At fessae multa referunt se nocte minores,
Crura thymo plenae: pascuntur et arbuta passim,
Et glaucas salices, casiamque crocumque rubentem,
Et pinguem tiliam, et ferrugineos hyacinthos.
Omnibus una quies operum, labor omnibus unus.
Georgic. iv. 169. Tum Bitian ardentem oculis animisque frementem;
Non jaculo, neque enim jaculo vitam ille dedisset;
Sed magnum stridens contorta falarica venit
Fulminis acta modo, quam nec duo taurea terga,
Nec duplici squama lorica fidelis et auro
Sustinuit: collapsa ruunt immania membra:
Dat tellus gemitum, et clypeum super intonat ingens.
Qualis in Euboico Baiarum littore quondam
Saxea pila cadit, magnis quam molibus ante
Constructam jaciunt ponto: sic illa ruinam
Prona trahit, penitusque vadis illisa recumbit:
Miscent se maria, et nigrae attolluntur arenae:
Tum sonitu Prochyta alta tremit, durumque cubile
Inarime Jovis imperiis imposta Typhoeo.
Aeneid. ix. 703. Loud as a bull makes hill and valley ring,
So roared the lock when it released the spring.
Odyssey xxi. 51. Such a simile upon the simplest of all actions, that of
opening a lock, is pure burlesque.

A writer of delicacy will avoid drawing his comparisons from any image that is
nauseous, ugly, or remarkably disagreeable: for however strong the resemblance
may be, more will be lost than gained by such comparison. Therefore I cannot
help condemning, though with some reluctance, the following simile, or rather
metaphor. O thou fond many! with what loud applause
Did thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke
Before he was what thou would have him be?
And now being trimmed up in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him,
That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up.
And so, thou common dog, did thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard,
And now thou would eat thy dead vomit up,
And howl'st to find it.

Second Part Henry IV. act 1. sc. 6.

The strongest objection that can lie against a comparison, is, that it
consists in words only, not in sense. Such false coin, or bastard wit, does
extremely well in burlesque; but is far below the dignity of the epic, or of
any serious composition: The noble sister of Poplicola,
The moon of Rome; chaste as the isicle
That Is curdled by the frost from purest snow,
And hangs on Dian's temple.

Coriolanus, act 5. sc. 3. There is evidently no resemblance betwixt an isicle
and a woman, chaste or unchaste. But chastity is cold in a metaphorical sense,
and an isicle is cold in a proper sense; and this verbal resemblance, in the
hurry and glow of composing, has been thought a sufficient foundation for the
simile. Such phantom similes are mere witticisms, which ought to have no
quarter, except where purposely introduced to provoke laughter. Lucian, in his
dissertation upon history, talking of a certain author, makes the following
comparison, which is verbal merely. This author's descriptions are so cold,
that they surpass the Caspian snow, and all the ice of the north.

Virgil has not escaped this puerility: -- Galathaea thymo mihi dulcior Hyblae.
Bucol. vii. 37. -- Ego Sardois videar tibi amarior herbis.
Ibid. 41. Gallo, cujus amor tantum mihi crescit in horas,
Quantum vere novo viridis se subjicit alnus.
Buccol. x. 73. Nor Tasso, in his Aminta: Picciola e' l'ape, e fa col picciol
morso
Pur gravi, e pur moleste le ferite;
Ma, qual cosa e piu picciola d'amore,
Se in ogni breve spatio entra, e s'asconde
In ogni breve spatio? hor, sotto a l'ombra
De le palpebre, hor tra minuti rivi
D'un biondo crine, hor dentro le pozzette,
Che forma un dolce riso in bella guancia;
E pur fa tanto grandi, e si mortali,
E cosi immedicabili le piaghe.

Act 2. sc. 1. Nor Boileau, the chastest of all writers; and that even in his
art of poetry: Ainsi tell autrefois, qu'on vit avec Faret
Charbonner de ses verse les murs d'un cabaret,
S'en va mal a' propos, d'une voix insolente,
Chanter du peuple He'breu la fuite triomphante,
Et poursuivant Moise au travers des deserts,
Court avec Pharaon se noyer dans les mers.
Chant. 1. l. 21. -- But for their spirits and souls
This word rebellion had froze them up
As fish are in a pond.

Second Part Henry IV. act 1. sc. 3. Queen. The pretty vaulting sea refused to
drown me;
Knowing, that thou would have me drowned on shore
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness.

Second Part Henry VI. act 3. sc. 6. Here there is no manner of resemblance but
in the word drown; for there is no real resemblance betwixt being drowned at
sea, and dying of grief at land. But perhaps this sort of tinsel wit, may have
a propriety in it, when used to express an affected, not a real, passion, which
was the Queen's case.

Pope has several similes of the same stamp. I shall transcribe one or two from
the Essay on Man, the gravest and most instructive of all his performances. And
hence one master-passion in the breast,
Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest.
Epist. 2. l. 131. And again, talking of this same ruling or master passion.
Nature its mother, Habit is its nurse;
Wit, spirit, faculties, but make it worse;
Reason itself but gives it edge and power;
As heaven's blessed beam turns vinegar more sour.
Ibid. l. 145. Lord Bolingbroke, speaking of historians: Where their sincerity
as to fact is doubtful, we strike out truth by the confrontation of different
accounts; as we strike out sparks of fire by the collision of flints and steel.

Let us vary the phrase a very little, and there will not remain a shadow of
resemblance. Thus, for example: We discover truth by the confrontation of
different accounts; as we strike out sparks of fire by the collision of flints
and steel.

Racine makes Pyrrhus say to Andromaque, Vaincu, charge de fers, de regrets
consume,
Brule de plus de feux que je n'en allumai,
Helas! fus-je jamais si cruel que vous l'etes?
And Orestes, in the same strain: Que les Scythes sont moins cruels qu'Hermione.

Similes of this kind put one in mind of a ludicrous French song: Je croyois
Janneton
Aussi douce que belle:
Je croyois Janneton
Plus douce qu'un mouton;
Helas! helas!
Elle est cent fois, mill fois, plus cruelle
Que n'est le tigre aux bois.
Again, Helas! l'amour m'a pris,
Comme le chat fait la souris.
A vulgar Irish ballad begins thus: I have as much love in store
As there is apples in Portmore.


Where the subject is burlesque or ludicrous, such similes are far from being
improper. Horace says pleasantly, Quanquam tu levior cortice.
L. 3. ode 9. And Shakespeare, In breaking oaths he is stronger than Hercules.

And this leads me to observe, that beside the foregoing comparisons, which are
all serious, there is a species, the end and purpose of which is to excite
gaiety or mirth. Take the following examples.

Falstaff, speaking to his page: I do here walk before thee, like a sow that
has overwhelmed all her litter but one.


Second Part Henry IV. act 1. sc. 4. I think he is not a pick-purse, nor a
horse-stealer; but for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a
covered goblet, or a worm-eaten nut.


As you like it, act 3. sc. 10. This sword a dagger had his page,
That was but little for his age;
And therefore waited on him so
As dwarfs upon knights-errant do.
Hudibras, canto 1.

Description of Hudibras's horse: He was well stayed, and in his gait
Preserved a grave, majestic state.
At spur or switch no more he skipt,
Or mended pace, than Spaniard whipped:
And yet so fiery he would bound,
As if he grieved to touch the ground:
That Caesar's horse, who, as fame goes,
Had corns upon his feet and toes,
Was not by half so tender hooft,
Nor trod upon the ground so soft.
And as that beast would kneel and stoop,
(Some write) to take his rider up;
So Hudibras his ('it is well known)
Would often do, to set him down.
Canto 1. Honor is, like a widow, won
With brisk attempt and putting on,
With entering manfully, and urging;
Not slow approaches, like a virgin.
Canto 1. The sun had long since in the lap
Of Thetis taken out his nap;
And, like a lobster boiled, the morn
From black to red began to turn.
Part 2. canto 2. Books, like men, their authors, have but one way of coming
into the world; but there are ten thousand to go out of it, and return no more.

Tale of a Tub. And in this the world may perceive the difference between the
integrity of a generous author, and that of a common friend. The latter is
observed to adhere close in prosperity, but on the decline of fortune, to drop
suddenly off: whereas the generous author, just on the contrary, finds his hero
on the dunghill, from thence by gradual steps raises him to a throne, and then
immediately withdraws, expecting not so much as thanks for his pains.

Tale of a Tub. The most accomplished way of using books at present is, to
serve them as some do lords, learn their titles, and then brag of their
acquaintance.

Tale of a Tub. Box'd in a chair, the beau impatient sits,
While spouts run clatt'ring over the roof by fits;
And ever and anon with frightful din
The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed,
Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed,
(Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Instead of paying chairmen, run them through),
Laocoon struck the outside with his spear,
And each imprisoned hero quaked for fear.
Description of a city shower. Swift. Clubs, diamonds, hearts, in wild disorder
seen,
With throngs promiscuous strew the level green.
Thus when dispersed a routed army runs,
Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
With like confusion different nations fly,
Of various habit, and of various dye,
The pierced battalions disunited, fall
In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.
Rape of the Lock, canto 3. He does not consider, that sincerity in love is as
much out of fashion as sweet snuff; no body takes it now.

Careless Husband. Lady Easy. My dear, I am afraid you have provoked her a
little too far.


Sir Charles. O! Not at all. You shall see, I Will sweeten her, and she will cool
like a dish of tea.


Ibid.

CHAP. XX. FIGURES.
THE reader must not expect to find here a complete list of the different
tropes and figures that have been carefully noted by ancient critics and
grammarians. Tropes and figures have indeed been multiplied with so little
reserve, as to make it no easy matter to distinguish them from plain language.
A discovery almost accidental, made me think of giving them a place in this
work: I found that the most important of them depend on principles formerly
explained; and I was glad of an opportunity to show the extensive influence of
these principles. Confining myself therefore to figures that answer this
purpose, I am luckily freed from much trash; without dropping, so far as I
remember, any figure that merits a proper name. And I begin with Prosopopoeia
or personification, which is justy entitled to the first place.

SECT. I. PERSONIFICATION.
THis figure, which gives life to things inanimate, is so bold a delusion as to
require, one should imagine, very peculiar circumstances for operating the
effect. And yet, in the language of poetry, we find variety of expressions,
which, though commonly reduced to this figure, are used without ceremony or any
sort of preparation. I give, for example, the following expressions. Thirsty
ground, hungry churchyard, furious dart, angry ocean. The epithets here, in
their proper meaning, are attributes of sensible beings. What is the effect of
such epithets, when applied to things inanimate? Do they raise in the mind of
the reader a perception of sensibility? Do they make him conceive the ground,
the churchyard, the dart, the ocean, to be endued with animal functions? This
is a curious inquiry; and whether so or not, it cannot be declined in handling
the present subject.

One thing is certain, that the mind is prone to bestow sensibility upon things
inanimate, where that violent effect is necessary to gratify passion. This is
one instance, among many, of the power of passion to adjust our opinions and
belief to its gratification Chap. 2. part 5.
. I give the following examples. Antony, mourning over the body of Caesar,
murdered in the senate house, vents his passion in the following words. Antony.
O pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers.
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.

Julius Caesar, act 3. sc. 4. Here Antony must have been impressed with some
sort of notion, that the body of Caesar was listening to him, without which the
speech would be foolish and absurd. Nor will it appear strange, after what is
said in the chapter above cited, that passion should have such power over the
mind of man. Another example of the same kind is, where the earth, as a common
mother, is animated to give refuge against a father's unkindness. Almeria. O
Earth, behold, I kneel upon thy bosom,
And bend my flowing eyes to stream upon
Thy face, imploring thee that thou will yield;
Open thy bowels of compassion, take
Into thy womb the last and most forlorn
Of all thy race. Hear me thou, common parent;
-- I have no parent else. -- Be thou a mother,
And step between me and the curse of him,
Who was -- who was, but is no more a father;
But brands my innocence with horrid crimes;
And for the tender names of child and daughter,
Now calls me murderer and parricide.

Mourning Bride, act. 4. sc. 7.

Plaintive passions are extremely solicitous for vent. A soliloquy commonly
answers the purpose. But when a passion swells high, it is not satisfied with
so slight a gratification: it must have a person to complain to; and if none be
found, it will animate things devoid of sense. Thus Philoctetes complains to
the rocks and promontories of the isle of Lemnos Philoctetes of Sophocles, act
4. sc. 2.
; and Alcestes dying, invokes the sun, the light of day, the clouds, the earth,
her husband's palace, etc. Alcestes of Euripides, act 2. sc. 1.
. Plaintive passions carry the mind still farther. Among the many principles
that connect individuals in society, one is remarkable: it is that principle
which makes us earnestly wish, that others should enter into our concerns and
think and feel as we do See this principle accounted for, chap. 25.
. This social principle, when inflamed by a plaintive passion, will, for want
of a more complete gratification, prompt the mind to give life even to things
inanimate. Moschus, lamenting the death of Bion, conceives that the birds, the
fountains, the trees, lament with him. The shepherd, who in Virgil bewails the
death of Daphnis, expresses himself thus: Daphni, tuum Poenos etiam ingemuisse
leones
Interitum, montesque feri sylvaeque loquuntur.
Eclogue v. 27. Again, Illum etiam lauri, illum etiam flevere myricae.
Pinifer illum etiam sola sub rupe jacentem
Maenalus, et gelidi fleverunt saxa Lycaei.
Eclogue x. 13. Again, Ho visto al pianto mio
Responder per pietate i sassi e l'onde;
E sospirar le fronde
Ho visto al pianto mio.
Ma non ho visto may,
Ne spero di vedere
Compassion ne la crudele, e bella.

Aminta di Tasso, act 1. sc. 2. Earl Rivers carried to execution, says, O
Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to Noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the Second, here, was hacked to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.

Richard III. act 3. sc. 4. King Richard having got intelligence of
Bolingbroke's invasion, says, upon his landing in England from his Irish
expedition, in a mixture of joy and resentment, -- I weep for joy
To stand upon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses hoofs.
As a long parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears, and smiles in meeting;
So weeping, smiling, greet I thee my earth,
And do thee favor with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense:
But let thy spiders that suck up thy venom,
And heavy-gaited toads, lie in their way;
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet,
Which with usurping steps do trample thee.
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
And, when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it, I pr'ythee, with a lurking adder;
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, Lords:
This earth shall have a feeling; and these stones
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Shall faulter under foul rebellious arms.

Richard II. act 3. sc. 2.

Among the ancients, it was customary after a long voyage to salute the natal
soil. A long voyage, was of old a greater enterprise than at present: the safe
return to one's country after much fatigue and danger, was a circumstance
extremely delightful; and it was natural to give the natal soil a temporary
life, in order to sympathise with the traveller. See an example, Agamemnon of
Aeschilus, act 3. in the beginning. Regret for leaving a place one has been
accustomed to, has the same effect Philoctetes of Sophocles, at the close.
.

Terror produces the same effect. A man, to gratify this passion, extends it
to every thing around, even to things inanimate: Speaking of Polyphemus,
Clamorem immensum tollit, quo pontus et omnes
Intremuere undae penitusque exterrita tellus
Italiae.
Aeneid. iii. 672. -- As when old Ocean roars,
And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores.
Iliad ii. 249. And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
Iliad ii. 549. Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies.
Iliad v. 431. Racine, in the tragedy of Phedra, describing the sea monster
that destroyed Hippolitus, conceives the sea itself to be inspired with terror
as well as the spectators; or more accurately transfers from the spectators
their terror to the sea, with which they were connected: Le flot qui l'apporta
recule epouvante.

A man also naturally communicates his joy to all objects around, animate or
inanimate: -- As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambic, off at sea north-east winds blow
Sabean odor from the spicy shore
Of Araby the Blessed; with such delay
Well pleased, they slack their course, and many a league
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
Paradise Lost, b. 4.

I have been profuse of examples, to show what power many passions have to
animate their objects. In all the foregoing examples, the personification, if I
mistake not, is so complete as to be derived from an actual conviction,
momentary indeed, of life and intelligence. But it is evident from numberless
instances, that personification is not always so complete. Personification is a
common figure in descriptive poetry, understood to be the language of the
writer, and not of any of his personages in a fit of passion. In this case, it
seldom or never comes up to a conviction, even momentary, of life and
intelligence. I give the following examples. First in his east the glorious
lamp was seen,
Regent of day, and all the horizon round
Invested with bright rays; jocund to run
His longitude through heaven's high road: the gray
Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danced,
Shedding sweet influence. Less bright the moon
But opposite, in levelled west was set
His mirror, with full face borrowing her light
From him; for other light she needed none.
Paradise Lost, b. 7. l. 370. The chastity of the English language, which in
common usage distinguishes by genders no words but what signify beings male and
female, gives thus a fine opportunity for the prosopopoeia; a beauty unknown in
other languages, where every word is masculine or feminine.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops.

Romeo and Juliet, act 3. sc. 7. But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks over the dew of you high eastward hill.

Hamlet, act 1. sc. 1. It may, I presume, be taken for granted, that, in the
foregoing instances, the personification, either with the poet or his reader,
amounts not to a conviction of intelligence; nor that the sun, the moon, the
day, the morn, are here understood to be sensible beings. What then is the
nature of this personification? Upon considering the matter attentively, I
discover that this species of personification must be referred to the
imagination. The inanimate object is imagined to be a sensible being, but
without any conviction, even for a moment, that it really is so. Ideas or
fictions of imagination have power to raise emotions in the mind See appendix,
containing definitions and explanation of terms.
; and when any thing inanimate is, in imagination, supposed to be a sensible
being, it makes by that means a greater figure than when an idea is formed of
it according to truth. The elevation however in this case, is far from being so
great as when the personification arises to an actual conviction; and therefore
must be considered as of a lower or inferior sort. Thus personification is of
two kinds. The first or nobler, may be termed passionate personification: the
other, or more humble, descriptive personification; because seldom or never is
personification in a description carried the length of conviction.

The imagination is so lively and active, that its images are raised with very
little effort; and this justifies the frequent use of descriptive
personification. This figure abounds in Milton's Allegro and Penseroso.

Abstract and general terms, as well as particular objects, are often necessary
in poetry. Such terms however are not well adapted to poetry, because they
suggest not any image to the mind: I can readily form an image of Alexander or
Achilles in wrath; but I cannot form an image of wrath in the abstract, or of
wrath independent of a person. Upon that account, in works addressed to the
imagination, abstract terms are frequently personified. But this
personification never goes farther than the imagination. Sed mihi vel Tellus
optem prius ima dehiscat;
Vel pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad umbras,
Pallentes umbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante pudor quam te violo, aut tua jura resolvo.
Aeneid. 4. l. 24. Thus, to explain the effects of slander, it is imagined to
be a voluntary agent: -- No, it is Slander;
Whose edge is sharper than the sword; whose tongue
Out-venoms all the worms of Nile; whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and does belie
All corners of the world, kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons: nay, the secrets of the grave
This viperous Slander enters.

Shakespeare, Cymbeline, act 3. sc. 4. As also human passions. Take the
following example. -- For Pleasure and Revenge
Have ears more deaf than adders, to the voice
Of any true decision.

Troilus and Cressida, act 2. sc. 4. Virgil explains fame and its effects by a
still greater variety of action Aeneid. iv. 173.
. And Shakespeare personifies death and its operations in a manner extremely
fanciful: -- Within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king,
Keeps Death his court; and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state, and grinning at his pomp;
Allowing him a breath, a little scene
To monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks;
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if his flesh, which walls about our life,
Were brass impregnable; and humored thus,
Comes at the last, and with a little pin
Bores through his castle-walls, and farewell king!

Richard II. act 3. sc. 4. Not less successfully is life and action given even
to sleep: K. Henry. How many thousands of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! O gentle Sleep,
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, Sleep, lie thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber;
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sounds of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god, why lie thou with the vile
In loathsome beds, and leave the kingly couch,
A watch-case to a common larum-bell?
Will thou, upon the high and giddy mast,
Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge;
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
With deaf'ning clamours in the slippery shrouds,
That, with the hurly, Death itself awakes:
Can thou, O partial Sleep, give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude;
And, in the calmest and the stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then, happy low! lie down;
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.

Second Part Henry IV. act 3. sc. 1. I shall add one example more, to show that
descriptive personification may be used with propriety, even where the purpose
of the discourse is instruction merely: Oh! let the steps of youth be cautious,
How they advance into a dangerous world;
Our duty only can conduct us safe:
Our passions are seducers: but of all,
The strongest Love: he first approaches us,
In childish play, wantoning in our walks:
If heedlessly we wander after him,
As he will pick out all the dancing way,
We Are lost, and hardly to return again.
We should take warning: he is painted blind,
To show us, if we fondly follow him,
The precipices we may fall into.
Therefore let Virtue take him by the hand:
Directed so, he leads to certain joy.
Southern.

Hitherto our progress has been upon firm ground. Whether we shall be so lucky
in the remaining part of the journey, seems doubtful. For after acquiring some
knowledge of the subject, when we now look back to the expressions mentioned in
the beginning, thirsty ground, furious dart, and such like, it seems as
difficult as at first to say what sort of personification it is. Such
expressions evidently raise not the slightest conviction of sensibility. Nor do
I think they amount to descriptive personification: in the expressions
mentioned, we do not so much as figure the ground or the dart to be animated;
and if so, they cannot at all come under the present subject. And to show this
more clearly, I shall endeavor to explain what effect such expressions have
naturally upon the mind. In the expression angry ocean, for example, do we not
tacitly compare the ocean in a storm, to a man in wrath? It is by this tacit
comparison, that the expression acquires a force or elevation, beyond what is
found when an epithet is used proper to the object: for I have had occasion to
show Chap. 19.
, that a thing inanimate acquires a certain elevation by being compared to a
sensible being. And this very comparison is itself a demonstration, that there
is no personification in such expressions. For, by the very nature of a
comparison, the things compared are kept distinct, and the native appearance of
each is preserved. It will be shown afterward, that expressions of this kind
belong to another figure, which I term a figure of speech, and which employs
the seventh section of the present chapter.

Though thus in general we can precisely distinguish descriptive
personification from what is merely a figure of speech, it is however often
difficult to say, with respect to some expressions, whether they are of the one
kind or of the other. Take the following instances. The moon shines bright: in
such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no noise; in such a night,
Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan wall,
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

Merchant of Venice, act 5. sc. 1. -- I have seen
The ambitious ocean swell, and rage, and foam,
To be exalted with the threatening clouds.

Julius Caesar, act 1. sc. 6. Jane Shore. My form, alas! has long forgot to
please;
The scene of beauty and delight is changed,
No roses bloom upon my fading cheek,
No laughing graces wanton in my eyes;
But haggard Grief, lean-looking sallow Care,
And pining Discontent, a rueful train,
Dwell on my brow, all hideous and forlorn.

Jane Shore, act 1. sc. 2. With respect to these and numberless other instances
of the same kind, whether they be examples of personification or of a figure of
speech merely, seems to be an arbitrary question. They will be ranged under the
former class by those only who are endued with a sprightly imagination. Nor
will the judgment even of the same person be steady: it will vary with the
present state of the spirits, lively or composed.

Having thus at large explained the present figure, its different kinds, and
the principles from whence derived; what comes next in order is to ascertain
its proper province, by showing in what cases it is suitable, in what
unsuitable. I begin with observing, upon passionate personification, that this
figure is not promoted by every passion indifferently. All dispiriting passions
are averse to it. Remorse, in particular, is too serious and severe, to be
gratified by a phantom of the mind. I cannot therefore approve the following
speech of Enobarbus, who had deserted his master Antony. Be witness to me, O
thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent --
Oh sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me.

Antony and Cleopatra, act 4. sc. 7. If this can be justified, it must be upon
the Heathen system of theology, which converted into deities the sun, moon, and
stars.

Secondly, After a passionate personification is properly introduced, it ought
to be confined strictly to its proper province, that of gratifying the passion;
and no sentiment nor action ought to be exerted by the animated object, but
what answers that purpose. Personification is at any rate a bold figure, and
ought to be employed with great reserve. The passion of love, for example, in a
plaintive tone, may give a momentary life to woods and rocks, that the lover
may vent his distress to them: but no passion will support a conviction so far
stretched, as that these woods and rocks should be living witnesses to report
the distress to others: Ch'i' t'ami piu de la mia vita,
Se tu nol sai, crudele,
Chiedilo a queste selve,
Che te'l diranno, et te'l diran con esse
Le fere loro e i duri sterpi, e i sassi
Di questi alpestri monti,
Ch'i' ho si spesse volte
Inteneriti al suon de' miei Iamenti.

Pastor fido, act 3. sc. 3. No lover who is not crazed will utter such a
sentiment: it is plainly the operation of the writer, indulging his imagination
without regard to nature. The same observation is applicable to the following
passage. In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages, long ago betid:
And ere thou bid goodnight, to quiet their grief,
Tell them the lamentable fall of me,
And send the hearers weeping to their beds.
For why! the senseless brands will sympathise
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue,
And in compassion weep the fire out.

Richard II. act 5. sc. 1. One must read this passage very seriously to avoid
laughing. The following passage is quite extravagant: the different parts of
the human body are too intimately connected with self, to be personified by the
power of any passion; and after converting such a part into a sensible being,
it is still worse to make it be conceived as rising in rebellion against self.
Cleopatra. Haste, bare my arm, and rouse the serpent's fury.
Coward flesh --
Would thou conspire with Caesar, to betray me,
As thou were none of mine? I Will force thee to it.

Dryden, All for Love, act 5.

Next comes descriptive personification; upon which I must observe in general,
that it ought to be cautiously used. A personage in a tragedy, agitated by a
strong passion, deals in strong sentiments; and the reader, catching fire by
sympathy, relishes the boldest personifications. But a writer, even in the most
lively description, ought to take a lower flight, and content himself with such
easy personifications as agree with the tone of mind inspired by the
description. In plain narrative, again, the mind, serious and sedate, rejects
personification altogether. Strada, in his history of the Belgic wars, has the
following passage, which, by a strained elevation above the tone of the
subject, deviates into burlesk. "Vix descenderat a praetoria navi Caesar; cum
foeda illico exorta in portu tempestas, classem impetu disjecit, praetoriam
hausit: quasi non vecturam amplius Caesarem, Caesarisque fortunam Dec. 1. l. 1.
." Neither do I approve, in Shakespeare, the speech of King John, gravely
exhorting the citizens of Angiers to a surrender; though a tragic writer has
much greater latitude than a historian. Take the following specimen of this
speech. The cannons have their bowels full of wrath;
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their iron-indignation against your walls.

Act 2. sc. 3.

Secondly, If extraordinary marks of respect put upon a person of the lowest
rank be ridiculous, not less so is the personification of a mean object. This
rule chiefly regards descriptive personification: for an object can hardly be
mean that is the cause of a violent passion; in that circumstance, at least, it
must be an object of importance. With respect to this point, it would be in
vain to set limits to personification: taste is the only rule. A poet of
superior genius has more than others the command of this figure; because he
has more than others the power of inflaming the mind. Homer appears not
extravagant in animating his darts and arrows: nor Thomson in animating the
seasons, the winds, the rains, the dews. He even ventures to animate the
diamond, and does it with propriety. -- That polished bright
And all its native luster let abroad,
Dares, as it sparkles on the fair-one's breast,
With vain ambition emulate her eyes.
But there are things familiar and base, to which personification cannot
descend. In a composed state of mind, to animate a lump of matter even in the
most rapid flight of fancy, degenerates into burlesk. How now? What noise? that
spirit's possessed with haste,
That wounds the unresisting postern with these strokes.

Shakespeare, Measure for Measure, act 4. sc. 6. The following little better: --
Or from the shore
The plovers when to scatter over the heath,
And sing their wild notes to the listening waste.
Thomson, Spring, l. 23. Speaking of a man's hand cut off in battle: Te decisa
suum, Laride, dextera quaerit:
Semianimesque micant digiti; ferrumque retractant.
Aeneid. x. 395. The personification here of a hand is insufferable, especially
in a plain narration; not to mention that such a trivial incident is too
minutely described.

The same observation is applicable to abstract terms, which ought not to be
animated unless they have some natural dignity. Thomson, in this article, is
quite licentious. Witness the following instances out of many. O vale of bliss!
O softly swelling hills!
On which the power of cultivation lies,
And joys to see the wonders of his toil.
Summer, l. 1423. Then sated Hunger bids his brother Thirst
Produce the mighty bowl:
Nor wanting is the brown October, drawn
Mature and perfect, from his dark retreat
Of thirty years; and now his honest front
Flames in the light refulgent.
Autumn, l. 516.

Thirdly, it is not sufficient to avoid improper subjects. Some preparation is
necessary, in order to rouse the mind. The imagination refuses its aid, till it
be warmed at least, if not inflamed. Yet Thomson, without the least ceremony or
preparation, introduces each season as a sensible being: From brightening
fields of ether fair disclosed,
Child of the sun, refulgent Summer comes,
In pride of youth, and felt through Nature's depth.
He comes attended by the sultry hours,
And ever-fanning breezes, on his way,
While from his ardent look, the turning Spring
Averts her blushful face, and earth and skies
All-smiling, to his hot dominion leaves.
Summer, l. 1. See Winter comes, to rule the varied year,
Sullen and sad with all his rising train,
Vapors, and clouds, and storms.
Winter, l. 1. This has violently the air of writing mechanically without
taste. It is not natural, that the imagination of a writer should be so much
heated at the very commencement; and, at any rate, he cannot expect such
ductility in his readers: but if this practice can be justified by authority,
Thomson has one of no mean note: Vida begins his first eclogue in the following
words. Dicite, vos Musae, et juvenum memorate querelas;
Dicite; nam motas ipsas ad carmina cautes
Et requiesse suos perhibent vaga flumina cursus.
Even Shakespeare is not always careful to prepare the mind for this bold
figure. Take the following instance: -- Upon these taxations,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them 'longing, have put off
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers; who,
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar,
And Danger serves among them.

Henry VIII. act 1. sc. 4.

Fourthly, Descriptive personification ought never to be carried farther than
barely to animate the subject: and yet poets are not easily restrained from
making this phantom of their own creating behave and act in every respect as if
it were really a sensible being. By such license we lose sight of the subject;
and the description is rendered obscure or unintelligible, instead of being
more lively and striking. In this view, the following passage, describing
Cleopatra on shipboard, appears to me exceptionable. The barge she sat in, like
a burnished throne,
Burnt on the water; the poop was beaten gold,
Purple the fails, and so perfumed, that
The winds were love sick with 'em.

Antony and Cleopatra, act 2. sc. 3. Let the winds be personified; I make no
objection. But to make them lovesick, is too far stretched; having no
resemblance to any natural action of wind. In another passage, where Cleopatra
is also the subject, the personification of the air is carried beyond all
bounds: -- The city cast
Its people out upon her; and Antony
Enthroned in the marketplace, did sit alone,
Whistling to the air, which but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.

Antony and Cleopatra, act 2. sc. 3. The following personification of the earth
or soil is not less wild. She shall be dignified with this high honor
To bear my Lady's train; lest the base earth
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss;
And of so great a favor growing proud,
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower,
And make rough winter everlastingly.

The Two Gentlemen of Verona, act 2 sc. 7. Shakespeare, far from approving such
intemperance of imagination, puts this speech in the mouth of a ranting lover.
Neither can I relish what follows. Omnia quae, Phoebo quondam meditante, beatus
Audiit Eurotas, jussitque ediscere lauros,
Ille canit.
Virgil, Buc. vi. 82. The cheerfulness singly of a pastoral song, will scarce
support personification in the lowest degree. But admitting, that a river
gently flowing may be imagined a sensible being listening to a song, I cannot
enter into the conceit of the river's ordering his laurels to learn the song.
Here all resemblance to any thing real is quite lost. This however is copied
literally by one of our greatest poets; early indeed, before maturity of taste
or judgment. Thames heard the numbers as he flowed along,
And bade his willows learn the moving song.
Pope's Pastorals, past. 4. l. 13. This author, in riper years, is guilty of a
much greater deviation from the rule. Dullness may be imagined a deity or idol,
to be worshipped by bad writers: but then some sort of disguise is requisite,
some bastard virtue must be bestowed, to give this idol a plausible appearance.
Yet in the Dunciad, dullness, without the least disguise, is made the object of
worship. The mind rejects such a fiction as unnatural; for dullness is a
defect, of which even the dullest mortal is ashamed: Then he: great tamer of
all human art, etc.
Book i. 163. The following instance is stretched beyond all resemblance. It is
bold to take a part or member of a living creature, and to bestow upon it life,
volition, and action: after animating two such members, it is still bolder to
make them envy each other; for this is wide of any resemblance to reality: --
De nostri baci
Meritamente sia giudice quella, etc.

Pastor Fido, act 2. sc. 1.

Fifthly, The enthusiasm of passion may have the effect to prolong passionate
personification: but descriptive personification cannot be dispatched in too
few words. A minute description dissolves the charm, and makes the attempt to
personify appear ridiculous. Homer succeeds in animating his darts and arrows:
but such personification spun out in a French translation, is mere burlesk: Et
la fleche en fury, avide de son sang,
Part, vole a lui, l'atteint, et lui perce le flanc.
Horace says happily, "Post equitem sedet atra Cura." See how this thought
degenerates by being divided, like the former, into a number of minute parts:
Un fou rempli d'erreurs, que le trouble accompagne
Et malade a la ville ainsi qu'a la campaign,
En vain monte a cheval pour tromper son ennui,
Le Chagrin monte en croupe et galope avec lui.
The following passage is, if possible, still more faulty. Her fate is
whispered by the gentle breeze,
And told in sighs to all the trembling trees;
The trembling trees, in every plain and wood,
Her fate remurmur to the silver flood;
The silver flood, so lately calm, appears
Swelled with new passion, and overflows with tears;
The winds, and trees, and floods, her death deplore,
Daphne, our grief! our glory! now no more.
Pope's Pastorals, iv. 61. Let grief or love have the power to animate the
winds, the trees, the floods, provided the figure be dispatched in a single
expression. Even in that case, the figure seldom has a good effect; because
grief or love of the pastoral kind, are causes rather too faint for so violent
an effect as imagining the winds, trees, or floods, to be sensible beings. But
when this figure is deliberately spread out with great regularity and accuracy
through many lines, the reader, instead of relishing it, is struck with its
ridiculous appearance.

SECT. II. APOSTROPHE.
THis figure and the former are derived from the same principle. If, to gratify
a plaintive passion, we can bestow a momentary sensibility upon an inanimate
object, it is not more difficult to bestow a momentary presence upon a sensible
being who is absent. Hinc Drepani me portus et illaetabilis ora
Accipit. Hic, pelagi tot tempestatibus actus,
Heu! genitorem, omnis curae casusque levamen,
Amitto Anchisen: hic me pater optime fessum
Deseris, heu! tantis nequicquam erepte periclis.
Nec vates Helenus, cum multa horrenda monerer,
Hos mihi praedixit luctus; non dira Celaeno.
Aeneid. iii. 707. This figure is sometimes joined with the former: things
inanimate, to qualify them for listening to a passionate expostulation, are not
only personified, but also conceived to be present. Et, si fata Deum, si men's
non laeva fuisset,
Impulerat ferro Argolicas foedare latebras:
Trojaque nunc stares, Priamique arx alta maneres.
Aeneid. ii. 54. Helena. -- Poor Lord, is it I
That chase thee from thy country, and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of non-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; pierce the still moving air,
That sings with piercing; do not touch my Lord.

All Is well that ends well, act 3. sc. 4.

This figure, like all others, requires an agitation of mind. In plain
narrative, as, for example, in giving the genealogy of a family, it has no good
effect: -- Fauno Picus pater; isque parentem
Te, Saturn, refert; tu sanguinis ultimus auctor.
Aeneid. vii. 48.

SECT. III. HYPERBOLE.
IN this figure we have another effect of the foregoing principle. An object
uncommon with respect to size, either very great of its kind or very little,
strikes us with surprise; and this emotion, like all others, prone to
gratification, forces upon the mind a momentary conviction that the object is
greater or less than it is in reality. The same effect, precisely, attends
figurative grandeur or littleness. Every object that produces surprise by its
singularity, is always seen in a false light while the emotion subsists:
circumstances are exaggerated beyond truth; and it is not till after the
emotion subsides, that things appear as they are. A writer, taking advantage of
this natural delusion, enriches his description greatly by the hyperbole. And
the reader, even in his coolest moments, relishes this figure, being sensible
that it is the operation of nature upon a warm fancy.

It will be observed, that a writer is generally more successful in magnifying
by a hyperbole than in diminishing: a minute object contracts the mind, and
fetters its power of conception; but the mind, dilated and inflamed with a
grand object, moulds objects for its gratification with great facility.
Longinus, with respect to the diminishing power of a hyperbole, cites the
following ludicrous thought from a comic poet. "He was owner of a bit of ground
not larger than a Lacedemonian letter. Chap. 31. of his treatise on the sublime.
" But, for the reason now given, the hyperbole has by far the greater force in
magnifying objects; of which take the following specimen. For all the land
which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. And I will
make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of
the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

Genesis xiii. 15. 16. Illa vel intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina: nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas.
Aeneid. vii. 808. -- Atque imo barathri ter gurgite vastos
Sorbet in abruptum fluctus, rursusque sub auras
Erigit alternos, et sidera verberat unda.
Aeneid. iii. 421. -- Horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis,
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo et candente favilla:
Attollitque globos flammarum, et sidera lambit.
Aeneid. iii. 571. Speaking of Polyphemus, -- Ipse arduus, altaque pulsat
Sidera.
Aeneid. iii. 619. -- When he speaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is still.

Henry V. act 1. sc. 1. Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
To armor armor, lance to lance opposed,
Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
Victors and vanquished join promiscuous cries,
And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are died,
And slaughtered heroes swell the dreadful tide.
Iliad iv. 508. The following may also pass, though stretched pretty far.
Econjungendo a temerario ardire
Estrema forza, e infaticabil lena
Vien che si' impetuoso il ferro gire,
Che ne trema la terra, e'l ciel balena.
Gierusalem, cant. 6. st. 46.

Quintilian L. 8. cap. 6. in fin.
is fensible that this figure is natural. "For," says he, "not contented with
truth, we naturally incline to augment or diminish beyond it; and for that
reason the hyperbole is familiar even among the vulgar and illiterate." And he
adds, very justly, "That the hyperbole is then proper, when the subject of
itself exceeds the common measure." From these premises, one would not expect
the following conclusion, the only reason he can find for justifying this
figure of speech. "Conceditur enim amplius dicere, quia dici quantum est, non
potest: meliusque ultra quam citra stat oration." (We are indulged to say more
than enough, because we cannot say enough; and it is better to be over than
under). In the name of wonder, why this slight and childish reason, when
immediately before he had made it evident, that the hyperbole is founded on
human nature? I could not resist this personal stroke of criticism, intended
not against our author, for no human creature is exempt from error; but against
the blind veneration that is paid to the ancient classic writers, without
distinguishing their blemishes from their beauties.

Having examined the nature of this figure, and the principle on which it is
erected; I proceed, as in the first section, to some rules by which it ought to
be governed. And in the first place, it is a capital fault to introduce an
hyperbole in the description of an ordinary object or event which creates no
surprise. In such a case, the hyperbole is altogether unnatural, being
destitute of surprise, the only foundation that can support it. Take the
following instance, where the subject is extremely familiar, viz. swimming to
gain the shore after a shipwreck. I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water;
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swollen that met him: his bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good arms, in lusty strokes
To the shore, that over his wave-born basis bowed,
As stooping to relieve him.

Tempest, act 2. sc. 1.

In the next place, it may be gathered from what is said, that an hyperbole can
never suit the tone of any dispiriting passion. Sorrow in particular will never
prompt such a figure; and for that reason the following hyperboles must be
condemned as unnatural. K. Rich. Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tenderhearted cousin!
We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs, and they, shall lodge the summer-corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land.

Richard II. act 3. sc. 6. Draw them to Tyber's bank, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.

Julius Caesar, act 1. sc. 1.

Thirdly, a writer, if he wish to succeed, ought always to have the reader in
his eye. He ought in particular never to venture a bold thought or expression,
till the reader be warmed and prepared for it. For this reason, an hyperbole in
the beginning of any work can never be in its place. Example: Jam pauca aratro
jugera regiae
Moles relinquent.
Horat. Carm. lib. 2. ode. 15.

In the fourth place, the nicest point of all, is to ascertain the natural
limits of an hyperbole, beyond which being overstrained it has a bad effect.
Longinus, in the abovecited chapter, with great propriety of thought, enters a
caveat against an hyperbole of this kind. He compares it to a bowstring, which
relaxes by overstraining, and produces an effect directly opposite to what is
intended. I pretend not to ascertain any precise boundary: the attempt would be
difficult, if not impracticable. I must therefore be satisfied with an humbler
task, which is, to give a specimen of what I reckon overstrained hyperboles;
and I shall be also extremely curt upon this subject, because examples are to
be found every where. No fault is more common among writers of inferior rank;
and instances are found even among those of the finest taste; witness the
following hyperbole, too bold even for an Hotspur. Hotspur talking of Mortimer:
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower.
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood;
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp'd head in the hollow bank
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.

First Part Henry IV. act 1. sc. 4. Speaking of Henry V. England never had a
King until his time:
Virtue he had, deserving to command:
His brandished sword did blind men with its beams:
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings:
His sparkling eyes, replete with awful fire,
More dazzled, and drove back his enemies,
Than midday sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech:
He never lifted up his hand, but conquered.

First Part Henry VI. act 1. sc. 1.

Lastly, an hyperbole after it is introduced with all advantages, ought to be
comprehended within the fewest words possible. As it cannot be relished but in
the hurry and swelling of the mind, a leisurely view dissolves the charm, and
discovers the description to be extravagant at least, and perhaps also
ridiculous. This fault is palpable in a sonnet which passes for one of the
most complete in the French language. Phillis is made as far to outshine the
sun as he outshines the stars. Le silence regnoit sur la terre et sur l'onde,
L'air devenoit serain, etc.
Collection of French epigrams, vol. 1. p. 66. There is in Chaucer a thought
expressed in a single line, which sets a young beauty in a more advantageous
light, than the whole of this much-laboured poem. Up rose the sun, and up rose
Emelie.

SECT. IV. The means or instrument conceived to be the agent.
IN viewing a group of things, we have obviously a natural tendency to bestow
all possible perfection upon that particular object which makes the greatest
figure. The emotion raised by the object, is, by this means, thoroughly
gratified; and if the emotion be lively, it prompts us even to exceed nature in
the conception we form of the object. Take the following examples. For Neleus'
sons Alcides' rage had slain.
A broken rock the force of Pirus threw.
In these instances, the rage of Hercules and the force of Pirus, being the
capital circumstances, are so far exalted as to be conceived the agents that
produce the effects.

In the following instance, hunger being the chief circumstance in the
description, is itself imagined to be the patient. Whose hunger has not tasted
food these three days.
Jane Shore. -- As when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a hill.
Paradise Lost. -- As when the potent rod
Of Amram's son in Egypt's evil day
Waved round the coast, upcall'd a pitchy cloud
Of locusts.
Paradise Lost.

SECT. V. A figure, which, among related objects, extends properties of one to
another.
THis figure is not dignified with a proper name, because it has been
overlooked by all writers. It merits, however, place in this work; and must be
distinguished from those formerly handled, as depending on a different
principle. Giddy brink, jovial wine, daring wound, are examples of this figure.
Here are expressions that certainly import not the ordinary relation of an
adjective to its substantive. A brink, for example, cannot be termed giddy in a
proper sense: neither can it be termed giddy in any figurative sense that can
import any of its qualities or attributes. When we attend to the expression, we
discover that a brink is termed giddy from producing that effect in those who
stand on it. In the same manner a wound is said to be daring, not with respect
to itself, but with respect to the boldness of the person who inflicts it: and
wine is said to be jovial, as inspiring mirth and jollity. Thus the attributes
of one subject, are extended to another with which it is connected; and such
expression must be considered as a figure, because it deviates from ordinary
language.

How are we to account for this figure, for we see it lies in the thought, and
to what principle shall we refer it? Have poets a privilege to alter the nature
of things, and at pleasure to bestow attributes upon subjects to which these
attributes do not belong? It is an evident truth, which we have had often
occasion to inculcate, that the mind, in idea, passes easily and sweetly along
a train of connected objects; and, where the objects are intimately connected,
that it is disposed to carry along the good or bad properties of one to
another; especially where it is in any degree inflamed with these properties
See chap. 2. part 1. sect. 4.
. From this principle is derived the figure under consideration. Language,
invented for the communication of thought, would be imperfect, if it were not
expressive even of the slighter propensities and more delicate feelings. But
language cannot remain so imperfect, among a people who have received any
polish; because language is regulated by internal feeling, and is gradually so
improved as to express whatever passes in the mind. Thus, for example, a sword
in the hand of a coward, is, in poetical diction, termed a coward sword: the
expression is significative of an internal operation; for the mind, in passing
from the agent to its instrument, is disposed to extend to the latter the
properties of the former. Governed by the same principle, we say listening
fear, by extending the attribute listening of the man who listens, to the
passion with which he is moved. In the expression, bold deed, or audax facinus,
we extend to the effect, what properly belongs to the cause. But not to waste
time by making a commentary upon every expression of this kind, the best way to
give a complete view of the subject, is to exhibit a table of the different
connections that may give occasion to this figure. And in viewing this table,
it will be observed, that the figure can never have any grace but where the
connections are of the most intimate kind.

1. An attribute of the cause expressed as an attribute of the effect. Audax
facinus.
Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make.
An impious mortal gave the daring wound.
-- To my adventrous song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar.
Paradise Lost. 2. An attribute of the effect expressed as an attribute of the
cause. Quos periisse ambos misera censebam in mari.
Plautus. No wonder, fallen such a pernicious height.
Paradise Lost. 3. An effect expressed as an attribute of the cause. Jovial
wine, Giddy brink, Drowsy night, Musing midnight, Panting height, Astonished
thought, Mournful gloom.

Casting a dim religious light.
Milton, Comus. And the merry bells ring round,
And the jocund rebecks sound.
Milton, Allegro. 4. An atribute of a subject bestowed upon one of its parts or
members. Longing arms.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.

Romeo and Juliet, act 3. sc. 7. -- Oh, lay by
Those most ungentle looks and angry weapons;
Unless you mean my griefs and killing fears
Should stretch me out at your relentless feet.

Fair Penitent, act 3. -- And ready now
To stoop with wearied wing, and willing feet,
On the bare outside of this world.
Paradise Lost, b. 3. 5. A quality of the agent given to the instrument with
which it operates. Why peep your coward swords half out their shells?
6. An attribute of the agent given to the subject upon which it operates.
High-climbing hill.
Milton. 7. A quality of one subject given to another. Icci, beatis nunc Arabum
invides
Gazis.
Hora. Carm. l. 1. ode 29. When sapless age, and weak unable limbs,
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
Shakespeare. By art, the pilot through the boiling deep
And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship.
Iliad xxiii. 385. Then, nothing loath, the enamored fair he led,
And sunk transported on the conscious bed.
Odyss. viii. 337. A stupid moment motionless she stood.
Summer, l. 1336. 8. A circumstance connected with a subject, expressed as a
quality of the subject. Breezy summit.
It Is ours the chance of fighting fields to try.
Iliad i. 301. Oh! had I died before that well-fought wall.
Odyss. v. 395.
From this table it appears, that the expressing an effect as an attribute of
the cause, is not so agreeable as the opposite expression. The descent from
cause to effect is natural and easy: the opposite direction resembles
retrograde motion See chap. 1.
. Panting height, for example, astonished thought, are strained and uncouth
expressions, which a writer of taste will avoid. For the same reason, an
epithet is unsuitable, which at present is not applicable to the subject,
however applicable it may be afterward. Submersasque obrue puppes.
Aeneid. i. 73. And mighty ruins fall.
Iliad v. 411. Impious sons their mangled fathers wound.


Another rule regards this figure, That the property of one object ought not to
be bestowed upon another with which it is incongruous: K. Rich. -- How dare thy
joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence.

Richard II. act 3. sc. 6. The connection betwixt an awful superior and his
submissive dependent is so intimate, that an attribute may readily be
transferred from the one to the other. But awfulness cannot be so transferred,
because it is inconsistent with submission.

SECT VI. Metaphor and Allegory.
A Metaphor differs from a simile, in form only, not in substance. In a simile
the two different subjects are kept distinct in the expression, as well as in
the thought: in a metaphor, the two subjects are kept distinct in thought only,
not in expression. A hero resembles a lion, and upon that resemblance many
similes have been made by Homer and other poets. But instead of resembling a
lion, let us take the aid of the imagination, and feign or figure the hero to
be a lion. By this variation the simile is converted into a metaphor; which is
carried on by describing all the qualities of a lion that resemble those of the
hero. The fundamental pleasure here, that of resemblance, belongs to thought as
distinguished from expression. There is an additional pleasure which arises
from the expression. The poet, by figuring his hero to be a lion, goes on to
describe the lion in appearance, but in reality the hero; and his description
is peculiarly beautiful, by expressing the virtues and qualities of the hero in
new terms, which, properly speaking, belong not to him, but to a different
being. This will better be understood by examples. A family connected with a
common parent, resembles a tree, the trunk and branches of which are connected
with a common root. But let us suppose, that a family is figured not barely to
be like a tree, but to be a tree; and then the simile will be converted into a
metaphor, in the following manner. Edward's sev'n sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were sev'n fair branches, springing from one root:
Some of these branches by the dest'nies cut:
But Thomas, my dear Lord, my life, my Glo'ster,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is hacked down, and his summer-leaves all faded,
By Envy's hand and Murder's bloody axe.

Richard II. act 1. sc. 3. Figuring human life to be a voyage at sea: There is
a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat;
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.

Julius Caesar, act 4. sc. 5. Figuring glory and honor to be a garland of
fresh flowers: Hotspur. -- Would to heaven,
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!

Pr. Henry. I Will make it greater, ere I part from thee;
And all the budding honors on thy crest
I Will crop, to make a garland for my head.

First Part Henry IV. act 5. sc. 9. Figuring a man who has acquired great
reputation and honor to be a tree full of fruit: -- Oh, boys, this story
The world may read in me: my body's marked
With Roman swords; and my report was once
First with the best of note. Cymbeline loved me;
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a tree,
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night,
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay my leaves;
And left me bare to weather.

Cymbeline, act 3. sc. 3.

I am aware that the term metaphor has been used in a more extensive sense than
I give it; but I thought it of consequence, in matters of some intricacy, to
separate things that differ from each other, and to confine words within their
most proper sense. An allegory differs from a metaphor; and what I would choose
to call a figure of speech, differs from both. I shall proceed to explain these
differences. A metaphor is defined above to be an operation of the imagination,
figuring one thing to be another. An allegory requires no operation of the
imagination, nor is one thing figured to be another: it consists in choosing a
subject having properties or circumstances resembling those of the principal
subject; and the former is described in such a manner as to represent the
latter. The subject thus represented is kept out of view; we are left to
discover it by reflection; and we are pleased with the discovery, because it is
our own work. Quintilian L. 8. cap. 6. sect. 2,
gives the following instance of an allegory, O navis, referent in mare te novi
Fluctus. O quid agis? fortiter occupa portum.
Horat. lib. 1. ode 14, and explains it elegantly in the following words:
"Totusque ille Horatii locus, quo navim pro republica, fluctuum tempestates pro
bellis civilibus, portum pro pace atque concordia, dicit."

There cannot be a finer or more correct allegory than the following, in which
a vineyard is put for God's own people the Jews. Thou have brought a vine out
of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen, and planted it. Thou did cause it
to take deep root, and it filled the land. The hills were covered with its
shadow, and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars. Why have thou then
broken down her hedges, so that all which pass do pluck her? The boar out of
the wood does waste it, and the wild beast does devour it. Return, we beseech
thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold and visit this vine,
and the vineyard thy right hand has planted, and the branch thou made strong
for thyself.

Psalm 80.

In a word, an allegory is in every respect similar to an hieroglyphical
painting, excepting only, that words are used instead of colors. Their effects
are precisely the same. A hieroglyphic raises two images in the mind; one seen,
which represents one not seen. An allegory does the same. The representative
subject is described; and it is by resemblance that we are enabled to apply the
description to the subject represented.

In a figure of speech, neither is there any fiction of the imagination
employed, nor a representative subject introduced. A figure of speech, as
implied from its name, regards the expression only, not the thought; and it may
be defined, the employing a word in a sense different from what is proper to
it. Thus youth or the beginning of life, is expressed figuratively by morning
of life. Morning is the beginning of the day; and it is transferred sweetly and
easily to signify the beginning of any other series, life especially, the
progress of which is reckoned by days.

Figures of speech are reserved for a separate section; but a metaphor and
allegory are so much connected, that it is necessary to handle them together:
the rules for distinguishing the good from the bad, are common to both. We
shall therefore proceed to these rules, after adding some examples to
illustrate the nature of an allegory. Horace speaking of his love to Pyrrha,
which was now extinguished, expresses himself thus. -- Me tabula sacer
Votiva paries indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo.
Carm. l. 1. ode 5. Again, Phoebus volentem praelia me loqui,
Victas et urbes, increpuit lyra:
Ne parva Tyrrhenum per aequor
Vela darem.
Carm. l. 4. ode 15. Queen. Great Lords, wise men never sit and wail their loss,
But chearly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is It meet, that he
Should leave the helm, and, like a fearful lad,
With tearful eyes add water to the sea;
And give more strength to that which has too much?
While in his moan the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!

Third Part Henry VI. act 5. sc. 5. Oroonoko. Ha! thou have roused
The lion in his den, he stalks abroad
And the wide forest trembles at his roar.
I find the danger now.

Oroonoko, act 3. sc. 2.

The rules that govern metaphors and allegories, are of two kinds: those of the
first kind concern the construction of a metaphor or allegory, and ascertain
what are perfect and what are faulty: those of the other kind concern the
propriety or impropriety of introduction, in what circumstances these figures
may be admitted, and in what circumstances they are out of place. I begin with
rules of the first kind; some of which coincide with those already given with
respect to similes; some are peculiar to metaphors and allegories.

And in the first place, it has been observed, that a simile cannot be
agreeable where the resemblance is either too strong or too faint. This holds
equally in a metaphor and allegory; and the reason is the same in all. In the
following instances, the resemblance is too faint to be agreeable. Malcolm. --
But there is no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids, could not fill up
The cistern of my lust.

Macbeth, act 4. sc. 4. The best way to judge of this metaphor, is to convert
it into a simile; which would be bad, because there is scarce any resemblance
betwixt lust and a cistern, or betwixt enormous lust and a large cistern.
Again, He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of rule.

Macbeth, act 5. sc. 2. There is no resemblance betwixt a distempered cause and
any body that can be confined within a belt. Again, Steep me in poverty to the
very lips.

Othello, act 4. sc. 9. Poverty here must be conceived a fluid, which it
resembles not in any manner. Speaking to Bolingbroke banished for six years.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem a foil, wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home-return.

Richard II. act 1. sc. 6. Again, Here is a letter, lady,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing lifeblood.

Merchant of Venice, act 3. sc. 3. The following metaphor is strained beyond
all endurance. Timur-bec, known to us by the name of Tamarlane the Great,
writes to Bajazet Emperor of the Ottomans in the following terms. Where is the
monarch who dares resist us? where is the potentate who does not glory in being
numbered among our attendants? As for thee, descended from a Turcoman sailor,
since the vessel of thy unbounded ambition has been wrecked in the gulf of
they self-love, it would be proper, that thou should take in the sails of
they temerity, and cast the anchor of repentance in the port of sincerity and
justice, which is the port of safety; lest the tempest of our vengeance make
thee perish in the sea of the punishment thou deservest.

Such strained figures, it is observable, are not unfrequent in the first dawn
of refinement. The mind in a new enjoyment knows no bounds, and is generally
carried to excess, till experience discover the just medium.

Secondly, whatever resemblance subjects may have, it is wrong to put one for
another if they bear no mutual proportion. Where a very high and a very low
subject are compared, the simile takes on an air of burlesk; and the same will
be the effect, where the one is imagined to be the other, as in a metaphor, or
made to represent the other, as in an allegory.

Thirdly, these figures, a metaphor in particular, ought not to be extended to
a great length, nor be crowded with many minute circumstances; for in that case
it is scarcely possible to avoid obscurity. It is difficult, during any course
of time, to support a lively image of one thing being another. A metaphor drawn
out to any length, instead of illustrating or enlivening the principal subject,
becomes disagreeable by overstraining the mind. Cowley is extremely licentious
in this way. Take the following instance: Great, and wise conqu'ror, who
wherever
Thou come, do fortify, and settle there!
Who can defend as well as get;
And never had one quarter beat up yet;
Now thou art in, thou never will part
With one inch of my vanquished heart;
For since thou took'st it by assault from me,
It Is garrisoned so strong with thoughts of thee
It fears no beauteous enemy.
For the same reason, however agreeable at first long allegories may be by
their novelty, they never afford any lasting pleasure: witness the Fairy Queen,
which with great power of expression, variety of images, and melody of
versification, is scarce ever read a second time.

In the fourth place, the comparison carried on in a simile, being in a
metaphor sunk, and the principal subject being imagined that very thing which
it only resembles, an opportunity is furnished to describe it in terms taken
strictly or literally with respect to its imagined nature. This suggests
another rule, That in constructing a metaphor, the writer ought to confine
himself to the simplest expressions, and make use of such words only as are
applicable literally to the imagined nature of his subject. Figurative words
ought carefully to be avoided; for such complicated images, instead of setting
the principal subject in a strong light, involve it in a cloud; and it is well
if the reader, without rejecting by the lump, endeavor patiently to gather the
plain meaning, regardless of the figures: A stubborn and unconquerable flame
Creeps in his veins, and drinks the streams of life.

Lady Jane Gray, act 1. sc. 1. Copied from Ovid, Sorbent avidae praecordia
flammae.
Metamorphoses, lib. ix. 172. Let us analize this expression. That a fever may
be imagined a flame, I admit; though more than one step is necessary to come at
the resemblance. A fever, by heating the body, resembles fire; and it is no
stretch to imagine a fever to be a fire. Again, by a figure of speech, flame
may be put for fire, because they are commonly conjoined; and therefore a fever
may also be imagined a flame. But now admitting a fever to be a flame, its
effects ought to be explained in words that agree literally to a flame. This
rule is not observed here; for a flame drinks figuratively only, not properly.
King Henry to his son Prince Henry: Thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy
thoughts,
Which thou have whetted on thy stony heart
To stab at half an hour of my frail life.

Second Part Henry IV. act 4. sc. 11. Such faulty metaphors are pleasantly
ridiculed in the Rehearsal: Physician. Sir, to conclude, the place you fill has
more than amply exacted the talents of a wary pilot; and all these threatening
storms, which, like impregnate clouds, hover over our heads, will, when they
once are grasped but by the eye of reason, melt into fruitful showers of
blessings on the people.


Bays. Pray mark that allegory. Is not that good?


Johnson. Yes, that grasping of a storm with the eye, is admirable.


Act 2. sc. 1.

Fifthly, The jumbling different metaphors in the same sentence, or the
beginning with one metaphor and ending with another, is commonly called a mixed
metaphor. Quintilian bears testimony against it in the bitterest terms: "Nam id
quoque in primis est custodiendum, ut quo ex genere coeperis translationis, hoc
desinas. Multi enim, cum initium a tempestate sumpserunt, incendio aut ruina
finiunt: quae est inconsequentia rerum foedissima." L. 8. cap. 6. 2. K. Henry.
-- Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war,
And move in that obedient orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light?

First Part Henry IV. act 5. sc. 1. Whether it is nobler in the mind, to suffer
The stings and arrows of outrag'ous fortune;
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them.

Hamlet, act 3. sc. 2.

In the sixth place, It is unpleasant to join different metaphors in the same
period, even where they are preserved distinct. It is difficult to imagine the
subject to be first one thing and then another in the same period without
interval: the mind is distracted by the rapid transition; and when the
imagination is put on such hard duty, its images are too faint to produce any
good effect: At regina gravi jamdudum saucia cura,
Vulnus alit venis, et caeco carpitur igni.
Aeneid. iv. 1. -- -- Est mollis flamma medullas
Interea, et tacitum vivit sub pectore vulnus.
Aeneid. iv. 66. Motum ex Metello consule civicum,
Bellique causas, et vitia, et modos,
Ludumque fortunae, gravesque
Principum amicitias, et arma
Nondum expiatis uncta cruoribus,
Periculosae plenum opus aleae,
Tractas, et incedis per ignes
Subpositos cineri doloso.
Horat. Carm. l. 2. ode 1.

In the last place, It is still worse to jumble together metaphorical and
natural expression, or to construct a period so as that it must be understood
partly metaphorically partly literally. The imagination cannot follow with
sufficient ease changes so sudden and unprepared. A metaphor begun and not
carried on, has no beauty; and instead of light there is nothing but obscurity
and confusion. Instances of such incorrect composition are without number. I
shall, for a specimen, select a few from different authors:

Speaking of Britain, This precious stone set in the sea
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house
Against the envy of less happier lands.

Richard II. act 2. sc. 1. In the first line Britain is figured to be a
precious stone. In the following lines, Britain, divested of her metaphorical
dress, is presented to the reader in her natural appearance. These growing
feathers plucked from Caesar's wing,
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men,
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

Julius Caesar, act 1. sc. 1. Rebus angustis animosus atque
Fortis adpare: sapienter idem
Contrahes vento nimium secundo
Turgida vela.
The following is a miserable jumble of expressions, arising from an unsteady
view of the subject betwixt its figurative and natural appearance. But now from
gathering clouds destruction pours,
Which ruins with mad rage our halcyon hours:
Mists from black jealousies the tempest form,
Whilst late divisions reinforce the storm.
Dispensary, canto 3. To thee, the world its present homage pays,
The harvest early, but mature the praise.
Pope's imitation of Horace, b. 2. Oui, sa pudeur n'est que franche grimace,
Qu'une ombre de virtue qui guard mal la place,
Et qui s'evanouit, comme l'on peut savoir
Aux rayons du soleil qu'une bourse fait voir.

Molliere, L'Etourdi, act 3. sc. 2. Et son feu depourvu de sense et de lecture,
S'eteint a chaque pas, fault de nourriture.
Boileau, L'art poetique, chant. 3. l. 319. Dryden, in his dedication to the
translation of Juvenal, says, When thus, as I may say, before the use of the
loadstone, or knowledge of the compass, I was sailing in a vast ocean, without
other help than the pole star of the ancients, and the rules of the French
stage among the moderns, etc.

There is a time when factions, by the vehemence of their own fermentation,
stun and disable one another.

Bolingbroke.

This fault of jumbling the figure and plain expression into one confused mass,
is not less common in allegory than in metaphor. Take the following example. --
Heu! quoties fidem,
Mutatosque Deos flebit, et aspera
Nigris aequora ventis
Emirabitur insolens,
Qui nunc te fruitur credulus aurea:
Qui semper vacuam, semper amabilem
Sperat, nescius aurae Fallacis.
Horat. Carm. l. 1. ode 5. Lord Halifax, speaking of the ancient fabulists:
"They (says he) wrote in signs and spoke in parables: all their fables carry a
double meaning: the story is one and entire; the characters the same
throughout; not broken or changed, and always conformable to the nature of the
creature they introduce. They never tell you, that the dog which snapp'd at a
shadow, lost his troop of horse; that would be unintelligible. This is his
(Dryden's) new way of telling a story, and confounding the moral and the fable
together." After instancing from the hind and panther, he goes on thus: "What
relation has the hind to our Savior? or what notion have we of a panther's
bible? If you say he means the church, how does the church feed on lawns, or
range in the forest? Let it be always a church or always a clovenfooted beast,
for we cannot bear his shifting the scene every line."

A few words more upon allegory. Nothing gives greater pleasure than this
figure, when the representative subject bears a strong analogy, in all its
circumstances, to that which is represented. But the choice is seldom so lucky;
the resemblance of the representative subject to the principal, being generally
so faint and obscure, as to puzzle and not please. An allegory is still more
difficult in painting than in poetry. The former can show no resemblance but
what appears to the eye: the latter has many other resources for showing the
resemblance. With respect to what the Abbe du Bos Reflections sur la Poesy,
etc. vol. 1. sect. 24.
terms mixed allegorical compositions, these may do in poetry, because in
writing the allegory can easily be distinguished from the historical part: no
person mistakes Virgil's Fame for a real being. But such a mixture in a picture
is intolerable; because in a picture the objects must appear all of the same
kind, wholly real or wholly emblematical. The history of Mary de Medicis, in
the palace of Luxenbourg, painted by Rubens, is in a vicious taste, by a
perpetual jumble of real and allegorical personages, which produce a
discordance of parts and an obscurity upon the whole: witness in particular,
the tablature representing the arrival of Mary de Medicis at Marseilles: mixed
with the real personages, the Nereids and Tritons appear sounding their shells.
Such a mixture of fiction and reality in the same group, is strangely absurd.
The picture of Alexander and Roxana, described by Lucian, is gay and fanciful:
but it suffers by the allegorical figures. It is not in the wit of man to
invent an allegorical representation deviating farther from any appearance of
resemblance, than one exhibited by Lewis XIV. anno 1664; in which an overgrown
chariot, intended to represent that of the sun, is dragged along, surrounded
with men and women, representing the four ages of the world, the celestial
signs, the seasons, the hours, etc.: a monstrous composition; and yet scarce
more absurd than Guido's tablature of Aurora.

In an allegory, as well as in a metaphor, terms ought to be chosen that
properly and literally are applicable to the representative subject. Nor ought
any circumstance to be added, that is not proper to the representative subject,
however justly it may be applicable figuratively to the principal. Upon this
account the following allegory is faulty. Ferus et Cupido,
Semper ardentes acuens sagittas
Cote cruenta.
Horat. l. 2. ode 8. For though blood may suggest the cruelty of love, it is an
improper or immaterial circumstance in the representative subject: water, not
blood, is proper for a whetstone.

We proceed to the next head, which is, to examine in what circumstances these
figures are proper, in what improper. This inquiry is not altogether superseded
by what is said upon the same subject in the chapter of comparisons; because,
upon trial, it will be found, that a short metaphor or allegory may be proper,
where a simile, drawn out to a greater length, and in its nature more solemn,
would scarce be relished. The difference however is not considerable; and in
most instances the same rules are applicable to both. And, in the first place,
a metaphor, as well as a simile, are excluded from common conversation, and
from the description of ordinary incidents.

In the next place, in any severe passion which totally occupies the mind,
metaphor is unnatural. For that reason, we must condemn the following speech of
Macbeth. Methought, I heard a voice cry, Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep; the innocent sleep;
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of Care,
The birth of each day's life, sore Labor's bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great Nature's second course,
Chief nourisher in life's feast. --

Act 2. sc. 3. The next example, of deep despair, beside the highly figurative
style, has more the air of raving than of sense: Calista. Is it the voice of
thunder, or my father?
Madness! Confusion! let the storm come on,
Let the tumultuous roar drive all upon me,
Dash my devoted bark; ye surges, break it;
It Is for my ruin that the tempest rises.
When I am lost, sunk to the bottom low,
Peace shall return, and all be calm again.

Fair Penitent, act 4. The metaphor I next introduce, is sweet and lively, but
it suits not the fiery temper of Chamont, inflamed with passion. Parables are
not the language of wrath venting itself without restraint: Chamont. You took
her up a little tender flower,
Just sprouted on a bank, which the next frost
Had nip'd; and with a careful loving hand,
Transplanted her into your own fair garden,
Where the sun always shines: there long she flourished,
Grew sweet to sense and lovely to the eye,
Till at the last a cruel spoiler came,
Cropped this fair rose, and rifled all its sweetness,
Then cast it like a loathsome weed away.

Orphan, act 4. The following speech, full of imagery, is not natural in grief
and dejection of mind. Gonsalez. O my son! from the blind dotage
Of a father's fondness these ills arose.
For thee I Have been ambitious, base and bloody:
For thee I Have plunged into this sea of sin;
Stemming the tide with only one weak hand,
While the other bore the crown, (to wreathe thy brow),
Whose weight has sunk me ere I reached the shore.

Mourning Bride, act 5. sc. 6. The finest picture that ever was drawn of deep
distress, is in Macbeth Act 4. sc. 6.
, where Macduff is represented lamenting his wife and children, inhumanly
murdered by the tyrant. Struck with the news, he questions the messenger over
and over; not that he doubted the fact, but that his heart revolted against so
cruel a misfortune. After struggling some time with his grief, he turns from
his wife and children to their savage butcher; and then gives vent to his
resentment; but still with manliness and dignity: O, I could play the woman
with mine eyes,
And braggart with my tongue. But, gentle Heaven!
Cut short all intermission: front to front
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
Within my sword's length set him -- If he 'scape,
Then Heaven forgive him too.
This passage is a delicious picture of human nature. One expression only seems
doubtful. In examining the messenger, Macduff expresses himself thus: He has
no children -- all my pretty ones!
Did you say all? what all? Oh, hell-kite! all?
What! all my pretty little chickens and their dam,
At one fell swoop!
Metaphorical expression, I am sensible, may sometimes be used with grace,
where a regular simile would be intolerable: but there are situations so
overwhelming, as not to admit even the slightest metaphor. It requires great
delicacy of taste to determine with firmness, whether the present case be of
that nature. I incline to think it is; and yet I would not willingly alter a
single word of this admirable scene.

But metaphorical language is proper when a man struggles to bear with dignity
or decency a misfortune however great. The struggle agitates and animates the
mind: Wolsey. Farewell, a long farewell, to all my greatness!
This is the state of man; to day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes; tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls as I do.

Henry VIII. act 3. sc. 6.

SECT. VII. Figure of Speech.
IN the section immediately foregoing, a figure of speech is defined, "The
employing a word in a sense different from what is proper to it;" and the new
or uncommon sense of the word is termed the figurative sense. The figurative
sense must have a relation to that which is proper; and the more intimate the
relation is, the figure is the more happy. How ornamental this figure is to
language, will not be readily imagined by any one who has not given peculiar
attention. I shall endeavor to display its capital beauties and advantages. In
the first place, a word used figuratively, together with its new sense,
suggests what it commonly bears: and thus it has the effect to present two
objects; one signified by the figurative sense, which may be termed the
principal object; and one signified by the proper sense, which may be termed
accessory. The principal makes a part of the thought; the accessory is merely
ornamental. In this respect, a figure of speech is precisely similar to
concordant sounds in music, which, without contributing to the melody, make it
harmonious. I explain myself by examples. Youth, by a figure of speech, is
termed the morning of life. This expression signifies youth, the principal
object, which enters into the thought: but it suggests, at the same time, the
proper sense of morning; and this accessory object being in itself beautiful
and connected by resemblance to the principal object, is not a little
ornamental. I give another example, of a different kind, where an attribute is
expressed figuratively, Imperious ocean. Together with the figurative meaning
of the epithet imperious, there is suggested its proper meaning, viz. the stern
authority of a despotic prince. Upon this figurative power of words, Vida
descants with great elegance: Nonne vides, verbis ut veris saepe relictis
Accersant simulata, aliundeque nomina porro
Transportent, aptentque aliis ea rebus; ut ip sae,
Exuviasque novas, res, insolitosque colores
Indutae, saepe externi mirentur amictus
Unde illi, laetaeque aliena luce fruantur,
Mutatoque habitu, nec jam sua nomina mallent?
Saepe ideo, cum bella canunt, incendia c^edas
Cernere, diluviumque ingens surgentibus undis.
Contra etiam Martis pugnas imitabitur ignis,
Cum furit accensis acies Vulcania campis.
Nec turbato oritur quondam minor aequore pugna:
Confligunt animosi Euri certamine vasto
Inter se, pugnantque adversis molibus undae.
Usque adeo passim sua res insignia laetae
Permutantque, juvantque vicissim; and mutua sese
Altera in alterius transformat protinus ora.
Tum specie capti gaudent spectare legentes:
Nam diversa simul datur e re cernere eadem
Multarum simulacra animo subeuntia rerum.
Poet. lib. 3. l. 44.

In the next place, this figure possesses a signal power of aggrandising an
object, by the following means. Words, which have no original beauty but what
arises from their sound, acquire an adventitious beauty from their meaning. A
word signifying any thing that is agreeable, becomes by that means agreeable;
for the agreeableness of the object is communicated to its name See chap. 2.
part 1. sect. 4.
. This acquired beauty, by the force of custom, adheres to the word even when
used figuratively; and the beauty received from the thing it properly
signifies, is communicated to the thing which it is made to signify
figuratively. Consider the foregoing expression Imperious ocean, how much more
elevated it is than Stormy ocean.

Thirdly, this figure has a happy effect in preventing the familiarity of
proper names. The familiarity of a proper name, is communicated to the thing it
signifies by means of their intimate connection; and the thing is thereby
brought down in our feeling I have often regretted, that a factious spirit of
opposition to the reigning family made it necessary in public worship to
distinguish the King by his proper name. One will scarce imagine, who has not
made the trial, how much better it sounds to pray for our Sovereign Lord the
King, without any addition.
. This bad effect is prevented by using a figurative word instead of one that
is proper; as, for example, when we express the sky by terming it the blue
vault of heaven. For though no work made with hands can compare with the sky in
magnificence, the expression however is good, by preventing the object from
being brought down by the familiarity of its proper name. With respect to the
degrading familiarity of proper names, Vida has the following passage. Hinc si
dura mihi passus dicendus Ulysses,
Non illum vero memorabo nomine, sed qui
Et mores hominum multorum vidit, and urbes,
Naufragus eversae post saeva incendia Trojae.
Poet. lib. 2. l. 46.

Lastly, by this figure language is enriched and rendered more copious. In that
respect, were there no other, a figure of speech is a happy invention. This
property is finely touched by Vida: Quinetiam agricolas ea fandi nota voluptas
Exercet, dum laeta seges, dum trudere gemmas
Incipiunt vites, sitientiaque aetheris imbrem
Prata bibunt, ridentque satis surgentibus agri.
Hanc vulgo speciem propriae penuria vocis
Intulit, indictisque urgens in rebus egestas.
Quippe ubi se vera ostendebant nomina nusquam,
Fas erat hinc atque hinc transfer simillima veris.
Poet. lib. 3. l. 90.

The beauties I have mentioned belong to every figure of speech. Several other
beauties peculiar to one or other sort, I shall have occasion to remark
afterward.

Not only subjects, but qualities, actions, effects, may be expressed
figuratively. Thus as to subjects, the gates of breath for the lips, the watery
kingdom for the ocean. As to qualities, fierce for stormy, in the expression
Fierce winter: altus for profundus, altus puteus, altum mare: Breathing for
perspiring, Breathing plants. Again, as to actions, the sea rages: Time will
melt her frozen thoughts: Time kills grief. An effect is put for the cause, as
lux for the sun; and a cause for the effect, as boum labores for corn. The
relation of resemblance is one plentiful source of figures of speech; and
nothing is more common than to apply to one object the name of another that
resembles it in any respect. Height, size, and wordly greatness, though in
themselves they have no resemblance, produce emotions in the mind that have a
resemblance; and, led by this resemblance, we naturally express worldly
greatness by height or size. One feels a certain uneasiness in looking down to
a great depth: and hence depth is made to express any thing disagreeable by
excess; as depth of grief, depth of despair. Again, height of place and time
long past, produce similar feelings; and hence the expression, Ut altius
repetam. Distance in past time, producing a strong feeling, is put for any
strong feeling: Nihil mihi antiquius nostra amicitia. Shortness with relation
to space, for shortness with relation to time: Brevis esse laboro; obscurus
fio. Suffering a punishment resembles paying a debt: hence pendere poenas. Upon
the same account, light may be put for glory, sunshine for prosperity, and
weight for importance.

Many words, originally figurative, having, by long and constant use, lost
their figurative power, are degraded to the inferior rank of proper terms. Thus
the words that express the operations of the mind, have in all languages been
originally figurative. The reason holds in all, that when these operations came
first under consideration, there was no other way of describing them but by
what they resembled. It was not practicable to give them proper names, as may
be done to objects that can be ascertained by sight and touch. A soft nature,
jarring tempers, weight of woe, pompous phrase, beget compassion, assuage grief,
break a vow, bend the eye downward, shower down curses, drowned in tears, wrapped
in joy, warmed with eloquence, laden with spoils, and a thousand other
expressions of the like nature, have lost their figurative sense. Some terms
there are, that cannot be said to be either purely figurative or altogether
proper: originally figurative, they are tending to simplicity, without having
lost altogether their figurative power. Virgil's Regina saucia cura, is perhaps
one of these expressions. With ordinary readers, saucia will be considered as
expressing simply the effect of grief; but one of a lively imagination will
exalt the phrase into a figure.

To epitomize this subject, and at the same time to give a clear view of it, I
cannot think of a better method, than to present to the reader a list of the
several relations upon which figures of speech are commonly founded. This list
I divide into two tables; one of subjects expressed figuratively, and one of
attributes.

FIRST TABLE. Subjects expressed figuratively.
1. A word proper to one subject employed figuratively to express a resembling
subject. There is no figure of speech so frequent, as what is derived from the
relation of resemblance. Youth, for example, is signified figuratively by the
morning of life. The life of a man resembles a natural day in several
particulars. The morning is the beginning of day, youth the beginning of life:
the morning is cheerful, so is youth; etc. By another resemblance, a bold
warrior is termed the thunderbolt of war; a multitude of troubles, a sea of
troubles.

No other figure of speech possesses so many different beauties, as that which
is founded on resemblance. Beside the beauties above mentioned, common to all
sorts, it possesses in particular the beauty of a metaphor or of a simile. A
figure of speech built upon resemblance, suggests always a comparison betwixt
the principal subject and the accessory; and by this means every good effect of
a metaphor or simile, may, in a short and lively manner, be produced by this
figure of speech.

2. A word proper to the effect employed figuratively to express the cause. Lux
for the sun. Shadow for cloud. A helmet is signified by the expression
glittering terror. A tree by shadow or umbrage. Hence the expression, Nec habet
Pelion umbras.
Ovid. Where the dun umbrage hangs.
Spring, l. 1023. A wound is made to signify an arrow: Vulnere non pedibus te
consequar.
Ovid.

There is a peculiar force and beauty in this figure. The word which signifies
figuratively the principal subject, denotes it to be a cause by suggesting the
effect.

3. A word proper to the cause, employed figuratively to express the effect.
Boumque labores for corn. Sorrow or grief for tears. Again Ulysses veiled his
pensive head,
Again unmann'd, a shower of sorrow shed.
Streaming Grief his faded cheek bedewed.


Blindness for darkness: Caecis erramus in undis.
Aeneid. iii. 200.

There is a peculiar energy in this figure similar to that in the former. The
figurative name denotes the subject to be an effect by suggesting its cause.

4. Two things being intimately connected, the proper name of the one employed
figuratively to signify the other. Day for light. Night for darkness. Hence, A
sudden night. Winter for a storm at sea. Interea magno misceri murmr pontum,
Emissamque Hyemem sensit Neptunus.
Aeneid. i. 128. This last figure would be too bold for a British writer, as a
storm at sea is not inseparably connected with winter in this climate.

5. A word proper to an attribute employed figuratively to denote the subject.
Youth and beauty for those who are young and beautiful: Youth and beauty shall
be laid in dust.

Majesty for the King: What art thou, that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form,
In which the Majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometime march?

Hamlet, act 1. sc. 1. -- Or have ye chosen this place,
After the toils of battle, to repose
Your wearied virtue?
Paradise Lost. Verdure for a green field.
Summer. l. 301. Speaking of cranes: To pigmy nations wounds and death they
bring,
And all the war descends upon the wing.
Iliad iii. 10. Cool age advances venerably wise.
Iliad iii. 149.

The peculiar beauty of this figure arises from suggesting an attribute that
embellishes the subject, or puts it in a stronger light.

6. A complex term employed figuratively to denote one of the component parts.
Funus for a dead body. Burial for a grave.

7. The name of one of the component parts instead of the complex term. Taeda
for a marriage. The East for a country situated east from us. Jovis vestigia
servat, for imitating Jupiter in general.

8. A word signifying time or place employed figuratively to denote a connected
subject. Clime for a nation, or for a constitution of government: Hence the
expression, Merciful clime. Fleecy winter for snow. Seculum felix.

9. A part for the whole. The pole for the earth. The head for the person.
Triginta minas pro capite tuo dedi.
Plautus. Tergum for the man: Fugiens tergum.
Ovid. Vultus for the man: Jam fulgor armorum fugaces
Terret equos, equitumque vultus.
Horat. Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
Tam chari capitis?
Horat. Dumque virent genua.
Horat. Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
Iliad ix. 616. -- Forthwith from the pool he rears
His mighty stature.
Paradise Lost. The silent heart which grief assails.
Parnell. The peculiar beauty of this figure consists in marking out that part
which makes the greatest figure.

10. The name of the container employed figuratively to signify what is
contained. Grove for the birds in it: Vocal grove. Ships for the seamen:
Agonizing ships. Mountains for the sheep pasturing upon them: Bleating
mountains. Zacynthus, Ithaca, etc. for the inhabitants. Ex moestis domibus.
Livy.

11. The name of the sustainer employed figuratively to signify what is
sustained. Altar for the sacrifice. Field for the battle fought upon it:
Well-fought field.

12. The name of the materials employed figuratively to signify the things made
of them. Ferrum for gladius.

13. The names of the Heathen deities employed figuratively to signify what
they patronise. Jove for the air. Mars for war. Venus for beauty. Cupid for
love. Ceres for corn. Neptune for the sea. Vulcan for fire.

This figure bestows great elevation upon the subject; and therefore ought to
be confined to the higher strains of poetry.


SECOND TABLE. Attributes expressed figuratively.
1. When two attributes are connected, the name of the one may be employed
figuratively to express the other. Purity and virginity are attributes of the
same person. Hence the expression, Virgin snow for pure snow.

2. A word signifying properly an attribute of one subject, employed
figuratively to express a resembling attribute of another subject. Tottering
state. Imperious ocean. Angry flood. Raging tempest. Shallow fears. My sure
divinity shall bear the shield,
And edge thy sword to reap the glorious field.
Odyssey xx. 61.

Black omen, for an omen that portends bad fortune: Ater odor.
Virgil.

The peculiar beauty of this figure arises from suggesting a comparison.

3. A word proper to the subject, employed to express one of its attributes.
Men's for intellectus. Men's for a resolution. Istam, oro, exue mentem.

4. When two subjects have a resemblance by a common quality, the name of the
one subject may be employed figuratively to denote that quality in the other.
Summer life for agreeable life.

5. The name of the instrument, made to signify the power of employing it. --
Melpomene, cui liquidam pater
Vocem cum cithara dedit.

The ample field of figurative expression displayed in these tables, affords
great scope for reasoning and reflection. Several of the observations relating
to metaphor, are applicable to figures of speech. These I shall slightly
retouch, with some additions peculiarly adapted to the present subject.

In the first place, as the figure under consideration is built upon relation,
we find from experience, and it must be obvious from reason, that the beauty of
the figure depends on the intimacy of the relation betwixt the figurative and
proper sense of the word. A slight resemblance, in particular, will never make
this figure agreeable. The expression, for example, drink down a secret, for
listening to a secret with attention, is harsh and uncouth, because there is
scarce any resemblance betwixt listening and drinking. The expression weighty
crack, used by Ben Johnson for loud crack, is worse if possible: a loud sound
has not the slightest resemblance to a piece of matter that is weighty. The
following expression of Lucretius is not less faulty. "Et lepido quae sunt
fucata sonore." i. 645. -- Sed magis
Pugnas et exactos tyrannos
Densum humeris bibit aure vulgus.
Horat. Carm. l. 2. ode 13. Phemius! let acts of gods, and heroes old,
What ancient bards in hall and bower have told,
Attemper'd to the lyre, your voice employ,
Such the pleased ear will drink with silent joy,
Odyssey i. 433. Strepitumque exterritus hausit.
Aeneid. vi. 559. -- Write, my Queen,
And with mine eyes I Will drink the words you send.

Cymbeline, act 1. sc. 2. As thus the effulgence tremulous I drink.
Summer, l. 1684. Neque audit currus habenas.
Georg. i. 514. O Prince! (Lycaon's valiant son replied)
As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
The horses practiced to their lord's command,
Shall hear the rein, and answer to thy hand.
Iliad. v. 288.

The following figures of speech seem altogether wild and extravagant, the
figurative and proper meaning having no connection whatever. Moving softness,
freshness breathes, breathing prospect, flowing spring, dewy light, lucid
coolness, and many others of this false coin may be found in Thomson's Seasons.

Secondly, the proper sense of the word ought to bear some proportion to the
figurative sense, and not soar much above it, nor sink much below it. This
rule, as well as the foregoing, is finely illustrated by Vida: Haec adeo cum
sint, cum fas audere poetis
Multa modis multis; tamen observare memento,
Si quando haud propriis rem mavis dicere verbis,
Translatisque aliunde notis, longeque petitis,
Ne nimiam ostendas, quaerendo talia, curam.
Namque aliqui exercent vim duram, et rebus iniqui
Nativam eripiunt formam, indignantibus ipsis,
Invitasque jubent alienos sumere vultus.
Haud magis imprudens mihi erit, et luminis expers,
Qui puero ingentes habitus det far gigantis,
Quam siquis stabula alta lares appellet equinos,
Aut crines magnae genitricis gramina dicat.
Poet. l. iii. 148.

Thirdly, in a figure of speech, every circumstance ought to be avoided that
agrees with the proper sense only, not the figurative sense; for it is the
latter that expresses the thought, and the former serves for no other purpose
but to make harmony: Zacynthus green with ever-shady groves,
And Ithaca, presumptuous boast their loves;
Obtruding on my choice a second lord,
They press the Hymenean rite abhorred.
Odyssey xix. 152. Zacynthus here standing figuratively for the inhabitants,
the description of the island is quite out of place. It puzzles the reader, by
making him doubt whether the word ought to be taken in its proper or figurative
sense. -- Write, my Queen,
And with mine eyes. I Will drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.

Cymbeline, act 1. sc. 2. The disgust one has to drink ink in reality, is
nothing to the purpose where the subject is drinking ink figuratively.

In the fourth place, to draw consequences from a figure of speech, as if the
word were to be understood literally, is a gross absurdity, for it is
confounding truth with fiction: Be Moubray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
That they may break his foaming courser's back,
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford.

Richard II. act 1. sc. 3. Sin may be imagined heavy in a figurative sense: but
weight in a proper sense belongs to the accessory only; and therefore to
describe the effects of weight, is to desert the principal subject, and to
convert the accessory into a principal. Cromwell. How does your Grace?

Wolsey. Why, well;
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
I know myself now, and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience. The King has cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace; and, from these shoulders,
These ruined pillars, out of pity taken
A load would sink a navy, too much honor.

Henry VIII. act 3. sc. 6. Ulysses speaking of Hector: I wonder now how yonder
city stands
When we have here the base and pillar by us.

Troilus and Cressida, act 4. sc. 9. Othello. No, my heart is turned to stone:
I strike it and it hurts my hand.


Othello, act 4. sc. 5. Not less, even in this despicable now,
Than when my name filled Afric with affrights,
And froze your hearts beneath your torrid zone.

Don Sebastian King of Portugal, act 1. How long a space, since first I loved,
it is!
To look into a glass I fear,
And am surprised with wonder, when I miss
Gray hairs and wrinkles there.
Cowley, vol. 1. p. 86. I chose the flourishing'st tree in all the park
With freshest boughs, and fairest head;
I cut my love into his gentle bark,
And in three days behold it is dead;
My very written flames so violent be,
They Have burnt and withered up the tree.
Cowley, vol. 1. p. 136. Ah, mighty Love, that it were inward heat
Which made this precious Limbeck sweat!
But what, alas, ah what does it avail
That she weeps tears so wondrous cold,
As scarce the asses hoof can hold,
So cold, that I admire they fall not hail.
Cowley, vol. 1. p. 132. Je crains que cette saison
Ne nous amenne la peste;
La gueule du chien celeste
Vomit feu sur l'horison.
A fin que je m'en delivre,
Je veux lire ton gros livre
Jusques au dernier feuillet:
Tout ce que ta plume trace,
Robinet, a de la glace
A fair trembler Juillet.
Maynard. In me tota ruens Venus
Cyprum deseruit.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 19. Almeria. O Alphonso, Alphonso!
Devouring seas have washed thee from my sight,
No time shall raze thee from my memory;
No, I will live to be thy monument:
The cruel ocean is no more thy tomb;
But in my heart thou art interred.

Mourning Bride, act 1. sc. 1. This would be very right, if there were any
inconsistence in being interred in one place really and in another place
figuratively.

From considering that a word employed in a figurative sense suggests at the
same time its proper meaning, a fifth rule occurs, That to raise a figure of
speech, we ought to use no word, the proper sense of which is inconsistent or
incongruous with the subject: for no incongruity, far less inconsistency,
whether real or imagined, ought to enter into the expression of any subject:
Interea genitor Tyberini ad fluminis undam
Vulnera siccabat lymphis --
Aeneid. x. 833. Tres adeo incertos caeca caligine soles
Erramus pelago, totidem sine sidere noctes.
Aeneid. iii. 203.

The foregoing rule may be extended to form a sixth, That no epithet ought to
be given to the figurative sense of a word that agrees not also with its proper
sense: -- Dicat Opuntiae
Frater Megillae, quo beatus
Vulnere.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 27. Parcus deorum cultor, et infrequens,
Insanientis dum sapientiae
Consultus erro.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 34.

Seventhly, The crowding into one period or thought different figures of
speech, is not less faulty than crowding metaphors in that manner. The mind is
distracted in the quick transition from one image to another, and is puzzled
instead of being pleased: I am of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his music vows.

Hamlet. My bleeding bosom sickens at the sound.
Odyss. i. 439. -- Ah miser,
Quanta laboras in Charybdi!
Digne puer meliore flamma.
Quae saga, quis te solvere Thessalis
Magus venenis, quis poterit deus?
Vix illigatum te triformi
Pegasus expediet Chimaera.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 27.

Eighthly, If crowding figures be bad, it is still worse to graft one figure
upon another. For instance, While his keen falchion drinks the warriors lives.
Iliad xi. 211. A falchion drinking the warriors blood is a figure built upon
resemblance, which is passable. But then in the expression, lives is again put
for blood; and by thus grafting one figure upon another the expression is
rendered obscure and unpleasant.

Ninthly, Intricate and involved figures, that can scarce be analized or
reduced to plain language, are least of all tolerable: Votis incendimus aras.
Aeneid. iii. 279. -- Onerantque canistris
Dona laboratae Cereris.
Aeneid. viii. 180. Vulcan to the Cyclopes, Arma acri facienda viro: nunc
viribus usus,
Nunc manibus rapidis, omni nunc art magistra:
Praecipitate moras.
Aeneid. viii. 441. -- Huic gladio, perque aerea suta
Per tunicam squalentem auro, latus haurit apertum.
Aeneid. x. 313. Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Lethi, corripuit gradum.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 3. Scriberis Vario fortis, et hostium
Victor, Maeonii carminis alite.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 6. Else shall our fates be numbered with the dead.
Iliad v. 294. Commutual death the fate of war confounds.
Iliad viii. 85. and xi. 117. Speaking of Proteus, Instant he wears, elusive of
the rape,
The mimic force of every savage shape.
Odyss. iv. 563. Rolling convulsive on the floor, is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate Queen.
Ibid. iv. 952. The mingling tempest waves its gloom.
Autumn, 337. A various sweetness swells the gentle race.
Ibid. 640. A sober calm fleeces unbounded either.
Ibid. 967. The distant water-fall swells in the breeze.
Winter, 738.

In the tenth place, When a subject is introduced by its proper name, it is
absurd to attribute to it the properties of a different subject to which the
word is sometimes applied in a figurative sense: Hear me, oh Neptune! thou
whose arms are hurled
From shore to shore, and gird the solid world.
Odyss. ix. 617. Neptune is here introduced personally, and not figuratively
for the ocean: the description therefore, which is only applicable to the
ocean, is altogether improper.

It is not sufficient, that a figure of speech be regularly constructed, and be
free from blemish: it requires taste to discern when it is proper when
improper; and taste, I suspect, is the only guide we can rely on. One however
may gather from reflection and experience, that ornaments and graces suit not
any of the dispiriting passions, nor are proper for expressing any thing grave
and important. In familiar conversation, they are in some measure ridiculous.
Prospero in the Tempest, speaking to his daughter Miranda, says, The fringed
curtains of thine eyes advance,
And say what thou see yond.
No exception can be taken to the justness of the figure; and circumstances may
be imagined to make it proper: but it is certainly not proper in familiar
conversation.

In the last place, though figures of speech have a charming effect when
accurately constructed and properly introduced, they ought however to be
scattered with a sparing hand: nothing is more luscious, and nothing
consequently more satiating, than redundant ornament of any kind.

CHAP. XXI. Narration and Description.
HORACE, and many writers after him, give instructions for choosing a subject
adapted to the genius of the author. But rules of criticism would be endless,
did one descend to peculiarities in talent or genius. The aim of the present
work is, to consider human nature in general, and to explore what is common to
the species. The choice of a subject comes not under such a plan: but the
manner of execution comes under it; because the manner of execution is
subjected to general rules These rules respect the things expressed, as well as
the language or expression; which suggests a division of the present chapter
into two parts; first of thoughts, and next of words. I pretend not to justify
this division as entirely accurate. In discoursing of the thoughts, it is
difficult to abstract altogether from words; and still more difficult, in
discoursing of the words, to abstract altogether from thought.

The first observation is, That the thoughts which embellish a narration ought
to be chaste and solid. While the mind is intent upon facts, it is little
disposed to the operarations of the imagination. Poetical images in a grave
history are intolerable; and yet Strada's Belgic history is full of poetical
images. These being discordant with the subject, are disgustful; and they have
a still worse effect, by giving an air of fiction to a genuine history. Such
flowers ought to be scattered with a sparing hand, even in epic poetry; and at
no rate are they proper, till the reader be warmed, and by an enlivened
imagination be prepared to relish them: in that state of mind, they are
extremely agreeable. But while we are sedate and attentive to an historical
chain of facts, we reject with disdain every fiction. This Belgic history is
indeed woefully vicious both in matter and form: it is stuffed with frigid and
unmeaning reflections, as well as with poetical flashes, which, even laying
aside the impropriety, are mere tinsel.

Vida Poet. lib. 2. l. 30.
, following Horace, recommends a modest commencement of an epic poem; giving
for a reason, that the writer ought to husband his fire. This reason has
weight; but what is said above suggests a reason still more weighty: Bold
thoughts and figures are never relished till the mind be heated and thoroughly
engaged, which is not the reader's case at the commencement. Shakespeare, in the
first part of his history of Henry VI. begins with a sentiment too bold for the
most heated imagination: Bedford. Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to
night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars.
That have consented unto Henry's death!
Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
England never lost a king of so much worth.

The passage with which Strada begins his history, is too poetical for a
subject of that kind; and at any rate too high for the beginning of a grave
performance. A third reason ought to have not less influence than either of the
former: A man who, upon his first appearance, endeavors to exhibit all his
talents, is never relished; the first periods of a work ought therefore to be
short, natural, and simple. Cicero, in his oration pro Archia poeta, errs
against this rule: his reader is out of breath at the very first period, which
seems never to end. Burnet begins the history of his own times with a period
long and intricate.

A third rule or observation is, That where the subject is intended for
entertainment solely, not for instruction, a thing ought to be described as it
appears, not as it is in reality. In running, for example, the impulse upon the
ground is accurately proportioned to the celerity of motion: in appearance it
is otherwise; for a person in swift motion seems to skim the ground, and
scarcely to touch it. Virgil, with great taste, describes quick running
according to its appearance; and thereby raises an image far more lively, than
it could have been by adhering scrupulously to truth: Hos super advenit Volsca
de gente Camilla,
Agmen agens equitum et florentes aere catervas,
Bellatrix: non illa colo calathisve Minervae
Foemineas assueta manus; sed praelia virgo
Dura pati, cursuque pedum praevertere ventos.
Illa vel intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina: nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas:
Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspensa tumenti,
Ferret iter; celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas.
Aeneid vii. 803. This example is copied by the author of Telemachus: Les
Brutiens sont legeres a la course comme les cerfs, et comme les daims. On
croiroit que l'herbe meme la plus tender n'est point foulee sous leurs pieds; a
peine laissent ils dans le sable quelques traces de leurs pas.

Live. 10. Again, Deja il avoit abattu Eusilas si ledger a la course, qu'a peine
il imprimoit la trace de ses pas dans le sable, et qui devancoit dans son pays
les plus rapides flots de l'Eurotas et de l'Alphee.

Live. 20.

Fourthly, In narration as well as in description, facts and objects ought to
be painted so accurately as to form in the mind of the reader distinct and
lively images. Every useless circumstance ought indeed to be suppressed,
because every such circumstance loads the narration; but if a circumstance be
necessary, however slight, it cannot be described too minutely. The force of
language consists in raising complete images Part 1. sect. 6.
; which cannot be done till the reader, forgetting himself, be transported as
by magic into the very place and time of the important action, and be
converted, as it were, into a real spectator, beholding every thing that
passes. In this view, the narrative in an epic poem ought to rival a picture in
the liveliness and accuracy of its representations: no circumstance must be
omitted that tends to make a complete image; because an imperfect image, as
well as any other imperfect conception, is cold and uninterresting. I shall
illustrate this rule by several examples, giving the first place to a beautiful
passage from Virgil. Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub umbra
Amiss^s queritur foetus, quos durus arator
Observans nido implumes detraxit.
Georg. lib. 4. l. 511. The poplar, plowman, and unfledged, though not
essential in the description, are circumstances that tend to make a complete
image, and upon that account are an embellishment.

Again, Hic viridem Aeneas frondenti ex ilice metam
Constituit, signum nautis.
Aeneid. v. 129. Horace, addressing to Fortune: Te pauper ambit sollicita prece
Ruris colonus: te dominam aequoris,
Quicumque Bithyna lacessit
Carpathium pelagus carina.
Carm. lib. 1. ode 35. -- Illum ex moenibus hosticis
Matrona bellantis tyranni
Prospiciens, et adulta virgo,
Suspiret: Eheu, ne rudis agminum
Sponsus lacessat regius asperum
Tactu leonem, quem cruenta
Per medias rapit ira caedes.
Carm. lib. 3. ode 2. Shakespeare says Henry V. act 4. sc. 4.
, "You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice by fanning in his face with
a peacock's father." The peacock's feather, not to mention the beauty of the
object, completes the image. An accurate image cannot be formed of this
fanciful operation, without conceiving a particular feather; and the mind is at
some loss, when this is not specified in the description. Again, "The rogues
slighted me into the river with as little remorse, as they would have drowned a
bitch's blind puppies, fifteen in the litter Merry Wives of Windsor, act 3. sc.
15.
." Old Lady. You would not be a queen?

Anne. No not for all the riches under heaven.

Old Lady. It Is strange: a threepence bowed would hire me, old as I am, to
queen it.

Henry VIII. act 2. sc. 5. In the following passage, the action, with all its
material circumstances, is represented so much to the life, that it could not
be better conceived by a real spectator; and it is this manner of description
which contributes greatly to the sublimity of the passage. He spoke; and to
confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty cherubim: the sudden blaze
Far round illumined hell: highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms,
Clash'd on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of heaven.
Milton, b. 1. A passage I am to cite from Shakespeare, falls not much short of
that now mentioned in particularity of description: O you hard hearts! you
cruel men of Rome!
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and often
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,
Your infants in your arms; and there have sat
The live-long day with patient expectation
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tyber trembled underneath his banks,
To hear the replication of your sounds,
Made in his concave shores?

Julius Caesar, act 1. sc. 1. The Henriade of Voltaire errs greatly against the
foregoing rule: every thing is touched in a summary way, without ever
descending to the circumstances of an event. This manner is good in a general
history, the purpose of which is to record important transactions: but in a
fable, which has a very different aim, it is cold and uninteresting; because
it is impracticable to form distinct images of persons or things represented in
a manner so superficial.

It is observed above, that every useless circumstance ought to be suppressed.
To deal in such circumstances, is a fault, on the one hand, not less to be
avoided, than the conciseness for which Voltaire is blamed, on the other. In
the Aeneid Lib. 4. l. 632.
, Barce, the nurse of Sichaeus, whom we never hear of before or after, is
introduced for a purpose not more important than to call Anna to her sister
Dido. And that it might not be thought unjust in Dido, even in this trivial
incident, to prefer her husband's nurse before her own, the poet takes care to
inform his reader, that Dido's nurse was dead. To this I must oppose a
beautiful passage in the same book, where, after Dido's last speech, the poet,
supposing her dead, hastens to describe the lamentation of her attendants:
Dixerat: atque illam media inter talia ferro
Collapsam aspiciunt comites, ensemque cruore
Spumantem, sparsasque manus. It clamor ad alta
Atria, concussam bacchatur fama per urbem;
Lamentis gemituque et foemineo ululatu
Tecta fremunt, resonat magnis plangoribus ether.
Lib. 4. l. 663.

As an appendix to the foregoing rule, I add the following observation, That to
raise a sudden and strong impression, some single circumstance happily
selected, has more power than the most labored description. Macbeth,
mentioning to his lady some voices he heard while he was murdering the King,
says, There Is one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried Murder!
They waked each other; and I stood and heard them;
But they did say their prayers, and address them Again to sleep.

Lady. There are two lodged together.

Macbeth. One cried, God bless us! and, Amen! the other;
As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
Listening their fear, I could not say, Amen,
When they did say, God bless us.

Lady. Consider it not so deeply.

Macbeth. But wherefore could not I pronounce, Amen?
I had most need of blessing, and Amen
Stuck in my throat.

Lady. These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.

Macbeth. Methought, I heard a voice cry,
Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep, etc.

Act 2. sc. 3. Describing Prince Henry: I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury;
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.

First Part Henry IV. act 4. sc. 2. King Henry. Lord Cardinal, if thou think
on heaven's bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies, and makes no sign!

Second Part Henry VI. act 3. sc. 10. The same author, speaking ludicrously of
an army debilitated with diseases, says, Half of them dare not shake the snow
from off their cassocks, lest they shake themselves to pieces.



To draw a character is the master-stroke of description. In this Tacitus
excels: his figures are natural, distinct, and complete; not a feature wanting
or misplaced. Shakespeare however exceeds Tacitus in the sprightliness of his
figures: some characteristical circumstance is generally invented or laid hold
of, which paints more to the life than many words. The following instances will
explain my meaning, and at the same time prove my observation to be just. Why
should a man, whose blood is warm within,
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice,
By being peevish? I tell that what, Anthonio,
(I love thee, and it is my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men, whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond;
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
As who should say, I am Sir Oracle,
And when I open my lips, let no dog bark!
O my Anthonio, I do know of those,
That therefore only are reputed wise,
For saying nothing.

Merchant of Venice, act 1. sc. 1. Again, Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of
nothing, more than any man in all Venice: his reasons are two grains of wheat
hid in two bushels of chaff; you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when
you have them, they are not worth the search.

Ibid. In the following passage a character is completed by a single stroke.
Shallow. O the mad days that I have spent; and to see how many of mine old
acquaintance are dead.


Silence. We shall all follow, Cousin.


Shallow. Certain, it is certain, very sure, very sure; Death (as the Psalmist
says) is certain to all: all shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at
Stamford fair?


Slender. Truly, Cousin, I was not there.


Shallow. Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living yet.


Silence. Dead, Sir.


Shallow. Dead! see, see; he drew a good bow: and dead? He shot a fine shoot.
How a score of ewes now?


Silence. Thereafter as they be. A score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.


Shallow. And is old Double dead?


Second Part Henry IV. act 3. sc. 3. Describing a jealous husband: Neither
press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he has an abstract for the
remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his note. There is no hiding
you in the house.


Merry Wives of Windsor, act 4. sc. 3. Congreve has an inimitable stroke of
this kind in his comedy of Love for Love: Ben Legend. Well, father, and how do
all at home? how does brother Dick, and brother Val?


Sir Sampson. Dick, body of me, Dick has been dead these two years, I writ you
word, when you were at Leghorn.


Ben. Mess, that is true; marry, I had forgot. Dick's dead, as you say.


Act 3. sc. 6. Falstaff speaking of Ancient Pistol, He Is no swaggerer, hostess;
a tame cheater in faith; you may stroke him as gently as a puppey-greyhound; he
will not swagger with a Barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of
resistance.


Second Part Henry IV. act 2. sc. 9.

Some writers, through heat of imagination, fall into contradictions; some are
guilty of downright inconsistencies; and some even rave like madmen. Against
such capital errors one cannot be warned to better purpose than by collecting
instances. The first shall be of a contradiction, the most venial of all.
Virgil speaking of Neptune: Interea magno misceri murmr pontum
Emissamque hyemem sensit Neptunus, et imis
Stagna refusa vadis: graviter commotu^, et alto
Prospiciens, summa placidum caput extulit unda.
Aeneid. i. 128. Again, When first young Maro, in his boundless mind,
A work t'outlast immortal Rome designed.
Essay on Criticism, l. 130.

The following examples are of downright inconsistencies. Alii pulsis e
tormento catenis discerpti sectique, dimidiato corpore pugnabant sibi
superstites, ac peremptae partis ultores.

Strada, Dec. 2. L. 2. Il pover huomo, che non sen' era accorto,
Andava combattendo, ed era morto.
Berni. He fled, but flying, left his life behind.
Iliad xi. 443. Full through his neck the weighty falchion sped:
Along the pavement rolled the mutt'ring head.
Odyssey xxii. 365.

The last article is of raving like one mad. Cleopatra speaking to the aspick:
-- Welcome, thou kind deceiver,
Thou best of thieves; who, with an easy key,
Do open life, and unperceived by us
Even steal us from ourselves; discharging so
Death's dreadful office, better than himself,
Touching our limbs so gently into slumber,
That Death stands by, deceived by his own image,
And thinks himself but Sleep.

Dryden, All for Love, act 5.

Reasons that are common and known to every person, ought to be taken for
granted: to express them is childish and interrupts the narration. Quintus
Curtius, relating the battle of Issus: Jam in conspectu, sed extra teli jactum,
utraque acies erat; quum priores Persae inconditum et trucem sustulere
clamorem. Redditur et a Macedonibus major, exercitus impar numero, sed jugis
montium vastisque saltibus repercussus: quippe semper circumjecta nemora
petraeque, quantamcumque accepere vocem, multiplicato sono referunt.



Having discussed what observations occurred upon the thoughts or things
expressed, I proceed to what more peculiarly concern the language or verbal
dress. The language proper for expressing passion is the subject of a former
chapter. Several observations there made, are applicable to the present
subject; particularly, That words are intimately connected with the ideas they
represent, and that the representation cannot be perfect unless the emotions
raised by the sound and the sense be concordant. It is not sufficient, that the
sense be clearly expressed: the words must correspond to the subject in every
particular. An elevated subject requires an elevated style: what is familiar,
ought to be familiarly expressed: a subject that is serious and important,
ought to be clothed in plain nervous language: a description, on the other
hand, addressed to the imagination, is susceptible of the highest ornaments
that sounding words, metaphor, and figurative expression, can bestow upon it.

I shall give a few examples of the foregoing doctrine. A poet of any genius
will not readily dress a high subject in low words; and yet blemishes of this
kind are found even in some classical works. Horace observing that men,
perfectly satisfied with themselves, are seldom so with their condition,
introduces Jupiter indulging to each his own choice: Jam faciam quod vultis:
eris tu, qui modo miles,
Mercator: tu, consultus modo, rusticus: hinc vos,
Vos hinc mutatis discedite partibus: eia,
Quid? statis? nolint: atqui licet esse beatis.
Quid causae est, merito quin illis Jupiter ambas
Iratus buccas inflet? neque se fore posthac
Tam facilem dicat, votis ut praebeat aurem?
Sermon. lib. 1. sat. 1. l. 16. Jupiter in wrath puffing up both cheeks, is a
ludicrous expression, far from suitable to the gravity of the subject: every
one must feel the discordance. The following couplet, sinking far below the
subject, is not less ludicrous. Not one looks backward, onward still he goes,
Yet never looks forward farther than his nose.
Essay on Man, ep. iv. 223.

On the other hand, to raise the expression above the tone of the subject, is a
fault than which none is more common. Take the following instances. Orcan le
plus fidele a server ses desseins,
Ne sous le ciel brulant des plus noirs Affricains.

Bajazet, act 3. sc. 8. Les ombres par trois fois ont obscurci les cieux
Depuis que le sommeil n'est enter dans vos yeux;
Et le jour a trois fois chasse la nuit obscure
Depuis que votre corpse languit sans nourriture.

Phedra, act 1. sc. 3. Assuerus. Ce mortel, qui montra tant de zele pour moi,
Vit-il encore?

Asaph. -- Il voit l'astre qui vous eclaire.

Esther, act 2. sc. 3. Oui, c'est Agamemnon, c'est ton Roi qui t'eveille;
Viens, reconnois la voix qui frape ton oreille.

Iphigenie. -- In the inner room
I spy a winking lamp, that weakly strikes
The ambient air, scarce kindling into light.

Southern, Fate of Capua, act 3. In the funeral orations of the Bishop of
Meaux, the following passages are raised far above the tone of the subject.
L'Ocean etonne de se voir traverse tant de fois en des appareils si diverse, et
pour des causes si differentes, etc.

p. 6. Grande Reine, je satisfais a vos plus tendres desirs, quand je celebre
ce monarque; et ce coeur qui n'a jamais vecu que pour lui, se eveille, tout
poudre qu'il est, et devient sensible, meme sous ce drap mortuaire, au nom d'un
epoux si cher.

p. 32. Montesquieu, in a didactic work, L'esprit des Loix, gives too great
indulgence to imagination: the tone of his language swells frequently above his
subject. I give an example: Mr le Comte de Boulainvilliers et Mr l'Abbe Dubos
ont fait chacun un systeme, don't l'un semble etre une conjuration contre le
tiers-etat, et l'autre une conjuration contre la noblesse. Lorsque le Soleil
donna a Phaeton son char a conduire, il lui dit: Si vous montez trop haut, vous
brulerez la demeure celeste; si vous descendez trop bas, vous reduirez en
cendres la terre: n'allez point trop a droite, vous tomberiez dans la
constellation du serpent; n'allez point trop a gauche, vous iriez dans celle de
l'autel: tenez-vous enter les deux.

L. chapter 10. The following passage, intended, one would imagine, as a receipt to
boil water, is altogether burlesque by the labored elevation of the diction. A
massy caldron of stupendous frame
They brought, and placed it over the rising flame:
Then heap the lighted wood; the flame divides
Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:
In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream:
The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
Pope's Homer, book xviii. 405. In a passage near the beginning of the 4th book
of Telamachus, one feels a sudden bound upward without preparation, which
accords not with the subject: Claypso, qui avoit ete jusqu'a ce moment immobile
et transportee de plaisir en ecoutant les avantures de Telemaque, l'interrompit
pour lui fair prendre quelque repos. Il est tems, lui dit-elle, que vous
alliez gouter la douceur du sommeil apres tant de travaux. Vous n'avez rien a
craindre ici; tout vous est favorable. Abandonnez-vous donc a la joye. Goutez
la paix, et tous les autres dons des dieux don't vous allez etre comble. Demain,
quand l'Aurore avec ses doigts de roses entr'ouvrira les ports dorees de
l'Orient, et que les chevaux du soleit sortans de l'onde amere repandront les
flames du jour, pour chasser devant eux toutes les etoiles du ciel, nous
reprendrons, mon cher Telemaque, l'histoire de vos malheurs.

This obviously is copied from a similar passage in the Aeneid, which ought not
to have been copied, because it lies open to the same censure: but the force of
authority is great. At regina gravi jamdudum saucia cura,
Vulnus alit venis, and caeco carpitur igni.
Multa viri virtus animo, multusque recursat
Gentis honos: haerent infixi pectore vultus,
Verbaque: nec placidam membris dat cura quietem.
Postera Phoebea lustrabat lampade terras,
Humentemque Aurora polo dimoverat umbram;
Cum sic unanimem alloquitur malesana sororem:
Lib. iv. 1. Take another example where the words rise above the subject: Ainsi
les peuples y accoururent bientot en foul de toutes parts; le commerce de
cette ville etoit semblable au flux et reflux de la mer. Les tresors y
entroient comme les flots viennent l'un sur l'autre. Tout y etoit apporte et en
sortoit librement: tout ce qui y entroit, etoit utile; toute ce qui en sortoit,
laissoit en sortant d'autres richesses en sa place. La justice severe presidoit
dans le port au milieu de tant de nations. La franchise, la bonne foi, la
candeur, sembloient du haut de ces superbs tours appeller les marchands des
terres les plus eloignees: chacun des ces marchands, soit qu'il vint des rives
orientales ou le soleil sort chaque jour du sein des ondes, soit qu'il fut
parti de cette grande mer ou le soleil ass de son course va eteindre ses feux,
vivoit plaisible et en surete dans Salente comme dans sa patrie!

Telemaque, l. 12.

The language of Homer is suited to his subject, not less accurately than the
actions and sentiments of his heroes are to their characters. Virgil, in this
particular, falls short of perfection: his language is stately throughout; and
though he descends at times to the simplest branches of cookery, roasting and
boiling for example, yet he never relaxes a moment from the high tone See
Aeneid. lib. i. 188. -- 219.
. In adjusting his language to his subject, no writer equals Swift. I can
recollect but one exception, which at the same time is far from being gross.
The journal of a modern lady, is composed in a style where sprightliness is
blended with familiarity, perfectly suited to the subject. In one passage,
however, the poet assumes a higher tone, which corresponds neither to the
subject nor to the tone of language employed in the rest of that piece. The
passage I have in view begins l. 116. "But let me now a while survey," etc. and
ends at l. 135.

It is proper to be observed upon this head, that writers of inferior rank are
continually upon the stretch to enliven and enforce their subject by
exaggeration and superlatives. This unluckily has an effect opposite to what is
intended: the reader, disgusted with language that swells above the subject, is
led by contrast to think more meanly of the subject than it may possibly
deserve. A man of prudence, beside, will be not less careful to husband his
strength in writing than in walking: a writer too liberal of superlatives,
exhausts his whole stock upon ordinary incidents, and reserves no share to
express, with greater energy, matters of importance Montaigne, reflecting upon
the then present modes, observes, that there never was at any other time so
abject and servile prostitution of words in the addresses made by people of
fashion to one another; the humblest tenders of life and soul, no professions
under that of devotion and adoration; the writer constantly declaring himself a
vassal, nay a slave: so that when any more serious occasion of friendship or
gratitude requires more genuine professions, words are wanting to express them.
.

The power that language possesses to imitate thought, goes farther than to the
capital circumstances above mentioned: it reaches even the slighter
modifications. Slow action, for example, is imitated by words pronounced slow;
labor or toil, by words harsh or rough in their sound. But this subject has
been already handled Chapter 18. sect. 3.
.

In dialogue-writing, the condition of the speaker is chiefly to be regarded in
framing the expression. The sentinel in Hamlet, interrogated about the ghost,
whether his watch had been quiet? answers with great propriety for a man in his
station, "Not a mouse stirring One can scarce avoid smiling at the blindness of
a certain critic, who, with an air of self-sufficiency, condemns this
expression as low and vulgar. A French poet, says he, would express the same
thought in a more sublime manner: "Mais tout dort, et l'armee, et les vents, et
Neptune," And he adds, "The English poet may please at London, but the French
every where else."
."

I proceed to a second remark, not less important than the former. No person of
reflection but must be sensible, that an incident makes a stronger impression
on an eyewitness, than when heard at second hand. Writers of genius, sensible
that the eye is the best avenue to the heart, represent every thing as passing
in our sight; and from readers or hearers, transform us, as it were, into
spectators. A skilful writer conceals himself, and presents his personages. In
a word, every thing becomes dramatic as much as possible. Plutarch, de gloria
Atheniensium, observes, that Thucydides makes his reader a spectator, and
inspires him with the same passions as if he were an eyewitness. I am entitled
to make the same observation upon our countryman Swift. From this happy talent
arises that energy of style which is peculiar to him: he cannot always avoid
narration; but the pencil is his choice, by which he bestows life and coloring
upon his objects. Pope is richer in ornament, but possesses not in the same
degree the talent of drawing from the life. A translation of the sixth satire
of Horace, begun by the former and finished by the latter, affords the fairest
opportunity for a comparison. Pope obviously imitates the picturesque manner of
his friend: yet every one of taste must be sensible, that the imitation, though
fine, falls short of the original. In other instances, where Pope writes in his
own style, the difference of manner is still more conspicuous.

Abstract or general terms have no good effect in any composition for
amusement; because it is only of particular objects that images can be formed
See chap. 4.
. Shakespeare's style in that respect is excellent. Every article in his
descriptions is particular, as in nature; and if accidentally a vague
expression slip in, the blemish is extremely discernible by the bluntness of
its impression. Take the following example. Falstaff, excusing himself for
running away at a robbery, says, By the Lord, I knew ye, as well as he that
made ye. Why, hear ye, my masters; was it for me to kill the heir-apparent?
should I turn upon the true prince? Why, thou know, I am as valiant as
Hercules; but beware instinct, the lion will not touch the true prince:
instinct is a great matter. I was a coward on instinct: I shall think the
better of myself, and thee, during my life; I, for a valiant lion, and thou for
a true prince. But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess,
clap to the doors; watch tonight, pray tomorrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts
of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be
merry? shall we have a play extempore?


First Part Henry IV. act 2. sc. 9. The particular words I object to are,
instinct is a great matter, which make but a poor figure, compared with the
liveliness of the rest of the speech. It was one of Homer's advantages, that he
wrote before general terms were multiplied: the superior genius of Shakespeare
displays itself in avoiding them after they were multiplied. Addison describes
the family of Sir Roger de Coverley in the following words. You would take his
valet de chamber for his brother, his butler is gray headed, his groom is one
of the gravest men that I have ever seen, and his coachman has the looks of a
privy counselor.

Spectator, No 106. The description of the groom is less lively than of the
others; plainly because the expression, being vague and general, tends not to
form any image. "Dives opum variarum Georg. l. ii. 468.
," is an expression still more vague; and so are the following. -- Maecenas,
mearum
Grande decus, columenque rerum.
Horat. Carm. l. 2. ode 17. -- et side Teia
Dices laborantes in uno
Penelopen, vitreamque Circen.
Horat. Carm. l. 1. ode 17.

In the fine arts, it is a rule, to put the capital objects in the strongest
point of view; and even to present them oftener than once, where it can be
done. In history-painting, the principal figure is placed in the front, and in
the best light: an equestrian statue is placed in a center of streets, that it
may be seen from many places at once. In no composition is there a greater
opportunity for this rule than in writing: -- Sequitur pulcherrimus Astur,
Astur equo fidens et versicoloribus armis.
Aeneid. x. 180. -- Full many a lady
I Have eyed with best regard, and many a time
The harmony of their tongues has into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear, for several virtues
Have I liked several women, never any
With so full soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
And put it to the foil. But you, O you,
So perfect, and so peerless, are created
Of every creature's best.

The Tempest, act 3. sc. 1. With thee conversing I forget all time;
All seasons and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds; pleasant the sun
When first on this delightful land he spreads
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower,
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful evening mild, the silent night
With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,
And these the gems of heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of morn, when she ascends
With charm of earliest birds, nor rising sun
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew, nor fragrance after showers,
Nor grateful evening mild, nor silent night,
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,
Or glittering starlight, without thee is sweet.
Paradise Lost, book 4. l. 634. What mean ye, that ye use this proverb, The
fathers have eaten four grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? As I
live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion to use this proverb in
Israel. If a man keep my judgments to deal truly, he is just, he shall surely
live. But if he be a robber, a shedder of blood; if he have eaten upon the
mountains, and defiled his neighbor's wife; if he have oppressed the poor and
needy, have spoiled by violence, have not restored the pledge, have lift up his
eyes to idols, have given forth upon usury, and have taken increase: shall he
live? he shall not live: he shall surely die; and his blood shall be upon him.
Now, lo, if he beget a son, that sees all his father's sins, and considers,
and does not such like; that has not eaten upon the mountains, has not lift
up his eyes to idols, nor defiled his neighbor's wife, has not oppressed any
nor withheld the pledge, neither has spoiled by violence, but has given his
bread to the hungry, and covered the naked with a garment; that has not
received usury nor increase, that has executed my judgments, and walked in my
statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father; he shall surely
live. The soul that sins, it shall die: the son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father; neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him. Have I any pleasure that the wicked should die? says
the Lord God; and not that he should return from his ways and live.

Ezekiel xviii. The repetitions in Homer, which are frequent, have been the
occasion of much criticism. Suppose we were at a loss about the reason, might
not taste be sufficient to justify them? At the same time, one must be devoid
of understanding not to be sensible, that they make the narration dramatic; and
give an air of truth, by making things appear as passing in our sight.

A concise comprehensive style is a great ornament in narration; and a
superfluity of unnecessary words, not less than of circumstances, a great
nuisance. A judicious selection of the striking circumstances, clothed in a
nervous style, is delightful. In this style, Tacitus excels all writers,
ancient and modern. Instances are numberless: take the following specimen.
Crebra hinc praelia, et saepius in modum latrocinii: per saltus, per paludes;
ut cuique fors aut virtus: temere, proviso, ob iram, ob praedam, jussu, et
aliquando ignaris ducibus.

Annal. lib. 12. 39.

If a concise or nervous style be a beauty, tautology must be a blemish. And
yet writers, fettered by verse, are not sufficiently careful to avoid this
slovenly practice: they may be pitied, but they cannot be justified. Take for a
specimen the following instances, from the best poet, for versification at
least, that England has to boast of: High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
His beamy shield emits a living ray,
The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies.
Iliad v. 5. Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne.
Iliad viii. 576. So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
Iliad ix. 19. His clanging armor rung.
Iliad xii. 94. Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
Iliad xv. 4. The blaze of armor flashed against the day.
Iliad xvii. 736. As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow.
Iliad xix. 380. And like the moon, the broad refulgent shield
Blazed with long rays, and gleam'd athwart the field.
Iliad xix. 402. No -- could our swiftness over the winds prevail,
Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
All were in vain --
Iliad xix. 460. The humid sweat from every pore descends.
Iliad xxiii. 829. Redundant epithets, such as humid, in the last citation, are
by Quintilian disallowed to orators, but indulged to poets Lib. 8. cap. 6. 2.
; because his favorite poets, in a few instances, are reduced to such epithets
for the sake of versification. For instance, Prata canis albicant pruinis, of
Horace, and liquidos fontes, of Virgil.

As an apology for such careless expressions, it may well suffice, that Pope,
in submitting to be a translator, acts below his genius. In a translation, it
is hard to require the same spirit or accuracy, that is cheerfully bestowed on
an original work. And to support the reputation of this author, I shall give
some instances from Virgil and Horace, more faulty by redundancy than any of
those above mentioned: Saepe etiam immensum coelo venit agmen aquarum,
Et foedam glomerant tempestatem imbribus atris
Collectae ex alto nubes: ruit arduus ether,
Et pluvia ingenti sata laeta, boumque labores Diluit.
Georg. lib. i. 322. Postquam altum tenuere rates, nec jam amplius ullae
Apparent terrae; coelum undique et undique pontus:
Tum mihi coeruleus supra caput astitit imber,
Noctem hyememque ferens: et inhorruit unda tenebris.
Aeneid. lib. iii. 191. -- Hinc tibi copia
Manabit ad plenum benigno
Ruris honorum opulenta cornu.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. ode 17. Videre fessos vomerem inversum boves
Collo trahentes languido.
Horat. Epod. ii. 63. Here I can luckily apply Horace's rule against himself:
Est brevitate opus, ut currat sententia, neu se
Impediat verbis lassas onerantibus aures.
Sermon. lib. 1. sat. x. 9.

I close this chapter with a curious inquiry. An object, however ugly to the
sight, is far from being so when represented by colors or by words. What is
the cause of this difference? The cause with respect to painting is obvious. A
good picture, whatever the subject be, is agreeable, because of the pleasure we
take in imitation: the agreeableness of imitation overbalances the
disagreeableness of the subject; and the picture upon the whole is agreeable.
It requires a greater compass to explain the cause with respect to the
description of an ugly object. To connect individuals in the social state, no
one particular contributes more than language, by the power it possesses of an
expeditious communication of thought and a lively representation of
transactions. But nature has not been satisfied to recommend language by its
utility merely: it is made susceptible of many beauties that have no relation
to utility, which are directly felt without the intervention of any reflection
See chap. 18.
. And this unfolds the mystery; for the pleasure of language is so great, as in
a lively description to overbalance the disagreeableness of the image raised by
it See chap. 2. part 4.
. This however is no encouragement to deal in disagreeable subjects; for the
pleasure is out of sight greater where the subject and the description are both
of them agreeable.

The following description is upon the whole agreeable, though the subject
described is in itself dismal. Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf
Confounded though immortal: but his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate:
At once as far as angels ken he views
The dismal situation waste and wild:
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great furnace flamed; yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever-burning sulphur unconsum'd:
Such place eternal justice had prepared
For those rebellious.
Paradise Lost, book 1. l. 50. An unmanly depression of spirits in time of
danger is not an agreeable sight; and yet a fine description or representation
of it will be relished: K. Richard. What must the King do now? must he submit?
The King shall do it: must he be deposed?
The King shall be contented: must he lose
The name of King? OF God's name, let it go:
I Will give my jewels for a set of beads;
My gorgeous palace, for a hermitage;
My gay apparel, for an almsman's gown;
My figured goblets, for a dish of wood;
My scepter, for a palmer's walking staff;
My subjects, for a pair of carved saints;
And my large kingdom, for a little grave;
A little, little grave; -- an obscure grave.
Or I Will be buried in the King's highway;
Some way of common tread, where subjects feet
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head:
For on my heart they tread now, whilst I live;
And, buried once, why not upon my head?

Richard II. act 3. sc. 6.

Objects that strike terror in a spectator, have in poetry and painting a fine
effect. The picture, by raising a slight emotion of terror, agitates the mind;
and in that condition every beauty makes a deep impression. May not contrast
heighten the pleasure, by opposing our present security to the danger we would
be in by encountering the object represented? -- The other shape,
If shape it might be called, that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb;
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as night,
Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell,
And shook a dreadful dart.
Paradise Lost, book 2. l. 666. -- Now storming fury rose,
And clamor such as heard in heaven till now
Was never, arms on armor clashing brayed
Horrible discord, and the madding wheels
Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over-head the dismal hiss
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew,
And flying vaulted either host with fire.
So under fiery cope together rushed
Both battles main, with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage; all heaven
Resounded, and had earth been then, all earth
Had to her center shook.
Paradise Lost, book 6. l. 207. Ghost. -- But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prisonhouse,
I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
Thy knotty and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand on end
Like quills upon the fretful porcupine:
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood.

Hamlet, act 1. sc. 8. Gratiano. Poor Desdemona! I Am glad thy father's dead:
Thy match was mortal to him; and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn:
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobation.

Othello, act 5. sc. 8.

Objects of horror must be excepted from the foregoing theory; for no
description, however masterly, is sufficient to overbalance the disgust raised
even by the idea of such an object. Every thing horrible ought therefore to be
avoided in a description. Nor is this a severe law: the poet will avoid such
scenes for his own sake, as well as for that of his reader; and to vary his
descriptions, nature affords plenty of objects that disgust us in some degree
without raising horror. I am obliged therefore to condemn the picture of sin in
the second book of Paradise Lost, though drawn with a masterly hand. The
original would be a horrible spectacle; and the horror is not much softened in
the copy. -- Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou see,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way,
Tore through my intrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed; but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal dart,
Made to destroy: I fled, and cried out Death;
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and sighed
From all her caves, and back resounded Death.
I fled, but he pursued, (though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust than rage), and swifter far,
Me overtook, his mother all dismayed,
And in embraces forcible and foul
Ingendring with me, of that rape begot
These yelling monsters that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou saw, hourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me; for when they list, into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl and gnaw
My bowels, their repast; then bursting forth
A fresh with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death, my son and foe, who sets them on,
And me his parent would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter morsel, and his bane,
Whenever that shall be.
Book 2. l. 777. Iago's character in the tragedy of Othello, is so monstrous
and satanical, as not to be sufferable in a representation: not even
Shakespeare's masterly hand can make the picture agreeable.

Though the objects introduced in the following scenes, are not altogether so
horrible as Sin is in Milton's picture; yet with every person of taste, disgust
will be the prevailing emotion. -- Strophades Graio stant nomine dictae
Insulae Ionio in magno: quas dira Celaeno,
Harpyiaeque colunt aliae: Phineia postquam
Clausa domus, mensasque metu liquere priores.
Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis et ira Deum Stygiis sese extulit undis.
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Proluvies, uncaeque manus, et pallida semper.
Ora fame.
Huc ubi delati portus intravimus: ecce
Laeta boum passim campis armenta videmus,
Caprigenumque pecus, nullo custode, per herbas.
Irruimus ferro, et Divos ipsumque vocamus
In praedam partemque Jovem: tunc littore curvo
Extruimusque toros, dapibusque epulamur opimis.
At subitae horrifico lapsu de montibus adsunt
Harpyiae: et magnis quatiunt clangoribus alas:
Diripiuntque dapes, contactuque omnia foedant
Immundo: tum vox tetrum dira inter odorem.
Aeneid. lib. iii. 210. Sum patria ex Ithaca, comes infelicis Ulyssei,
Nomen Achemenides: Trojam, genitore Adamasto
Paupere (mansissetque utinam fortuna!) profectus.
Hic me, dum trepidi crudelia limina linquunt,
Immemores socii vasto Cyclopis in antro
Deseruere. Domus sanie dapibusque cruentis,
Intus opaca, ingens: ipse arduus, altaque pulsat
Sidera: (Dii, talem terris avertite pestem)
Nec visu facilis, nec dictu affabilis ulli.
Visceribus miserorum, et sanguine vescitur atro.
Vidi egomet, duo de numero cum corpora nostro,
Prensa manu magna, medio resupinus in antro,
Frangeret ad saxum, sanieque aspersa natarent
Limina: vidi, atro cum membra fluentia tabo
Manderet, et tepidi tremerent sub dentibus artus.
Haud impune quidem: nec talia passus Ulysses,
Oblitusve sui est Ithacus discrimine tanto.
Nam simul expletus dapibus, vinoque sepultus
Cervicem inflexam posuit, jacuitque per antrum
Immensus, saniem eructans, ac frusta cruento
Per somnum commixta mero; nos, magna precati
Numina, sortitique vices, una undique circum
Fundimur, et telo lumen terebramus acuto
Ingens, quod torva solum sub front latebat.
Aeneid. lib. iii. 613.

CHAP. XXII. Epic and Dramatic Compositions.
TRAGEDY differs from the epic more in form than in substance. The ends
proposed by each are instruction and amusement; and each of them copy human
actions as means to bring about these ends. They differ in the manner only of
copying. Epic poetry deals in narration: Tragedy represents its facts as
transacted in our sight. In the former, the poet introduces himself as an
historian: in the latter he presents his actors and never himself The dialogue
in a dramatic composition separates it so clearly from other compositions, that
no writer has thought it necessary to search for any other distinguishing mark.
But much useless labor has been bestowed, to distinguish an epic poem by some
such mark. Bossu defines this poem to be, "A composition in verse, intended to
form the manners by instructions disguised under the allegories of an
importantaction," which will exclude every epic poem founded upon real facts,
and perhaps include several of Esop's fables. Voltaire reckons verse so
essential, as for that single reason to exclude the adventures of Telemachus.
See his Essay upon Epic Poetry. Others, affected with substance more than with
ornament, hesitate not to pronounce that poem to be epic. It is not a little
diverting, to see so many shallow critics hunting for what is not to be found.
They always take for granted, without the least foundation, that there must be
some precise criterion to distinguish epic poetry from every other species of
writing. Literary compositions run into each other, precisely like colors: in
their strong tints they are easily distinguished; but are susceptible of so
much variety, and take on so many different forms, that we never can say where
one species ends and another begins. As to the general taste, there is little
reason to doubt, that a work where heroic actions are related in an elevated
style, will, without further requisite, be deemed an epic poem.
.

This difference, regarding form only, may be thought slight; but the effects
it occasions, are by no means so. What we see, makes a stronger impression than
what we learn from others. A narrative poem is a story told by another: facts
and incidents passing upon the stage, come under our own observation; and are
beside much enlivened by action and gesture, expressive of many sentiments
beyond the reach of language

A dramatic composition has another property, independent altogether of action.
A dialogue makes a deeper impression than a narration: because in the former
persons express their own sentiments; whereas in the latter sentiments are
related at second hand. For that reason, Aristotle, the father of critics, lays
it down as a rule, That in an epic poem the author ought to take every
opportunity to introduce his actors, and to confine the narrative part within
the narrowest bounds Poet. chapter 25. sect. 6.
. Homer understood perfectly the advantage of this method; and his poems are
both of them in a great measure dramatic. Lucan runs to the opposite extreme;
and is guilty of a still greater fault: the Pharsalia is stuffed with cold and
languid reflections; the merit of which the author assumes to himself, and
deigns not to share with his personages. Nothing can be more impertinent, than
a chain of such reflections, which suspend the battle of Pharsalia after the
leaders had made their speeches, and the two armies are ready to engage Lib. 7.
from line 385. to line 460.
.

Aristotle, from the nature of the fable, divides tragedy into simple and
complex. But it is of greater moment, with respect to dramatic as well as epic
poetry, to found a distinction upon the different ends attained by such
compositions. A poem, whether dramatic or epic, that has no tendency beyond
moving the passions and exhibiting pictures of virtue and vice, may be
distinguished by the name of pathetic. But where a story is purposely contrived
to illustrate some important lesson of morality, by showing the natural
connection betwixt disorderly passions and external misfortunes, such
composition may be denominated moral The same distinction is applicable to that
sort of fable which is said to be the invention of Aesop. A moral, it is true,
is by all critics considered as essential to such a fable. But nothing is more
common, than to be led blindly by authority. Of the numerous collections I have
seen, the fables that clearly inculcate a moral, make a very small part. In
many fables, indeed, proper pictures of virtue and vice are exhibited: but the
bulk of these collections convey no instruction, nor afford any amusement
beyond what a child receives in reading an ordinary story.
. It indeed conveys moral instruction with a perspicuity that is not exceeded
by the most accurate reasoning; and makes a deeper impression than any moral
discourse can do. To be satisfied of this, we need but reflect, that a man
whose affections are justly balanced, has a better chance to escape
misfortunes, than one who is a slave to every passion. Indeed, nothing is more
evident, than the natural connection that vice has with misery, and virtue
with happiness; and such connection may be illustrated, by stating a fact as
well as by urging an argument. Let us assume, for example, the following moral
truths, That discord among the chiefs, renders ineffectual all common measures;
and that the consequences of a slightly-founded quarrel, fostered by pride and
arrogance, are not less fatal than those of the grossest injury. These truths
may be inculcated, by the quarrel betwixt Agamemnon and Achilles at the siege
of Troy. In this view, it ought to be the poet's chief aim, to invent proper
circumstances, presenting to our view the natural consequences of such discord.
These circumstances must seem to arise in the common course of human affairs:
no accidental or unaccountable event ought to be indulged; for the necessary or
probable connection betwixt vice and misery, is learned from no events but what
are governed by the characters and passions of the persons represented. A real
event of which we see no cause, may be a lesson to us; because what has
happened may again happen: but this cannot be inferred from a story that is
known to be fictitious.

Many are the good effects of such compositions. A pathetic composition,
whether epic or dramatic, tends to a habit of virtue, by exciting emotions that
produce good actions, and avert us from those that are vicious or irregular See
chap. 2. part 1. sect. 3.
. It likewise, by its frequent pictures of human woes, humanizes the mind, and
fortifies us in bearing our own misfortunes. A moral composition must obviously
produce the same good effects, because by being moral it does not cease to be
pathetic. It enjoys beside an excellence peculiar to itself: for it not only
improves the heart, as above mentioned, but instructs the head by the moral it
contains. For my part, I cannot imagine any entertainment more suited to a
rational being, than a work thus happily illustrating some moral truth; where a
number of persons of different characters are engaged in an important action,
some retarding, others promoting, the great catastrophe; and where there is
dignity of style as well as of matter. A work of this kind, has our sympathy at
command, and can put in motion the whole train of the social affections. We
have at the same time great mental enjoyment, in perceiving every event and
every subordinate incident connected with its proper cause. Our curiosity is by
turns excited and gratified; and our delight is consummated at the close, upon
finding, from the characters and situations exhibited at the commencement, that
every circumstance down to the final catastrophe is natural, and that the whole
in conjunction make a regular chain of causes and effects.

Considering an epic and dramatic poem as the same in substance, and having the
same aim or end, it might be thought that they are equally fitted for the same
subjects. But considering their difference as to form, there will be found
reason to correct that thought, at least in some degree. Many subjects may
indeed be treated with equal advantage in either form; but the subjects are
still more numerous for which one of the forms is better qualified than the
other; and there are subjects proper for the one and not for the other. To give
some slight notion of the difference, as there is no room here for enlarging
upon every article, I observe, that dialogue is better qualified for expressing
sentiments, and narrative for displaying facts. These peculiarities tend to
confine each within certain limits. Heroism, magnanimity, undaunted courage,
and the whole tribe of the elevated virtues, figure best in action: tender
passions and the whole tribe of sympathetic affections, figure best in
sentiment. What we feel is the most remarkable in the latter: what we perform
is the most remarkable in the former. It clearly follows, that tender passions
are more peculiarly the province of tragedy, grand and heroic actions of epic
poetry In Racine, tender sentiments prevail; in Corneille, grand and heroic
manners. Hence clearly the preference of the former before the latter, as
dramatic poets. Corneille would figure better in an heroic poem.
.

I have no occasion to say more upon the epic, considered as peculiarly adapted
to certain subjects. But as dramatic subjects are more complex, I must take a
narrower view of them; which I do the more willingly, in order to clear a point
thrown into great obscurity by critics.

In the chapter of emotions and passions Part 4.
, it is occasionally shown, that the subject best fitted for tragedy is the
story of a man who has himself been the cause of his misfortune. But this man
must neither be deeply guilty nor altogether innocent. The misfortune must be
occasioned by a fault incident to human nature, and therefore venial.
Misfortunes of this kind, call forth the whole force of the social affections,
and interest the spectator in the warmest manner. An accidental misfortune, if
not extermely singular, does not greatly move our pity. The person who suffers,
being innocent, is freed from the greatest of all torments, viz. the anguish of
mind occasioned by remorse: Poco e funesta
Laltrui fortuna,
Quando non resta
Ragione alcuna
Ne di pentirsi, ne darrossir.
Metastasio. A criminal, on the other hand, who brings misfortunes upon
himself, excites little pity, for a different reason. His remorse, it is true,
aggravates his distress, and swells the first emotions of pity: but then our
hatred to the criminal blending with pity, blunts its edge considerably.
Misfortunes that are not innocent nor highly criminal, partake the advantages
of each extreme: they are attended with remorse to embitter the distress, which
raises our pity to a great height; and the slight indignation we have at a
venial fault, detracts not sensibly from our pity. For this reason, the
happiest of all subjects for tragedy, if such a one could be invented, would be
where a man of integrity falls into a great misfortune by doing an innocent
action, but which by some singular means he conceives to be criminal. His
remorse aggravates his distress; and our compassion, unrestrained by
indignation, rises to its highest pitch. Pity comes thus to be the ruling
passion of a pathetic tragedy; and by proper representation, may be raised to a
height scarce exceeded by any thing felt in real life. A moral tragedy takes in
a larger field; for, beside exercising our pity, it raises another passion,
selfish indeed, but which deserves to be cherished equally with the social
affections. When a misfortune is the natural consequence of some wrong bias in
the temper, every spectator who is conscious of some such defect in himself,
takes the alarm, and considers that he is liable to the same misfortune. This
consideration raises in him an emotion of fear or terror; and it is by this
emotion, frequently reiterated in a variety of moral tragedies, that the
spectators are put upon their guard against the disorders of passion.

The commentators upon Aristotle and other critics, have been much graveled
about the account given of tragedy by this author, "That by means of pity and
terror it refines in us all sorts of passion." But no one who has a clear
conception of the end and effects of a good tragedy, can have any difficulty
about Aristotle's meaning. Our pity is engaged for the persons represented, and
our terror is upon our own account. Pity indeed is here made to stand for all
the sympathetic emotions, because of these it is the capital. There can be no
doubt, that our sympathetic emotions are refined or improved by daily exercise;
and in what manner our other passions are refined by terror I have just now
said. One thing is certain, that no other meaning can justly be given to the
foregoing doctrine than that now mentioned; and that it was really Aristotle's
meaning, appears from his 13th chapter, where he delivers several propositions
agreeable to the doctrine as here explained. These, at the same time, I the
rather choose to mention; because, so far as authority can go, they confirm the
foregoing reasoning about the proper subjects for tragedy. His first
proposition is, That it being the province of tragedy to excite pity and
terror, an innocent person falling into adversity ought never to be the
subject. This proposition is a necessary consequence of his doctrine as
explained: a subject of this nature may indeed excite pity and terror; but the
former in an inferior degree, and the latter in no degree for moral
instruction. The second proposition is, That we must not represent a wicked
person emerging from misery to good fortune. This excites neither terror nor
compassion, nor is agreeable in any respect. The third is, That the misfortunes
of a wicked person ought not to be represented. Such representation may be
agreeable in some measure upon a principle of justice: but it will not move our
pity; or any degree of terror, except in those of the same vicious disposition
with the person represented. His last proposition is, That the only character
fit for representation lies in the middle, neither eminently good nor eminently
bad; where the misfortune is not the effect of deliberate vice, but of some
involuntary fault, as our author expresses it If one can be amused with a grave
discourse which promises much and performs nothing, he may see this subject
treated by Brumoy in his Theater Grec. Preliminary discourse on the origin of
tragedy.
. The only objection I find to Aristotle's account of tragedy, is, that he
confines it within too narrow bounds, by refusing admittance to the pathetic
kind. For if terror be essential to tragedy, no representation deserves that
name, but where the misfortunes exhibited are caused by a wrong balance of
mind, or some disorder in the internal constitution. Such misfortunes always
suggest moral instruction; and by such misfortunes only can terror be excited
for our improvement.

Thus Aristotle's four propositions above mentioned, relate solely to tragedies
of the moral kind. Those of the pathetic kind, are not confined within so
narrow limits. Subjects fitted for the theater, are not in such plenty, as to
make us reject innocent misfortunes which rouse our sympathy, though they
inculcate no moral. With respect to subjects of this kind, it may indeed be a
doubtful question, whether the conclusion ought not always to be happy. Where a
person of integrity is represented as suffering to the end under misfortunes
purely accidental, we depart discontented, and with some obscure sense of
injustice; for seldom is man so submissive to the course of Providence, as not
to revolt against the tyranny and vexations of blind chance: he will be
inclined to say, This ought not to be. I give for an example the Romeo and
Juliet of Shakespeare, where the fatal catastrophe is occasioned by Friar
Laurence's coming to the monument a minute too late. Such a story we think of
with regret: we are vexed at the unlucky chance, and go away dissatisfied. This
is a temper of mind which ought not to be cherished; and for that reason, I
vote for excluding stories of this kind from the theater. The misfortunes of a
virtuous person arising from necessary causes, or from a chain of unavoidable
circumstances, will, I am apt to think, be considered in a different light.
Chance affords always a gloomy prospect, and in every instance gives an
impression of anarchy and misrule. A regular chain, on the other hand, of
causes and effects, directed by the general laws of nature, never fails to
suggest the hand of Providence; to which we submit without resentment, being
conscious that submission is our duty See essays on the principles of morality,
edit. 2. p. 291.
. For that reason, we are not dissatisfied with the distresses of Voltaire's
Mariamne, though redoubled on her till the moment of her death, without the
least fault or failing on her part. Her misfortunes are owing to a cause
extremely natural, and not unfrequent, the jealousy of a barbarous husband. The
fate of Desdemona in the Moor of Venice, affects us in the same manner. We are
not so easily reconciled to the fate of Cordelia in King Lear: the causes of
her misfortune, are by no means so evident, as to exclude the gloomy notion of
chance. In short, it appears, that a perfect character suffering under
misfortunes is qualified for being the subject of a pathetic tragedy, provided
chance be excluded. Nor is it altogether inconsistent with a moral tragedy: it
may successfully be introduced as an under-part, supposing the chief place to
be filled with an imperfect character from which a moral can be drawn. This is
the case of Desdemona and Mariamne just now mentioned; and it is the case of
Monimia and Belvidera, in Otway's two tragedies, The Orphan, and Venice
preserved.

I had an early opportunity to unfold a curious doctrine, That fable operates
on our passions, by representing its events as passing in our sight, and by
deluding us into a conviction of reality Chap. 2. part 1. sect. 6.
. Hence, in epic and dramatic compositions, it is of importance to employ every
means that may promote the delusion, such as the borrowing from history some
noted event, with the addition of circumstances that may answer the author's
purpose. The principal facts are known to be true; and we are disposed to
extend our belief to every circumstance. But in choosing a subject that makes a
figure in history, greater precaution is necessary than where the whole is
invented. In the first place, no circumstances must be added, but such as
connect naturally with what are known to be true: history may be supplied, but
it must not be contradicted. In the next place, a pure fable, entirely new with
respect to the persons as well as the incidents, may be supposed an ancient or
a modern story. But if the poet build upon truth, the subject he chooses must be
distant in time, or at least in place; for he ought by all means to avoid the
familiarity of persons and events nearly connected with us. Familiarity ought
more especially to be avoided in an epic poem, the peculiar character of which
is dignity and elevation. Modern manners make but a poor figure in such a poem
I would not from this observation be thought to undervalue modern manners. The
roughness, plainness, and impetuosity of ancient manners, may show better in an
epic poem, without being better fitted for society. But without regard to this
circumstance, it is the familiarity of modern manners that unqualifies them for
a lofty subject. The dignity of our present manners, will be better understood
in suture ages when they have become ancient.
.

After Voltaire, no writer, it is probable, will think of erecting an epic poem
upon a recent event in the history of his own country. But an event of this
kind is perhaps not altogether unqualified for tragedy. It was admitted in
Greece, and Shakespeare has employed it successfully in several of his pieces.
One advantage it possesses above fiction, that of more readily engaging our
belief, which tends above any other particular to raise our sympathy. The scene
of comedy is generally laid at home: familiarity is no objection; and we are
peculiarly sensible of the ridicule of our own manners.

After a proper subject is chosen, there appears to me some delicacy in
dividing it into parts. The conclusion of a book in an epic poem, or of an act
in a play, cannot be altogether arbitrary; nor be intended for so slight a
purpose as to make the parts of equal length. The supposed pause at the end of
every book, and the real pause at the end of every act, ought always to
coincide with some pause in the action. In this respect, a dramatic or epic
poem, ought to resemble a sentence or period in language, divided into members
that are distinguished from each other by regular pauses: or it ought to
resemble a piece of music, having a full close at the end, preceded by
imperfect closes that contribute to the melody. Every act therefore ought to
close with some incident that makes a pause in the action; for otherwise there
can be no pretext for interrupting the representation. It would be absurd to
break off in the very heat of action: against this every one would exclaim. The
absurdity still remains, though the action relents, if it be not actually
suspended for some time. This rule is also applicable to an epic poem; though
there a deviation from the rule is less remarkable, because it is in the
reader's power to hide the absurdity, by proceeding instantly to another book.
The first book of the Paradise Lost, ends without any regular close, perfect or
imperfect: it breaks off abruptly, where Satan, seated on his throne, is
prepared to make a speech to the convocated host of the fallen angels; and the
second book begins with the speech. Milton seems to have copied the Aeneid, of
which the two first books are divided much in the same manner. Neither is there
any proper pause at the end of the fifth book of the Aeneid. There is no proper
pause at end of the seventh book of Paradise Lost, nor at the end of the
eleventh.

Hitherto I have carried on together the epic and dramatic compositions. I
proceed to handle them separately, and to mention circumstances peculiar to
each, beginning with the epic kind. In a theatrical entertainment, which
employs both the eye and the ear, it would be a monstrous absurdity to
introduce upon the stage invisible beings in a visible shape. But it has been
much disputed, whether such beings may not be properly introduced in an epic
poem. If we rest upon the authority of practice, we must declare for the
affirmative; and Boileau Third part of his art of poetry.
, among many other critics, is a stout champion for this sort of machinery. But
waving authority, which is apt to impose upon the judgment, let us draw what
light we can from reason. I begin with a preliminary remark, That this matter
is but indistinctly handled by critics. It is laid down above, that several
passions incite the mind to animate its objects Chap. 20. sect. 1.
: the moral virtues become so many goddesses, and even darts and arrows are
inspired with life and action. But then it must not be overlooked, that such
personification, being the work of imagination, is descriptive only, and
assumes not even an appearance of truth Ibid.
. This is very different from what is termed machinery, where deities, angels,
devils, or other supernatural powers, are introduced as real personages, mixing
in the action, and contributing to the catastrophe; and yet these two things
are constantly jumbled together in the reasoning. The poetical privilege of
animating insensible objects for the sake of description, cannot be
controverted, because it is founded on a natural principle. But has the
privilege of machinery, if it be a privilege, the same good foundation? Far
from it: nothing can be more unnatural. Its effects, at the same time, are
deplorable. First, it gives an air of fiction to the whole; and prevents that
impression of reality which is requisite to interest our affections, and to
move our passions See chap. 2. part 1. sect. 6.
. This of itself is sufficient to explode machinery, whatever entertainment it
may give to readers of a fantastic taste or irregular imagination. And next,
were it possible to disguise the fiction, and to delude us into a notion of
reality, which I think can hardly be, an insuperable objection would still
remain, which is, that the aim or end of an epic poem can never be accomplished
in any perfection where machinery is introduced. Virtuous emotions cannot be
raised successfully but by the actions of those who are endued with passions
and affections like our own, that is, by human actions. And as for moral
instruction, it is evident, that we can draw none from beings who act not upon
the same principles with us. A fable in Aesop's manner is no objection to this
reasoning. His lions, bulls, and goats, are truly men under disguise: they act
and feel in every respect as human beings; and the moral we draw is founded on
that supposition. Homer, it is true, introduces the gods into his fable; and he
was authorized to take that liberty by the religion of his country; it being an
article in the Grecian creed, that the gods often interpose visibly and bodily
in human affairs. I must however observe, that Homer's deities do no honor to
his poems. Fictions that transgress the bounds of nature, seldom have a good
effect: they may inflame the imagination for a moment, but will not be relished
by any person of a correct taste. Let me add, that of whatever use such
fictions may be to a mean genius, an able writer has much finer materials of
Nature's production for elevating his subject, and making it interesting.

Boileau, a strenuous advocate for the Heathen deities, as observed, declares
against angels and devils, though supported by the religious creed of his
country. One would be apt to imagine, that a critic famed for his good taste,
could have no other meaning than to justify the employing Heathen deities for
enlivening or elevating the description. But as the Heathen deities make not a
better figure in poetical language than angels and devils, Boileau, in pleading
for the former, certainly meant, if he had any distinct meaning, that these may
be introduced as actors. And, in fact, he himself is guilty of this glaring
absurdity, where it is not so pardonable as in an epic poem. In his ode upon
the taking of Namur, he demands with a most serious countenance, whether the
walls were built by Apollo or Neptune; and in relating the passage of the
Rhine, anno 1672, he describes the god of that river as fighting with all his
might to oppose the French monarch. This is confounding fiction with reality at
a strange rate. The French writers in general run into this error: wonderful!
that they should not be sensible how ridiculous it is.

That this is a capital error in the Gierusalleme liberata, Tasso's greatest
admirers must acknowledge. A situation can never be intricate, nor the reader
ever in pain about the catastrophe, so long as there is an angel, devil, or
magician, to lend a helping hand. Voltaire, in his essay upon epic poetry,
talking of the Pharsalia, observes judiciously, "That the proximity of time,
the notoriety of events, the character of the age, enlightened and political,
joined with the solidity of Lucan's subject, deprived him of all liberty of
poetical fiction." Is it not amazing, that a critic who reasons so justly with
respect to others; can be so blind with respect to himself? Voltaire, not
satisfied to enrich his language with images drawn from invisible and superior
beings, introduces them into the action. In the sixth canto of the Henriade, St
Louis appears in person, and terrifies the soldiers; in the seventh canto, St
Louis sends the god of Sleep to Henry; and, in the tenth, the demons of
Discord, Fanaticism, War, etc. assist Aumale in a single combat with Turenne,
and are chased away by a good angel brandishing the sword of God. To blend such
fictitious personages in the same action with mortals, makes a bad figure at
any rate; and is intolerable in a history so recent as that of Henry IV. This
singly is sufficient to make the Henriade a short-lived poem, were it otherwise
possessed of every beauty. I have tried serious reasoning upon this subject;
but ridicule, I suppose, will be found a more successful weapon, which Addison
has applied in an elegant manner: "Whereas the time of a general peace is, in
all appearance, drawing near; being informed that there are several ingenious
persons who intend to show their talents on so happy an occasion, and being
willing, as much as in me lies, to prevent that effusion of nonsense which we
have good cause to apprehend; I do hereby strictly require every person who
shall write on this subject, to remember that he is a Christian, and not to
sacrifice his catechism to his poetry. In order to it, I do expect of him in
the first place, to make his own poem, without depending upon Phoebus for any
part of it, or calling out for aid upon any of the muses by name. I do likewise
positively forbid the sending of Mercury with any particular message or
dispatch relating to the peace; and shall by no means suffer Minerva to take
upon her the shape of any plenipotentiary concerned in this great work. I do
further declare, that I shall not allow the destinies to have had an hand in
the deaths of the several thousands who have been slain in the late war; being
of opinion that all such deaths may be very well accounted for by the Christian
system of powder and ball. I do therefore strictly forbid the fates to cut the
thread of man's life upon any pretense whatsoever, unless it be for the sake of
the rhyme. And whereas I have good reason to fear, that Neptune will have a
great deal of business on his hands in several poems which we may now suppose
are upon the anvil, I do also prohibit his appearance, unless it be done in
metaphor, simile, or any very short allusion; and that even here he be not
permitted to enter, but with great caution and circumspection. I desire that
the same rule may be extended to his whole fraternity of Heathen gods; it being
my design to condemn every poem to the flames in which Jupiter thunders, or
exercises any other act of authority which does not belong to him. In short, I
expect that no Pagan agent shall be introduced, or any fact related which a man
cannot give credit to with a good conscience. Provided always, that nothing
herein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to several of the
female poets in this nation, who shall still be left in full possession of
their gods and goddesses, in the same manner as if this paper had never been
written." Spectator, No 523.

The mavelous is indeed so much promoted by machinery, that it is not
wonderful to find it embraced by the bulk of writers, and perhaps of readers.
If indulged at all, it is generally indulged to excess. Homer introduces his
deities with no greater ceremony than his mortals; and Virgil has still less
moderation: an overwatched pilot cannot fall asleep and drop into the sea by
natural means: the two lovers, Aeneas and Dido, cannot take the same bed,
without the immediate interposition of superior powers. The ridiculous in such
fictions, must appear even through the thickest vail of gravity and solemnity.

Angels and devils serve equally with the Heathen deities, as materials for
figurative language, perhaps better among Christians, because we believe in
them, and not in the Heathen deities. But every one is sensible, as well as
Boileau, that the invisible powers in our creed make a much worse figure as
actors in a modern poem, than the invisible powers in the Heathen creed did in
ancient poems. The reason I take to be what follows. The Heathen deities, in
the opinion of their votaries, were beings elevated one step only above
mankind, actuated by the same passions, and directed by the same motives;
therefore not altogether improper to mix with mankind in an important action.
In our creed, superior beings are placed at such a mighty distance from us, and
are of a nature so different, that with no propriety can they appear with us
upon the same stage. Man is a creature so much inferior, that he loses all
dignity when set in opposition.

There seems to be no doubt, that an historical poem admits the embellishment
of allegory, as well as of metaphor, simile, or other figure. Moral truth, in
particular, is finely illustrated in the allegorical manner. It amuses the
fancy to find abstract terms, by a sort of magic, converted into active beings;
and it is delightful to trace a general proposition in a pictured event. But
allegorical beings should be confined within their own sphere; and never be
admitted to mix in the principal action, nor to cooperate in retarding or
advancing the catastrophe. This would have a still worse effect, than the
introduction of invisible powers; and I am ready to assign the reason. An
historical fable affords entertainment chiefly by making us conceive its
personages to be really existing and acting in our presence: in an allegory,
this agreeable delusion is denied; for we must not imagine an allegorical
personage to be a real being, but the figure only of some virtue or vice;
otherwise the allegory is lost. The impression of real existence, essential to
an epic poem, is inconsistent with that figurative existence which is essential
to an allegory; and therefore no method can be more effectual to destroy the
impression of reality, than to introduce allegorical beings cooperating with
those whom we conceive to be really existing. The love-episode in the Henriade
Canto 9.
, is insufferable by the discordant mixture of allegory with real life. This
episode is copied from that of Rinaldo and Armida in the Gierusalemme liberata,
which has no merit to entitle it to be copied. An allegorical object, such as
fame in the Aeneid, and the temple of love in the Henriade, may find place in a
description: but to introduce Discord as a real personage, imploring the
assistance of Love as another real personage, to enervate the courage of the
hero, is making these figurative beings act beyond their sphere, and creating a
strange jumble of discordant materials, viz. truth and fiction. The allegory of
Sin and Death in the Paradise Lost, is, I presume, not generally relished,
though it is not entirely of the same nature with what I have been condemning.
The Paradise Lost is not confined to the history of our first parents; and in a
work comprehending the achievements of superior beings, there is more room for
fancy than where it is confined to human actions.

What is the true notion of an episode? or how is it to be distinguished from
what is really a part of the principal action? Every incident that promotes or
retards the catastrophe, must be a part of the principal action. This clears
the nature of an episode; which may be defined, "An incident connected with the
principal action, but which contributes not either to advance or retard it."
The descent of Aeneas into hell does not advance or retard the catastrophe; and
therefore is an episode. The story of Nisus and Euryalus, producing an
alteration in the affairs of the contending parties, is a part of the principal
action. The family-scene in the sixth book of the Iliad is of the same nature:
by Hector's retiring from the field of battle to visit his wife, the Grecians
got liberty to breathe, and even to press upon the Trojans. It being thus the
nature of an episode to break the unity of action, it ought never to be
indulged unless to refresh and unbend the mind after the fatigue of a long
narration. This purpose of an episode demands the following properties. It
ought to be well connected with the principal action: it ought to be short: and
it ought to be lively and interesting.

Next, upon the peculiarities of a dramatic poem. And the first I shall mention
is a double plot; being naturally led to it by what is said immediately above.
One of these double plots must be of the nature of an episode in an epic poem;
for it would distract the spectator, instead of entertaining him, if he were
forced to attend, at the same time, to two capital plots equally interesting.
An under-plot in a tragedy has seldom a good effect; because a passionate piece
cannot be too simple. The sympathetic emotions once roused, cling to their
objects, and cannot bear interruption: when a subject fills the mind, it leaves
no room for any separate concern Racine, in his preface to the tragedy of
Berenice, is sensible, that simplicity is a great beauty in tragedy, but
mistakes the cause. "Nothing (says he) but verisimilitude pleases in tragedy:
but where is the verisimilitude, that within the compass of a day, events
should be crowded which commonly are extended through months?" This is
mistaking the accuracy of imitation for the probability or improbability of
future events. I explain myself. The verisimilitude required in tragedy, is
that the actions correspond to the manners, and the manners to nature. When
this resemblance is preserved, the imitation is just, because it is a true copy
of nature. But I deny that the verisimilitude of future events, meaning the
probability of future events, is any rule in tragedy. A number of extraordinary
events, are, it is true, seldom crowded within the compass of a day: but what
seldom happens may happen; and when such events fall out, they appear not less
natural than the most ordinary accidents. To make verisimilitude in the sense
of probability a governing rule in tragedy, would annihilate this sort of
writing altogether; for it would exclude all extraordinary events, in which the
life of tragedy consists. It is very improbable or unlikely, pitching upon any
man at random, that he will sacrifice his life and fortune for his mistress or
for his country: yet when this event happens, supposing it agreeable to the
character, we recognize the verisimilitude as to nature, whatever want of
verisimilitude or of probability there was a priori that such would be the
event.
. Variety is more tolerable in comedy, which pretends only to amuse, without
totally occupying the mind. But even here, to make a double plot agreeable, a
good deal of art is requisite. The under-plot ought not to vary greatly in its
tone from that which is principal: passions may be varied, but discordant
passions are unpleasant when jumbled together. This is a solid objection to
tragicomedy. For this reason, I blame the Provoked Husband: all the scenes that
bring the family of the Wrongheads into action, being ludicrous and farcical,
agree very ill with the sharpness and severity of the principal subject,
exhibiting the discord betwixt Lord Townly and his lady. The same objection
touches not the double plot of the Careless Husband: the different subjects are
sweetly connected; and have only so much variety as to resemble shades of
colors harmoniously mixed. But this is not all. The under plot ought to be
connected with the principal action, so as to employ the same persons: the
intervals or pauses of the principal action ought to be filled with the
under-plot; and both ought to be concluded together. This is the case of the
Merry Wives of Windsor.

Violent action ought to be excluded from the stage. While the dialogue runs
on, a thousand particulars concur to delude us into an impression of reality;
genuine sentiments, passionate language, and persuasive gesture. The spectator
once engaged, is willing to be deceived, loses sight of himself, and without
scruple enjoys the spectacle as a reality. From this absent state, he is roused
by violent action: he wakes as from a pleasing dream, and gathering his senses
about him, finds all to be a fiction. Horace delivers the same rule; and founds
it upon the reason given: Ne pueros coram populo Medea trucidet;
Aut humana palam coquat exta nefarius Atreus;
Aut in avem Progne vertatur, Cadmus in anguem.
Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi.
The French critics, as it appears to me, misapprehend the reason of this rule.
Shedding blood upon the stage, say they, is barbarous and shocking to a polite
audience. This no doubt is an additional reason for excluding bloodshed from
the French stage, supposing the French to be in reality so delicate. But this
evidently is not the reason that weighed with the Greeks: that polite people
had no notion of such delicacy; witness the murder of Clytemnestra by her son
Orestes, passing behind the scene, as represented by Sophocles. Her voice is
heard calling out for mercy, bitter expostulations on his part, loud shrieks
upon her being stabbed, and then a deep silence. I appeal to every person of
feeling, whether this scene be not more horrible, than if the deed had been
committed in sight of the spectators upon a sudden gust of passion. According
to the foregoing reasoning of the French critics, there is nothing to exclude
from the stage a duel occasioned by an affair of honor, because in it there is
nothing barbarous or shocking to a polite audience: yet a scene of this nature
is excluded from the French stage; which shows, without more argument, that
these critics have misapprehended the rule laid down by Horace. If Corneille,
in representing the affair betwixt Horatius and his sister, upon which murder
ensues behind the scene, had no other view than to remove from the spectators a
scene of horror, he certainly was in a capital mistake: for murder in cold
blood, which in some measure was the case as represented, is more horrible even
where the conclusive stab is not seen, than the same act performed on the stage
by violent and unpremeditated passion, as suddenly repented of as committed. I
heartily agree with Addison Spectator, No. 44.
, that no part of this incident ought to have been represented, but reserved
for a narrative, with all the alleviating circumstances possible in favor of
the hero. This is the only method to avoid the difficulties that unqualify this
incident for representation, a deliberate murder on the one hand, and on the
other a violent action performed on the stage, which must rouse the spectator
from his dream of reality.

I shall finish with a few words upon the dialogue; which ought to be so
conducted as to be a true representation of nature. I talk not here of the
sentiments, nor of the language; for these come under different heads. I talk
of what properly belongs to dialogue-writing; where every single speech, short
or long, ought to arise from what is said by the former speaker, and furnish
matter for what comes after, till the end of the scene. In this view, the whole
speeches, from first to last, represent so many links, all connected together
in one regular chain. No author, ancient or modern, possesses the art of
dialogue equal to Shakespeare. Dryden, in this particular, may justly be placed
as his opposite. He frequently introduces three or four persons speaking upon
the same subject, each throwing out his own sentiments separately, without
regarding what is said by the rest. I give for an example the first scene of
Aurenzebe. Sometimes he makes a number club in relating an event, not to a
stranger, supposed ignorant of it, but to one another, for the sake merely of
speaking. Of this notable sort of dialogue, we have a specimen in the first
scene of the first part of the Conquest of Granada. In the second part of the
same tragedy, scene second, the King, Abenamar, and Zulema, make their separate
observations, like so many soliloquies, upon the fluctuating temper of the mob.
It puts one in mind of a pastoral, where two shepherds are introduced reciting
couplets alternately, each in praise of his own mistress, as if they were
contending for a prize.

The bandying sentiments in this manner, beside an unnatural air, has another
bad effect. It stays the course of the action, because it is not productive of
any consequence. In Congreve's comedies, the action is often suspended to make
way for a play of wit. But of this more particularly in the chapter immediately
following.

CHAP. XXIII. The three Unities.
THE first chapter unfolds the pleasure we have in a chain of connected facts.
In histories of the world, of a country, of a people, this pleasure is but
faint; because the connections are slight or obscure. We find more
entertainment in biography, where the incidents are connected by their relation
to one person, who makes a figure and commands our attention. But the greatest
entertainment of the kind, is afforded by the history of a single event,
supposing it to be interesting. The history of one event produces a more
entire connection among the parts, than the history of one person. In the
latter, the circumstances are not otherwise connected than by their relation to
that person: in the former, the circumstances are connected by the strongest of
all relations, that of cause and effect. Thus, the circumstances of a single
event, having a mutual connection extremely intimate, form a delightful train:
we survey with peculiar pleasure a number of facts that give birth to each
other; and we pass with ease and satisfaction from the first to the last.

But this subject merits a more particular discussion. When we consider the
chain of causes and effects in the material world, independent of purpose,
design, or thought, we find a train of incidents in succession, without
beginning, middle, or end. Every thing that happens is both a cause and an
effect: it is the effect of something that goes before, and the cause of one or
many things that follow. One incident may affect us more, another less; but all
of them, great and small, are so many links in the universal chain. The mind,
in viewing these incidents, cannot rest or settle ultimately upon any one; but
is carried along in the train without any close.

But when the intellectual world is taken under view, in conjunction with the
material, the scene is varied. Man acts with deliberation, will, and choice; he
acts with a view to some end, glory, for example, or riches, or conquest, the
procuring happiness to individuals, or to his country in general; and he
proposes means and lays schemes to attain the end proposed. Here is recognized
a capital end or event, connected with subordinate events or incidents by the
relation of causation. In running over a series of subordinate events, we
cannot rest upon any one; because they are presented to us as means only,
leading to some end. But we rest with satisfaction upon the ultimate event;
because there, the purpose, the plan, the aim, of the chief person or persons,
is completed and brought to a final conclusion. This indicates a beginning, a
middle, and an end, of what Aristotle calls an entire action Poet. cap 6. See
also cap. 7.
. The story naturally begins with describing those circumstances which move the
distinguished person to form a plan, in order to compass some desired event.
The prosecution of that plan, and the obstructions, carry the reader into the
heat of action. The middle is properly where the action is the most involved;
and the end is where the event is brought about, and the design accomplished.

A design or plan thus happily perfected, after many obstructions, affords
wonderful delight to the reader. And to produce this delight, a principle
mentioned above Chap. 8.
mainly contributes; a principle that disposes the mind to complete every work
commenced, and in general to carry every thing to its ultimate conclusion.

I have given the foregoing example of a plan laid down and completed, because
it affords the clearest conception of a beginning, a middle, and an end, in
which consists unity of action: and indeed stricter unity cannot be imagined
than in this case. But an action may have unity, or a beginning, middle, and
end, without so intimate a relation of parts. The catastrophe may be different
from what is intended or desired; which is frequently the case in our best
tragedies. The Aeneid is an instance of means employed to produce a certain
event, and these means crowned with success. The Iliad is formed upon a
different model. It begins with the quarrel betwixt Achilles and Agamemnon: it
goes on to describe the several effects produced by that cause; and ends in a
reconciliation. Here is unity of action, no doubt, a beginning, a middle, and
an end: it must however be acknowledged, that the Aeneid is more happy in point
of connection. The mind has a propensity to go forward in the chain of
history: it keeps always in view the expected event; and when the incidents or
under-parts are connected together by their relation to the event, the mind
runs sweetly and easily along them. This pleasure we have in the Aeneid. But it
is not altogether so pleasant, as in the Iliad, to connect effects by their
common cause; for such connection forces the mind to a continual retrospect:
looking backward is like walking backward.

But Homer's plan is still more imperfect, for another reason, That the events
described are but imperfectly connected with the wrath of Achilles as their
cause. His wrath did not exert itself in action; and the misfortunes of his
countrymen were but negatively the effects of his wrath, by depriving them of
his assistance.

If unity of action be a capital beauty in a fable imitative of human affairs,
a double action must be a capital defect, by carrying on together two trains of
unconnected objects. For the sake of variety, we indulge an under-plot that
contributes to the principal event. But two unconnected events are a great
deformity; and it lessens the deformity but a very little, to engage the same
actors in both. Ariosto is quite licentious in this particular: he carries on
at the same time a plurality of unconnected stories. His only excuse is, that
his plan is perfectly well adjusted to his subject; for every thing in the
Orlando Furioso is wild and extravagant.

To state facts according to the order of time, is the most natural and the
most simple method: a method however not so essential, in an historical fable
especially, as not to yield to some conspicuous beauties See chap. 1.
. If a noted story, cold and simple in its first movements, be made the subject
of an epic poem, the reader may be hurried into the heat of action, reserving
the preliminaries for a conversation-piece, if it shall be thought necessary.
This method, at the same time, being dramatic, has a peculiar beauty, which
narration cannot reach See chap. 21.
. Romance-writers, who give little attention to nature, deviate in this
particular, among many, from a just standard. They make no difficulty of
presenting to the reader, without the least preparation, unknown persons
engaged in some adventure equally unknown. In Cassandra, two personages, who
afterward are discovered to be the heroes of the story, start up completely
armed upon the banks of the Euphrates, and engage in a single combat I am
sensible that a commencement of this sort is much relished by certain readers
disposed to wonder. Their curiosity is raised, and they are much tickled in its
gratification. But curiosity is at an end with the first reading, because the
personages are no longer unknown; and therefore at the second reading a
commencement so artificial, loses all its power even over the vulgar. A writer
of genius loves to deal in lasting beauties.
.

A play analyzed, is a chain of connected facts, of which each scene makes a
link. Each scene, accordingly, ought to produce some incident relative to the
catastrophe or ultimate event, by advancing or retarding it. If no incident be
produced, such a scene, which may be termed barren, ought not to be indulged,
because it breaks the unity of action. A barren scene can never be entitled to
a place, because the chain is complete without it. In the Old Bachelor, the 3d
scene of act 2. and all that follow to the end of that act, are mere
conversation-pieces, without any consequence. The 10th and 11th scenes, act 3.
Double Dealer, the 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th scenes, act 1. Love for
Love, are of the same kind. Neither is The Way of the World entirely guiltless
of such scenes. It will be no justification, that they help to display
characters. It were better, like Dryden, in his dramatis personae, to describe
characters beforehand, which would not interrupt the chain of action. But a
writer of genius has no occasion for such artifice: he can display the
characters of his personages much more to the life in sentiment and action. How
successfully is this done by Shakespeare! in whose works there is not to be
found a single barren scene.

Upon the whole, it appears, that all the facts in an historical fable, ought
to have a mutual connection by their common relation to the grand event or
catastrophe. And this relation, in which the unity of action consists, is
equally essential to epic and dramatic compositions.

How far the unities of time and of place are essential, is a question of
greater intricacy. These unities were strictly observed in the Grecian and
Roman theaters; and they are inculcated by the French and English critics as
essential to every dramatic composition. In theory, these unities are also
acknowledged by our best poets, though their practice is seldom correspondent:
they are often forced to take liberties, which they pretend not to justify,
against the practice of the Greeks and Romans, and against the solemn decision
of their own countrymen. But in the course of this inquiry it will be made
evident, that the example of the ancients ought, upon this point, to have no
weight with us, and that our critics are guilty of a mistake, in admitting no
greater latitude of place and time than was admitted in Greece and Rome.

Suffer me only to premise, that the unities of place and time, are not, by the
most rigid critics, required in a narrative poem. In such a composition, if it
pretend to copy nature, these unities would be absurd; because real events are
seldom confined within narrow limits either of place or of time. And yet we can
follow history, or an historical fable, through all its changes, with the
greatest facility. We never once think of measuring the real time by what is
taken in reading; nor of forming any connection betwixt the place of action and
that which we occupy.

I am sensible, that the drama differs so far from the epic, as to admit
different rules. It will be observed, "That an historical fable, which affords
entertainment by reading solely, is under no limitation of time or of place,
more than a genuine history; but that a dramatic composition cannot be
accurately represented, unless it be limited, as its representation is, to one
place and to a few hours; and therefore that no fable can be admitted but what
has these properties, because it would be absurd to compose a piece for
representation that cannot be justly represented." This argument, I
acknowledge, has at least a plausible appearance; and yet one is apt to suspect
some fallacy, considering that no critic, however strict, has ventured to
confine the unities of place and of time within so narrow bounds Bossu, after
observing, with wonderful critical sagacity, that winter is an improper season
for an epic poem, and night not less improper for tragedy; admits however, that
an epic poem may be spread through the whole summer months, and a tragedy
through the whole sunshine hours of the longest summer-day. Du poem epique,
l. 3. chap. 12. At this rate an English tragedy may be longer than a French
tragedy; and in Nova Zembla the time of a tragedy and of an epic poem may be
the same.
.

A view of the Grecian drama, and a comparison betwixt it and our own, may
perhaps help to relieve us from this dilemma. If they be differently
constructed, as shall by and by be made evident, it is possible that the
foregoing reasoning may not be applicable with equal force to both. This is an
article, that, with relation to the present subject, has not, so far as I know,
been examined by any writer.

All authors agree, that the first notion of tragedy in Greece, was derived
from the hymns in praise of Bacchus, which were sung in parts by a chorus.
Thespis, to relieve the singers, and for the sake of variety, introduced one
actor; who gave a narrative of the subject, and sometimes represented one or
other personage. Eschylus, introducing a second actor, formed the dialogue; by
which the performance became dramatic: and the actors were multiplied when the
subject represented made it necessary. But still, the chorus, which gave a
beginning to tragedy, was considered as an essential part of its constitution.
In the first scene, generally, are unfolded the preliminary circumstances that
lead to the grand event. This scene is by Aristotle termed the prologue. In the
second scene, where the action properly begins, the chorus is introduced,
which, as originally, continues upon the stage during the whole performance.
Sophocles adheres to this plan religiously. Euripides is not altogether so
correct. In some of his pieces it becomes necessary to remove the chorus. But
this is seldom done; and when done, matters are so ordered as that their
absence is but momentary. The chorus often mix in the dialogue; and when the
dialogue happens to be suspended, the chorus, during the interval, is employed
in singing. Nor does the removal of the chorus, when that unusual step is
risked, interrupt the representation. They never leave the stage of their own
accord, but at the command of some principal personage who constantly waits
their return.

Thus the Grecian drama is a continued representation without any interruption;
a circumstance that merits attention. A continued representation without a
pause, affords not opportunity to vary the place of action; and has withal a
very short duration. To a representation so confined in place and time, the
foregoing reasoning is strictly applicable. A real or feigned action that is
brought to a conclusion after considerable intervals of time and frequent
change of place, cannot accurately be copied in a representation that admits of
no latitude in either. Hence it is, that the unities of place and of time,
were, or ought to have been, strictly observed in the Grecian tragedies. This
is made necessary by the very constitution of their drama; for it is absurd to
compose a tragedy that cannot be justly represented.

Modern critics, who for our drama pretend to establish rules founded on the
practice of the Greeks, are guilty of an egregious blunder. The unities of
place and of time, so much vaunted, were in Greece, as we see, a matter of
necessity, not of choice. I am now ready to show, that if we submit to these
fetters, it must be from choice not necessity. This will be evident upon taking
a view of the construction of our drama, which differs widely from that of
Greece; whether more or less perfect, is a separate question, which shall be
handled afterward. By dropping the chorus, an opportunity is afforded to split
our drama into parts or acts, which in the representation are distinguished by
intervals of time; and during these intervals, the stage is totally evacuated
and the spectacle suspended. This construction qualifies our drama for subjects
spread through a wide space both of time and of place. The time supposed to
pass during the suspension of the representation, is not measured by the time
of the suspension; nor is any connection formed, betwixt the box we sit in and
the place where things are supposed to be transacted in our absence: and by
that means, many subjects can be justly represented in our theaters, for which
there was no place in those of ancient Greece. This doctrine may be
illustrated, by comparing a modern play to a set of historical pictures: let us
suppose them five in number, and the resemblance will be complete. Each of the
pictures resembles an act in one of our plays. There must necessarily be the
strictest unity of place and of time in each picture; and the same necessity
requires these two unities during each act of a play, because during an act
there is no interruption in the spectacle. Now, when we view in succession a
number of such historical pictures, let it be, for example, the history of
Alexander by Le Brun, we have no difficulty to conceive, that months or years
have passed betwixt the subjects exhibited in two different pictures, though
the interruption is imperceptible in passing our eye from the one to the other.
We have as little difficulty to conceive a change of place, however great. In
this matter, there is truly no difference betwixt five acts of a modern play
and five such pictures. Where the representation is suspended, we can with the
greatest facility suppose any length of time or any change of place. The
spectator, it is true, may be conscious, that the real time and place are not
the same with what are employed in the representation, even including the
intervals. But this is a work of reflection; and by the same reflection he may
also be conscious, that Garrick is not King Lear, that the playhouse is not
Dover cliffs, nor the noise he hears thunder and lightning. In a word, during
an interruption of the representation, it is not more difficult for a spectator
to imagine himself carried from place to place, and from one period of time to
another, than at once, when the scene first opens, to be carried from London to
Rome, or from the present time two thousand years back. And indeed, it must
appear ridiculous, that a critic, who makes no difficulty of supposing
candlelight to be sunshine, and some painted canvasses a palace or a prison,
should affect so much difficulty in imagining a latitude of place or of time in
the story, beyond what is necessary in the representation.

There are, I acknowledge, some effects of great latitude in time that ought
never to be indulged in a composition for the theater. Nothing can be more
absurd, than at the close to exhibit a full grown person who appears a child at
the beginning. The mind rejects as contrary to all probability, such latitude
of time as is requisite for a change so remarkable. The greatest change from
place to place has not altogether the same bad effect. In the bulk of human
affairs place is not material; and the mind, when occupied with an interesting
event, is little regardful of minute circumstances. These may be varied at
will, because they scarce make any impression.

But though I have thus taken arms to rescue modern poets from the slavish
fetters of modern critics, I would not be understood to justify liberty without
any reserve. An unbounded license with relation to place and time, is faulty
for a reason that seems to have been overlooked: it never fails to break in
upon the unity of action. In the ordinary course of human affairs, single
events, such as are fit to be represented on the stage, are confined to a
narrow spot, and generally employ no great extent of time. We accordingly
seldom find strict unity of action in a dramatic composition, where any
remarkable latitude is indulged in these particulars. I must say farther, that
a composition which employs but one place, and requires not a greater length of
time than is necessary for the representation, is so far the more perfect:
because the confining an event within so narrow bounds, contributes to the
unity of action; and also prevents that labor, however slight, which the mind
must undergo in imagining frequent changes of place and many intervals of time.
But still I must insist, that the limitation of place and time which was
necessary in the Grecian drama, is no rule to us; and therefore that though
such limitation adds one beauty more to the composition, it is at best but a
refinement, which may justly give place to a thousand beauties more
substantial. And I may add, that it is extremely difficult, I was about to say
impracticable, to contract within the Grecian limits, any fable so fruitful of
incidents in number and variety as to give full scope to the fluctuation of
passion.

It may now appear, that critics who put the unities of place and of time upon
the same footing with the unity of action, making them all equally essential,
have not attended to the nature and construction of the modern drama. If they
admit an interrupted representation, with which no writer finds fault, it is
plainly absurd to condemn the greatest advantage it procures us, that of
representing many interesting subjects excluded from the Grecian stage. If
there needs must be a reformation, why not restore the ancient chorus and the
ancient continuity of action? There is certainly no medium: for to admit an
interruption without relaxing from the strict unities of place and of time, is
in effect to load us with all the inconveniences of the ancient drama, and at
the same time to withold from us its advantages.

And therefore the only proper question is, whether our model be or be not a
real improvement. This indeed may justly be called in question; and in order to
a fair comparative trial, some particulars must be premised. When a play
begins, we have no difficulty to enter into the scene of action, however
distant it be in time or in place. We know that the play is a representation
only: and the imagination, with facility, accommodates itself to every
circumstance. Our situation is very different after we are engaged. It is the
perfection of representation to hide itself, to impose upon the spectator, and
to produce in him an impression of reality, as if he were spectator of a real
event Chap. 2. part 1. sect. 6.
. Any interruption annihilates this impression: he is roused out of his waking
dream, and unhappily restored to his senses. So difficult it is to support this
impression of reality, that much slighter interruptions than the interval
betwixt two acts are sufficient to dissolve the charm. In the 5th act of the
Mourning Bride, the three first scenes are in a room of state; the fourth in a
prison. This change is operated by shifting the scene, which is done in a
trice. But however quick the transition may be, it is impracticable to impose
upon the spectators so far as to make them conceive that they are actually
carried from the palace to the prison. They immediately reflect, that the
palace and prison are imaginary, and that the whole is a fiction.

From these premises one will be naturally led, at first view, to declare
against the frequent interruptions in the modern drama. It will occur, "That
every interruption must have the effect to banish the dream of reality, and
with it to banish our concern, which cannot subsist while we are conscious that
all is a fiction; and therefore that in the modern drama sufficient time is not
afforded for the fluctuation and swelling of passion, like what is afforded in
the Grecian drama, where there is no interruption." This reasoning, it must be
owned, has a specious appearance: but we must not turn faint-hearted upon the
first repulse; let us rally our troops for a second engagement.

Considering attentively the ancient drama, we find, that though the
representation is never interrupted, the principal action is suspended not less
frequently than in the modern drama. There are five acts in each; and the only
difference is, that in the former, when the action is suspended, as it is at
the end of every act, opportunity is taken of the interval to employ the chorus
in singing. Hence it appears, that the Grecian continuity of representation
cannot have the effect to prolong the impression of reality. To banish this
impression, a suspension of the action while the chorus is employed in singing,
is not less operative than a total suspension both of the representation and
action.

But to open a larger view, I am ready to show, that a continued
representation, without a single pause even in the principal action, so far
from an advantage, would be really an imperfection; and that a representation
with proper pauses, is better calculated for moving the audience, and making
the strongest impressions. Representation cannot very long support an
impression of reality: when the spirits are exhausted by close attention and by
the agitation of passion, an uneasiness ensues, which never fails to banish the
waking dream. Now supposing an act to employ as much time as can easily be
given with strict attention to any incident, a supposition that cannot be far
from the truth; it follows, that the impression of reality would not be
prolonged beyond the space of an act, even supposing a continued
representation. Hence it appears, that a continued representation without any
pause, would be a bad contrivance: it would break the attention by
overstraining it, and produce a total absence of mind. In this respect, the
four pauses have a fine effect. By affording to the audience a seasonable
respite when the impression of reality is gone, and while nothing material is
in agitation, they relieve the mind from its fatigue; and consequently prevent
a wandering of thought at the very time possibly of the most interesting scenes.

In one article indeed, the Grecian model has greatly the advantage: its
chorus, during an interval, not only preserves alive the impressions made upon
the audience, but also prepares their hearts finely for new impressions. In our
theaters, on the contrary, the audience, at the end of every act, are in a
manner solicited to withdraw their thoughts from what has been passing, and to
trifle away the time the best way they can. Thus in the intervals betwixt the
acts, every warm impression is banished; and the spectators begin the next act
cool and indifferent, as at the commencement of the play. Here is a gross
malady in our theatrical representations; but a malady that luckily is not
incurable. To revive the Grecian chorus, would be to revive the Grecian slavery
of place and time. But I can figure a detached chorus coinciding with a pause
in the representation, as the ancient chorus did with a pause in the principal
action. What objection, for example, can there lie against music betwixt the
acts, vocal and instrumental, adapted to the subject? Such detached chorus,
beside admitting the same latitude that we enjoy at present as to time and
place, would have more than one happy effect: it would recruit the spirits; and
it would preserve entire, the tone, if not the tide, of passion. The music that
comes first, ought to accord with the tone of the preceding passion, and be
gradually varied till it accord with the tone of the passion that is to succeed
in the next act. The music and the representation would both of them be gainers
by their conjunction; which will thus appear. Music that accords with the
present tone of mind, is, upon that account, doubly agreeable; and accordingly,
though music singly has not power to raise any passion, it tends greatly to
support a passion already raised. Further, music, though it cannot of itself
raise a passion, prepares us for the passion that follows: by making cheerful,
tender, melancholy, or animated impressions, music has power to dispose the
heart to various passions. Of this power, the first scene of the Mourning Bride
is a shining instance: without the preparation of soft music in a melancholy
strain, it would be extremely difficult to enter all at once into Almeria's
deep distress. In this manner, music and representation support each other
delightfully: the impression made upon the audience by the representation, is a
fine preparation for the music that succeeds; and the impression made by the
music, is a fine preparation for the representation that succeeds. It appears
to me clear, that, by some such contrivance, the modern drama may be improved,
so as to enjoy the advantage of the ancient chorus without its slavish
limitation of place and time. And as to music in particular, I cannot figure
any plan that would tend more to its improvement. Composers, those for the
stage at least, would be reduced to the happy necessity of studying and
imitating nature; instead of indulging, according to the present fashion, in
wild, fantastic, and unnatural conceits. But we must return to our subject, and
finish the comparison betwixt the ancient and the modern drama.

The numberless improprieties forced upon the Grecian dramatic poets by the
constitution of their drama, are, of themselves one should think, a sufficient
reason for preferring that of the moderns, even abstracting from the
improvement proposed. To prepare the reader for this article, it must be
premised, that as in the ancient drama the place of action never varies, a
place necessarily must be chosen to which every person may have access without
any improbability. This confines the scene to some open place, generally the
court or area before a palace; which excludes from the Grecian theater
transactions within doors, though these commonly are the most important. Such
cruel restraint is of itself sufficient to cramp the most pregnant invention;
and accordingly the Grecian writers, in order to preserve unity of place, are
reduced to woeful improprieties. In the Hippolytus of Euripides Act 1. sc. 6.
, Phedra, distressed in mind and body, is carried without any pretext from her
palace to the place of action, is there laid upon a couch unable to support
herself upon her limbs, and made to utter many things improper to be heard by a
number of women who form the chorus. What is still worse, her female attendant
uses the strongest entreaties to make her reveal the secret cause of her
anguish; which at last Phedra, contrary to decency and probability, is
prevailed upon to do in presence of this very chorus Act 2. sc. 2.
. Alcestes, in Euripides, at the point of death, is brought from the palace to
the place of action, groaning and lamenting her untimely fate Act 2. sc. 1.
. In the Trachiniens of Sophocles Act 2.
, a secret is imparted to Dejanira, the wife of Hercules, in presence of the
chorus. In the tragedy of Iphigenia, the messenger employed to carry
Clitemnestra the news that Iphigenia was sacrificed, stops short at the place
of action, and with a loud voice calls the Queen from her palace to hear the
news. Again, in the Iphigenia in Tauris, the necessary presence of the chorus
forces Euripides into a gross absurdity, which is to form a secret plot in
their hearing Act 4. at the close.
; and to disguise the absurdity, much courtship is bestowed on the chorus, not
one woman but a number, to engage them to secrecy. In the Medea of Euripides,
that princess makes no difficulty, in presence of the chorus, to plot the death
of her husband, of his mistress, and of her father the King of Corinth, all by
poison. It was necessary to bring Medea upon the stage, and there is but one
place of action, which is always occupied by the chorus. This scene closes the
second act; and in the end of the third, she frankly makes the chorus her
confidents in ploting the murder of her own children. Terence, by identity of
place, is often forced to make a conversation within doors be heard on the open
street: the cries of a woman in labor are there heard distinctly.

The Grecian poets are not more happy with respect to time than with respect to
place. In the Hippolytus of Euripides, that prince is banished at the end of
the fourth act. In the first scene of the following act, a messenger relates to
Theseus the whole particulars of the death of Hippolytus by the sea monster.
This remarkable event must have employed many hours; and yet in the
representation it is confined to the time employed by the chorus upon the song
at the end of the 4th act. The inconsistency is still greater in the Iphigenia
in Tauris Act 5. sc. 4.
. The song could not exhaust half an hour; and yet the incidents supposed to
have happened in that time, could not naturally be transacted in less than half
a day.

The Grecian artists are not less frequently obliged to transgress another
rule, derived also from a continued representation, which is, that the place of
action must constantly be occupied; for the very least vacuity is an
interruption of the representation. Sophocles, with regard to this rule as well
as others, is generally correct. But Euripides cannot bear such restraint: he
often evacuates the stage, and leaves it empty for others in succession.
Iphigenia in Tauris, after pronouncing a soliloquy in the first scene, leaves
the place of action, and is succeeded by Orestes and Pylades. They, after some
conversation, walk off; and Iphigenia reenters, accompanied with the chorus.
In the Alcestes, which is of the same author, the place of action is void at
the end of the third act. It is true, that to cover this irregularity, and to
preserve the representation in motion, Euripides is extremely careful to fill
the stage without loss of time. But this is still an interruption, and a link
of the chain broken: for during the change of the actors, there must always be
a space of time, when we cannot justly say, that the stage is occupied by
either set. It makes indeed a more remarkable interruption, to change the place
of action as well as the actors; but that was not practicable upon the Grecian
stage.

It is hard to say upon what model Terence has formed his plays. Having no
chorus, there is a cessation in the representation at the end of every act. But
advantage is not taken of this cessation, even to vary the place of action. The
street is always chosen, where every thing passing may be seen by every person:
and by this choice, the most sprightly and interesting parts of the action,
which commonly pass within doors, are excluded; witness the last act of the
Eunuch. He has submitted to the same slavery with respect to time. In a word,
a play with a regular chorus, is not more confined in place and time than his
plays are. Thus a zealous sectary follows implicitly ancient forms and
ceremonies, without once considering whether their introductive cause be still
subsisting. Plautus, of a bolder genius than Terence, makes good use of the
liberty afforded by an interrupted representation: he varies the place of
action upon all occasions, when the variation suits his purpose.

The intelligent reader will by this time understand, that I plead for no
change of place in our plays but after an interval, nor for any latitude in
point of time but what falls in with an interval. The unities of place and time
ought to be strictly observed during each act; for during the representation,
there is no opportunity for the smallest deviation from either. Hence it is an
essential requisite, that during an act the stage be always occupied; for even
a momentary vacuity makes an interval. Another rule is not less essential: it
would be a gross breach of the unity of action, to exhibit upon the stage two
separate actions at the same time; and therefore to preserve this unity, it is
necessary that each personage introduced during an act, be linked to those in
possession of the stage, so as to join all in one action. These things follow
from the very conception of an act, which admits not the slightest
interruption. The moment the representation is intermitted, there is an end of
that act; and we have no other notion of a new act, but where after a pause or
interval, the representation is again put in motion. French writers, generally
speaking, are extremely correct in this particular: the English, on the
contrary, are so irregular as scarce to deserve a criticism: actors not only
succeed each other in the same place without connection; but, what is still
worse, they frequently succeed each other in different places. This change of
place in the same act, ought never to be indulged; for, beside breaking the
unity of the act, it has a disagreeable effect. After an interval, the mind can
readily accommodate itself to any place that is necessary, just as readily as
at the commencement of the play; but during the representation, the mind
rejects change of place. From the foregoing censure must be excepted the
Mourning Bride of Congreve, where regularity concurs with the beauty of
sentiment and of language, to make it one of the most complete pieces England
has to boast of I must acknowledge, however, that in point of regularity, this
elegant performance is not altogether unexceptionable. In the four first acts,
the unities of place and time are strictly observed: but in the last act, there
is a capital error with respect to unity of place. In the three first scenes of
that act, the place of action is a room of state, which is changed to a prison
in the fourth scene: the chain of the actors withal is broken; for the persons
introduced in the prison, are different from those who made their appearance in
the room of state. This remarkable interruption of the representation, makes in
effect two acts instead of one: and therefore, if it be a rule, that a play
ought not to consist of more acts than five, this performance is so far
defective in point of regularity. I may add, that even admitting six acts, the
irregularity would not be altogether removed, without a longer pause in the
representation than is allowed in the acting; for it requires more than a
momentary interruption, to enable the imagination readily to accommodate itself
to a new place, or to prorogation of time. In The Way of the World, of the same
author, unity of place is preserved during every act, and a stricter unity of
time during the whole play than is necessary.

CHAP. XXIV. Gardening and Architecture.
THE books that have been composed upon architecture and upon embellishing
ground, abound in practical instruction necessary for a mechanic: but in vain
would we rummage them for rational principles to improve our taste. In a
general system, it might be thought sufficient to have unfolded the principles
that govern these and other fine arts, leaving the application to the reader:
but as I would neglect no opportunity of illustrating these principles, I
propose to give a specimen of their application to gardening and architecture,
being favorite arts, though I profess no peculiar skill in either.

Gardening was at first an useful art: in the garden of Alcinoous, described by
Homer, we find nothing done for pleasure merely. But gardening is now improved
into a fine art; and when we talk of a garden without any epithet, a pleasure
garden, by way of eminence, is understood. The garden of Alcinoous, in modern
language, was but a kitchen-garden. Architecture has run the same course. It
continued many ages an useful art merely, before it aspired to be classed with
the fine arts. Architecture therefore and gardening must be handled in a
twofold view, as being useful arts as well as fine arts. The reader however
will not here expect rules for improving any work of art in point of utility.
It is no part of my plan to treat of any useful art as such. But there is a
beauty in utility; and in discoursing of beauty, that of utility ought not to
be neglected. This leads us to consider gardens and buildings in different
views: they may be destined for use solely, for beauty solely, or for both.
Such variety in the destination, bestows upon gardening and architecture a
great command of beauties complex not less than various, which makes it
difficult to form an accurate taste in these arts. And hence that difference
and wavering of taste which is more remarkable here than in any art that has
but a single destination.

Architecture and gardening cannot otherwise entertain the mind, than by
raising certain agreeable emotions or feelings; and before we descend to
particulars, these arts shall be presented in a general view, by showing what
are the emotions or feelings that can be raised by them. Poetry, as to its
power of raising emotions, possesses justly the first place among the fine
arts; for scarce one emotion of human nature is beyond its reach. Painting and
sculpture are more circumscribed, having the command of no emotions but what
are produced by sight. They are peculiarly successful in expressing painful
passions, which are displayed by external signs extremely legible See chap. 15.
. Gardening, beside the emotions of beauty by means of regularity, order,
proportion, color, and utility, can raise emotions of grandeur, of sweetness,
of gaiety, melancholy, wildness, and even of surprise or wonder. In
architecture, regularity, order, and proportion, and the beauties that result
from them, are still more conspicuous than in gardening. But with respect to
the beauty of color, architecture is far inferior. Grandeur can be expressed
in a building, perhaps more successfully than in a garden; but as to the other
emotions above mentioned, architecture hitherto has not been brought to the
perfection of expressing them distinctly. To balance this defect, architecture
can display the beauty of utility in the highest perfection.

But gardening possesses one advantage, which never can be equalled in the
other art. A garden may be so contrived, as in various scenes to raise
successively all its different emotions. But to operate this delicious effect,
the garden must be extensive, so as to admit a slow succession: for a small
garden, comprehended at one view, ought to be confined to one expression See
chap. 8.
: it may be gay, it may be sweet, it may be gloomy; but an attempt to mix
these, would create a jumble of emotions not a little unpleasant. For the same
reason, a building, even the most magnificent, is necessarily confined to one
expression.

Architecture, considered as a fine art, instead of rivaling gardening in its
progress toward perfection, seems not far advanced beyond its infant-state. To
bring it to maturity, two things mainly are wanted. First, A greater variety of
parts and ornaments than it seems provided with. Gardening here has greatly the
advantage: it is provided with such plenty and such variety of materials, that
it must be the fault of the artists, if the spectator be not entertained with
different scenes, and affected with various emotions. But materials in
architecture are so scanty, that artists hitherto have not been successful in
raising emotions, other than those of beauty and grandeur. With respect to the
former, there are indeed plenty of means, regularity, order, symmetry,
simplicity; and with respect to the latter, the addition of size is sufficient.
But though it be evident, that every building ought to have a certain character
or expression suitable to its destination; yet this is a refinement which
artists have scarce ventured upon. A death's head and bones employed in
monumental buildings, will indeed produce an emotion of gloom and melancholy:
but every ornament of this kind, if these can be termed so, ought to be
rejected, because they are in themselves disagreeable. The other thing wanted
to bring the art to perfection, is, to ascertain the precise impression made by
every single part and ornament, cupolas, spires, columns, carvings, statues,
vases, etc. For in vain will an artist attempt rules for employing these,
either singly or in combination, until the different emotions or feelings they
produce be distinctly explained. Gardening in this particular has also the
advantage. The several emotions raised by trees, rivers, cascades, plains,
eminences, and other materials it employs, are understood; and the nature of
each can be described with some degree of precision, which is done occasionally
in the foregoing parts of this work.

In gardening as well as in architecture, simplicity ought to be the governing
taste. Profuse ornament has no better effect than to confound the eye, and to
prevent the object from making an impression as one entire whole. An artist
destitute of genius for capital beauties, is naturally prompted to supply the
defect by crowding his plan with slight embellishments. Hence in gardens,
triumphal arches, Chinese houses, temples, obelisks, cascades, fountains,
without end; and hence in buildings, pillars, vases, statues, and a profusion
of carved work. Thus a woman who has no just taste, is apt to overcharge every
part of her dress with ornament. Superfluity of decoration has another bad
effect: it gives the object a diminutive look. An island in a wide extended
lake, makes it appear larger; but an artificial lake, which must always be
little, appears still less by making an island in it See appendix to part 5.
chap. 2.
.

In forming plans for embellishing a field, an artist void of taste deals in
straight lines, circles, squares; because these show best upon paper. He
perceives not, that to humor and adorn nature is the perfection of his art;
and that nature, neglecting regularity, reaches superior beauties by
distributing her objects in great variety with a bold hand. A large field laid
out with strict regularity, is stiff and artificial. Nature indeed, in
organized bodies comprehended under one view, studies regularity; which, for
the same reason, ought to be studied in architecture: but in large objects,
which cannot otherwise be surveyed than in parts and by succession, regularity
and uniformity would be useless properties, because they cannot be discovered
by the eye A square field appears not such to the eye when viewed from any part
of it; and the center is the only place where a circular field preserves in
appearance its real figure.
. Nature therefore, in her large works, neglects these properties; and in
copying nature the artist ought to neglect them.

Having thus far carried on a comparison betwixt gardening and architecture, I
proceed to rules peculiar to each; and I begin with gardening. The simplest
idea of a garden, is that of a spot embellished with a number of natural
objects, trees, walks, polished parterres, flowers, streams, etc. One more
complex comprehends statues and buildings, that nature and art may be mutually
ornamental. A third approaching nearer perfection, is of objects assembled
together, in order to produce, not only an emotion of beauty, essential to
gardens of every kind, but also some other particular emotion, grandeur, for
example, gaiety, or any other of those above mentioned. The most perfect idea
of a garden is an improvement upon the third, requiring the adjustment of the
several parts, in such a manner as to inspire all the different emotions that
can be raised by gardening. In this idea of a garden, the arrangement is an
important circumstance; for it has been shown, that some emotions figure best
in conjunction, and that others ought always to appear in succession and never
in conjunction. I have had occasion to observe above Chap. 8.
, that when the most opposite emotions, such as gloominess and gaiety,
stillness and activity, follow each other in succession, the pleasure on the
whole will be the greatest; but that opposite or dissimilar emotions ought not
to be united, because they produce an unpleasant mixture Chap. 2. part 4.
. For that reason, a ruin, affording a sort of melancholy pleasure, ought not
to be seen from a flower-parterre, which is gay and cheerful. But to pass
immediately from an exhilerating object to a ruin, has a glorious effect; for
each of the emotions is the more sensibly felt by being contrasted with the
other. Similar emotions, on the other hand, such as gaiety and sweetness,
stillness and gloominess, motion and grandeur, ought to be raised together; for
their effects upon the mind are greatly heightened by their conjunction See the
place immediately above cited.
.

Kent's method of embellishing a field, is admirable. It is painting a field
with beautiful objects, natural and artificial, disposed like colors upon a
canvas. It requires indeed more genius to paint in the gardening way. In
forming a landscape upon a canvas, no more is required but to adjust the
figures to each other: an artist who lays out ground in Kent's manner, has an
additional task, which is to adjust his figures to the several varieties of the
field.

One garden must be distinguished from a plurality; and yet it is not obvious
wherein the unity of a garden consists. A notion of unity is indeed suggested
from viewing a garden surrounding a palace, with views from each window, and
walks leading to every corner. But there may be a garden without a house. In
this case, I must pronounce, that what makes it one garden, is the unity of
design, every single spot appearing part of a whole. The gardens of Versailles,
properly expressed in the plural number, being no fewer than sixteen, are
indeed all of them connected with the palace, but have scarce any mutual
connection: they appear not like parts of one whole, but rather like small
gardens in contiguity. Were these gardens at some distance from each other,
they would have a better effect. Their junction breeds confusion of ideas, and
upon the whole gives less pleasure than would be felt in a slower succession.

Regularity is required in that part of a garden which joins the
dwelling house; for being considered as a more immediate accessory, it ought to
partake the regularity of the principal object The influence of this connection
surpassing all bounds, is visible in many gardens, left in their original form
of horizontal plains forced with great labor and expense, perpendicular faces
of earth supported with massy stone walls, terrace-walks in stages one above
another, regular ponds and canals without the least motion, and the whole
surrounded, like a prison, with high walls excluding every external object. At
first view it may puzzle one to account for a taste running cross to nature in
every particular. But nothing happens without a cause. Perfect regularity and
uniformity are required in a house; and this idea is extended to its accessory
the garden, especially if it be a small spot incapable of grandeur or much
variety. The house is regular, so must the garden be: the floors of the house
are horizontal, and the garden must have the same position: in the house we are
protected from every intruding eye, so must we be in the garden. This, it must
be confessed, is carrying the notion of resemblance very far. But where reason
and taste are laid asleep, nothing is more common than to carry resemblance
beyond proper bounds.
. But in proportion to the distance from the house considered as the center,
regularity ought less and less to be studied. In an extensive plan, it has a
fine effect to lead the mind insensibly from regularity to a bold variety
giving an impression of grandeur. And grandeur ought to be studied as much as
possible, even in a more confined plan, by avoiding a multiplicity of small
parts See chap. 4.
. Nothing contributes more to grandeur, than a right disposition of trees. Let
them be scattered extremely thin near the dwelling house, and thickened in
proportion to their distance: distant eminences to be filled with trees, and
laid open to view. A small garden, on the other hand, which admits not
grandeur, ought to be strictly regular.

Milton, describing the garden of Eden, prefers justly the grand taste to that
of regularity. Flowers worthy of paradise, which not nice art
In beds and curious knots; but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain;
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierc'd shade
Imbrown'd the noontide-bow'rs.
Paradise Lost, b. 4.

In the manner of planting a wood or thicket, much art may be displayed. A
common center of walks, termed a star, from whence are seen a number of
remarkable objects, appears too artificial to be agreeable. The crowding withal
so many objects together, lessens the pleasure that would be felt in a slower
succession. Abandoning therefore the star, being stiff and formal, let us try
to substitute some form more natural, that will lay open all the remarkable
objects in the neighborhood. This may be done by openings in the wood at
various distances, which, in walking, bring successively under the eye every
object as by accident. Some openings display single objects, some a plurality
in a line, and some a rapid succession of them. In this plan, the mind at
intervals is roused and cheared by agreeable objects; and the scene is greatly
heightened by the surprise it occasions when we stumble, as it were, upon
objects of which we had no expectation.

As gardening is not an inventive art, but an imitation of nature, or rather
nature itself ornamented; it follows necessarily, that every thing unnatural
ought to be rejected with disdain. Statues of wild beasts vomiting water, a
common ornament in gardens, prevails in those of Versailles. Is this ornament
in a good taste? A jet d'eau, being purely artificial, may, without disgust, be
tortured into a thousand shapes: but a representation of what really exists in
nature, admits not any unnatural circumstance. These statues therefore in the
gardens of Versailles must be condemned: and yet so insensible has the artist
been to just imitation, as to have displayed his vicious taste without the
least color or disguise. A lifeless statue of an animal pouring out water, may
be endured without much disgust. But here the lions and wolves are put in
violent action: each has seized its prey, a deer or a lamb, in act to devour.
And yet, instead of extended claws and open mouth, the whole, as by a
hocus-pocus trick, is converted into a different scene: the lion, forgetting
his prey, pours out water plentifully; and the deer, forgetting its danger,
performs the same operation; a representation not less absurd than that in the
opera, where Alexander the Great, after mounting the wall of a town besieged,
turns about and entertains his army with a song.

In gardening, every lively exhibition of what is beautiful in nature has a
fine effect: on the other hand, distant and faint imitations are displeasing to
every one of taste. The cutting evergreens in the shape of animals, is a very
ancient practice; as appears from the epistles of Pliny, who seems to be a
great admirer of this puerile conceit. The propensity to imitation gave birth
to this practice; and has supported it wonderfully long, considering how faint
and insipid the imitation is. But the vulgar, great and small, devoid of taste,
are entertained with the oddness and singularity of a resemblance, however
distant, betwixt a tree and an animal. An attempt, in the gardens of
Versailles, to imitate a grove of trees by a group of jets d'eau, appears, for
the same reason, not less ridiculous.

In laying out a garden, every thing trivial or whimsical ought to be avoided.
Is a labyrinth then to be justified? It is a mere conceit, like that of
composing verses in the shape of an axe or an egg. The walks and hedges may be
agreeable; but in the form of a labyrinth, they serve to no end but to puzzle.
A riddle is a conceit not so mean; because the solution is a proof of sagacity,
which affords no aid in tracing a labyrinth.

The gardens of Versailles, executed with infinite expense by men at that time
in high repute, are a lasting monument of a taste the most vicious and
depraved. The faults above mentioned, instead of being avoided, are chosen as
beauties, and multiplied without end. Nature, it would seem, was deemed too
vulgar to be imitated in the works of a magnificent monarch; and for that
reason preference was given to things unnatural, which probably were mistaken
for supernatural. I have often amused myself with a fanciful resemblance
betwixt these gardens and the Arabian tales. Each of them is a performance
intended for the amusement of a great king: in the sixteen gardens of
Versailles there is no unity of design, more than in the thousand and one
Arabian tales: and, lastly, they are equally unnatural; groves of jets d'eau,
statues of animals conversing in the manner of Aesop, water issuing out of the
mouths of wild beasts, give an impression of fairy-land and witchcraft, not
less than diamond-palaces, invisible rings, spells and incantations.

A straight road is the most agreeable, because it shortens the journey. But in
an embellished field, a straight walk has an air of stiffness and confinement:
and at any rate is less agreeable than a winding or waving walk; for in
surveying the beauties of a fine field, we love to roam from place to place at
freedom. Winding walks have another advantage: at every step they open new
views. In short, the walks in a field intended for entertainment, ought not to
have any appearance of a road. My intention is not to make a journey, but to
feast my eye with the beauties of art and nature. This rule excludes not long
straight openings terminating upon distant objects. These, beside variety,
never fail to raise an emotion of grandeur, by extending in appearance the size
of the field. An opening without a terminating object, soon closes upon the
eye: but an object, at whatever distance, continues the opening; and deludes
the spectator into a conviction, that the trees which confine the view are
continued till they join the object. Straight walks also in recesses do
extremely well: they vary the scenery, and are favorable to meditation.

An avenue ought not to be directed in a straight line upon a dwelling house:
better far an oblique approach in a waving line, with single trees and other
scattered objects interposed. In a direct approach, the first appearance
continues the same to the end: we see a house at a distance, and we see it all
along in the same spot without any variety. In an oblique approach, the
intervening objects put the house seemingly in motion: it moves with the
passenger, and appears to direct its course so as hospitably to intercept him.
An oblique approach contributes also to variety: the house being seen
successively in different directions, takes on at every step a new figure.

A garden on a flat ought to be highly and variously ornamented, in order to
occupy the mind and prevent its regretting the insipidity of an uniform plain.
Artificial mounts in this view are common: but no person has thought of an
artificial walk elevated high above the plain. Such a walk is airy, and tends
to elevate the mind: it extends and varies the prospect: and it makes the
plain, seen from a height, appear more agreeable.

Whether should a ruin be in the Gothic or Grecian form? In the former, I say;
because it exhibits the triumph of time over strength, a melancholy but not
unpleasant thought. A Grecian ruin suggests rather the triumph of barbarity
over taste, a gloomy and discouraging thought.

Fountains are seldom in a good taste. Statues of animals vomiting water, which
prevail every where, stand condemned. A statue of a whale spouting water upward
from its head, would in one sense be natural, as whales of a certain species
have that power. The design however would scarce be relished, because its
singularity would give it the appearance of being unnatural. There is another
reason against it, that the figure of a whale is in itself not agreeable. In
the many fountains in and about Rome, statues of fishes are frequently employed
to support a large basin of water. This unnatural conceit cannot be otherwise
explained, than by the connection betwixt water and the fish that swim in it;
which by the way is a proof of the influence that even the slighter connections
have on the mind. The only good design for a fountain I have met with, is what
follows. In an artificial rock, rugged and abrupt, there is a cavity out of
sight at the top: the water, conveyed to it by a pipe, pours or trickles down
the broken parts of the rock, and is collected into a basin at the foot: it is
so contrived, as to make the water fall in sheets or in rills at pleasure.

Hitherto a garden has been treated as a work intended solely for pleasure, or,
in other words, for giving impressions of intrinsic beauty. What comes next in
order is the beauty of a garden destined for use, termed relative beauty See
these terms defined, chap. 3.
; and this branch shall be dispatched in a few words. In gardening, luckily,
relative beauty need never stand in opposition to intrinsic beauty. All the
ground that can be requisite for use, makes but a small proportion of an
ornamented field; and may be put in any corner without obstructing the
disposition of the capital parts. At the same time, a kitchengarden or an
orchard is susceptible of intrinsic beauty; and may be so artfully disposed
among the other parts, as by variety and contrast to contribute to the beauty
of the whole. In this respect, architecture is far more intricate, as will be
seen immediately: for there, it being often requisite to blend intrinsic and
relative beauty in the same building, it becomes a difficult task to attain
both in any perfection.

As gardening is brought to greater perfection in China than in any other known
country, an account of the means practiced by Chinese artists to inspire all
the various emotions of gardening, will be a fine illustration of the foregoing
doctrine. In general, it is an indispensable law with them, never to deviate
from nature: but in order to produce that degree of variety which is pleasing,
every method is used that is consistent with nature. Nature is strictly
imitated in the banks of their artificial lakes and rivers; which sometimes are
bare and gravelly, sometimes covered with wood quite to the brink of the water.
To flat spots adorned with flowers and shrubs, are opposed others steep and
rocky. We see meadows covered with cattle; rice-grounds that run into the
lakes; groves into which enter navigable creeks and rivulets. These generally
conduct to some interesting object, a magnificent building, terraces cut in a
mountain, a cascade, a grotto, an artificial rock, and other such inventions.
Their artificial rivers are generally serpentine; sometimes narrow, noisy, and
rapid; sometimes deep, broad, and slow: and to make the scene still more
active, mills and other moving machines are often erected. In the lakes are
interspersed islands; some barren, surrounded with rocks and shoals; others
enriched with every thing that art and nature can furnish. Even in their
cascades they avoid regularity, as forcing nature out of its course: the waters
are seen bursting out from among the caverns and windings of the artificial
rocks; here an impetuous cataract, there many lesser falls: and in its passage,
the water is often impeded by trees and heaps of stones, that seem brought down
by the violence of the current. Straight lines, generally avoided, are
sometimes indulged, in order to take the advantage of any interesting object at
a distance, by directing openings upon it.

Sensible of the influence of contrast, the Chinese artists deal in sudden
transitions, and in opposing to each other, forms, colors, and shades. The eye
is conducted, from limited to extensive views, and from lakes and rivers to
plains, hills, and woods: to dark and gloomy colors, are opposed the more
brilliant: the different masses of light and shade are disposed in such a
manner, as to render the composition distinct in its parts, and striking on the
whole. In plantations, the trees are artfully mixed according to their shape
and color; those of spreading branches with the pyramidal, and the light with
the deep green. They even introduce decayed trees, some erect, and some half
out of the ground Taste has suggested to Kent the same artifice. The placing a
decayed tree properly, contributes to contrast; and also produces a sort of
pity, grounded on an imaginary personification.
. In order to heighten contrast, much bolder strokes are risked. They sometimes
introduce rough rocks, dark caverns, trees ill formed and seemingly rent by
tempests, or blasted by lightning, a building in ruins or half consumed by
fire. But to relieve the mind from the harshness of such objects, they are
always succeeded by the sweetest and most beautiful scenes.

The Chinese study to give play to the imagination. They hide the termination
of their lakes: the view of a cascade is frequently interrupted by trees,
through which are seen obscurely the waters as they fall. The imagination once
roused, is disposed to magnify every object.

Nothing is more studied in Chinese gardens than to raise wonder or surprise.
In scenes calculated for that end, every thing appears like fairy-land; a
torrent, for example, conveyed under ground, producing an uncommon sound that
puzzles a stranger to guess what it may be; and, to increase our wonder by
multiplying such uncommon sounds, the rocks and buildings are contrived with
cavities and interstices. Sometimes one is led insensibly into dark caverns,
terminating unexpectedly in a landscape enriched with all that nature affords
the most delicious. At other times, beautiful walks insensibly conduct us to a
rough uncultivated field, where bushes briers and stones interrupt the passage:
when we look about for an outlet, some rich prospect unexpectedly opens to
view. Another artifice is, to obscure some capital part by trees or other
interposed objects: our curiosity is raised to know what lies beyond; and after
a few steps, we are greatly surprised with some scene totally different from
what was expected.

I close these cursory observations upon gardening, with a remark that must
touch every reader. Rough uncultivated ground, dismal to the eye, inspires
peevishness and discontent. May not this be one cause of the harsh manners of
savages? In a field richly ornamented, are collected beautiful objects of
various kinds. Such a field displays in full luster, the goodness of the Deity
and the ample provision he has made for our happiness; which must fill every
spectator, with gratitude to his Maker and with benevolence to his
fellow creatures. Other fine arts may be perverted to excite irregular, and
even vicious, emotions: but gardening, which inspires the purest and most
refined pleasures, cannot but promote every good affection. The gaiety and
harmony of mind it produces, must naturally incline the spectator to
communicate his satisfaction to others by acts of humanity and kindness.

Having finished what occurred on gardening, I proceed to rules and
observations that more peculiarly concern architecture. Architecture being an
useful as well as a fine art, buildings and parts of buildings must be
distinguished into three kinds, viz. what are intended for utility solely, what
for ornament solely, and what for both. A building intended for utility solely,
such as detached offices, ought in every part to correspond precisely to that
intention. The least deviation from use, though contributing to ornament, will
be disagreeable. For every work of use being considered as a means to an end,
its perfection as a means is the capital circumstance; and every other beauty,
in opposition, is neglected as improper and impertinent. In things again
intended for ornament, such as pillars, obelisks, triumphal arches, beauty
solely ought to be regarded. A Heathen temple must be considered as merely
ornamental; for being dedicated to some deity, and not intended for habitation,
it is susceptible of any figure and any embellishment that fancy can suggest
and beauty require. The great difficulty of contrivance, respects buildings
that are intended for pleasure as well as for use. These ends, employing
different and often opposite means, are with difficulty reconciled. In palaces,
and other buildings sufficiently extensive to admit a variety of useful
contrivance, regularity justly takes the lead. But in dwelling-houses that are
too small for variety of contrivance, utility ought to prevail; neglecting
regularity so far as it stands in opposition to convenience.

Intrinsic and relative beauty being founded on different principles, must be
handled separately; and I begin with relative beauty, as of the greater
importance.

The proportions of a door, are determined by the use to which it is destined.
The door of a dwelling house, which ought to correspond to the human size, is
confined to seven or eight feet in height, and three or four in breadth. The
proportions proper for the door of a barn or coach-house, are widely different.
Another consideration enters. To study intrinsic beauty in a coach-house or
barn, intended merely for use, is obviously improper. But a dwelling house may
admit ornaments; and the principal door of a palace demands all the grandeur
that is consistent with the foregoing proportions dictated by utility. It ought
to be elevated and approached by steps; and it may be adorned with pillars
supporting an architrave, or in any other beautiful manner. The door of a
church ought to be wide, in order to afford an easy passage for a multitude.
The wideness, at the same time, regulates the height, as will appear by and by.
The size of windows ought to be proportioned to that of the room they serve
with light; for if the apperture be not sufficiently large to convey light to
every corner, the room is dark and gloomy. Steps of stairs ought to be
accommodated to the human figure, without regarding any other proportion: these
steps accordingly are the same in large and in small buildings, because both
are inhabited by men of the same size.

I proceed to consider intrinsic beauty blended with that which is relative. A
cube in itself is more agreeable than a parallelopipedon, which will constantly
hold in small figures. But a large building in the form a cube, appears lumpish
and heavy; while the other figure, set on its smaller base, is by its elevation
more agreeable: and hence the beauty of a Gothic tower. But let us suppose this
parallelopipedon destined for a dwelling house, to make way for relative
beauty. Here utility prevails over elevation; and a parallelopipedon,
inconvenient by its height, is set upon its larger base. The loftiness is gone;
but that loss is more than compensated by additional convenience; and for that
reason the form of a building spread more upon the ground than raised in
height, is always preferred for a dwelling house, without excepting even the
most sumptuous palace.

With respect to the divisions within, utility requires that the rooms be
rectangular; for otherwise void spaces will be left of no use. A hexagonal
figure leaves no void spaces; but then it determines the rooms to be all of one
size, which is extremely inconvenient. A cube will at first be pronounced the
most agreeable figure; and this may hold in a room of a moderate size. But in a
very large room, utility requires a different figure. The chief convenience of
a great room, is unconfined motion. This directs us to the greatest length that
can be obtained. But a square room of a great size is inconvenient, by removing
far from the hand, chairs and tables, which, when unemploy'd, must be ranged
along the sides of the room. Utility therefore requires a large room to be a
parallelogram. This figure, at the same time, is the best calculated for
receiving light; because, to avoid cross-light, all the windows ought to be in
one wall; and if the opposite wall be at such distance as not to be fully
lighted, the room must be obscure. The height of a room exceeding nine or ten
feet, has little or no relation to utility; and therefore proportion is the
only rule for determining the height when above that number of feet.

As all artists who deal in the beautiful are naturally prone to entertain the
eye, they have great opportunity to exert their taste upon palaces and
sumptuous buildings, where, as above observed, intrinsic beauty ought to have
the ascendant over that which is relative. But such propensity is unhappy with
respect to private dwelling-houses; because in these, relative beauty cannot be
displayed in any perfection, without abandoning intrinsic beauty. There is no
opportunity for great variety of form in a small house; and in an edifice of
this kind, internal convenience has not hitherto been happily adjusted to
external regularity. I am apt to believe, that an accurate coincidence here, is
beyond the reach of art. And yet architects always split upon this rock; for
they never will give over attempting to reconcile these two incompatibles. How
else should it be accounted for, that of the endless variety of private
dwelling-houses, there is not one to be found, that is generally agreed upon as
a good pattern? The unwearied propensity to make a house regular as well as
convenient, forces the architect, in some articles, to sacrifice convenience to
regularity, and in others, regularity to convenience. By this means, the house,
which turns out neither regular nor convenient, never fails to displease. The
faults are obvious, and the difficulty of doing better is known to the artist
only "Houses are built to live in, and not to look on. Therefore let use be
preferred before uniformity, except where both may be had." Lo. Verulam, essay
45.


.

Nothing can be more evident, than that the form of a dwelling house ought to
be suited to the climate; and yet no error is more common, than to copy in
Britain the form of Italian houses; not forgetting even those parts that are
purposely contrived for air, and for excluding the sun. I shall give one or two
instances. A colonnade along the front of a building, has a fine effect in
Greece and Italy, by producing coolness and obscurity, agreeable properties in
warm and luminous climates. The cold climate of Britain is altogether averse to
this ornament. A colonnade therefore, can never be proper in this country,
unless when employed to communicate with a detached building. Again, a logio
opening the house to the north, contrived in Italy for gathering cool air, is,
if possible, still more improper for this climate. Scarce endurable in summer,
it, in winter, exposes the house to the bitter blasts of the north, and to
every shower of snow and rain.

Having discussed what appeared necessary to be said upon relative beauty,
singly considered, or in combination with intrinsic beauty, the next step is,
to view architecture as one of the fine arts, and to examine those buildings
and parts of buildings that are solely calculated to please the eye. In the
works of nature, grand and magnificent, variety prevails. The timid hand of
art, is guided by rule and compass. Hence it is, that in works which imitate
nature, the great art is to hide every appearance of art; which is done by
avoiding regularity and indulging variety. But in works of art that are
original and not imitative, such as architecture, strict regularity and
uniformity ought to be studied so far as consistent with utility.

In buildings intended to please the eye, proportion is not less essential than
regularity and uniformity; for we are so framed by nature, as to be pleased
equally with each of these. By many writers it is taken for granted, that in
all the parts of a building there are certain strict proportions which please
the eye; precisely as there are certain strict proportions of sound which
please the ear; and that in both the slightest deviation is equally
disagreeable. Others again seem to relish more a comparison betwixt proportion
in numbers and proportion in quantity; and hold that the same proportions are
agreeable in both. The proportions, for example, of the numbers 16, 24, and 36
are agreeable; and so, say they, are the proportions of a room, the height of
which is 16 feet, the breadth 24, and the length 36. This point, with relation
to the present subject, being of importance, the reader will examine it with
attention and impartiality. To refute the notion of a resemblance betwixt
musical proportions and those of architecture, it might be sufficient to
observe in general, that the one is addressed to the ear, the other to the eye;
and that objects of different senses have no resemblance, nor indeed any
relation to each other. But more particularly, what pleases the ear in harmony,
is not the proportion of the strings of the instrument, but of the sounds that
these strings produce. In architecture, on the contrary, it is the proportion
of different quantities that pleases the eye, without the least relation to
sound. Beside, were quantity here to be the sole ground of comparison, we have
no reason to presume, that there is any natural analogy betwixt the proportions
that please in a building and the proportions of strings that produce
concordant sounds. I instance in particular an octave, the most complete of all
concords. An octave is produced by two strings of the same tension and
diameter, and as to length in the proportion of one to two. I do not know, that
this proportion will be agreeable in any two parts of a building. I add, that
concordant notes are produced by wind instruments, which, as to proportion,
appear not to have even the slightest resemblance to a building.

With respect to the other notion instituting a comparison betwixt proportion
in numbers and proportion in quantity, I urge, that number and quantity are so
distinct from each other, as to afford no probability of any natural relation
betwixt them. Quantity is a real quality of every substance or body: number is
not a real quality, but merely a conception that arises upon viewing a
plurality of things in succession. Because an arithmetical proportion is
agreeable in numbers, have we any reason to conclude that it must also be
agreeable in quantity? At this rate, a geometrical proportion and many others,
ought also to be agreeable in both. A certain proportion may coincide in both;
and among an endless variety of proportions, it would be wonderful, if there
never should be a coincidence. One example is given of this coincidence, in the
numbers 16, 24, and 36; but to be convinced that it is merely accidental, we
need but reflect, that the same proportions are not applicable to the external
figure of a house, and far less to a column.

That we are framed by nature to relish proportion as well as regularity, is
indisputable: but that agreeable proportion, like concord in sounds, is
confined to certain precise measures, is not warranted by experience: on the
contrary, we learn from experience, that various proportions are equally
agreeable, that proportion is never tied down to precise measures but admits
more and less, and that we are not sensible of disproportion till the
difference betwixt the quantities compared become the most striking
circumstance. Columns evidently admit different proportions, equally agreeable.
The case is the same in houses, rooms, and other parts of a building. And this
opens an interesting reflection. The foregoing difference betwixt concord and
proportion, is an additional instance of that admirable harmony which subsists
among the several branches of the human frame. The ear is an accurate judge of
sounds and of their smallest differences; and that concord in sounds should be
regulated by accurate measures, is perfectly well suited to this accuracy of
perception. The eye is more uncertain about the size of a large object, than of
one that is small; and in different situations the same object appears of
different sizes. Delicacy of feeling therefore with respect to proportion in
quantities, would be an useless quality. It is much better ordered, that there
should be such a latitude with respect to agreeable proportions, as to
correspond to the uncertainty of the eye with respect to quantity.

But this scene is too interesting to be passed over in a cursory view: all its
beauties are not yet displayed. I proceed to observe, that to make the eye as
delicate with respect to proportion as the ear is with respect to concord,
would not only be an useless quality, but be the source of continual pain and
uneasiness. I need go no farther for a proof than the very room I possess at
present: every step I take, varies to me, in appearance, the proportion of the
length and breadth. At that rate, I should not be happy but in one precise
spot, where the proportion appears agreeable. Let me further observe, that it
would be singular indeed, to find in the nature of man, any two principles in
perpetual opposition to each other. This would precisely be the case, if
proportion were circumscribed like concord; for it would exclude all but one of
those proportions that utility requires in different buildings, and in
different parts of the same building.

It is ludicrous to observe all writers acknowledging the necessity of accurate
proportions, and yet differing widely about them. Laying afide reasoning and
philosophy, one fact universally agreed on ought to have undeceived them, that
the same proportions which please in a model are not agreeable in a large
building. A room 48 feet in length and 24 in breadth and height, is well
proportioned; but a room 12 feet wide and high and 24 long, looks like a
gallery.

Perrault, in his comparison of the ancients and moderns p. 94.
, is the only author who runs to the opposite extreme; maintaining, that the
different proportions assigned to each order of columns are arbitrary, and that
the beauty of these proportions is entirely the effect of custom. This bewrays
ignorance of human nature, which evidently delights in proportion, as well as
in regularity, order, and propriety. But without any acquaintance with human
nature, a single reflection might have convinced him of his error; that if
these proportions had not originally been agreeable, they could not have been
established by custom. If a thing be universal, it must be natural.

To illustrate the present point, I shall add a few examples of the
agreeableness of different proportions. In a sumptuous edifice, the capital
rooms ought to be large, for otherwise they will not be proportioned to the
size of the building. On the other hand, a very large room in a small house, is
disproportioned. But in things thus related, the mind requires not a precise or
single proportion, rejecting all others; on the contrary, many different
proportions are made equally welcome. It is only when a proportion becomes
loose and distant, that the agreeableness abates, and at last vanishes. In all
buildings accordingly, we find rooms of different proportions equally
agreeable, even where the proportion is not influenced by utility. With respect
to the height of a room, the proportion it ought to bear to the length and
breadth, is extremely arbitrary; and it cannot be otherwise, considering the
uncertainty of the eye as to the height of a room, when it exceeds 17 or 18
feet. In columns again, even architects must confess, that the proportion of
height and thickness varies betwixt 8 diameters and 10, and that every
proportion betwixt these two extremes is agreeable. But this is not all. There
must certainly be a further variation of proportion, depending on the size of
the column. A row of columns 10 feet high, and a row twice that height, require
different proportions. The intercolumniations must also differ in proportion
according to the height of the row.

Proportion of parts is not only itself a beauty, but is inseparably connected
with a beauty of the first magnitude. Parts that in conjunction appear
proportional, never fail separately to produce similar emotions; which existing
together, are extremely pleasant, as I have had occasion to show Chap. 2. part
4.
. Thus a room of which the parts are all finely adjusted to each other, strikes
us with the beauty of proportion. It produces at the same time a pleasure far
superior. The length, the breadth, the height, the windows, raise each of them
separately an emotion. These emotions are similar; and though faint when felt
separately, they produce in conjunction the emotion of concord or harmony,
which is extremely pleasant. On the other hand, where the length of a room far
exceeds the breadth, the mind comparing together parts so intimately connected,
immediately perceives a disagreement or disproportion which disgusts. But this
is not all. Viewing them separately, different emotions are produced, that of
grandeur from the great length, and that of meanness or littleness from the
small breadth, which in union are disagreeable by their discordance. Hence it
is, that a long gallery, however convenient for exercise, is not an agreeable
figure of a room. We consider it, like a stable, as destined for use, and
expect not that in any other respect it should be agreeable.

Regularity and proportion are essential in buildings destined chiefly or
solely to please the eye, because they are the means to produce intrinsic
beauty. But a skilful artist will not confine his view to regularity and
proportion. He will also study propriety, which is perceived when the form and
ornaments of a structure are suited to the purpose for which it is appointed.
The sense of propriety dictates the following rule, That every building ought
to have an expression corresponding to its destination. A palace ought to be
sumptuous and grand; a private dwelling, neat and modest; a playhouse, gay and
splendid; and a monument, gloomy and melancholy. A Heathen temple has a double
destination: it is considered chiefly as a house dedicated to some divinity;
and in that respect it ought to be grand, elevated, and magnificent: it is
considered also as a place of worship; and in that respect it ought to be
somewhat dark or gloomy; because dimness produces that tone of mind which is
suited to humility and devotion. A Christian church is not considered as a
house for the Deity, but merely a place of worship: it ought therefore to be
decent and plain, without much ornament: a situation ought to be chosen, humble
and retired; because the congregation, during worship, ought to be humble and
disengaged from the world. Columns, beside their chief destination of being
supports, contribute to that peculiar expression which the destination of a
building requires: columns of different proportions, serve to express
loftiness, lightness, etc. as well as strength. Situation also may contribute
to expression: convenience regulates the situation of a private dwelling house;
but, as I have had occasion to observe Chap. 10.
, the situation of a palace ought to be lofty.

And this leads me to examine, whether the situation of a great house, where
the artist is limited in his choice, ought in any measure to regulate its form.
The connection betwixt a great house and the neighboring grounds, though not
extremely intimate, demands however some congruity. It would, for instance,
displease us to find an elegant building thrown away upon a wild uncultivated
country: congruity requires a polished field for such a building; and beside
the pleasure of congruity, the spectator is sensible of the pleasure of
concordance from the similarity of the emotions produced by the two objects.
The old Gothic form of building seems well suited to the rough uncultivated
regions where it was invented. The only mistake was, the transferring this form
to the fine plains of France and Italy, better fitted for buildings in the
Grecian taste. But by refining upon the Gothic form, every thing in the power
of invention has been done, to reconcile it to its new situation. The profuse
variety of wild and grand objects about Inverary, demanded a house in the
Gothic form; and every one must approve the taste of the proprietor, in
adjusting so finely, as he has done, the appearance of his house to that of the
country where it is placed.

The external structure of a great house, leads naturally to its internal
structure. A large and spacious room, receives us commonly upon our entrance.
This seems to me a bad contrivance in several respects. In the first place,
when immediately from the open air we step into such a room, its size in
appearance is diminished by contrast: it looks little compared with the great
canopy the sky. In the next place, when it recovers its grandeur, as it soon
does, it gives a diminutive appearance to the rest of the house: passing from
it, every apartment looks little. This room therefore may be aptly compared to
the swollen commencement of an epic poem. Bella per Emathios plusquam civilia
campos. In the third place, by its situation it serves only for a waiting-room,
and a passage to the principal apartments. And yet undoubtedly, the room of the
greatest size ought to be reserved for company. A great room, which enlarges
the mind and gives a certain elevation to the spirits, is destined by nature
for conversation. Rejecting therefore this form, I take a hint from the climax
in writing for another form that appears more suitable. My plan is, first a
handsome portico, proportioned to the size and fashion of the front: this
portico leads into a waiting-room of a larger size; and this again to the great
room, all by a progression from small to great. If the house be very large,
there may be space for the following suit of rooms; first, a portico; second, a
passage within the house bounded by rows of columns on each side connected by
arcades; third, an octagon room, or of any other figure, about the center of
the building; and, lastly, the great room.

Of all the emotions that can be raised by architecture, grandeur is that which
has the greatest influence on the mind. It ought therefore to be the chief
study of the artist, to raise this emotion in great buildings. But it seems
unhappy for architecture, that it is necessarily governed by certain principles
opposite to grandeur: the direct effect of regularity and proportion, is to
make a building appear less than it is in reality. Any invention to reconcile
these with grandeur, would be a capital improvement in architecture.

Next of ornaments, which contribute greatly to give buildings a peculiar
expression. It has been a doubt with me, whether a building can regularly admit
any ornament but what is useful, or at least appears to be useful. But
considering the double aim of architecture, a fine as well as an useful art,
there is no good reason why ornaments may not be added to please the eye
without any relation to use. This liberty is allowed in poetry, painting, and
gardening, and why not in architecture considered as a fine art? A private
dwellinghouse, it is true, and other edifices where use is the chief aim, admit
not regularly any ornament but what has the appearance, at least, of use: but
temples, triumphal arches, and other buildings intended chiefly or solely for
show, may be highly ornamented.

This suggests a division of ornaments into three kinds, viz. ornaments that
are beautiful without relation to use, such as statues in niches, vases, basso
or alto relievo: next, things in themselves not beautiful, but possessing the
beauty of utility by imposing on the spectator, and appearing to be of use,
blind windows for example: the third kind is, where the thing is in itself
beautiful, and also takes on the appearance of use; the case of a pilaster.
With respect to the second, it is an egregious blunder, to contrive the
ornament so as to make it appear useless. If a blind window therefore be
necessary for regularity, it ought to be so disguised, as not to be
distinguished from the real windows. If it appear to be a blind window, it is
disgustful, as a vain attempt to supply the want of invention. It shows the
irregularity in a stronger light; by signifying that a window ought to be there
in point of regularity, but that the architect had not skill sufficient to
connect external regularity with internal convenience.

From ornaments in general, we descend to a pillar, the chief ornament in great
buildings. The destination of a pillar is to support, really or in appearance,
another part termed the architrave. With respect to the form of this ornament,
I observe, that a circle is a more agreeable figure than a square, a globe than
a cube, and a cylinder than a parallelopipedon. This last, in the language of
architecture, is saying, that a column is a more agreeable figure than a
pilaster. For that reason, it ought to be preferred, all other circumstances
being equal. Another reason concurs, that a column annexed to a wall, which is
a plain surface, makes a greater variety than a pilaster. There is an
additional reason for rejecting pilasters in the external front of a building,
arising from a principle unfolded above Chap. 8.
, viz. a remarkable tendency in the mind of man, to advance every thing to its
perfection as well as to its final issue. If I see a thing obscurely in a dim
light, and by disjointed parts, my curiosity is roused, and prompts me, out of
the disjointed parts to compose an entire whole. I suppose it to be, for
example, a horse. My eyesight being obedient to this conjecture, I immediately
perceive a horse, almost as distinctly as in daylight. This principle is
applicable to the case in hand. The most superb front, at a great distance,
appears a plain surface: approaching gradually, we begin to perceive
inequalities: these inequalities, advancing a few steps more, take on the
appearance of pillars; but whether round or square, we are uncertain: our
curiosity anticipating our progress, cannot rest in suspense: we naturally
suppose the most complete pillar, or that which is the most agreeable to the
eye; and we immediately perceive, or seem to perceive, a number of columns: if
upon a near approach we find pilasters only, the disappointment makes these
pilasters appear disagreeable; when abstracted from that circumstance, they
would only have appeared somewhat less agreeable. But as this deception cannot
happen in the inner front enclosing a court, I see no reason for excluding
pilasters there, when there is any reason for preferring them before columns.

With respect now to the parts of a column, a bare uniform cylinder without
base or capital, appears naked and scarce agreeable: it ought therefore to have
some finishing at the top and at the bottom. Hence the three chief parts of a
column, the shaft, the base, and the capital. Nature undoubtedly requires a
certain proportion among these parts, but not limited within precise bounds. I
suspect that the proportions in use have been influenced in some degree by the
human figure; the capital being conceived as the head, the base as the feet.
With respect to the base indeed, the principle of utility interposes to vary it
from the human figure: the base must be so proportioned to the whole, as to
give the column the appearance of stability.

In architecture as well as in gardening, contradictory expressions ought to be
avoided. Firmness and solidity are the proper expressions of a pedestal: carved
work, on the contrary, ought to be light and delicate. A pedestal therefore,
whether of a column or of a statue, ought to be sparingly ornamented: the
ancients never ventured any bolder ornament than the basso-relievo.

To succeed in allegorical or emblematic ornaments, is no slight effort of
genius; for it is extremely difficult to dispose them so in a building as to
produce any good effect. The mixing them with realities, makes a miserable
jumble of truth and fiction See chap. 20. sect. 5.
. In a basso-relievo on Antonin's pillar, rain obtained by the prayers of a
Christian legion, is expressed by joining to the group of soldiers a rainy
Jupiter, with water in abundance running from his head and beard. De Piles,
fond of the conceit, carefully informs his reader, that he must not take this
for a real Jupiter, but for a symbol which among the Pagans signified rain: an
emblem ought not to make a part of the group representing real objects or real
events, but be detached from it, so as even at first view to appear an emblem.
But this is not all, nor the chief point. Every emblem ought to be rejected
that is not clearly expressive of its meaning: if it be in any degree obscure,
it never can be relished. The temples of Ancient and Modern Virtue in the
gardens of Stow, appear not at first view emblematical; and when we are
informed that they are so, it is not easy to gather their meaning. The
spectator sees one temple in full repair, another in ruins: but without an
explanatory inscription, he may guess, but cannot be certain, that the former
being dedicated to Ancient Virtue, the latter to Modern Virtue, are intended a
satire upon the present times. On the other hand, a trite emblem, like a trite
simile, is disgustful See chap. 8.
. Nor ought an emblem more than a simile to be founded on low or familiar
objects; for if the objects be not agreeable, as well as their meaning, the
emblem upon the whole will not be relished. A room in a dwelling house
containing a monument to a deceased friend, is dedicated to Melancholy. Its
furniture is a clock that strikes every minute to signify how swiftly time
passes: upon the monument, weeping figures and other hackney'd ornaments
commonly found upon tomb-stones, with a stuffed raven in a corner: verses on
death, and other serious subjects, inscribed all around. The objects are too
familiar, and the artifice too apparent, to produce the intended effect.

The statue of Moses striking a rock from which water actually issues, is also
in a false taste; for it is mixing reality with representation: Moses himself
may bring water out of the rock, but this miracle is too much for his statue.
The same objection lies against a cascade where we see the statue of a
water-god pouring out of his urn real water.

It is observed above of gardening, that it contributes to rectitude of
manners, by inspiring gaiety and benevolence. I add another observation, That
both gardening and architecture contribute to the same end, by inspiring
neatness and elegance. It is observed in Scotland, that even a turnpikeroad has
some influence of this kind upon the low people in the neighborhood. They
acquire a taste for regularity and neatness; which is displayed first upon
their yards and little enclosures, and next within doors. A taste for
regularity and neatness thus gathering strength, comes insensibly to be
extended to dress, and even to behavior and manners.

CHAP. XXV. Standard of Taste.
"THAT there is no disputing about taste", meaning taste in its most extensive
sense, is a saying so generally received as to have become a proverb. One thing
indeed is evident, that if the proverb hold true with respect to any one
external sense, it must hold true with respect to all. If the pleasures of the
palate disdain a comparative trial and reject all criticism, the pleasures of
touch, of smell, of sound, and even of sight, must be equally privileged. At
this rate, a man is not within the reach of censure, even where, insensible to
beauty, grandeur, or elegance, he prefers the Saracen's head upon a sign-post
before the best tablature of Raphael, or a rude Gothic tower before the finest
Grecian building: nor where he prefers the smell of a rotten carcass before
that of the most odoriferous flower: nor jarring discords before the most
exquisite harmony.

But we must not stop here. If the pleasures of external sense be exempted from
criticism, why not every one of our pleasures, from whatever source derived? If
taste in the proper sense of the word cannot be disputed, there is as little
room for disputing it in its figurative sense. The proverb accordingly
comprehends both; and in that large sense may be resolved into the following
general proposition, That with respect to the sensitive part of our nature, by
which some objects are agreeable some disagreeable, there is not such a thing
as a good or bad, a right or wrong; that every man's taste is to himself an
ultimate standard without appeal; and consequently that there is no ground of
censure against any one, if such a one there be, who prefers Blackmore before
Homer, selfishness before benevolence, or cowardice before magnanimity.

The proverb in the foregoing instances, is indeed carried very far. It seems
difficult, however, to sap its foundation, or with success to attack it from
any quarter. For in comparing the various tastes of individuals, it is not
obvious what standard must be appealed to. Is not every man equally a judge of
what is agreeable or disagreeable to himself? Does it not seem odd, and perhaps
absurd, that a man ought not to be pleased when he is, or that he ought to be
pleased when he is not?

This reasoning may perplex, but, in contradiction to sense and feeling, will
never afford conviction. A man of taste must necessarily feel the reasoning to
be false, however unqualified to detect the fallacy. At the same time, though
no man of taste will subscribe to the proverb as holding true in every case, no
man will venture to affirm that it holds true in no case. Subjects there are
undoubtedly, that we may like or dislike indifferently, without any imputation
upon our taste. Were a philosopher to make a scale for human pleasures with
many divisions, in order that the value of each pleasure may be denoted by the
place it occupies, he would not think of making divisions without end, but
would rank together many pleasures arising perhaps from different objects,
either as being equally valuable, or differing so imperceptibly as to make a
separation unnecessary. Nature has taken this course, so far as appears to the
generality of mankind. There may be subdivisions without end; but we are only
sensible of the grosser divisions, comprehending each of them many pleasures of
various kinds. To these the proverb is applicable in the strictest sense; for
with respect to pleasures of the same rank, what ground can there be for
preferring one before another? If a preference in fact be given by any
individual, it cannot be taste, but custom, imitation, or some peculiarity of
mind.

Nature in her scale of pleasures, has been sparing of divisions: she has
wisely and benevolently filled every division with many pleasures; in order
that individuals may be contented with their own lot, without envying the
happiness of others: many hands must be employed to procure us the
conveniences of life; and it is necessary that the different branches of
business, whether more or less agreeable, be filled with hands. A taste too
nice and delicate, would obstruct this plan; for it would crowd some
employments, leaving others, not less useful, totally neglected. In our present
condition, happy it is, that the plurality are not delicate in their choice.
They fall in readily with the occupations, pleasures, food, and company, that
fortune throws in their way; and if at first there be any displeasing
circumstance, custom soon makes it easy.

The proverb will be admitted so far as it regards the particulars now
explained. But when applied in general to every subject of taste, the
difficulties to be encountered are insuperable. What shall we say, in
particular, as to the difficulty that arises from human nature itself? Do we
not talk of a good and a bad taste? of a right and a wrong taste? and upon that
supposition, do we not, with great confidence, censure writers, painters,
architects, and every one who deals in the fine arts? Are such criticisms
absurd and void of foundation? Have the foregoing expressions, familiar in all
languages and among all people, no sort of meaning? This can hardly be: what is
universal must have a foundation in nature. If we can reach this foundation,
the standard of taste will no longer be a secret.

All living creatures are by nature distributed into classes; the individuals
of each, however diversified by slighter differences, having a wonderful
uniformity in their capital parts internal and external. Each class is
distinguishable from others by an external form; and not less distinguishable
by an internal constitution, manifested by certain powers, feelings, desires,
and actions, peculiar to the individuals of each class. Thus each class may be
conceived to have a common nature, which, in framing the individuals belonging
to the class, is taken for a model or standard.

Independent altogether of experience, men have a sense or conviction of a
common nature or standard, not only in their own species, but in every species
of animals. And hence it is a matter of wonder, to find any individual
deviating from the common nature of the species, whether in its internal or
external construction: a child born with an aversion to its mother's milk, is a
matter of wonder, not less than if born without a mouth, or with more than one
See Essays on morality and natural religion, part 1. essay 2. chapter 1.
.

With respect to this common nature or standard, we are so constituted as to
conceive it to be perfect or right; and consequently that individuals ought to
be made conformable to it. Every remarkable deviation accordingly from the
standard, makes an impression upon us of imperfection, irregularity, or
disorder: it is disagreeable and raises in us a painful emotion: monstrous
births, exciting the curiosity of a philosopher, fail not at the same time to
excite aversion in a high degree.

Lastly, we have a conviction, that the common nature of man is invariable not
less than universal: we conceive that it has no relation to time nor to place;
but that it will be the same hereafter as at present, and as it was in time
past; the same among all nations and in all corners of the earth. Nor are we
deceived: giving allowance for the difference of culture and gradual refinement
of manners, the fact corresponds to our conviction.

This conviction of a common nature or standard, and of its perfection, is the
foundation of morality; and accounts clearly for that remarkable conception we
have, of a right and a wrong taste in morals. It accounts not less clearly for
the conception we have of a right and a wrong taste in the fine arts. A person
who rejects objects generally agreeable, and delights in objects generally
disagreeable, is condemned as a monster: we disapprove his taste as bad or
wrong; and we have a clear conception that he deviates from the common
standard. If man were so framed as not to have any notion of a common standard,
the proverb mentioned in the beginning would hold universally, not only in the
fine arts but in morals: upon that supposition, the taste of every man, with
respect to both, would to himself be an ultimate standard. But the conviction
of a common standard being made a part of our nature, we intuitively conceive a
taste to be right or good if conformable to the common standard, and wrong or
bad if disconformable.

No particular concerning human nature is more universal, than the uneasiness a
man feels when in matters of importance his opinions are rejected by others.
Why should difference in opinion create uneasiness, more than difference in
stature, in countenance, or in dress? The sense of a common standard is the
only principle that can explain this mystery. Every man, generally speaking,
taking it for granted that his opinions agree with the common sense of mankind,
is therefore disgusted with those of a contrary opinion, not as differing from
him, but as differing from the common standard. Hence in all disputes, we find
the parties, each of them equally, appealing constantly to the common sense of
mankind as the ultimate rule or standard. Were it not for this standard, of
which the conviction is universal, I'cannot discover the slightest foundation
for rancor or animosity when persons differ in essential points more than in
points purely indifferent. With respect to the latter, which are not supposed
to be regulated by any standard, individuals are permitted to think for
themselves with impunity. The same liberty is not indulged with respect to the
former: for what reason, other than that the standard by which these are
regulated, ought, as we judge, to produce an uniformity of opinion in all men?
In a word, to this sense of a common standard must be wholly attributed the
pleasure we take in those who espouse the same principles and opinions with
ourselves, as well as the aversion we have at those who differ from us. In
matters left indifferent by the standard, we find nothing of the same pleasure
or pain. A bookish man, unless swayed by convenience, relisheth not the
contemplative more than the active part of mankind: his friends and companions
are chosen indifferently out of either class. A painter consorts with a poet or
musician, as readily as with those of his own art; and one is not the more
agreeable to me for loving beef, as I do, nor the less agreeable for preferring
mutton.

I have said, that my disgust is raised, not by differing from me, but by
differing from what I judge to be the common standard. This point, being of
importance, ought to be firmly established. Men, it is true, are prone to
flatter themselves, by taking it for granted, that their opinions and their
taste are in all respects agreeable to the common standard. But there may be
exceptions, and experience shows there are some. There are instances without
number, of persons who cling to the grosser amusements of gaming, eating,
drinking, without having any relish for more elegant pleasures, such, for
example, as are afforded by the fine arts. Yet these very persons, talking the
same language with the rest of mankind, pronounce in favor of the more elegant
pleasures: they invariably approve those who have a more refined taste, and are
ashamed of their own as low and sensual. It is in vain to think of giving a
reason for this singular impartiality against self, other than the authority of
the common standard. Every individual of the human species, the most grovelling
not excepted, has a natural sense of the dignity of human nature See chap. 11.
. Hence every man is esteemed and respected in proportion to the dignity of his
character, sentiments, and actions. And from the instances now given we
discover, that the sense of the dignity of human nature is so vigorous, as even
to prevail over self-partiality, and to make us despise our own taste compared
with the more elevated taste of others.

In our sense of a common standard and in the pleasure individuals give us by
their conformity to it, a curious final cause is discovered. An uniformity of
taste and sentiment in matters of importance, forms an intimate connection
among individuals, and is a great blessing in the social state. With respect to
morals in particular, unhappy it would be for mankind did not this uniformity
prevail: it is necessary that the actions of all men be uniform with respect to
right and wrong; and in order to uniformity of action, it is necessary that all
men think the same way in these particulars: if they differ through any
irregular bias, the common sense of mankind is appealed to as the rule; and it
is the province of judges, in matters especially of equity, to apply that rule.
The same uniformity, it is yielded, is not so strictly necessary in other
matters of taste: men, though connected in general as members of the same
state, are, by birth, office, or occupation, separated and distinguished into
different classes; and are thereby qualified for different amusements: variety
of taste, so far, is no obstruction to the general connection. But with respect
to the more capital pleasures, such as are best enjoyed in common, uniformity
of taste is necessary for two great ends, first to connect individuals the more
intimately in the social life, and next to advance these pleasures to their
highest perfection. With respect to the first, if instead of a common taste,
every man had a taste peculiar to himself, leading him to place his happiness
upon things indifferent or perhaps disagreeable to others, these capital
pleasures could not be enjoyed in common: every man would pursue his own
happiness by flying from others; and instead of a natural tendency to union,
remarkable in the human species, union would be our aversion: man would not be
a consistent being: his interest would lead him to society, and his taste would
draw him from it. The other end will be best explained by entering upon
particulars. Uniformity of taste gives opportunity for sumptuous and elegant
buildings, for fine gardens, and extensive embellishments, which please
universally. Works of this nature could never have reached any degree of
perfection, had every man a taste peculiar to himself: there could not be any
suitable reward, either of profit or honor, to encourage men of genius to
labor in such works. The same uniformity of taste is equally necessary to
perfect the arts of music, sculpture, and painting; and to support the expense
they require after they are brought to perfection. Nature is in every
particular consistent with herself. We are formed by nature to have a high
relish for the fine arts, which are a great source of happiness, and extremely
friendly to virtue. We are, at the same time, formed with an uniformity of
taste, to furnish proper objects for this high relish: if uniformity of taste
did not prevail, the fine arts could never have made any figure.

Thus, upon a sense common to the species, is erected a standard of taste,
which without hesitation is applied to the taste of every individual. This
standard, ascertaining what actions are right what wrong, what proper what
improper, has enabled moralists to establish rules for our conduct from which
no person is allowed to swerve. We have the same standard for ascertaining in
all the fine arts, what is beautiful or ugly, high or low, proper or improper,
proportioned or disproportioned. And here, as in morals, we justly condemn
every taste that swerves from what is thus ascertained by the common standard.

The discovery of a rule or standard for trying the taste of individuals in the
fine arts as well as in morals, is a considerable advance, but completes not
our journey. We have a great way yet to travel. It is made out that there is a
standard: but it is not made out, by what means we shall prevent mistaking a
false standard for that of nature. If from opinion and practice we endeavor to
ascertain the standard of nature, we are betrayed into endless perplexities.
Viewing this matter historically, nothing appears more various and more
wavering than taste in the fine arts. If we judge by numbers, the Gothic taste
of architecture will be preferred before that of Greece; and the Chinese taste
probably before both. It would be endless, to recount the various tastes of
gardening that have prevailed in different ages, and still prevail in different
countries. Despising the modest coloring of nature, women of fashion in France
daub their cheeks with a red powder. Nay, the unnatural swelling in the neck, a
disease peculiar to the inhabitants of the Alps, is relished by that people.
But we ought not to be discouraged by such untoward instances. For do we not
find the like contradictions with respect to morals? was it not once held
lawful, for a man to expose his infant children, and, when grown up, to sell
them for slaves? was it not held equally lawful, to punish children for the
crime of their parents? was not the murder of an enemy in cold blood an
universal practice? what stronger instance can be given, than the abominable
practice of human sacrifices, not less impious than immoral? Such aberrations
from the rules of morality, prove only, that men, originally savage and
brutish, acquire not rationality or any delicacy of taste, till they be long
disciplined in society. To ascertain the rules of morality, we appeal not to
the common sense of savages, but of men in their more perfect state: and we
make the same appeal, in forming the rules that ought to govern the fine arts.
In neither can we safely rely on a local or transitory taste; but on what is
the most universal and the most lasting among polite nations.

In this very manner, a standard for morals has been established with a good
deal of accuracy; and so well fitted for practice, that in the hand of able
judges it is daily applied with general satisfaction. The standard of taste in
the fine arts, is not yet brought to such perfection. And there is an obvious
reason for its slower progress. The sense of a right and a wrong in action, is
conspicuous in the breast of every individual, almost without exception. The
sense of a right and a wrong in the fine arts, is more faint and wavering: it
is by nature a tender plant, requiring much culture to bring it to maturity: in
a barren soil it cannot live; and in any soil, without cultivation, it is weak
and sickly. I talk chiefly with relation to its more refined objects: for some
objects make such lively impressions of beauty, grandeur, and proportion, as
without exception to command the general taste. There appears to me great
contrivance, in distinguishing thus the moral sense from a taste in the fine
arts. The former, as a rule of conduct and as a law we ought to obey, must be
clear and authoritative. The latter is not entitled to the same authority,
since it contributes to our pleasure and amusement only. Were it more strong
and lively, it would usurp upon our duty, and call off the attention from
matters of greater moment. Were it more clear and authoritative, it would
banish all difference of taste: a refined taste would not form a character, nor
be entitled to esteem. This would put an end to rivalship, and consequently to
all improvement.

But to return to our subject. However languid and cloudy the common sense of
mankind may be with respect to the fine arts, it is yet the only standard in
these as well as in morals. And when the matter is attentively considered, this
standard will be sound less imperfect than it appears to be at first sight. In
gathering the common sense of mankind upon morals, we may safely consult every
individual. But with respect to the fine arts, our method must be different: a
wary choice is necessary; for to collect votes indifferently, will certainly
mislead us: those who depend for food on bodily labor, are totally void of
taste; of such a taste at least as can be of use in the fine arts. This
consideration bars the greater part of mankind; and of the remaining part, many
have their taste corrupted to such a degree as to unqualify them altogether for
voting. The common sense of mankind must then be confined to the few that fall
not under these exceptions. But as such selection seems to throw matters again
into uncertainty, we must be more explicit upon this branch of our subject.

Nothing tends more than voluptuousness to corrupt the whole internal frame,
and to vitiate our taste, not only in the fine arts, but even in morals. It
never fails, in course of time, to extinguish all the sympathetic affections,
and to bring on a beastly selfishness which leaves nothing of man but the
shape. About excluding persons of this stamp there will be no dispute. Let us
next bring under trial, the opulent whose chief pleasure is expense. Riches,
coveted by most men for the sake of superiority and to command respect, are
generally bestowed upon costly furniture, numerous attendants, a princely
dwelling, every thing superb and gorgeous, to amaze and humble all beholders.
Simplicity, elegance, propriety, and every thing natural, sweet, or amiable,
are despised or neglected; for these are not at the command of riches, and make
no figure in the public eye. In a word, nothing is relished, but what serves to
gratify pride, by an imagined exaltation of the possessor above those he
reckons the vulgar. Such a tenor of life contracts the heart and makes every
principle give way to self-interest. Benevolence and public spirit, with all
their refined emotions, are little felt and less regarded. And if these be
excluded, there can be no place for the faint and delicate emotions of the fine
arts.

The exclusion of classes so many and various, reduces within a narrow compass
those who are qualified to be judges in the fine arts. Many circumstances are
necessary to form a judge of this sort: there must be a good natural taste:
this taste must be improved by education, reflection, and experience: it must
be preserved alive, by a regular course of life, by using the goods of fortune
with moderation, and by following the dictates of improved nature which gives
welcome to every rational pleasure without deviating into excess. This is the
tenor of life which of all contributes the most to refinement of taste; and the
same tenor of life contributes the most to happiness in general.

If there appear much uncertainty in a standard that requires so painful and
intricate a selection, we may possibly be reconciled to it by the following
consideration, That, with respect to the fine arts, there is less difference of
taste than is commonly imagined. Nature has marked all her works with
indelible characters of high or low, plain or elegant, strong or weak. These,
if at all perceived, are seldom misapprehended by any taste; and the same marks
are equally perceptible in works of art. A defective taste is incurable; and it
hurts none but the possessor, because it carries no authority to impose upon
others. I know not if there be such a thing as a taste naturally bad or wrong;
a taste, for example, that prefers a grovelling pleasure before one that is high
and elegant. Grovelling pleasures are never preferred: they are only made
welcome by those who know no better. Differences about objects of taste, it is
true, are endless: but they generally concern trifles, or possibly matters of
equal rank where the preference may be given either way with impunity. If, on
any occasion, the dispute go deeper and persons differ where they ought not, a
depraved taste will readily be discovered on one or other side, occasioned by
imitation, custom, or corrupted manners, such as are described above.

If, after all that is said, the standard of taste be thought not yet
sufficiently ascertained, there is still one resource in which I put great
confidence. What I have in view, are the principles that constitute the
sensitive part of our nature. By means of these principles, common to all men,
a wonderful uniformity is preserved among the emotions and feelings of
different individuals; the same object making upon every person the same
impression; the same in kind, at least, if not in degree. There have been
aberrations, as above observed, from these principles; but soon or late they
always prevail, by restoring the wanderers to the right track. The uniformity
of taste here accounted for, is the very thing that in other words is termed
the common sense of mankind. And this discovery leads us to means for
ascertaining the common sense of mankind or the standard of taste, more
unerringly than the selection above insisted on. Every doubt with relation to
this standard, occasioned by the practice of different nations and different
times, may be cleared by applying to the principles that ought to govern the
taste of every individual. In a word, a thorough acquaintance with these
principles will enable us to form the standard of taste; and to lay a
foundation for this valuable branch of knowledge, is the declared purpose of
the present undertaking.

APPENDIX. Terms defined or explained.
1. CONSIDERING the things I am conscious of, some are internal or within my
mind, some external or without. Passion, thinking, volition, are internal
objects. Objects of sight, of hearing, of smell, of touch, of taste, are
external.

2. The faculty by which I discover an internal object, is termed an internal
sense: the faculty by which I discover an external object, is termed an
external sense. This distinction among the senses is made with reference to
their objects merely; for the senses, external and internal, are equally powers
or faculties of the mind.

3. But as self is an object, and the only one that cannot be termed either
external or internal, the faculty by which I am conscious of myself, must be
distinguished from both the internal and external senses.

4. By sight we perceive the qualities of figure, color, motion, etc.: by the
ear we perceive the qualities high, low, loud, soft: by touch we perceive
rough, smooth, hot, cold, etc.: by taste we perceive sweet, sour, bitter, etc.:
by smell we perceive fragrant, stinking, etc. Qualities, from our very
conception of them, are not capable of an independent existence; but must
belong to something of which they are the qualities. A thing with respect to
its qualities is termed a subject, or substratum; because its qualities rest,
as it were, upon it, or are founded upon it. The subject or substratum of
visible qualities, is termed substance, of audible qualities, sound; of
tangible qualities, body. In like manner, taste is the substratum of qualities
perceived by our sense of tasting; and smell is the substratum of qualities
perceived by our sense of smelling.

5. Substance and sound are perceived existing in a certain place; often at a
considerable distance from the organ. But smell, touch, and taste, are
perceived at the organs of sense.

6. Objects of internal sense are conceived to be attributes: deliberation,
reasoning, resolution, willing, consenting, are internal actions: passions and
emotions are internal agitations. With regard to the former, I am conscious of
being active; with regard to the latter, I am conscious of being passive.

7. Again, we are conscious of internal action as in the head; of passions and
emotions as in the heart.

8. Many actions may be exerted internally and many effects produced, of which
we are not conscious. When we investigate the ultimate cause of animal motions,
it is the most probable opinion, that they proceed from some internal power:
and if so, we are, in this particular, unconscious of our own operations. But
consciousness being implied in the very conception of deliberating, reasoning,
resolving, willing, consenting, these operations cannot go on without our
knowledge. The same is the case of passions and emotions; for no internal
agitation is denominated a passion or emotion, but what we are conscious of.

9. The mind is not always in the same state: it is at times cheerful,
melancholy, severe, peevish. These different states may not improperly be
denominated tones. An object, by making an impression, produces an emotion or
passion, which again gives the mind a certain tone suited to it.

10. Perception and sensation are commonly reckoned synonymous terms,
signifying the consciousness we have of objects; but, in accurate language,
they are distinguished. The consciousness we have of external objects, is
termed perception. Thus we are said to perceive a certain animal, a certain
color, sound, taste, smell, etc. The consciousness we have of pleasure or pain
arising from external objects, is termed sensation. Thus we have a sensation of
cold, of heat, of the pain of a wound, of the pleasure of a landscape, of
music, of beauty, of propriety, of behavior, etc. The consciousness we have of
internal action, such as deliberation, resolution, choice, is never termed
either a perception or a sensation.

11. Conception ought to be distinguished from perception. External things and
their attributes are objects of perception: relations among things are objects
of conception. I see two men, James and John: the consciousness I have of them
is a perception: but the consciousness I have of their relation as father and
son, is termed a conception. Again, perception relates to objects really
existing: conception to fictitious objects, or to those framed by the
imagination.

12. Feeling, beside denoting one of the external senses, has two different
significations. Of these the most common includes not only sensation, but also
that branch of consciousness which relates to passions and emotions: it is
proper to say, I have a feeling of cold, of heat, or of pain; and it is not
less proper to say, I have a feeling of love, of hatred, of anger, or of any
other passion. But it is not applied to internal action: for it is not proper
to say, that a man feels himself deliberating or resolving. In a sense less
common, feeling is put for the thing that is felt; and in this sense it is a
general term for every one of our passions and emotions.

13. That we cannot perceive an external object till an impression be made upon
our body, is probable from reason, and is ascertained by experience. But it is
not necessary that we be made sensible of the impression. It is true, that in
touching, tasting, and smelling, we feel the impression made at the organ of
sense: but in seeing and hearing, we feel no impression. We know indeed by
experience, that before we perceive a visible object, its image is spread upon
the retina tunica; and that before we perceive a sound, an impression is made
upon the drum of the ear: and yet here, we are not conscious either of the
organic image or the organic impression: nor are we conscious of any other
operation preparatory to the act of perception. All we can say, is, that we see
that river, or hear that trumpet Yet a singular opinion that impressions are
the only objects of perception, has been espoused by some philosophers of no
mean rank; not attending to the foregoing peculiarity in the senses of seeing
and hearing, that we perceive objects without being conscious of an organic
impression or of any impression. See the treatise upon human nature, where we
find the following passage, book 1. p. 4. sect. 2. "Properly speaking it is not
our body we perceive when we regard our limbs and members; so that the
ascribing a real and corporeal existence to these impressions or to their
objects, is an act of the mind as difficult to explain," etc.
.

14. Objects once perceived may be recalled to the mind by the power of memory.
When I recall an object in this manner, it appears to me the same as in the
original survey, only more faint and obscure. For example, I saw yesterday a
spreading oak growing on the brink of a river. I endeavor to recall it to my
mind. How is this operation performed? Do I endeavor to form in my mind a
picture of it or representative image? Not so. I transport myself ideally to
the place where I saw the tree yesterday; upon which I have a perception of the
tree and river, similar in all respects to the perception I had of it when I
viewed it with my eyes, only more obscure. And in this recollection, I am not
conscious of a picture or representative image, more than in the original
survey: the perception is of the tree itself, as at first. I confirm this by
another experiment. After attentively surveying a fine statue, I close my eyes.
What follows? The same object continues, without any difference but that it is
less distinct than formerly. This indistinct secondary perception of an object,
is termed an idea. And therefore the precise and accurate definition of an
idea, in contradistinction to an original perception, is, "That perception or
consciousness of a real object, which a person has by exercising the power of
memory." Every thing one is conscious of, whether internal or external,
passions, emotions, thinking, resolving, willing, heat, cold, etc. as well as
external objects, may be recalled as above by the power of memory From this
definition of an idea, the following proposition must be evident, That there
can be no such thing as an innate idea. If the original perception of an object
be not innate, which is obvious, it is not less obvious, that the idea or
secondary perception of that object cannot be innate. And yet to prove this
self-evident proposition, Lock has bestowed a whole book of his treatise upon
human understanding. So necessary it is to give accurate definitions, and so
preventive of dispute are definitions when accurate. Dr Berkeley has taken
great pains to prove another proposition equally evident, That there can be no
such thing as a general idea. All our original perceptions are of particular
objects, and our secondary perceptions or ideas must be equally so.
.

15. The original perceptions of external objects, are either simple or
complex. A sound may be so simple as not to be resolvable into parts: so may a
taste and a smell. A perception of touch, is generally compounded of the more
simple perceptions of hardness or softness, joined with smoothness or
roughness, heat or cold, etc. But of all the perceptions of external sense,
that of a visible object is the most complex; because the eye takes in more
particulars than any other organ. A tree is composed of its trunk, branches,
leaves: it has color, figure, size: every one of these separately produces a
perception in the mind of the spectator, which are all combined into the
complex perception of the tree.

16. The original perception of an object of sight, is more complete, lively,
and distinct, than that of any other external sense: and for that reason, an
idea or secondary perception of a visible object, is more distinct and lively
than that of any other object. A fine passage in music, may, for a moment, be
recalled to the mind with tolerable accuracy: but the idea of any other object,
and also of sound after the shortest interval, is extremely obscure.

17. As the range of an individual is commonly within narrow bounds of space,
opportunities seldom offer of an enlarged acquaintance with external objects.
Original perceptions therefore, and their corresponding ideas, are a provision
too scanty for the purposes of life. Language is an admirable contrivance for
supplying this deficiency; for by language, the original perceptions of each
individual may be communicated to all; and the same may be done by painting and
other imitative arts. It is natural to suppose, that the most lively ideas are
the most susceptible of being communicated to others. This holds more
especially when language is the vehicle of communication; for language hitherto
has not arrived at any greater perfection than to express clear and lively
ideas. Hence it is, that poets and orators, who are extremely successful in
describing objects of sight, find objects of the other senses too faint and
obscure for language. An idea thus acquired of an object at second hand, ought
to be distinguished from an idea of memory; though their resemblance has
occasioned the same term to be applied to both. This is to be regretted; for
when knowledge is to be communicated by language, ambiguity in the
signification of words is a great obstruction to accuracy of conception. Thus
nature has furnished the means of multiplying ideas without end, and of
providing every individual with a sufficient stock to answer, not only the
necessities, but even the elegancies of life.

18. Further, man is endued with a sort of creative power: he can fabricate
images of things that have no existence. The materials employed in this
operation, are ideas of sight, which may be taken to pieces and combined into
new forms at pleasure: their complexity and vivacity make them fit materials.
But a man has no such power over any of his other ideas, whether of the
external or internal senses: he cannot, after the utmost effort, combine these
into new forms: his ideas of such objects are too obscure for this operation.
An image thus fabricated cannot be called a secondary perception, not being
derived from an original perception: the poverty of language however, as in the
case immediately above mentioned, has occasioned the same term idea to be
applied to all. This singular power of fabricating images independent of real
objects, is distinguished by the name imagination.

19. As ideas are the chief materials employed in thinking, reasoning, and
reflecting, it is of consequence that their nature and differences be
understood. It appears now, that ideas may be distinguished into three kinds;
first, Ideas or secondary perceptions, properly termed ideas of memory; second,
Ideas communicated by language or other signs; and, third, Ideas of
imagination. These ideas differ from each other in many respects; but the chief
foundation of the distinction is the difference of their causes. The first kind
are derived from real existences that have been objects of our senses: language
is the cause of the second, or any other sign that has the same power with
language; and a man's imagination is to himself the cause of the third. It is
scarce necessary to add, that an idea, originally of imagination, being
conveyed to others by language or any other vehicle, becomes in the mind of
those to whom it is conveyed an idea of the second kind; and again, that an
idea of this kind, being afterward recalled to the mind, becomes in that
circumstance an idea of memory.

20. Human nature is not so constituted, as that its objects are perceived with
indifferency: these, with very few exceptions, raise in us either pleasant or
painful emotions. External objects, at the same time, appear in themselves
agreeable or disagreeable; but with some difference betwixt those which produce
organic impressions, and those which affect us from a distance. When we touch a
soft and smooth body, we have a pleasant feeling as at the place of contact;
and this feeling we distinguish not, at least not accurately, from the
agreeableness of the body itself. The same holds in general with regard to all
the organic impressions. It is otherwise in hearing and seeing. A sound is
perceived as in itself agreeable; and, at the same time, raises in the hearer a
pleasant emotion: an object of sight appears in itself agreeable; and, at the
same time, raises in the seer a pleasant emotion. These are accurately
distinguished. The pleasant emotion is felt as within the mind: the
agreeableness of the object is placed upon the object, and is perceived as one
of its qualities or properties. The agreeable appearance of an object of sight,
is termed beauty; and the disagreeable appearance of such an object is termed
ugliness.

21. But though beauty and ugliness, in their proper and genuine signification,
are confined to objects of sight; yet in a more lax and figurative
signification, they are applied to objects of the other senses. They are
sometimes applied even to abstract terms; for it is not unusual to say, a
beautiful theorem, a beautiful constitution of government. But I am inclined to
think, that we are led to use such expression by conceiving the thing as
delineated upon paper, and as in some sort an object of sight.

22. A line composed by a precise rule, is perceived and said to be regular. A
straight line, a parabola, a hyperbola, the circumference of a circle, and of
an ellipse, are all of them regular lines. A figure composed by a precise rule,
is perceived and said to be regular. Thus a circle, a square, a hexagon, an
equilateral triangle, are regular figures, being composed by a rule that
determines the form of each. When the form of a line or of a figure is
ascertained by a rule that leaves nothing arbitrary, the line and the figure
are said to be perfectly regular: this is the case of the figures now
mentioned; and it is the case of a straight line and of the circumference of a
circle. A figure and a line are not perfectly regular where any part or
circumstance is left arbitrary. A parallelogram and a rhomb are less regular
than a square: the parallelogram is subjected to no rule as to the length of
sides, other than that the opposite sides be equal: the rhomb is subjected to
no rule as to its angles, other than that the opposite angles be equal. For the
same reason, the circumference of an ellipse, the form of which is susceptible
of much variety, is less regular than that of a circle.

23. Regularity, properly speaking, belongs, like beauty, to objects of sight:
like beauty, it is also applied figuratively to other objects. Thus we say, a
regular government, a regular composition of music, and, regular discipline.

24. When two figures are composed of similar parts, they are said to be
uniform. Perfect uniformity is where the constituent parts of two figures are
precisely similar to each other. Thus two cubes of the same dimensions are
perfectly uniform in all their parts. An imperfect uniformity is, where the
parts mutually correspond, but without being precisely similar. The uniformity
is imperfect betwixt two squares or cubes of unequal dimensions; and still more
so betwixt a square and a parallelogram.

25. Uniformity is also applicable to the constituent parts of the same figure.
The constituent parts of a square are perfectly uniform: its sides are equal
and its angles are equal. Wherein then differs regularity from uniformity? for
a figure composed of similar or uniform parts must undoubtedly be regular.
Regularity is predicated of a figure considered as a whole composed of
resembling or uniform parts: uniformity again is predicated of these parts as
related to each other by resemblance. We say, a square is a regular, not an
uniform figure: but with respect to the constituent parts of a square, we say
not that they are regular, but that they are uniform.

26. In things destined for the same use, as legs, arms, eyes, windows, spoons,
we expect uniformity. Proportion ought to govern parts intended for different
uses. We require a certain proportion betwixt a leg and an arm; in the base,
the shaft, the capital, of a pillar; and in the length, the breadth, the
height, of a room. Some proportion is also required in different things
intimately connected, as betwixt a dwelling house, the garden, and the stables.
But we require no proportion among things slightly connected, as betwixt the
table a man writes on and the dog that follows him. Proportion and uniformity
never coincide: things perfectly similar are uniform; but proportion is never
applied to them: the four sides and angles of a square are equal and perfectly
uniform; but we say not that they are proportional. Thus, proportion always
implies inequality or difference; but then it implies it to a certain degree
only: the most agreeable proportion resembles a maximum in mathematics; a
greater or less inequality or difference is less agreeable.

27. Order regards various particulars. First, in tracing or surveying objects,
we are directed by a sense of order: we conceive it to be more orderly, that we
should pass from a principle to its accessories and from a whole to its parts,
than in the contrary direction. Next, with respect to the position of things, a
sense of order directs us to place together things intimately connected.
Thirdly, in placing things that have no natural connection, that order appears
the most perfect, where the particulars are made to bear the strongest relation
to each other that position can give them. Thus parallelism is the strongest
relation that position can bestow upon straight lines. If they be so placed as
by production to intersect each other, the relation is less perfect. A large
body in the middle and two equal bodies of less size, one on each side, is an
order that produces the strongest relation the bodies are susceptible of by
position. The relation betwixt the two equal bodies would be stronger by
juxtaposition; but they would not both have the same relation to the third.

28. The beauty or agreeableness of an object, as it enters into the original
perception, enters also into the secondary perception or idea. An idea of
imagination is also agreeable; though in a lower degree than an idea of memory,
where the objects are of the same kind. But this defect in the ideas of
imagination is abundantly supplied by their greatness and variety. For the
imagination acting without control, can fabricate ideas of finer visible
objects, of more noble and heroic actions, of greater wickedness, of more
surprising events, than ever in fact existed. And by communicating these ideas
in words, painting, sculpture, etc. the influence of the imagination is not
less extensive than great.

29. In the nature of every man, there is somewhat original, that serves to
distinguish him from others, that tends to form a character, and, with the
concurrence of external accidents, to make him meek or fiery, candid or
deceitful, resolute or timorous, cheerful or morose. This original bent is
termed disposition. Which must be distinguished from a principle: no original
bent obtains the latter appellation, but what belongs to the whole species. A
principle makes part of the common nature of man: a disposition makes part of
the nature of this or that man. A propensity comprehends both; for it signifies
indifferently either a principle or a disposition.

30. Affection, signifying a settled bent of mind toward a particular being or
thing, occupies a middle place betwixt propensity on the one hand, and passion
on the other. A propensity being original, must exist before any opportunity be
offered to exert it: affection can never be original; because, having a special
relation to a particular object, it cannot exist till the object be presented.
Again, passion depends on the presence of the object, in idea at least, if not
in reality: when the idea vanishes, the passion vanishes with it. Affection, on
the contrary, once settled on a person, is a lasting connection; and, like
other connections, subsists even when we do not think of it. A familiar example
will clear the whole. There may be in the mind a propensity to gratitude,
which, through want of an object, happens never to be exerted, and which
therefore is never discovered even by the person who has it. Another who has
the same propensity, meets with a kindly office that makes him grateful to his
benefactor: an intimate connection is formed betwixt them, termed affection;
which, like other connections, has a permanent existence, though not always in
view. The affection, for the most part, lies dormant, till an opportunity offer
of exerting it: in this circumstance, it is converted into the passion of
gratitude; and the opportunity is greedily seized for testifying gratitude in
the most complete manner.

31. Aversion, I think, must be opposed to affection, and not to desire, as it
commonly is We have an affection for one person; we have an aversion to
another: the former disposes us to do good to its object, the latter to do ill.

32. What is a sentiment? It is not a perception; for a perception signifies
our consciousness of external objects. It is not consciousness of an internal
action; such as thinking, suspending thought, inclining, resolving, willing,
etc. Neither is it a conception of relation amongst objects or of their
differences: a conception of this kind, is termed opinion. The term sentiment
is appropriated to those thoughts that are suggested by a passion or emotion.

33. Attention is that state of mind which prepares a man to receive
impressions. According to the degree of attention, objects make a stronger or
weaker impression Bacon, in his natural history, makes the following
observations. Sounds are meliorated by the intension of the sense, where the
common sense is collected most to the particular sense of hearing, and the
sight suspended. Therefore sounds are sweeter, as well as greater, in the night
than in the day: and I suppose they are sweeter to blind men than to others:
and it is manifest that between sleeping and waking, when all the senses are
bound and suspended, music is far sweeter than when one is fully waking.
. In an indolent state, or in a reverie, objects make but a slight impression;
far from what they make when they command our attention. In a train of
perceptions, no single object makes such a figure as it would do single and
apart: for when the attention is divided among many objects, no single object
is entitled to a large share. Hence the stillness of night contributes to
terror, there being nothing to divert the attention. Horror ubique animos,
simul ipsa silentia terrent.
Aeneid. 2. Zara. Silence and solitude are every where!
Through all the gloomy ways and iron doors
That hither lead, nor human face nor voice
Is seen or heard A dreadful din was wont
To grate the sense, when entered here, from groans
And howls of slaves condemned, from clink of chains,
And crash of rusty bars and creeking hinges:
And ever and anon the sight was dashed
With frightful faces and the meagre looks
Of grim and ghastly executioners.
Yet more this stillness terrifies my soul
Than did that scene of complicated horrors.

Mourning Bride, act 5. sc. 8. And hence it is, that an object seen at the
termination of a confined view, is more agreeable than when seen in a group
with the surrounding objects. The crow does sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended; and, I think,
The nightingale, if she should sing by day,
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.

Merchant of Venice.

34. In matters of slight importance, attention, in a great measure, is
directed by will; and for that reason, it is our own fault if trifling objects
make any deep impression. Had we power equally to withold our attention from
matters of importance, we might be proof against any deep impression. But our
power fails us here: an interesting object seizes and fixes the attention
beyond the possibility of control; and while our attention is thus forcibly
attached by one object, others may solicit for admittance; but in vain, for
they will not be regarded. Thus a small misfortune is scarce felt in presence
of a greater: Lear. Thou think it is much, that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin; so it is to thee;
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'd'st shun a bear;
But if thy flight lay towered the roaring sea,
Thou'd'st meet the bear in the mouth. When the mind's free,
The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind
Does from my senses take all feeling else,
Save what beats there.

King Lear, act 3. sc. 5.

35. Genus, species, modification, are terms invented to distinguish beings
from each other. Individuals are distinguished by their qualities: a large
class of individuals enjoying qualities in common, is termed a genus: a
subdivision of such class is termed a species. Again, that circumstance which
distinguishes one genus, one species, or even one individual, from another, is
termed a modification: the same particular that is termed a property or quality
when considered as belonging to an individual or a class of individuals, is
termed a modification when considered as distinguishing the individual or the
class from another. A black skin and soft curled hair, are properties of a
negro: the same circumstances considered as marks that distinguish a negro from
a man of a different species, are denominated modifications.

36. Objects of sight, being complex, are distinguishable into the several
particulars that enter into the composition: these objects are all of them
colored; and they all have length, breadth, and thickness. When I behold a
spreading oak, I distinguish in this object, size, figure, color, and
sometimes motion: viewing a flowing river, I distinguish color, figure, and
constant motion: a dye has color, black spots, six plain surfaces, all equal
and uniform. The objects of touch, have all of them extension. Some of them are
felt rough, some smooth: some of them are hard, some soft. With respect to the
other senses, some of their objects are simple, some complex: a sound, a taste,
a smell, may be so simple as not to be distinguishable into any parts: others
are perceived to be compounded of different sounds, different tastes, and
different smells.

37. The eye at one look can take in a number of objects, as of trees in a
field, or men in a crowd: as these objects are distinct from each other, each
having a separate and independent existence, they are distinguishable in the
mind as well as in reality; and there is nothing more easy, than to abstract
from some and to confine our contemplation to others. A large oak with its
spreading branches, fixes our attention upon itself, and abstracts us from the
shrubs that surround it. In the same manner, with respect to compounded sounds,
tastes, or smells, we can fix our thoughts upon any one of the component parts,
abstracting our attention from the rest. But the power of abstraction is not
confined to objects that are separable in reality as well as mentally: it also
takes place where there can be no real separation. The size, the figure, the
color, of a tree, are inseparably connected, and cannot exist independent of
each other: the same of length, breadth, and thickness: and yet we can mentally
confine our observations to one of these, neglecting or abstracting from the
rest. Here abstraction takes place where there cannot be a real separation.

38. This power of abstraction is of great utility. A carpenter considers a log
of wood, with regard to hardness, firmness, color, and texture: a philosopher,
neglectting these properties, makes the log undergo a chemical analysis; and
examines its taste, its smell, and its component principles: the geometrician
confines his reasoning to the figure, the length, breadth, and thickness. In
general, every artist, abstracting from all other properties, confines his
observations to those which have a more immediate connection with his
profession.

39. Hence clearly appears the meaning of an abstract term, and abstract idea.
If in viewing an object, we can abstract from some of its parts or properties,
and attach ourselves to others; there must be the same facility, when we recall
this object to the mind in idea. This leads directly to the definition of an
abstract idea, viz. "A partial view of a complex object, limited to one or more
of the component parts or properties, laying aside or abstracting from others."
A word that denotes an abstract idea, is called an abstract term.

40. The power of abstraction is bestowed upon man, for the purposes solely of
reasoning. It tends greatly to the facility as well as clearness of any process
of reasoning, that, withdrawing from every other circumstance, we can confine
our attention to the single property we desire to investigate.

41. Abstract ideas, may, I think, be distinguished into three different kinds,
all equally subservient to the reasoning faculty. Individuals appear to have no
end; and did we not possess the faculty of distributing them into classes, the
mind would be lost in an endless variety, and no progress be made in knowledge.
It is by the faculty of abstraction that we distribute beings into genera and
species: finding a number of individuals connected by certain qualities common
to all, we give a name to these individuals considered as thus connected; which
name, by gathering them together into one class, serves in a curt manner to
express the whole of these individuals as distinct from others. Thus the word
animal serves to denote every being which has self-motion; and the words man,
horse, lion, etc. answer similar purposes. This is the first and most common
sort of abstraction; and it is of the most extensive use, by enabling us to
comprehend in our reasoning whole kinds and sorts, instead of individuals
without end. The next sort of abstract ideas and terms comprehends a number of
individual objects considered as connected by some occasional relation. A great
number of persons collected together in one place, without any other relation
but merely that of contiguity, are denominated a crowd: in forming this term,
we abstract from sex, from age, from condition, from dress, etc. A number of
persons connected by being subjected to the same laws and to the same
government, are termed a nation; and a number of men subjected to the same
military command, are termed an army. A third sort of abstraction is, where a
single property or part, which may be common to many individuals, is selected
to be the subject of our contemplation; for example, whiteness, heat, beauty,
length, roundness, head, arm.

42. Abstract terms are a happy invention: it is by their means chiefly, that
the particulars which we make the subject of our reasoning, are brought into
close union, and separated from all others however naturally connected. Without
the aid of such terms, the mind could never be kept steady to its proper
subject, but would perpetually be in hazard of assuming foreign circumstances
or neglecting what are essential. In a word, a general term denotes in a curt
manner certain objects occasionally combined. We can, without the aid of
language, compare real objects by intuition, when these objects are present;
and, when absent, we can compare them by means of the ideas we have of them:
but when we advance farther, and attempt to make inferences, and draw
conclusions, we always employ abstract terms, even in thinking. It would be as
difficult to reason without them, as to perform operations in algebra without
signs: for there is scarce any reasoning without some degree of abstraction;
and we cannot abstract to purpose without making use of general terms. Hence it
follows, that without language man would scarce be a rational being.

43. The same thing, in different respects, has different names. With respect
to certain qualities, it is termed a substance; with respect to other
qualities, a body; and with respect to qualities of all sorts, a subject: it is
termed a passive subject with respect to an action exerted upon it; an object
with respect to a percipient; a cause with respect to the effect it produces;
and an effect with respect to its cause.

INDEX.
[The volumes are denoted by numeral letters, the pages by figures.]

ABstract idea) defined iii. 402. Abstract ideas of different kinds iii. 403.
Abstraction) power of iii. 401. Its use iii. 402. 403. Abstract terms) ought to
be avoided in poetry i. 294. iii. 198. Cannot be compared but by being
personified iii. 6. Personified iii. 65. Defined iii. 402. The use of abstract
terms iii. 405. Accent) defined ii. 361. The musical accents that are necessary
in an hexameter line ii. 376. A low word must not be accented ii. 405. Rules
for accenting English heroic verse ii. 415. How far affected by the pause ii.
422. etc. Accent and pause have a mutual influence ii. 428. Action) what
feelings are raised by human actions i. 48. 49. 276. We are impelled to action
by desire i. 55. Some actions are ultimate, some are means leading to an end i.
57. Actions great and elevated, low and grovelling i. 276. Emotions occasioned
by propriety of action ii. 13. Occasioned by impropriety of action ii. 14.
Human actions produce a great variety of emotions ii. 28. Human actions
considered with respect to dignity and meanness ii. 35. We are conscious of
internal action as in the head iii. 377. Internal action may exist without our
being conscious of it iii. 377. Actor) bombast action i. 308. An actor ought to
feel the passion he represents ii. 153. Admiration) defined i. 320.
Affectation) defined ii. 11. Affection) to children accounted for i. 82. To
bloodrelations accounted for i. 83. To property accounted for i. 84. Affection
to children endures longer than any other affection i. 150. Opinion and belief
influenced by affection i. 199. Affection defined ii. 87. iii. 394. Agamemnon)
of Seneca censured ii. 193. Agreeable emotions and passions i. 127. etc.
Alcestes) of Euripides censured iii. 286. 289. Alexandre of Racine) censured
ii. 177. Allegory iii. 108. etc. More difficult in painting than in poetry iii.
129. In an historical poem iii. 248. All for Love) of Dryden censured ii. 202.
Ambiguity) occasioned by a wrong arrangement ii. 297. Amynta) of Tasso censured
ii. 167. Amor patriae) accounted for i. 88. Amphibrachys ii. 460. Amphimacer
ii. 460. Analytic) and synthetic methods of reasoning compared i. 31.
Anapaestus ii. 460. Anger) explained i. 95. etc. Sometimes exerted against the
innocent i. 191. And even against things inanimate i. 191. Not infectious i.
221. Has no dignity in it ii. 33. Animals) distributed by nature into classes
iii. 356. Antibacchius ii. 460. Anticlimax ii. 345. Antispastus ii. 461.
Antithesis ii. 73. 262. Verbal antithesis ii. 268. Apostrophe iii. 87. etc.
Appearance) in poetry, things ought to be described as they appear, not as they
are in reality iii. 172. Appetite) defined i. 59. Appetites of hunger, thirst,
animal love, arise without an object i. 73. Appetite for fame or esteem i. 237.
Architecture chapter 24. iii. 294. Grandeur of manner in architecture i. 294. The
situation of a great house ought to be lofty ii. 7. A playhouse or a music-room
susceptible of much ornament ii. 9. What emotions can be raised by architecture
iii. 297. Its emotions compared with those of gardening iii. 297. Every
building ought to have an expression suited to its destination iii. 298. 338.
Simplicity ought to be the governing taste iii. 300. Regularity ought to be
studied iii. 301. External form of dwelling-houses iii. 324. Divisions within
iii. 324. 340. A palace ought to be regular, but in a small house convenience
ought chiefly to be studied iii. 326. The form of a dwelling house ought to be
suited to the climate iii. 327. Propriety ought to be studied in architecture
iii. 338. Governed by principles which produce opposite effects iii. 342.
Different ornaments employed by it iii. 342. Allegorical or emblematic
ornaments iii. 347. Architecture inspires a taste for neatness and regularity
iii. 350. Architrave iii. 344. Ariosto) censured iii. 264. Aristaeus) the
episode of Aristaeus in the Georgies censured ii. 457. Army) defined iii. 405.
Arrangement) the best arrangement of words is to place them as much as possible
in an increasing series ii. 251. Articulate sounds) how far agreeable to the
ear ii. 240. Artificial mount iii. 313. Ascent) pleasant, but descent not
painful i. 273. Athalie) of Racine censured ii. 193. Attention) defined iii.
396. Impression which objects make depends on the degree of attention iii. 396.
Attention not always voluntary iii. 398. Attractive emotions ii. 133.
Attractive object i. 226. Attributes) transferred from one subject to another
iii. 100. etc. Avarice) defined i. 52. Avenue) to a house iii. 312. Aversion)
defined ii. 87. iii. 395.
Bacchius ii. 460. Barren scene) defined iii. 266. Base) of a column iii. 346.
Basso-relievo iii. 347. Batrachomuomachia) censured ii. 42. Beauty, chapter 3. i.
241. Intrinsic and relative i. 244. Beauty of simplicity i. 247. of figure i.
248. of the circle i. 251. of the square i. 251. of a regular polygon i. 252.
of a parallelogram i. 252. of an equilateral triangle i. 253. Beauty, whether a
primary or secondary quality of objects i. 260. Distinguished from congruity
ii. 8. Great beauty seldom produces a constant lover ii. 101. Beauty proper and
figurative iii. 388. Belief) fortified by a lively narrative or a good
historical painting i. 122. influenced by passion i. 196. iii. 55. 89.
influenced by propensity i. 199. influenced by affection i. 199. Benevolence)
joins with self-love to make us happy i. 228. inspired by gardening iii. 320.
Blank verse ii. 381. 435. Its aptitude for inversion ii. 438. Its melody ii.
439. etc. Body) defined iii. 406. Boileau) censured iii. 242. Bombast i. 303.
Bombast in action i. 308. Burlesk) machinery does well in a burlesk poem i.
125. Burlesk distinguished into two kinds ii. 41.
Cadence ii. 348. 362. Capital) of a column iii. 346. Careless Husband) its
double plot well contrived iii. 253. Cascade i. 314. Cause) resembling causes
may produce effects that have no resemblance: and causes that have no
resemblance may produce resembling effects ii. 337. etc. Cause defined iii.
406. Chance) the mind revolts against misfortunes that happen by chance iii.
232. Character) to draw a character is the masterpiece of description iii.
182. Characteristics) of Shaftesbury criticized ii. 10. Note. Children) love to
them accounted for i. 82. Chinese gardens iii. 316. Wonder and surprise studied
in them iii. 319. Choreus ii. 459. Choriambus ii. 461. Chorus) an essential
part of the Grecian tragedy iii. 270. Church) what ought to be its form and
situation iii. 338. Cicero) censured ii. 329. 350. Cid) of Corneille censured
ii. 166. 198. Cinna) of Corneille censured ii. 11. 161. 194. Circle) its beauty
i. 251. Circumstances) in a period, how they ought to be arranged ii. 314. etc.
Class) all living creatures distributed into classes iii. 356. Climax) in sense
i. 281. ii. 322. in sound ii. 252. Coephores) of Eschylus censured ii. 114.
Coexistent) emotions and passions i. 151. etc. Colonnade) where proper iii.
327. Color) a secondary quality i. 259. Columns) every column ought to have a
base i. 218. The base ought to be square i. 218. 219. Columns admit different
proportions iii. 332. What emotions they raise iii. 339. Column more beautiful
than a pilaster iii. 344. Its form iii. 346. Comedy) double plot in a comedy
iii. 253. Commencement) the commencement of a work ought to be modest and
simple iii. 171. Common nature) in every species of animals iii. 356. We have a
conviction that this common nature is perfect or right iii. 357. Also that it
is invariable iii. 357. Common senseiii. 359. 373. Comparison i. 346. etc. Chapter
19. iii. 3. Comparisons that resolve into a play of words iii. 42. Complex
emotion i. 152. 154. 155. Complex perception iii. 383. Complexion) white suits
with a pale complexion, black with a dark complexion, and scarlet with one that
is over-flushed i. 369. Conception) defined iii. 379. Concord) or harmony in
objects of sight i. 156. Concordant sounds) defined i. 151. Congreve) censured
iii. 258. Congruity and propriety, chapter 10. ii. 3. Congruity distinguished from
beauty ii. 8. distinguished from propriety ii. 8. Congruity coincides with
proportion with respect to quantity ii. 19. Connection) necessary in all
compositions i. 34. Conquest of Granada) of Dryden censured ii. 201. Consonants
ii. 239. Constancy) great beauty the cause generally of inconstancy ii. 101.
Construction) of language explained ii. 285. Contempt) raised by improper
action i. 340. Contrast i. 345. etc. Its effect in gardening iii. 317.
Conviction) intuitive. See Intuitive conviction. Copulative) to drop the
copulatives enlivens the expression ii. 281. etc. Coriolanus) of Shakespeare
censured ii. 200. Corneille) censured ii. 159. 216. Corporeal pleasure i. 1. 2.
low and sometimes mean ii. 32. Couplet ii. 381. Courage) of greater dignity
than justice. Why? ii. 31. Creticus ii. 460. Criminal) the hour of execution
seems to him to approach with a swift pace i. 202. Criticism) its advantages i.
8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. its terms not accurately defined ii. 139. Crowd) defined
iii. 404. Curiosity i. 320. 345. etc. Custom and habit, chapter 14. ii. 81. Custom
distinguished from habit ii. 82.
Dactyle ii. 364. etc. 460. Declensions) explained ii. 288. 289. Delicacy) of
taste i. 136. Derision ii. 16. Descent) not painful i. 273. Description) it
animates a description to represent things past as present i. 118. The rules
which ought to govern it iii. 169. etc. A lively description is agreeable,
though the subject described be disagreeable iii. 208. Description cannot reach
any object but those of sight iii. 385. Descriptive personification iii. 64.
Descriptive tragedy ii. 155. Desire) defined i. 55. It impels us to action i.
55. It determines the will i. 222. Desire in a criminal of self-punishment i.
232. Desire tends the most to happiness when moderate i. 263. Dialogue)
dialogue-writing requires great genius ii. 151. 152. 153. In dialogue every
expression ought to be suited to the character of the speaker iii. 196. Rules
for its composition iii. 256. Dignity and meanness, chapter 11. ii. 27. Dignity of
human nature iii. 361. Diiambus ii. 461. Disagreeable emotions and passions i.
127. etc. Discordant sounds) defined i. 152. Dispondeus ii. 461. Disposition)
defined iii. 394. Dissimilar emotions i. 153. Their effects when co-existent i.
159. iii. 303. 337. Dissimilar passions) their effects i. 171. Dissocial
passions i. 62. Dissocial passions all painful i. 131. and also disagreeable i.
134. Ditrochaeus ii. 461. Door) its proportion iii. 322. Double action) in an
epic poem iii. 264. Double-dealer) of Congreve censured ii. 193. iii. 266.
Double plot) in a dramatic composition iii. 251. Drama) ancient and modern
drama compared iii. 280. Dramatic poetry iii. 218. etc. Drapery ought to hang
loose i. 219. Dress) rules about dress ii. 10. iii. 300. Dryden) censured iii.
128. 257. 267. Duties) moral duties of two kinds, respecting ourselves and
respecting others ii. 20. Foundation of duties that respect ourselves ii. 21.
Of those that respect others ii. 21.
Effects) resembling effects may be produced by causes that have no resemblance
ii. 337. etc. Effect defined iii. 406. Electra) of Sophocles censured ii. 115.
Elevation i. 264. etc. real and figurative intimately connected i. 279.
Figurative elevation distinguished from figurative grandeur iii. 21. 22.
Emotion) no pleasure of external sense except of seeing and hearing is termed
an emotion or passion i. 42. Emotions defined i. 46. 47. and their causes
assigned i. 47. etc. Emotion distinguished from passion i. 52. etc. Emotions
generated by relations i. 76. etc. Primary, secondary i. 81. Raised by fiction
i. 104. etc. Division of emotions into pleasant and painful, agreeable and
disagreeable i. 127. etc. iii. 387. The interrupted existence of emotions i.
139. etc. Their growth and decay i. 139. etc. Their identity i. 141.
Co-existent emotions i. 151. etc. Emotions similar and dissimilar i. 153.
Complex emotion i. 154. 155. Effects of similar emotions when co-existent i.
155. iii. 336. Effects of dissimilar emotions when co-existent i. 159. iii.
303. 337. Emotions resemble their causes i. 217. etc. Emotion of grandeur i.
266. etc. of sublimity i. 269. A low emotion i. 276. Emotion of laughter i.
337. of ridicule i. 341. Emotions when contrasted ought not to be too slow or
too quick in their succession i. 373. Emotions raised by the fine arts ought to
be contrasted in succession i. 374. Emotion of congruity ii. 12. of propriety
ii. 12. Emotions produced by human actions ii. 28. Emotions ranked according to
their dignity ii. 32. External signs of emotions chapter 15. ii. 116. Attractive
and repulsive emotions ii. 133. Emotion and passions expanded upon related
objects i. 76. etc. ii. 312. etc. 336. 372. 415. 416. iii. 60. etc. 139. 140.
Gratification of emotions i. 183. etc. 203. 358. iii. 98. What emotions do best
in succession, what in conjunction iii. 302. Man is passive with regard to his
emotions iii. 377. We are conscious of emotions as in the heart iii. 377.
Emphasis) must not be put upon a low word ii. 405. Eneid) its unity of action
iii. 263. English plays) generally irregular iii. 292. English tongue) too
rough ii. 247. It is peculiarly qualified for personification iii. 63. Note.
Envy) defined i. 55. It magnifies every bad quality in its object i. 187. Epic
poem) no improbable fact ought to be admitted in it i. 124. Machinery in it has
a bad effect i. 125. It does not always reject ludicrous images i. 378. We
pardon many faults in it which are intolerable in a sonnet or epigram i. 299.
Its commencement ought to be modest and simple iii. 171 In what respect it
differs from a tragedy iii. 218. Distinguished into pathetic and moral iii.
221. Its good effects iii. 223. Compared with tragedy as to the subjects proper
for each iii. 225. How far it may borrow from history iii. 234. Rule for
dividing it into parts iii. 236. Epic poetry chapter 22. iii. 218. Episode) in an
historical poem iii. 250. Epistles dedicatory) censured ii. 6. Note. Epithets)
redundant iii. 206. Epitritus ii. 462. Esteem) love of i. 237. 286. Esther) of
Racine censured ii. 193. 198. Evergreens) cut in the shape of animals iii. 309.
Expression) elevated, low i. 276. Expression that has no distinct meaning ii.
232. Two members of a sentence which express a resemblance betwixt two objects
ought to have a resemblance to each other ii. 270. etc. External senses)
distinguished into two kinds i. 1. External sense iii. 375. External signs) of
emotions and passions chapter 15. ii. 116. External signs of passion, what emotions
they raise in a spectator ii. 131. etc.
Faculty) by which we know passion from its external signs ii. 136. Fairy
Queen) criticized iii. 120. False quantity) painful to the ear ii. 386. Fame)
love of i. 237. Fashion) its influence accounted for i. 80. Fashion is in a
continual flux i. 256. Fear) explained i. 95. etc. rises often to its utmost
pitch in an instant i. 148. is infectious i. 221. Feeling) its different
significations iii. 379. Fiction) emotions raised by fiction i. 104. etc.
Figure) beauty of i. 248. Definition of a regular figure iii. 389. Figures)
some passions favorable to figurative expression ii. 20^. Figures chapter 20. iii.
53. Figure of speech iii. 70. 113. 136. etc. Final cause) of our sense of order
and connection i. 41. of the sympathetic emotion of virtue i. 74. of the
instinctive passion of fear i. 96. 97. of the instinctive passion of anger i.
103. of ideal presence i. 121. of the power that fiction has on the mind i.
126. of emotions and passions i. 222. etc. of regularity, uniformity, order,
and simplicity i. 249. 251. of proportion i. 250. of beauty i. 262. why certain
objects are neither pleasant nor painful i. 272. 309. of the pleasure we have
in motion and force i. 318. of curiosity l. 320. of wonder i. 335. of surprise
i. 336. of the principle that prompts us to perfect every work i. 366. of the
pleasure or pain that results from the different circumstances of a train of
perceptions i. 397. etc. of congruity and propriety ii. 18. etc. of dignity and
meanness ii. 35. etc. of habit ii. 106. etc. of the external signs of passion
and emotion ii. 127. 137. etc. why articulate sounds singly agreeable are
always agreeable in conjunction ii. 241. of the pleasure we have in language
iii. 208. of our relish for various proportions in quantity iii. 333. of our
conviction of a common standard in every species of beings iii. 362. of
uniformity of taste in the fine arts iii. 363. 364. why the sense of a right
and a wrong in the fine arts is less clear and authoritative than the sense of
a right and a wrong in actions iii. 368. Fine arts) defined i. 6. 7. 16. a
subject of reasoning i. 8. Their emotions ought to be contrasted in succession
i. 374. considered with respect to dignity ii. 34. How far they may be
regulated by custom ii. 108. None of them are imitative but painting and
sculpture ii. 234. Aberrations from a true taste in these arts iii. 366. Who
are qualified to be judges in the fine arts iii. 371. Fluid) motion of fluids
i. 311. Foot) a list of verse feet ii. 459. Force) produces a feeling that
resembles it i. 218. Force i. 309. etc. Moving force i. 312. The pleasure of
force differs from that of motion i. 313. It contributes to grandeur i. 315.
Foreign) preference given to foreign curiosities i. 331. Fountains) in what
form they ought to be iii. 313. Friendship) considered with respect to dignity
and meanness ii. 33.
Games) public games of the Greeks i. 314. Gardening) grandeur of manner in
gardening i. 294. Its emotions ought to be contrasted in succession i. 375. A
small garden ought to be confined to a single expression i. 376. A garden near
a great city ought to have an air of solitude i. 376. A garden in a wild
country ought to be gay and splendid i. 377. Gardening chapter 24. iii. 294. What
emotions can be raised by it iii. 296. Its emotions compared with those of
architecture iii. 297. Simplicity ought to be the governing taste iii. 300.
Wherein the unity of a garden consists iii. 304. How far ought regularity to be
studied in it iii. 305. Resemblance carried too far in it iii. 305. Note.
Grandeur in gardening iii. 306. Every unnatural object ought to be rejected
iii. 308. Distant and faint imitations displease iii. 309. The effect of giving
play to the imagination iii. 318. Gardening inspires henevolence iii. 320. and
contributes to rectitude of manners iii. 350. General idea) there cannot be
such a thing iii. 383. Note. General terms) ought to be avoided in compositions
for amusement iii. 198. General theorems) why they are agreeable i. 255.
Genetic habit) defined ii. 95. Generosity) why of greater dignity than justice
ii. 31. Genus) defined iii. 399. Gestures) that accompany the different
passions ii. 120. 121. 125. Gierusalleme liberata) censured iii. 242. 249. Good
nature) why of less dignity than courage or generosity ii. 31. Gothic tower)
its beauty iii. 324. Government) natural foundation of submission to government
i. 236. Grandeur) demands not strict regularity i. 257. 298. Grandeur and
sublimity Chapter 4. i. 264. Real and figurative grandeur intimately connected i.
279. Grandeur of manner i. 288. Grandeur may be employed indirectly to humble
the mind i. 300. Suits ill with wit and ridicule i. 377. Figurative grandeur
distinguished from figurative elevation iii. 21. 22. Grandeur in gardening iii.
306. Regularity and proportion hide the grandeur of a building iii. 342.
Gratification) of passion i. 58. 59. 65. 66. 183. etc. 203. 358 iii. 98.
Gratitude) exerted upon the children of the benefactor i. 187. Punishment of
ingratitude ii. 25. Gratitude considered with respect to dignity and meanness
ii. 33. Grief) magnifies its cause i. 190. occasions a false reckoning of time
i. 211. is infectious i. 220. when immoderate is silent ii. 204. Gross pleasure
i. 137. Guido) censured iii. 131.
Habit) chapter 14. ii. 81. distinguished from custom ii. 82. Harmony) or concord
in objects of sight i. 156. Distinguished from melody ii. 358. Note. Hatred)
signifies more commonly affection than passion i. 146. Hearing) in hearing we
feel no impression iii. 380. Henriade) censured iii. 178. 236. 243. 249.
Hexameter) Virgils hexameters extremely melodious; those of Horace not always
so ii. 357. Structure of an hexameter line ii. 364. Rules for its structure ii.
367. Musical pauses in an hexameter line ii. 368. Wherein its melody consists
ii. 380. Hippolytus) of Euripides censured ii. 197. iii. 286. 288. History)
histories of conquerors and heroes singularly agreeable. Why? i. 72. 285. By
what means does history raise our passions i. 115. 118. It rejects poetical
images iii. 170. Homer) defective in order and connection i. 35. His language
finely suited to his subject iii. 194. His repetitions defended iii. 204. His
poems in a great measure dramatic iii. 220. censured iii. 246. Horace)
defective in connection i. 35. His hexameters not always melodious ii. 358.
Their defects pointed out ii. 380. Horror) objects of horror ought to be
banished from poetry and painting iii. 213. Humor) defined ii. 44. Humor in
writing distinguished from humor in character ii. 44. Hyperbole iii. 89.
Hyppobacchius ii. 460.
Iambic verse) its modulation faint ii. 358. Iambus ii. 459. Jane Shore)
censured ii. 168. Idea) succession of ideas i. 381. Idea of memory defined iii.
382. cannot be innate iii. 382. Note. No general ideas iii. 383. Note. Idea of
an object of sight more distinct than of any other object iii. 384. Ideas
distinguished into three kinds iii. 386. Idea of imagination not so pleasant as
an idea of memory iii. 393. Ideal presence i. 107. etc. Identity) of passions
and emotions i. 141. Jet d'eau i. 313. 314. iii. 308. 310. Jingle of words ii.
231. Iliad) criticized iii. 263. Imagination) not always at rest even in sleep
i. 337. Effect in gardening of giving play to it iii. 318. Its power of
fabricating images iii. 385. Imitation) we naturally imitate virtuous actions
i. 220. not those that are vicious i. 221. None of the fine arts imitate nature
except painting and sculpture ii. 234. The agreeableness of imitation
overbalances the disagreeableness of the subject iii. 208. Distant and faint
imitations displease iii. 309. Impression) made on the organ of sense iii. 380.
Impropriety) in action raises contempt i. 340. Its punishment ii. 15. Impulse)
a strong impulse succeeding a weak, makes a double impression: a weak impulse
succeeding a strong, makes scarce any impression ii. 251. Infinite series)
becomes disagreeable when prolonged i. 365. Note. Innate idea) there cannot be
such a thing iii. 382. Note. Instrument) the means or instrument conceived to
be the agent iii. 98. etc. Intellectual pleasure i. 2. 3. Internal senseiii.
375. Intrinsic beauty i. 244. Intuitive conviction) of the veracity of our
senses i. 105. of the dignity of human nature ii. 29. iii. 361. of a common
nature or standard in every species of beings iii. 356. and of the perfection
of that standard iii. 357. also that it is invariable iii. 357. Intuitive
conviction that the external signs of passion are natural, and the same in all
men ii. 135. Inversion) an inverted style described ii. 290. etc. Inversion
gives force and liveliness to the expression by suspending the thought till the
close ii. 324. Inversion how regulated ii. 330. 331. 332. Beauties of inversion
ii. 331. 332. Full scope for it in blank verse ii. 438. Ionicus ii. 461. Joy)
its cause i. 65. infectious i. 220. considered with respect to dignity and
meanness ii. 33. Iphigenia) of Racine censured ii. 112. Iphigenia in Tauris)
censured iii. 287. 288. 289. Irony) defined ii. 50. Italian tongue) too smooth
ii. 246. Note. Judgment) and memory in perfection, seldom united i. 28.
Judgment seldom united with wit i. 28. Julius Caesar) of Shakespeare censured
ii. 200. Justice) of less dignity than generosity or courage ii. 31.
Kent) his skill in gardening iii. 303. Key-note ii. 348. 361. Kitchen-garden
iii. 315.
Labyrinth) in a garden iii. 310. Landscape) why it is so agreeable i. 156. The
pleasure it gives explained i. 298. A landscape in painting ought to be
confined to a single expression i. 376. Language) power of language to raise
emotions, whence derived i. 112. 121. Language of passion chapter 17. ii. 204.
broken and interrupted ii. 206. of impetuous passion ii. 210. of languid
passion ii. 210. of calm emotions ii. 211. of turbulent passion ii. 211.
Language elevated above the tone of the sentiment ii. 224. too artificial or
too figurative ii. 225. too light or airy ii. 227. Language how far imitative
of nature ii. 234. its beauty with respect to signification ii. 235. 254. etc.
its beauty with respect to sound ii. 238. it ought to correspond to the subject
ii. 258. its structure explained ii. 285. Beauty of language from a
resemblance: betwixt sound and signification ii. 333. etc. The force of
language proceeds from raising complete images iii. 174. its power of producing
pleasant emotions iii. 208. Without language man would scarce be a rational
being iii. 406. L'avare) of Moliere censured ii. 198. Laughter i. 338. Laugh of
derision or scorn ii. 16. Law) defined ii. 22. Laws of human nature) necessary
succession of perceptions i. 21. 380. We never act but through the impulse of
desire i. 55. 222. An object loses its relish by familiarity i. 144. Passions
sudden in their growth are equally sudden in their decay i. 148. ii. 91. Every
passion ceases upon attaining its ultimate end i. 148. Laws of motion)
agreeable i. 255. Les Freres ennemies) of Racine censured ii. 177. Lex
talionis) upon what principle founded i. 370. Line) definition of a regular
line iii. 389. Littleness) is neither pleasant nor painful i. 272. Logic) cause
of its obscurity and intricacy ii. 138. Logio) improper in this climate iii.
327. Love) to children accounted for i. 82. The love a man bears to his country
explained i. 88. Love produced by pity i. 93. It signifies more commonly
affection than passion i. 146. To a lover absence appears long i. 202. Love
assumes the qualities of its object i. 219. considered with respect to dignity
and meanness ii. 33. seldom constant when founded on exquisite beauty ii. 101.
ill represented in French plays ii. 194. when immoderate is silent ii. 205.
Love for love) censured iii. 266. Lowness) is neither pleasant nor painful i.
272. Lucan) too minute in his descriptions i. 292. censured iii. 220. Ludicrous
i. 338. may be introduced into an epic poem i. 378. Lutrin) censured for
incongruity ii. 9. characterized ii. 41. Luxury) corrupts our taste iii. 370.
Machinery) ought to be excluded from an epic poem i. 125. iii. 239. does well
in a burlesk poem i. 125. Man) fitted for society i. 237. Conformity of the
nature of man to his external circumstances i. 310. ii. 143. The different
branches of his internal constitution finely suited to each other iii. 33^.
364. Manners) gross and refined i. 1^8. The bad tendency of rough and blunt
manners ii. 141. Note. Mavelous) in epic poetry iii. 246. Meanness ii. 27.
etc. Means) the means or instrument conceived to be the agent iii. 98. etc.
Measure) natural measure of time i. 200. etc. of space, i. ^11. etc. Medea) of
Euripides censured iii. 287. Melody) or modulation defined ii. 355.
distinguished from harmony ii. 358. Note. Members of a period) have a fine
effect placed in an increasing series ii. 252. Memory) and judgment in
perfection seldom united i. 28. Memory and wit often united i. 28. Memory iii.
381. Merry wives of Windsor) its double plot well contrived iii. 253. Metaphor
iii. 108. etc. Meter ii. 381. Mile) the computed miles are longer in a barren
than in a populous country i. 209. Milton) his style much inverted ii. 439. The
defect of his versification is the want of coincidence betwixt the pauses of
the sense and the sound ii. 445. the beauty of Milton's comparisons iii. 16.
Moderation) in our desires contributes the most to happiness i. 263. Modern
manners) make a poor figure in an epic poem iii. 235. Modification) defined
iii. 399. Modulation) defined ii. 355. Molossus ii. 459. Monosyllables)
English, arbitrary as to quantity ii. 383. Moral duties) See Duties. Morality)
its foundation iii. 358. Aberrations from its true standard iii. 366. Moral
tragedy iii. 221. Motion) productive of feelings that resemble it i. 217. Its
laws agreeable i. 255. Motion and force, chapter 5. i. 309. etc. What motions are
the most agreeable i. 310. Regular motion i. 311. accelerated motion i. 311.
upward motion i. 311. undulating motion i. 311. Motion of fluids i. 311. A body
moved neither agreeable nor disagreeable i. 312. The pleasure of motion differs
from that of force i. 313. Grace of motion i. 317. Motions of the human body i.
317. Motive) defined i. 58. 59. Mount) artificial iii. 313. Mourning Bride)
censured ii. 180. 197. iii. 279. 292. Music) vocal distinguished from
instrumental i. 166. What subjects proper for vocal music i. 166. etc. Music
betwixt the acts of a play, the advantages that may be drawn from it iii. 283.
Though it cannot raise a passion, it disposes the heart to various passions
iii. 284. Musical instruments) their different effects upon the mind i. 283.
Musical measure) defined ii. 355.
Narration) it animates a narrative to represent things past as present i. 118.
Narration and description, chapter 21. iii. 169. It animates a narrative, to make
it dramatic iii. 197. 220. Nation) defined iii. 404. Note, a high note and a
low note in music i. 278. Novelty and the unexpected appearance of objects, chapter
6. i. 319. Novelty a pleasant emotion i. 322. etc. distinguished from variety
i. 329. its different degrees i. 329. etc. Number) defined iii. 331. Numerus)
defined ii. 355.
Object) of a passion defined i. 56. An agreeable object produces a pleasant
emotion, and a disagreeable object a painful emotion i. 223. attractive object
i. 226. repulsive object i. 226. Objects of sight the most complex i. 243.
Objects that are neither pleasant nor painful i. 272. 309. 312. Objects of
external sense in what place they are perceived iii. 370. Objects of internal
sense iii. 377. All objects of sight are complex iii. 400. Objects simple and
complex iii. 401. Object defined iii. 406. Old Bachelor) censured iii. 266.
Opera) censured ii. 9. Opinion) influenced by passion i. 183. etc. iii. 55.
influenced by propensity i. 199. influenced by affection i. 199. why differing
from me in opinion is disagreeable iii. ^59. Opinion defined iii. 396. Oration)
pro Archia poeta censured ii. 329. Orchard iii. ^^^. Order) i. 28. etc. iii.
392. pleasure we have in order i. 32. necessary in all compositions i. 34.
Sense of order has an influence upon our passions i. 81. 89. when a list of
many particulars is brought into a period, in what order should they be placed?
ii. 321. Order in stating facts iii. 264. Organ of sense i. 1. Organic pleasure
i 1. 2. 3. 4. Orlando Furioso) censured iii. 264. Ornament) redundant ornaments
ought to be avoided iii. 168. Ornaments in architecture iii. 342. Allegorical
or emblematic ornaments iii. 347. Othello) censured iii. 215.
Paeon ii. 461. Pain) cessation of pain extremely pleasant i. 68. Pain lesens
by custom ii. 102. iii. 355. Some pains felt internally some externally iii
387. Painful emotions and passions i 127. etc. Painting) in grotesque painting
the figures ought to be small, in historical painting as great as the life i.
279. Grandeur of manner in painting i. 293. Painting is an imitation of nature
ii. 234. In history-painting the principal figure ought to be in the best light
iii. 201. A good picture agreeable, though the subject be disagreeable iii.
208. Objects that strike terror have a fine effect in painting iii. 211.
Objects of horror ought not to be represented iii. 213. What emotions can be
raised by painting iii. 296. Panic i. 221. Parallelogram) its beauty i. 252.
Parody) defined ii. 52. 160. Note. Particles ii. 404. not capable of an accent
ii. 405. 416. Passion) no pleasure of external sense denominated a passion
except of seeing and hearing i. 42. Passion distinguished from emotion i. 52.
53. 54. Passions distinguished into instinctive and deliberative i. 58. 95.
etc. What are selfish, what social i. 59. What dissocial i. 62. Passion founded
on relations i. 76. etc. A passion paves the way to others in the same tone i.
92. Passions considered as pleasant or painful, agreeable or disagreeable i.
127. etc. as refined or gross i. 137. Their interrupted existence i. 139. etc.
Their growth and decay i. 139. etc. The identity of a passion i. 141. The bulk
of our passions are the affections of love or hatred inflamed into a passion i.
146. Passions swell by opposition i. 146. A passion sudden in growth is sudden
in decay i. 148. ceases upon attaining its ultimate end i. 148. Co-existent
passions i. 151. etc. Passions similar and dissimilar i. 171. Fluctuation of
passion i. 178. etc. Its influence upon our opinions and belief i. 183. etc.
203. 358. Its influence upon our perceptions i. 215. 216. Prone to its
gratification i. 238. 239. has an influence even upon our eyesight i. 362.
363. Passions ranked according to their dignity ii. 32. No disagreeable passion
is attended with dignity ii. 33. Social passions of greater dignity than
selfish ii. 37. External signs of passion chapter 15. ii. 116. Passion generally
fluctuates, swelling and subsiding by turns ii. 163. Language of passion chapter
17. ii. 204. etc. A passion when immoderate is silent ii. 204. Language of
passion broken and interrupted ii. 206. What passions admit figurative
expression ii. 208. Language proper for impetuous passion ii. 210. for
melancholy ii. 210. for calm emotions ii. 211. for turbulent passion ii. 211.
Passions expanded upon related objects i. 76. etc. ii. 312. etc. 336. 372. 415.
416. iii. 60. etc. 139. 140. With regard to passion man is passive iii. 377. We
are conscious of passions as in the heart iii. 377. Passionate) personification
iii. 64. Passive subject) defined iii. 406. Pathetic tragedy iii. 221. Pause)
pauses necessary for three different purposes ii. 360. Musical pauses in an
hexameter line ii. 368. Musical pauses ought to coincide with those in the
sense ii. 371. 375. What musical pauses are essential in English heroic verse
ii. 388. Rules concerning them ii. 390. etc. Pause and accent have a mutual
influence ii. 428. Pedestal) ought to be sparingly ornamented iii. 347.
Perceptions) succession of i. 380. Perception defined iii. 378. Original and
secondary iii. 382. Simple and complex iii. 383. Period) has a fine effect when
its members proceed in the form of an increasing series ii. 252. In the periods
of a discourse variety ought to be studied ii. 253. Different thoughts ought
not to be crowded into one period ii. 263. The scene ought not to be changed in
a period ii. 278. A period so arranged as to express the sense clearly, seems
more musical than where the sense is left doubtful ii. 307. In what part of the
period does a word make the greatest figure ii. 318. A period ought to be
closed with that word which makes the greatest figure ii. 320. When there is
occasion to mention many particulars, in what order ought they to be placed ii.
321. A short period is lively and familiar, a long period grave and solemn ii.
328. A discourse ought not to commence with a long period ii. 329.
Personification iii. 54. etc. Passionate and descriptive iii. 64. Perspicuity)
a capital requisite in writing ii. 256. Pharsalia) censured iii. 220. Phedra)
of Racine censured ii. 113. 216. Pilaster) less beautiful than a column iii.
345. Pindar) defective in order and connection i. 35. Pity) defined i. 55. apt
to produce love i. 93. always painful, yet always agreeable i. 134. resembles
its cause i. 221. What are the proper subjects for raising pity iii. 226.
Planetary system) its beauty i. 316. Play) is a chain of connected facts, each
scene making a link iii. 266. Play of words) ii. 71. 228 etc. Comparisons that
resolve into a play of words iii. 42. Pleasant emotions and passions i. 127.
etc. Pleasant pain explained i. 155. Pleasure) pleasures of seeing and hearing
distinguished from those of the other senses i. 1. 2. etc. Pleasure of order i.
32. of connection i. 32. Pleasures of taste, touch, and smell, not termed
emotions or passions i. 42. Pleasures refined and gross i. 137. Corporeal
pleasure low and sometimes mean ii. 32. Pleasures of the eye and ear never low
or mean ii. 32. Pleasures of the understanding are high in point of dignity ii.
34. Some pleasures felt internally, some externally iii. 387. Poet) the chief
talent of a poet who deals in the pathetic ii. 119. Poetry) objects that strike
terror have a fine effect in it iii. 211. Objects of horror ought to be
banished from it iii. 213. Poetry has power over all the human affections iii.
296. The most successful in describing objects of sight iii. 385. Polite
behavior i. 138. Polygon) regular its beauty i. 252. Polysyllables) how far
agreeable to the ear ii. 242. seldom have place in the construction of English
verse ii. 385. 421. Pompey) of Corneille censured ii. 176. 191. 194. Pope
excels in the variety of his melody ii. 411. His style compared with that of
Swift iii. 198. Posture) constrained posture disagreeable to the spectator i.
219. Power of abstraction iii. 401. Its use iii. 402. 403. Prepositions)
explained ii. 289. Pride) incites us to ridicule the blunders and absurdities
of others ii. 17. Considered with respect to dignity and meanness ii. 34. Its
external expressions or signs disagreeable ii. 132. Primary and secondary
qualities of matter i. 259. Principle) of order i. 28. 29. of morality i. 49.
74. ii. 21. of self-preservation i. 96. of selfishness i. 227. 229. of
benevolence i. 228. 229. Principle that makes us fond of esteem i. 237. 286. of
curiosity i. 320. 345. etc. of habit ii. 105. Principle that makes us wish
others to be of our opinion iii. 57. 359. Principle defined iii. 394. See
Propensity. Principles of the fine arts i. 7. Proceleusmaticus ii. 461.
Prodigies) find ready credit with the vulgar i. 198. Prologue of the ancient
tragedy iii. 271. Pronoun) defined ii. 310. Pronunciation) rules for it ii.
347. etc. distinguished from singing ii. 348. Singing and pronouncing compared
ii. 351. Propensity) opinion and belief influenced by it i. 199. Propensity to
fit objects for the gratification of our passions i. 184. iii. 98. Propensity
to justify our passions and actions i. 185. Propensity to punish guilt and
reward virtue i. 231. Propensity to carry along the good or bad properties of
one subject to another i. 76. ii. 235. 307. 312. 372. 415. 416. iii. 101.
Propensity to complete every work that is begun and to carry things to
perfection i. 364. 365. iii. 262. 345. Propensity to communicate to others
every thing that affects us ii. 204. Propensity to place together things
mutually connected ii. 308. Propensity defined iii. 394. See Principle.
Properties) transferred from one subject to another iii. 100. etc. Property)
the affection man bears to his property i. 84. Prophecy) those who believe in
prophecies wish the accomplishment i. 239. Propriety ii. 3. etc. distinguished
from congruity ii. 8. distinguished from proportion ii. 19. Propriety in
buildings iii. 338. Proportion) distinguished from propriety ii. 19. As to
quantity coincides with congruity ii. 19. examined as applied to architecture
iii. 328. Proportion defined iii. 391. Prose) distinguished from verse ii. 353.
Prospect) pleasure of a fine prospect i. 298. An unbounded prospect
disagreeable i. 366. Note. Provoked husband) censured iii. 253. Pun) defined
ii. 77. Punishment) in the place where the crime was committed i. 371.
Punishment of impropriety ii. 15. Public games) of the Greeks i. 314.
Pyrrhichius ii. 459.
Qualities) primary and secondary i. 259. A quality cannot be conceived
independent of the subject to which it belongs ii. 293. Different qualities
perceived by different senses iii. 376. Quantity) with respect to melody ii.
363. 383. Quantity with respect to English verse ii. 383. Quintilian) censured
iii. 92. Quintus Curtius) censured ii. 167.
Racine) criticized ii. 216. etc. Rape of the Lock) uncharacterized ii. 43.
admirable versification ii. 362. Reading) chief talent of a fine reader ii.
120. Plaintive passions require a slow pronunciation ii. 161. Note. Rules for
reading ii. 347. etc. compared with singing ii. 351. Reason) reasons to justify
a favorite opinion are always at hand and much relished i. 186. Refined
pleasure i. 137. Regularity) not essential in grand objects i. 257. required in
a small work, not so much in one that is extensive i. 299. how far to be
studied in architecture iii. 301. 322. 328. how far to be studied in a garden
iii. 305. Regular line defined iii. 389. Regular figure defined iii. 389.
Regularity proper and figurative iii. 390. Relations i. 22. 23. have an
influence in generating emotions and passions i. 76. etc. are the foundation of
congruity and propriety ii. 5. in what manner are relations expressed in words
ii. 286. Relative beauty i. 244. Remorse) its gratification i. 232. is not
mean. ii. 34. Repartee ii. 80. Representation) its perfection lies in hiding
itself and producing an impression of reality iii. 279. Repulsive) object i.
226. Repulsive emotions ii. 133. Resemblance) and contrast, chapter 8. i. 345. The
members of a sentence signifying a resemblance betwixt objects ought to
resemble each other ii. 270. etc. Resembling causes may produce effects that
have no resemblance, and causes that have no resemblance may produce resembling
effects ii. 337. etc. Resemblance carried too far in some gardens iii. 305.
Note. Resentment) explained i. 98. etc. disagreeable in excess i. 134. extended
against relations of the offender i. 190. its gratification i. 231. when
immoderate is silent ii. 205. Rest) neither agreeable nor disagreeable i. 309.
Revenge) animates but does not elevate the mind i. 283. has no dignity in it
ii. 33. Reverie) cause of the pleasure we have in it i. 112. Rhyme) for what
subjects it is proper ii. 447. etc. Melody of rhyme ii. 449. Rhythmus) defined
ii. 355. Riches) love of, corrupts the taste iii. 370. Riddle iii. 310.
Ridicule) a gross pleasure i. 138. is losing ground in England i. 138. Emotion
of ridicule i. 341. not concordant with grandeur i. 377. Ridicule ii. 16. 40.
etc. whether it be a test of truth ii. 55. Ridiculous) distinguished from
risible i. 341. Risible objects, chapter 7. i. 337. Risible distinguished from
ridiculous i. 341. Rubens) censured iii. 130. Ruin) ought not to be seen from a
flower-parterre iii. 303. in what form it ought to be iii. 313.
Sallust) censured for want of connection i. 37. Sapphic verse) has a very
agreeable modulation ii. 358. Scorn ii. 16. Sculpture) imitates nature ii. 234.
what emotions can be raised by it iii. 296. Secchia rapita) characterized ii.
41. Secondary qualities of matter i. 259. Seeing) in seeing we feel no
impression iii. 380. Objects of sight are all of them complex iii. 400.
Self-deceit i. 185. ii. 190. Selfish passions i. 59. are pleasant i. 131. less
refined than the social i. 137. inferior in dignity to the social ii. 37.
Selfishness) promoted by luxury iii. 370. and also by love of riches iii. 370.
Self-love) its prevalence accounted for i. 63. in excess disagreeable i. 134.
not inconsistent with benevolence i. 228. Semipause) in an hexameter line ii.
369. what semipauses are found in an English heroic line ii. 390. Sensation)
defined iii. 378. Sense) of order i. 28. etc. contributes to generate emotions
i. 81. and passions i. 89. Sense of right and wrong i. 49. of the veracity of
our senses i. 105. Sense of congruity or propriety ii. 6. of the dignity of
human nature ii. 29. iii. 361. Sense by which we discover a passion from its
external signs ii. 136. Sense of a common nature in every species of beings
iii. 356. Sense internal and external iii. 375. In touching, tasting, and
smelling, we feel the impression at the organ of sense, not in seeing and
hearing iii. 380. Sentence) it detracts from neatness to vary the scene in the
same sentence ii. 278. A sentence so arranged as to express the sense clearly,
seems always more musical than where the sense is left in any degree doubtful
ii. 307. Sentiment) elevated, low i. 276. Sentiments chapter 16. ii. 149.
Sentiments expressing the swelling of passion ii. 164. expressing the different
stages of a passion ii. 165. dictated by co-existent passions ii. 169.
Sentiments of strong passions are hid or dissembled ii. 171. Sentiments above
the tone of the passion ii. 175. below the tone of the passion ii. 176.
Sentiments too gay for a serious passion ii. 178. too artificial for a serious
passion ii. 179. fanciful or finical ii. 182. discordant with character ii.
186. misplaced ii. 189. Immoral sentiments expressed without disguise ii. 189.
unnatural ii. 196. Sentiment defined iii. 396. Series) from small to great
agreeable i. 272. Ascending series i. 274. Descending series i. 275. The effect
of a number of objects placed in an increasing or decreasing series ii. 249.
Serpentine river) its beauty i. 311. iii. 316. Sertorius) of Corneille censured
ii. 163. Shaft) of a column iii. 346. Shakespeare) criticized ii. 212. deals
little in inversion ii. 439. excells in drawing characters iii. 182. his style
in what respect excellent iii. 198. his dialogue excellent iii. 257. deals not
in barren scenes iii. 267. Shame) is not mean ii. 34. Similar emotions i. 153.
their effects when co-existent i. 155. iii. 336. Similar passions i. 171.
Effects of co-existent similar passions i. 171. Simple perception iii. 383.
Simplicity) beauty of i. 247. 254. abandoned in the fine arts i. 255. a great
beauty in tragedy iii. 252. Note. ought to be the governing taste in gardening
and architecture iii. 300. Singing) distinguished from pronouncing or reading
ii. 348. Singing and pronouncing compared ii. 351. Situation) different
situations suited to different buildings iii. 339. Smelling) in smelling we
feel an impression upon the organ of sense iii. 380. Smoke) the pleasure of
ascending smoke accounted for i. 33. 313. Social passions i. 59. more refined
than the selfish i. 137. of greater dignity ii. 37. Society) advantages of i.
237. 238. 240. Soliloquy) has a foundation in nature ii. 123. Solilo. quies ii.
218. etc. Sorrow) cause of it i. 65. Sounds) concordant i. 151. discordant i.
152. produce emotions that resemble them i. 218. articulate how far agreeable
to the ear ii. 240. A smooth sound sooths the mind, and a rough sound animates
ii. 245. Space) natural computation of space i. 211. etc. Species) defined iii.
399. Specific habit) defined ii. 95. Speech) power of speech to raise emotions,
whence derived i. 112. 121. Spondee ii. 364. etc. ii. 459. Square) its beauty
i. 251. Stairs) their proportion iii. 323. Standard) of taste chapter 25. iii. 351.
Standard of morals iii. 367. Star) in gardening iii. 307. Statue) the reason
why a statue is not colored i. 372. An equestrian statue is placed in a center
of streets that it may be seen from many places at once iii. 201. Statue of an
animal pouring out water iii. 308. of a water-god pouring water out of his urn
iii. 350. Strada) censured iii. 170. Style) natural and inverted ii. 290. etc.
The beauties of a natural style ii. 332. of an inverted style ii. 332. Concise
style a great ornament iii. 204. Subject) may be conceived independent of any
particular quality ii. 293. Subject with respect to its qualities iii. 376.
Subject defined iii. 406. Sublimity i. 264. etc. Sublime in poetry i. 277.
Sublimity may be employed indirectly to sink the mind i. 300. False sublime i.
303. 306. Submission) natural foundation of submission to government i. 236.
Substance) defined iii. 406. Substratum) defined iii. 376. Succession) of
perceptions and ideas i. 380. etc. Superlatives) inferior writers deal in
superlatives iii. 195. Surprise) instantaneous i. 142. 321. pleasant or painful
according to circumstances i. 326. etc. Surprise is the cause of contrast i.
359. Surprise a silent passion ii. 205. studied in Chinese gardens iii. 319.
Suspense) an uneasy state i. 205. Sweet distress) explained i. 155. Swift) his
language always suited to his subject iii. 194. has a peculiar energy of style
iii. 198. compared with Pope iii. 198. Syllable ii. 239. Syllables long and
short ii. 363. Sympathy) sympathetic emotion of virtue i. 70. Sympathy i. 229.
attractive i. 230. never low nor mean ii. 32. the cement of society ii. 143.
Synthetic) and analytic methods of reasoning compared i. 31.
Tacitus) excells in drawing characters iii. 182. his style comprehensive iii.
204. Tasso) censured iii. 242. Taste) in tasting we feel an impression upon the
organ of sense iii. 380. Taste in the fine arts compared with the moral sense
i. 7. its advantages i. 10. etc. Delicacy of taste i. 136. A low taste i. 276.
The foundation of a right and a wrong in taste iii. 358. Taste in the fine arts
as well as in morals corrupted by voluptuousness iii. 370. corrupted by love of
riches iii. 370. Taste never naturally bad or wrong iii. 372. Aberrations from
a true taste in the fine arts iii. 366. Tautology) a blemish in writing iii.
205. Temples) of Ancient and Modern Virtue in the gardens of Stow iii. 348.
Terence) censured iii. 288. 290. Terror) arises sometimes to its utmost height
instantaneously i. 143. a silent passion ii. 205. Objects that strike terror
have a fine effect in poetry and painting iii. 211. The terror raised by
tragedy explained iii. 228. Theorem) general theorems agreeable i. 255. Time)
past time expressed as present i. 118. Natural computation of time i. 200. etc.
Tone) of mind iii. 378. Touch) in touching we feel an impression upon the organ
of sense iii. 380. Trachiniens) of Sophocles censured iii. 286. Tragedy) modern
tragedy censured ii. 155. French tragedy censured ii. 159. Note. ii. 194. The
Greek tragedy accompanied with musical notes to ascertain the pronunciation ii.
350. Tragedy chapter 22. iii. 218. in what respect it differs from an epic poem
iii. 218. distinguished into pathetic and moral iii. 221. its good effects iii.
223. compared with the epic as to the subjects proper for each iii. 225. 226.
how far it may borrow from history iii. 234. rule for dividing it into acts
iii. 236. double plot in it iii. 251. admits not supernatural events iii. 254.
its origin iii. 270. Ancient tragedy a continued representation without
interruption iii. 271. Constitution of the modern drama iii. 273. Trees) the
best manner of placing them iii. 307. Triangle) equilateral, its beauty i. 253.
Tribrachys ii. 459. Trochaeus ii. 459. Tropes chapter 20. iii. 53.
Ugliness) proper and figurative iii. 388. Unbounded prospect) disagreeable i.
366. Note. Uniformity) apt to disgust by excess i. 253. Uniformity and variety
chapter 9. i. 380. The melody ought to be uniform where the things described are
uniform ii. 411. Uniformity defined iii. 390. Unity) the three unities chapter 23.
iii. 259. of action iii. 260. of time and of place iii. 267. Unities of time
and place not required in an epic poem iii. 268. strictly observed in the Greek
tragedy iii. 272. Unity of place in the ancient drama iii. 285. Unities of
place and time ought to be strictly observed in each act of a modern play iii.
291. Wherein the unity of a garden consists iii. 304. Unumquodque eodem modo
dissolvitur quo colligatum est i. 368.
Vanity) a disagreeable passion i. 134. always appears mean ii. 34. Variety)
distinguished from novelty i. 329. Variety chapter 9. i. 380. Verbal antithesis)
defined ii. 73. 268. Versailles) gardens of iii. 310. Verse) distinguished from
prose ii. 353. Sapphic verse extremely melodious ii. 358. Iambic less so ii.
358. Structure of an hexameter line ii. 364. Structure of English heroic verse
ii. 382. 384. English monosyllables arbitrary as to quantity ii. 383. English
heroic lines distinguished into four sorts ii. 421. Latin hexameter compared
with English rhyme ii. 441. compared with blank verse ii. 442. French heroic
verse compared with hexameter and rhyme ii. 443. The English language incapable
of the melody of hexameter verse ii. 446. For what subjects is rhyme proper ii.
447. etc. Melody of rhyme ii. 449. Melody of verse is so enchanting as to draw
a veil over gross imperfections ii. 457. Verses composed in the shape of an axe
or an egg iii. 310. Violent action) ought to be excluded from the stage iii.
254. Virgil) censured for want of connection i. 36. etc. his verse extremely
melodious ii. 357. his versification criticized ii. 376. censured iii. 179.
194. 246. Virgil travestie) characterized ii. 41. Voltaire) censured iii. 178.
236. 243. Vowels ii. 238.
Walk) in a garden, whether it ought to be straight or waving iii. 311.
artificial walk elevated above the plain iii. 313. Wall) that is not
perpendicular occasions an uneasy feeling i. 218. Water-fall i. 314. Water-god)
statue of, pouring out water iii. 350. Way of the World) censured iii. 266. the
unities of place and time strictly observed in it iii. 293. Will) how far our
train of perceptions can be regulated by it i. 23. 381. 388. determined by
desire i. 222. Windows) their proportions iii. 323. Wish) distinguished from
desire i. 55. Wit) desined i. 28. seldom united with judgment i. 28. but
generally with memory i. 28. not concordant with grandeur i. 377. Wit chapter 13.
ii. 58. Wonder) instantaneous i. 143. Wonders and prodigies find ready credit
with the vulgar i. 198. Wonder i. 320. studied in Chinese gardens iii. 319.
Words) play of ii. 228. etc. jingle of ii. 231. what are their best arrangement
in a period ii. 251. A conjunction or disjunction in the members of the thought
ought to be imitated in the expression ii. 260. 265. Words expressing things
connected ought to be placed as near together as possible ii. 307. etc. In what
part of a sentence does a word make the greatest figure ii. 318. Words acquire
a beauty from their meaning iii. 139. The words ought to accord with the
sentiment iii. 188. A word is often redoubled to add force to the expression
iii. 201. Writing) a subject intended for amusement may be highly ornamented
ii. 9. A grand subject appears best in a plain dress ii. 10.
FINIS.

