THE EAST INDIAN: A COMEDY.

IN FIVE ACTS.

As Performed at the THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

By M. G. LEWIS, Esquire. M. P. Author of the MONK, CASTLE SPECTRE, etc.

SECOND EDITION.

Quadringenta tibi si quis Deus, aut similis Diis,
Et melior fatis donaret, homuncio quantus
Ex nihilo fieres, quantus Virronis amicus!
"Da Trebio!" -- "Pone ad Trebium!" -- "Vis, ^rator, ab ipsis
"Ilibus*" -- O nummi, vobis hunc praestat honorem!
Vos estis Fratres!
JUVENAL, Sat. 5. LONDON: PRINTED BY J. DAVIS. CHANCERY LANE; FOR J. BELL, NO.
148, OXFORD STREET. M. DCCC.

PREFACE.
THE Plot of this Comedy, as far as regards Rivers's visits to Modish and Mrs.
Ormond, was taken from the Novel of Sidney Biddulph; Mr. Sheridan had already
borrowed the same incident from the same source, and employed it (though in a
different manner) in the "School for Scandal."

The "East Indian" was admirably well acted from beginning to end, particularly
the part of Rivers by Mr. Kemble: nothing was overcharged, nothing under-acted.
Indeed, to call his performance acting, is doing it injustice: It was nature
throughout.

This Comedy was written before I was sixteen. It was performed last season for
the benefits of Mrs. Jordan and Mrs. Powell, and, in consequence of the
approbation with which it was received, was brought forward again in last
December. It was again received with applause, for which I thank the Public:
the succeeding representations did not prove attractive, for which I here make
my acknowledgments to Mr. Sheridan, who blocked up my road, mounted on his
great tragic war-horse Pizarro, and trampled my humble pad-nag of a Comedy
under foot without the least compunction. My Readers must decide, whether my
Play merited so transient an existence; it is unnecessary to say, that I am
quite of the contrary opinion.

Jan. 14. 1800. M. G. LEWIS.

PROLOGUE.
By the Author.
SPOKEN BY MR. C. KEMBLE.
IN life's gay spring, while yet the careless hours
Dance light on blooming beds of early flowers,
Ere knowledge of the world has taught the mind
To sorrow for itself and shun mankind,
In sweet vain dreams still Fancy bids the boy
Dote on fair prospects of ideal joy:
Life's choicest fruits then court his eager hand;
Each eye is gentle, and each voice is bland;
False friendship prompts no sigh, and draws no tear,
And love seems scarce more beauteous, than sincere!
Ere sixteen years had winged their wanton flight,
While yet his head was young, and heart was light,
Our author planned these scenes; and while he drew,
How bright each color seemed, each line how true.
Gods! with what rapture every speech he spoke!
Gods! how he chuckled as he penned each joke!
And when at length his ravished eyes survey
That wondrous work complete -- a Five Act Play,
His youthful heart how self applauses swell!
-- "It is not perfect, but its vastly well!" --
Since then, with many a pang, our Bard has bought
More just decision, and less partial thought:
Kind vanity no longer blinds his sight,
His fillet falls, and lets in odious light.
Time bids the darling work its leaves expand,
Each flower Parnassian withers in his hand;
Stern judgment every latent fault detects,
And all its fancied beauties prove defects.
Yet, for she thinks some scenes possess an art
To please the fancy, and to melt the heart,
Thalia bids his play tonight appear,
Thalia called in heaven, but Jordan here The Comedy was first performed for
the Benefit of Mrs. Jordan.
.
So frail his hope, so weak he thinks his cause,
Our author says he dares not ask applause;
He only begs, that with indulgence new,
You Will hear him patiently, and hear him through:
Then, if his piece proves worthless, never sham it;
But damn it, gentle friends -- Oh! damn it! damn it!

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
LORD LISTLESS, Mr. PALMER. MODISH, Mr. BARRYMORE. RIVERS, Mr. KEMBLE.
BEAUCHAMP, Mr. C. KEMBLE. WALSINGHAM, Mr. AICKIN. FRANK, Mr. BANNISTER jun This
part was latterly played by Mr. WATHEN, as was that of ZORAYDA by Miss BIGGS.
. SQUEEZ'EM, Mr. HOLLINGSWORTH. FRIPONEAU, Mr. WEWITZER. TRIFLE, Mr. FISHER.
JOHN, Mr. WEBB. ROBERT, Mr. EVANS.
LADY CLARA MODISH, Miss STUART. Mrs. ORMOND, Mrs. POWELL. Miss CHATTERALL,
Miss POPE. ZORAYDA, Mrs. JORDAN. Mrs. SLIP-SLOP, Mrs. SPARKS. Lady HUBBUB, Mrs.
CUYLER. Mrs. BLAB-ALL, Miss TIDSWELL. Mrs. TIFFANY, Mrs. COATS. ANNE, Mrs.
JONES.
Ladies, Gentlemen, Servants, etc.

THE EAST INDIAN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Room in an Hotel.
WALSINGHAM is seated by a Table; ROBERT waiting. WALSINGHAM. BEAUCHAMP, say
you?


ROB. I think, that is the gentleman's name, sir.


WALL. Show him up -- [ Exit Robert.] -- I Am glad that he is returned to England;
for, though a young man, and a gay man, Beauchamp is among the few whom I
esteem.


Enter BEAUCHAMP. My dear Ned!

BEAU. Mr. Walsingham! -- This pleasure is quite unexpected; but where have you
been concealed these hundred years? I was afraid, that Cynthia wearied of her
Endymion had pitched upon you for his successor, and believed you at this
moment an inhabitant of the moon.


WALL. No, no, my young friend; the goddess has too much taste to select such an
old weather-beaten fellow for a Cecisbeo. But if you seriously ask, what I Have
been doing for these last three years, you must know, I Have been fool-hunting.


BEAU. Fool-hunting?


WALL. Yes. Being of an adust cynical constitution, infinite laughter is
absolutely necessary for my health: for this purpose my physician prescribed me
a course of fools, and truly I Have reaped great benefit from his advice.


BEAU. Why then leave Great Britain? Heaven knows, a scarcity of fools is not
one of our wants!


WALL. True; but the growth of English absurdity for the year 95 not being to my
taste, I determined to change my fools, as other invalids change the air; but
after all I must give the preference to the folly of my own country.


BEAU. Your own country is very much obliged to you; but since this is your
taste, I Have a superb feast for you in Lord Listless.


WALL. What, your uncle?


BEAU. No; to my sorrow he sleeps with his forefathers, while my noble cousin
possesses his title and estate, and, what is worst, has me entirely in his
power.


WALL. How so?


BEAU. It Is a tedious story; but the short of it is, that when I married, my
generous uncle discharged my debts to the tune of 3OOOl.: unluckily he
neglected to destroy my acknowledgment, which falling into his son's hands, the
present Earl wisely keeps it, and calls himself my sole creditor. Discharge it
for some time I cannot; but, however, unless we disagree, he will not press me
for immediate payment.


WALL. Well, well, and even if he should, we'll find means to satisfy him; and
so away with that gloomy face, dear Ned! As soon as I saw you, I guessed that
something was wrong; but I Am glad, 'twas nothing more than a pecuniary
difficulty.


BEAU. Would to heaven, it were!


WALL. Hey? Why what other cause --


BEAU. Oh! Mr. Walsingham, how shall I tell you --


WALL. Out with it!


BEAU. That I have been -- That I still am -- a villain!


WALL. I don't believe one word of it: he, who dares own that he has been a
villain, must needs already have ceased to be one.


BEAU. Hear me then, and judge for yourself -- You knew well the character of
the woman, to whose fate, while I was still a stripling, accident not affection
united mine.


WALL. Yes, and a miserable life she led you!


BEAU. Jealous without love, profuse without generosity, negligent in her
dress, violent in her temper, coarse in her manners, with no virtue but that
one which she owed to constitution, not to principle, during three years she
rendered my home an hell. My patience was at length exhausted; I made over to
her the remnants of an estate which her extravagance had ruined, bade this
domestic fiend an eternal farewell, and sailed, under the assumed name of
Dorimant, to India.


WALL. I see no harm as yet. Lived with her three years? I wouldn't have lived
with her three days -- No! not to have buried her on the fourth.


BEAU. Soon after my arrival, it was my chance to save the life of the famous
Mortimer, who --


WALL. The Nabob, whose immense wealth --


BEAU. The same. This procured me admission to his house, where I saw his
daughter: She was lovely, and grateful to me for the preservation of her
father's life; opportunities of seeing each other were frequent, and in an
unguarded moment -- yet heaven can witness to my intentions! -- in an unguarded
moment I -- I was a villain!


WALL. [shaking his head] -- Little better, I must say!


BEAU. Her weakness and my per^^dy were soon discovered. Marry her, I could
not; her father's wrath was dreadful; she sought a refuge from it in my arms,
and fled with me from India.


WALL. From India, and from her father? Young man! Young man! And what says your
wife to all this?


BEAU. Soon after our separation, I find that she went abroad, nor has she been
heard of for near two years either by her banker, or her friends. Report says,
that she is dead: If so, my hand is Zorayda's; and in the mean while she
resides with my cousin, Lady Clara Modish.


WALL. Lady Clara? And how the devil came she to receive her?


BEAU. The Devil made her, the great Devil of all! Money, man, darling money!
Her Ladyship had been extravagant, and so I paid a gaming debt or two for her:
besides this, the appearance of protecting a friendless orphan flatters that
oftentatious sensibility, which it is her passion to display on every occasion.


WALL. But does she know the history of her protegee?


BEAU. I was compelled to trust her with it under a promise of profound secrecy.


WALL. And how has she kept her promise?


BEAU. Why really extremely well, considering she is a woman of fashion. She
only confided it to her most intimate friends, who told it again to all their
particular acquaintance, who repeated it to every creature they knew; and now
the whole Town is informed of the whole transaction.


WALL. And you really have the heart to present this poor young creature to the
world in a light so despicable?


BEAU. Spare your reproaches, my dear sir; they have already been made by a
very able advocate. You remember Modish's sister, Emily?


WALL. Young Ormond's widow? -- A charming creature!


BEAU. She is interested about Zorayda, and has frequently written to me on
this subject. Her remonstrances have carried with them conviction, and I am
resolved to wait on her this morning to entreat her protection for Zorayda;
and, should she grant it, to engage, cruel as it will be to the feelings of us
both, no more to visit my love, till I can offer her my hand and fortune.


WALL. A very good resolution too: I long to see your goddess.


BEAU. Come then to Lady Clara's, and behold the fictitious charms of modish
beauty effaced by the native graces, the enchanting simplicity of my artless,
my bewitching Zorayda! But as this is but weak attraction for a satirist, if
you still exclaim, "Thou, Folly, art my goddess!" I can promise you some
diversion in your own way; for Lady Clara's table is seldom unsupplied with a
plentiful banquet of fools.


WALL. Every table in town may be supplied with that article at a very small
expense, I doubt not; for, after all my peregrinations in quest of folly, I am
decided, that no country abounds more with that luxury than little, England;
where absurdities spring as kindly as mushrooms upon dunghills, and you cannot
turn a corner without starting a fool! Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- Lady CLARA's.
Enter Mrs. TIFFANY and SLIP-SLOP. Mrs. TIF. No really, Mrs. Slip-slop, I cannot
stay a moment longer, and I Am sure her La'ship will find the dress quite the
thing.


SLIP. Cannot you confer your departure for one quarter of an hour, Mrs.
Tiffany? My Lady'll be mightily aspirated, if you go without seeing her.


Mrs. TIF. [ringing the bell.] Quite impossible! There Is Lady Tawdry, Lady
Tick, Miss Flash, and Lady Rachel Rounabout all waiting for me at this very
moment.

Enter JOHN. My chariot and servants, if you please, sir. -- [Exit John.] --
Good morning, Mrs. Slip-slop.


Exit. Mrs. SLIP. My chariot and servants! -- Lud! Lud! how I detest and
extricate that conceited trollop! She affects to contemnify me too, and why?
Sure my figure and hidication an't anterior to hers; and as to birth, I hope my
contraction's as extinguished as Mrs. Tiffany's, or truly I should be sorry for
it!


Enter ZORAYDA. ZOR. Is the mantua-maker gone, Mrs. Slipslop?


Mrs. SLIP. Yes; but left this note for you, Miss. [Zorayda reads.]
Superdescribed, I see, to Miss Mandeville, though she knows well enough that is
only a consumed name. Now do tell me, dear Miss, what is your right one? What
is your real abomination?


ZOR. Impertinent questions, Mrs. Slip-slop.


Mrs. SLIP. Oh! but if you will only tell me, I Will be so secret --!


ZOR. Of that I Am certain, Mrs. Slip-slop; for I well believe --

Thou will not utter what thou do not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Slip-slop!

Mrs. SLIP. So far, indeed!


ZOR. Not a jot farther.


Enter John. JOHN. Lord Listless. Exit.


Mrs. SLIP. [Aside.] Miss keeps her secret as close as if 'twere a scheme she
had prevented for paying off the natural debt, and was frightful that somebody
would embellish her ideras. Exit.


Enter Lord LISTLESS. Lord LIST. Quite alone, Miss Mandeville! Where Is Clara?


ZOR. Still at breakfast in her dressing room. She slept ill, and left her bed
late this morning.


Lord LIST. She was quite in the right: for my part I wonder why people leave
their beds at all, for they only contrive to bore themselves and their
acquaintance. Now I Have some thoughts of going to bed one of these nights, and
never getting up again.


ZOR. Oh! pray, my Lord, put that scheme into execution, for the benefit of
your friends as well as yourself.


Lord LIST. Yes, 'twould certainly take, for people imitate every thing I do so
ridiculously, that 'pon my soul I Am bored to death with them; but, to say the
truth, I Am bored with every thing and every body.


ZOR. I should be sorry to increase your ennui, and so wish you good morning.


Lord LIST. No, no; stay, pray stay; for there is nothing I like so much as the
company of Ladies.


ZOR. [drawing away her hand.] I Am sorry that I cannot return the compliment;
but there is nothing I like so little as the company of Lords!


Lord LIST. Umph! Pert enough, 'pon my soul!


Enter Lady CLARA. Lord LIST. Morning, Clara! You look frightful today.


Lady CLARA. Do I? I dare say I do: for my nerves are in such a state! -- Oh!
and then I had such a dream! -- Only conceive: Methought my favorite little
Pug, Fidelio, had fallen into the Serpentine; I saw him struggling, heard him
barking, and woke in an agony of tears!


ZOR. Exquisite sensibility!


Lady CLARA. Ha, Beauchamp!


Enter BEAUCHAMP and WALSINGHAM. BEAU. Let me present a friend to you, Lady
Clara, whose absence from England you have heard me frequently lament -- Mr.
Walsingham.


Lady CLARA. Your friends are always welcome here for your sake; but Mr.
Walsingham will be welcome for his own.


WALL. Your ladyship does me honor. -- [Aside to Beauchamp] Is she a fool too?


BEAU. None of the wisest, I promise you. -- Miss Mandeville, Mr. Walsingham.
[Zorayda courtesies.]


WALL. Mandeville? I Have known several of that name. Who --


Lady CLARA. [laughing.] Yes; but not of Miss Mandeville's family, I take it.
Were they, Zorayda?


BEAU. [aside to Walsingham.] Hush! Mandeville's an assumed name.


WALL. Oh! the devil! Why didn't you tell me so before?


BEAU. But, Lady Clara, I Have another friend to introduce.


Lady CLARA. I shall be very -- [turning round; then with indifference] -- Oh,
you wretch! my husband!


ZOR. [aside to Beauchamp.] You couldn't have introduced a greater stranger.


Enter MODISH. MOD. Mr. Walsingham, I rejoice to see you. Just returned, I
suppose? -- You rested well, I hope, Lady Clara? [carelessly.]


Lady CLARA. Perfectly; never passed a quieter night in my life.


[JOHN delivers a Letter to Modish, and goes off.] MOD. [opens, and then throws
it on the table.] Rivers.


WALL. I beg I may not prevent --


MOD. Oh! it is from a poor relation; 'twill keep. -- Beauchamp, were you at
Lady Sparkle's last night?


BEAU. Yes; and sound it very fashionable, and very dull.


Lady CLARA. Oh! the terms are now synonimous.


MOD. Quite; for since every thing that is fashionable is insipid, in mere
justice every thing that is insipid must be fashionable!


WALL. Indeed! Is this really so, my lord?


Lord LIST. Matter of fact, sir, 'pon my soul! In^ip^^^ty is now the very
criterion of fashion. A man of ton should never dance but when he is not wanted,
or sing but when nobody wishes to hear him. He should yawn at a comedy, laugh
at a tragedy, cry "damned bore" at both, tread upon his neighbor's toes, hunt
with a tooth-pick in his mouth, see women tumble down stairs without trying to
stop them, and, in order to be perfectly fashionable, should make himself
completely disagreeable!


ZOR. Bless me! how admirably your Lordship's practice exemplifies your theory!


Lord LIST. Oh! you flatter me.


ZOR. No really; I do you but justice when I protest that I never saw any thing
half so fashionable or insipid as your Lordship.


WALL. Nor I, upon my honor!


Lord LIST. 'Pon my soul you're too obliging! Too obliging, 'pon my soul!


Lady CLARA. Hark! A knock!


ZOR. [looking from the window.] Now heaven preserve my hearing! it is Miss
Chatterall.


Lady CLARA. I Am glad of it; she always talks scandal, and scandal is the best
thing in the world for the nerves.


Lord LIST. And she talks incessantly, which saves one the trouble of an answer.


ZOR. But she is so malicious!


Lady CLARA. She cheats horribly at play!


MOD. She Is disagreeable and affected.


Lord LIST. She Is a bore.


BEAU. She Is deceitful.


Lady CLARA. She Is abominable....


Enter Miss CHATTERALL. Lady CLARA. My dear creature, I Am so charmed to see
you! We Have not met this age!


Miss CHAT. Oh, Lady Clara! such a dreadful thing has happened to me! I Have been
so shocked, and so quizzed, and all that!


Lady CLARA. You alarm me!


Miss CHAT. You must know, as I came along, another carriage got entangled with
mine. A mob soon collected round us, and out of pure good nature and
condescension, I thought I Would entertain them with a little graceful terror.


Lady CLARA. How kind!


Miss CHAT. Was Not it? -- So, on this, I screamed in the most delightful way
imaginable, practiced my new Parisot attitudes, and threw myself into my very
best convulsions.


MOD. And, I warrant, the spectators burst into tears?


Miss CHAT. No truly, they burst out a laughing!


ALL. Oh, shameful!


Miss CHAT. Was Not it? -- I declare I was just like Orphy, the old fiddler,
playing to the stocks and stones! The more I squalled the more they laughed;
and at last they made me so angry that I vowed never to go into fits again,
except in the very best company.


WALL. And a mighty proper resolution too!


Miss CHAT. Was Not it? -- But, Modish, what provoked me most was your uncle;
that great gawky creature, General Truncheon. He never offered to help me the
least bit. And then he ha-ha-hae'd, and he-he-he'd, and all that so, you have no
idea! -- How shocking! Was Not it?


MOD. Oh! you know my uncle's a blockhead; he is supposed to have the greatest
body and least wit of any man in London.


ZOR. That follows of course: I Have observed, that in lofty houses the upper
apartments are always the worst furnished.


Miss CHAT. Very well, Miss Mandeville; extremely well indeed! -- [Aside] I Will
remember that, and sport it for my own. -- But, Lord! I must be gone, or Lady
Cogwell will be out, and I wouldn't miss seeing her for the world.


Lady CLARA. Lady Cogwell! I thought she was your aversion?


Miss CHAT. Oh dear, so she is; but last night Mrs. Punt, playing with her at
whist, found the ace of diamonds hid in her muff; so I Am going to comfort, and
console, and vex, and teaze her, and all that, you know. Modish, lead me to my
carriage. You will not go with me, Miss Mandeville?


ZOR. No; I Am not in a vexing, teazing, and all that humor this morning. But
are you sure of the truth of this story?


Miss CHAT. Sure of it? Why Mrs. Blab-all told it me, and I believe all she
says to be gospel, for she has talked scandal to me every morning for this year
and an half past, and in all that time never told the least bit of a lie. How
kind of her! Was Not it?


Lady CLARA. Are you going, Mr. Walsingham? We dine at home; if you can put up
with a family dinner -- [ He bows, and exit with Beauchamp.] -- You Will be with
me in the evening, Miss Chatterall?


Miss CHAT. Oh! without fail; and I hope by that time to have collected
authentic information concerning two elopements, four young men ruined at play,
nine ladies of quality taken tripping with their footmen, and one who died of a
cold which she caught in going to church. How comical! Was Not it? Come, Modish!


Exit with Modish. Lord LIST. Pray, Clara -- What was I going to -- Oh! Where
does Mrs. Ormond live?


Lady CLARA. I protest I Have forgotten, but the porter can tell you. May I ask,
why you enquire?


Lord LIST. I Have no sort of objection to your asking the question, provided
you have none to my not answering it. Good morning; we shall meet at dinner; or
perhaps not till tomorrow; or perhaps not this month; it does not signify, you
know, if we never meet at all.


Lady CLARA. Oh! not in the least -- Good morning. Exit Lord Listless.


ZOR. I see Mr. Modish returning; shall I stay, or leave you to your usual
discussions? Perhaps my presence may prevent --


Lady CLARA. Oh! child, don't mind me: these little matrimonial rubs are
excellent for the vapors, and Modish is never so entertaining as when I Have put
him out of temper.


ZOR. I Am sure then he is entertaining very often, but I cannot admire your mode
of making him so* and for my own part I verily think that were I to live a
thousand years, I could never succeed in extracting amusement from my husband's
uneasiness, or find pleasure in being the torment of a man, whom I had sworn
before the altar to love and to obey! Exit.


Enter MODISH. Lady CLARA. [ humming an Italian air, opens Modish's letter
thoughtless^y] -- Lud! what am I doing! Beg your pardon, Modish, I Have not read
ten words upon my honor.


MOD. 'Twas of no consequence.


Lady CLARA. Oh! it might have been from a lady, and I Have no wish to pry into
your secrets.


MOD. This letter comes from a relation, who after dissipating his fortune here
went to India some eighteen years ago -- Let me see what he says -- "My dear
cousin will be surprised to find, that a man still exists, whom I doubt not he
has long numbered with the dead: Still more will it surprise you to know, that
soon after my arrival in India, my union with a rich widow at once cleared me
of debt, and placed me in a state of opulence."


Lady CLARA. Opulence? This grows interesting.


MOD. "On my wife's death I realized my fortune, determined to share it with
you, my dear George."


Lady CLARA. The worthy man! Who waits? Send Slip-slop to me. -- I Will have a
chamber prepared this instant.


MOD. "But fate was not yet weary of persecuting me; the vessel in which I had
embarked my wealth was ship wrecked, and I regained the English shore, poor as
I left it."


Lady CLARA. Then the money's lost?


Enter SLIP-SLOP. SLIP. Did your La'ship --


Lady CLARA. It does not signify, Slip-slop.

Exit Slip slop.
MOD. "To you then, my dear George, I must apply for assistance, and soon after
receiving this you may expect a visit from your affectionate cousin and friend,
WILLIAM RIVERS."


Lady CLARA. How unlucky! This money would have been so seasonable --


MOD. Seasonable, madam? Say, necessary, absolutely necessary; and what has
made it so? Your dissipation, your extravagance, your --


Lady CLARA. Oh! mercy, dear Modish, mercy! Moderate your tone, I beg; consider
my nerves.


MOD. My manner, madam, may be moderate, but the matter must be harsh.


Lady CLARA. Oh! sir, let but your voice be gentle, and as to the matter of
what you say, I shall not mind it a straw.


MOD. What I say, madam, you never do mind.


Lady CLARA. True, sir; I never do.


MOD. Madam, madam, I must say, and I will say --


Lady CLARA. Say, sir? Lord, couldn't you sing? 'Twould be much more agreeable.


MOD. Zounds, madam, I Am serious, and well I may be so. My affairs are so
embarrassed that I expect an execution in the house every day, and but one way
remains of preventing it. You must give up your diamonds, I Will procure you
paste instead; and as you're known to possess real jewels, nobody will suspect
those you wear to be false.


Lady CLARA. Well, sir, I Will only mention one circumstance, and then if you
still wish it, the diamonds are at your disposal.


MOD. [aside] -- So readily? I Am amazed! -- Well, my dear Lady Clara, and this
circumstance is --


Lady CLARA. Simply this. About three months ago I sold the real jewels, and
those now in my possession are the paste This was related to me as an anecdote.
.


MOD. [violently] -- Confusion! Fire, and Furies!


Lady CLARA. Don't swear, sir!


MOD. Zounds! madam, I must and will swear, and I must and will tell you once
for all --

Enter JOHN.
JOHN. Mr. Rivers. Exit.


MOD. He has nicked the time: I never felt less charitably disposed in my life.
-- [ Throws himself into a chair, his back turned to Lady Clara, who sits in an
indolent posture, humming to herself.] --


Enter RIVERS. RIV. It is with diffidence, Sir, that I venture --


Lady CLARA. Oh! Heavens! A black scratch! Drops! drops, or I shall faint! --
[Modish rings] --


RIV. I fear, madam, I have by some means occasioned an alarm, which --


Enter SLIP-SLOP [ with drops.] Lady CLARA. Quick! quick! or I expire. [After
taking a smelling-bottle.] -- Slip-slop, tell the man, I beg his pardon, but
I Have always had a particular aversion to black scratches.


SLIP. [ to Rivers] -- Sir, my Lady hopes you will accuse her, but a black
scratch always was her particular diversion.


RIV. I Am sorry to have offended, but it is the lot of misfortune to offend in
every thing!


MOD. I -- I think, Mr. Rivers, I Have heard my father speak of you, but as to
what he said, I really don't remember a syllable.


RIV. I fear, if you did, it could not prejudice you in my favor; yet as my
conduct was only imprudent, never dishonorable, your father's friendship was
mine to the last.


MOD. Very possibly; I don't dispute it.


RIV. Were he alive, I should not want a friend! Let me, however, rejoice in
his son's affluence. Your numerous retinue, your splendid mansion prove, that
you have the ability to serve me, and your inclination I cannot doubt.


MOD. Why really -- Hem! -- Appearances are frequently deceitful and -- and to
say the truth -- Pray, what may your plans be?


RIV. They rest on you. As all hopes of independence are finally destroyed, I
must rely on your good offices to obtain for me some small place, and being so
near a relation, I think, I have some claim to your exertions.


MOD. Claim -- Oh! yes -- certainly a claim -- But really places are so
difficult to obtain --


Lady CLARA. Difficult! I tried the other day without success to get my footman
into the Custom-house; so nothing can be done for you in that way.


MOD. However, sir, I Will look about me, and if any thing occurs will let you
know. Good morning.


RIV. In the mean time may I without offense mention to you my distressed
situation? The griping hand of poverty presses hard upon me; I have do other
support, have no one to look to but yourself. -- Oh! George, George, you once
loved me! Often have I carried you in my arms, often has my hand supplied you
with money when a boy, and in all your little distresses it was from my
partiality that you sought assistance! Let these recollections, let the
recollection of your excellent father plead for me, when I mention -- that --
that a trifling pecuniary aid will be of most essential service.


MOD. [ with emotion, aside to Lady Clara.] I Will -- I Will give him a ten pound
note, and send him away.


Lady CLARA. Ten pounds? Heavens! Modish! don't be so extravagant.


MOD. Your Ladyship is always oeconomical, when charity is in the case!


Lady CLARA. [with a sneer.] -- Oh! sir, you're partial to me!


MOD. If I am, dam'me! -- [resuming his cold manner.] I Am very sorry, Mr.
Rivers, it is out of my power to assist you at present, but if I hear of any
thing to suit you, I Will let you know. Good morning.


RIV. But sir --


MOD. I Will move heaven and earth to serve you. Good morning.


RIV. But sir, if you don't know where I live, how can you inform me of your
success?


MOD. Oh! true! Where shall I send?


RIV. [hesitating] -- I Am ashamed to name such a miserable -- I -- I lodge at
the Three Blue Posts, in Little Britain.


Lady CLARA. Oh! shocking! Is it possible that any body can live at the Three
Blue Posts?


Mrs. SLIP. Oh! dear no, my Lady; it an't possible.


RIV. Before I go, sir, let me ask whether your sister Emily is still living.


Lady CLARA. Oh! yes, but she cannot assist you, so it is useless applying to
her. However, my porter can give you her direction.


RIV. Is she then in distress? I Will hasten to her, and though she may not give
me relief for my wants, with her I may at least find sympathy for my woes, a
sentiment which I have vainly sought for in the Palaces of the Great. -- [With
stifled anger] -- Good morning, sir.


MOD. Your servant.


RIV. [aside.] So fades my hope! On how sandy a foundation do they build, who
place their reliance on the friendship of affluence! Exit.


Lady CLARA. So, he is gone at last.


Mrs. SLIP. And truly I Am glad of it! No wonder your La'ship was so flusterated
at seeing him; for when I first saw his odorous black scratch, I protest it
threw me into such a constellation, that I thought I should have conspired upon
the spot!


Lady CLARA. Poor Slip-slop! Order the carriage to the door. Exit Slip-slop.


MOD. Before you go, madam, I must say --


Lady CLARA. My dear Mr. Modish, say not another word on the subject, since on
one point I am decided; that whenever we are of different opinions, you must be
wrong, and I must be right. Good morning. Exit.


MOD. I Have gained much by this conference! Bachelors! Bachelors! Tie yourselves
up in the noose of hemp, rather than the noose of matrimony. The pain of the
former is never felt after a few minutes; but the knot of the latter grows
tighter every hour during years, and is at last only loosened by death or
infamy! Exit.


END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
ZORAYDA'S Apartment. -- She is discovered folding a Letter. ZORAYDA. IT IS
done! Yes, Beauchamp, we part, and for ever! Yes, tell you so myself -- No, no!
I cannot! That painful task, I trust, this letter will induce Mrs. Ormond to
undertake. What? Beauchamp's mistress? The mistress of a married man? Break,
fond heart, break, but support such shame no longer! Hark! -- He comes! --
[Concealing the letter.] --


Enter BEAUCHAMP. BEAU. Zorayda! -- How, in tears, my love?


ZOR. [assuming gaiety] -- Heed them not! -- A mere trifle -- My grief is
already forgotten.


BEAU. Indeed? Had your grief then so slight a cause?


ZOR. Ah! while remorse and shame dwell here, can my cause for grief ever be
slight?


BEAU. Yet methinks in public your manner --


ZOR. Is gay, is forced, is agonizing! Loath am I that the world should see that
I suffer, since 'twas from you my sufferings sprung; but believe me, Beauchamp,
the smiles which play on my cheek in public are to my heart as moon-beams
falling on some rock of ice; they shine, but warm not!


BEAU. Dearest Zorayda! --


ZOR. Edward! Edward! Oh! where is my father? Perhaps now stretched on the bed
of sickness, calling, on Zorayda for those offices which a daughter alone can
perform; and woe is me! calling in vain! Perhaps --, perhaps ere this cold in a
foreign grave, where his heart has forgot at my name to burn with anger, or to
glow with love, where Death has long since forbidden his lips to call on me, or
curse me! Yet if he still should live....too surely, wretched Zorayda, he lives
no longer for thee.


BEAU. Zorayda, would you drive me mad?


ZOR. And still no letters from India? Still no word from my father, or kind,
or cruel? Oh that I could but know he still exists! that I could but once more
see the characters of his hand! that I could but for one moment hear his voice,
though in the next I again heard it curse me!


BEAU. Nay, be comforted! A person just arrived from India, I trust, can give
me some tidings of Mr. Mortimer, and having discharged my errand here, I hasten
to him. You mentioned some trinkets which you wished to purchase; these notes
will answer their price. And now, my love, farewell for the present: when next
we meet, I hope to bring good tidings.


ZOR. Heaven grant it! but to whom go you?


BEAU. To a poor relation of Modish's, who applied to him for relief.


ZOR. And he departed....?


BEAU. Unrelieved.


ZOR. Alas! Yet perhaps be was undeserving?


BEAU. That I know not; but trust me, Zorayda, I love not those, who weigh too
nicely the transgressions of a sufferer: to punish human errors is the province
of Heaven; to relieve human wants is the duty of man!


ZOR. True, true, dear Edward! and therefore cannot you....


BEAU. You know, my means are circumscribed; what cash I could have spared, was
already appropriated to your use.


ZOR. To mine? -- these notes? -- And whither is he now gone?


BEAU. To Mrs. Ormond's, whose noble heart would willingly relieve him, but
whose means....


ZOR. And if she cannot -- what must he do?


BEAU. Starve, Zorayda!


ZOR. He shall not! -- no, no, he shall not! Follow him! These notes -- take
them, take them all: haste to him with them: oh! haste, ere it be too late!
Nay, oppose me not, dear Edward; in this I must not be opposed.


BEAU. Oppose you, Zorayda? be my own heart hardened, when I defeat the
generosity of yours! I haste with your present to Mrs. Ormond, and at the same
time I trust I shall obtain some tidings of Mr. Mortimer.


ZOR. To Mrs. Ormond? Stay! I will enclose the notes in this letter -- [sealing
it] -- Give it her; it says --


BEAU. What, my love?


ZOR. -- [after a pause] -- What I cannot! -- Leave me! Nay delay not! Leave
me, I conjure you!


BEAU. I obey! Exit.


ZOR. I cannot doubt that letter's effect: Mrs. Ormond will read my sad story
with compassion, and stretch forth her hand to save from destruction a poor
creature, whose guilt began in ignorance, whose knowledge of that guilt, but
for her, must end in despair! She will convince Beauchamp, that it is necessary
we should part: then will I hasten back to India, hasten to my dear, my cruel
father: will throw me on his bosom, will cling round his knees, will clasp his
hand till it dashes me on the ground, and then, if his feet trample me, will
bathe them with my tears, kiss them, and die! Exit.


SCENE II. -- Mrs. ORMOND's. -- The Breakfast Table is set.
Enter Mrs. ORMOND, followed by ANNE. Mrs. ORM. Nay, Anne, it must be so; I
must part with him.


ANNE. Part with Frank? how will you manage that, madam? Why, you will never
persuade him to go.


Mrs. ORM. But he must; I can no longer afford to keep him.


ANNE. For that very reason, he will stay, madam. Oh! Frank will never go, I Am
certain.


Mrs. ORM. Well, well, send him hither -- [ Exit Anne. Mrs. Ormond looking at a
letter which she holds] -- "will call this morning -- Edward Beauchamp." -- I
hope, then, my remonstrances have at length prevailed, and he sees his conduct
to Zorayda in its proper light. Yet even then, how to persuade her to part from
him --


Enter FRANK, places the Tea-Urn on the Table, and is going. Mrs. ORM. Stay,
Frank; I must speak with you.


FRANK. I wait your orders, madam.


Mrs. ORM. I give them for the last time.


FRANK. Madam!


Mrs. ORM. It grieves me to say it, my good fellow, but we must part.


FRANK. Part, madam! -- Part?


Mrs. ORM. Even so; but be assured, Frank, I shall always feel grateful for
your fidelity, and should my fortunes ever change, you shall not be forgotten.
-- What is due to you? -- [taking out her purse.]


FRANK. And you really turn me away?


Mrs. ORM. Turn you away? No, but I Am constrained to dismiss you.


FRANK. Dismiss me? -- Very well! -- Do it! -- But I will not go!


Mrs. ORM. Nay, but, Frank --


FRANK. And you can be cruel enough to turn me away? In Mr. Ormond's family
have I lived forty years, man and boy, and now all of a sudden you turn me
a-drift! Ah! I see a fair face may hide an hard heart!


Mrs. ORM. But hear me, my good fellow! my circumstances demand retrenchment,
and unable longer either to maintain or pay you --


FRANK. I don't want to be paid! I don't want to be maintained! I ask but to
see you every morning, and be assured you are in health; I ask but to see my
young master grow up the image of his father; carry him in my arms while he is a
child, and when he is a man to die in his presence! I ask but this, and you
refuse me! Yet you cannot surely be so cruel; you could never really mean to
drive me away -- [Kneeling] -- Dear good lady, comfort me, say you did this but
to try me, say you never really meant to part with your poor and faithful Frank!


Mrs. ORM. [affected.] -- Rise, rise, my good fellow! -- Yes, you shall remain
with me! Rather will I endure any inconvenience, than pain an heart so feeling!


FRANK. Inconvenience? God bless you, madam, I shall rather relieve you than
occasion any. I am yet strong and hearty; I can labor, can work my fingers to
the bones in your service, and rather than you or yours should want wherewithal
to eat, Lord forgive me if I wouldn't consent to your eating me! Exit.


Mrs. ORM. Noble heart! -- I have heard servants called the plagues of life;
but never did I pass more delightful moments than while listening to the
effusions of this honest fellow's gratitude.


Re-enter FRANK, followed by RIVERS. FRANK. This way, sir! -- A gentleman to
wait on you, madam. Exit.


RIV. When I left England, madam, you were so young that probably no trace
remains in my cousin Emily's remembrance --


Mrs. ORM. Is it possible? Surely, sir, I now speak to Mr. Rivers.


RIV. Even so; but if you recollect my story as well as my features, I fear you
are not prejudiced in my favor: my juvenile follies --


Mrs. ORM. -- [eagerly.] -- Sir, my father loved you; his friends can never be
judged harshly by me. But pray inform me, I fear your expedition to the East --


RIV. The East, my dear lady, was sufficiently kind; but, on my return, a
tempest swept in one moment away the gains of eighteen painful years.


Mrs. ORM. I feel for your disappointment; -- but ere we proceed, may I not
offer you some breakfast? I am rather an invalid, and rose late today.


RIV. Were it not an intrusion --


Mrs. ORM. Intrusion? Oh! my good sir; to meet with one whom my father loved,
and who loved my father, is to me a delight so exquisite, and which now, alas!
I enjoy so rarely! -- Nay, be seated; I must not be denied.


RIV. What a contrast! [aside.] -- I fear you will think me impertinent, yet I
must hazard one enquiry. How comes it that your situation differs from your
brother's so strangely?


Mrs. ORM. Oh! at my first entrance into life, my establishment was not less
splendid, but my husband's nature, generous and benevolent to excess,
ultimately proved our ruin. He was compelled to part with his estate, and we
retired to an humble retreat, where my beloved Ormond expired.


RIV. But still your jointure --


Mrs. ORM. Satisfied my husband's creditors, nor till I felt it, could I
believe, that so much pleasure could be purchased by a sacrifice so trifling.


RIV. [aside.] -- An angel, by Jupiter!


Mrs. ORM. This avowal must excuse my not offering you that assistance, which I
should afford you most willingly; but doubtless on applying to my brother --


RIV. I have applied.


Mrs. ORM. And the result was --


RIV. Coldness and scorn!


Mrs. ORM. Indeed? -- Oh George! -- Well, well, we will not despond: In my
poverty, I have still some friends, I trust, both able and willing to oblige
me. To these will I recommend you, and till they succced in serving you, take a
lodging near mine; my table shall be always open to you; and as you may already
have contracted some little debts, pray make use of this trifle to discharge
them. If not sufficient, only say it, and the sum shall be increased.


RIV. Madam! -- Cousin! -- Emily! -- Nay, now my heart must burst!


Mrs. ORM. Let not such a trifle --


RIV. Forgive me! -- Dearest Emily, forgive me! Here -- take it, take it, and
Heaven make you as happy with it as you deserve to be. -- [Giving her a
pocketbook.]


Mrs. ORM. How? -- Notes? -- and to a large amount! -- What can this mean?


RIV. It means, that I deserve to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, for giving
one moment's uneasiness to such an heart. I am rich, Emily, rich -- Yet I lie,
for all that was mine is now yours.


Mrs. ORM. Amazement! Can this be real?


RIV. A few hours shall convince you of its truth, nor can you feel better
pleased to be heiress of my riches, than I feel at finding an heiress who
deserves them. But I must away and begin my preparations, for by six o'clock
you must be lodged in your own house, attended by your own servants, and ready
to welcome me at your own table.


Mrs. ORM. But, dear sir, this great haste....


RIV. Oh! hang delay; what I do, I do at once, and so farewell for the present.
-- [Going.]


Mrs. ORM. But at least take back these notes; their value --


RIV. Is trifling when compared with that of your present! [kissing it.] But
never -- no, while I have life never will I part with this note! I Will wear it
next my heart as a talisman, for you gave it when you could full ill afford it,
and gave it too from the noblest of motives, compassion for the distressed, and
respect for the memory of a father!


Exit. Mrs. ORM. This event so unexpected, so sudden...Now than I can look
forward once more without anxiety. -- Oh! from what a weight is my bosom
relieved! -- William -- my dear, my darling William -- thy prospects are bright
again! -- While she clasps thee to her bosom, thy mother shall tremble no more
for thy future fate; and want shall no longer compel her to restrain the
openness of thy liberal hand, or blame the benevolence of thy little feeling
heart. My faithful servants too....How! Lord Listless?


Enter Lord LISTLESS. Lord LIST. Even he. But you seem surprised at my visit:
when you know its purport, I think, my dear Mrs. Ormond, you will not be sorry to
see me.


Mrs. ORM. [coldly.] Lady Clara, I suppose...


Lord LIST. No, Clara's quite out of the question; the thought's entirely my
own, I Will assure you; but don't let your joy overpower you.


Mrs. ORM. My joy!


Lord LIST. Yes; for you must know, my dear creature, I Am in love with you.


Mrs. ORM. You, my Lord? You?


Lord LIST. To distraction, 'pon my soul!


[carelessly.] Mrs. ORM. I can scarcely credit my hearing.


Lord LIST. And here I am for the express purpose of making you proposals.


Mrs. ORM. I protest I Am so surprised....


Lord LIST. I Have ordered my lawyer to draw up an handsome settlement; and as
these apartments are but La, La, you had better remove to my house immediately.
-- La Fleur, my carriage! -- Will you come?


Mrs. ORM. The coxcomb! [aside.] -- My Lord, I must be candid with you.
Considering our situations, I know the world will blame me for not accepting
your proposals; but could I so easily forget Mr. Ormond's loss, I must frankly
own that your Lordship is by no means the man whom I think likely to make me
happy in a second marriage.


Lord LIST. Marriage! my dear creature, who said a word on the subject? Nothing
could be farther from my thoughts, for I think marriage a great bore: Don't
you? -- Now, what I meant was that sort of amicable arrangement, which, when we
grow tired of each other, (as I doubt not, we soon shall,) may leave both at
liberty to pursue our separate inclinations. Thus stands the case: You are
poor, I am rich; you are handsome, so am I. Despise then the opinions of prudes
and cynics, and sharing a splendid establishment with love and me.... [yawning.]


Mrs. ORM. Beyond a doubt must be perfectly enchanting! -- [Aside] Insolent
coxcomb! Yet he is so absurd that anger here would be ridiculous.


Lord LIST. Yes, I thought you would like the proposal. Nay, I should have flown to
you with it upon the wings of love a month ago, if something or other had not
continually driven it out of my head; and if my valet had not put me in mind of
it this morning, 'pon my soul I believe I shouldn't have remembered it at all.


Mrs. ORM. It were better, my Lord, that you never had, for I cannot hold your
insolent offers in greater contempt than I do their proposer. After this
declaration you must be convinced that your presence here cannot be acceptable.
[Going.]


Lord LIST. Nonsense! Come, come, don't be silly, child! My carriage is at the
door, and I must positively take you away with me.


Mrs. ORM. Unhand me, my Lord!


Lord LIST. Ten thousand pardons! I forgot; you are a prude, and a little
gentle force is necessary to quiet your scruples.


Mrs. ORM. My Lord! -- I beg....I entreat you....


Lord LIST. Now, why the devil give me all this trouble? Nay, come you must,
'pon my soul!


Mrs. ORM. Nay then....Frank! -- Frank, I say! -- Help! help!

Enter BEAUCHAMP.
BEAU. [ Seizing Lord Listless, and disengaging Mrs. Ormond, who sinks into a
chair.] Rascal! how dare you.....Hey, the devil? Lord Listless! -- And what
brings your Lordship here?


Lord LIST. Poh, Beauchamp! it is a mere joke. Mrs. Ormond was alarmed without
reason, and thought proper....


BEAU. Without reason? I doubt it not; I believe no one has much to fear from
your Lordship.


Lord LIST. I don't understand that sneer, but the immediate enforcement of
your bond shall convince you that you, sir, at least have something to fear
from me. This will be merely a proper mode of punishing your present conduct,
which I cannot but consider as ungrateful in the extreme; and 'pon my soul I
should be in a confounded passion, if being angry were not too great an
exertion for a man of fashion. Exit.


BEAU. Mean coxcomb! Mrs. Ormond, I fear your agitation....


Mrs. ORM. Oh! a fit of tears has relieved me; but how can I sufficiently thank
you for your interference?


BEAU. By accepting without scruple this from Zorayda. [Giving a packet.]


Mrs. ORM. And its contents are....


BEAU. Hearing that Mr. Rivers meant to apply to you for assistance, and
fearing lest your ability to relieve him should not square with your
inclination, she readily sacrificed some jewels, which she had long been
anxious to possess, and appropriated the money to the alleviation of his
distresses.


Mrs. ORM. Noble girl! And while such is her conduct, how, Colonel Beauchamp,
how can you justify your own, either to her or to yourself?


BEAU. Justify it, I cannot. Yet surely circumstances may in some measure
extenuate its impropriety. The woman's character, who, for my sins, calls me
her husband....


Mrs. ORM. That woman, be she what she may; is still your wife, Colonel
Beauchamp, nor are her faults any apology for yours. I may pity you for being
united to such a woman; but while she exists, I must blame your attachment to
any other.


BEAU. Well then, my fair moralist, show that pity by counselling my future
conduct. What should I do!


Mrs. ORM. Can you ask me? Restore Zorayda to virtue and her father.


BEAU. On one condition you shall be obeyed. A report, which seems well
authenticated, has reached me, that many months are past since my wife expired
at Turin. For that place I mean instantly to set out, anxious to ascertain the
fact; which, if true, leaves me at liberty to repair my injuries to Zorayda;
and if false --


Mrs. ORM. You will then be guided by me?


BEAU. There is my hand; on my honor, I will.


Mrs. ORM. I accept then your conditions. -- When mean you to set out for Turin?


BEAU. I am impatient to be gone; yet how to tell Zorayda that I must leave her
--


Mrs. ORM. Be that my care.


BEAU. Dear Mrs. Ormond, would you but undertake that painful task, would you
explain to her the object of my journey to Turin, and, should it prove
unsuccessful, strive to reconcile her to the cruel alternative --


Mrs. ORM. All this shall be done, though not exactly by me; situated as I am
with Lady Clara, I cannot go myself to her house uninvited; but I think Mr.
Rivers may without impropriety, under the pretext of returning to her this now
unnecessary present.


BEAU. Unnecessary! Have his wants then been already relieved?


Mrs. ORM. They needed no relief; Rivers is wealthy, and the object of his
visit to Lady Clara's this morning was to make an experiment on her heart, not
her purse. Zorayda's gift, therefore, being now superfluous, I will persuade
Rivers to return it to her himself; and while expressing his gratitude for her
well-intended benevolence, he may take an opportunity of convincing her that
your absence is necessary, that Lady Clara's is by no means a proper abode for
her, and he shall press her, 'till the result of your inquiries shall have
determined her future conduct, to accept an asylum in my house.


BEAU. And will you, Mrs. Ormond, will you hazard your reputation, and subject
yourself to the world's censure, by affording protection and support to an
unfortunate, whose errors --


Mrs. ORM. Hush! hush! No more of this. You accept then my proposal?


BEAU. With transport! But by heaven you are an angel! -- Oh, Mrs. Ormond! did
all your sex think, like you -- would Chastity stretch forth her hand to assist
the penitent, not raise it to plunge her deeper -- many a poor victim of
imprudence now struggling with the billows might easily regain the shore! --
But when some unhappy girl has made the first false step, branded with shame,
abandoned by her former friends, courted by vice, and shunned by virtue, no
wonder that she flies from remorse to the arms of luxury, and purchases a
momentary oblivion of her sorrows by a repetition of the fault which caused
them.


Exeunt severally. END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- An Apartment elegantly furnished.
Mrs. ORMOND and RIVERS are seated near a Table, on which is Desert, etc.
RIVERS. WELL, well, your commission is a delicate one, and I doubt much my
executing it to your satisfaction; but however I Will do my best. Beauchamp, you
say, is the villain's name, who --


Mrs. ORM. It is, but guilty as he is in the present instance, justice compels
me to say, that by no other act has he ever merited the name of villain.


RIV. By my soul, this one is quite sufficient! The married seducer of an
unsuspecting girl, the selfish betrayer of a father's confidence! Oh! he is
qualified to take the degree of villain in any college of vice throughout the
universe!


Mrs. ORM. Thus severe upon Beauchamp, how can Miss Mandeville's errors hope
from you that indulgence --


RIV. Surely the case is widely different; besides, her generosity has
interested me sincerely in her behalf. This you say is the packet which I am to
return to her? -- Mandeville? -- Mandeville? -- I don't recollect any person of
that name in India; but no matter: Whoever her father may be, if he really
loves his daughter, heartily shall I rejoice to relieve the poor man from
suffering, what I once felt so keenly myself!


Mrs. ORM. Yourself?


RIV. Emily, it was my misfortune to have a daughter on whom my soul doated.
Her mother died while my child was yet an infant, and my child was the image of
that mother, was the delight of my eye, was the comfort of my heart, was the
solitary blessing of my existence; and while that one blessing was mine, I
thought I possessed every other! This daughter, this very idolized daughter,
sacrificed to passion her honor and my love, abandoned me for a villain, and
her father became childless!


Mrs. ORM. Is she then dead?


RIV. To me for ever! She fled from India, doubtless with the perfidious
Dorimant; and what has since become of her, I know not. But be she where she
may, the ungrateful is no more my daughter.


Mrs. ORM. Yet were she now stretched in penitence at your feet --


RIV. Stretched in her coffin I might forgive her, else never!


Mrs. ORM. Oh! Mr. Rivers --


RIV. Nay, speak of her no more. I have sworn never to pardon her; that oath
will I keep religiously, and seek that happiness, my dear cousin, in your
family, which the ungrateful fugitive has banished for ever from my own! Exit.


Mrs. ORM. Either Mr. Rivers deceives himself, or the difference must be
strange between a father's and a mother's feelings! Yes, my loved William,
should thou prove unworthy my regard, I think my heart would break with
grief; but till it did break, never, oh! surely never, would it feel one spark
of less affection for thee!


Exit. SCENE II. -- A Room at Lady Clara's. -- Another is seen through
Folding-Doors.
Enter Lord LISTLESS and MODISH. Lord LIST. A peer and a man of fashion lend
money? Mad! Positively mad, dear Modish, or such an idea could never have
entered your head!


MOD. Is it so strange, then, to expect assistance from a brother?


Lord LIST. No, but uncommonly strange to expect money from a man of fashion.


MOD. Absurd, when the largeness of your income --


Lord LIST. Is absolutely necessary for the largeness of my expenditure. 'Pon
my soul, my dear fellow, I could almost imagine, that you have quite forgotten
how absolutely necessary it is for a man in my situation to keep up a certain
style; to have horses he never rides, houses he never inhabits, and mistresses
he scarcely knows by sight. In short, these unnecessary necessities are so
innumerable, that I Am myself much straitened in my circumstances, and mean to
insist immediately upon the payment of Beauchamp's bond.


MOD. How, Lord Listless! That bond, which it is well known your father never
intended to -- But this is foreign to the subject. Will you oblige me with the
sum I mentioned?


Lord LIST. I cannot, 'pon my soul!


MOD. Say rather, you will not; I shall be better pleased.


Lord LIST. Shall you? -- Then I will not, 'pon my soul!


MOD. I Have done. If you can justify to yourself this conduct toward so near a
relation as Lady Clara, and a man whom you called your friend --


Lord LIST. Friends? Relations? Ridiculous! My dear Modish, you surely forget
that I Am a citizen of the world, an universal philanthropist. The poor are my
relations, the unfortunate are my friends; and as to my natural friends and
relations, I don't care that for them all put together, 'pon my soul! --
[snapping his fingers.] -- Exit.


MOD. Contemptible! -- Yet how dare I arraign his conduct, when I remember how
little did compassion sway my own this morning to poor Rivers!


Enter JOHN. JOHN. Here Is a sad job, sir! The porter has let in the old usurer.


MOD. Who? The usurer? What, Squeez'em?


JOHN. The same, sir.


MOD. The Devil! -- Yet I dare not refuse to see him. -- Show him up. -- [ Exit
John.] -- No doubt he comes for money, but I must endeavor to beat him off as
civilly as I can.


JOHN introduces SQUEEZ'EM. MOD. Good God, is it you, my dear Mr. Squeez'em?
I Am charmed beyond measure to see you! Why, you look charmingly, charmingly I
protest!


SQUEEZ. You're mighty good to say so, sir. I made-bold to call --


MOD. I Am extremely glad you did, for I was just wondering why I had not seen
you for so long; and why don't you call oftener? I Am happy at all times to see
my best friend, Mr. Squeez'em.


SQUEEZ. I am much flattered by your kindness, sir -- There is a --


MOD. I beg you will be seated. John, a chair for Mr. Squeez'em.


SQUEEZ. It Is quite unnecessary, for I only --


MOD. I must insist upon it. My good friend, sit yourself down, I entreat you.
-- [They sit.] -- And now tell me, how are your children? All well, I hope? No
meazles? No hooping-cough? No --


SQUEEZ. None, sir, none, I thank you; but there is a little --


MOD. A little one coming is there? I beg I may stand godfather.


SQUEEZ. Lord! sir, you mistake; I Would only --


MOD. Why, is not dear Mrs. Squeez'em likely to --


SQUEEZ. Dear Mrs. Squeez'em has nothing at all to do with what I Am come about.
To be plain with you, Mr. Modish, there is a little affair, which --


MOD. A little affair? Oh! you sly rogue! What, which must be a secret between
you and me? Well, well, I promise you, Mrs. Squeez'em shall not hear a word of it.
And so the little girl is pretty, is she?


SQUEEZ. Lord, sir, I cannot get you to hear me out; and I Have walked here all
the way from St. Mary Axe on purpose to --


MOD. Walked here? What, all that way? Then pray take some refreshment, for I Am
sure you must be fatigued. Here John, tea, coffee -- or perhaps you would prefer a
glass of wine? Only say what you like, and --


SQUEEZ. Dear sir, there is nothing I should like so much at present as to have
you listen to what I want to say.


MOD. Surely, surely; you will not take any refreshment then?


SQUEEZ. None, I thank you, sir; I Am in a hurry to return home, and only wish
to ask --


MOD. In an hurry to return home? Then for Heaven's sake don't let me detain
you. -- Here, John, light Mr. Squeez'em down stairs.


SQUEEZ. Sir, I only want to --


MOD. To get home, I know it. Good night.


SQUEEZ. I should be glad to --


MOD. To go; pray suit your own convenience, but I Am greatly obliged to you for
this call. Chatting away an hour with a friend like you is so amusing! -- Open
the door, John.


SQUEEZ. If you would only be so good as to pay --


MOD. My respects to Mrs. Squeez'em; I shall take the first opportunity, and
bring lady Clara with me, till when, adieu, my dear Mr. Squeez'em; consider me
as your fast friend, and be assured, that I shall always be delighted to serve
you to the very utmost extent of my ability.


Exeunt Squeez'em and John This scene was suggested by that of Monsieur
Dimanche in Moli^re's "Festin de Pierre."
. MOD. So! He Is gone, and now I can breathe again; but I must rejoin my
company, lest the cause of my absence should be suspected. With a mind thus ill
at ease how tormenting is it to assume the appearance of content, and mingle in
the irksome gaiety of the happy and unthinking. Exit.


Enter Miss CHATTERALL and SLIP SLOP. Miss CHAT. Let Lady Clara know that I Am
here, and have something to say to her of importance. -- Exit Slip-slop.


Enter WALSINGHAM. Miss CHAT. Oh! Lord, Mr. Walsingham! --


WALL. Oh! Lord, Miss Chatterall! --


Miss CHAT. I Have got such a story to tell you!


WALL. "A story to tell?" -- I dare say you have.


Miss CHAT. Do you know Miss Bloomly?


WALL. Only by character.


Miss CHAT. Then you know the worst of her, for her character's monstrous
shocking, that is the truth on it. But would you believe it, she is crooked! How
comical, an't it?


WALL. Crooked? Impossible.


Miss CHAT. Oh! but I assure you it is true, for her most intimate friend told
me so just now with her own mouth.


WALL. Her friend! -- A pretty sort of a friend, by my honor! Before I Would have
such friends --


Miss CHAT. Nay but, Mr. Walsingham, there was no harm in telling it to me, for
she knew very well it would go no further.


WALL. Did she? Then I pronounce her a most learned lady, for she knows what no
other person in London does, man, woman, or child.


Miss CHAT. Well, but now don't repeat this story I beg, for nobody else knows
it; and I only mean to tell it to Lady Clara, and a few particular friends,
under a profound promise of secrecy.


WALL. There you are quite right, for whenever you wish a malicious report to
circulate, you should always relate it as an inviolable secret. -- People of
fashion hear so much scandal daily, that one's own particular lie is frequently
huddled in the crowd, and perhaps totally forgotten; but tell a fine lady a
scandalous anecdote under a promise of secrecy, and I Will be bound that she pops
it out within five minutes after. Exit.


Miss CHAT. I declare now, he does not believe a word of it, and that is
monstrous provoking! However, I hope it will still serve to break, off Miss
Bloomly's marriage with young Flash. Well I protest I cannot conceive how it is
that every body contrives to get married except myself! I Am sure I do all in my
power; grudge no expense in fans, feathers, cold cream, pearl powder, and bloom
of oriental lilies; and it was but last week that I paid the Lord knows what
for a new pair of the very best arched eyebrows! -- Yet all will not do, and I Am
sure it is -- it is cursed provoking, so it is!


Enter ZORAYDA. Miss CHAT. Oh! Miss Mandeville, do you know --


ZOR. Alas! Yes, Miss Chatterall, I know it but too well!


Miss CHAT. Do you? Oh! Gemini! who could have told you?


ZOR. The town talks of nothing else: at first indeed I wouldn't believe the
story; but the redness of your eyes proves it to be but too well-founded.


Miss CHAT. My eyes? -- Dear, what can you mean?


ZOR. I Am sure I pity you sincerely, but how could you be so imprudent? How
could you think of going in your own carriage to the place where your little
boys are nursed?


Miss CHAT. My little boys?


ZOR. Nay, it is too late to pretend ignorance; I know the story but too well!


Miss CHAT. Do you? Then pray let me know it too; for let me die if this is not
the first word I ever heard of it.


ZOR Nay, this is carrying the jest too far, since every body knows you were
married in St. Martin's Church to a Sergeant of the Guards, of the name of
Brazen, on the 17th of last June, at seven and thirty minutes past eleven, odd
seconds; and that you have at this moment too fine little boys at nurse with
Mrs. Mum, No. 9, Paradise Row, three doors from the Red Lamps and Green
Railing. Why, dear me, every body knows it as well as I do!


Miss CHAT. Oh! Mercy! What, I marry a Sergeant in the Guards! I have fine
little boys! I visit a vulgar Mrs. Mum! Oh! horrid! Oh! monstrous!


ZOR. Really, Mrs. Brazen --


Miss CHAT. Don't call me Mrs. Brazen! I will not be called Mrs. Brazen!


ZOR. Nay, it is a disagreeable situation, I own, and I declare I pity you
extremely.


Miss CHAT. Don't pity me, Miss! I will not bear to be pitied! There Is not a
syllable of truth in the story, and I Am surprised you could believe such a
thing.


ZOR. Oh! but I had it from your friend Mrs. Blab-all, and she, you know --
"has talked scandal to you for this year and an half past, and never told you
the least bit of a lie in all that time!" --


Miss CHAT. Mrs. Blab-all? A malicious creature! But I always thought her a
very bad woman! I Will go this moment and tell her -- But even if this story were
true, I don't understand, Miss, why you should talk to me about it of all
people in the world!


ZOR. Dear! I thought talking over the subject would console you! Did not you
go this morning to Lady Cogwell, on purpose to talk over the story of her
cheating?


Miss CHAT. Yes, but I did that merely to teaze her.


ZOR. Did you? Then I vow and protest, that is the very reason why I did this.


Miss CHAT. Indeed? Then let me tell you, Miss --


ZOR. Come, Miss Chatterall, even make yourself easy. After all this story of
the footman is simply an experiment of mine, intended to ascertain how you
would bear being the heroine of such an anecdote, as I have frequently heard
you relate of others; and I trust it will convince you, that murdering
characters is not an amusement quite so harmless as you and your acquaintance
seem to think it.


Miss CHAT. Very well, Miss! Very well! But since you think proper to take such
liberties with --


ZOR. Nay, nay, either be calm, or excuse my leaving you, since if the storm
must rage, I prefer infinitely hearing it at a distance.


BALLAD. -- [Cease, Rude Boreas.]
STILL this tempest wildly raging,
List, fair Lady, list to me;
Let my prayers your wrath assuaging,
Calm your bosom's stormy sea!
Anger now would sure be silly,
Nothing should your peace destroy;
While you think on little Billy,
Sergeant Brazen's own sweet boy! Exit.
Miss CHAT. A saucy chit! I protest she has so slurried me, that I dare say
just now I look as hideous as herself! And here is somebody coming too! -- I Will
step into the next room, and settle myself before the glass. Retires.


Enter JOHN followed by RIVERS. RIV. Say to Miss Mandeville that a gentleman
has a message to her from Mrs. Ormond. -- [ Exit John.] -- I feel not a little
embarrassed at entering upon a business so delicate. How the Deuce shall I open
the conversation? -- Nay, there is no time for reflection, for here comes the
lady.


Miss CHAT. [ advancing, and looking at him through her glass.] -- Um! a
stranger! -- And really a personable man. -- I Will accost him. -- If you wish,
sir, to see Lady Clara --


RIV. No, madam; my business is with you. My name is Rivers, and I come here
authorized by Colonel Beauchamp to converse with you on a very delicate
subject. -- [Aside] -- Well, hang me if I see an atom of the youth and beauty
which Mrs. Ormond praised so highly!


Miss CHAT. By Beauchamp, did you say, sir? By Colonel Beauchamp?


RIV. You seem surprised, madam; but suffer me to say, that Beauchamp's
attachment to you --


Miss CHAT. Attachment to me? I Am sure, if he ever had any, he kept it a
profound secret.


RIV. Ah! madam, you flatter yourself! In spite of his precautions, that secret
is now so well known, that things can no longer remain as they are, and some
change in your situation ought to take place as soon as possible. I trust,
madam, you are of my opinion.


Miss CHAT. Why really, sir....to say the truth....I cannot deny that I am
rather of your way of thinking. But (...) Col. Beauchamp has a wife...


RIV. That wife, he has great reason to believe, exists no longer


Miss CHAT. [looking pleased.] -- Indeed? -- Dear sir, but that quite alters
the case, you know!


RIV. It does; and should this event be ascertained, his hand will immediately
be offered, where his heart has long been given. -- [Aside] Well, there
certainly is no accounting for tastes!


Miss CHAT. Lord, sir! Dear sir! -- [Aside] Thank heaven then I shall be
married after all!


RIV. But should Mrs. Beauchamp still be living....


Miss CHAT. [sighing.] -- Then, sir, there is an end of the whole business!


RIV. True, madam, and I rejoice that you feel the necessity: It relieves me
from the most embarrassing part of my commission, and emboldens me to say,
without further ceremony, that in case of your not marrying Beauchamp, all your
friends think it right that you should set off immediately for India.


Miss CHAT. For India! -- Lord, sir, what should I do there? Why must I needs
be packed off to India, because I cannot marry Colonel Beauchamp?


RIV. My dear madam, it is absolutely necessary, and till you set sail, Mrs.
Ormond requests you to accept an asylum in her house. At first indeed she had
some scruples at engaging in an affair so delicate; but as she is confident
that Col. Beauchamp is the only person who has ever been particular to you....


Miss CHAT. [tossing her head.] -- Indeed, Sir? Upon my word then she is very
much mistaken. A great many people have been much more particular than Colonel
Beauchamp, I can assure her.


RIV. How! a great many?


Miss CHAT. Yes, sir: Fifty at least.


RIV. Zounds! madam, fifty?


Miss CHAT. Bless me, sir, what is there so strange in that? Why if I don't
marry for a year, I dare say there'll be fifty more.


RIV. The devil, there will! -- Then, madam, your going to India --


Miss CHAT. I Would as soon go to the moon, sir! -- What, leave London, dear
London, and the gay world, the dear gay world! The very thought on it is quite
odious and execrable, and all that sir, an't it?


RIV. But, madam, madam, should your marriage not take place, can you think it
proper that Beauchamp's attachment to you should last?


Miss CHAT. No, to be sure I don't. In that case he will go his way, I mine, till
either he has got rid of his matrimonial clog, or I found some other lover as
much to my liking. That Is all, sir.


RIV. Fire and furies! what depravity! [aside.] Your grief then for his loss
wouldn't prevent....


Miss CHAT. Lord, no, sir! why should it? The man is certainly well enough for
a man; but if he breaks with me, I don't despair of finding as good to supply
his place.


RIV. By heaven this is too much! -- Hear me, lost unhappy creature!


Miss CHAT. Oh! Lord bless me, what is the matter?


RIV. Are you then indeed so dead to shame....But I abandon you to the sorrows
which cannot fail to arise from principles so depraved!


Miss CHAT. How? What? -- Sir, how do you dare....


RIV. Yet I thank you for not preserving the mask before me. I can now open
Mrs. Ormond's eyes, and shall insist upon her taking no further notice of a
woman, who has not only broken down the pale of virtue, but who glories in the
breach! Oh! fie upon you!


Miss CHAT. I? -- I? -- Oh! monstrous! -- [Ringing the bell violently.] Who
waits there? -- Lady Clara! -- Mr. Modish! where are you, Mr. Modish? Oh I
shall burst with rage! -- [throwing herself into a chair.]


Enter Lady CLARA. Lady CLARA. For heaven's sake, why is all this noise?


Miss CHAT. [sobbing.] -- Oh! Lady Clara, I Have been so shocked and insulted by
that odious man! He has said such things! How quizzical, an't it?


Lady CLARA. Mr. Rivers here again!


RIV. Even He; but I shall intrude upon your Ladyship no longer than while I
return this packet to Miss Mandeville, and with it my thanks: It grieves me
that I cannot praise her other qualities as highly as her generosity.


Miss CHAT. Miss Mandeville? Nay then I Will see -- [opening the packet.]


Lady CLARA. I Am amazed at you, Mr. Rivers! what you can mean by this
conduct....


RIV. A time may come, when your Ladyship may not be perfectly satisfied with
your own; but however great may then be your contrition, remember, that I now
bid you an eternal farewell! -- [ Going, he meets Beauchamp, and starts back.]
-- Dorimant, by Heaven!


BEAU. Ha! Mortimer here!


RIV. [seizing him.] -- Where is my child? What place conceals her? Answer, or
I spurn you at my foot!


Lady CLARA. Bless me, Beauchamp, what means....


RIV. Beauchamp! -- Ha! then my poor girl is already abandoned, abandoned for
yon coquette! But this is no place for -- You shall hear from me soon, sir; --
and till he does hear from me, sit thou heavy on his soul, curse of a
distracted father!


Exit. Lady CLARA. Why, what can the fellow....


BEAU. Oh! Lady Clara, I shall go mad! It Is Mortimer, it is the rich
East-Indian, who --


Lady CLARA. Lord, no! That is Rivers, our poor relation, who....


BEAU. Oh! no, no, no! I know him but too well! But why do I linger here? I Will
follow him, and either perish by his hand, or obtain from him Zorayda's pardon!
Exit.


Lady CLARA. Mortimer? I protest, I Am frightened out of my senses!


Miss CHAT. [reading.] -- "Unfortunate attachment" -- "ignorance of the world"
-- "Beauchamp" -- "my father" -- "fled from India." -- So! the whole story of
Miss Mandeville's seduction, and consequent embarrassments, in her own hand! I
think I shall now be even with her, for I Will to the printer's with this letter
immediately.


Enter MODISH. MOD. Whither now, Miss Chatterall?


Miss CHAT. Oh! I cannot stop a moment. Look, sir, look; a letter of Miss
Mandeville's, and tomorrow's newspaper shall serve it up at every fashionable
breakfast-table in town, where "Philanthropus" shall cry out shame upon her!
"an indignant observer" pull her to pieces without mercy, and, while one paper
torments her with "gentle hint," another shall pester her to death with
friendly remonstrances." -- Your servant, Sir. Exit.


MOD. A letter of Zorayda's! What can the spiteful creature mean? -- Ha! Lady
Clara, you seem agitated?


Lady CLARA. Something has happened which...But I Will know the truth of it this
moment.


Enter SLIP-SLOP. Lady CLARA. Slip-slop, let one of Mrs. Ormond's servants be
sent for instantly.


SLIP. Frank, is below, my Lady; but, begging your pardon, I think he is a
little intozticated with liquor.


Lady CLARA. No matter, send him hither.


Exit Slip-slop. MOD. But what can possibly...


Lady CLAR. You shall know all presently. -- Oh! here he comes.


FRANK. [ entering, half drunk, with Slip-slop.] Huzza! the East-Indian for
ever! huzza!


Mrs. SLIP. Hush, hush, Frank! None of these exhalations! Don't you see...


Lady CLARA. Come nearer, Frank. Pray does your Lady know Mr. Rivers?


FRANK. Know him! Aye, that she does, Heaven bless him! -- By your asking, I
suppose by this time your Ladyship knows him too! Nay, he did take you in
finely, that is the truth on it.


Lady CLARA. The fellow's drunk!


FRANK. No, ma'am, Mrs. Slip-slop's not drunk; that is not it. But upon my soul,
ma'am, I cannot tell you the story properly if you keep turning round and round
in that comical manner.


MOD. Took, her in, say you?


FRANK. Yes, and your honor too, saving your presence. Why he is the great rich
monstracious nabob, Mortimer! He Is the East-Indian! Huzza! the East-Indian
for....


SLIP. [putting her hand before his mouth.] Hush! hush, fellow!


MOD. How! Mortimer?


Lady CLARA. And.....and is he so very rich?


FRANK. Oh! not so very rich. His servant, indeed, Mr.Yambo-Zing, assured me he
had brought over whole bushels of godas, and pecks of blue peace! But, for all
his boasting, I don't believe he is worth above two or three millions at most.


Lady CLARA. Millions? oh mercy!


MOD. Confusion!


FRANK. But honest Frank, says he, all I have is your Lady's. Oh! that made me
mortal happy! -- And then, says he, honest Frank, Lady Clara shall not have a
farthing on it. Oh! that made me a mortal deal happier! -- Huzza! huzza! The
East-Indian for ever! Huzza! Exit.


MOD. See, madam, see what your insensibility has thrown away.


Lady CLARA. My insensibility, sir! oh monstrous! I whose nerves are so
delicate, whose sentiments are so refined, that....


MOD. Madam, madam, the fault is yours, I pitied Rivers's distress, and should
have relieved it had not you....


Lady CLARA. Lord, sir, what would you have had me do? I Am sure I made the best
guess I could, and would have given the man any thing in the world had I only
known that he wanted nothing.


MOD. Madam, madam, you have committed the fault -- you must repair it. Go this
moment to my sister's, entreat her to intercede for us with Mr. Rivers, and
either bring home his pardon or never hope for mine. Exit,


Lady CLARA. Yes, I must go. Slip-slop, my cloak! -- Such a princely fortune
lost! -- I remember now to have heard of Mortimer's immense wealth; and perhaps
at the very moment he pleaded for half-a-crown, his pockets were stuffed with
pearls and diamonds; and I warrant his odious black scratch periwig had been
papilloted with bank-notes! -- Oh! I could go distracted. Exeunt.


END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- Mrs. ORMOND'S.
Enter Mrs. ORMOND and RIVERS, Mrs. ORMOND. MISS Mandeville's manners coarse,
and her person disagreeable?


RIV. Upon my word I thought so; but I Have been so long absent from the
fashionable circles, that possibly she may be the general taste; I Am only
certain that she is not at all to mine.


Mrs. ORM. And when you spoke of her return to India....


RIV. Oh! she could not endure the very mention of it. I was really afraid
she would have gone into hysterics.


Mrs. ORM. Strange! But, however, I Will ascertain the fact tomorrow, and this
mystery shall be explained.


RIV. 'Till then let the matter rest. -- And now, my dear Emily... [A knocking
without.] Hey! what can be the meaning of that thundering rap?


Enter SERVANT. SERVE. Lady Clara Modish.


RIV. Lady Clara Devil! and I Would rather meet the latter. Which way is she coming
up?


SERVE. This way. Exit.


RIV. Then I Will go down the other.


Mrs. ORM. Oh! pray stay.


RIV. No, no; I Am not yet cool enough to conceal from the woman how heartily I
despise her.


Mrs. ORM. Yet perhaps her neglect of you...


RIV. I guess what you would say, my good Emily. A moment of ill humor, a dish
of tea too strong, a bad run of luck last night, the indisposition of her
lap-dog, or any other fine-lady-like affliction, might occasion her
indifference to my distress -- but that she could see the infant graces of your
child without interest, that she could suffer without compassion an heart like
yours to languish in poverty, betrays an insensibility which I never can
forgive. Exit.


Mrs. ORM. You must though, my dear sir, or your heart is composed of tougher
materials than I imagine. Yes, yes, Rivers and my brother must be friends, and
probably that brings Lady Clara hither. -- So, here she comes!


Servant shows in Lady Clara, and exit. Lady CLARA. My dear Mrs. Ormond, I Have
just hurried hither for one instant! -- Why, they tell me you have been
indisposed. You look charmingly, however: But, you cruel creature, why did not
you let me know you were ill?


Mrs. ORM. Knowing your exquisite sensibility, Lady Clara, surely it had been
barbarous in me to torture your nerves by a recital of my sufferings.


Lady CLARA. Oh! fie, fie! when the delicate attentions of friendship can
alleviate....I protest, Mrs. Ormond, you have got a mighty pretty house here.


Mrs. ORM. Tolerable. Mr. Rivers insisted upon my removing hither immediately,
and therefore things are not quite....


Lady CLARA. Mr. Rivers! Dear, that puts me in mind -- I want to talk to you
about him. Do you know, he put the drollest trick upon me this morning!


Mrs. ORM. [archly.] So he did upon me; but you were too cunning for him: I,
poor innocent, was completely the dupe of his feigned distresses; but upon you,
he tells me, they made not the slightest impression.


Lady CLARA. Ha, ha, ha! no more they did -- Ha, ha, ha! -- [Aside] Spiteful
thing, how I hate her! -- But, my dear Mrs. Ormond, you...you relieved him
then....


Mrs. ORM. Oh! the relief in my power to afford him was very moderate; and in
truth our exchange of presents bore no proportion to one another. I had nothing
to bestow on him but a very trifle and a dish of tea, and he repaid me with
notes of not less than a thousand pounds.


Lady CLARA. Mercy on me! a thousand pounds for a dish of tea? How unlucky it
was that I had just sent away the chocolate This trait is borrowed from
Mercier's "Habitant de la Guadaloupe."
!


Mrs. ORM. Then he has such plans for equipages, diamonds, and estates....It
would quite fatigue you, Lady Clara, only to hear the list.


Lady CLARA. Oh! I shall faint presently! [aside.] -- But I hope the dear
beggar thinks this trick of his as entertaining as you and I do?


Mrs. ORM. I am afraid he takes the affair a little more seriously.


Lady CLARA. But surely, my dear creature, you can explain to him....


Mrs. ORM. Believe me, Lady Clara, however great may be my cause of complaint,
my brother's interest will never cease to be mine; and if my interference can
possibly produce a reconciliation....


Lady CLARA. You will use it? Let me die now if that is not being extremely
kind; but indeed I always said you had one of the best hearts in the world. And
suppose now, to lose no time, you were to bring Mr. Rivers to my house tonight?


Mrs. ORM. Tonight? Why really....my mourning....


Lady CLARA. Oh! as to your mourning, you know you will be considered as at home;
for, is not my house, is not every thing I possess, as much yours as my own?


Mrs. ORM. You're too kind, Lady Clara; indeed you're too kind!


Lady CLARA. Not at all! oh dear, not at all! I shall expect you then, and pray
bring Mr. Rivers.


Mrs. ORM. I Will do my best; but in truth I doubt my being able to prevail on
him, unless you can make use of Falstaff's excuse, and protest solemnly that
you knew him all the while: however, if he should not come, depend upon it is
not being a fault of mine.


Lady CLARA. Well now, that is a dear creature; and I hope to Heaven you may
suceeed! Yet should your endeavors to appease Mr. Rivers prove fruitless, I
shall console myself with the reflection that at least my dear sister enjoys
those advantages of which, by imprudence, I have deprived myself. -- [Aside]
Oh! I could tear her eyes out! Exit.


Mrs. ORM. Ha, ha, ha! I suspect Lady Clara leaves me not too well pleased with
her visit. -- So, here comes Mr. Rivers!


Enter RIVERS. RIV. So, Emily, your visitor is gone; and now let me know what
brought her hither.


Mrs. ORM. Can you seriously ask that question?


RIV. Why I believe I could guess -- your brother no doubt --


Mrs. ORM. Even so. Lady Clara's errand was to express her contrition for this
morning's adventure with all possible humility, and request your presence at
her house tonight for the express purpose of receiving her husband's apologies
and her own.


RIV. Aye? Well! well! I Am glad to hear it -- I Will go --


Mrs. ORM. Will you?


RIV. Aye; and so shall you. -- I intend to take the liberty of tormenting her
Ladyship -- and she will not be the worse for a little wholesome mortification --


Mrs. ORM. Nay, that is a fact which I cannot take upon me to deny.


RIV. And now for the scene of action; where you shall see crowds of coxcombs,
and legions of coquettes at my coming, all " dissolve, And like the baseless
fabric of a vision
Leave not one fop behind."



Mrs. ORM. You Have a secret then for killing insects, I presume?


RIV. No, only for dispersing them, and my talisman consists in pronouncing
that single cabalistical word "Distress;" away they go; for in fact, my dear
Emily, a fashionable friend is an absolute bird of passage, --

Which here, while Summer reigns, enjoys the day,
Wings the ^arm gale, and courts the kindly ray:
But soon as Winter lours, and storms arise,
To brighter scenes the airy wanderer flies,
Where breathe less boisterous winds, where smile less clouded skies.
Exeunt
SCENE II. -- Lord LISTLESS's.
Enter Lord LISTLESS and FRIPONEAU. Lord LIST. The writ was executed, you say?


FRIP. Oui, my lor; et Le Colonel Beauchamp, be tres bien lock up chez cet
honnete, Monsieur Touchit!


Lord LIST. Good! but unluckily Beauchamp has friends, who wont leave him there
long. -- Now could I find some lasting means of revenging myself on the
puppy....What say you, monsieur?


FRIP. Mais voyons, my lor, voyons! Suppose -- suppose you carry off
Mademoiselle Mandeville?


Lord LIST. I carry her off? -- Why should I take the trouble?


FRIP. Mon dieu! you not see? -- Beauchamp love mademoiselle a la folly; but
ven all of von sudden she disappear, he vil swear, vil cry, vil go distract!
and ven Mademoiselle Mandeville been two tree day wid your lorship, serviteur a
la reputation de Mademoiselle Mandeville.


Lord LIST. Um! the idea would be tolerable if it were not that afterward
Beauchamp might take it into his head to cut my throat. -- Now that I shouldn't
like, because you know it would dirty my neckloth.


FRIP. Ma foi, mi lor, en verite! dat it voud! mais l'Italie, mi lor? vy you
not enlever la petite....


Lord LIST. Right, right. -- But then how to get hold of her, monsieur?


FRIP. Oh c'est bien facile! I go vid a chair to Lady Clara's, and as
mademoiselle go in, or as she come out, I vip her into de sedan, de chair-men
vip her up, your lorship vip her away; et voila' qu'elle est prise, pardi!


Lord LIST. Um, could this be done quietly, and in a proper way....for a bustle
always bores me, 'pon my soul!


Enter WALSINGHAM. WALL. How, in close consultation, my Lord? Perhaps I intrude.


Lord LIST. Oh! by no means; I Have a little business indeed, which....


WALL. A secret?


Lord LIST. Um! you might serve me in it, if it were not --


WALL. My dear lord, too happy if --


Lord LIST. And you will be silent?


WALL. As a concealed author, whose comedy has just been damned. I give you my
word! and now --


Lord LIST. You must know, then, I Am on the point of eloping with a certain
young lady....


WALL. You? Good heavens! how can you take so much trouble! and have you a
chaise-and-four ready?


Lord LIST. No, but I shall order my sedan chair to be prepared immediately.


WALL. A sedan? 'Faith that is new! -- Well, you will order your chair to Gretna
Green, I hope?


Lord LIST. Oh! you mistake the business: the lady in question is in love with
a fellow, who bores me intolerably; and I carry off his mistress, merely for
the sake of plaguing him.


WALL. Merely for the sake of plaguing him!


Lord LIST. Nothing else, 'pon my soul! The idea's good, an't it?


WALL. Good? it is excellent!


Lord LIST. Now the only difficulty is, how to entice her to the spot where my
servants will be waiting for her; and if any friend --


WALL. Entice her! -- then she is not appris'd of the honor intended her by your
lordship?


Lord LIST. Has'nt the most distant idea of it; and, in fact, hates me like the
devil.


WALL. Zounds! my lord, but that makes the joke a great deal better! -- And
could you possibly doubt my assisting so honorable a design? --


Lord LIST. Why, to tell you the truth, (but remember your promise of secrecy)
the lady is no other than Miss Mandeville; and as you are Beauchamp's friend --


WALL. Pshaw! what does that signify? -- Is Not he a commoner, an't you a peer?
Is Not he poor, an't you rich? Is Not he an old friend, an't you a new
acquaintance? And can you doubt which of the two I should prefer serving? -- My
dear lord, pray judge a little more of me by yourself!


Lord LIST. [aside.] A sensible fellow, 'pon my soul! -- You Will undertake then
to --


WALL. And think myself too happy in being of use to you, only let your chair
and servants be ready --


Lord LIST. Oh! monsieur shall take care of that. -- Friponeau, attend this
gentleman, conduct Miss Mandeville hither, and when she arrives wake me. [ Exit
FRIPONEAU] Good evening, Walsingham. 'Pon my soul extremely obliged to you; am
indeed....a....a....a....'pon my soul! Exit.


WALL. Go thy ways, thou prince of puppies! But it is well that this fellow has
made me his confident, for the consequences of his scheme might have been very
unpleasant to Zorayda; but now to mar it, and, if possible, get him into a
scrape, of which at present he little dreams. The scoundrel! -- but alas! there
are but too many in the world, who, like him, would soon make themselves
villains, if nature had not kindly prevented it by making them fools.


Exit. SCENE III. -- An antichamber at Lady Clara 's.
[Music within.] Company cross the Stage. Servants pass with refreshments.
Enter Miss CHATTERALL and Mrs. BLAB-ALL. Mrs. BLAB. Nay, my soul, if this
letter be authentic, Lady Clara must give up Miss Mandeville, or my
acquaintance, I Will assure you!


Miss CHAT. Oh dear! My dear, as to that, I shall visit Lady Clara no more at
any rate, unless indeed she gives a masquerade; and then you know nobody need
know whether one visits her or not. -- But accept a favor from her barefaced!
-- Lord, my love, I blush at the very thought! Oh it is a sad family!


Mrs. BLAB. Shocking, my dear!


Miss CHAT. True, my life; only conceive! Beauchamp in gaol, Mrs. Ormond
intriguing with him, Miss Mandeville eloped, and Lady Clara giving
entertainments when her husband's going to be arrested, and her brother's at
the point of death.


Mrs. BLAB. Oh! fie, fie, fie! I protest I Am quite shocked.


M^ss CHAT. Shocked, my dear? so am I, an't I?


Mrs. BLAB. But Lord Listless dying? I never heard of that before.


Miss CHAT. No? Dear, I thought every body had heard that Lord Listless having
discovered an intrigue between Beauchamp and Mrs. Ormond with whom he was
himself on certain terms....You understand me, my dear?


Mrs. BLAB. Oh Lord! yes my dear to be sure I do; well, my love, and so --


Miss. CHAT. Well, and so, my life, my Lord was so severe in his observations,
that at length Beauchamp got into a terrible rage, rapped out three great oaths
that he would be the death of him, seized a blunderbuss (which happened to be upon
the breakfast table) shot his lordship through the body, and the Colonel and
his enamorata immediately made off for France, with the intention of offering
their services to the triumvirate. How odd! an't it?


Mrs. BLAB. Odd indeed! -- But lord! my life, how unlucky it was that Mrs.
Ormond should happen to have a blunderbuss lying on her breakfast table?


Miss CHAT. Extremely unlucky indeed, my dear. But come let us in, and if Miss
Mandeville shows her face to night, I shall tell Lady Clara what I think of her
very plainly! for after all, my dear, to own a truth, the greatest advantage I
ever could find in walking straight myself in the path of virtue, was the
privilege of insulting those who step a little on one side. Come, my dear!
Exeunt.


[ As they go off, enter WALSINGHAM and FRIPONEAU.] WALL. Do you see her? There
she goes!


FRIP. Vid de scarlet plume?


WALL. The same: wait at the great entrance till I entice her to the door, then
convey her to your master with all speed. Exit Friponeau.


WALL. Hist, hist, Miss Chatterall!


Miss CHATTERALL returning. Miss CHAT. Mr. Walsingham, didn't you --


WALL. Hush! speak softly! My dear young lady, I Have just discovered the most
abominable design, the most atrocious plot!


Miss CHAT. Eh! what? against me?


WALL. Against you!


Miss CHAT. Oh! Goodness defend me!


WALL. And am come to caution you not to venture near the great entrance without
sufficient protection.


Miss CHAT. Dear me! and why?


WALL. The infamous agents of a certain nobleman are waiting there for the
express purpose of carrying you off.


Miss CHAT. Lord bless me!


WALL. And though I well know your virtue to be proof against either force or
artifice --


Miss CHAT. Undoubtedly!


WALL. Yet, as this affair would make such a disturbance --


Miss CHAT. Terrible!


WALL. Would get into all the newspapers --


Miss CHAT. Odious!


WALL. And render you the subject of general animadversion.....


Miss CHAT. Execrable!


WALL. The consequences would be, that either your friends would fight a duel on
your account --


Miss CHAT. Tremendous!


WALL. Or you quiet the business by a marriage with his Lordship.


Miss CHAT. Charming -- Monstrous I mean!


WALL. The best thing you can do, therefore, is to send for a guard --


Miss CHAT. I Will do it instantly --


WALL Return home under its protection --


Miss CHAT. With the utmost diligence --


WALL. And above all, take care not to approach the great entrance.


Miss CHAT. I approach it! -- Oh Mr. Walsingham! I Would rather die than advance a
single step toward it: Good evening, and a thousand thanks!


Exeunt severally. [ A pause, after which Miss Chatterall puts in her head,
looks round cautiously, then hurries across the stage, and exit.] Re-enter
WALSINGHAM laughing. WALL. So my plot has taken effect. Now if her friends can
but persuade Lord Listless to repair her injuries by marriage, (and I know he
has no great fondness for fighting,) the breed will be excellent, and I shall
immediately put in my claim for a puppy!


Enter ZORAYDA (in an Evening Dress) as from the Assembly Room. WALLS. What,
Miss Mandeville, retiring so early! -- How is this? -- You seem agitated!


ZOR. Oh Mr. Walsingham! -- I know not how -- I dare not -- but you are Colonel
Beauchamp's friend.


WALL. He has none more sincere.


ZOR. A dreadful report is circulating within -- a quarrel this morning -- a
duel -- I heard the story but imperfectly, but heard enough to alarm me for
Beauchamp's safety. For pity's sake, sir, hasten to him -- and should you find
this report well founded --


WALL. I will strain every nerve to prevent the consequences. But what
antagonist --?


ZOR. Lord Listless was named.


WALL. Lord Listless! Oh! to my certain knowledge he is otherwise engaged at
present, and has too much respect for his own safety to endanger any other
person's. However, I Will go immediately in search of Beauchamp. -- So farewell,
my dear young lady! make yourself easy, and depend on my care. Exit.


ZOR. I cannot rejoin the unfeeling crowd within! I Will to my chamber, and if
possible to rest. Ah! no -- there is now no rest for me! -- Repose never visits
my eyelids till they close wearied with weeping: The sounds which lull me to
sleep are the groans of a forsaken father, and the spirit of dreams still
repeats to me his parting curse! Oh that my next slumbers might be the slumbers
of the grave! Oh that my eyes could for ever shut out light, since my heart is
closed against peace for ever!


SONG. AIR -- "Auld Robin Gray."
COLD winter frowns, but soon again
Shall lovely spring appear:
The sun is set, but soon again
His glorious head shall rear:
Night veils the skies, but soon shall day
Once more illume the plain;
But never can a guilty heart
Be soothed to peace again.
Oh! sad is my soul!
All my nights are passed in tears!
I think upon my father's house,
And all that home endears;
Think, how that father loved me well,
But all his love was vain;
I broke his heart, and never shall
Mine own know peace again.
Exit. SCENE IV. -- A magnificent Apartment at Modish's, illuminated.
MODISH, TRIFLE, Lady HUBBUB, Mrs. BLAB-ALL, etc. discovered -- Card Tables,
etc. -- Ladies and Gentlemen playing at them. Lady HUB. Well I never heard any
thing so strange! Poor Lady Clara, I Am sure I pity her excessively, though I
cannot but own that she deserves it.


Mrs. BLAB. Richly, Lady Hubbub, richly, And, for my part, I shall not be sorry to
see her pride have a fall; which must be the case shortly, for they say Mr.
Rivers has positively refused to advance Modish a single guinea.


TRIFLE. Nay it is even whispered there are three executions in the house at
this moment.


Lady HUB. Oh, as for that, since I have known it, this house has never been
without an execution in it for three days together.


Mrs. BLAB. Very true, and therefore I wonder that Modish should have neglected
to provide himself with a rotten borough; for he ought to have known, that as
he couldn't pay his debts, he had but one alternative, and must certainly get
into prison unless he got into parliament.


Lady HUB. Oh! here is Lady Clara!


Enter Lady CLARA, splendidly dressed. Lady CLARA [as entering.] How do you do?
Charmed to see you! Been here long? You there, Trifle! -- Ah, Lady Hubbub.


Lady HUB. Oh my dear Lady Clara!


Lady CLARA. What Is the matter?


Lady HUB. Mr. Rivers -- I Am ^o concerned for you! --


Mrs. BLAB. I could cry with vexation!


Lady HUB. To lose such a fortune by a trick my dear creature, it grieves me to
the heart!


Mrs. BLAB. And I Am told you must part with your beautiful set of cream
colored ponies? -- Lord! Lord! you have no idea how that distresses me!


Lady CLARA. Now let me die but you're both of you very kind; and it quite
delights me that I Am able to relieve you from such excessive affliction.
Whatever you may have heard to the contrary, Mr. Rivers and Modish are on the
best terms possible, and I hope in a few minutes to have the pleasure of making
him known to you. [Aside] Spiteful toads!


Lady HUB. No really! Lord, I Am prodigious glad to hear it! [Aside] I wish you
were both at the bottom of the Thames!


Mrs. BLAB. Delighted, my dear Lady Clara! Quite delighted, I protest! --
[Aside] Another birthday suit to cut out mine, I Would lay my life on it.


Lady CLARA, [aside] -- Well, of all earthly torments, the sympathy of one's
friends is certainly the greatest. -- Ha! Miss Chatterall! -- Heavens! What Is
the matter?


Enter Miss CHATTERALL hastily. Miss CHAT. Oh Lady Clara! Oh Lady Hubbub! -- I
shall faint, Lady Hubbub I shall certainly faint.


Lady CLARA. Faint! Why, what has alarmed you?


MOD. Aye, aye! -- All things in order; tell your story first, and faint
afterward.


Miss CHAT. Oh! your brother, Lady Clara! your vile brother! -- I cannot speak
for passion!


Lady CLARA. What has he done?


Miss CHAT. What indeed? Why he has -- he has -- [bursting into tears] -- he
has carried me off in a sedan chair! So he has! -- How monstrous! was not it?


Lady CLARA. Carried you off! -- Mercy, why should he do that?


MOD. Aye, why indeed? -- Oh! I don't believe a word on it.


Miss CHAT. Not believe it? -- Oh Gemini! but it is very true though; and what is
more, sir, what is more, I Am almost morally certain you're one of his
accomplices!


MOD. I? -- Oh fie, Miss Chatterall, fie!


ALL. Oh! fie, fie, fie!


Miss CHAT. Fie, indeed! Fie? Oh that ever I should live to be fyed! -- Lady
Clara, as I hope to be married, was carried by force to your brother's house
this evening; and when he first handed me out of the sedan, to give the devil
his due, I must say he was civil enough; but as soon as he saw that I was I,
and nobody but myself, he yawned in my face, said I was a great bore, put me
into the chair, bade the men box me up tight, and, without saying another
syllable, sent me back again! How disagreeable, was not it? -- [crying
bitterly.] -- Never, no surely never before was such an insult offered to
virtue, delicacy, and the first cousin of an Irish Peer! -- But I Will be
revenged! I Will to my lawyer's, and have an action for burglary brought against
him without delay; and if the law will not do me right, I warrant my Irish uncle
Sir Blarney O'Blunderbuss will! -- Oh he will come to my assistance, good soul,
at the first word; will insist on his Lordship's repairing by marriage the
injury done my reputation; and when I once find myself his wife -- oh what a
miserable wretch I Will make him! Exit.


Lady CLARA [laughing.] -- But what can all this mean? Ha! Modish, I see Rivers
advancing.


MOD. [aside.] I tremble to meet him; I feel how ungratefully I have treated
him; and my only consolation is, that I felt it before I knew how much my
ingratitude had cost me.


Lady CLARA. So here he comes -- Now, ladies -- now, ladies, you shall see --


Enter RIVERS and Mrs. ORMOND. Mrs. ORM. [ to RIVERS] -- Remember your promise
-- Gentleness!


RIV. Oh, never fear!


Lady CLARA [ to Mrs. Ormond]. And here you are at last? My dear creature,
you have no notion how you have agitated me; I Have expected you this half hour, and
was almost afraid that some accident had happened -- and Mr. Rivers too, I
declare! -- My dear sir, I can scarcely thank you for this visit for laughing
when I think of the ridiculous affair of this morning: well I never was so
quizzed in my life; but you must certainly have a world of humor!


RIV. [drily.] Um, aye, it was ridiculous enough; but yet the best part of the
joke is still to come.


Lady CLARA. Is it? Dear, I Am prodigiously glad to hear it, for it has
entertained me so, you have no idea --


RIV. Pardon me, I can conceive it perfectly.


Lady CLARA. Impossible, quite impossible! And indeed I called at your house
this evening for the sole purpose of saying how extremely --


RIV. My house! -- Mrs. Ormond's you mean. Your Ladyship forgets -- I live at
the Three Blue Posts in Little Britain.


Lady CLARA. Ha! ha! ha! very true; and Modish must pay his respects to you at
the Three Blue Posts, I suppose?


RIV. May I expect so much condescension from Mr. Modish?


MOD. Mr. Rivers, I will not aggravate my fault by attempting to excuse it; I
am heartily ashamed of my behavior this morning, and see it myself in such
offensive colors, that I cannot hope by any present submissions to obtain your
pardon.


RIV. Give me your hand, sir; the best thing is certainly not to commit a
fault, but the next best is to be sorry for it when committed. -- And yet, when
you reflect on Lady Clara's very flattering reception of me this morning, you
cannot possibly found any expectations on my assistance, though, Heaven knows,
at this very moment you stand woefully in need of it.


Lady CLARA. At this moment?


RIV. Certainly; for in the first place there is an execution in the house.


TRIFLE. Good night, Modish. Exit.


RIV. There goes one! [aside.] -- Then, Modish, Squeez'em the usurer has taken
out a writ against you.


Mrs. BLAB. Your servant, Lady Clara.


Exit. RIV. [aside] There go two! -- So that you will certainly go to prison
tomorrow, unless you can borrow a considerable sum among your acquaintance --


Lady HUB. Call Lady Hubbub's servants, if you please, sir. Exit.


RIV. [aside.] There goes a third! -- And can get two of your friends to stand
bail for you.


ALL. Mr. Modish, we wish you a very good night! Exeunt.


Manent RIVERS, MODISH, Lady CLARA, and Mrs. ORMOND. RIV. Bravo, bravo! There
goes the whole covey!


MOD. Narrow-hearted rascals!


Lady CLARA. What, all gone! -- Lord bless me! -- What, all! --


RIV. Aye, aye, Lady Clara, the coast is clear; and what otherwise could you
expect? what else than --


Mrs. ORM. Hush! hush! my dear sir! Surely they are already sufficiently
mortified, and to punish them farther would be both cruel and unnecessary --
Suffer me then to plead for my brother -- and --


MOD. Emily, you must plead in vain: Lady Clara's imprudence has been too
gross, my ingratitude too culpable to --


RIV. May be so, George; but you may as well confine your reproaches to your
own breast, since your sister has already carried the point for you, and I have
promised to discharge your debts.


MOD. and Lady CLARA. Dear sir, in what manner --


RIV. Nay, no thanks, or, if you needs must pay them, offer them to Emily; they
are her due, and I can tell you, George --


Enter JOHN, delivers a Letter to Mrs. ORMOND, and exit. Mrs. ORM. [after
reading it.] Good Heavens!


RIV. Emily, what has alarmed you? You change color!


Mrs. ORM. Something has happened which -- Might I request a few moments
private conversation with you?


Lady CLARA. Oh! pray consider yourself at home, my dear -- we leave you. [ To
Modish] Will you come, Love?


MOD. Come, my life? -- To be sure I will.


Exeunt arm in arm. RIV. [looking after them.] Fudge! -- And now Emily, what
dismal tale have you to relate?


Mrs. ORM. One, my dear sir, which interests me nearly. Soon after your leaving
me this morning, I owed my rescue from the grossest impertinence to an officer,
who unluckily was indebted for a large sum to the coxcomb by whom I was
insulted. This note informs me, that, in consequence of having afforded me his
protection, he has been arrested, and is now confined at the suit of Lord
Listless.


RIV. Confined? He shall not be so long. England needs such men, nor shall she
be deprived of them, while I can help it. -- What does your friend owe? --


Mrs. ORM. Not less than 3000l.


RIV. A large sum! But no matter! Set your heart at rest, Emily; the debt shall
be discharged.


Mrs. ORM. My dear sir! --


RIV. Psha! dear nonsense! And his name? --


Mrs. ORM. You will be surprised to hear, that my friend is no other than
Colonel Beauchamp.


RIV. [starting.] Beauchamp! --


Mrs. ORM. Even he; and his conduct to me this morning must convince you, that,
if he has faults, he is not without virtues -- but I hasten with these good
tidings to Miss Mandeville. -- Oh Mr. Rivers! believe me I feel well, how
trifling a gift is the wealth which you heap upon me, compared to the
advantages which my son will reap from your acquaintance; much from your
precepts, but more from your example. Exit.


RIV. [ ^e^us.] My embarrassments increase every hour -- Why, why must
Beauchamp have faults to none but me? -- What course shall I pursue? -- Suppose
-- Yes! I Will discharge his debts under a feigned name, and, when he is at
liberty, challenge him in my own; the first to reward his merits, the second to
avenge my wrongs! It shall be so -- and if I fall tomorrow -- then may my poor
Zorayda find Heaven more merciful than she found her father! -- May God forgive
her, but I never can! Exit.


END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. -- Lady CLARA's.
ZORAYDA discovered seated on a Sofa, and leaning her Head on Mrs. ORMOND's
Shoulder. Lady CLARA is standing near her. Lady CLARA. NAY, sweet Zorayda, why
this despair? Probably ere this, the cause of yoor distress has ceased, and
Beauchamp is at liberty.


Mrs. ORM. Calm your spirits, dearest girl! Believe me this excess of grief is
childish, when every thing bids you hope --


ZOR. Hope! -- Mine is fled for ever! -- My father, madam, my father! -- I
planted his path with thorns; I should have strewn it with ^^ses: -- he warmed
me in his bosom; the snake stung him to the heart: -- he loved me; I abandoned
him: -- he cursed me, and I dare not hope!


Mrs. ORM. Oh blush, Zorayda! when thus sinking beneath misfortune --


ZOR. Not beneath misfortune; it is beneath the burden of my faults I sink. Oh!
well may innocence see the lightning flash without alarm; well may virtue lift
her head undaunted above the billows. -- But when with sufferings comes the
consciousness of their being deserved, oh they are insupportable, and I faint
beneath the weight of mine! --


Mrs. ORM. Dear, unhappy girl! -- Would to Heaven Rivers were returned! --
Pray, Lady Clara, did Zorayda see him this morning?


Lady CLARA. No: I have since heard that by some unaccountable mistake he was
conducted to Miss Chatterall instead of her.


Mrs. ORM. Miss Chatterall? Oh! then the case is clear. Know then, my Zorayda
-- [Knocking without.]


Lady CLARA. Hark! a carriage stops -- It must be Mr. Rivers.


ZOR. [starting from the sopha.] Oh! I fear! -- I fear! --


Mrs. ORM. You grow pale; retire, my love, and compose yourself.


ZOR. But Beauchamp --


Mrs. ORM. As soon as I have learnt the result of Rivers's visit, I will hasten
to let you know it.


ZOR. And delay not, pray delay not! -- Oh father, father! could you know what
I feel at this moment, you would own, that, great as my faults have been, they
are equalled by my sufferings!


Exit. Mrs. ORM. Poor Zorayda! -- Perhaps Mr. Rivers's intercession may induce
her father --


Re-enter ZORAYDA hastily through the Folding-Doors. ZOR. Save me, madam! -- Oh
save me! save me! --


Mrs. ORM. What alarms you? -- Save you from whom?


ZOR. My father! Oh my father! I saw him from the window by the flambeau's
light! -- Even now he entered the house.


Lady CLARA and Mrs. ORM. How! Your father!


RIV. [without.] Very well -- I Will go up stairs.


ZOR. Hark! hark! hark! It Is his voice, it is his voice! -- Oh! where shall I
hide me, whither fly to avoid his resentment?


Mrs. ORM. I know not what -- Yet surely -- Fear nothings my love; all shall
yet be well -- leave it to me; compose your spirits -- retire, and wait till I
rejoin you -- Lady Clara! --


Lady CLARA. I will take care of her -- Come, dear Zorayda! --


ZOR. I obey; but, oh how cruel is it to shudder at his approach, whose sight
is dearer to me than my own, and banish myself from his presence, whose embrace
I would die to obtain!


Exit with Lady Clara. Mrs. ORM. Yes, I must try it; Rivers must have his
daughter again.


Enter RIVERS. RIV. So that business is done -- There, Emily, set your heart at
rest; your champion is free. -- But hey! the deuce! you seem if possible still
more disturbed than when I left you! -- I hope you have not met with more
impertinent peers and generous protectors?


Mrs. ORM. Not exactly; the cause of my present emotion rather concerns my
former protector.


RIV. What! Beauchamp again?


Mrs. ORM. No, the business now regards Beauchamp's mistress; but I find you have
made a terrible mistake. -- The lady you saw here this evening was a woman of
the very strictest virtue.


RIV. Zounds! what a blunder! Why the poor creature must have thought me mad,
for I proposed packing her off to India without ceremony. But where then is the
real Miss Mandeville? Does she not reside with Lady Clara?


Mrs. ORM. She does, and you may now, my dear sir, execute the plan which --


RIV. Nay, I Have blundered in the outset of it so confoundedly, that I wish some
other person --


Mrs. ORM. No one can undertake this business so properly as yourself. -- I Have
persuaded her that your intercession with her father --


RIV. Mine? Why I don't know him even by sight!


Mrs. ORM. True -- but your consequence -- your Indian connections -- In short,
see her; talk to her; advise her: -- Show her the impropriety of continuing
with Beauchamp, paint to her what her father must suffer at her absence, and
comfort her with the hope of obtaining his pardon: -- But be gentle with her, I
entreat you; moderate your naturally impetuous temper; and beware not to heap
fresh anguish on an heart, whose wounds are already deep -- whose sufferings
are already exquisite!

Exit.
RIV. Poor Emily! She little thinks that the man from whose friendship she
hopes so much, in a few hours will either be expiring himself, or a fugitive
from England, stained with the blood of Beauchamp! My will, however, secures
her in affluence, and after that --


Enter Mrs. ORMOND and ZORAYDA veiled, through the Folding-Doors. RIV. But see,
she comes with her protegee -- Ha! veiled, I see!


Mrs. ORM. [aside to Zorayda.] Nay, dearest girl, why thus terrified? Doubt it
not, all will turn out well.


ZOR. [ aside to Mrs. Ormond.] Yes, yes! it is he! -- How I tremble at his
presence!


Mrs. ORM In vain have I endeavored, my dear sir, to convince Miss Mandeville
that she dreads, without reason, the severity of your st^ctures. I assure her
that you will speak to her....


RIV. Most soothingly! most kindly! Even as a father would speak to his
daughter.


Mrs. ORM. [ ^agerly.] Right! exactly right! Remember your promise -- Speak to
her as an indulgent father would to his daughter, his beloved and repentant
daughter. I leave you with her. My dear girl....


ZOR. [embracing her] Oh, madam!


Mrs. ORM. [aside] Would it were over! Yet what should I dread? I know well the
excellence of his nature; and hard indeed must that heart be which can listen
unmoved to the pleading of such a penitent! Exit.


RIV. [after a pause] I...I...presume, Miss Mandeville, you are aware how
delicate a task Mrs. Ormond has imposed on me. [Zorayda bows.] So delicate, in
truth, that no sentiment could induce my undertaking it less strong than
gratitude for your generous intentions toward myself, and the interest which
Emily's account of you at first inspired me with, and which your own appearance
could not fail to increase.


ZOR. [aside] Oh that dear voice! Yet how terrible it sounds!


RIV. I will not dwell upon the worth of public opinion, the blessings of
self-satisfaction, the torments of present shame and of future remorse; I know
full well how light these considerations weigh against love when a young hand
holds the balance. 'Twas your heart which led you astray; to your heart then
will I make my appeal; and, if it be not marble, I shall not make my appeal in
vain. Miss Mandeville, I will speak of your father -- will explain how heavy is
a father's curse -- will paint how dreadful is a father's anguish! -- Well can
I describe that anguish! I have felt it, feel it still! I once had a daughter
--!


ZOR. [aside] His voice falters!


RIV. This daughter....Oh! how I loved her, words cannot say, thought cannot
measure! -- This daughter sacrificed me for a villain, fled from my paternal
roof, and....her flight has broken my heart -- her ingratitude has dug my grave!


ZOR. [aside] How I suffer! -- Oh my God!


RIV. [recovering himself] Young Lady, my daughter's seducer was Beauchamp! He
has deserted her; so, doubt it not, will he desert you. My execration is upon
her! Oh! let not your father's fall upon you as heavy. Haste to him ere it be
too late! Wait not till his resentment becomes rooted -- till his resolve
becomes immutable -- 'till he sheds such burning tears as I now shed -- 'till
he suffers such bitter pangs as I now suffer -- 'till he curses as I now
curse....


ZOR. [throwing aside her veil, and sinking on her knees] Spare me! spare me!


RIV. Zorayda! -- [after a pause] Away!


ZOR. Pardon! pardon!


RIV. Leave me, girl!


ZOR. While I have life, never again! Never; no, not even though you still
frown on me! Nay, struggle not! -- Father, I am a poor desperate distracted
creature! Still shall my lips, till sealed by death, cry to you for mercy --
still will I thus clasp my father's hand, till he cuts off mine, or else
forgives me!


RIV. Zorayda! Girl!.....Hence, foolish tears!


ZOR. I hope not for kindness, I sue but for pardon -- I ask not to live happy
in your love, I plead but to die soothed by your forgiveness. -- Still ^oath my
fault, frown on me still, dash me on the earth, trample me in the dust, kill me
-- but forgive me!


RIV. Her voice -- her tears -- I can support them no longer.


[Breaks from her, and hastens to the door.] ZOR. [wringing her hands in
despair] Cruel! cruel! My God! my God! -- Oh! were my mother but alive!


RIV. [starting.] Her mother!


ZOR. Ah! he stops. She lives then! lives too in his heart! -- Oh! plead thou
for me, sainted spirit! plead thou too, in former sorrows my greatest comfort,
in present sufferings my only hope! -- [Taking a picture from her bosom] Look
on it, my father! it is the portrait of your wife, of your adored Zorayda! --
Look on these eyes -- you have so often said they were like mine. Be moved by
my voice -- you have so often said it reminded you of my mother's! -- It Is she
who thus sinks at your feet -- it is she who now cries to you, Pardon your
erring, your repentant child! -- Father, I stand on the brink of ruin: already
the ground gives way beneath my feet -- yet a moment, and I am lost! -- Save
me! Father, save me! If not for my sake, if not for your own, oh father,
father! save me for my mother's sake!


RIV. [Looking alternately at the portrait and her.] Zorayda -- Zorayda! -- My
child! my child!


[Sinks upon her bosom.] Enter MODISH, Lady CLARA, and Mrs. ORMOND. Mrs. ORM He
yields, and we triumph.


RIV. [recovering himself.] Yet mark me, Zorayda -- Beauchamp....


ZOR. Alas!


RIV. Never must you meet again; tomorrow either sees him stained with my
blood, or this hand must....


Enter BEAUCHAMP and WALSINGHAM. ALL. How! Beauchamp?


RIV. Astonishment! -- [To Zorayda sternly] Follow me!


BEAU. Stay, Mr. Rivers; hear me for one moment.


RIV. Hear you? Amazing confidence! -- What? hear you extenuate your crime?
hear you say that....


BEAU. That I am guilty, that misery ought to be my lot; but that, if my lot be
misery, it must also be Zorayda's. On your affection for her I throw myself
Great have been my faults, great have been Zorayda's injuries -- yet, if
suffered to repair them....


RIV. Repair them! and your wife....


BEAU. Her death has been long reported; this letter, just received, ascertains
the fact. My hand is free, and from the first moment I beheld her that hand was
destined to your daughter. I feel how little I deserve her -- feel the whole
weight of my offense, and loath myself for its commission: -- but my punishment
would be Zorayda's -- but Zorayda's fate is interwoven with mine. Be this my
plea, when thus I kneel before you, imploring permission to expiate my faults
to your daughter and yourself by affection for my wife and unremitting
attention to her father.


WALL. Nor imagine, sir, that your wealth influences this proposal. Continue
still your dispositions in Mrs. Ormond's favor; my fortune is ample, it has
long been destined to Beauchamp, and the day which makes him your son makes him
my heir.


RIV. [hesitating.] I know not...I ought not...


Mrs. ORM. Dear sir, if my entreaties....


WALL. If my advice....


ZOR. [embracing him.] Dear, dear father!


ALL. Pardon! pardon!


RIV. I am vanquished! Rise, rise my son, and receive from me Zorayda!


BEAU. My love! my wife! Oh, teach me to thank your father for so invaluable a
gift!


ZOR. Edward to be yours, and with his approbation!....Dear, dear sir, is not
all this a dream? Am I indeed again your Zorayda? Is your affection indeed mine
again?


RIV. Yours it was ever; and surely, had I loved you less, I had been appeased
more easily. Many a pang, my child, has your absence cost me; but the pleasure
of this moment overpays them all. Sweet, oh! sweet are a father's tears shed on
the bosom of a repentant child. Hear this, ye flinty-hearted -- hear it, and
pardon! -- Yet how is this? when every other face wears a smile, why hangs a
cloud on the brow of my Zorayda?


ZOR. Ah, my father! it is a cloud which must never be removed; for, it is the
gloom of self-reproach! -- I have erred, and been forgiven; but am I therefore
less culpable? -- Your indulgence has been great; but is my fault therefore
less enormous? Oh, no, no, no! The calm of innocence has for ever left me, the
courage of conscious virtue must be mine no more! Still must the memory of
errors past torment me, and embitter every future joy: -- still must I blush to
read scorn in the world's eye, suspicion in my husband's: -- and still must
feel this painful truth most keenly, that she who once deviates from the paths
of virtue, though she may obtain the forgiveness of others, never can obtain
her own!


END of the FIFTH ACT.
EPILOGUE.
By the Author.
SPOKEN BY MR. BANNISTER JUN.
Thunder and Lightning. The Ghost of QUEEN ELIZABETH rises in a Flash of Fire.
Stare not, fair dames, nor criticize my dress;
You see before you jolly old Queen Bess,
Who from the land of roasting, boiling, stewing,
Is come to see what you above are doing!
Below, where some slight peccadilloes sent me,
Long did a wish, a foolish wish torment me,
For some few days in Britain to revive,
And view that land once more, I loved so well alive: --
This wish so teas'd me, morn, night, noon, and eve,
That I resolved to ask old Pluto's leave;
And though I knew to gain the point was hard,
Boldly dispatched Lord Burleigh with this card.
"Queen Bess's comp'ts to Pluto -- begs to say
"She hopes, this card will find him well today;
"And should her visit now convenient be,
"Means to drink sulphur with his majesty.
For in our lower realms the truth to utter,
Sulphur means tea, and brimstone bread and butter.
Well, he received me, and (my sulphur sipp'd,)
"Dear Sir," quoth I -- "I Am nervous, sick, and hipp'd,
"Besides have frightful dreams, and truth to speak,
"Scarce eat a chicken's pinion in a week.
"Shocked at my sickly plight and strange condition,
"I Have asked advice of maint and maint physician;
"And having heard them with one voice declare,
"Nothing can cure me but a change of air,
"'It Is my design, for health and for diversion,
"To Albion's Isle to make a short excursion --
At this old Pluto looked extremely glum,
First scratched his head, then frowned, and bit his thumb;
At length the business sifted to the dregs,
Thus spoke the king with the flame-coloured legs:
"Go, Bess," he answered ('it was not over civil
To crop my name, but it is an ill-bred Divle!)
"Go, Bess," he answered; "you have my full permission
"To visit London on this one condition.
"Tonight at Drury, (so the papers tell)
"Is played a Comedy that is toute nouvelle" --
[His majesty speaks French extremely well] "I to this piece your new existence
tie,
"And, as it lives or dies, you live or die.
"Should the dread ordeal with success be passed,
"Your second life shall for the season last;
"But, should it fail, instant (I Would have you know it)
"Here you return, and with you....bring the poet."
I took his offer, packed up hoods and ruffs,
Strait bodice, farthingales, and little muffs;
And least old Dis should take his promise back,
Through yon trap-door reached Drury in a crack.
Now then I come before the Public's throne,
To plead the author's cause, and eke my own.
Think with what terrors must my bosom tremble,
Since that the piece is bad I cannot dissemble:
Yet, weary with my journey, faint with fright;
Pray don't oblige me to set out tonight;
Rather with kind applause prolong my stay,
And for a few short nights support the play.
But, should my prayers prove vain, should the piece fail,
The plot thought dull, -- the humor coarse and stale,
Bess out of sorts, and Poet out of feather,
Are damned alike, and jog down stairs together.

FINIS.
Printed by J. DAVIS, Chancery Lane.

BOOKS LATELY PUBLISHED BY J. BELL, No. 148, OXFORD-STREET.
I. AMBROSIO; or THE MONK, a Romance. By M G. LEWIS, Esquire. M. P. The Fourth
Edition, with considerable additions and alterations. In three vols. Price 10s.
6d. In this edition the Author has paid particular attention to some passages
that have been objected to. -- A few remaining copies of the original edition
may be had by applying to the Publisher. II. THE CASTLE SPECTRE: a Drama, in
Five Acts, as originally written by M. G. LEWIS, Esquire. M. P. The 8th edition.
The printed copy of this Play contains nearly one half more than what is
performed. I. THE MINISTER: A Tragedy, in Five Acts. Translated from the German
of SCHILLER, Author of The Robbers, Don Carlos, etc. By M. G. LEWIS, Esquire. M. P.
Second Edition. 4s. 6d. sewed. IV. THE CYPRIOTS; or, A History of the Island of
Cyprus, by the Pagan World dedicated to Venus. In 2 vols. Second Edition. Price
7s. By the Author of The Minstrel. V. THE FAMILY OF HALDEN, a Novel. By
Augustus La Fontaine. Translated from the German. In 4 vols. Price 14s. VI. ST.
JULIEN, or MEMOIRS OF A FATHER. By Augustus la Fontaine. Translated from the
German. Price 4s.

