ILLUMINATION: OR, THE GLAZIERS' CONSPIRACY. A PRELUDE. AS IT IS PERFORMED,
WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE, AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN. BY F. PILON.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. KEARSLEY, AT No. 46, IN FLEET STREET MDCCLXXIX.

Entered at Stationers' Hall.

ADVERTISEMENT. TO THE READER.
THE Author of the following trifle is as fully satisfied of the small claim it
has to public attention, as the best critical anatomist in town could make him
-- but as the country managers procure copies of every piece played with
success in London, that is not published, he is unwilling to have the number of
his faults increased through the blunders and inaccuracies of an ignorant
shorthand writer. He therefore presents his little offspring to the reader as
it came into the world; for though a parent may find no great beauty in a
child, few, I fancy, are so unnatural as so stand by and see one knocked of the
head, or get a broken limb, without making some effort to prevent the accident.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Skylight, a master glazier, Mr. LEE JEWS. Dip, a tallow chandler, Mr. WILSON.
Quillet, an attorney's clerk, Mr. BRUNSDON. Parchment. Mr. Thompson. Mob, etc.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Skylight, Mrs. PIT. Miss Skylight, Miss GREEN,
ILLUMINATION.
SCENE an Apartment in SKYLIGHT'S House, Mrs. SKYLIGHT, Miss SKYLIGHT, and Mr.
SKYLIGHT discovered at Tea. MRS. SKYLIGHT. SOPHIA, my dear, how do you like
this tea?


SKYLIGHT. Sophia! zounds! cannot you call her plain Sue, as she was christened?


MRS. SKYLIGHT. I see, Mr. Skylight, you will never get rid of your vulgar
ideras, notwithstanding all the pains I take with you.


SKYLIGHT. But what right have you to give your daughter a higher name than
plain Kate, Bridget, or Susan? Are'nt these, think you, good enough for a
tradesman's wife, as she must be? If you don't keep a tighter rein with that
girl Bridget, she will resemble her betters in more respects than her name: ay,
and if ever she gets a husband, will put him in the fashion as well as herself,
or I Am out in my calculation.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Why, my dear, was not she baptized Susannah Sophia Serina?


SKYLIGHT. Much against my will. She was called, Susannah after her
grandmother; and damme, if I, was a bishop, but I Would pluck the blockhead's
cassock over his ears who tacked the other two heathenish, nonsensical
additions to it -- But don't sit chatting nonsense all night over that slop --
go to the shop, and see the customers ar'nt neglected -- I expect a few panes
knocked out in the beginning of the evening, and people don't care to let 'em
stand all night without mending.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. You may look after the customers yourself; Sophy and I are
engaged this evening.


SKYLIGHT. Why, sure, you hav'nt the impudence to leave the house of an
illumination night? and the last I expect too, till we have news from the West
Indies.


SUSANNAH. Indeed, indeed, papa, we are engaged to a coach-party, to drive
through all the streets, and see the windows; indeed we are, and cannot
polsitivey be off, if we would maintain any thing like character.


SKYLIGHT. What, and have that haycock upon your head set fire to by squibs and
crackers? I tell you what, Mrs. Prate-most, you're in the high road to lose all
characters; as for your part, Bridget, damn me! but I believe romances,
hard-words and quality airs, have turned your head; you encourage your daughter
to fly in her father's face.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Take no notice of him, my dear; I asked you how you liked this
tea?


SKYLIGHT. Is this to be borne, now, in a man's own house?


SUSANNAH. I like it prodigiously, mama -- it is Hoisan, to be sure.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. It is real Gunpowder, child -- I had it of Mr. Bamboo, of the
Seahorse.


SKYLIGHT. I wish, from the bottom of my soul, you were both in the Seahorse,
half way to the East Indies.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. You saw Billy Quillet himself, then?


SKYLIGHT. Here Is a fellow too! though I forbad him my house, he will have my
daughter in spite of me -- But madam, madam -- I ask you once more, will you
go to the shop?


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Take no notice of him -- So then you saw Billy himself?


SKYLIGHT. Will you go to the shop? -- will you go to the shop?


[With great vehemence. MRS. SKYLIGHT. As sure as can be the man's non Pompey's
prentice, as Billey Quillet says.


SKYLIGHT. Damn me! I wish you were prentice for life to any man in the
kingdom, so I could get quit of your indentures.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Come, Sophy, we'll leave him to recover from his tantrums -- [
going.] You see, child, what you have to expect, if you marry a man who has no
idera of the foster commotions, and whose heart is more indurate than the glass
which he glazes.


[Exeunt Sophy and Mrs. Skylight. SKYLIGHT. So, off they go, to that puppy
Quillet, the lawyer's clerk, and Abraham Skylight has seen the last of them
'till tomorrow morning [Sits down in a melancholy posture.] Why did I marry?
Was it not as clear as plate-glass, that a prudent glazier could never live in
peace with a woman of her confounded extravagant turbulent spirit? Is there one
part of her marriage vow she has not broken? Yes, let me do her justice; her
chastity; that I look, upon to be a whole pane yet; and I fancy, while her
present head continues upon her shoulders, it is a pane few will think worth
smashing.


Enter DIP. DIP. What in the dumps, friend Skylight?


SKYLIGHT. I have been thinking, Dip, what windows will be broke, 'twixt this
and five tomorrow morning.


DIP. Ay, always an eye to business, but what was done last night? -- Any great
strokes struck?


SKYLIGHT. Great strokes? I and my apprentices struck in half the windows about
Soho Square. But how was your demand for candles today?


DIP. Prodigious! -- prodigious! -- I sold fifteen boxes between four o'clock
and seven; but Lud-Hill is a mint of customers to me; -- you know Doctor
Solidskull the apothecary, he has set that whole quarter in an blaze.


SKYLIGHT. Oh! that is a fine fellow for our trade; he is a magazine of
patriotism; all I am afraid of, is, that as he has so much combustible stuff
about him, he will blow up one of these days, to the great loss of chandlers and
glaziers. Did you take a survey of the different streets last night?


DIP. The greater part of them, from the Cat and Gridiron at Ratcliffe Highway,
to the Highlander and Bag-pipe at Tyburn turnpike.


SKYLIGHT. How was the City?


DIP. A bonfire, from Temple Bar to the Minories.


SKYLIGHT. How was the Strand?


DIP. For all the world like a bundle of matches lighted; a blaze all above,
and brimstone all below.


SKYLIGHT. How was Bow-street?


DIP. I cannot tell, for there was a file of musketeers at both ends of it: but
what was doing about White Hall? I know nothing of what passed there.


SKYLIGHT. Then you saw nothing. -- Oh! my friend, how shall I relate the ever
memorable action of Charing Cross and the investure, storming, and reduction of
the Admiralty.


DIP. Let me hear it, let me hear it.


SKYLIGHT. About eleven, I sallied out at the head of two and thirty glaziers,
all choice hands as ever put in or knocked out a pane of glass.


DIP. Then you did not meet my journeymen?


SKYLIGHT. Oh! yes, I might have been reinforced by four chandlers at
Northumberland House, but I found 'em so well posted, and doing so much
execution, that I thought it a pity to disturb them.


DIP. You were right not to take them from their work; it was a box of candles
in my pocket this morning. Was the statue illuminated?


SKYLIGHT. The first night, -- but a confounded Whig ^^^erly wind blew the
candles out, so the de^^^^ was dropped -- but to the siege -- from Cha^^^^g
Cross, to Downing-street, the mob stowed as (...) as a barrel of Colchester
oysters. But all (...) lads under my command were trained to (...) service last
war, when I believe I need not (...) you what work our admirals and generals
^^ut for us in the illumination way.


DIP. If we could have persuaded people to put up ^^dles as often as they
ought, we should have (...) no great reason to complain this war;^o for (...)
our fleet did not as it generally does, prove (...) extinguisher, it turned out
for our trade a ^^^pleat save-all -- but on with the siege.


SKYLIGHT. Well, Sir, through the crowd they darted, ^ith the nimbleness of
pickpockets, and gave such vigor to the assault on the great gate, that they
were off the hinges in the glazing a garret window. -- Down they thunder --
rushed the mob -- and Oh! my friend did su^^ business! -- in ten minuits there
was not a window frame left standing. The ground, Sir, w^^ covered with broken
glass, and by the reflecti^^ of the lamps looked like the sky of a fro^^^
night, thick set with stars as a cake with plum^^ at Christmas -- over the
ruins I walked w^^^ the triumph of a general across the field (...) battle
after a victory. -- Zounds what a fight (...) was for a glazier!


DIP. 'Twas a glorious night, -- but how were y^^ off for ammunition?


SKYLIGHT. We crammed our pockets at Kensing^^^ Gravel Pits, for you must know
I was af^^^^ to trust to the Scotch pavement. But did (...) hear of any
accident in the course of (...) night?


DIP. Why yes, a short-sighted gentleman was high having his eyes burnt out
passing the General Advertiser because he did not illuminate his spectacles --
and a coach full of ladies had like to have been burnt down to the ground
opposite the London Tavern, owing to a squib which was thrown into one of the
women's heads, and raised such a conflagration in a few seconds amongst the
wool, gauze, pomatum, and false hair she had on, that there was a hole burnt
through the top of the coach before the flames could be got under.


Enter DICK. DICK. Lord, Sir, you will lose all the fun if you do'nt go out.


SKYLIGHT. What you rascal, have you left the shop and not a journeyman in the
house but yourself?


DICK. Why, Sir, there is not another gentleman of the trade will suffer one of
his men to finger a piece of putty till tomorrow morning -- besides, if you let
me go out I Will engage to make work for myself before I come home.


SKYLIGHT. Get in, sirrah! and be ready to attend, if a customer should call.


[Exit Dick. DIP. Don't you hear a shout? Something's going forward -- Come,
let us patrole the streets, and see what our troops have done, then we'll
finish the night at Ashley's Punch House, where we may smoke Rowley and get
drunk pro bono publico.


[Exeunt. Enter Mrs. SKYLIGHT, SUSSANAH, and QUILLET. MRS. SKYLIGHT. The coast,
I see, is clear -- so we may be off as soon as we please -- but first tell me
what your mock press gang is made up of?


QUILLET. All limbs of the law, like your humble servant -- their valiant
commander is clerk to Title Deed the great conveyancer -- a pretty, smart,
tight, little fellow -- just such another as I am -- sports his figure every
Sunday at the Dog and Duck -- you may twig him under the organ with his head
frizzed like a Porcupine and gridiron buckles.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Oh, gemmini! I dote upon gridiron buckles -- why don't you wear
them, Billy?


QUILLET. I will, my love, when the days grow colder -- but gridiron buckles
are broiling wear in warm weather,. -- My dear Mrs. Skylight, a word in your
ear, as we say in our office, Mr. Skylight -- how is he as to temperance? --
does he drink of an afternoon?


MRS. SKYLIGHT Oh! heavens! like a fish -- if he is sober now it is a wonder. I
never knew him sober of an illumination night since I was married to him.


QUILLET. Truly I am very proud to hear this -- for you must know I have no
great dependence on the courage of my press-gang; but, Lord, what is to be
expected from an army of Quills and parchment? Poor lids! not one of them ever
fought a battle in his life, except with hard words, and law Latin, In old acts
of parliament.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Now, Billy, if I understand this plot rightly, you are to come
up when Mr. Skylight is pressed, as it were on Sousong and refostulate the
affair with the gang.


SUSANNAH. Yes, to be sure he is, mama; and then my papa will be so thankful,
when my dear Billy gets him out of the hands of the press gang, that I Am sure
he will consent to our wedding.


QUILLET. You have hit my plot, my angel, to the finest. hair stroke in a
marriage settlement.


SUSANNAH. Oh, gemmini! my heart beats so with pleasure, that -- Do, Billy, put
your hand to it, for fear it should jump out of my bosom into yours.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Come, come, I Will have no beating of hearts, or jumping into
bosoms, truly; for as Friar Florence says, in Romer and Julit, "by your leaves,
you shall be alone, till Holy Church immortulate two in one."


[Going between them. [Exeunt SCENE, the Street. An Illumination, Guns firing,
Mob shouting, Marrow Bones and Cleavers chiming. FIRST MOB. Did you draw in the
carriage yesterday?


SECOND MOB. By my soul, you may say that I did -- I was the right hand horse,
fastened without harness, to the left side of it.


THIRD MOB. Now, why, do you see me, neighbors, should we draw this here
carriage, when there are beaste^ses enough to do it for us?


FIRST MOB. Because, you fool, there is going to be a tax upon horses.


SECOND MOB. By my soul I Am satisfied, provided there is no tax upon legs.


THIRD MOB. If legs were taxed by their size, you have more to pay for your
calves, Paddy, than your head and shoulders are worth.


SECOND MOB. Arrah! don't you bother your head about my calves, -- they will
always enable me to take a ride when I Am not able to pay for a horse, by land
or by sea.


[A press gang's whistle heard. ALL. A press-gang! a press-gang! away, damn me!
or we shall be nabb'd.


[Exeunt, running. Enter at one door, PARCHMENT with his gang, at the other DIP
and SKYLIGHT, drunk. PARCHMENT. Here come the heroes of the night -- Stand back
a little and watch them.


SKYLIGHT. Huzza! Old England and liberty for ever.


DIP. I say liberty -- for what, do you see me, would Old England be without
liberty?


SKYLIGHT. And what would our trade be without liberty?


DIP. Without liberty to break windows, it is most certain glazing would soon go
to pot.


PARCHMENT. Come, boys, advance -- holloa! who goes there? Stand I say.


SKYLIGHT. Stand! why suppose we cannot stand, what is to be done in that case?


PARCHMENT. Come come, Sir, I fancy you don't know what company you are in.


DIP. If we may judge of our company by their breeding, we have got into damned
bad company I think -- but do you know who we are Sir? Do you know that I am
Ezekel Dip the Chandler, and that this is Abraham Skylight the Glazier; two as
respectable -- I say respectable, honest sober tradesmen, as any in the parish
of -- in the parish of -- damn me! I have forgot the name of my own parish.


SKYLIGHT. That Is because you never were a churchwarden -- If you were, the
poor-rate would make you remember it.


PARCH MEANT. Bring them away this moment -- for you see they are both drunk.


SKYLIGHT. Damn me! I Will lay you a crown we are not drunk, and I say done first.
[Pulls money from his pocket.] Come, post your coal, my kiddy.


PARCHMENT. Bring them away, I say; if they resist, hand cuff them.


[Attemps to drag them off. DIP and SKYLIGHT. I (...) ^^^ch, watch -- is this
usage for sober citizen! Hoa! watch! watch!


Enter QUILLET. QUILLET. Why, sure, it is not possible! -- What Mr. Skylight in
the hands of a press-gang?


SKYLIGHT. The very man himself -- Old Abe Skylight, of St. Martin's in the
Fields -- as well known there as Bow bell in Cheapside, though I cannot say I has
made quite so much noise in the parish.


QUILLET. Dear Sir, don't you know me?


SKYLIGHT. Not I, as I Am a Christian and a glazier.


QUILLET. What, not know Billy Quillet, the lawyer?


SKYLIGHT. Damme, Sir, I hate the law.


QUILLET. Sir!


SKYLIGHT. No, no, that is not my meaning -- I love the law, but I hate a
lawyer. The law is a devilish good thing, if it was not spoilt by you confound^d
rogues the lawyers.


QUILLET. Sir, I overlook every thing you say to me in your present condition.


SKYLIGHT. Sir, I wish you would overlook yourself about your business. -- I am in
as much dread of a lawyer as a mouse of a large tabby -- a man in the clutches
of a lawyer, is like a sheep in a thicket -- he never gets clear, without
leaving the bell of his wool amongst the brambles;


QUILLET. I Will speak to the gentleman for you, Sir, notwithstanding your
ill-treatment.


Enter Mrs. SKYLIGHT and SUSANNAH. MRS. SKYLIGHT. Where is he -- where is this
villain? What, in the hands of a press-gang, at last?


SUSANNAH. Oh! Mr. Quillet, you're a lawyer, cannot you get my poor papa his
liberty?


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Don't attempt it, Mr. Quillet -- let the drunken sot go on
board a man of war, it is the fittist place for him.


SKYLIGHT. With your leave, my dear, I should beg to be excused this voyage --
disagreeable as home (...) you are to me, I should prefer you both, (...) all
your unpleasant circumstances, to cruiz^^


QUILLET. I Will tell you what, Sir, [ To Parchment.] the ^^^le neighborhood is
now alarmed -- I am (...) known here, therefore be assured, if you (...) not
set these gentlemen at liberty immediate^^ I Will take such measures as will make
you (...) your conduct as long as you have to (...).


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Lord! Mr. Quillet, why will you trouble ^^^r head so much about
him?


SKYLIGHT. Perhaps he may not repent it, [aside.] for I (...) to sober a
little, I think; but that is no won^^^ -- I have got a wife would sober any man
in ^^gland.


PARCHMENT. Sir, if you will answer for their not being vagabonds, -- I Am
satisfied. -- They shall have their liberties.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. But, dear Sir, -- Had not you better keep them in custody till
tomorrow morning? -- I should be sorry you were to suffer by your good nature.


SKYLIGHT. If he does, love, that is more than ever you will -- But, Sir, I am
obliged to you for my freedom and if I have offended you, hope you will
attr^bute my behavior to the state you found (...) in.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Why, Abraham, you have got your senses again*


SKYLIGHT. Yes -- my dear -- tenderness, and affection like yours, would
restore any husband to his senses. -- I am heartily obliged to you, Mr.
Quillet, for the pains you have taken on my account -- From this hour you and I
are friends -- But as a hostage of my faith -- here is my daughter.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. Now you have acted like a man of sense, for once in your life,
as you have done just what your wife would have you. -- But where is your
drunken companion? -- Mr. Dip, are you alive yet?


DIP. Ask me tomorrow morning -- At present I Am planet struck.


QUILLET. Now my dear Sophia.


[Interrupting him. SKYLIGHT. Susan, I insist upon it.


MRS. SKYLIGHT. I say Sophia.


SKYLIGHT. Susan I am determined shall be her name, if ever you hope to touch a
shilling of her fortune.


QUILLET. Susan, Sir, shall be her name, and I hope you will find, by my
compliance to your wishes on every other occasion, that I wish at least to win
your favor.


SKYLIGHT. Win my favor, Sir! Win the favor of this circle, and I shall never
tax you on the score of disobedience.


EPILOGUE.
DIP, recovering. What! the press-gang gone? Then I Will home to-bed,
I think I Am sober -- Skylight, how is your head?
[ Seeing Mrs. Skylight. How is his head, and Mrs. Skylight there!
How burns a candle in a foul damp air?

SKYLIGHT. We have done great business, neighbor Dip, tonight,


DIP. Yes, like our betters, we have brought things to light;
But, still my conscience tells me, all is not right.

SKYLIGHT. Your conscience! come, come, friend, of that no more,
Your conscience wanted glazing long before;
That is a window-trade so often smashes,
We nail it up, to save the charge of sashes.

DIP. Where Piccadilly joins St. James's Street,
And Kewbride coach and Richmond stages meet,
A fine dressed beau, who saw the pains I took,
Gave me his hand, crying, Well d^^e, my buck!
Lord, Sir! said I, I think it only right,
That these here people should put up some light,
And who do you think it was, come, guess now?

SKYLIGHT. Nay, I cannot tell, pr'ythee, how should I know?


DIP. A flaming patriot, who, I Am told, can speak,
Ay, without end, for one entire week;
Who says we are ruined East, North, and South,
Unless he gets a place to stop his mouth.

SKYLIGHT. Never mind, patriots, man; they are bought and sold,
The fleet, and army, 'are our staple hold:
Before the summer's done, if Monseer sights,
We'll have some bonfires, and some roaring nights,
Without rejoicing, not a week will pass,
How you will sell candles --

DIP. Oh! how you will sell glass.


SKYLIGHT. Glaziers and chandlers, throughout the nation,
Will make their fortunes by Illumination.

Exeunt omnes. THE END.

