Double Falsehood; OR, The DISTRESSED LOVERS.

A

[Price 1 s. and 6 d.]

GEORGE R.
GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come,
Greeting. Whereas our Trusty, and Well-beloved Lewis Theobald, of our City of
London, Gent. has, by his Petition, humbly represented to Us, That He having,
at a considerable Expense, Purchased the Manuscript Copy of an Original Play of
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, called, Double Falsehood; Or, the Distressed Lovers; and,
with great Labor and Pains, Revised, and Adapted the same to the Stage; has
humbly besought Us, to grant him Our Royal Privilege, and License, for the sole
Printing and Publishing thereof, for the Term of Fourteen Years: We, being
willing to give all due Encouragement to this his Undertaking, are graciously
pleased to condescend to his Request: and do therefore, by these Presents, so
far as may be agreeable to the Statute in that Behalf made and provided, for
Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, grant unto Him, the said Lewis Theobald, his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, Our Royal License, for the sole
Printing and Publishing the said Play, in such Size and Manner, as He and They
shall think fit, for the Term of Fourteen Years, to be computed from the Date
hereof; strictly forbidding all our Subjects within our Kingdoms and Dominions,
to Reprint the same, either in the like, or in any other Size, or Manner
whatsoever; or to Import, Buy, Vend, Utter or Distribute any Copies thereof,
Reprinted beyond the Seas, during the aforesaid Term of Fourteen Years, without
the Consent, or Approbation of the said Lewis Theobald, his Heirs, Executors,
and Assigns, under his, or their Hands and Seals first had, and obtained; as
they will answer the contrary at their Peril* -- Whereof the Commissioners, and
other Officers of our Customs, the Master, Warden, and Company of Stationers,
are to take Notice, that the same may be entered in the Register of the said
Company, and that due Obedience be rendered thereunto. Given at Our Court at St.
James's, the Fifth Day of December, 1727; in the First Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, HOLLES NEWCASTLE.

Double Falsehood; OR, The DISTRESSED LOVERS.

A PLAY, As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

Written Originally by W. SHAKESPEARE; And now Revised and Adapted to the Stage
By Mr. THEOBALD, the Author of Shakespeare Restored.

-- Quod optanti Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda Dies, en! attulit ultro.
Virg. LONDON: Printed by J. WATTS, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's Inn Fields. M DCC XXVIII.

To the Right HONORABLE George Dodington, Esquire
SIR,
NOTHING can more strongly second the Pleasure I feel, from the
UniversalApplause which crowns this Orphan Play, than this Other which I take
in presuming to shelter it under Your Name. I bear so dear an Affection to the
Writings and Memory of SHAKESPEARE, that, as it is my good Fortune to retrieve
this Remnant of his Pen from Obscurity, so it is my greatest Ambition that this
Piece should be received into the Protection of such a Patron: And, I hope,
Future Times, when they mean to pay Shakespeare the best Compliment, will
remember to say, Mr. DODINGTON was that Friend to his Remains, which his own
SOUTHAMPTON was to his living Merit.

It is from the fine Discernment of our Patrons, that we can generally best
promise Ourselves the good Opinion of the Public. You are not only a
distinguished Friend of the Muses, but most intimately allied to them: And from
hence it is I flatter Myself, that if You shall think fit to pronounce this
Piece genuine, it will silence the Censures of those Unbelievers, who think it
impossible a Manuscript of Shakespeare could so long have lain dormant; and who
are blindly paying Me a greater Compliment than either They design, or I can
merit, while they cannot but confess Themselves pleased, yet would fain
insinuate that they are imposed upon. I should esteem it some Sort of Virtue,
were I able to commit so agreeable a Cheat.

But pardon Me, Sir, for a Digression that perverts the very Rule of
Dedications. I own, I have my Reasons for it. As, SIR, your known Integrity,
and Honor engages the warmest Wishes of all good Men for your Prosperity, so
your known Distinction in polite Letters, and your generous Encouragement of
Those who pretend to them, obliges us to consider your Advancement as our own
personal Interest, and as a good Omen, at least, if not as the surest Means of
the future flourishing Condition of those Humane Arts amongst us, which We
profess, and which You adorn. But neither Your Modesty, nor my Inability will
suffer me to enter upon that Subject. Permit me therefore, SIR, to convert
Panegyric into a most ardent Wish, that You would look with a Tender Eye on
this dear Relick, and that you would believe me, with the most unfeigned Zeal
and Respect,

SIR, Your most Devoted and Obedient Humble Servant, LEW. THEOBALD.
Great Russell-stree, 21st December, 1727.
PREFACE OF THE EDITOR.
THE Success, which this Play has met with from the Town in the Representation,
(to say nothing of the Reception it found from those Great Judges, to whom I
have had the Honor of communicating it in Manuscript;) has almost made the
Purpose of a Preface unnecessary: And therefore what I have to say, is designed
rather to wipe out a flying Objection to two, than to labor at proving it the
Production of Shakespeare. It has been alleged as incredible, that such a
Curiosity should be stifled and lost to the World for above a Century. To This
my Answer is short; that though it never till now made its Appearance on the
Stage, yet one of the Manuscript Copies, which I have, is of above Sixty Years
Standing, in the Handwriting of Mr. Downs, the famous Old Prompter; and, as I
am credibly informed, was early in the Possession of the celebrated Mr.
Betterton, and by Him designed to have been ushered into the World. What
Accident prevented This Purpose of his, I do not pretend to know: Or through what
hands it had successively passed before that Period of Time. There is a
Tradition (which I have from the Noble Person, who supplied me with One of my
Copies) that it was given by our Author, as a Present of Value, to a Natural
Daughter of his, for whose Sake he wrote it, in the Time of his Retirement from
the Stage. Two other Copies I have, (one of which I was glad to purchase at a
very good Rate,) which may not, perhaps, be quite so Old as the Former; but One
of Them is much more perfect, and has fewer Flaws and Interruptions in the
Sense.

Another Objection has been started, (which would carry much more Weight with
it, were it Fact;) that the Tale of this Play, being built upon a Novel in Don
Quixot, Chronology is against Us, and Shakespeare could not be the Author. But
it happens, that Don Quixot was published in the Year 1611, and Shakespeare did
not dye till April 1616, a sufficient Interval of Time for All that We want
granted.

Others again, to depreciate the Affair, as they thought, have been pleased to
urge, that though the Play may have some Resemblances of Shakespeare, yet the
Coloring, Diction, and Characters, come nearer to the Style and Manner of
FLETCHER. This, I think, is far from deserving any Answer; I submit it to the
Determination of better Judgments; though my Partiality for Shakespeare makes me
wish, that Every Thing which is good, or pleasing, in our Tongue, had been
owing to his Pen.

As to the Performance of the respective Actors concerned in this Play, my
applauding It here would be altogether superfluous. The Public has
distinguished and given them a Praise, much beyond Any that can flow from my
Pen. But I have some particular Acknowledgments to make to the Managers of this
Company, for which I am glad to embrace so fair an Opportunity.

I came to Them at this Juncture as an Editor, not an Author, and have met with
so much Candor, and handsome Treatment from Them, that I am willing to
believe, the Complaint, which has so commonly obtained, of their Disregard and
ill Behavior to Writers, has been more severely urged, than it is justly
grounded. They must certainly be too good Judges of their own Interest, not to
know that a Theater cannot always subsist on old Stock, but that the Town
requires Novelty at their Hands. On the other Hand, they must be so far Judges
of their own Art and Profession, as to know that all the Compositions, which
are offered them, would never go down with Audiences of so nice and delicate a
Taste, as in this Age frequent the Theaters. It would be very hard upon such a
Community, where so many Interests are concerned, and so much Merit in their
Business allowed, if they had not a Privilege of refusing some crude Pieces,
too imperfect for the Entertainment of the Public I would not be thought to
infer, that they have never discouraged what They might, perhaps, afterward
wish they had received. They do not, I believe, set up for such a Constant
Infallibility. But if We do but fairly consider out of above Four Thousand
Plays extant, how small a Number will now stand the Test: if We do but consider
too, how often a raw Performance has been extolled by the Partiality of private
Friendship; and what a Clamor of Injury has been raised from that Quarter,
upon such Performance meeting a Repulse; we may pretty easily account for the
Grounds upon which they proceeded in discountenancing some Plays, and the harsh
Things that are thrown out upon their giving a Repulse to others.

But I should beg Pardon for interfering in this Question, in which I am
properly neither Party, nor Judge. I am only throwing out a private Opinion,
without Interest or Prejudice, and if I am right in the Notion, Valeat quantum
valere potest.

PROLOGUE.
Written by PHILIP FROWDE, Esquire
And Spoken by Mr. WILKS. AS in some Region, where indulgent Skies
Enrich the Soil, a thousand Plants arise
Frequent and bold; a thousand Landskips meet
Our ravished View, irregularly sweet:
We gaze, divided, now on These, now Those;
While All one beauteous Wilderness compose.
Such SHAKESPEARE's Genius was: -- Let Britons boast
The glorious Birth, and, eager, strive who most
Shall celebrate his Verse; for while we raise
Trophies of Fame to him, ourselves we praise*
Display the Talents of a British Mind,
Where All is great, free, open, unconfined.
Be it our Pride, to reach his daring Flight;
And relish Beauties, he alone could write.
Most modern Authors, fearful to aspire,
With Imitation cramp their genial Fire;
The well-schemed Plan keep strict before their Eyes,
Dwell on Proportions, trifling Decencies;
While noble Nature all neglected lies.
Nature, that claims Precedence of Place,
Perfection's Basis, and essential Grace!
Nature so intimately SHAKESPEARE knew,
From her first Springs his Sentiments he drew;
Most greatly wild they flow; and, when most wild, yet true.
While These, secure in what the Critics teach,
Of servile Laws still dread the dangerous Breach;
His vast, unbounded, Soul disdained their Rule,
Above the Precepts of the Pedant School!
Oh! could the Bard, revisiting our Light,
Receive these Honors done his Shade Tonight,
How would he bless the Scene this Age displays,
Transcending his Eliza's golden Days!
When great AUGUSTUS fills the British Throne,
And his loved Consort makes the Muse her own.
How would he joy, to see fair Merit's Claim
Thus answered in his own reviving Fame!
How cry with Pride -- " Oblivion I forgive;
" This my last Child to latest Times shall live:
" Lost to the World, well for the Birth it stayed;
" To this auspicious Era well delayed.
EPILOGUE.
Written by a Friend.
Spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD. WELL, Heaven defend us from these ancient Plays,
These Moral Bards of good Queen Bess's Days!
They write from Virtue's Laws, and think no further;
But draw a Rape as dreadful as a Murder.
You modern Wits, more deeply versed in Nature,
Can tip the wink, to tell us, you know better;
As who should say -- " It Is no such killing Matter --
" We Have heard old Stories told, and yet never wondered,
" Of many a Prude, that has endured a Hundred:
" And Violante grieves, or we are mistaken,
" Not, because ravished; but because -- forsaken. --
Had this been written to the modern Stage,
Her Manners had been copied from the Age.
Then, though she had been once a little wrong,
She still had had the Grace to have held her Tongue;
And after all, with downcast Looks, been led
Like any Virgin to the Bridal Bed.
There, if the good Man questioned her Mis-doing,
She Would stop him short -- " Pray, who made you so knowing?
" What, doubt my Virtue! -- What Is your base Intention?
" Sir, that is a Point above your Comprehension. --
Well, Heaven be praised, the Virtue of our Times
Secures us from our Gothic Grandsires Crimes.
Rapes, Magic, new Opinions, which before
Have filled our Chronicles, are now no more:
And this reforming Age may justly boast,
That dreadful Sin Polygamy is lost.
So far from multiplying Wives, it is known
Our Husbands find, they have Work enough with one. --
Then, as for Rapes, those dangerous days are past;
Our Dapper Sparks are seldom in such haste.
In SHAKESPEARE's Age the English Youth inspired,
Loved, as they fought, by him and Beauty fired.
It Is yours to crown the Bard, whose Magic Strain
Could charm the Heroes of that glorious Reign,
Which humbled to the Dust the Pride of Spain.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN*
Duke Angelo. Mr. Corey. Roderick, his Elder Son. Mr. Mills. Henriquez, his
Younger Son. Mr. Wilks. Don Bernard, Father to Leonora. Mr. Harper. Camillo,
Father to Julio. Mr. Griffin. Julio, in Love with Leonora. Mr. Booth. Citizen.
Mr. Oats. Master of the Flocks. Mr. Bridgwater* First Shepherd. Mr. Norris.
Second Shepherd. Mr. Ray.
WOMEN.
Leonora. Mrs. Porter. Violante. Mrs. Booth.
SCENE, the Province of Andalusia in Spain. DOUBLE FALSEHOOD; OR, The DISTRESSED
LOVERS.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, A Royal Palace.
Duke Angelo, Roderick, and Courtiers. RODERICK. MY gracious Father, this
unwonted Strain
Visits my Heart with Sadness.

Duke. -- Why, my Son?
Making my Death familiar to my Tongue
Digs not my Grave one Jot before the Date.
I Have worn the Garland of my Honors long,
And would not leave it withered to thy Brow,
But flourishing and green; worthy the Man, Who, with my Dukedoms, heirs my
better Glories.

Roder. This Praise, which is my Pride, spreads me with Blushes.

Duke. Think not, that I can flatter thee, my Roderick;
Or let the Scale of Love o'er-poize my Judgment.
Like a fair Glass of Retrospection, Thou
Reflect'st the Virtues of my early Youth;
Making my old Blood mend its Pace with Transport:
While fond Henriquez, thy irregular Brother,
Sets the large Credit of his Name at Stake,
A Truant to my Wishes, and his Birth.
His Taints of Wildness hurt our nicer Honor,
And call for swift Reclaim.

Roder. -- I trust, my Brother
Will, by the Vantage of his cooler Wisdom,
E'er-while redeem the hot Escapes of Youth,
And court Opinion with a golden Conduct.

Duke. Be Thou a Prophet in that kind Suggestion!
But I, by Fears weighing his unweigh'd Course,
Interpret for the Future from the Past.
And strange Misgivings, why he has of late
By Importunity, and strained Petition,
Wrested our Leave of Absence from the Court,
Awake Suspicion. Thou art inward with him;
And, happily, from the bosomed Trust can shape
Some formal Cause to qualify my Doubts.

Roder. Why he has pressed this Absence, Sir, I know not;
But have his Letters of a modern Date,
Wherein by Julio, good Camillo's Son,
(Who, as he says, shall follow hard upon;
And whom I with the growing Hour expect:)
He does solicit the Return of Gold
To purchase certain Horse, that like him well.
This Julio he encountered first in France,
And lovingly commends him to my Favor;
Wishing, I would detain him some few Days,
To know the Value of his well-placed Trust.

Duke. O, do it, Roderick; and assay to mould him
An honest Spy upon thy Brother's Riots.
Make us acquainted when the Youth arrives;
We'll see this Julio, and he shall from Us
Receive the secret Loan his Friend requires.
Bring him to Court.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. Prospect of a Village at a Distance.
Enters Camillo with a Letter. Came. How comes the Duke to take such Notice of
my Son, that he must needs have him in Court, and I must send him upon the View
of his Letter? -- Horsemanship! What Horsemanship has Julio? I think, he can no
more but gallop a Hackney, unless he practiced Riding in France. It may be, he
did so; for he was there a good Continuance. But I have not heard him speak
much of his Horsemanship. That Is no Matter: if he be not a good Horseman, all is
one in such a Case, he must bear. Princes are absolute; they may do what they
will in any Thing, save what they cannot do.

Enters Julio. O, come on, Sir; read this Paper: no more Ado, but read it: It
must not be answered by my Hand, nor yours, but, in Gross, by your Person; your
sole Person. Read aloud.


Jul. 'Please you, to let me first o'erlook it, Sir.


Came. I was this other day in a Spleen against your new Suits: I do now think,
some Fate was the Taylour that has fitted them: for, this Hour, they are for
the Palace of the Duke. -- Your Father's House is too dusty.


Jul. Hem! -- to Court? Which is the better, to serve a Mistress, or a Duke? I
am sued to be his Slave, and I sue to be Leonora's. [Aside.


Came. You shall find your Horsemanship much praised there; Are you so good a
Horseman?


Jul. I have been,
Ever now, commended for my Seat, or mocked.

Came. Take one Commendation with another, every Third's a Mock. -- Affect not
therefore to be praised. Here Is a deal of Command and Entreaty mixed; there is no
denying; you must go, peremptorily he inforces That.


Jul. What Fortune soever my Going shall encounter, cannot be good Fortune;
What I part withal unseasons any other Goodness. [Aside.


Came. You must needs go; he rather conjures, than importunes.


Jul. No moving of my Love-Suit to him now? -- [Aside.


Came. Great Fortunes have grown out of less Grounds.


Jul. What may her Father think of me, who expects to be solicited this very
Night? [Aside.


Came. Those scattered Pieces of Virtue, which are in him, the Court will solder
together, varnish, and rectify.


Jul. He will surely think I deal too slightly, or unmannerly, or foolishly,
indeed; nay, dishonestly; to bear him in hand with my Father's Consent, who yet
has not been touched with so much as a Request to it. [Aside.


Came. Well, Sir, have you read it over?


Jul. Yes, Sir.


Came. And considered it?


Jul. As I can.


Came. If you are courted by good Fortune, you must go.


Jul. So it please You, Sir.


Came. By any Means, and to morrow: Is it not there the Limit of his Request?


Jul. It is, Sir.


Came. I must bethink me of some Necessaries, without which you might be
unfurnished: And my Supplies shall at all Convenience follow You. Come to my
Closet by and by; I would there speak with You.


[Exit Camillo. Manet Julio solus. Jul. I do not see that Fervor in the Maid,
Which Youth and Love should kindle. She consents,
As 'twere to feed without an Appetite;
Tells me, She is content; and plays the Coy one,
Like Those that subtly make their Words their Ward,
Keeping Address at Distance. This Affection
Is such a feigned One, as will break untouched;
Dye frosty, ever it can be thawed; while mine,
Like to a Clime beneath Hyperion's Eye,
Burns with one constant Heat. I Will strait go to her;
Pray her to regard my Honor: but She greets me. --
Enter Leonora, and Maid. See, how her Beauty does enrich the Place!
O, add the Music of thy charming Tongue,
Sweet as the Lark that wakens up the Morn,
And make me think it Paradise indeed.
I was about to seek thee, Leonora,
And chide thy Coldness, Love.

Leon. -- What says your Father?

Jul. I have not moved him yet.

Leon. -- Then do not, Julio.

Jul. Not move him? Was it not your own Command,
That his Consent should ratify our Loves?

Leon. Perhaps, it was: but now I Have changed my Mind.
You purchase at too dear a Rate, that puts You
To woo me and your Father too: Besides,
As He, perchance, may say, you shall not have me;
You, who are so obedient, must discharge me
Out of your Fancy: Then, you know, 'twill prove
My Shame and Sorrow, meeting such Repulse,
To wear the Willow in my Prime of Youth.

Jul. Oh! do not rack me with these ill-placed Doubts;
Nor think, though Age has in my Father's Breast
Put out Love's Flame, he therefore has not Eyes,
Or is in Judgment blind. You wrong your Beauties,
Venus will frown if you disprize her Gifts,
That have a Face would make a frozen Hermit
Leap from his Cell, and burn his Beads to kiss it;
Eyes, that are nothing but continual Births
Of new Desires in Those that view their Beams.
You cannot have a Cause to doubt.

Leon. -- Why, Julio?
When you that dare not choose without your Father,
And, where you love, you dare not vouch it; must not,
Though you have Eyes, see with 'em; -- can I, think you,
Somewhat, perhaps, infected with your Suit,
Sit down content to say, You would, but dare not?

Jul. Urge not Suspicions of what cannot be;
You deal unkindly; mis-becomingly,
I Am loath to say: For All that waits on you,
Is graced, and graces. -- No Impediment
Shall bar my Wishes, but such grave Delays
As Reason presses Patience with; which blunt not,
But rather whet our Loves. Be patient, Sweet.

Leon Patient! What else? My Flames are in the Flint.
Happily, to lose a Husband I may weep;
Never, to get One: When I cry for Bondage,
Let Freedom quit me.

Jul. -- From what a Spirit comes This?
I now perceive too plain, you care not for me.
Duke, I obey thy Summons, be its Tenor
Whatever it will: If War, I come thy Soldier:
Or if to waste my silken Hours at Court,
The Slave of Fashion, I with willing Soul
Embrace the lazy Banishment for Life;
Since Leonora has pronounced my Doom.

Leon. What do you mean? Why talk you of the Duke?
Wherefore of War, or Court, or Banishment?

Jul. How this new Note is grown of me, I know not;
But the Duke writes for Me. Coming to move
My Father in our Business, I did find him
Reading this Letter; whose Contents require
My instant Service, and Repair to Court.

Leon. Now I perceive the Birth of these Delays;
Why Leonora was not worth your Suit.
Repair to Court? Ay, there you shall, perhaps,
(Rather, past Doubt;) behold some choicer Beauty,
Rich in her Charms, trained to the Arts of Soothing,
Shall prompt you to a Spirit of Hardiness,
To say, So please you, Father, I have chosen
This Mistress for my own. --

Jul. -- Still you mistake me:
Ever your Servant I profess my self;
And will not blot me with a Change, for all
That Sea and Land inherit.

Leon. But when go you?

Jul. To morrow, Love; so runs the Duke's Command;
Stinting our Farewell-kisses, cutting off
The Forms of Parting, and the Interchange
Of thousand precious Vows, with Haste too rude.
Lovers have Things of Moment to debate,
More than a Prince, or dreaming Statesman, know:
Such Ceremonies wait on Cupid's Throne.
Why heaved that Sigh?

Leon. O Julio, let me whisper
What, but for Parting, I should blush to tell thee:
My Heart beats thick with Fears, lest the gay Scene,
The Splendors of a Court, should from thy Breast
Banish my Image, kill my Interest in thee,
And I be left, the Scoff of Maids, to drop
A Widow's Tear for thy departed Faith.

Jul. O let Assurance, strong as Words can bind,
Tell thy pleased Soul, I will be wondrous faithful;
True, as the Sun is to his Race of Light,
As Shade to Darkness, as Desire to Beauty:
And when I swerve, let Wretchedness overtake me,
Great as ever Falsehood met, or Change can merit.

Leon. Enough; I Am satisfied: and will remain
Yours, with a firm and untir'd Constancy.
Make not your Absence long: Old Men are wavering;
And swayed by Interest more than Promise given.
Should some fresh Offer start, when you're away,
I may be pressed to Something, which must put
My Faith, or my Obedience, to the Rack.

Jul. Fear not, but I with swiftest Wing of Time
Will labor my Return. And in my Absence,
My noble Friend, and now our honored Guest,
The Lord Henriquez, will in my behalf
Hang at your Father's Ear, and with kind Hints,
Poured from a friendly Tongue, secure my Claim;
And play the Lover for thy absent Julio.

Leon. Is there no Instance of a Friend turned false?
Take Heed of That: No Love by Proxy, Julio.
My Father --

Enters Don Bernard. D. Bern. What, Julio, in public? This Wooeing is too
urgent. Is your Father yet moved in the Suit, who must be the prime Unfolder of
this Business?


Jul. I have not yet, indeed, at full possessed
My Father, whom it is my Service follows;
But only that I have a Wife in Chase.

D. Bern. Chase! -- Let Chase alone: No Matter for That. -- You may halt after
her, whom you profess to pursue, and catch her too; Marry, not unless your
Father let you slip. -- Briefly, I desire you, (for she tells me, my
Instructions shall be both Eyes and Feet to her;) no farther to insist in your
Requiring, 'till, as I have formerly said, Camillo make known to Me, that his
good Liking goes along with Us; which but once breathed, all is done; 'till
when, the Business has no Life, and cannot find a Beginning.


Jul. Sir, I will know his Mind, ever I taste Sleep:
At Morn, you shall be learned in his Desire.
I take my Leave. -- O virtuous Leonora,
Repose, sweet as thy Beauties, seal thy Eyes;
Once more, adieu. I have thy Promise, Love;
Remember, and be faithful.

[Ex. Julio. D. Bern. His Father is as unsettled, as he is wayward, in his
Disposition. If I thought young Julio's Temper were not mended by the Metal of
his Mother, I should be something crazy in giving my Consent to this Match:
And, to tell you true, if my Eyes might be the Directors to your Mind, I could
in this Town look upon Twenty Men of more delicate Choice. I speak not This
altogether to unbend your Affections to him: But the Meaning of what I say is,
that you set such Price upon yourself to him, as Many, and much his Betters,
would buy you at; (and reckon those Virtues in you at the rate of their
Scarcity;) to which if he come not up, you remain for a better Mart.


Leon. My Obedience, Sir, is chained to your Advice.


D. Bern. It Is well said, and wisely. I fear, your Lover is a little
Folly-tainted; which, shortly after it proves so, you will repent.


Leon. Sir, I confess, I approve him of all the Men I know; but that
Approbation is nothing, 'till seasoned by your Consent.


D. Bern. We shall hear soon what his Father will do, and so proceed
accordingly. I have no great Heart to the Business, neither will I with any
Violence oppose it: But leave it to that Power which rules in these
Conjunctions, and there is an End. Come; haste We homeward, Girl.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Henriquez, and Servants with Lights. Henr. Bear the Lights close: --
Where is the Music, Sirs?

Serve. Coming, my Lord.

Henr. Let 'em not come too near. This Maid,
For whom my Sighs ride on the Night's chill Vapor,
Is born most humbly, though she be as fair
As Nature's richest Mould and Skill can make her,
Mended with strong Imagination.
But what of That? The Obscureness of her Birth
Cannot eclipse the Luster of her Eyes,
Which make her all One Light. -- Strike up, my Masters;
But touch the Strings with a religious Softness;
Teach Sound to languish through the Night's dull Ear,
'Till Melancholy start from her lazy Couch,
And Carelessness grow Convert to Attention.
[Musick plays. She drives me into Wonder, when I sometimes
Hear her discourse; The Court, whereof Report,
And Guess alone inform her, she will rave at,
As if she there sev'n Reigns had sl^^der'd Time.
Then, when she reasons on her Country State,
Health, Virtue, Plainness, and Simplicity,
On Beauties true in Title, scorning Art,
Freedom as well to do, as think, what is good;
My Heart grows sick of Birth and empty Rank,
And I become a Villager in Wish.
Play on; -- She sleeps too sound: -- Be still, and vanish:
A Gleam of Day breaks sudden from her Window:
O Taper, graced by that midnight Hand!

Violante appears above at her Window. Viol. Who is it, that wooes at this late
Hour? What are you?

Henr. One, who for your dear Sake --

Viol. Watches the starless Night!
My Lord Henriquez, or my Ear deceives me.
You Have had my Answer, and it is more than strange
You Will combat these Repulses. Good my Lord,
Be Friend to your own Health; and give me Leave,
Securing my poor Fame, nothing to pity
What Pangs you swear you suffer. It Is impossible
To plant your choice Affections in my Shade,
At least, for them to grow there.

Henr. -- Why, Violante?

Viol. Alas! Sir, there are Reasons numberless
To bar your Aims. Be warned to Hours more wholesome;
For, These you watch in vain. I have read Stories,
(I fear, too true ones;) how young Lords, like you,
Have thus besung mean Windows, rhymed their Sufferings
Even to The Abuse of Things Divine, set up
Plain Girls, like me, the Idols of their Worship,
Then left them to bewail their easy Faith,
And stand the World's Contempt.

Henr. -- Your Memory,
Too faithful to the Wrongs of few lost Maids,
Makes Fear too general.

Viol. -- Let us be homely,
And let us too be chaste, doing you Lords no Wrong;
But crediting your Oaths with such a Spirit,
As you profess them: so no Party trusted
Shall make a losing Bargain. Home, my Lord,
What you can say, is most unseasonable; what sing,
Most absonant and harsh: Nay, your Perfume,
Which I smell hither, cheers not my Sense
Like our Field-violet's Breath.

Henr. -- Why, this Dismission
Does more invite my Staying.

Viol. -- Men of your Temper
Make every Thing their Bramble. But I wrong
That which I am preserving, my Maid's Name,
To hold so long Discourse. Your Virtues guide you
To Effect some nobler Purpose!

[Ex. Violante. Henr. Stay, bright Maid!
Come back, and leave me with a fairer Hope.
She Is gone: -- Who am I, that am thus contemned?
The second Son to a Prince? -- Yes; well; What then?
Why, your great Birth forbids you to descend
To a low Alliance: -- Here Is is the self-same Stuff,
Whereof we Dukes are made; but Clay more pure! And take away my Title, which
is acquired Not by my self, but thrown by Fortune on Me,
Or by the Merit of some Ancestour
Of singular Quality, She does inherit
Deserts t'outweigh me. -- I must stoop to gain her;
Throw all my gay Comparisons aside,
And turn my proud Additions out of Service,
Rather than keep them to become my Masters.
The Dignities we wear, are Gifts of Pride;
And laughed at by the Wise, as mere Outside.
[Exit.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE, The Prospect of a Village.
Enter Fabian and Lopez; Henriquez on the Opposite Side. Lop. SOFT, soft you,
Neighbor; who comes here? Pray you, slink aside.


Henr. Ha! Is it come to this? Oh the Devil, the Devil, the Devil!


Fab. Lo you now! for Want of the discreet Ladle of a cool Understanding, will
this Fellow's Brains boil over.


Henr. To have enjoyed her, I would have given -- What?
All that at present I could boast my own,
And the Reversion of the World to boot,
Had the Inheritance been mine: -- And now,
(Just Doom of guilty Joys!) I grieve as much
That I have rifled all the Stores of Beauty,
Those Charms of Innocence and artless Love,
As just before I was devoured with Sorrow,
That she refused my Vows, and shut the Door
Upon my ardent Longings.

Lop. Love! Love! -- Downright Love! I see by the Foolishness of it.


Henr. Now then to Recollection -- Was It not so? A Promise first of Marriage --
Not a Promise only, for 'twas bound with Surety of a thousand Oaths; -- and
those not light ones neither. -- Yet I remember too, those Oaths could not
prevail; the unpracticed Maid trembled to meet my Love: By Force alone I
snatched the imperfect Joy, which now torments my Memory. Not Love, but brutal
Violence prevailed; to which the Time, and Place, and Opportunity, were
Accessaries most dishonorable. Shame, Shame upon it!


Fab. What a Heap of Stuff's this -- I fancy, this Fellow's Head would make a
good Pedlar's Pack, Neighbor.


Henr. Hold, let me be severe to my Self, but not unjust. -- Was it a Rape
then? No. Her Shrieks, her Exclamations then had drove me from her. True, she
did not consent; as true, she did resist; but still in Silence all. -- 'Twas
but the Coyness of a modest Bride, not the Resentment of a ravished Maid. And is
the Man yet born, who would not risque the Guilt, to meet the Joy? -- The
Guilt! that is true -- but then the Danger; the Tears, the Clamours of the
ruined Maid, pursuing me to Court. That, that, I fear will (as it already does
my Conscience) something shatter my Honor. What Is to be done? But now I have
no Choice. Fair Leonora reigns confessed the Tyrant Queen of my revolted Heart,
and Violante seems a short Usurper there. -- Julio's already by my Arts
removed. -- O Friendship, how will thou answer That? Oh, that a Man could
reason down this Fever of the Blood, or sooth with Words the Tumult in his
Heart! Then, Julio, I might be, indeed, thy Friend. They, they only should
condemn me, who born devoid of Passion never have proved the fierce Disputes
'twixt Virtue and Desire. While they, who have, like me,

The loose Escapes of youthful Nature known.
Must wink at mine, indulgent to their own.

[Exit Henriquez. Lop. This Man is certainly mad, and may be mischievous.
Pr'ythee, Neighbor, let us follow him; but at some Distance, for fear of the
worst.


[Exeunt, after Henr. SCENE II. An Apartment.
Enters Violante alone. Viol. Whom shall I look upon without a Blush?
There Is not a Maid, whose Eye with Virgin Gaze
Pierces not to my Guilt. What will it avail me,
To say I was not willing;
Nothing; but that I publish my Dishonor,
And wound my Fame anew. -- O Misery,
To seem to all one's Neighbors rich, yet know
One's Self necessitous and wretched.

Enter Maid, and afterward Gerald with a Letter. Maid. Madam, here is Gerald,
Lord Henriquez' Servant;
He brings a Letter to you.

Viol. A Letter to me! How I tremble now!
Your Lord's for Court, good Gerald, is he not?

Ger. Not so, Lady.

Viol. O my presaging Heart! When goes he then?

Ger. His Business now steers him some other Course.

Viol. Whither, I pray you? -- How my Fears torment me!

Ger. Some two Months Progress.

Viol. -- Whither, whither, Sir,
I do beseech you? Good Heavens, I lose all Patience.
Did he deliberate this? or was the Business
But then conceived, when it was born?

Ger. Lady, I know not That; nor is it in the Command I have to wait your
Answer. For the perusing the Letter I commend you to your Leisure.


[Exit Gerald. Viol. To Hearts like mine Suspense is Misery.
Wax, render up thy Trust: Be the Contents
Prosperous, or fatal, they are all my Due.
Reads.] Our Prudence should now teach us to forget, what our Indiscretion has
committed. I have already made one Step toward this Wisdom, by prevailing on
Myself to bid you Farewell. O, Wretched and betrayed! Lost Violante!
Heart-wounded with a thousand perjured Vows,
Poisoned with studied Language, and bequeathed
To Desperation. I am now become
The Tomb of my own Honor: a dark Mansion,
For Death alone to dwell in. I invite thee,
Consuming Desolation, to this Temple,
Now fit to be thy Spoil: the ruined Fabric,
Which cannot be repaired, at once o'er-throw.
What must I do? -- But That Is not worth my Thought:
I will commend to Hazard all the Time
That I shall spend hereafter: Farewell, my Father,
Whom I Will no more offend: and Men, adieu,
Whom I Will no more believe: and Maids, adieu,
Whom I Will no longer shame. The Way I go,
As yet I know not. -- Sorrow be my Guide.

[Exit Violante. SCENE III. Prospect of a Village, before Don Bernard's House.
Enters Henriquez. Henr. Where were the Eyes, the Voice, the various Charms,
Each beauteous Particle, each nameless Grace,
Parents of glowing Love? All These in Her,
It seems, were not: but a Disease in Me,
That fancied Graces in her. -- Who never beheld
More than a Hawthorne, shall have Cause to say
The Cedar's a tall Tree; and scorn the Shade,
The loved Bush once had lent him. Soft! mine Honor
Begins to sicken in this black Reflection.
How can it be, that with my Honor safe
I should pursue Leonora for my Wife?
That were accumulating Injuries,
To Violante first, and now to Julio;
To her a perjured Wretch, to him perfidious;
And to myself in strongest Terms accused
Of murdering Honor wilfully, without which
My Dog's the Creature of the nobler Kind. --
But Pleasure is too strong for Reason's Curb;
And Conscience sinks o'er-power'd with Beauty's Sweets.
Come, Leonora, Authress of my Crime,
Appear, and vindicate thy Empire here;
Aid me to drive this lingering Honor hence,
And I am wholly thine.

Enter to him, Don Bernard and Leonora. D. Bern. Fie, my good Lord; why would
you wait without?
If you suspect your Welcome, I have brought
My Leonora to assure you of it.

[ Henr. salutes Leon. Henr. O Kiss, sweet as the Odours of the Spring,
But cold as Dews that dwell on Morning Flowers!
Say, Leonora, has your Father conquered?
Shall Duty then at last obtain the Prize,
Which you refused to Love? And shall Henriquez
Owe all his Happiness to good Bernardo?
Ah! no; I read my Ruin in your Eyes:
That Sorrow, louder than a thousand Tongues,
Pronounces my Despair.

D. Bern. -- Come, Leonora,
You are not now to learn, this noble Lord,
(Whom but to name, restores my failing Age,)
Has with a Lover's Eye beheld your Beauty;
Through which his Heart speaks more than Language can;
It offers Joy and Happiness to You,
And Honor to our House. Imagine then
The Birth and Qualities of him that loves you;
Which when you know, you cannot rate too dear.

Leon. My Father, on my Knees I do beseech you
To pause one Moment on your Daughter's Ruin.
I vow, my Heart even bleeds, that I must thank you
For your past Tenderness; and yet distrust
That which is yet behind. Consider, Sir,
Whoe'er's the Occasion of another's Fault,
Cannot himself be innocent. O, give not
The censuring World Occasion to reproach
Your harsh Commands; or to my Charge lay That
Which most I fear, the Fault of Disobedience.

D. Bern. Pr'ythee, fear neither the One, nor the Other: I tell thee, Girl,
there is more Fear than Danger. For my own part, as soon as Thou art married to
this noble Lord, my Fears will be over.


Leon. Sir, I should be the vainest of my Sex,
Not to esteem myself unworthy far
Of this high Honor. Once there was a Time,
When to have heard my Lord Henriquez' Vows,
Might have subdued my unexperienced Heart,
And made me wholly his. -- But That Is now past:
And my firm-plighted Faith by your Consent
Was long since given to the injured Julio.

D. Bern. Why then, by my Consent even take it back again. Thou, like a simple
Wench, have given thy Affections to a Fellow, that does not care a Farthing for
them. One, that has left thee for a Jaunt to Court; as who should say, I Will get
a Place now; it is Time enough to marry, when I Am turned out of it.


Henr. So, surely, it should seem, most lovely Maid;
Julio, alas, feels nothing of my Passion:
His Love is but the Amusement of an Hour,
A short Relief from Business, or Ambition,
The Sport of Youth, and Fashion of the Age.
O! had he known the Hopes, the Doubts, the Ardours,
Or half the fond Varieties of Passion,
That play the Tyrant with my tortured Soul;
He had not left Thee to pursue his Fortune:
To practice Cringes in a slavish Circle,
And barter real Bliss for unsure Honor.

Leon. Oh, the opposing Wind,
Should'ring the Tide, makes here a fearful Billow:
I needs must perish in it. -- Oh, my Lord,
Is it then possible, you can forget
What Is due to your great Name, and princely Birth,
To Friendship's holy Law, to Faith reposed,
To Truth, to Honor, and poor injured Julio?
O think, my Lord, how much this Julio loves you;
Recall his Services, his well-try'd Faith;
Think too, this very Hour, wherever he be,
Your Favor is the Envy of the Court,
And secret Triumph of his grateful Heart.
Poor Julio, how securely thou depend'st
Upon the Faith and Honor of thy Master;
Mistaken Youth! this very Hour he robs thee
Of all thy Heart holds dear. -- It Is so Henriquez
Repays the Merits of unhappy Julio. [Weeps.

Henr. My slumbering Honor catches the Alarm.
I was to blame to parley with her thus:
She Has shown me to myself. It troubles me. [Aside.

D. Bern. Mad; Mad. Stark mad, by this Light.


Leon. I but begin to be so. -- I conjure you,
By all the tender Interests of Nature,
By the chaste Love 'twixt you, and my dear Mother*
(O holy Heaven, that she were living now!)
Forgive and pity me. -- Oh, Sir, remember,
I Have heard my Mother say a thousand Times,
Her Father would have forced her Virgin Choice;
But when the Conflict was 'twixt Love and Duty,
Which should be first obeyed, my Mother quickly
Paid up her Vows to Love, and married You.
You thought this well, and she was praised for This;
For this her Name was honored, Disobedience
Was never imputed to her, her firm Love
Conquered whatever opposed it, and she prosper'd
Long Time your Wife. My Case is now the same;
You are the Father, which You then condemned;
I, what my Mother was; but not so happy. --

D. Bern. Go to, you're a Fool. No doubt, You have old Stories enough to undo
you. -- What, you cannot throw yourself away but by Precedent, ha? -- You will
needs be married to One, that will None of You? You will be happy no Body's way
but your own, forsooth. -- But, do you mark me, spare your Tongue for the future;
(and That Is using you hardly too, to bid you spare what you have a great deal
too much of:) Go, go your ways, and do you hear, get ready within these Two days
to be married to a Husband you don't deserve; -- Do it, or, by my dead Father's
Soul, you are no Acquaintance of mine.


Henr. She weeps: Be gentler to her, good Bernardo.

Leon. Then Woe the Day. -- I Am circled round with Fire;
No Way for my Escape, but through the Flames.
Oh, can I ever resolve to live without
A Father's Blessing, or abandon Julio?
With other Maids, the Choice were not so hard;
Interest, that rules the World, has made at last
A Merchandise of Hearts: and Virgins now
Choose as they are bid, and wed without Esteem.
By nobler Springs shall my Affections move;
Nor own a Master, but the Man I love.

[Exit Leonora. D. Bern. Go thy ways, Contradiction. -- Follow her, my Lord;
follow her, in the very Heat. This Obstinacy must be combated by Importunity as
obstinate.

[Exit Henriquez after her. The Girl says right; her Mother was just such
Another. I remember, Two of Us courted her at the same Time. She loved neither
of Us, but She chose me purely to spite that surly Old Blockhead my
Father-in-Law. Who comes here, Camillo? Now the refusing Part will lie on my
Side. --


Enters Camillo. Came. My worthy Neighbor, I am much in Fortune's Favor to
find You thus alone. I have a Suit to You.


D. Bern. Please to name it, Sir.


Came. Sir, I have long held You in singular Esteem: and what I shall now say,
will be a Proof of it. You know, Sir, I have but one Son.


D. Bern. Ay, Sir.


Came. And the Fortune I am blessed withal, You pretty well know what it is.


D. Bern. It Is a fair One, Sir.


Came. Such as it is, the whole Reversion is my Son's. He is now engaged in his
Attendance on our Master, the Duke. But ever he went, he left with me the
Secret of his Heart, his Love for your fair Daughter. For your Consent, he
said, 'twas ready: I took a Night, indeed, to think upon it, and now have
brought you mine; and am come to bind the Contract with half my Fortune in
present, the Whole some time hence, and, in the mean while, my hearty Blessing.
Ha? What say You to it, Don Bernard?


D. Bern. Why, really, Neighbor, -- I must own, I have heard Something of this
Matter. --


Came. Heard Something of it? No doubt, you have.


D. Bern. Yes, now I recollect it well.


Came. Was it so long ago then?


D. Bern. Very long ago, Neighbor. -- On Tuesday last.


Came. What, am I mocked in this Business, Don Bernard?


D. Bern. Not mocked, good Camillo, not mocked: But in Love-matters, you know,
there are Abundance of Changes in half an Hour. Time, Time, Neighbor, plays
Tricks with all of us.


Came. Time, Sir! What tell you me of Time? Come, I see how this goes. Can a
little Time take a Man by the Shoulder, and shake off his Honor? Let me tell
you, Neighbor, it must either be a strong Wind, or a very mellow Honesty that
drops so easily. Time, quoth'a?


D. Bern. Look'ee, Camillo; will you please to put your Indignation in your
Pocket for half a Moment, while I tell you the whole Truth of the Matter. My
Daughter, you must know, is such a tender Soul, she cannot possibly see a
Duke's younger Son without falling desperately in Love with him. Now, you know,
Neighbor, when Greatness rides Post after a Man of my Years, it is both
Prudence, and good Breeding, to let one's self be overtaken by it. And who can
help all This? I profess, it was not my seeking, Neighbor.


Came. I profess, a Fox might earth in the Hollowness of your Heart, Neighbor,
and there is an End. If I were to give a bad Conscience its true Likeness, it
should be drawn after a very near Neighbor to a certain poor Neighbor of
yours. -- Neighbor! with a Pox.


D. Bern. Nay, you are so nimble with me, you will hear Nothing.


Came. Sir, if I must speak Nothing, I will hear Nothing. As for what you have
to say, if it comes from your Heart, it is a Lie before you speak it. -- I Will to
Leonora; and if I find her in the same Story, why, I shall believe your Wife
was true to You, and your Daughter is your own. Fare you well.


[Exit, as into D. Bernard's House. D. Bern. Ay, but two Words must go to that
Bargain. It happens, that I am at present of Opinion my Daughter shall receive
no more Company to day at least, no such Visits as yours.


[Exit D. Bernard, following him SCENE IV. Changes to another Prospect of Don
Bernard's House.
Leonora, above. Leon. How tediously I Have waited at the Window,
Yet know not One that passes. -- Should I trust
My Letter to a Stranger, whom I think
To bear an honest Face, (in which sometimes
We fancy we are wondrous skilful;) then
I might be much deceived. This late Example
Of base Henriquez, bleeding in me now,
From each good Aspect takes away my Trust:
For his Face seemed to promise Truth and Honor.
Since Nature's Gifts in noblest Forms deceive,
Be happy You, that want 'em! -- Here comes One;
I Have seen him, though I know him not; He has
An honest Face too -- that is no Matter. -- Sir, --

Enters Citizen. Citiz. To me?

Leon. As You were of a virtuous Matron born,
(There is no Doubt, you are:) I do conjure you
Grant me one Boon. Say, do you know me, Sir?

Citiz. Ay, Leonora, and your worthy Father.

Leon. I have not Time to press the Suit I Have to you
With many Words; nay, I should want the Words,
Though I had Leisure: but for Love of Justice,
And as you pity Misery -- But I wander
Wide from my Subject. Know you Julio, Sir?

Citiz. Yes, very well; and love him too, as well.

Leon. Oh, there an Angel spoke! Then I conjure you,
Convey this Paper to him: and believe me,
You do Heaven Service in it, and shall have Cause
Not to repent your Pains. -- I know not what
Your Fortune is; -- Pardon me, gentle Sir,
That I am bold to offer This. [Throws down a Purse with Money.

D. Bern. within.] Leonora. --

Leon. I trust to you; Heaven put it in your Heart
To work me some Relief.

Citiz. Doubt it not, Lady. You have moved me so,
That though a thousand Dangers barred my way,
I Would dare 'em all to serve you.

[Exit Citizen. Leon. Thanks from a richer Hand than mine requite you!

D. Bern. within.] Why, Daughter --

Leon. I come: -- Oh, Julio, feel but half my Grief,
And Thou will outfly Time to bring Relief.

[Exit Leonora from the Window. End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE, The Prospect of a Village.
Enter Julio with a Letter, and Citizen. Citiz. WHEN from the Window she did
bow and call,
Her Passions shook her Voice; and from her Eyes
Mistemper and Distraction, with strange Wildness
Bespoke Concern above a common Sorrow.

Jul. Poor Leonora! Treacherous, damned Henriquez!
She bids me fill my Memory with her Danger;
I do, my Leonora; yes, I fill
The Region of my Thought with nothing else;
Lower, she tells me here, that this Affair
Shall yield a Testimony of her Love:
And prays, her Letter may come safe and sudden.
This Prayer the Heavens have heard, and I beseech 'em,
To hear all Prayers she makes.

Citiz. -- Have Patience, Sir.

Jul. O my good Friend, methinks, I am too patient.
Is there a Treachery, like This in Baseness,
Recorded any where? It is the deepest:
None but Itself can be its Parallel:
And from a Friend, professed! -- Friendship? Why, it is
A Word for ever maimed; in human Nature
It was a Thing the noblest; and among Beasts,
It stood not in mean Place: Things of fierce Nature
Hold Amity and Concordance. -- Such a Villainy
A Writer could not put down in his Scene,
Without Taxation of his Auditory
For Fiction most enormous.

Citiz. -- These Upbraidings
Cool Time, while they are vented.

Jul. -- I am counseled.
For you, evermore, Thanks. You Have done much for Us;
So gently pressed to 't, that I may persuade me
You Will do a little more.

Citiz. -- Put me t'Employment
That Is honest, though not safe, with my best Spirits
I Will give 't Accomplishment.

Jul. No more but This;
For I must see Leonora: And to appear
Like Julio, as I am, might happily spoil
Some good Event ensuing. Let me crave
The Exchange of Habit with you: some Disguise,
May bear Me to my Love, unmarked, and secret.

Citiz. You shall not want. Yonder Is the House before us:
Make Haste to reach it.

Jul. -- Still I thank you, Sir.
O Leonora! stand but this rude Shock;
Hold out thy Faith against the dread Assault
Of this base Lord, the Service of my Life
Shall be devoted to repay thy Constancy.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. Don Bernard's House.
Enters Leonora. Leon. I Have hoped to the latest Minute Hope can give:
'He will not come: H'as not received my Letter:
'May be, some other View has from our Home
Repealed his changed Eye: for what Business can
Excuse a Tardiness thus wilful? None.
Well then, it is not Business. -- Oh! that Letter, --
I say, is not delivered; or He Is sick;
Or, O Suggestion, wherefore will Thou fright me?
Julio does to Henriquez on mere Purpose,
On plotted Purpose, yield me up; and He
Has chose another Mistress. All Presumptions
Make powerful to this Point: His own Protraction,
Henriquez left behind; -- That Strain lacked Jealousy,
Therefore lacked Love. -- So sure as Life shall empty
It self in Death, this new Surmise of mine
Is a bold Certainty. It Is plain, and obvious,
Henriquez would not, durst not, thus infringe
The Law of Friendship; thus provoke a Man,
That bears a Sword, and wears his Flag of Youth
As fresh as He: He durst not: It Is Contrivance,
Gross-dawbing 'twixt them Both. -- But I Am o'erheard. [Going.

Enters Julio, disguised. Jul. Stay, Leonora; Has this outward Veil
Quite lost me to thy Knowledge?

Leon. -- O my Julio!
Thy Presence ends the stern Debate of Doubt,
And cures me of a thousand heartsick Fears,
Sprung from thy Absence: yet awakes a Train
Of other sleeping Terrors. Do you weep?

Jul. No, Leonora; when I weep, it must be
The Substance of mine Eye. 'Would I could weep;
For then mine Eye would drop upon my Heart,
And swage the Fire there.

Leon. -- You are full possessed
How things go here. First, welcome heartily;
Welcome to th'Ending of my last good Hour:
Now Summer Bliss and gaudy Days are gone,
My Lease in 'em 's expired.

Jul. -- Not so, Leonora.

Leon. Yes, Julio, yes; an everlasting Storm
Is come upon me, which I cannot bear out.
I cannot stay much Talk; we have lost Leisure;
And thus it is: Your Absence has given Breeding
To what my Letter has declared, and is
This Instant on th'effecting, Hark! the Music [Flourish within.
Is now on tuning, which must celebrate
This Business so discordant. -- Tell me then,
What you will do.

Jul. -- I know not what: Advise me:
I Will kill the Traitor.

Leon. -- O! take Heed: his Death
Betters our Cause no whit. No killing, Julio.

Jul. My Blood stands still; and all my Faculties
Are by Enchantment dulled. You gracious Powers,
The Guardians of sworn Faith, and suffering Virtue,
Inspire Prevention of this dreaded Mischief!
This Moment is our own; Let Us use it, Love,
And fly of the Instant from this House of Woe.

Leon. Alas! Impossible: My Steps are watched;
There Is no Escape for Me. You must stay too.

Jul. What! stay, and see thee ravished from my Arms?
I Will force thy Passage. Wear I not a Sword?
Never on Man's Thigh rode better. -- If I suffer
The Traitor play his Part; if I not do
Manhood and Justice, Honor; let me be deemed
A tame, pale, Coward, whom the Night-Owl's Hoot
May turn to Aspen-leaf: Some Man take This,
Give Me a Distaff for it.

Leon. -- Patience, Julio;
And trust to Me: I have forethought the Means
To disappoint these Nuptials. -- Hark! again; [Musick within.
These are the Bells knoll for Us. -- See, the Lights
Move this Way, Julio. Quick, behind yon Arras,
And take thy secret Stand. -- Dispute it not;
I have my Reasons, you anon shall know them: --
There you may mark the Passages of the Night.
Yet, more: -- I charge you by the dearest Ties,
What-e'er you see, or hear, what-e'er shall hap,
In your Concealment rest a silent Statue.
Nay, hide thee strait, -- or, -- see, I Am armed, and vow [Shews a Dagger.
To fall a bleeding Sacrifice before Thee. [Thrusts him out, to the Arras.
I dare not tell thee of my Purpose, Julio,
Lest it should wrap thee in such Agonies,
Which my Love could not look on. --

SCENE opens to a large Hall: An Altar prepared with Tapers. Enter at one Door
Servants with Lights, Henriquez, Don Bernard, and Churchman. At another,
Attendants to Leonora. Henriquez runs to her. Henr. Why, Leonora, will Thou
with this Gloom
Darken my Triumph; suffering Discontent,
And wan Displeasure, to subdue that Check
Where Love should sit enthroned? Behold your Slave;
Nay, frown not; for each Hour of growing Time
Shall task me to thy Service, 'till by Merit
Of dearest Love I blot the low-born Julio
From thy fair Mind.

Leon. -- So I shall make it foul;
This Counsel is corrupt.

Henr. -- Come, you will change. --

Leon. Why would you make a Wife of such a One,
That is so apt to change? This foul Proceeding
Still speaks against itself, and vilifies
The purest of your Judgment. -- For your Birth's Sake
I will not dart my hoarded Curses at you,
Nor give my Meanings Language: For the Love
Of all good Things together, yet take heed,
And spurn the Tempter back.

D. Bern. I think, you're mad. -- Perverse, and foolish, Wretch!

Leon. How may I be obedient, and wise too?
Of my Obedience, Sir, I cannot strip me;
Nor can I then be wise: Grace against Grace!
Ungracious, if I not obey a Father;
Most perjured, if I do. -- Yet, Lord, consider,
Or ever too late, or ever that Knot be tied,
Which may with Violence damnable be broken,
No other way dissever'd: Yet consider,
You wed my Body, not my Heart, my Lord;
No Part of my Affection. Sounds it well,
That Julio's Love is Lord Henriquez' Wife;
Have you an Ear for this harsh Sound?

Henr. No Shot of Reason can come near the Place,
Where my Love's fortified. The Day shall come,
Wherein you will chide this Backwardness, and bless
Our Fervor in this Course.

Leon. -- No, no, Henriquez,
When you shall find what Prophet you are proved,
You Will prophecy no more.

D. Bern. -- Have done this Talking,
If you will cleave to your Obedience, do it;
If not, unbolt the Portal, and be gone;
My Blessing stay behind you.

Leon. -- Sir, your Pardon:
I will not swerve a Hair's Breadth from my Duty;
It shall first cost me dear.

D. Bern. -- Well then, to the Point:
Give me your Hand. -- My honored Lord, receive
My Daughter of Me, -- (nay, no dragging back,
But with my Curses;) -- whom I frankly give you,
And wish you Joy and Honor.

[As Don Bernard goes to give Leonora to Henriquez, Julio advances from the
Arras, and steps between. Jul. -- Hold, Don Bernard,
Mine is the elder Claim.

D. Bern. -- What are you, Sir?

Jul. A Wretch, that is almost lost to his own Knowledge,
Struck through with Injuries. --

Henr. -- Ha! Julio? -- Hear you,
Were you not sent on our Commands to Court?
Ordered to wait your fair Dismission thence?
And have you dared, knowing you are our Vassal,
To steal away unpriviledg'd, and leave
My Business and your Duty unaccomplish'd?

Jul. Ungen'rous Lord! The Circumstance of Things
Should stop the Tongue of Question. -- You have wronged me;
Wronged me so basely, in so dear a Point,
As stains the Cheek of Honor with a Blush;
Cancells the Bonds of Service; bids Allegiance
Throw to the Wind all high Respects of Birth,
Title, and Eminence; and, in their Stead,
Fills up the panting Heart with just Defiance.
If you have Sense of Shame, or Justice, Lord,
Forego this bad Intent; or with your Sword
Answer me like a Man, and I shall thank you.
Julio once dead, Leonora may be thine;
But, living, She Is a Prize too rich to part with.

Henr. Vain Man! the present Hour is fraught with Business
Of richer Moment. Love shall first be served:
Then, if your Courage hold to claim it of me,
I may have Leisure to chastise this Boldness.

Jul. Nay, then I Will seize my Right.

Henr. -- What, here, a Brawl?
My Servants, -- Turn this boisterous Sworder forth;
And see he come not to disturb our Joys.

Jul. Hold, Dogs! -- Leonora, -- Coward, base, Henriquez!

[ Julio is seized, and dragged out by the Servants. Henr. She dies upon Me;
help!

[ Leonora swoons; as they endeavor to recover her, a Paper drops from her. D.
Bern. -- Throng not about her;
But give her Air.

Henr. -- What Paper's That? let us see it.
It is her own Handwriting.

D. Bern. -- Bow her Head:
It Is but her Fright; she will recover soon.
What learn you by that Paper, good my Lord?

Henr. That she would do the Violence to herself,
Which Nature has anticipated on her.
What Dagger means she? Search her well, I pray you.

D. Bern. Here is the Dagger. -- Oh, the stubborn Sex,
Rash even to Madness! --

Henr. -- Bear her to her Chamber:
Life flows in her again. -- Pray, bear her hence:
And tend her, as you would the World's best Treasure.
[Women carry Leonora off. Don Bernard, this wild Tumult soon will cease,
The Cause removed; and all return to Calmness.
Passions in Women are as short in Working,
As strong in their Effect. Let the Priest wait:
Come, go we in: My Soul is all on Fire;
And burns impatient of this forced Delay.

[Exeunt; and the Scene closes. SCENE III. Prospect of a Village at a Distance.
Enters Roderick. Rod. Julio's Departure thus in secret from Me,
With the long doubtful Absence of my Brother,
(Who cannot suffer, but my Father feels it;)
Have trusted me with strong Suspicions,
And Dreams, that will not let me sleep, nor eat,
Nor taste those Recreations Health demands:
But, like a Whirlwind, hither have they snatched me,
Perforce, to be resolved. I know my Brother
Had Julio's Father for his Host: from him
Enquiry may befriend me.
Enters Camillo. Old Sir, I Am glad
To 've met you thus: What ails the Man? Camillo, --

Came. Ha?

Rod. Is It possible, you should forget your Friends?

Came. Friends! What are Those?

Rod. -- Why, Those that love you, Sir.

Came. You're None of Those, sure, if you be Lord Roderick.

Rod. Yes, I am that Lord Roderick, and I lie not,
If I protest, I love you passing well.

Came. You loved my Son too passing well, I take it:
One, that believed too suddenly his Court-Creed.

Rod. All is not well. [aside.] -- Good old Man, do not rail.

Came. My Lord, my Lord, you have dealt dishonourably.

Rod. Good Sir, I am so far from doing Wrongs
Of that base Strain, I understand you not.

Came. Indeed! -- You know not neither, of my Conscience,
How your most virtuous Brother, noble Henriquez,
(You look so like him, Lord, you are the worse for it;
Rots upon such Dissemblers!) under color
Of buying Coursers, and I know not what,
Bought my poor Boy out of Possession
Even of his plighted Faith. -- Was not this Honor?
And This a constant Friend?

Rod. -- I dare not say so.

Came. Now you have robbed him of his Love, take all;
Make up your Malice, and dispatch his Life too.

Rod. If you would hear me, Sir, --

Came. -- Your brave old Father
Would have been torn in Pieces with wild Horses,
Ever he had done this Treachery. On my Conscience,
Had he but dreamt you Two durst have committed
This base, unmanly Crime, --

Rod. Why, this is Madness. --

Came. I Have done; I Have eased my Heart; now you may talk.

Rod. Then as I am a Gentleman, believe me,
(For I will lie for no Man;) I Am so far
From being guilty of the least Suspicion
Of Sin that way, that fearing the long Absence
Of Julio and my Brother might beget
Something to start at, hither have I traveled
To know the Truth of you.

Enters Violante behind. Viol. My Servant loiters; sure, he means me well.
Camillo, and a Stranger? These may give me
Some Comfort from their Talk. I Will step aside:
And hear what Fame is stirring.

[ Violante retires. Rod. -- Why this Wondering?

Came. Can there be one so near in Blood as you are
To that Henriquez, and an honest Man?

Rod. While he was good, I do confess my Nearness;
But, since his Fall from Honor, he is to me
As a strange Face I saw but Yesterday,
And as soon lost.

Came. -- I ask your Pardon, Lord;
I was too rash and bold.

Rod. -- No Harm done, Sir.

Came. But is it possible, you should not hear
The Passage 'twixt Leonora and your Brother?

Rod. None of All This.

Enters Citizen. Came. How now?

Citiz. I bear you Tidings, Sir, which I could wish
Some other Tongue delivered.

Came. -- Whence, I pray you?

Citiz. From your Son, Sir.

Came. Pr'ythee, where is he?

Citiz. That Is more than I know now, Sir.
But This I can assure you, he has left
The City raging mad; Heaven comfort him!
He came to that cursed Marriage -- The Fiends take it! --

Came. Pr'ythee, be gone, and bid the Bell knoll for me:
I have had one Foot in the Grave some Time.
Nay, go, good Friend; thy News deserve no Thanks.
How does your Lordship?

[Exit Citizen. Rod. -- That Is well said, Old Man.
I hope, all shall be well yet.

Came. -- It had need;
For it is a crooked World. Farewell, poor Boy! --

Enters Don Bernard. D. Bern. This comes of forcing Women where they hate:
It was my own Sin; and I am rewarded.
Now I am like an aged Oak, alone,
Left for all Tempests. -- I would cry, but cannot:
I Am dried to Death almost with these Vexations.
Lord! what a heavy Load I have within me!
My Heart, -- my Heart, -- my Heart --

Came. -- Has this ill Weather Met with Thee too?

D. Bern. -- O Wench, that I were with thee!

Came. You do not come to mock at me now?

D. Bern. Ha? --

Came. Do not dissemble; Thou may find a Knave
As bad as thou art, to undo thee too:
I hope to see that Day before I dye yet.

D. Bern. It needs not, Camillo; I am Knave
Sufficient to my self. If thou will rail,
Do it as bitterly as thou can think of;
For I deserve it. Draw thy Sword, and strike me;
And I will thank thee for it. -- I Have lost my Daughter;
She Is stolen away; and whither gone, I know not.

Came. She has a fair Blessing in being from you, Sir.
I was too poor a Brother for your Greatness;
You must be grafted into noble Stocks,
And have your Titles raised. My State was laughed at:
And my Alliance scorned. I Have lost a Son too;
Which must not be put up so. [Offers to draw.

Rod. -- Hold; be counseled.
You Have equal Losses; urge no farther Anger.
Heaven, pleased now at your Love, may bring again,
And, no Doubt, will, your Children to your Comforts:
In which Adventure my Foot shall be foremost.
And One more will I add, my Honored Father;
Who has a Son to grieve for too, though tainted.
Let your joint Sorrow be as Balm to heal
These Wounds of adverse Fortune.

D. Bern. Come, Camillo,
Do not deny your Love, for Charity;
I ask it of you. Let this noble Lord
Make Brothers of Us, whom our own cross Fates
Could never join. What I have been, forget;
What I intend to be, believe and nourish:
I do confess my Wrongs; give me your Hand.

Came. Heaven make thee honest; -- there.

Rod. -- It Is done like good Men.
Now there rests Naught, but that we part, and each
Take several Ways in Quest of our lost Friends:
Some of my Train over the wild Rocks shall wait you.
Our best Search ended, here we'll meet again,
And tell the Fortunes of our separate Travels.

[Exeunt. Violante comes forward. Viol. I would, your Brother had but half your
Virtue!
Yet there remains a little Spark of Hope
That lights me to some Comfort.
The Match is crossed; The Parties separate; and I again
May come to see this Man that has betrayed me;
And wound his Conscience for it: Home again
I will not go, whatever Fortune guides me;
Though every Step I went, I trod upon
Dangers as fearful and as pale as Death.
No, no, Henriquez; I will follow thee
Where there is Day. Time may beget a Wonder.
Enters Servant. O, are you come? What News?

Serve. None, but the worst. Your Father makes mighty Offers yonder by a Crier,
to any One can bring you home again.


Viol. Art Thou corrupted?


Serve. No.


Viol. Will thou be honest?


Serve. I hope, you do not fear me.


Viol. Indeed, I do not. Thou have an honest Face;
And such a Face, when it deceives, take heed,
Is cursed of all Heaven's Creatures.

Serve. I Will hang first.

Viol. Heaven bless thee from that End! -- I Have heard a Man
Say more than This; and yet that Man was false.
Thou^^^ not be so, I hope.

Serve. By my Life, Mistress, --


Viol. Swear not; I credit Thee. But pry'thee though,
Take Heed, thou do not fail: I do not doubt Thee:
Yet I have trusted such a serious Face,
And been abused too.

Serve. If I fail your Trust, --


Viol. I do thee Wrong to hold thy Honesty
At Distance thus: Thou shall know all my Fortunes.
Get me a Shepherd's Habit.

Serve. Well; what else?


Viol. And wait me in the Evening, where I told thee;
There Thou shall know my farther Ends. Take Heed --

Serve. Do You fear me still?


Viol. -- No; This is only Counsel:
My Life and Death I have put equally
Into thy Hand: Let not Rewards, nor Hopes,
Be cast into the Scale to turn thy Faith.
Be honest but for Virtue's sake, that is all;
He, that has such a Treasure, cannot fall.

[Exeunt. The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE, A Wide Plain, with a Prospect of Mountains at a Distance.
Enter Master of the Flocks, three or four Shepherds, and Violante in Boy's
Clothes. 1 Shep. WELL, he is as sweet a Man, Heaven comfort him! as ever these
Eyes looked on.


2 Shep. If he have a Mother, I believe, Neighbors, she is a Woe-woman for him
at this Hour.


Mast. Why should he haunt these wild unpeopled Mountains, Where nothing dwells
but Hunger, and sharp Winds?


1 Shep. His Melancholy, Sir, that is the main Devil does it. Go to, I fear he
has had too much foul Play offered him.


Mast. How gets he Meat?


2 Shep. Why, now and then he takes our Victuals from us, though we desire him to
eat; and instead of a short Grace, beats us well and soundly, and then falls to.


Mast. Where lies He?


1 Shep. Even where the Night o'ertakes him.


2 Shep. Now will I be hanged, an'some fair-snouted skittish Woman, or other,
be not at the End of this Madness.


1 Shep. Well, if he lodged within the Sound of us, I knew our Music would
allure him. How attentively he stood, and how he fixed his Eyes, when your Boy
sung his Love-Ditty. Oh, here he comes again.


Mast. Let him alone; he wonders strangely at us.


1 Shep. Not a Word, Sirs, to cross him, as you love your Shoulders.


2 Shep. He seems much disturbed: I believe the mad Fit is upon him.


Enters Julio. Jul. Horsemanship! -- Hell -- Riding shall be abolished:
Turn the barb'd Steed loose to his native Wildness;
It is a Beast too noble to be made
The Property of Man's Baseness. -- What a Letter
Wrote he to's Brother? What a Man was I?
Why, Perseus did not know his Seat like me;
The Parthian, that rides swift without the Rein,
Matched not my Grace and Firmness. -- Shall this Lord
Dye, when Men pray for him? Think you it is meet?

1 Shep. I don't know what to say: Neither I, nor all the Confessors in Spain,
can unriddle this wild Stuff.


Jul. I must to Court! be ushered into Grace,
By a large List of Praises ready penned!
O Devil! What a venomous World is this,
When Commendations are the Baits to Ruin!
All these good Words were Gyves and Fetters, Sir,
To keep me bolted there: while the false Sender
Played out the Game of Treach'ry. -- Hold; come hither;
You have an Aspect, Sir, of wondrous Wisdom,
And, as it seems, are traveled deep in Knowledge;
Have you ever seen the Phaenix of the Earth,
The Bird of Paradise?

2 Shep. -- In Troth, not I, Sir.


Jul. I have; and known her Haunts, and where she built
Her spicy Nest: 'till, like a credulous Fool,
I showed the Treasure to a Friend in Trust,
And he has robbed me of her. -- Trust no Friend:
Keep thy Heart's Counsels close. -- Have thou a Mistress?
Give her not out in Words; nor let thy Pride
Be wanton to display her Charms to View;
Love is contagious: and a Breath of Praise,
Or a slight Glance, has kindled up its Flame,
And turned a Friend a Traitor. -- It Is in Proof;
And it has hurt my Brain.

1 Shep. Marry, now there is some Moral in his Madness, and we may profit by it.


Mast. See, he grows cool, and pensive.
Go toward him, Boy, but do not look that way.

Viol. Alas! I tremble --


Jul. -- Oh, my pretty Youth!
Come hither, Child; Did not your Song imply
Something of Love?

1 Shep. Ha -- ha -- goes it there? Now if the Boy be witty, we shall trace
something.


Viol. Yes, Sir, it was the Subject.


Jul. Sit here then: Come, shake not, good pretty Soul,
Nor do not fear me; I Will not do thee Wrong.

Viol. Why do you look so on me?


Jul. -- I have Reasons.
It puzzles my Philosophy, to think
That the rude Blast, hot Sun, and dashing Rains
Have made no fiercer War upon thy Youth;
Nor hurt the Bloom of that Vermilion Cheek.
You weep too, do you not?

Viol. -- Sometimes, I do.


Jul. I weep sometimes too. You're extremely young.

Viol. Indeed, I Have seen more Sorrows far than Years.


Jul. Yet all these have not broken your Complexion.
You have a strong Heart, and you are the happier.
I warrant, you're a very loving Woman.

Viol. A Woman, Sir? -- I fear, h'as found me out. [Aside.


2 Shep. He takes the Boy for a Woman. -- Mad, again!


Jul. You Have met some Disappointment; some foul Play
Has crossed your Love. -- I read it in your Face.

Viol. You read a Truth then.


Jul. -- Where can lie the Fault?
Is It in the Man, or some dissembling Knave,
He put in Trust? Ho! have I hit the Cause?

Viol. You're not far off.


Jul. This World is full of Coz'ners, very full;
Young Virgins must be wary in their Ways.
I Have known a Duke's Son do as great a Knavery.
Will you be ruled by me?

Viol. -- Yes.


Jul. -- Kill Yourself.
'Twill be a Terror to the Villain's Conscience,
The longest Day he lives.

Viol. -- By no Means. What?
Commit Self-murder!

Jul. -- Yes; I Will have it so.

1 Shep. I fear, his Fit is returning. Take heed of all hands. -- Sir, -- do
you want any thing?


Jul. Thouly'st; thou can not hurt me: I am proof
Against farther Wrongs. -- Steal close behind me, Lady.
I will avenge Thee.

Viol. -- Thank the Heavens, I Am free.

Jul. O treacherous, base Henriquez! have I caught thee?

2 Shep. Help! help! good Neighbors; he will kill me else.


[ Julio seizes on the Shepherd; Violante runs out. Jul. Here Thou shall pay
thy Heart-blood for the Wrongs
Thou'st heaped upon this Head. Faith-breaker! Villain!
I Will suck thy Lifeblood.

1 Shep. Good Sir, have Patience; this is no Henriquez.


[They rescue the Shepherd. Jul. Well; let him slink to Court, and hide a
Coward;
Not all his Father's Guards shall shield him there.
Or if he prove too strong for Mortal Arm,
I will solicit every Saint in Heaven
To lend me Vengeance. -- I Will about it strait. --
The wrathful Elements shall wage this War;
Furies shall haunt him; Vultures gnaw his Heart;
And Nature pour forth all her Stores of Plagues,
To join in Punishment of Trust betrayed.

[Exit Julio. 2 Shep. Go thy Ways, and a Vengeance go with Thee! -- Pray, feel
my Nose; is it fast, Neighbors?


1 Shep. It Is as well as may be.


2 Shep. He pulled at it, as he would have dragged a Bullock backward by the
Tail. -- An't had been some Men's Nose that I know, Neighbors, who knows where
it had been now? He has given me such a devilish Dash over the Mouth, that I
feel, I shall never whistle to my Sheep again: Then they will make Holy Day.


1 Shep. Come, shall we go? for, I fear, if the Youth return, our second Course
will be much more against our Stomachs.


Mast. Walk you before; I will but give my Boy
Some short Instructions, and I Will follow strait.
We'll crash a Cup together.

1 Shep. Pray, do not linger.


Mast. I will not, Sirs; -- This must not be a Boy;
His Voice, Mein, Gesture, every Thing he does,
Savor of soft and female Delicacy.
He but puts on this Seeming, and his Garb
Speaks him of such a Rank, as well persuades me,
He plays the Swain, rather to cloak some Purpose,
Than forced to it by a Need: I Have waited long
To mark the End he has in his Disguise;
But am not perfect in it. The Madman's Coil
Has driven him shaking hence. These Fears betray him.
If he prove right, I Am happy. O, he is here.
Enters Violante. Come hither, Boy; where did you leave the Flock, Child?

Viol. Grazing below, Sir. -- What does he mean, to stroke One of the Cheek so?
I hope, I Am not betrayed.


Mast. Have you learnt the Whistle yet, and when to Fold?
And how to make the Dog bring in the Strayers?

Viol. Time, Sir, will furnish me with all these Rules;
My Will is able, but my Knowledge weak, Sir.

Mast. That Is a good Child: Why do thou blush, my Boy?
It Is certainly a Woman. [Aside.] Speak, my Boy.

Viol. Heaven! how I tremble. -- It Is unusual to me
To find such Kindness at a Master's Hand,
That am a poor Boy, every way unable,
Unless it be in Prayers, to merit it.
Besides, I Have often heard old People say,
Too much Indulgence makes Boys rude and saucy.

Mast. Are you so cunning! --

Viol. -- How his Eyesshake Fire,
And measure every Piece of Youth about me! [Aside.
The Ewes want Water, Sir: Shall I go drive 'em
Down to the Cisterns? Shall I make haste, Sir?
'Would I were five Miles from him -- How he gripes me! [Aside.

Mast. Come, come, all this is not sufficient, Child,
To make a Fool of me. -- This is a fine Hand,
A delicate fine Hand, -- Never change Color;
You understand me, -- and a Woman's Hand.

Viol. You're strangely out: Yet if I were a Woman,
I know, you are so honest and so good,
That though I wore Disguises for some Ends,
You would not wrong me. --

Mast. -- Come, you're made for Love;
Will you comply? I Am madder with this Talk.
There Is Nothing you can say, can take my Edge off.

Viol. Oh, do but quench these foul Affections in you,
That, like base Thieves, have robbed you of your Reason,
And I will be a Woman; and begin
So sad a Story, that if there be aught
Of humane in you, or a Soul that is gentle,
You cannot choose but pity my lost Youth.

Mast. No Stories now. --

Viol. -- Kill me directly, Sir;
As you have any Goodness, take my Life.

Rod. within. Hoa! Shepherd, will you hear, Sir?

Mast. What bawling Rogue is that, in the Devil's Name?

Viol. Blessings upon him, whatsoever he be! [Runs out.

Enters Roderick. Rod. Good Even, my Friend; I thought, you all had been asleep
in this Country.


Mast. You had lied then; for you were waking, when you thought so.


Rod. I thank you, Sir.


Mast. I pray, be covered; it is not so much worth, Sir.


Rod. Was that thy Boy ran crying?


Mast. Yes; what then?


Rod. Why do thou beat him so?


Mast. To make him grow.


Rod. A pretty Medicine! Thou can not tell me the Way to the next Nunnery?
--


Mast. How do you know That? -- Yes, I can tell you; but the Question is,
whether I will or no; and, indeed, I will not. Fare you well.


[Exit Master. Rod. What a brute Fellow's this! Are they all thus?
My Brother Henriquez tells me by his Letters,
The Mistress of his Soul not far from hence
Has taken Sanctuary: from which he prays
My Aid to bring her back. -- From what Camillo
Hinted, I wear some Doubts. -- Here it is appointed
That we should meet; it must be here; it is so.
He comes.
Enters Henriquez. Now, Brother, what is this post-haste Business
You hurry me about? -- Some wenching Matter --

Henr. My Letter told you, Sir.

Rod. It Is true, it tells me, that you have lost a Mistress
Whom your Heart bleeds for; but the Means to win her
From her close Life, I take it, is not mentioned.
You're ever in these Troubles. --

Henr. -- Noble Brother,
^own, I have too freely given a Scope
To Youth's intemp'rate Heat, and rash Desires:
But think not, that I would engage your Virtues
To any Cause, wherein my constant Heart
Attended not my Eye. 'Till now my Passions
Reigned in my Blood; never pierced into my Mind;
But I Am a Convert grown to purest Thoughts:
And must in Anguish spend my Days to come,
If I possess not her: So much I love.

Rod. The Means? -- She Is in a Cloister, is she not?
Within whose Walls to enter as We are,
Will never be: Few Men, but Friars, come there;
Which We shall never make.

Henr. -- If That would do it,
I would make Any thing.

Rod. -- Are you so hot?
I Will serve him, be it but to save his Honor. [Aside.
To feign a Corpse -- By the Mass, it shall be so.
We must pretend, we do transport a Body
As 'twere to's Funeral: and coming late by,
Crave a Night's Leave to rest the Hearse in the Convent
That be our Course; for to such Charity
Strict Zeal and Custom of the House give Way.

Henr. And, opportune, a vacant Hearse passed by
From Rites but new performed: This for a Price
We'll hire, to put our Scheme in Act. Ho! Gerald --

[Enter Gerald, whom Henriquez whispers; then Gerald goes out. Rod. When we are
once lodged, the Means of (...) Conveyance,
By safe and secret Force, with Ease we'll compass*
But, Brother, know my Terms. -- If that your Mistres
Will to the World come back, and she appear
An Object worthy in our Father's Eye,
Woo her, and win her; but if his Consent
Keep not Pace with your Purpose --

Henr. Doubt it not.
I Have looked not with a common Eye; but chose
A noble Virgin, who to make her so,
Has all the Gifts of Heaven and Earth upon her.
If ever Woman yet could be an Angel,
She is the nearest.

Rhod. -- Well; a Lover's Praise
Feasts not a Common Ear. -- Now to our Plot;
We shall bring Night in with Us.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Julio, and Two Gentlemen. Gent. Good Sir, compose yourself.

Jul. -- O Leonora,
That Heaven had made Thee stronger than a Woman,
How happy had I been!

Gent. -- He Is calm again:
I Will take this Interval to work upon Him.
These wild and solitary Places, Sir,
But feed your Pain; let better Reason guide you;
And quit this forlorn State, that yields no Comfort.

[Lute sounds within. Jul. Ha! hark, a Sound from Heaven! Do you hear Nothing?

Gent. Yes, Sir; the Touch of some sweet Instrument:
Here Is no Inhabitant.

Jul. -- No, no, the better.

Gent. This is a strange Place to hear Music in.

Jul. I Am often visited with these sweet Airs.
The Spirit of some hapless Man that died,
And left his Love hid in a faithless Woman,
Sure haunts these Mountains.

[ Violante sings within. Fond Echo! forego thy light Strain,
And heedfully hear a last Maid;
Go, tell the false Ear of the Swain
How deeply his Vows have betrayed.
Go, tell him, what Sorrows I bear;
See, yet if his Heart feel my Woe:
It Is now he must heal my Despair,
Or Death will make Pity too slow.
Gent. See, how his Soul strives in him! This sad Strain
Has searched him to the Heart.

Jul. Excellent Sorrow!
You never loved?

Gent. No.

Jul. -- Peace; and learn to grieve then.
[ Violante sings within. Go, tell him, what Sorrows I bear;
See, yet if his Heart feel my Woe:
It Is now he must heal my Despair,
Or Death will make Pity too slow.
Is not this heavenly?

Gent. I never heard the Like, Sir.

Jul. I Will tell you, my good Friends; but pray, say Nothing;
I Am strangely touched with This. The heavenly Sound
Diffuses a sweet Peace through all my Soul.
But yet I wonder, what new, sad, Companion
Grief has brought hither to out-bid my Sorrows.
Stand off, stand off, stand off -- Friends, it appears.

Enters Violante. Viol. How much more grateful are these craggy Mountains,
And these wild Trees, than things of nobler Natures;
For These receive my Plaints, and mourn again
In many Echoes to Me. All good People
Are fallen asleep for ever. None are left,
That have the Sense, and Touch of Tenderness
For Virtue's sake: No, scarce their Memory:
From whom I may expect Counsel in Fears,
Ease to Complainings, or Redress of Wrongs.

Jul. This is a moving Sorrow, but say nothing.

Viol. What Dangers have I run, and to what Insults
Exposed this Ruin of my self? Oh! Mischief
On that Soul-spotted Hind, my vicious Master!
Who would have thought, that such poor Worms as They,
(Whose best Feed is coarse Bread; whose Bev'rage, Water;)
Should have so much rank Blood? I shake all over,
And blush to think what had become of me,
If that good Man had not relieved me from him.

Jul. Since she is not Leonora, she is heavenly.
When she speaks next, listen as seriously,
As Women do that have their Loves at Sea,
What Wind blows every Morning. --

Viol. I cannot get this false Man's Memory
Out of my Mind. You Maidens, that shall live
To hear my mournful Tale, when I am Ashes,
Be wise; and to an Oath no more give Credit,
To Tears, to Vows, (false Both!) or any Thing
A Man shall promise, than to Clouds, that now
Bear such a pleasing Shape, and now are nothing.
For they will cozen, (if They may be cozened,)
The very Gods they worship. -- Valor, Justice,
Discretion, Honesty, and all they covet,
To make them seeming Saints, are but the Wiles
By which these Sirens lure us to Destruction.

Jul. Do not you weep now? I could drop myself
Into a Fountain for her.

Gent. She weeps extremely.

Jul. -- Let her weep; it is well:
Her Heart will break else. Great Sorrows live in Tears.

Viol. O false Henriquez! --

Jul. -- Ha!

Viol. -- And Oh, thou Fool,
Fors^ken Violante! whose Belief
And childish Love have made Thee so -- go, dye;
^or there is nothing left Thee now to look for,
That can bring Comfort, but a quiet Grave.
There all the Miseries I long have felt,
(...) Th se to come, shall sweetly sleep together.
(...) may guide that false Henriquez hither,
(...) weep Repentance over my pale, dead Coarse,
And cheer my wandering Spirit with those loved Obsequies. [Going.

Jul. Stay, Lady, stay: Can it be possible,
That you are Violante?

Viol. -- That lost Name,
Spoken by One, that needs must know my Fortunes,
Has taken much Fear from me. Who are you, Sir?
For, sure, I am that hopeless Violante.

Jul. And I, as far from any earthly Comfort
That I know yet, the much-wrong'd Julio!

Viol. -- Julio!

Jul. I once was thought so. -- If the cursed Henriquez
Had Power to change you to a Boy, why, Lady,
Should not that Mischief make me any thing,
That have an equal Share in all the Miseries
His Crimes have flung upon Us?

Viol. -- Well I know it:
And pardon Me, I could not know your Virtues,
Before your Griefs. Methought, when last we met,
The Accent of your Voice struck on my Ear
Like something I had known, but Floods of Sorrow
Drowned the Remembrance. If you will please to sit,
(Since I have found a suffering true Companion,)
And give me Hearing, I will tell you something
Of Leonora, that may comfort you.

Jul. Blessing upon Thee! Henceforth, I protest
Never to leave Thee, if Heaven say Amen.
But, soft! let us shift our Ground, guide our sad Steps
To some remoter Gloom, where, undisturbed,
We may compare our Woes; dwell on the Tale
Of mutual Injuries, 'till our Eyes run over,
And we infect each other, with fresh Sorrows. --
Talked you of Comfort? It Is the Food of Fools,
And We will None on it; but indulge Despair:
So, worn with Griefs, steal to the Cave of Death,
And in a Sigh give up our latest Breath.

[Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE, The Prospect of the Mountains continued.
Enter Roderick, Leonora veiled, Henriquez, Attendants as Mourners. Rod. REST
certain, Lady, Nothing shall betide you,
But fair, and noble Usage. Pardon me,
That hitherto a Course of Violence
Has snatched you from that Seat of Contemplation
To which you gave your After-Life.

Leon. Where am I?

Rod. Not in the Nunnery; never blush, nor tremble;
Your Honor has as fair a Guard, as when
Within a Cloister. Know then, what is done,
(Which, I presume, you understand not truly,)
Has this Use, to preserve the Life of One
Dying for Love of You: my Brother, and your Friend:
Under which Color we desired to rest
Our Hearse one Night within your hallowed Walls,
Where we surpised you.

Leon. -- Are you that Lord Roderick,
So spoken of for Virtue, and fair Life,
And dare you lose these to be Advocate
For such a Brother, such a sinful Brother,
Such an unfaithful, treacherous, brutal Brother?

Rod. This is a fearful Charge. -- [Looks at Henriquez.

Leon. -- If you would have me
Think, you still bear Respect for Virtue's Name;
As you would wish, your Daughters, thus distressed,
Might find a Guard, protect me from Henriquez;
And I am happy.

Rod. -- Come, Sir, make your Answer;
For as I have a Soul, I am ashamed on it.

Henr. O Leonora, see! thus self-condemned,
I throw me at your Feet, and sue for Mercy.
If I have erred, impute it to my Love;
The Tyrant God that bows us to his Sway,
Rebellious to the Laws of reasoning Men;
That will not have his Votaries Actions scanned,
But calls it Justice, when we most obey him.
He but commanded, what your Eyes inspired;
Whose sacred Beams, darted into my Soul,
Have purged the Mansion from impure Desires,
And kindled in my Heart a Vestal's Flame.

Leon. Rise, rise, my Lord; this well-dissembled Passion
Has gained you nothing but a deeper Hate.
Should I imagine, he can truly love me,
That, like a Villain, murders my Desires?
Or should I drink that Wine, and think it Cordial,
When I see Poison in it?

Rod. -- Draw this way, Lady;
I am not perfect in your Story yet;
But see you have had some Wrongs, that want Redress.
Only you must have Patience to go with us
To yon small Lodge, which meets the Sight from hence,
Where your Distress shall find the due Respect:
'Till when, your Griefs shall govern me as much,
As Nearness and Affection to my Brother.
Call my Attendants yours; and use them freely;
For as I am a Gentleman, no Power,
Above your own Will, shall come near your Person.

[As they are going out, Violante enters, and plucks Roderick by the Sleeve;
the rest go out.] Viol. Your Ear a Moment: Scorn not my tender Youth.

Roder. Look to the Lady there. -- I follow strait.
What ails this Boy? Why do thou single me?

Viol. The due Observance of your noble Virtue,
Vowed to this mourning Virgin, makes me bold
To give it more Employment.

Rod. -- Art not Thou
The surly Shepherd's Boy, that, when I called
To know the Way, ran crying by me?

Viol. Yes, Sir.
And I thank Heaven and you for helping me.

Rod. How did I help thee, Boy?

Viol. I do but seem so, Sir; and am indeed
A Woman; one your Brother once has loved;
Or, Heaven forgive him else, he ly'd extremely.

Rod. Weep not, good Maid; O this licentious Brother!
But how came you a Wanderer on these Mountains?

Viol. That, as we pass, an't please you, I Will discover.
I will assure you, Sir, these barren Mountains
Hold many Wonders of your Brother's making.
Here wanders hapless Julio, worthy Man!
Besides himself with Wrongs --

Rod. That once again. --

Viol. Sir, I said, Julio. -- Sleep weighed down his Eyelids,
Oppressed with Watching, just as you approached us.

Rod. O Brother! We shall sound the Depths of Falsehood.
If this be true, no more but guide me to him:
I hope, a fair End will succeed all yet.
If it be He, by your Leave, gentle Brother,
I Will see him served first. -- Maid, you have o'erjoy'd me.
Thou shall have Right too: Make thy fair Appeal
To the good Duke, and doubt not but thy Tears
Shall be repaid with Interest from his Justice.
Lead me to Julio.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. An Apartment in the Lodge.
Enter Duke, Don Bernard, and Camillo. Came. Ay, then your Grace had had a Son
more; He, a Daughter; and I, an Heir: But let it be as it is, I cannot mend it;
one way or other, I shall (...) it over, with rubbing to my Grave, and there is
an End on it.


Duke. Our Sorrows cannot help us, Gentlemen.

Came. Hang me, Sir, if I shed one Tear more. By Jove, I Have wept so long, I Am as
blind as Justice. When I come to see my Hawks (which I held a Toy next to my
Son;) if they be but House-high, I must stand aiming at them like a Gunner.


Duke. Why, he mourns like a Man. Don Bernard, you
Are still like April, full of Showers and Dews:
And yet I blame you not: for I myself
Feel the self-same Affections. -- Let them go;
They Are disobedient Children.

D. Bern. -- Ay, my Lord;
Yet they may turn again.

Came. Let them even have their Swing: they are young and wanton; the next Storm
we shall have them gallop homeward, whining as Pigs do in the Wind.


D. Bern Would I had my Daughter any way.

Came. Would thou have her with Bearn, Man, tell me that?

D. Bern. I care not, if an honest Father got it.

Came. You might have had her so in this good Time,
Had my Son had her: Now you may go seek
Your Fool to stop a Gap with.

Duke. You say, that Rod'rick charged you here should wait him:
He has o'erslip'd the Time, at which his Letters
Of Speed request that I should also meet him.
I fear, some bad Event is ushered in
By this Delay: -- How now?

Enters Gentleman. Gent. -- So please your Grace,
Lord Rod'rick makes Approach.

Duke. -- I thank thee, Fellow,
For thy so timely News: Comes he alone?

Gent. No, Sir, attended well: and in his Train
Follows a Hearse with all due Rites of Mourning.

[Exit Gent. Duke. Heaven send, Henriquez live!

Came. -- It Is my poor Julio. --

Enters Roderick, hastily. Duke. O welcome, welcome,
Welcome, good Rod'rick! Say, what News?

Came. Do you bring Joy or Grief, my Lord? For me,
Come what can come, I Will live a Month or two
If the Gout please; curse my Physician once more,
And then, --
Under this Stone
Lies Sev'nty One.

Rod. Signior, you do express a manly Patience.
My noble Father, something I have brought
To ease your Sorrows: My Endeavors have not
Been altogether barren in my Journey.

Duke. It comes at need, Boy; but I hoped it from thee.

Enter Leonora veiled, Henriquez behind, and Attendants. Rod. The Company I
bring, will bear me Witness
The busiest of my Time has been employed
On this good Task. Don Bernard finds beneath
This Veil his Daughter: You, my Royal Father,
Behind that Lady find a wandering Son.
How I met with them, and how brought them hither,
More Leisure must unfold.

Henr. -- My Father here!
And Julio's! O Confusion! -- Low as Earth
I bow me for your Pardon. [To the Duke.

D. Bern. O my Girl!
Thou bring'st new Life. -- [Embraces Leonora.

Duke. And you, my Son, restore me [To Roderick.
One Comfort here that has been missing long.
I hope, thy Follies thou have left abroad. [To Henriq.

Came. Ay, ay; you have all Comforts but I; you have ruined me, killed my poor
Boy; cheated and ruined him; and I have no Comfort.


Rod. Be patient, Signior; Time may guide my Hand
To work you Comfort too.

Came. I thank your Lordship;
'Would Grandsire Time had been so kind to 've done it;
We might have joy'd together like good Fellows.
But he is so full of Business, good Old Man,
It Is Wonder, he could do the Good he has done.

D. Bern. Nay, Child, be comforted. These Tears distract me.

Duke. Hear your good Father, Lady.

Leon. -- Willingly.

Duke. The Voice of Parents is the Voice of Gods:
For to their Children they are Heaven's Lieutenants:
Made Fathers, not for common Uses merely
Of Procreation; (Beasts and Birds would be
As noble then as we are) but to steer
The wanton Freight of Youth through Storms and Dangers,
Which with full Sails they bear upon: and streighten
The moral Line of Life, they bend so often.
For These are We made Fathers; and for These,
May challenge Duty on our Children's Part.
Obedience is the Sacrifice of Angels,
Whose Form you carry.

D. Bern. Hear the Duke, good Wench.

Leon. I do most heedfully. My gracious Lord, [To the Duke.
Let me be so unmanner'd to request,
He would not farther press me with Persuasions
Of The instant Hour: but have the gentle Patience
To bury this keen Suit, 'till I shake Hands
With my old Sorrows, --

Came. -- Why do look at me?
Alas! I cannot help thee.

Leon. -- And but weep
A Farewell to my murdered Julio, --

Came. Blessing be with thy Soul, whenever it leaves Thee!

Leon. For such sad Rites must be performed, my Lord,
Ever I can love again. Maids, that have loved,
If they be worth that noble Testimony,
Wear their Loves here, my Lord; here, in their Hearts;
Deep, deep within; not in their Eyes, or Accents;
^uch may be slipped away; or with two Tears
Washed out of all Remembrance: Mine, no Physic,
^ut Time, or Death, can cure.

Henr. You make your own Conditions, and I seal them
Thus on your virtuous Hand. [Aside.

Came. Well, Wench, thy Equal
^all not be found in haste; I give thee That:
Thou art a right one, every Inch. -- Thy Father
(For, without Doubt, that Snuff never begot Thee,)
Was some choice Fellow, some true Gentleman;
I give thy Mother Thanks for it -- there is no Harm done. --
Would I were young again, and had but thee,
A good Horse under me, and a good Sword,
And thus much for Inheritance. --

[ Violante offers, once or twice, to show herself, but goes back. Duke. What
Boy's That,
Has offered twice or thrice to break upon us?
I Have noted him, and still he falls back fearful.

Rod. A little Boy, Sir, like a Shepherd?

Duke. Yes.

Rod. It Is your Page, Brother; -- One that was so, late.

Henr. My Page! What Page?

Rod. -- Even so he says, your Page;
And more, and worse, you stole him from his Friends,
And promised him Preferment.

Henr. I, Preferment!

Rod. And on some slight Occasion let him slip
Here on these Mountains, where he had been starved,
Had not my People found him, as we traveled.
This was not handsome, Brother.

Henr. -- You are merry.

Rod. You Will find it sober Truth.

Duke. -- If so, it is ill.

Henr. It Is Fiction all, Sir; -- Brother, you (...) please
To look some other Fool to put these Tricks on;
They are too obvious: -- Please your Grace, gi^^ Leave
TO admit the Boy; If he know me, and say,
I stole him from his Friends, and cast him off,
Know me no more. -- Brother, pray do not wr^^^ me.

Enters Violante. Rod. Here is the Boy. If he deny this to you,
Then I have wronged you.

Duke. -- Hear me; What Is thy Name, Boy?

Viol. Florio, an't like your Grace.

Duke. -- A pretty Child.
Where wast thou born?

Viol. -- On the other Side the Mountains.

Duke. What are thy Friends?

Viol. -- A Father, Sir; but poor.

Duke. How came thou hither? how, to leave thy Father?

Viol. That noble Gentleman pleased once to like me, [Pointing to Henriquez.
And, not to lie, so much to dote upon me,
That with his Promises he won my Youth,
and Duty, from my Father: Him I followed.

Rod. How say you now, Brother?

Came. -- Ay, my Lord, how say You?

Hen. As I have Life and Soul, it is all a Trick, Sir.
^ never saw the Boy before.

Viol. -- O Sir,
^all not your Soul to witness in a Wrong:
and it is not noble in you, to despise
What you have made thus. If I lie, let Justice
^urn all her Rods upon me.

Duke. -- Fie, Henriquez;
^here is no Trace of Cunning in this Boy.

Came. A good Boy! -- Be not fearful: Speak thy Mind, Child.
nature, sure, meant thou should have been a Wench;
and then't had been no Marvel he had bobb'd thee.

Duke. Why did he put thee from him?

Viol. -- That to me
(...) yet unknown, Sir; for my Faith, he could not;
^ never did deceive him: for my Service,
He had no just Cause; what my Youth was able,
My Will still put in Act, to please my Master:
I cannot steal; therefore that can be nothing
To my Undoing: no, nor lie; my Breeding,
Though it be plain, is honest.

Duke. -- Weep not, Child.

Came. This Lord has abused Men, Women, (...) Children already: What farther
Plot he has, the D^^ knows.


Duke. If thou can bring a Witness of thy Wro^^
(Else it would be Injustice to believe thee,
He having sworn against it;) thou shall have,
I bind it with my Honor, Satisfaction
To thine own Wishes.

Viol. -- I desire no more, Sir.
I have a Witness, and a noble one,
For Truth and Honesty.

Rod. -- Go, bring him hither.

[Exit Violante Henr. This lying Boy will take him to his Heels,
And leave me slandered.

Rod. -- No; I Will be his Voucher.

Henr. Nay then it is plain, this is Confederacy.

Rod. That he has been an Agent in your Service,
Appears from this. Here is a Letter, Brother,
(Produced, perforce, to give him Credit with me;)
The Writing, yours; the Matter, Love; for so,
He says, he can explain it.

Came. -- Then, belike,
A young He-bawd.

Henr. -- This Forgery confounds me!

Duke. Read it, Roderick.

Rod. Reads.] Our Prudence should now teach us (...) forget, what our
Indiscretion has ^^^mitted. I have already made one (...) toward this Wisdom
--


Henr. Hold, Sir. -- My very Words to Violante. [Asi^^

Duke. Go on.

Henr. -- My gracious Father, give me Pardon;
I do confess, I some such Letter wrote
(The Purport all too trivial for your Ear,)
But how it reached this young Dissembler's Hands,
Is what I cannot solve. For on my Soul,
And by the Honors of my Birth and House,
The Minion's Face 'till now I never saw.

Rod. Run not too far in Debt on Protestation. --
Why should you do a Child this Wrong?

Henr. -- Go to;
Your Friendships past warrant not this Abuse:
If you provoke me thus, I shall forget
What you are to me. This is a mere Practice,
And Villainy to draw me into Scandal.

Rod. No more; you are a Boy. -- Here comes a Witness,
^all prove you so: No more. --

Enter Julio, disguised; Violante, as a Woman. Henr. -- Another Rascal!

Duke. Hold: --

Henr. Ha! [Seeing Violante.

Duke. What Is here?

Henr. By all my Sins, the injured Violante. [Aside.

Rod. Now, Sir, whose Practice breaks?

Came -- Is this a Page? [To Henr.

Rod. One that has done him Service,
(...) he has paid her for it; but broke his Covenant.

Viol. My Lord, I come not now to wound your Spirit.
(...) pure Affection dead, which first betrayed me,
(...) Claim dye with it! Only let me not
(...) to the Grave with Infamy upon me:
^^ect my Virtue, though it hurt your Faith;
(...) my last Breath shall speak Henriquez noble.

^^nr. What a fierce Conflict Shame, and wounded Honor,
Raise in my Breast! -- but Honor shall overcome. --
She looks as beauteous, and as innocent,
As when I wronged her. -- Virtuous Violante!
Too good for me! dare you still love a Man,
So faithless as I am? -- I know you love me.
Thus, thus, and thus, I print my vowed Repentance:
Let all Men read it here. -- My gracious Father,
Forgive, and make me rich with your Consent,
This is my Wife; no other would I choose,
Were she a Queen.

Came. Here Is a new Change. Bernard looks dull upon it.

Henr. And fair Leonora, from whose Virgin Arms
I forced my wronged Friend Julio, O forgive me.
Take home your holy Vows, and let him have 'em
That has deserved them. O that he were here!
That I might own the Baseness of my Wrong,
And purposed Recompense. My Violante,
You must again be widowed: for I vow
A ceaseless Pilgrimage, never to know Joy,
'Till I can give it to the injured Julio.

Came. This almost melts me: -- But my poor (...) Boy --

Rod. I Will stop that Voyage, Brother. -- Gentle Lady*
What think you of this honest Man?

Leon. Alas!
My Thoughts, my Lord, were all employed within*
He has a Face makes me remember something
I have thought well of; how he looks upon me!
Poor Man, he weeps. -- Ha! stay; it cannot be --
He has his Eye, his Features, Shape, and Gesture. --
'Would, he would speak.

Jul. -- Leonora, -- [Throws off his Disg^^^

Leon. -- Yes, it is He.
O Ecstacy of Joy! --

[They embra^^ Came. Now, what is the Matter?

Rod Let 'em alone; they are almost starved (...) Kisses.

Came. Stand forty Foot off; no Man trouble 'em.
Much Good may't do your Hearts! -- What is he, Lord,
What is he?

Rod. A certain Son of yours.

Came. -- The Devil he is.

Rod. If he be the Devil, that Devil must call you Father.

Came. By your Leave a little, ho, -- Are you my Julio?

Jul. My Duty tells me so, Sir,
Still on my Knees. -- But Love engrossed me all;
O Leonora, do I once more hold thee?

Came. Nay, to it again: I will not hinder you a Kiss,
It Is he -- [Leaps.

Leon. The righteous Powers at length have crowned our Loves.
Think, Julio, from the Storm that is now o'erblown,
Though sour Affliction combat Hope awhile,
When Lovers swear true Faith, the listening Angels
Stand on the golden Battlemen's of Heaven,
And waft their Vows to the Eternal Throne.
Such were our Vows, and so are they repaid.

Duke. Even as you are, we'll join your Hands together.
A Providence above our Power rules all.
Ask him Forgiveness, Boy. [To Henriquez.

Jul. -- He has it, Sir:
The Fault was Love's, not his.

Henr. -- Brave, generous Julio!
I knew thy Nobleness of old, and prized it,
'Till Passiom made me blind -- Once more, my Friend,
Share in a Heart, that never shall wrong thee more.
And, Brother, --

Rod. -- This Embrace cuts off Excuses.

Duke. I must, in part, repair my Son's Offense:
At your best Leisure, Julio, know our Court.
And, Violante, (for I know you now;)
^ have a Debt to pay: Your good old Father,
Once, when I chased the Boar, preserved my Life:
For that good Deed, and for your Virtue's Sake,
Though your Descent be low, call me your Father.
A Match drawn out of Honesty, and Goodness,
Is Pedigree enough. -- Are you all pleased? [Gives her to Henriquez

Camil. All.

Henr. -- All, Sir,

Jul. All.

Duke. And I not least. We'll now return to Cou^^
(And that short Travel, and your Loves completed
Shall, as I trust, for Life restrain these Wand'rings)
There, the Solemnity, and Grace* I Will do
Your several Nuptials, shall approve my Joy;
And make grieved Lovers, that your Story read,
Wi^^, true Love's Wand'rings may like yours suc^^^

[Curtain fa^^^ FINIS

