THE CURE OF SAUL. A SACRED ODE. Written by DR. BROWN.

LONDON, Printed for L. DAVIS and C. REYMERS against Gray's-Inn, Holbourn.
Printers to the ROYAL (...) MDCCXXIII.

THE ARGUMENT.
SAUL, for his Disobedience to Heaven, is afflicted with the Fiend of
MELANCHOLY, p. 1. DAVID is sent for, to cure him by the Power of Music, p. 2.
He comes, attended with a Choir of Shepherds; and, as the means of dispelling
READINESS Despair, he sings the Creation of the World, and the happy Estate of our
first Parents in Paradise, p. 3 to 7. SAUL is moved by the Representation; but
expostulates with DAVID, "why, when others are happy, He should be miserable,"
p. 7. DAVID, to convince him that Guilt is the Source of Misery, sings the Fall
of Man, and his Expulsion from Paradise, p. 8. This alarms the Monarch's Pride;
and instead of reclaiming, provokes him to Resentment and Rage, p. 9. DAVID,
superior to his Threats, awakens his Conscience, and terrifies him, by singing
the Fate and Punishment of Guilt, in the Destruction of the rebellious Tribe of
CHORAH by an Earthquake, and of the guilty World by the general Deluge, p. 10.
SAUL, struck with Horror, attempts to kill himself, p. 13. But being prevented
by his Friends, DAVID sooths his Anguish, by invoking Repentance and divine
Mercy to compose his Passions, p. 14. SAUL relents into virtuous Sorrow, p. 15.
But his Despair returning, DAVID calls on his attendant Choir to raise a more
sublime and affecting Strain, p. 16. This has its Effect; and SAUL melts into
Tears of Penitence, ib. DAVID now comforts him with the Return of the divine
Favor, p. 17. To banish the Remains of Pride, he then sings his own Happiness
in the humble Station of a Shepherd, ib. Still farther to compose the Monarch's
Griefs, by a Strain of soft Music he throws him into a gentle Slumber; invoking
celestial Visions to transport him to the Regions of the Blessed, and change
his Anguish into Joy, p. 18. The desired Effects appear in his Countenance: The
Fiend departs: And SAUL awakes in perfect Tranquillity, p. 19. DAVID then
concludes with a Song of Triumph on the Powers of Harmony, and the seraphic
Hymn that attended her, as the Minister of Heaven, on the Creation of the
World, p. 20.

THE CURE OF SAUL. A SACRED ODE.
"VENGEANCE, arise from thy infernal Bed;
"And pour thy Tempest on his Guilty Head!"
Thus Heaven's Decree, in Thunder's Sound,
Shook the dark Abyss profound. --
The unchain'd Furies come!
Pale Melancholy stalks from Hell:
The abortive Offspring of her Womb,
Despair and Anguish round her yell.
By sleepless Terror SAUL possessed,
Deep feels the Fiend within his tortured Breast.
Midnight Specter round him howl:
Before his Eyes
In Troops they rise;
And Seas of Horror overwhelm his Soul.
Haste; to JESSE'S Son repair:
He best can sweep the Lyre,
Wake the solemn sounding Air,
And lead the vocal Choir:
On every String soft-breathing Raptures dwell,
To sooth the Throbbings of the troubled Breast;
Whose magic Voice can bid the Tides of Passion swell,
Or lull the raging Storm to Rest.
Sunk on his Couch, and loathing Day,
The heav'n-forsaken Monarch lay:
To the sad Couch the Shepherd now drew near;
And, while the obedient Choir stood round,
Prepared to catch the Soul commanding Sound,
He dropped a generous Tear. --
Thy pitying Aid, O GOD, impart!
For lo, thy poisoned Arrows drink his Heart!
The mighty Song from Chaos rose. --
Aro^nd his Throne the formless Atoms sleep,
And drowzy Darkness broods upon the Deep. --
Confusion, wake!
I*d the Realms of Chaos shake!
Rouse him from ^is dread Repose! --
Hark! loud Discord breaks her Chain:
The hostile Atoms clash with deafning Roar:
Her hoarse Voice thunders through the drear Domain;
And kindles every Element to War. --
"Tumult cease!
"Sink to Peace!
"Let there be Light!" -- The Almighty said:
And lo, the radiant Sun,
Flaming from his orient Bed,
His endless Course begun.
See, the twinkling Pleiads rise:
Thy Star, Orion, reddens in the Skies:
While slow around the northern Plain,
Arcturus wheels his nightly Wane.
Thy Glories, too, refulgent Moon, he sung;
Thy mystic Mazes, and thy changeful Ray:
O fairest of the starry Throng!
Thy solemn Orb of Light
Guides the triumphant Carr of Night
Over Silver Clouds, and sheds a softer Day!
Ye Planets, and each circling Constellation,
In Songs harmonious tell your Generation!
Oh, while yon radiant Seraph turns the Spheres,
And on the steadfast Pole Star stands sublime;
Wheel your Rounds
To heavenly Sounds;
And sooth his Song-inchanted Ears,
With your celestial Chime.
In dumb Surprise the listening Monarch lay;
(His Woe suspended by sweet Music's Sway)
And awe-struck, with uplifted Eye
Mused on the newborn Wonders of the Sky.
Lead the soothing Verse along:
He feels, he feels the Power of Song. --
Ocean hastens to his Bed:
The laboring Mountain rears his rock-encumber'd Head:
Down his steep and shaggy Side
The Torrent rolls his thundering Tide;
Then smooth and clear, along the fertile Plain
Winds his majestic Waters to the distant Main.
Flocks and Herds the Hills adorn:
The Lark, high-soaring, hails the Morn.
And while along yon crimson-clouded Steep
The slow Sun steals into the golden Deep,
Hark! the solemn Nightingale
Warbles to the woodland Dale.
See, descending Angels shower
Heaven's own Bliss on Eden's Bower:
Peace on Nature's Lap reposes;
Pleasure strews her guiltless Roses:
Joys divine in Circles move,
Linked with Innocence and Love.
Hail, happy Love, with Innocence combined!
All hail, ye sinless Parents of Mankind!
They paused: -- the Monarch, prostrate on his Bed,
Submissive bowed his Head;
Adored the Works of boundless Power divine:
Then, Anguish-struck, he cried (and smote his Breast)*
Why, why is Peace the welcome Guest
Of every Heart but Mine!
Now let the solemn Numbers flow,
Till he feel that Guilt is Woe.
Heavenly Harp, in mournful Strain
Over yon weeping Bower complain:
What Sounds of bitter Pangs I hear!
What Lamentations wound mine Ear!
In vain, devoted Pair, these Tears ye shed:
Peace with Innocence is fled.
The Messengers of Grace depart:
Death glares, and shakes the dreadful Dart!
Ah, whither fly ye, by yourselves abhorred,
To shun that frowning Cherub's firey Sword? --
Lo!
Hapless, hapless Pair,
Goaded by Despair,
Forlorn, through desert Climes they go!
Wake, my Lyre! can Pity sleep,
When Heaven is moved, and Angels weep!
Flow, ye melting Numbers, flow;
Till he feel, that Guilt is Woe. --
The King, with Pride, and Shame, and Anguish, torn,
Shot Fury from his Eyes, and Scorn.
The glowing Youth,
Bold in Truth,
(So still should Virtue guilty Power engage)
With Brow undaunted met his Rage.
See, his Cheek kindles into generous Fire:
Stern, he bends him over his Lyre;
And, while the Doom of Guilt he sings,
Shakes Horror from the tortured Strings.
What Sounds of Terror and Distress
Rend yon howling Wilderness!
The dreadful Thunders sound;
The forked Lightnings flash along the Ground.
Why yawns that deep'ning Gulf below? --
It Is for Heaven's rebellious Foe: --
Fly, ye Sons of ISRAEL, fly,
Who dwells in Korah's guilty Tents must die! --
They sink! -- Have Mercy, Lord! -- Their Cries
In dreadful Tumult rise!
Hark, from the Deep their loud Laments I hear!
They lessen now, and lessen on the Ear!
Now, Destruction's Strise is over!
The countless Host
For ever lost!
The Gulf is closed! -- Their Cries are heard no more! --
But Oh, my Lyre, what Accents can relate
Sinful Man's appointed Fate!
He comes, he comes! the avenging GOD!
Clouds and Darkness round him roll:
Tremble, Earth! Ye Mountains, nod!
He bows the Skies, and shakes the Pole.
The gloomy Banners of his Wrath unfurled,
He calls the Floods, to drown a guilty World:
"Ruin, lift thy baleful Head;
"Rouse the guilty World from Sleep:
"Lead up thy Billows from their cavern'd Bed,
"And burst the Rocks that chain thee in the Deep. --
Now, the impetuous Torrents rise;
The hoarse-ascending Deluge roars:
Down rush the Cataracts from the Skies;
The swelling Waves overwhelm the Shores.
Just, O God, is thy Decree!
Shall guilty Man contend with Thee!
Lo, Hate and Envy, sea-intomb'd,
And Rage with Lust in Ruin sleep;
And scoffing Luxury is doomed
To glut the vast and ravenous Deep! --
In vain from Fate the astonished Remnant flies: --
"Shrink, ye Rocks! Ye Oceans, rise!" --
The tottering Cliffs no more the Floods control;
Sea following Sea ingulphs the Ball:
Over the sunk Hills the watery Mountains roll,
And wide Destruction swallows all! --
Now fiercer let th'impassion'd Numbers glow:
Swell the Song, ye mighty Choir!
Wing your dreadful Darts with Fire!
Hear me, Monarch! -- Guilt is Woe! --
Thus while the frowning Shepherd poured along
The deep impetuous Torrent of his Song;
SAUL, stung by dire Despair,
Gnash'd his Teeth, and tore his Hair:
From his Blood, by Horror chilled,
A cold and agonizing Sweat distilled:
Then, foaming with unutterable Smart,
He aimed a Dagger at his Heart.
His watchful Train prevent the Blow;
And call each lenient Balm, to sooth his frantic Woe:
But pleased, the Shepherd now beheld
His Pride by Heaven's own Terrors quelled:
Then bade his potent Lyre control
The mighty Storm that rent his Soul.
Cease your Cares: the Body's Pain
A sweet Relief may find:
But Gums and lenient Balms are vain,
To heal the wounded Mind.
Come, fair Repentance, from the Skies
O sainted Maid, with upcast Eyes!
Descend in thy celestial Shroud,
Vested in a weeping Cloud!
Holy Guide, descend, and bring
Mercy from the eternal King!
To his Soul your Beams impart,
And whisper Comfort to his Heart! --
They come: O King, thine Ear incline:
Listen to their Voice divine:
Their Voice shall every Pang compose,
To gentle Sorrow sooth thy Woes;
Till each pure Wish to Heaven shall soar,
And Peace return, to part no more!
Behold, obedient to their great Command,
The lifted Dagger quits his trembling Hand:
Smoothed is his Brow, where sullen Care
And furrowed Horror couched with fell Despair:
No more his Eyes with Fury glow;
But heavenly Grief succeeds to hell-born Woe, --
See, the Signs of Grace appear:
See the soft relenting Tear,
Trickling at sweet Mercy's Call!
Catch it, Angels, ere it fall!
And let the heart-sent Offering rise,
Heaven's best-accepted Sacrifice! --
Yet, yet again? -- Ah see, the Pang returns!
Again with inward Fire his heaving Bosom burns!
Now, Shepherds, wake a mightier Strain;
Search the deep, heart rending Pain;
Till the large Floods of Sorrow roll,
And quench the Tortures of his Soul.
Almighty LORD, accept his Pang sincere!
Let heavenly Hope dispell each dark Temptation!
And, while he pours the penitential Tear,
O visit him with thy Salvation! --
Stoop from Heaven, ye raptured Throng:
Sink, ye swelling Tides of Song!
For lo, dissolved by Music's melting Power,
Celestial Sorrow rolls her plenteous Shower.
Over his wan Cheek the Colors rise;
And Beams of Comfort brighten in his Eyes.
Happy King, thy Woes are over!
Thy God shall wound thy Soul no more:
The pitying Father of Mankind
Meets the pure-returning Mind.
Now lowly let the rustic Measure glide,
To quell the dark Remains of self-consuming Pride;
Till Nature's home-sprung Blessings he confess,
And own that calm Content is Happiness. --
Ye Woods and Lakes, ye Cliffs and Mountains!
Haunted Grots, and living Fountains!
Listen to your Shepherd's Lay,
Whose artless Carols close the Day.
Bounding Kids around him throng;
The steep Rock echoes back his Song:
While all unseen to mortal Eye,
Sliding down the evening Sky,
Holy Peace, though born above,
Daughter of Innocence and Love,
Quits her Throne and Mansion bright,
Her Crown of Stars, and Robe of Light,
Serene, in gentle Smiles arrayed,
To dwell beneath his Palm Tree Shade.
Hail, meek Angel! awful Guest!
Still pour thy Radiance over my Breast!
Pride and Hate in Courts may shine:
The Shepherd's calm and blameless Tent is Thine! --
Softly, softly breath your Numbers;
And wrap his wearied Soul in Slumbers!
Gentle Sleep, becalm his Breast,
And close his Eyes in healing Rest!
Descend, celestial Visions, ye who wait,
GOD'S ministering Powers, at Heaven's eternal Gate!
Ye, who nightly Vigils keep,
And rule the silent Realms of Sleep,
Exalt the Just to Joys refined,
And plunge in Woe the guilty Mind,
Descend! -- Oh, wast him to the Skies,
And open all Heaven's Glories to his Eyes!
Beyond yon starry Roof, by Seraphs trod,
Where Light's unclouded Fountains blaze;
Where Choirs immortal hymn their GOD,
Intranc'd in Ecstasy of ceaseless Praise.
Angels, heal his Anguish!
Your Harps and Voices join!
His Grief to Bliss shall languish,
When soothed by Sounds divine.
Behold, with dawning Joy each Feature glows!
See, the blissful Tear overflows! --
The Fiend is fled! -- Let Music's Rapture rise:
Now Harmony, thy every Nerve employ:
Shake the Dome, and pierce the Skies:
Wake him, wake him into Joy. --
What Power can every Passion's Throe control?
What Power can boast the Charm divine,
To still the Tempest of the Soul?
Celestial Harmony, that mighty Charm is Thine!
She, heav'nly-born, came down to visit Earth,
When from GOD'S eternal Throne
The Beam of all-creative Wisdom shone,
And spoke fair Order into Birth.
At Wisdom's Call she robed yon glittering Skies,
Attun'd the Spheres, and taught consenting Orbs to rise.
Angels wrapped in Wonder stood,
And saw that All was Fair, and All was Good.
'Twas then, ye Sons of GOD, in bright Array
Ye shouted over Creation's Day:
Then kindling into Joy,
The Morning Stars together sung;
And through the vast etherial Sky
Seraphic Hymns and loud Hosannahs rung.
THE END.

