THE COUNTRY ELECTION; A FARCE: IN TWO ACTS.
LONDON: Sold by S. HOOPER, near the New Church, in the Strand, M DCC LXVIII.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Harry Simple. A shallow fellow, of small fortune, in love with Maria,
candidate for the county of.... Artful. A popular hypocritical man, the other
candidate, in opposition to Sir Harry. Trueman. A man of some fortune, in the
interest of Artful, in love with Maria. Mr. Wealthy. A man of great opulence,
determined to marry his daughter to none but a member of parliament. Crafty.
Quirk.
Two false friends to Sir Harry, but in his interest. Smut. A blacksmith.
Blunt. A surly farmer. Landlord. Puritan. Countryman.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Wealthy. Wife to Wealthy. Maria. Her daughter in love with Trueman.
Betty. The maid in the interest of Maria. Mrs. Blunt. Wife to Blunt. Wife to
Puritan.
Waiters, Children, Mob, and Attendants.

The Representation of particular Scenes is submitted to Mr. Hogarth's
excellent Prints of an Election.

THE COUNTRY ELECTION.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
A Room. Enter MARIA and BETTY, meeting. BETTY. LORD, Miss Maria, not dressed
yet! -- Why, there'll be a world of folks here, presently, -- especially as my
master has given it out that he intends keeping open house till the day of
Election, in favor of Sir Harry Simple.


MARIA. Don't talk to me of dress, nor Sir Harry neither; I hate him; -- I wish
he had been fixed to a stake, and burnt yesterday instead of his effigy.


BETTY. O fie Miss, you should not wish such cruel wishes as that.


MARIA. Indeed I do. But prithee trouble me no more about him; have you seen
Mr. Trueman today?


BETTY. Love, as the saying is, has given him wings: I saw him fly by the
house, once or twice, but could not get to speak to him. He Is purely busy, in
Squire Artful's cause, not indeed out of any respect to him, but merely to
oppose that goose Simple. -- Well, I do think it a whimsical notion of my
master, not to marry his daughter, but to one of those yea-and-nay creatures,
called a Member of Parliament.


MARIA. Marry, Betty! -- Why, if he carries his Election, I will not have him. --
I Would run to Scotland first; -- a poor shallow-pated fop; so he may save himself
both the trouble and expense.


BETTY. So say I, Miss. To be sure, Mr. Trueman is a much more properer man,
and, as we say in our country, has got some guts in his brains.


MARIA. If it was not for my mamma, my pappa would be well enough, but, she is
always dinging in his ears, family, places, interest, and such stuff. For my
part, I don't see what interest she would have, if all her relations were in
parliament, unless it were to frank her nonsense into every part of the
kingdom, which now she cannot convey, without adding something to the revenue.


BETTY. Why there would be something in that, and not the worse for us; for,
the more she would write, the less she would talk. But -- bless me; who comes yonder!
If Mr. Trueman is not coming through the hall, in disguise, with some of the
folks!


MARIA. Is he indeed! -- run, then, Betty, and take care, neither my pappa and
mamma comes into the room while he is here.


BETTY. Make good use of your time, for, depend upon it, you cannot be long
together.


Exit. Enter TRUEMAN in Boots, disguised like a Countryman. TRUEMAN, looking
about. Hist! -- Maria, -- are we alone?


MARIA. I would not for the world, Mr. Trueman, any of the family should see
you here; I should lead a weary life, if they did.


TRUEMAN. It happens very fortunately for us, that your father now keeps open
house, as I can slip in and out unperceived; I provided this dress on purpose,
as in case we should be seen together, I may pass off undiscovered.


MARIA. 'Twas a good thought; but, tell me, how have you sped?


TRUEMAN. As well as I could wish. I do believe the day's our own: Artful
readily accepted of my services, and I have been indefatigable in his interest;
up, night and day; you see my life, what you can spur me to. I shall think my
labor well repaid, if but at last I call Maria, mine.


MARIA. I make no doubt, but both my pappa and mamma may be brought to give
their consent, if we can but upset this scheme of Simple's.


TRUEMAN. Never doubt it. I Will try my best for it. I hav'n't been within a pair
of sheets these six nights; no messenger, or mail-carrier, has rid at once more
miles, with greater expedition than I, in canvassing this country for Votes.
But, when Love dictates, its votaries must obey.


MARIA. Indeed, Mr. Trueman, I am greatly obliged to you, and, heartily wish
you may succeed.


TRUEMAN. Pray heaven, we may! but, believe me, it is hot work. Simple, though a
mere fool, seems to have plenty of money, which he makes fly, like wild fire,
and, gold, Maria, in this, as well as in every other case, is the most
prevailing argument a man can use. I could get no admittance any where, without
first showing my ticket. Indeed, Artful's tongue being so well oiled, saves him
many a guinea: the women are all in his interest, and then, you know, the men,
they follow of course.


MARIA. If gaining the favor of the women, Mr. Trueman is necessary, he could
not have a better friend, on this occasion than you.


TRUEMAN bows. Gad so, your mother!


BETTY without, loud. Miss Maria's in the next room, Ma'am, shall I call her?


Mrs. W. without. No, no, I Will go to her.


Enter BETTY frightened, running before, and Mrs. WEALTHY in seeming haste,
when she sees TRUEMAN, she stops short. MARIA to TRUEM. I am persuaded, Sir,
your giving your vote to Sir Harry, will greatly oblige my father.


Mrs. W. Who is this man, daughter?


MARIA. He tells me he belongs to the next parish, mamma, that he is a
freeholder, and has influenced several neighbors in favor of Sir Harry.


TRUEM. in a feigned voice. An I had twenty Votes, I Would gee um aal to he; if
it were only on Squoire Wealthy's account.


BETTY, aside. Faith, leave him alone for a scheme! O, he is a charming man!


Mrs. W. confused. My good neighbor, I beg your pardon, -- I thought it had
been some -- Indeed, Sir, I thank you, and, when Mr. Wealthy sees you, he shall
thank you too. I assure you, Sir Harry is a very fine gentleman, and more than
that, is determined, if chose, right or wrong, always to vote against the
court. [Aside to Maria] I tell him so, you know, though that would not be the way
to swell our interest, and get a place for your cousin Tom. [To Trueman.] For
the court -- Well, go backward friend, into the saloon, (you will see many of
your acquaintance there) and get something to refresh you, for you seem almost
choked with dust.


Exit Truem. looking at Maria. MARIA, aside. A lucky escape, indeed!


Mrs. W. Come, girl, go get your cap on; at present, you are hardly fit to be
seen, I expect Sir Harry here shortly. 'Twill be a charming thing, Maria, if he
gets chose for the county, 'twill be the making of us all. Your father shall
have a place in the Chequer, for he loves to be counting of money; I Will be
mistress of the robes, you shall be a woman of the bedchamber, and, as for
cousin Tom, he shall be -- What shall he be? -- No matter, I Will think for him
by-and-by.


BETTY. And I, Madam; you have forgot me?


Mrs. W. Behave but well, and you shall be -- let me see -- you shall be --
sweeper of the Mall.


MARIA. Ay, but mamma --


Mrs. W. Come, away, away, don't stand talking, I have always told you one
talker in a family's enough; go get yourself dressed.


Exit Maria. BETTY, aside. And that she is determined shall be herself, for
she will let nobody hardly edge in a word. -- Sweeper of the Mall!


going. Mrs. W. Betty.


BETTY. Ma'am.


Mrs. W. Is the drawing room fit to receive company?


BETTY. Yes, Ma'am.


Mrs. W. Go, then, tell your master to make haste into the saloon to his
guests, [Betty going.] and do you hear? [returning] tell John to hang the silver
cistern up in the saloon, and let it run with port wine, till the clock strikes
four, [ going] and -- stay -- [returning] let me see -- tell Will -- are the
two ventilators fixed? I am sure we shall have need of them, for the whole
house smells now as hot and frouzy as a beggar's bedchamber, with these dirty
fellows in it. -- Hah? why don't you answer me?


BETTY. They are, Ma'am.


Mrs. W. Well -- then, you may go.

Betty, going. But heark'ye, [returning] tell Will, I Would have him wait above,
[going] and -- [returning] let that new, sleepy fellow, with the scripture name
there --


BETTY. Hezekiah.


Mrs. W. Ay, I don't know what you call him -- tell him to attend the door,
keep both his eyes open, and watch that nothing is taken out of the house,
[Betty going] and -- [returning] see that every thing is as it should be.


Exit. BETTY. If every thing was as it should be, one would think your tongue
should be tired, but that is out of the nature of things.


Exit. SCENE II. A Village.
Enter ARTFUL booted, with a paper in his hand (and Landlord) on his Canvass.
ARTFUL. I know not how Trueman is, but, egad, Landlord, I am almost worn out
with riding: it is well this is the last place.


LANDLORD. The folks say as how Master Trueman was all about the neighboring
parishes the last week.


ARTF. looking on his paper. Timothy Blunt, -- farmer, -- a wife, -- three
children, Sarah, Mary and Thomas. -- What sort of a man is he?


LANDL. A huge, surly hunks, but has a notable woman to's wife, as ever trod in
shoe leather.


ARTF. Well, I have had pretty good success hitherto. Who comes here?


LANDL. Please your Worship's honor, Ned Smut, our blacksmith, he has a Vote,
your honor, and will gee it you, your honor, as free as a'r'a man in the
county.


ARTF. examining his Paper. Edward Smut -- Blacksmith! he is not upon my list;
-- this was a mistake. -- Is he married?


LANDL. Yeas, along while, your honor.


Enter SMUT. ARTF. runs, takes him by the hands and kisses him. My dear friend,
Mr Smut, it gives me great pleasure to see you, I was just going to your house;
pray how does your good wife?


LANDL. to SMUT. Squoire Artful, Neighbor Smut.


SMUT. Thank your honor, she is not main well, she has been mortally bad with
an agur.


ARTF. Odd so, I am very sorry to hear it; I hope not long; I Will make it my
business to go to see her -- If I recollect right, you have children, Mr. Smut?


SMUT. Yes, your honor, I am father of two, a boy, and a girl that can near
run alone.


ARTF. Is not your son's name Thomas?


SMUT. No, your honor, Richard -- and Susan, uncle and mother's names.


ARTF. Ay, Ay, -- Richard, -- I meant Richard, though I said Thomas; I thought I
remembered 'em. [aside] Faith I Would like to have been out there. [To Smut] How
does little Dick do? Sukey grows a great girl I suppose? -- But, I Will call and
see 'em very soon, I should have called before now, if this Election had not
taken up my time.


SMUT. I hope as how your honor will be chose, I have one vote at your
service, an I had ten, they be the same.


ARTF. squeezing his hand. My best friend, I thank you, and assure you, I take
it extremely kind; make my compliments to your good wife, and tell her, I wish
her better, and beg she will accept of that trifle [giving money] to buy her a
little tea and sugar.


SMUT. I humbly thank your honor. -- Your servant, Sir.

Exit.
ARTF. Mr. Smut, good day to you, [calling out] and pray let her know I Will
certainly call and see her. -- [aside] Well, a crown has secured his vote: easy
enough. How essential a quality is hypocrisy to a man upon his canvass! [To
Landlord] a mighty honest man that Landlord!


LANDL. Ay, your honor, as ever broke bread.


ARTF. Now which is Farmer Blunt's?


LANDL. That right against us.


ARTF. aside. I had like to have forgotten my cue, slips a guinea into his
mouth and knocks.


Enter Mrs. BLUNT. ARTF. Is Mr. Blunt within?


Mrs. B. to LANDLORD. My husband, Mr. Bluffer, is just gone to your house.


ARTF. Gad so; -- you are Mrs. Blunt, -- I protest I had almost forgot you, you
are grown so florid in the face, [kisses her, slipping the guinea from his
mouth into hers, eyeing of Landlord] My dear good woman, I hope I see you well.
How does the little folks within?


Mrs. B. in confusion. Lord, Sir, -- a -- thank your honor -- pretty well -- a
-- you are so good! -- a -- pray -- please to walk in, -- it is but a dirty
house, Sir, -- but -- a -- do, Sir, -- I hope Madam's well?


ARTF. I thank you, Mrs. Blunt, for your kind enquiry, she is very well, and, I
assure you, wonders you don't come and see her.


Mrs. B. I give you and Madam many thanks, Sir, -- [aside] Oh! he is a good
gentleman! -- People in our way of life have not much time to go abroad, --
besides, Sir, to tell you the truth, my husband don't like I should.


ARTF. Not like you should? Sure he does not pretend to control you. I always
look upon the women as goddesses, and think it is man's greatest happiness, when
they are suffered to worship them.


Mrs. B. Ay, Sir, -- I would it were so, -- but a -- I would not say it, --
it is quite the contrary, Mr. Bluffer here, and all [Landlord advances] the
parish knows it; it is he is the god, and I am forced to obey him.


weeps. LANDL. It Is so indeed, the more's the pity.


ARTF. I Am sorry to hear it -- I should think so pretty, so agreeable, so good
a woman as Mrs. Blunt, would have power sufficient to melt his rigor, and
mould him into what form she pleases.


Mrs. B. Oh! dear Sir, -- you are so good -- [aside] Ay, he is fit for a
Parliament Man! -- [to Artf.] No, Sir, -- he moulds me, indeed, much oftener
than I like.


ARTF. Ha, ha, ha, but why do you let him?

Three Children run to the door, one runs to play with Landlord. Oh, here are
the little folks -- How do you do, Tommy? how do you do my little dears?


caressing the Children. Mrs. B. to Children. Where Is your bow, Tom? -- don't
you see the gentleman, girls? -- I hope your honor will excuse 'em, they
forget their manners; -- don't stare in the gentleman's face so, Tommy, -- one
would think you was bred on a common.


ARTF. Let 'em have their way, I love to see 'em, -- here my little man, --
there my pretty maids [giving 'em money] go buy yourselves some cakes -- fine,
pretty children, indeed, Mrs. Blunt.


Mrs. B. You are very good, Sir; [to Child.] say, thank your honor; -- but do,
Sir, walk in, I Am quite ashamed to see you stand at the door, I Will send for my
husband immediately.


ARTF. No, no, my good woman, you shall not trouble yourself; I have a house or
two to call at, after which shall go back to my Landlord's, where I shall
probably meet with him.


Mrs. B. Well, Sir, use your own pleasure: -- if he should come home before you
get back, I Will send him to you.


ARTF. Do so; but -- let me see, I presume you know Wednesday next is the day
of Election, let me beg the favor of you to wear that favor [giving one] in
honor of it.


Mrs. B. curtesying. Ay, Sir, if all Parliament Members were like your honor,
we should never have been plagued with the militia, nor the cider bill neither.
I heartily wish you success, Sir.


ARTF. Thank you, Mrs. Blunt, good morning to you.


Mrs. B. Your servant, Sir; your servant, Mr. Bluffer.


LANDL. Your servant.


ARTF. to LANDL. A very good sort of a woman; Blunt, you say, is a covetous
surly fellow?


LANDL. Yeas, your honor, the quite avarse of her.


Exeunt Artf. and Land. Mrs. B. He Is a worthy gentleman! -- but, a plague on it,
I forgot to ask him to drink any thing; 'twas your faults ye brats; -- go, get
ye in, for what you're good for -- Aye, this is something like a Parliament Man!


Exeunt. SCENE III. A Country Town.
Enter three of Sir Harry Simple's mob, with ribbands in their hats, sticks and
beer in their hands. ALL. Sir Harry Simple for ever; Huzza.


1st MOB half drunk. I say Sir Harry's an honorable gem'man, let who dare say
to the contrary.


2d MOB. I Am sure I ought to think so, for I Have had a main deal of his money;
I Would go fifty mile an end to vote for 'en.


3d MOB. Ay, damn Artful; here is Sir Harry for ever, huzza.


drinks. ALL. Huzza.


1st MOB. Zounds, there is such good living here; I Will not go home one while
again. Sir Harry Simple for ever I say, huzza.


drinks. 2d MOB. Egad, Will, this fever, as you caal it, will make Mall, as
foin as a Duchess; here is Sir Harry for ever.


drinks. ALL. Huzza.


3d MOB. So soon as ever he is chose, they hoist him on their shoulders you say,
and fling money about, golore? -- damn it, we shall have rare sport -- huzza.


2d MOB. Zounekins, -- Mall will be main vexed, if she does not come.


1st MOB, brandishing his stick and drinking. This is rare stuff. Simple for
ever I say, and the first man that contradicts it -- I Will break his head, --
damn me.


Enter ARTFUL 's Mob, with favors in their hats, and sticks in their hands.
ARTF. Mob all. Artful for ever. Huzza.


SIMP. Mob all. Simple for ever. Huzza.


SIMP. 1st Mob. I say Sir Harry Simple's the best gem'man.


ARTF. 1st Mob. I say, you lie.


SIMP. 2d Mob, interfering. No quarrelling, no quarrelling; let both have fair
play; -- now, pray friend, tell us, why Squire Artful's a better man, than Sir
Harry Simple?


ARTF. 1st Mob. Because -- he is. -- For experiment, he is not above speaking
to us, but talks to any of us, as if, as how, we was his acquaintance.


ARTF. 2d Mob. He went to see my dame, and was so lovingly fond of her, as
thoff she would been madam: he squeezed her so close, and hugged her and kissed
her, as thoff he would have eat her up. Sue was ready to die away in his arms
for joy.


SIMP. 2d Mob. If that is the case, the Squire is a good gentleman.


SIMP. 3d Mob. Zounds, what argufies all his kissing and slobbering, will he
take off the militia bill? Has he gee you any of his money?


ARTF. 2d Mob. What Is that to you whether he has, or nay?


SIMP. 3d Mob. Then damn Artful, here is Simple for ever.


SIMP. Mob. all. Huzza.


ARTF. Mob. all. Knock 'em down. -- Artful for ever, huzza.


They scuffle. Enter Sir HARRY, CRAFTY, QUIRK, with MOB. ARTF. Mob. all. No
thicksculs, no Simple's; Artful for ever, huzza.


Sir HARRY. Here my lads, [gives money to his Mob.] break their heads, a parcel
of scoundrels!


They fight, Artful's mob is beat off. Exit Mob. hollowing. Before Gad, nothing
like a little gold to make one beloved.

CRAFTY. If gold will do, and, faith, I never knew it fail yet, we shall carry
it, in spite of Artful's devilish hypocrisy.


QUIRK. I never was fond of clandestine proceedings, -- but, -- however, of two
evils, we are to choose the least; now, bribery alone, is not so bad as bribery
and hypocrisy together.


Sir HARRY. Let Artful salve over the matter as he pleases; if he gives but a
penny, he comes within the oath, as much as if he gave a pound.


QUIRK. And, let him give it under what pretense he will, in foro conscientiae,
it is bribery nevertheless; therefore we have this satisfaction, that if we are
no better than other people, thank heaven and our own virtue, we are no worse.


Sir HARRY to CRAFTY. Have you ordered the music and cleavers to meet us in
Cocksheet-Hollow, on Wednesday morning, in time?


CRAFTY. I have appointed them there by ten, lest Artful's party should parade
it into town before us.


Sir HARRY, warmly. Confound Artful and his party too. Double my numbers,
Quirk, and not suffer the scoundrels to enter the town at all.


QUIRK. No; -- that will not do; -- that will not do; were we to carry it under those
circumstances, it would be deemed no election: they would bring it into the house,
and swear their voters could not poll, for fear of their lives.


Sir HARRY. Well, gentlemen, I shall leave these matters wholly to you; I hope
there is not much doubt of success?


CRAFTY. Nothing is certain, but, by what I can see, we have as good as, if not
better of it, than Artful.


QUIRK. You must spare no expense; if you do, in my opinion, it is over with
you. Artful's plea upon all occasions, is, I Am no Courtier, though 'twas but the
other day I saw him following the breech of my Lord M'Sawney, into the great
house at the bottom of St. James's Street.


Sir HARRY. You should tell some devilish lie or another. -- Cannot you say that
I Will get the militia bill and the beer act repealed? or, -- tell 'em I Will get
an act passed that every man shall be at liberty to leave his wife, at the
expiration of three years, if he does not like her, and marry again.


CRAFTY. Ha, ha, ha, I don't know what that indeed might do, but as to the
militia bill, and the beer act, they will now go no more down with the people,
than stale small beer, to a man that is not thirsty.


Sir HARRY apart. 'Twill be confounded hard to lose it, after spending so much
money! -- Lose it! -- I must not think of it. -- If I do, I Am ruined. -- I have
been now obliged to borrow a considerable sum. However, if I get the girl, she
has fortune enough to set all to rights again.


QUIRK apart, to CRAFTY. Who shall touch him for the next five hundred? you or
I?


CRAFTY apart, to QUIRK. No matter which. -- I will, you had the last. [to Sir
Harry.] Why so thoughtful, Sir Harry? keep up your spirits man, or, we lose the
cause.


Sir HARRY. I have been considering, gentlemen, how much I am obliged to you.
What could I have done without you? Should I succeed, you shall not find me
ungrateful.


QUIRK. Should! -- Let us not suppose a doubt. -- Money must certainly carry
it. The generality of freeholders, especially the lower sort, would not only
sell their country, but, they would part with their wives and children could they
get any thing for 'em.


CRAFTY. The great inconsistency of these people, often makes me smile: they
sell themselves, and then wonder, and are displeased at being sold.


Sir HARRY. Before Gad! that is true enough. [to Quirk.] How have you done in the
lower part of the county?


QUIRK. Damn the lower part; I found 'em as mercenary and venal, as they could
well be. Many of them turned up their noses at five pieces; I was obliged to
give them ten, and, at one place, I was under a necessity of entertaining the
girls with the humors of Mr. Punch; that cost me fifty; I should have done
nothing if I had'nt; for the tongues of the men and women in that place are,
like the strings of a fiddle equally tuned, in perfect unison. What one cries,
the other answers.


Sir HARRY. The women in some places have a wonderful attraction, ha, ha, ha.
Have you Crafty, finished in the upper part?


CRAFTY. Not quite; I have a parish or two to canvass yet; indeed, I should not
have been here, had'nt I got to the bottom of my purse. -- I must have another
five hundred.

Sir HARRY taking out a pocket book, and giving him a note. Must you! Blessings
go with it, then! Nothing venture they say, nothing have. A day or two now will
determine all. My friend Wealthy has opened his house in my interest, and I
have promised to attend him every day between this and Wednesday; therefore you
must excuse me; I presume I shall see you some time tomorrow, you will find me
either there or at the old place.


Exit. QUIRK. Now we are alone, tell me, Crafty, how you succeeded last week.


CRAFTY. I Will deal frankly with you; for rogues are generally honest to one
another. -- I made a complete thousand. -- I got a cool hundred out of one
parish.


QUIRK. Then you have done better than I, for what with presents, balls,
feasting and puppet-shews, I hav'n't been able to save quite seven hundred;
and, when I gave him in the account, he thought I had been too profuse.


CRAFTY. Zounds, man, you don't take the right step. Did you make the landlords
of public houses your friends? tip them but a piece or two extraordinary, and
they will give you a receipt for double the money you spend. They daren't cry out
for fear of betraying themselves.


QUIRK. All that I took care to do.


CRAFTY. Did you enter in your account, so much to ringers, so much to fiddlers,
so much to tatlers?


QUIRK. Tatlers? who are they?


CRAFTY. Why, the old women.


QUIRK. Indeed, I never thought of them.


CRAFTY. Not fee the old women! then you hav'n't done either Sir Harry, or
yourself, justice. -- It would not only have swelled the account, but tip an
old woman's tongue with gold, and, she will talk you off, in such gilded strains,
as shall do you more essential service, than all you give besides. Oh! -- the
old women, the tatlers as I call them, have a power of talking you black or
white, just as disposition leads 'em. Whatever you do, -- secure the old women.


QUIRK. Live and learn's an old proverb. -- I presume you include the parson,
and the apothecary, in the number of the old women.


CRAFTY. Doubtless. -- They are the belweathers of a parish, they are the main
springs that set the female tongue a-going. Nothing in this point can ever be
done, without the parson and the apothecary.


QUIRK. It Is impossible, Simple could have employed a better man in this
business than you, Crafty; you seem perfectly acquainted with it, and can fall
in with the taste of all ranks of people. -- I Will be bold to say, you will eat,
drink, lie, swear and whore, with any man in the three kingdoms.


CRAFTY. Ha, ha, ha. Necessity has no law; there is no carrying the point
without it. The better we keep up the spirit of the thing, the greater
advantage we shall reap. I Would see Simple at the devil, before I Would take so much
pains, if I had not a feeling in it. If he is returned, he marries the girl, her
fortune is paid, and I hope we shall have some of the fingering it. If not, as
we shall have the bonds he has given us ready in force, we'll execute the
writs, and secure the money, while he has any to pay. [Apeing Sir Harry.] I
have been considering, gentlemen, how much I amobliged to you. -- Hah, Quirk?
-- but, come let us away, we'll defer our settling till the business is done.


Exeunt. SCENE IV. A Room in an Alehouse.
Enter ARTFUL and LANDLORD. ARTF. I hope she will send him back again, Landlord?


LANDL. No fear, your honor, -- I never knew her ge'an to falsifications in my
born days.


ARTF. Well, make us a bowl of your best punch; probably he may be here by that
time. [ Exit Landlord.] Never was I more at a loss in my life, than I am at
present, how I shall heat this surly wretch: apply to him I must, as I am told
he has great influence among his neighbors. -- It Is according as it hits! -- I
shall be heartily glad when this day's over.


Re-enter LANDLORD. LANDL. Measter Blunt's just come, your honor.


ARTF. Oh, he is? -- pray desire him to walk in, -- and bring the liquor. [Exit
Landl.] Now must I have all my wits about me.


Re-enter LANDLORD with a bowl of punch, and BLUNT. ARTF. running and squeezing
Blunt by the hand.] My dear friend, Mr. Blunt, I am heartily glad to see you.


BLUNT, aside. Mayhap so; but, it is for his own ends I suppose. -- Why had not
he kissed me as he did my wife? [to Artf.] Your servant, Sir, What is your
business with me?


ARTF. As to business, Mr. Blunt, -- we'll leave that alone, I never talk of
business so abruptly. -- Come, sit down and take a glass of punch.


BLUNT, aside. I never am against that.


ARTF. You have no objections to our Landlord's company, I hope?


BLUNT. None at all; Bluffer's an honest fellow.


They all sit. ARTF. Here Is your good health, Mr. Blunt.


drinks. BLUNT. Thank you, Sir -- to yours.


drinks. ARTF. Landlord, fill your glass, and drink to our good friend here.


LANDL. Measter Blunt, my service to you.


drinks. BLUNT shaking his head, aside. All this will not do. [to Landl.] Measter
Bluffer, I thank you.


ARTF. What Is the best news Mr. Blunt, in this part of the country?


BLUNT. News, quother! -- This damned militia bill continues to make such
confusion in this place, that I wish that man's tail had been on fire, that
first proposed it.


ARTF. I am very sorry you should entertain so bad an opinion....


BLUNT interrupting him. Sorry! -- bad an opinion! -- pox on it -- don't tell me
that we are to maintain the brats of a parcel of lazy, idle scoundrels; that, at
certain times, make it their business to loiter about the country, pilfering
and stealing every thing they can lay their hands on. No, no, Mr. Artful. --
Sir Harry Simple thinks as I do.


ARTF. Whatever Sir Harry may think, I am convinced, the act has now been so
long established, it is out of any man's power to alter it.


BLUNT. And then there is your beer and cider act; -- add to that the exorbitant
price of provisions -- look about, look about, the poor are starving every
where.


ARTF. Starving! Mr. Blunt!


BLUNT, aping ARTF. Starving! Mr. Blunt! -- yes starving. -- Would you have 'em
eat horse-dung?


ARTF. Bread seems to be the most material thing, and I cannot see how they can
lower the price of that, without injuring the farmer. Rents are dear, taxes are
high, and hands scarce.


LANDL. Indeed they are. No one can tell where the shoe pinches so well as he
that wears it. I hav'n't above ten acres, and yet I can feel it.


BLUNT. Bread, neighbor Bluffer's the least on it, let 'em take the taxes off
other articles, and then we shall see who is to fault; the Parliament or the
farmer.


ARTF. Nothing would make me happier than to have it in my power, to be
instrumental to the good of my countrymen. Give me leave to drink to your good
families health. Landlord, here is Mrs. Blunt and her little ones. [ drinks.] [
all drink.] You have three mighty pretty children, Mr. Blunt.


BLUNT. They are well enough, -- they are as God made 'em.


LANDL. You mentioned Sir Harry Simple, Measter Blunt, have you seen any thing
of en?


BLUNT. Hav'n't you? -- He came to ask me for my vote.


LANDL. An' have you promised it him?


BLUNT. May hap, I have, -- and, mayhap, I hav'n't; -- that is nothing to no
body.


ARTF. to LANNDL. Mr. Blunt is right; a freeholder, in that respect, is a free
man, and I have this opinion of Mr. Blunt, that no money or interest will
induce him to give his vote from his friend.


BLUNT, aside. But you're damnably mistaken.


ARTF. to BLUNT. And I flatter myself, my good man, that I have always lived in
such repute as to have the voice of every one in this place, and, among the
rest, that of yours.


BLUNT, aside. Adod! -- That Is flattery, with a vengeance! --


ARTF. But come, my friend, drink the other glass. [helps him.] Here Is prosperity
to this place! -- [they all drink.]


BLUNT. I don't know.... You called on my wife, she tells me.


ARTF. About two hours ago, and was pleased to see her look so well.


BLUNT. Yes! --


ARTF. And I told her, Mrs. Artful takes it ill, she does not come and see her.


BLUNT, aside. May hap so -- [to Artf.] Ay, -- you was civil to her? -- you
say? --


ARTF. I am always glad to see my friends.


BLUNT. So I suppose... Didn't you kiss her? --


ARTF. I did testify my joy in seeing her by a salute.


BLUNT. Then you might have testified your joy (as you call it) in seeing me
the same way.


ARTF. Gad so, where were my thoughts. [ slips gold into his mouth, kisses
Blunt, and slips it into his mouth.] I assure you, my good friend, I am
heartily glad to see you.


BLUNT. Ay, -- well -- [eyeing of Landlord, and conveying the guinea from his
mouth into his pocket.] Now you may testify your joy to my Breech, for to be
plain with you, I have promised Sir Harry my vote and interest, and he has it,
if I can crawl to town; so Mr. Artful, your servant.


Exit, laughing. ARTF. amazed. Unparallelled impudence!


LANDL. Didn't I tell your honor, as how he was a surly chap?


ARTF. Surly chap! -- I never met with so much insolence in my life. I was very
civil to him, why should he affront me? had he told me at first he was engaged,
I should'n't have been displeased; but, I Will think no more on it, it vexes me;
be so good, Landlord, as to bring my horse to the door.


BLUNT. Yeas, your honor.


Exit, Landlord. ARTFUL. A rascal! -- I Would have horse-whipped him, if it had not
been at this time. Drinks my liquor! -- votes against me! -- takes my money! --
laughs in my face, and bids me kiss his breech! very frank indeed! -- but as I
often say, He that plays at bowls, must expect some rubs.


Exit. END of ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Parlour. Enter BETTY. BETTY. The continual noise and hurry in this house,
ever since my master has opened his doors, has almost made me distracted.
There Is nothing done but running backwards and forwards, all day long. I never
saw so much eating and drinking in any house, since I Have been a servant.
Guttle, guttle, guttle; and then as to liquor,.... in my mind, as fast as they
pour it in, it runs out... I do believe John hasn't emptied our large pewter
jordan less than twenty times this morning! -- [going out, meets Maria
entering.] A letter from Mr. Trueman, Miss.


giving a letter. MARIA. Is any one waiting?


BETTY. The man that brought it said, it did not require an answer.


MARIA reads the Letter. It Is only to tell me, he will take the first opportunity
of seeing me tomorrow, after the election is over. -- I hope Simple will lose
it, both for my sake, and the sake of this poor county; for such a
representative he would make, as was never seen before.


BETTY. Pray fortune he may! -- though he could say, aye -- or -- no; -- as well
as the best; and few of them ever say more. -- Heaven's be praised, this is the
last day! for I am sure the house has been topsy turvy for this week past.


MARIA. Where Is my pappa?


BETTY. Making a beast of himself, with the bears, in the great room.


MARIA. I peeped in as I passed the door, but could hardly see any thing for
smoke. -- Has Sir Harry been here today?


BETTY. I fancy not, or the whole neighborhood must have known it, they would have
roared so loud.


MARIA. Should he come and enquire for me, say I Am gone out, for I Am determined
not to see the fool.


Three huzzas are heard behind. BETTY, stopping her ears. Do You hear the brutes?
-- They Are drinking now, confusion to the Scotch, or some such nonsense.


MARIA. Let Us get out of the hearing of it, for it lowers my spirits.


Exit. Another hollow is heard. BETTY. Away, away, there is another storm.


Exit. SCENE II. opens, and discovers Mr. WEALTHY, and a number of Freeholders
at a table, eating and drinking, a collation being spread, with pipes, etc.
WEALTHY. Pray gentleman be free. -- There Is a cold pasty; I have not tasted
it, but believe it is very good.


The French Horns and Trumpets are blown while they eat. Men talk to one
another. 1st MAN. Faith, Jan, my chops water at yon pudden.


2d MAN. An' I have a duced inclination to taste those red things.


1st MAN. Do then... here. [giving him a lobster.]


2d MAN, tasting it. Zookers, it is rare good: I Will carry this whame to Nell. he
slips it into his pocket, and reaches another. Many slip different things into
their pockets.


WEALTHY comes forward, and some of the Company. WEALTHY. Suppose we have a
song?


ALL. A song, a song.


A song here by Wealthy with a chorus. Enter a Man with a parcel of favors.
WEALTHY. Oh, here are the cockades. -- Come, gentlemen, put them into your
hats. Here, give me your hat. [ takes the 3 d man's hat, and fixes the
ribband.] there, Sir, [putting it on his head.] I enlist you under my friend
Sir Harry Simple's banner.


3d Man, half drunk, frightened and angry. Hah? -- List me! -- No, by George --
[tearing the ribband out of his hat.] -- Not so fast. -- I didn't come here to
be listed. -- [aside.] If that is the case, Sir Harry may go to the devil for
me. -- It cost me three pound the other day to get off the militia, and I
shall not go for a soldier now.


WEALTHY. Ha, ha, ha. -- Sha, -- you fool, what are you about? Put it in again
-- I don't enlist you for a soldier, only to follow Sir Harry, tomorrow
morning in triumph.


3d MAN. If that be all -- I thought you might have been going to list me in
right earnest. [aside.] That would have been a pretty joke --


Some put their ribbands in their pockets and ask for more. French horns and
trumpets sound again. The men retire to the table. Enter Sir HARRY and QUIRK.
WEALTHY. We have been impatient, Sir Harry, for your coming; you see how I have
been laboring for you; if the rest of your friends work as hard, we shall make
a pretty show tomorrow morning.


QUIRK. I hope we shall; but must confess you will exceed us all.


Sir HARRY. Indeed, my good Sir, I am greatly indebted to you.


a stool is brought. WEALTHY. Help, Sir Harry to a glass of wine.


Servant helps him. Sir Harry gets upon the stool. ALL. Silence, silence.


Sir HARRY bowing. Gentlemen, hem.... Gentlemen, -- I think myself greatly
happy... honored I would have said. Hem.... I say, gentlemen, I think myself
greatly honored, in this numberous... numerous appearance of friends, in my
interest. Though I Am a stranger in this county; that is, I mean, not born in
it, for to be sure, I have been often in all parts of it, though I Am a stranger,
I beg leave to say, I have it as much at heart as any representative you ever
had, [aside] and that God knows is very little, and will be bold to affirm,
aver and declare, that if I am so happy, so highly honored as to be chose,
I Will do you as much service as I can... as I can. hem... and, be assured,
gentlemen, that while I have life and spirits, I will oppose every thing in the
House, that every individual shall dislike; your cause, shall be my cause, your
prosperity, my prosperity. [Bows. All clap their hands.] Give me leave, then to
drink to your good healths. Gentlemen, I have the honor to drink prosperity to
you all, and this county in particular.


[drinks.] Sir HARRY, WEALTHY, and QUIRK. Huzza, -- huzza, -- huzza.


Sir Harry gets down. WEALTHY. I can assure you, Sir Harry, every man here is
as much your friend, as I am. Come, gentlemen, let us fill a bumper to our
worthy friend. [All fill their glasses, horns and trumpets sound.] Sir Harry
Simple for ever.


ALL. Sir Harry Simple for ever [all drink.] Huzza.


Sir Harry bowing. WEALTHY. Again.


ALL. Huzza.


Sir Harry bowing. WEALTHY. Once more.


ALL. Huzza.


Sir Harry bowing. WEALTHY hollows by himself. Huzza. I wish, with all my soul,
I was a few years younger, I Would drink and hollow till tomorrow this time.


QUIRK. You do excellently well as it is.


WEALTHY. If it is agreeable to you, Sir Harry, we'll adjourn. [to the company]
Pray, gentlemen, be free; I Will be with you again shortly.


Exeunt Wealthy, Quirk, and Sir Harry bowing. ALL the remaining company. Huzza.


Scene shuts all in. SCENE III.
A Lobby in ARTFUL' s House. Enter ARTFUL and TRUEMAN talking. TRUEM. Blunt by
name, -- Blunt by nature! -- I never heard of so much impudence before! -- Sure
there must be something infatuating in the House of Commons, or gentlemen,
would not take so much pains, and degrade themselves as they do, to obtain a
seat there.


ARTF. You shall know the sweets of it, when once it is in my power to inform
you.


TRUEM. Sooner than I Would take this trouble for myself, I Would forego the honor of
sitting there to all eternity.


musing. ARTF. Then, Trueman, I Am the more obliged to you.


TRUEM. Honor did I call it? -- It was an honor once, when honesty and
patriotism were the reigning principles; but, now, since venality has found a
way into the breast, and tainted that integrity our fathers gloried in, --
Honor is become a phantom, and patriotism little better than a shadow.


ARTF. Let us not despair, but hope to see those days again. You're glad, I
presume your work is done?


TRUEM. In very truth, I am. None but he who has experienced it, can tell the
fatigue and trouble that attends it -- Up night and day for weeks together,
fawning on, kissing and flattering the women all day, smoking, boozing, and
licking the very spittle of the men, all night.


ARTF. 'Twould be well enough at particular times, and with particular persons,
but, to be obliged to do it with all ranks and degrees of people, and so long
together; Tailors, Barbers, Shoemakers, Tinkers and Blacksmiths; and to be
forced to be obsequious to those, whom you hate the sight of.... Faith,
Trueman, I Am ashamed of it. --


TRUEM. The times, my friend, the times are such, -- there is no getting into
the house without it?


ARTF. What Is the place of our rendezvous?


TRUEM. Ivy Common. As we are to be upon the hustings by twelve, it is necessary
we should repair thither immediately, for the clock has struck nine.


ARTF. I received a card yesterday from the mayor (no doubt Simple had the
same) desiring us to enter into town on foot, lest any accident should happen
from the horses.


TRUEM. No bad precaution that, I thought of it myself.


ARTF. Are there houses enough of entertainment open?


TRUEM. That we might err on the right side, I have just opened the Bell. I
ought to have done it sooner, for it has put the landlord into a confounded
bustle. How did you succeed in your canvass, with the clergy?


ARTF. They, at present, declare themselves neuter, however, I doubt not but at
dinner time, I shall have the greatest show of them, for I have sent in a pair
of bucks, and have ordered my table to be served with French wines; whereas, I
hear Sir Harry's is served up cold.


TRUEM. There Is many at the Bull I Am told, already; funking one another with
tobacco, even before dinner. They Are in reserve, I presume, in case of tight
work.


Enter a SERVANT. SERVANT. There Is a number of gentlemen on horseback at the
door, waiting your coming, Sir.


ARTF. Well, -- bring our horses to the fore-gate. [Exit servant.] Now to the
field.


Exeunt. SCENE IV.
A Street, in the County Town. A number of signs are seen with boards hanging
to the bottom of them, on some is written ARTFUL, on some SIMPLE, intimating,
in whose interest each house is open.

Various people cross the stage, some sick, some lame, some blind, going as to
the poll, among these is a Puritan accompanied by his wife, and two Emissaries
of different parties distributing hills, etc.

1st EM. to PURITAN. Who do you vote for, friend?


PURITAN. My conscience bids me poll for the Squire, but my wise says, I
mustn't... I don't know what to do.


1st EMIS. For Sir Harry, to be sure... If you would do your country any service,
give your vote to Sir Harry. He expects you to dinner at the George... Here Is a
bill of the house.


offers a bill, with money in it. PURIT. I never takes no bribes;... my
conscience will not let me.


WIFE to PURIT. Plague of your conscience! -- so much fuss about a trumpery
thing! -- Will conscience buy you a dinner? take it, there is gold in it.


PURIT. So much the worse, wife, so much the worse.... Satan wrapped up in it! --
avaunt, tempter, avaunt. --


1st EMIS. You should gild your conscience as the doctors do their pills, to
make 'em go down.


WIFE. Take it I say, Will, this minute, or -- you shall never hear the last
on it... [ to 1 st Emis.] you are very good, Sir, I Will take it for'n, and make
him vote for Sir Harry [takes the money.] [to her husband.] You foolish
blockhead, -- you refused it so often, I thought we should have lost it. -- Now,
you may vote according to your Conscience.


PURIT. Mind wife, it was not I that took it, it was not I that took it.


Exit Puritan and wife. Enter a man half drunk, brandishing a stick, his face
scarred, having been in a scuffle; crossing the stage be meets a waiter with a
cloth under his arm. WAITER. Shall I show you to the Crown and thistle;


MAN. Pox of your Crown and thistle;... I Am not for the court.... Liberty and
property for ever! -- Damme.


Exit with waiter. Enter a country fellow, whistling. He is met by the two
Emissaries. 2d EMIS. Your vote is desired for Squire Artful, and your company
requested at the Bell.


giving a paper. 1st EMIS. The George is the best house; -- your friends are at
the George...


giving a paper. COUNTRYM. Which of you two, am I to believe?


2d EMIS. Whose interest are you in?


COUNTRYM. My own.


1st EMIS. Well said, countryman; then you will dine with Sir Harry; every man
that studies his own interest, gives his vote to Sir Harry.


slipping money into his hand. COUNTRYM. I ar'n't right sure of that. Where Is
the best living?


2d EMISS. to COUNTRYM. At the Bell, besides, [whispering.] Sir Harry's a
courtier; -- the Squire is not.


putting a piece into his hand. Countryman holds fast the money, eyeing them
both. both whisper the countryman as he goes out. 1st EMIS. whispering. Sir
Harry will give you a guinea every child you have.


2d EMIS. ditto. The Squire will stand for 'em.


1st EMIS. ditto. He Will lower the taxes.


2d EMIS. ditto. He hates the Scotch.


Exeunt. Noise without. Enter a procession of Sir HARRY' s Party. Headed by Sir
HARRY, WEALTHY, CRAFTY, and QUIRK, and several gentlemen richly dressed, with
mob, colors, music, marrowbones and cleavers. Sir HARRY bowing to all. MOB
all. Sir Harry for ever, Sir Harry Simple for ever, huzza, huzza.


Music plays. CRAFTY. Pray, gentlemen, make way there.


MOB, all. Sir Harry for ever, huzza.


Music plays, the procession goes off. 1st MOB. Wouns, he is main foinly dressed.


2d MOB. Did you obsarve, Jan; how mannerly he was?


bowing aukwardly. 3d MOB. Yeas, most tediously so; I warnt you he took us all
for his friends.


1st MOB. It Is aal pocrisy, like our farmers, when landlord comes, they are cap
in hand; but as soon as his back is turned, he may go to the devil for what
they care.


hollowing, without. 2d MOB. Stand out of the way, -- here comes the Squoire's
party.


Enter ARTFUL' s party, in procession, with colors, music, etc. ARTFUL,
TRUEMAN, and several gentlemen at the head, finely dressed. ARTFUL bowing to
all. MOB, all. No Simple's, no Simple's, Artful for ever, huzza, huzza.


TRUBM. By your leave, gentlemen.


MOB, all. Liberty, property, and no excise! -- Huzza.


Enter Music play, procession goes off. Enter a waiter calling another in the
crowd. 1st WAITER. Nicodemus! -- Nicode -- mus!


2d WAITER. Here, here --


1st WAITER, loud. More rum and tobacco for the clergy. --


2d WAITER. Coming, com-ing.


Exeunt all SCENE V.
A Room in WEALTHY' s House. Enter Mrs. WEALTHY. Mrs. W. I Am all upon the
fidgets to know how this matter goes; Mr. Wealthy had my particular orders to
dispatch a messenger every ten minutes. Betty -- [ calls] why, Betty. --


Enter BETTY. BETTY, aside. Lord, how quiet the house is, since those bears
have left it; I can hardly here my Mistress now.


Mrs. W. Betty.


BETTY. Madam.


Mrs. W. Is there no express arrived? -- No account from the hustings?


BETTY. None that I know of, Ma'am. -- I hear Sir Harry will lose it.


Mrs. W. Peace baggage; -- better you lose your tongue first.


BETTY. A neighbor passed the door this instant, and told me squire Artful had
it five to three.


Mrs. W. It Is impossible, varlet. -- And, yet I fear there is something in it,
as no body's been here.


BETTY. Oh, it is certainly so.


Mrs. W. Run to the door, and see if any one's coming.


BETTY. Mercy, how still the house is! I hardly know where I am.


Exit Betty. Enter MARIA. Mrs. W. Maria, is it not very unaccountable that your
father should send no kind of word?


MARIA. Perhaps it goes hard against Sir Harry, and my Papa waits till the poll
takes a better turn.


Mrs. W. Tell me not of better or worse; I believe in my heart, if he does not
carry it I shall go distracted.


MARIA. I Am sorry, mamma, to see you so much concerned about it; what advantage
will it be to you if he is returned?


Mrs. W. How can you ask that nonsensical question? -- Will it be no advantage
to have the disposal of many places about the Court? Will it be no advantage to
be importuned for our interest? Will it be no advantage to have one's daughter
the wife of a member of parliament? --


MARIA. Mamma, you quite astonish me; do you think....


Mrs. W. If he does not gain it, I Will have nothing to say to him; -- you shall not
have him, let Mr. Wealthy say what he will.


MARIA. With respect to that, you may be perfectly easy; for I would not be the
wife of so illiterate a fop, was he possessed of the first seat in the House of
Lords.


Mrs. W. You're thinking of that low bred fellow, Trueman, now.


MARIA. Mr. Trueman is a gentleman, a man of some honor, and had he stood for
the county, would have carried it in spite of fate, but Sir Harry is such an
ignorant coxcomb, that had he spent ten times the sum he has, I Am persuaded it
must have been to little purpose...I fear you have only disgraced yourselves in
espousing his cause.


Mrs. W. Girl cease your impertinence.


MARIA. If you and my pappa are determined your sonin-law shall be a knight of
the shire, you need only consent to my marriage with Mr. Trueman, support him
as heartily as you have done Sir Harry, and I Will be bound you will succeed.


Mrs. W. How Is that, Maria?


listening greedily. MARIA. I say, mamma; as I am an only child, and my pappa
does not want for money, let him consent to my marrying Mr. Trueman, put him up
for the county the next vacancy; support him as he has done Sir Harry, and
there is no doubt he will carry it; for in his canvass for Mr. Artful, he has won
the hearts of all the people.


Mrs. W. aside. She talks a little reasonable. -- But it must not be.... Sir
Harry cannot lose it... Run to the upper windows, and see if any of our fellows
are coming. That wench stays an age, I Will go out into the road myself.


MARIA. Good fortune be my friend, and I may be blessed at last! --


Exit. SCENE VI.
Opens and discovers a street crowded. Windows full of ladies, holding out
their handkerchiefs; Artful hoisted. Bells heard ringing; colors flying, music
playing; in procession, marrowbones and cleavers chiming; great scuffling to
get on; Mob hollowing, and, Artful bowing to the ladies. MOB, all. Artful for
ever. Artful for ever. Huzza, huzza.


Procession goes off. Scene shuts all in. SCENE VII.
A Room in WEALTHY' s House. Enter WEALTHY, at one door, Mrs. WEALTHY and MARIA
at the opposite. Mrs. W. You need not tell us, you need not tell us; ill news
flies apace; we have heard it all.


Mr. W. To be so widely thrown out! -- I never was more out in my calculations
in my life.


Mrs. W. Some of 'em surely must have turned tail, or, Artful could never have
carried it two to one.


Mr. W. Trueman was the means of his succeeding; had he opposed 'em, he would have
thrown 'em both.


MARIA. Just as I said, mamma.


Mrs. W. Said, -- you fool? -- I hav'n'r patience... Where Is Sir Harry?


Mr. W. There, I suppose. -- I left him among 'em. -- We made a pretty
appearance too -- but -- Fortune was perverse!


Enter BETTY. BETTY. Here Is a man desires to see you, Sir, he is brought a
letter.


Mrs. W. Bid him come in.


Exit Betty. Mr. W. Who can this be from? --


Re-enter BETTY, and TRUEMAN in disguise. Trueman gives Wealthy the letter,
Wealthy reads. MARIA, aside. What could possess Mr. Trueman to come here at
this unseasonable time!


WEALTHY, giving Mrs. WEALTHY the letter. It Is from Sir Harry, -- there, --
he is ruined, and charges me with his undoing; he says, he was obliged to borrow
a large sum on account of this election, that he depended on success, and
thought to have repaid it, with my daughter's fortune; that he has been
betrayed by Quirk and Crafty, that bonds he is given, are put in execution
against him, that he has not a farthing left, has therefore gone out of the
way, and says nothing can retrieve him but an alliance with my family -- a
mighty pretty scoundrel! -- This, wife, is your doing. --


Mrs. W. My doing, Mr. Wealthy? You know as how we thought he was a man of
fortune, or, I never should have consented to his marrying my daughter.


MARIA. It Is well, pappa, it is no worse; I am delivered from a bad husband, and
you freed from a wicked villain.


Mr. W. I question whether the scoundrel's a Baronet.


TRUEM. If report speaks true, he is all that is bad. Many an honest man in town
will be a loser by him; the publican's bills, I fear, will come short of
payment. --


BETTY to MARIA. It Is an ill wind that blows no body good.


Mr. W. All the praises of the day, have been in favor of that Trueman; had I
stirred as much for him, as I Have done for the other, we should not have set down
under this disgrace.


Mrs. W. You may do that next time, for your daughter's determined to have him,
and I Am resolved my son-in-law shall be in parliament.


MARIA. Indeed, pappa, Mr. Trueman is possessed of such good qualities as do
honor to the gentleman; though he is not so rich as some, you are sensible a
fortune with us is not so great an object of attention, as honor and honesty.


Mr. W. All that without book, huzzy? --


MARIA. Besides, Sir, my future happiness is wrapped up in him, and, I have
always had reason to believe you wish for nothing more, than to see your only
child settled happily in the world.


Mrs. W. I have given my consent to the match, ever since I heard of Artful's
being returned; and would have you do so too; -- [aside] besides I would do it
purely to be revenged of Simple -- c^^^^ing us with his ruin! -- a paltry
fellow! --


Mr. W. Well, I Will hear what he has to say, one of these days.


TRUEM. throwing off his disguise. Then, let that day be now. -- See, Sir,
before you, that Trueman you have been pleased to think so favorably of, and
suffer him to say, that if he could obtain your consent [ addressing himself to
both] to marry miss Maria, the daily study of his life, should be to make her
happy, and repay your kindness with filial gratitude.


WEALTHY, astonished. How Is all this? --


TRUEM. Meeting with the man appointed to deliver that letter, and desiring to
see the object of my love, I procured this upper habit at the expense of a
crown, promising to deliver it for him. -- He is waiting at the next public
house for an answer.


Mrs. W. angrily. We'll send him an answer, presently.


Mr. W. That man must be an unaccountable being, that does not respect one, of
whom the whole country speaks so well. Let us then repair a broken alliance,
which must have been dreadful in its consequences, by that of one, which bodes
a deal of good. Take my girl [joining Trueman's and Maria's hand.] with all a
father's wishes; make her a good husband, and teach the world, that honesty is
the best policy, and that it is more noble to espouse integrity, than to stand
forth in the cause of iniquity.


Exeunt omnes. END of ACT II.
FINIS.

