THE DROP and PILL OF Mr. WARD, CONSIDERED: AS WELL In respect to their
Composition, as their Operation and Effects.

WHEREIN, As there is great Reason to believe, the genuine RECEIPT of both.

IN AN EPISTLE TO Dr. JAMES JURIN, Fellow of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, And of
the ROYAL SOCIETY: FROM DANIEL TURNER, Of the same COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS in
London.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN CLARKE, at the Bible under the Royal Exchange,
MDCCXXXV. [Price Sixpence.]

THE DROP and PILL OF Mr. WARD, CONSIDERED. In an EPISTLE, etc.
SIR,
YOU may wonder possibly, that I, who have been so uncivilly treated by some
who call themselves Gentlemen, on the Account of my Enquiry after the crude
Quicksilver, should give myself any manner of Concern about the well or ill
Fare of my Fellow Citizens, but leave them rather to the ancient, and common
Saying, If They will be, let Them be deceived.

I dare be confident, whatever certain envious Persons may think to the
contrary, you will be so charitable as to believe, that I have no Ends of my
own to serve by an Undertaking, in which, though I may happen to please some, I
shall, in all Likelihood, displease others.

The Friendship indeed of good, as well as learned Men, (and such I esteem
yourself) I shall at all Times value, whilst the Malice and ill Nature of the
Petulant and Profligate, however learned, I have long since learned to despise.
But what, alas! avail the Smiles or Frowns of the World to an old Man, that
must soon leave it? And, provided he has a well grounded Peace in his own
Breast, when he takes that Leave, has less Reason to be concerned at the unjust
Censure of unreasonable Men.

To detain you no longer, I am satisfied you are no Stranger to the Fame this
Drop and Pill of Mr. Ward, have acquired within these twelve Months past: How
deservedly, we are now to examine: But first, a Word or two of their
Composition.

The Conjectures about which are various, as the diverse Judgments and Opinions
of the Conjecturers have diversely led them.

Some (surely without Reason,) have surmised the same to be Mercurial: Yet,
among the Hundreds daily taking them, not one Instance can be given of a sore
Mouth, or Tongue, much less Salivation, which must at some Time have inevitably
fallen out, if the Basis was Mercurial.

Others more rightly therefore conclude them Antimonial: Among these, there
are, who pretend to be Masters of the Secret, and who tell us, that the Pill is
the same with the Kermes Mineralis, of the French Dispensatory, made out of
four parts Antimony, and one of fixed Nitre, boiled in Rainwater, and then
filtered: After which, more Water is added, and more also of the Nitre: Boiling
and filtering as before; when still more Water and Nitre, in the several
Proportions observed by the Prescript, are decocted. Finally, the several
Liquors filtered, having stood to settle twenty-four Hours, are poured off from
the Sediment, which being sweetened by often washing, the same is dried, and
twice flagrated with Spirit of Wine.

But this Praecipitate, which I have seen prepared, comes forth of a deeper Red
than Mr. Ward's, nor will it operate in so small a Quantity as his Pill.

Hartman has one more Simple than the former, which he calls his Sulphur of
Antimony, answering nearer to the Color, and working after like Manner, both
upwards and downwards, not so doggedly, in the same Weight; though it has been
given sometimes to four or five Grains.

This is made of the fine Powder of Antimony, digested for a Week in a strong
Lixivium of Aqua Calcis; when it is filtered, and after gentle boiling, a red
Powder is thrown down; which being washed, is dried, and kept for Use.

His Copier, Salmon, says, this Powder performs all that the Crocus can do.

Related to the foregoing, is that of Beguinus, which is nothing but the same
Mineral, boiled also in a strong Lixivium, and after precipitated with
Rainwater, impregnated with the Spirit of Vinegar.

The Lixivium, used for these Purposes, is made commonly of the Sal Tartari,
Calx Viva, and common Salt, a^ dissolved in Water, and then filtered, or of the
Alkaline Salt of Plants; although the Aqua Calcis, as above, very frequently
supplies the Place.

Again, there is a Sulphur of Antimony made from the Crocus Metallorum boiled
in the same Lixive, and precipitated with the Acet. destil. having the Virtues
of the Crocus, and is much the finer of the two, given in the same Dose, from
two to four Grains, or five.

The golden Sulphur is prepared by boiling the Dross, separated from the
Regulus in a Lixivium, as the rest; then, precipitating with Vinegar, there
falls a Powder of the Color of Gold, (whence the Name,) which is sweetened by
Ablution in a large Quantity of Rainwater, and dried for Use.

But the true Sulphur, according to our last recited Author, is prepared from
Cinnabar, finely powdered, and boiled in a Solution of Salt of Tartar, Nitre,
and Calx Viva. After decanting the Liquor from the Quicksilver at the Bottom,
filter and incline the Vessel, that the red Sulphur may settle, which you must
sweeten with hot Water, and dry gently; so have you (with this Gentleman) the
true Sulphur Antimonti, which opens all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, and Hypochonders; expelling all Humors whatever, or wherever heaped
up in the Body, both upwards and downwards.

Of this Sulphur and the Regulus, there is a Panacaea compounded, wonderfully
extolled by Hartman, as a universal Medicine, curing all obstinate Diseases, as
the Lues, Lepra, Scurvy, etc. by the way of Sweat.

Mr. Wilson gives us another, little differing from the former, unless in the
Strength of the Lee, i. e. by the pouring one Pound of the Lixivium Capitale,
or the first running of the Soap-makers Lees, upon four Ounces of the finest
levigated Antimony, set to digest in warm Sand, four or five Days, shaking them
well together; then put thereto some warm Water: After thus standing to settle
for some Time, it is poured off into a clean Pan. This Ablution is to be
repeated, 'till all the brownish Powder is separated from that which appears
like the crude Antimony, upon which more Lees are thrown; and the Washing
renewed, 'till the whole of the Antimony is reduced into the Powder aforesaid,
which being well rinsed from the Salts, is to be kept dry 'till called for.

The Virtues are much the same with the rest, being Emetic, Cathartick and
Diaphoretick, i. e. by Vomit, Stool and Sweat. According to our Chemist, this
Process was used as a Succedaneum to that, which went formerly under the Name
of Russel's Powder.

Besides the abovementioned, I could enumerate others, drawn from the same
Mineral by the Torture of Fire, as when flux'd in the Crucible together with
Sal Armoniack. Thus the Antimon. resuscitatum, or with Nitre, common Salt, and
Charcoal, put into a red hot Crucible by a Spoonful at a Time; then either
pouring it into a Cone, or suffering it to cool in the Crucible, there will be
found three different Substances, viz. at the Bottom, a little Regulus; above
that, a closer, or more compact Matter, like the Liver of Antimony; and on the
Surface, a finer and lighter Mass.

The two last of these are to be kept asunder, putting by the Regulus;
powdering the other and washing them apart, till freed from their Salts, which
you may know by the Taste of the Water; the uppermost is accounted the best,
being of a fine red Color, after it has been washed; the middle Substance
looks not of so pleasant a Color, and works more roughly; the undermost, or
Regulus, is the same with the Regulus of Antimony.

These red Flowers, with Monsieur Lemery, are the more Sulphurous parts of
Antimony, sublimed by Fire, as the same are precipitated from the Lixivia, or
Lees, by the Ablution with Water and Vinegar.

Powder, says he, and mix together four Pounds of common Glass, with one Pound
of Antimony; put them into a Retort set in a Reverberatory Furnace, fitted with
a Receiver, lute the Junctures, giving a little Fire at first, then increase,
and you will see the red Flowers come forth into the Receiver.

Their Operation, as of the rest, is by Vomit and Stool, being given in the
Venereal Disease, the Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, and other Chronical Distempers,
from two to four Grains.

It was the former of these Processes (according to Mr. Wilson,) that Mr.
Lockyer aimed at in the Composition of his Pill, by which he acquired a great
Estate.

Now whether or no these Flowers of Antimony, thus raised by Fire, or any of
the Praecipitates of the same Color here observed, (as by some has been
thought,) be the Composition of Mr. Ward's Pill, is less material to our
Purpose; since it is, I think, out of Dispute, that most of them will do as
much Good, and as much Mischief also, when directed by ignorant Persons, and
taken by the like, at all Adventures: Although, to deal plainly, when I
consider the strange Ravage it makes among the solid as well as fluid Parts of
the Body, in so small a Quantity as one Grain Weight, as much even as the Glass
itself, or Crocus would do, I have been ready to apprehend it rather a
Praecipitate like the Algarct, though of a different Color, from the same
Caustic Oil, or Butter of Antimony; which, if fit to be countenanced, or to
have a Sanction from any one in regular Practice, I leave all such, with
yourself, to determine.

About the same Time, give me leave to acquaint you of Mr. Lockyer and Mr.
Russel aforementioned, viz. about Fifty or Sixty Years past, there was another
Russel, who had been an Itinerant Mountebank, traveling the Countries, but
happening to Marry a Lady of some Condition as well as Estate, he hired a very
handsome House in Holborn, near Grays-Inn-Gate, and coming here acquainted with
a Chemist, who had been, as he said, an Operator in Mr. Boyle's Elaboratory, he
got a Preparation of Antimony from him, like this of Mr. Ward's, if not the
same, which was prepared at the Doctor's House, being called by the Name of his
Panacea, or Golden Sulphur of Antimony, by which many famous Cures were said to
be effected.

It happened I was at this Time the Doctor's Patient, and going often to his
House, as living but a few Doors off, I have seen his Black bring of this red
Powder in a small earthen Platter into his Study; where his Master weighing it
out, would moisten the same with a Liquor, and form it into Pills of the
bigness of large Pins-heads, resembling, both in Bulk and Color, these of our
new Aesculapius; Ten of which being put into a small tin Box, were sold for as
many Shillings. The Poor, who made an Interest to my Lady, had them gratis;
their Operation was rough, both upwards and downwards, like the other Dr.
Russel's Powder; and as Lockyer's would frequently work, according as they met
with Constitutions more robust or weak, or as the Fibers of the Stomach and
Guts were more or less susceptible of the Stimulating Salt and Sulphur in the
Preparation.

What I would observe farther from these Persons Remedies, is this, that my
Neighbor the Doctor his Pill did not survive him, but through some fatal
Accidents, like these of Mr. Ward's, was soon blasted; and he fell then upon a
safer and more popular Medicine, which was his Spirit of Scurvy Grass, both
plain and purging, with which he furnished all parts of the Kingdom, as well as
many abroad.

His Name-sakes Powder kept its Fame longer, and was, I remember, in much
Esteem with some Midwives as a Specific to forward Childbirth; but gradually
declined for the same Cause, and is now, in a manner, lost.

Mr. Lockyer's held out still, and till within twenty or thirty Years past,
some hundreds of Pounds, I have been informed, have been annually returned
thereby, though I have known Mischief ensue thence. Upon his Death it came into
the Hands of Mr. Fyge, an Apothecary in my Neighborhood, and is to this Day,
in his Family; but I believe now, with little Emolument or Advantage, to what
it has been formerly.

Thus my Friend, you see the Fate of these Empirical Medicines; and how it is
possible for some Antiquated Ones, after Mischief's forgot, to come into play
again, or be revived; an Instance of which, we have surely now before us, as
lately in the crude Quicksilver, which was tampered with in the last Age, and
brought once more into great Request in this; but sunk almost again, by the
popular Eulogye of the Drop and Pill.

Thus it must always fare with Remedies, however powerful in themselves,
distributed without Judgment, or indiscriminately to all People, without any
Regard to the State and Condition of the Bowels which are to entertain them, or
to any Circumstances whatever in the Sick, or his Disease, favoring or
opposing their Administration.

Having laid down my Thoughts as to their Composition, I shall next proceed to
the pretended Cures, and possibly some real Ones, effected thereby, with the
Method how the same may be brought about.

And here, if we duly consider the Action of the Stomach, or the Force under
which the same is acted, during the Operation of a strong Vomit, like most of
these Antimonial Ones, together with that of all the Muscles therein concerned,
which according to Mathematick Calculus, is scarce credible; we shall less
wonder that not only its own Cavity, or the near adjacent, but the most remote
also in the whole Animal Fabric, being drawn into Consent therewith, should
have their Contents impel'd forwards by so forcible a Contraction of all the
Fibers: by which the most rivetted Obstructions therein, may in Time, be this
way opened; whilst the Fluxion of Humors on any particular Part is called off:
whence Tumors, or Swellings of any kind, may be softened and diminished;
Ulcers disposed for healing, which before would yield to no Application
whatever. Of this, you know, we have constant Experience in our Venereal
Cancers, and other corrosive Phagedaenick Ulcers, when a Dose or two of the
Turpeth. Minerale, will render those Sores in a few Days tractable, which, for
many Weeks before, would not yield to any Topics administered by the best
Artists: And surely we need not wonder, if by the same Way of Revulsion, many
Chronical Diseases, from the heaping up of Humors and obstructing the Vessels,
should, by this Drop and Pill, thus daily repeated for some Time, give Way;
many Scorbutic, Serpiginous, Leproas, or Venereal Affects of the Skin, clear
off; whilst the morbid Matter furnishing the same out of the Blood, is
eliminated, or cast forth by this double, if not triple Discharge; first by
Vomit, secondly by Stools; when thirdly, the Remainder is, by the Conflict
raised therein, during the violent Commotion thereof, perspired in Sweat.

This, I say, is the plain and obvious, as well as Mechanic Process, by which
many surprising Alterations are brought about, and Cures performed by such
Remedies: Yet, if we reflect upon the great Hazard some Persons undergo, it is
surely incumbent upon all who take upon them the Administration of any such, or
who may advise them, to consider thoroughly the State and Condition of the
Sick, in regard to the Soundness of his Bowels and Blood Vessels, and of the
Fibers in general, which compose them, and which are to undergo so forcible a
Contraction under the Operation; as well as that of the whole Nervous System,
suffering likewise under the Shock; and for want of Regard to which, there will
sometimes fall out as great Harm, and as much Mischief, as at others, Benefit
or Advantage.

To avoid the Accidents of this Nature, the honorable Mr. Boil, who
understood the Chemical Pharmacy as well as the Animal Structure, much better,
I dare say, than Mr. Ward pretends; yet, being fearful of the least Injury that
might arise by the trusting to his own Judgment, and tender of Life, when he
had found out any Remedy, or had any such recommended to him, after preparing
the same, gave it into the Hand of some learned and experienced Physician of
his Acquaintance, to make such Trials therewith, as might be done with Safety,
and to report to him the Success; that if found safe and beneficial, they might
encourage it, or if any ways detrimental, point out the Danger, or lay it
wholly aside: Nor, as I have been told, would he suffer any one of those which
go under the Name of his Receipts, of which a Collection has been Published
since his Death, to go abroad, till it had the Approbation of one or other of
the Faculty, to recommend it.

If Mr. Ward had taken the same Method, he might doubtless have been the Author
of much greater Good to his Country Men, by avoiding the Danger that will
attend his Medicines, in this promiscuous Distribution of them to all Sorts and
Conditions of the People, under whatever Temperament as well as Distemper.

From his Pill, give me leave, just to make Mention of what is called his Drop:
But here, whether he gives one or more, is uncertain, being diffused in a Sack
Vehicle; and possibly, if rightly understood, may differ little from that
common Infusion of our Crocus Metallorum; at least is of the same Family with
his Pill, which we need not stay to Scrutinize.

Every one who is tolerably acquainted with the Chemists Furnace, must know
that many Liquids, in the Forms of Tincture, Spirit, or Oil, may be drawn with
this Mineral, which in a very small Quantity, as that of a Drop or two, however
diluted, will work too powerfully for some weakly Habits, or tender
Constitutions. An Instance of this we have in the Preparation of its Cinnabar,
where a Caustic Oil, called the Butter of Antimony, will arise, the least Drop
of which, notwithstanding its Dilution, is not safe to be given inwardly, being
chiefly used by the Surgeons, to destroy what they term Proud Flesh, and to
level the callous rising Lips of Ulcers: Though there have been those who (as
Lemery observes) have given a Drop, two, or three of this Butter or Oil of
Antimony in Broth, to cause Vomiting, which practice says he, "I cannot
approve, because it is too strong, and produces the same Effects as the Powder
of Algarot, which is nothing but the said Butter washed in warm Water, whence a
white Powder is praecipitated, called (but very improperly) Mercurius Vitae,"
which to some I have known, in like manner a Mercurius Mortis.

The vast Subtilty of this Mineral, in some of its Preparations, is very
surprising; and in none more remarkably, than in that called the Vomiting Cup,
without any sensible diminution in its Weight or Virtue.

One of these, compounded of the Regulus and Mars, I have now by me; which was
sent me as a Present, about forty Years past, by a Country Gentleman,
practicing among his Poor Neighbors, in the way of Charity. This Cup was lent
out from one Neighbor to another, in which they steeped Cider, Stale Beer, or
other Spirituous Liquors all Night, and drank them the next Day, to cure Fevers
and Agues: But after two Persons (for whom it proved too strong) were destroyed
thereby, it lost all the Credit it had gotten; and whereas before, it went by
the Name of the Angelick, it was now called the Devil's Cup. Quickly after,
being sent back to the Owner, it so happened that I became its Proprietor; who
have never suffered one Trial to be made with it, since it was in my Possession.

The Operation of all these Antimonial Vomits, is so very precarious, that no
Man can be absolutely certain how they will turn out. Monsieur Lemery's
Observation being very just, in the Words sollowing.

"When the Medicine diffuseth itself suddenly in the Stomach, mixing with the
Juices thereof, and there Stimulating its nervous Fibers, the same is
constrained to throw up its Contents: If it stays longer, or till some of its
Particles are derived to the Guts, the same Stimulus twitching their Fibers, a
purging downwards happens: They must differ also according to different
Constitutions, in those who take them; and very often the same which makes a
Person vomit at one time, purges him by Stool only at an Other; nay at
sometimes will move only by Sweat, which shall often ensue both those
Operations." Course of Chym. p. 225. With all which, I Am sure you are well
acquainted. But there is one Observation; (give me leave to take notice) of
this great Chemist, about this Mineral, which may give us to understand of how
little Service a mere Hypothesis will be to us in our Practice, which is daily
contradicted thereby, and that is this; That the Crude Antimony is dangerous
for to take inwardly, or in Substance, because it may meet with an Acid in the
Stomach, that would open its Body, and be the Cause of great Vomitings to ensue.

What has led this Gentleman into a Mistake of this kind, must be surely his
Surmise, that the Natural Heat of the Stomach, bears some Affinity or
Resemblance with the Artificial of the Furnace or Crucible placed therein; by
which the Body of the said Mineral being opened, and its Texture broken, the
Sulphur is set free, and enabled to raise such Disturbance therein.

For my own part (who have given many Pounds of Crude Antimony,) I have rarely
known it to operate otherwise, (unless in too great a Dose,) than as an
Alterative, correcting the salt and acrid Humors in the Blood, and by that
Means subduing those corrosive, scorbutic Eruptions on the Skin, which have
stood out even against Mercury itself. For these Purposes, I direct ss of the
crude Antimony, most finely levigated, and j of the Cons. Cochlear. hort. with
j, jss, or ij of the Gum Guaj. to be formed s. a. into an Electuary, with a q.
s. of the Sir. E. Suc. Aurant. of which the Patient takes the Quantity of a
Nutmeg Night and Morning, drinking after it, a small Draught of the Decoct. ex
Lignis, or of Bates's Aq. Bened. Simpl. which from the Gum, but hardly from the
Antimony, gives a Stool, sometimes two or three in a Day, yet without Regimen:
And for the Psora, Scabies, or common Pruritus, I know of few, or none, that
excel (after a Mercurial Purge or two,) the same Mineral, with an equal
Quantity of Aethiops, made up in like Manner, and taken the same Way. To return
whence I have digress'd.

From this Account of these Remedies, with the Hazard and Uncertainty of their
Operation, and the manifest Danger that must frequently attend upon many of
those who think proper to venture on them, from the Warranty of such as know as
little as themselves of the Nature of the Remedies they recommend, much less of
the Diseases for which they recommend them, and less still of the human Frame
which is to grapple with them, and for want of which many Persons must risque
their Lives. For these Reasons, I say, I thought I might do an acceptable Piece
of Service to the Public, if I laid down some Cautions in Reference thereunto:
And surely, the Dispenser of them to necessitous Persons, will not be
displeased at the same, since the more Good he can do with them, without any
unhappy Accident supervening, the greater Applause to him, as well as Esteem
for his Remedies; nor will there be found any better Method for securing that
Estimation, or that can render them of long Continuance, which, like others of
like kind, palm'd upon the World for great and useful Discoveries, for want of
proper Caution, have, through some fatal Miscarriages, soon dwindled away (as
these, doubtless, will do in a little Time) to nothing.

First then, I would advise all Hysterical, or Hypochondriacal People, subject
to be ruffled by any Evacuation, especially of so rough a Nature, as these
Medicines may produce, or to be thrown into convulsive Suffocations,
Palpitations at Heart, with Tremors on the Nerves, to be careful how they
engage with them: Some such I have known to suffer from the weak Frame thereof,
and the Hurry their Spirits have been thrown into under the Operation, not
recoverable for a long Time after.

Secondly, these Medicines can by no Means agree with the Hectical, or
Consumptive and thin Habits, under any inflammatory State of their Blood, their
Vessels tender, and the same apt, upon any straining, to break its Enclosures.
Some of these also I have heard of falling into profuse Haemorrhages, or
bleeding at the Nose: And one that I was lately sent for to, seized the Night
following the taking one of these Pills, with a Vomiting up a large Quantity of
Blood, to which he is still liable between Whiles, and which, I have Cause to
believe, will be, at long Run, fatal. For the same Reason, no Person whatever,
with an over-bearing Heat therein, or Fullness of the Vessels, should enter
upon this Course, before they have emptied them by free and repeated Bleeding.

Thirdly, Such as labor under Ruptures, whether of the Navel, Groin, or
Scrotum, must shun these Medicines, as they would Rats-bane: The Pressure of
the Parts of the lower Belly being so great under the working of any Vomit,
much more such as these, that there would be the greatest Danger imaginable of
rendering the Malady irretrievable. Dr. D -- d told a Friend of mine very
lately, he had visited a Woman with a Navel Rupture, brought upon her by the
hard straining in the working of this Pill of Mr. Ward's.

Fourthly, Such as have weakened the Tone of their Stomachs, by Dram-drinking
all Day, Whetting in the Morning, or Bottling a Nights, and have brought upon
them a loathing to all Food, or after taking the same, immediately throwing it
up again, can be no fit Subjects for these Remedies: For that, besides their
feeble, if not rotten Viscera, with their weak and tender Vessels, rendering
them liable to a Breach therein, their constant Retchings, more especially in a
Morning, which scarce any Remedy can bridle, or put a Stop to, will be
increased; and an over Vomiting, or Purging, hasten their Deaths; of which I
have had an Account of two Instances, in three Months past.

Fifthly, Those who bear not this Evacuation, unless with Difficulty; also such
as are easily set on Vomiting, must be careful they are not, with the
foregoing, overset thereby; for that at sometimes, the Sulphur of the Antimony
adhering to, or being entangled in the tender Coats of the Stomach, whose
Lining, by preceding Evacuation, has been scoured off, is continually
stimulating to the Excretion: And I could give as many Examples of those, where
the Operation has never ceased, till the Sick has been quite run down, and died
strongly convulsed. For this Cause, it will be always found expedient, that the
diseased Patient, before he enterprises either of these Medicines, (if they may
be so denominated,) be provided with a proper Quantity of Chicken or Mutton
Broth, which may serve to sheath and blunt the Salts and Sulphur, rendering
their Stimuli more tolerable to the Nervous Fibers; preventing those hard
Strainings, which might otherwise endanger the Animal Fabric.

This you know, Sir, was the Advice of Monsieur Lemery, ( Course of Chemistry,
page 292.) in the following Words.

"Broth, a little fat, is necessary, when the Patient finds an Inclination to
vomit, because it will render the same easier, and be the Means of hindering
those great Efforts under the Operation of these Remedies, which sometimes
break the Vessels, and occasion mortal Haemorrhages. When if, notwithstanding
the Use of these, the Vomiting will not cease, you may dissolve a little Cream
of Tartar in the said Broth, and take some Spoonfulls every Quarter of an Hour:
This (says he) stops the Vomiting, because joining with the Antimony, it fixes
the same; so that together, they are precipitated by Stool."

The last general Caution I have to impart, leaveing you to judge if it be not
a very necessary one, is this, That Children, weakly Persons, and all others,
naturally prone to Fluxes of any kind, and who are apt to throw up what they
take upon the slightest Occasion, not from any viscid, or phlegmatic Humors,
nestling in the plushy Coat of the Stomach, but from mere Debility, or Atony
(as it is named by us,) of the Fibers thereof, must be exceeding careful how
they engage with these Remedies, for Fear, as in my last Caution, of raising
such a Storm as may not be laid again, but by the Patient's Death. One single
Pill (the only he ever took) taken by a poor Fellow, who had been my Patient,
for a Venereal Nocturnal Headache, after a most violent Vomiting for some
Hours, produced, as I was told by the Surgeon consulted, between sixty and
seventy Stools, not without the most imminent Danger of his Life.

Having laid down these Cautions, very necessary for all People to observe, who
think fit to venture upon such Medicines, I shall speak now of the Diseases for
which they have been recommended; and in which, according to vulgar Report,
they have been, at some Times, found successful.

Here, indeed, we have a large Field to survey, because there are very few,
wherein, by some or other, they have not been tried, by the Approbation of
their Author first of all, and after, from One to Another: However, among the
Principal, have been reckoned many of the most obstinate; such as the Gout and
Rheumatism, the Scurvy, Palsy, Lues Venerea, King's Evil, and Cancer itself.

The former, I think, we may readily give up, provided we had one Instance of a
true Cancer absolutely cured thereby. This, I say, would, and ought to be
acknowledged the greatest Gift of Heaven to poor Mortals, on this side the
Grave; the most useful Discovery, I will call it the most inestimable Jewel of
a Medicine, since the Infancy of the Healing Art; provided at the same Time, it
was found a certain, and withal a safe one.

I have already observed to you, how we may reconcile the Removal of many
stubborn Obstructions of the Vessels; how the Fluxion of Humors may be called
off, for the present, from some Part burdened therewith; how Scabs, Blotches,
fretful Sores, and eating Ulcers, in this way of Revulsion, especially in those
who can bear the repeated Shocks, are disposed to crumble off, and heal; though
quickly after, they have broke out again, and spread with greater Virulence
than before. But admit these Cures to stand, I am exceeding doubtful, whether
the Cancer will bear to be handled after the same Manner, which I never found
would suffer any other than Lenients, whether internal, or external; being ever
exasperated by a Stimulus of any kind: So that the Strength of such a
Revulsion, however it may for the present take off the Tention, relax the
Glands, and soften, in some measure, the Induration for a Time; yet, soon
after, the old Leaven fermenting afresh, the Disease repullulates, sprouts
anew, and rages oftentimes worse than before, at length putting an End to a
miserable Life.

What I have seen of this Nature myself, or which has been imparted to me by
Persons of Credit, as well as Judgment in their Profession, I shall now
communicate unto you.

This last Summer, C -- l C -- r, from the W -- t I -- s, came over to England,
to consult some Gentlemen, as well Physicians as Surgeons, about a stubborn
Sore above his Eye-brow: Among the latter, Mr. C -- l -- n, was the first
called in; quickly after he had a Meeting with Dr. M -- d, and Dr. H -- s; and
afterward (as I was told by the Apothecary) Mr. St. H -- l and Mr. S -- n.

At one of these Meetings, I was proposed by the C -- l, but it so happened,
that I was put by. At the time of these Consultations he was under the Care of
Mr. C -- l -- n, but soon after, at the desire of some about the Court, and the
Relations he received of several as bad Cases, set to Rights by Mr. Ward's
Medicines, that Gentleman was advised with, and undertook the Chyrurgery, as
well as the Physical Regimen.

Whilst he was under this Person's Care, he desired a Visit from me; when I saw
his Sore dressed, the Ulcer had spread all over one side of the Forehead,
extending itself toward the Temple side-ways, and was making Havoc downwards
through the Brow, into the Orbit of the Eye: In some Places it appeared sloughy
and foul, in others fresh and red, with unequal callous Lips, and had the
Aspect of an Ulcer truly Cacooethic, or what we call of an ill Dispofition: The
whole of the local Medicine, was warm Butter-Milk to wash the Sore, and the
Curd to be applied after, instead of a Plaster; which is the Gentleman's usual
Topic.

Whilst the Ulcer lay bare for my View, the C -- l asked me, what I called his
Malady? I told him, it might well bear the Name of an Herpes Exedens, and what
says he, does that differ from a Cancer? I answered, every ulcerated Cancer
might bear that Name, yet there were of the Herpes kind, which were not
Cancerous; and that I hoped his might be such.

In order to subdue the Virulency of the Ulcer, and dispose it for healing, I
proposed Salivation, which he said he had been under in the Country, but, as I
understood, neither raised by the Unction, nor continued for due time: I then
mentioned my Cinnabar Suffitus, and the Quicksilver Pill; by the former, I
proposed to gain at least this Satisfaction, that if the Edges of the Ulcer
spread not under it, but contracted and looked better Conditioned, I should
have made less doubt of his Cure, by a Salivation raised by the Anointing,
having lessened his Fears as well as my own of its being Cancerous, which
indeed were not ill grounded; since by his Observation, it would not suffer any
detersive Medicine, such as the Praecipit. Rub. his Surgeon had formerly
sprinkled on the sordid Parts, without being exasperated thereby, so that he
had prudently left off the same, and dressed with dry Lint and a Digestive over
all.

The Patient seemed inclinable to the Experiment I had proposed, but said he
must go on a while longer with Mr. Ward's Medicines, or else his Friends would
say he had mist his Cure for want of Perseverance. How long he continued that
Regimen after my Visit, I cannot say exactly; but finding at length his Body
harrass'd by this constant Vomiting and Purging, without any Encouragement from
his Sore; the next News I had was from Mr. J -- s D -- ie, to whom I had
imparted the Case, who told me the C -- l had sent for him, and that having
found the Ulcer in the Condition I had represented it, he had (whilst Mr. C --
l -- n was by) delivered his Opinion, that the Salivation by Unction, might be
of Service to him, and probably lay a foundation for his Cure; to which that
Gentleman assented.

After this, having laid aside Mr. Ward's Method, or fully purposing so to do,
two Gentlemen of his Acquaintance came to me, in order to let me know they
could not be satisfied unless the C -- l was put under my Care; and that they
would persuade him to remove into the City, for the Convenience of my
Attendance, where I promised to do him what Service I could, and in the way I
had proposed, viz. by Smoking the Ulcer for three or four times, and finding
Encouragement, to proceed instantly with the Unction.

In a few Days more they came again, and told me, they had concluded upon the
Removal of their Friend, to an equal Distance between me and Mr. C -- l -- n,
for the Convenience of us both: I now objected a Misunderstanding between
myself and that Gentleman, which he had not rectified in the manner I expected;
and therefore I proposed Mr. D -- ie, whom the C -- l had so lately consulted,
as a Person more agreeable to me, and with whom I could Act with more Freedom
and Satisfaction: But whilst this Matter was under Debate, some other Empirical
Undertaker, who knows, I hear, as little of the Affair as the former, by means
doubtless of stronger assurance of a Cure, than he had from us, has undertaken
him; but with what Success I know not.

This Case has been variously reported about the Town; some have taken the
Liberty to give out, that Mr. Ward has cured him, after all these
Consultations: Others, of that Gentleman's Friends, that he would have cured
him, had he gone on; and others again, that I had left him in as bad a
Condition as I found him, intimating his having been under my Care, who never
saw him more than once, nor prescribed one Grain of Medicine for him.

The second Case of a Cancer, under this Method, I had from Mr. D -- ie, in a
poor Woman, recommended to him, with a painful Schirrous hardness in the Glands
of her Breast, for which he advised her to be quiet, and not to tamper; at the
same time she had the Opinion of the Surgeons of the House, particularly of Mr.
F -- ke, who were of the same Opinion, that nothing could be done more than to
palliate, and keep her quiet; however, by some Interest or other, she was
recommended to Mr. Ward, and took his Medicines with such success, that when
Mr. D -- ie saw her some Weeks after, he told me, he was surpised, the Tention
of the Skin, by means of the strong Revulsion made by the Operation, under the
repeated Vomiting, being much lessened, the Glands softened, and the whole
Breast reduced: But some Weeks after this, out of Curiosity, making her another
Visit, the Aspect, it seems, was not so promising; for the Wolf, (as the common
People express themselves) which before had withdrawn it for a Season, began to
show its head again, i. e. the Fomes stiffled for a time, threatening to bust
out a-fresh: Since when she has been denied, and the Surgeons not admitted to
see her; possibly, for that her Cure is not yet completed, which is the
mildest Construction can be put upon the Case, if not for that the Disease is
now raging as at first. But by the way, this poor Woman is since dead of her
Cancer.

Since I had this account of Mr. D -- ie's, I was desired by a Gentleman to
Visit his Spouse, in one of whose Breasts, I felt a large and painful Knot,
which had lain quiet for some Years, but by improper Topics, was exasperated,
and had put on the Appearance of a true Cancer, of which she had already been
informed; I asked her, whether she had Courage to part with her Breast? not
that I am over fond of recommending these Excissions, but it might so fall out,
that she might herself think of it, when by the Increase or Adhaesion, or
communicating with the Glands of the Axilla, it was not practicable.

This I found had given Offense, and I heard no more of her, till about a Month
or six Weeks after, when by Accident meeting her Husband in the Street, and
enquiring how she did; he told me she was almost well, by taking Mr. Ward's
Pill, which unknown to him, by the Interest of some Friend or Acquaintance, she
had procured; and in the working of which, her Breast broke, and discharged a
great quantity of Bloody Water; since which her Nipple had been drawn in, but
she was easier, and the Breast a great deal less than when I saw it. I told him
I wished a Continuance of the Amendment, but owned myself very doubtful: For
this Retraction of the Tubuli Lactiferi, or Milk Pipes, with the tucking-in of
the Nipple, is always an untoward Appearance, and generally speaking, as sure a
Sign of a Cancer in the Breast, as the painful Knot therein itself; and truly
by the distant Enquiry I have since made, this Truce was but of a short
Duration; the Distemper being again, worse than ever, the Remedy, by reason of
its rough Operation long since laid aside, and the Patient, as I heard but this
Day, deceased also.

The last Instance I will give you upon my own Knowledge, in respect to the
pretended Cures of Cancers, shall be that of C -- n W -- s Lady, whom I Visited
this last Summer, not long after Mr. F -- n had been to see her on the same
Occasion: I perceived one of her Breasts of an uncommon Magnitude, the whole
Body of which, was one continued Induration, and so very ponderous, that she
was forced to wear a Suspensory round her Neck, for the better support of it.
She was prepared to receive any Sentence, I should pass on her Disease: But
finding we were able to administer little Comfort, at the Importunity of a
Friend, Mr. Ward was consulted, and gave her (if I am rightly informed) the
greatest Assurance of a Cure, by his Butter-milk and Curds externally, and his
Drop and Pill internally administered; nay, when she told him she feared by the
great stretch of the Skin, the Breast would burst, he made very light thereof,
and replied, no matter, his Medicines would make it whole again.

How long this unhappy Gentlewoman prosecuted his Method, I am not positive,
but have heard, as long and as often as he himself desired her; at first with
that seeming Advantage, that she apprehended herself lithsomer and better able
to turn herself in her Bed; but at this time, now many Months past, I
understand, in as bad a State as ever: And although under the same Gentleman's
Care, the Drop, Pill and Pultis, having failed him, he now has changed them for
a different set of Medicines; at least the Old in a different Disguise.

These are the Cases which have fallen under my own Inspection, or have been
confirmed by the Persons concerned, relating to the Cure of Cancers. I have
heard indeed of more, and some which common Rumor has spread for Cures
completed: But whether or no they have been really, or truly Cancers, or only
so reported, remains with me a Doubt.

I should be glad if the Author, or his Confident, who gives them out, would be
careful to collect a History of his Cures, more especially of this kind, well
attested, where any Artist had before passed the Sentence of a true Cancer,
which might very much conduce to the clearing up of this Affair; and we may
allow, I dare say, of nine Miscarriages, if every tenth Experiment in this
terrible Distemper has been attended with Success. Among those I have talked
with, or have heard from others, the far greater Number, on whatever Occasion
they may have taken the same, have bitterly inveighed against the roughness of
the Operation, without any benefit thereby.

From the Cancer, in the inverted Order I took notice of them, I come to the
Scrofula, or King's Evil; and here I must say, that I have seen some stubborn
Ulcers, where there were no foul Bones, better disposed for healing, after
taking of these Pills three or four times; but they have cracked, fester'd, and
spread again quickly after: nor have I heard of any strumous Glands about the
Neck and Fauces thereby resolved: here indeed the Revulsion is lost, because
the Humors in the Operation of Vomiting, are still more derived to these
Parts, as is evident in those constant Tiplers of strong Liquors, who sometimes
from their violent retchings, and throwing up all they take, whether Food or
Physic, shall have their Faces bloated, when the rest of their Bodies are
emaciated and wasted away.

These Remedies have been also cried up as infallible in the Lues Venerea, or
French Pox. Here also, as in the foregoing, as likewise in Scorbutic Affects
of the Skin, I have heard of Scabs and other breakings out, which by using of
the Pill, have cast off, and dried away, as I have before observed; but whether
or no the Venereal Poison is this way to be extirpated, as it has been at
sometimes by the late Misaubin's, and by the Quicksilver Pill, as I have hinted
in my Discourse thereon, I am alike doubtful: Yet as to safety in the
Operation, I must give the Preference to either of the two last; having known
(as I took notice before) a poor Fellow very merely destroyed by the first.

The Palsy is another Disease, reported to be cured thereby; and for those who
can bear the Ruffle of such repeated Revulsion, it is not improbable but that
Examples may be given, where not only obstructed Blood Vessels, but obstructed
Nerves, by a pituitous Humor therein impacted, such as the Gutta Serena, which
is a Palsy of the Optic Nerves, may be thence discharged: In like manner the
Apoplexy, Lethargy, Coma, Carus, and other Phlegmatic Soporous Disorders,
where the Nervous Fibers are relaxed and sluggish, with the Sensation dull and
torpid; and where these Antimonial Vomits may be more safely enterpriz'd than
when those Fibers are in a State of Tention, and the Spirits more active.

A remarkable Recovery of this kind, Mr. Ward has given us, in the London
Evening Post, Nov. 7. and continued in several other Papers, which he tells us
was drawn up by my Lord Chief Baron Reynolds's own Hand; but that surely does
not appear by the Baron's Letter to him, who says only, That he had sent him
the Case enclosed, drawn up with exactness in point of Fact; for which he
desires his Credit may be looked upon as a Guarantee, as doubtless it will be:
But it can hardly be supposed that if the Narrative had been drawn by him, the
Case would have been expressed as follows: MARY BETTS, a young Country Maid,
Servant in the Lord Chief Baron Reynolds's Family, and constantly residing at
his House, in St. Edmunds Bury, etc. -- Besides the Terms Emetic, Cathartic,
Emmenagogue, denote the same, however signed by the Baron, to have been
originally drawn up by the Physician, or Apothecary at least, concerned; and if
indeed in the Manner it is drawn, it was intended for the Information of the
Common Reader, great part thereof might have been modestly omitted, as
absolutely useless to them, and that without any way lessening the Cure: If for
the Instruction of the Faculty, few of these, I dare say, will think it
strange, that from so great a force upon the Blood Vessels under the violent
Streining, together with the Stimulus added to the Blood itself from the
Medicine, the same should break through, not only the Vessels of the Uterus,
but those of other Parts also, as it has done in others, under the same Force.
However, as these Obstructions might have no share in the Palsy, unless every
Woman thus obstructed was Paralitical, or Vice Versa, every Paralitiek thus
obstructed, this part of the History was superaboundant: No less, the pulling
down of the Eyelids to bring on Sleep, and the lifting them up again, that she
might lie awake; as if either depended on those Motions, or that a Man could
not Sleep with his Eyes open, which some do frequently, and others are forced
to do, from a Cicatrix after a Wound or Absces on the upper Lid, occasioning
such a Stricture as will not suffer the same to be depressed; or that he could
not lie awake with his Eyes shut, which others are constrained to do also,
where the elevating Muscle has had its Fibers transverfly divided, so that the
Lid falls.

There seems, I must own, something singular in this Paralysis of the Maid's
Eyelids, that upon lifting them up, they should keep so, and not fall down
again, upon removing the Finger. This Part, however, of the Description,
together with her inability to compress the Glands of her Eyes, in order to
shed Tears, with that also of lifting up the Lip, for the taking in of her
Nourishment, however inaccurate, were, I suppose, intended to give us to
understand, that there was a universal Resolution of the whole System of the
Nerves; unless, possibly, those of the Sphincters, of which no Notice is taken.
And whether or no a Salivation was any Part of Regular Practice, or carried any
Likelihood of bracing up the Fibers, or invigorating their Tone, thus
debilitated, I shall leave to you, and others in such Practice, to determine.

If we go upon those two great Principles, of the Strictum et Laxum, of the
Animal Fiber, and consider the latter to be the Condition of it, for the most
part, if not always, in Paralytic Patients: The cold Submersion, especially in
a youthful Subject, had carried greater Probability of Success, than a
Salivation, which I have known to have brought on that Disease, but rarely,
that I remember, proved its Cure.

We are not, I must acknowledge, certain, that this Experiment also, of cold
Bathing, was not tried, among other Parts of the regular Practice mentioned:
Nor will I question all proper Methods taken for the poor Girl's Relief, by the
Physician, who was concerned. I will grant farther, all that Mr. Ward, or his
Friends, can desire, that it was by the Threefold Evacuation, Vomiting,
Sweating, and Purging, that this remarkable Cure was effected; and that these
were the Result of his Drop and Pill: But with whatever Views this Narrative
was made public, I hope no one, under the like Circumstances, will try the
Experiment, upon an Expectation of the same Success, or run unadvisedly
thereon. Let them consider, I say, first, that Part of the Story, relating to
the Operation, and then, possibly they may judge it fit only for those who
choose the Chance (and a very sorry one,) of being cured, or killed, rather
than drag on longer a very miserable Life. The Case Writer says, That after two
or three Days Interval from the Drop, Mrs. Reynolds gave her one of the Pills,
which had so violent an Operation, both as an Emetic and Cathartick, (i.e.
upwards and downwards,) that the Maid, weakened to the last Degree, by her
former long Course of Physic, was, for twelve Hours together, with great
Difficulty, kept alive.

A Case somewhat related to this, in a Paralytick, farther advanced in Years,
has been, with great Industry, concealed; where a violent Vomiting began the
Tragedy, and after seventy, or nearer eighty Stools, most of them Blood, the
Patient died upon the Bed-pan.

If then the same tender Concern for the People's Welfare, the same Humanity
Mr. Ward takes Notice of in my Lord C -- Baron, puts me (and I solemnly declare
to the World, it is nothing else,) upon giving them this Advice, and delivering
these Cautions, I hope I shall stand clear of any unreasonable, or unkind
Censure, as well from the B -- n, who recommends, as Mr. Ward himself, the
Dispenser of these Remedies.

I must own, Sir, to you, it was ever my Opinion, that private Gentlemen, or
others of Fortune, unacquainted with human Bodies, and the Disorders it is
subject to, might employ their Charity to much better Advantage, by succouring
the Indigent with Food and Raiment, than by administering Physic, especially
such as must inevitably be attended with equal, if not greater Mischief than
Benefit or Advantage. Whether the good Intention will atone for the Homicides
happening in this Way, is out of my Province: But if the People cannot be
content without some Quackery, it were better, surely, they would return again
to their Quicksilver, as the least hazardous of the two.

Asking Pardon for this Digression, occasioned by so notable an Advertisement,
I proceed.

The Rheumatism and Gout, they tell us, have been removed by the same
Medicines; of which I can say nothing, any more than of the foregoing, upon my
own Knowledge. It is, I grant, less to be wondered at, if some strong Habits,
with robust Fibers, both Muscular, as well as Nervous, should, in the like
Method of Revulsion, with some others, after repeated Evacuation of the
Humors, as well upwards as downwards, be set free of their Confinement: But I
should expect the same Regimen exceedingly hazardous to those of differing
Temperaments and Constitutions; the sound Bottom may ride out the Storm, when
the leaky founders.

And now, lastly, in respect to the Gout, it has been long since my settled
Judgment, That the prime physical Intentions, are (with Sydenham,) to
strengthen the Digestion, and fortify the noble Parts, leaving the Gouty
Matter, thrown forth upon the Joints, to spend itself there: For though, at
some Times, I have heard of such, who, by the Use of my Name-sake's Powder of
Turbith, Hermodacts, Scammony, etc. have put by a Fit, as they thought, or
lessened the same, by discharging the Gouty Matter in the way of Stool. I have
heard of others, who, by the same Means, have brought the Distemper upon their
Bowels, their Stomach, or their Brains, where, notwithstanding all Endeavors,
they have lost their Lives thereby: An Example of which, I was a Witness, about
four Years past, in an elderly Gentleman, who laboring long therewith upon his
Feet, was persuaded to take one of these Purges; the Day after which, he grew
easier on those Parts, but was instantly tortured in his Bowels, to such
Degree, that the strongest Dose of Opium would scarce give Ease: Hence the
Distemper took to his Stomach, and raised as great a Storm with incessant
Vomiting. His Apothecary had given an easy Dose, as I remember, twelve Grains
of the Indian Root, and in the Evening an Opiate again, which freed him from
this new Attack; but before Morning, the same Matter had seized his Head, when
he grew stupid, snorted, and fell into a Coma, out of which, neither Volatiles,
sharp Clysters, Cupping, Blistering, Vomiting, Sternutatories, or any Stimulus,
could rouse him. In this Condition he lay for forty-eight Hours, and then
expired, through the unfortunate Translation of a Disease, with which could he
have been content to have conflicted as formerly, some Days longer, whilst the
same was upon the extreme Parts, he might, as in those he had formerly
undergone, in all Probability, have protracted his Life.

These Considerations, which I readily submit, Sir, to your Judgment, I thought
proper to communicate to the Public, at a Time when great Numbers of the
People, who can so readily come at them, are trying Experiments with Remedies,
so often hazardous to their Welfare; and by which, as it may fall out, some
Benefit, so also much Mischief must ensue the present Method of promiscuously
taking them, or through the want of proper Information.

If that which I now offer, or from the Cautions here laid down, I may be
instrumental in saving one single Life, it will afford me abundantly more real
Pleasure and Satisfaction, than the idle Cavils of evil-minded Men, the
snarling of loose-Principled Persons, or the Scurrilities offered by
Debauchees, (who, destitute of Argument, fly to Slander,) shall give Disquiet.

I am, Sir, in the strictest Sincerity, Your Friend, and very humble Servant,
D. TURNER.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE following CASES are drawn with so much Judgment, and appear withal so
authentic, that I have taken the Liberty to transcribe them, for the
Satisfaction of all those into whose Hands the Journal, whence they are
extracted, has not fallen; and as I have been charged with being the Compiler,
I take this Opportunity to declare, that I know not the Author; yet, at the
same Time, return him hearty Thanks, as the whole Kingdom ought to do, for his
Industry, in collecting them, and that honest Zeal he has shown, to safeguard
his Countrymen from that Danger they may see others have been betrayed into,
under the specious Views of Infallible Remedies.

CASE I. A Gentleman of a middle Age, of a very robust and strong Habit of
Body, having no other Disorder but some of the common Symptoms of the Scurvy,
was, about three Months ago, brought to take one of these Drops, and two of the
Pills. The Drop worked very roughly; but he went on, in Hopes of being made
quite sound by this pretended Catholicon, and took one Pill. That carried on
the Disturbance, and so shook his Constitution, that he broke out all over his
Body; with many other Disorders, too tedious to mention. He goes to WARD
himself, tells his Complaints, and asks further Advice, which was given him,
That he must take more Pills. He bought four more; but upon taking one, became
so shattered with its Violence, that his under Jaw became paralytick; so that,
without the Assistance of his Hand, he could not move it up or down: The
Eruptions increased, and grew troublesome, in some Parts leaking a sharp Ichor.
He recovered the Use of his Jaw in a little Time, but languish'd, with vain
Hopes, that other Disorders would mend. But the Tendons of his Insteps, and of
the Backs of his Hands swelled: He had a general Weakness of his Joints all
over his Body; the tendonous Parts apt to swell, upon any little Exercise, and
be painful. His Head grew much disturbed; he almost loft his Hearing of his
right Ear, and had a continual Noise in it; his Eyes grew watery, and sore, and
so weak, he could not read five Minutes at a Time, without Pain and smarting.
In this declining State, he fell into a Fever, about three Weeks ago, but by
safer Remedies is recovered; only those ill Effects of WARD's Medicines are not
yet removed. -- Those who are curious to know this Gentleman's Name, may
enquire of the Bookseller.

CASE II. Mrs. TEMPRO, Servant to FRANCIS WHITWORTH, Esquire; in Clifford-Street,
Burlington-Gardens, aged about Thirty-five, had some wandering Pains, and other
small Complaints, about last Whitsuntide. She took one Dose of WARD's Nostrum,
which vomited and purged her very much, and so affected her Nerves, that one of
her Hands became numbed upon it. She took a second, and that was so violent, it
threw her into strong Convulsions, and brought a confirmed Palsy upon both her
Hands and Arms, so that she could make no manner of Use of them, attended with
grievous Sickness, and Vomiting almost continually. She applied for Relief to
those in the Physical way near Hand, for she was then in one of the Lodges in
Windsor Forest; but they being unable to relieve her, she was brought to London
about the second of October, has received some Benefit here, and is in a Way of
Recovery.

I shall in the second Place, relate some Cases which have proved mortal.

CASE III. ELIZ. MOOR, Servant to Mrs. BURTON, in King's-Street, near St. Ann's
Church, aged thirty-four; subject to Hysteric Fits, advised with Mr. WARD first
of all, on Friday, July 5, 1734; he ordered her to take his Pill, she took one
that Night, which had no Operation at all, so that she went about her Business.
The Tuesday Night following she took another, which operated no more than the
first. Then she went to Mr. WARD again, who advised her to take another, which
she did the next Wednesday Night, being July the 10th, this operated no more
than the others that Night: But the next Day she was taken very ill at a
Neighbor's House, and was brought home in a Coach, screaming and crying out of
an intolerable Pain in her Stom^ch and Guts, declaring to her Friends who stood
by, that the Pill had killed her. Her Pulse was scarcely to be felt, she had
cold Sweats, fell into Convulsions, and died about three o'Clock on Friday
Morning the 12th.

CASE IV. HESTER STAPS, a Waiter at the Bagnio, Charing Cross, aged about
forty-five, of a moderate strong Constitution, and troubled with no other
Distemper, but some small Scorbutic Pimples, which used to break out Spring and
Fall, would needs try Mr. WARD's Panacea. The first Dose she said Vomited and
Purged her times beyond numbering, and brought upon her many Disorders; she
hoping, that repeating the like Medicine would cure them, took a third Dose;
but instead of curing them, it brought on a violent Disorder and Pain in her
Head, loss of Appetite, an inward continual Fever, or Fever on the Spirits,
with great Dejection and lowness of Spirits, and continual griping Pain in her
Bowels. She grew from hence Pleuretic and Pthisical: But more than all these,
the third Dose threw out all over her Body a most violent Leprosy. This Disease
she never had any sign of before, but now it was so violent, that the Scales
which came off her were very offensive: Thus she miserably wasted away, and the
beginning of last Month died; which was about two Months, from her taking the
third Dose from WARD.

CASE V and VI. JOHN WOOTEN, Aged thirty-six, and DANIEL his Brother
thirty-four, being Pthisical, took WARD's Drop; and DANIEL took one of his
Pills besides. They both had the Drop mixed in a Decoction of Riasins, which
they took near two Months, but grew much worse; and DANIEL's Pill burst a
Vessel within him in the working, and forced up a quantity of Blood: He died
about four Days after, and his Brother JOHN the next Day. They were Chairmen in
Lumley-Court, in the Strand.

CASE VII. Mr. T. KING, Baker in St. Giles's, about forty Years old, was
Consumptive, but with the Direction of an eminent Physician, grew better. He
took one of WARD's Pills the twenty-third of July last, which vomited him for
three Days, then turned downward, and purged him as much, till it brought a
quantity of Blood with his Stools; and the first of August he died.

CASE VIII. SAMUEL GRAY, middle Aged, being ill of a Consumption, in the Parish
Workhouse of St. George Hanover-Square, would needs take WARD's Medicine; he
died within an Hour after taking the second Dose.

CASE IX. MARCUM CAMBEL, about forty Years old, of Patin-street,
Hanover-Square, having an Ague, took six Doses of WARD's Medicine; but was made
so ill by them, that being sent three Days after to the Infirmary at
Hyde-Park-Corner, he could not there be relieved, but died in five Days.

CASE X. Mrs. MAGEE's Daughter, of Carnaby-Market, about five Years of Age, was
only ill of a Rash, took three Doses, and died the next Morning after taking
the third Dose; it never Operating with her.

CASE XI. ANNE EVING, Servant to Mr. BURTON, of Conduit-street, about thirty
Years old, had only Scrophulous Tumors on her Neck, took five Doses of WARD's
Medicines, and died two Days after taking the last Dose.

CASE XII. Mrs. GILBERT, who kept the Horseshoe Alehouse in Essex-street, of a
middle Age and robust Constitution, took one of WARD's Pills the beginning of
July last; it vomited her thirty-four, and purged her twenty-two times. She
sent for an eminent Physician and Apothecary the next Day, who found her very
feverish, and thirsty, having continual retchings to Vomit, violent Pains in
her Belly; and to be short, with all the Symptoms of Bowels a mortifying; and,
what was almost as bad, the Operation had caused a violent Navel Rupture. The
Physician used his utmost Endeavors to assist her, but could get nothing to
pass through her, but on the Morrow-night, she miserably died.

To the foregoing, give me leave to add the two following.

I have already observed, in discoursing of the Palsy, a Case industriously
concealed, and notwithstanding all the Application and Interest I could make,
have been denied Admittance, to the Widow of the Deceased. Thus much upon the
most solemn Assurance, that no Names should ever be brought upon the Stage, I
have gathered from a Relation to the Family; that about the middle of last
Month, the Brother of the Deceased, having read in the public Papers, of a
great Cure of a Palsy, persuaded him to take one of these Pills; When I asked
what Condition he was in at that time? they said he had a Palsy on one side,
under which he labored several Years: That in four Hours, after taking of the
Pill, he was seized with a violent Vomiting, and could not keep from the
Close-stool, till he fell off in a Fit; that they then laid him on the Bed,
with the Pan under him, where he lay in cold Sweats, and very great Agonies;
the Stools continuing to run from him, till he lost all Sense, and fell into
Convulsions; his Jaws locked up, and all his Limbs contracted; in which Posture
he died the same Evening.

I now enquired, What Report the Searchers had made upon so violent a Death,
and so evidently brought on, by the Poison he had taken? and received for
Answer, That they supposed it was returned Convulsions.

Whence Sir, it seems plain to me, that whilst these poor Women, employed as
Searchers, either ignorantly, or through Corruption, pass by such miserable
Deaths, we shall never be able to come at the tenth part of these Miscarages:
To detect which, I think it absolutely necessary, that every Parish Clark, lay
the strictest Injunction upon these Creatures, to make a true Report of all
those immediately ensuing the taking of these Medicines, where they can come to
understand, that any such had been given the same or the Day or two before; and
that these Symptoms of violent Vomitings or Fluxes have instantly destroyed the
deceased Person. If this trust had been duly executed, I question whether we
should have had one Weekly Bill, these three or four Months past, wherein there
might not have been inserted among the Accidents; Poisoned by the Drop and
Pill. --

If a Person voluntarily or with Design of destroying himself, takes Poison
(and these Pills we see will do the same Execution) he is deemed a Felo de se,
and an Inquesi must sit upon the Body; nay, if by Mistake or Accident he is
destroyed the same way, yet still there must be the same Enquiry. Why then
should so many of his Majesty's Subjects be thus hurried out of the World, and
no notice taken, for that some others have struggled and got the better, as
well of the said Poison, as the Discase sometimes, for which it was taken.

You very well know, that every Member of the College, is Sworn to present what
is justly denominated by us Mala Praxis; dear Doctor, tell me what is this? but
as the Gentlemen of the Faculty care not to turn Informers, neither the
Governing Part of the College to take Cognizance yet a while thereof; so
possibly, the Government itself, may in time, see Cause to enquire into an
Affair of so great Moment, and either wholly suppress the distribution of these
dangerous Druggs, among the People, or take Care to see, that they are placed
under a better Regulation.

About ten Days past, a Gentleman, in Company with his Wife, having some
tetterish Eruptions on her Skin, consulted with Mr. Ward, who made no Doubt of
curing her in Time, if she pursued his Directions. When she objected the
Weakness of her Constitution, unable to undergo the Operation of any rough
Medicines, he did assure her, that he would order nothing which the weakest
Person might not venture on with the greatest Safety, and gave her, at that
Time, two of his Drops, that is, the same Number of his Sack Draughts, one of
which she took on the Sunday Morning following, without other Effect, than a
little Sickness and Vomiting. On the Tuesday she took the other, with as small
Disturbance as the first. On the next Day, which was Wednesday, she went again
to Mr. Ward, who now gave her two of his Pills, the one of which she swallowed
the next Morning, viz. on Thursday; this had as little Effect as the Draughts,
but at Night she found herself swelled, as if she had been poisoned, which
indeed she was: However, on the Friday she lay by, continuing thus full, and
pained in her Bowels. On the Saturday she ventured on her second Pill, in hopes
that might work off the rest, when by Noon she was taken with enormous Vomiting
and Purging at the same Time, which, after some Hours Continuance, threw her
into strong Convulsions; so that she lost her Senses, and seemed as one dead to
the Assistants round about. The Apothecary was called, and her Husband proposed
a Physician; but he told them, the whole Stress lay upon getting down what
Quantities they could of small Broths, or other dilating Liquors, which might
wash off the poisonous Salts, and defend her Bowels from a Mortification
thereby.

In this Condition she continued all Night; her Fainting and Convulsions often
returning; and frequently no Pulse, or other Signs of Life. The Day following,
she came a little to herself; yet is not, at this Time, free from the malign
Impression left upon her Nerves by the Poison, being still, upon the least
Occasion, subject to the convulsive Motions; nor, possibly, may she suddenly,
if ever, get clear from the same.

In the first of these Relations, I could have the Opportunity of letting
myself only into the Misfortune of a Family, which must, it seems, remain
secreted from the World, under a Pretext of preventing the surviving Brother
running out of his Senses, who was instrumental in procuring and giving the
fatal Pill, if the same were to be made public. In this last, though I am
forbid the Publication of Names, yet I have Leave given to send any Gentleman
or Lady of Reputation, who doubts the Truth of the Narrative, to the House,
where the Husband will confirm it, as well as the Gentlewoman herself, who
underwent the cruel Symptoms, and who has so narrowly escaped with Life.

To these Instances it may be objected, that many Hundreds of People have
taken, and are daily devouring, these Draughts and Pills, without these
mischievous Accidents. To which may be answered, That the same Number might
very likely take Arsnick in that Dose, with as little Complaint: It is not
every one who takes ten times as much, that can dispatch themselves thereby, as
they had intended. Either some Quantity of Liquor already in the Stomach, or
poured down immediately after, dissolving and diffusing the Caustic Salts,
Nature rousing by strong Efforts, throws up by Vomit, (as in these Cases,) what
lies therein, discharging, at the same Time, (however, with horrid Gripings,)
what is passed lower, by the way of Stool, and at length frees herself
therefrom, though much weakened, and almost spent. Thus I say, (and I doubt
not, you will join Issue with me,) that it is possible for many, by the
Strength of a good Constitution, or some lucky Incident in their Favor, to
escape these Symptoms, and to suffer little otherwise than under common
Vomiting and Purgeing from a rough Medicine, of a different Tribe: But, indeed,
it is so very difficult to come at all which have fallen out in this Way, that
it may be made a Question, whether the one hundredth Part is brought to Light;
the People who have been imposed on, being ashamed of their Credulity, in
listening with the Herd after them, have stifled all they can: And unless they
have been destroyed outright, which too, you see has been the Case, their
Friends care not it should be known, but endeavor what they can to conceal
them. Had this been the Fate of a great Man's Servant, (and surely, nothing
could be more near,) she also had, in all Likelihood, died simply, as some
others, of Convulsions, without an Inquest: And why it should be made an
Example (as it was) for others to imitate, is, I own, above my Comprehension.
But the Nature of these Medicaments will better appear from the following more
certain Account of their Composition, as the same is reported to have been
communicated by the French King's Physician; the Original of which is at this
Time, I hear, or was very lately, in the Custody of that worthy, and very
learned Man, Dr. P -- t.

Mr. WARD's DROP.

Butyr. Antimon. ij. Crem. Tartar. iv. M. et Coq. in Aq. Com. q. s. per octo
horas. deinde add gradatim Ol. Tart. p. Deliq. iv. Cola and Evapora ut paretur
Sal. quod fluat. p. Deliq. Capiat hujus a gut. j. ad plures. in haustulo vini
albi cujuslibet Mollioris.

The PILL.

Is said to be no other than the Vitrum Antimonij, formed, with the Drop, into
small Pills, each of a Grain Weight.

Now, Sir, as none but the Physician, Apothecary, or Chemist, can rightly
inform the World of the poisonous Nature of these Compositions, and the
dangerous Effects thereof, upon the more sensible Parts of Men's Bodies, such, I
mean, as the Nerves, I will readily submit to the whole Body of these
Gentlemen, whether any one of a sound Judgment in Physic, and well acquainted
with the human Frame, will either prescribe any such himself, or consent to
their being taken; and if it must not denote all those to have a weak one in
this Particular, how knowing soever, in some others, who shall venture to take
them; especially after so fair a Warning as has been given in the Journal,
already referred to, as well as from the farther Intimation here delivered by,

SIR, (once more,) Your humble Servant.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHOEVER shall think fit, to send an Account of what they know, of the Good or
Bad Consequences (that equal Justice may be done the same,) from the taking of
these Medicines; by a Letter directed for the AUTHOR, to be left at Mr. JOHN
CLARKE's, Bookseller, under the Royal Exchange, the Favor will be
acknowledged; and provided the Facts are truly stated, with the Patients Names,
and Places of Residence, at least private Allowance for any diffident Person to
satisfy themselves of the Truth of such Facts; the Persons Name who sends such
Information, shall be made no other Use of, than he himself gives free
Permission.

FINIS.

