AN ESSAY on SATIRE: Occasioned by the DEATH of Mr. POPE.

O sacred Weapon, left for Truth's Defense,
Sole Dread of Folly, Vice, and Insolence!
To all, but Heav'n-directed Hands, denied,
The Muse may give thee, but the Gods must guide.


LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in Pall Mall. M.DCC.XLV. [Price
One Shilling.]

CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the end and efficacy of Satire. The love of Glory and fear of Shame
universal: v. 23. This passion implanted in man as a Spur to Virtue, is
generally perverted: v. 37. And thus becomes the occasion of the greatest
miseries, follies, and vices: v. 49. It is the work of Satire to rectify this
passion, to reduce it to its proper channel, and convert it into an incentive
to Wisdom and Virtue: v. 81. Hence it appears, that Satire may influence those
who defy all laws human and divine: v. 93. An objection answered: v. 123. PART
II. Rules for the conduct of Satire. Justice and Truth its chief and essential
Property: v. 159, Prudence in the application of Wit and Ridicule, whose
province is, not to explore unknown, but to enforce known truths: v. 185,
Proper subjects of Satire are, the Manners of present Times: v. 225. Decency of
expression recommended: v. 245. The different methods in which Folly and Vice
ought to be chastised: v. 259. The variety of Style and Manner which these two
subjects require: v. 267. The Praises of Virtue, though not an essential branch
of Satire, may yet be admitted with propriety: v. 313. Caution with regard to
Panegyric: v. 315. PART III. The history of Satire. Roman Satirists, Lucilius:
v. 352. Horace: v. 355. Persius: v. 363. Juvenal: v. 372. Causes of the decay
of Literature, and particularly of Satire: v. 378. Revival of Satire: v. 389.
Erasmus one of its principal Restorers: v. 393. Done; v. 399. The abuse of
Satire in England during the licentious reign of King Charles II. v. 403.
Dryden: v. 425. The true ends of Satire pursued by Boileau in France: v. 435.
and Mr. Pope in England: v. 445, etc.
AN ESSAY ON SATIRE, etc.
FATE gave the word, the cruel arrow sped,
And POPE lies numbered with the mighty dead.
Exulting Dullness eyed the setting light,
And flapp'd her wing, impatient for the night:
Guilt at the signal rowzing all her train,
Broods over the glories of her growing reign:
The envenomed monsters spit their deadly foam,
To blast the laurel that surrounds his tomb:
With inextinguishable rage they burn,
And snake-hung Envy hisses over his urn.
But thou whose eye, from passion's film refined,
Can see true greatness in an honest mind;
Can see each virtue and each grace unite,
And taste the raptures of a PURE delight;
O visit often his awful page with care,
And view the bright assemblage treasured there. --
Yet deign to hear the efforts of a muse,
Whose eye, not wing, his ardent flight pursues;
Intent from this great archetype to draw,
Or faintly shadow SATIRE's power and law;
Pleased, if from hence the unlearned may comprehend,
And reverence HIS and SATIRE's generous end.
1. In every breast there burns an active flame,
The love of glory, or the dread of shame:
The passion ONE, though different forms it wear,
As brightened into hope, or sunk by fear:
The lisping infant, and the hoary sire,
And youth and manhood feel the heart-born fire:
The charms of praise the coy, the modest woo,
And fly from glory that she may pursue:
(As Galatea -- Galatea lasciva Puella
Fugit ad Salices, sed se cupit ante videri.
VIRG.
, playful on the green,
Hides in the grove, yet wishes to be seen:)
She, powerful goddess, rules the wise and great;
Bends even reluctant hermits at her feet:
Haunts the proud city, and the lowly shade,
And sways alike the scepter and the spade.
Heaven thus in man it is friendly power displays,
To urge him on to deeds that merit praise:
But man, vain man, to folly only wife,
Rejects the Manna sent him from the skies:
With rapture hears corrupted passion's call,
Still proudly prone to mingle with the stall.
As each deceitful shadow tempts his view,
He for imagined substance quits the true:
Eager to catch the visionary prize,
In quest of glory plunges deep in vice;
Till madly zealous, impotently vain,
He forfeits every praise he pants to gain.
Thus still imperious nature plies her part,
And still her dictates work in every heart:
Each power that sovereign nature bids enjoy,
Man may corrupt, but man can never destroy:
Like mighty rivers, with resistless force
The passions rage, obstructed in their course;
Swell to new heights, forbidden paths explore,
And drown those virtues which they fed before.
And sure the deadliest foe to virtue's flame,
Our worst of evils, is perverted shame.
Beneath this yoke what abject numbers groan,
The shackled slaves to folly not their own!
Blind to ourselves, by sordid fear oppressed,
We seek our Virtues in each other's breast;
Meanly adopt another's wild caprice,
Another's weakness, or another's vice.
Each tool to hood-winked pride, so poorly great,
That pines in splendid wretchedness of state,
Tired in ambition's chase, would nobly yield,
And but for shame, like Sylla, quit the field:
The demon Shame paints strong the ridicule,
And whispers close " the world will call you fool."
Behold, yon wretch, to impious madness driven,
Believes and trembles, while he scoffs at heaven:
By weakness strong, and bold through fear alone,
He dreads the sneer by shallow coxcombs thrown,
Dauntless pursues the path Spinoza trod,
To man a coward, a bravoe to GOD Vois-tu ce Libertin en public intrepide,
Qui preche contre un Dieu que dans son ame il croit?
Il iroit embrasser la verite qu'il voit:
Mais de ses faux amiss il craint la raillerie,
Et ne brave ainsi Dieu que par poltronnerie.
BOIL. Ep. 3.
.
Truth, justice, heaven, in vain shall claim their power,
If the heart court fantastic honor more:
Thus virtue sinks beneath unnumber'd woes,
When passions born her friends, revolt, her foes.
Hence SATIRE's power: It Is her instructive part,
To calm the wild disorders of the heart:
She points the arduous height where glory lies,
And teaches mad ambition to be wise;
From foul example kindles fair desire,
Draws good from ill, from flint elicits fire;
Like the nice BE, with art most subtly true
From poisonous vice extracts a healing dew Parody on these lines of Mr. POPE:
In the nice BE what art so subtly true
From poisonous herbs extracts a healing dew.

,
Strips black oppression of her gay disguise,
And bids the hag in native horror rise;
Strikes bloated pride, and lawless rapine dead,
And plants the wreath of fame on virtue's head.
Nor boasts the muse imaginary power,
Though often she mourn those ills she cannot cure:
The worthy court her, and the worthless fear;
Who hate her piercing eye, that eye revere:
Her awful voice the vain and vile obey,
And every foe to wisdom feels her sway:
Smarts, pedants, as she smiles, no more grow vain;
Desponding fops resign the clouded cane:
Hushed at her voice, pert folly's self is still,
And dullness wonders while she drops her quill.
Her hand from vice fair virtues often has sprung,
As the skilled planter raises flowers from dung:
Weak are the ties which public art can find,
To quell the madness of the tainted mind:
Cunning evades, securely wrapped in wiles;
And force strong-sinew'd rends the unequal toils:
The stream of vice impetuous drives along,
Too deep for policy, for power too strong:
Even fair religion, native of the skies,
Scorned by the fool, seeks refuge with the wise:
But SATIRE's arrow searches every breast:
She plays a ruling passion on the rest:
Fast binds the slave that earth and heaven defied,
And awes him from the battery of his pride.
When fell corruption, by her vassals crowned,
Derides fallen justice prostrate on the ground;
Swift to redress an injured people's groan,
Bold SATIRE shakes the tyrant on her throne;
Powerful as death, defies the sordid train,
And slaves and sycophants surround in vain.
But with the friends of vice, the foes of SATIRE,
All truth is spleen, all spirit is ill nature. --
Well may they dread the Muse's fatal skill;
Well may they tremble when she draws her quill:
Her magic quill, that like Ithuriel's spear
Displays the cloven hoof, or lengthened ear;
Bids vice and folly take unborrow'd shapes,
Turns Duchesses to Not these into Duchesses; which is but a modern art.
strumpets, beaux to apes,
Drags the vile whisperer from his dark abode,
Till all the demon starts up from the toad.
O sordid maxim, formed to screen the vile,
That true goodnature still must wear a smile!
In frowns involved her beauties stronger rise,
When love of virtue wakes her scorn of vice:
Where justice calls, it is cruelty to save;
And it is the law's goodnature hangs the knave.
Who combats virtue's foe, is virtue's friend;
Then judge of SATIRE's merit by her end:
To guilt alone her vengeance stands confined,
The object of her love is all mankind.
They least are pained, who merit Satire most:
Folly the Laureat's, vice was Chartres' boast:
And sure it is just to gibbet high the name
Of fools and knaves already dead to shame.
Often SATIRE acts the faithful surgeon's part;
Generous and kind, though painful is her art:
Her optics all the dark disease explore,
Her weapon lances wide the gangreen'd sore;
Deep wounds hypocrisy's fair-seeming skin,
Where death in ulcerous humors lurks within:
With caution bold, she only strikes to heal,
Though folly burns to break the friendly steel.
Then sure no guilt impartial SATIRE knows,
Kind, even in vengeance kind to virtue's foes:
Whose is the crime, the scandal too be their's:
The knave and fool are their own libellers.
2. Dare nobly then: But conscious of your trust,
As ever warm and bold, be ever just:
Nor court applause in these degenerate days;
The hate of villains is extorted praise.
Over all be steady in a noble end,
And show mankind that truth has yet a friend.
It Is mean for empty praise of wit to write
(As Foplings laugh to show their teeth are white;)
To lash a doubtful folly with a smile,
Or madly blaze unknown defects, is vile:
It Is doubly vile, when but to prove your art,
You fix an arrow in a blameless heart.
O lost to honor's call, O doomed to shame,
Thou fiend accursed, thou murderer of fame!
Fell ravisher, from innocence to tear
That name, than life, than freedom held more dear:
To breathe contagion over the springing flower:
Procrustes like, in wantonness of power
To torture truth and virtue till they fit,
And die in pangs upon the rack of wit!
Where shall thy baseness meet it is just return,
Or what repay thy guilt, but endless scorn!
And know, immortal truth shall mock thy toil:
Immortal truth shall bid the shaft recoil;
With rage redoubled, wing the deadly dart;
And steep it is load of poison in thy heart.
Let SATIRE next, her proper limits know;
And ever she strike, be sure she strikes a foe.
Nor fondly deem, you spy a real fool
At each gay impulse of blind ridicule;
Before whose altar virtue often has bled,
And often a fated victim shall be led:
Lo! It were to be wished that Lord Shaftsbury had expressed himself with
greater precision on this subject: However, thus much may be affirmed with
truth.

1st, By the general tenor of his Essays on Enthusiasm, and the Freedom of Wit
and Humor, it appears that his principal design was to recommend the Way of
Ridicule (as he calls it) for the Investigation of Truth, and Detection of
Falsehood, not only in moral but religious subjects.

2dly, It appears no less evident, that in the course of his reasonings on this
question, he confounds two things which are in their nature and consequences
entirely different. These are, Ridicule and Good Humor: the latter
acknowledged by all to be the best Mediator in every debate; the former no less
regarded by most, as an Embroiler and Incendiary. Though he sets out with a
formal profession of proving the efficacy of Wit, Humor, and Ridicule in the
investigation of Truth, yet by shifting and mixing his terms, he generally
slides insensibly into mere encomiums on Good-Breeding, Cheerfulness, Urbanity,
and free Enquiry. This indeed keeps something like an argument on foot, and
amuses the superficial reader; but to a more observant eye discovers a very
contemptible defect either of sincerity or penetration.

The question concerning Ridicule may be thus not improperly stated: Whether
doubtful Propositions of any kind can be ascertained by the application of
Ridicule? Much might be said on this question; but a few words will make the
matter clear to an unprejudiced mind.

The Disapprobation or Contempt which certain objects raise in the mind of man,
is a particular mode of Passion: the objects of this passion are apparent
Falsehood, Incongruity, or Impropriety of some particular kinds. Thus, the
object of Fear is apparent Danger, or probable approaching Ill. But who has
ever dreamt of exalting the passion of Fear into a Standard or Test of real
Danger? The design must have been rejected as absurd, because it is the work of
Reason only, to correct and fix the passion on its proper objects. The case is
parallel: apparent or seeming Falsehoods, etc. are the objects of Contempt; but
it is the work of Reason only, to determine whether the supposed Falsehoods be
real or fictitious. But it is said, "The Sense of Ridicule can never be
mistaken." -- Why, no more can the Sense of Danger. -- "What, do men never fear
without reason?" -- Yes, very commonly; but they as often despise and laugh
without reason. And thus, before any thing can be determined in either case,
Reason, and Reason only, must examine Circumstances, separate Ideas, decide
upon, restrain, and correct the Passion.

Hence it follows, that the way of Ridicule is in fact no more than a species
of Eloquence: It applies to a Passion, and therefore can go no farther in the
investigation of Truth, than any of those arts which tend to raise Love, Pity,
Terror, Rage or Hatred in the heart of man. Consequently, his Lordship might
have transplanted the whole System of Rhetoric into his new scheme, with the
same propriety as he has introduced the way of Ridicule itself. A hopeful
project this, for the propagation of Truth!

As this seems to be the real nature and tendency of Ridicule, it has been
generally discouraged by Philosophers and Divines, together with every other
mode of eloquence, when applied to controverted Opinions. This discouragement,
from what is said above, appears to have been rational and just; therefore the
charge laid against Divines with regard to this affair by a zealous admirer of
Lord Shaftsbury (See a note on the Pleasures of Imagination, Book III.) seems
entirely groundless. The distinction which the same author has attempted with
respect to the influence of Ridicule, between speculative and moral Truths,
seems no better founded. It is certain that Opinions are no less liable to
Ridicule than Actions. And it is no less certain that the way of Ridicule
cannot determine the Propriety or Impropriety of the one, more than the Truth
or Falsehood of the other; because the same passion of Contempt is equally
engaged in both cases, and therefore (as above) Reason only can examine the
circumstances of the Action or Opinion, and thus six the Passion on its proper
Objects.

Upon the whole, this new design of discovering Truth by the vague and unsteady
Light of Ridicule, puts one in mind of the honest Irishman, who applied his
Candle to the Sun-Dial in order to see how the Night went.


Shaftsb'ry rears her high on reason's throne,
And loads the slave with honors not her own:
Big-swoln with folly, as her smiles provoke,
Profaneness spawns, pert dullness drops a joke!
Say, shall we join a while this gaping crew,
And prove at least, the idiot may be true,
Deride our weak forefathers' musty rule,
Who therefore smiled, because they saw a fool?
Sublimer logic now adorns our isle;
We therefore see a fool, because we smile:
Truth in her gloomy cave why fondly seek?
Lo! gay she sits in laughter's dimpled cheek:
Contemns each surly academick foe,
And courts the spruce free-thinker and the beau:
Daedalian arguments but few can trace,
But all can screw the muscles of their face:
Hence mighty Ridicule's all-conqu'ring hand
Shall work Herculean wonders through the land:
Bound in the magic of her cobweb chain,
Great WARBURTON shall rage, but rage in vain;
Truth's sacred prize the loudest horse-laugh win;
And coxcombs vanquish BERKLEY by a grin.
But you more wise, reject the inverted rule,
That truth is ever explored by ridicule:
On truth, on falsehood let her colors fall,
She throws a dazzling glare alike on all:
Beware the mad advent'rer: Bold and blind
She hoists her sail, and drives with every wind,
Deaf as the storm to sinking virtue's groan,
Nor heeds a friend's destruction, or her own.
Let clear-ey'd reason at the helm preside,
Bear to the wind, or stem the furious tide:
Then mirth may urge when reason can explore,
This point the way, that waft us to the shore.
Though distant times be sketch'd in SATIRE's page,
Yet chief, it is here is to draw the present age:
With wisdom's luster, folly's shade contrast,
And judge the reigning manners by the past:
Bid Britain's Heroes (awful shades!) arise,
And ancient honor beam on modern vice:
Point back to minds ingenuous, actions fair,
Till the sons blush at what their fathers were;
Ever yet 'twas beggary the great to trust;
Ever yet 'twas quite a scandal to be just;
When vulgar sharpers only dared a lie,
Or falsify'd the card, or cogg'd the dye;
Ever lewdness the stained garb of honor wore,
Or chastity was carted for the whore,
Vice strutted in the plumes of freedom dressed,
Or public spirit was the public jest:
Ever yet indignant SATIRE's honest page
Was fired to vengeance by an iron age,
The parent and the nurse of every crime,
The dregs, the drainings of exhausted time.
Be ever in a just expression bold,
Yet never degrade fair SATIRE to a scold:
Let no unworthy rage her form debase,
But let her smile, and let her frown with grace:
In mirth be temperate, decent in her spleen;
Nor, while she preaches modesty, obscene:
Deep let her wound, not rankle to a sore;
Nor call his lordship -- --, her grace a -- -- -:
The muse's charms with surest force assail,
When wrapped in Irony's transparent veil:
Her beauties half-conceal'd the more surprise,
And keener luster sparkles in her eyes.
Then be your line with sharp encomiums graced:
Style Clodius honorable, Bufa chaste:
For memoirs, Air the glory of the nation;
Cibber for ode, and Gordon for translation Of TACITUS.
.
Dart not on Folly an indignant eye:
Who ever discharged artillery on a fly?
Laugh not at vice: absurd the thought and vain,
To bind the tiger in so weak a chain:
Nay more: when flagrant crimes your laughter move,
The knave exults: to smile is to approve.
The muse's labor then success shall crown,
When Folly feels her smile, and Vice her frown.
Know next what measures to each theme belong,
And suit your thoughts and numbers to your song;
On wings proportioned to your quarry rise,
And stoop to earth, or soar among the skies.
Thus when prevailing folly claims a smile,
Free the expression, humble be the style:
In strains adapted sing the midnight toil
Of Camps and S -- -s disciplined by Hoyle.
In artless numbers paint the ambitious P -- -- -r,
That mounts the box, and shines a charioteer,
For glory warm, the leathern belt puts on,
And smacks the whip with art, and rivals John;
Or him whose moderate ambition reaches
But to his hip, a connoisseur in breeches,
Proud with his sheers to clip his way to fame,
And grope for glory while he covers shame.
Let SATIRE here in milder beauty shine,
And gayly graceful sport along the line;
Bid awkard folly quit her thin pretense,
And smile each affectation into sense.
Not so when Virtue by her guards betrayed,
Spurned from her throne, implores the muse's aid:
When crimes which erst in kindred darkness lay,
Rise frontless and insult the eye of day:
When weeping Hymen veils his hallowed fires,
And white-rob'd Chastity with sighs retires;
And rank Adultery on the marriage bed
Hot from Cocytus rears her crimson head:
When private Faith and public Trust are sold,
And traitors barter Liberty for gold:
When fell Corruption dark and deep as fate,
Saps the foundation of a tottering state:
When Giant-Vice and Irreligion rise
On mountain'd falsehoods to invade the skies: --
Then warmer numbers glow through SATIRE's page,
And all her smiles are darkened into rage:
On eagle wing she gains Parnassus' height,
Not lofty Epic soars a nobler flight;
The conscious mountain trembles at her nod,
And every awful gesture speaks the God:
Then keener indignation fires her eye,
Then flash her lightenings, and her thunders fly;
Wide and more wide the flaming bolts are hurled,
Till all her wrath involves the guilty world.
Yet SATIRE often assumes a gentler mein,
And beams on virtue's friends a smile serene;
Reluctant wounds, but pours her balm with joy,
Pleased to commend, where merit strikes her eye.
But tread with caution this enchanted ground,
Enclosed by faithless precipices round:
Truth be your guide: disdain ambition's call:
And if you fall with Truth, you greatly fall.
It Is virtue's native Luster that must shine:
The poet can but set it in his line:
And who unmoved with laughter can behold
A dirty Pebble meanly graced with gold?
Let real merit then adorn your lays,
For shame attends on prostituted praise:
And all your wit, your most distinguished art
Can only prove, you want an honest heart.
Nor think the Muse by SATIRE's law confined:
She yields description of the noblest kind.
Great is the toil, the latent soul to trace,
To paint the heart, and catch internal grace;
By turns bid vice and virtue strike our eyes,
Now bid a WOLSEY or SEJANUS rise;
Now with a touch more sacred and refined,
Call forth a BRUTUS' or a SCIPIO's mind;
Here sweet or strong may every color flow:
Here let the pencil warm, the canvass glow:
Of light and shade provoke the noble strife,
And wake the swelling figures into life.
3. Through ages thus has SATIRE greatly shined,
The friend to truth, to virtue, and mankind:
Yet the fair plant from virtue never had sprung;
And man was guilty ever the Poet sung.
With joy the Muse beheld each better age,
Till glowing crimes had waked her into rage:
Truth saw her honest spleen with just delight,
And bad her wing her shafts, and urge their flight:
First on the sons of Greece she proved her art,
And Sparta felt the fierce IAMBICK Dart Archilocum proprio rabies armavit
Iambo.
HOR.
.
To Latium next, avenging SATIRE flew:
The flaming faulcion bold LUCILIUS Ense velut stricto quoties Lucilius ardens
Infremuit, rubet auditor cui frigida men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia culpa.
JUV. Sat. 1.
drew;
With dauntless warmth in virtue's cause engaged,
And conscious villains trembled as he raged.
Next, playful HORACE Omne vafer vitium ridenti Flaccus amico
Tangit, and admissus circum praecordia ludit,
Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso.
PERS. Sat. 1.
caught the generous fire;
For SATIRE's bow resigned the sounding lyre:
Each arrow polished in his hand was seen,
And as it grew more polished, grew more keen.
He clothed his art in studied negligence,
Politely sly, cajoled the foes of sense;
Seemed but to sport and trifle with the dart,
But while he sported, stabbed them to the heart.
In graver strains majestic PERSIUS wrote,
Big with a ripe exuberance of thought:
Greatly sedate, contemned a tyrant's reign,
And lashed corruption with a calm disdain:
Yet far from vulgar eyes removed his seat;
Vast chains of rocks enclose the green retreat:
Let BOND conduct you through the dark profound,
And fair poetic scenes shall open round.
More ardent eloquence, and boundless rage
Devour, in JUVENAL's exalted page:
His mighty numbers awed corrupted Rome,
And swept audacious greatness to it is doom;
As headlong torrents thundering from on high,
Rend the proud rock that lately braved the sky.
But lo! the fatal victor of mankind,
Swollen Luxury! -- and Ruin stalks behind!
As countless insects from the North-east pour,
To blast the spring, and ravage every flower;
So barbarous millions spread contagious death,
The sickening laurel withered at their breath:
Deep Superstition's night the skies o'erhung,
Beneath whose baleful dews the poppy sprung.
No longer Genius wooed the Nine to love,
But dullness nodded in the Muse's grove;
Wit, spirit, freedom were the sole offense,
Nor aught was held ridiculous but sense.
At length, again fair Science shot her ray,
Dawned in the skies, and spoke returning day:
Now SATIRE, triumph over thy flying foe,
Whet, whet thy arrows, and resume thy bow!
See, great ERASMUS breaks the powerful spell,
And wounds triumphant folly in her cell!
In vain the solemn cowl surrounds her face,
Vain all her bigot cant, her sow'r grimace;
With shame compelled her giddy throne to quit,
And own the force of reason urged by wit.
'Twas then plain DONE in honest vengeance 'rose,
His wit refulgent, though his rhyme were prose:
He 'midst an age of puns and pedants wrote
With genuine sense, and Roman strength of thought.
Yet scarce had SATIRE well relum'd her flame,
(With grief the muse relates her country's shame)
Ever Britain saw the foul revolt commence,
And treacherous Wit began her war with Sense.
Then 'rose a shameless, mercenary crew,
Whom latest time with just contempt shall view:
A race fantastic, in whose page you see
Untutored fancy, a mere Jeu d'Esprit:
Wit's shattered mirror lies in fragments bright,
Reflects not nature, but confounds the sight.
Dry morals the court-poet blushed to sing;
'Twas all his praise to say " the oddest thing:"
By quaint conceits and turns of wit surprise,
And puff poetic dust into your eyes.
Perhaps some virtue was his awkward theme,
When the light purse inspired a darker dream:
When active hunger urged her lawless power,
Or the stern bailiff thundered at the door:
But lo! again the Splendid Shilling shines,
And the bard grows immoral as he dines;
Proud, for a jest obscene, a patron's nod,
To martyr virtue, or blaspheme his God.
Unhappy DRYDEN! who unmoved can see,
The extremes of wit and meanness joined in thee!
Flames that could mount and gain their kindred skies,
Low-creeping in the putrid sink of vice:
A muse whom truth and wisdom wooed in vain,
The pimp of power, the prostitute to gain.
Wreaths that should deck fair Virtue's form alone,
To strumpets, traitors, tyrants, vilely thrown:
Unrivaled parts, the scorn of honest fame;
And genius rise, a monument of shame!
More happy France: immortal BOILEAU there
Protected wisdom with a father's care:
Him with her love propitious SATIRE blessed,
And breathed her airs divine into his breast:
To form his line, perfection's laws conspire,
And faultless judgment guides unbounded fire:
Whether he smiles at folly's fond caprice,
Or pours the thunder of his rage on vice.
But see at length relenting SATIRE smile,
And shower her choicest boon on BRITAIN's isle:
Behold, for POPE she twines the laurel crown,
And leads the bard triumphant to his throne;
Despairing guilt and dullness loath the sight,
As goblins vanish at approaching light;
The gentle Thames, that pours his urn fast by,
Surveys the structure with revering eye;
To a clear mirror smooths his glassy tide,
Proud to reflect a nation's justest pride.
But oh! what thoughts, what numbers shall I find,
But faintly to express the Poet's mind!
Who yonder star's effulgence can display,
Unless he dip his pencil in the ray?
Who paint a God, unless the God inspire?
What catch the lightning, but the speed of fire?
So, mighty POPE, to make thy genius known,
All power is weak, all numbers -- but thy own.
For thee each Muse with kind contention strove,
For thee the Graces left th'Idalian grove;
With watchful fondness over thy cradle hung,
Attun'd thy voice, and formed thy infant tongue.
Next, to her bard majestic Wisdom came;
The bard enraptured caught the vigorous flame:
With taste superior scorned the venal tribe;
Whom fear can sway, or guilty greatness bribe;
At fancy's call who rear the wanton sail,
Sport with the stream, and trifle in the gale;
Sublimer views thy daring spirit bound;
Thy mighty voyage was Creation's round;
Intent, new worlds of science to explore,
And bless mankind with wisdom's sacred store;
A nobler joy than wit can give, impart;
And pour a moral transport over the heart.
Fantastic wit shoots momentary fires,
And like a meteor, while we gaze, expires;
Wit kindled by the sulfurous breath of vice,
Like the blue lightning, while it shines, destroys;
But genius fired by truth's eternal ray,
Burns clear and constant, like the source of day;
Like this, it is beam prolifick and refined,
Feeds, warms, inspirits, and exalts the mind;
Mildly dispells each wintry passion's gloom,
And opens all the virtues into bloom.
This praise, immortal POPE, to thee be given;
Thy genius was indeed a gift from heaven.
Hail, bard unequaled, in whose deathless line
Reason and wit with strength collected shine,
Where matchless wit but wins the second praise,
Lost, nobly lost, in Truth's superior blaze.
Did friendship ever mislead his wandering muse?
O let that friendship plead the great excuse;
That sacred friendship which inspired his song,
Fair in defect, and amiably wrong.
Ye deathless names, ye sons of endless praise,
By virtue crowned with never-fading bays!
Say, shall an artless muse, if you inspire,
Light her pale lamp at your immortal fire?
Should she attempt, O may she faultless claim
A small, a temporary wreath of fame?
If such her fate; do thou fair Truth descend,
And watchful guard her in an honest end;
Kindly severe, instruct her equal line
To court no friend, nor own a foe, but thine.
But if her giddy eye should vainly quit
Thy sacred paths, to run the maze of Wit;
If her apostate heart should ever incline
To offer incense at Corruption's shrine;
Urge, urge thy power, the black attempt confound,
And dash the smoking censer to the ground;
Till awed to fear, instructed bards may see
That guilt is doomed to sink in infamy.
FINIS.

