THE FATAL DISCOVERY. A TRAGEDY. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN
DRURY LANE.

-- Moriens animam abstulit hosti,
Tum super exanimem sese projecit amicam,
Consossus, placidaque ibi demum morte quievit.
Fortunati ambo! -- Si quid mea carmina possunt
Nulla dies unquam memori vos eximet aevo.
VIRG. LONDON: ^RINTED FOR T. BECKET AND P. A. DE HONDT IN THE STRAND. M DCC
LXIX.

[Price One Shilling and Six Pence]

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. BARRY.
WHEN first the children of the Muse began
To try their magic on the mind of man,
Astonished mortals saw, with wondering eyes,
The fair creation of the bard arise.
Hence is derived the Poet's lofty name,
For Poet and Creator mean the same;
He, from his fancy, where the seeds of things
As in a chaos lie, to order brings
Worlds of his own and builds the lofty rhyme
Whose polished strength defies the rage of time.
Such were the bards, whom we too call divine,
Homer the father of the godlike line,
The Mantuan bard, whom all mankind admire
For sweet expression and for vestal fire.
Shakespeare and Milton, both in England born,
Whose glorious names the Queen of Isles adorn,
Who, proudly sitting on her azure throne,
In arts and empire will no equal own.
Thus far our Author as a Prologue writ,
And would have been, I think, a-writing yet,
Enamored of his theme. -- But I drew near,
And whispered that of him you wished to hear.
'Twas difficult he said -- in such a case
He could have wished another in his place;
To tell, with what alternate hopes and fears,
An anxious Author on the Stage appears;
For, like the nightingale, he has addressed
Himself to sing -- a thorn at his fond breast.
If, like the native warbler of the grove,
His plaintive notes are full of tender love;
Your hand may pull the thorn that caused his pain
And give him spirit for a nobler strain.

(...) KATHUL. My faithful Euran!
Those dastards left their master in the storm
That rose at eve: my son has passed the night
Alone upon the hill beyond the lake.

EURAN. Of him no fear; both hill and dale he knows,
Cavern and cave and every sheltered spot!
Of the wide forest.

KATHUL. Not one moment's peace
Have I enjoyed, since to the Pictish king
I gave my daughter's hand. Unhappy she,
In secret anguish pines her life away!
My son, afflicted, shuns his father's sight,
And, in the woods and forests, wastes his days,
A lonely hunter. To complete my woes,
Our new ally keeps not his promised time;
Is this his Pictish faith?

EURAN. Doubt not, O king!
Doubt not the faith of Durstan, nor the love
He bears his queen. -- Soon shall you see his sails
Rise on the distant wave, white as the fowls
That chase the flying shoals. -- When he arrives,
Let not indulgence grant the least delay,
But waft Rivine to the Pictish shore.
When she has left the place, where every tree
And rock and haunted stream recall the memory
Of what she should forget, her grief will fly
Like mist before the wind.

KATHUL. Rather the mist
Will thicken into darkness. Euran, my heart
Misgives and chides itself. Sprung as I am
From ancient Albion, in her evil days
I left her shattered side. By passion swayed
And rage at perjured Ronan, I forsook
The stock of which I came, and joined myself
By strict alliance to her mortal foe;
To him, whose arm had hewed her branches down.
From deeds, like this, in wrong of nature done,
Observers date commencement of decay,
And strange disafter to the guilty line.

EURAN. Disaster seize on him who broke his faith,
And threw away the pearl of womankind!
O! could my wish recall that signal hour
When Elig's hall blazed with a thousand shields
Of kings and heroes. Emulous to please
The all-admired daughter of the Isles!
Rivine, partial to her brother's friend,
Preferred the prince of Morven; though by far,
In wealth and power, inferior to the Pict,
And other royal suitors for her love.
Yet he, distinguished, favored, honored thus,
Ungrateful man! forsook the matchless maid,
Without complaint, pretense, abandoned her,
To wed the queen of Erin. Ireland.
-- In my mind
Most happily for thee, and for thy house;
Else thou, the friend of vanquished Albion, still
Had shared the fortunes of a ruined people. --

KATHUL. Not ruined yet --


EURAN. Expelled their native land,
Their king and more than half his princes slain.

KATHUL. Another king succeeds: Congallus claims
His right of blood. -- Here in the bay last night
A rover of the main his vessel moored;
He told me he had seen on Norway's coast
A fleet immense: far off, it seemed a wood,
Stretching from cape to cape; as if the firs
From their eternal mountains had come down,
To grow amidst the waves.

EURAN. Was this huge fleet
Prepared against the Pict?

KATHUL. It was; and charged
With mighty armies: both the kings were there
Of Denmark.
Lochlin and of Norway -- On the deck
Of one, the headmost ship, Congallus stood,
Wooing the winds to fill his hoisted sails:
With him, a multitude of warriors, born
In various climes, of the Albanian race;
Who, though they never saw their father's land,
Call it their country too. The foremost they,
The fiercest in her cause.

EURAN. It Is Ronan's cause!
For him the sons of Erin lift the spear;
For him the kings of Scandinavia arm.
But let them come, the pirates of the North! --
Strong is the Pict, and mighty his allies!
Who can resist the Romans?

KATHUL. By their force,
And not his own, though he is great in arms,
The Pict over Albion's warlike sons prevailed;
But now the Roman eagle southward flies;
The dark-ey'd chief his legions has withdrawn,
To quell the Britons; nor can Durstan hope
Their present aid. --

EURAN. -- I trust he shall not need!
Behold Rivine comes. --
[Looking toward the wood.
KATHUL. -- Entranced in thought --
See how she tosses to the skies her arms,
Now wrings her folded hands! Thus is she wont
To wander through the woods, ever alone,
And ever mourning. Like a wounded deer,
Apart she stalks and seeks the darkest shade
Of hanging rocks, and melancholy boughs,
To hide and nourish her determined sorrow. --
Let us avoid her. O! unhappy child!
I fear thy father's counsel has undone thee!

[Exeunt. Enter RIVINE. RIVINE. How soon is evil done! The sycamores,
The pines, whose bulk successive ages reared,
The tempest of one night has overthrown!
Thou too art fallen, thou fair and stately oak,
Beneath whose pleasant shade Rivine sat,
When first she listened to false Ronan's love.
O! thou expressive emblem of my state!
Like thee, the chief in beauty and in place,
I flourished once; now rooted up like thee,
I wither on the field. Daily I die!
Delighted, I perceive my swift decay.
There will I make my grave; under that rock,
In peace shall rest the daughter of the Isles,
Who, 'till she is laid in earth, no peace can know,
No peace for me! O! how I envy you,
Ye lovelorn maids! who, slighted and forsaken,
Yet entertain no motion of revenge,
But mildly bear your wrongs, decline and die,
The blameless victims of inconstant man!

Enter CONNAN. Ha! does my brother come to see Rivine!
What has procured me this unwonted favor?
CONNAN. Perhaps, in prudence and in love to thee,
I should conceal my tidings; but my heart
Cannot contain them. Though it make thee wretched,
Yet I must tell thee, that my friend is wronged.
Ronan is innocent; he loves thee still;
He never ceased to love thee!

RIVINE. I believe it.
He never ceased to love, who never loved.
But why pretend, why counterfeit again?
Has Erin's queen found out how false he is,
And thrown the specious traitor from her arms?
And does he think once more to find Rivine
Free, credulous and fit to be deceived?
But me he thinks not of; he courts thy aid;
He needs the valor of his partial friend.
A stranger still to what his crimes have done,
He knows not who I am; he does not know,
That Connan's valor guards the Pictish throne.

CONNAN. This flash of indignation, O! my sister!
Gleams for a moment over thy troubled mind;
But darkest woe shall shortly close around thee.
I have a dreadful story for thine ear. --

RIVINE. A dreadful story! how can he be wronged,
Who publicly renounced his plighted faith,
Plighted a thousand times?

CONNAN. He never did:
He sent no message to renounce thy love.

RIVINE. What then was Valma?


CONNAN. An unhappy wretch,
The slave of gold; gained by the worst of men,
To work thine overthrow.

RIVINE. Leave me to judge
Of my condition. Tell me what thou know.

CONNAN. I need not tell Rivine why I shunned her,
Since Durstan was her husband; I have fled
The human race, distracted in my mind,
With grief and shame and anger: often my soul
Resolved revenge on Ronan. By-and-by
Something would whisper that we were deceived;
That noble Ronan never could be base.
Perplexed with thoughts like these, I ranged the woods,
And heeded not the game my dogs pursued.
The storm of yesterday surpised me, strayed
Beyond my usual bounds; nor could I find,
Amidst the darkness of the driving blast,
A path to guide aright my doubtful steps. --
As night came on, more furious grew the storm.
The thunder bellowed and the lightning glanced
Along the dreary heath: before, behind
And on each side, the sudden torrents roared.
I wandered on and frequently I thought,
The world without was like my troubled mind.
At last, far in the east, whence the wind blew,
^ heard the howling of a shepherd's dog;
With lighter steps, I turned me to the sound
And heard it often repeated. As I hoped,
It led me to a hut -- I entered there;
And, by the embers of a fire of turf,
I saw a ghastly man stretched on a bed
Of sticks and heath composed. Come near, he said,
And listen to the dying voice of Valma. --

RIVINE. Of Valma! --


CONNAN. Valma, whom I had not seen
Since he, for Erin, with his master sailed:
I found he did mistake me for his host,
And silent listened with a beating heart.
Your charitable cares, he said, are vain;
My hour draws nigh. -- Good shepherd, you have lodg'd'
Under your blameless roof, the basest wretch
That ever lived on earth. My name is Valma,
The favored servant of the prince of Morven.
My master sent me, from green Erin's shore,
With tokens and a message to his love,
The fair Rivine: but a tempest drove
My luckless vessel on the Pictish coast.
Durstan, the king, by promises and threats,
Compelled me to deceive the constant maid,
And falsely to report, that my brave lord
Renounced her love. -- Rivine, thou grow'st pale!
Lean on my arm. --.

RIVINE. No: I have strength enough!
Lead me, my brother! lead me to the place
Where Valma is.

CONNAN. At midnight he expired --


RIVINE. Would he had lived one other day for me!
O! I had much to ask him: did not Ronan,
With eyes of love behold the beauteous queen?
So I have often heard and that was told
Long before Valma came. --

CONNAN. Ay, so it was
Contrived and told, on purpose to prepare
Thy mind, thus tainted, to receive the tale.
But know, for I explored the heart of Valma,
The noble Ronan, in the hall of kings,
Who sought alliance with so brave a chief,
Fondly displayed -- his passion for Rivine.
With gems of thine he decked his conquering arms,
And raised the song of beauty to thy praise!
Such ostentation withered the desire
And killed the hope of every blushing maid.
The hero comes, unaltered in his love,
And finds thee --

RIVINE. Connan! me he shall not find!
We never shall meet again -- when does he come?

CONNAN. Be-like tomorrow, or perhaps to day.
This is the appointed time, the season meet
For enterprise of arms. Now the mild moon
Of autumn rises when the sun descends,
And at the self-same hour, for many a night,
Lifts her fair head, to bless with light the world.
I mean to share the perils of my friend;
Nor shall Rivine as an hostage go
Against her brother's and her Ronan's sword.

RIVINE. Would that the swords of both were in my b east!
Ye winds, that I have wished should sleep for ever;
Ye southern winds! from Etha's mountains blow,
And waft to Elig's bay the Pictish fleet!
I go to Durstan's kingdom --

CONNAN. Go, and perish!
Have thou no rage, no indignation in thee?
No generous drop in thy exhausted veins?
Art thou so tame, so vile, so base of soul,
To bear the sight of Durstan? Crimes like his
Dissolve all ties. Besides his wrongs to thee,
He murdered Valma on the lonely heath;
Murdered the traitor to conceal the treason.

RIVINE. Yes, I am base and vile; my soul submits
To each opprobrious name from Ronan's friend;
But I am not so tame: my heart is full
Of rage, of anger and of mortal hatred! --

CONNAN. To whom?


RIVINE. To Durstan's wife.


CONNAN. Renounce the name,
And thou may still -- Thy brother will defend,
And save thee from his power.

RIVINE. O! save not me
From any misery! But tell me rather,
How I may be more wretched than I am:
If thou can tell. Farewell my native land!
Ye woods and streams of Elig's vale, farewell!
Rivine leaves you with a broken heart,
To waste her days in horror and despair,
With the detested author of her woes.
But welcome woe to me! Fool that I was,
A wretch unworthy of a hero's love,
Who readily believed a lying tale,
Against the honor of the first of men:
Then in the cursed hour of jealous rage,
Gave up myself to misery and Durstan.

Enter MESSENGER. MESSENGER. The fleet, so long expected, comes at last.
One lofty vessel far outsails the rest
And bears the colors of the Pictish king.

CONNAN. It Is well. [Exit Mess.] Bethink thee, sister!


RIVINE. It Is too late! --
I should have thought before I wedded Durstan.
Now would thou have me stay till Ronan comes?
It Is not his anger, nor his hate I fear;
No, nor his scorn. My just desert is scorn;
But hide me, rocks and mountains, from his pity!
As the fond parent to the child relents,
When sore affliction lays the offender low;
So would his generous soul to pity melt,
Should he behold the ruins of Rivine!
Come, Pictish Durstan! bear me from his sight,
To die unpitied in thy hated land! --

[Exit. CONNAN. She Is desperate -- and what will Ronan be,
When, high in hope, he hears she is lost for ever?
His words, his gestures I remember well,
When last we parted at the vessel's side:
From his embrace I turned me to the shore:
His arm he stretched, and caught my hand again;
He pressed it to his breast, he wrung it hard;
And, with a look of infinite affection,
Connan! he said, my king commands; I go:
To thee, my friend, I leave my love in charge!
Fondly I promised to defend the maid.
What shall I answer when he claims his bride? --
She must not go with Durstan. O! my sire!
Thy wrath I fear, and not the Pictish sword!
But Ronan has my faith. Where is my page,
So swift of foot? Thy master calls thee, Calmar.

Enter CALMAR. CALMAR. What would my lord?


CONNAN. Now, Calmar, win my favor;
I have a message for the eagle's wing,
Or the swift pinions of the wind, to bear;
Exert thy utmost speed!

CALMAR. Speak, and I fly,
Swift as the arrow from my master's bow. --

CONNAN. Here lies thy way: come on, and mark my words.

[Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, the Palace of Kathul EURAN alone. EURAN. I HAVE been sleeping on a
hollow bank,
Above a flood unfathomed. -- O! those slaves!
Who gave assurance of the death of Valma,
And boasted each that his good sword dispatched him.
The blame as yet on Durstan only falls.
Would I had never joined my hand to his,
Nor touched the proffered gold! -- Often have I heard,
And now at last believe, it is safer far
To deal deceitfully with crasty men,
Than practice art on unexperienced youth,
Whose passions sally out beyond conjecture,
And, by extravagance, confound the wise.
The passions of this prince are like the wind:
The Pictish name is odious to the tribes,
Whose hearts still sway to Albion's kindred race.
If Connan calls to arms, enraged they rise,
Like billows when the furious tempest blows. --
The kings have met: how shall I warn the Pict
Without alarming Kathul? -- Here they come.

Enter KATHUL, DURSTAN and several Pictish Chiefs. DURSTAN. Excuse my long,
involuntary absence!
Uncertain is his hour whose work is war,
Who takes his way across the changeful main.
Euran, thou faithful servant of thy lord,
I greet thee well.

EURAN. With joyful heart, O king!
I see thee in the wished for hour return.

DURSTAN. Soon must I quit again this friendly shore;
For I am doomed to pass my life in arms. --
The wandering heir of Albion's vanquished line,
Congallus, threatens to invade my kingdoms.
This on the seas I learned.

KATHUL. I can confirm
The truth of that report. --

DURSTAN. King of the Isles!
I Will give those bold invaders warlike welcome!
At eve, with favoring tide, I sail again.
The radiant moon, with all her splendour, shines
To light my vessel through the watery way.
Impart my purpose to thy beauteous daughter,
And tell the urgent cause.

KATHUL. -- Urgent, indeed;
Unwilling as we are so soon to lose thee;
Tidings like these admit of no delay.
But let us spread the feast and raise the song,
Whilst yet thy steps are here. Sweet to the ear
Is melody and pleasant to the soul
The tale of battles fought and woes endured,
By chiefs, who long have ceased from war and woe.
We, in our turn, O King! shall pass away,
And in the song be found. --

EURAN. The Queen draws near.


Enter RIVINE. [Kathul advances toward her. EURAN. [ To Durstan.] Stay not the
feast, there is danger in the hall;
Demand thy queen; her brother knows too much.

KATHUL. Now, as becomes thee, meet thy husband's love,
And look complacent on the Pictish chiefs;
Through many dangers they have reached the shore.

DURSTAN. Cold is my welcome! slowly she approaches,
Silent and sad, fixed on the earth her eyes.
With such reluctance, such averted looks,
In bitterness of soul, a captive comes
Before the conqueror, whose hands are red
With her dear kindred's blood.

RIVINE. King of the Picts,
Thou read'st my thoughts aright, within thy breast
Dwells an interpreter that cannot err. --

DURSTAN. To these injurious words, I know not, Queen!
What answer best belongs. Thy gloomy mind
Some foul suspicion of thy husband stains,
Changing to hatred and to harsh disdain,
That melancholy and that cold reserve,
Which I regretted once. Unfold thy thoughts!
And show the viper that has stung thy soul.
She heeds me not. Ha! wherefore do thou tremble,
And stare so wildly on a stranger's face?

RIVINE. [ to one of the Picts.] Permit me, stranger, to behold that sword,
Trust it, I pray, one moment to my hand.
[ The Pict gives the sword. It is, it is his sword. I know it well,
This jewel once was mine!

KATHUL. What means my daughter?


RIVINE. Behold the sword of Ronan. O! my father!
Too certain sign the hero lives no more.
Is this thy nuptial present, cruel king!
But I accept it for it suits our love.

DURSTAN. Not in the hearing of these gallant chiefs,
Whom I would wish to hold thee high in honor,
Will I reply to passion. Thou have named
The owner of the sword. His it may be;
But whose it was, I never knew before.

RIVINE. Thou can no more deceive me. The long train
Of treachery and lies, the murder too
Has been detected. Miserable Valma
Lived only to reveal it. -- Now thou come,
With this proud trophy of thy work complete.
O! thou sole relic of the first of men!
Signal of death! memorial of the brave!
Companion of my woes, perhaps the end!
Why did thou thirst, O! Durstan for his blood?
Had thou not wronged him, was not that enough
But thou did wisely, to consult thy safety,
For conscience told thee, whilst the warrior lived,
The robber was not safe.

DURSTAN. Thy words are madness;
If I had killed him, was he not my foe?

RIVINE. How did the hero fall? -- By fraud he fell!
For he was still invincible in arms,
Alone a match for many in the field.

DURSTAN. That sword, the sight of which disturbs thy soul,
Is not the trophy of a hero slain;
In evil hour I sound it.

RIVINE. Found it, where?
Was not its owner near?

DURSTAN. If he was near,
Thou have conjectured right, he lives no more:
For where I found it death and horror reigned.

RIVINE. Now, I believe thee, Durstan! Tell me, Pict!
How, when, without a master too thou found'st
His sword who never yet was foiled in arms?

DURSTAN. As in our way to thee we crossed those seas,
Whose rage scarce summer tames, a tempest rose,
A dreadful one, as ever swept the main.
All night we labored in the jaws of death.
But, when the morning dawned, the tempest ceased;
Red, on the troubled deep, the sun arose,
And showed a dismal object to our eyes;
Fast, on a ridge of rocks, a wreck appeared,
Which seemed the ruin of a noble vessel;
Near as our safety would permit we sailed,
And viewed the fate, which might have been our own. --
The ship was broken, by the heavy seas
Parted in two; and all about the rocks
Dead bodies floated, on the tossing waves.

RIVINE. Was there no living creature?


DURSTAN. No, not one,
Low are the rocks; their ragged tops are seen,
And barely seen above the smoothest sea;
But in a storm their place is known afar,
By the white waves, that rage, and swell, and break
Like mountains over them; there no man could live.
Who'er aboard that luckless vessel sailed,
Embraced the same inevitable doom. --

RIVINE. Was the sword there?


DURSTAN. It was. About to leave
The wreck, we sought some token of the dead
By which they might be known, that sword we spied,
Caught in the cordage of a mast it hung
And glittered through the water. --

RIVINE. It Is enough!
If at my feet his breathless body lay,
I could not be more certain of his fate.
In those wild waves the chief of warriors died;
To me he hastened through the seas and storms;
Unknowing of his wrongs for me he died.

KATHUL. Forbear, my daughter! for my sake forbear!


DURSTAN. And for thine own, O queen! respect thyself.


RIVINE. I will. For ever I renounce thee, Durstan!
To Ronan's memory I devote my days!
Few are the days that of my life remain.
Hear me, amazed spectators! ye who think
Rivine has forgot her sex's shame;
And judge me with more justice. In my hand
I hold the sword of Ronan. Who he was,
And of what high renown, is not unknown;
For through the kingdoms of the North his name
Flew on the wings of Fame. -- His love to me
And mine to him, for I avow my love,
My sire approved. -- To him I was betrothed,
But in his absence, Durstan did seduce,
A faithless servant to betray his master.
He framed a message from the noble Ronan,
Rejecting me, and setting free my faith;
Then urged a fond exasperated maid,
And with the help of her deceived father,
Precipitated her disordered mind,
To yield a rash consent. -- That was my crime,
Which I deny not; nor refuse to bear
My punishment, which, like my crime, is great.
Despair consumes me! withered like the leaf
Of autumn is my beauty. Now I stand
On the dim threshold of the house of darkness;
Remorse pursues Rivine to the tomb.

DURSTAN. Who with a woman's frenzy can contend?
Thou have avowed thy hatred to thy husband,
And to another owned thy guilty love:
For loss of him thou rav'st --

Enter MESSENGER. MESSENGER. King of the Isles!
On Mora's top the fiery signal burns.
I saw a troop, in shining steel arrayed,
Descend the hill, by active Calmar led.

KATHUL. Whose hand presumes to light the warning fire
That never burns in peace? Where is my son?
The feet of Calmar fly at his command.

MESSENGER. To war they fly. On the high-pointed rock
That runs into the bay, Connan himself
Stands like a tower. His angry voice he sends,
Along the roaring waves, and shakes his spear
Against the Picts approaching to the shore. --

DURSTAN. I am betrayed


KATHUL. Of me distrustful too?


DURSTAN. The son my enemy, I dread the sire.
My brave companions, whose renown in arms,
Rose on the ruins of a greater foe
Than Connan is, or those who swell his pride,
Now let your valor shine. At bay we stand,
But not like timid deer.

FIRST PICT. Our lives are thine:
With thee we conquer, or with thee we fall. --

KATHUL. Some angry spirit hovers in the air,
And scatters rage and fury. Hear me, Pict!
Suspicion argues often a guilty mind;
A noble spirit never. Sheath your swords!
I am your guard in Elig. To the shore
I go to quell the tumult, and receive
Thy people as my friends. -- My daughter! hear
Thy father's counsel. Never was a child
To a fond parent dearer. O! Rivine!
Much of my hope is lost; but do not thou,
In rash resentment, throw the rest away.
Think who thou art! the daughter of a king,
And of a king the wife! the pledge of peace
Among the nations; be not thou the cause
Of war and mortal strife! thy name shall go,
To furture times for good, or ill renowned,
The curse or blessing of thy native land,
And of thy father's house. My child be wise!
Forget the past, which cannot be recalled;
And arm thyself with patience. --

[ Exit Kathul and Euran. DURSTAN. Sweet the voice
Of those that counsel peace. Rage was not made
Nor lasting anger for a gentle breast. --
My soul is innocent of Ronan's fate;
And if I used some art against a rival,
Ascribe it only to excess of love. --
Wise are thy father's words. Forget the past,
And be hereafter happy. --

RIVINE. Leave me, Pict!
I hate the present; I abhor the past!
The time to come, Durstan, is not for me.
I hasten to the tomb! There I shall find
Forgetfulness. O! leave me to my sorrows!
Leave me to die here in my native land,
Where once with peace and innocence I lived
(Companions whom my soul shall know no more)
Till thou came hither. Thou have made me wretched
Beyond all utterance, example, thought
Or stretch of fancy. When the mournful bard
Seeks a sad subject for the midnight song,
He shall reject the woes of other times,
And choose Rivine for the tale of tears.

DURSTAN. Forbear such fond complaints, and henceforth, Queen,
Think of the duty which thy state requires. --

RIVINE. It Is my chief duty to renounce that state,
And thee for ever.
[Going.]
DURSTAN. Hence thou must not go.
I will not trust thee to thy own disposal. --

RIVINE. Am I a captive?


DURSTAN. No, nor art thou free
To cast thy husband off. Foul shame it were
For me to suffer such contempt from thee.
Willing or not, forthwith thou must embark;
Thy prudent father yielded his consent;
Be thou persuaded rather than compelled.

RIVINE. I shall be neither; my deliverer comes!

Enter CONNAN. CONNAN. Unhand my sister! else --


DURSTAN. Thou guard'st thyself
By mixing with thy threats a name of safety.

CONNAN. My safety, Pict, depends not on thy will.
Behold my force, to thine superior far. --
[Calmar appears, with the warriors of Connan. But fair and equal, man to man,
I meet thee,
I use no vile deceitful arts like thee.
I take no base advantage of a foe. --

DURSTAN. Am I thy foe?


CONNAN. Have thou not wronged my friend?
And do thou ask if Connan be thy foe?

RIVINE. Alas, the friend of Connan lives no more!
Behold! --

CONNAN. It Is Ronan's sword; with life and this
At once the hero parted. Ah! my sister!
How came it hither?

RIVINE. Durstan!


CONNAN. Ha! the spoils
Of Ronan by his foe in triumph borne!
No tears I shed: red are thy drops, revenge!
Durstan, call up thy courage; rear thy crest,
And to bold defiance, boldly answer.
I charge thee first with treachery and falsehood,
Crimes that strike down the warrior's gallant plumes:
With murder next, for wretched Valma's death;
For Ronan last; for Ronan, basely slain;
By hands like thine, he could not else have fallen.
With mortal hate I call thee to the combat.

RIVINE. My Brother, hear me! Not by Durstan's hand,
Nor by the arm of man, did Ronan fall.
Far from the shore, amidst the stormy waves,
Amongst the cordage of a vessel wrecked
The sword was found. -- Forgiven be my wrongs,
And to his kingdom let the Pict return.

DURSTAN. Great is thy clemency! Permit the Pict,
Injured, defied, dishonored, to be gone. --
Is Durstan's name of such account in Elig?
Are these the terms on which he quits the field?
Connan, thy challenge and thy wrath I scorn;
Thy sister, as my queen, I justly claim:
If she is with held, I shall lay waste your Isles,
And to my kingdom's add one scepter more.

CONNAN. If she desires to pass her days with thee,
She is not worth the splinter of a spear.
But if her soul reveres her lover's shade,
And flies from thee to solitude and sorrow,
My sword from insult shall the mourner guard. --
Thy threats I laugh at; thou unwarlike king,
To boast of conquest and refuse the combat.
Will thou not fight, thou chief without a soul?
Then fly without delay. Now make thy choice;
Begone or draw thy sword!

DURSTAN. Vainglorious youth!
Thou fit companion of the boaster Ronan,
Whom I could wish this moment in thy place!
I Will seek the king. If he denies me justice,
Unworthy as thou art of Durstan's sword,
Expect me soon.

CONNAN. Thou will not come so soon
As Connan wishes. --

[ Exit Durstan and Picts. RIVINE. Why this strife for me?
Who should be shunned like the infectious blast,
Which, where it takes, destroys. Ronan is dead.
Let not the friend of Ronan fall for me.
I have a refuge sure. Behold yon cliff,
Whose summit, jutting over its wave-worn base,
Darkens the deep below.

CONNAN. Fly from despair!
And seek the shelter of thy brother's love. --
The friend of Ronan will protect Rivine.
If the pale ghost that dwells amidst the storm.
Retains the affections of its former state,
Over us the ghost of Ronan shall rejoice. --
To Elig's towers thou must not now return.
Come on; I Will lodge thee in a place of safety,
The cave of sad Orellan: now the tide,
Retiring, leaves a passage cross the bay. --

RIVINE. [ To Calmar. Go to the hall of Elig. Tell the maid
Omazia to give out that there I rest,
And watch as if she guarded my repose.

[Exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, a Cliff on the Seashore, with a Cave. RIVINE and ORELLAN. ORELLAN.
BEHOLD the habitation of Orellan!
For threescore years and ten this rock has been
My dewlling place; and here I sit in sorrow,
Silent and motionless from morn to eve;
'Till the sea-fowl, that skim along the shore,
Fearless alight, and, sitting at my feet,
Scream their wild notes, as if I was a stone
Or senseless trunk, that could not do them harm. --
It was not always thus; I was not born
To misery; nor in the wild woods bred
Of savage race; fair was my morn of youth!
With thy brave grandsire I was trained to arms,
His chosen warrior, and his trusted friend.
But love and jealousy surpised my soul,
Drove me from men, and blotted out my name.
This arm slew Namora.

RIVINE. Father, forgive
My importunity! Vouchsafe to tell
What I in part have heard.

ORELLAN. My story's old,
Thy sorrow recent: but to hear my woes
Will teach thee patience. Such as thou art now,
Or as thou wast, ever grief had made thee wan,
Namora was. Like thine, her beauty charmed
Contending princes; but the generous maid
Preferred to princes fond Orellan's love.
Daily we met in woods, in groves, in glades,
Remote and secret. One unhappy time,
Returning from the chase, I sought the grove.
Entering, I saw Namora; her white arms
Embraced a youth; her lips were joined to his.
My bow was in my hand; I bent it soon,
And pierced them with one arrow. Ere I reached
The spot on which they fell, Namora's eyes
Were closed for ever. The expiring youth
Was her brave brother, to his native shore
That day returned. His sister's steps he traced,
To perish in her arms. I kneeled me down,
And begged the warrior, if he yet had strength,
To give me death. He heard me not, he died,
And left me living. -- This bleak cave I chose,
My everlasting mansion. In those days
The hollow shore resounded with my cries.
Often the hunter hastened from the hill,
And often the mariner steered from the deep,
And wondered at me. Time, that rage subdued
To milder grief. My tears incessant flowed
Like waters from the rock. Here have I mourned
An age of man complete. Alike to me
Summer and winter, autumn an the spring,
And night and day the same. --

RIVINE. Thus would I wish
To waste my days, a spectacle of woe!
Without or change or interval. I feel
Within myself a source and spring of sorrow,
That never will cease to flow, 'till death shall stop it.
Surely the spirits of the dead delight
To be remembered, and lamented, father.

ORELLAN. Daughter, they do -- my own experience tells. --
Once every year, that day Namora died,
A wondrous vision comes. In the still air
(For not a breath then stirs the silent bay)
Are heard the saddest, yet the sweetest sounds,
That ever touched the ear or heart of man,
The melody of woe. -- Then from the skies
Descend the shadows of the murdered pair,
Pale as the colors of the lunar bow.
Hovering before the cavern's mouth they spread
Their arms; they fix on m^ their pitying eyes,
And, with a shriek, they vanish into air:
Does hoar tradition tell a tale like this?
Was ever mortal destiny like mine?

RIVINE. Could I but hope to see my love arise,
And look on me with pity; I would live
In the vast ocean on a rock alone.
But Ronan's injured ghost detests Rivine. --
In the dark world of spirits thou shall join
Thy dear Namora's shade; but far from mine
The angry spirit of my love will fly. --

ORELLAN. I have another charge besides thee, daughter!
Within my cave a wretched stranger lies,
Who tasted all the bitterness of death;
But scarce yet knows his wonderful escape.

RIVINE. Escape from what?


ORELLAN. From shipwreck in the storm
That raged last night upon the rocky shore.

RIVINE. From shipwreck! ha! Is he a man in years,
Or of the youthful time?

ORELLAN. In prime of youth,
And beautiful he seemed, though in the arms
Of death upon the naked beach he lay.
I found him there. Attentive I perceived
That the warm life was not wholly fled.
I called a shepherd swain to give me help,
Who from a neighboring hill surveyed the deep.
He came, and willing in his arms he bore
The youth insensible; he brought him hither.
Within he lies, stretched on the skins of deers;
A sleep profound has seized him; when he wakes
He will not know, if in a friendly place,
Or in the dwelling of his foes he lies. --
I Will go --

RIVINE. Not yet a while.


ORELLAN. Thy color shifts
From pale to red, from red to pale again.
What do thou hope or fear?

RIVINE. A strange event!
Yet, like the fate and fortune of my life,
Wild and incredible. Perhaps this youth
Saved from the wreck, and sleeping in thy cell,
Is Ronan.

ORELLAN. No; delusive are thy hopes;
The various vest and floating robe I know
Of Albion's warlike race. He wore not those.
His dress is splendid, bright with foreign gold,
And marks the chieftain of a distant land.

RIVINE. Enter, and if he sleeps, to me return,
I will behold and bless him where he lies;
Then from his presence fly, if it is Ronan.

ORELLAN. I hear a noise within; the stranger comes;
His steps sound on the rock.

RIVINE. Now, now my heart!
Thy moment this.
[Rivine retires to the side-s^^^^. [ The stranger from the inner part of the
cave sees Orellan.
STRANGER. Thou venerable man,
Preserver of my life! for so methinks
I ought to call thee: tell me on what shore
The waves have thrown me? For the place imports
Almost as much as life.

RIVINE. It Is he! It Is Ronan!


RONAN. Rivine's voice! I am where I would wish;
My love is here!

RIVINE. Thy love! approach me not!
Thou noble youth! nor call Rivine thine.

RONAN. Not call thee mine!


RIVINE. No, never, never more!
I am unworthy of thy least regard;
Unworthy of the air that Ronan breathes.
When thou shall know what cannot be concealed
Thou must abhor me.

RONAN. I abhor Rivine!
Ah! thou art changed indeed since I beheld thee!
Anguish gleams in thine eye, and wild despair
Contends with shame. -- Rivine, speak and save me
From horrible conjectures.

RIVINE. Spare a wretch,
Whose heart is breaking! Fain, fain would I speak,
And tell thee how Rivine was betrayed.

RONAN. Betrayed! to what betrayed?


RIVINE. Will not the rock
Fall down and cover with a heap my shame.
Follow me not! this hoary sire will tell
My crime; my misery cannot be told!

[Runs into the cave. RONAN. It must be so. Thou confident of guilt,
Perhaps the counselor!

ORELLAN. Young man! attend
To every circumstance of this misfortune,
And thou will pity her whom once thou lov'd'st.

RONAN. Tell me one circumstance, I ask no more;
Is she not wedded?

ORELLAN. Listen to my words,
And thou shall have an answer to thy question.

RONAN. I have no patience for a tedious tale;
Answer at once: is she not wedded, say?
Then I may hear thy story.

ORELLAN. It were better,
Better for thee, rash youth! to let me tell
How this disaster did overtake thy love. --

RONAN. Will thou not say what the disaster is?
How tedious, hard, and obstinate is age!

ORELLAN. Unless I should deceive thee to thy hurt,
I can no longer hide from thee the truth.

RONAN. Then she is wedded?


ORELLAN. Yes.


RONAN. Do thou say yes?


ORELLAN. Unwillingly I speak the painful truth:
My soul is grieved for thee.

RONAN. Thou art the cause
Of what I suffer. Thy officious hand
Saved me from death, to make me perish worse.
My latest thought when sinking in the storm
Was of Rivine; of her love, her truth,
Her grief eternal for her Ronan lost. --
And now I find her in another's arms;
Of me regardless, though my faithful heart,
Full of her image, for her sake despised
The beauteous queen of Erin's warlike land.

ORELLAN. Young man! thou wrong'st Rivine. --


RONAN. Would that thou
Who say I wrong her were a young man too,
And strong and valiant to defend her cause!
Let me behold the trait'ress, and confound
Her guilty soul. --

ORELLAN. Go, give thy passion way,
Pursue and seize her in thy frantic arms;
Then throw her headlong from the airy cliff!
I killed the maid I loved; I thought her false,
But she was truth itself.

RONAN. And wedded too?
But who is he that durst invade my right?
What is his name? She says she was betrayed.
Who of mankind is he?

ORELLAN. Her husband!


RONAN. Oh!


ORELLAN. The Pictish king.


RONAN. Durstan, my mortal foe!
The cursed oppressor of my native land!
From all mankind has she selected him,
Whom most my soul abhorred?

ORELLAN. She never chose:
She was betrayed, deluded, and compelled.
Thy servant Valma, gained by Durstan's gold,
Delivered to Rivine a false message;
Cold and contemptuous, full of slight excuse,
For breach of faith confessed, and worst of all
Fraught with the praises of the beauteous queen,
Whose love had made thee lord of Erin's land.

RONAN. Could she believe him?


ORELLAN The bold traitor swore,
That he was witness to the proud espousals.

RONAN. O! villain! villain! Did she credit this?


ORELLAN. How could she doubt it?


RONAN. Ha! did she not know me?
Did not each action of my life belie
The monstrous tale?

ORELLAN. Long before that, the Isles
Resounded with the fame of thy great acts
In Erin's wars performed; and rumor spread
Abroad the story of the grateful queen.

RONAN. Where was my friend?


ORELLAN. When Durstan came to Elig,
Connan was absent in the distant isles;
His faith to thee this day of danger proves.

RONAN. This day!


ORELLAN. The fraud of Durstan was detected,
And from presumption strong thy death believed;
Rivine, who till then concealed her anguish
And veiled with sickly smiles her broken heart,
Then owned her love and published her despair.
With threats the Pict requires his wedded wife:
Connan defies him, and demands the combat.

RONAN. I knew he would; my brave, my faithful friend!
But mine the cause, and mine shall be the combat.

ORELLAN. The tribes are up in arms; for strong the host
That haughty Durstan leads.

RONAN. I have no arms,
The deep has swallowed up my sword and shield.

ORELLAN. Here is a sword.


RONAN. A sword! It is my own.
Never more welcome to thy master's hand.
I Will trust thy temper tried. This on the shore
Did thou not find?

ORELLAN. Rivine brought it hither,
And bathed it with her tear. --

RONAN. Did she, Rivine?
Of her I must not think while Durstan lives;
Father, farewell. --

Enter RIVINE. RIVINE. Yet stay and hear me, Ronan.
Behold Rivine, prostrate at thy feet!
I know I never must behold thee more;
And from that certainty derive the boldness
To offer to thine ear my last request.
When I am dead, as I shall shortly be,
Think not too hardly of me. By the ghosts
And spirits of the air that wait for me,
I never ceased to love thee. My fond heart,
Even when I thought thee false, and strove to hate thee,
Even then my tortured heart was full of thee.
It Is this that sends me to an early grave;
I could not bear to be and not be thine. --
O Ronan! Ronan! when in dust I lie,
And thou art wedded to some lovely maid,
Worthy of thee, unlike the rash Rivine;
Then let thine anger cease! my fleeting ghost
For ever near thee shall some pleasure know.

RONAN. May Durstan's javelin nail me to the ground,
And may my dying eyes behold thee borne
Aboard his vessel, if I do not love thee!
Then of my pity judge. --

RIVINE. Thou giv'st too much.
First let the earth receive my lifeless clay,
Before thou pitiest me. My fate is fixed,
The place is chosen, where my tomb shall rise:
A little hillock in the narrow plain,
Beside the rock, fast by the water-fall,
Where in my better days we often have met.
^un not the place which thou wast wont to love:
But come alone, come when the mourner's voice
For me has ceased and silent is the vale;
Then if thy soul is willing to be sad,
Look on my grave.

RONAN. Thy grave! thou shall not die
My soul is in my voice; forgive thyself,
What Ronan has forgiven. Speak not of death,
Let me not hear thee utter such a sound,
Unless thou mean to send me to the field
Subdued by thee, disheartened and unmanned,
An easy prey to some inglorious arm,
The conquest of a coward. Do thou hear,
And not reply to this? No, not one word!
But sullen silence, and a down-cast eye.
Thy will shall be obeyed: when I am slain --
Within thy destined grave let me be laid,
If the stern umpire of thy fate and mine,
Permit so much and thou do not disdain
To rest beside the victim of thy pride. --

RIVINE. To what a narrow ridge thou driv'st Rivine!
A dreadful precipice on either hand!
And I can only choose which way to fall.
I Have wronged thee much, let me not wrong thee mo^^
Nor come a dark eclipse across thy fame.
Go where thy valor bids; go in full strength
And confidence; let not a fear for me,
Unnerve thy mighty arm. I will endure
The load of life: embrace all shame and sorrow;
Rather than thou should bow thy noble head,
Beneath the sword of an insulting foe. --

RONAN. Now I am strong!


ORELLAN. A nimble foot descends
The winding path. --

RIVINE. It Is Calmar's airy gait.


Enter CALMAR. CALMAR. [ sess Ronan.] come in haste to warn --


RONAN. Be not afraid!
Believe thine eyes; the friend of Connan live.

CALMAR. Friend of my master's soul, for whom he mourns,
^ prince of Morven! like the morning beam
Thou come to chase the heavy night of woe
That darkens Connan; hasten to his aid,
Many the foes whom he for thee defies.

RONAN. Where is thy lord?


CALMAR. On the wood-skirted lawn
Beyond the hill of pines his warriors stand;
^he Pictish army covers all the shore. --
^aw our aged king tear his gray locks,
(...) he implored them to forbear the fight. --

RONAN. Shame to my soul! why do I tarry here?
Farewell! farewell! Rivine!

[Exit.] RIVINE. To the field,
Rejoicing in his might the hero goes,
And so he should; from me he parted well. --
I see, I see the path that I must follow,
Bright as the starry way that shines above,
When the blue frost is beautiful in Heaven.
Thy tidings, Calmar?

CALMAR. Your retreat is known.


RIVINE. To Durstan?


CALMAR. No, but to your troubled sire,
Who partial to the Pict his daughter blames.
Connan entreats you to forsake this place,
And seek the shelter of the inland vale.
I am your guide and guard.

RIVINE. I Will leave this place,
And thou shall be my guide. Father, farewell!
[ To Orellan.] The joy that dwells with tender grief be thine,
To me alas! denied. -- No pleasant ray
Can ever reach the dark abode of shame.
One issue yet is left. --

ORELLAN. I read thy thoughts,
Had thou been silent I had known thy purpose.
Thy port exalted, thine enlightened eye,
Denote the pitch of thy determined mind;
The storm-toss'd vessel seeks a shore unknown.
I blame thee not, O! daughter of affliction.
Strange is thy destiny! thyself alone
Can be thy counselor. --

RIVINE. Affliction's friend!
Devoted vassal of eternal sorrow,
Thanks for thy gentle sympathy, if thou
Should give a tear to me or my sad story,
Namora's memory would not be wronged.

ORELLAN. [ Exit Rivine and Calmar.] Bright star! that hastes to set. O child
of youth,
Like the green oak, before its head is bare,
Untimely torn from some high mountain's brow.
So shall thou fall, but not without thy praise.
This cave, a while the mansion of thy woes,
Those hoary cliffs, and yon resounding bay,
Shall often echo thy lamented name.
My voice shall pierce the stillness of the morning,
And evening's milder calm, bewailing thee.
Namora's gentle shade will love the song
That joins her sister-memory to thine. --

END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, a Thick Wood. Enter KATHUL and CONNAN. CONNAN. MY friend is dead. But
friendship never dies.
Remember, Sir, how Ronan fought for me.
The youth were met in the sequestered vale,
And held a feast of joy. The bards arose,
And sung heroic deeds achieved of old.
Roused with the song the chiefs began to boast
Their own exploits in arms. Above the rest
Proud Armor vaunted, trusting in his strength;
Truth he regarded not; he told how once,
In Ardven's vale he met the blue-ey'd maid,
Old Alpine's daughter; Connan was her guard,
Who shunned the combat, and resigned the maid.
Silent and pale my sad companions heard;
But from the banquet generous Ronan rose,
And dared the giant to maintain his words,
By combat on the plain. Furious they met,
Like two strong bulls contending for the herd;
They fought from midday 'till the setting sun
Gilded the vale; then Ronan's arm prevailed,
And Armor bit the ground. Fast by the lake,
Marked with a stone, is seen his lengthened grave;
Eternal monument of Ronan's faith
And of his glory; but of shame to me,
If ever my soul forgets the hero's love.

KATHUL. Ha! who comes yonder rushing from the wood,
Swift as the roe? see at one bound he leaps
From bank to bank the brook. Connan, beware!
His ready weapon glitters in his hand.

CONNAN. Spirits of earth and air! it is Ronan's form!
Thus have I seen him hasten to the field,
Thus spring exulting when the foe drew near.

KATHUL. Often have I heard the voice of mournful ghosts,
Borne on the wings of the careering winds,
But never 'till now beheld -- It stops and glares
With angry eyes on me. Speak thou, my son!
For ye were one.

Enter RONAN. CONNAN. O spirit of my friend!
Come thou to urge thy Connan to revenge?

RONAN. I am no spirit: come, my faithful friend,
And in my arms feel that thy Ronan lives.
Now art thou satisfied? --
[They embrace.]
CONNAN. I am transported!
Ronan to life restored and at my side,
When in despair against his foes I armed!
I have a thousand questions, but not now.
I must be sudden and abrupt, my friend!
The times are so. -- Sad tidings thou must hear.
But let resentment chase thy grief away:
The salve of sorrow is a brave revenge.

RONAN. I come to seek revenge; my wrongs I know,
For I have seen Rivine. Where is Durstan?
I hoped to meet him in the battle's front;
But peace is here.

KATHUL. No, prince of Morven, no!
Peace dwells not here. Between the swords I came
Of raging warriors and obtained a truce
Until tomorrow's dawn. Although my hope
Of reconcilement at thy presence fades,
My troubled soul rejoices in thy safety.
Thy timeless death I mourned.

RONAN. King of the isles!
Why did thou give thy daughter to the Pict?

KATHUL. Ronan, I was deceived. I hold thee dear,
And wish -- But nothing can recall the past. --

RONAN. Recall the past!


CONNAN. Ronan!


RONAN. Be not alarmed!
O! King! thou art the father of my friend,
The father of my loved my lost Rivine.
And that restrains my tongue. Yet I must say,
Had thou been constant to thy old allies,
Had thou been faithful, and preserved my bride,
This day had crowned thy hoary head with joy.
Impatient to behold my love, I failed
And left behind the Scandinavian fleet
Of warriors full. With these lerne's sons
And Erin's chiefs for injured Albion arm.
Selma shall rise again.

KATHUL. May Selma rise,
And Albion's honored race for ever reign.
Yet hear me Ronan! from my heart I speak;
Thou bear a noble mind; thy fame is great
For justice as for valor; with the Pict
Thou have a rightful quarrel; but respect
This hospitable shore; contend not here,
Nor fight with Durstan for his wedded wife.

RONAN. Not fight with Durstan! then let Durstan fly
And I shall follow, to whatever shore
He takes his flight.

KATHUL. I understand thee well. --
My son do thou regard thy sister's fame!
(...) fairer aspect much her conduct wore,
When thy loved friend was numbered with the dead,
Than now, when he in arms her husband braves. --
I go to meet the ancients of the land,
The hoary counselors, who can compare
The present trouble with the times of old,
And call experience to vouch their counsel.
Under the spreading beech that shades the brook
They sit and ruminate.

[Exit. RONAN. Their thoughts I know.
Cold are the counsels of inactive age,
Patient of injury, averse to arms.
I long for vengeance and my soul is sick
Of this delay. But why should I defer
My just revenge? no truce was made for me;
I Will send him a defiance. --

CONNAN. Not to day,
Nor yet to morrow do I wish the Pict
By Ronan's hand to fall. --

RONAN. If he should fall
By any other hand, I Am not revenged.
We Are interrupted. Ha! what man is that,
Who steps so haughtily before the rest?

CONNAN. It is the Pict. --


RONAN. I thought so.


CONNAN. Yet be calm!
Your eyes flash fire; your heart beats in your breast
As it would burst your bosom.

RONAN. Mark me, Connan!
This hour let my own spirit guide itself.
He knows me not. Beware of naming me,
I Will take my time to speak.
[Walks aside.]
Enter DURSTAN attended. DURSTAN. I sought the king --
But thou, who have usurped thy father's power,
May in his absence answer. --

CONNAN. What Is thy question?


DURSTAN. A plain one, whither was the vessel bound,
That left the shore just now with crowded sails?

CONNAN. I know not what she is, nor whither bound.
Why do thou ask of me?

DURSTAN. I do suspect,
She is dispatched to summon to your aid,
The warriors of the isles.

CONNAN. Perhaps she is;
Credit thy worst suspicion; break the truce
And I will thank thee. I desired no truce
And never will have cordial peace with thee.

DURSTAN. My faith, young man, is plighted to thy father,
And he shall own, to vindicate my fame,
That Durstan sought not to lay waste his isles,
Nor stay his people. --

CONNAN. If thou art sincere,
And tender of the lives of blameless men,
With me decide the quarrel; should I fall,
Rivine's dowry is a kingdom then.

DURSTAN. Not that I fear thine arm, do I decline
To answer thy proud challenge; but thou art
The brother of Rivine.

RONAN. Wise thy words,
And just the reason thou assign'st, O! King!
But I am not the brother of Rivine;
And I accuse thee; I defy thee too!

DURSTAN. Thou! who art thou!


RONAN. Not less in blood and birth
Than Durstan is; of royal lineage born,
To Ronan near allied. Ha! do thou start
And tremble, Pict, at injured Ronan's name?

DURSTAN. Boaster, I know no fear; but thee I scorn.
Who vaunts his lineage and conceals his name,
Is of his race the stain.

RONAN. Soon shall thou know,
Perhaps, somewhat too soon, the name I bear;
But, first, I Will tell thee thy detested deeds,
And gall, if possible, thine iron heart. --
Unlike a prince, a warrior and a man,
Meanly thou did seduce a servile soul
To wrong his master's honor and his love;
And by the blackest artifice betrayed
To endless misery, a royal fair,
Who dies of grief and hate to the assassin!
And still thou do presume --

DURSTAN. Away! begone!


RONAN. I will not; nor shall thou, from Ronan go. --


DURSTAN. Thou, Ronan!


RONAN. I! now, robber, do thou tremble?
Unsheath thy sword! Each moment seems an age
'Till I avenge on thee my mighty wrongs,
And give thy spirit to the winds of heaven.

DURSTAN. So confident! Behold this sword I draw,
It Is stained with blood of Albion's vanquished kings,
To Ronan near allied: I lift it now
To send thee to thy fathers. --

RONAN. Take my answer. --

[They engage.
FIRST PICT. [ Interposing. Let kings with kings contend and subjects meet
A subject's arm. --

CONNAN. If thou love honor, Pict,
Or fear eternal shame, command these men,
Thy subjects, to retire. --

FIRST PICT. Should he command,
It is our duty now to disobey.

RONAN. Let us assail them all!


CONNAN. [ Advancing. Ronan, my friend!
Step not before me; let me guard thy side. --

Enter KATHUL, and EURAN. [Kathul, coming between their swords.] KATHUL. My
guests, forbear! and thou rebellious boy,
Put up thy sword, or shed thy father's blood!

RONAN. Why do thou guard my foes, King of the isles!
What is thine aim? This is no sudden strife,
Sprung from a light and accidental cause;
It is a mortal quarrel founded deep
On wrongs not to be borne. Let honored age
Avoid the sight of blood. --

KATHUL. Hear me, rash youth!
My aim is to be just, and to prevent
A combat, whose event must fatal prove
To my allies, my children and my fame.
Do thou hereafter, on some distant shore,
Pursue thy quarrel with the Pictish king,
And bear the cause of Albion on thy sword.
Now I forbid the war and will propound
Impartial terms of peace. He who believes
His cause is just, will readily assent.

DURSTAN. Although with us the odds of combat lie,
Not less in valor, and in number more;
If full assurance that my cause is good
Implies assent, on mine thou may depend.

RONAN. May my sword shiver, when it strikes thy helm,
If it does not defend the better cause.

KATHUL. Thy soul is like the torrent of thy hills!
O! chief of desert Morven! Fierce thy words,
But confident and suited to my purpose.
Behold where yonder white and ragged cliff
Points the long ridge and terminates the bay;
There, in a cave, the sea-mark of the main,
A man unlike the rest of mortals dwells!
Once great in arms, abreast of mighty chiess,
The brave Orellan trod the paths of Fame:
But strange misfortune crossed the warrior's way.
In early youth he killed the fair he loved,
Then left mankind, to live alone with sorrow!
Bare is his bosom to the howling winds,
And wet his hoary head, with foam that flies
From the resounding surges of the main;
The coot, the cormorant are his companions.
Sometimes, he says, his cries bring from her cloud
The pallid image of the murdered maid!

RONAN. I know the sad Orellan. To what end
Do thou describe to us the man of sorrow? --

KATHUL. He is the judge who cannot be unjust;
For his pure mind no partial passion knows:
The sole affection of his breast is pity;
The man of sorrow feels for human woes!
To him submit the cause of doubtful strife,
And let his voice determine of Rivine.

RONAN. Is this thy counsel, king? and do thou think
That it will be regarded? Shall Rivine,
Like flocks or herds in contest, be adjudged?
No. Whilst I live, Rivine shall be free;
Rivine shall determine of herself.
She has determined never to behold
The face of Durstan and I will defend
The resolution which my soul approvies

DURSTAN. Art thou the judge?


RONAN. I am, and thou shall find so;
Follow my steps. In such a strife as this
The valiant know no umpire but the sword --

[Exit. [Kathul stops Connan.] KATHUL. By all the reverence thou owe thy
father
And by the love thou bear thy native land,
Stay 'till thou hear'st the Pict --

[ While Kathul speaks, Euran whispers Durstan. CONNAN. What can he say?
Who still, though often defied, declines the combat.

DURSTAN. Kathul, I speak to thee. In just respect
To thy fair conduct and thy chosen judge,
To his decision, conscious of my right,
I would submit my cause. But since the pride
Of haughty Ronan to the sword appeals,
I answer him -- His challenge I accept;
And will to morrow, with the rising sun,
Meet him in arms. Here, where we first encountered.
It Is thine, O King! to regulate the combat. --

KATHUL. Durstan, I disapprove --


DURSTAN. I know thou do;
But thou can not prevent. It must be so:
King of the isles, farewell!

KATHUL. Tarry a while;
Enter my hall, and of the feast partake.
The hall of Semo shines with many fires.

DURSTAN. Fast by my ships, upon the sandy shore,
I Will pass the night. The feast of foes I shun. --
Often, when the circling shell awakes the soul,
Like flints the words of enemies strike fire.
Forth comes the hasty steel. Whoever prevails
A doubtful fame th'inglorious strife attends.
[Going.
KATHUL. Let me conduct thy footsteps to the shore,
And show our people that in peace we part. --

[ Exeunt all but Connan. CONNAN. It Is not what I desired -- 'Twas my prime wish
To meet the Pict and to revenge my friend.
Yonder he comes impatient --

Enter RONAN. RONAN. Ha! they are gone!
What said the Pict?

CONNAN. Thy challenge he accepted.


RONAN. Did he?


CONNAN. He did; tomorrow is the time,
And this the appointed place.

RONAN. Why not today?


CONNAN. It is too late, sunk in the western wave,
The sun but half his glorious circle shows,
Soon will the splendour of his path be dim,
And his pale sister rule the silent world.

RONAN. O, thou fair light! whose beams rejoice the heart
Of him whose thoughts are open as his deeds!
In thy dark chamber do not tarry long:
But, with unwonted speed, thy course pursue,
Till the gray eastern cloud grows red again,
Before thy flaming steps. --

CONNAN. My warriors wait.
Some care the business of tomorrow claims;
An equal number drawn from either host
Must guard the lists! Oh! were the combat mine;
My dearest friend once for his Connan fought --

RONAN. When Connan was not there.


CONNAN. Go to the hall.


RONAN. Where is Rivine?


CONNAN. To some place remote,
^ar in the forest, Calmar has conveyed her.
Uncertain is the spot, and vain it were
To seek her at this hour. Turn to the hall,
And for my sake speak gently to my father.

[ Exit Connan. RONAN. I wish I could avoid the sight of him
And every person. When the heart is full
Of its own swelling thoughts, society
Is molestation. Solitude is best.
Ye woods and groves! where I was wont to roam
With her I loved; I left you in your glory!
Fair as the grove of June I left my love!
Not long my absence, yet the leaf is fallen.
Trees of the forest! you shall hear again
The voice of spring and cloth yourselves anew
In the green robe you lost -- But never more
Shall bud or blossom -- Ha! what new event
Brings this keen messenger.

Enter EURAN hastily. EURAN. O prince of Morven!
Thy haughty courage and thy upright heart
Expose thee to the snafts of secret fraud
Which Durstan aims.

RONAN. At me!


EURAN. Of that be judge.
Whilst every eye, secure of peace, is closed,
Amidst the darkness of the night he means
To bear Rivine from her father's house,
And sail ever morning rise.

RONAN. Ha! I believe it.
This is the secret which explains his conduct.
Has he abettors in the house of Kathul,
Or does the robber trust in force alone?

EURAN. He trusts in me.


RONAN. In thee!


EURAN, I plant the watch
Which guards the hall of Kathul; that he knows,
And with immense rewards assailed my faith.
I seemed to yield; and thus the plan is laid:
The youth that watch tonight, by me assured
That they obey in mine their king's command,
Seize the princess. One bold and faithful Pict
Waits near the northern gate to give the word,
And lead them safely through the Pictish host:
That office Durstan chose.

RONAN. Durstan!


EURAN. Himself!
Wrapped in the shades of night, alone in arms. --

RONAN. I have my soul's desire! ghost of my king!
Ghosts of my kinsmen, slain that evil day
When Albion fought without her Ronan's arm.
Leave the dark mountains where you mourn your fate
Not yet revenged and see me meet your foe!
Euran! whatever the lavish Pict has promised
To tempt thee to betray thy master's house,
Tenfold I Will give thee to preserve thy faith.
But let no man, not Kathul, Connan know;
The wrong is mine, and vengeance is my right. --
The northern gate! what is the appointed time
Of his approach?

EURAN. The time that is most remote
From the sun's rising or his setting beams,
When over the castle, red Tonthena burns. --
Shall I thy steps attend?

RONAN. Not for the world!
The moon, the stars, the spirits of the night,
They only shall behold the rough encounter.

[ Exit Ronan. EURAN. There goes the chief whose arm in battle rules,
Whose name alone brings nations to the field.
Yet, simple as the fry, he takes the bait:
Beyond my hopes this last device succeeds.
One night of care, then I shall shake no more.

[Exit. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, a Wood. Enter RONAN. RONAN. TWICE have I made the circuit of the wood,
To waste the weary interval; and now
Right over the castle red Tonthena burns.
Ye fleecy clouds that sail along the sky,
Come not too near the moon, to spread a veil
Though transient over her face. Lift up your heads,
Ye stars of heaven! and light the listed field.
Methinks I see the figure of a man
Moving this way; within the shade he keeps,
A little onward, and the shade will fail.
It Is he; his armor shines, he draws his sword,
And resolute advances. Here I Will stand
'Till he comes nearer; then I spring upon him.
Now robber, villain, Durstan!
[Runs to the side-scene.
Enter CONNAN. CONNAN. Ronan, stay
Thy furious arm, it is Connan bids thee stay.

RONAN. Connan, what strange encounter!


CONNAN. Strange it is,
And fatal might have been; but let us trace
This error to its source. You called me Durstan,
When rushing on my shield: if I had spoken,
I should have called thee by no other name.

RONAN. Did thou come hither too, to meet the Pict?


CONNAN. I came to meet the Pict. Now answer me,
Who gave the information of his purpose?

RONAN. Euran.


CONNAN. The traitor! it is as I suspected.
That villain is confederate with Durstan,
To you, to me, he told the self-same tale,
And sent us forth, to shock, and sink together,
Like vessels in a storm.

RONAN. It must be so;
The circumstances banish every doubt.
This is another plot of that dark brain
Whose cruel guile at first o'erthrew my love.
Am I a beast of chase, a harmless deer,
For whom the hunter plants his mortal toils,
Himself secure and safe?

CONNAN. One silent shaft,
Winged like the bird of night, has over us slown.
Another's on the string -- if right I judge,
Durstan is near and many are our foes.

RONAN. Would I could see them.


CONNAN. We may feel them first,
If on this spot unguarded you remain.

RONAN. Shall they not feel us too?


CONNAN. My friend, be calm.
Not far from hence, a little to the left,
There is a dell, whose sloping sides are rough
With thick-grown hazel. -- In that place obscure
The best and bravest of my warriors lie.
Mistrustful of the Pict, I placed them there.
Now let us join them and explore with steel
Each angle of the wood.

RONAN. Prince of the people!
Valor and wisdom hand in hand advance,
When thou do guide the war -- let us divide
Thy band and, parting, sooner sweep the vale. --

[Exeunt. Enter RIVINE and CALMAR. RIVINE. Did thou not hear a voice?


CALMAR. It was the wind
^f midnight in the trees and hollow rocks.
This is no place of safety.

RIVINE. Yes -- it is
^ place of safety, and of rest for me.
Calmar, begone, and leave me to myself.
Why stand'st thou motionless? Do thou not hear?
I bad thee leave me.

CALMAR. Oh! I heard too well!
I have observed the tossing of your mind
Ever since we parted from Orellan's cave.
I led you to the forest dark and wild,
Full of sequestered and secure retreats:
But you disliked each one, and roam'd about,
'Till dewy night descended on your head.
Then all at once, with a determined tone,
You bad me follow you; and here you are
Between the towers of Elig and the shore.
What sort of rest, Forlorn! --

RIVINE. Do thou presume
On my distress? and am I fallen so low
That thou controul'st me. Go --

CALMAR. I must obey --
But full of sorrow is the soul of Calmar. --
[going
RIVINE. Farewell! true-hearted Calmar! But thy truth
And loving service are intruders here,
The part I Have taken I must act alone.

CALMAR. I fear her much. I Will hasten to the hall,
And bring her brother or her father hither.
[aside.
[Exit. RIVINE. It is but weakness, when on death resolved,
Fendly to seek for easy ways to die.
Yet it is nature. Thrice I lifted up
The steel against my life, and thrice let fall
Mine arm, afraid to strike the fatal blow.
I see the oak beside the froth-clad pool,
Where, in old time, as I have often heard,
A woman desperate, a wretch like me,
Ended her woes; her woes were not like mine.
I love thee, Ronan! love thee to excess,
Nor am I less beloved. Who hears me now?
Silence, and night, and death, dumb as you are,
I will not utter more. Ronan will know
When he beholds me floating on the stream,
His heart will tell him why Rivine died. --

[Running off. Enter DURSTAN and EURAN. DURSTAN. Stop!


RIVINE. Ah!


DURSTAN. Again you are found. I Will hold thee now,
Outrageous woman.

RIVINE. Durstan, from thy mouth
Reproaches please me best. Thou have o'erheard
A portion of my words and needs must know
I am above thy threats, beyond the reach,
The aim of human power.

DURSTAN. That shall be tried.
I Will bear thee hence, confine and watch thee close,
Lest thy wild frenzy work thine own perdition.
Thy shattered judgment shall have time to join,
And to unite again. Then thou will bless
Thy husband's lenity, which could forgive
Offenses gross as thine -- This is the path
That thou must walk in.

RIVINE. Never will I walk
In the same path with thee.

DURSTAN. Thou have no choice.
I have a right to rule thee -- and the power
Is in my hands. I Will use it.

RIVINE. Right! what right,
Deceiver and betrayer of my soul,
Have thou? But it were madness, I confess,
With thee to argue. For thy heart obdured
Admits no plea of reason or of nature. --
But Durstan this at least may comprehend,
I am resolved, immutable, to die.
And who can hinder me? Aboard thy fleet,
Amidst thy warriors, in the field, the hall,
In the dark dungeon or the vaulted cell,
Alike my soul is free to take its flight.
No chains, no fetters, can the spirit bind;
Which makes each instrument of opposition
The weapon of its will. Art thou convinced?
Or would thou have me call those horrors forth
Which here inhabit and to thy confusion
Blazon and vindicate my just despair?
Tell thee, if words can tell --

DURSTAN. It Is loss of time
To listen to thy words --
[ Lays bold of Rivine.
RIVINE. Is there no help? what will my brother think,
And Ronan, when they hear I am with Durstan?
Tear me in pieces. --
[Struggling.
[Ronan behind the scenes.] RONAN. Villain, quit thy prey,
And guard thyself. --

DURSTAN. Euran, bring up my men:
I Will stop his course. --

[ Exit Euran. [Durstan holding Rivine with one hand, and drawing his sword
with the other.] Enter RONAN. DURSTAN. Halt. If thou do advance
One step, Rivine on the motion dies.

RONAN. Inhuman murderer! withdraw thine arm
And drop thy point. Thou see I do not stir.

DURSTAN. Keep farther off; bend not thy body forward,
As if preparing to spring in upon me,
And I will talk with thee. What would thou have?
Why come thou with thy weapon ruffian like,
To rob a husband of his wedded wife?
Is she not mine?

RONAN. No, traitor! robber, no!
Fraud is the sole foundation of thy right,
And therefore thou have none. If thou dare trust
Thy valor, or thy cause, let go her arm,
And in her presence with thy sword defend
Thy title like a man. Ha! do thou smile
And mock at me? Thou coward! thou assasim!
Basest of men! less valiant than the deer
That graze the hills. They for their mates will bleed
And in their sight are bold.

DURSTAN. Rage on, rail on,
Thy ineffectual passion I enjoy. --
Our nations, Ronan, ever have been foes.
In enmity our fathers lived and died,
And we were born and nursed in mortal hate
Hereditary, never to be appeased. --
To fill the measure up -- Thou wast my rival,
I triumphed over thee, and I triumph now.
Behold this woman here! is she not fair?
Though frowardness has somewhat marred her beauty.
Thou doat'st upon her, and she loves thee too.
But I --

RONAN. Insulting villain! --


DURSTAN. If thou lift'st
Thine arm, she dies.

RIVINE. Advance and let me die,
For I have lived too long. -- Ah! do thou shrink,
Lean on thy sword and gnaw thy quivering lip?
More tender of my life than of my fame
Or peace of mind. Thou but prolong'st the term
Of shame and anguish. Know I was resolved
(Though I dissembled to appease thee, Ronan)
Before this dreadful parley, not to live.
That Durstan knows full well.

DURSTAN. I know not that.
I know the nature of a woman's mind,
Direct in passion for a moment only,
And shifting like a whirlwind as it flies
To every point of heaven --

RIVINE. Thou speak the truth.
I change my purpose now. And be assured
If I escape from thee, I shall return
To him, to Ronan, to the rightful lord
Of me and my affections. Do not risk
By frivolous delay thy dear revenge:
Were thou stuck round with eyes on every side,
And hung with hands to wield a thousand swords,
Yet thou might be surpised: strike, while thou can
And disappoint thy rival. --

DURSTAN. Though indeed,
I seldom do believe what women say,
Yet, from my soul, I do believe thee now. --
This rage of death, this fury, this despair
Are but the smoke and vapor of that fire,
That amorous fire which in your bosom burns.
Give it the air of hope.

RONAN. Curse on thy tongue:
What do thou mean in such discourse as this,
Self-loving Durstan, to consume the time?
Thou can not escape from hence. Connan is near,
With all the youth of Elig at his side.
Ever he arrives, once more I offer thee
The equal combat. If thou doubt'st thine arm
Commit Rivine to her father's care.

DURSTAN. Commit Rivine to her father's care,
To Ronan's care, to her dear lover's care!
He will be tender of her and perhaps
May reconcile her to the love of life.
[Looking to the side scene.] Now mighty warrior, of thy valor vain,
And trusting for success to force alone,
I have amused thee, till the hour is past.
The moment of equality between us:
For though I deem mine arm as strong as thine,
Chance might have thrown the advantage on thy side.
Behold --

RIVINE. Ha! Euran with the Picts returns.
Now let the spirit of her race inspire,
In this extreme, the daughter of the Isles.
O prince of Morven! guard thy noble life.
From shame, from Durstan, this shall save Rivine.
[Stabs herself.
RONAN. O dreadful act!
[ To Durstan.] On thee, thou wretch accursed!
Auther of all our woes, I Will be revenged
[They fight, and are both wounded.] This to thy heart, and this -- down to the
ground.
[ As Durstan falls, Euran enters with the Picts, and receives him in his
arms.]
DURSTAN. ^hou have it too. I leave thee to enjoy
^hy conquest and thy love.

FIRST PICT. Hence; Connan comes.


[They bear him off.] RONAN. ^^'s dead -- Dishonor rest upon his name,
^y love! my love! -- How could thou? -- But it is done. --
shall not long survive thee, that is my comfort. --

RIVINE. ^hat's the torture which I cannot bear,
^as prepared for death, but not for thine.
(...) me there was no refuge but the tomb:
(...) thee I could not, nor without thee, live.

RONAN. ^o not speak so tenderly, nor look
(...) such heart-piercing eyes.

RIVINE. I had one hope
On which I leaned, now I am all despair.
I thought (when I was dead) that from the cloud
Of grief, my hero would break forth again:
And run his course of glory and of fame. --
But thou art snatched away, I have undone thee,
Blasted thy youth, cut short thy noble life,
This is the fruit that thou have gathered, Ronan!
The only fruit of cursed Rivine's love.

RONAN. O! I could speak such things, but not to thee,
Whose generous heart, regardless of thyself,
Amidst despair and death for Ronan mourns. --
It Is not thy fault. Fortune has crossed our love,
But I would rather be what now I am,
Than love thee less, or yet be less beloved.

RIVINE. Beloved thou art. I die, give me thy hand. --

RONAN. My heart my soul are thine. --


RIVINE. O! best of men!
And best beloved! farewell, farewell for ever!
[Dies.]
RONAN. Flow fast my blood -- why do thou linger, death?
My heart is torn with agonizing thoughts.
O! memory would I could fly from thee!
And give my moments to a softer sorrow. --
Caught in an eddy, up and down the stream
I drive and wheeling to one point return.
That monster there! that villain! land of ghosts!
Shall I forget it there?
[Dies.]
Enter CALMAR hastily. CALMAR. Alas! my lord!
Too true the traitor's words.

Enter CONNAN with his warriors. CONNAN. Oh! Ronan! Ronan!
O! my ill-fated sister! love of thee
Brought down the towering eagle of the war,
From his high rock of fame. Let me not blame,
Pity forbid that I should blame the dust
Of poor Rivine -- Bear the bodies hence,
Let not old Kathul see his daughter's blood: --
I left him standing by the corse of Euran.
Overwhelmed and dumb with grief. --

Enter KATHUL. KATHUL. I am the cause
Of all that has befallen. Thy father's steps
Turn to his hall no more: deaf is mine ear
For ever to the voice of youth and joy.
Orellan's lonely cave shall hide my grief.
There we will dwell together and decay
Like two old trees, whose roots hang uppermost
On some bare mountain's side, from which each storm
Wastes a portion of the mouldering soil
'Till down they fall.

CONNAN. Do not indulge
Such melancholy thoughts.

KATHUL. I am resolved:
To thee, my son, the scepter I resign;
I trust 'twill prosper in thy steadfast hand.
Thou will not listen to the tale of lies,
Nor in rash mood forsake thine ancient friends.
Oh! friend of Ronan! be the peoples friend.
Still let thy open gate receive the stranger,
Who from the hill or from the ship descends,
So shall thy name like grateful odor spread
From thy own dwelling to far distant lands.
I have no other wish. My son farewell!

[ Exit Kathul. CONNAN. To morrow we a monument shall raise
To mark the place where mighty Ronan rests
With fair Rivine, in the house of death.
If right my soul forebodes they shall not lie
In dark oblivion; on their buried woes
The light refulgent of the song shall rise
And brighten the sad tale to future times.
The brave, the fair shall give the pleasing tear
Of nature, partial to the woes of love.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mrs. ABINGTON.
[Enters in a Hurry.] FORGIVE my coming thus, our griefs to utter --
I Am such a figure! -- and in such a flutter --
So circumstanc'd, in such an awkward way,
I know not what to do, or what to say.
Our bard, a strange unfashionable creature,
As obstinate, as savage in his nature,
Will have no Epilogue! -- I told the brute --
If Sir, these trifles don't your genius suit;
We have a working Prologue-smith, within,
Will strike one off, as if it were a pin.
Nay, Epilogues are Pins, -- whose points, well-plac'd,
Will trick your Muse out, in the tip-top taste!
(...) Pins, madam! (frowned the Bard) the Greeks used none,
(Then mutt'ring Greek -- something like this, -- wenton)
Pinnos, painton, patcheros, non Graeco Modon."
coax'd, he swore -- "That tie him to a stake,
He Would suffer all for Decency's fair sake;
No Bribery should make him change his plan."
^^ere's an odd mortal. Match him if you can.
^h, sir! (said I) -- your reasoning is not deep,
(...) when at Tragedies spectators weep,
They often, like children, cry thems elves asleep.
(...) if no jogging Epilogue you write,
(...) Box, and Gallery, may sleep all night:
"Like harmless infants mourn themselves asleep. ALEX.
"Better (he swore) -- a nap should overtake ye,
"Than Folly should to Folly's pranks awake ye;
"Rakes are more harmless nodding upon benches,
"Than ogling to ensnare poor simple wenches;
"And simple girls had better close their eyes,
"Than send 'em gadding after butterslies.
"Nay, should a statesman make a box his nest;
"Who, that his country loves, would break his rest?
"Let come what may, I will not make 'em laugh,
"Take for an Epilogue -- This Epitaph.
"For as my lovers lives, I would not save,
"No poisonous weeds shall root upon their grave."
It Is thus these pedant Greek-read poets vapor --
Is it your pleasure I should read the paper?
Here, in the arms of death, a matchless pair,
A young-lov'd hero, and beloved fair,
Now find repose. -- Their virtues tempest-tost,
Sea-sick, and weary, reach the wished for coast.
Whatever mortal to this spot is brought,
O may the living, by the dead be taught!
May here Ambition learn to clip her wing,
And Jealousy to blunt her deadly sting;
Then shall the Poet every with obtain,
Nor Roman and Rivine die in vain.


