HARVEST-HOME. A COMIC OPERA, IN TWO ACTS. AS PERFORMED, WITH UNIVERSAL
APPLAUSE, AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN THE HAY-MARKET. BY MR. DIBDIN.

LONDON: Printed for HARRISON and Co. No 18, Paternoster-Row. M DCC LXXXVII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Glanville Mr. MEADOWS. Scandaroon Mr. USHER. Muzzy Mr. MATHEWS. Trim Mr.
CHAPMAN. Congo Mr. JOHNSON. Pickle Young SESTINI.
Signora Estella Mrs. POUSSIN. Cleora Mrs. BANNISTER. Goody Muzzy Mrs. EDWARDS.
Unah Miss GEORGE.
HARVEST-HOME. A COMIC OPERA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Lawn pretty far back, terminating with a Country-seat; on one Side,
the Entrance to Muzzy's House; and on the other, an Avenue of large Trees. --
All the Spaces are intersected with Cornfieldsd.
Enter Muzzy; Goody Muzzy following. Goody. JOHN Muzzy! -- John Muzzy! -- I
tell thee, the poor thing sha'n't be imposed upon! -- She is friendless, and
helpless; and, what is worse than all, lovesick. -- Ah! I have been lovesick,
myself, before now! -- You know she was left by her lover, Patrick O'Liffy,
last hay-time; and if it had not been for me, and my good Lady Signora Estella,
Heaven knows what would have become of her! -- Lord, Lord, how I do love to
hear her chaunt her wild Irish notes! and then her comical brogue --


Muz. Have done? -- Why, what harm do I intend to do the wench! I like her
Lango-lee's, and her Gramacree's, and her Lilly Lilly Loo's, as well as thee
do; and don't I prove it, by giving her a good husband?


Goody. Yes, with a vengeance! -- Old Congo, the exciseman.


Muz. An honest fellow, like myself.


Goody. A drunkard, like thyself!


Muz. Why that is the same thing: all drunkards are honest fellows! -- I hate
your sober, sneaking rascals; give me the man that will take a dobbin with his
friend! -- But stay, stay, who have we here!


Goody. Some of your honest fellows, I suppose. Will Not you ask them to take a
dobbin with their friend?


Enter Glanville and Trim, dressed as Countrymen. Trim. Pray, Measter --


Muz. What!


Trim. Zur.


Muz. Oh, ho! Hem.


Trim. Your worship!


Muz. What do you say, friend?


Trim. Craving your pardon, and under favor, a'n't you Mr. Gaffer Muzzy;
game-keeper of the hundred, bailly of the village, and steward to our
outlandish lady of the manor?


Muz. I am, friend. -- Hem!


Trim. I know'd it! -- for they said I should find you out by your portly belly
and your handsome feace.


Glan. Yes; and they says you have the finest yeal in the kiounty!


Muz. Wife -- get these honest people something to drink.


Goody. I thought so! -- Well, I may as well fetch a quart; for, if he went,
he would bring them a gallon.


Muz. And now, friends, what is your business?


Trim. Why, hearing as how harvest was beginning in these um here pearts, we
comed to lend you a hond.


Muz. Can you drink like a fish?


Trim. You don't mean the same liquor, I hope?


Muz. Well answered! -- I take you for my right hand man. -- As for you -- [ To
Glanville.] But here comes the liquor.


Enter Goody Muzzy with the Ale. Goody. I do wonder, John Muzzy, thou can
take delight in this filthy liquor! It Is fit for nothing, but to make thee
quarrel with thy neighbors.


Muz. Well, well; don't abuse it, wife, but give it me.


Goody Why, have no more manners? Let me drink to the strangers first! -- Young
men, your healths.


Muz. Faith, well pulled! -- Well, my lads, we shall have rare work this
harvest: it is to begin with a wedding; how it will end, is another matter.


Glan. 'Wounds! I do like a wedding, hugeously! -- And who is to be married,
pray?


Muz. Slidikins, she is a nice one! -- You must know that my wife --


Goody. [Pulling him away.] John Muzzy, let me tell my own story!


Muz. What a good creature it is! -- She hates ale, and will drink first: she
never talks, and yet nobody must tell a story but herself!


Enter a Reaper. Reap. Measter Muzzy, you are wanted in field. Madam and the
gentlefolks be there.


Goody. Run, John Muzzy! run.


Muz. One pull first.

[Drinks.]
SONG.
I.
'Wounds, here is such a coil! I am none of your poor
Petty varlets, who flatter, and cringe, and procure!
I Am a freeman, a nabob, a king on his throne;
For I Have chattels, and goods, and strong-beer, of my own:
Besides, it is a rule -- that good fellows never fail
To let every thing wait, but the generous ale.
II.
My interest I love; thee I love, too, good wife!
But still I love better a jovial life:
And, for thee or my lady, with duty devout,
I Will run to Old Nick, when the dobbin's drank out:
But it is always a rule -- that good fellows never fail
To let every thing wait, but the generous ale.
Exit. Glan. Now for the love-story, Goody?


Goody. Why, you must know, that my dear child is to be married tomorrow.


Trim. I never heard as you had a datur.


Goody. Lord love you! -- not my own child, Miss Cleora, Madam Estella's
daughter! I nursed her -- I am sorry I shall lose her.


Trim. 'Wounds, never mind it! She Will find thee half a dozen young ones to
nurse, in good time.


Glan. And pray does she love the gentleman intended for her?


Goody. Why, I don't know what to say to it. There was a rake of a young man she
saw in London -- one Glanville -- he certainly did steal her heart; but I Will
take care she sha'n't have he!


Glan. You will!


Goody. Yes; he! -- a vile wretch, making the poor dear child's heart ache --


Glan. But suppose his own aches at the same time?


Goody. His, indeed!


Glan. Yes; his happiness, his very existence, depends upon Cleora's smile! He
dissolves in rapture at her name! -- he contemplates her charms with adoration!
Inexpressible are his pangs at her absence! and, though he would even consent
to this marriage, if it made her happy, it would be to him a source of
irretrievable misery! -- In short, I am Glanville, the wretched lover of Cleora.


Trim. And I his man Trim.


Goody. Never heard such a pretty-spoken young man in my life!


Glan. Pity me, then! -- Assist me.


Goody. I cannot think on it! -- My lady will never consent.


Trim. Then we must manage it without her consent, Goody Muzzy.


Goody. Let me think! -- Will you promise to do nothing but what I bid you?


Trim. Most willingly, my dear Goody Muzzy.


Glan. Solemnly! -- Sacredly!


Goody. Ah! she said you were a coaxing creature. -- But will you love her
dearly?


Glan. Tenderly! -- Rapturously! -- My life, my desires, my every wish, shall
be devoted to my dear Cleora!


Trim. And mine -- to Goody Muzzy.


DUET.
Glanville and Trim. Glan. Sweet, oh! sweet, the breeze of morning,
Passing over the new-blown rose;
Where verdant bowers, the meads adorning,
Court rustic lovers to repose!
The gay domain of gentle Flora,
And all delights it can impart;
Have not a sweet like my Cleora:
Dearest flower of my heart!

Trim. Sweet, oh! sweet, the humming liquor,
Mantling in the crystal glass;
In which, with rosy gills, the vicar,
Chuckling, toasts his favorite lass!
Venus was a buxom hussy,
As Vulcan, Mars, and Jove, can tell;
And yet, why may not Goody Muzzy,
When one's sharp-set, do full as well!

Glan. Pity from her I love invoking,
To plead my wishes do not fail! --

Trim. See, with love and thirst I Am choking;
Smile, and hand the mug of ale!

Glan. Thus while I Am to your heart appealing,
Do not my tender suit deny! --

Trim. Goody, I am tired with kneeling;
Therefore, pr'ythee now comply!



Enter Pickle. Pickle. What! two at a time, Goody!


Goody. Lord, now, if that little villain has not discovered us!


Pickle. Yes, yes; nothing escapes me. I should be a town servant to little
purpose, if I did not know all the secrets of the family.


Trim. Ecod! well zed, younker.


Pickle. Ha! now don't palm your clod-hopping dialect upon me: for, do you see
-- 'I am Glanville, the wretched lover of "Cleora!"

Mimicking.
Trim. What a little villain!


Pickle. Oh! I Have seen all your tricks for these three days -- But, Goody,
'twas shameful in you to impose upon the young gentleman! -- Mr. Glanville,
upon my honor, Cleora is not the daughter of Madam Estella.


Goody. Why, you little prating --


Pickle. Choo! choo! choo! -- Mother Muzzy, Mother Muzzy! didn't her dying
friend leave the little soul to the good lady's care? -- Estella was never
married in her life -- though, I fancy, if there was a good handsome fellow in
her way -- like me, if I was a little bigger -- she would have no objection! --
Hey, Muzzy? You elderly ladies, you know, love to have the young fellows at
your feet.


Goody. The dog! how did he discover this! -- We must not affront him.


Trim. Not for the world! -- Upon my word -- So you have found us out, then --
He! he! he!


Pickle. What do you think on it? -- Ha! ha! ha!


Trim. What Is to be done?


Pickle. Why, you must buy me for as much as I am worth.


Trim. That Is soon done.


Pickle. Soon, is it! -- I Will go this minute, and tell my lady every thing that
has passed


Trim. Whew!


Glan. Here, here! come back. He did but jest! -- Thou shall have any thing;
every thing: in short, favor my pretensions, and I Will make thy fortune.


Pickle. That Is what I call speaking out. Hitherto I have been a spy on you, by
my lady's directions -- now, like other spies, if I find yours the strongest
side, I Will forsake my own, and turn deserter. But mum -- Ah! little Unah, are
you here!


Enter Unah. Unah. I have brought you the milk, and the pigeons, fait^ and a
long tiresome way it was. But the fatigue was a pleasure to me; because I did
it for you, Goody


Trim. What, you loikes to sarve Goody, mayhap!


Unah. Musha, my heart! I Would toil for her a whole day and a night, and all the
rest of the twenty-four hours into the bargain.


Goody. Thank thee kindly, Unah!


Trim. Zounds! this is the girl I was so mad after last hay-time! -- I
pr'ythee, young woman, what is becom'd of the Irishman that used to be so sweet
upon you? -- Has he left you?


Unah. Ah! now, don't ax me. -- If he had let me go along wid him, I would not
have minded his leaving me a pin!


Goody Well, cheer thy heart; thou art a good girl, and may get a better.


Trim. Aye, aye; never mind that fellow!


Unah. Fellow! Fait, honey, if you were his fellow, there would be a better
pair of you, than if he was yours -- Ah! now, don't abuse him. I am sure, if it
was not for his being fa^e to me, and forsaking me for ever, he is the best
creature in the world.


AIR.
Arah! Pat, did you leave your poor Unah to mourn?
Fait and troth, my dear jewel,
Now was it not cruel?
Oh! come back again; or you will never return,
To cheer me, when I Am brokenhearted!
Straight forward I look; where around me, so gay,
I Would a pleasure in toiling,
While Patrick was smiling:
The sun shined, tho, 'twas cloudy, the while we made hay;
For den, Pat and I had not parted.
Each bird, while it is singing, may shut up it is throat;
I wont look at the thistle,
Where goldfinches whistle;
For, though they all stun me, I don't hear a note;
How can I, while thus brokenhearted!
The cows may courant it, the sheep frisk and play;
Lambs and kidlings be dancing,
And skipping and prancing;
For, though they are before me, they are all gone away,
Since Patrick and Unah are parted!
Exit. Trim. All matters being now clearly explained, each must have a separate
task. My master must marry Miss Cleora, and I Unah; Old Congo must be punished
for his impudent pretensions to her; and John Muzzy must be cured of going to
the alehouse.


Goody. Ah! if thou could but manage that --


Trim. I Will undertake it, if thou wilt manage the other.


Pickle. Assisted by me, if you please, Mr. Trim!


Trim Sir, I humbly beg your pardon.


Goody. Begone, begone! here comes Miss Cleora.


Glan. Like another Proserpine, surrounded by her nymphs! -- Oh! I Will rescue
her from that infernal Pluto, or lose my life.


Exit. Enter Estella, Cleora, and Scandaroon. Cleora. AIR.
Round me throng each sport and pleasure!
Ceres, bring thy golden treasure!
Hours, that gay delight shall measure,
Sportive spread your fluttering wings!
The rural gambols lead up neatly;
Now, begin -- in measure seatly,
See! they move; while, warbling sweetly,
Hark! the mellow blackbird sings.

Estel. My dear child, we want to talk to you.


Cleo. Here I am, Madam, ready to hear you.


Estel. Here is a gentleman, for whom you seem to have an esteem; he asks your
hand Speak for yourself, Mr. Scandaroon.


Scan. Why, Madam, you see I have but little to say. I have seen all the world;
and men, and manners; and everything, and every body. I want to marry Miss. My
way is to make but few words about any thing!


Estel. In one word, daughter, what do you think of my friend for a husband?


Cleo. I am proud of your choice, Madam. I thank the gentleman for his good
opinion of me; and yet, if I marry him -- you know I shall leave you!


Estel. My sweet girl, I brought thee up! It was a delicious task; but, were
you even to forget me, you ought to marry -- it is a duty you owe society.


Cleo. I forget you, Madam!


Estel. 'Twas unkind to say so.


Scan. Come, come, Madam, we must not be too hasty with the young lady. Give
her a little time. I cannot press her, Madam. I have not the language of a
lover; for I make but few words about any thing.


Estel. Yes, but I want to see her cheerful. When I was of her age --


AIR.
Gay as the lark, that early soaring,
Views from on high the glittering streams;
And, while his oraisons are pouring,
Basks in Phoebus' chearing beams.
II.
I knew, at morning, naught but pleasure;
Noon never came to see me grieve;
Nor did delight, far beyond measure,
Ever fail to greet my steps at eve!
Exeunt Estella and Scandaroon. Glan. My angel! my Cleora! one single word, for
Heaven's sake!


Cleo. Not for the world -- I Will see you in the meadow -- I have much to tell
you.

Going off.
Glan. Exquisite sounds! -- [ To Trim, who comes on.] -- I Have seen my angel,
Trim! She spoke to me; I heard her sing, and listened with the same rapture as
a blessed soul attends to the voice of the seraph that wings it is way to heaven!


AIR.
When on Cleora's form I gaze;
Surveying that exhaustless store,
Till then unnotic'd charms I praise,
And those till then praised I adore!
And while I look with fond surprise,
And catch soft madness from my fair;
I wish for Argus' hundred eyes,
And wish to gaze for ever there.
II.
But when Cleora's voice I hear,
And when she strikes the trembling strings;
I wish each eye was made an ear,
To list with angels while she sings!
Thus, while in rapture they rejoice,
My senses still her empire own;
And, touch her, see her, hear her voice,
All, all confirm me, here is alone!
Exit. Enter Pickle, Goody Muzzy, and Unah. Trim. My master's in a rare
rapturous humor! -- Oh, here come my associates! -- Well, good people, it is
time we should enter upon our different stations! -- My little Unah, if I serve
the exciseman a good trick, will you love me?


Unah. Yes; to be after being served as I was by Patrick!


Trim. Oh, no; I Will love you for ever.


Unah. And a fortnight!


Goody. Come, come, she sha'n't be teased.


Trim. Well, well; I Will take some other time. -- Goody Muzzy, I know you hate
old Congo; and therefore I shall set him and your husband together by the ears.


Goody. What to do!


Trim. To keep him from the alehouse.


Goody. Lord help your head!


Trim. I will, I tell you; but you must assist.


Goody. I! why, so much I love him, that, rather than he should injure his
health, I Would drink all the liquor myself.


Trim. Very considerate, upon my word! -- Pray, was he ever jealous?


Goody. Jealous! -- I never gave him cause.


Trim. Oh, you must give him a little directly.


Goody. A little! -- If I do any thing, I had better give him a good deal; for
John's woundy dull of apprehension.


Trim. Oh, as much as ever you please.


Unah. But cannot you be telling us what all dis ^s for?


Trim. I want Goody to appear fond of the exciseman; let me alone for the rest.


Goody. Oh, Lord! not I. What would John say?


Unah. He will not be thumping you, will he?


Goody. Oh, no, child! it is I thump him. But suppose the old fellow should make
love to me in good earnest?


Unah. Why den, sure, cannot you consent to it in jest?


Trim. Aye, aye; we shall be too near for him to use force.


Goody. Force! I say, force! -- Oh, I should like to catch any body forcing of
me!


Trim. You must find him, Unah; and break it to him, while I stay here to
receive Old Muzzy. -- Pickle, you go and watch down in the meadow -- And,
Goody, do you go and prepare Cleora.


Goody. AIR.
Dear me! I Am all in a twitter, to think on it;
Fine doings, at my age, to have a gallant!
I Am sixty, I think, or not far from the brink on it;
A fine time of life a spark's heart to enchant!
Set my mouth how I will, when he bows with a grace,
His fond wishes presses,
And tells his caresses,
I -- ha! ha! ha! -- shall laugh full in his face.
His violent love, when my dry shrivelled hand
He fumbles,
And mumbles,
How can I withstand!
With asthmatic lungs, when he fetches a sigh;
And grins in rheumatics, to make me comply!
How can I at such tender ecstasy scoff,
That protests in an ague, and vows in a cough!

Exit. Trim. Well said, Goody. The old girl has some spirit yet! -- Oh, here
comes John, half-seas over, in faith! -- Ah, Measter! you have been at the
barrel.


Muz. Ah! what, Russet-grey! -- Yes, I have. We must empty the poor things, how
could they get filled else? Where Is your partner?


Trim. At your house, with the women-folks. I am of your way of thinking. Hang
the petticoats, I say; give me yeal.


Muz. Strike us thy fist! -- Remember, I give you a general invitation to the
buttery. You are my friend -- I Will tell you all my sorrows; nothing but sorrow
makes me drink!


Trim. Indeed!


Muz. You know I have a wife.


Trim. So you have.


Muz. She is the devil! -- Don't you tell her I said so! -- She has such a
tongue -- I should never go to the alehouse, if it was not for her damned
tongue! -- Never.


AIR.
When Goody plays the devil, or so
In midst of scolding, strife, and tears,
Off to the alehouse straight I go,
To drink my pint, and save my ears:
There, for the tuneful nightingale,
Do I exchange the screech-owl's note;
For, as I drink the sparkling ale,
It jug, jug, jug, goes down my throat.
Trim. 'Wounds! that is well enough. -- But I have heard 'em say, a wife and a
guinea are two bad things; one a body cannot keep, and the other one cannot get rid
of.


Muz. Well said, Linsey-woolsey! -- There Is one thing in my wife, though, that
all men are not blessed with -- She Is honest!


Trim. Icod! so we be all, till we be found out.


Muz. What do you mean by that?


Trim. Mean! that I can sing your song to another guess-^ort of burden.


When Goody Muzzy's in a pout,
And scolds, and storms, and fleers, and jaunts;
Only to send her husband out,
That she may let in her gallants;
Then, John, in vain thy ale shall foam,
And sparkle in it is crystal bound;
The nightingale's sweet voice at home,
Now -- jug, jug, jug -- in kisses, sounds.
Muz. Pooh! pooh! all nonsense. Odd's wounds! I should like to see her old
withered jaws trying to smile at a lover! No, no! she is a devil of a fury, to
be sure; but all is safe here, for all that.


Trim. Do think so? -- Why, then, come along with me; and I Will show thee one
old fox that is after thy poultry.


Muz. Here Is to thee, however, all the same.

Drinks.
DUET.
Trim and Muzzy. Still let us put the drink about;
Vexing's no service, mon -- od's life!
'Twere time enough, when that is drank out,
To think of any faithless wife!
Besides, who yet the screech-owl fears,

Muz. We Have 'twixt us still, the nightingale,

Trim. You Have 'twixt you still, the nightingale,

Goody -- jug, jug, in kisses, hears;
And John hears -- jug, jug, jug, in ale!



Enter Glanville, Pickle, Cleora, Reapers, etc. Trim. But here come the
reapers! -- Do you go, Master Muzzy, and sleep off your ale; and then well set
to work at this discovery. [Muzzy goes off.] So! so!


Glan. In short, my dear Cleora, there is not a moment's time for hesitation:
we can get a chaise instantly.


Cleo. You know, Glanville, this was our former quarrel!


Glan. You cannot be more obedient to the will of Estella than I could wish
you: but consider, charming Cleora, she was always inexorable to me; and her
title to your esteem is not, perhaps --


Pickle. You must part! you must part! The reapers are coming this way, and my
lady and Mr. Scandaroon with them!


Trim. Here they are, sure enough!


Glan. FINALE.
The sultry Neon cries -- While they last,
Seize on pleasures, take repast;
Fortune's sickle,
And Fate's sickle
May surprise us in our prime!
Death's the Harvest-Home of Time.
Fair ones, blessed with charms and truth,
Reap the profit in your youth:
In that season,
Follow Reason,
And of pleasure take your part:
Love's the Harvest of the Heart.
CHORUS.
The sultry noon, etc.
Young men, who all in woman find,
That Is good, and beautiful, and kind,
Never grieve 'em,
Vex, or leave 'em,
But treat 'em gently, nobly, kind!
Truth's the Harvest of the Mind.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Hall.
Estella and Cleora. Estel. THY little heart does not know it is own wishes.


Cleo. Yes, it does! It wishes for a husband -- if I must marry -- that can
make it dance with joy at the sight of him, and whose absence can give it pain;
aye, pain! -- but then it is such a sort of pain, that is better than all the
pleasure in the world!


Estel. And pray does not Mr. Scandaroon do all this?


Cleo. No, indeed! If he was only a friend, or a relation, though ever so near,
I should love him dearly: but, for a husband --


Estel. You prefer young Glanville?


Cleo. Young Glanville, Madam!


Estel. Yes -- you have seen him; listened to him; met him privately; promised
-- Oh! Cleora -- to elope with him!


Cleo. Why, Ma'am, if --


Estel. Come, my dear girl, do not consider me as a mother, but as a friend.
I Will see him for you. If he should prove worthy of you, I Will even interest Mr.
Scandaroon in his behalf; but you must first solemnly bind yourself, neither to
marry him, nor any other, without my approbation.


Cleo. After this, Madam, it would be the highest want of duty not to trust you
implicitly! -- Take my hand; bestow it where you please; and may the prudent
foresight of a parent lead me to happiness.


AIR.
Away! pale fear, and ghastly terror;
Fly, at a parent's voice, away!
Correcting every youthful error,
She deigns to bid, and I obey!
And, oh! my heart, thou murmurest treason,
Perturb'd, and frightened, thus to move:
This sacrifice I make to Reason;
Lie still, poor flutterer, and approve!
Estel. Dear girl! she knows not half the felicity that awaits her. A parent's
consent will, indeed, ratify her happiness. But now, to see after my own
affairs a little.


Enter Pickle. Pickle. The post-chaise, Madam! -- [ Seeing Estella.] -- Eh! eh!
-- why -- I say --


Estel. What do you say?


Pickle. I say, tea's ready!


Estel. Very well.

Exeunt. Pickle alone. I parried that well, at least. Poor turtles! 'twould be
a pity to disturb them. How nobly he swore; then how prettily she blushed --
how graceful he dropped upon his knee; then how tenderly she bid him rise --
how rapturously he snatched her hand; how reluctantly she withdrew it -- and,
in the struggle, such eagerness, such warmth, such -- Oh! I wish I was but
three years older.


AIR.
The first word I lisp'd, I Am told, was love!
High down, derry derry,
Ho down, derry derry,
Let Us be merry,
In the hawthorn grove;
For there, in the bushes,
The blackbirds and thrushes,
Teach you, if you're not a fool,
To study in Love's charming school.
II.
At five years I went in a barn to play,
High down, derry derry,
Ho down, derry derry,
Let Us be merry
Among the hay;
For there Ralph and Dolly,
Bumpkin and Molly.
Taught me, or I Would been a fool,
To study in Love's charming school.
What my good lady is at, I cannot say.
Exit. Scene -- A Grove.
Enter Trim and Unah. Unah. Troth, and you are right enough, Mr. Trim! -- She
is a good creature, and loves Old Muzzy as she ought; and, sure enough, if she
can keep him from making himself sick by going to the filthy alehouse, 'twill
be no bad thing for his health.


Trim. It has sober'd him already; the fumes of the liquor gave way to the
fumes of jealousy, just as water buries itself under oil. In short, there are
two things to be done, to bring Muzzy to his fireside -- and you, little Unah,
to mine!


Unah. Why, perhaps it might be warmer than Old Congo's; but I am afraid it
would sooner grow cold: yours would be a blaze, like straw, and then go out;
but his would be, like peat, always burning, and yet produce no fire but smoke.


Trim. Hush, hush! you jade, to business. -- Here he comes! I shall be at hand.


Enter Congo. Congo. Ah! my little siren of the sod! when is this marriage of
ours to be? I long to bring up the young ones. It must be at the Harvest-Home
-- we shall have a house full of them.


Unah. Ah! now, don't be eating the bread till the corn's thrashed -- they are
not born yet.


Congo. Oh, I don't despair of living to be a great-grandfather!


Unah. What, for you and the other infants to be children together! -- But all
this is fine talking. You false-hearted creature, you; you are as bad as
Patrick!


Congo. I am thy humble slave, my little humming-bird from the banks of the
Shannon.


Unah. All boder and game! Do you tink it is to Goody Muzzy you are talking?


Congo. Goody Muzzy! What, that old Jezebel!


Unah. Ah! now, don't be giving me a copy of your countenance -- Don't you know
that you would hang yourself for her, but dat it would be de death of you?


Congo. Never had any serious thoughts of her in my life!


Unah. May be, then, they were all comical ones!


Congo. None of any sort -- I have a kind of veneration for all old women.


Unah. Fait, and you are right enough: you don't know how soon you may be an
old woman yourself. -- What, den, you will not make love to her for your own sake?


Congo. Not I, indeed.


Unah. Will you do it den a little for mine?


Congo. What pleasure can it give thee?


Unah. I Will tell you -- I have promised Goody never to marry without her
consent; and she will not give it me till Gaffer breaks his pipe and noggin, and
stays at home with her. Now, if you would make him jealous --


Congo. Matters could be explained afterward. He would turn sober, and we
should be a comfortable little family together.


Unah. Why, what a guess you have!


Congo. But suppose she should really fall in love with me?


Unah. Why then you must help her up again.


Congo. Remember, I do it all for thee, my little pipe and drone.


Unah. All for me, and a little for yourself, honey.


Congo. Well, tickle my ears with one of thy enchanting airs, a merry one --
and I Will set about it.


Unah. AIR.
As Dermot toiled one summer's day,
Young Shelah, as she sat beside him,
Fairly stole his pipe away:
Oh, den to hear how she would deride him! --
'Where, poor Dermot, is it gone!
'Your lilly lilly loodle?
'They've left you nothing but the drone;
'And that is yourself, you noodle!'
'Beam bum boodle, loodle, loodle,
'Beam bum boodle, loodle loo;
'Poor Dermot's pipe is lost and gone,
'And what will the poor devil do!'
II.
'Fait, now I am undone, and more!'
Cried Dermot -- 'Ah! will you be easy?
'Did not you steal my heart before?
'Is it, you would have a man run crazy?
'I've nothing left me now to moan:
'My lilly lilly loodle,
'That used to cheer me so, is gone --
'Ah, Dermot, you are a noodle!
'Beam bum boodle, loodle, loodle,
'Beam bum boodle, loodle, loo;
'My heart and pipe, and peace, are gone;
'What next will cruel Shelah do?'
III.
Then Shelah, hearing Dermot vex,
Cried -- 'Fait, 'twas little Cupid moved me,
'You fool, to steal it, out of tricks,
'Only to see how much you loved me!
'Come, cheer thee, Dermot! never moan,
'But take your lilly loodle;
'And, for the heart of you that is gone,
'You shall have mine, you noodle!'
Beam bum, boodle, loodle, loodle,
Beam bum, boodle, loodle, loo;
Shelah's to church with Dermot gone;
And, for de rest, what is dat to you?

Enter Trim. Trim. Master Congo, Goody Muzzy is seeking you far and near.


Congo. Indeed! the thing looks serious! -- If any thing should happen, I
sha'n't be the first that has been well with his friend's wife!


Unah. Cannot you go and comfort the poor creature?


Congo. I go! -- Bye, my song-thrush!


Unah. Ah, your servant! -- And do you be gone; for here comes old Muzzy!


Enter Muzzy. Muz. Very pretty work here! -- I have found the assignation, the
very letter of appointment!


Unah. Yes, dat Trim forged.

Aside.
Muz. Let me see --

[Reading.] 'CHOICEST commodity of my heart!' -- There Is a beginning for an
exciseman! -- 'if you will but cheat your husband often minutes duty, you will
find me in the grove by the mansion, impatiently waiting to gauge your
affections, which I hope are, like my own, above proof. I long to smuggle thee;
for thou have made a seizure of the heart of thy slave,

CALEB CONGO.'


Ah! what, are you here? -- [ Sees Unah.] -- You an't going to stay, are you?


Unah. Is it dat you want me gone, honey?


Muz. If I tell her, I do -- she is a woman, and will stay on purpose. -- I
have a little business here, to be sure.


Unah. Why, this is not an alehouse and what pleasure can you have in any
business but drinking? Come, come, I know what you are about -- An't you
ashamed of yourself, to let old Congo fall in love with poor, dear Goody?


Muz. She knows it.


Unah. To be sure I don't!


Muz. But how is all this? -- Congo was to be married to you!


Unah. Yes; the false-hearted wretch -- Oh, he is as bad as the best of you!


Muz. Zounds! -- It Is a comical thought! -- Unah, you are a merry one, when you
please.


Unah. I was, before I lost Patrick.


Muz. Pooh! pooh! hang Patrick! -- You and I ought to serve my wife and old
Congo a trick.


Unah. A trick!


Muz. Yes; I ought to make love to you, out of revenge!


Unah. Get along with your colt's tooth! You Would be a pretty winning devil to
make love! Would you begin wid axing me to drink wid you?


Muz. Nay; but, Unah --


Unah. Cannot you be easy, and you will have a love-scene in perfection; for here
come the turtles!


They draw back. Enter Congo and Goody. Goody. Dear neighbor Congo -- kind
neighbor Congo -- you are so tender -- so pressing -- so eager -- so different
from that brute, my husband!


Muz. Brute!


Unah. Aye, aye!


Goody. But will you always be kind to me?


Congo. She grows devilish fond! -- I wish somebody would come and interrupt
us. -- Always, my love.


Goody. Charming!


Muz. Tender! pressing! and charming! -- When did she find time to learn all
these pretty words?


Unah. Why, sure, was it not while you was at the alehouse?


Goody. Oh, neighbor; I wish my husband was dead --


Muz. Devilishly obliged to you, upon my soul!


Goody. I Would marry you in four-and-twenty hours after I had buried him!


Muz. But, you see, I Am in good health, and don't choose to be buried.


Goody. What, you are there? -- I am glad of it.


Muz. And, pray, are you glad of it, old Puncheon; old Run-goods?


Congo. Why, you see, neighbor --


Muz. Yes, yes, I see very plainly that you are an old rogue; and that, under a
pretense of coming after the chicken, you are cackling after the old hen: but
I Would have you to know, I am cock of the dunghill, and nobody shall approach my
partlet.


Goody. But I say he shall!


Muz. He shall! -- Oh, we'll see that presently! Where Is Lumkin and Sturdy? He
shall first take a walk through the horse-pond; and then we'll set Thunder at
him, that he may have a good run to dry himself.


Unah. Suppose we threaten him a little with the revenge?


Muz. Hold your tongue, you jade!


Goody. John Muzzy, it does not signify -- If you were to kill him, I Would get
somebody else!


Muz. The devil you would! -- And, pray, how often do you mean to play these
tricks?


Goody. Every time you go to the alehouse.


Muz. All in a story! -- What Is to be done?


Unah. Done! Why, you must beg her pardon, and never be dry again; so that you
may not want to drink.


Muz. What, to please a liquorish wife, and a wanton old gauger of Hollands!


Unah. Come, come, you had better be easy -- it was in joke dis time; it may be
in earnest next. Crack your dobbin in your chimney-corner, and be quiet.


Congo. Aye, or in mine; where he will hear the prattle of all our little
excisemen -- will not he, Unah?


Unah. Fait, don't you tink de country's overrun enough wid them already? --
Shall I tell you how you will do? As you intend to live till you are very old,
you shall have my granddaughter, after I am married to Patrick.


Muz. Friend Congo, imitate me, and cope with them no longer; they are a sweet
set of creatures, without a fault in the world; they are always prudent, always
handsome, always good-tempered, and always silent!


Muz. AIR.
Women, to bless the men designed,
Are always prudent, good, and kind;
Always fair, and always young:
It Is true -- a woman has a tongue;
But then, the ill to counterpoise,
It never makes the smallest noise;
Rants, roars, or any scandal tells;
Or, with abuse, at random runs;
Or wrangling,
Jangling,
The ear stuns,
Ringing a peal like parish-belis.
II.
If maids, they all with patience wait,
Nor envy aught the marriage-state;
If wives, still faithful to his bed,
They never wish the husband dead;
If widows, they shed tears like rain,
And never were known to wed again:
For, Sirs, in this, and all things else,
Charming woman's never wrong;
Nor wrangling,
Jangling,
Wags her tongue,
Ringing a peal like parish-bells.

Exit. Scene, Unah and Trim.
Trim. And now, little Unah, can you think of me?


Unah. Yes, sure; and with a great deal of pleasure.


Trim. Is it possible!


Unah. Ah! now, don't be too much in a hurry! -- Nobody gets my love but
Patrick: when I have two hearts, you shall have one of them; but, you see, as I
never had but one, and he stole it, how can I give you the other?


Trim. Why, then, I must wear the willow!


Unah. I Will tell you what wear -- Wear a heart that rejoices in the happiness
of others; and that is a willow that might grow in the garden of a prince.


AIR.
Though I am humble, mean, and poor,
Yet, faith, am I defarning;
And one may see the sun shine, sure,
Without the help of larning!
This little maxim, for my sake,
I pray you, be believing --
The truest pleasures that we take,
Are those that we are giving!
II.
Is there a wretch, with all his pelf,
So poor as a rich miser?
Sure, does not he defraud himself?
No maxim can be wiser!
He who is blessed for his own sake,
Fait, is himself deceiving --
The truest pleasures that we take,
Are those that we are giving!
Enter Pickle and Scandaroon. Pickle. Faith, Sir, I had like to have done your
business effectually: but impudence never fails me at a pinch; and so I gave
the matter such a turn --


Glan. But is the chaise ready?


Pickle. Yes, Sir. -- Hush! -- She Is coming! -- Zounds! it is the old Codger! --
What the devil can he want! -- I will not be seen.


Scan Sir, your servant.


Glan. What does the old fool want?


Scan. Your name's Glanville?


Glan. Well, Sir --


Scan. Nay, Sir, I Have a little business with you; I sha'n't detain you long. I
make but few words about any thing.


Glan. You Will be expeditious, then, I hope?


Scan. This belongs to you.

Delivering Parchments.
Glan. What Is here? -- The writings of my uncle's estate!


Scan. I am his executor, you his heir! I make but few words about any thing.


Glan. Nay, Sir, permit me --


Scan. And yet I care not if I speak a word to you on a certain subject. You
love Cleora?


Glan. I adore her!


Scan. But you have been a very sad young man -- a rake!


Glan. I was, Sir, till her charms reclaimed me.


AIR.
Free from strife, and Love's alarms,
With joyous heart, and mind at ease,
Time was, when, with a thousand charms,
Bacchus knew the way to please!
When, while the merry glee went round,
Gaily I saw each moment pass;
Nor ever had I heard a sound
Like the sweet tinkling of the glass!
The flask now broke, and spilt the wine,
For Cupid, Bacchus' joys I quit;
The myrtle kills the blighted vine;
And Love, turned Fate, cries out -- 'Submit!'
Scan. Does Cleora love you?


Glan. I flatter myself she does.


Scan. Marry her, then; I give her up. She is ruined; she has not a penny in
the world! I make but few words about any thing. -- Your servant.


Exit. Glan Ruined! how? -- But no matter. I thank fortune that has put in my
power -- But here she comes! -- My dear Cleora, love and happiness await thee!
The chaise is at the bottom of the avenue, and nothing can retard our felicity!


Cleo. I cannot consent, Glanville! I have made a solemn promise to my mother
--


Glan. To whom? You are abused, Cleora; you have no mother!


Cleo. What do you mean?


Glan. That Estella has bred you up, and taken care of your fortune, out of
respect to your real parents; but has carefully concealed from you the amount
of one, and the quality of the other.


Cleo. It Is impossible!


Glan. It Is truth: I can give you indubitable proof of it.


Cleo. Then I am ruined! -- For the implicit consent I have given her, at first
verbally, and at length under my hand has certainly put me entirely in her
power!


Glan. I Am glad on it!


Cleo. Glad! -- Why?


Glan. Because my fortune shall retrieve the loss, and convince you of my
disinterested affection. I am in possession of all that belonged to my uncle.


Cleo. Yet, I cannot consent!


Glan. Cruel, Cleora! to refuse me the best and most exquisite opportunity that
ever presented of convincing you of the purity of my passion.


Scene the Last -- All the Characters.
Estel. Accept his offer, Cleora; he has told you the truth. I am not your
mother, though I hope to be so tomorrow morning.


Cleo. How, Madam!


Estel. By marrying your father.


Cleo. My father!


Scan. Yes, my child! Come to my arms! Upon the death of your mother, whose
loss I could not bear, I left you in Estella's care, and traveled to improve
my fortune. The extravagant frolic I put in practice has answered my purpose
beyond expectation; for I find my old friend Glanville's nephew as honest a
fellow as his uncle; therefore, to reward the fidelity of Estella, and his
affection, we'll go all to church tomorrow morning. I make but few words about
any thing!


Trim. Now the weighty matters are discussed, we'll take the liberty to trouble
your honors with our affairs. -- But, first, health and happiness to our noble
patrons!


Unah. Oh, till they are tired of it!


Glan. Well, I hope we all begin to agree?


Trim. Why, yes, Sir. Unah is resolved to think of nobody but Patrick, and we
have agreed to teaze her no longer: Master Muzzy is never to get drunk; and his
wife is never to fall in love till he does!


Muz. Now, if I may be so bold, I think we are more likely to disagree about
what is to come than what is past.


Scan. Aye! How so?


Muz. Why, your worship, I foresee we shall have a great deal of feasting --


Unah. Why, dat's only seeing an inch before your nose?


Muz. Spits will groan with oxen, and fountains will flow with wine; and if we
don't take care to be very regular in our proceedings --


Unah. Why, to be sure, dear will be a great deal of confusion!


Glan. Well, well, you shall all have your stations. Trim shall be master of
the ceremonies; old Muzzy shall have the care of the cellar --


Unah. And old Congo shall gauge the barrels, to see how much they drink.


Muz. Thank your worship! -- I will be so drunk tonight!


Goody. How, John Muzzy!


Muz. For the last time, wife!


Scan. And, to show you we shall be as anxious for your merriment as our own,
we'll mix with you, and lead up the first country-dance.


Glan. And thus we bid every votary of pure and disinterested passion welcome
to -- Love's Harvest-Home!


FINALE.
Cleo. Who social pleasures love to share,
Where rise, nor hall, nor costly dome;
Far from the meagre train of Care,
Come, smiling, to Love's Harvest-Home!
CHORUS. Who social, etc.

Unah. Oh! I Will be merry, never fear,
Although I Am sad at heart: but, come,
Who knows that we sha'n't see, next year,
Our Patrick here, at Harvest-Home!
CHORUS. Who social, etc.

Glan. With chaplets crowned, and garlands twined,
Light, sportive, airy, frolicksome;
Thus good and happy -- may we find
Elysium in Love's Harvest-Home!



FINIS.

