THE FANCID.

AN HEROIC POEM. In SIX CANTOS.

To His GRACE the Duke of MARLBOROUGH, ON THE TURN of His GENIUS to ARMS.

Up, Sword: and know thou a more proper Time.
HAMLET. LONDON: Printed for J. OSBORN, at the Golden Bail in Paternoster Row.
M.DCC.XLIII.

THE PREFACE.
IT will be easily perceived, why no Address, by way of Dedication, could be
proper to this Poem: Yet, the Verses ought perhaps to have been offered, before
printed, to the View of One Great Family (lest, among Ideas, of so complicated
a Variety, there should be some, wherewith it might not, as to Point of
Delicacy, have been found eligible to associate Names, of such sincere
Distinction and Importance). But the Writer recollected, that the mere Omission
of an Act of Ceremony could not, equitably, be complained of, in a Poem where
he has not arrogated, to Himself, the Freedom to give PRAISE, or CENSURE: All,
that points at either One or Other, being narrative Recital only; and That,
too, from the Voices of such Speakers, as the Public daily hears, expressing
more, upon both Subjects, than they are represented in this Place, as uttering.

As to the general Disposition of the Purpose, if Any too bold Strokes of
Liberty should chance to be suspected in it, let it be remembered in the
Writer's Favor, that he is no better than an empty Visionary! And This is not
the first Time, that a Man, in a Dream, has been a very impertinent Fellow,
who, in his waking Intervals, has kept within the Bounds of due Decorum.

Concerning LUXURY especially, none ought to make the Muse accountable for what
she prattles in her Sleep: Since it is about a Power she never corresponds with,
but in Slumber. And, if TRADE is touchy, and will not bear to have it credited,
that Daughters come by means of Mothers, -- who could shun the Hazard of
offending such a choleric Petulance? -- The Writer had no License to restrain,
or castrate, Sentiments he but reports, from Personages, to whom his Country
owes a Reverence that forbids the Boldness of curtailing their Ideas. --
Neither has he given the captious Coquette above-named the least Occasion of
Offense, without Hard-straining and Partiality; for, Who can look upon it as an
Undervaluing of Trade, that she is represented as not overmuch disposed to
carry Arms Herself; nor over-fond, indeed, of Those she pays for carrying them?
-- Authorities enough might probably be found, to prove plain Truth no Slander.
But he rather pleads the Merit of that prophesied Expedient, toward the End of
the Vth Canto, for a perfect Reconciliation between the Drum, and Warehouse. --
If, notwithstanding This, the waking Poet must be charged with the Vagaries of
his dreaming Muse, He can but borrow Comfort from this tit-for-tat Reflection:
-- That, since Trade is naturally disposed to think, with Dullness and Contempt,
of Poetry, the Poet in his Turn, may, by Right of Equivalent, assume the same
dull Privilege; and prate, as foolishly, of Traffic.

To pass, at once, from Poetry, -- to Prose, and Truth, and serious History: --
The great, and nobly-judging, Lady, to whom, in the VIth Canto, an Advice of
no small Consequence is offered, by a bold, though naked, Friend, (of whom she
never yet was known to be ashamed, however bare, and out of Fashion, she
approached her) will reflect, with some Attention, on the Proposition; after
hearing what Foundation It was grounded on.

About the Year 1735, a private Person, not worth naming, but an ardent Lover
of his Country's Reputation, became difpossess'd of a mistaken Notion, (which
had been at first imbibed by Conversation with the Prejudiced, but gradually
confirmed and heightened, by much Reading, Speculation, and Reflection, upon
military Subjects) that the most celebrated English Conqueror, of this last
Age, (It might, I think, be added, without Flattery, above Any, of the Former)
was not pre-meditatively, and by Force of his superior Skill, the Author of his
own unprecedented Victories. -- The Mistaker grounded his Conclusion on that
Great General's Letters, written from the Fields of Battle, with the first
Accounts of his Successes. -- It is visible beyond Dispute, that, there, one
meets with none of those descriptive and explanatory Circumstances, whereby the
skilful Captains, of all Ages, took such cautionary Care to guard against
unjust Impressions of their Conduct; by unfolding it, in Plan, in Progress, and
Accomplishment: that, not their Fortune only, but their Foresight, and
Superiority of Genius, might be noted, in their Victories. It is hence, that in
so many of the Antient's, and in some great Modern's, written Narratives, we
see, and understand, minutely, the whole Ground-plots, Dispositions,
Oppositions, and clear Out-break, of the Actions: Not in their bald Success
alone; but with their previous Motives, their impending Agitations, and
eventual Over-balance, and Conclusion: Whereas, from all the published Letters
of our more than equal Executer of his own unequalled Purposes, we gather
nothing further, than that the Army He commanded was triumphant; and that He
seems to think each Leader, in it, more deserving his Remark, than the
Elucidation of his own Designs, in their reported Execution.

In a Visit made, about the Time just mentioned, to another English General, a
Noble Lord, since dead, at a small Garden Seat of his, near London, These
Observations were enlarged upon, (as they had often been to others) in a
Conversation on the military Character of our great Favorite of Fortune:
whom, it has been thought, the Lord here meant had, formerly, regarded with
some Rival Pangs of Emulation. It were therefore an ungenerous Coldness to his
Memory, to conceal the noble Sentiments wherewith he closed the Conversation on
this Subject! -- "You have (said he) misunderstood His Character, and done it
the same Wrong, that many Thousands do, and will continue to do, from but the
natural Consequence of his sincere and modest Negligence of Ostentation. -- He
thought it, equally, His Duty to subdue the Enemy, and His own Sensibility of
Triumph for subduing him. -- He made, I think, but one Mistake in his Field
Conduct: But That was a Mistake of such unlucky Consequence, that It has been
able to do more, against Himself, than Ten French Armies could: for It obscures
(you see) the Luster of his Genius. -- He trusted History, for Explanations,
which, He should have known, It could not make (but in a lame and superficial
manner) for want of Lights, which He alone had Power to furnish, who was the
only Person dis-inclinable to wish 'em furnished."

The Impression which this truly noble Answer made, and the Reflections which
It gave Occasion to, have often, since, presented to Imagination as a National
Misfortune, the Possibility of some destructive Accident, to those invaluable
Original Papers, which contain ('it is said) sufficient Matter, in His Family's
Possession, to immortalize, as well That Great Man's Temper, Wisdom, Suavity,
Skill, MODES, and MEANS, of Conquest, as the Reputation merely, of the
Victories themselves. -- The Last, it must be owned, is Glory: But it is a
Glory of a barren and unpropagative Species: It Is the Glory of a Nimrod, a
Sesostris, Hercules, Arthur, and Pendragon: Names, of aweful Cloudinessl but
uneffectual Admiration! -- because heard of, more than shown: -- Not Lights, of
Living History; by whose Help, the Caesar's and the Alexanders are not only, in
Themselves, immortal; but by their Force of Emulative Inspiration, have been,
are, and will continue to the End of Time, the military Fathers, of new Sons of
Glory, in all Nations, and throughout all Ages.

Who, therefore, could too much lament an Accident of such severe Importance,
should it happen to the mentioned Papers, before That glorious Use has been
drawn from them, which is hinted in the Close of the last Canto? Where that the
Writer may not seem impertinent, he has, here, assigned his Reasons, for
conceiving it both a Domestic, and a Public Duty, on the Care of That
illustrious Conqueror's Representatives. -- But where the Hand is to be found,
in all Points, equal to an Undertaking of such arduous Difficulty, is a Wish,
that may be added to the List of those Desiderata, rather hinted at, than hoped
for, by the boldest Enterprizers, in the Commonwealth of Learning!

CONTENTS of CANTO I. Exordium. Duties of a Poet's Character. Verse too low, if
it but looks like Flattery. Invocation. Apology for too light a Title. The
Time's Fault, not the Writer's. Duke of Marlborough in his Library. The Library
described. Apparition of the Spirit of a late Great Conqueror, from the Leaves
of a Book. Speech of the illustrious Spirit. Reproach of Insults too tamely
submitted to. Present Times compared with the Past. Excitement of the Noble
Owner of the Library to vindicate the warlike Destiny of his triumphant Race.
Confessed Sensation, that It cannot, yet, be practicable. Celestial Spirit,
scenting the Approach of an Infernal One, gives Notice, and then vanishes.
CONTENTS of CANTO II. DEscription of a dark cold Horror, that precedes the
Entrance of a frightful Monster, The Fury described. Who she is. Her
self-distracting War of Tongues. Persons, and Measures, accused, and satirized,
in Charges, and Recriminations. Corruption's Demon pointed out, and cursed
emphatically. The Curses retorted, from an opposite Quarter. Qualities of the
Mock-Patriot. Of the true Patriot. Fury driven away by a sudden Irruption of
Luster. Gives a dreadful Alarm to the City. Circulating Progression of the
Uproar. Its Advance throughout Three Entire Kingdoms. CONTENTS of CANTO III.
CHariot of Fancy. How drawn. Who rides in it. Who taken into it. Whither
carried; and with what Purpose. Why the Power in the Chariot affects so airy an
Equipage. Approach to the Edge of the Atlantic. Terrible, but Majestic,
Appearance of a Spectre. Who the Spectre is. Why hid, and asleep, under the
Ocean. Shakes Three Kingdoms at once, by a Grasp with her Left Hand. Shoots her
Shadow to the American Continent. Hushes the Roar of the Fury. Corrects and
exposes her Impertinence. Paid Partakers have no Right to be Murmurers. How
Bribes might as easily be broken, as Bubbles. Thieves are impudent, when they
spurn at their Fetters. Why our Fathers were dreadful, abroad. Why their Sons
are contemptible. Arms inconsistent with Luxury. Who They are, whom Liberty
cannot save. Poverty was Strength, among the Ancients. Wealth, among the
Moderns, is Weakness. Some past Exceptions but the Blazes of Comets. Prediction
of one more such, to come. CONTENTS of CANTO IV. HOW Commerce affects War.
Impolitie Blindnesses in Trade. Ancient Armies not Mercenaries. Rough Sons of
old England described. Modern Lightness and Affectations, in Military Postures,
exposed. -- Compared with the Archer's more manly Appearance, at his Holiday
Exercises. Transition, to a Description of their March to, and Behavior in,
the Battle of Cressi. The French a brave Nation. What the true Cause of our
Victories over them. War not waged, in those Days, by Hirelings. Armies,
un-fear'd, un-paid, and un-standing. Always ready. And skilful alike, in the
Sword, and the Plow-share. Who hinders the same Practice at present. Luxury a
Sun-shewn Cobweb. What Effects It has produced, and where. Saints in Arms: and
Thieves in Discipline. CONTENTS of CANTO V. A National Danger, that lately hung
over these Kingdoms. Strength, natural and political, of France. Her Purpose
discerned, and prevented: and by whom, and by what Means. A wily Spirit put
into Possession of the Brain of Cardinal Fleury. Effect of this Spirit's
Impression on the Cardinal's Ideas: And of the Cardinal's wrong Turn of Head,
on his Nation. Shortsightedness of modern Kings, and Politicians. Lazy Logs,
that load Thrones, conceive no Storm, till they feel it. France, and another
Country, equally balanced for the future, may, now, quarrel securely.
Ridiculous Maxim corrected. Money not the Sinews of War. What, more truly her
Sinews. Where experienced, and from whom. Apostrophe, to Trade. Removeable
Remora's and Impediments to War. A Prediction that they shall be removed.
Martial Medium, at last, will be hit. Trade, War, Power, and Liberty,
reconciled in one Center. What that Center is. Clouds, first to be passed over.
In the Interim, Design goes to sleep. Care frighted away to the Hills of
Armenia. All, hushed, composed, and contented! CONTENTS of CANTO VI. FANCY
drops from her Chariot, and tumbles into the Sea. Narrow Escape of the Power
she was Guide to. Advice to the Duke of Marlborough, for suspending his
Military Warmth, till due Season, and why. Just Encomium, however, on the
Greatness and Generosity of his Purpose. Mistaken Injustice of its Censurers.
Party's Cell. Who at Work, there: and on what. Fruits of factious Partialities.
False Scale for weighing the Great, and the Thinking. In Spite of what, and of
whom, and when, and for what Time, they shall triumph. Transition, to a
Misfortune to be lamented by the Nation: but, peculiarly, by the Marlborough
Family. The Remedy: by a Care that calls loudly on the present Duke. If not,
first, made unnecessary to Him, by the noble Taste of Glory, so conspicuous in
the DUCHESS DOWAGER. Brass and Marble too perishable, to immortalize the late
Duke's, yet not half understood, Great Character. By what Means she may, more
surely, effect it. The Resolution, recommended to Her fine Spirit. It will
re-marry Her own Fame to Her Consort's: and make Both, jointly, and deservedly,
Immortal.
THE FANCIAD.
CANTO I.
POETS whom Truth inspires, and Genius draws,
Court not a Patron, but assert a Cause:
Heedless of Censure, thoughtless of Reward,
They shun Dependence, to demand Regard.
Proud is the Muse they serve; unbred to wait:
And willing Stranger, to the Great Man's Gate.
YET, while their Ivy scorns to taint its Green,
Far from their Thoughts be Arrogance, or Spleen!
Self-subject be the Mind: but let the Heart
Flow for Mankind, and heave with social Smart.
What, but not Who, the Writer, deign to know. --
Verse, that but looks like Flattery, stoops too low.
ALL, pond'ring, -- nor seduced, by Taste, nor Pride,
From Rights of Reason, to Belief's blind Side,
Piercing through Names, to Things, and taught to dare
What Conscience bids, though Devils should bid beware:
Fired for my Country's Fame, hear, MARLBRO'! hear:
The Muse unvenal claims the Patriot's Ear.
No hackn'ydPlunger, Mine -- no Birthday Drone,
That hums hired Nonsense, and benumbs a Throne.
She sings unpension'd, and a Bribe disdains:
No black, appropriate, Mark her Forehead stains,
Unbadg'd to Power; and, but by Truth, confined;
Her Anger hateless: nor her Pity blind.
Detesting Party, and unfool'd by Forms,
She hails no Sunshine; and she flies no Storms:
But weighs, unbiased, (Hope and Hate disclaimed)
A W -- flattered: or a B -- defamed.
O, Thou! -- Sustainer of a deathless Name!
Whom Glory waits for, and whom Vict'ries claim!
Thou, lengthening Stream, that drawn through springless Lands,
Must flow self-deep'ning, or be lost in Sands!
Sigh, and forgive, with a Reflecter's Pain,
Too light a TITLE, to so grave a Strain.
It Is the Time's Curse, when Truth attracts no Eyes,
Till Art conceals her, in the Fool's Disguise.
But, Thou, invoked, expect no light Address:
Thy Race claims Reverence: nor thy Virtues less.
Thine be the Verse -- nor, loved by Both, refuse
Joint-Off'ring, from the Poet, and the Muse.
LATE, when He, first, thy LEARNED COLLECTION viewed,
Each Shelf's long Lading his Retreat pursued:
Clung to pleased Memory, till Idea blazed;
And, on Night's Waste, this vision'd Fabric raised.
DEEP, in that lettered Mansion of the Dead,
Where Souls long linger, after Forms are fled;
Where hostile Tongues concur, in Learning's Right;
And Turk, Jew, Pope, and Pagan, All, unite;
Where slow-distinguish'd Merit shines, too late;
And Estimation casts off Name, for Weight:
Till many a gilt-back'd Wretch, in Death, grows gay,
Whose Life, in Want's bare Weeds, was wept away:
Pond'ring his deathless Store, with Joy surveyed,
Each Path to Science pensive Marlbro' weighed.
Silence and solemn Night had hushed the Scene,
And thin-plac'd Tapers grey'd the Gloom between:
While, here and there, he stopped; as Doubts engage:
Eased a tried Shelf; and turned the examined Page.
Bent on a Theme that all his Ardour claimed,
His Grandsire's Glory, and his Country famed!
While suppliant France he viewed, and victim Spain,
Prostrate Adorners of a female Reign,
Back, from the fluttering Leaves, that flashed with Light,
He starts -- in more than earthly Luster, bright!
Wide, round th'infoliate Fire, in sparkly Glow,
Legions of undulating Glories flow:
No Form, distinguished, limbed the living Blaze,
But a soft Sound thus voic'd th'emitted Rays.
WHY art thou here, when half my Trophies fade?
The Field requires thee, in my Mem'ry's Aid.
Too proud the Hesperian, and the Gaul too vain!
They shake the Continent! they bar the Main!
Quit thy learned Ease, Teach the tame War to shine:
Fate is thy Family's -- and Conquest Thine.
Troy, till ACHILLES came, could fear no Fall:
And Bourbon's Insults for a MARLBRO' call.
TOUCHED to the Soul, th'ingodded Offspring glowed:
And paid in rev'rent Joy, the Vows he owed.
While, from the Center, through the incircling Rays,
Th'unbody'd Parent thus re-voic'd the Blaze.
LEND Practice, to thy Power: nor, longer drain
Ideal Springs, of All that Arts contain.
Givethy Books Rest: thou hold'st the exhausted Store,
Where Mem'ry's magic Muster runs it over.
Roused from theoric Search, un-load thy Freight:
And roll War's Thunder, with THY added Weight.
Go: it is thy Right, the aspiring Gaul to thwart:
Go: shake remembered Marlbro', over his Heart.
Go -- build new Blenheims, for succeeding Fame:
And, to past Triumphs, prove thy RACE's Claim.
Heard, thy known Purpose charms thy Friends Above:
Thy Edwards, and thy Henrys, look -- and love!
Eliza glows! calm Anna's Hopes it warms!
'Twas Force Prophetic, fired thy Soul to Arms.
Oh! were It TIME! -- But, go. Thy Country aid.
Some Cramp's cold Torpor does her Nerves invade!
Never, till now, she sighed, at threatened Blood:
Too rash, too prompt, she pushed the advancing Flood.
Sprung to the Plain, impatient of a Foe:
And knew no Insult: for she spared no Blow.
Now, cautious Vengeance, coldly, halts -- to hear:
While muzzling Forecast fetters Rage, by Fear!
I felt, in Realms of Joy, the unlikely Shame!
Impassive Spirit mourned, for suffering Name.
I called -- Thou heardst: but War's wronged Soul, was fled!
Fame was despised: and Love of Glory dead!
Brave Minds, whom Fashion's changeful Starts misdrew,
At length, feared Danger: as the Mode most new!
Feared non-existing Shades; and Shapes of Air:
A Gorgon's Tresses! -- a Chimaera's Glare!
Feared Monsters, never formed, by Time, nor Chance;
From Spain, feared Rashness! -- Steadiness, from France!
Hung, hesitated, stopped. -- Resolve, re-dread;
All the long Windings of Reluctance tread.
Weighed, and prepared -- prepared, and weighed, once more;
Treated, re-treated, thumb'd Expedients over:
Lost, like a nodding Jove, in Sleep's soft Band;
Loose-grasping idle Thunders, in his Hand!
Go: vindicate, in Arms, thy Birthright's Claim,
Nor let all Sense be lost, of ancient Fame.
Lest Arrogance, un-humbled, climb too high:
And Bourbon call Fifth Henry's Acts a LIE.
Be, All, I was. Be, if thou can be, more!
Be, All, in one great Name, that blazed before!
Be, what thy Country was, when Richard fought;
Or each dire Edward War's red Lesson taught:
When neither Distance, Clime, nor Wants, could tire;
Nor Winds, nor Seas, nor Sickness, damped her Fire:
'Till Sunburned Syria, by untawny Hands,
Saw circly Slaughter drench her smoking Sands.
Be, what thy Country was, when, haughty Spain,
Blushful in Blood, bewailed Eliza's Reign.
Then, iron hearted Biscay shook, with Dread!
Then, warring Squadrons no tame Canvas, spread.
But, now! -- It Is painful, All! --
Spirits, exempt from Insult, feel -- and shrink:
And shocked Archangel Guardians turn, and wink.
(Fallen their Supporter) shield-shown Lilies fade!
-- Shake thy Sword's Lightning over the cumbent Shade.
Rouse the Log Lion, into Sense of Pain:
Couched, in his Den; talon'd and toothed, in vain!
Fright those rash Frogs, that leap, disdainful over:
Rampant, and raised, re-wake his dreadful Roar.
Bid thy Name's Thunder shake the Iberian Strand.
Victory shall hear: and own thy fated Hand!
Gaul shall pant hushed; remindful of the Sound:
Safe-shrunk, behind Pyrene's shieldy Mound.
BUT, Time resists! -- Some Fury blasts thy Aim!
It must not, now, succeed. -- Suspend the Flame.
Pause: but stand firm. Th'incumbent Cloud blows over.
Called to recede, farewell! -- I must no more.
Baleful! and dire! the effluviate Scent of Hell
Breathes near! -- I feel th'intrusive Pest! -- Farewell.
CANTO II.
THE immortal Spirit stopped. -- 'Twas Light no more:
Black refluent Shadows gloom'd the Lustres over.
Sweet, in slow Falls, the softening Notes decay:
And, lost in loose Expansion, die away.
Charmed hung the filial Virtue, fixed profound:
Listening, and lengthening out the last, loved Sound.
'Till silent Horror, touching cold, as Death,
Struck, and drove inward, his suspended Breath.
Wondering, he turned -- and, near the admissive Door,
Met a pale Gleam, that crawled along the Floor.
Mid the streaked Greyness of the dusky Ray,
Dwelt an imperfect Shape, that barred his Way.
Angry and fierce it seemed: yet, came not on.
Formless, and indistinct, It dimly shone.
Tongues, from a War of Heads, loud Jargon threw:
Feet, without Number, strode, with struggling View.
Hands battling Hands, Feet Feet, Tongue crossing Tongue,
One endless Length of aimless Larum rung:
Idly, contentious! Limb to Limb unkind --
Yet, the whole busy Bugbear weak, and blind!
NEED it be told? -- 'Twas FACTION's imag'd Soul,
Faction! that shakes the World, from Pole to Pole.
Plaintive, forever, never un-distrest:
Destroyed, by Motion, yet despising Rest!
Builds, and confounds, with never-ceasing Din:
Without, All Thunder! and All Smoke, within!
WHAT would thou do, th'illusive Scarecrow cried --
What mad Presumption moves thy martial Pride?
Are These fit Times? shall Want's weak Blows restrain
Steel-handed France, and Silver-breasted Spain?
Bats might, as well, pounce Eagles! -- Curs, as soon,
Yelping their midnight Howls, bark down the Moon!
Fame? it is Romantic! -- Liberty's at Stake.
Our Groundwork rises: and our Pillars shake.
Ere, stop-gap Stakes, in foreign Fields, we stand,
Mark, what Home Breaches ask a Mender's Hand.
When Freedom's Friends can separate Interest slight,
When Valor finds no Foes, but Those in Fight;
Then, Patriot Tints may touch that hueless Race,
Whose Prayer is Pension, and whose God is Place.
Then, conscious Thought the Elect's loose Joke reclaim,
Who buys th'Elector's Right to laugh at Shame.
Then, Boys in Senates, veiled in manlier Air,
Absolve th'unthinking Choice, that plac'd'em there.
Stripped to the naked Soul, light Slaves of Dress,
Who live for Pastime in a State's Distress,
Wondering at Power to blush, may, then, first, find,
That more than Tailor goes, to make a Mind.
TRY, cried an interruptive Tide of Tongue,
Old Wills to quicken, or unfire the Young.
Reason the Bribed, to Dread, of courted Shame:
Bid the neglected Proud sit pleased, and tame.
Teach Shops, for Virtue, to relinquish Gain.
Teach Indolence and Ease, to reverence Pain.
From Love's loose Garland, break the Soft away.
Call off keen Sportsmen, to sublimer Prey.
Teach flattering Priests to damn the advowzon'd Friend:
Bid flattering Pens discarded Worth defend.
THEN, Love of Fame may strike a Soul-sunk Race:
And rouse insulted Fleghm, to feel Disgrace!
Till then -- fond Ardour! -- Whence should Victory come?
Why wave yon Ensigns? and why beats that Drum?
Why pours that Trumpet forth it is angry Strains?
-- Mark the capp'd Racers, of those gentler Plains!
Frighted, they fly dispersed, from Plates un-won:
As Rooks rise, kaw-full, round the alarming Gun!
WHENCE, ye pale Powers! should War derive Success,
If Swords are padlock'd, to prevent Redress?
O, dire Dis-relish of derided Fame!
Thou sink'st Ambition, into Self's low Claim:
In sensual Fetters bind'st the sneaking Heart;
And know no Blessing, if thou shar'st no Part.
Thine, the Corruptor's Whisper! Thine, the Sneer,
That, to bought Baseness, lends the witling Fleer!
Thine, the chained Ay, that longs to dare dissent:
Yet, backward, winds the unductile Argument.
Thine, the poor Craft, where Question courts Delay,
Till Ranks, too thin, can mend their loose Array,
Ek'd, in long, wrangling Drawl, to tire Debate:
Load the tugged Ear, and bid Decision wait.
Thine, the mouthed Cerberus, whose Bark frights Hell;
Till (the Sop swallowed) All is hushed, and well.
OUT-BURSTING here, fierce Roars, with Roars combined,
Mixed their clash'd Curses, wild as fighting Wind.
Some charging, some recriminating spoke;
And, first and loudest, out This Torrent broke.
Cursed be the Wretch, -- if such a Wretch there be,
Cursed, till no Devil is half so damned, as He!
Who, working upward, in fermenting Times,
With Trick of Talking, and a Cloak for Crimes,
Risen to a Pitch too dreadful for his Brain,
Looks down with Horror; yet, crawls on, with Pain:
And, inly trembling, for his own feared Fall,
Buys one Man's Safety, with the Rights of All.
Who, neither nerv'd for War, nor brained for Peace,
Shepherds the hounded Flock, to filch the Fleece.
Mazed, amid clueless Folds of timid Care,
Still hunts Evasion: and still starts Despair.
Winds, and un-winds; and, weaving Error's Nets,
In all the puzzling Plunge of Mystery, sweats.
With Mind audacious, but with Heart afraid,
Invites Assaulters, by seducing Aid:
Whose Means too narrow, and whose Ends too bold;
Retreats too hasty, and Resolves too cold.
Whose Dread is Penetration, -- Jest, Regret --
Whose War is See-saw, and whose Peace is Debt.
Who bears his Country's Wrongs, buys off his own:
Or cries, Pelt on -- and skulks behind a Throne.
-- Such if there live, so lost, in Public Trust,
Thus, let Corruption hear her Demon cursed!
THEN, hostile Sounds on Sounds, invasive broke:
And different Powers, with different Vows, invoke.
Frenzy, from disappointed Hope! they cried;
Curses, for Curses, blast your spleenful Pride!
Be doubly cursed, ye dire, malignant, Minds;
Whom Envy cankers, -- not Confusion blinds!
Who, piqu'd at Person, disregard Intent:
And smoth'ring Conscience, give Detraction vent!
With bitter Foretaste, pre-enjoy the Woe,
Your Friend must weep at -- FOR, 'twill hurt your Foe.
Untaught the godlike Power, the generous Art,
To shame the Judgment, yet attract the Heart:
Untaught the patriot Pang, to hold back Sense
Of private Wrongs, -- in Public Preference:
To aid, and guide, Perverseness, you despise;
To pour Discernment on unthankful Eyes:
To serve your Country, though your Schemes are crossed:
To task your Pity, at your Anger's Cost:
And, nobly lending an Opposer Weight,
Wreathe the lost Laurel, for a Head you hate.
SWIFT, from above, down rushed a Flood of Light,
And, rolling radiant, swept the Fiend of Night.
Up flew the Fury. -- Raving loud she rose,
And over the Roof, out-bursting, louder grows:
Augusta hears: and, through her marbly Throats,
Winding, re-multiplies the clashing Notes.
Broad Execration, thence, extending fast,
From circling Millions, swells the expanded Blast.
Round her, above, below, enraged Despair
Rings through the Winds, and climbs the vocal Air.
Concurring Slander meets the assisted Sound,
And, in reverb'rate Tempest, drives it round:
Rock-ribb'd Cornavia joins old Cantium's Roar.
Thence, the voic'd Earthquake shakes the East-Anglian Shore.
Northward, increased, and wid'ning as it goes,
Over the sky'd Grampian, deaf'ning Clamor flows.
Consenting Mona hugs the excursive Blast:
And moist Ierne hears, and howls, the Last!
CANTO III.
STUNNED at the Noise, the pensive Peer revolves
Thy Sweets, fair Candor! and thy calm Resolves:
Shocked at the intemp'rate Fury's formless Brawl,
And doubtful even of Truths, so mixed with Gall.
But starts from Thought, -- involved in Seas of Light!
And hears soft Angels, whispering, on his Right.
" Just, and too wise, a Mind-like Thine, brave Youth!
" Torev'rence Faction! -- Thou were born, for Truth.
" And, lo! the Present Power asserts her Claim:
" White, and unsullied, as thy Grandsire's Fame.
WARMED into Rapture, at the inspiring Sound,
Quick as his Eye-beam's Glance, he turns him round:
There, charmed and wondering, thinks, he sees, below,
Descended Deities, that, near him, glow!
Horses, whose Coats outstreak'd the Morning's Hue;
Pranc'd, amid Flames, that from their Boundings, flew:
Tipped were their pearly Manes, with roseate Bloom,
And every streamy Nostril neigh'd Perfume.
Rein'd in a gemmy Chariot's radiant Blaze,
That shone with dazzling, yet with lambent, Rays,
FANCY, gay Driver! full of Eyes, they drew;
Bright, in a flaky Robe, of changeful Blue:
Winged, were her starry Eyes: and playful Spires
Waved their soft silv'ry Tips, in feath'ry Fires.
Sparks, at each spangly Movement, scattering fly:
And bow-bent Cupids dance, from every Eye.
CALM, on the tow'ry Seat, superior placed,
Sat TRUTH, majestic! obvious to the Waist.
Candid, in naked Loveliness of Air;
Thin-veil'd by lengthening Falls of loosened Hair.
Broad, on her Breast, a Sun's down-darted Rays
Poured, round her Charms, impenetrable Blaze.
Come: to my Guidance trust thy Worth, she cried:
Willed for my Care! and formed, to grace my Side!
Come, trace this baneful Fury's plaintive Yells;
To watery Wastes, where Albion's Guardian dwells:
There shall the Power appealed, responsive, rise,
Check this rash Turbulence, and warn the Wise.
Great, though thy Purpose, and thy Soul sublime,
Halt, in thy March -- and wait the Advance of TIME.
Come, -- the best Judge shall War's wide Wants reveal:
Her, whom thy Soul reveres, thy Heart will feel.
BENDING, she smiled; and stretched her Hand below:
Up sprung the invited Charge, and kissed it is Snow:
Sharing the spotless Seat, irradiate shone,
And felt the aspiring Coursers bounding on.
-- SAVE me, enthusiast Muse! -- Alost, they spring,
Swift and all-scatt'ring, as the Light'ning's Wing!
Bright, through the involving Atmosphere they ride:
And over passed Seas, and sky-topp'd Mountains, glide!
THUS while (outstripping Winds) soft Air they pressed,
The unerring Guide bespoke her wondering Guest.
-- Had my plain Power sufficed, over Faction's Rage,
To lift my Vot'ries, in this partial Age,
Pleased without Pomp, self-conscious, and alone,
Nor raised, thus light, on FANCY's airy Throne,
Thou had beheld me, grave, severe, serene;
Bold, like thy Virtue: modest, as thy Mien!
-- But Passion's Phalanx, no calm Influence breaks;
Truth, till strong-mounted, every Danger shakes.
Now, though contending Worlds should bar our Way,
Safe shall we pass -- nor can false Friends betray.
-- Mark, hence, -- the alarming Thunder's circly Sound
Has heaved the Atlantic, through yon dark Profound!
Look down -- Behold Hibernia's Western Shore:
Here, Europe's Sea-wash'd Skirts emerge no more.
Mark! from the Surge, That Form, up-heaving, slow,
Grows, into Heaven! -- yet walks in Seas below!
Roused at the Din, she wakes; blessed Power! -- it is SHE!
Albion's lost GENIUS! -- hid, beneath her Sea!
Here, in faint Hope, she waits some happier Day:
Sleeps, to shun Sorrow: and wears Shame away.
Here, her sad Head reclines, on Connaught's Sand:
While her stretched Feet annect Nov-Albion's Strand!
It Is for Her sought Decision, These big Roars,
Loudly appealing, rock the awak'ning Shotes.
Hark! the bold Rush of Grievance pains her Ear.
Weighed is her Answer: with due Reverence hear.
Thy Country's Genius best it is Wants detects:
Best knows its Power -- and feels it is dark Defects.
STERN, in rough Majesty, slow-marking round,
Broad and immense, the up-rising Spectre frowned.
Brown over the Surface gloom'd the watery Glade!
-- On, shot, from World to World, th'out-length'ning Shade.
She moves! -- Three Tridents, her Right Hand displays:
Over her broad Forehead, Three crowned Turrets blaze.
Honored, immortal, long-lost Queen! -- she stood:
Struck the sky'd Surge, and aw'dth' uncurling Flood.
" Silence, ye Lands, she cried, whose Hills I shake:"
-- 'Twixt her Left Grasp, Three conscious Kingdoms quake!
Cold, thro'their inmost Vales, in Fear's flat Creep,
Steal, their hushed Souls -- and softening Thunders sleep.
Hark! she begins. -- Her Heav'n-turn'd Voice descends!
Air spreads it, Earth receives, and Truth attends.
WHY am I waked, by Faction's Rage, in vain?
Ill-judg'd Complaint deserves Increase of Pain.
BACK'NING, rebuked, the in-murm'ring Monster groaned:
Hung her hushed Heads -- and, dumbly sullen, moan'd.
WHOM, but yourselves, ye Caitiffs! would you blame?
Ye Slaves of Luxury! ye Shreds of Shame!
Would ye shun Woe, shun Guilt: and dare be PURE.
Curses avail not: it is Contempt, must cure.
Scorned is your Anger, at Events you aid:
What Right have paid Partakers, to upbraid?
Have the Few wronged ye? Let the Many blush!
Where Union shelters, Weight wants Power to crush!
But venal Shrinkers arm the Oppressor's Hand:
All justify the Abuse, which none withstand.
Sell not your Freedom, or your Frowns restrain:
It Is Impudence, in Thieves, to spurn their Chain!
GOLD's effluent Lentor lulls a languid State,
Not from who gives, but who receives the Bait.
Checked, with the Boldness of an honest Scorn,
Bribes are, like Bubbles, burst, as soon as born.
Perish this blind Propensity to rail!
Let the Wise rectify -- The Weak, bewail.
AT home low-rated, and despised abroad,
Vainly you rage, that Insult acts, un-aw'd.
What should it fear?-your warlike Sires, it is true,
More Realms once trembled at, than smile at you.
Sons, to their Names; not to their Fame, ye rose:
Dare yebetaught, whence Allthis Difference grows?
Know your Pain's ROOT. -- Never did partial Fate
At once, to Arms and Lux'ry, form a State.
Wealth is the Bane of War.-Where Avarice flames,
Honor and Enterprise are empty Names.
Dropsy'd by Plenty, lazy Virtue lags:
Help halts, at Murmur: Zeal expires, in Brags.
False Want, by Auction, sells all Taste of Fame,
All Search of Wisdom, and all Sense of Shame.
Dream not, deceived, that Liberty can save,
Whom Vice enfeebles, and low Thoughts enslave.
Base Love of Gain, to Hate of Danger, tied,
In War, breeds Diffidence: in Safety, Pride.
No Frame of Freedom ever was built, to last,
Where Independence held not Virtue fast.
Commerce, and Wealth, may paint an Empire's Face:
But aid her Beauty to her Strength's Disgrace.
Lean Poverty moved light, -- and, limbed for Toil,
Was pleased with Marches, and content with Spoil:
Possessing little, had no Loss to dread:
But, brisk and hopeful, was to Victory led.
Wealth is Encumbrance, and to Fears allied;
Held back, by Forecast; dis-inclin'd by Pride:
Un-nerv'd, by Privilege; by Faction, fired;
In Peace, contentious; and, in Action, tired.
WHAT! though One Son of mine, through Darkness bright,
Beamed Indistinction: and emblazon'd Night?
CAESAR'S, sometimes, and sometimes MARLBRO's rise:
Comets! that sweep new Tracks, and fright the Skies!
Not to be measured, These, by War's known Laws:
Formed, for excentric Fame, and learned Applause!
No General System circumscribes their Ways.
They move, un-rival'd: and were born, to blaze!
These make, like DEITIES, the Men they lead:
Dust, in their Hands, grows Life! and Languor, Speed!
These, I except -- as bursting Nature's Chains:
No Rule includes them: and no Chance restrains!
ONE MARLBRO' blessed me, thus! -- nor One the Last:
Heaven sees the future, kindling at the past!
Son, of his Soul, ANOTHER SUCH shall shine:
Ah! -- were his Speed unclogg'd -- He, NOW, were mine!
Such, ere Ten Winters wane, through Fate I see --
Brings on new Wonders: and shall shine for ME.
TRUTH, smiling on her Guest, that Fate applied:
Conscious, He bowed, and blushed -- and looked aside.
CANTO IV.
LEARN, cried the Genius, and resumed her Clue;
Learn, with what groundless Hope the Sword ye drew.
Find, in your Trade's Extent, your Triumph's Bar:
You courting Commerce, Commerce cumb'ring War!
Who, but a God, can guard a State from Harms,
Too rich for Virtue, and too proud for Arms!
Where Stall-fed Plumpness rails out lazy Life;
And murmuring Millions lend but Tongues to Strife!
Where Fools of Fortune grasp their Purse, with Care;
Yet, hurl the guardian Sword, to rash Despair!
Scorn the poor Soldier, whose Defense they buy:
Yet dread those Dregs of Want, they hire to die!
Trust, where they fear -- yet, injure, where they trust:
With Heads unheedful, and with Hearts unjust.
Starve, and provoke, Distress, which ARMED, they see!
And dream THOSE Slaves, by whom Themselves are free!
Where, shunning Musters, Pride bids Pen'ry dare:
And Fame's a Toy, beneath a Tradesman's Care!
BUT, 'twas not, always, so! -- Not always bled
Low, mercenary Breasts, by Hunger led.
Once, there was nobler War. -- Else, France! thy Fields
Had lost no Lilies, to my EDWARD's Shields.
There was a Time, when Kings, of martial Soul,
In Death's black Bands, could Yeomens Hearts enrol:
When Thames, and Trent, and Tracts where Severn runs,
" Poured at their Prince's Feet their dreadful Sons:"
Youths, whom no raw Resentment's idiot Start
Snatched, from a Sweet-heart's Frown, or Parent's Heart:
But, versed in Arms, from Boy-hood's opening Bloom;
Aspects, of surly Force, and threatening Gloom!
No puny Postures spaniel'd native Glow:
No mincing Motions jirk'd, the undancing Bow.
Scornful of Tricks, and Twists, and apish Fling;
The thigh-struck Hand-clap, and the heel-twirl'd Spring;
The toe-toss'd Strut, the down-thump'd Firelock's Bang;
The Stare of Promptness, and the time-kept Clang.
Needless Parade, to Limbs, from infant Dawn,
Nerv'd into Menace, and fatigued, to Brawn!
Churls, whom each Festival to Practice led,
Braced for the shafted Butt, with sin'wy Tread:
Praised, by the Nymphs they loved, by Friends caressed;
And, by pleased Groups of joy-touch'd Parents, blessed!
Firm, as a Pyramid's broad Base, they stood:
And sternly meas'ring, eyed the whitened Wood:
Each strong-strain'd Muscle, hard retracting, bent,
Backed the tugged Arrow, to it is Length's Extent:
Then, the String struggling, out the Mischief flew --
Shook, in the Mark: and shook the Observers too!
THESE were the Limbs, by Nature formed, to kill!
Big-bon'd Athletics! bred, to Brawls, and Skill!
Theirs, were the Hands for Blows! the Eyes for Fight!
The Voice for Startling! and the Scorn for Flight!
EVEN now, rough Sons! pleased Memory paints 'em gay!
Muscly, they march, -- to CRESSI's dreadful Day!
Swarms of light GAULS, in vain, broad Plains, o'erfill:
Shine, from each Steep, and quicken every Hill.
Conscious, in vain, pale Genii lend their Aid;
Cowr over each Standard: scream from every Shade!
In vain, Streams, Woods, Rocks, Walls, and Turrets, lined,
With vocal Thunder arm the impregnate Wind.
Onward we pressed -- slow meas'ring hostile Ground;
Unreck'ning Number, and un-answ'ring Sound.
With Look fixed forward, dreadfully serene!
My sour-soul'd Archers moved, with surly Mien.
Dumbly severe, the hers'd Arrangement closed:
And one long Weft, of War-knit Strength, composed.
No Smoak's involving Night their Frowns concealed:
No roared Explosion stunned the deaf'ning Field.
Hushed, as the Shades of Death, whose Shafts they bore,
Majestic Stillness breathed stern Reverence, over!
Aweful Attention watched, the unsounding Sign:
Till the raised Finger warned th'awak'ning Line.
Then, back'ning aimful, Rank from Rank reclined,
Their String-strain'd Arrows loosened to the Wind --
Prone, and point-blanc, the Front's barb'd Tempest drove;
While, in curv'd Cloud, the Rear's slop'd Lightnings rove.
Storms, foll'wing Storms, a steely Deluge rain:
And Drifts of feath'ry Death deface the Plain!
WHY were these Glories Ours? -- 'Twere poor, to boast!
Brave is the Gaul! and forms no feeble Host!
All that was Man's was Theirs. -- Who wrongs his Foe,
Shames his own Triumph, and disclaims his Blow.
-- What, then, prevailed -- over Courage, Numbers, Laws?
'Twas -- that no venal Hireling stained my Cause.
Then, War was Freehold Tenure: farmed no Aid:
Limp'd on no golden Legs -- exposed no Trade:
No lukewarm Shout, in Death's dire Field was known;
For, each touched Pleader felt the Cause his own.
Then, fiery Barons bled, for England's Fame:
And kindling Tenants caught their Landlord's Flame.
One, vast, un-listed, Host, whole Albion framed:
Marched, conquered, and dispersed -- to Cotts reclaimed:
Active, alike, the Death-dy'd Sword to wield,
Or wind the Plow-share's Point, to tame the Field.
To Bribes, unbow'd: yet ductile in Command:
Their Heart, their Country's -- and their King's, their Hand,
STILL-but how changed! -thus, thus, were Armies taught;
Un-paid, thus tractile; and thus raised, un-bought:
Forever standing, and yet never feared;
By Rights, held Freemen, and, to Homes, endeared:
Nor Time, nor Envy, should your Safety shake:
Nor Nimrod's Hunters your Enclosures break.
BUT, Trade's exempted Pride no Arms will bear:
She sells her Scarlet; and bids Misery wear!
Her silken Sons, and Drum's big Sound chagrines:
Her End is Safety -- but she scorns the MEANS!
OH, Lux'ry! Sun-shown Cobweb! weakly fine!
Thy soft Seduction, none could ever resign:
Till wrapped in Ruin, (which Thy Love made Fate)
Thou falling -- with thee fell th'unjointed State!
Name not her glittering Face: proud Shade. -- 'twas She,
Gave Carthage up -- to Rome, poor, brave, and free.
Again, 'twas She, to naked Vandals, gave
Rome, rich, proud, base, a Coward, and a Slave.
'Twas Wealth's fat Indolence, superbly weak!
To Lydian Wand'rers, sold the Imperial Greek.
Hard, as their native Hills, descending Swarms
Of Thieves, in Penury, and Saints, in Arms,
Plund'ring Byzantium's GOLD, it is Influence felt:
And, now, wait, ripening -- for the Woes they dealt.
So mourned the tutelary Power; and paused:
Pensively touched, for Ills by Affluence caused!
While a thin Pediment, of colored Clouds,
Truth, and her Chariot's flamy Driver, shrouds:
Over the curled Windings of whose wavy Flow,
That, wid'ning vast, o'ercop'd the Depth below;
FANCY, in fiery Rings, on Air's soft Field,
Round, and still round, the impatient Coursers wheeled.
CANTO V.
LONG, sighed the Genius, thoughtfully begloom'd;
At length, broke Silence; and her Theme resumed.
DREAD, what you heard, my Sons! and shun this Doom
Of Greece, rich Carthage, and all-conqu'ring ROME.
Let your near Danger, now it is past, be known!
The impending Suffering was designed your own!
Yes, Boaster France! had thou but known thy Day;
Known, where thy Strength, cluded Samson, lay:
Known, what resistless Odds, in War, befriend
The Sons of Steel, where Slaves of Gold contend;
Abstemious Patience Pride's great Work had done;
Commerce had still been lost -- but Empire won!
(HEAVEN!) to my frighted Fancy, let me paint
What, late, France was -- then, boast her timed Restraint!
Twenty prompt Millions pressed her peopled Plains;
Who fed no Factions; and who felt no Chains:
Despotic Power grew there, in plaintless Soil;
Peasants, who sung, in Want; and danced, in Toil!
Dependent Nobles, fired for martial Fame:
A Church, All linking to one Sovereign Claim.
Her Sons too poor for Pride, too fierce for Trade:
Her King, too stored, to need a Merchant's Aid!
VAST, and self-mov'd, on came this Giant Soul!
Each Part connected, to propel the Whole:
For Conquest apt, and panting to begin:
And bursting every Rein, that held her in.
I saw the all-daring Power! Too near, she stood:
Hung over her Cliffs, and darkened Half my Flood!
-- Is there, I cried, in vast Ambition's Walk,
No dim proud Corner, where Mistake might stalk?
With fancied Forms, to scare misjudging Sight,
Till Shade seem Substance, and Deception Light?
There IS! -- Blind Envy shall contend, to share
Disputed COMMERCE -- and enervate WAR:
Bloat humble Want, to wealthy Discontent:
Feed Strength, to Weakness: and give Faction Vent:
Till fading Lilies, by rank Weeds, o'ergrown,
The Priest's false Step shall shake the Prince's Throne.
IN Heaven's kind Ear, I lodged the accepted Prayer:
(Still reigns my MARLBRO's living Influence there!)
Walking, with Seraph Powers, the eternal Round,
The immortal Captain caught the imploring Sound:
Where, on War's Theme, with MICHAEL, he conferred,
And Caesar's silent Soul, attentive, HEARD.
Strait, from unbounded Voids of azure Light,
Where Spirits, freed from Flesh, and bleach'd from Night,
Gliding, from Sun to Sun, new Worlds survey,
That roll, by Millions, and adorn their Way:
The all-rev'renc'd Leader called a wily Mind,
That left all Tinge of bodied Phlegm behind;
One, that had Popes and Jesuits Ardour fired;
And slow-soul'd Mufties solemn Spleens inspired:
Now, stripped and naked, skimm'd the eternal Space,
Anxious for Office, and in Wait, for Place.
Go, cried the Voice Seraphic, faithful! tried! --
In Fleury's brainy Cells, thy Entrance hide:
Heedful attend, where Thought's dim Embryos lie:
Fan the speck'd Fire -- but bend its Flame awry.
Lure him the Effects of powerful WEALTH to dread:
And to tried Traffic turn the Frenchman's Head.
THERE! conquering Guardian, of thy Country's Fame
Blessed be thy Spirit! deathless be thy Name!
There sprung the MINE, shall cost the unwary Foe
A hundred Blenheims, in one, peaceful, Blow!
Now, Seas and Lands, Gaul's grasping Talon strains:
And rich Obstruction cloggs her tumid Veins.
Bound down to Avarice, and improved, for Prey,
Terror shall hesitate Resolves away:
Reclaim of Rights revolt each stubborn Town,
And sliced Exemptions lop the curtailed Crown:
Heavy, on slow, chock'd, Wheels, the encumbered State
Shall drag stretched Faction's all-retarding Weight.
O, Policy! short-sighted Shade of Skill!
How small thy Grasp is! how immense, thy Will!
WHO weighed the Weakness, of this dreaded Man?
WHO marked, his Purpose blasted, by his Plan?
How have rash Kings concurred, to swell thy Fame,
Calm Fleury! -- how be-gemm'd thy faded Name!
Blind to thy Scheme's Event, they failed to see
Republics raised on ruined Monarchy:
Failed to foremark the exalted Peasant's Tread,
High in Trade's Sandals, over the Noble's Head:
And this feared Priest -- praised Idol, of an Hour!
With nursed Rebellion, blast his PRINCE's Power!
So fall the lazy Logs, that load a Throne;
Lump Lords, of All Men's Passions, but their own!
Whose truant 'Scape from Care conceives no Storm,
Till the Waves reach them, and the Winds deform;
Then start they, half awake! stare, stamp, and rail;
Void and tempestuous, as the o'ertaking Gale!
Fierce, in hot Fright, unhelm one erring Tool:
And, to new Masters, put their Faith to School.
HAIL, my saved Sons! -- now, smile at threatening France,
Declined for ever, by misjudg'd Advance!
One glittering Weakness lightning both your Scales,
Quarrel secure, while neither's Weight prevails:
By one false Maxim, two fierce Nations cooled --
That War's tough Sinews owe their Strength to GOLD!
Trite Blindness! -- Thousand falling States shall feel,
No Power can ever want GOLD, whose Nerves are STEEL.
This, Rome's old Generals, born for Conquest, knew:
For whom, unsown, Earth's hostile Harvests grew.
This, knew lean Hunns, devouring Rome's Increase!
This, Greeks in Persia knew: and Turks, in Greece.
This, Goth Gustavus, meas'ring German Soil:
And ALL, the un-number'd Wasters, paid by Spoil.
O, Trade! fair Dalilah! -- thy wanton Charms
Bind lap-laid Slumb'rers, while thy Fear disarms!
How sweet thy Smile! how dazzling is thy Glare!
Witchcraft thy Accents! Paradise thy Air!
Yet, weak'ning Wantonness thy Slaves destroys:
Nerveless thy Vot'ries! indolent thy Joys!
Sunk, and absorbed, within thy soft Embrace,
Pants the lulled Virtue, and forgets Disgrace. --
With Sense, too abject, and with Claim, too proud,
Thou shrink'st the Noble: and thou swell'st the Crowd.
Too tasteful Those, to leave luxurious Seats,
For Sunburned Marches, or for Sea-shook Fleets!
And These too want-less, to be trained to Awe;
Where Mobs make Magistrates, and Brib'ry Law!
UNMARKED, these Remoras, close cleaving, deep,
Hang on War's Motions, and retard her Sweep:
But Time's slow Scythe the encumbered Keel shall free,
Point the strait Course, and smooth the obstructed Sea.
Thou, Faction! HEAD by HEAD, sop-silenc'd, fast,
Shall rest thy Heels; and fold thy Arms at last!
Then, un-impeded Councils, laboring long,
Shall hit that Martial Medium, safely strong:
Where Trade, War, Power, and Freedom, cen'tring, meet!
-- ASKILL'D MILITIA! and a GUARDIAN FLEET!
TILL then -- (long, intervening Shades I see!)
Darkness and Diffidence require not ME.
Farewell -- your Howl shall break my Rest no more.
Bawl -- till Sleep's destined Gag suspends your Roar.
HERE stopped the Genius. -- Three wiped Tears she shed:
And Clouds descending veiled her tow'ry Head.
Three times, she sighed: then, lost, in slow Descent,
Sunk, through the embracing Surge's pressed Extent:
Strait, dull, surrounding Flatness smoothed the Deep;
Hushed Winds, half whispering, lull Design to sleep;
Fat stagnant Reeks unbrace reposing Air.
Wide, over Armenian Hills, flew frighted Care.
Happy Content saw Fame's close Curtain drawn:
And Three stretched Nations shared one pangless Yawn.
CANTO VI.
QUENCHED, and down-rushing, like a falling Star,
Off dropped chilled FANCY, from her flamy Car:
In shrunk her Fires: her winged Ideas die;
And dim Suffusion darkened every Eye.
Whirled, like ejected Phaeton, she fell:
And over her, murmuring, closed, the unfathomed Swell.
Active, no more, the ethereal Coursers neigh:
No more flashed Lightnings mark their burning Way.
Tame, hung their drooping Necks: Each loos'ning Trace
Drags false -- and all the exulting Nerves unbrace.
Half the plunged Harness, now, the Sea conceals:
Now, hissing Waves half quench the smoking Wheels!
When, stooping mild, calm Truth her Danger spied:
Snatched the saved Reins -- Herself her surest Guide!
Up, from the engulphing Deep's defeated Flow,
Rose the drawn Chariot -- steady! solemn! slow!
Beamless, and bald of Fires: but heavenly White!
Rich, without Pomp, and, without Dazzling bright.
Soft gliding homeward, through unruffled Air,
Thus spoke the Immortal, to her pensive Care.
OH, Pain-touch'd Marlbro'! mitigate thy Grief:
Check thy warm Wish, till Heaven prepares Relief.
Wait thy due Glories: born, an Age too late;
When Fear grew Wisdom, and Contempt was FATE!
Snatched to thy lettered Pile, indulge Retreat:
Suspend thy Purpose; and disarm thy Heat.
Bear back thy unpermitted Power to shine:
While gathering Darkness spreads, by Doom Divine!
While Genius quits an un-aspiring Race;
Where War is pinioned: and Corruption Grace!
Where, Solids sinking, only Bubbles swim:
Where Fame is Quixotism! and Virtue Whim!
YET, be thy Brav'ry blessed! that dared intend!
Blessed thy skilled Means, that matched thy Patriot End!
Blessed thy Soul's generous Start from Home, to flame
Expansive, for Redress of Alien Shame!
And was there? could there be? whose angry Zeal
Disclaimed this Fervor! or declined to feel!
Which, wid'ning with a God's impartial Call,
Left some dissatisfied, to care for ALL!
Oh! hushed, forever, be the rash Complaint,
That saw such Greatness, with an Eye so faint!
-- Is there a Breast, overwhelmed with willing Woe?
That can, for Public, private Joys forego?
Sigh, for his Pains, O World! -- since one, who bears
For All -- gives ALL Distress, by separate Shares.
SHAME on that locked Recess, in Party's Cell,
Where groveling Pique, and brow-bent Censure, dwell!
Where in-look'd Arrogance sits, crippling Sense:
Helped, by pained Pride, and angry Eminence!
Laboring, each Heave, of Pity's Heart, to quell;
And squeeze whole Nature into Self's hard Shell!
O, Spleen! -- Thy Gall has Reason's Mark effaced:
Till Human Weakness measures Truth, by Taste!
Our Deeds catch Color from Opinion's Hue:
And Right and Wrong take Name, from Place, and View!
These are thy Triumphs, thou detractive Cheat,
Cloak'd Faction! perched in Freedom's sullied Seat.
Narrow'd Contraction suits thy shortened Sight:
As Owls owe Eye-beams to the Dusk of Night.
Lost, to Perception of the Soul's Extent,
Thou feel'st no Greatness, stretched beyond thy Bent.
Merit, thou try'st by Service: Guilt, by Hate.
Call'st Malice Vigilance: and Knav'ry, Weight.
Worth, in a Foe, thy Eyes want Strength to see:
And no Tear touches, till it flows for THEE.
SUCH are the Scales, in which the Great are weighed!
And by such Optics is the Muse surveyed!
Yet, spite of Envy, Slander, Wrongs, and Time,
The Great shall triumph, and the Muse shall climb.
When the pale Meteors of a State's dark Day
Fall, from their Heights, and steam their Stench away:
When All the Chance-mix'd Mobs of Power shall die,
And, lost in titled Dust, forgotten lie:
When Ministry, and Pomp, and Wealth, and Trade,
And Place, and Pride, and Hopes, and Fears, shall fade:
When, silent as their Grave's forsaken Gloom!
Kings, justly buried, shall no Life resume;
Then, shall immortal Triumph swell the Name,
That fought, for Glory: or that thought, for Fame.
Then even the obscurer Sons, of future Praise,
Whose Heads wore Diadems, or Genius, Bays,
Risen, from Oppression's Wound, or Want's Restraint,
From Foes too furious, or from Friends too faint;
In second Life, past Fortune's Guilt atone;
And, one Age lost, claim All the Rest, their own.
Bright, in distinguished Orbs, of Wit, and War,
Mark Hist'ry's measured Heaven, from Star, to Star.
HERE, pause; -- and sigh one Pain, supremely Thine:
Thou, great Transmitter, of a MARLBRO's Line!
-- While, nobly negligent of CAESAR's Care,
No self-shown Comments conscious Skill, declare;
Greatly content, to save and serve, Mankind,
Yet, lose Himself, and leave no Lights, behind!
Where are the PENS, that, aidful of his Fame,
Fight his past Battles, and ungloom his Claim?
TRUE, the dry Drones of Care can Facts enrol,
Call Annals HISTORY: and forget, but, SOUL.
True, even through Clouds like Theirs, His Acts can blaze!
-- But, mass-mix'd Piles profane His hallowed Praise.
It Is not with wide-spread Smoke, from Side Events,
To veil schem'd Views, and darken lost Intents:
It Is, through the thought-perplexing Deeps of War,
Skilful, to hold in View the GUIDING STAR!
From one, chief Part, educe the pendent Whole:
Till acting Body proves, but acted Soul.
THINK! -- in the Sunset of a conquering State,
Should Gaul's vain Sons dispute their Conqu'ror's Weight?
Or partial German (socializing Fame)
Bid Indistinction drown connected Name?
Where is the Proof so plain, the Light so strong,
Could shame the Encroachment, and repel the Wrong?
The Saver of Half Europe, who could save? --
No grateful Pen re-pays the Fame, He gave!
Where could we boast His full-drawn Length, designed,
In Strokes, that vivify the pictured Mind?
Where is that Hand, that, copying from the Heart,
Can trace it is Compass, and its Depth impart?
And, skilled, to justify deduced Applause,
Hunt the due Glory, through the darkened Cause?
Show Actions done, compared with Measures meant?
Give, the Soul's Conquest, in the Plan's Extent?
From laurell'd Councils, wind the Triumph down;
And trust no Power to Chance, to stain Renown?
Drawn, for Eternal Taste, and every Clime,
Lend Marlbro's lengthened Life, to dateless Time?
O! it is a dreadful Task! and claims Thy Care:
Thou, his Name's Guardian! and his Glory's Heir!
-- If, (first) not HERS, the accomplished Purpose shine,
Whose Right stands foremost -- and precludes even Thine.
Hers, to whose Choice his Love-drawn Heart inclined:
The soft, sole, CONQU'ROR, He was born to find!
SHE -- nobly touched, for Heroes Taste of Fame!
Bids Brass and Marble breathe the attested Flame.
But, Brass and Marble must, Themselves, decay:
No Life possessing, These no Life convey.
These, Time shall eat; and Love's lost Sigh be vain:
Nor (even in Heaven!) Her Soul escape One Pain!
But, -- would her pious Hand engrave his Name,
Deeper than Brass can bear, or Stone proclaim:
Let her some Life's devoted Length engage,
Skilful, to lead him, down the illumined Page:
Marked like Himself: all shown, all felt, all read --
And living fresh, when Blenheim's Towers are dead.
BUT, Who? -- What Strength such Atlas Weight, can bear?
The Pen's vast Spirit, like the Chief's, must dare!
Winged withHISFire, like Lightning, sweep the Plain:
Yet, tower, all temperate, to the Conqu'ror's Brain!
SUCH, may your House's happy Judgment find!
Ere Fate, or Fortune, gives it to the Wind.
Worn or consumed, ere PAPERS quit their Trust:
And the wronged Shade lament the mouldering Dust!
FINIS

