THE HEIRESS. A COMEDY IN FIVE ACTS. [PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.] [
Entered at Stationers' Hall.]

THE HEIRESS. A COMEDY IN FIVE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL
DRURY LANE.

Spectatores, ad pudicos mores facta haec fabula est:
Qui pudicitiae esse voltis praemium, plausum date.
PLAUTUS. LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. DEBRETT, OPPOSITE BURLINGTON-HOUSE,
PICCADILLY. MDCCLXXXVI.

TO THE EARL OF DERBY.
MY DEAR LORD,
OUR connection and friendship, as well as the partiality I know you will
entertain in favor of any attempt at regulated Drama, mark you as the person,
to whom, with the most propriety, and inclination, I can inscribe the Comedy of
the Heiress.

It also comes to your Lordship's hand with a secondary claim to your
acceptance, as owing its existence to the leisure and tranquillity I enjoyed
during the two last summers at Knowsley.

I long intended, as your Lordship can witness, to keep the name of the author
concealed. After the success with which the Play has been honored, I must
expect that the change of my design will be imputed by many to vanity: I shall
submit, without murmuring, to that belief, if I may obtain equal credit for the
sincerity of another pride which this discovery gratifies -- that, of
testifying, in the most public manner, the respect, and affection with which I
have the honor to be,

My dear Lord, Your most obedient, And most humble servant, J. BURGOYNE.
H^rtford street, Feb 1 st, 1786.
PREFACE.
THE approbation the following Comedy has received upon the Stage, and the
candor with which every criticism, that has come to the Author's knowledge,
has been accompanied, might encourage him to trust it to the closet without any
other preface, than an acknowledgement of his gratitude to the Public, for the
honors done to him. And if he detains the reader a few moments more, it is not
to disavow what has been hinted at in some of the daily prints, as a species of
plagiarism, but to plead it in behalf of dramatic writing in general* against
rules, that if carried to the extent they lead to, would fix shackles upon
genius, and give a very undue limitation to variety.

In point of fable for instance -- Is it a reproach to borrow?

Surely the dramatist, like the architect, brings his talents equally to the
test, whether he builds upon another man's ground or his own. And if instead of
small and detached parts, the writer of the Heiress had taken the complete plot
of his play from a novel; he would have imitated the examples (the only
imitation to which he has any pretense) of the best dramatic Poets of every age.

In point of originality of characters -- It is humbly hoped this Comedy is not
without it. But present instances apart, it is submitted to the judicious,
whether such an exaction of novelty as would make a resemblance to any thing
ever seen upon the stage before unacceptable, might not materially vitiate the
public taste, carry the major part of writers beyond the scope of nature and
probability, and deprive the spectator of that pleasing and infinite diversity
of shape and coloring that the leading passions, vices, and follies of
civilized life, admit. Love, avarice, misanthropy, etc. etc. if drawn a
thousand and a thousand times with new shades, and in different points of view,
will do as much credit to invention, and have as just an effect in exhibition,
as if Moliere or Congrave had never touched the subjects. It is not whether
there may not be personages in the Heiress, in whom we may discover family
features, that is asked, but whether they are not still individuals, with whom
we have been hitherto unacquainted -- i^ a question, not for the Author to
determine.

Original thought -- It has been observed that there is an image in a speech of
Lord Gayville, copied closely from Rousseau. Very possibly it may be so. The
Author of the Heiress certainly has read that elegant writer; and to show how
easily invention may be deceived, he will quote another writer (in his
estimation still more elegant) who thus accounts, and apologizes for,
unconscious plagiarism -- "Faded ideas," says Mr. Sheridan, "Float in the fancy
like half forgotten dreams; and imagination, in its fullest enjoyments, becomes
suspicious of its offspring, and doubts whether it has created or adopted."

More sentiments and expression due to the imagination of others, may possibly
be challenged, though they are equally out of the recollection of the Author.
-- He would only wish the candid to admit the probability, that while he
believed them his own, he thought them his best.

Many of the scenes now submitted to perusal, have been shortened in
representation, and a few words have been altered occasionally to preserve
connection -- a circumstance necessary to be known lest the performers should
be suspected of negligence, when, on the contrary, too much cannot be said of
their attention and zeal. When all have been eminent, it would be unnecessary,
if not invidious, to particularize any: There is nevertheless a Lady, to whom,
by her standing separately and individually in one part of the performance, the
Author, without departing from his maxim, may express his more than ordinary
obligation. Miss Farren, by her inimitable manner of delivering the Epilogue,
has made a better apology to the public than any his pen could have produced,
for a composition which, from an accident, was much too hastily written in some
parts, and in others pieced together with a like insufficiency of time.

The Epilogue excepted, no defects in the following sheets can be covered by
the excuse of hurry: They cannot be so, consistently with truth, nor indeed,
with inclination: For the Author had rather be thought incapable of pleasing,
after his greatest cares, than wanting in the attention and respect which every
man who ventures to publish a production of this nature owes to the world and
to himself -- Not to let it pass from his hands without frequent revisal, and
the best considered finish his abilities can give.

PROLOGUE. By the Rt. Hon. RICHARD FITZPATRICK. Spoken by Mr. KING.
AS sprightly sunbeams gild the face of day,
When lowering tempests calmly glide away,
So when the Poet's dark horizon clears,
Arrayed in smiles, the Epilogue appears.
She, of that house the lively emblem still,
Whose brilliant speakers start what themes they will,
Still varying topics for her sportive rhymes
From all the follies of these fruitful times,
Uncheck'd by forms, with flippant hand may cull,
Prologues, like Peers, by privilege are dull.
In solemn strain address the assembled Pit,
The legal judges of dramatic wit,
Confining still with dignified decorum,
Their observations, -- to the Play before 'em.
Now when each bachelor a helpmate lacks,
(That sweet exemption from a double Tax)
When laws are framed with a benignant plan
Of lightning burdens on the married man,
And Hymen adds one solid comfort more
To all those comforts he conferred before,
To smooth the rough laborious road to fame
Our bard has chosen -- an alluring name.
As wealth in wedlock often is known to hide
The imperfections of a homely bride,
This tempting title, he perhaps expects,
May heighten beauties, -- and conceal defects:
Thus sixty's wrinkles, viewed through fortune's glass,
The rosy dimples of sixteen surpass:
The modern suitor, grasps his fair one's hand,
O'erlooks her person, and adores -- her land;
Leers on her houses with an ogling eye,
Over her rich acres heaves an amorous sigh,
His heartfelt pangs through groves of -- timber vents,
And runs distracted for -- her three per cents.
Will thus the Poet's mimic Heiress find,
The bridegroom critic to her failings blind,
Who claims, alas! his nicer taste to hit,
The Lady's portion paid in sterling wit?
On your decrees, to fix her future fate,
Depends our Heiress for her whole estate:
Rich in your smiles, she charms the admiring town;
A very bankrupt, should your chance to frown:
O may a verdict, given in your applause,
Pronounce the prosperous issue of her cause,
Confirm the name an anxious parent gave her,
And prove her Heiress of -- the Public Favor!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Clement Flint, Mr. KING. Clifford, Mr. SMITH. Lord Gayville, Mr. PALMER.
Alscrip, Mr. PARSONS. Chignon, Mr. BADDELEY. Mr. Blandish, Mr. BANNISTER, jun.
Prompt, Mr. R. PALMER. Mr. Rightly, Mr. AICKIN.
Chairman, Servants, etc.

WOMEN.
Lady Emily, Miss FARREN. Miss Alscrip, Miss POPE. Miss Alton, Mrs. CROUCH.
Mrs. Sagely, Mrs. BOOTH. Tiffany, Miss TIDSWELL. Mrs. Blandish, Mrs. WILSON.
THE HEIRESS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Lady's Apartment.
Mr. Blandish and Mrs. Letitia Blandish discovered writing: letters folded up,
and message cards scattered upon the table. Mrs. Blandish. Leans upon her
elbows as meditating. Writes as pleased with her thought, lays down the pen.
THERE, it is complete -- -- reads conceitedly "Adieu, my charming friend, my
amiable, my all
Accomplished sociate! conceive the ardor of
Your lover's united with your own sensibility --
Still will the compound be but faintly expressive
Of the truth and tenderness of your
"LETITIA BLANDISH." There Is phrase -- There Is a period -- Match it if you can.


Blandish. Not I indeed: I am working upon a quite different plan: but you are
as welcome to my cast off style, as you should be to my old embroidery. Pick
out the gold if it be of any use.


Mrs. Blandish. Cast off style! Excellent assurance! And pray, Sir, to whom are
you indebted for the very elements of wheedling, and all that has attended it is
progress, from the plaything in your nursery, to the brilliant upon your finger?


Blandish. For the elements, my honored sister, and partner, I confess the
obligation; but for the proficiency, I have attained the sublime of the
science, while you with more experience are still a novice; like a Miss at her
stuttering harpsicord, with a nimble finger, but no ear; -- You keep in tune,
it is true, for that is the merit of the instrument, but you are continually out
of time, and all-ways thrumming the same key.


Mrs. Blandish. Which in plain English is as much as to say --


Blandish. That human vanity is an instrument of such ease and compass, the
most unskilful can play something upon it: but to touch it to the true purpose
--


Mrs. Blandish. Well, Sir, and look round you pray; these apartments were not
furnished from the interest of two miserable thousand pounds in the three per
cents, any more than our table and equipage have been maintained by your
patrimony -- A land estate of three hundred a year, out of repair, and
mortgaged for nearly it is value. I believe I have stated our original family
circumstances pretty accurately.


Blandish. They wanted improvement, it must be acknowledged. But before we
bring our industry to a comparison, in the name of the old father of flattery,
to whom is that perfect phrase addressed?


Mrs. Blandish. To one worth the pains, I can tell you. -- Miss Alscrip.


Blandish. What, sensibility to Miss Alscrip! my dear sister, this is too much,
even in your own way; had you run changes upon her fortune, stocks, bonds and
mortgages; upon Lord Gayville's coronet at her feet, or forty other coronets,
to make footballs of, if she pleased, -- it would have been plausible; but the
quality you have selected --


Mrs. Blandish. Is one she has no pretensions to, therefore the flattery is
more persuasive -- that is my maxim.


Blandish. And mine also, but I don't try it quite so high -- Sensibility to
Miss Alscrip! you might as well have applied it to her Uncle's Pig-iron, from
which she derives her first fifty thousand; or the harder heart of the old
Usurer, her Father, from whom she expects the second. But come rings to the
business of the morning.

Enter Prompt the Valet de Chamber. Here Prompt -- send out the chairmen with
the billets and cards. -- Have you any orders, madam?


Mrs. Blandish delivering her letter. This to Miss Alscrip, with my impatient
enquiries after her last night's rest, and that she shall have my personal
statute in half an hour. -- You take care to send to all the lying-in ladies?


Prompt. At their doors, Madam, before the first load of straw.


Blandish. And to all great men that keep the house -- Whether for their own
disorders, or those of the nation?


Prompt. To all, Sir -- their secretaries, and principal clerks.


Blandish. aside to Prompt. How goes on the business you have undertaken for
Lord Gayville?


Prompt. I have conveyed his letter, and expect this morning to get an answer.


Blandish. He does not think me in the secret?


Prompt. Mercy forbid you should be! archly


Blandish. I should never forgive your meddling. --


Prompt. Oh! never, never!


Blandish. aloud. Well, dispatch. --


Mrs. Blandish. Hold! -- apropos, to the lying in list -- at Mrs. Barbara
Winterbloom's to enquire after the Angola kittens, and the last hatch of Java
sparrows.


Prompt. Reading his memorandum as he goes out. Ladies in the straw --
Ministers, etc. -- Old Maids, Cats and Sparrows, never had a better list of how
d'ye's since I had the honor to collect for the Blandish family. Exit.


Mrs. Blandish. These are the attentions that establish valuable friendships in
female life. By adapting myself to the whims of one, submitting to the jest of
another, assisting the little plots of a third, and taking part against the
husbands with all, I am become an absolute essential in the polite world; the
very foul of every fashionable party in town or country.


Blandish. The country! Pshaw! Time thrown away.


Mrs. Blandish. Time thrown away! As if women of fashion left London, to turn
freckled shepherdesses. -- No, no; cards, cards and backgammon, are the
delights of rural life; and slightly as you may think of my skill, at the
year's end I am no inconsiderable sharer in the pin-money of my society.


Blandish. A paltry resource -- Gambling is a damned trade, and I have done
with it.


Mrs. Blandish. Indeed!


Blandish. Yes, 'twas high time. -- The women don't pay. -- And as for the men,
the age grows circumspect in proportion to it is poverty: It Is odds but one
loses a character to establish a debt, and must fight a duel to obtain the
payment. I have a thousand better plans, but two principal ones -- And I am
only at a loss, which to choose.


Mrs. Blandish. Out with them, I beseech you.


Blandish. Whether I shall marry my friend's intended bride, or his sister.


Mrs. Blandish. Marry his intended bride? -- What pig-iron and usury? -- Your
opinion of her must advance your addresses admirably.


Blandish. My Lord's opinion of her will advance them; he cannot bear the sight
of her, and defiance of his uncle, Sir Clement Flint's eagerness for the match,
is running mad after an adventure, which I, who am his confidant shall keep
going till I determine. -- There Is news for you.


Mrs. Blandish. And his sister, Lady Emily, the alternative! The first match in
England in beauty, wit, and accomplishment.


Blandish. Pooh! A fig for her personal charms, she will bring me connection
that would soon supply fortune; the other would bring fortune enough to make
connection unnecessary.


Mrs. Blandish. And as to the certainty of success with the one or the other.
--


Blandish. Success! -- Are they not women? Why even you can cajole them -- What
then must I do who have advantage of sex, and am equally ready to adore every
feature of the face, or to fall incorporeally in love with the mind. -- But no
more of theory, I must away to practice. -- And first for Gayville, and his
fellow student Clifford, who is come home with a wise face, and a conceited
confidence in his old ascendancy over his Lordship; but thanks to the accident
that kept him two months behind, Mr. Monitor will find himself mistaken.


Mrs. Blandish. Beware of the Monitor notwithstanding in another quarter. Lady
Emily and he were acquainted at the age of first impressions.


Blandish. I dare say he always meant to be the complete friend of the family,
though without a single talent for the purpose. I question whether he ever made a
compliment in his life.


Mrs. Blandish. Oh, the brute.


Blandish. His game I find, has been to work upon Lord Gayville's
understanding; he thinks he must finally establish himself in his esteem, by
inexorably opposing all his follies -- Poor simpleton! -- Now my touch of
opposition goes only to inhance the value of my acquiescence. So adieu for the
morning -- You to Miss Alscrip with an unction of flattery fit for a house
painter's brush; I to Sir Clement, and his family, with a composition as
delicate as ether, and to be applied with the point of a feather. Going.


Mrs. Blandish. Hark you, Blandish, a good wish before you go: To make your
success complete, may you find but half your own vanity in those you have to
work on!


Blandish. Thank you, my dear Letty; this is not the only tap you have hit me
today, and you are right; for if you and I did not sometimes speak truth to
each other, we should forget there was such a quality incident to the human
mind.


Exeunt. SCENE II. Lord Gayville's Apartment.
Enter Lord Gayville and Mr. Clifford. Lord Gayville. My dear Clifford, urge me
no more. How can a man of your liberality of sentiment descend to be the
advocate of my uncle's family avarice?


Clifford. My lord, you do not live for yourself. You have an ancient name and
title to support.


Lord Gayville. Preposterous policy! Whenever the father builds, games, or
electioneers, the heir and title must go to market. Oh the happy families Sir
Clement Flint will enumerate, where this practice has prevailed for centuries;
and the estate been improved in every generation, though specifically spent by
each individual!


Clifford. But you thought with him a month ago, and wrote with transport of
the match -- "Whenever you think of Miss Alscrip, visions of equipage and
splendour, villas and hotels, the delights of independance and profuseness,
dance in your imagination."


Lord Gayville. It is true, I was that dissipated, fashionable wretch.


Clifford. Come, this reserve betrays a consciousness of having acted wrong:
You would not hide what would give me pleasure: But I Will not be officious.


Lord Gayville. Hear me without severity, and I Will tell you all -- Such a
woman, such an assemblage of all that is lovely in the sex! --


Clifford. Well but -- the who, the how, the where?


Lord Gayville. I met her walking, and alone; and indeed so humbly
circumstanced as to carry a parcel in her own hand.


Clifford. I cannot but smile at this opening of your adventure -- how many
such charmers have we met in our former excursions from Cambridge! I warrant
she had a smart hat, and a drawn up petticoat, like a curtain in festoons, to
discover a new buckle, and a neat ancle.


Lord Gayville. No, Clifford, her dress was such as a judicious painter would
choose to characterize modesty. But natural grace and elegance, stole upon the
observation, and through the simplicity of a Quaker, showed all we could
conceive of a Goddess. I gazed and turned idolater.


Clifford. Smiling. You may as well finish the description in poetry at once;
you are on the very verge of it.


Lord Gayville. She was under the persecution of one of those beings peculiar
to this town, who assume the name of gentlemen upon the sole credentials of a
boot, a switch, and round hat -- The things, that escape from counters and
writing desks to disturb public places, insult foreigners, and put decent women
out of countenance. I had no difficulty in the rescue.


Clifford. And having silenced the dragon, in the true spirit of chivalry, you
conducted the damsel to her castle.


Lord Gayville. The utmost I could obtain was, leave to put her into a hackney
coach, which I followed unperceived and lodged her in the house of an obscure
milliner in a bye street.


Clifford. The sweet Cyprian retreat! Such a priestess of your goddess, I dare
say, did not refuse access to the shrine.


Lord Gayville. It is true a few guineas made the milliner my own. I almost
lived in the house; and often, when I was not suspected to be there, passed
whole hours listening to a voice, that would have captivated my very soul, though
it had been her only attraction. At last --


Clifford. What is to follow!


Lord Gayville. By the persuasions of the woman, who laughed at my scruples
with an unknown girl, a lodger upon a second floor, I hid myself in the closet
of her apartment. And the practiced trader assured me I had nothing to fear,
from the interruption of the family.


Clifford. Oh for shame, my Lord: whatever may be the end of your adventure,
such means were very much below you.


Lord Gayville. I confess it, and have been punished. Upon the discovery of me,
fear, indignation and resolution agitated the whole frame of the sweet girl by
turns -- I would sooner have committed sacrilege than have offered an affront
to her person -- Confused -- overpowered -- I stammer'd out a few incoherent
words -- Interest in her fortune -- respect -- entreaty of forgiveness -- and
left her, to detest me.


Clifford. You need go no farther. I meant to rally you, but your proceedings
and emotion alarm me for your peace and honor. If this girl is an adventurer,
which I suspect, you are making yourself ridiculous -- If she is strictly
innocent, upon what ground dare a man of your principle think farther of her?
you are on a double precipice; on one side impelled by folly, on the other --


Lord Gayville. Hold, Clifford, I am not prepared for so much admonition. Your
tone is changed since our separation; you seem to drop the Companion and assume
the Governor.


Clifford. No, my Lord, I scorn the Sycophant, and assert the Friend.


Enter servant, followed by Blandish. Servant. My Lord, Mr. Blandish Exit.


Clifford. significantly I hope every man will do the same.


Blandish. Mr. Clifford do not let me drive you away -- I want to learn your
power to gain and to preserve dear Lord Gayville's esteem.


Clifford. with a seeming effort to withdraw his hand which Blandish holds.
Sir, you are quite accomplished to be an example. --


Blandish. I have been at your apartment to look for you -- we have been
talking of you with Sir Clement -- Lady Emily threw in her word. --


Clifford. disengaging his hand Oh, Sir; you make me too proud. aside Practiced
Parasite! Exit.


Blandish. aside Sneering Puppy -- to Lord Gayville My Lord you seem
disconcerted, has any thing new occurred?


Lord Gayville. No, for their is nothing new in being disappointed in a friend.


Blandish. Have you told your story to Mr. Clifford?


Lord Gayville. I have, and I might as well have told it to the Cynic, my
Uncle: he could not have discouraged, or condemned me more.


Blandish. They are both in the right. I see things exactly as they do -- but I
have less fortitude, or more attachment than others: -- The inclinations of the
man I love are spells upon my opposition.


Lord Gayville. Kind Blandish! you are the confidant I want.


Blandish. What has happened since your discovery in the closet?


Lord Gayville. The lovely wanderer left her lodgings the next morning -- but I
have again found her -- she is in a house of equal retirement, but of very
different character, in the city, and inaccessable. I have wrote to her, and
knowing her to be distressed, I have enclosed Bank Bills for two hundred
pounds, the acceptance of which I have urged with all the delicacy I am master
of, and by heaven without a purpose of corruption.


Blandish. Two hundred pounds, and Lord Gayville's name --


Lord Gayville. She has never known me, but by the name of Mr. Heartly. Since
my ambition has been to be loved for my own sake, I have been jealous of my
title.


Blandish. And prithee by what diligence or chance, did Mr. Heartly trace his
fugitive?


Lord Gayville. By the acuteness of Mr. Prompt, your Valet de Chamber. You must
pardon me for pressing into my service for this occasion, the fellow in the
world fittest for it.


Blandish. You know I am incapable of being angry with you, -- but that dog to
practice upon my weakness, and engage without my consent!


Lord Gayville. The blame is all mine. He is now waiting an answer to my letter
-- how my heart palpitates at the delay. --


Enter Prompt. Prompt. Starts at seeing his master. Are you alone my Lord?


Lord Gayville. Don't be afraid Prompt -- your peace is made.


Prompt. Then there is my return for your Lordship's goodness. Giving the
letter This letter was just now brought to the place appointed by a porter.


Lord Gayville. By a Cupid, honest Prompt, and these characters were engraved
by the point of his arrow! kissing the superscription. "To -- Heartly, Esquire."
Blandish, did you ever see any thing like it?


Blandish. If her style be equal to her handwriting --


Lord Gayville. If it be equal! -- Infidel! you shall have proof directly.
opens the letter precipitaely Hey day! what the Devil's here? my bills again
and no line -- not a word -- Death and disappointment, what is this?


Prompt. Gad it is well if she is not off again -- faith I never asked where the
letter came from.


Lord Gayville. Should you know the messenger again?


Prompt. I believe I should, my Lord. For a Cupid he was somewhat in years,
about six feet high, and a nose rather given to purple.


Lord Gayville. Spare your wit, Sir, till you find him.


Prompt. I have a shorter way -- my life upon it I start her myself.


Blandish. And what is your device, sirrah?


Prompt. Lord, Sir, nothing so easy as to bring every living creature in this
town to the window: a tame bear, or a mad ox; two men, or two dogs fighting; a
balloon in the air -- (or tied up to the ceiling it is the same thing) make but
noise enough and out they come, first and second childhood, and every thing
between -- I am sure I shall know her by inspiration.


Lord Gayville. Shall I describe her to you?


Prompt. No, my lord, time is too precious -- I Will be at her last lodgings, and
afterward half the town over before before your Lordship will travel from her
forehead to her chin.


Lord Gayville. Away then, my good fellow. He cannot mistake her, for when she
was formed nature broke the mould. Exit Prompt.


Blandish. Now for the blood of me, cannot I call that fellow back; it is
absolute infatuation: ah! I see how this will end.


Lord Gayville. What are your apprehensions?


Blandish. That my ferret yonder will do his part completely, that I shall set
all your uncle's doctrine at naught, and thus lend myself to this wild
intrigue, till the girl is put into your arms.


Lord Gayville. Propitious be the thought, my best friend -- my uncle's
doctrine! but advise me, how shall I keep my secret from him for the present?
He is suspicion personified: the eye of Sir Clement is a very probe to the mind.


Blandish. aside Yes, and it sometimes gives one a cursed deal of pain before
he is convinced of touching a sound part. To Lord Gayville. Your best chance
would be to double your assiduities to Miss Alscrip. But then dissimulation is
so mean a vice. --


Lord Gayville. It is so indeed, and if I give into it for a moment. It is upon
the determination of never being her husband. I may despise and offend a woman;
but disgust would be no excuse for betraying her. Adieu, Blandish; if you see
Prompt first, I trust to you for the quickest communication of intelligence.


Blandish. I am afraid you may -- I cannot resist you Exit Lord Gayville -- Ah!
wrong -- wrong -- wrong; I hope that exclamation is not lost. A blind
compliance with a young man's passions, is a poor plot upon his affections.
Exit.


SCENE III. Mrs. Sagely's House.
Enter Mrs. Sagely and Miss Alton. Mrs. Sagely. Indeed, Miss Alton, (since you
are resolved to continue that name) you may bless yourself for finding me out
in this wilderness -- Wilderness! this town is ten times more dangerous to
youth and innocence: every man you meet is a wolf.


Miss Alton. Dear Madam, I see you dwell upon my indiscretion in flying to
London, but remember the safeguard I expected to find here. How cruel was the
disappointment! how dangerous have been the consequences! I thought the chance
happy that threw a retired lodging in my way: I was upon my guard against the
other sex, but for my own to be treacherous to an unfortunate, could I expect
it?


Mrs. Sagely. Suspect every body, if you would be safe -- but most of all
suspect yourself. Ah, my pretty truant -- the heart that is so violent in it is
aversions, is in sad danger of being the same in it is affections, depend upon
it.


Miss Alton. Let them spring from a just esteem and you will absolve me; my
aversion was to the character of the wretch I was threatened with -- can you
reprove me?


Mrs. Sagely. And tell me truly now; do you feel the same detestation for this
worse character you have made acquaintance with? This rake -- this abominable
Heartly? -- Ah, child, your look is suspicious.


Miss Alton. Madam, I have not a thought, that I will not sincerely lay open to
you. Mr. Heartly is made to please, and to be avoided; I desire never to see
him more -- his discovery of me here; his letters, his offers, have greatly
alarmed me. I conjure you lose not an hour in placing me under the sort of
protection I solicited.


Mrs. Sagely. If you are resolved, I believe I can serve you. Miss Alscrip, the
great Heiress, (you may have heard of the name in your family) has been
enquiring among decayed gentry for a companion. She is too fine a lady to bear
to be alone, and perhaps does not look to a husband's company as a certain
dependence. Your musical talent will be a great recommendation -- She is
already apprized, and a line from me will introduce you.


Miss Alton. I will avail myself of your kindness immediately.


Prompt without. I tell you I have business with Mrs. Sagely -- I must come in.


Mrs. Sagely. As I live here is an impudent fellow forcing himself into the
passage.


Miss Alton. Oh heaven! if Mr. Heartly should be behind!


Mrs. Sagely. Get into the back parlour; be he who he will, I Will warrant I
protect you.


Exit Miss Alton. Enter Prompt looking about. Mrs. Sagely. Who are you, Sir?
What are you looking for?


Prompt. Madam, I was looking -- I was looking -- for you.


Mrs. Sagely. Well, Sir, and what do you want?


Prompt still prying about. Madam, I want -- I want -- I want --


Mrs. Sagely. To rob the house, perhaps.


Prompt. Just the contrary, Madam -- to see that all is safe within it. -- You
have a treasure in your possession that I would not have lost for the world --
A young Lady.


Mrs. Sagely. Indeed! -- begone about your business, friend -- there are no
young ladies to be spoke with here.


Prompt. Lord, Madam, I don't desire to speak with her -- My attentions go to
ladies of the elder sort -- I come to make proposals to you alone.


Mrs. Sagely. You make proposals to me? Did you know my late husband, Sir?


Prompt. Husband! My good Mrs. Sagely -- be at ease -- I have no more views
upon you, that way, than upon my grandmother -- My proposals are of a quite
different nature.


Mrs. Sagely. Of a different nature! Why you audacious varlet! Here, call a
constable --


Prompt. Dear Madam, how you continue to misunderstand me -- I have a respect
for you, that will set at naught all the personal temptations about you, depend
upon it, powerful as they are -- And as for the young Lady, my purpose is only
that you shall guard her safe. -- I would offer you a pretty snug house in a
pleasant quarter of the town, where you two would be much more commodiously
lodged -- the furniture new, and in the prettiest taste -- A neat little
sideboard of plate -- a black boy, with a turban, to wait upon you. --


Mrs. Sagely. And for what purpose am I to be bribed, -- I am above it, sirrah.
-- I have but a pittance, it is true, and heavy outgoings -- My husband's
decayed bookkeeper to maintain, and poor old Smiler, that so many years
together drew our whole family in a chaise. -- Heavy charges -- but by cutting
off my luxuries, and stopping up a few windows, I can jog on, and scorn to be
beholden to you, or him that sent you. Prompt tries at the door, and peeps
through the keyhole. What would the impertinent fellow be at now? Keep the door
bolted, and don't stand in sight.


Prompt. aside. Oh! oh! -- She is here I find, and that is enough -- My good
Mrs. Sagely -- your humble servant -- I would fain be better acquainted with you
-- in a modest way -- but must wait, I see, a more happy hour. Aside going out.
When honesty and poverty do happen to meet, they grow so fond of each other's
company, it is labor lost to try to separate them. Exit.


Mrs. Sagely. Shut the street door after him, and never let him in again.


Enter Miss Alton from the inner room. Miss Alton. For mercy, Madam, let me
begone immediately. I am very uneasy -- I am certain Mr. Heartly is at the
bottom of this.


Mrs. Sagely. I believe it, my dear, and now see the necessity of your removal.
I Will write your letter -- and heaven protect you. Remember my warning, Suspect
yourself. Exit.


Miss Alton, sola. In truth I will. I Will forget the forbearance of this
profligate, and remember only his intentions. And is Gratitude then suspicious?
Painful lesson! A woman must not think herself secure because she has no bad
impulse to fear: she must be upon her guard, lest her very best should betray
her. Exit.


End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An apartment in Sir Clement Flint's house.
Lady Emily Gayville and Clifford at Chess. Sir Clement sitting at a distance
pretending to read a parchment, but slyly observing them. Lady Emily. CHECK --
If you do not take care, you are gone the next move.


Clifford. I confess, Lady Emily, you are on the point of complete victory.


Lady Emily. Pooh, I would not give a farthing for victory without a more
spirited defense.


Clifford. Then you must engage with those (if those there are) that do not
find you irresistible.


Lady Emily. I could find a thousand such; but I Will engage with none whose
triumph I could not submit to with pleasure.


Sir Clement. Apart Pretty significant on both sides. I wonder how much farther
it will go.


Lady Emily. Uncle, did you speak?


Sir Clement. Reading to himself."And the parties to this indenture do farther
covenant and agree, that all and every the said lands, tenements, and
hereditaments -- um -- um" -- How useful sometimes is ambiguity! Loud enough to
be heard.


Clifford. A very natural observation of Sir Clement's upon that long
parchment. Pauses again upon the chess board.


Lady Emily looking pensively at his face. Clifford. To what a dilemma have you
reduced me, Lady Emily. If I advance, I perish by my temerity; and it is out of
my power to retreat.


Sir Clement. Apart Better and better! -- To talk in cipher is a curious
faculty.


Clifford. Sir?


Sir Clement. Still reading"In witness whereof the said parties have hereunto
interchangeably set their hands and seals this -- um -- um -- day of um -- um.
--."


Lady Emily. Resuming an air of vivacity Come, I trifle with you too long --
There Is your coup de grace. -- Uncle, I have conquered. Both rising from the
table.


Sir Clement. Niece, I do not doubt it -- and in the style of the great
proficients, without looking upon the board. Clifford, was not your mother's
name Charlton? Folding up the parchment and rising.


Clifford. It was, Sir.


Sir Clement. In looking over the writings Alscrip has sent me, preparatory to
his daughter's settlement, I find mention of a conveyance from a Sir William
Charlton of Devonshire. Was he a relation?


Clifford. My grandfather, Sir: The plunder of his fortune was one of the first
materials for raising that of Mr. Alscrip, who was steward to Sir William's
estate, then manager of his difficulties, and lastly his sole creditor.


Sir Clement. And no better monopoly than that of a man's distresses. Alscrip
has had twenty such, or I should not have singled out his daughter to be Lord
Gayville's wife.


Clifford. It is a compensation for my family losses, that in the event they
will conduce to the interest of the man I most love.


Sir Clement. Hey day, Clifford! -- take care, don't trench upon the Blandish
-- Your cue, you know, is Sincerity.


Clifford. You seem to think, Sir, there is no such quality. I doubt whether
you believe there is an honest man in the world.


Sir Clement. You do me great injustice -- several -- several -- and upon the
old principle that -- "honesty is the best policy." -- Self-interest is the
great end of life, says human nature -- Honesty is a better agent than craft --
says proverb.


Clifford. But as for ingenuous, or purely disinterested motives --


Sir Clement. Clifford, do you mean to laugh at me?


Clifford. What is your opinion, Lady Emily?


Lady Emily. Endeavoring again at vivacity That there may be such: but it is
odds they are troublesome or insipid. Pure ingenuousness, I take it, is a
rugged sort of thing, which scarcely will bear the polish of common civility;
and for disinterestedness -- young people sometimes set out with it; but it is
like traveling upon a broken spring -- one is glad to get it mended at the
next stage.


Sir Clement. Emily, I protest you seem to study after me; proceed child and we
will read together every character that comes in our way.


Lady Emily. Read one's acquaintance -- delightful! what romances, novels,
satires, and mock heroics present themselves to my imagination! Our young men
are flimsy essays; old ones, political pamphlets; coquets fugitive pieces; and
fashionable beauties, a compilation of advertized perfumery, essence of pearl,
milk of roses, and Olympian dew. -- Lord, I should now and then though turn over
an acquaintance with a sort of fear and trembling.


Clifford. How so?


Lady Emily. Lest one should pop unaware upon something one should not, like a
naughty speech in an old comedy; but it is only skipping what would make one
blush.


Sir Clement. Or if you did not skip, when a woman reads by herself and to
herself, there are wicked philosophers who doubt whether her blushes are very
troublesome.


Lady Emily. To Sir Clement Do you know now that for that speech of yours --
and for that saucy smile of yours to Clifford I am strongly tempted to read you
both aloud!


Sir Clement. Come try -- I Will be the first to open the book.


Lady Emily. A treatise of the Houyhnhnms after the manner of Swift, tending to
make us odious to ourselves, and to extract morose mirth from our imperfections
-- turning to Clifford Contrasted with an exposition of ancient morality
addressed to the moderns: a chimerical attempt upon an obsolete subject.


Sir Clement. Clifford! we must double down that page. And now we'll have a
specimen of her Ladyship.


Lady Emily. I Will give it you myself, and with justice; which is more than
either of you would.


Sir Clement. And without skipping.


Lady Emily. Thus then, -- a light, airy, fantastic sketch of genteel manners
as they are; with a little endeavor at what they ought to be -- rather
entertaining than instructive, not without art, but sparing in the use of it --


Sir Clement. But the passions, Emily. Do not forget what should stand in the
foreground of a female treatise.


Lady Emily. They abound: but mixed and blended cleverly enough to prevent any
from predominating; like the colors of a shot lutestring, that change as you
look at it sideways or full: they are sometimes brightened by vivacity, and now
and then subject to a shade of caprice -- but meaning no ill -- not afraid of a
critical review: and thus gentlemen I present myself to you fresh from the
press, and I hope not inelegantly bound.


Sir Clement. Altogether making a perfectly desirable companion for the
closet: I am sure Clifford you will agree with me. Gad we are got into such a
pleasant freedom with each other, it is a pity to separate while any curiosity
remains in the company -- Prithee Clifford satisfy me a little as to your
history. Old Lord Hardacre, if I am rightly informed, disinherited your father,
his second son.


Clifford. For the very marriage we have been speaking of. The little fortune
my father could call his own was sunk before his death as a provision for my
mother; upon an idea that whatever resentment he might personally have incurred
-- it would not be extended to an innocent offspring.


Sir Clement. A very silly confidence. How readily now, should you and I,
Emily, have discovered in a sensible old man, the irreconcilable offense of a
marriage of the passions -- You understand me?


Lady Emily. Perfectly! aside. Old petrifaction, your hints always speak
forceably.


Sir Clement. But your uncle, the present Lord, made amends?


Clifford. Amply. He offered to send me from Cambridge to an academy in
Germany, to fit me for foreign service: Well judging that a cannon ball was a
fair and quick provision for a poor relation.


Sir Clement. Upon my word I have known uncles less considerate.


Clifford. When Lord Gayville's friendship, and your indulgence, made me the
companion of his travels, Lord Hardacre's undivided cares devolved upon my
sister; whose whole independent possession at my mother's death, was five
hundred pounds -- All our education had permitted that unhappy parent to lay by.


Lady Emily. Oh, for an act of justice and benevolence to reconcile me to the
odious man! Tell me this instant what did he do for Miss Clifford?


Clifford. He bestowed upon her forty pounds a year, upon condition that she
resided with a family of his dependants in a remote county, to save the family
from disgrace; and that allowance, when I heard last from her, he had
threatened to withdraw, upon her refusing a detestable match he had endeavored
to force upon her.


Lady Emily. Poor girl!


Sir Clement. Upon my word an interesting story, and told with pathetic effect.
-- Emily, you look grave child.


Lady Emily. aside. I shall not own it however. to him. For once, my dear
uncle, you want your spectacles. My thoughts are on a diverting subject -- My
first visit to Miss Alscrip; to take a near view of that collection of charms
destined to my happy brother.


Sir Clement. You need not go out of the room for that purpose. The schedule of
an Heiress's fortune is a compendium of her merits and the true security for
marriage happiness.


Lady Emily. I am sure I guess at your system -- That union must be most wise
which has wealth to support it, and no affections to disturb it.


Sir Clement. Right.


Lady Emily. That makes a divorce the first promise of wedlock; and widowhood,
the best blessing of life; that separates the interest of husband, wife and
child --


Sir Clement. To establish the independent comfort of all --


Lady Emily. Upon the broad basis of family hatred. Excellent, my dear Uncle,
excellent indeed; and upon that principle, though the Lady is likely to be your
niece, and my sister, I am sure you will have no objection to my laughing at
her a little.


Sir Clement. You Will be puzzled to make her more ridiculous than I think her.
What is your plan?


Lady Emily. Why though her pride is to be thought a leader in fashions, she is
sometimes a servile copyist. Blandish tells me I am her principal model; and
what is most provoking, she is intent upon catching my manner as well as my
dress, which she exaggerates to an excess that vexes me. Now, if she will take
me in shade, I Will give her a new outline, I am resolved; and if I do not make
her a caricature for a printshop --


Clifford. Will all this be strictly consistent with your good nature, Lady
Emily?


Lady Emily. No, nor I don't know when I shall do any thing consistent with it
again, except leaving you two critics to a better subject than your humble
servant.


Curtsies and exit with a lively air. Sir Clement. Well, Clifford! What do you
think of her?


Clifford. That when she professes ill-temper, she is a very awkward
counterfeit.


Sir Clement. But her beauty, her wit, her improvement since you went abroad? I
expected from a man of your age and taste, something more than a cold
compliment upon her temper -- Could not you compatibly with the immaculate
sincerity you possess, venture as far as admiration?


Clifford. I admire her, Sir, as I do a bright star in the firmament, and
consider the distance of both as equally immeasureable.


Sir Clement. aside. Specious rogue! to him. Well, leave Emily then to be
winked at through telescopes; and now to a matter of nearer observation -- What
is Gayville doing?


Clifford. Every thing you desire, Sir, I trust; but you know I have been at
home only three days, and have hardly seen him since I came.


Sir Clement. Nor I neither; but I find he has profited wonderfully by foreign
experience -- After rambling half the world over without harm, he is caught
like a traveled woodcock, at his landing.


Clifford. If you suspect Lord Gayville of indiscretion, why do you not put him
heartily to the test? I Will be bound for his ingenuousness not to withold any
confession you may require.


Sir Clement. You may be right, but he will confess more to you in an hour, than
to me in a month for all that; come, Clifford, look as you ought to do at your
interest -- Sift him -- Watch him -- You cannot guess how much you will make me
your friend, and how grateful I may be if you will discover. --


Clifford. Sir, you mistake the footing upon which Lord Gayville and I live --
I am often the partner of his thoughts, but never a spy upon his actions. Bow
and exit.


Sir Clement. alone. Well, played Clifford! Good air and emphasis, and well
suited to the trick of the scene -- He would do, if the practical part of
deceit were as easy at his age, as discernment of it is at mine. Gayville and
Emily, if they had not a vigilant guard, would be his sure prey; for they are
the examples of the generous affections coming to maturity with their stature;
wh^le suspicion, art and interest are still dormant in the seed. I must employ
Blandish in this business -- A rascal of a different cast -- Below Clifford in
hypocrisy, but greatly above him in the scale of impudence -- They shall both
forward my ends, while they think they are pursuing their own. I shall ever be
sure of a man's endeavors to serve me, while I hold out a lure to his knavery
and interest. Exit.


SCENE II. An Antichamber.
Alscrip. without. Dinner not ordered till seven o'clock -- Bid the kitchen
maid get me some eggs and bacon. -- Plague, what with the time of dining and
the French cookery, I am in the land of starvation, with half St.
James's-Market upon my weekly bills. Enter while speaking the last sentence.
What a change have I made to please my unpleaseable daughter? Instead of my
regular meal at Furnival's-Inn, here am I transported to Berkley-Square, to
fast at Alscrip House till my fine company come from their morning ride, two
hours after dark -- Nay its worse, if I am carried among my great neighbors in
Mi^s Alscrip's suite, as she calls it. My Lady looks over me; my Lord walks
over me; and sets me in a little tottering cane chair, at the cold corner of
the table -- Though I have a mortgage upon the house and furniture, and arrears
due of the whole interest. It Is a pleasure though to be well dressed. My daughter
maintains all fashions are founded in sense -- Icod the tightness of my wig,
and the stiffness of my cape, give me the sense of the pillory -- Plaguey scanty
about the hips too -- And the breast something of a merry thought reversed --
But there is some sense in that, for if one sex pares away in proportion where
the other swells, we shall take up no more room in the world than we did before.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, Miss Alscrip wishes to see you. She is at her
toilet.


Alscrip. Who is with her?


Servant. Only Mrs. Blandish, Sir.


Alscrip. She must content herself with that company 'till I have had my whet
-- order up the eggs and bacon. Exit.


SCENE III.
Miss Alscrip discovered at her toilette. Chignon, (her Valet de Chamber)
dressing her head. Mrs. Blandish, sitting by and holding a box of diamond pins.
Miss Alscrip. And so Blandish, you really think that the introduction of
Otahaite feathers in my trimming succeeded?


Mrs. Blandish. Oh, with the mixture of those charming Italian flowers, and the
knots of pearl that gathered up the festoons, never any thing had so happy an
effect -- It put the whole ball-room out of humor, and that is the surest test
of good taste. Monsieur Chignon, that pin a little more to the front.


Miss Alscrip. And what did they say?


Mrs. Blandish. You know it is the first solicitude of my life to see the
friend of my heart treated with justice -- So when you stood up to dance, I got
into the thick of the circle -- Monsieur don't you think this large diamond
would be well placed just in the middle.


Chignon. Eh! non, Madame; ce na releve pas -- Dat give no relief to de weight
of de curl -- Full in de front un gros bouton von great nob of diamend, pardie
ce seroit un accommodage a' la Polypheme de big eye of de geante in de center
of de forehead.


Miss Alscrip. Chignon is right in point of taste, though not quite so happy in
his allusions as he is sometimes.


Chignon. Ah! Madame, you have done von grande injure to my contrie: You go for
von monthe, and bring avay all de good taste -- At Paris -- All von side -- de
diamond, de cap -- de glance -- de bon mot meme -- All von side, nothing direct
a Paris.


Miss Alscrip. Smiling at Chignon, and then turning to Mrs. Blandish. Well! --
-- And so --


Mrs. Blandish. So it was all admiration! Elegant, says Lady Spite -- It may do
very well for Miss Alscrip, who never looks at expense. The dress of a bridal
princess! cries Mrs. Scanty, and for one night's wear too?


Miss Alscrip. Delightful! The very language I wished for -- Oh, how charmingly
apropos was my accident, did you see when my trimming in the passe-pied of a
cotillion came luckily in contact with Billy Skim's great shoe buckle -- How it
ripp'd away?


Mrs. Blandish. Did I see it?


Miss Alscrip. One of the great feathers stuck fast on the shoe and looked for
all the world like the heel wing of a Mercury in a pantomime.


Mrs. Blandish. Oh! you witty creature, how you describe!


Miss Alscrip. It was a most becoming rent!


Mrs. Blandish. And what a display of indifference; what an example for a woman
of fortune, did you exhibit in the bustle of picking up the scattered fragments!


Miss Alscrip. When the pearls were trundling about and I insisted upon the
company being no longer disturbed, but would leave what remained for fairy
favors to the maid who swept the room. He! he! he! -- Do you think Lady Emily
would have done that better?


Mrs. Blandish. Lady Emily? poor girl! -- How soon must she submit to be the
humble second of the family.


Miss Alscrip. He! he! he! Do you sincerely think so, Blandish? And yet it
would be strange if it were otherwise, for I could buy her ten-times over.


Chignon. Madame, vat humeure vould you wear to day?


Miss Alscrip. Humor! Chignon? What am I dressed for now?


Chignon. The parfaite aimble, Madame; but by bringing de point of de hair more
down to de eyebrow, or adding a littel blowse to de sides, I can give you de
look severe, capricieuse -- vat you please. --


Miss Alscrip. We'll put it off for half an hour, I am not quite decided. I was
in the capricieuse yesterday -- I believe I shall keep on the perfect amiable.
Exit Chignon. Tiffany, take off my powdering gown -- Ah! ho! -- How the wench
tugs -- do you think you are pulling off the coachman's great coat?


Mrs. Blandish. My dear amiable! -- do not let that sweet temper be ruffled --
Why will you not employ me in these little offices. Delicacy like yours should
be waited upon by the softness of a sylph.


During this speech Exit Tiffany peevish Miss Alscrip. I am promised a creature
to be about me out of the common way.


Mrs. Blandish. A new woman?


Miss Alscrip. No, something to be raised much higher, and at the same time
fitted better to receive one's ill-humour. An humble companion, well born, well
educated, and perfectly dependant, is a most useful appurtenance in the best
families.


Mrs. Blandish. Well, do not raise her to the rank of a friend, lest I should
be jealous.


Miss Alscrip. You may be perfectly secure -- I shall take particular care that
friendship shall be out of the question on both sides. I had once thought of a
restoration of pages to sit in scarlet and silver (as one reads in former
times) upon the forepart of the coach, and to hold up one's train -- but I have
a new male attendant in a Valet de Chamber, who has possession of my bust -- My
two women will have the charge from the point of the shoulder to the toe -- So
my person being provided for -- the Countess of Gayville shall have an
attendant to wait upon her mind.


Mrs. Blandish. I vow a most elegant and uncommon thought.


Miss Alscrip. One that can pen a note, in the familiar, the punctilious, or
the witty -- It Is quite troublesome to be always writing wit for one's self --
But above all she is to have a talent for music.


Mrs. Blandish. Aye, your very soul is framed for harmony.


Miss Alscrip. I have not quite determined what to call her -- Governante of
the private chamber, keeper of the boudoir with a silver key at her breast.


Enter Chignon. Chignon. Madame, a young lady beg to know if you be visible.


Miss Alscrip. A young lady -- It is not lady Emily Gayville.


Chignon. Non, Madame; but if you were absente and I had the adjustment of her
head, she would be the most chamante person I did ever see.


Miss Alscrip. Introduce her. Exit Chignon. Who can this be?


Mrs. Blandish. Some woman of taste to enquire your correspondent at Paris --
or --


Enter Miss Alton. Miss Alscrip curtsying respectfully, Miss Alton retiring
disconcerted. Miss Alscrip. Of taste indeed by her appearance! -- Who Is in the
antichamber? Why did they not open the folding doors? -- Chignon, approach a
fauteuil for the lady.


Miss Alton. Madam, I come! --


Miss Alscrip. Madam, pray be seated --


Miss Alton. -- Excuse me, Madam --


Miss Alscrip. Madam, I must beg --


Miss Alton. Madam, this letter will inform you how little pretensions I have
to the honors you are offering.


Miss Alscrip reads. Miss Alton, the bearer of this is the person I recommend
as worthy the honor of attending you as a companion eyes her scornfully. She is
born a gentlewoman, I dare say her talents and good qualities will speak more
in her favor, than any words I could use -- I am Madam, your most obedient --
um -- um -- Blandish, was there ever such a mistake?


Blandish. Oh! you dear, giddy, absent creature, what could you be thinking of?


Miss Alscrip. Absent indeed. Chignon give me the fauteuil, throws herself into
it young woman, where were you educated?


Miss Alton. Chiefly, Madam, with my parents.


Miss Alscrip. But finished, I take it for granted, at a country boarding
school; for we have, "young ladies," you know Blandish, "boarded and educated,"
upon blue boards in gold letters in every village; with a strolling player for
a dancing master, and a deserter from Dunkirk, to teach the French grammar.


Mrs. Blandish. How that genius of yours does paint! nothing escapes you -- I
dare say you have anticipated this young lady's story.


Miss Alton. It is very true, Madam, my life can afford nothing to interest the
curiosity of you two ladies; it has been too insignificant to merit your
concern, and attended with no circumstances to excite your pleasantry.


Miss Alscrip yawning. I hope, child, it will be attended with such for the
future as will add to your own -- I cannot bear a mope about me. -- -- I am
told you have a talent for music -- can you touch that harp -- It stands here
as a piece of furniture, but I have a notion it is kept in tune, by the man who
comes to wind up my clocks.


Miss Alton. Madam, I dare not disobey you. But I have been used to perform
before a most partial audience; I am afraid strangers will think my talent too
humble to be worthy attention.


A SONG.
I.
For tenderness framed in life's earliest day
A parent's soft sorrows to mine led the way;
The lesson of pity was caught from her eye,
And ever words were my own, I spoke in a sigh.
II.
The nightingale plundered, the mate-widow'd dove,
The warbled complaint of the suffering grove,
To youth as it ripened gave sentiment new,
The object still changing, the sympathy true.
III.
Soft embers of passion, yet rest in the glow --
A warmth of more pain may this breast never know!
Or if too indulgent the blessing I claim,
Let the spark drop from reason that wakens the flame.


Miss Alscrip. I declare not amiss, Blandish: only a little too plaintive --
but I dare say she can play a country dance, when the enlivening is required --
So Miss Alton you are welcome to my protection; and indeed I wish you to stay
from this hour -- My toilette being nearly finished, I shall have a horrid
vacation till dinner.


Miss Alton. Madam, you do me great honor, and I very readily obey you.


Mrs. Blandish. I wish you joy, Miss Alton, of the most enviable situation a
young person of elegant talents could be raised to -- You and I will vie with
each other to prevent our dear countess ever knowing a melancholy hour -- She
has but one fault to correct -- the giving way to the soft effusions of a too
tender heart.


Enter Servant. Servant. Madam, a letter --


Miss Alscrip. It Is big enough for a state packet -- Oh! mercy, a petition --
for heaven's sake Miss Alton, look it over. Miss Alton reads I should as soon
read one of lady Newchapel's methodist sermons -- What does it contain?


Miss Alton. Madam, an uncommon series of calamities, which prudence could
neither see, nor prevent: the reverse of a whole family from affluence and
content, to misery and imprisonment; and it adds, that the parties have the
honor, remotely, to be allied to you.


Miss Alscrip. Female relations! aye, they always think one's made of money.


Miss Alton. That some years ago --


Enter another servant. 2 d. Servant. A messenger, Madam, from the animal
repository, with the only puppy of the Peruvians, and the refusal at twenty
guineas.


Miss Alscrip. As I live the offspring of the beauteous Aza who has so long
been thought past hopes of continuing his family! Were he to ask fifty I must
have him.


Mrs. Blandish offering to run out I vow I Will give him the first kiss.


Miss Alscrip stopping her I Will swear you shall not.


Miss Alton. Madam, I was just finishing the petition.


Miss Alscrip. It Is throwing money away -- but give him a crown.


Exit with Mrs. Blandish striving which shall be first. Miss Alton. "The soft
effusions of a too tender heart." The proof is excellent, That the covetous
should be deaf to the miserable I can conceive, but I should not have believed,
if I had not seen, that a taste for profusion did not find its first indulgence
in benevolence. Exit.


End of Act the Second.
ACT III.
SCENE I. Miss Alscrip's dressing room continued.
Miss Alton. THANKS to Mrs. Blandish's inexhaustible talent for encomium, I
shall be relieved from one part of a companion that my nature revolts at. But
who comes here? It Is well if I shall not be exposed to impertinences I was not
aware of.

Enter Chignon aside. Ma foi, la voila -- I will lose no time to pay my
address -- Now for de humble maniere, and de unperplex assurance of my contree
bowing with French shrug Miss Alton turning over new music books Mademoiselle,
est il permis? may I presume, to offer you my profounde homage Miss Alton not
taking notice Mademoiselle -- if you vill put your head into my hands, I will
give a distinction to your beauty, that shall make you and me, de conversation
of all de town.


Miss Alton. I request Mr. Chignon, you will devote your ambition to your own
part of the compliment.


Mr. Alscrip without Where is my daughter?


Miss Alton. Is that Mr. Alscrip's voice, Mr. Chignon? It Is awkward for me to
meet him before I Am introduced.


Chignon. Keep a little behind, Mademoiselle; he vill only pass de room -- He
vill not see through me.

Enter Alscrip. Hah, my daughter gone already, but sees Chignon there is a new
specimen of foreign virmin -- A lady's valet de chamber -- Taste for ever! --
Now if I was to give the charge of my person to a waiting maid, they would say I
was indelicate, as he crosses the stage, Chignon keeps sideling to intercept
his sight, and bowing as he looks toward him What the devil is Mounseer at? I
thought all his agility lay in his fingers: what anticks is the monkey
practicing? He twists and doubles himself as if he had a raree-show at his back.


Chignon aside. Be gar no raree-show for you, Monsieur Alscrip, if I can help.


Alscrip spying Miss Alton. Ah! ah! What have we got there? Monsieur who is
that?


Chignon. Sir, my lady wish to speak to you in her bondoir. She sent me to
conduct you, Sir.


Alscrip imitating Yes Sir, but I will first conduct myself to this lady --
Tell me this minute, who she is.


Chignon. Sir, she come to live here, companion to my lady -- Mademoiselle
study some music -- she must not be disturbed.


Alscrip. Get about your business Monsieur, or I Will disturb every comb in your
head -- Go tell my daughter to stay till I come to her. I shall give her
companion some cautions against saucy Frenchmen, sirrah!


Chignon aside. Cautious! peste! you are subject a' cautions yourself -- I
suspecte you to be von old rake, but no ver dangerous rival. [Exit.


Alscrip to himself and lookng at her with his glass The devil is never tired
of throwing baits in my way. She comes forward modestly By all that is delicious
I must be better acquainted with her. He bows. She curtsies, the music book
still in her hand But how to begin -- My usual way of attacking my daughter's
maids will never do.


Miss Alton. aside My situation is very embarrassing.


Alscrip. Beauteous stranger, give me leave to add my welcome to my daughter's.
Since Alscrip House was established, she never brought any thing into it to
please me before.


Miss Alton. a little confused Sir, it is a great additional honor to that
Miss Alscrip has done me, to be thought worthy so respectable a protection as
yours.


Alscrip. I could furnish you with a better word than respectable. It sounds so
distant, and my feelings have so little to do with cold respect -- I never had
such a desire -- to make myself agreeable.


Miss Alton aside. A very strange old man. To him more confused, Sir, you will
pardon me, I believe Miss Alscrip is waiting.


Alscrip. Don't be afraid my dear, enchanting, diffident (zounds what a flutter
am I in) don't be afraid -- my disposition to be sure is too susceptible; but
then it is likewise so dove-like, so tender, and so innocent. Come, play me
that tune, and enchant my ear, as you have done my eye.


Miss Alton. Sir, I wish to be excused, indeed it does not deserve your
attention.


Alscrip. Not deserve it! I had rather hear you, than all the Italians in the
Hay-market, even when they sue the managers, and their purses chink the
symphony in Westminster Hall. presenting the harp.


Miss Alton. Sir, it is to avoid the affectation of refusing what is so little
worth asking for. Takes the harp and plays a few bars of a lively air. Alscrip
kisses her fingers with rapture.


Alscrip. Oh! the sweet little twiddle-diddles!


Miss Alton. For shame, Sir, what do you mean. Alscrip gets hold of both her
hands, and continues kissing her fingers.


Miss Alton. struggling. Help!


Miss Alscrip. entering. I wonder what my papa is doing all this time? starts.
A short pause. Miss Alscrip surprised. Miss Alton confused. Alscrip puts his
hand to his eye.


Alscrip. Oh, child! I have got something in my eye, that makes me almost mad.
-- A little midge -- I believe. -- Gad, I caught hold of this young lady's
hands in one of my twitches, and her nerves were as much in a flutter as if I
had bit her.


Miss Alscrip. significantly. Yes, my dear papa, I perceive you have something
in your eye, and I Will do my best to take it out immediately -- Miss Alton, will
you do me the favor to walk into the drawing room?


Miss Alton I hope, Madam, you will permit me, at a proper opportunity, to give
my explanation of what has passed. Retires.


Miss Ascrip. There Is no occasion -- Miss Alton being out of hearing Let it
rest among the catalogue of wonders, like the Glastonbury thorn, that blooms at
Christmas. -- To be serious, papa -- Though I carried off your behavior as
well as I could, I am really shocked at it -- A man of your years, and of a
profession where the opinion of the world is of such consequence --


Alscrip. My dear Molly, have not I quitted the practice of attorney, and
turned fine gentleman, to laugh at the world's opinion; or, had I not, do you
suppose the kiss of a pretty wench would hurt a lawyer? My dear Molly, if the
fraternity had no other reflections to be afraid of! --


Miss Alscrip. Oh! hideous, Molly indeed! you ought to have forgot I had a
christened name long ago; am not I going to be a countess? If you did not stint
my fortune, by squand'ring yours away upon dirty trulls, I might be called
your grace.


Alscrip. Spare your lectures, and you shall be called your highness if you
please.


Enter Servant. Servant. Madam, lady Emily Gayville is in her carriage in the
street, will your ladyship be at home?


Miss Alscrip. Yes, show her into the drawing room. Exit Servant. I entreat,
Sir, you will keep a little more guard upon your passions; consider the dignity
of your house, and if you must be cooing, buy a French figurante. Exit.


Alscrip. Well said, my lady countess! well said quality morals! What am I the
better for burying a jealous wife? To be chicken-peck'd is a new persecution,
more provoking than the old one -- Oh Molly! Molly! -- Plague upon the example
of an independent heiress. Exit.


SCENE II. The Drawing Room.
Miss Alton. alone. What perplexing scenes I already meet with in this house? I
ought, however, to be contented in the security it affords against the attempts
of Heartly. I am contented -- But, oh Clifford! It was hard to be left alone to
the choice of distresses.


Enter Chignon, introducing Lady Emily. Chignon. My Lady Emily Gayville --
Madame no here! Mademoiselle, announce if you please my lady.


Lady Emily aside. Did my ears deceive me? surely, I heard the name of Clifford
-- and it escaped in an accent -- Pray Sir, who is that? to Chignon.


Chignon. Mademoiselle Alton, confidante of my lady, and next, after me, in her
suite. Examines her head dress impertinently, Miss Alton with great modesty
rises and puts her work together.


Lady Emily. There seems to be considerable difference in the decorum of her
attendants. You need not stay, Sir.


Chignon as he goes out. Ma foi, sa tete est passable -- her head may pass.


Lady Emily aside. How my heart beats with curiosity! Miss Alton having
disposed her things in her work-bag is retiring with a curtsy. Miss-Alton, I am
in no haste. On the contrary, I think the occasion fortunate that allows me to
begin an acquaintance with a person of so amiable an appearance. I don't know
whether that pert foreigner has led me into an error -- but without being too
inquisitive, may I ask if you make any part of this family?


Miss Alton. Madam, I am under Miss Alscrip's protection. I imagine I am
represented as her dependant: I am not ashamed of humble circumstances, that
are not the consequences of indiscretion.


Lady Emily. That with such claims to respect, you should be in any
circumstances of humiliation, is a disgrace to the age we live in.


Miss Alton. Madam, my humiliation (if such it be) is just. Perhaps I have been
too proud, and my heart required this self-correction. A life of retired
industry might have been more pleasing to me; but an orphan -- a stranger --
ignorant and diffident, I preferred my present situation as one less exposed to
misrepresentation. Bell rings I can no longer detain Miss Alscrip from the
honor of receiving your Ladyship. A respectful curtsy, and Exit.


Lady Emily. There is something strangely mysterious and affecting in all this
-- what delicacy of sentiment -- what softness of manners! and how well do
these qualities accord with that sigh for Clifford! she had been proud -- proud
of what? -- of Clifford's love. It is too plain. But then to account for her
present condition? -- He has betrayed and abandoned her -- too plain again I
fear. -- She talked too of a self corrected heart -- take example, Emily, and
recall thine from an object, which it ought more than ever to renounce. But here
come the Alscrip and her friend: lud! lud! lud! how shall I recover my spirits!
I must attempt it, and if I lose my present thoughts in a trial of
extravagance, be it of their's or my own, it will be a happy expedient.


Enter Miss Alscrip and Mrs. Blandish. Miss Alscrip runs up to Lady Emily and
kiss her forehead. Lady Emily. I ask your pardon, Madam, for being so awkward,
but I confess I did not expect so elevated a salute.


Miss Alscrip. Dear Lady Emily, I had no notion of its not being universal. In
France, the touch of the lips just between the eyebrows has been adopted for
years.


Lady Emily. I perfectly acknowledge the propriety of the custom. It is almost
the only spot of the face where the touch would not risk a confusion of
complexions.


Miss Alscrip. He! he! he! what a pretty thought!


Mrs. Blandish. How I have longed for this day! -- Come let me put an end to
ceremony, and join the hands of the sweetest pair that ever nature and fortune
marked for connection. Joins their hands


Miss Alscrip. Thank you, my good Blandish, though I was determined to break the
ice, Lady Emily, in the first place I met you. But you were not at Lady
Doricourt's last night.


Lady Emily affectedly No, I went home directly from the Opera: projected the
revival of a cap; read a page in the trials of Temper; went to bed and dreamed
I was Belinda in the Rape of the Lock.


Mrs. Blandish. Elegant creature.


Miss Alscrip. aside I must have that air, if I die for it. Imitating I too
came home early; supped with my old gentleman; made him explain my marriage
articles, dower, and heirs entail; read a page in a trial of Divorce, and
dreamed of a rose color equipage with emblems of Cupids issuing out of
Coronets.


Mrs. Blandish Oh, you sweet twins of perfection! what equality in every thing!
I have thought of a name for you -- The inseparable inimitables.


Miss Alscrip. I declare I shall like it exceedingly -- one sees so few
uncopied originals -- the thing I cannot bear --


Lady Emily. Is vulgar imitation -- I must catch the words from your mouth to
show you how we agree.


Miss Alscrip. Exactly. Not that one wishes to be without affectation.


Lady Emily. Oh! mercy forbid!


Miss Alscrip. But to catch a manner, and weave it, as I may say, into one's
own originality.


Mrs. Blandish. Pretty! pretty!


Lady Emily. That Is the art -- Lord, if one lived entirely upon one's own
whims, who would not be run out in a twelvemonth?


Miss Alscrip. Dear Lady Emily, don't you dote upon folly?


Lady Emily. To extacy. I only despair of seeing it well kept up.


Miss Alscrip. I flatter myself there is no great danger of that.


Lady Emily. You are mistaken. We have, it is true, some examples of the
extravaganza in high life that no other country can match; but withal, many a
false sister, that starts as one would think, in the very hey day of the
fantastic, yet comes to a stand-still in the midst of the course.


Mrs. Blandish. Poor spiritless creatures!


Lady Emily. Do you know there is more than one duchess who has been seen in
the same carriage with her husband -- like two doves in a basket in the print
of Conjugal Felicity; and another has been detected! I almost blush to name it.


Mrs. Blandish. Bless us, where? and how? and how?


Lady Emily. In nursing her own child.


Miss Alscrip. Oh! barbarism! -- For heaven's sake let us change the subject.
You were mentioning a revived cap, Lady Emily; any thing of the Henry quatre?


Lady Emily. Quite different. An English mob under the chin, and artless
ringlets in natural color, that shall restore an admiration for Prior's Nut
Brown Maid.


Miss Alscrip. Horrid! shocking!


Lady Emily. Absolutely necessary. To be different from the rest of the world,
we must now revert to nature: Make haste, or you have so much to undo, you will
be left behind.


Miss Alscrip. I dare say so. But who can vulgarize all at once? What will the
French say?


Lady Emily. We are to have an interchange of fashions and follies upon a basis
of unequivocal reciprocity.


Miss Alscrip. Fashions and follies -- oh, what a promising manufacture!


Lady Emily. Yes, and one, thank heaven, that we may defy the edict of any
potentate to prohibit.


Miss Alscrip. with an affected drop of her lip in her laugh He! he! he! he!
he! he!


Lady Emily. My dear Miss Alscrip, what are you doing? I must correct you as I
love you. Sure you must have observed the drop of the under sip is exploded
since Lady Simpermode broke a tooth -- Sets her mouth affectedly -- I am
preparing the cast of the lips for the ensuing winter -- thus -- It is to be
called the Paphian mimp.


Miss Alscrip. imitating I swear I think it pretty -- I must try to get it


Lady Emily. Nothing so easy. It is done by one cabalistical word like a
metamorphosis in the fairy tales. You have only, when before your glass, to
keep pronouncing to yourself nimini-primini -- the lips cannot fail of taking
their plie.


Miss Alscrip. Nimini-pimini -- imini, mimini -- oh, it is delightfully
enfantine -- and so innocent, to be kissing one's own lips.


Lady Emily. You have it to a charm -- does it not become her infinitely, Mrs.
Blandish?


Mrs. Blandish. Our friend's feature must succeed in every grace; but never so
much as in a quick change of extremes.

Enter Servant. Madam, Lord Gayville desires to know if you are at home?


Miss Alscrip. A strange formality!


Lady Emily. aside No brother ever came more opportunely to a sister's relief,
"I have fooled it to the top of my bent."


Miss Alscrip. Desire Miss Alton to come to me Exit Servant Lady Emily you must
not blame me; I am supporting the cause of our sex, and must punish a lover for
some late inattentions -- I shall not see him.


Lady Emily. Oh cruel! Sees Miss Alton, who enters. Miss Alscrip you have
certainly the most elegant companion in the world.


Miss Alscrip. Dear, do you think so? an ungain, dull sort of a body, in my
mind; but we'll try her in the present business. Miss Alton, you must do me a
favor. I want to plague my husband that is to be -- you must take my part --
you must double me like a second actress at Paris, when the first has the
vapors.


Miss Alton. Madam!


Miss Alscrip. Oh never look alarmed -- It is only to convey my refusal of his
visit, and to set his alarms afloat a little -- particularly with jealousy,
that is the master torment.


Miss Alton. Really Madam, the task you would impose upon me --


Miss Alscrip. Will be a great improvement to you, and quite right for me.
Tease -- tease, and tame, is a rule without exception from the keeper of the
lions to the teacher of a piping bulfinch.


Mrs. Blandish. But you hard hearted thing, will you name any object for his
jealousy?


Miss Alscrip. No, keep him there in the dark -- Always keep your creature in
the dark -- That Is another secret of taming -- Don't be grave, Lady Emily. --
whose attention is fixed on Miss Alton Your brother's purgatory shall be short,
and I Will take the reconciliation scene upon myself.


Lady Emily. endeavoring to recover herself. I cannot but pity him; especially
as I am sure, that do what you will, he will always regard you with the same
eyes. And so, my sweet sister, I leave him to your mercy, and to that of your
representative, whose disposition, if I have any judgment, is ill suited to a
task of severity.


Mrs. Blandish. Dear Lady Emily carry me away with you. When a lover is coming,
it shall never be said I am in the way.


Lady Emily. I am at your orders looking at Miss Alton. asides What a suspense
am I to suffer? a moment more and I shall betray myself -- adieu, Miss Alscrip.


Miss Alscrip. Call Lady Emily's servants.


Lady Emily. You sha'n't stir -- remember nimini -- primini. Exit.


Mrs. Blandish. Coming back and squeezing Miss Alscrip's hand, in a half
whisper. She Would give her eyes to be like you. Exit.


Miss Alscrip. Now for it, Miss Alton -- Only remember that you are doubling me
the woman he adores.


Miss Alton. Indeed, Madam, I am quite incapable of executing you orders to
your satisfaction. The utmost I can undertake is a short message.


Miss Alscrip. Never fear. Knock at the door. There he comes -- Step aside and
I Will give you your very words. Exeunt.


Enter Lord Gayville, conducted by a Servant. Lord Gayville. So, now to get
thorough this piece of drudgery. There Is a meanness in my proceeding, and my
compunction is just. Oh, the dear lost possessor of my heart! lost,
irrecoverably lost!


Enter Miss Alton from the bottom of the Scene. Miss Alton. A pretty employment
I am sent upon.


Lord Gayville. to himself Could she but know the sacrifice I am ready to make?


Miss Alton. to herself. The very picture of a lover, if absence of mind marks
one. It is unpleasant for me to interrupt a man I never saw, but I shall
deliver my message very concisely. -- My Lord. --


Lord Gayville. turning. Madam. both start and stand in surprise Astonishment!
Miss Alton! my charming fugitive!


Miss Alton. How! Mr. Heartly -- Lord Gayville!


Lord Gayville. My joy and my surprise are alike unutterable. But I conjure
you, Madam, tell me by what strange circumstance do I meet you here?


Miss Alton. aside Now assist me, honest pride! -- assist me resentment.


Lord Gayville. You spoke to me -- Did you know me?


Miss Alton. No otherwise, my Lord, than as Miss Alscrip's lover. I had a
message from her to your lordship.


Lord Gayville. For heaven's sake, Madam, in what capacity?


Miss Alton. In one, my Lord, not very much above the class of a servant.


Lord Gayville. Impossible, sure! -- It is to place the brilliant below the
foil -- to make the inimitable work of nature secondary to art and defect.


Miss Alton. It is to take refuge in a situation that offers me security
against suspicious obligation; against vile design; against the attempts of a
seducer -- It is to exercise the patience, that the will, and perhaps the favor
of heaven, meant to try.


Lord Gayville. Cruel, cruel to yourself and me -- Could I have had a happiness
like that of assisting you against the injustice of fortune -- and when to be
thus degraded was the alternative. --


Miss Alton. My Lord, it is fit I should be explicit. Reflect upon the language
you have held to me; view the character in which you present yourself to this
family; and then pronounce in whose breast we must look for a sense of
degradation.


Lord Gayville. In mine, and mine alone. I confess it -- Hear nevertheless my
defense -- My actions are all the result of love. And culpable as I may seem,
my conscience does not reproach me with --


Miss Alton. Oh, my Lord, I readily believe you -- You are above its reproaches
-- Qualities that are infamous and fatal, in one class of life, create applause
and conscientious satisfaction in another.


Lord Gayville. Infamous and fatal qualiites! What means my lovely accuser?


Miss Alton. That to steal or stab is death in common life: but when one of
your lordship's degree sets his hard heart upon the destruction of a woman, how
glorious is his success! How consummate his triumph! When he can follow the
theft of her affections by the murder of her honor.


Miss Alscrip enters softly behind. Miss Alscrip. I wonder how it goes on.


Lord Gayville. Exalted! Adorable woman!


Miss Alscrip. Adorable! Aye, I thought how 'twou'd be!


Lord Gayville. Hear me! I conjure you --


Miss Alscrip. Not a word, if she knows her business.


Miss Alton. My Lord! I have heard too much.


Miss Alscrip. Brava! I could not have played it better myself.


Lord Gayville. Oh! Sill more charming than severe. Kneels.


Miss Alscrip. Humph! I hope he means me though.


Lord Gayville. The character in which you see me here, makes me appear more
odious to myself, if possible, than I am to you.


Miss Alscrip. behind By all that is treacherous I doubt it.


Miss Alton. Desist my Lord -- Miss Alscrip has a claim. --


Miss Alscrip. Aye, now for it.


Lord Gayville. By heaven she is my aversion. It is my family on whom I am
dependant that has betrayed me into these cursed addresses -- Accept my
contrition -- pity a wretch struggling with the complicated torments of
passion, shame, penitence and despair.


Miss Alscrip. comes forward all stand confused I never saw a part better
doubled in my life!


Lord Gayville. Confusion! What a light do I appear in to them both. How shall
I redeem myself, even in my own opinion?


Miss Alscrip. looking at Lord Gayville. Expressive dignity looking at Miss
Alton Sweet simplicity! Amiable diffidence! -- She should execute my commands
most aukwardly.


Lord Gayville. aside There is but one way. -- to Miss Alscrip. Madam, your
sudden entrance has effected a discovery which with shame I confess ought to
have been made before -- The lady who stands there is in possession of my
heart. If it is a crime to adore her, I am the most guilty wretch on earth --
pardon me if you can; my sincerity is painful to me -- But in this crisis it is
the only atonement I can offer. Bows and exit.


Miss Alscrip. after a pause. Admirable! -- Perf^ct! The most finished
declaration I am convinced, that ever was made from beggarly nobility to the
woman who was to make his fortune -- the Lady who stands there -- the lady --
Madam -- I am in patient expectation for the sincerity of your ladyship's
atonement.


Miss Alton. I am confounded at the strange occurrences that have happened; but
be assured you see in me an innocent, and most unwilling rival.


Miss Alscrip. Rival! Better and better! -- You -- you give me uneasiness! You
moppet -- you coquet of the side table to catch the gawkey heir of the family,
when he comes from school at Christmas -- You -- you -- you vile seducer of my
good old, honored father! cries in a passion again What, is my lady dumb?
Hussy? Have you the insolence to hold your tongue.


Miss Alton. Madam, I just now offered to justify this scene; I thought it the
part of duty to myself, and respect to you. But your behavior has now left but
one sentiment upon my mind.


Miss Alscrip. And what is that, Madam?


Miss Alton. With pointed expression Scorn.


Exit. Miss Alscrip. Was there ever any thing like this before -- and to a
woman of my fortune -- I to be robbed of a lover -- and that a poor Lord too --
I Will have the act revived against witchcraft; I Will have the minx tried -- I Will
-- I Will -- I Will verify the proverb of the tragedy --

Hell has no fury like a woman scorned. Exit.


SCENE III. Alscrip's room of business.
Alscrip and Rightly. Rightly. Upon all these matters, Mr. Alscrip, I am
authorized by my client, Sir Clement Flint, to agree. There remains nothing but
your favoring me with the inspection of the Charlton title deeds, and your
daughter's settlements may be engrossed.


Alscrip. I cannot conceive, my friend Rightly, any such inspection to be
requisite. Have not I been in constant quiet possession?


Rightly. Sir Clement insists upon it.


Alscrip. A client insist! and you an old practitioner, suffer such a demur to
your infallibility! -- Ah! in my practice I had the sure means of disappointing
such dabblers and diverse into their own cases.


Rightly. How, pray?


Alscrip. I read his writings to him myself -- I was the best reader in
Chancery Lane for setting the understanding at defiance -- Drew breath but once
in a quarter of an hour, always in the wrong place, and made a single sentence
of six skins of parchment -- Shall I give you a specimen?


Rightly. Smiling I have no doubt of your talent.


Alscrip. Then return to Sir Clement, and follow my example.


Rightly. No, Mr. Alscrip, though I acknowledge your skill, I do not subscribe to
your doctrine. The English law is the finest system of ethics, as well as
government, that ever the world produced, and it cannot be too generally
understood.


Alscrip. Law understood! Zounds! would you destroy the profession?


Rightly. No, I would raise it. Had every man of sense the knowledge of the
theory, to which he is competent; the practice would revert to the purity of
its institution, maintain the rights, and not promote the knavery of mankind.


Alscrip. aside Plaguey odd maxims. -- Sure he means to try me. -- to him
Brother Rightly, we know the world, and are alone -- I have locked the door in
a half whisper.


Rightly. A very useless precaution. I have not a principle nor a proceeding
that I would not proclaim at Charing Cross.


Alscrip. aside No! then I Will pronounce you the most silly, or the most
impudent fellow of the fraternity.


Rightly. But where are these writings? You can have no difficulty in laying
your hand upon them, for I perceive you keep things in a distinguished
regularity.


Alscrip. Yes, I have distinct repositories for all papers, and especially
title deeds -- Some in drawers -- Some in closets -- aside and a few under
ground.


Miss Alscrip. rattling at the door. What makes you lock the door, Sir? I must
speak to you this instant.


Alscrip. One moment child, and I Will be ready for you. Turning again to Rightly
as to dissuade him.


Miss Alscrip. Still rattling the door. Don't tell me of moments -- let me in.


Alscrip. Wheugh! What impatient devil possesses the girl -- Stay a moment I
tell you -- Turns again to Rightly.


Rightly. cooly. If the thoughts of the wedding day makes any part of the young
Lady's impatience, you take a bad way, Mr. Alscrip, to satisfy it; for I tell
you plainly our business cannot be completed till I see these writings.


Alscrip. aside Confound the old hound -- how he sticks to his scent.


Miss Alscrip, still at the door. Alscrip. I am coming I tell you. Opens a
bureau in a confused hurry shuffles papers about, puts one into Rightly's hand.
There, if this whim must be indulged, step into the next room -- You who know
the material parts of a parchment lie in a nutshell, will look it over in ten
minutes. Puts him into another room.


Miss Alscrip. I will not wait another instant whatever you are about -- Let me
in. --


Alscrip. opening the door. Sex, and vehemence! What is the matter now?


Enter Miss Alscrip, in the most violent emotion. Miss Alscrip. So, Sir; yes,
Sir; you have done finely by me indeed, you are a pattern for fathers -- a
precious match you had provided.


Walking about. Alscrip. What the devil's the matter?


Miss Alscrip. running on I that with 50,000 independent pounds left myself in
a father's hands -- a thing unheard of, and waited for a husband with
unparalleled patience till I was of age --


Alscrip. What the devil's the matter?


Miss Alscrip. following him about. I that at fourteen might have married a
French Marquis, my governess told me he was -- for all he was her brother --


Alscrip. Gad a mercy, governess --


Miss Alscrip. And as for commoners, had not I the choice of the market? And
the handsome Irish Colonel at Bath, that had carried off six heiresses before,
for himself and friends, and would have found his way to Gretna-green blindfold!


Alscrip. aside Gad I wish you were there now with all my heart -- What the
devil is at the bottom of all this?


Miss Alscrip. Why Lord Gayville is at the bottom -- And your hussy that you
were so sweet upon this morning, is at the bottom! a treacherous minx! -- I
sent her only for a little innocent diversion as my double --


Alscrip. Your what?


Miss Alscrip. Why my double, to vex him.


Alscrip. Double! this is the most useless attendant you have had yet. -- Gad
I Will start you single handed in the art of vexation against any ten women in
England.


Miss Alscrip. I caught them, just as I did you.


Alscrip. Is that all? Gad I don't see much in that.


Miss Alscrip. Not much? what, a woman of my fortune and accomplishments turned
off -- rejected -- renounced --


Alscrip. How! renounced? has he broke the contract! -- Will you prove he has
broke the contract?


Miss Alscrip. Aye. Now my dear papa, you take a tone that becomes you; now the
blood of the Alscrip's rises; -- rises, as it ought; you mean to fight him
directly, don't you?


Alscrip. Oh yes, I Am his man -- I Will show you a lawyer's challenge, sticks and
staves, guns, swords, daggers, poinards, knives, scissars and bodkins. I Will put
more weapons into a bit of paper, six inches square than would stock the armory
of the tower.


Miss Alscrip. Pistols! -- Don't talk to me of any thing but pistols, -- my
dear papa, who shall be your second?


Alscrip. I Will have two -- John Do, and Richard Roe -- as pretty fellows as
any in England to see fair play, and as used to the differences of good
company. -- They shall greet him with their fieri facias -- so don't be cast
down, Molly, I Will answer for damages to indemnify our loss of temper and
reputation -- he shall have a fi-fa before tomorrow night.


Miss Alscrip. Fiery faces and damages -- What does your Westminster Hall
gibberish mean? -- Are a woman's feelings to be satisfied with a fie-fa -- you
old insensible -- you have no sense of family honor -- no tender affections.


Alscrip. Gad you have enough for us both, when you want your father to be shot
through the head -- but stand out of the way, here is a species of family honor
more necessary to be taken care of -- If we were to go to law, this would be a
precious set off against us. Takes up the deed as if to lock it up This -- why
what the devil -- I hope I don't see clear -- Curse and confusion, I have given
the wrong one -- Here Is fine work -- Here Is a blunder -- Here Is the effect of a
woman's impetuosity.


Miss Alscrip. Lord, what a fuss you are in; what is in the old trumpery scroll?


Alscrip. Plague and parchment, old Rightly will find what is in it, if I don't
interrupt him -- Mr. Rightly -- Mr. Rightly -- Mr. Rightly -- going to the door
Rightly went out at.


Enter Servant. Servant. Sir, Mr. Rightly is gone.


Alscrip. Gone! whither?


Servant. Home, I believe, Sir -- He came out at the door into the hall, and
bade me tell your honor you might depend upon his reading over the deed with
particular care.


Alscrip. Fire, and fury, my hat and cane -- Exit Servant. Here, my hat and
cane stamps about.


Miss Alscrip. Sir, I expect, before you come home --


Alscrip. Death and devils, expect to be ruined -- this comes of listening to
you -- The sex hold the power of mischief by prescription -- Zounds -- Mischief
-- Mischief -- is the common law of womankind. Exit in a rage.


Miss Alscrip. Mercy on us -- I never saw him more provoked, even when my
mother was alive.


Exit. End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Alscrip's Room.
Chignon. QUE diable vent dire tout ca -- vat devil, all dis mean? -- Monsieur
Alscrip enrage' -- Mademoiselle Alscrip fly about like de dancing fury at de
Opera -- My littel musicienne, shut up, and in de absence of Madame, I keep de
key of de littel Bastille -- By gad, I vou'd rader have de custody of my pretty
prisoniere than the whole college of cardinals -- but vat have we here?


Enter Sir Clement and Clifford. Sir Clement speaking to a servant Mr. Alscrip
not at home, no matter -- we'll wait his return -- The French Valet de Chamber
to Clifford -- It may be of use to make acquaintance with him -- Monsieur, how
do you like this country?


Chignon. Ver good contree Sire, by and bye -- when you grow a little more poor.


Sir Clement. Is that a Parisian rule for improvement?


Chignon. Yes, Sir, and we help you to follow our example -- In good times you
hang, and you drown -- In bad time you vill be like us. -- Always poor -- always
gay -- forget your politics -- laugh at your grievances -- take your snuff,
vive la dissipation, -- ver good country.


Sir Clement. Thanks for your kind advice, Monsieur, you Frenchmen are so
obliging, and so communicative to strangers -- I hear there is a young lady
come into this family -- we don't exactly know in what capacity -- could not
you contrive that she should pass through this room -- or --


Chignon aside. By gar here be one more old rake after de littel musicienne.


Sir Clement. Only for curiosity, -- we never saw her, and have particular
reasons -- gives money.


Chignon. Ma foi, your reasons be ver expressive aside -- but vat devil shall I
do -- open de cage of my little Rosignol -- my pretty nightingale -- no.
Chignon -- no -- looking out ah, hah! La Tiffany -- Now for de politic --
begar I undertake your business -- and make you de dupe of de performance. Exit
with a sign to Sir Clement.


Sir Clement. So -- Clifford -- There goes as disinterested a fellow now as any
in Europe. -- But hark you -- Can you yet guess the purpose for which I brought
you here?


Clifford. I profess, Sir, I am in the dark. If it concerns Lord Gayville's
secret. --


Sir Clement. Namely, that I have discovered, without your assistance, that
this Dulcinea has started up in the shape of Miss Alscrip's musical companion
-- Her name is Alton, leering I tell it you, because I am sure you did not know
it -- or if you had -- a friend's secret ought to be sacred; and to keep it
from the only person, who by knowing it could save him from destruction, would
be a new exercise of your virtue.


Clifford. Sir, you will not know me. --


Sir Clement. Tut, tut, don't do me such injustice -- Come, all delicacy being
over by my having made the discovery, will you talk to this girl?


Clifford. For what end, Sir.


Sir Clement. If you state yourself as Lord Gayville's friend, she will
converse with you more readily, than she would with me -- Try her -- find out
what she is really at -- If she proves an impostor of the refined artifice I
suspect, that puts on humility to veil her purpose, and chastity to effect it
-- leave her to me -- if she has no hold upon him but her person, I shall be
easy.


Clifford. Sir, let my compliance convince you how much I wish to oblige you.
If I can get a sight of this wonder, I promise to give you my faithful opinion
of my friend's danger.


Enter Chignon and makes a sign to Sir Clement, that the person he inquired
after is coming. Sir Clement. Leave her with this gentleman -- Come Monsieur,
you shall show me the new room.


Exit. Chignon. aside. Vid dis gentleman -- Vid all my heart -- La Tiffany vill
answer his purpose, and mine too. Exit. Clifford is looking at the furniture of
the room.


Enter Tiffany. Tiffany. What does the Frenchman mean by gentlemen wanting me,
and his gibberish of making soft eyes -- I hope I know the exercise of my eyes
without his instruction -- hah! I vow, a clever looking man.


Clifford. seeing Tiffany. A good smart girl; but not altogether quaker-like in
her apparel, nor does her air quite answer my conception of a goddess.


Tiffany. aside. How he examines me! so much the better -- I shall lose nothing
by that, I believe.


Clifford. Faith a pretty attracting countenance -- but for that apprehensive
and timid look -- that awe impressing modesty, my friend so forcibly described.


Tiffany adjusts herself and pulls up. Clifford aside There is no judging of
that wonderful sex by rational rules -- Her silence marks diffidence; deuce
take me if I know how to begin for fear of offending her reserve.


Tiffany aside. I have been told pertness became me -- I Will try, I Am resolved.
to him I hear, Sir, you had something to say to a young person of this house --
that -- that -- looking down at the same time archly I could not but take the
description to myself -- I am ready to hear any thing a gentleman has to say.


Clifford aside. Thank my stars, my scruples are relieved.


Tiffany. Am I mistaken, Sir? Pray whom was you enquiring after.


Clifford. Oh! certainly you, my pretty stranger. A friend of mine has been
robbed of his heart, and I see the felony in your looks.


Tiffany simpering and coquetting. Lord, Sir, if I had suspected you had come
with a search warrant for hearts, I would have been more upon my guard.


Clifford chucking her under the chin. Will you confess, or must I arrest you?


Tiffany. Innocent, Sir, in fact, but not quite so in inclination -- I hope
your own is safe.


Clifford. And were it not, my smart unconscionable, would you run away with
that also.


Tiffany. Oh yes, and an hundred more; and melt them all down together as the
Jews do stolen goods to prevent their being reclaimed -- Gold, silver and lead;
pray, Sir of what metal may yours be?


Clifford. aside Astonishing! Have I hit upon the moment when her fancy outruns
her art! -- Or has it been Gayville's amusement to describe her by contraries?
And are you really the young Lady that is the companion of Miss Alscrip, that
makes such conquests at first sight. --


Tiffany. Sir, if you mean the young Lady who has been named, however
undeservedly, the flower of this family; that appears sometimes at these
windows; and to be sure has been followed home by gentlemen against her
inclinations -- Sir, you are not mistaken.


Clifford. aside It has been Gayville's madness or amusement then to describe
her by contraries.


Tiffany. I hope, Sir, you are not offended, I would not be impertinent, though I
am not so tasteless as to shy.


Clifford. Offended, my dear? I am quite charmed I assure you. You are just
what I did not expect, but wished to find you. You had been represented to me
so improperly. --


Tiffany. with pertness. Represented improperly! Pray, Sir, what do you mean?


Clifford. To rejoice in my mistake I promise you -- Nay, and to set my friend
right in his opinion, and so without further shyness on either part, let us be
free upon the subject I had to talk over with you. You surely are not looking
to lasting connections.


Tiffany. with airs. Sir, I don't understand you -- I am not what you suppose,
I assure you -- Connections indeed -- I should never have thought of that -- my
character -- my behavior, connexions, I don't know what the word signifies.


Sir Clement. without Clifford -- are you ready?


Clifford. I am at your orders, Sir.


Tiffany. aside Deuce take this interruption!


Sir Clement. without I shall not wait for Mr. Alscrip any longer.


Tiffany. aside Lud, lud, he gives me no time to come round again. Runs up to
him confusedly. It Is very true, Sir, I would not do such a thing for the world,
but you are a man of honor, and I am sure would not give bad advice to a poor
girl who is but a novice -- and so, Sir. Hears Sir Clement entering. Put your
proposal in writing and you may depend on having an answer.


Runs out. Enter Sir Clement. Sir Clement. Well, Clifford, what do you think of
her?


Clifford. Make yourself perfectly easy, Sir: This girl when known can make no
impression on Lord Gayville's mind; and I doubt not but a silk gown and a
lottery ticket, had they been offered as an ultimatum, would have purchased her
person.


Sir Clement. With a dry sneer. Don't you sometimes, Clifford, form erroneous
opinions of peoples' pretensions? Interest and foolish passion inspire strange
notions -- as one or the other prevails, we are brought to look so low, or so
high --


Clifford. With emotion. That we are compelled to call reason and honor to our
aid --


Sir Clement. And then --


Clifford. We lose the intemperance of our inclinations in the sense of what is
right.


Sir Clement. aside Sententious impostor! to him But to the point.


Clifford. Sir, I would please you, if I could -- I am thinking of a scheme to
restore Lord Gayville to his senses, without violence or injury to any one of
the parties.


Sir Clement. Let me hear it.


Clifford. Why the wench being cut short of marketing by word of mouth (which
she was doing in all due form when you came in) desired me to write proposals.
I am inclined to do so. We will show the answer to Lord Gayville, and depend
upon it, there will be character enough displayed to cure him of the
sentimental part of his attachment.


Sir Clement. I like your idea -- Sit down and put it into execution
immediately -- Clifford writes.


Sir Clement. to himself. He is quick at invention -- has a pretty turn at
profession -- A proud and peremptory show of honor that would overpower
prejudices -- Thank heaven, my opinions of knavery are convictions.


Clifford. Writing. I am sorry to detain you, Sir.


Sir Clement. Looking at the furniture. Oh! I am amusing myself better than you
think -- Indulging an edifying contemplation among the tombs of departed
estates -- Looking round the furniture, viz: closets that show old writings
tied up, shelves with boxes labelled mortgages, lease and release, etc. What
mouldered skins that will never see daylight again, and that with a good
herald would vie with Westminster-abbey in holiday entertainment. For instance
now, what have we here? -- Hah! The last remains of Fatland priory -- Once of
great monastic importance: A proverb of pride, sloth, and hypocrisy. After the
reformation the seat of old English hospitality and benevolence -- In the
present century, altered, adorned, pulled down, and the materials sold by
auction.


Clifford. Edifying indeed, Sir; your comments are not lost.


Sir Clement. Here lie undisturbed in dust, the relics of Court Baron castle,
granted at the conquest to the family of Loftimount. The last of this ancient
race having won twenty-seven king's plates, and represented the county in six
parliaments, after many struggles died of the pistol fever -- a disconsolate
annuitant inscribed this box to his memory.


Clifford. Ha! ha! ha! Rising. I am quite concerned to interrupt you, Sir, but
you shall hear my letter, reads. You have captivated a young man of rank and
fortune, but you are discovered, and his ruin and yours would be the
consequence of pursuing any designs, that could impede his proposed marriage
with Miss Alscrip -- Throw yourself upon the generosity of his family, and your
fortune's made -- Send your answer (and let it be immediate) to me at Sir
Clement Flint's house -- Yours, etc. etc. --

HENRY CLIFFORD.





Sir Clement. It will do very well, our French friend is the man to deliver it,
and to bring the answer. I am going home, you will overtake me.


Exit. Enter Chignon. Clifford. Sealing the letter. You come apropos. Monsieur
gives the letter with an air of mystery. Have the goodness to put this letter
into Miss Alton's own hands.


Chignon. to himself. Mademoiselle Alton* Peste! My trick has not passed.


Clifford. To Miss Alton by herself -- I am in all the secret.


Chignon. to himself. Devil take Tiffany for making you so wise.


Clifford. And you serve your Lady, when you serve me with Miss Alton --
Monsieur, an answer as quick as possible -- You will find me at Sir Clement
Flint's -- it is only in the next street -- and -- you understand me -- shaking
his purse. Alerte, Monsieur. Exit.


Chignon. Understand you -- Oui! da you talk de language universal imitating
his shaking the purse I'entre vois, I begin to see something -- By gad I will
give de letter, and try de inclination of Mademoiselle la Musicienne -- if dis
be de duette she vill play, it take her out of the vay of Alscrip, of Gayville,
and of myself also -- Vo la le malheur -- there -- de misfortune -- eh bien --
when love and interest come across -- always prefer de interest for today and
take de chance of de love tomorrow -- dat is de humor of France. Exit.


SCENE II. Sir Clement Flint's house.
Enter Lord Gayville and Sir Clement. Lord Gayvile. I am resolved to see Miss
Alscrip, no more.


Sir Clement. And I hope you are prepared with arguments to justify the cause
of this breach, to me, and to the world.


Lord Gayville. For my reconciliation with you I hope your former partiality
will return to my aid; and as for the world I despise it. The multitude look at
happiness through the false glare of wealth and pomp: I have discovered it, though
yet at a distance, thorough the only true medium, that of mutual affection.


Sir Clement. No common place book formed from a whole library of plays and
novels could furnish a better sentence. Your folly would shame a school boy --
even of the last age -- In the present he learns the world with his grammar,
and gets a just notion of the worthlessness of the other sex before he is of an
age to be duped by their attractions.


Lord Gayville. Sir, your prejudices. --


Sir Clement. My prejudices? -- will you appeal to Clifford -- here he comes --
your friend -- your


Enter Clifford. Lord Gayville. And will Clifford, condemn the choice of the
heart?


Clifford. Never, my lord, when justly placed -- In the case I perceive you are
arguing, I am ready to blush for you -- nay, don't look grave -- I am
acquainted with your inchantress.


Lord Gayville. You acquainted with her?


Clifford. Yes, and if I don't deceive myself, shall make her break her own
spell. I am in correspondence with her.


Lord Gayville. You in correspondence with Miss Alton! -- when? where? What am
I to think of this?


Clifford. My dear Lord, that she is the most errant coquette, the most
accomplished jilt, the most ready trafficker of her charms --


Lord Gayville. Phrenzy and profanation -- Such dignity of virtue, such
chastity of sentiment --


Sir Clement. Ha! ha! ha!


Clifford. Phrenzy indeed! You have formed a creature of imagination, and like
a true Quixote think it real; you have talked to her of dignity, of virtue and
chastity, of sentiment, till you have taught her a lure she never dreamt of --
Had you treated her at first as I did, she would have put a card into your hand
to inform you of her lodging.


Lord Gayville. Clifford, what has betrayed you into calumny so unwarrantable
and despicable?


Sir Clement. Come, Gayville, I Will be plain with you, you have sillily let the
girl raise her price upon you -- but if nothing else will satisfy you, even pay
it, and have done with her.


Lord Gayville. Sir, her price is an unadulterated heart: I am afraid we cannot
pay it betwixt us.


Enter Chignon delivers a letter to Clifford apart. Chignon. Alerte, Monsieure,
I repete your word -- Mademoiselle Alton, be all your own.


Sir Clement. Come, Clifford, the contents: his Lordship braves the trial.


Lord Gayville. What is this mighty scheme? and what is that paper to discover?


Clifford. breaking open the letter Your Lordship shall be informed word for
word. Upon first sight of the contents he shows the utmost emotion Amazement!
do I dream! can it be? who wrote this letter?


Sir Clement. Oh! speak out Monsieur, we are all friends.


Chignon. De true Mademoiselle Alton to whom you charge me to give your letter
-- she open it -- she turn pale -- den red -- den confuse -- den kiss your
name -- den write, and bid me fly.


Lord Gayville. Confusion, on confusion, what does all this mean? explain.


Clifford. You must pardon me, I am disconserted -- confounded --
thunderstruck -- This letter is indeed of a different nature, from that I
expected -- I am more interested in Miss Alton's fate, than your Lordship -- my
perplexity is not to be endured; friend, come with me instantly.


Exeunt Clifford and Chignon. Lord Gayville. Mystery, and torture! what am I to
collect from this? He interested in the fate of Miss Alton? he her former
acquaintance?


Sir Clement. Why not -- and her dupe also?


Enter servant. Servant. Is Mr. Clifford gone, Sir?


Lord Gayville. impatiently Who wants him?


Servant. A chairman with a letter, he will not deliver to a servant.


Sir Clement. Call the fellow in. Exit Servant. Who knows but he may help us in
our difficulties.


Chairman brought in with a letter in his hand. Lord Gayville. still
impatiently Whom did you bring that letter from?


Chairman. Please your honor, I don't know; passing through the square, a sash
flew up, and down came this letter and half a crown upon my head. It could not
have fallen better, there is not a fellow in town more expert than I am at
private business -- So I resolved to deliver it safely -- Is your honor's name
Clifford?


Lord Gayville. No indeed, friend, I am not so happy a man.


Sir Clement. aside That letter must not be lost though. Here, my friend --
I Will take charge of your letter. takes the letter Something for your pains.


Chairman. God bless your honor, and if you want to send an answer, my number
is forty seven in Bond-street -- your honor, I am known by the name of secret
Tom. Exit.


Lord Gayville. What is the use of this deceit? strong as my suspicion is, a
seal must be sacred.


Sir Clement. Our circumstances make an exception to your rule: when there is
treason in the state, wax gives way. takes the letter, opens and reads it.
Faith this is beyond my expectation -- though the mystery is unfathomable, the
aptness of it to my purpose is admirable -- Gayville -- I wish you joy.


Lord Gayville. Of what?


Sir Clement. Of conviction! if this is not plain! only hear reads "since my
confused lines of a few minutes past, my perplexities redouble upon my spirits
-- I am in momentary apprehension of further insult from the Alscrip family; I
am still more anxious to avoid Lord Gayville" pauses and looks at Lord
Gayville: "do not suspect my sincerity -- I have not a thought of him that
ought to disturb you." -- Here she is Gayville, look at her, through the true
medium of mutual affection -- "I have not a thought of him that ought to
disturb you" -- Fly to me, secure me, my dearest Henry.


Lord Gayville. Dearest Henry!


Sir Clement. reads on"Dearest Henry -- In this call, the danger of your
Harriet unites with the impatience of her affection."


Lord Gayville. Hell, and fury! this must be some trick, some forgery snatches
the letter. No, by all that is perfidious it is that exquisite hand that baffles
imitation.


Sir Clement. All, regular, strict, undeviating modern morals -- common
property is the first principle of friendship; your horse, your house, your
purse, your mistress -- nay, your wife would be a better example still of the
doctrine of this generous age. Bless fortune, Gayville, that has brought the
fidelity of your friend and your girl to the test at the same time.


Lord Gayville. Sir, I am not in a humor for any spleen but my own. What can
this mean? -- It must have been a secret attachment for years -- but then the
avowal of a correspondence and the confusion at receiving it -- his coldness in
traducing her; the passionate interest he expressed in her fate; the conviction
of his second letter -- It is all delirium. I Will search the matter to the
bottom, though I go to Clifford's heart for it. Exit in great anger.


Sir Clement. I Will after the precious fellow too -- He is a rogue above my
hopes, and the intricacy of his snares excite my curiosity. Exit.


SCENE III. Lady Emily's Apartment.
Lady Emily discovered reading. It will not do. My eyes may run over a thousand
subjects, but my thoughts center in one. Ah! that sigh! that sigh from the fair
sufferer this morning -- I have found it echo in my own heart ever since.

Enter Servant. Servant. Madam, Mr. Blandish.


Lady Emily. Pooh! did you say I was at home?


Servant. Your Ladyship gave no orders to the contrary.


Lady Emily. Show him in. Exit Servant. I must take up my air of levity again
-- It is the only humor for a fellow who I sometimes allow to entertain me,
but who never can get my esteem. I have more calls upon my affectation this
unlucky day, than my real disposition would execute in a long life.


Enter Blandish. Lady Emily. Blandish, I am horridly peevish; have you any
thing diverting in news or flattery?


Blandish. In the latter, Madam, nothing. My admiration has all the dullness of
truth: but show me what you think a flaw, and I Will try without flattery to
convince you it is a beauty.


Lady Emily. Tolerably expressed -- but the idea of a faultless woman is false
in point of encomium, she would be respectable, aweful, and unattracting. Odd
as it may seem, a woman, to charm, requires a little dash of harmless
imperfection. I know I Have a thousand amiable faults that I would not part with
for the world. So try again: Something more new and refined.


Blandish. Examine my heart, Lady Emily, and you will find both: The novelty of
disinterested passion, and refinement acquired by the study of you.


Lady Emily. Rather better: but that does not please me much; the less,
perhaps, as it is rather out of your way, and more in that of my friend your
sister, who, I observe, always put a compliment in full view -- Yours generally
come more forcibly, by affording us the pleasure of finding them out -- It is
the excellency of a brilliant to play in the dark.


Blandish. Allow yourself to be the brilliant and attend to another allusion.
With trembling ambition, I confess, that not content with admiring the jewel, I
would wear it.


Lady Emily. Wear it?


Blandish. As an appendage to my heart -- Conscious of it is value, proud of its
display, and devoted to its preservation.


Lady Emily. Riddles, Mr. Blandish -- but so let them remain -- I assure you
this hour is very inauspicious for explanation.


Blandish. I fear so. For in an hour, when Clifford proves treacherous, who can
escape suspicion.


Lady Emily. Clifford? for what purpose is he introduced in this conversation?


Blandish. You asked me for intelligence, the latest is, that Clifford has been
detected in a clandestine intercourse with the object of Lord Gayville's secret
passion; that he has betrayed the confidence of his friend and patron, and
actually carried her off. aside Which Gayville knows by this time with all its
aggravations, or Prompt has not been as active as he used to be.


Lady Emily with emotion. Blandish, this is a poor project. Clifford
treacherous to his friend! You might as soon make me believe Gayville
dispassionate, my uncle charitable, or you ingenuous.


Blandish. His conduct does not rest upon opinion, but proof; and when you know
it you must think of him with aversion.


Lady Emily. Must I? Then don't let me hear a word more -- I have aversions
enough already -- peevishly.


Blandish. It is impossible you can apply that word to one whose only offense
is to adore you. kisses her hand.


Enter Clifford. Clifford aside surprised. Blandish so favored?


Lady Emily aside. Perverse accident: what mistakes now will he make!


Blandish aside. The enemy has surprised me -- but the only remedy in such
emergencies, is to show a good countenance.


Clifford. I fear I have been guilty of an unpardonable intrusion.


Blandish. Mr. Clifford never can intrude, but though you had not come so
apropos yourself -- Lady Emily will bear testimony, I have not spared my pains
to remove any prejudices she might have entertained.


Lady Emily. Had you not better repeat in your own words, Mr. Blandish, all the
obliging things you have said of this gentleman?


Clifford. It is not necessary, Madam -- If without robbing you of moments that
I perceive are precious --


Lady Emily. Sir!


Clifford. I might obtain a short audience, looking at Blandish.


Blandish aside. He Is devilish impudent -- but he cannot soon get over facts,
and I Will take care the conference shall not be long. To Lady Emily -- Lady
Emily; hear Mr. Clifford, and judge if I have misrepresented him -- to Clifford
When you want a friend you know where to find him.


Exit. Lady Emily. This is an interview, Mr. Clifford, that I desire not to be
understood to have authorized. It is not to me, you are accountable for your
actions -- I have no personal interest in them.


Clifford. I know it too well.


Lady Emily peevishly. Do not run away with the notion neither, that I am
therefore interested in any other person's -- You have among you, vexed, and
disconcerted me, but there is not a grain of partiality in all my embarrassment
-- if you have any eyes you may see there is not.


Clifford. Happy Blandish, your triumph is evident.


Lady Emily. Blandish, the odious creature -- He is my abhorrence -- You are
hardly worse yourself in my bad opinion, though you have done so much more to
deserve it.


Clifford. How cruel are the circumstances that compel me to leave you under
these impressions -- nay more -- at such a time to urge a request, that during
your most favorable thoughts of me would have appeared strange if not
presumptuous. This is the key of my apartment. It contains a secret that the
exigency of the hour obliged me, against inclination or propriety, to lodge
there. Should Sir Clement return before me, I implore you to prevent his
discovery, and give to what you find within, your confidence and protection.
Lord Gayville -- but I shall go too far -- the most anxious event of my life
presses on me. I conjure you to comply, by all the compassion and tenderness
nature has treasured in your heart -- not for me -- but for occasions worthy
their display. Gives the key, which she receives with some reluctance, and Exit.


Lady Emily. Heigho! -- Its well, he is gone without insisting on my answer: I
was in a sad flutter of indecision. What mysterious means he takes to engage me
in a confidence which I could not directly accept! -- I am to find a letter, I
-- the story of his heart -- Its errors and defense -- My brother's name, also
-- to furnish me with a new interest in the secret, and one I might avow -- One
may dislike this art, but must be sensible of his delicacy. -- Ah, when those
two qualities unite in a man, I am afraid he is an over-match for the wisest of
us -- Hark! -- sure that is the sound of my Uncle's coach -- looks out of the
window. It Is he -- and now for the secret -- Curiosity! -- Curiosity! innate
irresistible principle in womankind, be my excuse, before I dare question my
mind upon other motives. Exit.


SCENE IV. Another apartment.
Enter Lady Emily. Oh! lud, I could hardly tremble more at opening this man's
apartment, were there a possibility of finding him within side. How do people
find courage to do a wrong thing, when an innocent discovery cannot be
prosecuted without such timidity.

Approaches the door timidly and unlocks it. Enter Miss Alton. Lady Emily.
Amazement. Miss Alton! what brought you here?


Miss Alton. Madam, I was brought here for an hour's concealment; who I really
am, I would not, if possible to avoid it, divulge in this house. When you saw
me last, you honored me with a favorable opinion -- My story not explained at
full, might subject me to doubts, that would shake your candor. The
circumstances in which I am involved, are strange, and have succeeded with the
rapidity and confusion of a dream -- Suffer me to recover for a moment my
disordered spirits, and I will satisfy you farther.


Lady Emily. What shall I do? -- She is pale and ready to faint -- I cannot let
her be exposed in such a situation -- Retire -- You may rely upon me for
present security -- You know best your pretensions to my future opinion --
hearing Sir Clement begone, or you are discovered -- shuts her in, and locks
Clifford's door.


Enter Sir Clement. Sir Clement. Oh! the triumph of honor! Oh the sincerity of
friendship, how my opinions are ratified -- how my system is proved.


Lady Emily. Oh, spirits, spirits, forsake me not -- oh, for a moment's
dissimulation!


Sir Clement. There are some now who would feed moroseness and misanthropy with
such events; to me they give delight as convictions and warnings to mankind.


Lady Emily. Of how superior a quality, my good Uncle must be to the
benevolence you possess! it rises with the progress of mischief; and is
gratified (upon principles of general good) by finding confidence abused, and
esteem misplaced. Am I not right in attributing your joy at present so that
sort of refinement?


Sir Clement. Hah! and to what sensations, my good niece, shall be attributed
the present state of your spirits? To the disgust you took to Clifford almost
at first sight. It will not be with indifference, but pleasure, you will hear
of his turning out the veriest rascal, the most complete impostor, the most
abandoned -- but hold! hold -- I must not wrong him by superlatives -- -- he is
matched too.


Lady Emily. Really! -- I congratulate you upon such a check of charity.


Sir Clement. And I wish you joy, my pretty pert one, upon the credit your sex
has acquired, in producing this other Chef-d'ouvre -- Such a composition of the
highest vices and the lowest --


Lady Emily. I know it will be in vain to oppose the pleasure you take in
coloring, by my want of taste to enjoy it; but you may spare your preparatory
shading, and come to the points with which I am not acquainted.


Sir Clement. And pray my incurious niece, with what points are you acquainted?


Lady Emily. That, before Mr. Clifford went abroad, it is suspected his
passions betrayed him into a fault that must be shocking to your morality, and
that I Am sure it is not my intention to justify. He ought to have resisted.
It Is a shame we have not more examples of young men correcting the frailties of
womankind -- I dare say he neglected a fair opportunity of becoming a prodigy.


Sir Clement. I protest you have a pretty way of dressing up an apology for the
venial faults of youth -- and it comes with a peculiar grace from a delicate
lady of twenty.


Lady Emily. Come, Sir; no more of your sarcasms. I can treat wrong actions
with levity, and yet consider them with detestation. Prudes and pretenders
condemn with austerity. To the collection of suspicions you are master of, let
me add one -- In a young lady of the delicacy -- and age you have described,
always suspect the virtue that does not wear a smile.


Sir Clement. And the sincerity that wears one aukwardly -- If you would know
the history of Clifford, ask but your brother; if of the precious adventurer he
has carried off, enquire of Miss Alscrip -- We shall come up with her yet --
woe be to any one who harbors her.


Enter Prompt hastily. Prompt. Joy to your honor, I see you have caught her.


Sir Clement. Her! -- who?


Prompt Lady Emily turning. I ask your ladyship's pardon -- Having only the
glimpse of a petticoat, and knowing the object of my chase was in this house, I
confess I mistook you.


Sir Clement. In this house?


Prompt. As sure as we are -- She came in thorough the garden, under Mr.
Clifford's arm -- up the other stairs, I suppose -- If my lady had been
hereabouts -- she must have seen her.


Lady Emily in confusion. Yes, but unluckily, I was quite out of the way.


Sir Clement. Such audaciousness passes credibility -- Emily what do you think
of him?


Lady Emily. That he is a monster aside. How my dilemmas multiply.


Sir Clement. What, to my house! to his apartment here! I wonder he did not ask
for protection in yours -- What should you have said?


Lady Emily. I don't know; but, had I been so imposed upon as to receive her, I
should scorn to betray even the criminal I had engaged to protect.


Sir Clement tries at the door, finds it locked. Emily, my dear, do ring the
bell to know if the housekeeper has a second key to this lock.


Lady Emily. What shall I do?


Prompt. She is certainly there, Sir, and cannot escape. Where can she better
remain, till you can assemble all parties, confront them face to face, and
bring every thing that has passed to a full explanation?


Sir Clement. With all my heart; send and collect every body concerned as fast
as possible -- How I long for so complicated an exhibition of the purity of the
human heart -- Come with me, Emily, and help to digest my plan -- Friends and
lovers, what a scene shall we show you. Takes Lady Emily under the arm. Exeunt.


End of the Fourth Act. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Clifford and Mr. Rightly. Clifford. YOUR knowledge in the profession,
Mr. Rightly, is as questionless as your integrity; but there is something so
surprising in the discovery of the Charlton estate.


Rightly. It is so strange, that I will not pronounce a positive opinion, till
I have read again the collateral papers, and considered fully the descents in
your family. Your grandfather, I think, was deceived in supposing he had a
right to sell that part of the Charlton estate, which Alscrip proposes for his
daughter's portion. The strength of this old settlement must have escaped my
brother lawyer, or he was mad when he put it into my hands.


Clifford. If you knew too, how the value of the acquisition is enhanced, by
the opportune moment in which it presents itself -- I am in too much emotion to
thank you as I ought.


Rightly. Sir, I want neither compliment, nor acknowledgement, for revealing
what I should be a party to dishonesty to conceal -- but that duty done, would
it be an abuse of benevolence, unworthy as some of the parties may be, to
preserve the peace of all concerned.


Clifford. In what manner.


Rightly. Sir Clement Flint will renounce the Alscrip alliance, at the first
appearance of this defalcation, and if I am well informed, Lord Gayville will
not lament the loss of his intended bride. The young lady is therefore free and
still possessed of a great inheritance.


Clifford. I do not yet perceive what you aim at.


Rightly. She has the faults that wealth and a false education create, but they
are not incurable. Marry her yourself. By sinking the claim in the union with
his family, you command the father's approbation; and the daughter must be of a
strange mould indeed, if the same obligation does not become a corrective of
her pride, and an excitement to her gratitude. smiling I give some token of my
friendship, when, as a lawyer, I propose you a wife instead of a suit in
chancery.


Clifford. I feel all the kindness of your suggestion; but if my claim is
precarious, it is as repugnant to my delicacy as to my inclination, to realize
it upon such terms; if it is substantial, I have such a disposition to make --
you have a right to all my thoughts; but I have an appointment to obey, that
admits no time for explanation; favor me for a moment with your pencil, Rightly
takes out a pencil and pocketbook. And a blank page in that memorandum book.


Clifford writes. Rightly. My life on it, his head is turned upon some girl not
worth a shilling -- -- There is an amiable defect, but a very observable one in
the nature of some men. A good head and heart operate as effectually as vice or
folly could do to make them improvident.


Clifford. Mr. Rightly, I confide to your hands a new secret relative to the
Charlton estate; do not read it till you return home, gives the book, aside and
going. There, Gayville, is one reply to your challenge -- and now for another.


Rightly. One moment, Sir -- I engage for no secrecy that my own judgment shall
not warrant.


Clifford. And the benevolence of your heart approve -- Those are my
conditions. --


Exeunt on opposite sides. SCENE II. Hyde-Park.
Enter Lord Gayville impetuously, looking at his watch. Not here! I am sure I
marked the hour as well as the place, precisely in my note, walks about. Had I
been told three days ago, that I should have been the appellant in a
premeditated duel, I should have thought it an insult upon my principles --
That Clifford should be the cause of my transgressing the legal and sacred
duties, we have ever both maintained -- oh, it would have seemed a visionary
impossibility -- But he comes, to cut reflection short --

Enter Clifford. Lord Gayville. I waited for you, Sir.


Clifford. Bows in silence.


Lord Gayville. That ceremonial would grace an encounter of punctilio, but
applies ill to the terms upon which I have called you here.


Clifford. What terms are those, my Lord.


Lord Gayville. Vengeance! Ample, final vengeance! Draw, Sir.


Clifford. No, my Lord, my sword is reserved for more becoming purposes: It is
not the instrument of passion; and has yet been untried in a dispute with my
friend.


Lord Gayville. But why is it not ready for a different trial, the vindication
of perfidy, the blackest species of perfidy, that ever the malignant enemy of
mankind infused into the human breast -- perfidy to the friend who loved and
trusted you, and in the nearest interests of his heart.


Clifford. Take care, my Lord; should my blood boil like yours, and it is
rising fast, you know not the punishment that awaits you. I came temperate,
your gross provocation and thirst of blood make temperance appear disgrace -- I
am tempted to take a revenge --


Lord Gayville. Draws. The means are ready. Come, Sir, you are to give an
example of qualities generally held incompatible -- bravery and dishonor.


Clifford. Another such word, and by heaven! -- How have I deserved this
opinion?


Lord Gayville. Ask your conscience -- Under the mask of friendship you have
held a secret intercourse with the woman I adore; you have supplanted me in her
affections, you have robbed me of the very charm of my life -- can you deny it?


Clifford. I avow it all.


Lord Gayville. Unparalleled insolence of guilt.


Clifford. Are you sure there is nothing within the scope of possibility, that
would excuse or atone --


Lord Gayville. Death -- Death only -- no abject submission -- no compromise
for infamy -- choose instantly -- and save yourself from the only stretch of
baseness left -- the invention of a falsehood to palliate --


Clifford. In the utmost agitation, and drawing his sword. Falsehood! -- You
shall have no other explanation. After a struggle within himself, Clifford
drops the point and exposes his breast.


Lord Gavyville. Stand upon your defense, Sir -- What do you mean?


Clifford. You said nothing but my life would satisfy you, take it, and
remember me.


Lord Gayville. I say so still -- but upon an equal pledge -- I am no assassin.


Clifford. with great emotion If to strike at the heart of your friend, more
deeply than that poor instrument in your hand could do, makes an assassin, you
have been one already.


Lord Gayville. That look, that tone, how like to innocence? Had he not avowed
such abominable practices --


Clifford. I avow them again: I have rivaled you in the love of the woman you
adore -- her affections are rivetted to me. I have removed her from your sight;
secured her from your recovery --


Lord Gayville. Damnation!


Clifford. I have done it to save unguarded beauty; to save unprotected
innocence; to save a sister.


Lord Gayville. A sister!


Clifford. With exultation. Vengeance! Ample, final vengeance! a pause It is
accomplished -- over him -- and over myself -- my victory is complete.


Lord Gayville. Where shall I hide my shame!


Clifford. We'll share it, and forget it here.


Embraces. Lord Gayville. Why did you keep the secret from me?


Clifford. I knew it not myself, till the strange concurrence of circumstances,
to which you were in part witness a few hours since, brought it to light. I
meant to impart to you the discovery, when my temper took fire -- Let us bury
our mutual errors in the thought, that we now for life are friends.


Lord Gayville. Brothers, Clifford -- Let us interchange that title and doubly,
doubly ratify it. Unite me to your charming sister; accept the hand of Lady
Emily in return -- her heart I have discovered to be yours -- We'll leave the
world to the sordid and the tasteless; let an Alscrip, or, a Sir Clement Flint,
wander after the fantom of happiness, we shall find her real retreat, and hold
her by the bonds she covets, virtue, love and friendship.


Clifford. Not a word more, my lord; the bars against your proposal are
insuperable.


Lord Gayville. What bars?


Clifford. Honor! propriety -- and pride.


Lord Gayville. Pride, Clifford?


Clifford. Yes, my Lord; Harriet Clifford, shall not steal the hand of a
prince; nor will I -- though doting on Lady Emily, with a passion like your own,
bear the idea of a clandestine union in a family, to whom I am bound by
obligation and trust. Indeed, my lord, without Sir Clement's consent, you must
think no more of my sister.


Lord Gayville. Stern Stoic, but I will, and not clandestinely; I Will instantly
to Sir Clement.


Clifford. Do not be rash -- Fortune or some better agent, is working in
wonders -- Meet me presently at your Uncle's; in the mean while promise not to
stir in this business.


Lord Gayville. What hope from delay.


Clifford. Promise --


Lord Gayville. I am in a state to catch at shadows -- I Will try to obey you.


Clifford. Farewell! -- Exeunt.


SCENE III. Sir Clement's house.
Enter Miss Alscrip in great spirits, followed by Mrs. Blandish. Miss Alscrip.
I am delighted at this summons from Sir Clement, Blandish; poor old
clear-sight, I hope he has projected a reconciliation.


Mrs. Blandish. How I rejoice to see those smiles returned to the face that was
made for them!


Miss Alscrip. Returned, Blandish? I desire you will not insinuate it ever was
without them -- Why sure, you would not have the world imagine the temper of an
Heiress of my class, was to be ruffled by the loss of a paltry earl -- I have
been highly diverted with what has passed from beginning to end.


Mrs. Blandish. Well, if good humor can be a fault, sure the excess you carry
it to must be the example.


Miss Alscrip. I desire it may be made known in all companies, that I have done
nothing but laugh -- nay, it is true too.


Mrs. Blandish. My dear creature, of what consequence is the truth, when you
are charging me with the execution of your desires.


Miss Alscrip. Could any thing be more diverting than my Lord's intriguing with
my chambermaid before marriage, that must be your cue.


Mrs. Blandish. Excellent!


Miss Alscrip. The design was in rule, and founded upon the best precedents --
only the time, in the news-paper phrase, was premature, he! he! he!


Mrs. Blandish. He! he! he!


Miss Alscrip. And then the airs of the moppet -- Could any thing be more
ridiculous?


Mrs. Blandish. The rivalship you mean -- Rival, Miss Alscrip -- He! he! he!
Half laugh.


Miss Alscrip. Yes, but when you take this tone in public, laugh a little
louder.


Mrs. Blandish. Rival, Miss Alscrip, ha! ha! ha!


Both. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Blandish. wiping her eyes as not quite recovered from her laugh. For
mirth's sake, what is become of the rival? -- Who will you choose she shall have
run away with?


Miss Alscrip. Leave it in doubt as it is; fixing circumstances confines the
curiosity to one story which may be disproved; uncertainty leaves it open to an
hundred, and makes them all probable. But I hear some of the company upon the
stairs: Now, Blandish -- You shall be witness to the temper and dignity, with
which a woman of my consequence can discard a quality courtship that offends
her -- Having sufficiently mortified the Uncle and Nephew, with a triumphant
raillery all my own, I shall request Lady Emily to set the Paphian mimp upon
the family disappointment, and leave them together to the exercise of the
patience that usually attends the loss of a hundred thousand pounds.


Mrs. Blandish. Sweet tempered soul!


Enter Sir Clement Flint. Sir Clement. Miss Alscrip, your --


As he is beginning to say your humble servant. Enter Blandish out of breath.
Blandish. The duel's over, and the combatants in whole skins -- Never ran so
fast since I was born --


Sir Clement. -- To be too late by some minutes in your intelligence. I know
you feel the disappointment from the sincere affection you bear all parties.


Miss Alscrip. Duel! -- Pray let us hear the particulars -- As there is no
mischief I shall not faint.


Ironically. Sir Clement. I guess it has been of the common place kind. -- Hats
over the brows -- glum silence -- thrust -- parry -- and riposte -- Explain,
and shake hands: Your man of honor never sets his friend right, till he has
exchanged a shot -- or a thrust: Oh, a little essence of steel or gunpowder, is
a morning whet to the temper: It carries off all qualms, and leaves the
digestion free for any thing that is presented to it.


Miss Alscrip. Dear, how fortunate! Considering the pills some folks have to
swallow.


Sir Clement. Blandish, see if the door of Clifford's room is yet unlocked,
there is a person within you little expect to find, and that it may be proper
for this lady, and me to interrogate together. -- I don't know what to call her
-- Inexplicability in petticoats. ( The door opens) and


Enter Lady Emily. Blandish. Lady Emily!


Sir Clement. Inexplicable, with a vengeance.


Miss Alscrip. aside Lady Emily, shut up in Clifford's apartment! Beyond my
expectation, indeed. With a malicious air.


Lady Emily seems pleased. Sir Clement. dryly Lady Emily I know you were always
cautious whom you visited, and never gave a better proof of your discernment.


Lady Emily. Never -- oh! my poor dear uncle you little think what is going to
befall you.


Sir Clement. Not a disappointment in love, I hope.


Lady Emily. No, but in something much nearer your heart -- your system is
threatened with a blow, that I think, and from my soul I hope, it never will
recover: would you guess that the sagacious observations of your whole life are
upon the point of being confounded by the production --


Sir Clement. Of what?


Lady Emily. A woman of ingenuous discretion, and a man of unaffected
intregrity.


Sir Clement. Hah!


Mrs. Blandish. What can she mean?


Miss Alscrip. Nothing good -- she looks so pleasant.


Lady Emily. Come forth, my injured friend. Our personal acquaintance has been
short, but our hearts were intimate from the first sight presenting her Your
prisoner, Sir, is Miss Harriot Clifford.


Sir Clement. Clifford's sister!


Miss Alscrip. What, the runaway Alton, turned into a sprig of quality.


Lady Emily. disdainfully to Miss Alscrip. The humble dependant of Alscrip's
house -- The wanton -- the paragon of fraud -- the only female that can equal
Clifford tauntingly to Sir Clement She is indeed! with emphasis and affection


Blandish. aside Oh, rot the source of the family fondness -- I see I have no
card left in my favor -- but the Heiress. Goes to her and pays court. During
this conversation, aside, Lady Emily seems encouraging Miss Clifford -- Sir
Clement musing, and by turns examining her.


Sir Clement. to himself"Ingenuous discretion!"


Enter Clifford and runs to his sister. Clifford. My dearest Harriot! the joy I
purposed in presenting you here, is anticipated; but, my blameless fugitive!
relate the tale of your distresses, and my pride in you will not be a wonder.


Miss Clifford. They have been short -- and are overpaid by your indulgence.
Insulted by the family I lived with; made more wretched by a detested pursuit
which my uncle's violence enforced, and confident of your being returned, I
fled to London for an asylum.


Sir Clement. Which has been admirably chosen in my house.


Clifford. Sir, I really think so. Lady Emily's generosity, your justice, and
my sister's honor make it sacred. While Clifford is speaking


Enter Lord Gayville. starts at seeing Miss Clifford. Sir Clement. perceiving
Lord Gayville And peculiarly secure against the visits of this deteste^ pursuer.


Lord Gayville. with rapture Her persecutor and her convert. Her virtues which
no humility could conceal, and every trial made more resplendant, discovered,
disgraced, and reclaimed a libertine.


Miss Clifford. How am I distressed -- what ought I to answer?


Lord Gayville. Impressed sentiment upon desire, gave honor to passion, and
drew from my soul a vow, which heaven chastise me when I violate, to obtain her
by a legal, sacred claim, or renounce fortune, family and friends, and become a
self-devoted outcast of the world.


Miss Clifford. Oh! brother, interpose.


Sir Clement. My Lord, your fortune, family, and friends are much obliged to
you. Your part is perfect -- Mr. Clifford you are called upon. Miss, in strict
propriety, throws the business upon her relations -- Come finish the comedy;
join one of her hands to the gallants, while, with the other, she covers her
blushes -- and he in rapture delivers the moral. All for Love, or, the World
well Lost. Miss Clifford still appears agitated.


Clifford. Be patient, my Harriot, this is the school for prejudice, and the
lesson of its shame is near.


Miss Alscrip. I vow these singular circumstances give me quite a confusion of
pleasure. The astonishing good fortune of my late Protegee in finding so
impassioned a friendship in her brother's bedchamber; the captivating
eloquence of Lord Gayville in winding up an eclaircissement which I admire --
not for the first time -- to day -- and the superlative joy, Sir Clement must
feel at an union, ^ounded upon the purity of the passions, are subjects of such
different congratulation, that I hardly know where to begin.


Lady Emily. aside Charming! -- her insolence will justify what so seldom
occurs to one -- a severe retort without a possible sense of compunction.


Miss Alscrip. But in point of fortune -- don't imagine, Sir Clement, I would
insinuate that the Lady is destitute -- oh Lord, far from it. Her musical
talents are a portion -- I cannot say I have yet seen a countess open a concert
for her own benefit; but there can be no reason why a woman of the first
quality should not be directress of the Opera -- Indeed, after all that has
happened, it is the best chance I see for a good administration there.


Alscrip and Rightly without. Alscrip. Why stop a moment -- Mr. Rightly; 'Death
after chasing you all over the town, don't be so impatient the instant I
overtake you.


Sir Clement. What have we here -- the lawyers in dispute?


Alscrip entering. You have not heard my last word yet.


Rightly entering. You have heard mine, Sir.


Alscrip whispering. I Will make the five thousand I offered, ten.


Rightly. Millions would not bribe me -- coming forward. When I detect wrong,
and vindicate the sufferer, I feel the spirit of the Law of England, and the
pride of a practitioner.


Alscrip. Lucifer confound such practices. In this part of the scene, Sir
Clement, Lord Gayville, Lady Emily, Clifford, and Miss Clifford, form one
groupe.


Rightly opens a deed, and points out a part of it to Sir Clement. Mr. and Miss
Alscrip carry on the following speeches on the side at which Alscrip has
entered. And Mr. and Mrs. Blandish are farther back observing. Alscrip. That
cursed! cursed flaw. --


Miss Alscrip. Flaw! who has dared to talk of one? not in my reputation, Sir?


Alscrip. No, but in my estate, which is a damned deal worse.


Miss Alscrip. How! what? -- when! -- where? -- The estate that was to be
settled upon me?


Alscrip. Yes, but that me, turned topsy turvey -- when me broke into my room
this morning, and the devil followed to fly away with all my faculties at once
-- I am ruined -- Let us see what you will settle upon your poor father.


Miss Alscrip. I settle upon you?


Mrs. Blandish. This is an embarrassing accident.


Miss Alscrip. Yes, and a pretty help you are, with a drop chin like a
frontispiece to the lamentations.


Rightly coming forward with Sir Clement. I stated this with some doubt this
morning, but now my credit as a lawyer upon the issue. -- The Heiress falls
short of the terms in your treaty by two thousand pounds a year -- which this
deed, lately and providentially discovered, entails upon the heirs of Sir
William Charlton, and consequently, in right of his mother, upon this gentleman.


Lady Emily. How!


Lord Gayville. Happy disappointment.


Sir Clement aside. Two thousand a year to Clifford! It Is pity for the parade
of disinterestedness, that he opened his designs upon Emily, before he knew his
pretensions.


Lady Emily aside. Now, if there were twenty ceilings, and as many floors,
could not I find a spot to settle my silly looks upon. Sir Clement observes her
with his usual shyness. Then turning toward Alscrip Palm a false title upon
me? I should have thought the attempt beyond the collective assurance of
Westminster Hall -- and he takes the loss as much to heart as if he bought the
estate with his own money.


Alscrip with hesitation. Sir Clement -- what think you -- of an amicable
adjustment of all these businesses?


Sir Clement ironically. Nothing can be more reasonable. The value of Miss
Alscrip's amiable disposition, placed against the abatement of her fortune, is
a matter of the most easy computation; and to decide the portion, Mr. Clifford
ought to relinquish of his acquisition -- Lady Emily -- will you be a referee?


Lady Emily aside. Yes, the Lynx has me -- I thought I should not escape -- to
him. No, Sir; my poor abilities only extend to an amicable endeavor here. to
Miss Alscrip And really, Miss Alscrip, I see no reason for your being
dispirited, there may be many ready made titles at market, within the reach of
your purse. Or, why should not a woman of your consequence originate her own
splendor? there is an old admirer of mine -- He would make a very pretty lord
-- and indeed, would contribute something on his own part to ease the purchase
-- The Blandish family is well with all administrations, and a new coronet is
always as big again as an old one. I don't see how you could lay out part of
your independency to more advantage.


Blandish aside. Yes, but since flaws are in fashion, I shall look a little
into things before I agree to the bargain.


Lady Emily. And if you replace this part of your family, pointing to Miss
Clifford by making an humble companion of your old gentleman, I protest, I do
not see any great alteration in your affairs.


Miss Alscrip aside. I Will die before I Will discover my vexation -- and yet, half
crying no title -- no place.


Lady Emily. Depend upon it, Miss Alscrip, your place will be found exactly
where it ought to be. The public eye in this country is never long deceived --
Believe me -- and cherish obscurity -- Title may bring forward merits, but it
also places our defects in horrid relief.


Miss Clifford. You seem to expect something from me, Miss Alscrip -- Be in no
pain for any thing that has passed between us -- My pity has entirely
overpowered my resentment.


Alscrip. Molly, the sooner we get out of court the better -- we have damnably
the worst of this cause, so come along Molly taking her under the arm -- and
farewell to Berkley-square. Whoever wants Alscrip's house, will find it in the
neighborhood of Furnival's-Inn, with the noble title of Scrivener, in capitals
-- Blank bonds at the windows, and a brass knocker at the door pulling her.
Come along Molly.


Miss Alscrip. half crying aside Oh! the barbarous metamorphosis -- but his
flusterums for a week, will serve my temper, as a regimen. I will then take the
management of my affairs into my own hands, and break from my cloud anew: and
you shall find to the company there are those without a coronet, that can be as
saucy, and as loud, and stop the way in all public places as well as the best
of you. Lady Emily laughs Yes, Madam, and without borrowing your Ladyship's
airs.


Alscrip pulling her. Come along, Molly.


Miss Alscrip. Oh you have been a jewel of a father. The company laugh.


Exeunt Mr. and Miss Alscrip. Mr. and Mrs. Blandish stay behind. Blandish.
aside What a cursed turn things have taken! My schemes evaporate like
inflammable air, and down drops poor adventurer.


Lady Emily. Mrs. Blandish, sure you do not leave your friend, Miss Alscrip, in
distress?


Mrs. Blandish. We'll not disturb the ashes of the dead -- my sweet Lady Emily
--


Blandish. None of your flourishes, my dear sister -- they already think you a
walking dedication -- When we cannot escape a situation, the only way is to
brave it -- So let them tell us we are sycophants. -- be it so -- then we are
the best friends society has. Flattery is the diet of good humor, and not one
of you can live without it, and when you quarrel with the family of Blandish,
you leave refined cookery to be fed upon scraps, by a poor cousin, or a led
captain -- taking his sister under his arm.


Mrs. Blandish. as she goes off Oh the two charming pair. Exit with Blandish.


Lord Gayville. Precious groupe, fare ye well to Sir Clement. And now, Sir,
whatever may be your determinations toward me -- here are pretensions you may
patronize without breach of discretion. The estate which devolves to my friend
--


Rightly. To prevent errors, is not his to bestow.


Sir Clement. What now -- more flaws?


Rightly. The estate was his beyond the reach of controversy: but before he was
truly sure of it, on his way to Hyde-Park did this spendthrift, by a stroke of
his pen, divest himself of every shilling -- Here is the covenant by which he
binds himself to execute proper conveyances as soon as the necessary forms can
be gone through.


Lord Gayville. And in favor of whom is this desperate act?


Rightly. Of a most dangerous seducer -- a little mercenary, that when she gets
hold of the heart, does not leave an atom of it our own.


All. How!


Rightly. with feeling. And there she stands; pointing to Miss Clifford with a
look and an emotion that wou' d condemn her before any court in the universe.


Lady Emily. Glorious -- matchless Clifford!


Miss Clifford. Brother, this must not be.


Clifford. Your pardon, my dear Harriet, it is done. Sir Clement, my sister's
fortune is still far short of what you expected with Miss Alscrip; for that
deficiency, I have only to offer the virtues, Lord Gayville has proved, and the
affection she found it easier to control than to coneeal. If you will receive
her, thus circumstanced, into your family, mine has been an acquisition indeed.


Lady. Emily. Coming up to Sir Clement. Now, Sir, where is suspicion! Where is
now the ruling principle that governs mankind! Through what perspective, by what
trial, will you find self-interest here? What, not one pithy word to mock my
credulity! -- Alas! poor Yorick -- quite chop-fallen. -- Forgive me, Sir, I own
I am agitated to extravagance -- You thought me disconcerted at the first
discovery; I am delighted at the last, there is a problem in my disposition
worthy your solving.


Sir Clement. Who has been profoundly thought full Mr. Rightly, favor me with
that paper in your hand.


Rightly. Mr. Clifford's engagement, Sir, Gives the paper, Sir Clement looks it
over and tears it. What do you mean, Sir?


Sir Clement. To cancel the obligation, and pay the equivalent to Gayville, or
if Clifford will have his own way and become a beggar by renewing it, to make
an heiress of my own for his reparation -- and there she stands pointing to
Lady Emily With sensibility and vivacity so uncommonly blended, that they
extract benevolence where ever it exists, and create it where it never was
before -- Your point is carried -- You may both fall upon your knees, for the
consent of ladies.


Lord Gayville. to Miss Clifford. In this happy moment, let my errors be
forgot, and my love alone remembered.


Miss Clifford. With these sanctions for my avowal -- I will not deny that I
saw and felt the sincerity of your attachment, from the time it was capable of
being restrained by respect.


Clifford. Words are wanting, Lady Emily --


Lady Emily. I wish they may with all my heart, but it is generally remarked
that wanting words, is the beginning of a florid set speech -- To be serious,
Clifford -- We want but little explanation on either side -- Sir Clement, will
tell you how long we have conversed by our actions. Gives her hand My dear
Uncle, how a smile becomes you in its natural meaning.


Sir Clement. If you think me a convert, you are mistaken, I have ever believed
self to be the predominant principle of the human mind -- My heart at this
instant confirms the doctrine -- There Is my problem for yours, my dear Emily,
and may all who hear me agree in this solution -- to reward the deserving, and
make those we love happy, is self-interest in the extreme.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE. Spoken by Miss FARREN.
THE Comic Muse, who here erects her shrine,
To court your offerings, and accepts of mine,
Sends me to state an anxious author's plea,
And wait with humble hope this Court's decree.
By no Prerogative will she decide,
She vows, an English Jury is her pride.
Then for our Heiress -- forced from finer air,
That lately fan'd her plumes in Berkeley-square;
Will she be helpless in her new resort,
And find no friends -- about the inns of court?
Sages be candid -- though you hate a knave,
Sure, for example, you will a Rightly save.
Be kind for once ye clerks -- ye sportive sirs
Who haunt our Theaters in boots and spurs,
So may you safely press your nightly hobby,
Run the whole ring -- and end it in the lobby.
Lovers of truth, be kind; and own that here
That love is strained as far as it will bear.
Poets may write -- Philosophers may dream --
But would the world bear truth in the extreme?
What, not one Blandish left behind! not one!
Poets are mute, and Painters all undone:
Where are those charms that Nature's term survive,
The maiden bloom that glows at forty-five?
Truth takes the pencil -- wrinkles -- freckles -- squint,
The whole's transformed, -- the devil's in it,
Dimples turn scars, the smile becomes a scowl!
The hair the ivy-bush, the face the owl.
But shall an author mock the flatt'rer's power?
Oh might you all be Blandishes this hour!
Then would the candid jurors of the Pit,
Grant their mild passport to the realms of Wit;
Then would I mount the car where often I ride,
And place the favored culprit by my side.
To aid our flight -- one fashionable hint --
See my authority -- a Morning Print --
"We learn" -- observe it Ladies -- "France's Queen
"Loves, like our own, a heart-directed scene;
"And while each thought she weighs, each beauty scans,
"Breaks, in one night's applause, a score of fans!"
Beating her fan against her hand. Adopt the mode, ye Belles -- so end my
prattle,
And show how you will outdo a Bourbon rattle.

