FLORIO: A TALE, FOR FINE GENTLEMAN AND FINE LADIES: AND, THE BAS BLEU; OR,
CONVERSATION: TWO POEMS.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXXVI, [Price Three
Shillings.]

TO THE HON. HORACE WALPOLE.
SIR,
IT would be very flattering to me, if I might hope that the little Tale, which
I now take the liberty of presenting to you, could amuse a few moments of your
tedious indisposition. It is, I confess, but a paltry return for the many hours
of agreeable information, and elegant amusement, which I have received from
your spirited and very entertaining writings: yet I am persuaded, that you will
receive it with favor, as a small offering of esteem and gratitude, of which
the intention alone makes all the little value.

The slight verses, Sir, which I place under your protection, will not, I fear,
impress the world with a very favorable idea of my poetical powers: But I
shall, at least, be suspected of having some taste, and of keeping good
company, when I confess s that some of the pleasantest hours of my life have
been passed in your conversation. I should be unjust to your very engaging and
well-bred turn of wit, if I did not declare that, among all the lively and
brilliant things I have heard from you, I do not remember ever to have heard an
unkind, or an ungenerous one: Let me be allowed to bear my feeble testimony to
your temperate use of this charming faculty, so delightful in itself, but which
can only be safely trusted in such hands as yours, where it is guarded by
politeness, and directed by humanity.

I have the honor to be, SIR, Your much obliged, And most obedient Humble
Servant, HANNAH MORE.
JANUARY 27, 1786.
FLORIO: A POETICAL TALE.

FLORIO: A POETICAL TALE, FOR FINE GENTLEMEN AND FINE LADIES.
FLORIO, a youth of gay renown,
Who figured much about the Town,
Had passed, with general approbation,
The modish forms of Education;
Knew what was proper to be known,
The establislih'd jargon of Bon-ton;
Had learnt, with very moderate reading,
The whole new system of good breeding:
Knew to be negligent and rude;
But still his feelings would intrude:
For FLORIO was not meant by nature,
A silly, or a worthless creature:
He had a heart disposed to feel,
Had sense and spirit, taste and zeal;
Was handsome, generous; but, by fate,
Predestined to a large estate!
Hence all the hopes he gave were foiled;
His mind by praise and pleasure spoiled.
The Destiny, who wove the thread
Of FLORIO'S being, sighed, and said,
Poor youth! this cumbrous twist of gold,
More, than my shuttle well can hold,
For which thy anxious fathers toiled,
Thy white and even thread has spoiled:
This shall seduce thy pliant youth
From sense, simplicity, and truth;
Thy erring fire, by this misled,
Shall scatter pleasures round thy head,
When wholesome disicipline's control,
Should brace the sinews of thy soul;
Coldly thou wilt toil for Learning's prize,
For why should he that is rich be wise?
The gracious Master of mankind,
Who knew us vain, and weak, and blind,
In mercy, though in anger, said,
That man should earn his daily bread;
Who counteracts the order given,
Disputes the high behest of Heaven.
Forgive (nor lay the fault on me)
This mixture of mythology;
The bard of Paradise has deigned
With truth to mingle fables feigned;
Who cannot reach his style, or thoughts,
With ease may irritate his faults.
Poor FLORIO, at the ardent age
When youth should rush on Glory's stage;
When Life should open fresh and fair,
And Hope advance with smiling air;
Of youthful gaiety bereft,
Had scarce an unbroach'd pleasure left;
He found already to his cost,
The shining gloss of life was lost;
And Pleasure was so coy a prude,
She fled the more the more pursued.
But FLORIO knew the WORLD, that Science
Set Sense and Learning at defiance;
He thought the world to him was known,
Whereas he only knew the Town;
In men this blunder still you find,
All think their little set -- Mankind.
Though high renown the youth had gained,
No flagrant crimes his life had stained;
No tool of falsehood, slave of passion,
But spoilt by CUSTOM, and the FASHION.
Though known among a certain set,
He did not like to be in debt;
He shudder'd at the dicer's box,
Nor thought it very heterodox
That tradesmen should be sometimes paid,
And promises be kept when made.
His utmost credit, as a sinner,
Was that he sometimes spoilt a dinner;
Ever, by system, came too late,
And made his choicest parties wait;
Yet 'twas a hopeful indication,
On which to found a reputation:
Small habits, well pursued betimes,
May reach the dignity of crimes.
His mornings were not spent in vice,
'Twas lounging, sauntering, eating ice:
Walk up and down St. James's Street,
Full fifty times the youth you would meet:
He hated cards, detested drinking,
But stroll'd to shun the toil of thinking;
'Twas doing nothing was his curse,
Is there a vice can plague us worse?
The wretch who digs the mine for bread,
Or ploughs, that others may be fed,
Feels less fatigue than that decreed
To him who cannot think, or read.
Not all the struggle of temptation,
Not all the furious war of passion,
Can quench the spark of Glory's flame,
Or blot out Virtue's very name;
Like the true taste for genuine saunter,
No rival passions can supplant her;
They rule in short and quick succession,
But SLOTH keeps one long, fast possession;
Ambition's reign is quickly closed,
The usurper Rage is soon deposed;
Intemperance, where there is no temptation,
Makes voluntary abdication;
Of other tyrants short the strife,
But INDOLENCE is king for life.
Yet though so polished FLORIO'S breeding,
Think him not ignorant of reading;
For he, to keep him from the vapors,
Subscribed at HOOKHAM'S, saw the papers;
Was deep in Poet's-corner wit,
Knew what was in Italics writ;
Explained fictitious names at will,
Each gutted syllable could fill;
There often, in paragraphs, his name
Gave symptom sweet of growing fame,
Though yet they served but to apprize
Of buttons' form, or buckles' size.
He studied while he dressed, for true it is
He read Compendiums, Extracts, Beauties,
Abreges, Dictionnaires, Recueils,
Mercures, Journaux, Extraits, and Feuilles:
No work in substance now is followed,
The Chemic Extract only's swallowed.
He liked those literary cooks
Who skim the cream of others' books,
And ruin half an Author's graces,
By plucking bons-mots from their places;
He wonders any writing sells,
But these spic'd mushrooms and morells;
His palate these alone can touch,
Where every mouthful is bonne bouche.
Of each new Play he saw a part,
And all the Anas had by heart;
He found whatever they produce
Is fit for conversation-use;
Is ever ready for display;
A page would prime him for a day:
They cram not with a mass of knowledge,
Which smacks of toil, and smells of college,
Which in the memory useless lies,
And only makes men -- good and wise.
A friend he had, BELLARIO hight,
A reasoning, reading, learned wight;
At least, with men of FLORIO'S breeding,
He was a prodigy of reading.
He knew each stale and vapid lie
In tomes of French Philosophy;
And then, we fairly may presume,
From PYRRHO down to DAVID HUME,
'Twere difficult to single out
A man more full of shallow doubt;
He knew the little skeptic prattle,
The sophist's paltry arts of battle;
Talked gravely of the atomic dance,
Of moral fitness, fate, and chance;
Quoted the nonsense of LUCRETIUS,
Stripped of the charm which makes it specious;
Dropped hints, with wondrous penetration,
Against the history of Creation;
Then proved, by argument circuitous,
The combination was fortuitous:
Swore, Priests whole trade was to deceive,
And prey on bigots who believe;
With bitter ridicule could jeer,
And had the true free-thinking sneer;
Stale arguments he had in store,
Which have been answered over and over.
Practiced, to raise his reputation,
The trite, old trick of false citation;
And would from ancient Authors quote
A sentiment they never wrote.
Upon his highest shelf there stood
The Classics, neatly cut in wood;
And in a more commodious station,
You found them in a French translation:
He swears, it is from the Greek he quotes,
But keeps the French, just for the notes.
He worshipped certain modern names
Who History write in Epigrams,
In pointed periods, shining phrases,
And all the small poetic daisies,
Which crowd the pert and florid style,
Where fact is dropped to raise a smile;
Arts scorned by History's sober Muse,
Arts CLARENDON disdained to use.
Whatever the subject of debate,
'Twas larded still with skeptic prate;
The good, with shame I speak it, feel
Not half this proselyting zeal.
Though FLORIO did not yet believe him,
He thought, why should a friend deceive him?
Much as he prized BELLARIO'S wit,
He liked not all his notions yet;
He thought him charming, pleasant, odd,
But hoped he might believe in God;
Still, though he tried a thousand ways,
Truth's insuppressive torch would blaze;
Where once her flame has burnt, I doubt
If ever it go fairly out.
Yet, under great BELLARIO'S care,
He gained each day a better air;
With many a leader of renown,
Deep in the learning of the Town,
Who never other science knew,
But what from that prime source they drew;
Pleased, to the opera they repair,
To get recruits of knowledge there;
Mythology gain at a glance,
And learn the Classics from a dance:
For though they never cared a groat,
How fared the venurous Argonaut,
Yet, pleased, they see MEDEA rise
On fiery dragons to the skies:
For DIDO, though they never knew her
As MARO'S magic pencil drew her,
Fond as she was, and brokenhearted,
Her pious vagabond departed;
Yet, for DIDONE how they roar!
And Cara! Cara! loud encore.
One taste, BELLARIO'S soul possessed,
The master passion of his breast;
Not one of those frail, transient joys,
Which, by possession, quickly cloys;
This bliss was solid, constant, true,
'Twas action, and 'twas passion too;
For though the business might be finished,
The pleasure scarcely was diminished;
Did he ride out, or sit, or walk,
Still he lived over again in talk
This keen, this ever new delight,
His joy by day, his dream by night.
'Twas eating did his soul allure,
In short, a modish Epicure;
Though once this word, as I opine,
Meant not such men as live to dine,
Yet all our modern Wits assure us,
That Is all they know of EPICURUS:
They fondly fancy, that repletion
Was the chief good of that famed Grecian.
To live in gardens full of flowers,
And talk philosophy in bowers,
Or, in the covert of a wood,
To descant on the sovereign good,
Might be the notion of their founder,
But they have notions vastly sounder;
Their bolder standards they erect,
To form a more voluptuous sect;
Old EPICURUS would not own 'em,
A dinner is their summum bonum.
You Will rather find such sparks as these
Like EPICURUS' deities;
Like them they laugh at human cares,
And with disdain view all affairs.
BELLARIO had embraced with glee,
This practical philosophy.
Young FLORIO'S father had a friend,
And never did Heaven a worthier send;
A cheerful knight of good estate,
Whose heart was warm, whose bounty great.
At Christmas still his oxen bled,
With which the grateful poor were fed;
Resentment vanished where he came,
And lawsuits died before his name;
The old esteemed, the young caressed him,
And all the smiling village blessed him.
Within his Castle's Gothic gate,
Sat Plenty, and old-fashioned State:
Scarce Prudence could his bounties stint; --
Such characters are out of print:
O! would kind Heaven, the age to mend,
A new edition of them send,
Before our tottering Castles fall,
And swarming Nabobs seize on all!
Some little whims he had, it is true,
But they were harmless, and were few;
He dreaded naught like alteration,
Improvement still was innovation;
He said, when any change was brewing,
Reform was a fine name for ruin;
He thought 'twou'd show a falling state,
If STERNHOLD should give way to TATE.
This ever dwelt upon his tongue,
How things were changed since he was young!
Of moderate parts, of moderate wit,
But parts for life and business fit:
He of no history made profession,
But of the Protestant succession:
On all occasions, never would fail,
At Popery and the FRENCH to rail.
Of BLACKSTONE he had read a part,
And all BURN'S JUSTICE knew by heart:
In books that he might waste no minute,
His poetry had business in it;
He never had heard of Bards of Greece,
But had read half of "DYER'S Fleece;"
To make his sphere of knowledge wider,
His Georgics, "PHILIPS upon cider:"
He could produce in proper place,
Three apt quotations from the A Poem by Mr. SOMERVILE.
"Chase,"
And in the hall, from day to day,
Old ISAAC WALTON'S angler lay.
This good and venerable knight,
One daughter had, his soul's delight:
For face, no mortal could resist her,
She smiled like HEBE'S youngest sister:
Her life, as lovely as her face,
Each duty marked with every grace;
Her native sense improved by reading,
Her native sweetness by good-breeding:
No pretty starts of feigned surprise,
No sweet minauderies closed her eyes;
Led by Simplicity divine,
She pleased, and never tried to shine;
She gave to Chance each unschool'd feature,
And left her cause to Sense and Nature.
The Sire of FLORIO, ere he died,
Decreed fair CELIA, FLORIO'S bride;
Bade him his latest wish attend,
And win the daughter of his friend;
When the last rites to him were paid,
He charged him to address the maid:
Sir GILBERT'S heart the wish approved,
For much his ancient friend he loved.
Six rapid months like lightning fly,
And the last gray was now thrown by;
FLORIO, reluctant, calls to mind
The orders of a Sire too kind:
Yet go he must; he must fulfill
The hard conditions of the will:
Go, at that precious hour of prime,
Go, at that swarming, bustling time,
When the full Town to joy invites,
Distracted with its own delights;
When Pleasure pours from her full urn,
Each tiresome transport in its turn;
When Dissipation's altars blaze,
And men run mad a thousand ways;
When, on his tablets, there were found
Engagements for full six weeks round;
Must leave, with grief and desperation,
Three packs of cards of invitation,
And all the wearisome delights
Of slavish days, and sleepless nights.
Ye Nymphs, whom tyrant Power drags down,
With hand despotic, from the Town,
When ALMACK'S doors wide open stand,
And the gay partner's offered hand
Courts to the dance; when steaming rooms,
Fetid with unguents and perfumes,
Invite you to the dear delight
Of well-bred crowds, and mobs polite;
You may conceive what FLORIO felt,
And sympathetically melt;
None else can guess the hardship dire,
To lawns and woodlands to retire,
When, freed from Winter's icy chain,
Glad Nature revels on the plain;
When blushing Spring leads on the hours,
And May is prodigal of flowers;
When Passion warbles through the grove,
And all is song, and all is love;
When newborn breezes sweep the vale,
And health adds fragrance to the gale.
Six bays, unconscious of their weight,
Soon lodged him at Sir GILBERT'S gate;
His trusty Swiss, who flew still faster,
Announc'd the arrival of his Master:
So loud the rap which shook the door,
The hall re-echo'd to the roar;
Since first the Castle walls were reared,
So dread a sound had never been heard;
The din alarmed the frightened deer,
Who in a corner slunk for fear;
The Butler thought 'twas beat of drum,
The Steward swore the French were come;
It tinged with red poor FLORIO'S face,
He thought himself in Portland Place.
Short joy! he entered, and the gate
Closed on him with its ponderous weight.
Who like Sir GILBERT now was blessed?
With rapture he embraced his guest.
Fair CELIA blushed, and FLORIO uttered
Half sentences, or rather muttered
Disjointed words -- as, "honor! pleasure!
"Kind! -- vastly good, Ma'am! -- beyond measure;"
Tame expletives, with which dull Fashion
Fills vacancies of sense and passion.
Yet, though disciple of cold Art,
FLORIO perceived he had a heart;
He saw; and but that Admiration,
Had been too active, too like passion,
Or had he been to Ton less true,
Cupid had shot him through and through;
But, vainly speeds the surest dart,
Where FASHION'S mail defends the heart,
The shaft her cold repulsion found,
And fell, without the power to wound:
For Fashion, with a mother's joy,
Dipped in her lake the darling boy,
That lake, whose chilling waves impart
The gift to freeze the warmest heart:
Yet, guarded as he was with phlegm,
With such delight he eyed the dame,
The Goddess strait his peril knew,
And, instant, to his succor flew;
But all was safe; she saw and smiled,
And claimed the triumph of her child.
CELIA a dinner still supplied,
Which modish luxury might deride:
Yet her discreet, well-ordered table,
Though sober, still was hospitable.
A modest dinner best displays
The Master eats on other days.
And decent Elegance was there,
And Plenty, with her liberal air;
But vulgar plenty gave offense,
And shocked poor FLORIO'S nicer sense:
One dish there was which never failed,
CELIA with this each guest regaled;
'Twas simple mutton, roast, or boiled,
Sole dish French cookery has not spoiled.
Though rich in game, and stored with fish,
She never forgot her standing dish.
FLORIO in secret would repine,
For FLORIO now but lived to dine;
Disgusted at the constant round
For ever at her table found;
He scarce could stand the slender loyn,
But fainted at the ample chine;
Yet still afraid to give offense,
Or shock his CELIA'S grosser sense,
Patient he yielded to his fate,
When good Sir GILBERT pil'd his plate;
He bowed submissive, made no question
But that 'twas sovereign for digestion;
But, such was his unlucky whim,
It never would agree with him.
Yet feigned to praise the vulgar treat,
And, if he eat not, seemed to eat.
In sleep sad FLORIO hoped to find,
The pleasures he had left behind.
He dreamt, and lo! to charm his eyes,
The form of WELTJE seemed to rise;
The gracious vision waved his wand,
And banquets sprung to FLORIO'S hand;
The imaginary savours rose
In tempting odours to his nose.
A bell, not Fancy's false creation,
Gives joyful "note of preparation;"
He starts, he wakes, the bell he hears;
Alas! it rings for morning prayers.
But how to spend next tedious morning,
Was past his possible discerning;
Unable to amuse himself,
He tumbled every well-rang'd shelf;
This book was dull, and that was wise,
And this was monstrous as to size.
With eager joy he gobbled down
Whatever related to the town;
Whatever looked small, whatever looked new,
Half-bound, or only stitched in blue;
Old play-bills, ASTLEY'S last year's feats,
And Opera disputes in sheets.
As these dear records meet his eyes,
Ghosts of departed pleasures rise;
He lays the book upon the shelf,
And leaves the day to spend itself.
To cheat the tedious hours, whenever
He sallied forth to take the air,
His sympathetic ponies knew
Which way their Lord's affections drew,
And, every time he went abroad,
Sought of themselves the London road;
He asked each mile of every clown,
How far they reckoned it to town?
And still his nimble spirits rise,
Whilst thither he directs his eyes;
But when his coursers back he guides,
The sinking Mercury quick subsides.
A week he had resolved to stay,
But found a week in every day;
Yet if the gentle maid was by,
Faint pleasure glisten'd in his eye;
But when no more the room she graced,
The slight impression was effaced.
Whenever Sir GILBERT'S sporting guests
Retail'd old news, or older jests,
FLORIO, quite calm, and debonair,
Still humm'd a new Italian air;
He did not even feign to hear 'em,
But plainly showed he could not bear 'em.
CELIA perceived his secret thoughts,
But liked the youth with all his faults;
Yet 'twas unlike, she softly said,
The tales of love which she had read,
Where heroes vowed, and sighed, and knelt;
Nay, 'twas unlike the love she felt;
Though to her Sire, with fault'ring tongue,
She often remarked, -- he was but young;
Confessed his manners wrong in part,
But then -- he had so good a heart!
His interest farther to secure,
She praised his bounty to the poor;
For, votary as he was of art,
He had a kind and melting heart;
Though, with a smile, he used to own
He had not time to feel in town;
Not that he blushed to show compassion, --
It chanced that year to be the fashion.
At length, to wake Ambition's flame,
A letter from BELLARIO came;
Announcing the supreme delight,
Preparing for a certain night,
By FLAVIA fair, returned from France,
Who took him captive at a glance:
The invitations all were given!
Five hundred cards! -- a little, heaven! --
A dinner first -- he would present him,
And begged that nothing might prevent him.
Whoever wished a noble air,
Must gain it by an entree there;
Of all the glories of the town,
'Twas the first passport to renown.
Then ridiculed his rural schemes,
His pastoral shades, and purling streams;
Sneer'd at his present brilliant life,
His polished Sire, and high-bred Wife!
Thus, doubly to inflame, he tried
His curiosity, and pride.
The youth, with agitated heart,
Prepared directly to depart;
But, bound in honor to obey
His father, at no distant day,
He promised soon to hasten down,
But business called him now to town;
Then faintly hints a cold proposal,
But leaves it to the Knight's disposal;
Stammer'd half words of love and duty,
And muttered much of -- worth and -- beauty;
Something of passion then he dropped,
And hoped his ardour -- Here he stopped;
For some remains of native truth
Flushed in his face, and checked the youth;
Yet still the ambiguous suffusion
Might pass for artless love's confusion.
The doting father thought 'twas strange,
But fancied men with times might change;
Yet owned, nor could he check his tongue,
It was not so when he was young.
That was the reign of love he swore,
But now those halcyon days are over.
In that blessed age, for honor famed,
Love paid the homage Beauty claimed;
Not that insipid, daudling Cupid,
With heart so hard, and air so stupid,
Who coldly courts the charms which lie
In Affectation's half-clos'd eye.
Love then was honest, genuine passon,
And manly gallantry the fashion;
Yet pure as ardent was the flame
Excited by the beauteous dame;
Hope could subsist on slender bounties,
And Courtiers galloped over two counties,
The Ball's fair partner to behold,
Or humbly hope -- she caught no cold.
But mark how much Love's annals mend!
Should Beauty's Goddess now descend;
On some adventure should she come,
To grace a modish drawing room,
With radiant eye, and heavenly air;
What Beau would hand her to her chair?
Vain were that motion which betrayed,
The goddess was no earth-born maid;
If noxious FARO'S baleful spright,
With rites infernal ruled the night,
The group so bent on play and pelf,
VENUS might call her doves herself.
As FLORIO passed the Castle-gate,
His spirits seem to lose their weight;
He feasts his lately vacant mind
With all the joys he hopes to find;
Yet on whatever his fancies brood,
The form of CELIA would intrude;
However his random thoughts might fly,
Her gentle graces filled his eye;
Nor was the obtrusive vision over,
Even when he reached BELLARIO'S door;
The friends embraced with warm delight,
And FLAVIA'S praises crowned the night.
Soon dawned the day which was to show
Glad FLORIO what was heaven below.
FLAVIA, admired wherever known,
The acknowledged Empress of bon-ton,
Over FASHION'S wayward kingdom reigns,
And holds BELLARIO in her chains.
Various her powers; a wit by day,
By night unmatched for lucky play.
The flattering, fashionable tribe,
Each stray bon-mot to her ascribe;
And all her "little senate" own
She made the best charade in town;
Her midnight suppers always drew
Whatever was fine, whatever was new.
There often the brightest fame you would see
The victim of a repartee;
For Slander's Priestess still supplies
The spotless for the sacrifice.
Who at her polished table sit,
The summit reach of modish wit,
The persiflage, the unfeeling jeer,
The civil, grave, ironic sneer;
The laugh, which, more than censure, wounds,
Which, more than argument, confounds.
The exalted deed, which would engage
The wonder of a nobler age,
With unbelieving scorn is heard,
Or else to selfish ends referred;
To Vanity's light effervescence,
Ascribe they Virtue's purest essence.
When Malice longs to throw her dart,
But finds no vulnerable part,
Because the Virtues all defend,
At every pass, their guarded friend;
Yet, by one slight insinuation,
One scarce perceived exaggeration,
Sly Ridicule, with half a word,
Can fix her stigma of -- absurd;
Her cruel caustics deeply pain,
And scars indelible remain.
Supreme in wit, supreme in play,
Despotic FLAVIA all obey;
Small were her natural charms of face,
But heightened with each foreign grace;
But what subdued BELLARIO'S soul
Beyond Philosophy's control,
Her daily table was as fine
As if ten Rajahs were to dine;
She every day produced such fish as
Would gratify the nice APICIUS,
Or realize what we think fabulous
In The bill of fare of ELAGABALUS.
Yet still the natural taste was cheated;
'Twas deluged in some sauce one hated.
All that can surfeit, or can cloy,
Soupes Santes, which the health destroy,
And, ever on her sumptuous board,
The savoury pie of PERIGORD.
All sauce! all sweetmeat! all confection!
All poignancy! and all perfection!
Rich Entremets, whose name none knows,
Ragouts, French Tourtes, and Fricandeaux,
Might picque the sensuality
OF the hogs of EPICURUS' sty;
Yet all so foreign, and so fine,
'Twas easier to admire, than dine.
O! if the Muse had power to tell
Each dish, no Muse has power to spell!
Great Goddess of the French Cuisine!
Not with unhallowed hands I mean
To violate thy secret shade,
Which eyes profane shall never invade:
No! of thy dignity supreme,
I, with "mysterious reverence," deem!
Or, should I venture with rash hand,
The vulgar would not understand;
The initiated only know
The raptures keen thy rites bestow.
Thus much to tell I lawful deem,
Thy works are never what they seem;
Thy will this general law has past,
That nothing of itself shall taste.
Thy word this high decree enacted,
"In all be NATURE, counteracted!"
Conceive, who can, the perfect bliss,
For it is not given to all to guess,
The rapturous joy BELLARIO found,
When thus his every wish was crowned;
To FLORIO, as the best of friends,
One dish he secretly commends;
Then hinted, as a special favor,
What gave it that delicious flavor;
A mystery he so much reveres,
He never to unhallowed ears
Would trust it, but to him would show
How far true Friendship's power could go.
FLORIO at first with transport eat,
And marvell'd at the sumptuous fete.
But soon his pleasure was destroyed,
Soon every craving sense was cloyed.
A little warp his taste had gained,
Which, unperceived, till now, remained;
For, from himself he would conceal
The change he did not choose to feel;
He almost wished he could be picking
An unsophisticated chicken;
And when he cast his eyes around,
And not one simple morsel found,
O give me, was his secret wish,
My charming CELIA'S Standing Dish!
Now Nature, struggling for her rights,
Lets in some little, casual lights,
And Love combines to war with Fashion,
Though yet 'twas but an infant passion:
The practiced FLAVIA tried each art
Of sly attack to steal his heart;
(Her forced civilities oppress,
Insulting through mere graciousness;)
While many a gay, intrepid dame,
By bold assault essayed the same.
Filled with disgust, he strove to fly
The artful glance, and fearless eye;
Their jargon he but faintly praises,
Nor echoes back their flimsy phrases.
He felt not CELIA'S powers of face,
Till weighed against bon-ton grimace;
Nor half her genuine beauties tasted,
'Till with factitious charms contrasted.
No moment's liberty he found,
The industrious harpies hovered round;
By force and flattery circumvented,
To play, reluctant, he consented;
Each Dame her power of pleasing tried,
To fix the novice by her side;
Of Pigeons, he the very best,
Who wealth, with ignorance, possessed:
But FLAVIA'S rhetoric best persuades,
That Sybil leads him to the shades;
The fatal leaves around the room,
Prophetic, tell the approaching doom!
Yet, different from the tale of old,
'Twas she who plucked the tempting gold;
Her arts the ponderous purse exhaust,
A borrowed thousand, staked, and lost,
Wakes him to sense and shame again,
Nor force, nor fraud could more obtain.
He rose, indignant, to attend
The summons of a ruined friend,
Whom keen BELLARIO'S arts betray
To all the depths of desperate play;
The youth, unconscious of deceit,
Was plundered of his whole estate;
Too late he looked for friendship's aid,
A beggar in a moment made.
And now, with horror, FLORIO views
The wild confusion which ensues;
Marks where the infernal furies hold
Their orgies foul over heaps of gold;
And demons dire appear to rise,
Guarding the horrid mysteries;
Marks how deforming passions tear
The bosoms of the losing fair;
How haggard looks, convulsive faces,
Banish the frightened loves, and graces!
Touched with disdain, with horror fired,
He thought of CELIA, and retired.
That night no sleep his eyelids pressed,
He thought; and thought's a foe to rest:
Or if, by chance, he closed his eyes,
What hideous specter round him rise!
Distempered Fancy wildly brings
The broken images of things;
His ruined friend, with eye-ball fixed,
Swallowing the draught Despair had mixed;
The frantic wife, beside him stands,
With bursting heart, and wringing hands;
And every horror dreams bestow,
Of pining Want, or raving Woe.
Next morn, to check, or cherish thought,
His Library's retreat he sought;
He viewed each book, with cold regard,
Of serious sage, or lighter bard;
At length, among the motley band,
The IDLER fell into his hand;
The alluring title caught his eye,
It promised cold inanity:
He read with pleasure and surprise,
And found 'twas charming, though 'twas wise;
His tea grew cold, whilst he, unheeding,
Pursued this new-discover'd reading.
He wondered at the change he found,
The elastic spirits nimbly bound;
Time slipped, without disgust, away,
While many a card unanswered lay;
Three papers reeking from the press,
Three Pamphlets thin, in azure dress,
Ephemeral literature well known,
The lie and scandal of the town;
Poison of letters, morals, time!
Assassin of our day's fresh prime!
These, on his table, all that day,
Unthought of, and neglected lay.
FLORIO had now full three hours read,
Hours which he used to waste in bed;
His pulse beat Virtue's vigorous tone,
The reason to himself unknown;
And if he stopped to seek the cause,
Fair CELIA'S image filled the pause.
And now, announc'd, BELLARIO'S name
Had almost quenched the newborn flame:
"Admit him," was the ready word
Which first escaped him, not unheard;
When sudden, to his mental sight,
Uprose the horrors of last night;
His plundered friend before him stands,
And -- "not at home," his firm commands.
He felt the conquest, as a joy,
The first temptation would destroy.
He knew that next day Hymen's hand,
Should tack the slight and slippery band,
Which, in loose bondage, would ensnare
BELLARIO bright, and FLAVIA fair,
Often had he promised to attend
The nuptials of his happy friend:
He longs to go -- but yet he fears;
At length a bolder deed he dares;
To CELIA he resolves to fly,
And catch fresh virtue from her eye;
Though three full weeks did yet remain,
Ere he engaged to come again.
This plan he tremblingly embraced,
With doubtful zeal, and fluttering haste;
Nor ventured he one card to read,
Which might his virtuous scheme impede;
Each note, he dreaded, might betray him,
And shudder'd lest each rap should stay him.
Behold him seated in his chaise;
With face that self-distrust betrays;
He hazards not a single glance,
Nor through the glasses peeps by chance,
Lest some old friend, or haunt well known,
Should melt his resolution down;
Fast as his foaming coursers fly,
Hyde Park attracts his half-rais'd eye;
He stole one fearful, conscious look,
Then dropped his eye upon his book.
Long as he viewed AUGUSTA'S towers,
The sight relaxed his thinking powers;
In vain he better plans revolves,
The softening sight his soul dissolves;
The towers once lost, the smoke his eyes
Pursue, while yet its volumes rise:
Soon as he got entirely clear
From this enfeebling atmosphere,
His mind was braced, his spirits light,
His heart was gay, his humor bright;
Thus feeling, at his inmost soul,
The sweet reward of self-controul;
Impatient now, and all alive,
He thought he never should arrive;
At length he entered with delight,
And, self-announc'd, embraced the knight:
The youth his joy unfeigned expressed,
The knight with joy received his guest,
And owned, with no unwilling tongue,
'Twas done like men when he was young.
For CELIA, not a word she said,
But blushed, "celestial, rosy red!"
Her heightened charms transport the youth,
Who promised everlasting truth.
CELIA, in honor of the day,
Resolved her table to display;
Such was the charm her sweetness gave,
He thought her Wedgwood had been seve;
Her taste diffused a gracious air,
And neat Simplicity was there,
Whose secret power, though silent, great is,
The loveliest of the sweet Penates.
FLORIO had now forgot to wish
For aught besides the STANDING DISH.
Sir GILBERT'S port he warmly praises,
And carefully avoids French phrases;
With patience hears a dissertation.
On Land Tax, and a ruined nation;
Listens to many a tedious tale
Of poachers, who deserved a jail;
Heard all the business of the Quorum,
Of hapless damsels brought before 'em;
Nor ever humm'd a single air,
While good Sir GILBERT filled his chair.
Abroad, with joy and grateful pride,
He walks, with CELIA by his side:
A thousand cheerful thoughts arise,
Each rural scene enchants his eyes;
With transport he begins to look
On Nature's all-instructive book;
No objects now seem mean, or low,
Which point to HIM from whom they flow.
A berry or a bud excites
A chain of reasoning which delights,
And, spite of skeptic ebullitions,
Proves Atheists not the best Logicians.
A tree, a brook, a blade of grass,
Suggests reflections as they pass,
'Till FLORIO with a sigh, confessed
The simplest pleasures are the best!
BELLARIO'S systems sink in air,
He feels the PERFECT, GOOD, and FAIR.
When called to dress, that Titus wore
A wig the altered FLORIO swore;
Or else, in estimating time,
He never had marked it as a crime,
That he had lost but one day's blessing,
When we so many lose, by dressing.
The rest, suffice it now to say,
Was finished in the usual way.
Cupid, impatient for his hour,
Reviled slow Themis' tedious power,
Whose parchment legends, signing, sealing,
Are cruel forms for Love to deal in.
At length, to FLORIO'S eager eyes,
Behold the day of bliss arise!
The flaming sun illumes the globe;
The burning torch, the saffron robe,
Just as of old, glad Hymen wears,
And Cupid, as of old, appears
In Hymen's train; so strange the case,
They hardly knew each other's face;
Yet both confessed, with glowing heart,
They never were designed to part.
This self-same sun, and where is the wonder?
Sees FLAVIA'S slight bands snapt asunder:
BELLARIO sues for a divorce,
And both pursue their separate course.
Reader! thy clemency to court,
Though long the Tale, the Moral's short;
Yet dare I, spite of Critic Satire,
Suppose the Standing Dish GOOD NATURE?
O! gentlest blessing man can find!
Sweet soother of the ruffled mind!
As the soft powers of oil assuage
Of Ocean's waves the furious rage;
Lull to repose the boiling tide,
Whose billows, charmed to rest, subside;
Smooth the vexed bosom of the deep,
'Till every trembling motion sleep! --
Thy soft enchantments thus control
The tumult of the troubled soul!
By labor worn, by care oppressed,
On THEE the weary mind shall rest;
From business, and distraction free,
Delighted, shall return to THEE;
To THEE the aching heart shall cling,
And find the peace it does not bring.
Ye candidates for Earth's best prize,
Domestic Life's sweet charities!
O! if your erring eye once strays
From smooth Good-nature's level ways;
If ever, in evil hour betrayed,
You choose some vain, fantastic maid,
On such for bliss if you depend,
Without the means you seek the end;
A pyramid you strive to place,
The point inverted for the base;
You hope, in spite of Reason's laws,
A consequence without a cause.
And you, bright nymphs, who bless our eyes
With all that skill, that Taste supplies;
Learn, that accomplishments at best,
Serve but for garnish in Life's feast;
Yet still with these the polished wife
Should deck the feast of human life;
Wit a poor Standing Dish would prove,
Though it is an excellent Remove;
However your transient guests may praise
Your gay parade on gala days,
Yet know, your husband still will wish,
Goodnature for his Standing Dish.
Still, in Life's Fasti, you presume
Eternal holidays will come;
But, in its highest, happiest lot,
O! let it never be forgot,
Life is not an Olympic game,
Where sports and plays must gain the same;
Each month is not the month of May,
Nor is each day a holiday.
Though wit may gild Life's atmosphere,
When all is lucid, calm, and clear,
In bleak Affliction's dreary hour,
The brightest flash must lose its power;
While Temper, in the darkest skies,
A kindly light and warmth supplies.
Divine GOODNATURE! it is decreed,
The happiest still thy charm should need.
Sweet Architect! raised by thy hands,
Fair Concord's Temple firmly stands:
Though Sense, though Prudence rear the pile,
Though each approving Virtue smile,
Some sudden gust, nor rare the case,
May shake the building to its base,
Unless, to guard against surprises,
On thy firm arch the structure rises.
THE BAS BLEU: OR, CONVERSATION.

ADDRESSED TO MRS. VESEY.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Trifle owes its birth and name to the mistake of a Foreigner of
Distinction, who gave the literal appellation of the Bas-bleu, to a small party
of friends, who had been sometimes called, by way of pleasantry, the Blue
Stockings. The slight performance, occasioned by this little circumstance, was
never intended to appear in print: It is, in general, too local, and too
personal for publication; and was only written with a wish to amuse the amiable
Lady to whom it is addressed, and a few partial friends. But copies having been
multiplied, far beyond the intention of the Author, she has been advised to
publish it, lest it should steal into the world in a state of still greater
imperfection; though she is almost ashamed to take refuge in so hackneyed an
apology, however true.

THE BAS BLEU.
VESEY! of Verse the judge and friend!
Awhile my idle strain attend:
Not with the days of early Greece,
I mean to ope' my slender piece;
The rare Symposium to proclaim,
Which crowned the Athenians' social name;
Or how ASPASIA'S parties shone,
The first Bas-bleu at Athens known;
Nor need I stop my tale, to show,
At least to Readers such as you,
How all that Rome esteemed polite,
Supped with LUCULLUS every night;
LUCULLUS, who, from Pontus come,
Brought conquests, and brought cherries home:
Name but the suppers in the Apollo,
What classic images will follow!
How wit flew round, while each might take
Conchylia from the Lucrine lake;
And Attic Salt, and Garum Sauce,
And Lettuce from the Isle of Cos;
The first and last from Greece transplanted,
Used here -- because the rhyme I wanted:
How Pheasants' heads, with cost collected,
And Phenicopters' stood neglected,
To laugh at SCIPIO'S lucky hit,
POMPEY'S bon-mot, or CAESAR'S wit!
Intemperance, listening to the tale,
Forgot the Mullet growing Seneca says, that in his time the Romans were
arrived at such a pitch of luxury, that the Mullet was reckoned stale which did
not die in the hands of the guest.
stale;
And Admiration, balanced, hung
'Twixt PEACOCKS' brains, and TULLY'S tongue.
I shall not stop to dwell on these,
But be as epic as I please,
And plunge at once in medias res.
To prove the privilege I plead,
I Will quote some Greek I cannot read;
Stunned by Authority, you yield,
And I, not Reason, keep the field.
Long was Society, e'er-run
By Whist, that desolating Hun;
Long did Quadrille despotic sit,
That Vandal of colloquial wit;
And Conversation's setting light
Lay half-obscur'd in Gothic night;
Till LEO'S triple crown, to you,
BOSCAWEN sage, bright MONTAGU,
Divided, fell; -- your cares in haste
Rescued the ravaged realms of Taste;
And LYTTELTON'S accomplished name,
And witty PULTNEY shared the fame;
The Men, not bound by pedant rules,
Nor Ladies' precieuses ridicules;
For polished WALPOLE showed the way,
How Wits may be both learned and gay;
And CARTER taught the female train,
The deeply wise are never vain;
And she, who SHAKESPEARE'S wrongs redrest,
Proved that the brightest are the best.
O! how unlike the wit that fell,
RAMBOUILLET The Society at the Hotel de RAMBOUILLET, though composed of polite
and ingenious persons, was much tainted with affectation and false taste. See
VOITURE, MENAGE, etc.
! at thy quaint Hotel;
Where point, and turn, and equivoque,
Distorted every word they spoke!
All so intolerably bright,
Plain Common Sense was put to flight;
Each speaker, so ingenious ever,
'Twas tiresome to be quite so clever;
There twisted Wit forgot to please,
And Mood and Figure banished ease:
Poor exiled Nature houseless strayed,
'Till SEVIGNE received the maid.
Though here she comes to bless our isle,
Not universal is her smile.
Muse! snatch the lyre which CAMBRIDGE strung,
When he the empty ball-room sung;
It Is tuned above thy pitch, I doubt,
And thou no music would draw out;
Yet, in a lower note, presume
To sing the full, dull Drawing Room.
Where the dire Circle keeps its station,
Each common phrase is an oration;
And cracking fans, and whispering Misses,
Compose their Conversation blisses.
The Matron marks the goodly show,
While the tall daughter eyes the Beau --
The frigid Beau! -- Ah! luckless fair,
It Is not for you that studied air;
Ah! not for you that sidelong glance,
And all that charming nonchalance;
Ah! not for you the three long hours
He worshipped the "Cosmetic powers;"
That finished head which breathes perfume,
And kills the nerves of half the room;
And all the murders meant to lie
In that large, languishing, gray eye;
Desist; -- less wild the attempt would be,
To warm the snows of Rhodope:
Too cold to feel, too proud to feign,
For him you're wise and fair in vain.
Chill shade of that affected Peer,
Who dreaded Mirth! come safely here;
For here no vulgar joy effaces
Thy rage for polish, ton, and graces.
Cold Ceremony's leaden hand,
Waves over the room her poppy wand;
Arrives the stranger; every guest
Conspires to torture the distressed;
At once they rise -- so have I seen --
You guess the simile I mean,
Take what comparison you please,
The crowded streets, the swarming bees,
The pebbles on the shores that lie,
The stars, which form the galaxy;
This serves to embellish what is said,
And shows, besides, that one has read; --
At once they rise -- the astonished guest
Back in a corner slinks, distressed;
Scared at the many bowing round,
And shocked at her own voice's sound,
Forgot the thing she meant to say,
Her words, half-utter'd, die away;
In sweet oblivion down she sinks,
And of her ten appointments thinks:
While her loud neighbor on the right,
Boasts what she has to do tonight;
So very much, you would swear her pride is
To match the labors of ALCIDES;
It Is true, in hyperbolic measure,
She nobly calls her labors Pleasure;
In this, unlike ALCMENA'S son,
She never means they should be done;
Her fancy of no limits dreams,
No! ne plus ultra bounds her schemes;
Fired at the idea, out she flounces,
And a new Martyr JOHN announces.
We pass the pleasures vast and various
Of Routs, not social, but gregarious;
And, pleased, to gentler scenes retreat,
Where Conversation holds her seat.
Small were that art which would ensure
The Circle's boasted quadrature!
See VESEY'S plastic genius make
A Circle every figure take;
Nay, shapes and forms which would defy
All science of Geometry,
Isosceles, and Parallel,
Names hard to speak, and hard to spell!
The enchantress waved her wand, and spoke!
Her potent wand the Circle broke;
The social Spirits hover round,
And bless the liberated ground.
Ask you what charms this gift dispense?
It Is the strong spell of COMMON SENSE.
Away fell Ceremony flew,
And with her bore Detraction too.
Nor only Geometric Art,
Does this presiding power impart;
But Chemists too, who want the essence,
Which makes or mars all coalescence,
Of her the secret rare might get,
How different kinds amalgamate:
And he, who wilder studies chose,
Find here a new metempsychose;
How forms can other forms assume,
Within her Pythagoric room;
Or be, and stranger is the event,
The very things which Nature meant;
Nor strive, by art and affectation,
To cross their genuine destination.
Here sober Duchesses are seen,
Chaste Wits, and Critics void of spleen;
Physicians, fraught with real science,
And Whigs and Tories in alliance;
Poets, fulfilling Christian duties,
Just Lawyers, reasonable Beauties;
Bishops who preach, and Peers who pay,
And Countesses who seldom play;
Learned Antiquaries, who, from college,
Reject the rust, and bring the knowledge;
And, hear it, age, believe it, youth,
Polemics, really seeking truth;
And Travelers of that rare tribe,
Who Have seen the countries they describe;
Ladies who point, nor think me partial,
An Epigram as well as MARTIAL;
Yet in all female worth succeed,
As well as those who cannot read.
Right pleasant were the task, I ween,
To name the groupes which fill the scene;
But Rhyme's of such fastidious nature,
She proudly scorns all Nomenclature,
Nor grace our Northern names her lips,
Like HOMER'S Catalogue of Ships.
Once -- faithful Memory! heave a sigh,
Here ROSCIUS gladden'd every eye.
Why comes not MARO? Far from town,
He rears the Urn to Taste, and BROWN;
His English garden breathes perfume,
And promises perennial bloom.
Here, rigid CATO, awful Sage!
Bold Censor of a thoughtless age,
Once dealt his pointed moral round,
And, not unheeded, fell the sound;
The Muse his honored memory weeps,
For CATO now with ROSCIUS sleeps!
Here once HORTENSIUS loved to sit,
Apostate now from social Wit:
Ah! why in wrangling senates waste
The noblest parts, the happiest taste?
Why Democratic Thunders wield,
And quit the Muses' calmer field?
Taste thou the gentler joys they give;
With HORACE and with LELIUS live.
Hail, Conversation, soothing Power,
Sweet Goddess of the social hour!
Not with more heartfelt warmth, at least,
Does LELIUS bend, thy true High Priest,
Than I, the lowest of thy train,
These field-flow'rs bring to deck thy fane;
Who to thy shrine like him can haste,
With warmer zeal, or purer taste?
O may thy worship long prevail,
And thy true votaries never fail!
Long may thy polished altars blaze
With wax-lights' undiminish'd rays!
Still be thy nightly offerings paid,
Libations large of Limonade!
On silver Vases, loaded, rise
The biscuits' ample sacrifice!
Nor be the milk-white streams forgot
Of thirst-assuaging, cool orgeat;
Rise, incense pure from fragrant Tea,
Delicious incense, worthy Thee!
Hail, Conversation, heavenly fair,
Thou bliss of life, and balm of care!
Call forth the long-forgotten knowledge
Of school, of travel, and of college!
For thee, best solace of his toil!
The sage consumes his midnight oil;
And keeps late vigils, to produce
Materials for thy future use.
If none behold, ah! wherefore fair?
Ah! wherefore wise, if none must hear?
Our intellectual ore must shine,
Not slumber, idly, in the mine.
Let Education's moral mint
The noblest images imprint;
Let Taste her curious touchstone hold,
To try if standard be the gold;
But it is thy commerce, Conversation,
Must give it use by circulation;
That noblest commerce of mankind,
Whose precious merchandise is MIND!
What stoic Traveller would try
A sterile soul, and parching sky,
Or dare the intemperate Northern zone,
If what he saw must never be known?
For this he bids his home farewell,
The joy of seeing is to tell.
Trust me, he never would have stirred,
Were he forbid to speak a word;
And Curiosity would sleep,
If her own secrets she must keep:
The bliss of telling what is past,
Becomes her rich reward at last.
Yet not from low desire to shine,
Does Genius toil in Learning's Mine;
Not to indulge in idle vision,
But strike new light by strong collision.
Over books the mind inactive lies,
Books, the mind's food, not exercise!
Her vigorous wing she scarcely feels,
'Till use the latest strength reveals;
Her slumbering energies called forth,
She rises, conscious of her worth;
And, at her newfound powers elated,
Thinks them not roused, but new created.
Enlightened spirits! you, who know
What charms from polished converse flow,
Speak, for you can, the pure delight
When kindred sympathies unite;
When correspondent tastes impart
Communion sweet from heart to heart;
You never the cold gradations need
Which vulgar souls to union lead;
No dry discussion to unfold
The meaning, caught as soon as told:
But sparks electric only strike
On souls electrical alike;
The flash of Intellect expires,
Unless it meet congenial fires.
The language to the Elect alone
Is, like the Mason's mystery, known;
In vain the unerring sign is made
To him who is not of the Trade.
What lively pleasure to divine,
The thought implied, the hinted line,
To feel Allusion's artful force,
And trace the Image to its source!
Quick Memory blends her scattered rays,
'Till Fancy kindles at the blaze;
The works of ages start to view,
And ancient Wit elicits new.
But wit and parts if thus we praise,
What nobler altars should we raise,
Those sacrifices could we see
Which Wit, O Virtue! makes to Thee.
At once the rising thought to dash,
To quench at once the bursting flash!
The shining Mischief to subdue,
And lose the praise, and pleasure too!
This is high Principle's control!
This is true continence of soul!
Blush, heroes, at your cheap renown,
A vanquished realm, a plundered town!
Your conquests were to gain a name,
This conquest triumphs over Fame;
So pure its essence; 'twere destroyed.
If known, and if commended, void.
Amidst the brightest truths believed,
Amidst the fairest deeds achieved,
Shall stand recorded and admired,
That Virtue sunk what Wit inspired!
But let the lettered, and the fair,
And, chiefly, let the Wit beware;
You, whose warm spirits never fail,
Forgive the hint which ends my tale.
Though Science nursed you in her bowers,
Though Fancy crown your brow with flowers,
Each thought, though bright Invention fill,
Though Attic bees each word distill;
Yet, if one gracious power refuse
Her gentle influence to infuse,
In vain shall listening crowds approve,
They Will praise you, but they will not love.
What is this power, you're loath to mention,
This charm, this witchcraft? it is ATTENTION:
Mute Angel, yes; thy looks dispense
The silence of intelligence;
Thy graceful form I well discern,
In act to listen and to learn;
It Is Thou for talents shall obtain
That pardon Wit would hope in vain;
Thy wondrous power, thy secret charm,
Shall Envy of her sting disarm;
Thy silent flattery sooths our spirit,
And we forgive eclipsing merit;
The sweet atonement screens the fault,
And love and praise are cheaply bought.
With mild complacency to hear,
Though somewhat long the tale appear, --
It Is more than Wit, it is moral Beauty,
It Is Pleasure rising out of Duty.
THE END.
Lately published, by the same Author,
SACRED DRAMAS; with a Poem on SENSIBILITY, 4th Edition. Price 4s. in Boards.
ESSAYS for Young, Ladies. 4th Edition. Price 3s. PERCY, a Tragedy; as it was
acted at the Theater Royal, Covent Garden. 3d Edition. Price 1s. 6d. FATAL
FALSEHOOD, a Tragedy; as it was acted at the Theater Royal, Covent Garden. 2d
Edition. Price 1s. 6d. The SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS; a Pastoral Drama. 8th
Edition. Price 1s. 6d. Sir ELDRED OR THE BOWER, and THE BLEEDING ROCK; Two
Legendary Tales. Price 1s. 6d.

