AN HISTORICAL TRAGEDY OF THE CIVIL WARS In the REIGN of King HENRY VI.

(Being a Sequel to the TRAGEDY of HUMFREY Duke of GLOUCESTER: And an
Introduction to the TRAGICAL HISTORY of King RICHARD III.)

Altered from SHAKESPEARE, in the Year 1720.

By THEO. CIBBER.

Heu! quantum potuit caeli pelagique parari,
Hoc quem Civiles fuderunt sanguine dextrae!
LUCAN. LONDON: Printed for J. WALTHOE, jun. in Cornhill; W. CHETWOOD, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden; and J. STAGG, in Westminster Hall: And Sold by J.
ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. Price 1 s. 6 d.

PREFACE.
THIS Piece was finished above Two Years ago, and put into my Hands, to make
what Use of it I thought fit. And though it cost our Author but the Labor of a
single Month, or less, yet, upon this Occasion, I cannot but think the
publishing it will oblige the World, since it is a Sequel to Mr. Philips 's
Play of Duke Humfrey, and an Introduction to Mr. Cibber's Alteration of Richard
the Third. Never Child had a more regardless Father, than the Parent of this;
and therefore rather than have it smothered, I thought it a more Human Act to
let it come upon the Parish. And, in my poor Opinion, I have seen a less
promising Appearance than this Brat carries about him, rise in the State.

But if, like Phaeton, in Shakespeare's Carr,
The unequal Muse unhappily should Err,
At least you will own from glorious Heights he fell,
And there is some Merit in attempting well.
Prol. to XIMENA. The PERSONS.
King Henry, Prince Edward, Old Clifford, Young Clifford, York, Edward, George,
Richard, Warwick.
Queen Margaret, Lady Gray, Lady Elizabeth, Lady Anne.
Messengers, Attendants, etc.
The Historical Tragedy of King HENRY VI.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter King Henry. K. Hen. NEVER had King less Joy in Rule than I,
Nor more Misfortune; Heaven was pleased to set
My Cradle on the Top of humane Glory,
Where I lay helpless, to all Storms exposed;
My childish Hand, not able to support
My Father's Sword, dropped the victorious Point,
And let fall all the Laurels that adorned it;
And French and English ravaged for the Spoil.
So lost I France; now am I threatened too
By wicked Rebels, with the Loss of England:
Cade and Plantagenet join to undo me.
Never did Subject long to be a King,
As I do long, and wish to be a Subject.

Enter the Queen, attended. Queen. Health and good Tidings to your Majesty;
The Villain Cade, is killed by brave young Clifford.

K. Hen. Killed!

Queen. He is killed, my Lord; and all his Powers do yield,
And wait your Highness Doom, of Life, or Death.

K. Hen. Their Fault was great, it is true; but their Submission
Now cancels that, and they shall meet my Mercy.
Therefore with pleasing Pardon to them all,
I do dismiss 'em to their several Homes.

Queen. Kings should have Mercy, but with it Justice too.

K. Hen. Just Heaven accept my Vows of Thanks and Praise,
For having saved the Lives of my poor People.
I swear I am more pleased to see this End,
Without the Shedding my poor Subjects Blood,
Than I should be to conquer the whole World
By Slaughter -- but -- Ha! old Clifford weeping.

Enter Old Clifford. O. Cliff. Yes, Sir, I weep; but I weep Tears of Joy;
For I am crushed between Two mighty Joys,
Your Royal Safety, and my Son's Success.

Enter Young Clifford, and kneels. K. Hen. O gallant Clifford! how shall I
reward thee?

Y. Cliff. I fought not for Rewards; or if I did,
I ought to end my Work ever I be paid.
I have only now pulled down a paltry Scaffold,
On which Plantagenet designed to climb,
To build his trayt'rous Projects -- Have you not heard
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland;
And with a puissant and mighty Power,
Is marching hitherwards in proud Array.

K. Hen. True, he approaches with a mighty Host,
But he gives out, he only does intend
To drive away from me some wicked Ministers.

Y. Cliff. The constant Vizard of Rebellion.
Rebellion is so foul and grim a Monster,
That those who mount the horrid Beast are forced
To cover it all over with gaudy Trappings.
They mark it in the Forehead with white Stars,
Pretenses heavenly.

Queen. Believe me, Sir -- he tells you naught but Truth.

K. Hen. Thus stands my State, 'twixt Cade and York distressed,
Like to a Ship, that having escaped a Tempest
Is straitway calmed, and boarded with a Pirate.
I pray thee, old Clifford, go and meet him,
And ask him what is the Reason of these Arms.

O. Cliff. I will, my Lord, and doubt not so to deal,
As all Things shall redound unto your Good.

K. Hen. Come Wife, let us in, and learn to govern better;
For yet may England curse my wretched Reign.
[Exeunt.
Enter York, Edward, George, Richard, and Soldiers. York. From Ireland thus
comes York to claim his Right,
And pluck the Crown from feeble Henry's Head.
Oh holy Majesty! who would not buy thee dear,
Let them obey that know not how to rule.
This Hand was made to handle naught but Gold.
I cannot give due Action to my Words,
Except a Sword or Scepter balance it.
A Scepter shall it have. Have I a Soul!
On which I Will toss the Flower de Luce of France.
Enter Old Clifford. Whom have we here? old Clifford to disturb me?
The King has sent him sure -- I must dissemble.

O. Cliff. York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.

York. Clifford of Cumberland, I accept thy Greeting.
Art thou a Messenger, or come of Pleasure?

O. Cliff. A Messenger from Henry our dread Liege,
To know the Reason of these Arms in Peace?
Or why, thou being a Subject, as I am,
Against thy Oath, and true Allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a Power without his Leave;
Or dare to bring thy Force so near the Court?

York. Scarce can I speak, my Choler is so great.
Oh! I could hew up Rocks, and fight with Flint,
I am so angry at these abject Terms:
And now, like frantic Ajax,
On Sheep, or Oxen, could I spend my Fury.
I am far better born than is the King;
More like a King, more kingly in my Thoughts.
But I must make fair Weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak, and I more strong. [aside.]
O Cumberland, I prithee pardon me,
That I have given no Answer all this while.
My Mind was troubled with deep Melancholy,
The Cause why I have brought this Army hither,
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his Grace, and to the State.

O. Cliff. That is too much Presumption on thy Part.
But if thy Arms be to no other End,
The King has yielded unto thy Demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.

York. Upon thy Honor, Is he Prisoner?

O. Cliff. Upon my Honor, he is Prisoner.

York. Then, noble Clifford, I Will dismiss my Powers,
And let my Sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest Son; nay, all my Sons,
As Pledges of my Fealty and Love;
I Will send 'em all, as willing as I live.
Lands, Goods, House, Armor, every Thing I have,
Is to his Use, so Somerset may die.

O. Cliff. York, I commend this kind Submission;
And I am sure 'twill glad King Henry's Heart,
Come, let us Two go friendly to the King.

Enter King Henry, attended. K. Hen. Clifford, does York intend no Harm to us,
That thus he marches with thee Arm in Arm.

York. In all Submission and Humility,
York does present himself unto your Highness.

K. Hen. Then what intend these Forces thou do bring.

York. To have the Traitor Somerset from hence,
And fight against that monstrous Rebel Cade;
Who since, I hear, is overcome and slain.

Enter the Queen, and Somerset. K. Hen. See, old Clifford; Somerset comes with
the Queen;
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.

Queen. For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his Head,
But boldly stand, and front him to his Face.

York. How now? Is Somerset at Liberty?
Then York unloose thy long imprisoned Thoughts,
And let thy Tongue be equal with thy Heart.
Shall I endure the Sight of Somerset?
False King, why have thou broken Faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook Abuse?
King, did I call thee? no, thou art no King,
Nor fit to govern and rule Multitudes,
Who has not Power to rule a single Traitor:
That Head of thine does not become a Crown;
Thy Hand is made to grasp a Palmer's Staff,
And not to grace an awful princely Scepter:
That Gold must round engirt these Brows of mine,
Whose Smile and Frown, like to Achilles's Spear,
Is able, with the Change, to kill and cure;
Here is a Hand to hold the Scepter up,
And, with the same, to act controuling Laws:
Give Place; by Heaven thou shall rule no more
Over him, whom Heaven created for thy Ruler.

Some. O, monstrous Traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital Treason against the King and Crown.

York. Somerset, in whose Name do you arrest me?

Some. In the King's Name.

York. Then I Will unfold my self;
Know, hitherto I Have been like a dark Cloud,
Where scorching Heat has been engendring Thunder;
The Grumbling and the Rolling you have heard,
And now the deadly Bolt shall light among you:
I am your King.

K. Hen. Ha!

York. Yes, I am your King,
Sprung from the Royal House of Clarence,
Whom three Usurpers of the House of Lancaster,
Successively, have trodden under Feet,
Whilst they have glittered in our Royal Glory,
Shone like false Diamonds in our Purple Robes.

Enter young Clifford. Y. Cliff. Health and all Happiness to my Lord the King.

York. I thank thee, Clifford, say, What News with thee?
Nay, think not to fright me with an angry Look,
We are thy Sovereign, Clifford, kneel thee down,
For thy mistaking so we pardon thee.

Y. Cliff. This is my King, York, I do not mistake,
But thou mistakest much to think I do.
To Bedlam with him -- Is the Man grown mad?

K. Hen. Ay, Clifford, Frenzy and ambitious Humor
Make him oppose himself against his King!

Y. Cliff. Did we not tell you this?

Edw. And we will tell you more, obey your King,
I mean, my Royal Father, or our Swords
Shall turn the Arrest of Treason on your selves.

O. Cliff. Surely you think you are among your Beauties,
Amorous Edward, there your Valor lies.

Queen. Let them admire thy Boasts, here art thou scorned.

Edw. It Is said, when the brave Duke of Suffolk lived,
Queen Margaret would not contemn a Lover;
I Am young, and love, but yet I am not stricken
So blind with Beauty, but I can discern
Both the fair Kingdom, and the fair Queen, lie
Sick of the Impotence of a weak King.

Queen. Ill manner'd Insolence!

Y. Cliff. Why, what a brood of Traitors have we here?

York. Look in a Glass, and call thy Image so;
I am thy King, and thou a false hearted Traitor.
I Have declared my Right, and here are my three Sons
To plead it with their Swords. Now I Will produce
The Sword of the Victorious Earl of Warwick.
Call in the Earl.

Enter Warwick. K. Hen. Thou against me, Warwick!
Say, did thou never swear Allegiance to me,
And can dispense with Heaven for such an Oath?

War. It is great Sin to swear unto a Sin,
But greater Sin to keep a sinful Oath:
Who can be bound by any solemn Vow,
To do a murderous Deed, to rob a Man,
To force a spotless Virgin's Chastity,
To 'reave the Orphan of his Patrimony,
And have no other Reason for his Wrong,
But that he was bound to it by solemn Oath?

Queen. A subtle Traitor needs no Sophister.

War. Cause I adored an Idol once, in Ignorance,
Must I still do so, now I see my Error?
Know, Duke of Lancaster (for you are no more)
Henry, your Grandfather, murdered his King,
Richard the Second; not content with that,
He trampled on the Rights of the next Heirs.
Your Father, warlike Henry, I confess,
Had in Desert what he did want in Title:
But Merit makes no lawful Claim to Crowns,
For if it did, I would be King of England;
But I will tell you to your Face, Duke Henry,
That you have neither Title nor Desert.

Queen. O. Cliff. Y. Cliff. Some. Most impudent of Traitors.

War. I Will speak Truth,
And value not the Fury of you all;
Your Father Henry was a Wall of Steel,
Through which there was no Passage to the Throne,
But you are only a soft silken Curtain,
Which with my Hand, or Breath, I Will put aside,
And seat your self, King Richard, in the Throne,
For it is empty though the Duke be there.

Y. Cliff. What, have these Traitors conquered us already,
They talk at this bold Rate? Thou Traitor Warwick,
Warwick, no! when thou dethron'st thy King
Thou made thy self a Groom, by the same Law
Thou tramplest on thy King; a saucy Groom
May set his dirty Foot upon thy Jaws,
And tell thee they were made both of one Clay.

Edw. What a fierce Talker's this?

War. I laugh at him;
All this loud Noise and Fury you have heard
Is but the Crackling of some burning Thorn,
That hedge the Duke, and they will soon be Ashes.

Queen. Wherefore does Henry parley with these Miscreants?
Let Us draw the Sword, and chase these Rebels hence,
Daily Disturbers of our Peace.

York. Poor Margaret,
I cannot blame thy Rage, but pity thee,
For thou have cause to rail, since from the Fall
Of good Duke Humphrey, all those Schemes proved Air,
Which hoped Success from noble Gloster's Death;
Mark Heaven's Vengeance.

Queen. Proud insulting York!
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.

York. Call Buckingham, and all the Friends thou have,
I am resolved for Death or Dignity.

O. Cliff. The first, I warrant thee -- if Dreams prove true.

War. You were best go to Bed, and dream again,
To keep thee from the Tempest of the Field.

O. Cliff. I am resolved to bear a greater Storm
Than any thou can conjure up to Day.

Y. Cliff. And so to Arms, my brave, and noble Father,
To quell the Rebels and their Accomplices.

War. And Royal Richard, fixed on Loyal Warwick,
Stand like a Cedar on a Mountain Top,
Securely rooted, and despise all Storm.

Edw. Now sound the Trumpets, and each Mandraw his Sword,
A Crown's the Prize, and Victory the Word.

K. Hen. My Cause is fixed in Heaven, for it is just,
And more in Heaven than our Arms I trust.
[Exeunt severally.
A great Charge here. Enter Warwick and York Meeting. War. How now, my noble
Lord, What, all a foot?

York. The deadly handed Clifford slew my Steed,
And I have made a Prey for Kites and Crows,
Even of the bonny Beast he loved so well.

Enter old Clifford. War. Old Clifford, now prepare to meet thy Fate.

York. Hold Warwick, seek thou out some other Chase,
For I my self must hunt this Deer to Death.

War. Then nobly, York, it is for a Crown thou fight'st.
As I intend Clifford to thrive to Day,
It grieves my Soul to leave thee unassail'd.
[Exit.
O Cliff. York, with thy Bearing should I be in love,
But that it is shown ignobly, and in Treason.

York. So let it help me now against thy Sword,
As I in Justice, and true Right, express it.
[They fight, Clifford falls. Farewell, old valiant Clifford, I should now
Be sorry for thee, were thou not my Enemy.
[Exit.
O. Cliff. I do not lack thy Sorrow, thou art a Traitor,
And I for Loyalty die honorably.

Enter Richard and Somerset. They fight. Somerset falls. Rich. So lie thou
there,
For underneath an Alehouse paltry Sign,
The Castle in St. Albans, Somerset
Has made the Wizard famous in his Death.
Sword, hold thy Temper; Heart be wrathful still,
Priests pray for Enemies, but Princes kill.
[Exit.
Enter young Clifford. Y. Cliff. Shame and Confusion! all is on the Rout!
My Men are fied, or slain, and I alone
Stand like a lofty Mast, showing my Head
Above the Waves, when all the Ship is sunk.
I cannot find my Father, nor my King.

O. Cliff. Oh, Son!

Y. Cliff. Ha!
Methought I heard a Voice resembling much
My Father's, very weak and faint it seemed,
As he were far from me, or near to Death.

O. Cliff. Oh, Clifford, it is thy aged Father calls!

Y. Cliff. Ha! Oh, there he lies!
All wel'tring in his Gore, gasping for Life!
Oh Father! Father! if thou have Breath enough,
Leave with me but the Name of him that wounded thee,
That I may give thee, and my Self, Revenge,
And I Will prefer that glorious Legacy,
Before the Estate and Honor which thou leave me.

O. Cliff. Plantagenet gave me my Death. Farewell!
[dies.
Y. Cliff. Plantagenet gave thee thy Death! Plantagenet
Then gave himself, and all his Race Destruction.
Now let the general Trumpet blow his Blast,
And Nature start at this great deadly Shock.
Wast thou ordained, Oh, my dear, loving, Father,
To lose thy Youth in Peace, and in thy Age
To die in Ruffian Battle? Even at this Sight
My Heart is turned to Stone; and from this Time
I will be famous for inhuman Cruelty.
Tears, to me, shall be as the Dew to Fire;
And Beauty, that the Tyrant often reclaims,
Shall to my flaming Wrath be Oil and Flax.
Never more will I have ought to do with Pity.
Meet I an Infant of the House of York,
Into as many Gobbets will I cut it,
As wild Medea young Absurtus did.
York kills our old Men, and I Will kill his Children,
That when he is dead he may not have a Son
To bear him to the Grave, as I my Father.
Alas, he hears me not -- he is dead, he is gone!
Come thou new Ruin of old Clifford's House,
As did Aeneas old Anchises bear,
So I Will bear thee upon my manly Shoulders;
But then Aeneas bare a living Load:
Nothing so heavy as these Woes of mine.
[Exit.
Trumpets sound, and great Shouts. Enter York, Edward, Richard, George, and
Soldiers. York. Of brave Warwick, Who can report of him?
This happy Day
Is not it self, nor have we won one Foot,
If that brave Man be lost.

Rich. My noble Father,
Three Times, to Day, I helped him to his Horse;
Three Times bestrid him; thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further Act,
And still where Danger was, still there I met him.
But Noble as he is, look where he comes.

Enter Warwick. York. Let me embrace the greatest Man that breathes.

Geo. England will learn again to fight and conquer;
A glorious Science we have almost lost,
Under the Reign of this tame, bookish King.

War. What is become of the young boasting Clifford?
Fate, as if tender of him, did to Day,
When ever I met him, thrust a Crowd betwixt us.

York. I met his Father in the Field; and there
I put the brave old Man to his last Bed.
The stout old Winter Lion, that had long
Endured the Brush of Time, fought with that Heat
As he had been but in the Spring of Youth:
Like Arras Hangings in a homely House,
So was his gallant Spirit in his Body.

Edw. Whilst we pursued the Horsemen of the North
With too much Heat, the King escaped our Hands;
But he has left behind some of his Friends;
I fell upon the gallant Duke of Buckingham,
And with one fortunate substantial Blow
I cleft his good steel Helmet and his Scull.

War. Now, by my Sword, well have thou fought to Day;
So did we all;
And by my Life, Lords, 'twas a glorious Day;
St. Alban's Battle worthy famous York,
Shall be eternized in all Age to come:
But now, my Lord, post we with speed to London,
For thither, I am told, the King is fled,
And there he will repair this Day's wide Breach.
Citizens always love tame, pious Princes,
And such as abhor fighting, like themselves.
Then, if you can, enter the Town before 'em,
And fill it with your Troops, and see to Morrow
To get early into the Parliament House,
There guarded well, openly claim the Crown;
My Tongue and Sword shall both assert your Title;
Then let me see who shall dare be so bold,
To gainsay what we with our Swords assert.

York. Thou Soul of Valor, Wisdom and Nobility,
I Will take thy Counsel.

War. -- Come then, away,
Our Enemies gain Strength by our Delay.
[Exeunt.
End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
York, Edward, George, Richard, Warwick, and other Lords, etc. discovered as in
Parliament. York. YE Peers of England, having shown my Title,
And you approving my just Pedigree;
I take Possession of my Royal Right,
And to my Death my Scepter I Will maintain.

Enter King Henry, Clifford, and others. K. Hen. My Lords, look where the
sturdy Rebel fits.
Young Lord Cumberland, he slew thy Father,
And I do think that you have vowed Revenge
On him, his Sons, his Favorites, and his Friends.

Cliff. The Hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in Steel.

War. What say you, Lancaster, will you resign,
In Peace, the Crown to him whose Right it is?
Or, shall we force it from you with our Swords?

Cliff. What, shall we suffer this? Lets pluck him down.
My Heart for Anger burns, I cannot brook it.
My gracious Lord, here in the Parliament
Let us assail the Family of York.

K. Hen. Far be the Thought of Strife from Henry's Heart
So to abuse this Place's Dignity.
No, my Lord Clifford, Frowns, Words, and Threats,
Shall be the War that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend the Throne,
And kneel for Grace and Mercy at my Feet.
I am thy Sovereign.

York. Henry I am thine.

K. Hen. And shall I stand, and thou sit in my Throne?

York. It must and shall be so -- Content thy self.

War. Be Duke of Lancaster, so he is King.

Cliff. He is both Duke of Lancaster, and King;
And that I Clifford boldly will maintain.

War. And Warwick shall disprove it; you forget
That we are those who chased you from the Field,
And slew your Fathers, and with Colors spread,
Marched through the City to the Palace Gates.

Cliff. Urge it no more, lest that instead of Words
I send thee, Warwick, such a Messenger
As shall revenge his Death before I stir.
Plantaganet, of thee, and these thy Sons,
Thy Favorites, and Friends, I Will have more Lives
Than Drops of Blood were in my Father's Veins.

War. Poor Clifford, how we scorn thy worthless Threats.

York. Will you, we show our Title to the Crown?
If not, our Swords shall plead it in the Field.

Edw. Good Father, as you love and honor Arms
Let Us fight it out, and not stand brawling thus.

Rich. Sound but the Trumpet, and the King will fly.

York. Peace, Sons.

K. Hen. Peace all of you, and hear your King.
Rebels, I fear all Danger less than you,
For I am better armed with Innocence.
But I confess I fear a Civil War;
Not for my own, but for my People's Sake.
I am afraid indeed of shedding Blood,
But you are all most bold in Cruelty:
By which (O Heaven) judge whose is the Child,
His who desires to have it cut in Pieces,
Or mine, who strive in Tenderness to save it.
Rebels may be successful for a Time,
And overturn all Order, Right, and Justice:
But Heaven does not let the World stand long
In that unnatural, uneasy Posture.
Just Heaven point out the Course I am to take,
I shudder at the Thought of Civil War.
And shall I tamely then resign the Crown,
So bravely fought for by my Ancestors?
I know not what to do. I shall run mad.

York. Thy own Mouth, Henry, has pronounced thy Doom.
Successful Murder, and Rebellion
Swelled for two Generations of thy Race,
Over all Right, and all that durst oppose 'em.
But Heaven in thee has dried up the black Stream
And made it such a Brook all trample over it.

K. Hen. Think thou I will leave my kingly Throne,
Wherein my Grandsire, and my Father sat?
No. First shall War unpeople this my Realm.
Ay, and their Colors often born in France,
And now in England, to our Heart's great Sorrow,
Shall be my Winding Sheet. -- Then fear not, Lords,
My Title's good, and better far than his.

Cliff. There spoke a King indeed.

York. Henry, do but prove
Thy Title good, and thou shall reign as King.

K. Hen. Henry the Fourth by Conquest got the Crown.

York. 'Twas in Rebellion against his lawful King.

K. Hen. Tell me, may not a King adopt an Heir?

York. What then?

K. Hen. Why, if he may, then am I lawful King,
For Richard, in the View of many Lords,
Resigned his Crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose Heir my Father was, and I am his.

York. Did not thy Grandfather compel him to it
By Force of Arms? and then the Parliament,
To their eternal Shame and Infamy,
Flattered the wicked, fortunate Usurper.

War. But say the King had done it unconstrained,
He could not give away another's Right.
Henry usurped the Right of the next Heirs.

York. To prove this true, read the last Words of Mortimer,
Who died in Prison in your Minor Days,
And dying breathed these Words into my Ears.
[Delivers a Scrowl to Henry.] That those were the Words of that injured Man,
I will maintain, both with my Oath and Sword.

K. Hen. I know not what to say -- my Title's weak.

Cliff. How, Sir, will you revolt from your own self,
Who will stand by you then?

War. Clifford, thou dy'st,
If thou permit'st not Henry to resign.

Cliff. Let Henry give his Title to the Crown,
He shall not give my Title to Revenge.
King Henry be thy Title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy Defense.
May that Ground gape, and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my Father.

War. Do Right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the House with armed Men,
And over the Chair of State, where now he sits,
Write up his Title with usurping Blood.

K. Hen. Hold, hold, my Lords -- Oh! let not Blood be shed,
First hear the Proffers that I have to make,
And hearken all -- I find my Title's weak,
And to defend it were to fight with Justice.
Besides, there lies already on my Head,
The Blood of Richard, murdered by my Grandfather,
And I Would be loath to add my People's Blood,
For saving which, hear this Proposal from me:
I have been King these Eight and Thirty Years,
And many Interests must grow to mine,
That you can never tear me from the Throne,
But you will set a Thousand Veins a bleeding.
Then let me Reign in Quiet all my Life,
And when I Am dead, Plantagenet be King.

York, I approve of it, and on that Condition
I swear to be King Henry's Vassal.

K. Hen. And not to seek the Crown by Arms or Treason.

York. Never whilst King Henry lives.

K. Hen. Then I intail
The Crown to thee, and to thy Heirs for ever.

Cliff. What Wrong is this unto the Prince your Son?

War. What Good is this to England and himself?

Cliff. Base, fearful, and despairing Henry,
How have thou injured both thy self and us?
But I will haste to inform the Queen of this.
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate King,
In whose cold Blood no Spark of Honor bides.
If thy great Father Henry's Soul did see
Thy Baseness, it would torture him in Heaven.
Plantagenet, when that great Monarch lived,
Thou durst have sooner let into thy Soul
Ten Thousand Devils than a Traytor's Thought.
Henry, adieu, be thou a Prey to York,
And die in Bonds for this unmanly Deed.
In dreadful War, may thou be overcome,
Or live in Peace, abandoned and despised.
[Exit.
York. Sons, head the Troops before the Palace Gates,
Lest furious Clifford should disturb our Peace.
[Exit.
K. Hen. Oh!

War. Why sigh you, Sir?

K. Hen. Not for my self, but my poor Son I Have wronged.

War. You have not wronged him, you have wholly freed him,
From all the Vengeance due to Usurpation.
York. I hear the Queen has raised Forces in the North.
My Lord of Warwick, attend you the King,
And stay to raise what Force you can in London,
Whilst I post to the North, and so between us
We'll wall her in, and keep that Fire from spreading.
[Exit.
K. Hen. Pray do, my Lords, I will assist you both
Against my self, but Justice shall be done.
See, yonder comes my Queen, whose unkind Looks
Strike Terror to me, oh! I dare not stay,
To hear the Bitterness of her Reproaches.

Enter the Queen and Prince. Queen. Where is the King? What, do you shun me,
Sir?
Nay, go not from me, I will follow thee.

K. Hen. Be patient, gentle Queen, and I will stay.

Queen. Who can be patient in such sad Extremes?
Oh wretched Man, would I had died a Maid,
And never seen thee, never bore the Son,
Since thou have proved so unnatural a Father!
Has he deserved to lose his Birthright thus?
Had thou but loved him half so much as I,
Or felt that Pain which I did for him once;
Or nourished him, as I did with my Blood,
Thou would have left thy dearest Heart Blood here,
Rather than make rebellious York thine Heir,
And difinherited thine only Son.

K. Hen. The Crown is his, I have no Title to it
But what is founded on Rebellion,
The Murder of a King, and Usurpation.

Queen. I shame to hear thee speak, thou timorous Wretch,
Thou have undone thy self, thy Son, and me,
And given to the House of York such Head,
As thou shall reign but by their Sufferance.
To intail him and his Heirs unto the Crown,
What is it, but to make thy Sepulcher,
And creep into it far before thy Time.
Had I been here, who am a poor weak Woman,
The Soldiers should have tossed me on their Pikes,
Ever I had stooped to such unnatural Baseness.
Oh, my dear Son, thou art no more a Prince,
Because thy Father is no more a King:
By one base Deed he has undone us all.

Prince. I am a Prince, and I will be a King:
Father, you cannot disinherit me;
You may bestow your Kingdom whilst you live,
But when you are dead, the Crown by Right is mine,
And by the sacred Memory of my Ancestors,
I Will bear no Head that does not wear a Crown.

Queen. My Son, he shall not disinherit thee,
I have Men here to guard us from the Rebels,
And Troops elsewhere to conquer 'em, and chastise,
And I will make thee, Son, a glorious Prince,
Whilst thou, tame Wretch, shall be a Slave to Traitors,
And only be a Shadow of a King.

K. Hen. Oh, my sweet Love, talk not so harshly to me!

Queen. I will be harsher in my Deeds than Words,
For, from this Moment, I divorce my self,
Both from thy Table, Henry, and thy Bed,
Until that Act of Parliament be repealed,
Whereby my Son is disinherited.

K. Hen. Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

Queen. Thou have spoke too much already, get thee gone;

K. Hen. Then, my Son Edward, will thou stay with me!

Queen. Ay, to be murdered by his Enemies!
No, thou shall have no Sons of me to ruin:
I scorn to be the Mother of a Slave.

Prince. When I return with Victory from the Field
I Will see your Grace, till then I Will follow her.

Queen. Come, Son, away, we may not linger thus.
[Exeunt.
K. Hen. Poor Queen, how Love and Pity for my Son
Cause Rage in her, as they cause Grief in me.

War. Add her Ambition to her Love and Pity.
For that has no small Share in her Disturbance.
But come, my Liege, let us straight call a Council,
So to prevent her spreading farther Mischief.

K. Hen. With all my Heart, my noble Lord of Warwick,
For, O! I Am weary of these deadly Broils,
To you I Will readily submit vain Rule:
Though on my self I sure Destruction bring,
Ever I Will hurt England I Will not reign your King.
[Exeunt.
Enter York, Edward, and Richard. Rub. Father, I think I Have plainly made appear
Your Oath to be most vain and frivolous,
Therefore to Arms, and, Father, do but think,
How sweet a Thing it is to wear a Crown,
Within whose Circuit is Elisium,
And all that Poets seign of Bliss and Joy.
Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white Rose that I wear, be died
Even in the lukewarm Blood of Henry's Heart.

York. Richard enough -- I will be King or die,
Mountague shall to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this Enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shall go to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of out Intent.
You, Edward, unto my brave Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentish Men will willing rise.
While you are thus employed, what rests more,
But that I seek Occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my Drift,
Nor any of the House of Lancaster.
Enter Gentleman. Now say, what News, that thou come in such Haste?

Gent. The Queen, with all the Northern Earls and Lords,
Are near at Hand with Twenty Thousand Men,
And therefore fortify your Hold, my Lord.

York. Ay, with my Sword,
What, think thou that we fear 'em?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me,
I Have sent your Brother George to raise some Troops;
I hoped he would have been with me ever now;
But I must take my Fortune -- Hark, the Enemy
Approaches us, bring in my dear Child Rutland.
Enter Rutland. My Darling, let me kiss thee ever I go;
I know not if I ever shall see thee more;
If I should fall under the numerous Enemy,
Whoever survives take care of this sweet Boy.

Rut. Why do you talk thus, Sir? You make me weep;
If you must die, I hope I shall die with you.
I had rather die with you, than live a King.

York. Sweet Boy, farewell, my Soul. There, take the Child,
And guard him safely -- If my Arms should fail,
Convey him with speed to our next Garrison,
And give his Brother Notice of his flight.
[Exit Rutland. Although the Queen has Twenty Thousand Men,
And our whole Power will make but Five Thousand,
I Will issue forth, and bid 'em Battle strait.
Five Men to Twenty -- True, the Odds are great,
Yet I Will not doubt, my Sons, of Victory.
Many a Battle have I won in France,
When the proud Foe has numbered Ten to One;
Why should I not now have the like Success?
Now show your selves the Loyal Sons of York,
And fight as each would wear the Royal Crown.
[Exeunt. Trumpets sound, etc.
Enter Clifford with a Party. Cliff. Pursue, pursue, and give no Quarter:
I charge you do not spare nor Sex, nor Age.
[Exit.
Enter Rutland. Rut. Oh! whither shall I fly? How shall I 'scape?
Ah, Clifford comes, and no one's here to guard me.

Re-enter Clifford. Cliff. Thou cursed Brat of York's accursed Race,
Prepare to die.

Rut. Oh! brave, noble, Clifford,
Hear me but speak a Word before I die.

Cliff. What can thou say, fond Boy, that is worth my hearing?

Rut. I only beg you to regard your self,
You are a Noble Man, I am a Boy;
Stain not your Fame by killing a poor Boy,
I would not for your own sake you should do it,
For I love gallant Men -- and I love you,
Though you are my Enemy -- because you are valiant.

Cliff. Away, you infinuating, flattering Boy,
Give over, give over, for were there in thy Voice
Celestial Harmony, my Father's Blood
Has shut the Passage where the Sound should enter.

Rut. I did not shed his Blood.

Cliff. Thy Father did.

Rut. Then fight my Father, that will get you Honor.

Cliff. Should I kill thee, thy Father, and thy Brothers,
'Twere not Revenge sufficient for my Wrath.
No, if I dig'd up thy Forefathers Graves
It could not slake mine Ire, or ease my Heart.
The Sight of any of the House of York
Is as a Fury to torment my Soul;
And till I root out the accursed Line,
And leave not one alive, I live in Hell,
Therefore --

Rut. Oh! let me pray before I take my Death;
To thee I pray -- sweet Clifford, pity me.

Cliff. Such Pity as my Rapier's Point affords.

Rut. Hear me, but one Word more, dear, brave, Lord Clifford,
You have a Son, for his sake pity me,
Lest in Revenge thereof, since Heaven is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Why should your Fury burn against the Innocent?

Cliff. I kill thee out of Hatred to thy Kind,
As I would do a Toad, or a young Serpent.

Rut. Ah! let me live in Prison all my Days,
And when I give Occasion of Offense
Then let me die, for now thou have no Cause.

Cliff. I Will hear no more, lest thy soft Tongue overcome me,
Thy Father slew my Father, therefore die.
[Stabs him.
Rut. May thou never get more Fame than by this Deed.
[Dies.
Cliff. Plantagenet, I come, Plantagenet,
And this thy Son's Blood cleaving to my Blade,
Shall rust upon my Weapon, till thy Blood
Congealed with this, do make me wipe off both.
Take up the Body, and bring it after me,
I Will make a Present of it to proud York.
[Exit.
Enter York. York. The Army of the Queen has got the Field,
My Uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my Followers to the eager Foe
Turn back, and fly like Ships before the Wind,
Or Lambs pursued by hungry starved Wolves.
My Sons, Heaven knows what has bechanced them,
But this I know, they have behaved themselves
Like Men born to Renown, by Life or Death.
Three Times did Richard make a Lane to me,
And thrice cried, Courage, Father, fight it out.
And full as often came Edward to my side,
With purple Falchion painted to the Hilt
In Blood of those who had encountered him.
Richard cried Charge, and give no Foot of Ground,
We'll have a Crown or else a glorious Tomb;
A Scepter, or an earthly Sepulcher.
With this we charged again, but soon, alas!
Retired back, as I have seen a Swan,
With bootless Labor, swim against the Tide,
And spend her Strength with over-matching Waves.
Ah! hark the fatal Followers do pursue,
And I am very faint, and cannot fly:
But had I Strength; I Am on all Sides enclosed.
The Sands are numbered that make up my Life,
Here must I stay, and here my Life must end.

Enter Queen, Clifford, and Guards. Cliff. Ha! have I found thee, proud
Plantagenet?
What tumbled, Phaeton, from thy shining Chariot!
Oh, Father! from thy Joys above descend,
And share with me the Pleasure of Revenge.

York. Thou bloody raging Clifford, do thy worst,
I Would scorn to ask thee Mercy had thou any;
But thou have none, then come with all thy Multitudes.

Cliff. So Cowards fight when they can fly no farther;
So Pigeons peck the Falcon's piercing Talons;
So desperate Thieves breathe Curses at their Officers.

York. So triumph Thieves upon their conquered Beauty;
So true Men yield, by Robbers so overmatch'd.
Have thou the Insolence to charge a Prince
With Cowardice, who made thee basely fly:
Call to thy Memory St. Alban's Battle.

Cliff. I do, then did thou kill my brave old Father.

York. And now would thee, were thou not backed with Multitudes.

Cliff. I will try that -- stand off, and do not touch him
Unless I fall -- then cut him all to pieces.
I will not lose Revenge -- yet I will give him
So much Revenge, to kill me if he can.

York. I thank thee for this Kindness, it is a great one.

Queen. Hold, Clifford, do not Honor him so much,
To prick thy Finger, though it wound his Heart.
What Valor were it, when a Cur does grin,
For one to thrust his Hand between his Teeth,
When he might spurn him with his Foot away?
It is War's Prize to take all Vantages.
And, valiant Clifford, for a Thousand Causes
I would prolong a while the Traytor's Life.
What, was it you that would be England's King?
Wast you that revell'd in our Parliaments,
And made a Preachment of your high Descent?
Where are your Mess of Sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward and the lusty George.
And where is that valiant Crook-back'd Prodigy,
Dicky, your Boy, that with his grumbling Voice
Was will not to cheer his Dad in Mutinies;
And, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York, I stained this Napkin with the Blood
That valiant Clifford, with his Rapier's Point,
Made issue from the Bosom of thy Boy,
I bring it thee to wipe away thy Tears.
Alas! poor York, but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable State.

York. Oh Tiger's Heart! wrapped in a Woman's Hide,
How could thou drain the Lifeblood of a Child,
To bid his Father wipe his Eyes withal,
And yet be seen to wear a Woman's Face?

Queen. Why, this I did, York, to increase thy Sorrow;
I know a Parent's Love, and thy fond Love,
And all the Mysteries of thy haughty Heart:
I knew that thou would Barricado it
Against the Losses of a Crown and Life,
With Iron Bars of Stubbornness and Pride:
But Oh! this Blood-like Oil will sink into it;
These crimson Threads will lead tormenting Grief
Into the inmost Lodgings of thy Soul.
And lest this Napkin be too soft a Thing,
I have at Hand an Engine that shall squeeze
Thy Soul into thy Eyes -- bring Rutland's Body.

Rutland's Body brought in. York. She Wolf of France, for Woman thou art (...):
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible,
Thou, stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless;
Would have me rage, why now thou have thy Will?
Would have me weep, why now thou have thy Wish?
These Tears are my sweet Rutland's Obsequies,
And every Drop cries Vengeance to his Death.
Against thee fell Clifford, and thou false French Woman.
Oh! my sweet Boy.

Queen. Why, this is Music to me.
This is the part thou mean I should have played,
If thy accursed Treasons had succeeded;
But, that my Tragedy must have been deeper,
And bloodier far, thou mean I should have wept,
For a lost Kingdom, Husband, and a Son!

York. See ruthless Queen, a hapless Father's Tears.
This Cloth thou dip'dst in Blood of my sweet Boy;
And I with Tears do wash the Blood away:
Keep thou the Napkin, and go boast of this,
And if thou tell the heavy Story right,
Upon my Soul the Hearers will shed Tears;
Yea, even my Foes will shed fast falling Tears,
And say, alas! it was a piteous Deed.
May, in thy need, such Comfort come to thee,
As now I reap at thy most cruel Hand.
Hard hearted Clifford, take me from the World,
My Soul to Heaven, my Blood upon thy Head.

Cliff. Here Is for my Oath, and for my Father's Death,
And here is to Right our gentle hearted King.
[Stabs York.
York. Open thy Gates of Mercy, gracious Heaven,
My Soul flies through these Wounds to seek out thee.
[Dies.
Queen. Now take his Head, once filled with lofty Thoughts,
And set it on a lofty Pinnacle.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Edward, Richard, and Soldiers. Edw. I Wonder how our princely Father
'scap'd,
Or, whether he be 'scap'd away, or no,
From Clifford's and Northumberland's Pursuit?
Had he been taken, or killed, we had heard the News:
Or otherwise, methinks, we should have heard
The happy Tidings of his good Escape.
How fares my Brother? Why are you sad?

Rich. I cannot Joy until I am resolved
What is become of our right valiant Father;
I saw him in the Battle range about,
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth;
Methought he bore him in the thickest Troop,
As does a Lion amongst a Herd of Deer;
Or, as a Bear encompassed round with Dogs,
Who having pinched a few, and made 'em cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him,
So fared our Father with his Enemies.
See how the Morning opes her golden Gates,
And takes her Farewell of the glorious Sun;
How well resembles it the Prime of Youth,
Trimmed like a Yonker prancing to his Love.

Edw. Dazzle my Eyes, or do I see three Suns!

Rich. Three glorious Suns, each one a perfect Sun,
Not separated with the racking Clouds,
But severed in a pale, clear, shining Sky;
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some League inviolable.
Now are they but one Lamp, one Light, one Sun.
In this the Heavens figure some Event.

Edw. It Is wondrous strange, the like -- yet never heard of,
I think it cites us, Brother, to the Field,
That we, the Sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our Deeds,
Should, notwithstanding, join our Lights together,
And over shine the Earth, as this the World.
Whatever it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my Target, Three fair shining Suns.
Enter Gentleman. But, what art thou, whose heavy Looks foretell
Some dreadful Story hanging on thy Tongue?

Gent. One that was a woeful Looker on,
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely Father, and my noble Lord.

Edw. Oh, speak no more! For I have heard too much.

Rich. Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

Gent. Environed he was with many Foes,
And stood against 'em, as the Hope of Troy
Against the Greeks, that would have entered there.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many Strokes, though with a little Ax,
Hews down, and fells the hardest timber'd Oak.
By many Hands your Father was subdued,
But only slaughtered by the ireful Arm
Of unrelenting Clifford, whilst the Queen
Laughed in his Face; and when with Grief he wept,
The ruthless Queen, gave him to dry his Cheeks,
A Napkin steeped in the harmless Blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain;
And after many Scorns, many foul Taunts,
They took his Head, and on the Gates of York
They set the same, and there it does remain
The saddest Spectacle that ever was viewed.

Edw. Oh Clifford! flinty Clifford! thou have crop'd
The Flower of Europe for his Chivalry,
And treacherously have thou vanquished him;
For Hand to Hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my Soul's Palace is become a Prison.
Oh! would she break from hence, that this my Body
Might in the Ground be closed up in Rest,
For I henceforth shall never joy again;
Never, Oh never, shall I know more Joy!

Rich. I cannot weep, for all my Body's Moisture
Scarce serves to quench my Furnace burning Heart.
Nor can my Tongue unload my Heart's great Burden,
For the same Wind that I should speak withal,
Is kindling Coals that fire up all my Breast;
And burn me up with Flames that Tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the Depth of Grief;
Tears then for Babes, but dear Revenge for me.
Richard, I bear thy Name, I Will 'venge thy Death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.

Enter Warwick and Soldiers. War. Now, noble Lords, tell me what News abroad.

Edw. O Warwick! Warwick! -- great Plantagenet
Is by the stern Lord Clifford put to Death.

War. Some Time ago I drowned this News in Tears,
After the bloody Fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave Father breathed his latest Gasp;
Tidings, as swiftly as the Post could run,
Were brought me of your Loss, and his Depart.
I then in London, Keeper of the King,
Mustered my Soldiers, gathered Flocks of Friends,
Marched toward St. Albans to intercept the Queen.
Bearing the King, in my Behalf, along;
For by my Scouts I was advertised,
That she was coming with a full Intent
To dash our late Decrees in Parliament,
Touching King Henry's Oaths, and your Succession.
Short Tale to make, we at St. Albans met,
Our Battles joined, and for long Time we fought;
But whether 'twas the Coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robbed my Soldiers of their heated Spleen;
Or, whether 'twas Report of her Success,
Or more than common Fear of Clifford's Vigor,
Who thunders to his Captives Blood and Death,
I cannot judge, but to conclude with Truth,
Their Weapons like to Lightning came and went;
Our Soldiers, like the Night-Owls lazy Flight,
Or like a lazy Thrasher with his Flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their Friends;
I cheered 'em up with Justice of our Cause,
With Promise of high Pay, and great Reward,
But all in vain, they had no Heart to fight;
And we in them no Hope to win the Day,
So that we fled; the King unto the Queen,
Lord George, your Brother; Norfolk and my self,
With the utmost speed, are come to join with you;
For in the Marshes here we heard you were,
Making another Head to fight again.

Edw. Where is the Duke of Norfolk, noble Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

War. Some four Miles off the Duke is with the Soldiers,
And for your Brother, he was lately sent
From your kind Aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With needful Aid of Soldiers to this War,
And every Minute I expect him here.

Rich. 'Twas Odds belike, when valiant Warwick fled;
Often have I heard his Praises in Pursuit,
But never till now, his Scandal of Retreat.

War. Nor now my Scandal, Richard, Do thou hear?
For thou shall know this strong right Hand of mine,
Can pluck the Diadem from faint Henry's Head,
And wring the awful Scepter from his Hand,
Were he as famous, and as bold in War,
As he is famed for Mildness, Peace, and Prayer.

Rich. I know it well, Lord Warwick, blame me not,
It Is Love I bear thy Glories makes me speak.
But in this busy Time, what is to be done?
Shall we go throw away our Coats of Steel,
And wrap our Bodies in black Mourning Gown,
Numb'ring our Ave Mary's with our Beads?
Or, shall we on the Helmets of our Foes
Tell our Devotion with revengeful Arms,
If for the last, say ay, and to it Lords?

War. Why therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my Brother Mountague;
Then once again let us stride our foaming Steeds,
And once again cry Charge upon our Foes,
But never more will we turn back and fly.

Rich. Ay, now, indeed, I hear great Warwick speak.
Never may he live to see a Sunshine Day
That cries Retreat, if Warwick bid him stay.

Enter George and Soldiers. Edw. My Brother George, take a short Soldiers
Welcome,
I have not Time to greet thee as I ought,
For we are going to a glorious Feast.

Geo. I heard of our great Father's sad Misfortunes,
And came to his Revenge with all the speed
A hungry Wretch would do to a great Feast,
Where there are many Guests, and he far off.

Edw. Say, my dear Brother, are your Troops prepared?

Geo. All, all with a longing Appetite for War.

War. No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York;
The next Degree is England's Royal Throne;
For King of England shall thou be proclaimed,
And he that throws not up his Cap for Joy,
Shall for the Fault make forfeit of his Head.
Stay we no longer dreaming of Renown,
But sound the Trumpets, and about our Task.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Princes prepare, the Foe is near at Hand,
The Amazon Queen drags Henry to the Battle,
Who fain would keep his Oath, but she will not suffer him.

Edw. Why, let 'em come, we are prepared to face 'em.

Rich. Then Clifford, were thy Heart as hard as Steel,
As thou have shown it flinty by thy Deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

Edw. This Day decides who shall be King of England.
Strike up our Drums, and let the Trumpets sound,
Our brave Approach shall so much dare the Field,
That Henry shall couch down in Fear, and yield.
[Exit.
A short March, then an Alarm, clashing of Swords, and shouting. Enter Warwick.
War. Even spent with Toil, as Runners with a Race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe,
For Strokes received, and many Blows repaid,
Have robbed my strong knit Sinews of their Strength.

Enter Edward. Edw. Smile, gentle Heaven, or strike, ungentle Death,
For this World's Frowns, and Edward's Sun is clouded.

Enter George. Geo. Our Ranks are broke, and Ruin follows us:
What Counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?

Edw. Bootless is Flight, they follow us with Wings,
And weak we are, and cannot shun Pursuit.

Enter Richard. Rich. Ah Warwick! -- Why have thou withdrawn thy self,
Thy Brother's Blood the thirsty Earth has drunk,
Broached with the steely Point of Clifford's Lance;
And in the very Pangs of Death he cried,
Like to a dismal Clangor heard from far,
Warwick revenge, Brother, revenge my Death:
So underneath the Belly of his Steeds,
That stained their Fetlocks in his smoking Blood,
The noble Gentleman gave up the Ghost.

War. Then let the Earth be drunken with our Blood,
I Will kill my Horse because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted Women here,
Wailing our Losses, while the Foe does rage,
And look upon, as if the Tragedy
Were played in Jest by counterfeiting Actors?
Here, on my Knees, I vow to Heaven above,
I Will never pause again, never stand still,
Till either Death does close these Eyes of mine,
Or, till the Battle gives me full Revenge.

Edw. O Warwick! I do bend my Knee with thine,
And in this Vow do chain my Soul to thine;
And ever my Knee rise from the Earth's cold Face,
I lift my Hands, my Eyes, my Heart, to thee,
Thou Setter up, and Plucker down, of Kings,
Beseeching thee (if with thy Will it stands)
That to my Foes this Body must be Prey,
Yet that thy glorious Gates of Heaven may open,
And give sweet Passage to my wandering Soul.

Geo. Yet let us all together to our Troops,
And give them leave to fly that dare not stay;
And call them Pillars that will stand to us,
Promising such Rewards if we should thrive,
As Victors wore at the Olympian Games:
This may plant Courage in their quailing Breasts,
For yet is Hope of Life and Victory.

Rich. Again then let our bloody Colors wave,
And either Victory, or else a Grave.

Edw. Now Lords, take leave until we meet again,
Wherever it be, in Heaven, or on Earth.
[Exeunt.
Enter Richard and Clifford, meeting. Rich. Now Clifford, I have singled thee
alone,
Suppose this Arm is for the Duke of York,
And for young Rutland, bound to revenge 'em both,
Were thou environed with a brazen Wall.

Cliff. And, Richard, here is the Hand that stabbed old York;
The self same Hand that slew thy Brother Rutland;
And here is the Heart that triumphs in their Deaths,
And cheers the Hand that slew thy Sire and Brother,
To execute the like upon thy self,
And so have at thee.

Rich. Now guard well thy Heart.
[Fight off the Stage
Enter King Henry. K. Hen. The Battle fares like to the Morning's War,
When dying Clouds contend with growing Light;
Both Armies tug for Victory Breast to Breast,
Yet neither's Conqueror, nor conquered.
Here, on this Molehill, will I set me down,
An easier Seat than a high Throne of State;
To whom Heaven will there be the Victory,
For Margaret, my Queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the Battle, swearing both,
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if it were Heavens good Will,
For what is in this World but Grief and Woe:
Oh! I am weary of this wretched State.
Just now I met a Son bearing his Father,
And an unhappy Father with his Son,
Each by the other slain unwittingly;
They being pressed into different Services.
Oh monstrous Effect of Civil War!
Oh piteous Spectacle! Oh sad Confusions!
What horrid Errors, and unnatural Ills,
Our horrid and unnatural War produces!
Alas! had they lacked Tears, I could supply 'em.
How will the Kingdom, for these woeful Chances,
Mis-think the King, and not be satisfied.
Oh wretched Men! How are ye all deceived,
Who think there is no true Joy but in a Crown.
By my Life,
It is the very Height of Misery:
Nature's common Benefits we want;
Our Sleep unsound, and short, and all our Needs,
To be supplied with Fear, since Treachery
Lurks in each Corner of a cursed Court?
How often is a Monarch stung to Death,
By the deadly Viper which his Bosom warmed?
How do we rack our Brain with Thoughts for others,
Who nothing think for us? Yet, how are Men gulled
With the deceitful Bait of Pomp and Show,
Mere gaudy Pagentry, to varnish over
A wild distracted State?
Now, by my Royalty, and pompous Woe,
A Prison's preferable to a Court:
There, though confined, I could enjoy my Mind,
At Liberty, soar to the high Orbs of Heaven,
And gain a Kingdom of immortal Joy;
While others, toiling for a Nation's Good,
Shall lose themselves. Alas!
Did my Son know the Trouble of a Crown,
He Would cease to wonder why I should resign it,
And join in Prayers for Heaven to take it from me.
Oh wretched Men, who in these Wars have lost
Your dearest Friends, and now are weeping for 'em,
Here is a King more woeful than you all,
You grieve but for your selves, I for you all!
Oh you, who when you suffer by your Kings,
Think to mend all by War, and by Rebellion,
See here your sad Mistakes; how dreadfully
You scourge your selves!
And, Oh! you Kings, who let your People rule
Till they have run themselves into Confusion,
See here, such Gentleness does wound like Tyranny.

Enter Queen and Prince. Prince. But that my Heart's on future Battles set,
I would speak Blasphemy ever bid you fly;
But fly you must, for all your Friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chased Bull:
Away, for Death does hold us in Pursuit.

Queen. The Day is lost, and with the Day the Kingdom.

K. Hen. Where Is Clifford?

Prince. Often within this Hour
I saw him down, often up again, and fighting,
From Helmet, to the Spur, all Blood he was.

Queen. Stay not to talk -- Clifford, I think, is dead;
I met him bleeding with an Hundred Wounds,
And now in Cakes of Blood his Fire is quenched.
Mount you, my Load, toward Berwick, post amain;
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed.

K. Hen. I go, but care not what becomes of me.
[Exit.
Enter Clifford wounded. Cliff. Here burns my Candle out, that lighted Henry:
My Love and Fear glew'd many Friends to thee,
And now I fall, thy tough Commixtures melt,
Impairing good Henry, strengthening proud York.
And, whither fly the Gnats but to the Sun?
And, who shines now but Henry's Enemies?
O Phoebus, had thou never given Consent,
That Phaeton should check thy fiery Steeds,
Thy burning Car never had scorched the Earth.
And Henry, had thou swayed as Kings should do;
Or as thy Father, and his Father did,
Giving no Ground unto the House of York,
They never then had sprung like Summer flies.
I, and Ten Thousand, in this luckless Realm,
Had left no Mourning Widows for our Death;
And thou, this Day, had kept thy Chair in Peace;
For, what does cherish Weeds, but gentle Air?
And, what makes Robbers bold, but too much Lenity.
Bootless are Plaints, and cureless are my Wounds;
No way to fly, nor Strength to hold out Flight:
The Foe is merciless, and will not pity;
For at their Hands I have deserved no Mercy.
The Air has got into my deadly Wounds,
And much Effuse of Blood does make me faint.
Come York and Richard, Clarence, and the rest,
I stabbed your Father's Bosons, split my Breast.
[Faints.
Shout.] Enter Edward, Richard, George, Warwick, Soldiers. Edw. Now breathe we,
Lords, good Fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the Frowns of War with peaceful Looks.
Are any Troops gone to pursue the Queen?
On her Fame Henry's Fortune does depend,
As the Seas Ebb and Flow does on the Moon.

War. I have taken Care of that.

Edw. Pray tell me, Lords,
Think you that Clifford fled with the King and Queen?

War. No, it is impossible he should escape;
For though before his Face I speak the Word,
Your Brother Richard marked him for the Grave,
And wheresoe'er he is, he is surely dead.

Cliff. Oh!
[dies.
Edw. Whose Soul is that which takes her deadly Leave?
See who it is -- And now the Battle's ended,
If Friend, or Foe, let him be gently used.

Rich. Revoke that Doom of Mercy -- for it is Clifford,
Who, not contented that he lopped the Branch,
In hewing Rutland, when his Leaves put forth,
But set his murdering Knife unto the Root,
From whence that tender Spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely Father, Duke of York.

Edw. Bring forth that fatal Screch-Owl to our House,
That nothing sung but Death to us and ours;
Now Death shall stop his dismal threatening Sound,
And his ill-boding Tongue no more shall speak.

War. I think his Understanding is bereft.
Say Clifford, Do thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark, cloudy Death, o'ershades his Beams of Life,
And he nor sees, nor hears us, what we say.
Since then he is dead, off with the Traytor's Head,
And rear it in the Place your Father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant March,
There to be crowned England's Royal King.
From hence shall Warwick cut the Sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy Queen;
So shall thou sinew both these Lands together;
And having France thy Friend, thou shall not dread
The scattered Foes that hope to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have 'em buz to offend your Ears.

Edw. Oh! thou have made me much in Love with Bona,
And all Relations have increased my Passion;
I cannot Marry better -- haste away.

War. Then, Royal Sir, I humbly take my Leave.

Edw. Success attend your Embassy, my Lord.
[Exit.
Enter a Gentleman. Gent. A beauteous Lady, attired in Widow's Weeds,
Entreats Admission to your Majesty.

Edw. Admit her instantly.
[Exit Gent.
Enter Lady Gray. She kneels, and delivers a Petition. The King gazes on her.
L. G. Sir, I present you humbly the Petition
Of a poor Widow, and her little Orphans.
I am the Relict of one Sir John Gray,
Who in St. Alban's Battle lost his Life,
In the Defense of him we thought our King.
If my poor Husband's Loyalty did err,
He dearly for that fatal Error paid.
My humble Prayer is, that my poor Orphans
May not be punished for their Father's Faults,
If erring Loyalty can be a Fault.

Edw. I never had Eyes, or my Eyes never saw Beauty
Till this amazing Minute.

Rich. So! he is lost,
And any one may have England now that will.

L. G. May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your Pleasure is shall satisfy me.

Rich. Ay, Widow, then, I Will warrant you, all your Lands,
If that which pleases him shall pleasure you.

Edw. I am so rapp'd, I mind not what she says,
Nor that she is all this while upon her Knees.
Pray, Madam, rise -- leave us.

Rich. Yea, is it so?
I see the Lady has a Thing to grant
Before the King will grant her humble Suit.

Edw. If I forget not, you said you had a Husband
Who in St. Alban's Battle lost his Life.

L. G. Yes, Sir, I had, his Name was Sir John Gray.

Edw. What Excellence had he above Mankind,
That he should be more blessed than all the rest?
How many Children have you, Lady? Tell me.

Geo. I think he means to beg a Child of her.

Rich. Nay, then hang me, he will rather give her two.

L. G. Three, my most gracious Lord.

Rich. You shall have Four if you will be ruled by him.

Edw. Oh wondrous, happy Man, to enjoy this Woman!
I must enquire about her, I was never,
Never so charmed before -- my Lord, come hither,
Pray do you know this Lady?

Lord. Yes, Sir, well,
She is the Widow of the late Sir John Gray,
A Man of noble Blood, and great Estate,
But a most vehement Lancastrian.

Edw. No Matter: Of what Family is she?

Lord. Her Quality does far exceed her Husband's,
And yet her Virtue does exceed her Quality;
She is the Daughter of Sir Richard Woodvil,
Her Mother was sometime Duchess of Bedford,
And Daughter of the Earl of St. Pool.

Edw. Of noble Birth, and by her Mother's Side
Related to the House of Lancaster.

Lord. She is by Marriage, Sir, that was the Cause
That Sir John Gray was such a fierce Lancastrian.

Edw. She has Beauty, Virtue, joined with noble Birth;
Why may not this fair Lady be a Queen?
But she is a Subject, England will not like it;
And the English Nation, like the Sea it governs,
Is bold and turbulent, and easily moved,
And always beats against the Shore that bounds it.
What, are the People free, and not the King?
Not free, where every Slave is free, his Bed;
Ay, so it is it seems, and the English Fury,
Will easily with any Wind be raised,
To dash the Palaces and Peace of Kings.
Come what will come, this Lady shall be mine;
She shall be, or my Mistress, or my Wife.
What was it, Madam, you desired of me?

L. G. To give poor Orphans, Sir, their Father's Lands.

Edw. Heaven forbid I should retain 'em from 'em.

L. G. Then, Sir, with humble Thanks, I take my leave.

Edw. Hold, Madam, for I must have one Word more.
Pray tell me, Madam, Do you love your Children?

L. G. More dearly, Sir, than I do love my self.

Edw. And would you not do much to do them good?

L. G. To do them good I would sustain much harm.

Edw. I must impose a Tax upon this Land.

L. G. It shall be thankfully and gladly paid.

Edw. It will, I Am sure, more gladly be received.
It is an easy Tax, no more but Love.

L. G. No Loyal Subject, Sir, but loves their King.

Edw. But this is Love that none but you can grant.

L. G. I do not understand your Meaning, Sir.

Edw. Truly I scarcely understand my self.
For I have gazed my self out of my Reason.

L. G. With your Permission, Sir, I take my Leave.

Edw. Oh, you shall never, never, part from me!

L. G. Alas! what mean you, Sir.

Edw. I mean all the Love
Ever was, or can be, in the Heart of Man.

L. G. Oh, Royal Sir, I dare not understand you,
Because I dare not think Ill of my Prince.

Edw. Can there be ill in Love? There will be all
The Happiness to me, Glory to you,
Your Heart and mine can possibly desire.
Why do you tremble, and draw back your Hand?
You must not, shall not stir, till you have granted
What all this Languishing and Pressing mean.

L. G. Oh, I shall swoon! Would I had never come here.
Sir, I thus low most humbly beg of you,
Let it suffice your conquering Arms have seized
My Husband's Life, your Laws have seized his Lands,
Seek not to take my Honor, and my Virtue.
I never fought against you, never opposed you.

Edw. Her Looks do argue her repleat with Modesty.
Her Words do show her Sense incomparable.
All her Perfections challenge Sovereignty;
I wrong her therefore, she deserves a Crown,
And each Look claims a Kingdom as its due.
Madam, I mean nothing but Honor to you,
I am resolved to make you Queen of England.

L. G. Now, Sir, you mean Dishonor to your self;
I am as much unworthy to be Queen,
As I Am above serving an ill Design.

Edw. Rather, the Crown's unworthy of your Beauty.

L. G. It is impossible you should descend
To such mean Thoughts.

Edw. It is impossible
I should have Happiness without your Love.
I had rather with your Love be your dead Husband,
Than with your Hatred be a living King.
Therefore consider well what you will do.
Think on the Extravagance of my Passion;
Think how very great or miserable
My Power can make you, and remember too,
You said you were fond of all your Children,
And that to do them Good you could bear Harm.
And now, behold a King, who courts both you
And them to Wealth, Pomp, and Royal Greatness.

L. G. Heaven instruct me what Answer I shall make.
Who knows how far his Passion, backed with Power,
May hurry him to ruin me and mine:
If I should not consent unto his Will,
I, by denial, ruin our whole House.
When I, by yielding, bear the Storm alone,
I rather will consent to sacrifice
My self, than see my poor little Orphans
Reduced to Shame, to Want, and Beggary;
That Thought strikes more Poniards into my Heart,
Than my consenting unto Edward's Love.
Oh, that I only were concerned in this! [aside.
I lately wished I never had come here,
For my own sake, I wish it now for yours.
Oh think, Sir, what will all your Subjects say!

Edw. They Will say I am in Love.

L. G. But will they not
Be much displeased their Prince should love so low.

Edw. I give them leave to choose where they like best,
And shall I be the only Man imposed on.

L. G. But you have sent to Court a foreign Princess,
May bring your Kingdom great Advantages,
Consider how you may enrage Lord Warwick.

Edw. He is my Friend and Subject, not my Master.

L. G. I fear the World will much condemn you, Sir.

Edw. I care not.
I had rather live a Minute in your Arms,
Than many Ages in the Praise of Fools.

Enter Gentleman. Gent. Most happy Tidings, Sir Henry, your Enemy,
Wandering alone disguised in homely Habit,
Was taken by the Keepers of the Forest,
As he was reading in a lonely Covert.

Edw. Good News, indeed! where is he, bring him to me.
Enter King Henry in mean Habit. Why, how now Henry, in this humble Garb?

Hen. Insult not, Edward, over my Misfortunes,
But from this Garb, in which thou scarce can know me,
Learn thou to know thy self, and remember,
Heaven can humble every King like me.

Edw. Henry, I pity thee, thou do not suffer
For thy own Crimes, but those of thy usurping
And traitorous Ancestors -- to London with him,
And keep him a close Prisoner in the Tower;
See that he there command all Things but Liberty.
How all my Happinesses flow together;
My Head incircled with a glorious Crown,
My greatest Enemy within my Power.
Successful Conquest waiting on my Arms,
And what is yet more, possessed of thy bright Charms.
[Exeunt.
Manet Rich. And have I fought only to give you Joys?
What, must not I too have an equal Share?
I have my Passions, Sir, as well as you.
Whence do those Passions spring, from childish Love?
No, from manly Greatness; all other Fondness
I Have banished from this rude tough Breast of mine,
For I Am not made to please a wanton Eye.
Then, what will satisfy my Appetite?
Naught but a Crown, it hangs within my sight,
And I will stretch this blasted Arm of mine
Over all the Heads that are 'twixt me and that
But I will reach it -- my Arm must then be long,
For say that Edward's Title's buried,
Still there remains Clarence and Henry,
And his Son Edward, with their unlooked for Issue,
To take their Rooms, ever I can place my self.
A cold Premeditation for my Purpose.
Why then do I but dream on Sovereignty?
Like one that stands upon a Promontory,
And spies afar off Shore, which he would tread,
Wishing his Foot were equal with his Eye;
And chides the Sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he will lave it dry, to have his Way.
So flatter I my self with Things impossible.
How rarely would the long Regal Robe
Hide my Deformity of Back and Legs?
How would a Scepter grace this shrunk up Arm?
And, Oh! what Beauty is there in a Crown?
And till I gain it I do live in Torment.
Shall I then stand like one lost in a Wood,
And rather bear the pricking of the Thorns,
Than stain my Sword by hewing out my Way?
Why do I not set this Brain of mine to work,
And frame my Countenance to all Occasions?
I Will play the Orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could,
And like a Sinon take another Troy.
I can add Colors to the Camelion,
And, for Advantage, can change Shapes with Proteus.
Have I endured all Hazards of the War,
Only to see this lustful Edward reign?
Have both my Hands, for him, been washed in
Blood --
And shall they not dare do the same for me?
Soft Time, and Cunning, and a daring Mind,
Shall set this wished for Crown upon my Head?
Some Men, perhaps, will say by Villainy,
That Is Villainy, which by its ill Success,
Betrays a Man, and into Ruin throws,
When once it gains a Crown, it Virtue grows.

The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Warwick with a Letter. EDward, it is well, I do deserve this from thee,
For being such an Ass to fight for one
Who melts each Hour away in Luxury,
And gives his Kingdom for a Widow's Toy.
Edward, my Wrongs are great, and thou shall find
I think 'em so.
Did I forget, that by the House of York
My Father came untimely to his Death:
Did I impale thee with the Regal Crown,
And put King Henry from his native Right,
And is it thus thou recompenc'st my Deeds?
My injured Honor rouses up my Rage.
Am I rewarded at the last with Shame?
Then, to repair my Honor lost for thee,
I will renounce thee, and return to Henry.
So, noble Margaret, former Grudges pass,
Henceforth I Will be her faithful Servitor,
And I Will plant Henry in his former State.
When I departed from this treacherous Edward,
Matters of Marriage was the Charge he gave me,
But dreadful War shall answer his Demand.
Had he none else to make a S^^^e but me?
Then none but I shall turn his Jest to Sorrow?
I was the Chief that raised him to this Pomp,
And I Will be Chief to bring him down again.
Both in Pity of Henry's Misery,
And for Revenge of Edward's Mockery.
[Exit.
Enter Edward, and Attendants, meeting a Messenger. Edw. Now Sir, what Letters,
or, what News, from France?

Mess. My Sovereign Liege, no Letters, and few Words,
But such as I (without your special Pardon)
Dare not relate.

Edw. Go too, we pardon thee:
Therefore, in brief, tell their Words,
As near as thou can guess them.
What Answer made King Lewis to our Letters?

Mess. At my Depart these were his very Words;
Go tell false Edward, thy supposed King,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers,
To revel it with him, and his new Bride.

Edw. Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my Marriage?

Mess. These were her Words, uttered with mild Disdain;
Tell him, in hope he will prove a Widower shortly,
I Will wear the Willow Garland for his sake.

Edw. I blame not her, she could say little less;
Here Is was the Wrong. But what said Henry's Queen?
For she, I hear, was present at that Time.

Mess. Tell him (quoth she)
My Mourning Weeds I now shall lay aside,
And I am ready to put Armor on.

Edw. Belike she means to play the Amazon,
Yet how brooks Warwick this our sudden Marriage?

Mess. He, more incensed against your Majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these Words;
Tell him, from me, that he has done me wrong,
And therefore I Will uncrown him ever be long.

Edw. Ha! durst the Traitor utter such proud Words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarned;
They shall have Wars, and pay for their Presumption;
But say, is Warwick Friends with Margaret?

Mess. They are so linked in Friendship, Sovereign,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's Daughter.

Edw. Haste you to Stafford; bid him levy Men,
The Foe already's landed on our Coast,
And therefore let us hence, and lose no Hour,
'Till we meet Rebel Warwick with his Power.
[Exeunt.
Enter King Henry, Prince, Queen, Warwick, and Guards. Queen. Now, Sir, you are
King again, this valiant Lord
Has left the horrid Deserts of Rebellion;
Where he, and all his glorious Deeds were lost,
And found the Road of Honor.

War. I confess
Fortune did mislead me, and I the Kingdom,
To give your Royal Rights to a false Prince,
Who has some Royal Blood, no Royal Virtues,
So has no Right to Crowns those Virtues gained.

K. Hen. I give you Thanks, my Lord, for your great Gifts;
Life, Freedom, and a Crown. I call 'em Gifts,
Cause you can take 'em from me, or let me keep 'em.
To Life and Freedom I have a clear Title,
Because I never did ill to forfeit 'em.
But oh! I am afraid to wear the Crown,
For fear I share the Murder that procured it.

Queen. Oh spiritless Prince! born for a Prison, not a Throne.
What, if your Grandfather murdered his King,
Must you take Physic for his Sicknesses?
Or rather die! for a King's Crown and Life
Go fight together -- so King Richard found it.

Prince. Sir, all our Lives wholly depend on yours,
And for one Fault of your dead Grandfather,
Which he repented, will you punish Thousands?
That he full sore repented Richard's Death,
His Deeds do show, for in goodly Order
He followed the King's Body to the Grave,
And on it he bestowed more contrite Tears,
Than from it issued forced Drops of Blood.
Five Hundred Poor he yearly held in pay,
Who twice a Day their withered Hands held up
Toward Heaven, to pardon the sad bloody Crime.
And more, did he not erect two Chauntries,
Where still the sad and solemn Priests do sing
For Richard's Soul: You Will sin to lose the Crown,
More than our Grandfather did to gain it.

Queen. If you will doom your self to be deposed,
Because the Crown was gotten by ill Means;
By the same Law you may destroy half your Kingdom,
If Men, by inheriting their Fathers Fortunes,
Inherit the Crimes, by which their Fathers gained 'em,
Where is the Nation would not deserve Death?

K. Hen. Full well has Marg'ret played the Orator,
Inferring Arguments of mighty Force:
But, pray now, tell me, did you never hear,
That Things ill got had ever bad Success.
I Will leave my Son my virtuous Deeds behind,
And would my Father had left me no more:
For all the rest is held at such a Rate,
As brings a Thousand Fold more Care to keep,
Than in Possession any Jot of Pleasure.

Prince. Sir, if you be no King, we are all Rebels,
And merit Death.

War. The undeserving Edward's,
Not only doomed by Heaven unfit for Reign,
But by his Flesh and Blood, his Brother Clarence,
Who has revolted from him,
And to create between us
A lasting League, marries my eldest Daughter.

Prince. And I have given my Heart, Sir, to her Sister,
Who has kindly list'ned to my Tale of Love.
Oh, do not make me wretched every Way!

Queen. Ambitious York did level at thy Crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry Brows;
He but a Duke would have his Son a King,
And raise his Issue, like a loving Sire.
Thou being a King, blessed with a goodly Son,
Did yield Consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving Father.
Unreasonable Creatures feed their Young;
And though Man's Face be fearful to their Eyes,
Yet in Protection of their tender Ones,
Who has not seen 'em, even with those Wings
Which sometimes they have used with fearful Flight,
Make War with him that climbed unto their Nest,
Offering their own Lives in their Young's Defense.
For shame then, Henry, make them your President;
Were it not pity that this goodly Boy
Should lose his Birthright by his Father's Fault,
And long hereafter say unto his Child,
What my great Grandfather, and Grandsire, got,
My careless Father fondly gave away?
Ah, what a Shame were this -- Look on the Boy,
And let his manly Face, which promises
Successful Fortune, steel thy melting Heart
To hold thy own, and leave thine own with him.

K. Hen. Oh! Nature conquers me!

Queen. Oh, happy Conquest!

Prince. Upon my Knees, Sir, I return you Thanks.

Enter George. War. See, here he comes, who gallantly to serve
His King and Country, will forsake his Brother.
Welcome, brave Clarence, I hold it Cowardice
To rest mistrustful, where a noble Heart
Has pawned an open Hand in Sign of Love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's Brother,
Were but a feigned Friend to our Proceedings.
But once more welcome, my Daughter shall be thine.

Geo. I thought my Blood derived a Crown to us,
But now I find it derives only Treason;
To clear the Taint, I come to set it boiling
Over a flaming Zeal for the King's Service.

War. What think you now, Sir? Do you judge your Title
Good, when your very Enemies proclaim it.

Hen. I find it is Heaven's Will that I should Reign.
My noble Friends, let me embrace you both.
My Lord of Warwick, you are Fortunate,
I must beg you to Rule, for I Am afraid
My thwarting Stars will blast this blessed Land.

War. Your Majesty is wise to foresee Evils,
And Good, that you would save your People from 'em.
Here stands a Prince most worthy of Command.

Geo. The World has not more Worth than great Lord Warwick.

K. Hen. Give me your Hands, I join you both together,
And make you both Protectors of the Kingdom;
Rule you, while I wait only on Devotion.

Queen. And now my Son, thy Inheritance is safe.

Prince. May I be Happy in my Mistress too.

Queen. Ay, if the King consent.

K. Hen. With all my Heart.

War. Thanks for this Honor, mighty Sovereign.
Who waits? Call in my Daughter, Lady Anne;
The Marriages shall both be suddenly,
For hourly I expect her Sister here.

Enter Lady Anne. L. Anne. Your Blessing, Sir.

War. Welcome, my dearest Daughter.

Henry. Welcome, young Lady unto Henry's Court.

Prince. [Gazing.] At every View my Wounds bleed all afresh.
Ye Powers! how her Charms
Steal through my Eyes, and fix upon my Heart.
Myriads of Cupids play within her Eyes,
A Thousand Graces wait upon her Smiles,
And her whole Form consists of lovely Charms.
Oh! I could gaze for ever on her Beauty.
Yet think it a short Time, and rarely spent.

Queen. Love, my dear Boy, has seized your Heart betimes,

Prince. What Heart so young, that must not feel her Power.
I Have heard you say, Love was a boyish Passion;
Why do you wonder then it strikes my Youth?
I cannot fancy now I am a Boy,
The Sight of her has warmed me into Man.

Queen. Peace, my young Ned, you make the Lady blush.

War. Say, Daughter, if our Will desire a Marriage
'Twixt you and this young Prince, Would you refuse it?

L. Anne. Sir, your Commands have ever been sacred to me,
Then do not think I Will now forget my Duty.
The Prince's Merit, and your precious Will,
Shall plead my Excuse for my so soon complying:
And thereon I give my Hand to the young Prince.

Prince. With ravished Heart, and bended Knee I take it,
The extremest Bliss my Soul could ever desire.
O Mother, do not wonder that my Words
Are full of Rapture, since my Heart is so:
She has Delights to ravish every Sense,
And my whole Soul dissolves away in Love.

K. Hen. Then let us in to celebrate your Nuptials,
And may Heaven prosper this your early Loves.

Prince. Amen, ye Powers.

War. And now what rests, but in Night's Coverture,
Edward being carelessly encamped,
His Soldiers lurking in the Town about,
And but attended by a simple Guard,
We may surprise and take him at our Pleasure.
Our Scouts have found the Adventure very easy;
That as Ulysses, and stout Diomede,
With Slight and Manhood stole to Rhesus' Tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal Steeds.
So we, well covered with the Night's black Mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's Guard,
And seize his Person, but none attempt his Life.
You that will follow me to this Attempt,
Applaud the Name of Henry with your Leader.
[Shout. Why then, let us on our Way in silent Sort,
For Henry and his Friends, Heaven and St. George.
[Exeunt.
Enter Guards. 1. Come on, my Masters, each Man take his Stand,
The King by this is set him down to sleep.

2. What, Will he not to Bed?

1. Why, no -- For he has made a solemn Vow,
Never to lie, and take his natural Rest,
'Till Warwick, or himself, be quite suppressed.

2. But say, I pray, What Nobleman is that,
That with the King here rests in his Tent?

1. It Is the Lord Hastings, the King's chiefest Friend.

2. Oh! is it so! -- but why commands the King,
That his chief Followers lodge in Towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold Field.

1. It Is the more Honor, because the more Danger.

2. Ay, but give me Worship and Quietness,
I like it better than a dangerous Honor.
If Warwick knew in what Estate he stands,
It Is to be doubted he would waken him.

1. Unless our Halbards did shut up his Passage.

2. Ay, Wherefore else guard we this royal Tent,
But to defend his Person from Night Foes.

Enter Warwick, with Soldiers. War. This is his Tent, and see where stands his
Guard.
Courage, my Masters, Honor now or never.
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

1. Who goes there?

2. Stay, or thou dy'st.

Warwick's Soldiers. Warwick, Warwick.
[They fall upon the Guards, and kill them, then rush into the Tent, and bring
out Edward.
Soldiers. What are they that fly there?

War. Richard and Hastings, let them go; here is the Duke.

Edw. Warwick, when we parted, thou call'dst me King.

Warw. When you disgraced me in my Embassade,
Then I degraded you from being King,
And now am come to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any Kingdom,
That cannot use a Nobleman with Honor.
Who cannot be contented with one Wife.
Nor know you how to use your Brother Clarence;
Nor how to study for the People's Welfare;
Nor how to shroud your self from Enemies;
Nor how to set true Value on a Friend.

Edw. Nay, then I see, that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all Mischance,
Edward will always bear himself as King:
Though Fortune's Malice overthrow my State,
My Mind exceeds the Compass of her Wheel.

War. Then for his Mind, be Edward England's King,
But Henry now shall wear the English Crown,
And be true King indeed, thou but a Shadow.
I Will prove upon thee Warwick's Power is great.

Edw. What Fates impose, poor Man must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both Wind and Tide.
[Exeunt.
Enter Lady Gray, meeting a Gentleman. L. G. Now, Sir, tell me, what is the News
with you.

Gent. Pardon me, gracious Queen, the News I bring
Is full of Grief, and royal Edward's Losses.

L. G. What of my Sovereign?

Gent. He Is taken Prisoner.
Either betrayed by Falsehood of his Guard,
Or by his Foes surpised at unawares.
And as I further have to understand,
Is now committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's Brother, and by that our Foe.

L. G. Alas! this News is full of Grief indeed.

Gent. Yet, gracious Madam, bear it like your self.
Warwick may lose, that now has won the Day.

L. G. Till then fair Hope must hinder Life's Decay.
And I the rather wean me from Despair,
For Love of Edward's Offspring in my Womb.
It Is this that makes me bridle in my Passion,
And bear with Mildness my Misfortune cross.
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a Tear,
And stop the rising of Blood-sucking Sighs:
Left with my Sighs or Tears, I blast or drown
King Edward's Fruit, true Heir to the English Crown.
Pray tell me, Where is Warwick then become?

Gent. I am informed that he is gone toward London,
To guard King Henry, who is reinstall'd.

L. G. I guess the rest, King Edward's Friends must down.
But to prevent the Tyrant's Violence,
For trust not him who once has broken Faith,;
I Will hence forthwith unto the Sanctuary,
To save, at least, the Heir of Edward's Right.
There shall I rest secure from Force and Fraud,
And all the Malice of imperious Warwick.
Come therefore let us fly, while we may fly,
If Warwick take us, we are sure to dye.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter King Henry, Prince Edward, Warwick, George, Queen, Lady Elizabeth, Lady
Anne, and Attendants. War. GRacious Henry, lend Ear unto my Speech,
Since Heaven approves your Reign in our Success,
I think, my Liege, that it is more than needful,
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a Traitor,
And all his Lands and Goods confiscated.
And with your royal Leave, I speak it, Henry,
That Clarence well deserves those forfeit Lands.

K. Hen. I think
There Is not a Thing I would deny Warwick,
Though Clarence's Merit did not prompt me to it.

War. Geo. Accept our hearty Thanks, my royal Liege.

Geo. And noble Warwick too accept my Thanks,
For the great Blessings you have given me.

Prince. And take my Thanks, who wish I had more,
To give brave Warwick for my beauteous Bride.

War. I wish her Merit were equal to your Love.

Prince. She deserves more than I can ever pay.

Queen. Heaven grant your Loves may ever prove successful.

Enter a Messenger. War. What News, my Friend?

Mess. Edward is escaped from your Brother.
And fled (as he hears since) to Burgundy.

War. Unsavory News! but how made he his Escape?

Mess. He was conveyed by Richard Duke of Gloucester,
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret Ambush on the Forest Side,
And from the Bishop's Huntsmen rescued him:
For hunting was his daily Exercise.

War. My Brother was too careless of his Charge.
But let us hasten in, and call a Council,
And so determine quickly what is to do.
[Exeunt.
Geo. So please you, Sir, I Will follow presently.
Now I Am secure of Warwick's beauteous Daughter,
Why let the Devil take him with his Treason.
Perhaps he will object my sacred Oath:
To keep that Oath were more Impiety,
Than Jephthab's when he sacrificed his Daughter.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, fare thee well.
Be it your Care, Sir, on the first Opportunity,
To seize my lovely Bride, and follow me;
For I in private (lest I should meet Prevention)
Will hasten hence, to join my Brother Edward.
And in each Town, as I do pass along,
I Will see and muster Soldiers for his Service.

Gent. Sir, I with Care will your Commands obey,
And if I fail, then take my forfeit Life.

Geo. If you succeed, doubt not of great Reward.
[Exeunt.
Enter Edward, Richard, Gentlemen, and Attendants. Edw. Now, Brother Richard,
and my noble Followers,
Yet thus far Fortune makes us Amends,
And says, That once more I shall interchange
My wained State, for Henry's regal Crown.
Well have we passed, and now repassed the Seas,
And brought desired Help from Burgundy.
Now say, How fares my faithful Brother?

Rich. Why much the better for that faithful Title,
And if I Richard ever prove untrue,
May Heaven's Vengnance follow me to my Grave.

Edw. Thanks, my dear Brother; and Thanks to all my Friends,
If Fortune serve me, I Will require this Kindness.
Now for this Night our T^^^ shall here be pitched,
And when the Morning Sun shall raise his Carr
Above the Border of this Horizon,
We'll forward toward Warwick and his Mates:
For well I wot, that Henry is no Soldier.
Ah! froward (...), how ill does it become thee,
To flatter Henry, and forsake thy Brother?
Yet as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave Soldiers, doubt not of the Day.
And that once gotten, doubt not of large Pay.
[Exeunt.
Enter Henry, Queen, Warwick, Lady Anne, and Attendants. War. What Counsel,
Lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans, and blunt Hollanders,
Has passed in Safety through the narrow Seas,
And with his Troops does march (...) to London,
And many giddy People stock to him.

K. Hen. Let Us muster Men, and beat him back again.

War. My Liege speaks well -- I will about it strait:
A little Fire is quickly trodden out,
Which being suffered, Rivers cannot quench.
I wonder what is now become of Clarence,
His Aid would be most needful at this Time.

K. Hen. No doubt he is gone to do us special Service,
For he most solemnly has sworn me Friendship.

Queen. Pray Heaven his Actions shall declare him so.
Enter Prince. Whence come you, my Ned?

Prince. I have been viewing
Our well-disposed Troops, their cheerful Looks;
Promise no less than glorious Victory.
Their Arms all shining bright appear a Sun;
Their piercing Eyes, that sparkle through their Helmets,
With a quick Motion spread a Fire around 'em,
And show like Stars twinkling in the Firmament.
The Plumes and Colors waving over their Heads,
Do fan the Fire that has possessed their Hearts.
Each prancing Horse neighs Courage to his Rider,
And with their horned Hoofs they paw the Ground,
As they would dig Graves for all our Enemies.
I am transported with the gallant Sight,
And my Breast burns, I so much long for War.

War. Then your Desires shall be satisfied,
For we will march to meet Edward this instant.
But hear you ought of Clarence, noble Prince?

Prince. 'Twas Part of what I would have told to you,
Had not your Words so soon cut off my Tale.
Clarence is fled to his Brother -- he left Orders
With one (whom Threats and Gold has caused discover it)
To bring your Daughter Lady Elizabeth after.

War. I will not waste the Time in idle Words,
But speedy Action shall declare my Rage.
Soon as I have given some Orders to my Daughter,
I Will mount my Horse, and with what Speed I may,
I Will hasten to chastise this perjured Clarence.
My Sovereign with the loving Citizens,
Like to his Island, girt with the Ocean,
Shall rest in London, 'till we return.

K. Hen. Farewell my Hector, and my Troy's true Hope,
Well-minded Warwick, be thou fortunate.

War. In Sign of Truth, I kiss your Highness' Hand,
Comfort, my Lord, and so I take my Leave.

K. Hen. What, my young Edward, Will thou to these Wars?

Prince. Why, who is he, whose Chin is but enriched
With one appearing Hair, that will not follow
These choice and gallant Cavaliers to War.

K. Hen. Why then I Will in, to pray for thy Success,
My Prayers, and Blessing, ever shall attend thee:
Yet much I fear we never shall meet again.

Queen. Fear as you will, he shall unto the Field.
Be speedy, Boy, for I Am resolved to see thee,
Sure of a Crown, or dying at my Feet.

Prince. My Heart has here a little Leave to take,
And then I follow.
[Exeunt. Manent Prince and Anne. Oh, my beauteous Anne!
The Battle bids me leave thee for a while,
But flushed with Conquest soon I will return,
And lay my dear bought Laurels at thy Feet.
By Heaven, I think I could persuade my Father
To resign his Crown for ever to proud York,
So I might rest within thy lovely Fold,
Secure of Peace, and undisturbed by War.
But that the Thoughts of making thee a Queen,
Awakes my Soul, and summons it to Arms:
Yet if I fall, which gracious Heaven forbid,
For now, methinks, I am even fond of Life,
(Having tasted of the Bliss of thy sweet Love)
Though I before thought of it as a Trifle.
The Loss of Life seems but of little Moment
When I reflect upon the Loss of thee.
And when the horrid Thought comes in my Mind,
I leave behind my Soul's dearest Treasure
For other happy Men, perhaps, to enjoy.
Then Sweet, I beg of thee this once to swear,
Thou never wilt have thought of other Man.

L. A. Why, my dear Lord, do you then doubt my Truth?

Prince. Oh no, by Heaven -- but I would have my Ear
Blessed with the Music of thy melting Voice,
In Words of Comfort, ever I do depart,
That if the Almighty Power's gracious Will
Is so determined, I must fall in Battle,
I may have Hopes our spotless Souls, through Love
And Constancy, may meet in Heaven hereafter,
And spite of War we may again be Happy.

L. A. Then hear me, gracious Heaven, and assist me,
To keep the Vow I solemnly do make.
If it seems sitting in the Eye of Heaven,
My precious Edward in this War should fall,
May Heaven forsake me at my latest Hour,
If I ever taste of Joy, or Comfort more.
And if my Heart should ever swerve from Truth,
May all the bitter Pangs of a racked Conscience
Pursue me here, and in the World to come:
And oh! ye mighty Guardians of the Just,
Protect his Youth in- the deadly brunt of War,
And send my Yew home adorned in Triumph.
Edward, my Love, be careful of thy Life,
For if thou dy'st, thy loving Anne falls with thee.

Prince. This is too much for Mortal to support,
How shall I bear this vast Excess of Bliss?
Surely I cannot have long time to live,
My Joys flow in so fast this present Hour.
But let Fate do its worst, this pays for all.
Oh, my Heart's Joy, if Edward ever prove false,
May Heaven inflict its deadliest Vengeance on me.
Hark, my Love,
[Trumpets sound. The cheerful Trumpet calls me to the Field,
My Heart even dances to its spritely Notes;
This one Embrace, and then farewell my Anne.
Adieu thou dearest, thou excelling Creature,
Now I am certain Fate it self cannot part us.
Let Death stand in its worst Form arrayed,
I will not entertain a Thought of Fear,
But warmed by thee, my Life, bravely I Will on,
To assert my lawful Title to the Crown.
By this Day's Feats in Battle I will prove,
What Youth dare do for Empire, and for Love.
[Exit.
Enter Lady Elizabeth. L. E. Oh Anne! now show thy self a loving Sister,
And send Elizabeth Supply of Tears,
For mine will never suffice for my great Sorrow.

L. A. Alas, from whence proceeds this sudden Grief!

L. E. Is not our Father Warwick gone to fight
Against King Edward, and my Husband Clarence,
And can thou ask the Occasion of these Tears;
Let who will conquer, still thy Sister mourns,
Or for her murdered Father, or her Husband.

L. A. Why, let his Treason wipe away his Love.

L. E. Oh, he is too deeply rooted in my Heart!
Be witness Heaven, I had never loved him,
Had not my noble Father first commanded.
I plainly saw, when he did leave King Edward,
It was his Love for me did prompt him on.
Why have I not the Power to keep him here?
Oh, now he has got Possession of my Person,
He, like a Tyrant, gives his Will free way!
My Father does command that I should hate him,
I, out of Duty to my worthy Father,
Would hate him much, but that my Heart pleads hard,
And will not turn him forth from out my Bosom.

L. A. Why then, indulge thy Sorrows, dear Eliza,
For I will be thy very faithful Friend,
And send forth Sigh for Sigh, and Tear for Tear.
Thy State, indeed, deserves extremest Pity,
Since thy great Sorrow is past hope of Cure,
Unless the Saints, in pity to thy Woes,
Should send some Miracle to end thy Grief.

L. E. The only Way to prove thy self my Friend,
Is to contrive how to increase my Sorrow;
For when I find that it is in Human Nature
To suffer more, it may avail a little
To stop the Torrent of my flowing Tears,
But I am sure that is impossible.
Whenever I strive to press a rising Sigh,
My Heart even bursts to give it a free Passage.

L. A. Let them have Scope, though what they do import
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the Heart.
[Exit.
Enter Queen, Prince, Warwick, and Soldiers. Queen. Thus far with Speed, and
easy March, we are come,
Now let us doff our silken Robes of Peace,
And arm our Minds and Bodies for fell War;
Stiffen the Sinews, summon up the Blood,
Disguise fair Nature with hard favored Rage,
And lend the Eye a terrible Aspect;
Now set the Teeth, and stretch the Nostril wide;
Hold hard the Breath, and rouse up every Spirit
To its full Height. On, on, you noblest English,
Whose Blood is fetched from Fathers of War Proof,
Fathers, that like so many Alexanders,
Have in these Parts from Morn till Evening fought,
And sheathed their Swords for lack of Argument.
Dishonor not your Mothers; now arrest,
That those whom you called Fathers did beget you.
Be Copy now, to Men of grosser Blood,
And teach 'em how to War. And you, good Yeomen,
Whose Limbs were made in England, show us now
The Mettle of your Pasture. Let us swear
That you are worth your Breeding, which I doubt not,
For there is none of you so Mean and Base,
That has not noble Luster in your Eyes.
I see you stand like Greyhounds in the Slips,
Straining upon the Start, the Games of Foot,
Follow your Spirit, and upon 'em Charge.
Oh, were I but a Man, that I by Deeds
Might stir your Hearts more than my poor Words can!

Prince. Methinks a Woman of this valiant Spirit,
Should, if a Coward heard her speak these Words,
Infuse his Breast with Magnanimity,
And make him, naked, foil a Man at Arms.
I speak not this as Doubting any here,
For did I but suspect a fearful Man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our Need he might infect another,
And make him of base Spirit, like himself.
If any such be here, which Heaven forbid,
Let him depart before we need his Help.

War. Women and Children of so high a Courage,
And Warriors faint, why, 'twere perpetual Shame.
Oh brave young Prince -- thy famous Grandfather
Does live again in thee: Long may thou live
To bear his Image, and renew his Glories.
And he that will not fight for such a Hope,
Go home to Bed, and like the Owl by Day,
If he arise, be mocked, and wondered at.

Queen. Thanks noble General, brave Warwick Thanks.

Prince. And take his Thanks, that yet has nothing else.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Prepare you Chiefs, for Edward is at Hand,
Ready to fight, therefore be resolute.

War. I thought no less; it is his Policy,
To haste thus fast to find us unprovided,
But he is deceived, we are in Readiness.

Queen. This cheers my Heart to see your Forwardness.

Mess. I am sorry, but I have more News to tell,
Royal Henry, by a Party of Duke Edward's,
In London was surpised, and now is kept
Close Prisoner in the Tower.

Queen. Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, what I should say
My Tears gainsay, for every Word I speak
Ye see I drink the Water of my Eye.
Therefore no more but this -- Henry, your Sovereign,
Is Prisoner to the Foe, his State usurped,
His Realm a Slaughterhouse, his Subjects slain,
His Statutes cancelled, and his Treasure spent,
And yonder is the Wolf that makes this Spoil.
You fight in Justice; then in Heaven's Name, Lords,
Be valiant, and give signal to the Fight.

War. Follow me all, for I will lead you on
To glorious Deeds of War in Justice's Cause.
[Exeunt, Alarm, etc.
Re-enter Warwick and Prince Edward. War. Oh young Prince Edward, I had
pleasing Hope
To tutor thee in Stratagems of War;
But now you are come unto a Feast of Death,
A terrible and unavoided Danger!
Therefore, dear Prince, mount on thy swiftest Horse,
And I Will direct thee how thou may escape,
For I have snatched thee from the Jaws of Death.

Prince. The Swords of Rebels have not made me smart;
These Words of yours draw Lifeblood from my Heart.
Before young Edward (of great Henry's Race,
Who conquered France, and made her Chiefs to tremble)
Relinquish Warwick in the Heat of War,
I Will slay each Horse I have within the Field,
Then, worthy Chief, lose not a Thought on me,
But to thy Sword-hack'd Soldiers strait return,
And with thy wondrous Deeds (too great for Words)
Animate thy Troops. I pray you, haste away,
Thy Presence only makes 'em win the Day.

War. Consult thy Safety, Prince, and leave the Field.
[Exit.
Prince. I shall consult my honorable Fame.
Fell Havoc now rages through all the Hosts;
The nodding Plumes that graced our Soldiers Helms,
Are shivered all; and all besmeared with Blood:
Their Arms and Armor hacked with lusty Blows,
And the whole Fight displays a general Terror.
The Sight is dreadful! but it is glorious too!
Shall I now basely shrink? No, Heaven forbid.
Love draws my Sword, Revenge shall steel its Point;
A Crown and Royalty shall man my Breast.
I Am resolute to die, or to return
A Conqueror worthy of my Anna's Bed:
And when succeeding Ages read my Deeds,
They shall not say they shamed our British Annals.
Ha! Richard here! Nay, then rouse up my Soul.

Enter Richard opposite to the Prince. Rich. Hence Stripling, for I am loath to
slain my Sword
Dishonourably in the Blood of Boys.
Though cursed Clifford could dip both his Hands
In the more precious Heart's Blood of young Rutland,
I Am above those poor Deeds -- yet now I think
It were great Folly should I let thee go:
Since if thy usurping Father's Friends should conquer,
Thou art his Heir -- though I will not kill thee,
But whip thee, thou rash Boy, into Submission.

Prince. These Words provoke me -- no Richard, though I Am a Youth,
The Blood of English Kings runs in these Veins,
And I am a Stranger to all Sorts of Fear.
Ever I will yield I Will split my Breast with Courage,
And I Will strain hard each Sinew and each Nerve,
That I may be an equal Match to meet
This mighty Bugbear Richard, so come on.

Rich. Now, by my Life, brave Youth, you are worth my Sword,
And since thou art so fond of Death, receive it.
[They approach to fight. Enter a Party on both Sides. Richard's beats off the
others.
Enter Edward and Warwick, fighting. He falls. Edw. So, lie thou there -- die
thou, and die our Fear;
Now I am King of England, and I owe
My Crown to my own Sword, and not to thine.
Now Montague, fit fast, I seek for thee,
That Warwick's Bones may keep thine Company.
[Exit.
War. Ah, who is nigh -- come to me Friend or Foe
And tell me who is Victor, York or Warwick.
Why ask I that? my mangled Body shows
My Blood, my want of Strength, and my sick Heart,
That I must yield my Body to the Earth,
And by my Fall, the Conquest to my Foe.
Thus yields the Cedar to the Axe's Edge,
Whose Arms gave Shelter to the princely Eagle;
Under whose Shade the ramping Lion slept,
Whose top Branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading Tree,
And kept low Shrubs from Winter's powerful Wind.
These Eyes, that now are dimmed with Death's black Veil,
Have been as piercing as the Midday Sun,
To search the secret Treasons of the World.
The Wrinkles of my Brows now filled with Blood,
Were lik'ned often to kingly Sepulchers,
For who lived King, but I could dig his Grave;
And who durst smile, when Warwick bent his Brow?
Lo, now my Glory smeared in Dust and Blood!
My Parks, my Walks, my Manors, that I had,
Even now forsake me, and of all my Lands,
Is nothing left me but my Body's length.
Why, what is Pomp, Rule, Reign, but Earth and Dast,
And live we how we can, yet die we must.
[Dies.
Enter Edward, George, Richard, and Soldiers. Edw. Thus far our Fortune keeps
an upward Course,
And we are graced with Wreaths of Victory.

Geo. Now, Sir, I hope you will forgive my Errors,
For you your self have felt the Power of Love.

Edw. Brother, your Errors are all buried under
Heaps of my Enemies you have killed to Day.
I have dispatched my greatest Enemy.
Warwick will make and unmake no more Kings.

Rich. And the bold Amazon Queen, and insolent Boy,
Her fierce Son Edward, are both taken Prisoners.
I Have ordered, Sir, they shall attend you here;
And now behold where youthful Edward comes.

Enter Queen and Prince, Prisoners. Edw. Bring forth the Gallant, let us hear
him speak.
What, can so young a Thorn begin to prick?

Edward, What Satisfaction can thou make,
For bearing Arms, for stirring up my Subjects,
And all the Trouble thou have given me?

Prince. Speak like a Subject, proud, ambitious York;
Suppose that I am now my Father's Mouth;
Resign thy Place, and where I stand, kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the self same Words to thee,
Which, Traitor, thou would have me answer to.

Queen. Oh that thy Father had been so resolved!

Rich. That so your Distaff might have been our Scepter.

Prince. Let Aesop fable in a Winter's Night,
His currish Riddles forth, not at this Time.

Rich. By Heaven, Brat, I Will plague you for that Word.

Queen. Ay, thou were born to be the Plague of Men.

Rich. Why take you not away this Captive Scold?

Prince. Nay, take away this scolding Crook-back rather.

Edw. Peace, wilful Boy, or I will charm thy Tongue.

Prince. I know my Duty -- you are all undutiful.
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dick, I tell ye all,
I am your Betters, Traitors as you are,
And thou usurp'st my Father's Right and mine.

Edw. Untutored Lad, thou art too malapert
[Edw. strikes him.
Rich. Take that, thou Likeness of this Railer here.
They stab him.
Geo. And there is for twitting me with Perjury.
They stab him.
Queen. Oh, kill me too!

Rich. Marry, with all my Heart.

Edw. Hold Richard, we have done too much already.

Rich. Why should she live to fill the World with Strife?

Edw. Behold she swoons, use Means for her Recovery.

Rich. Clarence, excuse me to the King my Brother,
I Will hence to London on a serious Matter.
Ever you come there, be sure to hear some News.

Geo. Why, whither go you?

Rich. To the Tower, the Tower.
[Exit.
Queen. Oh Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy Mother, Boy:
Can thou not speak? -- O Traitors! Murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar, shed no Blood at all;
Did not offend, nor were not worthy Blame.
If this foul Deed were by, to equal it:
He was a Man, this in respect a Child,
And Men never spend their Fury on a Child.
What Is worse than Murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my Heart will burst, and if I speak,
And I will speak, that so my Heart may burst.
Oh cruel Villains! bloody Cannibals!
How sweet a Plant have you untimely cropp'd?
You have no Children, Butchers, if you had,
The Thought of them would have stirred up Remorse;
But if you ever chance to have a Child,
Look in his Youth to have him so cut off.
As Death's Men you have rid this sweet young Prince.

Edw. Away with her. Go, bear her hence by force.

Queen. Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheath thy Sword, I Will pardon thee my Death.
What, will thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.

Geo. By Heaven I will not give thee so much Ease.

Queen. Good Clarence do, sweet Clarence do thou do it.

Geo. Did thou not hear me swear I would not do it.

Queen. Ay, but thou usest to forswear thy self.
'Twas Sin before, but now it is Charity.
What, will thou not; where is that Butcher Richard?
He is not here, or he would grant my Suit,
And set me free from hated Light at once.

Edw. Away, I say, I charge you bear her hence.

Queen. So come to you and yours as to this Prince.
[Exit.
Edw. Where Is Richard gone.

Geo. To London in great haste, and, as I guess,
To make a bloody Supper in the Tower.

Edw. He Is sudden if a Thing comes in his Head.
Now march we hence -- discharge the common sort
With Pay and Thanks, and let us away to London,
And see how well our gentle Queen does fare:
By this I hope she has a Son for me.
Now here is a Period of tumultuous Broils.
Once more we fit on England's Royal Throne,
Re-purchas'd with the Blood of Enemies.
What valiant Foe-Men, like to Autumn's Corn,
Have we mowed down in top of all her Pride.
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renowned
For hardy and undoubted Champions.
Two Cliffords, as the Father and the Son.
And two Northumberlands; two braver Men,
Never spurred their Coursers at the Trumpet's Sound.
With them the two brave Bears, Warwick and Mountague,
That in their Chains fettered the kingly Lion,
And made the Forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept Suspicion from our Seat,
And made our Footstool of Security.

Geo. What will your Grace have done with Margaret?

Edw. Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And then what rests, but that we spend the Time
With stately Triumphs, mirthful Comic Shows,
Such as befit the Pleasure of the Court,
So to divert our Subjects busy Minds,
From doing farther Mischief against the State.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, farewell all Annoy,
For here, I hope, begins our lasting Joy.
And may this Land, learn from our Houses Jars,
Ever to dread the Event of Civil Wars.

END.
BOOKS lately printed, for J. WALTHOE, jun. W. CHETWOOD, and J. STAGG.
I. THE Adventures of TELEMACHUS, the Son of Ulysses. Written in French by the
Archbishop of CAMBRAY, and translated into English by Mr. LITTLEBURY. The
Eleventh Edition. Adorned with 25 Copper Plates; and the Author's Effigies,
curiously engraved by Mr. Virtue. To which is likewise added, An Alphabetical
INDEX to each Volume. II. Dialogues concerning ELOQUENCE. By the late
Archbishop of CAMBRAY. With his Letter to the French Academy, concerning
Rhetoric, Poetry, History; and a Comparison betwixt the Ancients and Moderns.

Translated from the French, and illustrated with Notes and Quotations, by
WILLIAM STEVENSON, M. A. Rector of Morningthorp, in Norfolk.

III. FEMALE FALSEHOOD: Or, The Life and Adventures of a late French Nobleman.
Written by himself, after his Retirement, and digested by Mons. de St.
EVREMOND. " The Instructions in this Book regard not solely the Commerce with
Women, but will be found to extend to every Thing that has relation to the
Conduct and Business of a Man who converses with the World." The THIRD EDITION,
revised, corrected, and handsomely. Printed in two Pocket Volumes.

IV. T. LUCRETIUS CARUS, of the Nature of Things. Done into English Verse, by
THOMAS CREECH, M. A. Two Vols. 8 vo. -- Here LUCRETIUS whole we find,
His Words, his Music, and his Mind;
Thy Art has to our Country brought
All that he writ, and all he thought.
N. B. There are some few printed on large Paper.

V. The Laws of Poetry; being a Critical Commentary on the Duke of BUCKINGHAM'S
Essay on Poetry; and the Earl of ROSCOMON'S Essay on translated Verse; with
Notes upon the Lord LANSDOWNE'S Poem on Unnatural Flights in Poetry. Written by
his Lordship. The Commentary written by Mr. CHARLES GILDON, and revised by his
Grace the late Duke of BUCKINGHAM. Roscomon first, then Mulgrave rose like
Light,
To clear our Darkness, and to guide our Flight;
With steady Judgment, and in lofty Sounds,
They gave us Patterns, and they set us Bounds:
Who seek from Poetry a lasting Name,
May in their Lessons learn the Road to Fame.
Lord LANSDOWNE. VI. The Fortunes, and Misfortunes, of the Famous Moll
Flanders, who was born in Newgate, and during a Life of continual Variety for
Threescore Years (besides her Childhood) was twelve Years a Whore, five Times a
Wife (whereof once to her own Brother) twelve Years a Thief, eight Years a
transported Felon in Virginia; at last grew Rich, lived Honest, and died a
Penitent. Written from her own Memorandums. Price 5 s. VII. An impartial
History of the LIFE and ACTIONS of Peter Alexowitz, the present CZAR of
Muscovy, from his Birth, down to this present Time. Giving an Account of his
Travels, and Transactions, in the several Courts of Europe. With his Attempts
and Successes, in the Northern and Eastern Parts of the World. In which is
intermixed, The History of Muscovy. Price 5 s. VIII. The Travels and Adventures
of the Three Princes of Sarendip, interspersed with Novels. Illustrated with
Eight Copper Plates.

