AN HEROIC ANSWER, FROM RICHARD TWISS, Esquire F.R.S.

AN HEROIC ANSWER, FROM RICHARD TWISS, Esquire F.R.S. AT ROTTERDAM, TO DONNA TERESA
PINNA Y RUIZ, OF MURCIA.

Urbem, quam dicunt Romam, Meliboee, putavi
Stultus ego huic nostrae similem.
VIRGIL. DUBLIN: Printed for W. WILSON, No. 6, at Homer's-head, in Dame-street.
M, DCC, LXXVI.

AN HEROIC ANSWER, FROM RICHARD TWISS, Esquire F.R.S.
FROM various perils of the land and main,
By Venus wafted to Batavia's plain,
Where kindly ^ens, and genial fogs surround,
His Pinna's lines her anxious lover found.
Not dearer tumults to my kindling heart
A fungus, toad, or tadpole could impart:
Not with more joy some virtuoso spies
The first embraces of two foreign ^lies,
Whose deeds of love his eager fancy feed
With smiling omens of a lasting breed.
Scarce to thy Twiss more transport could it give
To lodge in cellars, or with pigs to live.
Thy melting strains both pain and pleasure move,
Pain for thine absence, pleasure for thy love.
I traced thy hand even at a single view,
Thy soul still better in the purport knew.
Thy gentle lines I drank with eager haste,
My lips pursued thee where thy fingers past;
My tears bedewed the lines my kisses dried --
I sung -- I danced -- I fiddle'd -- and I sighed --
Gods! can it be? -- too full, too perfect bliss!
Does then my Pinna still remember Twiss?
Is Richard's image to her fancy dear?
And Richard's name still soothing to her ear?
Now, spend your malice, cursed Hibernian kind!
For Richard lives within Teresa's mind.
Rail, write, and rage; I prize the sordid cry
Less than the hummings of the smallest fly. L. 25. Hibernian kind.] As to the
natural history of the Irish species, etc.

Twiss's Tour in Ireland, Dub. Edit. p. 24.



Yet let me own, appalled I trod the ground,
Where dangers lour'd, and shames lay scattered round.
A thousand tongues from stage to stage pursued,
And fresh disgrace the unwearied gibe renewed:
Thus down the chimney some poor sparrow strays,
And roams the parlour with a wild amaze;
Dogs, cats, and children, a malignant crew,
The hapless stranger round the room pursue.
Some demon sure attends the youth, who roves
To bogs and horse-ponds from the maid he loves.
Oh! I have much to tell, and thou to hear;
A tale of sorrows, that will rend thine ear.
Thy gentle spirit feels no vengeful flame;
Thou little know the cursed Hibernian dame;
What thirst of vengeance fires an Irish maid,
What ready arts that thirst of vengeance aid.
Heaven arms its creatures for their proper state
With various weapons of defense, or hate.
To serpents, teeth; to scorpions gave a tail;
To me, my printer, and my leaden flail;
Hibernian dames are trained to cuff and kick,
And nature armed them, -- for their legs are thick.
The thirst of vengeance every breast inspires,
And bowls of whiskey feed their cruel fires.
Lyaeus thus the Theban dames possessed,
And goads and stings inflamed the madding breast.
"Revenge! Revenge!" the dire Agave cried --
"Revenge! Revenge!" the vocal hills replied.
Citheron's summits heard the frantic shout,
And Pentheus trembled at the revel rout.
He scoured, he fled before the inhuman train,
In vain -- his limbs bestrew'd the impurpled plain. L. 55. And nature armed
them, for their legs are thick.] As to the natural history of the Irish
species, they are only remarkable for the thickness of their legs, especially
those of the plebeian females.

T. T. I. p. 42.



From forging franks, each pert Hibernian Miss
Converts the quill, and has her fling at Twiss.
The desperate inkhorn arms uncounted throngs
With puns and posies, anecdote and songs.
Revenge inspires them in Apollo's spite;
A Twiss provokes; and well, or ill, they write.
How shall the muse to thee, my fair! explain
The studied vengeance of the savage train?
What terms of art the secret shall declare!
Inform thy mind, and yet thy blushes spare!
Have thou not seen a vase of antique mold,
Of Parian marble, or Barbaric gold,
Doomed to enshrine some lovers cold remains,
Or pour libations at some mystic fanes?
Such are those utensils, ordained by fate,
The shameful engines of barbarian hate,
(Save that one handle, more for use than pride,
Shoots disproportioned from the vessel's side) L. 61. From forging franks,
etc.] The third custom is that of forging franks, which is pretty universal;
the ladies in particular use this privilege.

T. T. I. p. 41.



For offerings hallowed, which my charmer made
With purer zeal amid the citron shade;
They grace the closet, by the couch they stand,
And, night and morning, load the fairest hand.
Without, a foliage crowns the polished frames,
And burnished gold on flowers of purple flames;
Within, the potter plants thy Richard's face,
And bids him stare, in horrible grimace.
Through lakes of amber as the face appears,
The face repentant seems bedewed with tears.
The listening figure (by the painter's skill)
Attunes its fiddle to the purling rill.
Sure had I trod the dire Conatian wild,
The blood of Twiss had savage hands defiled: L. 91. Sure had I trod the dire
Conatian wild.] Neither did I go into that quarter of Ireland called Connaught,
which comprehends the counties of Mayo, Sligo, Leitrim, Roscommon, and Galway,
as I was assured that they were inhabited (especially along the coast) by a
kind of savages, and that there were neither roads for carriages, nor inns.
Undoubtedly the chief towns of those counties are more civilized.

T. T. I. p. 163.



But heaven in vision touched my trembling car,
Some God inspired me with a prudent fear.
A form, methought, half beast, half human, stood,
And cried, "My son, I warn thee for thy good."
(A mighty stink-pot in his hand appeared,
And ass's ears were on his temples reared)
"Once, like thyself, I traveled, lied, and wrote,
"An author then, though now a mountain goat.
"But soon, the victim of ill-manners, fell;
"A youth of Galway hurled me down to hell:
"Changed to a goat, to travel mountains sent,
"What was my pastime, is my punishment.
"If life is sweet, the wilds of Connaught spare;
"Beware of all; of Galway most beware.
"Yet thirst of railing, greater than thy fear,
"Will speak, though vengeance threats the votive ear;
"Untir'd, intrepid, as the taylor's wife,
"Will deal invectives, though they cost thy life.
"The furious tailor plunged her in the tide,
"Her fingers railed, when accents were denied,
"In death unconquered, showed the darling vice,
"And seemed to crack imaginary lice."
Not vainly was the warning fantom sent;
My backward course with timely fear I bent.
Yet still in dreams the ideal terrors rise,
Stain all my clothes, and seal my blackened eyes;
And oaken cudgels whistle in the wind,
And sharp-toed shoes assail me from behind.
Now Pinna seems to clasp me to her breast,
Now pats my cheeks, and whispers me to rest,
With sticking plaster heals her Richard's scars,
Disgraceful tokens of unequal wars,
Or seems the lenient flannel to prepare,
For love disdains not such a menial care,
Foments my head, still soft from weary blows,
And regions livid from eternal toes.
But say, what springs this persecution move?
The hate of woman, for neglected love.
Here droning pipes the tortured organs wound,
And yells funereal through the vales resound,
No lemon groves with harp and viol ring,
No maids and striplings tonadillas sing;
Their voice, their touch disgrace the soft guitar,
My catches mangle, my cantatas mar.
Let not thy bosom harbor jealous flames;
My steady scorn repulsed the Iernian dames.
My love of thee, the love of music aids;
I spurn the addresses of untuneful maids.
A thousand sonnets spoke the tender fear;
But, out of tune, no sonnet reached my ear.
Me more it charmed with beggar-wench to stray,
In wanton dalliance, all a summer's day,
Through darksome lanes, that vie with Tempe's vales,
Where frequent dram-shop balmy cloud exhales,
And steaming whiskey trulls and butcher's boys regales;
Whiskey, that mantles in the sparkling glass,
And, blessed Nepenthe, chears the northern lass.
I tuned my fiddle with Amphion's arts,
To melt and harmonize barbarian hearts.
I would have taught the savage maids to move
In graceful dance, that paints the joys of love;
I would have taught them the guitar to string,
To troll the tonadil, the catch to sing;
But screams of discord all my senses wound,
And, rule disdaining, sharps and flats confound.
This guilty cause inflamed the wives of Thrace
Against thee, musician of celestial race!
To teach them catches hapless Orpheus strove;
They scorned his fiddle, but they sought his love.
A song he gave them, but a kiss denied;
So bard and fiddle down the Hebrus glide.
Each moment bade some indecorum rise,
Some beastly custom shocked my tortured eyes.
Heavens! how I tremble, chilled with panic fear,
When water-glasses at the board appear! L. 153. Fandango, which, as Mr. Twiss
says, Est mel^^ de certaines attitudes, qui offrent un tableau continuel de
jouissance.

L. 167. When water-glasses at the board appear.] The filthy custom of using
water-glasses after meals is as common as in England; it may possibly be
endeavored to be excused, by pleading the natural unsociableness of the
British, who if obliged to withdraw to wash would seldom rejoin their company;
but then it may be urged that no wellbred persons touch their victuals with
their fingers, and consequently such ablutions ought to be unnecessary.

T. T I. p. 40 and 41.



How shall the hapless traveller escape undrown'd,
When direful females spout the table round!
Yes, Pinna, yes; conceive the soul disgrace;
A mouthful often was spurted in my face.
Thus, when a storm has plough'd the watery way,
And whales, in fullness of their bellies, play;
A thousand nostrils seem to threat the sky,
And laboring barks the spouting deluge fly.
Too well, my love, thou know the guilty shore,
And " perils such as never errant bore."
And say, what prize repaid the toil and pains?
What joy seduced me to the fatal plains?
No speaking picture crowns the lordly dome,
No breathing marble of old Greece or Rome;
No spreading towns the traveller's eye delight,
No stately villas burst upon his sight;
Along the road, nor lord nor esquire waits,
To tempt the traveller to his open gates;
Fled the last honor of the savage kind,
Their only boast, the hospitable mind.
Some, once invited, never asked me more;
And some against me shut the niggard door;
Some whispered while I played my favorite airs;
And some, more civil, showed me down their stairs.
But never will I mourn my toil and pains,
My weary wanderings on Hibernian plains,
Though dragged through lakes, or into rivers hurled,
Since there I saw the wonder of the world.
A wondrous trout exalts one favored lake;
And months and years I Would journey for its sake. L. 202. A wondrous trout
exalts one favored lake.] A species of trout, called gilderoy, are caught
here, and also in the neighboring lake, with a gizzard resembling that of
fowls. I have nothing more to say about this river, except that en passant I
took a dip in it.

T. T. I. 125.



Of fish they talked with gizzard like a bird:
I went, by doubtful, faint emotions, stirred.
Heavens! have I caught it! rapture fires my mind!
Gods! Gods! the gizzard of the winged kind!
Here smack your horse-whips, let your cudgels fall,
Hibernian Squires! for this I Would scorn them all.
I gained the trout, the precious trophy bore,
Preserved in whiskey, from the magic shore.
Haste, haste, ye sages! ye whom nature fires!
Gaze on my fish, and satiate your desires!
In vain his brethren seek, a curious train,
The darling treasure from thy Twiss to gain;
For when, my Pinna, Murcia's bowers I see,
Both trout and gizzard shall be fried for thee.
Well might an artist travel from afar,
To view the structure of a low-back'd car.
A downy mattress on the car is laid,
The reverend father mounts, and tender maid.
Some back to back, some side by side are placed,
The ravished maid by panting youth embraced.
By dozens thus, full many a Sunday morn,
With dangling legs the jovial crowd is borne;
Clontarf they seek, or Howth's aspiring brow,
Or Leixlip, smiling on the stream below. L. 213. To view the structure of a
low-back'd car.] Goods are conveyed about the city on small two-wheeled cars
drawn by a single horse; the wheels are thin round blocks, each about twenty
inches in diameter. The wheels of those cars which are used in the country, are
placed at a greater distance from each other than those of the city cars. They
are frequently used as vehicles for the common people, on their parties of
pleasure; a bed, or a mat, is at such times placed on the car, and half a dozen
people sit on it, with their legs hanging a few inches from the ground; they
are generally dragged a foot-pace.

T. T. I. p. 163.

L. 224. Buvindus.] The river Boyne.



When ease and cheapness would thy Twiss engage,
Cars he preferred to noddies or to stage.
Often on a car Buvindus saw me ride
From Tredagh's towers along his verdant side.
Wonders like these, of nature and of art,
Midst all his sufferings cheered thy Richard's heart;
And social comforts lent their genial rays,
When some kind Bufo gave his port and praise.
But why, my Pinna, kill me with thy tears,
Thy causeless sorrows, and thy idle fears?
Wrong not, my fair, thy lover and thy self! --
What! -- Twiss desert the Murcian maid for pelf!
Yet say, that gold could win thy Richard's charms,
Or grandeur lure him from thy constant arms:
Fear not a rival on the Hibernian plain;
I scorn its damsels, a penurious train.
Scarce by their portions are their gowns supplied,
And all their little wealth is dress and pride.
No Cupid there his arrows tips with gold,
Nor Plutus knits the bands that lovers hold. L. 237. I scorn its damsels, a
penurious train.] The Irish ladies are extremely well educated, as they have
little besides their beauty and merit to recommend them for wives, their
fortune in general being inconsiderable. Men of affluent fortune, who have
consequently no need of being mercenary in their choice, may find happiness in
an union with these ladies, provided they can convince themselves that they are
disinterestedly accepted. But, on the other hand, this polite education
prevents many ladies from being suitably married; for men of moderate fortunes
cannot afford to maintain them in the style in which they were bred or reared,
often greatly superior to their station.

T. T. I. p. 54 and 55.



No wary souls in bonds of Ind are caught,
No little loves arithmetic are taught;
But homebred virtue lurks with idle stealth,
And boasts in honor what it wants in wealth.
Cease, fond upbraider! cease the melting sigh;
For, big with joy, the teeming moments fly:
Not long shall fate disjoin our plighted hands,
Or hold thy Twiss from love's delicious bands.
One only wandering for the youth remains:
Then Venus wafts him to the Iberian plains.
Now fair occasion courts his swelling sails,
To fish on Greenland's happy shore for whales;
To strike the harpoon, uncoil the kindling line,
To boil the blubber, and the fat refine; L. 243 No little love arithmetic are
taught.] There is a celebrated picture by Corregio on this subject.

To roam with bears on drifted ice that live,
'Till gentle converse full refinement give;
'Till meet associates happy nature aid,
And make him perfect for the Murcian maid.
FINIS.
Just published,
The Third Edition, with a striking likeness of Donna Teresa Pinna, neatly
engraved, [Price a British Sixpence.] AN HEROIC EPISTLE, FROM DONNA TERESA
PINNA Y RUIZ, OF MURCIA, TO RICHARD TWISS, Esquire F. R. S. WITH SEVERAL
EXPLANATORY NOTES WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. Young Adam Cupid -- he who shot so trim,
When king Cophetua loved the beggar maid. --
SHAKESP. [Price a British Half Crown, bound.] A TOUR IN IRELAND IN 1775. WITH
A VIEW of the SALMON-LEAP at BALLYSHANNON. BY RICHARD TWISS, Esquire F.R.S. The
Seventh Edition, corrected, [Price Two British Shillings, sewed in Marble
Paper,] A VIEW OF THE INTERNAL EVIDENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. BY SOAME
JENYNS, ESQUIRE. Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. ACTS xxvi. 28. * The
prodigious demand for this Pamphlet, both in England and Ireland, which
required a Seventh Edition in a few months, the Editor presumes is a sufficient
testimony of its extraordinary merit. [Price a British Half Crown, bound,]
POLITICAL TRACTS, OF DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON, CONTAINING, The FALSE ALARM,
FALKLAND'S ISLANDS, The PATRIOT, and TAXATION NO TYRANNY.

