FALSTAFF'S WEDDING, A COMEDY: AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE.

BEING A SEQUEL TO THE SECOND PART OF THE PLAY OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH.

WRITTEN IN IMITATION OF SHAKESPEARE, BY W. KENRICK.

In magnis voluisse sat est.

LONDON, Printed for L. DAVIS and C. REYMERS, in Holborn; and J. ^AYN^, in
Paternoster Row. MDCCLXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE success, which a juvenile sketch of this Play has met with in
publication, having induced the Author to bring it on the stage; he flatters
himself the alterations, which were thought necessary to accommodate it to a
theatrical audience, will not give less satisfaction to the reader than such
scenes as he was obliged on that account to reject.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. DODD, in the Character of MERCURY.
[Mercury descends from the clouds, flying across the stage: Reenters,
followed by a servant, carrying a counsellor's gown and wig. A LA MERCURE,
equipped from top to toe,
My godship's name and quality you know.
Commissioned from Apollo, I come down
To Attend this bench of justices, the town.
Assembled here; all members of the quorum:
To lay a matter of complaint before 'em.
The errand's not in character, it is true;
But what our betters bid us, we must do.
Therefore, t'appear with decency at session,
I Have stole, you see, the garb of the profession.
This gown and band belong to sergeant Prig --
And this -- our brother Puzzle's learned wig. --
[Putting on the gown, etc. Dress makes the man, Sirs, vestis virum facit --
So -- now to business -- Hem! -- si vestris placet --
May't please your worships -- Forgery, which is grown
To such a height as never before was known --
I say, a forgery has been committed,
By which king Pluto's mirmidons, outwitted,
Certain choice spirits, in theatric shape,
Have suffered from Elisium to escape;
Of Shakespeare's offspring and ideal train,
Sprung, Pallas like, from an immortal brain!
Their names -- I have 'em down -- but, to be brief,
Shall only just enumerate the chief.
Imprimis, with Madeira swelled, and sack,
There Is Sir John Falstaff, alias called Plump Jack;
Next, captain Pistol, a notorious bully;
And Miss Dol Tearsheet, famed for jilting cully;
The widow Quickly, vintner, bawd and whore.
With Bardolph, Peto, Nym and -- several more;
Linked in a gang, each cutpurse with his crony,
All arrant thieves and Dramatis Personae;
Bent, as supposed, to prostitute to shame
The aforesaid Shakespeare's honor, name and fame.
I shall not trespass on your worship's time,
TO explain at full the nature of this crime:
But, Poets having an exclusive right
To bring their mental progeny to light,
This right's invaded by the party 'peach'd;
Who, vi et armis, has the old bard o'er-reach'd.
By counterfeiting of his hand, do ye see,
Feloniously to set these vagrants free;
With base design t'adopt them for his own,
Though Shakespeare's property, and his alone.
Such is the fact. -- A critic were an ass,
No doubt, to let such imposition pass;
Nor could a cheat so palpable succeed,
But that the captain of the guard could not read --
No, not for laughing, though to have saved his soul;
The scene and circumstances were so d roll.
Pistol, with yellow nightcap patched with red,
With Mother Quickly was retired to bed;
And, waking, swore, by Styx, he would not come,
Sans preparation, pike and beat of drum.
Of aqua-vitae having stole a flaggon,
Bardolph and Nym were playing at snap-dragon;
Sometimes proceeding from hard words to blows,
As by mistake Nym seized on Bardolph's nose.
With Falstaff sat Dol Tearsheet, cheek by joll,
And while she buss'd his chin and scratched his poll,
Slipped from his thumb his grandfire's copper ring,
For love, not for the value, of the thing:
Then stole his empty purse; but no abuse;
'T was only done to keep her hand in use:
He swearing, he would be damned as soon as trust his
Round belly more with Hall, or his chief justice.
But this is wandering from the point. -- They Are here,
And on your summons ready to appear:
Please to proceed then to examination;
And be attentive to their information.
If, as your judgment cannot be erroneous,
You take this forgery to be felonious,
The author meaning fraud, I need not mention
Your issuing warrants for his apprehension;
And when you have caught and into pieces tore him,
Hang up his mangled carcass in terrorem;
In flagrant crimes the process should be short;
The law is clear -- I leave it with the court.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, Mr. LOVE. JUSTICE SHALLOW, Mr. PARSONS. MASTER SLENDER, Mr.
DODD. MR. PLEADWELL, Mr. AICHIN. DR. CAIUS, Mr. BADDELY. FRIAR LAWRENCE, Mr.
BURTON. ANCIENT PISTOL, Mr. KING. BARDOLPH, Mr. MOODY. CORPORAL NYM, Mr.
ACKMAN. GADSHILL, Mr. WATKINS. OFFICER, Mr. STRANGE. FRANCIS, Master BURTON.
PETO, and Attendants.
WOMEN.
DAME URSULA, afterward Mrs. PRITCHARD. LADY FALSTAFF, Mrs. PRITCHARD.
BRIDGET, her Chambermaid, Mrs. BENNETT. MRS. QUICKLY, MRS. BRADSHAW. DOL
TEARSHEET, Mrs. DORMAN.
FALSTAFF'S WEDDING.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Street in WESTMINSTER, On the Day of the Coronation of King HENRY
the Fifth.
Enter Sir JOHN FALSTAFF, solus. WHAT a scurvy quarter is this? Not a bush, or
a blind Cupid, in the neighborhood! 'sblood, my legs will fail me ere I reach
a tavern. Phoo -- Phoo -- It is some comfort, however, I escaped with my life.
The green-apron'd rascals, crouding after the procession, had well nigh made an
end of me.

SCENE II.
Enter BARDOLPH. Bar. O, Sir John, I Am glad I have found ye. I was in the
fearfullest quandary for you in the world. I hope your honor has got no hurt.


Fall. Not its death's wound, I hope; though Hal, indeed, looked somewhat cold
upon me.


Bar. Cold, Sir John! I am a-fear'd we shall be in limbo shortly: for my
Lord-chief-justice --


Fall. Hold thy ill-omen'd croaking. If faithful services are thus requited, I
will turn cordwainer; yea, cobbler, and heel piece old shoes, ere I have to do
with blood royal again. Ingratitude! I hate it.


Bar. To be sure, Sir John, what you say is right; for, as the song says,
ingratitude is worse than the sin of witchcraft. But I hoped your honor got no
personable harm in the mob: you was carried off the terras, for all the world,
like a danghil from Mill-bank by a springtide.


Fall. Bardolph, away with thy filthy comparisons! I am ill at ease, and more
disposed to spleen than to merriment. I prithee, look out, and see if there be
a bawdy house at hand.


Bar. What here, so near the court, Sir John?


Fall. Where better? 'Sblood, do think there are no whores at Court? Are there
no dames of honor? Do think Hal has banished them too? Look out, look out.


Bar. I will, Sir John.

[Exit Bardolph.
SCENE III.
Sir JOHN FALSTAFF, solus. I would I were in East-cheap. Mine hostess has a
most excellent cordial; and I never stood in more need of it than now. The
gross indignity Hal has put on me, sticks in my throat; and, in the end, may
go near to choke me. I shall never gulp it down: that is flat: unless, indeed, a
full cup of sherris help to clear the way. And then, how I shall stomach it;
how I shall digest it, heaven knows! At present, both my person and knighthood
are in jeopardy; my Lord-chief-justice, to whose care I am commended, holding
me not altogether in good liking. But no matter -- if I am to be provided for,
what avails it who is my caterer? I could wish, nevertheless, old white wine
stood higher in his Lordship's favor; that I may not be stinted at table, or
in my by-drinkings. I like notsuch splenetic temperaments; such phlegmatic
constitutions; grey-beards, that never make allowances for the continual waste
of radical moisture. -- 'Sblood, I am as foundered and as sore as a blind horse
in a mill. -- Bardolph! where a plague art thou gotten to, caterwauling?


SCENE IV.
Enter Mrs. QUICKLY and DOLL TEARSHEET. Quick. O, Sir John Falstaff!


Doll. O, sweet Sir John!


Fall. How! mine hostess, and my good vestal Mrs. Tearsheet! save ye gentlewomen
both, good morrow.


Host. Godild ye, Sir John -- well I vow and protest an I didn't say he would
take as civil notice of his old acquaintance: nay, tho'f he was created by my
lord mayor of London.


Doll. What talk ye of lord-mayors and fusty citizens, gossip Quickly? Sir John
is a courtier, and to be sure we must gratulate him now as one of the greatest
knights in the nation. -- O sweet Sir John! --


Fall. Truce with your formalities, Mrs. Dorothy. Pray, have you seen none of
our followers by the way? Pistol, nor Peto!


Quick. No verily, Sir John, not one. -- We have seen nothing of any of them to
day. They are all gone to the coronation, I warrant; and indeed we should have
been there too, had not it been for that wicked villain, constable Fang, that,
by a mistake of the beadle of our ward, would have carried us to Bridewel this
morning.


Fall. How! mine hostess and my fair Dorothy to Bidewel!


Quick. Even to Bridewel, I can assure ye.


Fall. But how; how? dame Quickly to Bridewel! a ^ecent church-going widow and a
modest maiden, I should say, single gentlewoman, to a house of correction! ^hy,
what --


Quick. So I said, Sir John. Nuthook, Nuthook, says (...) do you know what you
do, says I? -- Have me to Bride^^l, says I, -- I say to Bridewel indeed! a
ruptable house keeper, that has paid scot and lot, and born the burden of half
the parish any time these twenty years.


Fall. That thou have, hostess; of the male half, I Will be sworn for thee.


Quick. Besides, says I, do you know Sir John Falstaff! says I. -- Touch a hair
of Mrs. Dorothy's head, says I, and Sir John will make you smart for it, says
I, every bone in your skin, says I.


Fall. And what said the rascal to that?


Quick. Said, Sir John! he stood mumchance, and spoke never a living syllable,
but set his vinegar-visag'd catchpoles upon us; who fastened their claws into
Mrs. Tearsheet's best kirtle, and tore it into as many rents and tatters, as
there were in the old tapestry hangings I pawned to fit your honor out for the
last expedition.


Fall. Pshaw!


Dol. Yes indeed, Sir John, made a mere tatterdemallion of me. But we did so
tongue the leather-ear'd vultures --


Fall. That they were glad to loose their gripe to get rid of you, I suppose.


Quick. Nay, Sir John, I was obliged to perduce an angel to convince them we
were not the parties indicted.


Fall. Infidel rogues! would nothing less than the testimony of an angel
convince them?


Quick. Ay, I knew how Sir John would take it. O, how soundly will the knave
constable be swing'd for this! a jack-in-office rascal! we shall cure the
blue-skin'd runnion of his itch for whipping, I warrant ye.


SCENE V.
Re-enter BARDOLPH. Bard. I have been looking all about, Sir John, but I cannot
find one.


Quick. What is it Sir John wants, Mr. Bardolph?


Bar. A bawdy house, mistress.


Quick. O Jesu-Maria! Mrs. Dorothy.


Fall. How, sirrah! what call'st thou a bawdy house I sent thee to look out for
a house of civil entertainment, where I might repose myself after my fatigue?
Why, what, you rogue, would you make of me?


Quick. Marry come up indeed! a bawdy house truly! but as to a house of civil
entertainment, Sir John; here is one hard by, where the knights and lords, and
all the great gentlemen of the court, are entertained, both by night and by
day, as civilly as at their own homes; and by gentlewomen as kind to them, I
warrant ye, as their own ladies themselves. -- A house of civil entertainment,
a bawdy house! Why, I keep a house of civility myself, and I would have you to
know Mr. Bardolph --


Bar. Nay, nay, it is all one: what Sir John pleases.


Quick. Yes, by my truly, and so I think it ought, for if Sir John recommends
you to the king --


Dol. Nay, were I Sir John, I Am sure I would never promote such a clown as
Bardolph at court.


Bar. Ah! Dol, Dol, I am afraid our promotion will be at the gallows. If Sir
John has any interest with the hangman, he may get me preferred, perhaps, to
the top of the ladder.


Dol. Why, how now varlet?


Quick. Do you hear? do you hear, sweet Sir John?


Fall. Ay, hostess, Bardolph is somewhat blunt: but, as for the king --


Quick. Heavens bless him! a sweet young prince he was; and, to be sure, a
gracious king he is. But what of him, Sir John?


Fall. Why, marry, -- hang him, hostess -- Treason must out as well as murder.


Quick. I am 'maz'd Sir John; why, how is this? what a goodness! when -- where
--


Dol. How is this, good Bardolph?


Fall. Why, I will tell ye how it is. That same ungrateful, speaking, pitiful
rascal, we are speaking of, is turned fanatic.


Quick. Fanatic! the king a fanatic!


Fall. Ay, fanatic, presbyter, bishop, if you will. Let his crown be his mitre;
I care not.


Dol. We don't take your meaning, Sir John.


Fall. You must know then, Dol, that after having, in pure love and affection,
ridden post day and night fourscore and odd miles, to congratulate him on his
accession, and condole with him on his father's death; instead of bidding me
welcome to court, he preached me my own funeral sermon.


Quick. A funeral sermon!


Fall. Ay, hostess: for at the end of his discourse he ordered me to be buried
alive, at ten miles distance from the court. And, to make this unnatural
interment the surer, he has appointed my Lord-chief-justice his undertaker, to
see to the disposal of my corpse.


Quick. Buried alive, quoth he! what, what is in all this?


Fall. In plain terms, dame Quickly, your gracious king has banished me the
presence; and, till he grows a graceless prince again, I am forbidden to
approach his person, within ten miles, on penalty of being hanged, Take ye me
now?


Quick. O Jesu! is it possitable?


Dol. Ah, ha! is it so? sits the wind in that quarter?


Quick. Well, as I am an honest woman, who would have thought it? it is a world
to see!


Dol. And so, Sir John is in disgrace; still plain Jack Falstaff and one of us!
ha! ha! ha! poor blown Jack!


Quick. A sad disappointment, indeed, Sir John! but, in good faith, things fall
out so odd, and the world goes so wrong, and the times are so hard; that here,
there, why, no longer ago now than yesterday, was I obliged to pay the
lord-knows-what-all away for one thing or other: and then my misfortune to day;
an angel to the constables; and besides this comes the day after to morrow,
when I must make up a sum for the wine-merchant: wherefore if your honor would
but discharge your score in East-cheap; because, as why, your honor knows --


Fall. How Is this, dame Quickly?


Quick. Because, I say, as why, your honor knows, seventy odd pound is a great
deal of money for a poor widow woman to lose.


Fall. What talk you of losing, hostess?


Quick. True, Sir John, as you say, to be sure, I shall not be willing to lose
it: for the law is open, and I know which way to get my money.


Fall. I am glad thou do, hostess: as in that case I need not give myself the
trouble to pay thee. The law is open, say thou? Ay, like a mouse-trap, on
the catch for nibbling clients. Enter thy action, and I will hold thee a gallon
of sack, thy departed husband will get out of purgatory ere thou out of the
hands of thy lawyer.


Quick. Nay, Sir John, you need not twit me upon that. You need not fling my
poor husband's soul in my teeth. He has not been gone so long; though for the
matter of that he might have been in heaven before now, had not I lent you the
money Mr. Dumb should have had to say masses for him. Yes, Sir John, you have
put into that great belly of yours what should have got my poor husband out of
purgatory, and now you reproach me for it. Had he been still alive you would
not have used his disconsolate widow thus. You wouldn't, Sir John.


Fall. No, I Will be sworn I should not.


Quick. Well then, Sir John, out of charity, if it were nothing else, you ought
to repay the money. Nay, if you don't, I Will pray night and day that you may be
haunted by his ghost. Heaven rest his soul. I would he might ^ever sleep
quietly in his grave, till he has made you ^ay me.


Fall. Go to, thou art a foolish woman: with good ^ords thou may be paid.


Quick. No, Sir John, good words will not do. I must ^ave money Sir John. The
priests will not get a soul out (...) purgatory without money. Besides, Sir John,
good ^ords are no payment, I can get no body to take them: ^od words will not
do with me.


Fall. Well, well, I say you may be paid --


Quick. May! Sir John, I must. -- You have thus ^^ffled off and on me, a good
while; but I must, I must (...) paid, I must --


Fall. Heigh! heigh! will thou raise the neighborhood on us? If thou art
clamorous, I will have thee duck'd in the Thames, for a bawd. What, a-plague,
art thou drunk? On the honor of my knighthood thou shall be paid. Do thou
doubt mine honor?


Quick. Why, Sir John, to be sure, nobody would scruple to conside in your
honor's honor: but then you know Sir John (nobody better) what honor is. It
will buy neither coals nor candles; nor will my landlord take it for rent, nor
the merchant for sack or sherry. But would you give me only the half in money,
and leave the rest to honor; so that a body might keep open house, Sir John.
That would be doing something.


Fall. Nay, if thou will be advised, I will do more for thee. -- Bardolph!
forget not to go (when I send thee) to the cashier, with whom I left a thousand
pound this morning, and tell him to satisfy Mrs. Quickly forthwith.


Quick. A thousand pound!


Fall. The times are not so bad, hostess (thanks to our friend Shallow) but we
may yet have a merry bout in East cheap. -- How says my Dol!


Dol. Nay, you know, sweet Jack, I was always at your pleasure there.


Quick. That I will say for her, and a sweeter-natur'd better hearted creature
never lay by the side of a true man Bat, goodness heart! why do we tarry here,
when Sir John complained of his being fatigued, and was looking for a house of
civil entertainment? I will show you the way incontinently, Sir John.


Fall. I thank thee, hostess; I am now somewhat recruited, and will endeavor to
reach Eastcheap. And ye a cap of sack, by the way, I think, would not be amiss

[Exeunt
SCENE VI. Tavern in Eastcheap.
Enter PISTOL and NYM. Pistol. Hang Pistol up with line of hempen string, Ere
he in rabbet-hutch be close immured. -- Seize the stiff cramp upon the fangs of
justice.


Nym. Marry-trap, we showed his myrmidons a light pair of heels though. I
wonderwhat is become of Sir John. They have certainly nailed his fat paunch. We
must not venture to the Fleet to see. They Will nab us there: and for the matter
of that, I suppose they will be running the humor upon us here too. I will
incontinently go and shut myself up. The storm may blow over when we are found
uninventible.


Pistol. Pistol disdains to skulk. Nolens, it is fate: But who would volens be
incarcerate?


Nym, we must eat, and money have we none.


Nym. True, nolus volus, as you say, we must eat. I like to starve, like a rat,
behind the arras, as, little as another man. But what shall we do if Sir John
be in limbo?


Pistol. Or in or out; his follower I no more.
Invention's mother is necessity,
And Pistol's demon is an imp of wit.
Merc'ry suggests, and Pallas does approve.
The great Ponjardo del Stilletto's dead,
Professor of the art of self-defence.
His broken foils, his daggers, belts and blades;
The stock in trade, I Will purchase upon tick:
My face, disguised with an usurped beard,
These jutting eyebrows, turned from black to red,
Shall skreen from knowledge. Thou shall too assume
A borrowed excrement, and partner be
In stock and block: since fighting's grown a trade,
Pence are picked up by masters of the blade.

Nym. The thought is lucky. Angels will ensue. But must we not transmutify our
names?


Pistol. My brain's my godfather, and, at the font, Me, Don Anticho del
Pistolo, called.


Nym. And pray what did this same godfather call me?


Pistol. Signior Nymwego!


Nym. Good! Signior Nymwego! and you Don Anticho del Pistolo! I will hold them
in oblivion. The trick of it pleases. But, here comes Quickly and Dol.


SCENE VII.
Enter QUICKLY and DOL TEARSHEET. Quick. So, Gentlemen! you are got home before
Sir John, I see.


Pistol. How fares the knight? Is he in durance vile?


Quick. No, by my truly; he returns forthwith; but in a woeful plight. Francis!
What, Francis! Bring the great chair for Sir John.


Francis within. Anon, Anon, Sir.


Dol. to Nym. Sirrah, Nym, has Falstaff got money by him?


Nym. Yes, a thousand Pound; he borrowed it of Justice Shallow: but we shall be
little the better for that; for the knight will certainly be in limbo.


Del. May be, no; and may be, yes. It is no matter.


[Dol. and Quickly conser apart. Nym. to Pistol. [who stands musing.] Does the
humor hold? Or shall we wait the coming of the knight?


Pistol. And share his fate in base incarceration! Shall Don Anticho del
Pistolo prove A vile hunt-counter? No -- We'll thrive alone. Hostess farewell;
we may return -- or not.


Nym. Bye Dol.

[Exeunt Pistol and Nym.
SCENE VIII.
Quick. It Is certainly so; Sir John has got the money.


Dol. I know not that; but if he has, he will probably carry it to jail with him.
Here comes Bardolph, ask him.


SCENE IX.
Enter BARDOLPH. Quick. Is Sir John at hand, Bardolph?


Bar. He will be here incontinently, hostess: I only stepped before, to let you
know he was a coming.


Quick. But is it veritably true, Bardolph, that Sir John has got a thousand
pound by him?


Dol. Ay, is that true, Bardolph?


Bar. True, upon honor; he had it of justice Shallow, of Gloucestershire; and
it lies now in master Gingle cash, the banker's hands. But Sir John will be
here momentably. Is every thing ready?


Quick. In a minute we are all clear. Run, good Dol, and receive the knight at
the door. Francis! what, Francis!


Fran. (without) Anon, anon, Sir.


Quick. Light up candles in the passage. A bottle of sherris, Francis, quick,
you sleeping knave. -- Always upon a snail's gallop! O that ever woman should
be plagued with such creeping varlets!


Dol. O, here is Sir John, himself.


SCENE X.
Enter Sir JOHN FALSTAFF. Quick. Jaded to death, I warrant! -- An easy chair,
good Bardolph. Please you to depose yourself, Sir John.


Fall. Soh! now have I taken up my sitting again, in my old quarters. A glass of
sherris, Francis!


Dol And how do you find yourself, my sweet knight?


Fall. Tolerably thirsty. ( Drinks) I can drink; and that is all the bodily
functions I am capable of. I am as sliff, every part about me, as a walking
tailor, or Don Diego on a sign-post.


Dol. Nay, Sir John, if that be the case, it is not over with you yet. Give me
a buss.


Fall. Go, Dol, you are riggish -- get you gone you water wag tail, you; I am
not merrily disposed.


Dol. But, will you give me a new kirtle at Bartlemew^^^^^?


Fall. I ^ill, Dol. -- Nay, I cannot bear you on my ^^ee.


Dol. Why, how came you so terribly mauled, my leman?


Fall. Did not I tell ye?


Quick. No indeed, Sir John, your honor spoke of fatigue; but did not descend
to particles.


Fall. Well then. I will tell ye now. Give me first a glass of sherris. (
Drinks) You must know that, after the king (hang him for a sheep-stealing cur)
gave me that rebuff I told you of; he stalked majestically away, and left me to
the mercy of the multitude: when, as I stood parleying with mine ancient; mine
arms a kembo thus; a knot of elbowing carls bore me down before them, with the
impetuosity of a torrent. Lo! there was I, jamm'd fast in the midst of a vile
groupe of mechanics, as if we had grown together in a body corporate: and in
this jeopardy was I carried along; sometimes bolster'd up on all sides, at the
confluence of several turnings, like a May Pole; and at others, wire-drawn
between two stone walls, as if they meant to make chitterlings of me: now this
fair round beliy taking the form of a Christmas pie, and by and by pressed as
slat as a pancake. It is a miracle I did not burst in the midst of them. Had it
nor been for the sufficiency of my buff doublet, I should have certainly
bursted.


Dol. If you had, Sir John, you would have went off with a report like a
bladder.


Fall. A bladder, ye jade, a demi-culverin at least. I should have died an hero:
my exit would have made some noise in the world.


Quick. Heaven forbid, Sir John, you should ever die a virulent death, I say.


Dol. I hope, indeed, sweet knight, you will never be pressed to death. That
must be an odd end, and yet methinks I could bear much.


Fall. I Will be sworn thou could, Dol: but thou art a woman, and made to bear.


Quick. Yes, in good sooth, poor woman is made to bear every thing. She must
suffer all a man's ill humors; let 'em lie never so heavy upon her: and, by my
truly, some men are nothing else. But, to be sure, Sir John, you was most
unhumanly used. Would no body take pity upon you?


Fall. Pity! the most remorseless rascals! they made no more of me than if I had
been a lump of dough, they were kneading to make dumplings of: and to
expostulate with the villains, would have been preaching to the winds.


Dol. Why did not you exert your courage, Sir John? draw upon them?


Fall. Draw, say thou? I could not come at my rapier, to be master of a
kingdom. And as for good words, in return for the few I gave them, they let fly
their jests so thick at me, and peppered me so plaguly with small wit, that I
was dumbfounded.


Dol. I thought you could never have been overmatch'd that way, Sir John.


Fall. Yet so it was, Doll. They were holiday-wits, and ^ame laden with
choke-pears: bur, indeed, I was overcower'd by numbers. Two to one, Doll, you
know -- They pelted me from all quarters. Will you hear? I wiil give you a
spice of their farcasms; a sample of the gibing ^ellets they threw at me. As I
was thus stemming the ^^de, and crying out for the lord's sake, a dried
eel's-s^in ^f a fishmonger asked me how I could complain of the ^^oud. Is a
porpoise ill at ease, said he, amidst a glut of sprats and herrings? I had not
time to answer the ^^elt, before a barber-surgeon, the very model of the
skeleton in his glass-case, offered to tap me for the dropsy; and to make us
all elbow-room by letting out a puncheon of canary, at my girdle. Right, cries
a third, at the word canary, I Will be hanged if any thing be in the doublet of
that fat rogue but a hog's-skin of Spanish wine; and incontinently they roared
out, on all sides, Tap him, there, -- tap him, master surgeon. -- 'Sblood; I
was forced to draw in my horns, and be silent; lest the villains, being
thirsty, should force the shaver to operation. The knave, indeed, was five
weavers off, and so could not well come at me; I might otherwise have been
drunk up alive.


Dol. And pray how came thou off at last, Sir John?


Fall. By mere providence: for, after the barbarous rascals had squeezed the
breath out of my body, they buffetted me because I could not roar out, God save
the king. At length, I know not how, they threw me down in the cloisters,
where, falling cross-wise and the way being narrow, I fairly blocked up the
passage: upon which (for they could not straddle over me) they took, another
way (a plague go with them!) for fear of losing the show. And thus was I left
to take in wind, and gather myself up at leisure.


Dol. And did the mangy villains so play upon thy sack but? a parcel of sapless
twigs! dry elms, fit only for fuel^ I would I had the burning of them.


Fall. Would thou fire them, Dol? Ha! art thou touch wood still, Dol?


Dol. Nay, Sir John, not so.


Quick. No, I Will be sworn, Sir John, to my carn^^ knowledge, if there be truth
or faith in medicine. (...) Sir John, what would your honor please to have
supper?


Fall. Another glass of sherris -- fill me out, Bardol I cannot eat. I have lost
my appetite by the way. Put egg into a quart of mull'd sack, and give it me
when a-bed. I will to sleep.


Dol. Would you have your bed prepared, strait, John?


Fall. Ay, on the instant, good Dol. Hostess! go thou and see to the brewage of
my sack.


[Exeunt Dol. and Mrs. Quickly. SCENE XI. Tavern continued.
Enter PISTOL and NYM. Pis. Sir Knight, I bring thee news: loud same reports My
lord-chief-justice has recalled his warrants.


Fall. I would he were choked with his warrants, ere he had issued them. But I
thank thee for the tidings. The sergeants will not disturb my rest, at least
to-nighr. But, what comes here?


Pis. From ducking-pond escaped in dripping plight,
The crooked-finger'd cutpurse, Peto hight.

SCENE XII.
Enter PETO, leaning upon GADSHILL. Fall. What Is the matter, Peto?


Gad. Matter! Sir Knight and master of mine! Matter faith enough. The mob at
Westminster had like to have murdered poor Peto here.


Fall. And how so?


Gad. Why, Sir John, as he was getting upon a cobler's pulk, to see what was
become of your honor, araw-bon'd waggering sergeant, coming by, whipped hold of
him by the ^eg, and threw him on the people's heads; where they shouldered him
about from post to pillar, as they would have done a hedgehog, or a dead
rabbit that had been shrown among them. I says, I thought they would have
^ill'd him.


Fall. How! was that Peto? I saw the bustle at a distance, and wondered what the
porters and 'prentices had got, to make sport withal. By the Lord, Peto, I have
a fellow-feeling for thy sufferings.


Pis. And I. But say, is merit thus repaid? Shall fortune play the jilt with
men of mould? Go, Peto, lay thy head in Parco's lap.


Fall. Good Peto, let me advise thee to go to bed, And lay thy head on a pillow.
Bardolph, see to him. Pistol and Nym, good night.


Pis. and Nym. Good night, Sir John.


Fall. Francis!

Light me to bed -- let Dol bring up the sack,
See to the urinals, and tuck up my back.
[Exit.
Pis. Signior Nymwego! Hear'st thou lad of craft?


Nym. Yea, marry, Don Anticho del Pistolo -- runs the humor well?


Pis. Well, Nym. and thou and I, over cup and can,
Will go, and schemes of operation plan.

[Exeunt. End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Street.
Enter Justice SHALLOW and Master SLENDER. Slen. I Wonder now, Coz; when you
know what a desperate kind of a horrible man Sir John is, you should --


Shall. Tut, tut. -- I fear him not; there is never a Sir John Falstaff in the
nation shall over reach me.


Slen. But what is done cannot be helped, Coz; he overreach'd you now, as I take
it, when you lent him the money.


Shall. Well, cousin of mine; then it is my turn now to overreach him, and get
it again.


Slen. That, indeed, cousin Shallow, to be sure would be quite right; tit for
tat, as we say in the country; but then he is such a bloody-minded caitiff; you
know he broke my head once for nothing at all: and if he should get an inkling
that you are going to law with him, O Lord, O Lord, I shall never sleep in
quiet again.


Shall. Poh, you chit, if he breaks the peace, I shall know what to do with him,
I warrant ye.


Slen. Ay, there indeed, cousin, ecod, I did not think of that. If I am in fear
of my life, I can answer taking him up with a warrant, and binding him over to
his good behavior. Suppose therefore, Coz, we swear the peace against him
first, and lay him fast by the heels before we enter the action. -- And yet I
don't know, if I might advise ye, I would wash my hands of him.


Shall. Talk not to me. I tell thee I will spend half my estate, ere the
rascally knight shall carry it off so. I had rather the inns of court should
share the money among them, than that the gorbellied knave should feast his
enormous guts at any free-cost of mine. -- I will to my council immediately;
and if the law will not avail me, my sword shall do me justice.


Slen. You know best, cousin Shallow, to be sure; but --


Shall. But me no buts, I say, but come along;
Your cousin Shallow puts up no such wrong.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. A Street.
Enter an Officer of the King's Household and a FRIAR. Offic. There, good friar,
thou have it: it would little conduce to raise the king's wisdom in the general
estimation of the world, to have it thought in the power of such unworthy men
as Falstaff and his fellows, to lead him implicitly into all those
extravagances under which the character of his youth suffered: and yet so it
would go near to be suspected, if his highness should now act toward them with
an ill-timed severity. My lord-chief-justice has therefore retracted his hasty
orders for their imprisonment.


Fri. Son, well observed; and I commend his lordship's prudence, in treating
their vices as infirmities; and will readily undertake to commune with them on
the grievous enormity of their dissolute lives.


Offic. His lordship would have you apply first to Sir John Falstaff, the
ringleader of this vicious troop. If you can dispose him to good, the rest may
follow.


Fri. I will attend these reprobates, and use the means.


Offic. His lordship requires that you would bring Falstaff over to retire to a
monastery, if possible; that, being concealed from the eyes of the world, he
may not daily remind it of what is past. Farewell, good father; I will see thee
again at the Priory.

[Exit officer.
SCENE III. Street continued.
FRIAR, solus. I will go; but I fear my mission will prove as fruitless as that
of many other Apostles, sent among Infidels. As there is no danger of
martyrdom, however, I am content. -- Persuade Sir John Falstaff to turn monk!
could I work miracles, indeed, and, like St. Thomas, turn an Ethiop white,
something might be said for it: bur, as it is, I despair of converting an old
deboshee from two such prevailing heresies as the whore and the bottle.

[Exit.
SCENE IV. Tavern in Eastcheap.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH. Fall. Two found naps, of eight hours a-piece, have
something recruited me. Bardolph, my morning's whet. Is it prepared?


Bar. It Is here Sir John.

[Gives Falstaff a tankard.
Fall. Here Is to our better fortune.

[Drinks.
Bar. Ah, Sir John, I am afeard our fortune has been at its highest stood. We
have seen our best days.


Fall. So the world goes Bardolph. Up and down! But is it not hard now? I that
have -- but that is nothing. I hate boasting. It is, however, well known what
pains I have taken to make a man of that Hal. Nay, you yourself are privy to
many the good offices I have done him. Before the younker knew me, he could not
drink sack; made conscience of going to church on holidays; and blushed like a
scarlet cloak, at entering a bawdy house. I ^nstructed him in all the manly
exercises. I was content to win his money, to teach him gaming: to get drunk
myself ^o try to make him so. Nay, setting rotten limbs and dignity aside, have
I not even pimp'd for the bashful rogue? Such a prince of Wales! by my troth, I
was ashamed of him. Had it not been for me, the milk-sop might have been
crowned before he had lost his maidenhead.


Bar. And that would have been a pity, Sir John, to be sure.


Fall. It was I first taught him to way-lay the true-man; for I knew him when he
durst not cry stand to a turkey-cock; nay, a gander, of the ordinary size of a
greengoose, had it met him on a common, would have made him run for it. I went
farther yet; and not only emboldened his actions, but taught him the manly arts
of conversation. In the style military, for instance, or swearing. --


Bar. Sir John, I believe, there you forget yourself; the prince wanted no
assistance of you in that; for when he was a little crack, he would swear ye as
well as a man six foot high.


Fall. Right, Bardolph, you are right. I remember me; swearing indeed he knew:
for, though but a king's son, he would, as thou say, rap out an oath like an
emperor. But then for the quintessence of all elocution, the use of the
hyperbole, vulgarly called lying; there I am a master, yet what a deal of pains
it has cost me to teach Hal to lie* and all thrown away upon him. He would
never do it roundly. He had no genius that way.


Bar. You know, Sir John, the prince never could away with lying. He used to
say 'twas beneath a gentleman and a soldier.


Fall. Well, well, he will never shine in the recital of his own exploits as
Xenophon, Caesar, and I, have done.


Bar. Why, Sir John, to be sure, you have done something.


Fall. Something! the services I have done him and his father are out of number.
Methinks my behavior, in the ever memorable action at Shrewsbury, should make
him blush at his ingratitude. Who killed Hotspur? Did not I give him his
death's wound in the thigh? Was i^ not I who took prisoner that fiery dragon
Coleville? and that even alive! And am I thus requited? Is this the guerdon of
my great achievements? Hang valor, I Will hack my sword no more* Thus has it
ever been the fate of merit to be rewarded. Alcibiades and Bellisarius for that!


Bar. Ay, Sir John, they were tall fellows: they were sadly used indeed: I have
heard of them. But that was in king John's time, I think.


Fall. They were the Falstaffs of antiquity, Bardolph.


Bar. Like enough, Sir John: they were before my time, to be sure; though
Pistol told me, the other day, that general Bellisarius was his god father.


Fall. Pistol is an ignorant braggard; an ass: I have injured my dignity by
associating with rascals, not worthy to wait at my heels. What tell thou me
of Pistol?


Bar. Nay, Sir John, I meant no harm. I do think you deserve to be made a lord
of indeed.


Fall. I expected nothing less, I can assure ye. And then, for my well-known
economy, to have had the sole management of the exchequer at least.


Bar. And instead of that to be banished --


Fall. I know not if I heard the word banish. I was forbidden indeed to come
near the king's person by ten miles; but I was not at that distance when those
injunctions were laid on me. Quere now (it might pose a casuist, let me tell
ye) whether I am thereby enjoined to march right out, ten miles an end; whether
the negative, not come, amounts to the positive, go. -- I will not understand
it so; and, if that be my lord ch^ef justice's construction, by the Lord, I
will put him to the trouble of carrying of me: I will be la^d up with the gout
ere I budge a foot.


Bar. Indeed, Sir John, the king did say, banish.


Fall. Admit it: unless he means to reside for ever in a place, and be in his
own proper person as immovable as a church, I hold my life on a damned
precarious tenure. He must give me timely notice of his motions, that I may
regulate mine accordingly; otherwise, if he be traveling my way, we may happen
to encounter, and I get myself hanged through inadvertency. I do not think it
safe, therefore, to stir out of town, without more explicit orders. Give me
another draught.


Bar. The tankard is out, Sir John, Shall I replenish?


Fall. No. I Will toward St. Paul's: a gentle perambulation this morning may
refresh me.

[Exeunt.
SCENE V. A Street.
Enter Justice SHALLOW, Master SLENDER, and a LAWYER. Shall. Well, master
Pleadwell, are you still of that opinion. If so, my money's gone?


Law. Indeed, I am still of that opinion, justice Shallow.


Shall. What! how! that my money's gone?


Law. Nay, I know not that. I say, I am of opinion you should have taken a
bond, or obligation, at the time of lending it, friend Shallow. A thousand
pound on the bare word of a courtier; and that courtier Sir John Falstaff!
never an alderman in the city of London would have lent a thousand pence on
such security.


Slen. Oh, that ever a country 'squire should have less wit than a city
alderman!


Law. A thousand pound, Mr. Shallow, is --


Shall. A thousand pound. I know it is, master Pleadwell, I know it well. But
pray now, is there no method in the law to recover it? He cannot have spent it
yet: cannot we compel him to restitution? Arrest him -- arrest him, Mr.
Pleadwell.


Law. But, should he deny the debt, how will you prove it? and who knows, on
such an emergency, what Sir John Falstaff will not do?


Shall. Nay, he will lie: that is the truth on it.


Slen. Ay, Coz, and that most consumedly too.


Shall. I can prove his receipt of the money.


Law. But the conditions, justice Shallow -- What have you to show that he is
engaged to return it? and when?


Shall. Nothing: I was weak enough to lend it him on his bare word.


Slen. Nay, cousin Shallow, not so neither. I Will be sworn he borrowed it upon
his oath. He swore upon the honor of a true knight, to give him a thousand
pound again; and besides that, the comings-in of a better thing, in his
majesty's court at London.


Law. Ah, Master Slender, these knights have just honor enough to swear by;
but, for any thing further, I am apprehensive we shall find him one of those
honorable knights, whose word is as good as their oath. But see, if I mistake
not, yonder he comes; this encounter may perhaps save us the trouble of
attending him at home. Let us speak him fair, and persuade him, if possible, to
sign an obligation for the money. If we can do that, we may trounce him. Let me
alone with him.


Slen. O would you could, Mr. Pleadwell! what would I give methinks to see him
well trounc'd! if it was only for giving me once a bloody coxcomb.


SCENE VI. Street continued.
Enter FALSTAFF. Fall. How! Master Shallow consulting with his lawyer! are ye
thereabouts, friend Shallow? would you hamper me with an action? (Aside.) I
will pass them by.


[Going. Shall. Sir John, Sir John, a word with you, if you please.


Fall. O my good friends Robert Shallow, Esquire and Master Slender! how fare ye
gentlemen both?


Law. Sir John, Mr. Shallow here has --


Fall. Ha! what mine old acquaintance Master Wheedlepoint! how is it with your
health, Master Wheedlepoint?


Law. Pleadwell is my name, Sir John.


Fall. Right. -- I cry you mercy -- Roundabout Pleadwell, think. My memory is
not so retentive as --


Law. No offense, Sir John, that is not the case.


Fall. Marry but it is, Mr. Pleadwell; a treacherous memory is my great defect:
and a misnomer in law thou know --


Law. Would be matter of consequence, Sir John. But that is not our business at
present. Mr. Shallow here has put a case. --


Fall. Ay, Master Shallow should know something of the law too. Was not he at
Clement's inn when thou were first entered there? That must be many years ago,
Mr. Pleadwell. -- Let me see. How many years ago must that be, Master Shallow?
-- Why you carry your age well, Mr. Pleadwell.


Shall. Pretty well, pretty well, Sir John, but that --


Fall. Nay marry, I say, very well, Master Shallow. And pray what is become of
young Puzzlecause, and Dick Silvertongue, your fellow-students there? they were
called to the bar, I suppose. That Dick was a prate-a-pace rogue? and a devil
among the bona robas. He and Master Shallow here were two with the wenches. Ha,
Master Shallow!


Shall. No matter, Sir John, at present we would confer on other business.


Fall. Nay, gentlemen, if ye are on business, I crave your pardon, and leave ye.
I am not used to be impertinent,


Law. You are not going, Sir John; it is with you our business lies.


Fall. Business with me!


Shall. Yes, about the thousand pound, Sir John.


Fall. What mean you, Master Shallow?


Shall. That you borrowed of me, Sir John.


Slen. Yes, Sir John, the thousand pound you borrowed of my cousin Shallow, Sir
John.


Fall. Take me with ye, gentlemen, both; let me understand ye. You presented me,
indeed, with a thousand pound to promote your interest at court, Master Shallow
and may depend on it, if I can serve you --


Shall. Fiddle, faddle, Sir John, I expect my money again: your interest at
court is not worth a farthing.


Fall. I cannot help that; the more is my misfortune, Mr. Shallow; you see my
heart is good.


Law. If so, Sir John, you will not refuse to give Mr. Shallow something to
show for his money, under your hand.


Fall. How do thou know that, Mr. Pleadwell? I must consult my counsel in this
case.


Law. There is no need, Sir John; I will draw up a little instrument, to which
thou will set thy hand immediately.


Fall. Not while I have a head, Master Pleadwell, I like not running hand over
head in these matters. By latter Lammas, or St. Falstaff's day, I may perhaps
bethink me.


Law. I know of no saint of thy family in the calendar, Sir John.


Fall. Well, well, there may be saints of a worse. Our merit has not stood in
the way of promotion; that is all: and yet there are as many whoremasters there
as lawyers, I believe; Bun I cannot tarry now to hold farther question with
thee; fatigued as I am, and earnest to reach my lodgings yonder.


Law. If thou will there sign the instrument, Sir John, we will attend you
thither.


Fall. Will thou? it is a notorious bawdy house.


Law. No matter, Sir John.


Fall. No matter, say thou? Is it then no matter for one of the grave sages of
the law to be seen in a public bawdy house? Lord, Lord, what will this world
come to! My conscience, however, is more tender: I should be sorry to give such
occasion of scandal.


Law. Please you, Sir John, to be serious. Let us rightly understand each other.


Fall. With all my heart, good Master Pleadwell; then, to be plain with you, I
find you do not know me. You talk to me of restitution and conditions; did
thou ever know Sir John Falstaff make restitution on any conditions? And do
thou think me so unpracticed a courtier as to return the perquisites of my
calling, because I am turned out; or to restore the purchase of my good will,
because I am not likely to get in. What take ye me for a younker? a geck? Go to
-- you cannot play upon me. -- Master Shallow, rest you content: your money is
in good hands; and, if I do not spend it like a gentleman, never trust me with
a thousand pound again.


Shall. Oh! that I ever did trust such a caitiff!


Law. But, pray, were these the conditions, Mr. Shallow? Was you to be repaid
by a place at court?


Slen. To be sure. Why what do you think. Mr. Pleadwell, cousin Shallow was
fool enough to lend a thousand pound for nothing? Why, I, myself, was to be
made a great man too; and that into the bargain.


Shall. Cousin Slender, speak in your turn, I pray you.


Law. Were these terms specified?


Fall. Not indeed on parchment, signatum and sigillatum, Mr. Pleadwell. A
courtier's promise is not, indeed, very good in law. But I can tell ye the
posts I should have procured for these noble 'squires: and by'r lady, thou will
say they would have been well occupied. Having a little pique or so at my
Lord-chief-justice, and Mr. Shallow, here, thinking himself qualified, I
promised him my interest for his worship's removal from the quorum to his
lordship's place on the bench. Was it not so, Mr. Shallow?


Shall. Don't belie me, Sir John, don't cheat me of my money, and laugh at me
too. Robert Shallow esquire will not put up with that.


Fall. Then for Mr. Slender here, I purposed, for his address and elocution, to
have got him appointed orator to the house of parliament; or otherwise, in
consideration of his figure and magnanimity, to have made him a staff officer,
or captain of horse, at the least.


Slen. Nay, Sir John, you did not tell me what; but I expected some notable
place, I Will assure ye: for I look upon myself, plain 'squire as I stand here,
to be somebody.


Shall. Coz, coz, you are an ass, coz.


Slen. Why, why, I didn't lend him the money; I.


Law. Justice Shallow, this is a very simple affair. I am sorry it is not in my
power to serve you in it. Sir John, if you had either honor or honesty, you
would restore the money; but, as you make pretensions to neither, I leave you.

[Exit Lawyer,
SCENE VII. Street continued.
FALSTAFF, SHALLOW, and SLENDER. Fall. Well, my masters, you hear the counsel
learned in the law. Will you to dinner with me? You shall see I am no niggard.
If you will lodge with me in Eastcheap, you shall see the thousand pound fairly
spent in sack: you shall share with me to the utmost farthing. But for dry
restitution, I have not been accustomed to it of many years. You would not have
me a changeling at this time of day, I hope, Master Shallow.


Shall. Changeling! no, Sir John, thou art no changeling; but, depend on it, I
will not put up this wrong. Robert Shallow, esquire will neither eat nor drink with
thee. If the law will not help me, I will take other methods. I will have my
money; depend on it I will have my money.

[Exit Shallow.
Slen. Ay, ay, we shall find means to get the money; ever fear. [Exit Slender.


SCENE VIII. Street continued.
FALSTAFF, solus. Nay, I fear it not -- at least before I shall have found
^^ans to spend it: and then, get it who may; it concerns ^^t me. We shall see,
however, whose business will be done first. Mine will go merrily forward. Ah!
shallow Master Shallow! But who could have thought the snipe would have went to
counsel, to get himself laughed at? Then to see how demurely Sir Slyboots
angled for me, as if I had been a gudgeon! How cunningly the rascally barrador
would have hooked me on his instrument! But I was even with the methodical
knave. -- My friend Shallow will never bring it to bear an action at law; and
if he should, I am on the right side of the hedge. Indeed, were I to go to law
for a mint of money, I would choose to have it all in my possession. There is
nothing like it. Possession is the very life's blood of a bad cause: on the
strength of which in mine, I will home to dinner.


SCENE IX. A fencing school.
Enter PISTOL and NYM disguised. Pistol. Is this not better than the service
mean Of Cappadocian or Assyrian knight? That last young quarreller, how much
gave he?


Nym. Two marks for entrance and an angel fee.


Pistol. It Is well, keep 'count; and lend attention mute.
Dame Ursula the knight's neglected flame,
Grown rich, is fond of finery and name;
To her has Don Pistolo made his suit
By love-epistle. -- Nym -- What say thou to it?

Nym. What, rival Sir John! It Is true he does not go there now, or he would make a
bloody business of it. You must know I Have courted her neice and chambermaid
Bridget ever since the last wind-fall.


Pistol. And have thou sped?


Nym. Very scurvily, ancient. The jade runs her humors upon me.


Pistol. Nym, I a letter for thee will indite,
In the true style of a Castilian knight.
Woman is taken by mere words and whim;
Nymwego shall command what is held from Nym.
But see new swaggerers coming -- keep your state.

SCENE X.
Enter Justice SHALLOW and Master SLENDER. Shall. Ay, this is my old school:
here have I had. my sa! and my ha! -- Odso, your servant, gentles, pray is
Signior Stiletto to be spoken with?


Pistol. The valiant wight translated is to heaven.


Shall. Faith and troth, I Am sorry for that; heartily sorry indeed.


Pistol. Ha! sorry! say thou, Paphlagonian vile? Would thou in Tartarus
that he should howl? Ha! -- Ha!


[Draws and makes a lunge at Shallow, who retires. Shall. Not I -- Not I. --
Pray moderate your passion. -- Gad's mercy on me what a furious lunge! -- Sir,
understand me. Signior Stiletto was my honored master. I had a friendship for
him.


Pistol. I then embrace thee with a soldier's arm. Stiletto was the glory of
the sword, The Ajax, Hector, Agamemnon, he!


Shall. And, if I may ask without offense, pray Sir, what is the name and
quality of your worship?


Pistol. I his successor am, and men me call Anticho del Pistolo.


Shall. A name of sound, and smacking loud of valor; it sorts well with your
figure and profession.


Slen. Ecod I think so; his name and looks I Am sure make me tremble. I would I
were safely out of the house, la!


Pistol. Needst thou my service?


Shall. To say the truth, Sir, though I am not of a quarrelsome disposition, I
have an affair of the sword upon my hands; and, having long laid by my rapier,
I came to take a lesson or two of Signior Stiletto; the better to withstand the
force of my adversary. Now, since my old master is dead, I would be obliged to
the skill of his successor.


Pistol. What is thy name and quality?


Shall. My name is Shallow, Sir.


Slen. Of Gloucestershire, esquire justice of the peace and of the quorum.


Pistol. A name of note, and smacking much of folly.

[Aside. It suiteth well thy figure and thy purpose.
Nymwego, hand the foils. There, grasp it well;
Bear thy point thus against thy rival's sword,
And had he twenty lives, he falls. Sa -- Sa.

[They skirmish and Shallow is disarmed. Shall. Enough, enough, for once brave
Sir, enough. I see. indeed, you're worship is a master. Another time I Will try
my skill again.


Pistol. Enough's a feast. Farewell, till next we meet.


[Exit Pistol. SCENE IX.
Nym. And will not my young 'Squire here enter into the humor of it. Come,
Sir, lay hold.


Slen. Cod so, not I. I quarrel with no body but my man. And I can break his
head at any time for Sixpence. So, I Have no occasion, Sir, I thank ye. -- Come,
Coz, let us go.


Shall. Sir, there is my thanks ( gives money to Nym) you will see me soon again.


Slen. Yes, yes, my cousin will come again; but I Have no occasion I thank ye.

[Exeunt Shallow and Slender.
SCENE XII.
NYM, solus. These two 'Squires are precious subjects to play humors on. -- I
have it too: they have land and beeves; and marry-trap, I will lay a trap for
marrying them. Our hostess Quickly and Dol. Tearsheet, when bedizen'd, may pass
on these Gloucestershire oass for London dames of rank. Nay, they resemble the
wealthy widow of Watling-street, and buxom Beatrice of Bucklersbury, her
forward niece. This were a trick of price: I Will fashion it, by working up these
noodles into a conceit of their being beloved by the widow and madam Beatrice.
I will about it strait.

[Exit.
End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. Tavern in Eastcheap.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH. Fall. BARDOLPH! How is it with Peto to day!


Bar. Why, he is in a bad way, Sir John.


Fall. That all! -- when was he otherwise? who ever knew Peto or thee in a good
way?


Bar. And yet, Sir John, we are your followers, you know.


Fall. Well said, Bardolph. -- I see thy wit is improved, I lead you the way, it
is true; but you follow me, like spaniels, with damnable circumvolutions. But,
whom have we here?


Bar. It is the doctor, Sir John, that has been up to see Peto.


Fall. O, doctor Caius Mithridate, the apothecary! a precious limb of Galen! --
At Windsor he was a physician, and starved by prescribing poisons, but now he
is turned apothecary, and thrives by administering them.


SCENE II.
Enter Dr. CSIUS. Fall. So, master Doctor, thou art a man of merit, I see --
Thou art sought after. -- Pray, how many patients may thou have dispatched
to day?


Caius. Pas beaucoup, Sir John -- not great many I pay visit betimes, en bon
matin, a monsieur de peto. -- But I must go now a I'instant, a la cour.


Fall. Nay, rest you a moment, Dr. Caius, I would commune with you a little on
the score of old acquaintance. Pray, master doctor, how came you to leave
Windsor? You were, I thought, in some repute there.


Caius. How Came I to leave Windsor! By gar dat Windsor did leave me. --
Repute! Morbleu, I was in de best reputation du monde. In dree year, dare vas
no less dan dree honderd patients of quality under my hands. -- They did never
complain of mal-treatment: and yet I did stay dear till I had no patients left.


Fall. Dead men tell no tales, Doctor, it is certain.


Caius. Eh, bien! my patients did die sure enough; but dear was deir sons, deir
daughters, deir cousin germans; dey was alive, and commend my treatment of de
defunct et non obstant they never would call me in demselves.


Fall. That Is much. -- But did all your patients die? Say you? Not one survive
to trumpet the fame of their doctor!


Caius. Yes, by gar, derevas one Bourgeois fort rich et fort mal: he bring me
more disgrace than all dose dat vas dead. I did exert all my skill for two,
dree year; and he would not be cured.


Fall. Then why did you not let him go after the rest?


Caius. By gar he would not go. II a ete fort entete, cet homme la. I ave give
him opiates, de narcotiques, stronger by gar dan Lethe itself. But he would not
be composed; he would live to disgrace me. So he turn me off; and grew well
himself, bientot, presently, without any medicine in the world.


Fall. A base Plebeian tyke!


Caius. By gar, he vas one base fellow, let me tell you dat. De quality no put
such affront upon practitioner renomme, un homme comme mol.


Fall. Right, master Caius; it is a damned thing when people will not die
secundum artem; but live in spite of the doctor. But to the present concern,
how is it with Peto?


Caius. Oh! j'espere qu'il seroit beintor gue^^; he is in very fair way, Sir
Joha.


Fall. Bardolph tells me here, he is in a bad one; fair and good, I have heard
often; but fair and bad, seldom. But what are his complaints, master doctor? I
know something of physic.


Caius. Vy, Sir John, de cutis of de occiput est lacere: there be gros tumors
all over de corpse, de body, De patient has a delire, a vertigo; and besides, de
symptoms febriles, de pouls indicate phlebotomy.


Fall. Phlebotomy! What bleeding?


Caius. A leetel, Sir John -- ve vill take avay but sixteen ounces, for un
petit revulsion.


Fall. Sixteen ounces! Have thou a design upon his life? What, a plague, would
thou kill him? He does not weigh four pounds averdupoize, flesh, bones and all;
and thou would take him away by quarterns, in a slop-bason.


Caius. Vat is dat, Sir John? vill you instruct me in de patologie, de
therapeutice, de indications et contra-indications? Monsieur Peto, must be bled.


Fall. Bleed sick apes and hypp'd monkies. If Peto be not hanged, he shall die a
natural death. Think thou I Will have his veins drained to fill a row of
porringers in a barber's shop window! use bits of red cloth and be damned: ye
shall have the blood of no follower of mine. Sixteen ounces! I tell thee, not
Galen, Hippocrates, nor Esculapius himself, were they alive, should thus
operate upon him. Phlebotomy! I will phlebotomize ye all with my rapier, by the
Lord, if you offer to draw a lancet on him.


Caius. Eh bien done, Sir John; be not in one passion; ve vill take little
less; but, by gar de patient vill die, if he no be bled. And let me tell you,
Sir John, you vould do yell to lose little blood. En vcrite vous etes crop
phletorique.


Fall. Me! I thank thee. But, in the blood is the life of the creature; and I
will not consent to part with mine.


Caius. II seroit mieux aussi: it would be better, Sir John, you mix little
more vater in your wine.


Fall. More water! I mix none.


Caius. Vorse and vorse! By gar, Sir John, if you no shange your regime, you
shall die. Your fat vill eat you up.


Fall. I shall eat up many a fat capon first, master doctor. -- But would
thou persuade me, with thy contra-indications, tha^ water is better than wine?


Caius. I our quelques temperamens et dans certains cas; for some constitutions
and in some cases, Sir John.


Fall. For thine, perhaps, but mine thanks thee for thy water. Wine is good
enough for me.


Caius. Ah! que vous etes mal avise. Eh bien, Sir John, you will no take my
advice, I leave you. Bon jour -- good day to you, Sir John.

(Aside.) Eh! mon dieu! si gras! si gros, by gar, he cannot live long; he will
overlay his own belly and burst, if he be not bled.

[Exit Dr. Caius.
SCENE III.
Fall. Good day to you, master doctor apothecary. And yet I know not whether I
ought to wish that neither; for a good day to him must be a bad one to
somebody. A man of any conscience, or humanity, knows not how to salute
fellows of such an occupation: for who would wish the rest of mankind lame and
blind, sick and sorry, to find them employment, forsooth? -- Poor Peto! I would
not lose him, methinks; for, though he be a worthless knave, he is an old
acquaintance; and I never could find in my heart to part with my old
acquaintance merely because they were good for nothing. King Hal is another
sort of a man to what I am, to abandon his old friends in his prosperity thus.
Poor Peto!


Bar. Ecod, Sir John, it happened lucky for me, I can tell ye, that I came off
so well as I did yesterday.


Fall. Ay, by'r lady, thou playd'st fair to get off in a whole skin, and leave
thy friend and master in extremity.


Bar. Nay, 'pon honor, Sir John, I did my utmost to keep up with you: but
'twas unpossible; and indeed it was very fortunable that I was not myself trod
to death by the populous.


Fall. Thou! tell me the moon is a Suffolk cheese, or a Windser pear. Thou! have
I not seen thee clear the ring without a staff, at a bear-baiting? Thou
might make thy way through a legion, nay the millions of a croisade: why,
who would come within a fathom of that firebrand, thy nose? It is a flaming
two-edged sword. Would thou make me believe the villains would come near
thee, to burn their holiday clothes? Thou would have set them a-blaz'ng like
stubble, and have consumed the whole procession of heralds, like men of straw.
A plague upon them, it was by their avoiding thee, I suppose, that I had like
to have died a martyr to corpulency.


Bar. Sir John, you are always plaguing me about my face; what would you have
me do with it?


Fall. Do with it! If there were water enough in the Thames, I would have thee
quench it. But water, I fear, can do nothing for thee; since I remember, when
we rode last from Canterbury, when the rain beating full in our faces, thou
came into the Borough with thy nose and cheeks glowing red-hot, although they
had been hissing all the way like a tailor's goose. God forgive me -- but when
thou runn'st behind the hedge, in fear of the officer; I could not help
comparing him and thee to Moses and the burning-bush. But thou will in time be
consumed: thy fire must out.


Bar. I would it were out, so be I might hear no more on it. In troth, Sir John,
if I must always be your butt, I shall seek another service I assure you.


Fall. Nay, nay, good Bardolph, that must not be. I speak not in disparagement,
heaven knows: for I mean to cherish thee against the lack of fuel, or the
visitation of a Dutch winter.


Bar. 'Sblood, Sir John, I Will bear it no longer.

[Going.
Fall. Hold, Bardolph, where art thou going? thou glowworm in magnature with
thy tail upwards; thou pumpion-headed rascal, stay, or --


Bar. Give me good words then, Sir John. Why pumkin head, pray now?


Fall. Have thou never seen a scoop'd pumpion set over a candle's-end, on a gate
post, to frighten ale wives from gossiping by owl-light? That is a type of thee
-- that is thy emblem: thy head being hollow, full of light, and easily broken;
as thou shall experience, if thou offer'st to fly thy colors till disbanded by
authority. I shall need thee, I tell thee, to keep me warm under the coldness
of the king's displeasure.


Bar. Indeed, Sir John, burnt sack and ginger will do you more good: for
whatsomever light I may give, I am fare, set aside choler, I am as cold as ever
a white-liver'd younker in town.


Fall. Cold, say thou! thy face would condemn thee for an incendiary before
any bench of judicature in the kingdom! thou would carry apparent
combustibles into court with thee. Tell not me of cold. Thou would certainly
have been hanged long ago, had not the sheriff been afraid thou would have
fired the hangman or the gibbet.


Bar. Why, Sir John, I have been your attendant off and on these twenty years,
come Candlemas; and I don't find I have had any such effect on you.


Fall. The cause, you rogue, the cause; am not I obliged to keep a pipe of
Canary constantly discharging on me? Are not the tapsters perpetually employed?
the sackbuckets for ever a going, to keep me from blazing? And yet at times my
skin is shrivelled up like an April pippin. Mark me but walking an hundred
paces, with thee glowing at my heels, if I do not broil and drip like a
roasting ox.


Bar. Ah, you are pleased to be hard upon me, Sir John, but I am sure my face
never hurt a hair of your head.


Fall. No! look at 'em -- has it not turned them all gray? Twenty years ago,
before they were calcined by thy fire, my locks were of a nut-brown.


Bar. Why, you grow old, Sir John.


Fall. Old! what call ye old? I am a little more than threescore: and Methusalem
lived to near a thousand. Why may not I be a patriarch, and beget sons and
daughters these hundred years, myself?


Bar. Then you must get a wife, Sir John, for your common fields, you know,
never bear clover.


Fall. Marry! what to be made a cuckold of, I warrant ye?


Bar. Why, Sir John, if you should marry, you would not like to be singular, I
suppose.


Fall, Nay, for the matter of that, all is one: but who will have me? Your dames
of breeding are too fine and finicking tor me to bear with them.


Bar. Ay, or for them to bear you either, Sir John.


Fall. Nay, whoever has me, she must be no tenderling; she must be none of your
gingerbread lasses, that will crumble to pieces in the towzling. She must be
none of your wishy-washy, panada gentry neither; your curd and whey
gentlefolks, that cannot support the embraces of a soldier, I must have a
kicksy-wicksey of more substantial stuff.


Bar. Why, Sir John, what say you to Madam Ursula, your old sweetheart? You
have courted her to my knowledge these twenty years last past. I suppose you
know her great aunt is dead, and has left her four hundred marks a year.


Fall. No, by the lord, I heard nothing on it. She sent me a letter, indeed, into
Gloucestershire; but I was over a bottle, and would not interrupt the glass to
read it. I knew it was hers by the superscription, which by the way, however,
was as unintelligible as the handwriting on the wall. It had never reached me
had not the bearer been a decypherer. Go, Bardolph, and fetch it; you will find
it among other trumpery in my cloak bag.


[Exit Bardolph, SCENE IV. Tavern continued.
FALSTAFF, solus. Four hundred marks a year, quoth he! It were not an
unreasonable competence were not sherries comparatively so dear. But if the
female encumbrance on it should turn out a shrew; the Lord have mercy on me, in
thus paying off the sins of my youth. Let me bethink me. Four hundred marks a
year! I have, it is true, small hopes from Hal; and shall grow old some time or
other. These aches in my limbs forebode it. I cannot hold out for ever; that is
certain. Were it not good, therefore, to make a virtue of necessiry, and take
up while I am in case to reap the credit of reformation? Could I reconcile it
to my interest, I believe my inclination would follow.


SCENE V. Tavern continued.
Re-enter BARDOLPH. Bar. There, Sir John, is the letter.


Fall. Come on: let us see if we are master of so much Arabic as to find out
our meaning. (Reads) Hum -- hum -- hum --! Why, dame Ursula, thou have a
memory. I could have credited thee for subtlety, on account of that old friend
to woman, the serpent: but how thou could remember for fifteen years together
what money I owed thee -- that indeed I cannot account for. I have myself
forgot it long since. She tells me here, I have borrowed five hundred pounds of
her at times, as tokens of my love. By the Lord, and as I am a soldier, I will
love her still, and she shall command semblable proofs of it. (Reads on) Hum --
hum -- Repayment of the money or the performance of my engagements! Hoo! am I
then to be married on compulsion? That will go most damnably against the grain.
But hold -- if I marry, her money will be mine: if nor, she may cease to lend
when she pleases: and the fortune of that man is always at the turning of the
tide, who depends on the caprice of a woman.


Bar. Why, marry her, then, Sir John. I dare say she has heard nothing of your
disgrace at court; so that she will not stand upon terms.


Fall. Marry, Bardolph, and I am half resolved to do so. Yea, by the Lord, and I
will too. She has besides two thousand pounds in money, I will courageously
make the attack and mount the breach of matrimony. If I sall into the hands of
Philistines; why, good night. It is but going into purgatory a few years before
my time, Bardolph, get me pen and ink, in the cupid. Thou shall be one of
love's messengers. -- I will write to her in trope and figure: metaphor and
hyperbole carry all before them with the women. Let her resist lies and
nonsense if she can.

[Exeunt.
SCENE VI.
Enter NYM, Dol, and QUICKLY. Dol. But do you think, Nym, they will not discover
us?


Nym. Not if you mind the trick of it, and don't betray yourselves. The old
'squire is as rampant as a goat, and conceited as an ape. And as for the young
one, he has but four senses out of the five. Let not your breath smell of
aquavitae, nor your lips smack of bawdry. Array yourselves antique, look modest
and speak supernaculum. Do this, and they will never suspect you.


Quick. O, let me alone for speaking supernaculum; I have a set of the
courtliest phrases in my huswisry book! I Will con them by heart.


Nym. Well, go, prosper: Pistol will be here presently.


Quick. Fear not -- we'll lose no time: come, Dol, we shall be made women, if
this plot succeeds.


[Exeunt omnes. SCENE VII.
Dame URSULA and BRIDGET attending.
Urs. And do you think, Bridget, Sir John will be at last as good as his word,
then? How sits my ruff today? I would thou had bought me one of those
new-fashioned farthingales.


Brid. O, madam, you are mighty fine, as it is, truly: and, I am sure, Sir John
can do nothing less than admire you.


Urs. Think thou so, Bridget? Why, to be certain, a peach-colour'd satin
does become my complexion hugely. But I think the roses are faded in my cheeks.
Well, no matter: he might have gathered them twenty years ago, had not he been
a rover. I hope, however, he has sold his wild oats now, and that I shall yet
have the satisfaction to be called my lady Falstaff.


Brid. To be sure, madam; and though Sir John is but a knight at present, he will
be very assuredly, now the young king is crowned, be made a great lord, and may
be a duke. Indeed, madam, I cannot think of less.


Urs. And then shall I be a duchess, Bridget. Dame Ursula a duchess!


Brid, Ay, madam, that will be a day to see; if I am so happy as to be in your
grace's favor.


Urs. For certain, Bridget, thou shall. Well, this love is a strange thing!
there is Sir John has deceived me a thousand times, and yet, I know not how, he
always persuaded me he was sincere.


Brid. A sure sign you loved him, madam.


Urs. And yet to be sure, before I received his letter, I thought I never
should hear from him again, and had almost come to a resolution to cast him
entirely off.


Brid. In good sooth, madam, that is very prudent; to cast off a lover when we
find he will leave us.


Urs. I think so, and not a little imprudent to do it before, for one of my
years at least.


Brid. Why, madam, you are not so old.


Urs. Indeed, but I am -- old enough to know I ought not to part with one lover
till I am sure of another.


Brid. To be sure, madam, a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush; but the
sport of hampering the rogues, who are at liberty, is so vastly pretty.


Urs. Ay, if we were sure of catching them at last; but Bridger, Bridget, how
often do they escape through our singers and give us the slip! Besides, it is
for younger lasses than I to go bird-catching -- I cannot throw salt on the
tail of a sparrow now.


Bridge. Nay, lay not so, madam; you forget your new lover, Don Anticho del
Pistolo.


Urs. Hang him, fustian pated rogue, whoever he be, to pester me with his
epistles. -- To write letters for his comrade to thee too! well, as I live, I
will expose this pair of bombards to Sir John. I will show him their letters.


Brid. Madam, the knight is coming.


Urs. Bless us, Bridget, and so he is. Introduce him and leave us.


SCENE VIII.
Enter FALSAFF. Fall. Well, my fair princess, see thy wandering knight.


Urs. Welcome to London, Sir John; thou art indeed a wanderer.


Fall. A true knight errant for thy sake.


Urs, For my sake, Sir John?


Fall. Ay, for thine, my Helen. Have I not encountered tremendous giants and
fiery dragons, in the rebels of Northumberland and Wales? And then for
magicians and enchanted castles: Owen Glandower and his Welsh devils we put to
the rout; and many a strong hold between here and West-Chester have I visited,
releasing fair damsels and distressed 'squires from captivity. I brought two of
the latter up to town; I would they were safely immured in the country again.


Urs. And all these exploits for me, Sir John.


Fall. As I am a true knight, to lay my laurels at thy feet.


Urs. Do you then still love me in sincerity, Sir John?


Fall. Do I love thee? Am I a soldier? Have I courage? Love thee; I will be thy
Troilus, and thou shall be my Cressida.


Urs. You have long told me so, indeed.


Fall. And can I lie? Thou shall be sole possessor of my person and wealth. Thou
shall share in the honors done me at the court of the new king. Thou shall --
but what shall thou not do? We will be married incontinently.


Urs. O, Sir John, you know your own power, and our sex's weakness: but indeed
for decency I cannot so speedily consent. Besides, Sir John, I am not yet put
into possession of my estate and moneys.


Fall. Nay then, as thou say, love, for decency's s^ke, we must bear with a
short delay: but I will no longer be kept out of possession than thou art.


Urs. You shall not, Sir John; and, in the mean time, our lawyers shall confer
on the terms of our marriage.


Fall. I hate lawyers. Let a priest suffice. Am not I a man of honor?

To do thee less than justice were a sin,
Give me thy lips, we'll settle all within.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A Chamber.
Enter Justice SHALLOW and Mrs. QUICKLY, dressed in tawdry clothes. Quick. NAY,
forsooth, Mr. Shallow, I am too young a widow; much too young to think of a
second husband.


Shall. Not so, fair mistress. If to wed be good, the sooner married still the
better sped. My assiduities will make you soon forget your former spouse.


Quick. Your acidities, indeed, are very great, Mr. Shallow. But you are too
pressing: I cannot so soon forget poor Quickly. -- What the goujeres have I
said?


Shall. Quickly! -- I thought your husband name was --


Quick. Yes, yes, and so it was; but I called him always Quickly, because he
was ever so slow. He died, poor man, of a slow melancholy. Always asleep! night
and day asleep!


Shall. Hah! addicted to somnolency.


Quick. Ay, so the doctors said. He died of a solemnity, and a solemn end, I
warrant ye, he made of it.


Shall. He was too fat and corpulent perhaps; I am leaner.


Quick. Yes, Sir, he grew fat and burstened, by sotting with his guests,
instead of minding the main chance and scoring double.


Shall. Say you? Mistress! --


Quick. Blisters on my nimble tongue. I say, Mr. Shallow, he was rich, and
keeping open house, had store of guests, that made a world of trouble.


Shall. Open house, and leave so much behind him: that is rare! he traded
greatly?


Quick. Greatly, Mr. Shallow.


Shall. And bore arms.


Quick. Two pumpions on a cucumber bed.


Shall. They will quarter. -- I Will settle on thee fairly, widow.


Quick. Will you, Mr. Shallow?


Shall. Ecod, I will. Ay, twice as much for such another smile. Odds heart, that
look shot through me like an arrow. Nay, I will kiss thee, fackins will I --

[They struggle; Shallow kisses her, and she breaks from him in affected anger.
Odds bods! a dainty widow!


Quick. You're rude, Sir, I must leave you.

[Exit.
Shall. Hah! gone! then Shallow shall not stay behind, But will pursue and force
her to be kind.

[Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Mr. SLENDER and DOL TEARSHEET. Slend.Sings, Slender and tender
And no mere pretender.
Ha! said I well, Mrs. Beatrice?


Dol. Ay, and sung well too, Sir.


Slend. Nay, I have a sweet breath to sing with: that is the truth of it. And
yet I warrant you did not know I could sing so well, when you first; fell in
love with me.


Dol. Oh, fie, Mr. Slender. You make me blush. Young maidens should not be told
so, though it were true. But, pray, where learnt you now that I was in love with
you? Who told you this?


Slend. Marry, that did my uncle Shadow's fencing master, the Don with the hard
name. I should otherwise have blushed more by hals than you. Hang me if you had
caught me at falling in love first. But one good turn deserves another, as we
say in the country.


Dol. To be sure, Mr. Slender has parts.


Slend. Marry, would I might be hanged else. Why, do you know, that I have had
maidens in love with me twice and once before now.


Dol. In the country belike.


Slend. Yea, verily, there was Mrs. Anne Page of Windsor, would have given, I
warrant ye, more than I wot of, to be married to me.


Dol. And you would not have her.


Slend. Yes, I would have had her then; but I know not how, they cozened me,
and married me to a great lubberly boy.


Dol. To a boy!


Slend. Yes, la! but, for that trick, if ever I marry any body again, I Will take
care they don't wear does-skin breeches under their petticoats; that I will.


Dol. Ha! ha! ha!


Slend. Nay, it was no such laughing matter that I know of.


Dol. Ha! ha! ha!


Slend. Ecod, if you laugh so at me, handsome as you are, I Will go and tell my
uncle; so I will.

[Exit.
Dol. Go thy way, with God's blessing, for a fool; were it not for thy wealth,
Doll Tearsheet would not follow thee.

[Exit.
SCENE III. Tavern in Eastcheap.
Enter FALSTAFF, laughing. Don Anticho del Pistolo! what a bombast rogue it is!
I knew his hand writing, the moment I saw it. But I have put a spike into the
wheel of his contrivance. Dame Ursula and her maid have given these rascals
encouragement. If they bite; the scoundrels will be hooked.

Enter FRANCIS. Fra. Sir John, here is the hobbling friar, that has been so
often to ask for you. Shall I say you are at home?


Fall. Ay, let him in. -- What can the gouty precisian want with me?


SCENE IV.
Enter FRIAR. Fr. Peace be with you. Sir John, God save ye.


Fall. Thank thee good father. What is your reverence's will.


Fr. I think thou do not know me, Sir John. It is indeed many years since our
personal intimacy: your way of life and mine --


Fall. Were something different, father, to be sure: and though I may have seen
you before, it is so long since I have been at shrift, that I must crave your
pardon if I have totally forgot you. And yet your reverence may be ray ghostly
father, for ought I know.


Fr. Fie, fie, Sir John, a man of your age and gravity.


Fall. Hoh! if your business be to chide me, I shut mine cars.


Fr. If you will not admit your wound to be prob'd; how can you expect to be
cured, Sir John?


Fall. Cured! 'sblood, I took thee for a priest, and I find thou art a surgeon.


Fr. A spiritual one, Sir John; and such as your disorder requires.


Fall. Do thou know my case then? A spiritual surgeon say thou? I am not
given over by the surgeons bodily yet. Who call in the divine till they have
sent out the doctor?


Fr. I know your case well, Sir John. It is perhaps less your body than your
mind that is infected.


Fall. Nay, like enough. I have indeed been damnably dispirited ever since the
king's coronation. A confounded melancholy hangs upon me like a quotidian ague.


Fr. It is that melancholy, and the cause of it, Sir John, I would remove.


Fall. And how would thou remove it? By providing me with a charge of horse,
and restoring me to the king's favor. I know no other way.


Fr. By inducing thee to repent, and be restored to the favor of the King of
kings; which thou have forfeited by a dissolute and abandoned life. Do thou
not think thou art in a state of reprobation?


Fall. Pray, friar, by what authority do thou take upon thee to catechize me?
Do thou come out of mere charity, or art thou employed by thy superiors?


Fr. Suppose the former, Sir John.


Fall. Suppose the former, father friar, why then the devil is so strong in me,
that I should be tempted to throw thee headlong down stairs for thy charitable
impertinence.


Fr. Thy ill-manners, Sir John, would be inexcusable, were it not to be
supposed the consequence of an habitual antipathy to every thing that is good.
But, I will not lay claim to greater merit than is my due. I am come by order
of my Lord-chief-justice; who is so much your friend as to interest himself in
your reformation.


Fall. My Lord-chief-justice! that is another matter. I cry thee mercy, reverend
father. I find you are not the man I took thee for. Your reverence does me
honor; and I profess I am much indebted to his lordship's kind love and regard
to my soul's health.


Fr. You Will hear me then, Sir John.


Fall. Yea, heaven forbid I should not -- what I said was meant against those
officious zealots, who are so forward to pry into men's consciences that will
not bear the looking into.


Fr. Sir John, we know your failings; and shall not put you to the trouble of
auricular confession at present.


Fall. There, friar, thou winn'st my heart. Come sit thee down. Wilt drink a
glass of sack?


Fr. I never do, Sir John.


Fall. I cry thee mercy, then. Here is to your reverence's health; and now, I Will
tell thee what, -- I do protest, I sit me now upon the stool of repentance, and
have been honestly deliberating, some time past, to change my course of life. I
am heartily tired of it. Indeed, I am, good father.


Fr. I am glad to find thee in such promising dispositions, and think thou
could not do better than to betake thyself, agreeable to his lordship's
intentions, to some monastery, where thou will be secluded from temptations,
and have all spiritual assistance to encourage thee to mortify the desires of
the flesh.


Fall. Hold thee there, good father. Let me understand thee. What! would his
lordship make a monk of me? I must there beg his pardon. A monk; and to mortify
the flesh! For heavens sake, good father, consider what a mortification indeed
that must be to me, who have fix times the quantity of any other man. If I must
be included within the pale of the church, why not make a canon of me (not
indeed a minor canon) but a prebendary, or a bishop, now. Something might be
said for either of these. But for a monk! I know not any thing I am less fit
for; unless indeed his lordship had meant to make a running footman of me.


Fr. Nay, Sir John, his lordship will not use compulsion in this. He will not
so far lay a restraint on your inclinations.


Fall. O, if I ever find myself that way inclined; his lordship may depend on it
I shall be as ready as ever to follow my inclinations. But the lesson of lean
and sallow abstinence is very long and hard, good father; I am not gotten
halfway through the first chapter yet.


Fr. Some steps, however, Sir John, you must take, toward a more reputable way
of life; and that speedily too: otherwise you will be stripped of the honors of
knighthood; and the king's sentence of banishment will be strictly put into
execution against you.


Fall. As to the matter of knighthood; once a knight and always a knight, you
know. The king may make as many knights as he pleases; but he will not so
easily unmake them again. My title will not depend on the king's courtesy, but
on that of my followers. I am, notwithstanding, very desirous to give his
lordship satisfaction: and do assure thee, on the honor of a soldier, of the
sincerity of my repentance.


Fr. And yet this may be only a transitory fit of penitence, owing to your late
disappointment. What reason can thou give me to hope this state of mind will
continue?


Fall. Why, father, what I am shortly going to do is an act, that has confined
many a man to a state of repentance, which has continued to the last hour of
his life.


Fr. This, Sir John, is saying something. Pray what are you going to do?


Fall. I have taken a resolution, father, to -- What do thou think now it is I
have resolved upon?


Fr. Some commendable act of penance, no doubt.


Fall. Nay, it may well be called so, I believe. I am determined, good father,
to marry.


Fr. Call you that an act of penance, Sir John? Is marriage a state of
mortification?


Fall. I wish I may not find it so.


Fr. Well, Sir John, marriage is a holy state; and in some degree I approve
your resolution; but, in the estimation of the church, it is also an holy act,
and ought not to be entered into unadvisedly. Your repentance should precede
your receiving the benefit of that sacrament.


Fall. O, doubt not but I shall repent me sufficiently afterward.


Fr. Ah! Sir John, Sir John, I fear me you are no true penitent: but, however,
it may be lawful to salve what cannot be effectually cured. I did not expect to
make a convert at the first interview. If thou take any measures that tend
toward reformation, thou shall have my prayers and best assistance therein.
Another time I will hold farther conversation with thee.


Fall. In the mean time, good father, let me stand fair in your report to my
Lord-chief-justice and his majesty.


Fr. Thou shall stand fairer than I fear thou deservest. Farewell.

[Exit Friar.
SCENE V. Tavern continued.
FALSTAFF, solus. Fare thee well, good father friar. What an hypocritical
puritan! Would not drink sack! Not with the ungodly I suppose. But I am
damnably mistaken, if he be not indebted for that rosy countenance and the
gout, to the penetrating qualities of old sherris.


SCENE VI.
Enter BARDODPH. Fall. Well Bardolph, what news do thou bring?


Bar. Marry Sir John, I have just seen a sight that you would have chuckled at.


Fall. And what is that?


Bar. Why, mother Quickly and Dol Tearsheet, attired like dames of fashion, and
courted by justice Shallow and master Slender. For my own part, I Am out of the
plot; but if I find the contrivance is deep: the 'squires are caught. Pistol
and Nym are somehow at the bottom of it. That Is all I can learn.


Fall. Bardolph, those knaves would leave me, and set up for themselves. The
'squires are mine; a lawful prey, and shall not be fed upon without our leave.
Learn more, and I will bethink me how to counteract the villainous machinations
of these runagates. Bur, now, attend me forth.

[Excunt.
SCENE VII.
Enter URSULA and BRIDGET. Urs. Now, Bridget, mark me well. That errant knave,
Our Spanish suitor, will anon be here. Sir John requests that I do greet him
kindly, And give him flattering earnest of success.


Brid. Doubt not my cunning: I Have been taught ere while to set an egg upon its
little end.


Urs. A grannum's secret, Bridget; but no more -- What creature's that, who
with enormous strides Measures the pavement yonder?


Brid. It Is the Don -- I will be ready, Madam, when you please, to scare him
hence.

[Exit Bridget.
Urs. Nay, he shall have some sour as well as sweet; Keen as he is, all honey
is not meet.


SCENE VIII.
Enter PISTOL. Pis. Fair dame, I kiss your hands, your gentle brief, Borne by
the winged Mercury, came to hand; And sends your slave to meet his amorous doom.


Urs. I fear, Sir, I have trespassed on the bounds Of maiden modesty, to write
so freely. What will the world say of this strange demeanor?


Pis. Breathes he etherial air will dare to east Reflections base on Ursula's
fair name?


Urs. Indeed, Signior Anticho, I have a woman's timidity, and am apprehensive
my behavior in this particular will seem too light. Affections of so speedy
growth are blamed, as weeds too rank to thrive in true love's garden.


Pis. No general rule's without exception, lady. The object of your choice --
Pistolo's fame Will silence all that hear and know his name.


Urs. In that indeed I place my confidence: and yet a stranger, till his
worth's approved, however noble in his native soil, is Open to suspicion. Not
that your valor, birth, or virtuous fame I mean to question; but to please my
phantasy, and justify my conduct to the world, I would know more of your high
rank and pedigree. What is the blazonry of its distinction?


Pis. Pistolo wears his coat upon his sword. Behold this blade. -- The very
steel is died [Draws. With blood of Infidels, Jews, Turks, and Moors.


Urs. It has a scurvy coat upon it indeed.


Pis. True, lady, this no burnished Finsbury blade,
Taken by young cutlers from their stock in trade,
And in Moorfields on holidays displayed. --
A soldier's weapon this, that bravely fell
In Palestine on Saracens pell-mell
The gift of that renowned and peerless paragon
Rhodomontado hight, the king of Arragon.

Urs. And has Pistolo's valor then been shown In Palestine? That merit's
great, I own.


Pis. There by this sword so many foes were slain, Tnat it was called the
flaming sword of Spain.


[Putting up his sword. Urs. Indeed! 'Twere much a warrior to withstand, Who
comes victorious from the Holy Land.


SCENE IX.
Enter BRIDGET in a hurry. Brid. Good gracious! madam! Sir John Falstaff. --


Pis. Ha! who? who? what is that? Falstaff did thou say?


Urs. No matter, Sir, you shall not hence away.

It is a quondam sweetheart; whom, for thee,
I shall dismiss with frowns, as thou shall see.

Brid. Heavens, madam, I would not for the world Sir John should come in while
the cavalier is here. We should have bloody doings I warrant. Did not the
knight, when he was as here last, complain of your indifference, and vow
vengeance on your new lover?


Pis. (Aside) By Styx, he will know and foil me.


Urs. Poh! poh! this gentleman fears him not, nor twenty such. Don Pistolo's
sword has been fleshed among the moors.


Brid. Moors! lack-a-day! what talk you of moors? What are simple moors to such
a paramour as he. You know, madam, he is in desperation at the loss of your
ladyship's affection.


Pis. Thou, mistress Abigail, art in the right -- Prior pretensions if the
knight does boast, Why happy man be's dole, say I, Il primo venuto il primo
servito.


Urs. How Is this, signior? Shall not a woman of my age and fashion make my own
choice? And can your honor thus desert your fortune?


Pis. Desert my fortune! ha! why -- what -- O, no --


Urs. Nay, nay, I claim protection from your sword Against this rude intruder.


Pis. Furies! -- ( Pauses) Oh! I have it. -- Enough -- thou say -- my sword
thou shall command Against pagan recreant or Christian knight Come forth,
Toledo, -- ( Draws) Ha! what is this I see? O blunder vile! unfortunate mistake!
My varlet has equipped me with a foil, A blunt and battered foil, sans point
and temper: It would not parry even a bulwark, this.


[Throws away his sword, which Bridget picks up. Urs. Bridget, let us see --

[Takes the sword, and clapping the point to the ground, bends it double. Alas!
it is so its plain.
Ha, ha, ha, the flaming sword of Spain!
The gift of that renowned and peerless paragon
Rhodomontado hight, the king of Arragon!

[Holding it up in derision. (Turning to Pistol.) Nay, do not take my humor
thus amiss,
I Am light of heart; but nothing mean to offend. --
As with this paultry foil thou can not fight,
Myself will with it encounter this same knight.
Bridget will safe conduct thee to the gate.
Go, and good tidings speedily await.
[Exit Ursula.
SCENE X.
PISTOL looking after her.
The gibbet be my portion, if I trow,
Whether she means to jilt me now, or no:
But fata trahunt -- Abigail, lead on,
If Falstaff's near, it is time that I were gone.
[Exeunt. SCENE XI. A Street.
Enter Justice SHALLOW and Master SLENDER. Shall. Take me -- take me this
letter, I say, to Sir John Falstaff. -- That is his suttling-house. I will maul
his cloak-bag of chitterlings with my rapier, as I may.


Slen. And will you fight him, cousin? Well, hang me if I carry the challenge.
I never could abide the thoughts of cold iron. Even a key put down my back for
a bloody nose, ugh -- ugh -- ugh, would always set me a shuddering.


Shall. Don't tell me -- if the law will not get me my money, I Will be revenged
of him. The tun-bellied knave shall not make such a fool of me. I will have his
blood or my money.


Slen. His blood! O lud! O lud! Why, cousin Shallow, you are enough to --


Shall. Carry me this letter, I say, to Sir John Falstaff. What is it to you? If
I am killed, you are my heir, and come in for my land and beaves. So, do as I
bid you.


Slen. Ecod, that is true. I did not think of that: if my cousin's kili'd, I
come in for his estate. (Aside) Ay, I Will carry him the challenge. Hey! here he
comes, with his bottle-nos'd man, that picked my pocket at Windsor.


SCENE XII. Street continued.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH. Shall. Sir John! Sir John Falstaff!


Bar. Sir John, justice Shallow calls ye.


Fall. What would the blade of spear-mint have with me? I have done with him.


Shall. But I have not yet done with you, Sir John? I would first have my
thousand pound of you again.


Fall. You would, master Shallow! like enough! You must take me then in the
humor. I am at present illdispos'd to your suit.


Shall. Tut, Sir John. I have said I will not tamely put up this wrong. If I do,
I shall be flouted and gib'd to death: I shall be pursued by the mockery of a
whole hundred.


Fall. Not unlikely. But, believe me, the more you bustle in this business, the
more you will expose yourself. The more you stir -- you know the proverb,
master Shallow, it is a little homely, so let that pass. Yet, let me advise
thee; rest content.


Shall. Content! I am not content. I cannot be content. Nay, I will not be
content. Give me back the money, or I will have satisfaction of thee.


Fall. Satisfaction, say thou? Why, thou will not dare me to the combat.


Shall. Such provocation would make a coward fight, Sir John.


Fall. If it make thee fight, I Will be sworn it would: for I have seen thee
tremble at the shaking of a wheat ear.


Shall. To be bamboozled! cheated! laughed at! I will not put it up. By heavens,
I will not put it up.


Fall. Well said, master Shallow. Now I see there is mettle in thee. But surely
thou would not be the first to break the peace? thou, whose office it is to
punish the breach of it.


Shall. Sir John, there are times and reasons for all things. If you will
neither give me my money nor gentleman's satisfaction, I will have thee tossed
in a blanket for a poltroon as thou art.


Fall. They must be stout carls, master Shallow, that toss me in a blanket.


Shall. Well, well, we shall see, I Will parley with you no longer. Cousin Slender
don't stand shill I, shall I, but give him the note.


Slen. Ay, ay, if coz is killed, I shall have his estate; and so there is the
challenge.


[Exeunt Shallow and Slender. SCENE XIII.
FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH. Fall. A challenge! -- By the Lord, and it is a
challenge. I am called upon here to meet him on Tower hill incontinently at
single rapier. Hoo! what a turluru! In the name of common-sense is the fool
turned madman? What means the simple tony by this? To get his money again? Does
he think by running me through the pericardium to become my heir at law? The
fearful stag is at bay, and become desperate. But let me see -- what is to be
done here? I am in person too much of a knight to engage with so little a
'squire. -- I have it. -- Bardolph, I being your master and a knight, thou art
by the laws of chivalry no less than a'squire. Now, as I take it, this quarrel
is properly thine: thou must meet justice Shallow at single rapier.


Bar. I, Sir John. He has no quarrel against me. The challenge is given to your
honor.


Fall. True, but I tell thee my honor disdains to encounter a pitiful 'squire:
thou must take my sword and fight him.


Bar. I shall only disgrace your arms, Sir John.


Fall. Go to, you will do well. He knows nothing of the sword; and should he
challenge thee at pistols, put a charge into each barrel, and present thy nose
at him: he will never stand thy fire.


Bar. Indeed, Sir John, I must be excused. I never could fight in my life,
unless there was something to be got by it; a booty on the highway, or so.


Fall. Why it is for a thousand pound, you rogue.


Bar. And where is the money?


Fall. At my cashier's.


Bar. Well then, Sir John, why should we fight for it?


Fall. Bardolph, thou art a coward; but no matter. I have a thought: I will meet
him myself. Go, fetch the buckler I fought with at Shrcwsbury.

[Exeunt.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Tower Hill.
Enter PISTOL and justice SHALLOW, stripped for the combat. Pis. DREAD naught,
brave 'squire, the knight's a coward rank.


Shall. I am glad to hear that, and yet I would I had had a lesson or two more,
before I had encountered him.


Pis. Bear thy point thus -- sa, sa, friend Shallow, sa.
Do thus, I say, and trust Pistolo's art.
I to the buxom widow will relate
This deed of prowess.

Shall. I will essay; but some one comes this way; let us retire, and try that
pass again.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Dr. CAIUS and his MAN. Cai. Jack Rugby, follow me Jack Rugby: I ave hear
dear is to be duel fought hereabouts, by and by. If de parties be not killed
outright, dey may vant assistance. Ve must vatch de opportunity, Jack Rugby.


Rug. To prevent the gentlemen fighting, Sir. --


Cai. To preventtheir fighting! vat ave we to do wid dat? No, you fool, Jack:
to take care of the vounded. Dat is my business.


Rug. But how if the other should run away?


Cai. By gar let him run: he be no patient for me. -- Come dis way.

[Exeunt
SCENE III.
Enter FALSTAFF. Aha -- aha -- What a vile mist there is abroad to day! I
cannot see a sword's length before me. This must be the spot. But where is the
adversary? I would not have him, methinks, lost in the fog. Master Shallow!
master Shallow!


SCENE IV.
Re-enter SHALLOW. Shall. Ay, ay, Sir John, here am I.


Fall. Saints and good angels guard us! What is this?


Shall. Come, Sir John, draw, draw.


Fall. It calls me by my name too! Jesu Maria! It is no deccptio visus. In the
name of heaven and earth, what art thou? Ouphe, fairy, ghost, hobgoblin, or
demon? Exerciso te. -- Pater noster --


Shall. Come, Sir John, don't think to put me from my purpose: you know me very
well. You know justice Shallow to his cost.


Fall. How! can this thing be Robert Shallow, of Gloucestershire, esquire justice of
the peace, and of the quorum? I took it for some strolling ghost escaped out of
purgatory, by all that is terrible.


Shall. Sir John, this mockery shall not suffice you.


Fall. Nay, it is true, as I am a sinner.


Shall. Will you fight me, Sir John, or will you not?


Fall. Fight thee! When thou see the princely eagle deseend to encounter the
tomtit. What! shall the lofty elephant wield his proboscis against a mite?
Shall Sir John Falstaff draw his martial sword against such a pigwidgeon as
thou?


Shall. What then did you come here for, Sir John? If you would not be treated
as a coward, lay down your target, and draw.


Fall. Lay down my target, say thou? Who would be fool then? Look ye, master
Shallow (since shallow thou will be) if I fight, it must be on equal terms. It
is but equitable that my body should be secured, when I engage with an
unsubstantial form; a thing that has none. Do thou think me such a goose cap
as to lay open this fair round belly to the point of thy rapier, when thou
presentest not a mark for me. It were as good as pricking at a lottery, ten
thousand blanks to a prize, to make a thrust at thee. It were indeed more than
a miracle to hit what, rhetorically speaking, is impalpable. But come, if thou
must fight with me, thou shall not say I deal unfairly by thee. To draw my
sword would be needless: for hit thee I never shall. -- That Is siat. Therefore
Toledo rest thou in thy scabbard. This is my ward. ( Stands on his desence with
his target.) Carry thy point as thou will: if thou can not come into me
before thou art weary, the money is mine; if thou do, and woundest: me, I
will then -- keep it to pay the surgeon. So, come on.


Shall. Sir John, you are a cowardly knave, and I will kill you if I can.

( They fight. Mr. Shallow thrusts at Sir John, who receives his point always
on his target.
Fall. Well said, master Shallow. -- Bravo! -- To It again. -- Sa -- sa.

(Shallow breaks his sword, and Falstaff closes with him, and seizes him by the
collar; on which Shall, low falls down on his knees, and Falstaff claps the
target on his head. Ha! have I nabb'd you? You should have appointed sticklers,
Mr. Shallow. What if I cut thy throat now?

(Taking off the target.
Shall. Sir John, my life is in your hands: but you know you have wronged me.


Fall. Well then, thy wrongs be forgotten; and, on that condition, I give thee
back thy forfeited life.


Shall. And I hope also you will not bear malice, Sir John against me for the
future.


Fall, By the Lord, not I. I do admire thy magnanimity and valor. Why, thou art
the very mirror of prowess, and pink of 'squire errantry. John of Gaunt was a
fool to thee. Were I a king, thou should, for this day's work, be made a
knight with all the honors of chivalry. Nay, by our lady, I will take majesty
upon me, and knight thee myself. Rise up Sir Robert Shallow, knight of the most
horrible order of combatants and murderers of the fifth button. And now, Sir
Robert, if thou do not think the tide I Have bestowed on thee worth the
thousand pound I owe thee, I will for the first time make restitution. Thou
shall be repaid out of my wife's portion. For thou must know I am this night to
be married, and have broke into the round sum to make handsome preparations for
my nuptials.


Shall. I give thee joy, Sir John; and as I find there is still so much honor
in thee, I will open my heart, and confess to thee, that both my nephew Slender
and I are going to be married too.


Fall. Ay! to whom, Master Shallow, to whom?


Shall. I to the wealthy widow of Watling-street, and my nephew Slender, to
buxom Beatrice her niece, of Bucklersbury.


Fall. Master Shallow, you are deceived, Master Shallow. I will be a friend to
thee. The widow and her niece are impostors.


Shall. Impostors!


Fall. Whores! whores, Master Shallow!


Shall, How, the widow of Watling-street, and Mrs. Beatrice of Bucklersbury --


Fall. Go to, I mean thy widow -- Give me thy hand; I will tell thee more as we
pass along.

[Exeunt.
SCENE V.
Enter Dr. CAIUS and his MAN. Caius. Dey shake hands! -- Eh, morbleu; dey be
one brace of cowards. Dat fat knight never once draw his rapier. By gar did we
not get more by de malade de France, dan by de English courage, we should not
get salt to our pottage, pardie. But, by gar, I will charge them both for my
attendance; and if they no pay me, I will expose their no courage. -- Come
along, Jack Rugby.

[Exeunt.
SCENE VI.
Enter PISTOL. Pistol. The train takes fire, and all will soon be flame. The
squires are gulled; and Dol and Quickly take For dames of wealth. The corporal
plotted well.


Enter NYM, who gives Pistol a letter. Nym. A letter for Madam Ursula; see if
there is humor in it.


Pistol. Ha! prize or blank! I Will open it, and see Our fortune in the
lottery-book of fate.

[Pistol reads to himself. By Jove's bright welkin, it is a golden prize.
Naught could withstand the flash of pistol's prime.
She writes us here she scorns the wassel knight,
Who keeps today high revels at the globe:
Where if we meet we may in masquerade
Be sped; I to the mistress, you the maid.

Nym. Marry-trap, the humor is good; but how shall we know them?


Pistol. In purple garb, like nymphs, they will be arrayed; And in feigned voices
speak: the word is soh!

Let us about our own disguises strait.
Money buys lands, but weddings go by fate.

SCENE VII.
A Ball-Room.
Enter FALSTAFF, with SHALLOW and SLENDER, in domino's. Their masks in their
hands. Shall. Marry Sir John, thou have a pithy pericranium; this is a notable
contrivance. I have appointed the parties as you directed to be dressed in
purple, and to meet us among the revellers here at the globe.


Fall. Thou have done well, Master Shallow; and I see you and your nephew are
clothed in the same disguises as Nym and Pistol. -- You shall see sport,
Master Shallow. But see, the maskers come this way. I must go meet the bride.

[Shallow and Slender put on their masks.
[Enter a number of maskers; among the rest Pistol, Nym, Mrs. Quickly, and
Doll. Re-enter FALSTAFF, leading in URSULA, followed by BRIDGET. Fall. Gentles,
you're welcome. -- You see I come unmasked among you. It were superfluous for
him to hide his face who could not be concealed for his belly. Could I mask
that indeed, I might pass in disguise. But come, begin the dance: I hope there
will be yet concealment enough in this revelry to defeat the rogueries
contrived in darkness, and bring them to light.


Pistol to Nym. Nym, who are those in purple vestments clad?


Nym. The two in green.


Pistol. In robes of Tyrian dye.


Nym. By their garb they should be the parties; let us accost them. The priest
is ready without. We will bespeedy; and, when sped, return unmasked to
tantalize the knight.

[They go up to Quickly and Doll, and take them out.
A DANCE. PISTOL and NYM re-enter unmasked. Fall. Pistol, how now? wherefore
have doff'd thy mask? Art thou the master of this feast? or am I thine?


Pistol. That is as fortune bids, and time shall show,
Same mount aloof, while others truckle low.
Sir knight, no more your ancient and base tyke,
Pistol was born to wield the potent pike.

Fall. Pistol, thou art always in the clouds. Art thou drunk? or have thou got a
commission?


Pistol. Gold honor buys, and Ursula has store.


Fall. How, rascal! do thou mean to rob my wife?


Nym, Thy wife! marry that were a good jest. -- I see the humor runs well.


Pistol. Not thine, but mine; proud Basilisco knight! Without, just married,
waits thy quondam flame.


Fall. To thee?


Pistol. To me.


Fall. Nym, What say thou?


Nym. Marry, Sir John, that is the short of it: and I myself was just now
married to Mrs. Bridget her woman.


Falstaff, turning to Ursula. Say, my fair queen of Sheba, is this true?
unmask: nay, gentles, all unmask, that we may see what faces are put on.


Urs. You, Sir John, can answer for me.


Bridget. And you for me, madam. Marry a corporal indeed! the fellows are drunk.

[Pistol and Nym look at each other with consusion and astonishment; during
which time Mrs. Quickly und Dol Tearsheet enter unmasked, and, passing by
Pistol and Nym, ( who start back with fresh astonishment) go up to justice
Shallow and Master Slender.
Fall. How now, you barefaced strumpets! what do you mean? This is no brothel:
play no gambols here.


Quick. Marry come up, Sir John; you will not hinder my going to my husband.
Mr. Shallow will protect me; my dear Mr. Shallow.


Dol. No, nor me neither, were he twenty Sir John Falstaffs. Sweet Mr: Slender.


Shall. Goody Quickly, loose your hold I pray you; I know you, Mrs. Quickly.


Slen. Ay, and I know you. too, Mrs. Dorothy.


Dol. O ho! do you so? What, Sir John has blown us; has he? But no matter; he
cannot unmarry us.


Quick. No, truly, that he cannot.


Fall. Nor would I: for since whores and rogues have conforted, I have never
seen four better matched.


Quick. I to wise Justice Shallow.


Dol. And I to foolish Mr. Slender.


Shall. Not so, hostess; keep your distance, I pray you.


Slen. No, no, keep off, Dol, keep off.


Quick. Plain Dol! do you hear that Mrs. Slender?


Dol. And hostess, truly! do you take that Mrs. Shallow?


Fall. Away -- ye termagant jades: or I will demolish your frippery. -- There
are your cuckolds. Pistol, Nym, why stand ye there like mutes? Are you
fascinated at the success of your mummery? Or are you ruminating on the
comforts of cuckoldom by anticipation. -- Take hence your crooked ribs.


[Pistol and Nym go and take Quickly and Dol by the hand. Quick. What, has
there been a trick, then, played on us in these disguises? Was I married to
you, Pistol?


Pistol. Dame Quickly, thou art mine. The fates have crossed us.


Fall. Nay, I Will be sworn they have joined you.


Dol. And was I married to you, Nym?


Nym. Even so, Dol. I am heartily sorry for it; but luck has turned tail upon
us, that is the trick on it.


Dol. A very scurvy trick, indeed, but I had so many husbands before, that one
more or less breaks no squares with Dol. Come, Mrs. Quickly, be of good cheer:
Pistol is better than nobody: he will protect thee, by outswaggering the
swaggerers.


Pistol. Contented I, since so the fates decree,
Soldier no more, a victualler I Will be;
The martial sword exchange for carving knife,
And cut out viands for the means of life.
No more in anger fight, but joyous dine,
And 'stead of drawing blood, draw sparkling wine;
Nay, should Sir John himself my service lack,
At the boar's head, he will find a glass of sack.

Fall. But will thou put no lime in it, Pistol?


Pistol, No, by Falernian Bacchus, for my knight.


Fall. Then will I be thy guest. Nay, by'r Lady, thou shall for once, be mine
too. I will not break off the thread of our quondam familiarity with so little
grace as Majesty has done. I do invite ye all, therefore, to supper with me.
And if you cannot laugh over the success of your own contrivances, be merry on
the consummation of my nuptials.

Come, spouse, though long indeed has been our courting,
We Are not quite past the days of love and sporting;
It Is true, a younger bridegroom had you sped,
He might have been less prone to sleep in bed;
Yet, even in autumn, some spring flowers may grow,
As there are lillies in September blow:
Youth's wild oats sown, it is never too late to mend;
The worst once past, the better is the end.

The END.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD.
Enters reading a Card. THE muse of Shakespeare's compliments! -- A card
T'excuse this evening's enterprizing Bard!
Great his presumption, to confess the truth:
But, as he pleads the passion of his youth,
Together with the magic of her charms,
Attracting him resistless to her arms;
Though somewhat by surprise, she owns, she suffered,
Yet, as no actual violence was offered,
She Is willing, if the audience should agree,
For this one time to set the offender free.
We women soon forgive, if not forget,
The crimes our beauties make the men commit,
Especially when once we are past our prime,
And Shakespeare's muse, like me,'s the worse for time.
For, though she charm with fancy ever young,
Though heavenly music dwell upon her tongue,
Lost many an artless smile and dimple sleek,
Which sat alluring on her virgin cheek;
Beauties, that faded on the gazer's eye,
And no cold-cream of comment can supply.
As for what Merc'ry in the Prologue told ye;
Pray, let not that from clemency withold ye.
That Hermes was of old a lying blade,
And practiced in imposture, as his trade;
The patron he, or classic lore deceives,
Of cheats, forestallers, higglers, hucksters, thieves.
Besides, -- to tell you a stage-trick of ours --
But you will not spread the secret out of doors, --
The man was no more Mercury, than I am
Queen Hecuba, the wife of Trojan Priam.
A messenger from Phoebus! He a god!
I can assure you all, 'twas Mr. Dodd;
His dropping from the clouds, was all a sham;
And his pretended errand but a flam.
We Have heathen gods of paste-board, made to fly
On hempen cords across the painted sky;
Those canvass clouds, that dangle there above,
Inveloping the throne itself of love!
His tale fictitious too, though told so glib;
For take it on my word, 'twas all a fib.
Old Falstaff in Elysium! -- To my thinking,
So great his natural tendency to sinking,
That to the shades if he had once descended,
To bring him back, not Atlas had pretended.
Dramatic sprites (at least they tell me so)
Dwell not with saints above, nor devils below:
But, formed the imagination to engage,
During their short-lived passage over the stage,
As mere ideal characters exist,
And stand as ciphers marked on Nature's list;
To genius given a delegated power
To form these transient beings of an hour,
Which, from this mimic world whenever they go,
Are free to range in fancy's pimlico,
A limbo large and broad; which in the schools
Is called by some the Paradise of Fools.
Feroe naturoe THERE, their preservation
Is purchased by no game association:
The poaching plagiary alone denied
A priviege, granted to each bard beside;
Who, though a cottager, to try his skill,
May shoot, or course, or hunt them down at will;
In his own paddock may the strays receive,
And scorn to ask a lordly owner's leave.
Not but that bear, the Author of the play,
By me begs leave submissively to say,
"None more than he reveres great Shakespeare's name,
"Or glows with zeal to vindicate his same."


