FALSE IMPRESSIONS: A COMEDY IN FIVE ACTS. PERFORMED At the Theater Royal,
Covent Garden. BY RICHARD CUMBERLAND, ESQUIRE.

Saepe, etiam audacem, fugat hoc terretque poetam;
Quod numero plures, virtute et honor minores,
Indocti, stolidique et depugnare parati
Si discordet eques, media inter carmina poscunt
Aut ursum aut pugiles: his nam plebecula gaudet.
London: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY, 1797. [ Price 2 s.]

PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. MURRAY.
THE time has been, but in a barbarous age,
When poets braved their audience from the stage,
Poets pontifical, whose lofty tone
Acknowledged no tribunal but their own,
And sent their Prologue-purveyor to raise
First fruits and fines of tributary praise.
Our modern bards are taught an humbler strain,
And, if less valiant, are not half so vain;
No longer aim the nation's taste to lead,
Content if they can follow and succeed.
Thus if the time should come, when in the place
Of Nature you should substitute grimace,
(Fatal reverse!) What could the Poet do?
Offend the many to appease the few?
No, if in Greece true taste had been as scarce,
The Stagyrite himself had stood for farce.
If wit through five long acts will not hold out,
Momus must help to stir the laugh about,
And when you crown his mummery with applause,
You bribe him to transgress the drama's laws.
He were a very wild romantic elf,
Who only wrote to figure on the shelf;
To hear his own sad sentiments rebound
Through empty galleries with a dying sound,
And sit like Seneca in calm decay,
Watching how life steals drop by drop away:
No, let him take his profit and his ease,
And trifle on so long as trifles please:
Too weak to struggle against fashion's tide,
If with the current he is content to glide,
He only yields as Caesar did before,
When Tiber's torrent drove him from the shore.
The simple tale we have to tell this night,
Shows truth triumphant over ranc'rous spite,
Casts in dark shades the base defamer's part,
And crowns with just reward the liberal heart.
Oh might our efforts gain their wished for end,
The gay to' amuse, the faulty to amend,
Make fiction rule her thoughts by nature's laws,
And wit exert her powers in virtue's cause,
Then and then only might we claim applause.
Dramatis Personae.
SIR OLIVER MONTRATH MR. MURRAY. ALGERNON MR. HOLMAN. SCUD (an Apothecary) MR.
QUICK. EARLING (an Attorney) MR. WHITFIELD. SIMON SINGLE (an old Servant) MR.
MUNDEN. FARMER GAWDRY MR. DAVENPORT. ISAAC (his Son) MR. FOLLET. PETER
(Journeyman to SCUD) MR. ABBOT. JACK (a Boy) MR. SIMMONS. FRANK (a Footman) MR.
THOMPSON. LADY CYPRESS MISS CHAPMAN. EMILY FITZALLAN MISS BETTERTON. JENNY SCUD
MRS. KNIGHT. MRS. BUCKRAM MRS. DAVENPORT. RACHEL WILLIAMS MRS. NORTON.
FALSE IMPRESSIONS: A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE, a Chamber in the House of SCUD the Apothecary. Enter SCUD. AHA! very
good, very good. Here I am again -- no bad night's work -- pretty fairish job
-- patient none the better, myself none the worse -- tipped two guineas for
sitting up with old Lady Cypress -- slept comfortably in an easy chair --
nibbled a cold chicken with my Lady's woman -- tiff'd a can of flip with the
old butler -- crib'd a kiss or two from the sweet lips of Mrs. Rachel, and gave
her a box of cardamums and a bottle of elder-flower water in return for the
favor -- So far, so good -- Well done, Jerry Scud! -- Holloa! Jack, boy,
puppy! where are you?


Enter JACK. Jack. Here am I, master.


Scud. Fetch my slippers, sirrah! Take off my boots. Exit JACK. My dear Jenny
cannot abide boots; very right, very reasonable; soil the carpet, dawb her
petticoats, annoy her olfactories -- No wonder -- delicate darling my Jenny --
sweet pretty creature -- perfect posey of a woman -- Re-enter JACK. So, so, so!
take hold, sirrah; pull away! That will do, that will do -- set my flippers --
red moroccos -- stockings not soiled -- pretty well off there -- Now, puppy
Jack, where is your mistress?


Jack. Don't know.


Scud. How does she do?


Jack. Cannot tell.


Scud. Is she at home?


Jack. An't sure.


Scud. Was she at home last night, or was she out?


Jack. Both: sometimes in, sometimes out.


Scud. You're a fool. Had she company?


Jack. No, no; no company.


Scud. Poor dear Jenny! What, quite alone?


Jack. No, no; not quite alone.


Scud. Jackanapes, didn't you tell me she had no company?


Jack. Yes I did; because why? she bade me let no company in; yet she was not
quite alone by herself, because young Squire Algernon was alone with her.


Scud. The devil and his dam! I Am done for. Get out of my fight! begone! away
with you!

Exit JACK. Ah Jenny, Jenny, Jenny! You are bent upon sending your poor husband
to heaven some day or other, when it rains while the sun shines -- How now,
Peter!


PETER enters. Peter. Is there any alteration to be made in Lady Cypress's
medicines?


Scud. None at all, none; draughts sicut ante.


Peter. They do no good.


Scud. They do no harm.


Peter. They are a mere chip in porridge -- Conserve of roses will never cure
an asthma.


Scud. I know it; what then? A patient cured is a customer lost. In one word
therefore, repetatur haustus.


Peter. Be it so! let nature do the work herself; our practice wont puzzle her.


Exit PETER. Scud. Miserable man that I am; my Jenny tete-a-tete with Harry
Algernon! -- a rake, a rogue, a rantipole. Hah! here she comes --

Enter Mrs. SCUD. Light of my eyes, joy of my heart, fair as a lily, come to my
arms! Out all night -- sighed for my darling -- counted the minutes -- terrible
long absence -- how did you bear it? -- Doubt you have been lonesome --


Jenny. Not at all; far from it. Harry Algernon has been here.


Scud. What does he want? Nothing to say to him.


Jenny. But you will hear what he has to say to you.


Scud. Let him say it to me only. Not fit company for jewel Jenny.


Jenny. Ridiculous! He only wants a little of your interest with Lady Cypress.
-- Apropos! he has brought you half a buck.


Scud. Let him take his half buck home again. Would Not name his name to Lady
Cypress for all the venison in his father's park.


Jenny. Hav'n't you named his name to Lady Cypress? I doubt you have, Jerry,
oftener than you ought, and in a way you should be ashamed of.


Scud. Only said what lawyer Earling said -- always had the law of my side.


Jenny. On which side was truth? on which side was gratitude? Recollect
yourself.


Scud. What should I recollect?


Jenny. I Will tell you. -- Your adventure at Barnstable races, when in the pride
of your heart you must show off in your new gig forsooth; and where would you
have been now if the very man you have defamed had not saved your life at the
peril of his own?


Scud. He did, he did -- I don't deny it. Tit run restive -- tipped me over a
wheelbarrow -- tumbled under his heels -- might have been kicked to atoms --
surgeon's work as it was -- snapt my arm -- well it was not my neck -- much
obliged to Harry Algernon -- never spoke against him since.


Jenny. Speak for him, man; 'tisn't enough you do not speak against him:
liberate your conscience.


Scud. Jenny, Jenny, liberate my conscience, as you call it, and I shall
liberate my customers; if Harry Algernon will be a rantipole; if his women and
his wine, his racing and his revelling, have crossed him out of the old lady's
books, how am I to blame?


Jenny. Well, well, 'tisn't your business to set the worst side of his
character to view; you have benefited by his courage and humanity -- why don't
you talk of them, and hold your tongue about his frailties?


Scud. My tongue can do nobody any harm. I tell you it is all up with him:
lawyer Earling has done his business. If ever he enters my lady's doors, or
touches a shilling of her fortune while he breathes, set me down for a fool and
a false prophet.


Jenny. Suppose he does not aim at touching a shilling of her fortune; suppose
he only wants -- but here he comes, and will tell you what he wants.


ALGERNON enters. Alg. Ah, Jerry, my worthy fellow, give me your hand, give me
your help. -- No, no, that is not the point at present -- take your fingers off
my pulse.


Scud. Very high, let me tell you -- very full -- gallops at a furious rate.


Alg. Expectation raises it, hope quickens it; love is my disease; and if you
don't stand my friend, disappointment will be my death.


Scud. Love! Cannot cure love -- troubled enough to cure the consequences of it.


Alg. Hark ye, Jerry, you are an intimate of Lady Cypress; I, though her
nearest of kin, am an exile. Within her castle lives the idol of my soul, Emily
Fitzallan; obtain for me an interview with her, and though you cannot cure love,
you may rescue me from death, and then you may fairly boast of having saved one
man's life by your practice.


Scud. Cannot do it -- not possible -- fair Emily never goes out of the castle.


Alg. Therefore it is I want to go into it.


Scud. Hopeless case -- not upon the chances -- Old Lady will not bear to look
upon you.


Alg. I Will excuse her if I may but look upon the young one: manage that for me,
my good fellow. -- Nobody knows me; nobody can find me out; I Am a stranger to
the whole family.


Scud. And so you are likely to remain.


Jenny. Come, come, Jerry, cast about; be good natured, and contrive some
errand or pretense to introduce him. If there is a little danger, surely you
may risque it for the preserver of your life.


Scud. Foolish scheme, jewel Jenny, foolish scheme. -- Will Not do.


Alg. Have you no medicines to send in? Cannot I personate your pestle and
mortar-man?


Scud. Not you; I keep no such pestle and mortar-man in my shop.


Alg. But you keep a heart in your body, and a memory in your brains, therefore
you must stand for me as I have stood for you.


Jenny. Hush! here comes Simon Single, the keeper of the castle. Leave me with
him, and I warrant I have a key to his castle.


Alg. Angel of my hope, into your hands I commit my cause.


Scud. Aye, aye, leave your cause, and quit your company.


Exeunt SCUD and ALGERNON. SIMON SINGLE, JENNY SCUD. Jenny. Welcome, welcome,
my good friend!


Simon. Glad to see you, pretty Mrs. Jane.


Jenny. So you are taking your rounds this fair morning, Mr. Simon.


Simon. Better take them than Jerry's doses.


Jenny. I agree with you.


Simon. So would not they perhaps.


Jenny. And how are all cronies at the castle? How does the venerable virgin
Mrs. Buckram, pretty Rachel Williams, and the rest of the fair nuns?


Simon. Name 'em not; you have not left your fellow. What is Rachel Williams? a
baby.


Jenny. Well, but Mrs. Buckram -- she is no baby.


Simon. No, of my word; she is of the race of the Anakims.


Jenny. No matter for that, friend Simon; you will marry Buckram.


Simon. No, no, that buckram shall never stick in my skirts. Harapha of Gath
would not marry her. I am no knight errant to encounter giants.


Jenny. I should think so; for if you were a true knight, you would not sleep
before you had set free your lovely prisoner, Emily Fitzallan.


Simon. There Is one a-coming will do that. Fair Emily will be a wife before
you will be a widow. Young Montrath is the man for her; he is expected every day
with his uncle Sir Oliver. It is all agreed upon, and my lady's whole fortune
will be settled on Miss Emily. There Is a start for you -- there is a sally from
dependence to prosperity; from wanting every thing to possessing all.


Jenny. And nothing left to Harry Algernon?


Simon. Yes, patience if he possesses it, and an ill-name whether he merits it
or not.


Jenny. Well, I cannot see the justice of all this.


Simon. Who can, where lawyer Earling is concerned? That puppy of an attorney
lords it over the whole castle; and now we are in the bustle of setting out
Miss Emily in a style before Sir Oliver arrives. There are fine dresses to be
made, fine apartments to be furnished, and fresh servants to be hired for the
heiress.


Jenny. Say you so? fresh servants? Are you full? If not, I can recommend you
such a lacquey -- the very man of men -- Jerry shall bring him to you.


Simon. Bring him yourself; lead him over in a white bridle, and let me judge
of his points and his paces.


Jenny. You shall -- my life for yours, Miss Emily will be charmed with him.


Simon. Adieu! time flies when I am with you. Once more, adieu! I shall expect
you. I hope you are happy with your little doctor; but I must think you were
much too fine a flower to be plucked by an apothecary, and stuck into a gallipot.


Exit. Jenny. He Is off; you may come out of your hiding hole; the coast is
clear.


Enter ALGERNON, followed by SCUD. Alg. Now, my fair advocate, what have you
done for me? Is there any hope?


Jenny. Of the old lady's fortune, none; your aunt has not left you a shilling.


Alg. I Am glad of it.


Scud. I wonder why.


Jenny. Miss Emily is to have the whole.


Alg. I Am sorry for it.


Scud. I wonder wherefore.


Alg. I Will tell you then. Had my aunt bequeathed to me her fortune, she would
have probably restricted me from marrying Emily; having given it to Emily, she
has doubtless tied her up from marrying me. Had she done neither one nor the
other, I have enough to maintain her, and the prize had been my own.


Jenny. And so she shall; I Have a project for your meeting.


Alg. I doubt if I ought to seek it.


Scud. Very true; lay it aside altogether; it will bring a plaguey deal of
mischief upon me, and do no good to you.


Alg. Tell it me however.


Jenny. You Will comprehend it at once. There is a proper valet to be hired for
the heiress, fit to wait upon her person, and grace the back of her chair at
table.


Alg. I cannot do it; I am not equal to the task; I cannot approach so near, and
yet refrain. When she spoke to me, I should be lost; when she looked on me, I
should betray myself; and when I handed her the plate, I should present it on
my knee.


Scud. Aye, then you would be vollied out of the window, and I kicked out of
the doors. Now, silly Jenny, what is become of your project?


Alg. Hold there! though dangerous in the extreme it is not altogether desperate.
If I cannot undertake the offices you describe, I may yet present myself as a
candidate for her service; and in that character perhaps obtain an interview
with my charmer. That hope is worth an effort.


Scud. It is not worth a farthing, and will be pounds and pounds out of my way.
Cursed scrape, foolish Jenny, cursed scrape!


Alg. But where shall I get a proper dress to appear in?


Scud. No where; you cannot appear at all.


Jenny. Fear nothing; I Will provide you with a dress.


Scud. Egad, she has a provision for every thing.


Alg. Who but must conquer that is armed by the fair? There is a rascal in the
family, Earling by name, who has slanderously defamed me; I Will wring his ears
from his head.


Scud. Take care; Earling is an attorney, and if he has any ears you will pay
for wringing them; if he has none, you will be puzzled to lay hold of them.


Alg. Come, Jerry, I see what staggers you; you are afraid of losing the old
lady's custom.


Scud. You are right; I am. She takes physic, and you take pleasure.


Alg. Mark me! I Will not promise you to swallow as many medicines as she does;
but, come what will, I Will guarantee you against all losses incurred on my
account; so fear nothing, but come on. Discretion I cannot boast of, but in
honor I will never be found wanting.


Scud. That Is enough, that is enough! Deal upon honor and I am with you. I love
to do a good natured action when there is nothing to be lost by it.


Exeunt. SCENE changes to an Apartment in Lady CYPRESS's Castle. Lady CYPRESS,
Lawyer EARLING. Lady Cyp. Enter, enter, Mr. Earling: you come upon a wish.


Earl. Ever prompt to approve myself your ladyship's most devoted and most
absolute humble servant, upon a wish I come, upon a word I vanish.


Lady Cyp. I am satisfied with your diligence; you may spare yourself the
trouble of describing it.


Earl. I am dumb.


Lady Cyp. Have you the memorandums about you, that I dictated?


Earl. If my tears have not defaced them. Believe me, gracious lady, when I saw
my own name set down to a bequest so munificent, I was covered with blushes, I
was choked with gratitude.


Lady Cyp. Out with it then, out with your name, if such is the effect, and
write in Algernon's; I warrant gratitude will not choke him.


Earl. Good, very good! Your ladyship has the gift of rallying me in the most
pleasant way out of my metaphors. Choke is a figure somewhat of the strongest.


Lady Cyp. Why yes, and I should think you may venture upon the legacy, and
risque the effects of it; so copy out your paper when you please.


Earl. I Will set my clerks upon it out of hand.


Lady Cyp. You Will set the world upon it when I Am out of it, for you have
totally cashiered Harry Algernon, and he is the son of my sister.


Earl. And your sister was the wife of his father, and his father was your
unremitting persecutor, who vexed you with a suit in chancery for ten long
years, and ten might have been added to ten, had it not been that I -- I speak
modestly of myself; I am no egotist -- I speak simply of number one, and nobody
else, for your barrister was a cipher --


Lady Cyp. But a cipher put to number one adds no trifle to its value; so the
upshot is, you gained the suit, and I paid the costs -- a victory little to be
envied -- and, after all, is it just and equitable the son should suffer for
the father's faults?


Earl. O jus et aequum! as if he had not faults enough of his own to warrant
your exclusion of him.


Lady Cyp. I have heard enough of his faults I confess, if you are correct in
describing them. If you have deceived me --


Earl. I! I deceive you! I defame your nephew! I who have never spoke of his
offenses but with regret and sorrow; never brought a story to your ears, but
with the view of intercepting malice and softening down impressions; I deceive
you! then where is truth and virtue?


Lady Cyp. Both in sight, as I should hope -- for Emily appears.


EMILY FITZALLAN enters. Earl. I humbly take my leave. Miss Emily, I Am yours
-- Humph! not a word! Your faithful friend to serve you. Not a look? Upstart!
I Will marry the old lady, and cut her out of every shilling -- I will.


Exit EARLING. Lady Cyp. Approach, my dear! Come near me. I must talk with you.
Well! You have been to see the apartment I have newly furnished -- and do you
like it, Emily?


Emily. It Is elegant in the extreme -- it is sumptuous.


Lady Cyp. It Is yours, my dear; it is to grace my Emily that I have decked it
out.


Emily. For me such finery?


Lady Cyp. Child of my heart, for you. All I possess is yours.


Emily. I hope you will not tempt me to forget that I was poor and humble.


Lady Cyp. I hope not: nature has endowed you with admirable qualities;
prosperity, I trust, will not pervert them. It does not quite come on you by
surprise: you could not well suppose I should adopt the son of my most
unrelenting persecutor.


Emily. I did not dare to reason in that case.


Lady Cyp. But you must know how worthless in himself, how undeserving of my
favor is he, who, in respect of consanguinity, is the only person that could
supersede you.


Emily. You speak of Mr. Algernon.


Lady Cyp. I do; I speak of him, whom no one speaks of but with reproach and
scorn.


Emily. I do confess I Have heard much evil speaking, but 'twas from one who
should have more respect for truth and decency than to traduce the nephew to
the aunt.


Lady Cyp. What do you mean? Would you defend a libertine?


Emily. No, madam, I defend no libertine; but you will not be angry if I avow
that I detest a libeller. If he, who thus has poisoned your opinion, knows not
the character, the manners, habits, sentiments, connections, perhaps not even
the outward form and feature of the man, whose fame he mangles, can I be to
blame if I implore you, for the love of justice, to hear before you strike?


Lady Cyp. What is this, Emily? What is this warmth?


Emily. Honest, not prudent; out of time and place, but still sincere, though
rash.


Lady Cyp. You call on me to hear before I strike; I now demand if you that
strike have heard? Do you know Algernon? Have you conversed with him?


Emily. Madam, I have.


Lady Cyp. You have! when, where? he comes not hither; never was admitted,
never will be, within these doors. Astonishing that you should dare to tell me
you have made acquaintance with this profligate.


Emily. Hear my defense. -- You gave me leave to pass a little time, for change
of air after my late confinement, at your Hill-farm. One evening I had rambled
about a mile from home, when upon entering a little copse, through which my
footpath led, judge of my horror, when a villain, such I must call him,
surpised me, seized me, and in spite of cries, prayers and entreaties --


Lady Cyp. Merciful providence! what do you tell me?


Emily. A dreadful tale I should have had to tell, or died ere I could tell it,
had not heaven sent me a rescue, a brave brave preserver, who with a soul all
fire, and motion quick as lightning, sprung on the assailant, grasped him in
his arms, and after a contention, furious though short, hurled him to the ground,
breathless, and maimed with bruises. -- Which of these merits the name of
profligate? Not be that saved me -- It was Algernon.


Lady Cyp. Algernon do you say? My worthless nephew Algernon! Take care!


Emily. Renounce me if I tell you an untruth.


Lady Cyp. I Am all astonishment. Who was the assailant?


Emily. Madam, I know not. Your heroic nephew bore me half dead and fainting to
my house; 'twas not till then I knew him to be Algernon. He staid with me no
longer than till the care of the good people had recovered me: the next morning
I returned to the castle, fearing to remain any longer in so solitary a place.
Of Algernon, I saw no more. Now suffer me to ask, is this the conduct of a
profligate?


Lady Cyp. It Is a strange story.


Emily. It Is a true one, madam.


Lady Cyp. Why have you kept it to yourself thus long? You Have been returned two
days.


Emily. Because until this hour I have not seen your spirits in a state to bear
the slightest agitation.


Lady Cyp. And do you think the agitation slight that I now suffer? No, I see
your danger, Emily; I see your weak credulity, and much I fear you will find
yourself the dupe of Algernon. What business could he have at my Hill-farm?


Emily. Madam, your tenant's wife nursed Mr. Algernon.


Lady Cyp. She never should have nursed you, Emily, or harbored you one
moment, had I known it.


Emily. That Is hard; but I must suffer and be silent.


Lady Cyp. Be silent then, and go to your chamber; there you may meditate on
what you have been, and call to mind, with timely recollection, what you may be
again.


END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
Cast Hall. -- SIMON SINGLE, Farmer GAWDRY, and his Son ISAAC. Simon. MASTER
Gawdry, Master Gawdry, have I not said the word, and will not the word that I
have said serve and suffice to put thee out of doubt, that Isaac thy son, thy
son Isaac, will not do?


Gawd. I pray you now, Master Simon Single, be kind-hearted, and consider of
it. I should be main proud to have him in my lady's livery; he is a docile lad,
and can turn his hand, as I may say, to any thing.


Simon. Let him turn it to the plough; he is a bumpkin: let him drive the team
and dung the land; he is born to it: let him ring the hogs, and tend the stye,
and toil in the drudgery of his vocation. Nature never fashioned him to be the
lacquey of a lady -- You are answered, farmer Gawdry.


Gawd. Aye, Master, I am answered, but I am not heard. I hann'a told you half
the things my boy can do.


Simon. What can he do? Unfold!


Gawd. A power -- Speak for yourself, Isaac; tell the gentleman what you can do.


Isaac. A'looks so grave, a'daunts me.


Gawd. What should daunt thee, boy? Don't hang thy head, but up, and tell him
boldly what can do.


Isaac. I wull, father, I wull. -- I can sing psalms, shoot flying, worm the
puppies, cut capons, climb the rookeries, and make gins for polecats.


Simon. Wonderful! and cannot you eat and drink, and sleep and snore abundantly?
Cannot you wench when you have an opportunity, swear now and then upon occasion,
and lie a little when it serves your purpose?


Isaac. Yes, yes, I know something of all these matters.


Gawd. I told you he was fit to wait upon any lady in the land.


Simon. Upon any lady but the lady Cypress he is welcome; upon her he may wait
long enough before he gets any other answer than I Have given you. Dictum est --
Good morning to you.


Gawd. Good morning to me indeed! How long, I trow, have you been this great
man, to carry yourself in your geers so stately? I can call to mind the day
when you came into this family as mere a bumpkin as you think my boy to be.


Simon. Keep your temper, neighbor Gawdry, keep your temper; mount your steed,
amble homewards, visit your oves and your boves, comfort your good dame, and
present my humble service to her.


Gawd. I will not comfort her; I will not present your humble service to her; I don't
find you are so willing to do her any service, and as for humble, it don't
belong to you -- but mark my words -- time is at hand -- county election's
coming on -- ask me for a plumper then, do; ask me, I say, for a plumper -- and
mind where I Will direct you to look for it. Come along, Isaac, come along!


Exeunt GAWDRY and ISAAC. Simon. We men in power; when we have a place to give
away, make nine enemies to one friend, and it is nine to one if that friend
don't turn an enemy before he is well warm in his office. -- Ah, Doctor, is it
you?


SCUD and SIMON SINGLE. Scud. Your servant, your servant! I have brought you
the young man Jenny recommended.


Simon. Have you so, have you so? Where did you fall in with him?


Scud. Crossed upon him by mere chance -- clever fellow -- wants a place --
think he will suit Miss Emily -- no objection, dare say, on his part -- will not
haggle for wages -- will you see him?


Simon. Hold a moment. -- Has he got a character?


Scud. Two -- a good one and a bad one; but the good one is what he would
prefer being known by.


Simon. I give him credit for that. What name does he bear?


Scud. Henry, alias Harry -- you may take your choice.


Simon. He has two of them, it seems; very good! What besides?


Scud. Scudamore.


Simon. A branch of the Scuds we'll suppose; but we'll see him. -- Where does
he come from?


Scud. The Other side of the country -- better let him answer questions for
himself -- come in, young man; present yourself to Mr. Simon Single, the
respectable major domo of this illustrious family.


ALGERNON enters. Simon. So, so! what is here? This is no drudge for all work
and all weathers; this is a thing for Sundays and for holidays! as clean a peg
to hang a livery on as heart could wish. -- Well, Henry Scudamore, you're for a
place, and, I conclude, one where there is least to do will please you most; you
are not used to labor.


Alg. I am not.


Simon. Nor ever mean to be, I dare believe.


Scud. Oh fie! you will put him down; he is modest to a fault.


Simon. If that is his only fault, we'll overlook it. What can you do?


Alg. My best to please my mistress, and something, I should hope, to gain your
favor.


Simon. Egad, you have found the way to that already; I like your answer much; I
like your manners, countenance, deportment; and I am no mean judge, although I
say it.


Alg. Sir, you have all the right in life to say it; for if none else will give
us a good word, we must even praise ourselves.


Simon. A sharp wit, let me tell you. -- Harkee, Henry, your name I know; the
place from whence you come I do not know; your qualifications remain to be
proved, and your character I dare say, if it is of your own giving, will be an
excellent good one.


Alg. With your leave I should prefer to speak upon all these points with the
lady I aspire to serve.


Simon. Aspire to serve! Sir, your most obedient humble servant. -- I shall
aspire to ask you no further questions, but turn you over for examination to
the lady of the house herself.


Alg. Is this the lady of the house now approaching?


Mrs. DOROTHY BUCKRAM enters. Simon. Of the lower house she is the lady. Make
your best bow to Mrs. Dorothy Buckram, but don't be too aspiring; if you offer
to salute her you are a lost man; that blessing don't fall to my lot above once
in a twelvemonth, and some would not aspire even to that.


Dor. What is this ribaldry that you are talking? and who is this young man?


Simon. A youth of promise; a candidate for service; one that aspires to the
supreme delight of carrying clogs and combing lap-dogs for the lady heiress.


Dor. What is his name.


Simon. Henry.


Dor. A gentle name, soothing and soft, I much approve of Henry: I Have ever had
a prejudice for Henry.


Simon. Simon is sweeter.


Scud. Jerry is more brisk.


Simon. Sweet Simon -- simple Simon -- why 'ts music -- it is a lute.


Scud. But Jerry sounded in F sharp's a trumpet.


Dor. Yes, truly, in the ears of a hen-peck'd husband when his partlet cackles.
-- But cannot this youngster speak? Henry should speak like Henry; let us hear
you. Were I the mistress you aspired to serve, what would you say to me?


Alg. Silence becomes a servant; it is a virtue; but if I were your equal and
your lover. --


Dor. Ah, then what would you say?


Alg. Then if you stood all tempting as you are, full in my sight, and cheered
your happy swain with smiles so lovely, languish so alluring. --


Dor. What would you do?


Alg. I Would snatch you to my heart, press you, caress you, smother you with
fondness. --


Dor. And so you will; let go, or I Will scream out.


Simon. Bravo; you will do -- A very good rehearsal.


Scud. A very villainous one, if my Jenny has had a part in it.


Simon. I give you joy, young man; your fortune's made.


Dor. I wonder who has taught him this assurance.


Scud. Oh madam, he is a pupil of my Jenny's; I Have nothing to do with him.


Simon. Come, come, there is no offense; it was a fair challenge, and no true
Englishman would have refused it. -- Courage, my lad! you will never want a
service. Let us adjourn.


Exeunt. Lady CYPRESS and Lawyer EARLING. Lady Cyp. Well, now you have heard the
story, what do you say to it?


Earl. Nothing.


Lady Cyp. What, nothing? then you don't believe it.


Earl. Pardon me, madam; I believe it happened just as Miss Emily relates it to
you; I do believe there was a man set on to frighten her, and that he took a
drubbing from her hero, for which I also perfectly believe he was well paid.


Lady Cyp. Why should you not suppose it might be real? there are such drunken
fellows up and down.


Earl. But sober men will not be taken in by such stale tricks. You meet the
same, or something very like it, in even paltry novel that you read. The man's
escaped; you will never hear of him; his bargain was not made to go to prison.


Lady Cyp. I see it now; I see through the contrivance.


Earl. Yes, madam, and you may also see which way your property will go, if
ever Miss has the disposal of it.


Lady Cyp. I Will never sign those deeds in her behalf till she consents to marry
as I Would have her. Indeed, indeed, you have saved me, my good Sir, from a most
rash and inconsiderate measure.


Earl. Now is the time; I Will seize the happy moment. -- My ever honored lady,
I but live to save and serve you; my whole life has been devoted to your
happiness; the founder of your fortune, I have fought your battles manfully,
and stood a siege as long as that of Troy in your defense; aye, and would die
in it if need required.


Lady Cyp. There is no need -- I know your services, and at my death you will
find I have not underrated them.


Earl. She melts -- I Will strike. -- Not at your death, dear lady, (may that be
far, far off!) but with your life reward me. -- Hah! that tells she yields to
the impression. --


Lady Cyp. How with my life? You have my good opinion; you have my friendship;
what more can I do for you?


Earl. Think of me only as I think of you. Why should a thankless girl engross
your fortune? Use it; employ it; many happy days are yet in store for you. When
the Lord Cypress married you he was your senior by a pretty many years more
than your ladyship is mine.


Lady Cyp. Your inference from that?


Earl. I dare not quite reveal it. I would wish your ladyship to take it to
your thoughts. A hint, a word, a look, so it were kind, would greatly help me
to declare it to you.


Lady Cyp. We'll talk no more at present, if you please; you will remember
you're my agent, Sir; and I will not forget your services. -- Good day to you.


Earl. May every day and every hour be happy as I could wish them, and you will
be blessed. -- 'Twill do -- her pride is dropping from the perch -- she totters;
I shall catch her.


Exit. SIMON SINGLE enters. Lady Cyp. How now, Simon! have you found a proper
lad amongst the tenants sons to serve Miss Emily?


Simon. Of them not one, so help me, honored lady -- I cannot recommend them;
they are boors, clowns, clodpates.


Lady Cyp. What is to be done?


Simon. There is a youth attending -- Doctor Scud speaks in his favor.


Lady Cyp. Scud's a babbler. -- What do you say?


Simon. He is above the level of these indigenous smock-frocks and hobnails. I
should advise your ladyship to see him.


Lady Cyp. By all means; let him enter.


Simon. Henry, you are permitted to approach: the Lady Cypress deigns to look
upon you -- make your obeisance!


ALGERNON enters. Lady Cyp. So! this is the young man -- Henry you call him;
what other name belongs to him?


Simon. Scudamore, an please you; so he gives in himself.


Lady Cyp. No vulgar name -- and, so far as appearances bespeak, no vulgar
person. Well, Henry Scudamore, you want a place.


Alg. I wish to serve your ladyship.


Lady Cyp. Have you been in service?


Alg. Never.


Lady Cyp. So I should guess. What leads you now to seek it?


Alg. The ambition of belonging to your ladyship; but I would answer more
directly, might I presume. --


Lady Cyp. I understand you. Simon, leave the room. Exit SIMON. You seem
embarrass'd. Was it not your wish to speak to me in private?


Alg. Madam, it was.


Lady Cyp. And what have you to impart, that one, who possibly may be your
fellow servant, might not be privy to?


Alg. Madam, I am a gentleman by birth; that being known amongst my fellow
servants might chance to raise an evil mind against me, and make my humble
station painful to me; your candor will not think the worse of me because I am
unfortunate.


Lady Cyp. No, not the worse in charity of thought, but I cannot employ you in
my service. No gentleman must wait upon that lady, to whom I else perhaps had
destined you. -- No gentleman at least of your appearance.


Alg. I Am sorry for it -- but it is my fate to be judged by appearances, and
condemned by reports.


Lady Cyp. If you have fallen into this decay by mere misfortune, or injurious
treatment, I can pity you; nay, Henry Scudamore, if that is your name, and if I
knew your story (which at present I have not time to hear) I could do more -- I
could (and something whispers me I would) consider your necessities, and help
you.


Alg. I am the victim, madam, of a villain. My story is soon told, for it is
founded on a simple fact, which I can make appear to full conviction, if you
will condescend to give me hearing, and suffer me to state such evidence, as
cannot be opposed by my defamer.


Lady Cyp. I know not what to say to that, young man; I have no strength to
spare for other's burdens, and am already loaded with my own, even to the
breaking down of my weak frame. If it is a case of pity, I Have a hand that is open
to your wants without enquiry; if it is matter of grievance and redress, I
would recommend you to state it to my lawyer, Mr. Earling, and he shall see you
righted.


Alg. I humbly thank you; I will state it to him, and trust the goodness of
your heart will see me righted.


Lady Cyp. Ah! I Have no heart, no health, no nerves to hear you. You must excuse
me, Henry Scudamore. I dare not undertake to arbitrate; but wait Sir Oliver
Montrath's arrival, and he shall hear you; he is a noble gentleman.


Alg. Where shall I wait the whilst?


Lady Cyp. Where? Let me see -- yes, you may stay this night here in the
castle. My old servant, Simon, will entertain you at the second table. Does
that content you?


Alg. I were most unthankful if it did not.


Lady Cyp. Follow me then, and I will give my orders.


Exeunt. EMILY's Apartment. EMILY FITZALLAN, RACHEL WILLIAMS. Emily. Rachel!


Rachel. Madam! what are your commands?


Emily. Don't answer me in that style. I have so long been a dependant, and
lived in such familiarity with you, my good Rachel, in particular, that, though
you are my servant, I don't wish you to use a language to me so submissive.


Rachel. Whatever language you would have me use, so it will but convey the
same respect, I will endeavor to conform to it.


Emily. I would fain keep upon such terms with fortune, that I may fall back to
my former poverty without a pang; therefore, if ever you perceive me giddy with
prosperity, recall my recollection to the low situation I emerg'd from, and do
it honestly, my girl; don't spare me.


Rachel. You Will want no monitor to warn you against pride, and yet, as you
require sincerity, there is one warning I conceive is needful just at this
crisis.


Emily. State it without reserve.


Rachel. Are you not now in danger of incurring your patroness's most severe
displeasure?


Emily. Perhaps I am; but be explicit with me.


Rachel. Your champion Algernon, has he not left a thorn in that soft heart?


Emily. If you call gratitude a thorn, he has.


Rachel. Are you quite sure it is only gratitude? May it not soon be love? Nay,
give me leave -- is it not love already?


Emily. Well, if it is, how can I strive against it?


Rachel. Prudence will tell you how.


Emily. Prudence will tell me an old gossip's tale, but who, that is in love,
will hear her out?


Rachel. Are you aware how fatal it will be to all your expectations, if my
lady discovers your attachment?


Emily. Are you aware how natural it is to love the man who saves you from
destruction? My lady gives me riches, Algernon rescues my life and honor; I
was lost but for his courage; I am only poor without her bounty; and if she
demands that I should sacrifice my heart's affections, she makes conditions
that I cannot grant, nor would her fortune bribe me to the attempt.


Rachel. Do you know Mr. Algernon's character?


Emily. Does he that blackens it? What does my lady know but what that lawyer
instills into her ear? Infamous man! And why does he defame him? why, but
because he may retain his power in the estate, and garbel it at pleasure?
Besides, he has an ample legacy; believe me, I hold it a disgrace to read my
name in the same page with his; nor would I be his partner in the crime of
plundering Algernon, but that I live in hopes the time will come when I may
render back the unlawful spoil.


Rachel. Then temporize the whilst, my dearest lady, or that time never will be
yours.


Emily. It Is right; you counsel well; and now I will confide a secret to you: I
have warned Algernon who is his enemy, and what base stories have been forged
against him. -- Ah! who is this? It Is he, it is he himself!


ALGERNON enters. Alg. Hush! not so loud.


Emily. Your name was on my lips. How came you here? How did you gain
admission, and what have you in view by this disguise? You may disclose; this
friendly girl is secret.


Alg. Then let her stay; I would not be surpised in private with you. I am
here by sufferance of Lady Cypress; I have seen my aunt for the first time,
conversed with her, and lodged a plea for further hearing when her friend, Sir
Oliver Montrath, shall be at leisure: one of his servants is already come; he
may be soon expected.


Emily. And his nephew, does he accompany him?


Alg. I did not ask that question of the servant, but if you wish it I will
make the enquiry.


Emily. No, let it pass. I know your aunt expects him. -- Hark, Rachel,
somebody is at the door -- see who it is.


Rachel. Madam, there is nobody, nor any sound that I can hear.


Emily. Stand where you are and listen! -- What is the meaning of this dress
you wear?


Alg. I put it on to counterfeit a servant, or, I should rather say, to ask for
service -- Will you not try me, Emily? don't take my character from that
attorney; I Will serve you honestly.


Emily. You serve! you're jesting.


Alg. Am I not your servant? I am your faithful servant.


Emily. My heroic preserver -- that is your rightful character, and by that
title you have a claim upon my gratitude, which only can expire with life --
and now inform me what you have in view by this adventure.


Alg. I am not so romantic as to think I can maintain my post longer than till
tomorrow, to which time I have a furlough by authority; if fortune stands my
friend I may effect something within that period; but even now am I not
supremely blessed to see you, hear you, and behold that face, that was of late so
pale and wan with terror, restored to all the luster of its charms?


Emily. That face, assure yourself, will never be turned from you to league
with those who seek to rob you of your fame and fortune.


Alg. I am not robbed of what enriches you.


Emily. The heart, that swells with indignation against all that wrong you, had
but for you been cold and motionless. --


Alg. Oh Emily, forbear.


Emily. This and no more -- I never will be made the slave of interest or dupe
of slander. My confidence in you cannot be shaken, my obligations cannot be
computed. The life that I possess is of your giving -- What can I say but that
I live for you? -- Now leave me, Henry; not a word, but leave me.


END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
Lady CYPRESS and Servant. LADY CYPRESS. HARK! it is the porter's bell -- run to
the hall, and tell me if Sir Oliver's arrived.


Serve. Madam, he is here: Sir Oliver is present.


Sir OLIVER MONTRATH enters. Lady Cyp. Welcome, most welcome! May I trust my
senses? This is above hope that you and I should live to meet again.


Sir Oliv. My ever dear, my ever honored lady!


Lady Cyp. Time has gone lightly over you, my friend! You, that have traversed
sea and land, are whole; I, that have tempted neither, am become a shattered
wreck on shore.


Sir Oliv. Not so, not altogether so, thank heaven! Time is a surly guest,
whose courtesy does not improve by long acquaintance with us; but we'll not
rail at him since he permits us once more to meet. -- And here is the same old
castle still unspoilt by modern foppery; aye, and the same old grand sires firm
in their frames with not one wrinkle more than when I parted from them years
ago.


Lady Cyp. Aye, years indeed -- but you have filled them up with glory; yours
has been a life of themes for future history, a field of laurels to adorn your
tomb -- mine has been tame and simple vegetation.


Sir Oliv. I have lived a soldier's life; but, heaven be thanked, I Have
plundered no nabob, stripped no rajah of his pearls and pagodas, nor have I any
blood upon my sword, but what a soldier's honor may avow -- but you have here
a relict of my gallant comrade major Antony Fitzallan. He was wounded by my
side, carried off the field, and died in my arms. With his last breath he
bequeathed ('it was all he had to bestow) a blessing to his daughter, and charged
me, if I lived to come to England, to thank you for your charity, and be a
friend to her.


Lady Cyp. I trust you will find her worthy of your friendship.


Sir Oliv. Is she good, is she amiable? Has she her father's principles, her
mother's purity?


Lady Cyp. See her and judge; she is naturally sincere -- but where is your
nephew? where is Mr. Lionel? -- I reckoned with much pleasure upon seeing him.


Sir Oliv. Ah, my good lady, there I am unfortunate. I had built upon the hopes
of presenting him to you; but it cannot be at present. Poor Lionel is
indisposed, and must bear his disappointment with what philosophy he can.


Lady Cyp. The disappointment is reciprocal -- a little time I hope will bring
him to us.


Sir Oliv. I wish it may -- but look! who comes --


Lady Cypr. This is my orphan charge -- This is our Emily.


EMILY FITZALLAN enters. Sir Oliv. The very image of her lovely mother.


Lady Cyp. My dear, this is Sir Oliver Montrath, mine and your father's friend;
as such you will honor him.


Sir Oliv. As such I claim the privilege to embrace and press her to my heart.
My child, my charge, devolved upon me by a father's legacy, when breathing out
his gallant soul in prayers and blessings for his Emily.


Emily. Oh sir, was you, was you beside him at that dreadful moment?


Sir Oliv. I was, my child! these arms supported him, covered with wounds, and
crowned with victory -- alas! how dearly purchased.


Emily. Then let his last commands be ever sacred; if you have any such in
charge to give me, impart them, I conjure you.


Sir Oliv. I have none but blessings to impart. In fortune's gifts the hero had
no share, in virtue's he abounded. In the care of this your generous
benefactress he had left you; to that and heaven's protection he bequeathed you.


Emily. I am content; and what before I owed in gratitude to this beneficent
and noble lady, I now will pay with filial obedience and duty superadded.
Suffer me, dearest madam, from this moment to call myself your daughter.


Lady Cyp. As such I have adopted you; remember now, my child, the duty you
have taken on yourself, the authority you have consigned to me. All rights
parental center now in me; your happiness, your credit, your establishment, are
trusts for which I am responsible. -- You have no other task but to obey.


Emily. Obedience, madam, has its limitations; but such as I would render to my
father I Will pay to you. Have I your leave to withdraw?


Lady Cyp. You may, my dear; your spirits seem to need it. -- Go and compose
yourself.


Exit EMILY. Sir Oliv. Exquisite creature! I Am enchanted with her. By heaven!
'twould be the height of my ambition, the object I have most at heart in life,
to see my Lionel -- Oh that I could! -- here kneeling at her feet. -- Born of
such parents, trained by such instructions, and graced with charms so lovely,
Emily, without a fortune, is a match for princes.


Lady Cyp. If such is your disinterested wish (and greater happiness I could
not pray for) I trust my fortune thrown into her scale will not make her appear
less worthy of your nephew, or cause you to retract your good opinion.


Sir Oliv. No, surely; but I doubt if I should wish your fortune to go out of
the right channel even to Emily. We that have never married should regard our
nephews as our sons.


Lady Cyp. But does affinity impose on me an obligation to bestow my property
on one that merits nothing, to the wrong of her that merits all?


Sir Oliv. Is that the character of Algernon? Is he so undeserving?


Lady Cyp. Ah there, my friend, there is my terror; the destiny I dread; the
man of all men living the most dangerous to my peace is Algernon.


Sir Oliv. Indeed!


Lady Cyp. Preserve my Emily from him -- save her from Algernon!


Sir Oliv. Is Algernon then born to be a curse to both of us?


Lady Cyp. Explain yourself.


Sir Oliv. He is your nephew, therefore I was silent, but if he is dangerous to
your peace of mind, to mine he is fatal -- in one word, the wound of which my
hapless Lionel now languishes was given by the hand of Algernon.


Lady Cyp. Horrible wretch! -- his murderer. --


Sir Oliv. I say not that; for modern courtesy gives not that name to
duellists, and honor sanctifies their bloody deeds.


Lady Cyp. Away with all such honor! Truth disavows it, nature revolts from
it, religion denounces it -- Oh! he is born to be my shame and torment.


Sir Oliv. Be patient for a while; suspend your judgment.


Lady Cyp. No, I regard a duellist with horror; I hold him as an agent of the
enemy of mankind, sent to disturb society, and rend the parent's and the
widow's hearts asunder: one action, one only action, and that a doubtful one,
had met my ear in favor of that wretch whom I call nephew, and henceforth even
that one I totally discredit, and renounce him.


Sir Oliv. Hold, I conjure you. In the midst of wrath let us remember justice.
I, like you, abhor a duellist professed; yet I am taught by long experience how
to make allowances for younger spirits, and warmer passions, that will not
submit to meet the world's contempt, and scorn its prejudices.


Lady Cyp. Away! you talk this language by profession; reason declares against
it.


Sir Oliv. Reason demands that we should pause in judgment. When two men draw
their swords upon each other, reason will tell us one must be to blame; but ere
we six the blame upon that one, justice decrees that we should hear them both.


Lady Cyp. What says your nephew? He will speak the truth.


Sir Oliv. I should expect he would; yet I Will not wholly trust to any man's
report against another in his own cause; and in this sentiment my nephew
honorably coincides, for he declines all answer to my questions, and will
state nothing to affect or criminate his antagonist -- Hah! who is this?


ALGERNON enters. Lady Cyp. Go, go! I did not send for you.


Alg. I know it; but I wish to speak in private with Sir Oliver Montrath.


Sir Oliv. With me? Who is this man? I do not know him. Is he one of your
ladyship's domestics?


Lady Cyp. No; he made offer of his services, but upon talking with him I
perceived he had a list of grievances to state, and not being then at leisure,
I believe I told him he might wait your coming, and make his suit to you.


Sir Oliv. And so he may -- his looks plead in his cause. Is it your wish to
speak with me, young man?


Alg. It is.


Sir Oliv. Alone?


Alg. Alone, if you will permit it.


Sir Oliv. Freely; and when I can command my time, it shall be yours. I Will
call for you.


Alg. I shall attend your summons.


Exit ALGERNON. Sir Oliv. I Am curious what this man can have to tell me. Do you
conjecture?


Lady Cyp. There is a mystery about him. He says he is a gentleman by birth,
and so far I believe him. Of what he had to tell besides I waved the hearing,
but offered him relief: that did not seem his object, nor was it mine to take a
gentleman into my service. But you will know the whole -- shall we adjourn and
see what is become of Emily?


Sir Oliv. With all my heart; and hope the mournful subject of our last
interview may be no more revived.


Exeunt. SCENE changes. LAWYER EARLING meeting ALGERNON. Earl. So! whence come
you? who are you? what is your business?


Alg. Sir, I don't know you.


Earl. Not know me? that is much. You must be new indeed.


Alg. Are you that worthy gentleman Mr. Earling?


Earl. I am the very person.


Alg. Heaven reward you! Your fame is sounded forth through all the county.


Earl. Are you not hired to wait on Miss Fitzallan?


Alg. No, Sir, my character don't seem to recommend me to the Lady Cypress. If
you would speak for me 'twou'd make my fortune.


Earl. How can I speak for you, whom I don't know?


Alg. 'Twou'd be as easy as to speak against me.


Earl. But I do neither; I have no concern with you or with your character.


Alg. Indeed! they told me you was famous for it.


Earl. For what is it I Am famous?


Alg. For speaking about characters you have no concern with; therefore I pray
you, sir, take mine in hand, and do me justice. I suspect some villain has
cruelly defamed me. -- Does Not an action lie for that at law?


Earl. Go! you're a fool; begone!


Alg. I am a fool to ask a knave for justice.


Exit. Earl. Knave! do you call me knave? I Will trounce you, sirrah! I Will blow
you to the moon, audacious beggar! Ah, master Doctor, do you know that rascal?


SCUD enters. Scud. I know several rascals, but which of them do you mean?


Earl. That impudent new comer, that mad fellow, that dares to insult me in my
lady's house. -- Call me a knave indeed, and to my face -- did you ever hear
such insolence?


Scud. Never, never: If he had only said it behind your back, why 'twere but
quid for quo; it would have passed; but to your face -- Oh monstrous!


Earl. I Will set him in the stocks; I Will have his ears nailed to the whipping
post.


Scud. No, don't do that; if whipping-posts had ears, they would hear the cries of
those that are tied to them, and pity them.


Earl. Pooh! you're as great a fool as he methinks: I Have done with you. -- Look
to yourself, Sir Ga^^ipot, your reign will not be long on this ground, take my
word for it.


Exit. Scud. There, there, there! I Am blown up, ousted, all is over with me.
Thought to have had my lady's custom till her death -- perceive now she will be
one of the few patients that out live my prescriptions. -- Oh fine work, fine
work!


ALGERNON enters. Alg. How now, friend Scud; what ails you?


Scud. Friend! call me fool. I Am ruined by my friendship. You Have played the
devil's dance with that damned lawyer, and set him whip and spur upon my back.


Alg. Why that is his proper place: backbiting is his trade.


Scud. And what is my trade, do you think? where shall I drive it? my gallipots
may grow into the shelves for everlasting, if I Am to be made the cat's-paw of
your schemes and foolish Jenny's -- but I Will go tell my lady all about you.


Alg. No, no, you will not do that, my little Scud.


Scud. I Will tell you what I will not do -- lose my customer.


Alg. Aye, but consider what an ornament your ears are to your head, and you will
lose them incontinently if you betray me.


Scud. My ears indeed! look to your own; the lawyer has sworn to nail them to
the whipping post. I Have got a wig, so have not you, my master. Besides, I Am not
quite certain but my lady's custom will be the greater loss. -- She takes a
world of physic.


SIMON SINGLE enters. Simon. Who talks of physic? I Have the best of medicines --
a case of old canary, which my lady has ordered us to tap, and drink a welcome
to our noble guest, Sir Oliver Montrath. -- I Have put my lips to it: it is
supernacu^^m.


Scud. I see you have; I see it is supernaculum, for some of it has got under
your wig already.


Simon. My wig, no, no, Dame Dorothy set that awry with a kind cuff of the ear.


Scud. You put your lips to her too, it should seem.


Simon. Perhaps I did, but that is all buckram, Doctor. Ah Henry, give me your
hand. Stand fast, my gallant hearts; lo, where she comes again, a portly sail
right on upon our convoy. My life upon it, she is bound to the Canaries.


Mrs. DOROTHY enters. Dor. Oh thou rash youth, thou have undone thyself.
Earling has vowed thy ruin.


Scud. He has vowed my ruin too, and that is one of the few vows that he will
keep religiously.


Dor. Ah, he is a carnal man; he will swallow up this castle and it is fortunes.


Simon. I hope the turrets of it will stick by the way, and choke him. He
sha'n't swallow the canary in it however; we'll be beforehand with him at that
sport.


Scud. I would I had the cooking of one dose for him. I wish he would swallow that.
It should be a settler.


Dor. What has he done by Harry Algernon? There Is malice for you; there is a
batch of mischief, blasted his character, garbled his fortune, and turned my
lady's heart to stone against him.


Simon. Flint, iron, adamant -- I told her so -- Madam, said I, the gentleman
is wronged; the neighbors, where he lives, all give him a good word, the
gentry love him, his father doats on him, the poor adore him: there is but one
bad character 'twixt him and your attorney -- Judge you, said I, which party it
belongs to.


Alg. Did you say this?


Simon. I did.


Alg. Then you're an honest fellow.


Simon. I know that well enough. Yes, I did say it.


Scud. How did she take it?


Simon. As she takes your physic -- gulp'd and made wry faces; but it went down.


Scud. I hope 'twill stay by her.


Simon. I hope it will, and when we have drank confusion to attorneys, I Will deal
her out another dose a little stronger. Damn it! -- no, hold, I will not swear
-- I Will do it coolly -- come, we'll call a council in the Canaries.


Scud. Agreed; I Will drink myself into a little courage, and have a word with
the old lass myself.


Simon. Come on, my hearts! Henry, conduct the lady. You may solicit her fair
hand in safety. Jerry and I have wigs.


Exeunt. SCENE changes. Lady CYPRESS, EMILY, Sir OLIVER MONTRATH, EARLING. Lady
Cyp. Now, Emily, you see what misery that wicked man has brought upon us all.


Emily. I Am sorry for Sir Oliver's misfortune.


Lady Cyp. I hope you have also pity for the sufferer.


Emily. I trust I have for all that merit it.


Earl. I Am sure Mis's Emily will not attempt to extenuate the guilt of such an
action.


Emily. You may be sure I never will defend a guilty person, knowing him for
such; be you as careful how you criminate an absent man, till you have proofs
against him. To Sir OLIVER. Sir, you are silent; I should wish to know if you
have any thing to urge against him.


Sir Oliv. Nothing, my dear, I Am listening with attention, and therefore
silent. I should be sorry were you less unwilling to give up your opinion of a
man who rendered you such service.


Lady Cyp. What service? Earling, you have heard the story; let us hear what
you have to say upon it.


Earl. If Miss Fitzallan will suffer me to put a simple question to her.


Emily. By all means; put your question.


Earl. When Mr. Algernon, by happy chance, came in so opportunely to her
rescue, can Miss Fitzallan say what brought him thither so far from his own
home?


Emily. I never asked what caused him to be there, nor did he tell me.


Earl. We'll call it then a very happy chance without a cause, or a most
fortunate presentiment that somewhere in that grove there would be found a
damsel in the power of some vile ruffian, whom he was doomed to rescue. Some
people might suppose this a collusion, but Miss Fitzallan can remove all doubts
by telling us who was the villain that offered her that violence.


Sir Oliv. Can you do this, my Emily?


Emily. I cannot.


Earl. Did Mr. Algernon know who he was?


Emily. I do not think he did.


Earl. Did he secure his person?


Emily. No; his care was wholly turned to me* the man he left upon the ground,
and, as it seemed, disabled.


Earl. I have done: I leave it to the court to judge.


Lady Cyp. A barefaced trick. It is too palpable.


Sir Oliv. Who can say that? -- Let Mr. Algernon speak for himself.


Earl. Speak!


Sir Oliv. Aye, you have spoke, and should not he? That Is justice, is it not?


Earl. Did you always find it so where you have been, Sir Oliver?


Sir Oliv. Whether I found it so or not, I felt it.


Emily. Now, Mr. Earling, you may put those questions, you have pressed on me, to
Mr. Algernon. Perhaps he will answer them.


Lady Cyp. Emily, Emily, you forget yourself.


Emily. Madam, I should, if I forbore to speak, when charges such as these are
urged against an absent, therefore a defenseless, man. You have not allowed him
to approach you, madam; this gentleman, equally unknown to him, prejudges him
at once; he is ingenious to find out bad motives for good actions; there is not
a virtue in the human heart but may be metamorphos'd by such cunning into a
vice. Sir Oliver has said, and said it in the language of a hero -- Let Mr.
Algernon speak for himself.


Sir Oliv. And I repeat those words. -- Let him be heard! -- However
circumstances bear against him, and wretched though he has made me, still I hold
it matter of conscience never to prejudge, however strong the grounds of my
suspicion.


Lady Cyp. Sir Oliver, we do not think alike, and therefore with your leave
we'll cut this subject short. Emily will retire -- a little recollection will
be useful to show the error of some rash opinions and amend them. Go, child,
remember I have now a right to look for the obedience of a daughter.


Emily. And I to expect the mildness of a mother.


Exit. Lady Cyp. And now, Sir Oliver, with your permission I will dispatch a
little business with my agent, and leave you to fulfill your promise to that
young man, who I perceive is waiting to approach you. Follow me, Mr Earling.


Exeunt Lady CYPRESS and EARLING. Sir Oliv. See here a sample of the blessings
of dependence! -- Poor orphan Emily, it is now my turn to prove that I am worthy
to be called friend of thy gallant father.

ALGERNON appears. Oh! come in, come in, young man! I promised you a hearing,
and I Will make good my word; but as my mind is pressed with many matters, be
short and to the point. --


Alg. I will. Your nephew has had an affair with Mr. Algernon, and is wounded.
You have visited him no doubt. Has he related to you the particulars of that
unpleasant business?


Sir Oliv. Before I answer, let me know who it is that questions me.


Alg. My father lives upon the lands of Sir George Algernon, and I have some
acquaintance with his son, the person whose unlucky chance it was to wound your
nephew.


Sir Oliv. And what is your motive for the question that you now put to me?


Alg. I am no stranger to your character, and if you know the circumstances of
that duel, I trust you will not suffer Mr. Earling to misrepresent them to the
Lady Cypress.


Sir Oliver. Certainly I should not, if I knew the truth, suffer it to be
disguised; but I have no particulars from my nephew. The affair remains a
mystery. Can you develope it?


Alg. If Lady Cypress will permit me to stay this night, as she has promised,
and you can bring me to an explanation with her in your presence, I can so far
elucidate this mystery, that if you still persist to trace it home you shall
have full possession of the means.


Sir Oliv. I hardly should expect it at your hands; nor where my nephew's
honor is concerned shall I be easily induced to listen to other evidence than
that of facts, incontrovertibly attested, and (I am free to say) admitted on
his part.


Alg. It Is to such facts and such authorities I shall appeal.


Sir Oliv. And do you mean to criminate my nephew?


Alg. Pardon me, sir, I have no other meaning but to declare the truth.


Sir Oliv. Have you the means to know it? Was you present at the rencontre?


Alg. If it appears that I have not the means to know the truth, or knowingly
disguise it, treat me as I deserve; I Am in your hands.


Sir Oliv. Well, sir, I Will urge no further questions on you, but use my
interest with the Lady Cypress to procure you the interview you wish. Now fail
not on your part: you know me, sir; I trust to you unknown.


Alg. Poor as I seem, I have a soul within that never yet was tainted by
dishonor.


Exeunt severally. END OF ACT III.
ACT IV.
Lady CYPRESS, EMILY FITZALLAN, and EARLING. Lady CYPRESS. WELL, child, I have
here the instrument, that makes you rich above the dreams of avarice. I have
not executed it, for that depends on you; I have not cancelled it, because this
gentleman, your steady friend, has interceded with me to recall you once more to
recollection and atonement.


Emily. For what must I atone?


Lady Cyp. For your intemperate defense of Algernon. Guilty or innocent, no
more of him! Where I bestow my fortune I expect to find no opposition to my
will in the disposal of it.


Emily. What is your will in that respect?


Lady Cyp. This is my will -- If Lionel Montrath survives his wound, he is the
man I destine for my heiress. To this if you declare instant assent I shall as
instantly confirm this paper; if not, I cancel it, and cast you off.


Emily. Not all the world could bribe me to do that, before I know which is the
offending party. What baseness, what ingratitude were mine, to give give my
hand to him that wronged the brave preserver of my life and honor!


Lady Cyp. Obstinate girl, you have no such preserver. Have not I told you it
was mere collusion?


Emily. Madam, you have; but I am not convinced, because you told me so by your
attorney, not from your own knowledge and conviction.


Lady Cyp. What will convince you?


Emily. Proof well established, and all parties heard.


Lady Cyp. You to make terms that called yourself my daughter! Where is your
duty?


Emily. Inviolate, unbroken. -- I shall ever bear you respect and true devotion
for your goodness; but no parent, no patroness, not even my father, to whose
awful spirit I now appeal, could have the power, or could possess the right to
tear away affections from my heart, which honor, gratitude, have planted
there, or force me to conspire with that bad man in stripping Algernon of fame
and fortune, and fixing artifice, deceit, and murder upon a man so near to you
in blood, in nature so abhorrent of those crimes.


Lady Cyp. You are mad; I have done with you; I cast you off. Now, Mr. Earling,
take away your papers; they, or the thankless object they allude to, must be
entirely changed before I sign them.


Exit. Earl. Miss Emily, it grieves me to the heart to have heard what now has
passed. Indeed you wrong me if you suppose I am the author of this fatal
breach. I am no otherwise the enemy of Mr. Algernon than as I am your friend;
in very truth I Am not his enemy,


Emily. Sir, for your enmity to Mr. Algernon, and so much of your friendship as
flows from it, I pray you let them go together; I have no use for either.


Earl. Do you scorn me because I pity you?


Emily. You pity me! There cannot be that state of human wretchedness which
could reduce me to accept your pity. I wonder you can waste your time with one,
who neither courts your favor, fears your power, nor credits your professions.


Earl. Well, haughty madam, I have been a friend, and I can be a foe.


Exit. ALGERNON enters. Alg. My Emily, my angel, what is this I Have heard?
Discarded, disinherited -- and for your generosity to me.


Emily. Yes, Algernon, I Am poor, but free. I was a prisoner in a gaudy cage,
where they would fain have taught me to call names, and whistle to a tune of
Earling's making; but being a bad bird, and obstinate, my keeper let me fly;
and now I Have got the wide world for my portion, and nothing but my own small
wits to trust to for picking up a living.


Alg. Fly to me, perch on my breast, for in my heart you will find both shelter
and affection.


Emily. Ah, that is generous, gallant, like yourself; but it is not yet a time
for me to hear you. The asylum that you offer is attacked, the very citadel of
your life and honor is besieged by assailants, and you must beat them off, my
hero, or I have sacrificed myself to ruin without the enjoyment of that honest
pride which glories in the cause for which it suffers.


Alg. Doubt me not, Emily, the shield of truth covers my breast, and I Am
invulnerable.


Emily. Earling accuses you of a collusion with my unknown assailant in the
wood --


Alg. I Am armed against that charge.


Emily. And for your wounding of Montrath, he calls it assassination -- There I
should fear you are not so well armed, having no seconds to appeal to, and
therefore more exposed to his attack.


Alg. Let him come on; at all points I defy him. Now, my sweet advocate, repose
in peace, and wait the event.


Emily. Farewell! If I am ruined in the cause of truth I Will not regret the
sacrifice.


Exit. Alg. Heroic Emily, how I adore you -- Hah! Jerry, whence come you?


JERRY SCUD enters. Scud. From the Canaries, where the illustrious major-domo
governs, and drinking is a duty by the laws of the sage Solon of the cellars,
the profound Diogenes of the tubs, of whose academy I am a member.


Alg. You Have not betrayed me in your cups, I hope.


Scud. Betrayed you! no, if you had fired the house, burnt the old lady in it,
and violated the virgin purity of dame Buckram, I Would not betray you -- D -- n
it! I scorn a sneaker; I loath him worse than physic -- Go on, my boy, and fear
not -- I am steady.


Alg. Pretty well for that. You Have had a sip or two with honest Simon.


Scud. Simon's a fish; Dame Buckram is a leech; fills where she fastens, and
delights in suction: I honor her for her absorbent qualities, and I pronounce
that they are silly apes and ignoramusses that say wine gets into the head --
it is false -- I say it gets into the heart; it drives ill humor, melancholy,
treason, and a whole gang of cowardly companions out of a man, as a carminative
does crudities and indigestion: it would have set my constitution clear, only
there is one thing sticks --


Alg. What Is that, my honest fellow? Out with it.


Scud. Why then it is jealousy -- and that you know is a confounded spasm --


Alg. Away with it at once! Why, man, you don't know half your happiness; you
have the best wife in the country -- Oh! if you could have heard her pine for
you last night; she would not hear of comfort --


Scud. Indeed, indeed! May I believe you, squire? May I be sure I Am not the
horned beast?


Alg. None of my making, Jerry, on my honor.


Scud. O jubilate! then I kick the clouds. Good bye, good bye to you. Let me
embrace you. All luck attend you. I Am going to my lady; if I can throw in a
provocative to stir her in your favor I will do it; I will upon my soul! Good
bye to you!


Alg. Stop, Jerry; hold your hand, my gallant fellow! I am too much your friend
to let you go to Lady Cypress in your present state. Why, man, you are tipsey.


Scud. Say drunk, and you will not say more than is true; but then it is I cure
my patients; when I am only sober I let them cure themselves.


Exit. Alg. Well, get you gone; I am not bound to find reason for him that will
not keep his own.


Exit ALG. SCENE changes. Lady CYPRESS, RACHEL WILLIAMS. Lady Cyp. Come hither,
Rachel, I would speak with you. When I promoted you to be about the person of
Miss Emily Fitzallan, it was because I saw you was attached to her, and I was
willing to do her a grace by thus preferring you. If you must now fall back
into your station, it is not that I have withdrawn my favor from you, but from
your mistress.


Rachel. I know it, madam; all your people know it, for Mr. Earling has
announc'd it to us; but I must beg your ladyship to excuse me if I decline all
service but Miss Emily's.


Lady Cyp. What should enable her to keep a servant?


Rachel. Then she will stand in the more need of me; I Will work my fingers to
the bone to serve her. Your ladyship may turn me from your doors, but I will
say that Mr. Earling's a base cruel man, and when he has driven all your
relations from you, your ladyship will find your house a desert, and nothing
but a villain left within it.


Exit. Lady Cyp. Out of my sight! begone! Such insolence is not to be endured
-- yet Earling is to blame to publish this to all my family. So! what comes
next?


Mrs. BUCKRAM enters. Buck. Madam, I Have served your ladyship too long to bear
the arrogance of Mr. Earling. I beg to be discharged; I Will not live in the
house with one who drives Miss Emily out of your doors, tells such monstrous
lies of Mr. Algernon, and sets your ladyship against all your friends and
relations.


Lady Cyp. Who made you a judge in matters that concern me only? When you are
cool I Will hear you. I know you have been junketing and caballing with Rachel
Williams, and the rest of them -- prithee retire!


Buck. That Is what I mean to do, and others beside me, or I Am mistaken. We
respect your ladyship, but we cannot put up with your attorney.


Exit. EARLING enters whilst this is saying. Lady Cyp. There, Mr. Earling, you
hear what is said against you -- Murmurs, complaints, invectives from all
quarters --


Earl. No wonder, when that Henry Scudamore, whom I suspect to be a secret
agent of your unworthy nephew's, sets them on to blacken and arraign me. Madam,
he has had the insolence to give me the worst of names.


Lady Cyp. Then give him his dismission -- send him away at once.


Earl. It shall be done.


Exit EARLING. Lady Cyp. Oh, that Sir Oliver had postpon'd his visit to his
nephew but one hour!

SCUD appears. Ah, prithee, prithee, do not plague me now. What brings you
hither?


Scud. Duty, my lady, duty -- want to hear how the draughts have agreed.


Lady Cyp. It Is plain how your draughts have agreed -- the operation's visible;
no matter about mine.


Scud. Oh pardon me, there is great matter -- spared for no pains -- employed
the best of drugs -- hope I have given content -- but rumors sly -- no
parrying defamation -- a man may be accused behind his back, and who can stand
it?


Lady Cyp. What rumors do you allude to? Who has accused you?


Scud. I don't know who may have accused me, my lady; I wish to heaven I could
say I have accused nobody.


Lady Cyp. What do you mean?


Scud. Oh dear, madam, I am troubled with the heart-ache; I have a lacerated
conscience.


Lady Cyp. You have a loaded head, I perceive; more wine in it than wit.


Scud. True, my lady; it is so full I can no longer hide the truth within it.
Out it must come, and true it is, I have slandered Mr. Algernon. He saved my
life, and I have stabbed his character.


Lady Cyp. You don't know what you say -- you're tipsey.


Scud. I wish I had been tipsey when I spoke of him; then I should have told
the truth.


Lady Cyp. Go your ways; get you gone! a man that is in two stories should be
credited for neither. You made him out to me a compound of all vices.


Scud. That was the very vilest compound that ever came out of my hands; but
lawyer Earling put a lie into my mouth, and like a gilded pill of loathsome
quality I swallowed it, and now it makes me sick.


Lady Cyp. Begone! I will no longer be insulted with your apothecary's jargon.
Never enter my doors again.


Scud. I hope your ladyship will give me leave to enter my own. Oh honesty,
honesty! it is very pleasant to speak the truth, but a man is sure to lose his
customers by it.


Exit SCUD. SIMON SINGLE enters. Lady Cyp. Heyday, Simon! and you too! I Will
have my cellar doors walled up, if I am to be troubled with all the tipsey
companions that resort to them.


Simon. Venerable lady, I am not inebriated. What I may be, if you wall up your
cellar doors, and me within them, I cannot pretend to say. I may in that case
drink to support life, as I have now been tasting a glass, by your permission,
to celebrate this mournful festival.


Lady Cyp. How can it be a festival and mournful? You know not what you say.


Simon. Pardon me, pardon me, most incomparable lady. A festival it must be,
because you are pleased to order us to be merry -- Mournful it surely is,
because your attorney makes us sad.


Lady Cyp. You see he is in my interest, and you are all in league against him.


Simon. No, no, no, my lady; it is not because he is in your interest we are
leagued against him -- your interest has been ever dearer to me than my own. If
you turn me out of your doors this night, I can lay my hand upon my heart, and
appeal to the Giver of it, that I never wronged you of a farthing; and, though a
poor servant, scorn to cringe and lie and vilify an absent man, as he has done.
Madam, you are abused; the county would rise up against him, if they knew what
he has said of Mr. Algernon -- so much is your nephew beloved.


Lady Cyp. Come, come, I know who tells you so -- it is Henry Scudamore, and no
one else.


Simon. Pray, madam, be no more deceived, but hear and judge for yourself. If
it was the last word I had to utter, I would say, and say it to his face, that
lawyer Earling is a falsifier and a defamer.


Lady Cyp. Go, stop him from discharging Henry Scudamore; don't let him leave
the house till I have seen him.


Exeunt severally. SCENE changes. EARLING enters. Earl. Where is this Henry
Scudamore? I Have hunted the whole house over for the fellow. If he is not driven
out before this night, my post will not be tenable tomorrow; we shall have
Algernon brought in in triumph upon the shoulders of his partisans, and all my
labors blasted in a moment. Hah! here is the man of all men for my purpose;
this surly fellow has the mastiff's property; show him his prey, and he will
fasten on it --

FRANK enters. Come hither, Frank; a word with you.


Frank. What is your pleasure, master?


Earl. Do you know a loose fellow, an interloper that came to seek a place, but
brought no character; a vagabond it should seem, that calls himself Henry
Scudamore?


Frank. Yes, I know Henry Scudamore.


Earl. Well, honest Frank, you see that he came here for no good purpose; and
it is not fit he should be let to stay and take the bread out of the mouths of
better than himself.


Frank. There Is bread enough for all of us methinks.


Earl. What then? what then? you're not a man, we'll hope, to be afraid of such
a wafer cake as he is, Frank.


Frank. I Am afraid of no man.


Earl. Why then, my hearty Frank, I give you orders to turn him bodily out of
this house, for which I have my lady's authority.


Frank. What has he done that I should turn him out?


Earl. He has insulted me, traduced my character, and set me at defiance.


Frank. Has he done this?


Earl. He has.


Frank. Then let him stay for me -- I will not touch him; I honor him for his
spirit. They call me surly Frank, and so I am if any man affronts me; but I Will
be no attorney's catch-pole, lookye! And as for turning out, if that is your
game, there is but one man I Will do that office for, and that is yourself, my
master -- There you have it.


Exit. Earl. Impudent varlet! the contagion's general if he has caught it. The
whole swarm's upon me, and I must stand their buzzing; as for their stings I Am
not in fear of them so long as I can keep the queen of the hive in my
possession.

ALGERNON enters. Oho! I have lit upon you at last. Harkye, sir, you Henry
Scudamore, whom nobody knows, decamp, pack up your wallet, and betake yourself
nobody cares whither. Off! the Lady Cypress warns you off -- begone!


Alg. Go back and say to Lady Cypress, when she sends her warning by a proper
messenger, I will obey her.


Earl. Why, who am I? What do you take me for?


Alg. A wretch beneath my notice -- a defamer.


SIMON enters. Simon. Well met, friend Henry, it is my lady's orders that you
don't leave the house 'till she has seen you.


Earl. Sot, you are drunk. You never had such orders.


Simon. I had no orders -- very well! And I Am a sot, I Am drunk -- why, very
well! -- So much for me, now for yourself -- you are no sot; you're sober Mr.
Earling the attorney; you're never drunk, for no man will drink with you; you
never make mistakes about your orders, for you are under orders from the old
one never to speak the truth, and faithfully adhere to your instructions.


Earl. This to my face?


Simon. Oh yes, I never saw a face better entitled to the compliment. I only
wish to see it face to face with Harry Algernon, and then perhaps your face may
be promoted, where I may treat it with an egg or two.


Alg. Go, go, unhappy man; it cannot be pleasant to hear yourself described so
faithfully.


Earl. I Will not go -- I summon you before the Lady Cypress -- she will do me
justice -- she will avenge my wrongs. Here comes Sir Oliver -- I appeal to him.


Sir OLIVER enters. Sir Oliv. What is the matter?


Earl. These fellows have insulted me most grossly.


Sir Oliv. You are a lawyer. You have your redress.


Earl. Sir, it is above redress by any law.


Sir Oliv. Then put it up and seek redress from patience. That is a remedy for
all complaints.


Earl. I hope I Have better remedies than patience -- I warrant I Will exterminate
these insolents. I Will pluck 'em root and branch out of this house, and hurl 'em
to the dunghill that they sprung from.


Sir Oliv. Go then and set about it. Leave me, sir, I Have business with this
gentleman.


Earl. This gentleman, forsooth! this gentleman --


Exit. Simon. Well, he may be a gentleman for me, only he lets the bottle stand
too long, and takes no pity on his company, that wish to give it motion --
that is not quite like a gentleman methinks -- else he may be a sober sort of a
gentleman -- but not a lord -- no, no, at least he will never be as drunk as a
lord.


Exit. Sir Oliv. Now, sir, I Have seen my nephew since we last conversed. You
asked me then if I had been informed of the particulars of that rencontre, and
by the motives you assigned for the enquiry, I should suppose you know some
circumstances of that dark affair.


Alg. The whole correctly.


Sir Oliv. Indeed! I hardly should have thought that Mr. Algernon would have
revealed the whole to any but his nearest and most confidential friend.


Alg. Nor has he; it remains still in his bosom an inviolable secret, though
known to me.


Sir Oliv. You mean to say that secrets in your keeping are secure. I have my
nephew's story as you have Algernon's, and should be glad, with your consent,
to compare them with each other.


Alg. They cannot differ, for my account is drawn up by your nephew, and being
signed by him, he neither can, nor will depart from it.


Sir Oliv. You much amaze me, sir, that Mr. Algernon should give a paper of
such consequence out of his hand. I greatly wish to see it.


Alg. Would it relieve your mind at the same time to see and talk with Algernon
himself?


Sir Oliv. Oh infinitely, if I could obtain it.


Alg. Then with a man of honor 'twou'd be mean to trifle any longer -- I am
Algernon.


Sir Oliv. How! -- Algernon! -- may I believe you? --


Alg. You shall not doubt me -- There Is your nephew's paper -- No eye but
yours has seen it from my hand.


Sir Oliv. Sir! -- Mr. Algernon -- I ask your pardon -- I am satisfied -- but
can you be unknown, and in this house?


Alg. I never entered it before this day, nor to my knowledge ever saw my aunt
'till I appeared before her in this habit, which I shall now put off -- but
hark! we shall be interrupted here -- Cannot we retire to a more private place?


Sir Oliv. To my apartment -- if you will be pleased to follow me. -- Ah! sir,
ah! Mr. Algernon, how hard to find, now at the close of a long life of
services, all it is enjoyments, all it is labors lost.


END OF ACT IV.
ACT V.
SCENE, the Castle Hall. JERRY SCUD and JENNY. SCUD. WELL, well, well! jewel
Jenny, here we are for the last time: farewell visits, to be sure, are
melancholy matters; but we have many good friends in the castle still, and though
I am thrown out of the cabinet, I have kept up my interest in the kitchen.


Jenny. Aye, and in the county too, when it shall be known that you have
forfeited my lady's favor by speaking up for Mr. Algernon; he is so much
pitied and beloved by all men, that your neighbors will sham sick on purpose
to employ you.


Scud. To say the truth, I have sometimes thought that was my lady's only
complaint; but I took care my physic should not cure her of it; and my comfort
is that nobody of the faculty will profit by my loss; for when she leaves off
my medicines she will find herself too well to employ a doctor.


Jenny. Come, come, Jerry, she will not leave off you nor your medicines. If you
can get to the speech of her, a little coaxing, and a submissive apology, will
set all things right.


Scud. No, no, jewel Jenny, she will hear no apology, and therefore I have
expressed myself more at large in my bill -- Here it is, here it is -- It Is a
bouncer; is not it?


Jenny. Yes, marry, if she has patience to go through this she will find you have
enough to say for yourself; but I suspect, Jerry, this argument is a little too
much on one side.


Scud. Turn over the leaf and you will find a great deal more on the other side.

SIMON SINGLE and Mrs. DOROTHY BUCKRAM. Ah my good friends, my good friends!
this is the most doleful visit I ever made to the castle. Jenny can witness I
have passed a sleepless night: that incubus of an attorney rode upon me like
^he nightmare.


Buck. Rode indeed! Set a beggar on horseback, and where will he not ride?


Scud. I attempted to put a cracker under his tail, but it burst in my hand,
and I only burnt my own fingers without singing him.


Simon. Let him go; the road he travels is all down-hill, and when he comes to
his journey's end, he will find those that will put crackers enough under his
tail, I warrant me.


Dor. As for me, a jackdaw in a cage has a better life of it than I have, for
he may cry rogue, and not be chidden for it -- We shall all be turned away: I
lay my account to be sent going for one.


Simon. Thirty years I have passed within these walls, and I would sooner pass
the rest of my days within the walls of a prison than live in a house where
scurrility is caressed and plain speaking turned out of doors -- Hah! who comes
here?


ALGERNON enters in his own Dress. Buck. Bless the good mark! our Henry -- No
-- Yes, sure it is Henry; how comes this to pass?


Alg. I Am ordered to attend upon my lady, so I put on my best.


Simon. Hark ye, my friend, if it is not your own, bad is your best. Let us
have no false feathers. Where did you get this suit?


Alg. It Is Harry Algernon's. He and I wear the same clothes: one tailor serves
us both -- Is Not it true, Jerry?


Scud. It is, it is, and the same measure fits you.


Simon. I don't know what you mean.


Alg. Then I Will inform you. Here are but two of you in company that do not know
me; you are both my friends, my generous, zealous friends, for which I thank
you, and come in person hither to convince you that Algernon is not that
worthless man, which calumny has painted him to be.


Buck. Heaven's grace light on you, if indeed you are that injured gentleman.


Scud. Oh by my soul, he is the very man: you may take that upon my word for
truth.


Simon. I saw it; I said it; I knew he was a gentleman. Now we have got that
attorney in a trap.


Jenny. Yes, yes, he will make that Earling shrink into his hole.


Simon. Hang him, polecat, I Will smoke him out of it. Oh! the inconceivable lies
that miscreant has told of a gentleman he does not know even by sight. I pray
you, sir, don't discover yourself to him, till we have had him up before my
lady -- Methinks I hear her say, Simon, I am convinced that lawyer is a rascal
-- Turn him out!


Buck. Aye, we'll all lend a helping hand to that.


Scud. Yes, or a helping foot, if that is wanted. I have one at his service.


Simon. Bless you, my worthy master, bless you heartily! I hope I have said
nothing to affront you; I was a little by the head just now, but that is over.


Alg. So is not my remembrance. I shall ever prize you as my best of friends.


Simon. Lord love you, we are all your friends; we are all Algernons and Anti
Earlings.


Buck. And when the election comes, well wear your colors.


Scud. Only put me in office on that day: let me be surgeon-general to the
enemy, and I Will engage they shall have more freeholders in the hospital than at
the hustings. I Will scour their consciences, I warrant me.


Alg. Now, my good friends, keep secret what has passed, and wait the event in
silence -- Here comes one, a gentle advocate, whom I would fain speak to apart.


Simon. We are gone; we are gone! All happiness befall you!


Exeunt all but ALGERNON. EMILY FITZALLAN enters. Emily. Bless me! you have
changed your habit.


Alg. Yes, my charmer -- In chase it is lawful to hang out false colors, but
when we are cleared and going into action we must show what we are.


Emily. Right, and where truth unfolds her standard, victory must follow.


Alg. And what should follow victory? What but the glorious prize for which I
struggle? that prize which fortune, aiming to impoverish, has only made more
rich in my esteem -- that generous heart, that sacrificed for me interest, for
which so many sacrifice themselves. Now call to mind those words so heavenly
sweet, which you left with me, whilst the ingenuous blush glowed on your cheek
-- "Henry, I live for you!"


Emily. Ah! that was then the only way I had to reinstate you in your property;
and, though it cost a blush to say those words, still I could say them, for I
scorned to rob you -- but to repeat them now would be -- Oh heaven! -- it would
be every thing but false, my Henry.


Alg. Then let me take that truth into a heart, of which no human power can
dispossess you.


Emily. I hope not, Henry, for take that away and I am poor indeed.


Alg. It Is yours for ever -- and believe me, dear one, if my too credulous
aunt has not outlived her reason, she will see the injustice of her own
decisions and revoke them. For my exclusion she may have some plea; our
families have been at suit for years, and law will cut asunder closer ties than
those existing between her and me; but of her motives for discarding you, take
my word, Emily, she will soon repent.


Emily. It is not that I fear her worthless favorite; the wretch has brought a
storm upon his head, and has already had some heavy shocks -- but my worst
fears point to another quarter.


Alg. I understand you. It Is Montrath you dread.


Emily. I could not temporize; I spoke too plainly. Indignant of the claim she
made upon me, I set her power too boldly at defiance, and challenged her to
cancel her bequest.


Alg. You must consult Sir Oliver upon this: I cannot speak upon Montrath's
affair even to you.


Emily. I see you either cannot or you will not, therefore I ask no questions,
well persuaded you never would take arms against the life of any man and know
yourself in fault.


Alg. I hope I shall not be found to have so done -- but look! here comes Sir
Oliver. -- I Will leave you; he may perhaps be less reserved than I am.


Exit ALGERNON. Sir OLIVER MONTRATH enters. Sir Oliv. Was not that Algernon?


Emily. You know him, sir, it seems --


Sir Oliv. I think I do; I have cause to know him.


Emily. Ah, sir, you speak so mournfully, I fear you have found no comfort in
your visit to your nephew.


Sir Oliv. Small comfort -- Yet the danger of his wound is much abated.


Emily. Then I Am afraid you have, or think you have, some cause of anger
against Algernon.


Sir Oliv. No, Emily, no anger against him. You cannot think too well of
Algernon, though I could wish you had not put your thoughts in language quite so
warm.


Emily. 'Twas indiscreet, but that defamer urged me, and put me off my guard.


Sir Oliv. Could Not you find another and a stronger cause that put you off your
guard? Is there not a certain passion, which our hearts are subject to, that
neither keeps a guard upon itself, nor suffers any to be kept against it?


Emily. If I should answer that as truth would prompt me, shou'dn't I expose
myself to another reproof for want of caution?


Sir Oliv. No; for so far from thinking with my lady, that you have chosen ill,
I think with you that you could no where make a better choice -- And more than
this -- was your brave father living, and knew what I know of your Algernon, he
would approve your judgment.


Emily. As I am sure you would not give that name but to a sacred truth, what
you have said sanctions the character of Algernon -- but does it warrant me in
suffering him to make a sacrifice of interest by marrying a beggar?


Sir Oliv. You point the question wrong, and should have asked if it exculpates
me, your father's friend, for suffering you to call yourself a beggar. -- No,
my dear child, it does not, nor will I permit it to be said, the daughter of
the generous Fitzallan, who in the battle found me faint with wounds, and
whilst he covered me received his death, wanted that dross which I abounded in.
-- This, Emily, this never should be said; so come with me, and don't oppose
one word to my resolves; for in an act of honor I will pause at no man's
bidding, no, my pretty one, nor yet at any woman's, though graced with all the
charms that heaven can give her.


Exeunt. SCENE changes. EARLING alone. Now, fortune, one kind lift, and I am
landed. So far success goes with me: I have nothing more to fear from Emily;
that pert proud miss is silenced and thrown by. It now remains to sweep those
menial vermin out my way, those insects that annoy me: old Sir Oliver, that
blusters about justice, is a hypocrite; he cannot be a friend to Algernon; and
yet he troubles me, takes up my seat at table, occupies the ear of the old
lady, and obstructs my suit, which stood so fair, that if I could but seize one
lucky moment, one fair opportunity. -- Hah! I have found it. -- Here she comes
alone -- Now, impudence befriend me!


Lady CYPRESS enters. Lady Cyp. So, Mr. Earling! much as I love peace, I will
not purchase it by mean concessions; I will not suffer the gentleman I esteem
and trust to be affronted by my saucy servants; they shall atone, or troop.


Earl. Most amiable, most excellent of ladies, whom with my heart I serve,
honor, obey and worship; I want words to speak my gratitude. -- Thus at your
feet in humble adoration let me seal on this dear hand the pledge, the sacred
pledge, of my unutterable, my unbounded love.


SIMON and DOROTHY enter. Simon. Look, Dorothy, the devil's at his prayers.


Dor. I hope they are his last prayers.


Earl. Curse on their coming! what a moment lost! Madam, do you permit your
menial servants thus to break in upon your private moments?


Lady Cyp. Why not? If you have any thing to add to your last speech I shall
not interrupt it. You may resume your posture, and go on.


Earl. Madam, I cannot.


Lady Cyp. I can help your memory if you have lost the word. 'Twas love,
unbounded love. When you had gone so far out of all bounds, all measure of
respect, can the appearance of these silly people deter you from proceeding?


Earl. Madam, if you're offended, I have done. I Will humbly take my leave.


Lady Cyp. No, sir, I must insist upon your staying. Though you are foiled to add
a single word to insolence so perfect and complete, yet you shall not be robbed
of your just right, that nature gives you, to be heard in vindication of your
own assertions. If you have spoke the truth, and nothing but the truth, of
Algernon, his character cannot be rescued, let the fate of yours be what it
may.


Simon. Any thing the matter, Mr. Attorney? Afraid you are not quite well just
now. You look a little pale.


Lady Cyp. Hold your tongue, foolish fellow! you, Simon, in the first place,
and you next, mistress, who dare to tell me I am made the dupe of false
impressions, are you not both ashamed to look this injured gentleman in the
face?


Simon. It is a face to make a man ashamed, and we did blush to see him on his
knees before your ladyship.


Lady Cyp. That Is my affair, fall down on yours and ask forgiveness of him.


Simon. Pray, madam, don't command me to do that, for fear I never should
forgive myself. -- I ask your pardon for approaching you when I was tipsey, but
you bade me drink, and I was over eager to obey you.


Lady Cyp. That Is easily forgiven; but your abuse of this gentleman, whom I
must still call the friend of truth, is monstrous.


Simon. Madam, if that gentleman is the friend of truth, he makes very free
with his friend truly. I only said he told lies to your ladyship, that is no
abuse, for here come those an prove it.


Sir OLIVER MONTRATH and EMILY. Earl. My evil genius! what does he do her^?


Sir Oliv. Forgive me, my good lady, if I come to atone to you and this fair
advocate for my unjust suspicions of your nephew. I have one here waiting,
who will confront that gentleman, his accuser, and, I trust, remove some false
impressions that your ladyship may have imbibed from his unfounded charges.
Come in, sir, if you please.


ALGERNON enters. Lady Cyp. How now! who is this? Henry!


Sir Oliv. I claim your promise to give him hearing.


Earl. I protest against him; that fellow's an impostor: we shall not listen to
his evidence.


Lady Cyp. He first came here humbly to ask for service, pleaded decay, and
said he was a gentleman by birth; I pitied him, and offered him relief. He now
has changed his dress, shifted his character, and claims to be an advocate for
Algernon. These are suspicious circumstances, and I should have some better
reasons for believing him than I am yet possessed of. Do you know any such, Sir
Oliver?


Earl. Aye, sir, do you know who this champion is?


Sir Oliv. Sir, give me leave to ask -- Do you?


Earl. Not I; I know him not.


Sir Oliv. Yet you know Algernon, are intimate with all his habits, frailties,
faults, offenses -- have looked into his heart, and kindly told the secrets you
discovered. -- Oh thou slanderer! Now look him in the face, and prove your
charge. -- Well may you start -- Mark his confusion, madam! -- This is your
nephew, this is Algernon.


Emily. Yes, on my honor, and my brave preserver.


Lady Cyp. I am confounded. -- Where is that defamer?


Simon. Madam, he has stepped aside to mend a flaw in his indictment. -- How do
you do, Mr. Attorney? Come forward, if you please, and get acquainted with this
gentleman's face. You knew him well enough behind his back.


Lady Cyp. Peace! let me hear what Algernon will say in his own cause.


Sir Oliv. Speak for yourself, brave Algernon.


Alg. I am that exiled man, whom, on the word of this defamer, though unknown to
him even by sight, it seems, you have proscribed. Despairing of admission to
your presence, and driven in self-defence on this resource, I took a
counterfeited character, and saw what I had never been allowed to approach --
your person. Much I wished to speak in mitigation of your prejudice, and give a
plain recital of my wrongs; but you had then no ear for such discourse, and I
was told to wait your better leisure.


Lady Cyp. All this is true -- proceed.


Alg. A friend here present told me I was accused to you of various crimes and
gross enormities. I plead to failings, to the common errors and indiscretions
youth is subject to, but, I trust, I have never degraded my character or
debased my principle; I am no gamester, as he makes me to be; no dissipater of
my paternal fortune, as he insinuates; no libertine, as he asserts; and, let me
add, in the hearing of Sir Oliver Montrath, I am no assassin.


Sir Oliv. It is now my duty, and a painful one I feel it, to bring to light,
in vindication of an injured character, the guilty person, for whose shameful
act no better palliation can be found than temporary madness and intoxication.
The monster, from whose brutal violence the purest of heaven's creatures was
preserved by Algernon, how shall I speak it without shame and horror! was
Lionel Montrath.


Lady Cyp. I am confounded and amazed! Montrath! -- This, if not told by you,
Sir Oliver, would mock belief.


Sir Oliv. Your nephew was too noble to disclose it, though he has in his hands a
written paper signed by the offender for his vindication. This, I believe, he
never has discovered, even to that lady, though a party in it.


Emily. Never, but constantly evaded my enquiries.


Sir Oliv. To this when I shall add, that my rash nephew forced the duel on him
in consequence of blows exchanged between them, I trust I may with safety rest
his cause upon the facts adduc'd -- unless indeed this gentleman has any other
charge, which in his modesty he will prefer.


Earl. You Will not draw any thing from me, Sir Oliver; you may talk on; I prefer
silence.


Sir Oliv. You are right; it is time your tongue had some repose.


Lady Cyp. Pray do not keep him longer in my sight. My nephew does not seem to
hold him worthy of a retort.


Alg. No, madam, I have nothing to return him for his malicious slander, but my
contempt.


Lady Cyp. If he can feel, it is punishment enough.


Sir Oliv. Be gone! your infamy go with you; and may no part of it adhere to
your profession.


Earl. Let my profession look to itself -- There are some understandings in
this world made, it should seem, by nature to be duped. Had you not been so
easy of belief, I had not been so forward to deceive you. Now put what name you
will upon my conduct, there are such glaring instances in point, of dealers in
seduction, infamy, and false impressions on credulity, as make my shame no
wonder.


Exit. Lady Cyp. Now, Henry, you have appealed to me for justice -- hear my
decree. There is your destiny; that is the prize which you have nobly earned.
My heart, so long estranged, is now your own. You are my son, and Emily my
daughter; all I possess is yours -- Have I atoned?


Alg. Oh! you have given me that, which might atone for all the pains mortality
could feel -- beauty to charm me, talents to enchant, and truth to fix my
happiness secure.


Emily. Oh! Henry, bear me to my benefactress, and let me kneel --


Lady Cyp. Yes, I will let you kneel, my child, for now thou have a treasure
worth thy thanks -- Be virtuous, loving, faithful to each other; ape not the
fashions of this guilty world; seek pleasures where alone they can be found, in
nuptial harmony, domestic duties, and that sweet reflection, which fortune well
employed is sure to give. -- Rise, my adopted, rise!


Sir Oliv. Oh, let me add a blessing -- May you be -- Well, well, it will not
forth; my heart's too full; but I will send it up in thought toward heaven --
Here, Emily, my love, I Will put the first chain on your bridal arm; they are
pure pearls, my child; not spoils of war, but gifts of gratitude for life
preserved -- wear them for my sake, and when I am dead cast a kind look upon
them, and drop one pearly tear, richer than them all, to the memory of old
Oliver.


Emily. Oh sir, sir, sir -- my father and my friend --!


Sir Oliv. So, so! no more. Henry, my gallant boy, give me your hand -- a
soldier's greeting after victory -- time was I could have grasped it harder.


Alg. I accept it, and press it to my heart.


Lady Cyp. Where are you all? This is a day of joy. Simon, I look to you to oil
the hinges of my castle gates, that they may open freely to the neighbors, the
tenants, and the poor.


Simon. I Will make 'em swing, so please you, and for one bad man now gone out of
them, a hundred good ones shall come in, I warrant me.


Lady Cyp. You, Dorothy, must set the girls a dancing; and you, Rachel, must
lead the ball in honor of your mistress.


SCUD and JENNY, who had crept in behind the servants, now step forward. Scud.
And when the bumpkins caper and kick shins, may they not want a plaster, good
my Lady? I Will cure them gratis on this happy night. I have brought a bill, so
please you, that will bear some riders on it, and not break it is back.


Lady Cyp. We'll have no bills nor bickerings any more; and to cut short all
reckonings, I Will establish you apothecary general to the castle upon a salary
fixed.


Simon. Then, Jerry, the less physic you send in the better for yourself.


Scud. And for all parties, my most honored lady. I hope most heartily for all
your sakes my place will be as near a sinecure as possible.


Lady Cyp. I hope so too. You and your fair wife are welcome. She is a child of
the castle, and will grace our dance.


Scud. Yes, under favor, Jenny, though I say it, has all the steps that now are
thought so graceful: she will balance on one leg and send the other upon a cruize
into her neighbor's pocket; no magnetizing doctor or dotterell-monger can
surpass my Jenny for the fine attitudes.


Lady Cyp. You're a strange mortal; but let mirth go round, and if the humble
annals of our castle can cheer one honest, ease one heavy heart, our harmless
efforts have not been in vain.


END OF THE COMEDY.
EPILOGUE. Spoken by Miss BETTERTON.
NOW False Impressions are no more in view,
Allow me to present you with the true --
A bond it is, impressed by honor's seal,
With Truth's fair form, engraved in perennial steel;
A bond of gratitude, to which I set
Both hand and heart to verify my debt;
And though in law an infant, and in merit
Poor, as heaven knows, I am not poor in spirit;
I Will pay you when I Am able from my gains;
If you will have patience, I Will not spare for pains.
In truth I did not seek this awful post;
No champion I to face so brave a host.
There are, who when five yawning acts are over,
Can tickle those same yawners till they roar;
These are the friends our prosing bard should court;
He gives soft slumbers, but they make the sport;
They have the spell to puff the stage balloon
Brim full of gas, and blow it to the moon:
Not so our poet -- He accounts it right
To keep his critics ever in his sight;
Such jaunts might turn their brains, disturb their thinking,
And send them where they would lose the art of sinking.
Rigor, when just, he can, he will endure,
The stream is bitter, but the spring is pure;
Candor, when candor happily he can meet,
Like Moses' rod, can turn the bitter sweet;
But the foul puddle, in which malice dips,
Is a dire dose -- He spurns it from his lips.
He writes, because, though writing is abused,
The world is not too grave to be amused;
He writes, and ever to some moral end,
Because the world is not too good to mend.
Soft female hearts are prone as wax to melt,
And, true or false, impressions will be felt;
Youth's yielding clay too easily receives
The featured st^mp that cross-ey'd cunning gives:
Therefore let her, whose dangerous lot in life
Hangs on the balance betwixt maid and wife,
Lay those few short prescriptions to her heart,
With which the Lady Cypress closed her part;
For base seduction spreads on every side
His treacherous snares to mesh the unwary bride.
She, in whose eyes enticing Cupids play,
Gives impudence the clue, and leads the way.
What though the faithless husband quits her hand,
Truth, like a column, of itself can stand:
To reasoning minds sufficient strength is given,
And none but fools can charge their faults on heaven.
December, 1797. In the Press, and speedily will be Published, A NEW AND
COMPLETE EDITION OF THE OBSERVER, In Six Volumes, Duodecimo, NEWLY CLASSED AND
ARRANGED; And containing, in Addition to the Original Matter, AN ENTIRE
TRANSLATION OF THE CLOUDS OF ARISTOPHANES, WITH NOTES CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY.

Also, A separate Edition of the said Translated COMEDY, printed on such Paper,
and in such Type, as to accommodate such Purchasers or Possessors of the former
Editions, as may choose to attach it thereunto.


