DUPLICITY: A COMEDY. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN COVENT GARDEN.

By THOMAS HOLCROFT.

LONDON: Printed for G. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER ROW.

M DCC LXXXI.

TO THOMAS HARRIS, ESQUIRE. THIS COMEDY IS INSCRIBED, AS A PUBLIC ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
OF THE ADVANTAGES IT RECEIVED, FROM HIS GREAT ATTENTION AND TASTE, AS A CRITIC,

BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT, HUMBLE SERVANT, THOMAS HOLCROFT.

PREFACE.
SINCE it is the fate of dramatic works to undergo a much more severe scrutiny
than any other of the efforts of the mind; authors, in this predicament, are
justifiable in taking every opportunity of speaking in their own behalf, and
the egotism should be, and is, by the candid, readily forgiven them. The
applauses bestowed upon DUPLICITY, in the Theater, have equalled my fondest
hopes; and self-love itself cannot accuse the auditors of ingratitude, or want
of penetration. But though there are scenes happy enough to have given
universal satisfaction, there are others that have been called vulgarities,
damned stuff, and by other concise and summary epithets, which men accustomed
to decide without deigning to reason, have invented and appropriated to their
own proper use. I do not mean to affirm there is no truth in these remarks: I
am, perhaps, the person least qualified of any to pronounce, with safety, on
the merits or demerits of the work. Fathers, who are the most free from
prejudice, cannot see those defects in their offspring, which are obvious to
others. In the rapidity of composition, blemishes are suffered to escape,
through a laudable attention to things of greater importance; and, like an ugly
face, presently become too familiar to be disgusting. It is, for this reason,
dangerous to commit any thing to paper, which the judgment, at the first
perception, condemns. A work of any consequence is read and reconsidered so
repeatedly, that the ideas at last lose both novelty and force, and the writer
is disgusted to find those things, which, when first conceived, gave him so
much pleasure, become vapid, and assume the appearance of common place. For
these reasons, I say, it would be arrogant in me to speak decidedly; I can only
allege what were my original motives for writing as I have done.

The English Comic Drama has long been renowned for humor; and when, about
fourteen years ago, the French Comedy Larmoyante, or, as we call it,
Sentimental Comedy, was introduced, the complaint was, that we had lost all the
spirit of our old writers, and were dwindled into mere translators. The town
was in this temper when Dr. Goldsinith's Comedy of SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER was
produced, in which, humor, alone, seems to be the chief intention of the
Author, and which gave a fatal blow to mere sentimental dialogue. The success
of this piece rouzed later writers from the soft slumbers of the heart, and wit
and humor became commodities in great request. The road to fame, though
difficult, was obvious; and it would have been unpardonable for a young
traveller, at his first out-set, so far to have mistaken, as not to have
attempted it. The difficulties and dangers have increased, however, in a vast
proportion. I need only mention the SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL; and every discerning
critic will immediately recollect how, and why.

In the Comedy of DUPLICITY, the 'squire and his sister are characters that, in
their own nature, cannot admit of delicate strokes; and, if I have erred, it is
not, I believe, so much in the coloring, as in the choice of my subject. An
Author in his first attempt, is seldom impressed with that awe for the Public
which is requisite, but ventures many things, that, perhaps, have their
excellencies in reading, but that appear rude, abrupt, or indelicate, when
pronounced before a large assembly. Were the humor of Smollet, which never
fails to excite laughter in the closet, spoken upon the stage, it would
frequently excite universal disgust. Characters of broad humor are become
peculiarly hazardous, because they are become far less frequent. A sense of
propriety spreads in proportion as people read, and reading is an infallible
consequence of riches. This produced duces delicate sensations in those who
have acquired such a strict sense of propriety, and they are offended when they
see things represented on the stage which, they suppose, do not exist in real
life; though there are a thousand living characters, a thousand incidents at
which, if exhibited, an audience would revolt, merely on the score of
improbability.

Whatever the execution may have been, the intention of this Comedy is of a far
nobler nature than the mere incitement of risibility: the vice it pretends to
correct is become truly enormous; and I would rather have the merit of driving
one man from the gaming-table, than of making a whole theater merry.

I have, likewise, been accused by some of imitation, and want of originality.
It is said, I have stolen an incident from one piece, and a character from
another, and that it is evidently the play of a player. This last remark, I
believe, would never have been made, had I not been known to be a player. The
accusations, which have the greatest appearance of truth, are, that LE
DISSIPATEUR of Monsieur Destouches, and the Tragedy of THE GAMESTER, have
furnished the great outlines of the plot. To these I answer, that, were it so,
I would make no scruple of avowing it, because I should not think myself
degraded by the avowal; but I declare the plot was finished, and almost the
comedy, before I ever read LE DISSIPATEUR: and if I have pillaged the GAMESTER,
it was from latent ideas, of which I am unconscious; for I have neither read,
nor seen the GAMESTER for many years. A parallel circumstance to that of Sir
Harry losing his sister's fortune, is found, I am told, in the GAMESTER; but
this incident was added to DUPLICITY since it was first written, by the advice
of a friend, to give a strength to the denoument. But there is a story told in
the life of Beau Nash, which, had these critics known, would have immediately
pointed out the place whence, they might have sworn, without the least
suspicion of perjury, I had stolen my plot; and yet, had they sworn, they would
have been perjured, for I never read that story till I had written my Play, and
then, I confess, I was amazed at the similarity.

However, I repeat, had I taken my plot from any play or story, I should have
made no scruple to confess it, because I think it no disgrace. The first of all
poets invented none of his plots; I shall never be the second, and yet I affirm
I did invent mine; that is, as far as I myself am conscious. The elegant Bishop
Hurd, in his discourse on Poetical Imitation, has the following remark, among
many others, which is applicable to the present occasion: The objects of
imitation, like the materials of human knowledge, are a common stock which
experience furnishes to all men; and it is in the operations of the mind upon
them that the glory of poetry, as of science, consists. Here the genius of the
poet has room to show itself, and from hence, alone, is the praise of
originality to be ascertained.

The Comedy is now committed to the impartial judgment of the true critic; and
I have only to wish, it may receive as favorable a sentence from him, as it
has already experienced from the voice of an indulgent Public.

PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. NICHOLSON,
and spoken by Mr. LEE-LEWES. RASH was the wight, who first, in hollowed tree,
Daring, resolved to tempt the treacherous sea!
Hungry the wretch, who, forth from shelly cloister,
First drew and swallowed down -- a living oyster!
But far more rash and daring is THAT wight,
Who, in this polished age, attempts to write:
Long may his hunger last, who pines for fame,
Who seeks that hard-earn'd morsel, called -- A NAME!
A morsel closed within a scaly guard
Of critic shells, obdurate, rough, and hard!
Well fare the bard, whose fortitude, sedate,
Stands, unappall'd, before impending fate;
When cat-call-pipers, groaners, whistlers, grinners,
Assembled, sit to judge of SCRIBBLING SINNERS!
What mortal mind can keep its terrors under
When gods sit armed, with awful -- wooden thunder?
What heart, so brave, can check its palpitation,
Before, the grave dispensers of damnation:
Or who, in danger of such mighty evil,
Would not turn Indian, and adore the devil?
[Bows. Various have been the stratagems and wiles,
Displayed in prologues, to obtain your smiles.
Some make the stage an inn; and hope to bribe,
With curious feast, the turtle-eating tribe:
Make vain attempts, in metaphor, to treat,
But metaphor is unsubstantial meat.
So bold harpooners, if their oars should fail,
Toss out an empty tub, to amuse the whale.
Others more mean, implore, in whining style,
That tender pity may your hearts beguile;
Bespeak applause, by way of deprecation,
And think that fame is charity's donation.
So dastard curs provoke the mastiff's bite,
Then fawn and cringe to shun the unequal fight.
Our author hopes, by honest means, to gain
Plaudits which merit never asked in vain:
Should such biest claim be his, he need not fear,
He knows your candor; -- Party dwells not here!
Patient to your decision he will submit,
Nor wish to bribe the arbiters of wit.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Mr. Osborne,Mr. HENDERSON. Sir Harry Portland,Mr. LEWIS. Sir Hornet
Armstrong,Mr. WILSON. 'Squire Turnbull,Mr. LEE-LEWES. Mr. Vandervelt,Mr.
WEWITZER. Timid,Mr. EDWIN. Scrip,Mr. STEVENS. Servants,Mr. J. WILSON.
Servants,Mr. NEWTON. Servants,Mr. JOULES. Clara,Miss YOUNG, Miss Turnbull,Mrs.
WILSON. Melissa,Mrs. INCHBALD. Mrs. Trip,Mrs. PIT.
DUPLICITY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Sir HARRY PORTLAND's House.
Enter CLARA and MELISSA. Clara. WELL, my dear Melissa, you will be a happy
woman!


Melissa. I have no doubt of it. The attention which Mr. Osborne has shown me,
was not that of a man eager to gain the affection of his mistress by humouring
her caprices, praising her beauty, and flattering her follies. He is obliging
and well-bred, but sincere; yet his disapprobation is delivered with a delicacy
that makes it more agreeable than some people's compliments.


Clara. If time, instead of mellowing the strokes, should wear away this smooth
varnish and discover a harsh outline, should you not be offended at the
severity of his manner, think you?


Melissa. Believe me, dear Clara, there is no danger; for if there be one man
on earth more capable of making a woman happy than another it is Mr. Osborne.


Clara. It would be heresy in you, my dear, to hold any other opinion; and I
have no doubt but you will continue orthodox after marriage.


Melissa. Yes -- I shall certainly die in that faith.


Clara. Your brother, Sir Harry, I believe, is of your religion too.


Melissa. Entirely -- The friendship of Mr. Osborne and my brother is as
sincere as the commencement of it was remarkable -- Have you ever heard their
story?


Clara. Never. You know my acquaintance with your family is but just begun;
but, I hope, you will not think them words of course when I assure you that,
short as it is, I feel myself interested in its happiness.


Melissa. Oh! I am sure you are sincere -- I know it by sympathy -- Well then,
I Will tell you -- Harry and Osborne happened to be both abroad at the same time.
As my brother was going to Italy, and passing through the mountainous part of
Savoy, he came to a hollow way, among the rocks, surrounded by trees and
caverns. All on a sudden, at a turning in the road, he beheld Osborne, and his
servants, attacked by six banditti, and ready to sink under their wounds.


Clara. Was Sir Harry alone?

( alarmed.)
Melissa. He had his governor, two servants, and the postillion -- My brother
instantly leaped from his carriage, snatched up his sword and pistols, andflew
to the place of action.


Clara. I declare you terrify me!


Melissa. He was not seen by the combatants, and took care to advance so near,
before he fired, that he could not fail to do execution -- He laid two of the
banditti dead; and their companions, who had discharged their firearms, and
beheld Sir Harry's people running to the attack and levelling their pieces,
fled.


Clara. Thank you for that, my dear -- you have given me breath.


Melissa. The intrepidity with which Sir Harry saw Osborne defend himself, and
the fortitude he discovered when he was informed, as it was at first believed,
that his wounds were mortal, attached my brother so powerfully to him, that he
resolved not to leave him in the hands of strangers, but anxiously waited while
he was under cure.


Clara. This was a noble generosity!


Melissa. It was; and Osborne was so sensible of it that, though he was going
the other way, he would return with Sir Harry into Italy; and their friendship
has continued ever since.


Clara. But is it not strange, my dear, that he cannot detach his friend, Sir
Harry, from the GAMING-TABLE?


Melissa My brother is insatuated -- It is his greatest, almost his only
weakness.


Clara. But the report is, that Mr. Osborne takes advantage of this weakness;
that, while he publicly satirizes the practice, he privately benefits by his
superior address; and, in fact, has half ruined Sir Harry HIMSELF.


Melissa. The report of malice, my dear.


Enter Sir HARRY PORTLAND and Mr. OSBORNE. Sir Harry. Ladies, your obedient --
Pray when did you arrive in town, Madam?

( To Clara.)
Clara. Yesterday -- But how came you to quit Bath so suddenly, Gentlemen? I
understood you intended to stay another week, and you were gone before me.


Sir Harry. Mr. Osborne, Madam, was horriblement ennuye -- dull as an alderman
at church, or a fat lap-dog after dinner -- thinking on marriage, Melissa, and
other momentous matters; and so --


Osborne. Come, come, Sir Harry, this is mighty ingenious; but you were, at
least, as willing to be gone as myself -- The truth, Madam, is, my MODEST
friend, here, heard YOU were to set off in a day or two; and, from that moment,
was continually giving hints, and asking me how I, as a lover, could exist so
long without a sight of my mistress; and, in short, began, all at once, to talk
so sympathetically about absence and ages, that I, who had made the excursion
purely to oblige him, was, I acknowledge, exceedingly happy to find I could
oblige him by returning.


Clara. What say you to this, Sir Harry? -- But, I know your politeness -- you
will confess it all to be true, and begin to say civil things upon the subject,
that will only put me to the trouble of blushing and curtsying; so we'll
suppose them all if you please -- But come, tell me -- what is the news of the
day?


Melissa. News! Oh, that is true -- Look here, my dear! -- I thought I had
something to tell you -- ( reads a paragraph in a newspaper) -- We hear, from
very good authority, that a hymeneal treaty is concluded between a certain
beautiful ward, not a mile from St. James's Square, and her old guardian; and
that the lady is expected in town from Bath, every hour, to sign and seal.


Sir Harry. What say you to this, Madam?


Clara. Say! I protest I don't know what to say! -- except that these
NEWSMAKERS are a very pleasant, ingenious kind of people.


Melissa. But a'n't you angry?


Clara. Angry! no indeed. I am sure I am very much obliged to them, for
thinking of me -- I shall be so stared at -- I Will go into public continually,
and my guardian shall go with me.


Melissa. But is there any foundation for this report, my dear?


Clara. Nay, I am sure I cannot tell: there may be, for aught I know -- I have
suspected the matter a great while, you must know, by my guardian's simpering
and squeezing my hand so often -- then, he is continually talking about
METHUSELAH, and the ANTEDILUVIANS, and making systems to convince me how much
stronger, and longer lived, some men are than others -- He read, the other day,
in the ANNUAL REGISTER, of a man, at INVERNESS, who lived to the age of one
hundred and seventeen; and he has been talking, ever since, of purchasing a
country seat in the HIGHLANDS.


Sir Harry. That would be pleasant.


Clara. Very -- Then we should have a flock of GOATS, I suppose!


Sir Harry. DORASTUS and FAUNIA.


Clara. Oh yes -- quite in the DAMON and PHILIDA way.


Osborne. You are very happy in a lover, Madam.


Clara. Exceedingly -- quite proud of my conquest -- There is no such great
miracle in bringing a young fellow, whose passions are all afloat, to die at
ones feet -- The thing's so natural that one does it every day -- But to thaw
the icy blood of a grave old gentleman, to see him simper, sigh, dance minuets,
and look ridiculous for one -- Oh! there is, positively, no flattery equal to
it.


Sir Harry. He will make your winter evenings in the HIGHLANDS quite
entertaining, with relating the wild pranks he committed, and the deeds of
prowess he was guilty of in his youth -- then you will be so delighted with
listening to his raptures, and tasting his panada, and --


Clara. Oh yes -- yes, yes -- ha, ha -- I -- I think I see him now, with his
venerable bald head, his shrivelled face, and his little pug nose, that looks
as red and as bright as the best Dutch sealing-wax, rising from his chair, by
the help of his crutch-headed stick, to breathe forth vows of love and
everlasting fidelity -- Ha, ha, ha.


Melissa. It Is whimsical enough.


Clara. Yes -- Oh, now you talk of whimsical, I was accosted by an old
gentleman, the night before I left Bath, in the rooms, who was the drollest
being, and had the most agreeable kind of whimsicallity about him, I ever met
with -- I thought he would have made love to me -- swore I was an angel, and
said a thousand civil things -- quite galant.


Osborne. Oh, Madam, the old men are the only polite men of this age.


Clara. Upon my word, I begin to think so.


Osborne. The young ones, taught in the modern school, hold a rude familiarity
to be the first principle of good breeding.


Clara. Manners, like point ruffles, are now most fashionable when they are
soiled.


Sir Harry. No, no -- they only hang the easier for being deprived of starch --
But who was this old gentleman, pray, Madam?


Clara. A relation of yours, Sir.


Sir Harry. Of mine, Madam?


Clara. I should suppose so, for he mentioned his nephew, Sir Harry Portland.


Melissa. Our uncle, Sir Hornet Armstrong.


Sir Harry. It is -- I found a letter from him, when I came to town, in which
he informed me, he should arrive in Bath the very day we left it.


Enter SERVANT. Sir Harry. Who brought this?


Servant. It came by the post, Sir.


[Exit Servant. ( Sir Harry reads the letter, and seems surprised.) Clara. I
die to be better acquainted with him -- I must have him in my train of sighing
swains.


Osborne. You seem astonished, Sir Harry.


Clara. Some unkind billet from his mistress, I suppose.


Sir Harry. No, indeed; it is the most unaccountable epistle I ever received,
and from my unaccountable uncle too -- There, read, read.

( To Osborne.)
Osbone. -- (Reads.) -- Dear Harry --
You know, you dog, how your old uncle loves you -- You will say so, when you
are thoroughly acquainted with the occasion of this -- In brief -- I met with a
young lady at Bath, the most extraordinary, take her all together, I ever
beheld -- She is a nonpareil! a phoenix! -- But you will judge for yourself --
She is coming up to town with her brother; who, by the bye, is a country booby
-- but that is no matter -- I saw her only once, and that was in the rooms; but
once is sufficient -- They intended coming up to London, by way of seeing the
town, for the are country people I find, though the sister has more
accomplishments, ease and good-breeding, than I ever yet saw in the
drawing room -- I proposed a match to the brother, and he seemed happy at the
offer -- They will arrive nearly as soon as this, for they set out before it;
and I shall follow, maugre the gout, as fast as I can.

HORNET ARMSTRONG.
P. S. I forgot to mention, their name is Turnbull. --




TURNBULL! why, what, in the devil's name, is Sir Hornet mad!


Sir Harry. In one of his right ancient whims, I suppose -- Sir Hornet has had
many such in his time.


Melissa. But pray, who is this miraculous lady, Mr. Osborne? for you seem to
know something of her.


Osborne. Do you remember, Sir Harry, a gawky girl, that stalked round the
rooms, and stared prodigiously -- she that was stuck to the side of a bobwig'd
country 'squire?


Clara. Oh! -- what the -- the wench with her arms dangling, her chin
projecting, and her mouth open -- dressed in the -- red ribband, tawdry style;
and that looked as if she were afraid of being lost.


Sir Harry. Yes -- or as if she durst not trust herself alone, out of her own
parish, lest somebody should catch her, put her in a sack, and send her for a
present to the king of the Cannibals.


Osborne. The same -- that is the accomplished Miss Turnbull.


Sir Harry. How!


Osborne. That is the easy, well-bred, drawingroom lady.


Sir Harry. Is it possible?


Clara. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, -- well -- ( with an affected gravity) -- and I
don't doubt but she would make a sort of a -- a -- a very good wife --
Understands the arts of brewing, baking, pickling of pork, curing of hung beef,
darning of stockings, and other branches of housewifery, in perfection.


Sir Harry. Oh, no doubt -- Is perfectly skilled too in the science of feeding
the pigs.


Clara. Yes -- and will make her own and her husband's linen, and do all the
needle work and quilting at home -- believes in ghosts, and has got the
wandering Prince of Troy, the Babes in the Wood, and the entertaining dialogue
of Death and the Lady, by heart.


Osborne. Such, and so numerous, are the wifelike properties of MISS BARBARA
TURNBULL.


Clara. TURNBULL, too! -- Well, that is such a delightful name, for a country
lady -- so pastoral!


Osborne. The father was one of the greatest graziers in the west of England;
and was so intent on getting money, that he bred his children in the most
stupid ignorance -- He is lately dead, and the son has commenced gentleman and
'squire, by virtue of the father's industry, and a pack of fox-hounds; and
though he has scarce knowledge enough of articulate sounds to hold a dialogue
with his own geese, yet does he esteem himself a devilish shrewd fellow, and a
wit -- His conversation is vociferous, and patched up of proverbs, and
out-of-the-way sayings, which he strings together without order or connection;
and utters, upon all occasions, and in all companies, without respect to time,
place, or person.


Clara. Well, well, Sir Harry, I shall have to wish you joy soon, I suppose --
but I must be gone -- fifty visits to make this morning -- time flies --
butagreeable company, and all that, you know -- Oh, Sir Harry, you mean to
attend the spring meetings this year, at Newmarket -- I am told you understand
the turf -- I think of sending a venture of five hundred by somebody -- But I
shall see you often enough before then -- Adieu.


[Exeunt Clara and Melissa. [Manent Sir Harry and Osborne. Sir Harry. Well,
what do you think of this lady, Osborne?


Osborne. I think her a very amiable, accomplished lady; and one that, under an
assumed levity, observes and understands every thing about her.


Sir Harry. I am entirely of your opinion -- If I may judge from an
acquaintance of such short date, she is the first woman in the world.


Osborne. Except one, Sir Harry.


Sir Harry. You, Osborne, may make exceptions, if you please -- I am not so
captious -- She has beauty without vanity, virtue without prudery, fashion
without affectation, wit without malice, gaiety without coquetry, humor --


Osborne. Hold, hold -- stop to breathe -- How was it? Vinegar without acid,
fire without heat, light without shade, motion without matter, and a likeness
without a feature.


Sir Harry. "Spite -- by the Gods! -- proud spite and burning envy."


Osborne. But did you observe her Newmarket hint, Sir Harry; and the concealed
significance with which it was delivered?


Sir Harry. I did.


Osborne. Which being faithfully done into English, bears this interpretation:
-- "I Clara Forrester, a beautiful, elegant, sensible girl, with a fine
fortune, should like to take you, Harry Portland, with youth, spirit, and
certain et ceteras, but" --


Sir Harry. "But that I am afraid of indulging a partiality for any man, who is
so intolerably addicted to gaming" -- Is not that the conclusion of your speech?


Osborne. Oh fie! No, no, gaming! -- That man has a body without a soul, that
never felt an inclination to gaming.


Sir Harry. Perhaps so; but that man has the greatest soul, who can best resist
that inclination.


Osborne. Pshaw! --;Gaming is the essence of fashion, and one of your strongest
recommendations -- Clara is a girl of spirit, and what girl that comes under
that description, would ever place her affections on a sneaking, sober, prudent
fellow -- a mechanical scoundrel, that knows the day of the month, sips tea,
keeps a pew in the parish church, writes memorandums, and goes to bed at eleven
o'clock -- Poh! absurd!


Sir Harry. Curse me, Osborne, if I know what to make of you -- You are a
riddle that I cannot expound. You have such an awkward way of praising gaming,
that it always has the appearance of satire.


Osborne. Satire! how so? Do you think I Would satirize myself? Who sports more
freely than I do?


Sir Harry. Why there is the mystery! -- You are as eager, to the full, as I am
-- If I set an hundred on a back hand, you offer a thousand; nay, had I the
fortune of a Nabob, and were to stake it all, you would be the first man to cry
covered, and be damned mad if any one wanted to go a guinea -- Not because you
have not generosity, but in the true and inveterate spirit of gaming.


Osborne. Certainly -- Gaming! -- why gaming is the best sal volatile for the
spleen -- It rouzes the spirits, agitates the blood, quickens the pulse, and
puts the whole nervous system in a continual vibration -- No man ever yet died
of an apoplexy, that loved a box and dice.


Sir Harry. But they have died as suddenly.


Osborne. Oh! ay, ay, but that is a fashionable disease, an influenza; that is to
make your exit with eclat; that is to go out of the world with a good report.


Sir Harry. True -- true -- and indeed, as to a few years, more or less, that
is, in reality, a mighty insignificant circumstance.


Osborne. A bagatelle! -- Let us live while we do live, and die when we cannot
live any longer.


Sir Harry. That Is my comfort -- that is my comfort -- Yes -- yes -- a pistol!
-- a pistol is a very certain remedy for the cholic -- Nobody but a pitiful
scoundrel would go sighing, and whining, and teizing other people with his
griefs and complaints. -- When a man is weary, what should he do but go to
sleep?


Osborne. To be sure -- Life itself is but a dream -- It Is only sleeping a
little sounder.


Sir Harry. What! live to be pitied! -- Ha, ha -- A decayed gentleman! No, no,
no -- A withered branch -- a firelock without a flint -- And yet -- heigho! --
this Clara -- damn it -- its provoking -- Youth -- beauty -- affability --
she is a bewitching girl!


Osborne. She is indeed.


Sir Harry. A lovely girl!


Osborne. Ay -- enough so to make any man, that might hope to be in her favor,
in love with life.


Sir Harry. Any man, any man -- but me -- no, no -- Undone -- undone -- undone
--


Osborne. Well but, seriously, since you have such bad success, why don't you
renounce play?


Sir Harry. It Is too late -- I have sunk eighty thousand -- My resources almost
all exhausted, my estates all mortgaged to Jews and scoundrels.


Osborne. All!


Sir Harry. All; except the estate in Kent.


Osborne. Well then, if you cannot content yourself with your present loss,
your best way will be to make another vigorous push.


Sir Harry. That Is exactly what I am determined to do; and, unless the devil
possesses the dice, I think I may expect, without a miracle, that fortune
should change hands.


Osborne. One would think so, indeed -- Will you dine then at my house? There
will be the Chevalier, the Baron, and the usual set -- They have engaged to
dine with me -- They are spirited fellows, and will play for any sum.


Sir Harry. I don't know -- Suspicion is a cursed meanness; and yet, I cannot
help having my doubts of some among that company -- Nay, had you not so often
assured me you were perfectly acquainted with them all --


Osborne. Why, I tell you again and again, so I am -- I will be answerable for
their conduct, and that is more than I would say for any other set of gamblers
upon earth.


Sir Harry. Well, well -- I Will meet you there.


Osborne. We dine early -- at five.


Sir Harry. Agreed.


Osborne. And then -- hey for a light heart, and a heavy purse.


[Exit Osborne. Sir Harry. No, no, -- No light heart for me -- I am sunk --
degraded in my own opinion -- Gaming alters our very nature -- Osborne used to
hate it -- he was then an open-hearted, generous fellow -- he now appears to
have contracted an insatiable love for money, and a violent desire to win -- he
cares not of whom -- of me as soon as another -- Were I in his situation, and
he in mine, I think I should find an aversion to increase his distress -- he
knows mine, yet has no such aversion -- Perhaps he thinks my ruin certain, and
that he may as well profit by it as another -- I know him to have the most
refined and strictest sense of honor -- I have lost most of my money to him,
and in his company, and therefore have not been duped out of it. -- That is
some comfort, however.


[Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Mr. OSBORNE and TIMID. Osborne. Well, Mr. Timid, has Sir Harry sent to
you for a further supply?


Timid. Lackaday, Sir, yes! -- And a very large supply too -- He wants 5000 l.
immediately -- Lackaday! I asked him how he thought it possible for me to raise
such sums, as he called upon me for every day -- reminded him what a bad way
his affairs were in, and what an usurious rate I was obliged to borrow all this
money at.


Osborne. What said he?


Timid. Lackaday -- not much -- seemed chagrined -- said it must have an end,
one way or another, soon; and demanded, whether I could, or could not, raise
the money -- Lackaday -- I told him, I was no longer master of ways and means;
and he said, then he must positively employ another prime minister, for
supplies he must have.


Osborne. Why did you tell him that? Go to him, inform him you have met with a
tenderhearted Jew, who knows nothing of the situation of his affairs, that
will lend him 10,000 directly, if he wants it.


Timid. Ten thousand! -- on what terms?


Osborne. Oh, the mortgage of the Kentish estate.


Timid. The Kentish estate! -- Lackaday -- But suppose he should go to gaming,
and lose it to somebody else instead of you.


Osborne. Oh, I Will take care of that.


Timid. Lackaday -- It must not be Benjamin Solomon's who lends this?


Osborne. True -- no -- humph -- Isaac Levi, agent to a private company at
Amsterdam.


Timid. (Writes in a pocketbook) "Isaac Levi, agent to a private company at
Amsterdam" -- Lackaday!


Osborne. Well -- go you to him, and inform him that the money shall be ready
in about half an hour.


Timid. Lackaday -- Good young gentleman -- Heaven pardon me, I had like to
have said, damn the dice -- You Will be a true friend?


Osborne. Be under no apprehensions -- This old fool is become suspicious, I
must be sudden

( aside.)
Timid. Had not we better inform him of all, before he goes any further?


Osborne. By no means -- leave that to me.


Timid. Lackaday -- Well -- The remembrance of a good deed is grateful on a
deathbed.


Osborne. Do you be expeditious -- I Will instruct the Jew, and he shall meet you
here.


[Exit Osborne. Timid. Heaven pardon me! I had like to have said, damn the
Jews. --


[Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT. II.
SCENE continues.
Sir HARRY and MELISSA. Sir Harry. HEAVENS what romance! I can scarce believe
my eyes -- Did you ever hear of so strange an affair?


Melissa. Strange! it is miraculous -- Quixotism! -- And our good uncle is the
prince of madmen.


Sir Harry. To send a foolish, illiterate, country dowdy, and her block-headed
brother, a visiting on such an errand -- What can I say to them? I declare, I
don't know how to behave -- Never was so embarrassed in my life -- Where are
they?


Melissa. He has made an acquaintance with the groom, and is gone to the mews,
which seems to be his proper element, to examine the horses; and I left her
with my woman, staring, like a Dutch doll, at every thing she fixed her eyes on
-- Here she comes.


Enter Miss TURNBULL. Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- Here be a power of vine --
(staring about). I wonder if that be he that be to be my husband.

( aside)
Sir Harry. I hope, Madam, the fatigue of your journey has not injured your
health.


Miss Turnbull. Zir!


Sir Harry. I hope you are pretty well after your journey.


Miss Turnbull. Pretty well thank you, Zir -- iveck he is a handsome man.

( aside)
Melissa. I don't know what to say to her -- I am afraid, Miss Turnbull, you
will not find the town so agreeable as the Elysian fields of Somersetshire


Miss Turnbull. Lisian vields! -- There be no zuch vields in our parts -- There
be only corn vields and hay vields.


Melissa. My brother, madam, means to say, You are not so well pleased with the
town as with the country, perhaps.


Miss Turnbull. Oh! -- Yes but I be though, and ten times better -- ( they stand
silent some time) Pray, Miss, when did you zee Zekel Turnbull, my uncle.


Melissa. I have not the honor to know him.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- What don't you know Zekel?


Melissa. No, indeed!


Miss Turnbull. Why, he do come to London zity vour times every year.


Sir Harry. Is he in parliament?


Miss Turnbull. Parliament?


Sir Harry. Yes.


Miss Turnbull. What a parliament man?


Sir Harry. Yes.


Miss Turnbull. No; he be a grazier -- (silent again) Pray, Miss, have you been
to zee the lions and the wax-work today.


Melissa. Today!


Miss Turnbull. Ees.


Melissa. I never saw them in my life.


Mis Turnbull. My gracious! -- What never zaw the kings, and the queens, and
the tombstones?


Melissa. No.


Miss Turnbull. Merciful vather! -- Well, let us go and zee 'em now then.


Melissa. People of fashion never go to those kind of places.


Miss Turnbull. Never!


Melissa. Never.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- But I am zure I will go every day, while I be
in London zity, if I can vind the way -- pray be this vair-time here -- Where
be all those volk gwain -- and where do they all come fro'.


( 'Squire Turnbull without.) Barbara -- Barbara -- Where bist Barbara?

Miss Turnbull. I be here.


Enter'SQUIRE. 'Squire. Well, Zir Harry, here we be -- Madam, your zervant -- I
zupped wi Zir Hornet three nights ago, an a zaid you be a vine lass -- What
though -- I had never zeen you, but I gave yo' Miss in a bumper; an Zir Hornet
swore, that except Barbara, a didn't know one to match you.


Melissa. He did me great honor.


'Squire. Why to be zure a did -- What though -- a was wrong -- I zee a was wrong
-- Barbara is well enough -- But what though -- the greatest calf is not always
the sweetest veal -- Vor all the length of her spurs, she will not do, pitted
against this vine ginger pullet.


Melissa. Your compliments quite overpower me, Sir.


'Squire. Compliments -- No, no -- What though -- Vather be dead, an' I have three
thousand a year, and the best pack of vox dogs in Zomerzetzhire -- I a no need
make compliments -- I would as zoon override the hounds, or vell oak zaplings
vor vire wood -- Barbara, mayhap, understands zic things, her reads kademy of
compliments -- vor my part, I a' no time vor zic trash --


Miss Turnbull. I Am zure it be a very pretty book.


'Squire. Hold thy tongue, Barbara, an' then nobody will know thee bist a vool
-- Lookye me, Miss -- I do want a wife -- an' I should like hugely vor you an I
to zet our horses together, as the zaying is.


Melissa. Sir -- I don't understand --


'Squire. Vor my part, I am none of your hawfbred ones -- What though -- shilly
shally and no thank you are always hungry -- A lame tongue gets nothing, and
the last wooer wins the maid -- A bad hound may start a hare, but a good one
will catch her.


Sir Harry. I believe, Sir, you never saw my sister before.


'Squire. Why, no, to be zure -- What tho -- Love and a red nose cannot be hid
-- If you cut up the goose, I Will eat it -- The hare starts when the hound least
expects it.


Sir Harry. Very true, Sir -- But here is a disagreeable misunderstanding --


'Squire. Why to be zure -- I do know it -- We misunderstand the thing parfitly
well -- it be very disagreeable, an' I be glad of it -- I a brought Barbara to
London to zee the lions, buy ribbands, an' be married -- But what though --
liking's liking, an' love's love -- myzelf bevore my zister -- If the mountain
will not go to the man, the man mun go to the mountain -- an vaint heart never won
vair lady.


Sir Harry. Don't you think, Sir, that were my sister's affections totally
disengaged, this abruptness were very unlikely to gain them? Is it not too
violent, think you, for female delicacy?


'Squire. Why to be zure -- vemale delicacy! -- I hate it -- and as vor your
abruptness, why gi' me the man that speaks bolt outright -- I am vor none of
your abruptness -- what though -- he must a' leave to speak that cannot hold his
tongue.


Melissa. Your proverb is quite a-propos, Sir.


'Squire. Why to be zure -- Dogs bark as they are bred.


Sir Harry. Ha! ha! ha!


Melissa. Ha! ha! ha!


'Squire. I am a staunch hound, Miss, and seldom at vault; an' zo, wi your
leave, Ill --

( Offers to kiss Melissa.)
Melissa. I beg, Sir --


'Squire. Nay, don't be bashful -- I like fruit too well to play long at
bobcherry -- a's a vool indeed that cannot carve a plumb-pudding --


( Offers to kiss again, and is prevented by Sir Harry.) Sir Harry. I am sorry
to be obliged to inform you, that you are entirely mistaken, both with respect
to the affections of my sister and myself. As a friend of my uncle's, Sir, I
shall be happy to show you every respect, but nothing farther can possibly take
place between the families.


Enter a SERVANT. ( Delivers a card to Melissa; she exits.) Servant. Mr. Timid
desired me to tell you, Sir, that Mr. Levi is quite tired of waiting; and says,
if you cannot come now, he will call again tomorrow.


Sir Harry. Oh, tell him he must not go -- I beg Mr, Levi's pardon; I Will be
with him in a minute. ( Exit Servant.) -- Sir Hornet has been exceedingly
precipitate in this business, Sir -- He is coming to town, and must apologize
for his error -- As to my sister, I have no doubt but she has every respect for
your merits they deserve; but her affections are pre-engaged, the nuptials
fixed, and are soon to be celebrated -- While you remain in town, however, I
beg you will command my house and services.


( Exit Sir Harry bowing.) 'Squire. Well, Barbara, what do think on un?


Miss Turnbull. Why, a be well enough -- but I daunt rightly know what a means.


'Squire. What a means -- thee bist a vool -- thee dust na know the London
tongue, thee means -- a zaid, in a kind of round-about way, that its all right.


Miss Turnbull. Did a?


'Squire. Did a -- why to be zure a did -- did na zee how zivil a were, a
what a low bow a made -- But thee has no contagion in thee -- thee will never
learn what is what.


Miss Turnbull. Why, where be I to learn zic things -- I a never been no where.


'Squire. Never been no where -- well -- what of that? -- Where have I been? I
a never been no where -- What though -- I do know how to stir my broth without
scalding my vinger -- I can zee an owl in an oven as soon as another.


Miss Turnbull. But when be us to go and zee the zights?


'Squire. Oh, we'll go all together on the wedding day.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- I wish it were here.


'Squire. Ay, ay -- I daunt doubt thee -- women, pigs and poultry be never
zatisfied.


Miss Turnbull. An be you to be married as well?


'Squire. Be I to be married as well? why to be zure I be -- thee bist a vool,
is not vather dead? an hannot I three thousand a year, an the best pack o vox
dogs in Zomerzetzhire? An did na hear me tell Miss 'at I would marry her? --
What though -- I do know how to catch two pigeons wi one pea -- Show a dog a
bone, and he will wag his tail -- He that is born a beauty is half married, an
like will to like.


Miss Turnbull. Well then, take me to parliament house, an show me the king, an
the queen, and the lord mayor, an the elephant, an' the rest of the royal
vamily.


'Squire. I tell thee, thee shatn't.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- What zignifications my coming to London zity,
an' I must be moped up a this'n; I will go, zo I will.


'Squire. I tell thee, thee shatn't.


Miss Turnbull. Why then, an I munnut zee the king -- I Will go into next room
and zee his picter, that I will --


( Exit Miss Turnbull.) 'Squire. A hoic! -- Barbara -- Barbara -- The helve
after the hatchet -- He that holds a woman, mun have a long rope an' a strong
arm -- Women an mules will go their own road, in zpite of riders or
stinging-nettles.


( Exit 'Squire.) SCENE II. The House of Mr. VANDERVELT.
Enter VANDERVELT ( meditating.) Vandervelt. Clara is very beautiful -- but
mankind is very censorious -- They will tell me, that sixtyseven is too late in
life to undertake the begetting, bringing up, and providing for a family --
What of that -- Must I go out of the world, as I came into it -- no body to
remember me? -- Must I leave no pretty picture of myself? -- Sixty-seven is but
sixty-seven -- Have not we a thousand examples of longevity upon record? -- And
then -- as to cuckolds -- I cannot be persuaded that they are as common now, as
they were when I was a youngster -- Times, men, and manners alter -- Children
are born wittier, and the world gets more sedate -- I myself am a living proof
of it -- I never go to bagnios now -- I never break lamps, beat watchmen, and
kick constables now -- Once, indeed, I should have made very little ceremony
about dignifying an elderly gentleman, that had a handsome wife; whereas now, I
can lay my hand upon my heart, and with a safe conscience declare, I have no
such wicked inclinations --


Enter CLARA. Clara. Ah! mon cher papa! What ruminating!


Vandervelt. Ah! Turtle! But why do you always call me papa? you know I don't
like that word, Turtle.


Clara. And why papa, do you always call me turtle? -- Have not I told you,
fifty times, it puts me in mind of calipash -- and aldermen -- and other ugly
animals.


Vandervelt. Calipash! Thou art sweeter, tenderer, more delicate, delightful
and delicious, than all the calipash and callipee in the universe -- A gem -- a
jewel -- that all the Sophy's, Sultans, Grand Signiors and Great Moguls, of the
whole earth, have not riches enough to purchase.


Clara. Ah! Mon cher Papa! -- You are so gallant -- You do say the most
obliging things!


Vandervelt. SAY the most obliging things! -- Ay and will -- No matter -- Deeds
-- Title deeds -- Rent rolls -- India bonds -- Well -- Death, and the day of
judgment, will make strange discoveries.


Clara. Oh, yes! -- I know you wise men often meditate on these serious
subjects.


Vandervelt. Ay -- Life is treacherous ground -- One foot firm, and the next in
a pit.


Clara. But why so melancholy, papa?


Vandervelt. I have no friends -- that is, no relations -- no children -- have
made a great fortune, by care, and labor, and anxiety, and debarring myself
the pleasures, and comforts of life, in my youth -- And why should not I sit
down and enjoy it?


Clara. Very true, and why don't you?


Vandervelt. Because men are fools, and laugh they don't know why -- I hate
ridicule -- Nobody loves to be thought ridiculous -- The world has got false
notions -- A man of fifty is called old, and must not be in love, for fear of
being pointed at -- Whereas some men are older at thirty, than others at
threescore.


Clara. Certainly.


Vandervelt. What is threescore?


Clara. A handful of minutes!


Vandervelt. That vanish like a summer shower.


Clara. Melt, like a lump of sugar, in a dish of tea.


Vandervelt. That come you don't know how.


Clara. And go you don't know where.


Vandervelt. Surely a man of sixty may walk through a churchyard, without fear
of tumbling into a grave?


Clara. If he can jump over it.


Vandervelt. True -- And I was once an excellent jumper -- Sixty! -- Why Henry
Jenkins, the Yorkshire fisherman, lived to a hundred and sixtynine -- So that a
man of sixty, even in these degenerate days, has a chance to live at least an
hundred years.


Clara. Well, I declare papa, you are quite a blooming youth! -- forty years
younger, in my opinion, than you were a quarter of an hour ago! --


Vandervelt. Forty?


Clara. At least!


Vandervelt. Why then, by dad, as thou say, I am a blooming youth -- Ah
turtle! -- I could tell you something -- that would surprise you -- I could
tell you -- Think what I could tell you -- (Sings)"If'tis joy to wound a lover"
-- hem -- "how much more to give him ease."


Clara. "When his passion we discover." ( Sings)


Vandervelt. (Speaks) "Oh how pleasing it is to please" -- Oh I could tell --
But no -- no -- no, no, no -- You are sniggering -- laughing in your sleeve --
Ay, ay -- I perceive it -- You're a wit, and I am an old fool -- Sneering --
ridiculing me -- I hate wit and ridicule.


Clara. Me a wit! -- Lord, papa -- I would not be such an animal for the world
-- A wit! -- Why a wit is a kind of urchin, that every man will set his dog at,
but will not touch himself, for fear of pricking his fingers. -- A wit is a
monster, with a hideous long tongue, and no brains -- A dealer in paradoxes --
One that is blind, through a profusion of light -- A wit is a spectre, that makes
a pair of stilts of his criss-cross-row, walks upon metaphor, is always seen in
a simile, vanishes if you come too near him, and is only to be laid by a cudgel.


Vandervelt. Frightful indeed! -- Thank heaven, nobody can say, I am a wit.


Enter a SERVANT. Servant. Mr. Codicil, the attorney, desires to speak with
you, Sir.


Vandervelt. Very well -- I am coming.


Servant. Mrs. Trip, Madam, is in the housekeeper's room, and says she hopes
your ladyship is well.


Clara. Desire her to walk up.


( Exit servant) Vandervelt. Who is Mrs. Trip, Turtle?


Clara. A person that lived several years in our family. She is, at present,
lady's maid to Melissa, Sir Harry Portland's sister -- She will divert me with
her fine language, besides that, I wish to ask her how she likes Sir Harry's
family.


Vandervelt. I know Sir Harry's uncle, Sir Hornet Armstrong, very well -- an
old friend.


Clara. Indeed! -- I never saw him here.


Vandervelt. Why no -- I don't know how it has happened, but I have not seen
him above twice, these two years, myself -- he is an odd mortal -- a whimsical
old gentleman -- well -- by, by!


Clara. Adieu!


Vandervelt. By, by!


[Exit. CLARA alone. This Sir Harry runs continually in my head -- ay, and I am
afraid has sound a place in my heart -- yes, yes -- there is no denying that --
but that FRIEND -- that Mr. OSBORNE -- Whether it be my particular concern for
Sir Harry, or my superior penetration, I cannot discover, but that man wears,
to me, a most suspicious, hypocritical face. ( Enter Mrs. Trip) So, Mrs. Trip,
how have you done this long time?

Mrs. Trip. Pretty well, thank you, Madam, except that I am subject to the
historicals, and troubled with the vapors; being, as I am, of a dilikut nirvus
system, whereof I am so giddy, that my poor head is sometimes quite in a
whirlpool; and if I did not bathe with my lady, the doctor tells me, I should
decline into a liturgy, and so fall down and die, perhaps, in a fit of apostasy.


Clara. And how long have you lived in Sir Harray's family, Mrs. Trip?


Mrs. Trip. I came soon after my poor dear lady, your mamma, died, and was
interrogated; whereof I was at her funereal -- My lady is a very good lady,
that is, I mean, Ma'am, my future lady that I live with at present -- she is to
be married soon, to Mr. Osborne, and may Hydra, the god of marriage, tie the
Gorgon knot -- whereof I heard your ladyship is to be one of the ceremonials.


Clara. I am invited, and shall be there -- But pray, Mrs. Trip, what is your
opinion of Mr. Osborne?


Mrs. Trip. Oh Lord! Ma'am, consarning Mr. Osborne -- I heard a small bird sing.


Clara. A small bird sing!


Mrs. Trip. Yes, Ma'am.


Clara. Of what feather was this fowl?


Mrs. Trip. Foul! -- No, I assure you, your ladyship, as fair a speechified
person as any in England -- whereof he has a great valiation for me.


Clara. Well.


Mrs. Trip. And so the secret is, that Mr. Osborne has won almost all Sir
Harry's estate.


Clara. Indeed!


Mrs. Trip. And, moreover, has pretended to be a synagogue, and a Jew, and has
lent money in other people's names, on morgagees, and nuitants, whereof my
friend has been a party consarned.


Clara. Good heaven! what villainy! ( aside) And pray who is your friend, Mrs.
Trip?


Mrs. Trip. Oh, Ma'am, I hope your ladyship will not intoxicate me on that head,
for I know Mr. Timid too well to --


Clara. Oh! it was Mr. Timid.


Mrs. Trip. Why -- that is -- Ma'am -- I didn't mean -- Mercy! -- What have I
said?


Clara. You may assure yourself, Mrs. Trip, I shall be careful not to do you
any prejudice.


Mrs. Trip. I am sure I am supinely obligationed to your ladyship.


[Exit Mrs. Trip. CLARA alone. Poor Sir Harry! He has a heart that does honor
to mankind, that does not merit distress, yet, if I augur right, that must
shortly feel the severest pangs a false friend can inflict! -- Ungrateful
Osborne! -- I must warn Melissa to beware of him, and, if possible, to detach
Sir Harry from the gaming-table.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT. III.
SCENE Sir HARRY'S House.
Enter Sir HARRY, CLARA, MELISSA, VANDERVELT, laughing. Clara. HA! ha! ha! Sir
Harry, you are a happy man!


Vandervelt. Ay, Sir Harry, you are a happy man!


Melissa. Such an accomplished spouse!


Clara. And so kind an uncle!


Sir Harry. Upon my soul, I cannot help laughing; and yet the more I reflect on
the affair, the more I am amazed -- Sir Hornet is whimsical, it is true, but no
fool.


Vandervelt. Fool! Sir Harry! -- no, no, he is always the readiest to spy the
fooleries of other people -- many a time have I laughed at his whims and jokes
-- an odd mortal he is.


Clara. Nay, if he be so fond of a joke, who knows but he may have sent them on
this errand, for the joke's sake,


Vandervelt. By dad, turtle! thou have hit it. -- As sure as can be that is it
-- it is for the joke's sake.


Sir Harry. Impossible -- The affair is too serious to be intentional caprice.


Melissa. But I thought, when I left you, you were coming to an eclaircissement.


Sir Harry. Coming to an eclaircissement! -- Why I told them, as plain as I
could speak, that no alliance whatever could take place between the families.


Melissa. It Is certain they have not understood you then.


Sir Harry. Well, there the matter must rest, till I can find an interpreter,
for I cannot make myself more intelligible.


Clara. And you have not had one tender love scene yet?


Sir Harry. Not one -- I am amazed at the girl's simplicity -- it equals her
ignorance -- she speaks and looks so totally unconscious of impropriety, so
void of intentional error, that I don't know how to reply.


Clara. Suppose then you were to practice a little -- Come, I Will stand up for
the young lady.


Sir Harry. I shall still find a difficulty to speak.


Clara. Surely!


Sir Harry. In very truth, Ma'am. -- But it will be from a quite different
motive.


Clara. Oh, for the love of curiosity, Sir Harry, explain your motive.


Vandervelt. Ay, Sir Harry, explain your motive.


Sir Harry. I cannot, Sir.


Vandervelt. Cannot! Sir Harry, why so?


Sir Harry. For reasons, Sir, which are far more easily imagined than described.


Vandervelt. Nay, don't be afraid, Sir Harry. -- My turtle knows how to answer
interrogatories -- you will not find her a simpleton, I Will warrant.


Sir Harry. No Sir -- the danger is that she might find me one.


Vandervelt. I fancy, Sir Harry, you are a little like me -- cautious with the
ladies, lest you should be made ridiculous -- I am very circumspect in those
matters.


Sir Harry. You are very right, Sir -- It is not every one who has the gift of
wearing a fool's cap with a grace.


Clara. Ay, but notwithstanding all this, Sir Harry, I should like to have a
love scene with you.


Vandervelt. How, turtle!


Clara. In the character of Miss Turnbull.


Vandervelt. Oh! -- Ay, do, Sir Harry, have a love scene with my turtle --


Sir Harry. Any thing to oblige you, Sir.


Vandervelt. Come then -- begin ( Clara sets herself in an awkward silly
attitude) Ah! ha, ha, ha -- look! look at my turtle lovidovey!


Sir Harry. (addresses Clara) My uncle, Sir Hornet Armstrong, madam, is
desirous that I should gain the inestimable blessing of your hand.


Clara. Anan!


Vandervelt. Ah! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Harry. And give me leave to say, madam, however unworthy I may be of the
happiness and honor intended me, no person can be more sensible of them.


Clara. What! -- That be as much as to zay, you wunt have me, I zuppose.

( whimpers)
Vandervelt. Ah! ha! ha! ha! -- Nay, but don't cry in earnest, lovidovey.


Sir Harry. Oh! dry those heavenly eyes, madam, and believe me, when I call
every sacred power to witness my affection -- I love, I adore, I die for you --
Suffer me to wipe away those pearly tears, that hide the beauties of your cheek

( offering to salute her.)
Clara. Hold, hold, Sir Harry!


Vandervelt. Ay, hold, hold, Sir Harry! --


Sir Harry. Why so, Sir? -- It Is quite in character.


Clara. Deuce take you, Sir Harry -- You -- you are too passionate in your
feigned addresses -- So warm and pressing --


Vandervelt. Ay -- so warm and pressing.


Clara. One was not aware.


Sir Harry. I was taken by surprise, myself, Madam -- The bounteous god of love
kindly contrived an opportunity, which my profound adoration, and a conscious
want of merit, had totally deprived me of -- Pardon me, if, for a moment, I
forgot that respect which every one, who beholds you, cannot help feeling.


Vandervelt. Why what is this, Sir Harry? You are not in downright earnest, are
you?


Sir Harry. Sincere, as dying sinners imploring mercy.


Vandervelt. What in love with my turtle!


Clara. Pooh -- Why no, to be sure -- We were only acting a supposed scene.


Vandervelt. Supposed! -- Bedad, I think it was devilish like a real scene --
You both did your parts very naturally.


Sir Harry. Oh, Sir! no actor who feels as forcibly as I do, can ever mistake
his character.


Vandervelt. Feels forcibly! -- Your feelings are forcible indeed.


Melissa. Come, come, let us adjourn to the drawing room; I want to have your
opinions on a painting of Coreggio's, that my brother has made me a present of.


Vandervelt. Favor me with your hand, young lady -- And, Sir Harry, do you
take my turtle -- but don't you let your feelings be too forcible.


[Exeunt. SCENE II. The Hall in Sir HARRY'S House.
Enter Sir HORNET ARMSTRONG and SERVANT, as just arrived. Sir Hornet. Are the
trunks safe, sirrah, George?


Servant. Yes, Sir.


Sir Hornet. And did you order that dog of a postilion to take care of the poor
devils the horses?


Servant. I did, Sir.


Sir Hornet. And of himself?


Servant. I did, Sir.


Sir Hornet. You did, Sir? -- Why then do you go, and take care of yourself,
you rascal.


Servant. I will, Sir.


Sir Hornet. And do you hear, George!


Servant. Sir!


Sir Hornet. If I find you disobey my orders, I Will break your bones.


Servant. I Will be very careful, Sir, I assure you.


[Exit Servant. Enter TIMID and SCRIP. Timid. Brokerage comes rather heavy, Mr.
Scrip, when the sum is large.


Scrip. Heavy! no, no -- a damned paltry pittance -- five and twenty pounds
only, you see, for selling out twenty thousand -- Get more by one lucky hit,
than fifty of these would produce.


Timid. Ay!


Scrip. Oh, yes! -- Jobbing -- Stock-jobbing, between you and me, is the high
road to wealth.


Timid. Lackaday, may be so -- Well, good day.

( Scrip is going, but seeing Sir Hornet stops to listen.)
Sir Hornet. What, old Lackaday!


Timid. Ah, Sir Hornet! --


Sir Hornet. What Is the best news with you?


Timid. Ah, lackaday, the best news I know, is scarce worth relating.


Scrip. Beg pardon, Sir, ( To Sir Hornet) -- beg pardon -- bad news in town,
did you say?


Sir Hornet. Bad, Sir! not that I have heard.


Scrip. Exceedingly sorry for it!


Sir Hornet. Sir!


Scrip. Never was more distressed for bad news.


Sir Hornet. Distressed for bad news!


Scrip. Excessively! The reduction of Gibraltar, the taking of Jamaica, or the
destruction of the grand fleet, either of the three would make me a happy man
for life --


Sir Hornet. The destruction of the grand fleet make you happy for life!


Scrip. Completely.


Sir Hornet. Here Is a precious scoundrel!


Scrip. No great reason to complain, to be sure -- do more business than any
three doctors of the college -- Generally of the sure side -- Made a large
fortune, if this does not give me a twinge -- rather overdone it; but any
severe stroke -- any great national misfortune, would exactly close my account.


Sir Hornet. Hark you, Sir!


Scrip. Sir!


Sir Hornet. It is to be hoped --


Scrip. Yes, Sir, it is to be hoped.


Sir Hornet. That a halter will exactly close your account.


Scrip. Sir!


Sir Hornet. You raven-faced rascal! -- Rejoice at national misfortunes!
Zounds! I thought such language was no where to be heard from the mouth of an
Englishman -- unless he were a Member of Parliament.


Scrip. Lord, Sir! -- You don't consider that I am a bear for almost half a
million.


Sir Hornet. You are an impudent villain! -- rejoice at the distress of your
country!


Scrip. Why, Lord, Sir, to be sure -- when I am a bear -- There Is not a bear in
the Alley but would do the same -- Were I bull, indeed, the case would be
altered.


Sir Hornet. A bull!


Scrip. For instance, at the taking of Charlestown, no man was merrier, no man
more elate, no man in better spirits.


Sir Hornet. How so, gentle Sir?


Scrip. Oh, dear Sir, at that time I was a bull to a vast amount, when, very
fortunately for me, the news arrived; the guns fired; the bells clattered; the
stocks mounted; and I made ten thousand pounds! -- Enough to make a man merry
-- Never spent a happier night in my life!


Sir Hornet. Aha! -- then according to that arithmetic, you would be as merry,
and as happy to night, could you accomplish the destruction of this said
British fleet.


Scrip. Happier, happier by half! -- for I should realize at least twice the
sum! -- twice the sum!


Sir Hornet. Twice the sum?


Scrip. Ay, twice the sum! -- Oh! that would be a glorious event indeed! Never
prayed so earnestly for any thing since I was born -- and who knows -- who
knows what a little time may do for us?


Sir Hornet. Zounds! how my elbow aches.

( aside)
Scrip. I shall call on some leading people -- men of intelligence -- of the
right stamp.


Sir Hornet. You shall


Scrip. Yes, Sir.


Sir Hornet. Why then -- perhaps you will be able to destroy the British fleet
between you.


Scrip I hope so -- I hope so -- do every thing in my power -- Oh! it would be
a glorious event.


Sir Hornet. Hark you, Sir -- Do you see that door?


Scrip. Sir!


Sir Hornet. And this cane?


Scrip. Why, but, Sir!


Sir Hornet. Make your exit, you imp.


Scrip. But, Sir!


Sir Hornet. Get out of the house, you vile rascal, you diabolical -- [Drives
Scrip off.] A son's son of a scoundrel -- Who is he? What business had he here?


Timid. Lackaday, Sir, he is a stock-broker, that Sir Harry employed, at his
sister's request, to sell out for her; because she chooses to have here fortune
in here own possession against tomorrow. -- I have been paying him the
brokerage, and receiving the money, which I shall deliver to Madam Melissa
directly.


Sir Hornet. An incomprehensible dog! pray for the reduction of Gibraltar, the
taking of Jamaica, or the destruction of the British fleet.


Timia. Lackaday, Sir! it is his trade.


Sir Hornet. Trade! a nation will never flourish, that encourages traders to
thrive by her misfortunes -- but come -- tell me something of my own affairs --
Where is Harry -- How does he go on?


Timid. Ah, lackaday!


Sir Hornet. What -- is he a wild young dog -- Does he get into thy books?


Timid. Ah, lackaday! -- Zounds, don't sigh, man -- He will not die in thy debt.


Timid. Ah, lackaday, Sir Hornet! he should be welcome to the last farthing I
have in the world.


Sir Hornet. Should he, old Trupenny! -- Then give me thy hand -- thou shall be
remembered in my codicil -- but what -- he shall be remembered in my codicil --
but what -- he shakes his elbow I suppose, hey? -- Seven's the main?


Timid. Ah, lackaday, Sir Hornet! what between main and chance he has been
sadly nicked.


Sir Hornet. Has he! -- I Will score his losings upon his pate, a dog -- that is,
if he will let me -- But where is Miss Turnbull? -- She Will soon reform him, her
angelic smiles will teach him --


Timid. Sir!


Sir Hornet. Sir! -- Zounds, you stare like the wooden heads of the twelve
Caesar's -- Miss Turnbull's charms, I say, will find employment for all his
virtues, and wean him from all his vices.


Timid. Will they, Sir?


Sir Hornet. Will they, Sir! Yes they will, Sir.


Timid. Lackaday!


Sir Hornet. Lackaday! -- What ails you?


Timid. Nothing, Sir, nothing -- only that I am afraid my eyes begin to grow
very dim.


Sir Hornet. Your head, I believe, begins to grow very thick.


Timid. Ah, lackaday, Sir, like enough -- like enough!


Sir Hornet. Be kind enough to answer me a few questions? -- Is not Miss
Turnbull a beautiful girl?


Timid. May I spak truth?


Sir Hornet. MAY you speak truth! to be sure you MAY.


Timid. Then I answer, No, Sir.


Sir Hornet. No!


Sir Hornet. Is she not an elegant girl?


Timid. No.


Sir Hornet. Nor a witty girl?


Timid. No.


Sir Hornet. No!


Timid. No.


Sir Hornet. No!!


Timid. No.


Sir Hornet. Tolderol lol! -- Tititum! -- Pray what is she in your opinion?


Timid. A silly, ignorant, ill-bred, country girl, and very unfit for Sir
Harry's wife.


Sir Hornet. Tolderolol -- laditum -- Let me look in your face -- Yes, yes --
he has it -- the moon's almost at full -- Poor Lackaday! -- which is your right
hand? -- (Timid holds it up) Indeed! wonderful! -- And are you really in your
sober senses?


Timid. Why, indeed, Sir, I begin to be rather in doubt -- I believe so -- but
lest I should lose them, I will wish your honor a good morning.


[Exit. Sir HORNET alone. Lackaday -- ha! ha! -- Not beautiful -- nor witty --
nor -- tolderol lol -- The old fool has a mind to set up for a wit, and has
began by bantering ME -- Zounds, I was neither drunk nor mad -- and, to the
best of my knowledge, I am not now in a dream -- The brother, indeed, is a
booby; and does not appear to be of the same family -- hardly of the same
species -- though he had sense enough to snap at the offer immediately -- I
remarked he did not stand on ceremony -- Surely I have made no mistake in the
business -- s'blood if it prove so! -- Parson Adams the second -- I shall --
hey? -- Who Is this? -- No -- no, no -- it is -- it is she, herself, in propria
pers. -- (Enter Clara) -- Miss Turnbull, I most heartily rejoice to see you.

Clara. Miss Turnbull!

(Aside.)
Sir Hornet. Your presence has relieved me from one of the oddest qualms -- But
the sight of you has given me a cordial.


Clara. What do you mean, Sir Hornet?


Sir Hornet. Mean, my angel! why here has been a bantering, lying, aenigmatical
son of a scoundrel, with a bundle of ironical, diabolical tales, railing at
your beauty and accomplishments, till egad, I began to fancy my fine-flavoured
pineapple a crab.


Clara. This is delightful! -- I half suspected this, from the first -- But the
mistake is so pleasant, that I cannot find in my heart to undeceive him
(aside). -- There is no answering for the difference of taste, Sir.


Sir Hornet. True -- Asses prefer thistles to nectarines -- But yet he must be
an ass indeed, who could not distinguish St. Paul's from the pillory.


Clara. Taste, Sir Hornet, is a sort of shot silk, and has a variety of shades
-- a camelion -- one says it is blue, another black, and a third is positive
it is yellow -- every body has it, yet nobody can tell what it is -- Like space,
it is undescribable, though all allow there is such a thing -- It would be a vain
attempt, therefore, for Miss Turnbull to endeavor to please the whole world.


Sir Hornet. An old booby -- I would not give a hair of the pope's beard to
please him -- But how is it with Sir Harry -- Is HE in raptures? Is HE dying
for you?


Clara. No, Sir -- he eats and drinks as usual, and is, for aught I can
discover, in tolerable good health.


Sir Hornet. Is he! -- an audacious dog! -- in good health! -- If I find him in
good health, I Will pistol him -- But you mistake the matter, perhaps -- The
rascal's proud, and not willing you should see his sufferings -- He is a
stricken deer, and sheds his tears in solitude and silence, mayhap -- Do you
discover no symptoms of the sighing swain? -- Does he never cut his fingers --
or scald himself -- or run against a post, and beg its pardon?


Clara. No, Sir.


Sir Hornet. I doubt he is a sad dog -- But no -- no, no -- I am certain he
adores you -- It Is impossible he should do otherwise -- But there is another
material point, about which I am not quite so certain.


Clara. What is that, Sir?


Sir Hornet. Has he found any place in your affections? -- It Is true, he is a
fine fellow -- I don't mean, by that, one that is pickled in cosmetics --
preserved in musk and marechal powder, and that will melt away, like Lot's
wife, in the first hard shower -- None of your fellows that are too valiant to
give a woman the wall, and too witty to let her have the last word -- But one
that is -- In short, his own manner will best describe what he is.


Clara. True, Sir Hornet, but the time has been so short.


Sir Hornet. Short! -- Ah, Madam, if he did not do the business with a coup
d'oeil -- at once -- I would not give a feather of a goose-wing for all the
arrows his Cupid has in his quiver -- But come, Miss Turnbull -- I know you are
above the silly prejudices that ordinary minds are swayed by -- tell me
sincerely -- Has he made any impression on your heart? -- Is he the man?


Clara. To speak ingenuously, Sir Hornet, that is a point entirely
undetermined, at present.


Sir Hornet. Undetermined! -- why! -- what!


Clara. Sir Harry's person is engaging, his manners delightful, and his
understanding unexceptionable.


Sir Hornet. Bravo! my dear girl! -- you charm me to hear you say so!


Clara. I will say more, Sir Hornet -- I find my heart interested in his
behalf, and, sincerely believe, I shall never see another man with whom I could
be half so happy.


Sir Hornet. My dear Miss Turnbull!


Clara. But yet, I have too many reasons to fear, it will be impossible we
should ever be united.


Sir Hornet. Impossible!


Clara. I do most firmly believe, Sir Harry possesses a thousand virtues, but
they are all tinged, discolored by a failing, which if not in its own nature
as erroneous as some other vices, is more destructive than any.


Sir Hornet. I understand you.


Clara. This will for ever deter a woman, who values her own peace and welfare,
from cherishing a passion that must, in its consequences, be so fatal.


Sir Hornet. But you, my angel, will soon cure him of this -- It is not a
rooted vice --


Clara. Permanently -- or my intelligence says false -- When he loses, there is
no possibility of persuading him to desist -- the recollection of his loss
preys upon his mind, and had he the Indies, he would set it upon the chance of
a card, the turn of a guinea, or the cast of a die.


Sir Hornet. Well, but we have hopes that Mr. Osborne will find means to
reclaim him -- he is continually with him, continually warning him, and --


Clara. Subtlety, and refined artifice! -- Mr. Osborne, Sir Hornet, is an
interested physician, and would rather encourage than cure the disease.


Sir Hornet. Heaven forbid! -- But who informs you of this!


Clara. Those who are in the secret, I assure you, Sir -- I am afraid Mr.
Osborne is a wicked man -- He is -- what I dare not speak.


Sir Hornet. I confess you alarm me, though I hope without cause -- Osborne
assumes every appearance of rigid virtue; and, if this were true, he would be
the worst of villains -- However, suspend your opinion awhile -- I Will soon sift
the affair -- And, in the mean time, let me beg of you to think as well of Sir
Harry as your doubts will permit you.


Clara. I shall do that, Sir Hornet, without an effort.


Exit. Enter VANDERVELT. ( Sees Clara going off on the other side of the
Stage.) Vandervelt. Why, turtle! -- why, -- Ah! Sir Hornet -- I am glad to see
you.


Sir Hornet. Ah, ha -- friend Van! -- Why you look tolerably well.


Vandervelt. Tolerably well! -- Ay, to be sure -- Why should I not?


Sir Hornet. Why should you not? -- Let me see -- There are, as near as I can
guess, about seventy reasons why you should not.


Vandervelt. Humph -- Oh -- what my age! -- No, no -- Let me tell you, Sir
Hornet, I -- I am not an old man.


Sir Hornet. No!


Vandervelt. No; -- nor you neither.


Sir Hornet. Indeed! -- I am exceedingly glad of that -- and pray when did you
make this discovery?


Vandervelt. Make it -- why I have been making it these twenty years and
upwards.


Sir Hornet. Oh, ho! -- And how do you prove it?


Vandervelt. By comparison and reflection -- I Will tell you -- hold -- first
I Will show you -- what I call MY list of worthies -- there -- look at that --

( gives a commonplace book.)
Sir Hornet. What the devil have we here! -- ( reads)"PATRICK O'NEAL --
married, for the seventh time, at the age of one hundred and thirteen -- walks
without a cane, never idle -- children and great great grandchildren, to the
number of -- one hundred and twenty-three!"


Vandervelt. There Is a fellow! -- I warrant that man is alive and hearty at
this moment.


Sir Hornet. Humph! -- And pray, do you think to imitate this worthy, as you
call him? -- Will you be married seven times, and have a hundred and
twenty-three children?


Vandervelt. That Is more than I can tell.


Sir Hornet. Ha! -- ( reads) THOMAS PAR, being aged one hundred and twenty,
fell in love with Catherine Milton.


Vandervelt. Ay, and did penance in a white sheet at the church door.


Sir Hornet. Humph -- "HENRY JENKINS."


Vandervelt. Ay! -- there is another! -- corrected his great grandson, a youth
of seventy, with his own hand, for being idle.


Sir Hornet. "JOHANNES DE TEMPORIBUS, or JOHN OF TIMES, armor-bearer to the
emperor Charlemagne, died, aged three hundred threescore and one year.


Vandervelt. Very well now tell me -- When you compare me to Johannes de
Temporibus, that is, when you compare sixty-seven to three hundred threescore
and one, can you say I am an old man?


Sir Hornet. An old man! -- By the beard of Methuselah thou art scarce an
infant -- it will be perhaps these five years yet before thou art perfectly a
child.


Vandervelt. Nay, Sir Hornet, let me beg of you to be serious -- you are an old
friend, and know the world -- I shall be glad of your advice -- I ruminate on
these things by myself, till I am quite melancholy -- Now, if I had but
somebody to bear half my griefs, I should suppose -- they would be lessened.


Sir Hornet. Why true, as you say, one would imagine so.


Vandervelt. Don't you think then, if I were to take a handsome -- young --
wife -- I should, perhaps, find a cure for all my ills?


Sir Hornet. An infallible one.


Vandervelt. And this is, seriously, your opinion.

( very gravely)
Sir Hornet. Seriously.

( affectedly grave)
Vandervelt. Then tell me -- You were talking with the young lady that went out
as I entered.


Sir Hornet. Well! what of her.


Vandervelt. Is she not very beautiful?


Sir Hornet. A divinity.


Vandervelt. Finely accomplished?


Sir Hornet. Beyond description.


Vandervelt. That Is right! -- You are a sensible, discerning man, Sir Hornet,
and I am delighted to find you approve my choice.


Sir Hornet. YOUR choice!


Vandervelt. MY choice -- That is the young lady, you must know, to whom I
intend to pay my addresses.


Sir Hornet. Your -- your -- your -- your what? --


Vandervelt. The Lady, I mean to marry.


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!

( laughs excessively.)
Vandervelt. Nay, Sir Hornet!


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! all mad -- every soul.


Vandervelt. I don't understand!


Sir Hornet. Most reverend youth, I beg your pardon, ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Vandervelt. You see things in a mighty strange light, Sir Hornet. -- Is it any
miracle that a man should love a beautiful woman?


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! -- love! Why you are another AEtna -- Cupid's
burning mountain. -- Your nose has took fire at your fancy, and is become a
beacon, to warn all young Gentlemen, of threefcore and ten, of the rocks and
quicksands hid in the sea of amorous desires.


Vandervelt. Upon my word, Sir Hornet, this is exceedingly strange.


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! -- You must excuse me -- What a rosy youth -- Ha! ha!
ha! -- Hark ye, friend Vandervelt, ( gravely) it is my opinion you have been
bantering me rather.


Vandervelt. Odd -- that is a good thought, ( aside) -- Bantering you, why, ay
to be sure, I have -- ha! ha! ha!

( forces a laugh.)
Sir Hornet. Oh! you have?


Vandervelt. Certainly, ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! ha!

( with the same tone and manner.)
Vandervelt. Didn't you perceive that before? Ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. No, faith -- ha! ha! ha!


Vandervelt. That Is a good joke, ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Excellent! ha! ha! ha!

[The laugh continues some time, during which Sir Hornet imitates Vandervelt's
voice and manner exactly, then stops suddenly, and looks very grave.]
Vandervelt. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Vandervelt. Ha! ha! --


Sir Hornet. Now, let us be serious.


Vandervelt. With all my heart.


Sir Hornet. And I Will tell you a story.


Vandervelt. Do.


Sir Hornet. There was a certain ancient personage, of my acquaintance, called
Andrew Vandervelt --


Vandervelt. What Is your story about me?


Sir Hornet. Give me leave, young gentleman, and you shall hear -- Every body
imagined him to be a prudent, sedate, grave person, with a moderate share of
common sense;


Vandervelt. Well.


Sir Hornet. And, as it was evident his beard was gray, his limbs palsied, his
skin shriveled, and his sinews shrunk;


Vandervelt. How, Sir Hornet!


Sir Hornet. They naturally concluded, he had made his will, wrote his epitaph,
and bespoke his coffin;


Vandervelt. Mercy upon me!


Sir Hornet. But instead of meditating, like a pious Christian, on the four
last things, a crotchet takes him in the head, he buys a three-penny fiddle,
scrapes a matrimonial jigg, claps a pair of horns upon his head, and curvets
through the town, the sport of the mob, derided by the young, pitied by the old,
and laughed at by all the world.


Vandervelt. Heaven deliver me, what a picture! But you forget, Sir Hornet --
Didn't I explain to you, that it was only a joke?


Sir Hornet. Oh! true -- Ah, witty rogue! -- well -- adieu -- I Will remember the
joke -- ha! ha! ha!


Vandervelt. Ay, do -- ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Oh! for a song to the tune of "Room for Cuckolds!"


[[Exeunt. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A Chamber at Sir HARRY'S.
Enter Sir HARRY ( much agitated.) Sir Harry. MAY the everlasting curse of
heaven consume those implements of hell -- those deceitful, infernal fiends --
I Will never touch, never look on cards or dice again -- If I ever make another
bett, may all the horrors of a ruined fortune haunt me, sleeping and waking --
May I be pointed at by children, and pitied by sharpers -- Distraction! MAY I
be -- I AM already, ruined, past redemption.


Enter SERVANT, and delivers a letter to Sir HARRY. Sir Harry. (Breaks open the
letter hastily) -- Um -- Um -- Stay, Sir ( to the servant) -- Damnation! Is it
possible! In league with sharpers -- Who brought this letter, Sir?


Servant. A porter, Sir.


Sir Harry. Where is he?


Servant. Gone, Sir -- he ran off round the corner in a hurry.


Sir Harry. You may go, Sir.


[Exit servant. Enter OSBORNE. Osborne. You seem moved, Sir Harry; may I
enquire the cause?


Sir Harry. You are the cause, Sir.


Osborne. I!


Sir Harry. Yes, you -- There, read, Sir.


Osborne. (reads) -- Beware of a false friend -- the person who gives you this
caution, would sacrifice a life to preserve you from the destruction that
threatens you -- Mr. Osborne is in league with Jews and sharpers, and you are a
victim to his avarice and duplicity. -- So, so -- ( seems chagrined) -- Well,
Sir Harry, do you give any credit to this epistle?


Sir Harry. Nay, Sir, you are to tell me how much, or how little, credit it
deserves.


Osborne. Why look you, Sir Harry, I cannot, nor I will not, enter into
explanations --


Sir Harry. Sir! -- Cannot, nor will not, enter into explanations!


Osborne. No, Sir.


Sir Harry. But I say, Sir, you shall.


Osborne. Shall!


Sir Harry. Yes, Sir, shall.


Osborne. Ay, Sir -- Who is he that SHALL make me?


Sir Harry. I am he, Sir.


Osborne. Indeed!


Sir Harry. Friendship, honor, honesty, ought to make you -- but present
appearances declare you void of these.


Osborne. Present appearances declare you void of reason, Sir, otherwise you
would remember me for one of those who are not to be terrified by a loud
tongue, or an angry brow -- I repeat it -- I will not now enter into
explanations -- I have played with you, I have staked MY money, and won YOURS
-- Would it have been dishonorable had you won mine? I have disposed of that
money as I thought proper. -- No matter whether with Jews or Christians; and, I
should have supposed, your passion and suspicion would have required better
proof, than the malevolent asperson of an anonymous letter, ere they ought to
have incited you to a quarrel with your friend.


Sir Harry. I beg your pardon, dear Osborne -- I am to blame -- nothing but the
severity of my late losses can plead for me -- I know you to be a
noble-hearted, worthy fellow, and explanations, on such an accusation, are as
much beneath you to give, as me to demand -- forget my silly warmth, it is my
weakness.


Osborne. Do you forget the cause on it, Harry, and it is forgot.


Sir Harry. It was madness -- I am above suspicion -- it is ungenerous -- it is
damnable -- pray excuse -- pray forgive me.


Osborne. Well, well, think no more on it -- only guard against suspicion for
the future.


[Exit Osborne. Sir Harry. No, no -- it cannot be -- there is an open fortitude
in his manner -- a boldness that can only result from innocence.


Enter MELISSA. Melissa. Oh, brother, I am glad I have found you -- Why did you
send these troublesome things to me? Why did not you take care of them for me?
Trust a giddy girl indeed with a parcel of bank bills -- here, here, here they
are -- take 'em -- take 'em -- they will be safe with you -- I have been in a
panic, ever since they were in my possession, lest they should take wing, and
fly through the keyhole, or some other unaccountable way -- I am unused to such
large sums, and don't feel happy while they are about me.


Sir Harry. But what am I to do with them?


Melissa. Keep them till tomorrow, and then, you know, when them too, to make
it the more acceptable -- there are just twenty, of one thousand each. -- So,
now I am easy -- good bye -- I am going to purchase a few knickknacks.


( Exit Melissa hastily.) Sir Harry. Well, but, sister, Melissa. She Is gone --
flown on the light wings of innocence and happiness -- while I, depressed
by.folly, feel a weight upon my heart, that hope itself cannot remove. -- What
is a ruined gamester? -- An idiot -- who begins for his amusement, who
continues hoping to retrieve, and who is ruined before he can recollect himself
-- a wretch -- deserted, solitary, forlorn -- ashamed of society, yet miserable
when alone -- shunned by the prosperous -- despised by the prudent --
deservedly exposed to the poisoned shafts of insolence and envy -- a byeword to
the vulgar, and a jest to the fortunate -- haunted by duns, preyed upon by
usurers, persecuted and cursed by creditors. -- Inexplicable infatuation!


[Exit Sir Harry. SCENE another Apartment.
Enter CLARA, MELISSA, and 'SQUIRE TURNBULL. Melissa. Mr. Turnbull, I must beg,
Sir, you will desist --


Squire. Dezist -- why to be zure -- I Will go and buy license out of hand --
make hay while the zun do zhine -- and don't lose the zheep for a ha'perth
o'tar -- what though -- the pepper-box must have a lid -- a bushel o'words wunt
vill a basket -- when the owl goes a hunting, it is time to light the candle.


Clara. Ha! ha! ha! -- If you will permit me, my dear, I think I can relieve you
from this embarrassment.


Melissa. Permit you! -- I am sure if you can, you shall be cannonized, and
have churches erected to your memory.


Clara. I Will talk to him in his own language -- he can comprehend no other.


'Squire. Well, vair Lady.


Clara. Well, Zir.


'Squire. You do zee how the nail do drive -- Be you to be one at bridal?


Clara. No.


'Squire. No! -- Why zo? -- you'st be bridemaid.


Clara. No but I wunt.


'Squire. Wunt you?


Clara. No -- nor you'st not be bridegroom another.


'Squire. No!


Clara. No.


'Squire. How zo!


Clara. Because you have zold the skin avore you have caught the vox -- You Have
reckoned your chickens bevore they be hatched


'Squire. Nay, nay -- stop at the dike -- zure, I do know my own mind -- an'
Miss be agreed.


Clara. But Miss ben't agreed.


'Squire. No! -- That Is a good joke -- but she be though.


Clara. But she ben't though.


'Squire. But I Am zure she be.


Clara. But I Am zure she ben't.


'Squire. No! -- Why Miss -- ben't you agreed?


Melissa. No, Sir.


'Squire. (astonished) No!


Clara. You may gape, but the cherry will not drop -- Too much mettle is dangerous
in a blind horse -- Misreckoning is no payment -- John would a' wed, but Mary
war na willing.


Melissa. You seem surprised, Sir -- I can only say, it is without reason --
You have deceived yourself, in supposing such an alliance possible, and I hope
your own good sense will inform you that, after this declaration, any renewal
of your addresses to me, must be considered an insult.


'Squire. (Stares as if he did not comprehend her for some time) An' zo then --
the meaning of all this vine speech, I zuppose, is that you wunt have me?


Melissa. It is.


Clara. "Make hay while the zun do zhine -- Don't lose the sheep for a
ha'p'erth of tar -- A bushel of words will not vill a basket -- When the owl goes
a hunting, it is time to light the candle" -- Your most obedient, gentle 'Squire
-- ha! ha! ha!


[Exeunt Melissa and Clara. Manet'SQUIRE. Zo then -- It zeems I a been
reckoning without my host here -- Well -- What though -- zoon hot zoon cold --
zoon got zoon gone -- Care's no cure -- Zorrow will not pay a man's debts -- He
wanted a zinging bird, that gave a groat for a cuckoo -- an' he that loses a
wife and zixpence, has lost a tester -- (Enter Miss Turnbull.) Why, Barbara!
what be's the matter wi'thee? Where has thee been?


Miss Turnbull. Been! -- Why I a bin wildered.


'Squire. What lost!


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- an' if I had na' by good hap met wi' John, who has got
direction in written hand, it were vive golden guineas to a brass varchin I'ad
been kidnapp'd, an' zent to America, among the Turks.


'Squire. Zerve thee right -- thee must be gadding -- But I a' news vor thee --
the cow'as kick't down the milk -- It Is all off 'tween Miss and I --


Miss Turnbull. Zure! -- rabbit me an I didn't guess as much.


'Squire. Ees -- the nail's clench'd -- Zhe and I a' zhook hands an' parted.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- What will not yo' have zhe?


'Squire. No -- I wunt -- Her may whistle, but I zhan't hear -- her may beckon,
but I zhan't come -- Catch me an' have me, I Am no vool -- Zo, do you zee, an'
you be minded to wed, zay grace an' vall too, vor I don't like your London
tricks, an' zo Is It leave it as vast as I can.


Miss Turnbull. An' when be I to be wed?


'Squire. Why, I do vind Zir Hornet be come, zo, when yo zee Zir Harry, yo' may
zettle't -- An', do you hear, Barbara -- Don't let me vind yo' at any o'these
skittish off an' on freaks -- I a' zeen too much on 'um lately -- Oh, here be
Sir Harry coming -- An' zo Is It leave you to make love your own way -- Is It not
play my ace o'trumps out yet. --


[Exit 'Squire. Enter Sir HARRY. Sir Harry. So -- here is my good whimsical
uncle's Nonpareil, as he calls her -- his phoenix -- All alone, Miss Turnbull?


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- Brother be just gone -- A's vallen out wi Miss, an a's
plaguily frump'd.


Sir Harry. Sure!


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- A zaid, too, at yo' an I be to make love --


Sir Harry. He did!


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- and I do know his tricks -- a'll be in a woundy rage, an
I don't do as he bids me.


Sir Harry. What, will he be surly?


Miss Turnbull. Zurly! -- a'll snarl worser than our great dog Jowler at a
beggar --


Sir Harry. He is ill tempered then?


Miss Turnbull. Oh, a'll zulk vor a vortnight round -- an' when a comes about
again, a'll make a believe to romp -- an' then a' lumps -- an' gripes -- an'
pinches -- till I am quite a weary on it.


Sir Harry. Well you may, I think -- Poor thing (aside) -- and which way are we
to make love?


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! don't you know?


Sir Harry. I believe I can give a guess -- You, I suppose, are to hang down
your head and titter.


Miss Turnbull. Ees --

(grins.)
Sir Harry. I -- hem -- and look sheepish.


Miss Turnbull. Ees.


Sir Harry. You gnaw your apron -- I twirl my thumbs.


Miss Turnbull. He! he! -- Ees.


Sir Harry. You say -- it is a very fine day, Sir, and I answer, Yes, Ma'am,
only it rains.


Miss Turnbull. He! he! he! -- Ees -- iveck, that be vor all the world the very
moral of our country vashion -- Oh! but here be zomebody coming --


Enter Sir HORNET, CLARA, and VANDERVELT. Sir Hornet. Why, Harry, you dog, what
have you hid yourself, because you would not see me?


Sir Harry. Dear Sir, I am exceedingly glad to see you, but it is not a quarter
of an hour since I heard of your being in town; and I suppose, Sir, you will
scarcely be angry at finding me in this company --


( Vandervelt, Sir Harry, and Miss Turnbull, walk up the stage in
conversation.) Sir Hornet. Finding you in! -- Zounds, what awkward cargo of
rusticity has he got there?

( To Clara.)
Clara. A young lady from Somersetshire, with a tolerable good fortune, that
Sir Harry, it is thought by some, intends to marry.


Sir Hornet. Marry! -- He should as soon marry the mummy of queen Semiramis.


Clara. She has been strongly recommended to the family, Sir.


Sir Hornet. Recommended! -- By whom!


Clara. By one you are very intimate with, and who has very great influence
with Sir Harry, as well as with yourself.


Sir Hornet. Ay! -- Who is that? --


Clara. Pardon me there, Sir Hornet.


Sir Hornet. Certainly the fellow cannot be foolish enough to admire her -- but
I shall soon discover that, by what, he thinks of you -- harkee, Harry!


Sir Harry. Sir!


Sir Hornet. I cannot, upon the whole, tell very well what to make of you --
Are you thoroughly convinced that you are, at this instant, legally capable of
making your will?


Sir Harry. My will, Sir!


Sir Hornet. Ay -- Are you of sound mind?


Sir Harry. I believe so, Sir!


Sir Hornet. Then pray tell me, now we have you face to face, what is your
opinion of Miss Turnbull?


Sir Harry. Sir! -- That is by no means a question proper to be answered in
this company.


Sir Hornet. Pshaw! -- Damn your delicacy -- Make your panegyric, and I Will
blush for her and you too.


Sir Harry. (Shrugs up his shoulders.) Sir, I have no panegyric to make.


Sir Hornet. Sir!


Sir Harry. Even so.


Sir Hornet. Why you impudent confounded -- Have you the barefaced effrontery,
with such a picture before your eyes, to --


Sir Harry. You have applied the torture, and my own ease requires confession.


Sir Hornet. Humph -- And so you -- Now pray all be attentive, for Bacon's
brazen head is going to utter -- So you do not think Miss Turnbull a most
engaging --


Sir Harry. (Smiles.)
Sir Hornet. Why you intolerable --


Sir Harry. I am concerned to see you so serious on the subject -- I must
acknowledge, that in this case, Sir, I have either a most perverse or stupid
imagination; and cannot, for the soul of me, discover the latent wonders in the
young lady, which your better sight has so distinct a view of.


Sir Hornet. Ha!


Sir Harry. I am, however, exceedingly willing to try the utmost strength of my
faith, to believe as much as I can, and take the rest for granted; provided you
will not inflict the punishment of a wife upon my superstition.


Sir Hornet. Obliging youth! ( Bows) -- inflict the punishment of a wife upon
your superstition -- And so you think, no doubt, a wife a burden, much too
heavy for the back of so fine and pretty a town-made gentleman as yourfelf.


Sir Harry. With the addition of Miss Turnbull's accomplishments, I most
undoubtedly do, Sir.


Sir Hornet. You do -- humph -- Pray, most civil Sir -- permit me to ask --
perhaps there may be some other lady, in this good company, to whom your
profound penetration would give the preference.


Sir Harry. If such preference could, in the least make me deserving of her, I
have no scruple to say there is.


Sir Hornet. Miracle of modesty! -- there is.


Sir Harry. Most assuredly -- But, though to possess the lady you hint at, would
make me blessed beyond description, I have never dared to declare so much before,
because I am conscious of being unworthy of such a prosusion of charms and
accomplishments.


Clara. Generous diffidence!

( aside.)
Sir Hornet. Charms and -- What the devil is all this! -- Where am I -- at sea,
or on shore -- Have I a calenture in my brain, or is this my nose! -- They --
they call you Sir Harry Portland, don't they Sir?


Sir Harry. And your nephew, Sir.


Sir. Hornet. No -- that is rather dubious -- Well then, Mr. Harry, or Sir
Harry, or what you please -- You are pretty well convinced, I suppose, that I
HAVE had some slight regard for you.


Sir Harry. Perfectly, Sir, and remember it with gratitude.


Sir Hornet. That remains to be proved, friend -- Ever since your father's
death, if I don't mistake, I have been tolerably busy, a little active, or so,
in forming your mind and manners, and moulding you into a sort of being, a man
might behold without blushing.


Sir Harry. It is impossible, Sir, I should ever forget your goodness, though I
am happy to be reminded of it.


Sir Hornet. That Is a lie, I believe -- However, Sir -- among the rest of my
cares, I was anxious to find a woman worthy of you -- Nay, so solicitous was I
about adjusting preliminaries, that though the gout had laid an embargo upon a
parcel of my fingers and toes, I resolved to forego my own ease, and set sail
immediately, that I might convoy you sase into the harbor of happiness.


Sir Harry. I am very sensible of the benevolence of your intentions, Sir, and
only wish you had done me the honor to --


Sir Hornet. Well, I have only a word or two more to say on the subject -- I
have been an enthusiastic old blockhead, it is true, and was fool enough to
think all men had eyes; however, if you have not either the complaisance, the
wit, or the love, to hit upon some expedient to make your peace with Miss
Turnbull, I will never see, never know, never speak to you again. And now, Sir,
you will act as your great wisdom shall direct.


Sir Harry. Indeed, Sir, I am distressed to see you so intent upon this
business; I am exceedingly unhappy, to do the least thing to incur your
displeasure -- at this moment especially -- I have a thousand reasons to be
disatisfied with myself, and am grieved to add your anger to the lift -- I
would do any thing, in my power, to preserve your friendship and affection; but
this is too severe a task -- I cannot totally forget common sense -- I cannot
entirely command so delicate a passion, as that of love -- A little time will
discover, whether I am ever to think of love or happiness again! -- Of this,
however, I am certain -- I never can possess either with Miss Turnbull --


[Exit Sir Harry. Sir Hornet. Indeed youngster! so resolute!


Clara. What a noble fortitude!

( aside)
Sir Hornet. We shall see who will first read their recantation -- An
insensible blind puppy -- I Will be a greater torment to him, than a beadle to a
beggar -- a cat to a rat -- or a candle to a moth -- I Will singe his wings --
I Will plague him worse than Moses did the Egyptians.


Clara. Oh, Sir Hornet! you will soon be of another opinion.


Sir Hornet. Never -- never -- never. -- ( Enter 'Squire behind, unperceived.)
However, let him act as he will, Miss Turnbull shall have no cause to repent
her coming to London.


Miss Turnbull. What! will yo' take me to zee the zights?


'Squire. Who the devil bade that goose cackle?


Sir Hornet. A cursed idiot -- or I have no skill in physiognomy.


'Squire. What, Barbara! -- Ees -- that her be -- though no vool, nether -- her
do know better than to thatch her house wi' pancakes.


Sir Hornet. Pshaw -- Miss Turnbull!

( to Clara)
Miss Turnbull. Ees -- I be here.


Sir Hornet. Again! -- ( takes Clara by the hand) Give me leave, I say, dear
Miss Turnbull, to --


Vandervelt. Hey! Sir Hornet!


Clara. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Why! -- what! --


Vandervelt. You don't take my turtle for Miss Turnbull, sure?


Sir Hornet. Your turtle! -- I don't know what you mean by your turtle; but I
take this young lady for Miss Turnbull, sure.


Vandervelt. You do!


Sir Hornet. Yes -- I do.


Vandervelt. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Clara. Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Hornet. Why -- what the devil -- hey -- why sure --


Vandervelt. Ah! ha! ha! ha! ha! -- This is a good joke.


Sir Hornet. A good joke! -- Why, Madam -- 'Squire -- Zounds --


Vandervelt. Ah! ha! ha! ha! ha! -- I would not have missed this for a thousand
pounds in new coined guineas.


Sir Hornet. Mr. Turnbull -- Sir -- Is not this your sister, Sir? --


'Squire. Zister!


Sir Hornet. Yes.


'Squire. What thic!


Sir Hornet. Yes.


'Squire. Thic Barbara!


Sir Hornet. Zounds, yes, I tell you.


'Squire. Why no, to be zure -- thic be Barbara.


Clara. Ha! ha! ha!


Vandervelt. Ha! ha! ha! -- the biter bit -- the fleerer fleer'd -- ha! ha! ha!
ha!


Sir Hornet. (Whistles) Thic be Barbara --


'Squire. Ees -- Thic be Barbara --


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- I be Barbara.


Vandervelt. Why, what a numskull your nephew is, Sir Hornet!


Sir Hornet. Do you think so?


Vandervelt. A blind, insensible puppy!


Sir Hornet. Is he?


Vandervelt. But you will torment him -- you will singe his wings -- you will plague
him worse than Moses did the Egyptians -- What a discovery!


Sir Hornet. Oh, yes -- I have made more discoveries!


Vandervelt. Ay, what are they?


Sir Hornet. Why the first is -- You're an old fool -- the next is -- I am
another -- and the third is, that we are not the only two fools in company.


[Exit, in a passion. [Exeunt Clara and Vandervelt, laughing. Manent 'SQUIRE
and Miss TURNBULL. ( they stand some time.) 'Squire. Barbara.


Miss Turnbull. Ees.


'Squire. How does thee like London?


Miss Turnbull. I know not -- It do zeem a strange place.


'Squire. A strange place?


Miss Turnbull. Ees -- I do think it be.


'Squire. Thee do.


Miss Turnbull. Ees.


'Squire. An' zo do I -- whereby, do zee, I Will get out on it as vast as I can
-- a pretty chase, as the man zaid that rode vifty miles a'ter a wild goose. --
London! -- an' this be London, the devil take London -- come, pack up thy
ribbands an' vlappets, an' make thy zel ready.


Miss Turnbull. Neea, zure -- you wunt go zo zoon.


'Squire. Wunt I? -- an' I stay in thic town tonight, I Will eat it vor breakvast
tomorrow.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious!


'Squire. Come, come -- don't stand mauxing and dawdling, but make thyzel ready.


Miss Turnbull. Lord! -- Why I a' zeen nothing yet.


'Squire. No -- nor nothing thee zhalt zee -- that I promise thee -- zo stir
thy stumps, I tell thee.


Miss Turnbull. My gracious! -- Mun I go down into 't country again like a
vool, an' have nothing to zay vor myzel?


'Squire. Why look thee, Barbara -- come along -- vor thee have come up like a
vool, zo there can be no harm in thy going down like a vool.


[Exeunt. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A Library in Sir HARRY'S House.
Sir HARRY, and TIMID discoverd. Timid. INDEED, Sir, you have always been the
best of masters to me.


Sir Harry. No, Timid, no -- I have been a very weak, idle, fellow; and have
put it out of my power to be a good master to any one.


Timid. Lackaday, Sir -- don't say so -- I am afraid I have been a bad servant
-- a very bad servant --


Sir Harry. Never --


Timid. Lackaday Sir, you don't know -- you don't know -- Lackaday, I thought
all for the best --


Sir Harry. You have only done what I commanded.


Timid. To be sure, Sir -- but, lackaday -- I wish I durst open my mind to him
-- I am terrified -- he will never believe me innocent.

( Aside.)
Sir Harry. My ruin is all my own work -- Here, Mr. Timid, take this ring and
remember me -- It may be the last present I shall ever make you.


Timid. Pray don't say so, Sir -- I am terrified.


Sir Harry. I am going to Mr. Osborne's.


Timid. To Mr. Osborne's!


Sir Harry. Yes -- If you should not see me tomorrow morning -- if any accident
should happen --


Timid. Lackaday!


Sir Harry. Give the state of my affairs, which I ordered you to draw up, to my
uncle, and this picture to Clara, the young lady that is with him.


Timid. Sir! What do you mean?


Sir Harry. Oh, nothing, nothing -- I Am not very well -- I -- a slight swimming
in my head -- that is all -- but there is no knowing what may happen.


Timid. Lackaday, Sir, you terrify me -- You talk like a dying man making his
will.


Sir Harry. No, no, -- not so -- I have nothing to leave -- And as to dying --
men must die -- live as long as they can, they must all die at last --


Timid. Shall I go for Sir Hornet, or your sister, or the young lady?


Sir Harry. No -- no young ladies for -- Oh!


Timid. Lackaday! my heart aches!


Sir Harry. I am going to Mr. Osborne's, presently.


Timid. Lackaday -- I wish he knew -- I Will take the mortgage of the Kentish
estate -- Mr. Osborne ordered me to bring it -- I Will lay it open on Mr.
Osborne's table -- I hope my dear master will see it -- I hope he will discover
all.

( Aside.)
Sir Harry. Heigho --


Timid. Dear Sir, don't sigh so -- don't look so -- tell me what I can do to
serve you -- to oblige you -- to make you happier?


Sir Harry. Nothing -- nothing -- past hope -- past cure -- quite, quite --


Timid. Lackaday!


Sir Harry. A thoughtless -- profligate -- idle -- dissipated fellow -- Oh my
head -- my head --


Timid. I cannot bear to see him so -- I Will hurry to Mr. Osborne's -- I Will try
if I can yet persuade him to be a true friend -- I Will beg, I Will pray, I Will go
down on my knees -- I Will do any thing.


[Exit Timid. Sir Harry. Clara! an angel! a cherub! And what am I? Well, well,
it will soon be all over -- there will be a sudden stop -- a speedy end -- (
laughing without) So happy -- Heaven -- Heaven increase your joys! -- mine are
for ever fled -- light laughter, innocent smiles, and social mirth are fled for
ever, for ever -- Oh folly! -- Oh madness!


[Exit Sir Harry. Enter Sir HORNET, VANDERVELT, and CLARA ( laughing.) Sir
Hornet. Ay, ay, pray laugh, laugh heartily, I beseech you -- I deserve, and I
desire no mercy.


Clara. It is one of the oddest adventures.


Vandervelt. How the deuce could you mistake that blowzabel, Miss Turnbull, for
my turtle?


Sir Hornet. Why true, as you say, friend Van: but that happens to be a blunder
which I never did, nor ever could make. I should as soon take myself for a
king, or you for a conjuror. I only mistook this lady to be Miss Turnbull, not
Miss Turnbull to be this lady.


Vandervelt. Mistook Miss Turnbull and this lady, and -- I don't understand it.


Clara. Be kind enough, Sir Hornet, to explain the matter.


Sir Hornet. You remember, Madam, I had some conversation with you in the rooms
at Bath.


Clara. Persectly --


Sir Hornet. And you could not but perceive how forcibly I was struck with your
wit, beauty, and accomplishments.


Clara. I recollect you were very polite, Sir, and were pleased to say
abundance of obliging things.


Sir Hornet. Not half so many as I thought, I assure you, Madam.


Vandervelt. Well said, Sir Hornet -- -- My old friend is quite enamoured with
you, turtle.


Sir Hornet. Yes, Sir, so I am -- though I do not intend to marry the lady.


Vandervelt. Hem!


Sir Hornet. My grand object, the thing that, of all others, I have most at
heart, is to see my nephew, Sir Harry, happy -- As for myself, I feel I am
growing old apace, and am almost tired of the farce of life.


Vandervelt. Why so, Sir Hornet? I am sure you play your part excellently.


Sir Hornet. No, no -- I am rolling down hill apace, and as the first steep
declivity may precipitate me to the bottom, there are certain affairs I wish to
see finished, one of which is the marriage of Sir Harry.


Clara. So the person you asked concerning me, when I went out of the rooms,
mistook the question, and thought you meant Miss Turnbull?


Sir Hornet. So it appears, madam -- And I was too much enraptured to stay to
rectify mistakes -- when I negotiated the affair with 'Squire Turnbull, I
studiously avoided an interview with his supposed sister, for fear the business
should wear a face of precipitate indelicacy. -- And I thought if I could once
bring you and Sir Harry together, I would leave the contingent possibilities to
love, and the superior good qualities and penetration of the parties, which I,
rationally enough, concluded could not fail to produce the desired effect.


Clara. But, Sir Hornet, how did it happen that you did not enquire of me
myself who I was?


Sir Hornet. Why faith, madam, I had been so particular with you, and had
spoken so freely on the subjects of love and matrimony, that I was afraid, if I
made those kind of enquiries, you would mistake the matter, perhaps, and think
I wanted to make love to you in my own proper person. Hey, young Van --

( half aside.)
Vandervelt. Heigho!


Clara. Oh! no, Sir Hornet -- I assure you, I had a better opinion of your
understanding.


Vandervelt. Hem!


Sir Hornet. Certainly, had I been capable of such a whim, I should have made
myself cursed ridiculous, Hey, young Van --

( half aside.)
Clara. Beyound dispute!


Vandervelt. Heigho!


Enter TIMID, looking wild and frighted. Sir Hornet. Heyday! What Is the matter
with you, old Lackaday?


Timid. I Am terrified -- I Am terrified -- I Am terrified! --


Sir Hornet. Terrified! -- what is the matter? -- Zounds! why don't you speak?


Timid. Lackaday -- I cannot -- I cannot speak.


Sir Hornet. Make signs then.


Timid. I Am a miserable old man -- I ran all the way to tell you --


Sir Hornet. What?


Timid. Mr. Osborne!


Sir Hornet. Mr. Osborne! What of him?


Timid. Lackaday -- Sir Harry!


Clara. Heavens! -- A duel.


Timid. I have put my trust in man, and am deceived -- I have leaned upon a
reed, and am fallen -- I have seen the shadow of friendship, and --


Sir Hornet. Curselight on your metaphors; come to facts -- What of Osborne?
What of Sir Harry? Where are they? What have they done? What are they doing?


Timid. Gambling!


Sir Hornet. How!


Timid. I was at Mr. Osborne's when Sir Harry came -- I was there with the
mortgage of the Kentish estate.


Sir Hornet. Of what?


Timid. It was executed this very day -- I am a miserable old man -- all lost!


Sir Hornet. Lost!


Timid. Lackaday! that is not all -- I went into the next room, and heard Sir
Harry go to gaming, with a gang of sharpers that were there on purpose -- Sir
Harry had lost every thing he had in the world -- Mr. Osborne has got all --
All the mortgages of all his estates -- I saw 'em -- left 'em all in a box on
his table.


Sir Hornet. Mortgages of all his estates! Perdition! -- How did he get them?
-- How came you to know?


Timid. Lackaday! I am terrified -- I dare not tell -- I am an accomplice! -- A
wicked, innocent, miserable old man.


Sir Hornet. Damnation! Order the coach there -- I Will tear him to atoms -- I Will
rend him piecemeal -- my poor boy -- an intolerable villain! -- Dear Madam, you
don't know what I feel.


Clara. Pardon me, Sir Hornet, if you knew my heart, you would not say so -- I
detest the treachery of Mr. Osborne as much as you do; and, woman as I am,
would risk my life to see it properly punished.


Sir Hornet. A smooth tongued, hypocritical villain, that owes his life to my
boy.


Clara. Dear Sir Hornet, excuse my weakness -- I am in the utmost terror -- in
dread of consequences still more fatal.


Timid. Lackaday, Sir, so am I -- I am terrified -- Sir Harry gave me this ring
for a remembrance, and bade me deliver this picture to you, Madam --


Clara. (Looks at it, and bursts into tears.) -- It is his own --


Timid. He looked so melancholy, and so furious -- He had his pistols.


Clara. His pistols! -- Oh for pity's sake, Sir Hornet, let us fly.


Sir Hornet. Instantly.


Timid. I Am a miserable old man.


[Exeunt. SCENE II. MR. OSBORNE'S House.
Sir Harry enters excessively agitated, followed by Osborne, with a brace of
pistols he had wrested from him. Oshorne. How now, Sir Harry -- What is the
cause of this sudden phrenzy? Why expose your want of temper and fortitude thus
to the company? -- You have driven them away -- they are all going --


Sir Harry. Oh! horror!


Osborne. If you must wreak vengeance on yourself, let it be a becoming one at
least.


Sir Harry. Insupportable horror!


Osborne. Fie, fie, recover your temper -- be, or seem to be a man -- What --
You knew you were ruined before this event.


Sir Harry. Oh, Osborne! Oh, Melissa! I cannot speak -- I cannot utter it --
I Am a wretch -- a villain -- the meanest -- the worst of villains -- and infamy
-- eternal infamy is mine.


Osborne. Why, what have you done?


Sir Harry. Ruined you -- ruined my sister --


Osborne. How!


Sir Harry. And branded myself, everlastingly, a villain.


Osborne. Ruined me! ruined your sister! which way?


Sir Harry. The money I have lost within --


Osborne. Well.


Sir Harry. Is here is -- Is yours.


Osborne. Mine!


Sir Harry. Melissa's -- her fortune -- She put it into my hand this very day
--


Osborne. Damnation!


Sir Harry. Have compassion on me -- give me the pistols, let me at once put an
end to my misery and shame.


Osborne. Thoughtless, weak man! Do you think the momentary pang of death a
sufficient punishment for the ruin and destruction you have entailed upon all
those who have had the misfortune to love, or to be related to you? Do you
think that to DIE, and to forget at once your infamy and crimes, is a
compensation for the havoc you have made with the peace and property of those
who were dearest to you, who must LIVE to feel the effect of your vices, and
bear, unjustly, the reproach of your abandoned conduct --


Sir Harry. Oh torture!


Osborne. Was it not enough that you had reduced yourself, from affluence and
honor, to contempt and beggary, but you must wantonly, wickedly, sport with
what was not your own; and involve the innocent and unborn in your
wretchedness? -- Shall not your sister's offspring, whom your intemperance
shall have reduced to poverty and misery, detest your memory, and imprecate
curses on your name?


Sir Harry. Oh hell!


(Sir Hornet speaks without, and afterward enters, followed by Clara and
Timid.) Sir Hornet. Where are they? which is the room? So, Mr. Lucifer -- Could
you decoy your friend to no other place to rob him, but your own house?


Osborne. Did you address yourself to me, Sir Hornet.


Sir Hornet. Yes, I did, Sir Satan, and if --


Sir Harry. Dear Sir, forbear -- I alone am the proper object of anger -- of
vengeance -- a wretch -- a despised and miserable outcast; and bitterness and
despair are deservedly my portion.


Sir Hornet. You are a dupe -- a poor sascinated fool -- you have beheld the
serpent's mouth open, have felt the insluence of his poisonous breath, yet
stupidly dropped into his ravenous jaws, and sung a requiem to your own
destruction.


Osborne. You are liberal, Sir, of your epithets and accusations. What do you
mean by them?


Sir Hornet. Horrible impudence! Have you not taken a vile, a rascally
advantage of the want of temper in the man, for whom you professed the most
perfect friendship? Have you not stripped him of his estate, by the most
villainous arts, by plotting with Jews and scoundrels?


Osborne. Your talk loud, Sir.


Sir Harry. Osborne! plotting! the letter then was true!


Sir Hornet. Yes, plotting! -- He is the principal, the leader of the hellish
gang that has been plundering you.


Osborne Well, Sir! -- suppose it -- What then?


Sir Hornet. What then! Halters! --


Osborne Why so, Sir! -- He has persisted in bringing destruction upon himself,
and must suffer the effects of his obstinacy -- What crime was there in my
receiving what he was resolved to throw away. He had not been a month returned
from his travels, before his passion for play made him the jest of every polite
sharper in town -- They saw there was an estate to be scrambled for, and every
one was industrious to obtain a share -- After squandering a part of his
fortune among these adventurers, he engaged at play with me; and after losing
one sum, was never easy till he had lost another -- Am I then to be accountable
for his folly?


Sir Harry. Infernal treachery! Dares he avow it!


Osborne. Dare! Yes Sir -- I dare.


Clara. Righteous heaven! Is there no peculiar, no quick vengeance for
ingratitude?

( aside)
Sir Hornet. The deeds, the annuities you have granted, the mortgages you have
made, are in his possession -- he owns -- he has them all --


Sir Harry. He!


Osborne. Yes, Sir -- I.


Sir Harry. Madness! remember and beware -- remember and tremble, though I have
no longer the fortune of Sir Harry Portland, I have still Harry's spirit, and
dare chastise insolence and perfidy yet --


Osborne. No doubt -- The man who is rash enough to risk his estate upon the
chance of a die, has generally valor enough to wish to cut the winners throat
-- Friendship is no protection.


Clara. Friendship! Monstrous prostitution! Friendship! Deeds Mr. Osborne are
the best proofs of friendship, and that, preacher will gain but little credit,
who is a detected villain, while he is describing the fitness and beauty of
moral virtue.


Sir Hornet. Friendship! Where are the deeds, the mortgages?


Osborne. There they are, Sir -- ( points to a box) They are mine -- the
annuities he has granted, and the mortgages he has made are mine -- his effects
are mine -- his houses are mine, his estates are mine, his notes are mine, his
ALL is mine; except his poverty and spirit, which, as he says are his own.


Sir Harry. Heavens! must I bear this?


Sir Hornet. Oh! for ratsbane or hemp --


Osborne. Nay more, Sir ( to Sir Harry) I was not only aware, but certain of my
own superior address, or I had not been weak enough to have risqued any part of
my fortune -- I have not yet acquired your heroic contempt for riches; as it
was, I used, every art to stimulate and incite you to play -- took every
advantage, studied every trick, improved every lucky chance, and rejoiced at
every and all of your losses, 'till I had you totally in my power -- I beheld
distress accumulating on your head, and was happy at it; remarked the agitation
of your mind, and increased it; saw the insirmity of your temper, and
aggravated it.


Sir Harry. Damnation! -- Are you a man?


Osborne. Try me.


Sir Harry. Dare you give me the satisfaction -- the revenge of a man?


Osborne I Will give it you instantly, Sir -- ( As Sir Harry offers to go,
Osborne seizes his arm, and before he speaks, his countenance changes from
assumed anger and contempt, to the most tender and expressive friendship.)
There, there lies your revenge -- there is your satisfaction -- take them --
remember your sormer folly, and be happy --


Sir Harry. Sir!


Sir Hornet. What!


Clara. Astonishment!


Osborne. Why do you seem surprised? -- my heart is yours, my life is yours
-- I owe you every thing -- A debt which never can be repaid, and never will be
forgotten. -- When sinking beneath the murderous hand of villainy, it was the
benevolent ardor of your soul, it was the intrepid valor of your arm that
rescued me.


Sir Harry. Generous friend!


Osborne. In that box is contained all that I have ever won of you, and almost
all you have ever lost -- I have become and associate with sharpers to protect
you from them, and by sacrificing a little, have preserved the rest. I have
worn the mask till it is become too painful, and now gladly cast it off. -- (
To Sir Hornet and company) If my conduct has yet a dubious appearance -- I have
a witness that will instantly be credited.

( Goes to the chamber door and calls Melissa; Melissa enters, runs to Sir
Harry, and falls upon his neck.)
Melissa. My brother!


Sir Harry. Sister! Osborne!


Clara. Oh my heart!


Sir Hornet. (after a pause, and endeavoring to restrain his tears) Tol der
roll.


Timid. Lackaday! -- I Am a happy old man! -- He Is a true friend! -- he is a true
friend! -- I Am a happy old man!


Sir Harry. Can you too, sister, forgive my folly? You that I have injured so
unpardonably?


Melissa. Dear brother, you are not so guilty as you suppose -- it was a plot
upon you; you were led into it, to show you what a losing gamester is capable
of?


Sir Hornet. Hark you, Sir? (to Osborne) All the mortgages and deeds are there,
you say?


Osborne. All, Sir -- together with whatever money else has, at any time, been
won of him, since I have been concerned in this transaction.


Sir Hornet. All in that box?


Osborne. All.


Timid. I Am a happy old man.


Sir Harry. My dear uncle!


Sir Hornet. Let me alone -- Tol der roll -- (Goes up to Osborne, takes his
hand, and wipes his own eyes) Will you forgive me, Osborne? Will you? Will you
forgive my boy?


Sir Harry. (Takes Osborne's other hand) Osborne! -- I cannot speak --


Clare. Indeed, Mr. Osborne, I don't know how to tell you what I think --
Esteem -- admiration -- veneration -- are poor expressions to convey my
feelings -- I have been mistaken and to blame -- I trembled for Sir Harry, I
rashly condemned you, and wrote a letter --


Sir Harry. Dear Madam, was that letter yours?


Clara. It was.


Sir Harry. How much obliged am I to you, and to you all.


Clara. I am sorry, I was to blame.


Osborne. Nay, Madam -- Nobody was to blame -- Angels are actuated by motives
like yours, and if they never err, it is because they have commerce with
angels only. -- And now, dear Harry, suffer me to say one word -- Let this
transaction be a powerful, an everlasting memento to you. -- Remember the blood
that has been spilt in the moment of passion and distress, in consequence of
indulging in this shocking vice -- Remember the distracted wife, and widow's
curse, the orphans tears, the sting of desperation, and the red and impious
hand of suicide; despise the folly that made the practice fashionable; oppose
its destructive course, and for ever shun, for ever abominate, the detestable
vice of gaming.


Sir Harry. Professions of resolution, from me, Osborne, come with an ill grace
-- I am ashamed of my folly -- I despised, even while I practiced it; but the
punishment you have inslicted, has been so judicious, so severely generous, I
think I can safely say, there is no probability of a relapse.


Sir hornet. Well, but Harry, turn about -- look at this lady -- surely you
have not forgot Miss Turnbull -- have you?


Sir Harry. Your Miss Turnbull, Sir, I shall never forget.


Sir Hornet. Oh! what you have heard the renowned history of my Bath adventure?


Sir Harry. I have, Sir.


Sir Hornet. Well, and what say you to -- hey my cherub -- you told me, you
know, you had no aversion to the fellow.


Clara. Nay, Sir Hornet, is that the part of a confidante?


Sir Hornet. Why, yes, it is -- for, as I take it, a confidante is but a kind
of a go-between to bring the parties together -- And here comes the blooming
youth -- ( Enter Vandervelt) here comes Johannes de Temporibus to second the
motion.


Vandervelt. To second what motion, Sir Hornet?


Sri Hornet. A hymeneal motion.


Vandervelt. Cannot tell -- who are the candidates?


Sir Hornet. Harry Portland and Clara Forester.


Vandervelt. Hold, hold, Sir Hornet, not so fast! -- That lady is my ward.


Sir Hornet. Yes, and may, if she pleases, be your wife.


Vandervelt. Nay -- I -- I did not say so, Sir Hornet.


Sir Hornet. No, but I did, young Van -- but hark you -- ( takes him aside)
Resign all your silly pretensions peaceably, throw your worthies into the fire,
and give up the lady to her lover; or you shall be held up, in terrorem, an
object of ridicule, to frighten all the dangling, whining, old fools in
christendom, who are turned of threescore.


Vandervelt. Well, well, speak in a lower key.


Sir Hornet. May I be certain of your consent then?


Vandervelt. Why, yes -- yes -- heigho: --


Sir Hornet. Dear Madam -- this worthy old Gentleman, your guardian, most
humbly implores you would have pity upon Sir Harry.


Clara. Did you say so, papa?


Vandervelt. Me! no --


Sir Hornet. How?


Vandervelt. N -- not in those exact words, but something very like it, Turtle
-- heigho! --


Melissa. Come, my dear Clara -- Let me have the happiness to call you sister
--


Osborne. Let me intercede, Madam.


Clara. Pshaw -- here is every body interceding, but him that can intercede
most to the purpose.


Sir Harry. Forgive me, dearest Clara -- My fate is suspended on your lips, and
I am so conscious of unworthiness, and so much affected by the fear of a severe
sentence, that I have not power to plead for mercy.


Clara. Yes -- but you have a partial, tenderhearted judge.


Sir Hornet. Ay -- "and a wise young judge" too --


Clara. Well, well! -- I cannot dissemble. A generous heart, a noble mind, are
seldom met and seldom merited. When happiness like this presents itself, to
reject is not to deserve it.


[Exeunt omnes. THE END.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by MISS YOUNG.
INFORM me, you, at whom he seems to write,
Don't this man's insolence your spleen excite?
Give the beau-monde impertinent advice?
Proscribe VINGT UNE -- prohibit box and dice!
Tell YOU of honor, infamy, undoing,
And -- impudently preach you out of ruin?
Are cards and dice fit subjects for his fables? --
( laughs) He Would better write a tragedy on E. O. tables?
And why, with so much rudeness and ill nature,
Against PRIVATE vice urge acrimonious satire,
Since legal lotteries flourish every year,
And peers and pedlars run the mad career
Of public ruin, in its full extent,
And beggars game -- BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT!
Nay, once in seven years, in full perfection,
Is played a game more desperate, called, "ELECTION!"
When each grave senator the cause promotes,
And throws the main with -- cogg'd and loaded votes;
When honor, conscience, justice, law, religion,
Are every one, by turns, the plundered pigeon!
But wherefore rail at games in any station?
Life is, itself, a game at calculation,
In which Dame Fortune gains but little thanks,
For each man swears HIS prizes are all blanks.
So when your amorous lover draws for wife,
And wit and beauty link with him for life,
Though twice ten thousand vows of love were paid,
To gain the charming! -- dear! -- angelic maid! --
Though constancy and raptures were the theme! --
Let but possession chase the honey'd dream,
His bouncing passion bursts like bonfire squib,
And wit and beauty form -- A CROOKED RIB!
The lordly husband takes a different tone,
When once sweet Miss becomes "bone of his bone!"
The tender epithet, the dying leer,
Are changed to -- "Damme, Madam, cannot you hear?"
For these, poor authors, who their pens employ
To write down pleasures which they cannot enjoy,
You, against whom they aim their boldest strokes,
Have too much NONCHALANCE to mind their jokes;
You find them soporifics, quite composing,
For all the while they are preaching, you are dozing.
Our bard, who full of antiquated notions,
Intends to cure the world by scenic potions,
Gravely resolves to set the nation right,
If your applause should crown his hopes to night.


