HE WOULD BE A SOLDIER. A COMEDY IN FIVE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER
ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

WRITTEN BY FREDERICK PILON. DEDICATED TO MRS. MONTAGUE.

LONDON: Printed for G. G. J. and J. ROBINSON, Paternoster Row. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

[Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

DEDICATION. TO MRS. MONTAGUE.
MADAM,
THOUGH I can boast no acquaintance with Mrs. MONTAGUE, but that intellectual
one, which the world of taste in general claims with her; I trust she will
pardon the liberty of prefixing her name to a comedy, the writer of which feels
an admiration equal to her own for Shakespeare. When research and criticism
seemed exhausted in throwing lights on the works of this great fountain of
English dramatic genius, you, Madam, as if a spirit more congenial to his own,
approach still nearer to the Immortal Poet, dispel the last mist which time had
shed around him, and unveil the full glory of his mind. The small tribute of
respect I have presumed to pay your talents in the course of my comedy, Madam,
was, believe me, the spontaneous incense of my heart; and I have the
satisfaction to reflect, that no reader will suspect me of flattery in this
declaration, but one who is a stranger to your same, and to your virtues.

I have the honor to be, MADAM, Your devoted, and obedient servant, FREDERICK
PILON.

PREFACE.
THE very great success which has attended the performance of the following
Comedy, induces the author to state a circumstance which, on the first blush of
the business, must appear rather singular. He would be a Soldier was presented
to Mr. Colman in the course of last Summer, and returned -- because that
gentleman did not like a line of it; and left this comfortable intelligence
were not sufficient to wound the feelings of the writer, Mr. Colman added, he
did not know what could be done with it, or in what shape it could be produced,
so as to contribute to the entertainment of the public.

The Author declares, that he then entertained such notions of Mr. Colman's
judgment, taste, and high sense of honor, that his opinion was final with
him; he laid by his performance in despair of ever acquiring profit or same by
it: -- fortunately an intimate friend one day advised him to show the piece to
Mr. Harris; imagining even Mr. Colman might be mistaken, or influenced by
motives, the writer of this address never-suspected any man harbored, till
bitter experience convinced him of the contrary. Mr. Harris, to the very great
surprise, and, no doubt, very great pleasure of the author, happened to be
totally of a different way of thinking from Mr. Colman; and what is more, he
heard the latter gentleman's opinion of the Comedy, but had too strong, and too
good a mind to be biassed by it. The success which has attended the piece makes
all farther comment on this short history of it unnecessary; and with the
liveliest sense of gratitude for the marked attention, kindness, and liberality
of Mr. Harris, the author submits his production to the perusal of the world.

PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR OF THE COMEDY, AND SPOKEN BY MR. FARREN.
PROLOGUES were first plain, simple bills of fare;
You just were told your entertainment there.
Without, parade, or aim at brilliant hit,
Genius was thrifty then, as rich in wit.
Our modern bards a different plan pursue,
And a fair outside always hold to view;
With point and jest the prologue still must play.
And strike each insect folly of the day.
But folly now unstricken, wild may fly,
For the muse wastes a favorite to the sky:
Can little objects charm or fill the mind,
When Howard's claims are known to all mankind?
Distance and clime in him excite no fears;
He visits dungeons, and the sick bed chears;
Fearless of danger, nobly on he goes,
Round the whole globe, to heal the wretches' woes:
Brother to all who like himself had birth,
He walks his Maker's messenger on earth;
And in the monument his country rears,
That country a divided glory shares.
To a great people, thus to merit true,
Why for our bard should we protection sue?
Worth still you foster; and where faults are found,
You probe to heal, and not enlarge the wound.
The reason strong that guides your every aim,
Cancels or seals disinterested fame.
If English genius, soaring eagle high
All nations, drops still in a lower sky,
It is because the sons of fame well know,
The praise that is worth ambition, you bestow.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Colonel Talbot, -- Mr. AICKIN. Sir Oliver Oldstock, -- Mr. QUICK. Captain
Crevelt, -- Mr. LEWIS. Mandeville, -- Mr. FARREN. Count Pierpoint, -- Mr.
WEWITZER. Wilkins, -- Mr. FEARON. Caleb, -- Mr. EDWIN. Amber, -- Mr. THOMPSON.
Johnson, -- Mr. BROWN. Servant to Colonel, -- Mr. HELM.
Charlotte, -- Mrs. POPE. Lady Oldstock, -- Mrs. WEBB. Harriet, -- Mrs. WELLS.
Mrs. Wilkins, -- Mrs. BROWN. Betty, -- Miss. STUART. Nancy, -- Miss ROWSON.
HE WOULD BE A SOLDIER.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Street.
Enter Mrs. Wilkins, followed by Johnson. Mrs. Wilkins. THERE IS no such thing
as stirring out of doors for the fellows nowadays. -- I beg, Sir, you would
not follow me any farther.


Johnson. I cannot leave you, my sweet, divine, charming girl!


Mrs. Will. To how many, now, have you repeated the same lesson before you met
me this morning?


John's. To how many! Were a dozen such fine women as yourself to appear every
day in public, there would be no such thing as walking the streets for you; a
man should have a piece of flint in his breast.


Mrs. Will. He Is a good handsome fellow, and does not talk badly. -- Then you
will persist in following me?


John's. How can I help it? I follow a fine woman by instinct. -- Do, my dear,
kind, cruel angel, tell me where you live. (Takes hold of her hand.)


Mrs. Will. But to what purpose? I can never see you?


John's. Why not, my love?


Mrs. Will. Lord, I am an old married woman! (Faintly struggling to disengage
her hand.) You wicked devil, leave me. The neighbors will take notice, and I
shall get a bad name by you. -- Do go -- I Am just at home.


John's. But which is the house you live at?


Mrs. Will. I cannot tell you -- besides, I think I see my husband talking to the
orange woman at the door; in the straw hat and scarlet cloak, with a little
curly-pole boy in her hand, eating ginger-bread.


John's. Why, that is the George inn. 'Sdeath! do you live there?


Mrs. Will. Oh, you devil! I shall be ruined if ever you come after me.


John's. Zounds! it is the very house I was going to. -- Is Not it kept by one
Jacob Wilkins?


Mrs. Will. Yes, it is.


John's. We Are quite at home now. -- I suppose you're old Jacob's daughter.


Mrs. Will. I happen to be old Jacob's wife, though.


John's. Pray, my dear, how long are you married?


Mrs. Will. A long time, Sir.


John's. Not a long time, I am sure, from your looks.


Mrs. Will. Looks are very deceitful, especially those of married folks. I was
married Candlemas day, five -- long -- months.


John's. Poor creature! you have had a tedious time of it.


Mrs. Will. But what is your business with Jacob Wilkins? Cannot I do it?


John's. Then you do Jacob's business sometimes?


Mrs. Will. To be sure I do, when he is out of the way. Poor man! it is a great
relief to him.


John's. But this is a matter on which I must see himself. -- Col. Talbot, a
gentleman of whom I think you must have heard, if you be Wilkins' wife, has
wrote to him, and desired I would see him in consequence of that letter: were
you at home when he received it?


Mrs. Will. No, I was not, Sir: but I have often heard of Col. Talbot; he is an
Oxfordshire gentleman; his family, I hear, was the makings of Wilkins. Lord! he
has been a long time in the Indies, and, I Am told, has made a power of money.
But is he come home, Sir?


John's. He is; and since, his return has been down in Oxfordshire, in search of
Wilkins, where he thought he still lived; and would have come here himself now,
only he is very much indisposed.


Mrs. Will. Bless your heart! Jacob Wilkins has been in town, and kept the
George inn these ten years.


John's. He has made a very ungrateful return to his benefactor, Col. Talbot. My
master thought him dead, not having heard from him so many years: a conduct
that was unpardonable, considering his obligations to the Colonel, and the
great trust reposed in him.


Mrs. Will. Great trust! Lord, Sir! what was it?


John's. Why, Colonel Talbot left a son in his care -- but come along, and I Will
tell you the whole story by the way.


Mrs. Will. We must not be seen together for the world; my husband is as jealous
as the vengeance. Take a turn down this next street, and let me go home alone.
Follow me in about ten minutes; but take care you don't speak to me as if you
had seen me before.


John's. My dear Mrs. Wilkins, what do you take me for? Do you suppose I never
paid a visit to a married woman in my life?


[Exeunt. SCENE II. The Bar of the George Inn.
Enter Caleb, followed by Wilkins, who appears greatly agitated. Caleb. What do
you knock me about for at this rate? Don't I slave like a horse from morning
till night? I wish I had gone for a soldier as my brother did!


Will. Your brother, you dog! I wish I had never seen either of your faces. --
What shall I do? I have no son to restore him!


[Bell rings violently. Call. Coming! coming! There Is a bill wanted in the
General Elliot.


Will. Let them wait.


Call. But suppose they will not wait, who will pay off the score?


Will. Out of my sight, sirrah, or I Will pay off your score -- Don't you see my
temper is ruffled?


Call. Yes, and I feel it too. (Bell rings.) Coming! coming up, Sir!


[Exit. Enter Mrs. Wilkins. Mrs. Will. My dear Mr. Wilkins, what is the matter?
The whole house seems turned topsy-turvy.


Will. I am ruined.


Mrs. Will. Ruined! Oh, heaven forbid!


Will. I say, woman, I Am undone; and the sooner I Am out of England, the better.


Mrs. Will. Lord, lord! you terrify me out of my wits, Jacob!


Will. Suppose the best friend you had in the world had entrusted an only child
to your care, and that through neglect you had lost him, what would you have to
say for yourself?


Mrs. Will. And is that your case, my dear?


Will. It is.


Mrs. Will. But tell me how it happened.


Will. You have frequently heard me make mention of Colonel Talbot, in whose
family I was brought up?


Mrs. Will. To be sure I have.


Will. It is a son of his I have lost.


Mrs. Will. You astonish me! But how came so great a man's son to be left in
your care?


Will. Why, you must know that Colonel Talbot, previous to his going abroad, was
privately married to a beautiful girl who waited on his mother: he had a son by
this girl; and as the child came into the world just as he was obliged to
embark with the army for Portugal, the war before last, he left him in my care,
desiring me to let him pass for my own till his return; and in case he was
killed, to continue the deception till the death of his father.


Mrs. Will. And has the Colonel never been in England since?


Will. Never till within these few days; therefore his son continued with me
till he was twelve years old, when I lost him.


Mrs. Will. In what manner did you lose him.


Will. I cannot be certain: but, as he was a boy of great spirit, and ever
prattling of being a soldier, I suspect he was inveigled off by a recruiting
party, which at that time was beating up for men in the village.


Mrs. Will. Didn't you acquaint his mother immediately with what had happened?


Will. She was dead.


Mrs. Will. You wrote to the Colonel, to be sure.


Will. There I was to blame. I could not summon up resolution sufficient. I
thought he would have attributed the child's leaving me, to neglect, or cruel
treatment.


Mrs. Will. The best advice I can give you is, to tell Colonel Talbot his son is
dead.


Will. But how shall I produce a certificate of that? Should he examine the
parish register, and no record of such a child's death be found, I should be
taken up, and tried on a suspicion of murder.


Mrs. Will. Then tell him the truth at once.


Will. Worse and worse! -- He Will suppose this a mere invention of my own, to
screen my villainy; else, why was I silent so long? and that I had been bribed
by his relations to remove an obstacle to their inheriting both his acquired
and paternal fortune.


Enter Caleb. Call. There Is a gentleman from Colonel Talbot desires to see you.


Will. What Is to be done? -- I dare not face him!


Call. What shall I say to him, father?


Will. Was there ever any thing so provoking -- as this fellow?


Mrs. Will. I have it. -- Show him into the parlour, my good boy; and tell him,
Mr. Wilkin's will be with him presently, my good boy!


Call. "My good boy!" -- Ecod, she good boys me to some tune this morning; I
hope there is no mischief in the wind; for I Am sure those are the first good
words I have had from her since she was my stepmother.


[ Exit Caleb. Mrs. Will. How old is your son Caleb?


Will. There Is only a week difference between his age and young Talbot's.


Mrs. Will. Pass him on the Colonel for his son.


Will. How!


Mrs. Will. Put a good face on the matter, and you will not only slip your neck
out of a halter, but make your fortune. I can turn Caleb round my finger. Go
and speak to this gentleman, and let him know you'ill introduce young Mr.
Talbot to him immediately. Do as I bid you, and leave the management of the
rest of the business to me.


Will. But what reason shall I give for not writing to him so long?


Mrs. Will. You must say you never received one of his letters; and your
quitting the country will make it probable enough they might have miscarried.


Will. Then to give his son no better education!


Mrs. Will. You must say he would not take any better; and you may find
instances enough of as dull heirs to large estates, to give color to your story.


Will. And make a drawer of him too!


Mrs. Will. Well, he will not be the first great man that has cried, "Coming up,
Sir!" -- What do you stand confounded for? Away, away, man; and let me break
the matter to Caleb.


Will. It goes against my conscience -- but selfpreservation will have it so.


[ Exit Wilkins. Mrs. Will. (Alone.) Now have I my gentleman under my thumb --
whenever his tongue wags with the found of jealousy, I Will threaten to discover
upon him -- and I Will see my dear, sweet fellow, who followed me home to day, as
often as I please. -- But to prepare this great booby -- Oh, here he comes.


Enter Caleb. Call. Here, mother, I have brought you the bill.


Mrs. Will. Well, never mind the bill -- I have something very particular to say
to you. -- Do you know, Caleb, that your father is a man of the first character
in this town?


Call. To be sure he is, for selling the best old port and sherry in the kingdom.


Mrs. Will. But come, sit down, and listen to me.


(They sit.) Call. What signifies hearing so much about father's character --
who gets him that character? -- Why, Caleb. -- Is there one in the house fit to
talk to a gentleman but myself?


Mrs. Will. My dear Caleb, let me entreat you to hear me.


Call. Dear Caleb! -- Yes, I Would listen to you all day for such words as these;
good words are sugar plumbs to me: besides, mother, you cannot think how pretty,
folks look when they are pleased.


Mrs. Will. Do you know, Caleb, whose son you are?


Call. Whose son I am! -- My father's, to be sure.


Mrs. Will. Certainly: but that father is not Jacob Wilkins.


Call. No!


Mrs. Will. Colonel Talbot, the great nabob just arrived from the Indies, is
your father.


Call. My godfather, I suppose you mean.


Mrs. Will. I tell you he is your own father. You were given when an infant to my
husband, and he was ordered to bring you up as his son; it being necessary for
family reasons, which you will know another time, to conceal your birth.


Call. I always thought I was a better man's son than I appeared to be. -- But,
mother, is not this all a joke?


Mrs. Will. Can my husband convince you that I am in earnest?


Call. He has often convinced me that he himself was in earnest, as my shoulders
can witness.


Mrs. Will. But, dear Sir, I beg ten thousand pardons for keeping my seat so
long.


(Getting up, and curtfying very low. -- Caleb keeps his seat, with a vacant
stare, and chuckling laugh of joy.) Call. I thought I Would come to something at
last.


Mrs. Will. Your father's gentleman, Sir, is now waiting to see you.


Call. My father's gentleman! -- I suppose I shall have a gentleman too.


Mrs. Will. Oh, no doubt.


Call. Then there will be a pair of us. -- But you're sure now you are in
earnest?


Mrs. Will. Will you go and be convinced I am?


Call. Come along, Mrs. Wilkins; I think that is your name.


Mrs. Will. At your Honor's service.


Call. Great men are apt to forget such trifles -- but I Will call and see you now
and then, though I am a Colonel's son.


Mrs. Will. We'll always think there is nothing too good at the George for your
Honor.


Call. But, hark'e, give old Jacob a hint not to forget himself, and make too
free.


Mrs. Will. I hope, Sir, we shall never forget ourselves in your presence.


Call. Well, well, I hope not, good woman. -- A colonel's son! -- What a fool I
must be, not to have found out this of my own accord! -- But it is a wise child
knows it own father.


[ Exeunt. Mrs. Wilkins ridiculing him. SCENE, a drawing Room at the House of
Sir Oliver Oldstock.
Enter Charlotte and Harriet. Char. How you teize me about this
all-accomplished Sir Charles! -- I cannot abide him!


Har. Cannot abide him! -- I don't think it possible for any woman actually to
dislike him.


Char. Yet, he is the last person breathing I should elect for my caro sposo;
the man's well enough as an acquaintance; he is lively; does not want for
understanding: but the best of him is, the talent he possesses for discovering
the ridiculous, wherever it is to be found -- then he paints it in colors so
high, and so pleasantly ill natured, that a woman takes him in her suite, as
the natural appendage of superior understanding; to show that her wit has
raised her above the power of ridicule, and that she has the chief laughers in
town upon her own side.


Har. What you praise him for, is, in my mind, the only exceptionable part of
his character.


Char. Lord! what harm is there in a little good-humored ill nature? --
Besides, what would you have people talk of when they meet? As politics are to
the men, scandal is to our sex -- these two subjects are the vast magazines of
the major part of our ideas; between them the heads of half the nation are
furnished.


Har. Have you seen Mandeville today?


Char. Poor Harriet! now do I perceive the cause of all this extraordinary zeal
for the interests of the handsome Baronet; you still are apprehensive, if you
don't provide me with a husband, I shall take your beloved Mandeville from you.


Har. As he is sole heir to Colonel Talbot's immense fortune, I know your
father will proceed to the last extremities.


Char. Dear Harriet, rest perfectly satisfied in my friendship for you; I never
will have him; I don't know what I would not do to avoid it; My heart is at
present a virgin tablet, on which Love has not written a single character;
however, should things come to the worst, you yourself must be my deliverer.


Har. As how?


Char. Even by taking wing with your beloved swain, for that blessed spot,
where law forges no setters for the heart; and Hymen, with a smile upon his
cheek, and his torch burning clear, lights consenting votaries to the temple of
real, and lasting felicity. -- Heaven, and a generous uncle be praised, who
bequeathed me ten thousand pounds independent of my father, I am not obliged to
sacrfice my own, and my friend's happiness! -- O, glorious independence! --
thou parent of every virtue! -- no wonder so many noble hearts emptied their
crimson fountains to preserve thee!


Har. I Am ashamed, Charlotte, to have harbored a suspicion, but for a moment,
that a mind like yours could act unworthy of itself.


Char. Now to put my theory into practice. -- Here comes Mandeville; do you
step into the next room, where you may overhear our conversation, and you shall
be entertained with a prologue truly anti-matrimonial.


Har. Dear Charlotte, I am already perfectly satisfied.


Char. But I insist on your going; it will enterain you.


[ Exit Har. Enter Mandeville. Char. My dear Mandeville! I was just wishing for
you; if you had staid much longer, I should have been insupportably vapour'd;
nothing runs in my head but our marriage; but I was thinking, as the fondest
couples have certain dull hours that hang heavy upon their hands, how we two
shall kill time during those spiritless seasons.


Man. I suppose we shall follow the example of other people; do all we can to
make one another uneasy.


Char. That Is one way, to be sure, of killing time: but we shall grow tired of
that at last; don't you think so, Mandeville?


Man. When I entertain a good opinion of a lady's wit, it rids me of all
apprehension on that score.


Char. Sir, your most obedient.


Man. I thought your cousin Harriet was here.


Char. My cousin Harriet! -- Lord! what is my cousin Harriet to the purpose? --
I shall grow jealous of you, at this rate. -- I wonder, Mandeville, what star
shed its influence when our marriage was first talked of; no two people
breathing agreed better.


Man. I always thought you the pleasantest companion imaginable.


Char. We were continually laughing at one body's expense or another.


Man. And as soon as we are married, I fancy every body will be even with us.


Char. Heigho!


Man. What Is that for, Madam?


Char. Not for a husband, I assure you; it was only a requiem to friendship,
going to be laid in the grave of matrimony. Methinks we two are preparing
ourselves for the penance of our future union, as knights-errant of old
prepared themselves for the toils of chivalry; I Have read somewhere, that those
champions of distressed damsels, at first wore heavy weights to their armor,
which they, fancied, on removal, would give a comparative lightness to the
galling load with which they were about to tax their shoulders.


Enter Harriet. Har. Just now, Mr. Mandeville, as I parted from my cousin, a
servant came and told me that your uncle, Colonel Talbot, was arrived. -- Your
father, Charlotte, has received a letter from him. -- But what do you think? It
seems he has a son nobody ever heard of before.


Char. A son! -- Now, Mandeville, if you can be content with your mistress, and
a moderate income, I Am satisfied you may have her; as the bulk of Colonel
Talbot's fortune will certainly devolve to his son, depend upon it, my father
will no more press my ladyship on your worship.


Man. Madam, my uncle may dispose of his property as he pleases -- I sincerely
rejoice at his safe arrival in England; and as he has an heir, I shall be the
first to congratulate him on the event; and I hope that heir may prove an heir
to his virtues.


Char. You are a generous fellow, Mandeville; and, if it did not cost you so
dear, I should congratulate you on the certain prospect you may indulge, that
we two shall never be one.


Man. My dear Harriet --


Char. Now, why don't you say, my dear Mandeville? One as naturally follows the
other, as the echo does the found.


Man. The occasion, ladies, I trust, will apolo gize for my leaving you thus
abruptly.


Char. Oh, go, go; you have my ample consent. -- But, Harriet, will you let him
go off easily?


Har. How can you be so ill natured?


Char. She says, she gives you leave to go: but it is on condition, that you do
not dedicate a second of your time to any human being but her self, longer than
common decency requires it. -- But, Mandeville, do you and I part as we ought a
betrothed pair!


Man. Yes, Charlotte, for we part wedded friends again.


[Exit. Manent Harriet and Charlotte.

Char. Now, Harriet, are all your apprehensions removed?


Har. They are, my friend; Hope sits smiling at my heart, and once more chears
it with a prospect of happiness.


[Exeunt. End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, an Apartment at Sir Oliver Oldstock's.
Enter Sir Oliver (alone.) THIS is a devilish lucky hit, the Colonel's having a
son; it enables me to provide for both my niece and daughter -- I expect from
the latter a good deal of contradiction in this business, but I like that; I
shou'dn't love her half so much as I do, if she had not spirit enough to
contradict me -- it shows she has an opinion of her own, and gives me an
opportunity to prove that I have one also; but of a much superior kind, and
upon occasions of a very coercive quality; it is one time in a hundred I can get
any body to contradict me; but men of large independent fortunes never hear the
truth -- nobody has spirit enough to oppose them in discourse -- Henceforward,
I am determined to take no man by the hand, who does not speak and look, when
we come to debate, as if he would knock me down in an argument. Well, I think I
shall be as happy as a married man can be, when my girls are disposed of; my
wife, to be sure, has a most unaccountable humor; to suppose I Am jealous of
her, now she is in her fifty-fifth year -- to do Lady Lucretia Oldstock justice,
she was once a charming woman; but at present, I think her as plain a piece of
goods, as a man could meet between Temple Bar and Whitechapel, -- here she
comes, brimfull of news.

Enter Lady Oldstock. La. Old. Was ever any thing so wonderful!


Sir O. Nothing upon earth! what is the matter, my love?


La. Old. Why, haven't you heard that Colonel Talbot has a son?


Sir O. A son! -- a dozen, I dare be sworn, if he would but own them; an old
soldier has generally children in all the quarters of the globe.


La. Old. Sir Oliver, you're a censorious man, and judge of every body by
yourself.


Sir O. Upon my soul, my dear, you allow me too much credit; I never was a man
of all that gallantry; no, no; I had a domestic magnet that attracted, and
fixed all my affections; united to such a woman as Lady Oldstock, who could be
a rover?


La. Old. Why, to do you Justice, Sir Oliver, you have, upon the whole, made a
very good husband; and if it was not for the weakness of your temper in one
particular, we might live very happily.


Sir O. (Aside.) Now she is off.


La. Old. If, indeed, I was one of the giddy flirts of the day, it would be
another thing -- but a woman, of whose truth you have had so many years
experience, to be jealous!


Sir O. I tell you again, and again, I am not jealous.


La. Old. Ah, Sir Oliver! I wish you would make your words good; if any man of
the least tolerable appearance pays me a common mark of respect, don't you
immediately sneer, and say that fellow has a design upon you?


Sir O. So I do: I always think that person has a design upon another, to whom
he gives their own way in every thing; no, no; if I am to choose a friend, and
an agreeable companion, give me the honest fellow who contradicts me.


La. Old. Then you are not jealous?


Sir O. No.


La. Old. No?


Sir O. No; damme if ever I was jealous of you!


La. Old. You are now more provoking, if possible, than ever; when you find I
hold your ridiculous suspicions in contempt, you would wound me another way,
and mortify my pride, by insinuating, that I never had attractions sufficient
to have a civil thing said to me, like other women.


Sir O. Then it seems, my Lady, you have had your civil things, said to you
like other women in your time?


La. Old. There there it broke forth! What it is to be married to a jealous
husband!


Sir O. Well, all this I can bear, because I like contradiction -- I consider
the mind like a spring; the more you press it, the more vigor you lend to its
elasticity; since I can remember, I always delighted to be of a different
opinion from other people; there is something wonderfully flattering to human
pride in being singular -- but in marriage it is absolutely neccessary -- man
and wife are like the contending qualities of bitter and sweet; they naturally
quarrel, and exist by downright opposition.


Enter Charlotte. La. Old. I Will submit my cause to the judgment of Charlotte.


Char. Submit your cause to my judgment! my dear ma'am, by no means; in all
cases of matrimonial litigation, the parties should be tried by their peers.


Sir O. Right, my girl! now in order to qualify you to be impanelled on suits
of the kind, I was that moment thinking about moving the court of Hymen, to
show cause why a rule should not be granted, to provide you with a husband.


La. Old. Whenever you marry, Charlotte, if you wish to be happy, above all
things avoid a temper like your father's.


Sir O. And like your mother's also, if you wish your husband to be happy.


La. Old. I clearly perceive my company is not agreeable.


Sir O. Your strange turn of mind, I confess, Lady Oldstock, is not altogether
so agreeable; but you see it does not make me angry.


La. Old. It Is that that tortures me -- if I could vex him, it would be a proof
I had some power left; but he treats me like a child.


[Exit Lady Oldstock. Sir O. It Is a spoilt one, if I do.


Char. Dear Sir, let me follow her.


Sir O. You shall not budge a step after her -- Soothing her in these humors is
only adding fuel to fire. Your mother, Charlotte, was born a coquette, and will
die one. She was a reigning toast in her youth, and to this hour expects the
adulation of those days. She had a whole army of lovers; and, what you will say
ought to make me set a very high value upon her indeed, either from necessity,
or choice, she hung like an overblown rose on the virgin thorn, full four and
thirty years waiting for me. But come, sit down, and let me talk to you. (They
sit.) I have for some time back observed, Charlotte, that the match I proposed
to you with Mandeville, does not meet your wishes.


Char. I confess, Sir, it never did -- besides I know that gentleman's
affections to be engaged elsewhere.


Sir O. I understand you, he is fond of my niece, Harriet; well, in the name of
happiness let them go together; I Will never mention his name to you again, nor
indeed shall I propose any match to you, upon which I may expect rational
contradiction.


Char. Now, Sir, you speak like my father -- Oh, how my heart springs with
gratitude and joy, to hear those generous words from your own lips!


Sir O. No, my girl, you shall never be sacrificed at the altar of Plutus -- I
say sacrificed -- for, what is it, in fact, but a sacrifice, to throw away a
fine young woman upon a man it is impossible she should like; as many fathers
do every day, who love money more than their children.


Char. The liberality of these sentiments delight me, they are so exactly in
conformity with my own! Dear Sir, you have given me such spirits -- Do you
know, when you asked me to sit down, I expected to have a quite different kind
of conversation with you?


Sir O. I suppose you thought I had some golden calf to propose to you for a
husband?


Char. I own I was so ungenerous.


Sir O. A fellow with nothing but gold in his pocket, and lead in his pate; ha,
ha, ha!


Char. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir O. How liable we are to be mistaken in our surmises of other people's
thoughts! No, no, my girl, I have no such match to propose to you -- I have a
husband for you, it is true, in my eye; and a rich one too -- but it is not to
riches you object -- it is to the man; and provided he be agreeable, I imagine,
no woman in her senses can suppose a husband may be too rich?


Char. Provided riches be obtained without leaving a stain upon the principles,
it is happiness to possess them, as they give us so much more ample power of
distributing felicity. I never was that romantic fool to imagine there can be
happiness where there is not independency; grant me that, and all the wealth
beside, which the earth contains, or the sea-devours, should not bribe me to
sell the free election of my heart, or barter for gold, what gold could never
restore me.


Sir O. Give me a kiss, you jade! You are your father's own daughter; but every
body tells me you're the picture of me; and, if the Colonel's son be but as
like his father as you are yours, you will be the handsomest couple in Great
Britain.


Char. (Rising.) The Colonel's son, Sir!


Sir O. Yes, my old friend, Colonel Talbot's son; one of the finest young
fellows I am told -- but no sop -- he has none of the vices and follies of your
young butterflies of fashion.


Char. No, Sir; nor any of their accomplishments, or I Am misinformed.


Sir O. It was an excellent thought of his father's, to have him brought up in
a snug private way.


Char. And yet, I Am told he has lived some time in a snug public way.


Sir O. What, Charlotte, have you been listening to any scandalous reports of
the youth?


Char. A pretty youth I understand he is for the husband of your daughter -- I
am told he was actually a waiter at some horrid place near Smithfield.


Sir O. Oh, infamous scandal! -- He a waiter at some horrid place near
Smithfield! -- The next report, I suppose, will be, that you were bar maid at
the same places and that I Am an old tobacconist, who supplied the house with
cut and dry, from the sign of the Black Boy in a neighboring alley.


Char. I am petrified as the very thoughts of the brute!


Sir O. Look you there now: she knows I love contradiction in my heart, and
therefore seems averse to the match, because she thinks it will please me. But,
come: you and your mother and my niece shall go pay the Colonel and his son a
morning visit.


Char. Sir, as you insist upon it, I will go as I would to see any other great
natural curiosity.


Sir O. Was ever any thing like this! she has heard a scandalous report of a
man, and she will not wait to be undeceived by her own eyes and her own ears; this
is downright inconvincible obstinacy, not rational, well-founded contradiction:
and I hate the one, as much as I love the other; besides, I ever thought you a
girl of too much sense, to lay any kind of stress on a tale of mere rumor.


Char. But, if rumor should speak truth?


Sir O. He Is so great a liar, I would not believe him.


[Exeunt. SCENE, an Apartment at Mandeville's.
Enter Johnson and Colonel Talbot. John's. He Is a rough diamond, Sir; he
requires a little polishing, I must confess.


Col. Good masters may remove his ignorance, and good company polish his
manners: but there is a meanness in the turn of his person, and the cast of his
features, which is insuperable; but take man in every point of view, and he
will be found the creature of habit; his body, like his mind, is subdued by
education.


John's. I wonder, Sir, you never wrote to any particular friend in England, to
have inquired about him, when you received no letter from this man, to whose
care you committed him.


Col. Who could I trust? None of my own family! -- Then, what solid friendships
do you suppose are contracted at the age I left England? I was then but twenty;
all my intimates were young fellows, sunk in pleasure and dissipation; if any
thing like friendship had subsisted between us, the many years we were asunder
had dissolve'd the tie; his mother, I knew, was dead, and from Wilkins's
silence, I concluded that he also had paid the debt of nature; therefore I
defisted from writing, thinking it was in vain to hope for any certainty till I
had myself reached England.


John's. I should not have believed it possible your Honor could have had such a
son, let his education be what it may.


Col. I own, Johnson, the weakness of a father induced me to believe I should
have found him very different; I fancied I should have seen him emerging from
the low contracted sphere to which his fate had consigned him, by the native
energy of his own powers; and flattered myself with the pleasing dream of
surprising a young man with affluence and distinction, who in obscurity had
acquired virtue to deserve them.


John's. I beg your Honor's pardon: -- but as I cannot see the least likeness of
you in this young gentleman's face, I suppose he resembled his mother.


Col. His mother! -- She had the countenance of an angel!


John's. Then he differs from you both most devilishly! -- But, Sir, the sooner
you provide him with a fencing and a dancing master the better; the latter of
these gentlemen seems indispensably necessary, if it is only to teach him to
walk; for no raw recruit on the first day of drilling was ever more pigeon-toed.


Col. Where is he now?


John's. I left him, Sir, very busy over his luncheon.


Col. His luncheon!


John's. Yes, Sir: a small morsel he takes before dinner, just to stay his
stomach, consisting of about a pound of beaf steaks and a tankard of porter.


Col. Send him to me. ( Exit Johnson.) -- I fear he is incorrigibly gone, beyond
the power of reformation.


Enter Mandeville. Col. Dear Mandeville, what course do you advise me to pursue
with this untoward boy? With all his faults, I must consider he is my son, and
pity, whilst he compels me to blush for him.


Man. Sir, we must endeavor to form him as well as we can: but I am rather
inclined to think we shall never be able to give him the graces.


Col. He Is not three and twenty -- that is young; we have many begin later in
life to acquire the rudiments of those sciences, in which they afterward
arrived to the highest pitch of eminence. -- Have you been able to discover how
the natural bent of his temper inclines, or if he has any strong propensities?


Man. Why, Sir, from what I can collect in my short acquaintance with him, the
natural bent of his temper seems inclined to gallantry; and if he has any
strong propensity, it is to the game of skittles.


Col. No matter how low and vulgar the game be, it shows a spirit of play in
him, and it must be crushed: but if he has a turn for gallantry, it gives me
the greatest hopes of his reformation. The society of an accomplished and
beautiful woman softens and refines the roughest nature; she imparts, by a
secret magic, her elegances and her graces; and to converse with her, is a kind
of study that insensibly polishes her admirer. -- But what reason have you to
suppose he is inclined to gallantry?


Man. He has imparted all his amors to me; but one in particular, which very
much diverted me, indeed: -- After having been successful with bar maids, young
milleners, and taylors' daughters, out of number, Cupid shot him from a
cheese-cake battery, and he fell in love with a pastrycook's daughter; which,
oh, terrible! was the cause of his having an affair of honor with an attorney's
clerk, in which both parties were bound over: but in painting this Helen, who
bred the contention, how shall I do him justice at second hand? Teniers lent
him his pencil for her waist, and Titian for her head; for she was shaped like
a Dutch cheese, and her locks were as red as a carrot.


Col. I have sent for him; and as I shall examine him closely, in order to
search if there be any latent seeds of ability, which culture may bring forth,
I wish you, Mandeville, to be present, and that you will also assist me in the
inquiry.


Man. Certainly; as my cousin, I think it a duty I owe him. -- Oh, here he
comes with Johnson.


Enter Caleb and Johnson. Call. (Speaks as entering.) You don't know what is
taste; my hair's the nattiest thing in town as it is dressed now.


Call. Don't you know, Sir, I sent for you?


Ca. Ah, father! -- Cousin! are you there too?


Man. You don't attend.


Ca. Attend! no: I hope I shall not attend anymore. -- Well, father, you sent for
me: now, what do you want, my old cock?


Col. (Turning away with disgust) It is in vain to think of cultivating a soil
like this!


Man. His manner is terrible, to be sure: but we must correct him.


Ca. Correct him! Why, what have I done to be corrected? I thought I was
corrected enough by my last father.


Col. Would that correction had taught you to speak!


Ca. That it did; and often to squeak too, till you could hear me two streets
off.


Col. Speak to him, Mandeville. -- There is something so barbarous in every
thing he says or does, that I cannot bear to look at him.


Man. You Will excuse me, dear cousin, for giving you a little advice; but as I
mean it well, I Am sure you will not be offended.


Ca. Bless your heart, you cannot offend me! I Am one of the best-temper'd boys
breathing: -- but what is the matter with old Firelock? He seems in the sulks.


Man. He Is not pleased with your manner and address; it is too rude and abrupt:
you should never approach him without evident marks of respect.


Ca. Oh! I understand you; I should always make a bow when I come into a place
where he is -- Ecod, with all my heart: but what set me wrong, was hearing it
said, that to have no manners at all was the best of breeding.


Man. Ceremony is altogether as ridiculous, as ^udeness is offensive; you must
avoid both.


Col. Have you ever read any thing in your life?


Ca. Why, do you think I cannot read? Then I tell you I can; and write and
cipher too.


Man. He does not doubt that; he only wishes to know what kind of reading or
books you are fond of.


Ca. Then you may tell him, I am fond of histories.


Man. That Is a good hearing, faith! If he is fond of history, he must possess
from nature a strong inquisitive mind under all this unpromising d'abord. Men,
educated in a low sphere of life, however uncouthly they express themselves,
often manifest a strong intellect; and on being put to the test, discover a
fund of knowledge the better-educated man would not expect from a slight
acquaintance with them: I consider such minds like rich metals, as yet
unpurify'd from alloy; but let it once be known that the ore is gold, and the
refiner's hand will soon bring forth the bullion. -- As you are fond of
history, you have no doubt dipped into the histories of Greece and Rome.


Ca. The best of their histories.


Man. Whose were they?


Ca. Why, in the first place, I have read Don Bellianis's History of Greece,
and the Seven wise Masters' History of Rome.


Col. Ask him no more questions.


Ca. Then I Have read the History of Colonel Jack, and the History of the English
Rogue, and the History of Moll Flanders.


Man. He appears as well read in modern as ancient history.


Col. I don't know any thing more mortifying to human pride, than to pass the
better part of a man's life in toil, anxiety, and danger, accumulating wealth,
to leave it to a fool at last.


Ca. You cannot think, father, how sensible money makes a fool look, and how
foolish a wise man looks without it.


Enter Servant. Serve. Mr. Serge, your Honor's tailor.


Man. He Is come to take measure of my cousin for his regimentals.


Ca. Regimentals! Why, am I to be a colonel as well as my father?


Col. Sir, you're to be a soldier.


Ca. A soldier! Why, what is all this? Am I to go for a soldier, after all? --
Has Doll Blouze been with the parish officers?


Col. I have procured you a commission; no son of mine shall waste his youth in
ease and indolence, dissipating that wealth I so hardly earned: the greater
part, it is true, he shall enjoy; but he shall first prove by his courage, and
his services to his country, that he deserves it.


Ca. There Is not a boy within the sound of Bow bell of a better spirit; I Will
fight any man in England of my weight and inches, with fair sistesses, for a
guinea -- aye, damme! if I don't, and say down first.


Man. Had Not you better step to the tailor?


Ca. Presently, presently, cousin -- But now I think of it, I Will not step to
him; let the tailor step to me. -- A captain step to a tailor! Impossible!
that is bidding a field piece dance the hayes after a thimble.


Col. I insist upon your going this moment.


Ca. Why, the old boy's in his tantrums. -- Cousin, a word in your ear: there is
one thing before I go, I must beg of you.


Man. What Is that?


Ca. Why, as you and I will be hand and glove, as a body may say; you will call
me Caleb, and I Will call you Tom, Frank, Harry, or -- what is your name?


Man. My name is Frederick.


Ca. Frederick! what a pretty name! I wish my name was Frederick. Cannot I be
new-christen'd for one name as well as another?


Man. (Aside.) Till you're new born, I fancy nothing can be done with you.


Ca. But I was going to tell you -- if you call me Caleb, never do it loud,
especially in company.


Man. For heaven's sake, why?


Ca. Why, if you was to cry out, as thus now, Caleb! (Bawling out.) I should
cry, "Coming up, Sir!" though you made a duke of me.


[ Exit Caleb. Col. Well, Mandeville, what do you think?


Man. Hope is left us in the worst of times; however, I do not despair of
making something of him yet: what I dread most, is introducing him to Charlotte.


Col. Why cannot man make over his mind, like his property to his children? Any
distinguishing quality in all other animals survives in the same species by
hereditary descent for ever; man continues upon the earth only in his name and
his revenues. -- Oh, that he should leave behind him his least valuable part,
and all that made him good or great should sink into the dust with him!


Enter Johnson. John's. Good news! good news, Sir! the Carnatic is arrived safe.
-- Captain Crevelt's servant is just come to acquaint you, that his master and
Count Pierpoint will be here immediately.


Col. Good news, indeed, Johnson; and heavy and afflicted as my heart is, your
tidings cheer it. The Count, Mandeville, is an officer of infinite merit; he
was my prisoner during the war, and is warmly attached to English manners and
our glorious constitution. -- But, Creveit! -- to know the merit of such a man,
you must be acquainted with him.


Man. Is he an Englishman?


Col. Yes, and you may judge of his merit as a soldier, when I tell you, he has
risen from the ranks, at the age of three and twenty, to the commission he now
holds of captain. He Is the reverse of this ill-fated boy we have been speaking
to. He is self-educated; for with scarce any advantages but those he derived
from a most noble and excellent nature, he is the man of sense, the scholar,
and the polished gentleman. His father, old Crevelt, was no more than a
sergeant, and served in Germany under Lord Granby; he brought this young man
with him to India, whilst yet a boy; the first day he ever was in action, he
saw his father fall; and he was found after the battle amongst the slain, close
to his body, apparently lifeless with loss of blood, as if he had died in the
pious office of defending a parent.


Enter Servant. Serve. Captain Crevelt, Sir.


Man. Let us go and receive him; my heart burns with impatience to call such a
man my friend.


[Exeunt. End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, Mandeville's House.
Enter Mandeville, Crevelt, and Colonel Talbot. Crevelt. I QUITTED England, Mr.
Mandeville, when a boy, and never was in London in my life before. I am charmed
with the appearance of this noble city, in which the ease, convenience, and
safety of its poorest inhabitant seem consulted.


Col. There is no token seen in the streets, of an exhausted people, drained by
a tedious and expensive war, during which, Great Britain fought at more unequal
odds than any nation on the earth ever did before.


Crev. So much the reverse, that I am astonished at the appearance of opulence
and prosperity to be met with every where; and the pleasing sensation. I feel,
to find my country in that state, is indescribable.


Col. Let gloomy politicians continue to predict, and foresee calamities that
exist only in imagination; whilst the genius of industry continues to smile
upon the labors of the husbandman, the mechanic, and the manufacturer, and
whilst strict probity is the character of England in her dealings with all
other nations, the resources of this country will be found inexhaustible; and
though its glory may be veiled by a momentary cloud, it soon recovers its
former splendor.


Enter Caleb, in Regimentals. Ca. Here I am, father, in full feather.


Col. What, Sir, is your dancing master gone already?


Ca. Bless your heart! -- no master of any kind for me to day; I never put on a
new suit of clothes in my life, that I did not make holiday.


Man. (Aside to Col.) We had better, I think, in some degree, give way to him:
you cannot expect immediately to reform manners so long confirmed by habit.


Col. (Aside.) I believe you're right, so I Will try what effect indulgence may
have on him. Well, it shall be as you would have it; this day shall be devoted
to pleasure and amusement: Crevelt, give me leave to introduce you to my son.


Crev. I don't know any circumstance of my life affects me more than the high
honor I now enjoy. [Introducing himself.


Ca. Why, look ye, young man, as my father desires it, I Will shake hands with
you, with all my heart: but I would not make so free with every old soldier's
son.


Col. How dare you, Sir, insult a man of his merit with language so gross?


Ca. Why, is not he an old soldier's son? -- pretty company truly to introduce
me to!


Crev. Sir, the humility of my birth I acknowledge, but must tell you, this is
the first time it ever brought a blush into my cheek -- I am choked with rage
-- Unused to insult, I cannot receive it without indignation even from the son
of Colonel Talbot!


Col. I insist upon your asking that gentleman's pardon.


Ca. Why, is he a gentleman?


Col. A man of his worth, his honor, and abilities, is a gentleman, though
sprung in the lowest vale of society.


Ca. Nay, if you say he is a gentleman, I ask his pardon with all my heart;
nothing so common nowadays as one gentleman's asking pardon of another; it
makes up a quarrel in a trice.


Crev. Sir, I accept your apology.


Col. ( To Caleb.) But, Sir, I will go farther with you -- You must ever
consider that man with respect; learn to esteem him, and it will do you more
honor than your birth has done.


Enter Servant. Serve. The gentleman from the India House, Sir, thar was here
before today, has called again.


Col. Let him know I Will wait on him immediately.

[Exit Servant. ( To Caleb.) Young man, I wish to undeceive you in one
particular; seize all those opportunities of instruction I mean to give you,
and redeem the time you have lost, which, if you neglect, your provision from
me shall be merely independence: my name you may disgrace, but I think it a
crime to bestow riches on one who would abuse them; even that youth, whose
birth is so inferior in your eye, I should consider as united to me by his
merit in nearer ties of kindred.


[Exit Colonel. Ca. (Strutting about.) So then, I am to be disinherited after
all, and for an old soldier's son too!


Crev. What Is that you say, Sir?


Ca. Say, Sir! -- Damme! he looks so fierce. I don't know what to say to him --
these old soldier's sons are so used to cutting of throats, it is the devil to
quarrel with them.


Man. I am ashamed of you, cousin -- If you proceed in this manner, you must be
looked up from all society.


Ca. I Will beg his pardon again: I know that is all he wants.


Crev. I Will spare you, Sir, the mortification of descending to so humiliating
an act; in respect to your father, I overlook every thing you have hitherto
said -- I now coolly behold all that had past through a different medium; and
rather feel for a youth, who, from his prospect of immense wealth, has been
perhaps from his childhood surrounded with sycophants, who never let him know
what it was to be acquainted with himself, and persuaded him into an opinion
that wealth supplies the absence of every accomplishment and virtue.


Ca. I don't rightly understand you, Captain; but I fancy, (only you mince the
matter,) that you meant to say I was much better fed than taught -- Well, no
matter -- Are we good friends again?


Crev. Very good!


Ca. Then give me your hand. (Aside.) He, he, he! I cannot help laughing, after
all, to think of such a fellow's being a gentleman -- But I say, Captain; they
tell me you are a devil of a fellow ^or fighting: now, do you see me, as I am
an ^fficer as well as yourself, I Would be glad to know ^ow you generally found
yourself before you went unto the field of battle.


Crev. Much as I do at present.


Ca. What, no more frightened?


Crev. No, Sir.


Ca. Come, come; no tricks upon travelers, ^aptain; do you think I Am such a
fool as to be^^ve you?


Crev. Sir!


Ca. (Terrified.) Sir! -- He looks at me like a tiger -- I Will ask him no more
questions -- he has half fright'ned me out of my commission already -- eh!
(Looking out.) Ecod, yonder I see my father talking to two fine girls; I Will go
have a peep at them; Cousin Mandeville, good bye -- Captain, your servant;
(Stifling a laugh.) a gentleman truly! What a fine thing it is to be born one
-- it saves a world of trouble in learning.


[ Exit Caleb. Man. The story of this unhappy young man, and how his education
came to be so much neglected, is too long to acquaint you of particularly, at
present; but you see what he is, and I hope estimate an insult from him
accordingly.


Crev. I think, no more of it -- but my heart bleeds for his father.


Man. You talk of leaving town today -- why, dear Sir, will you so suddenly
quit friends, who, of all things, covet your society? Is the business which
calls you from us, of that urgent nature you cannot postpone it for a few days
at least?


Crev. It is what I ought not to do -- for my relations in England, (if I have
any living) have never heard from me since I quitted the country; but perhaps
it is better to prepare them for the meeting; so I shall write to them by this
night's post, and continue your guest a little longer.


Man. Now this is truly friendly -- I would n't for the world have you leave
town till after my Cousin Talbot's wedding.


Crev. Then he is going to be married?


Man. So his father intends, as the only means of reforming him; the lady is
one of those two who came here within this half hour; and whom we left with
Count Pierpoint, admiring his magnificent present from the different princes of
the East at whose courts he has been occasionally envoy.


Crev. But which of the ladies is intended for Mr. Talbot?


Man. Charlotte -- she whom you so much admired: and, short as the Count's
acquaintance with them is, he appears already smitten with her Cousin Harriet
-- Unluckily for him, she happens to be engaged.


Crev. But, Charlotte! It is she, then, who is intended for Mr. Talbot; -- I
think I never saw a finer girl.


Man. She Is a divine creature! and though her Adonis is so near a relation, I
confess, I wish her a better husband; -- but I don't know how matters may
terminate -- She Is a girl of great spirit -- has a a very fine independency;
and such is her disposition, that I Am confident there is no temptation in
wealth could induce her to marry any man whom she did not like.


Enter Harriet. Har. Ha, ha, ha! I beg your pardon, Mr. Mandeville, for
laughing so much at the expense of your Cousin Talbot; but his manner, person
and conversation, are all so truly original, that gravity itself must be
provoked to laughter in his company.


Man. It Is very true, Harriet; he is a most extraordinary being, I must confess.


Han. He introduced himself to Charlotte this moment; and such a figure does he
cut! He can neither walk, sit nor stand still, with gazing at his person --
Charlotte and he are together; she seems delighted with him.


Crev. Then, Ma'am, she likes him?


Har. She likes to laugh at him, Sir -- Do, Mandeville, come, and take a look
at him.


Man. Will you go, Captain Crevelt?


Crev. I Will just speak to Johnson, Sir, and follow you. ( Exeunt Man. and Har.)
I never saw that woman in my life before, who in a moment has had such a power
over me. -- She will not marry him, they say, -- but what then? Does it follow
of course, that the must like me?


Enter Johnson. John's. I understand your Honor wished to see me.


Crev. Yes, Johnson; as you came to London before me, I wished to ask you, if
you knew any thing of the family of this young lady your master intends his son
shall marry?


John's. Why, Sir, I understand she is the daughter of a Sir Oliver Oldstock; an
old acquaintance of the Colonel's -- her father, I hear, meant she should marry
Mr. Mandeville, supposing he would be my master's heir; but when a son made his
appearance, like all worldly men, Sir Oliver changed his note; and the poor
young lady is to become a sacrifice to this -- I wish he was not my master's son.


Crev. But she will not, Johnson, be made a sacrifice.


John's. I hope not, Sir; -- but, lord! what will not money do? Don't we see money
every day couple age and deformity to youth and beauty; a young creature, like
an angel, linked to an old skeleton of dry bones -- as if the Demon of avarice
and sin had acquired such ascendancy in the world, as to bring about an union
betwixt death and immortality?


Crev. Why, Johnson, you speak with great feeling and spirit on the subject.


John's. Ah, Captain Crevelt! what a charming couple you two would make -- I,
who have seen your Honor in the field, would expect a Granby or a Marlborough
from, such a marriage.


Crev. (Musing.) I promised to follow them; but the less I see her, the better
for my peace: it is only feeding a passion I should banish from my heart for
ever. -- Johnson, take no notice that I have asked you any questions concerning
Miss Oldstock: should I be inquired for, I am gone to the library -- Books, or
my own thoughts, are the only society I am fit for.


[ Exit Crev. John's. Well, as long as I live, I never will think there is any
thing in great blood again. Here is a son of one of the best families in the
kingdom, with neither person nor mind superior to one of his father's domestics
-- and if we turn our eyes to the other side, we behold the offspring of an old
soldier, with the soul of a prince, and the head of a prime minister.


Enter Nancy, running. Nan. Mr. Johnson, Mr. Johnson, here is a letter for you,
brought by the penny post; (Gives it.) and short a time as you have been in
London. I Am sure it is a love letter.


John's. Aye; pray, Nancy, how have you made that discovery? Is it by the
elegant penmanship of its pothook-and-hanger superscription, or by the God of
Love's own broad seal, stamped upon it by a wafer and thimble?


Nan. Ecod, Mr. Johnson, you're a knowing hand; I Will engage you have hooked in
many a poor girl in your time.


John's. But I haven't paid the postage.


Nan. That Is always paid beforehand into the office with the letter.


John's. But you know, Nancy, letters are conveyed now upon a new establishment,
and for fear of mistakes, I Will even pay double postage.


[Kisses her. Nan. It Is mighty well! I suppose when you find this is a mistake,
you will be for having the overcharge back again.


[ Exit Nancy. John's. Now for my letter. -- 'Sdeath! it is from my sweet little
Mrs. Wilkins! (Reads.)

Mrs. Wilkins's compliments to Mr. Johnson; will be glad of his company this
evening to tea, as she wishes to treat with him about those little matters he
brought with him from India: if the two sets of China be as handsome as he said
they were, she will take them both off his hands; she will take, besides, some
chintz and muslins for gowns, and half a dozen shawls: he need not send her any
mandarins; she has more old figures than is worth house room.

P. S. Mr. Wilkins is very sorry he cannot be at home the whole evening, very
particular business calling him to Hogsden.




I was afraid I should have had no postscript; but all is right, I find. -- Yes,
my sweet Mrs. Wilkins, I will go and talk to you about those trifles I brought
with me from India: but you shall have no mandarins -- indeed, I thought you
had one too many of these old figures.


[Exit. Enter Caleb, followed by Charlotte. Ca. Well, Miss; how do you like me?
Don't you think I look like a captain?


Char. Like a captain! It would be doing you injustice to compare you to any
one officer under His Majesty: I am really at a loss for a comparison to match
you with -- Come, turn about, and let me see your shapes -- Mercy! what a long
sword they have tied you to!


Ca. That was all my own thought: I haven't learnt to sense yet; and as I am
told a gentleman is nobody till he has fought about a score duels, I was
determined the first time I fought not to be overreach'd by any body.


Char. A very prudent resolution I must confess! valor is by no means
incompatible with discretion: but pray, Sir, are you so very quarrel some, that
you expect to have all those duels upon your hands?


Ca. Me quarrelsome! -- Bless your heart, I Am as quiet as a lamb.


Char. Then why do you expect to fight so much?


Ca. Because it is the fashion; and you know a man had better be out of the
world than out of the fashion.


Char. Then I think you are taking an excellent method to have your choice.


Ca. Yes; fighting's quite a gentleman-like amusement; -- besides, it will be
put in the newspapers; and I shall read my own name in print, along with the
debates of Lords and Commons; and that is the cause, I suppose, of all duels.


Char. I believe duels have been fought more than once -- and, oh, fatal
delusion! perhaps a valuable life lost for a cause altogether as frivolous!


Ca. But now I am dressed, do you see me, I wish to show myself to some of my
old acquaintances; therefore, suppose you and I go this evening to Bagnigge
Wells, and drink tea -- the hot rolls are so nice there, you cannot think!


Char. Some other time; I cannot possibly go this evening.


Ca. Mayhap you think I will not pay for the tea, but I will; and moreover than
that, I Will treat you to the half-play afterward.


Char. You must, indeed, excuse me, Sir. -- (Aside.) I wish I could get rid of
him. -- This moment poor Crevelt passed me with a dejected air -- I followed
him with a stolen glance, till I traced him into the library. -- I wish I knew
what was the matter with him; I never saw a man in my life I pity so much.


Ca. (Looking at himself.) How they would stare at our hop, to see me in this dress!


Char. This fellow takes no notice of me; his regimentals have actually
rivall'd me!


Ca. (With great delight.) Dress I see is every thing: such a suit of
regimentals would make any man a great officer -- How this world goes! fine
fellows are made by tailors, and tailors undone by fine fellows!


Char. My Narcissus is so engaged with his person, it would be foolish to lose
this opportunity of getting rid of him: I Will drop carelessly into the library
-- I never saw so sudden an alteration in a man's looks as in poor Crevelt's. I
hope he is not in love -- Poor Charlotte, if the object be not in England!


[ Exit Char. Ca. (To himself.) To be sure, Caleb, you haven't a pair of legs!
-- It is not every Captain who can beat a march with such a pair of drumsticks
-- I wonder how my legs would look in a pair of new boots -- I never rode of a
Sunday, but in a pair of my father's old ones -- Most smart captains, I
observe, foot as well as horse, mount the streets in boots. -- So, you will not go
to Bagnigge Wells? (Looking up.) -- Eh! why she is gone! -- Ecod, I Am glad of
it! -- and now the coast is clear, I Will have a ramble. -- What signifies my
being dressed, if nobody sees me? -- I Will call over to Jacob Wilkins's, and
take a glass with him. -- Who knows, but one of these days, when I return from
abroad a great warrior, but old Jacob may take down his sign, and hang me up
over his door.


[Exit. Enter Lady Oldstock and Count Pierpoint. La. O. Really, my Lord, I
tremble for the consequences of this interview; if Sir Oliver should meet us,
and happen to be in one of his jealous moods, it is in vain to tell him of the
innocence of our conversation; he will interpret my very looks, and draw the
strangest inferences from even the tone of voice with which I utter the most
goodnatur'd sentence.


Count. Il est bien extraordinaire; it appears to me very strange, Madam, dat
people of fashion en Angleterre can be so bourgois. Mon Dieu! en France, quand
un homme est marie, ven ve marry, by Gar, our friends cannot nous oblige more
dan by take care of our vives.


La. O. Oh, my Lord! you're a resin'd people; we are, at least, half a century
behind you in point of civilization.


Count. But on my vord, you improve every ^ay; people de fashion in both
countries, vil be ^^er soon les memes; a present voila le difference -- at
present, see the difference between France and England -- Un Anglois est trop
brusque, ^oo rough; un Francis, peuretre trop poli; but at be fault fur cote
droit, on de right side -- sup^ose nous avons -- suppose ve have von traite de
^ommerce, pour un exchange des maniers; Jack ^ull is von guinea too heavy; and
un Frenchman, ^^tre nous, peutetre un Louis d'Or too light; -- ^^w to make a de
balance even, scrape de Englis, vat you call sweat a de English guinea, and
aug^^entez le Louis d'Or, and you give de polish to one, and de proper weight
to the other.


La. O. I blush, my Lord, to think my education was so cruelly neglected, that
I cannot hold a conversation with you in your own language. -- People of
condition should always speak French.


Count. Mais j'espere -- me hope you understand?


La. O. Oh, perfectly, my Lord; you speak the language of the Graces; and that,
our sex understand in every country.


Count. Si j'entends; vous, ma belle ange! If I understand, it is you have give
me the instructions.


La. O. How well he makes himself understood! I never heard such sweet broken
English in my life before.


Count. Mais, Madam! may I beg leave to solicit --


[Taking her by the hand. La. O. My Lord! Dear Count!


[Seemingly confused. Count. Madam, may I solicit votre pity, pour un passion
qui brule mon ame -- my passion consume a my heart.


La. O. Oh, heavens! what a discovery is here? How fatal to the happiness of
both! -- I hope, my Lord, you will exert your philosophy on this occasion, and
consider the insurmountable obstacle.


Count. Obstacle, Madam! quelle obstacle to a man of my rank and fortune?


La. O. Oh, fie, fie, my Lord! can a man of your delicacy talk in this strain?


Count. Ah, si vous pouviez lire -- if you could read a my heart --


La. O. Go, unhappy youth! and endeavor to extinguish a fruitless flame, that,
if it continue to burn, must only prove a source of disquietude (...) us both:
go, too-pleasing seducer! and like to faithful, but honorable Werter, leave
your ill star'd, sympathyzing Charlotte to her tears!


[Affecting to weep Count. My Charlotte! No, it is my Harriet.


La. O. Harriet! -- What Harriet?


Count. Your niece, Madam; that petite ange --


La. O. My niece! Was my niece the object of all this adoration?


Count. Is there one else living deserve so much?


La. O. Yes, a hundred, if you had eyes to see.


Count. Eh bien! Madam, what you say to my proposal?


La. O. My niece is engaged; or, if she was not, you should not have her.


Count. Mais, le Chevalier Oldstock dit le contraire. -- Sir Oliver say quite
different.


La. O. Sir Oliver's an old fool, and I suppose didn't understand you, for you
speak terrible English.


[Exit. Count. I speak terrible Englis! -- Mon Dieu! -- ^il est bien etrange!
-- just now I speak ver sweet broke Englis.


Enter Sir Oliver. Sir O. Well, Count, what says my wife?


Count. She does refuse -- she vil not consent.


Sir O. I Am glad of it.


Count. Diable! pourquois you glad of it?


Sir O. Because now I shall have an opportunity of showing my authority, and
letting her know, you shall have my niece in spite of her. -- She Is my own
brother's daughter; he left her an orphan in my care, and I Will dispose of her
as I like; I asked Lady Oldstock's approbation, only for the pleasure of being
refused it -- I love contradiction.


Count. Mon cher Chevalier! you transport me.


Sir O. Yes, Count; contradiction's my hobby horse; I mount him every hour of
the day; and he more he kicks and flings, the greater delight I ^ake in riding
him. -- I know you think me a whimsical old fellow; but you are new to our
clime and our manners -- we delight in thinking for ourselves -- opposition is
the very soul of an Englishman -- he likes it in himself, and in others also;
peace and prosperity, with good eating and drinking, would throw him into a
lethargy, if imagination didn't supply that spur to goad him on constantly to
action.


Count. Now, mon chere Pere, me ville settle --


Sir O. Odso! that is right -- mind, the foundation stone of our agreement is,
that you settle in England -- a niece of mine shall never breed subjects to
fight against her king and country!


Count. Monsieur, you have my vord of honor; and now I will go visit my pretty
Miss, vat you call Harriet: mais, Monsieur, rest assure me vil die, and live in
England.


[Exit Count. Sir O. Well said, Monsieur! cart before the horse. -- But now I
am alone, let me see how my accounts stand: I hay secured the French nabob for
my niece; now it would be a master stroke if I could obtain the English one for
my daughter, and thus center the two nabobs in my own family. This son of the
Colonel's is a down right savage: Charlotte never could like him; or if she
could, interest tells me I should not; therefore her liking's out of the
question: there is to be a division of the Colonel's property, between the son
and Mandeville: I want the whole, if possible. The Colonel's not fifty, and in
my mind he is a better looking man than either his son or his nephew.
Charlotte's having ten thousand pounds independent of me, makes her very
obstinate; debates will run high, I fear; as, indeed, they very often do in my
family, where, though I Am constantly left in a minority, I never lose a question
-- it is true, I have open mouths upon me from all sides, till, like greater
men, I Am fairly badger'd: but it is only waiting till the strangers are all out,
and I tell the house as I please afterward. -- Zoonds! here comes Mandeville:
I wish I could get decently out of his way.


Enter Mandeville. Man. I have been in search of you, Sir Oliver.


Sir O. I wish I had known that; I Would have saved you a good deal of trouble. --
Well, my good Sir, had you any thing particular to say to me?


Man. Is your conduct toward me consistent with honor?


Sir O. I don't understand you.


Man. How convenient it is to assume ignorance of a subject on which it is
painful to hear the truth, even to the man incapable of respecting it! Honor,
though shut out from the heart, will still knock at its gates, and tell the
guilty, there' is a register kept in the avenging court of remorse for every
act of injustice.


Sir O. Upon my word, Mr, Mandeville, you speak to me in a very strange style;
this is not a manner in which I am accustomed to be addressed. You bounce in
all of a sudden, transported with rage, for what cause is best known to
yourself, and with a knock-me-down countenance, treat me as if my age and my
rank had no kind of respect due to them.


Man. Sir, no man honors age more than I; or more readily yields rank every
respect it can claim, when that rank does not forfeit its title to esteem, by
meanly sinking and degrading itself: -- but, when men in superior stations
behave as if their actions were above all censure and control, they must be
told that they are deceiving themselves, as well as the world, and that no man
is suffered to injure another with impunity.


Sir O. Well, Sir, in what particular have I injured you, to provoke the
thunder of this terrible Phillipic?


Man. Can you seriously ask me that question, when you sanction the addresses
of Count Pierpoint to your niece?


Sir O. Well, and what then?


Man. Have you forgot your prior engagement to me?


Sir O. Mr. Mandeville, the poet says, that "Every day's a satire on the last;"
now I say that every day's a contradiction to the last; as circumstances vary,
or events fall out, we are compelled by necessity to change our minds. As to my
niece, whom I consider in the light of a daughter, I think it my duty, in
providing her with a husband, to make the best bargain I can for her.


Man. Sir, have you no regard to what the world will say on this occasion? The
world, Sir; that harsh, blind, misjudging multitude; whose slander, if it soil
the ermine purity of virtue, what will it say, when it has justice upon its
side?


Sir O. Nothing that I value -- Young man, when you have lived as many years
with the world as I have, you will learn to make your happiness independent of
its opinion -- Don't you see knaves and fools every day rise into consequence,
and all from the opinion of the world -- the opinion of the world, Sir! It Is a
mouthful of moonshine!


Man. I believe with you that the world is too indolent -- too much occupied
with its pleasures, or its miseries, to take up the business of a censor -- I
fear it never examines thoroughly, any man's pretensions to its favor: the
more he asks, the more he generally obtains from the world; hence, folly,
confidence and vice, revel in the arms of luxury, whilst merit, proud, and
retiring from the conscious dignity of genius and virtue, is suffered to perish
for want of bread! -- But, Sir --


Sir O. But me no more this debate, Mr. Mandeville -- the question is put, and
I am going. -- Partial as I am to a polemical mode of discourse, I find that
there may be sometimes even too much contradiction.


[Exit. Man. What shall I do with this deceitful, unfeeling man? But can I
hesitate whilst I have a particle of spirit left? I Will go this moment, state
the matter to Count Pierpoint, and he shall resign, or fight for his mistress!


Enter Harriet. Har. Dear Mandeville, what is the matter? -- My uncle has just
parted from you, seemingly much out of temper, and the wildness and disorder of
your looks, terrify me?


Man. My heart is torn to pieces, Harriet -- Indignation at the ungenerous
treatment I have met with from your uncle, added to my fears of losing you,
distract me.


Har. But can you doubt your Harriet? There is no power upon earth shall force
me to be another's; do then, dear Mandeville! strive to calm this tumult in
your mind -- Betrayed by the violence of your passion, you talked of going in
search of Count Pierpoint -- let me beseech you not.


Man. You were deceived, Harrier, in what you heard me say -- do not prevent my
going -- I have business of a most particular nature calls me.


Har. I know perfectly the business that calls you -- but let me conjure you,
by all that regard you ever professed for me, not to think of it -- You say
your fears of losing me, distract you -- judge then of the state of my heart,
by your own -- Has Harriet no fears for her Mandeville, at a moment, she sees
him eat up with an ungovernable rage -- about, perhaps, to hurry himself, or a
fellowcreature into eternity?


Man. Your apprehensions, Harriet, are groundless -- from what I learn of the
Count's character, I believe him to be a man of too nice honor; too equitable,
too generous, to reduce me to the necessity of proceeding to extremities; I
only wish to explain matters to him.


Har. I can recommend a much better course to you, and one much more likely to
succeed -- Go to your uncle, that good, that noble-hearted man -- tell him your
story -- if any body has weight with Sir Oliver, it is Colonel Talbot.


Man. Nobody has weight with him, when avarice claims his ear.


Har. You are mistaken: he is not so great a slave to avarice as you suppose
him.


Man. He is your uncle, Harriet, and I cannot speak of him with harshness.


Har. I know by your eyes, you are not so angry as you were.


Man. I will be guided by you in every thing -- There is a fascinating power,
Harriet, in your looks and accents, when you would persuade, that cannot be
resisted; a melting softness clings about my heart as I listen and behold you;
there is sure a divinity in angel-beauty! You caused the tempest in my soul,
and have calmed it.


[Exeunt. End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE, An Apartment at Mandeville's.
Caleb and Johnson discovered over a Bottle. Caleb. COME, my boy, since you
will not go to Jacob Wilkins's with me, we'll tope a little here -- Fill your
glass higher -- higher yet; I Will have no skylights -- This is a bumper toast.


John's. Well, what is it?


Ca. Our noble selves.


[Drinks. John's. I find that you think a sentiment, like charity, should begin
at home.


Ca. I do to be sure.


John's. We should have begun with the king and constitution.


Ca. Then here it goes -- and, though it is the second toast now, it shall be
first next bottle.


John's. Next bottle! But, Mr. Talbot, I have a particular engagement upon my
hands this evening -- I hope you will excuse my leaving you.


Ca. You shall not stir a foot (Pushes him to his chair.) Your wine's so good -- I
wonder how any body can quit such liquor.


John's. But suppose there is a lady in the case -- you will not press me to stay
surely, after I tell you that?


Ca. Damn it! Take me with you!


John's. Impossible!


Ca. Then sit down and drink with me, for I will not part with you.


John's. What the devil shall I do (Looking at his watch.) It wants but a
quarter to six, and Mrs. Wilkins will be waiting tea for me.


[Aside. Ca. Come, to the charge again, and a brimmer it shall be.


John's. (Aside.) I shall get suddled too; -- I have often in a frolic assumed
drunkenness; suppose I practice that stratagem now to get away from him? (
Hiccups. etc.)


Ca. Why, now I look at you, I think you are getting a little forward.


John's. But I am not quite so bad as you think; do let me go, Mr. Talbot.


Ca. Do you think I have no more regard for you? I tell you, you must go to bed
-- now do go to bed.


John's. How the devil shall I get away from him? Zounds, Sir, I am not drunk.


[Appearing to be sober. Ca. Poor fellow! I am sorry to see you so far gone;
but I Will take care of you for this night. No, no; no going out this night.


[Impeding him. John's. God's Death and fire! Will this convince you that I am sober.


[Walking firmly up the stage. Ca. Take another turn, and I Will tell you.


John's. But will you let me go then?


Ca. After we have had another bottle.


John's. Zounds! another bottle! -- Well, I Will go down to the cellar for it.


[Crosses. Ca. Mind you don't stay.


John's. No, no; I shall not stay -- (Aside.) long in this house, now I have got
out of your clutches, young gentleman.


[Exit. Ca. This is a devilish honest bottle -- there is half a pint in it yet
-- Well, my friend is gone, so here goes his health (Drinks.) Poor fellow! -- I
never saw a man so soon drunk and sober -- Damn it, how he stays! -- I long for
a glass of wine; tho he is not here, ecod, I Will fill my glass -- a good bottle
of wine is excellent company.


[Drinks. Enter Mandeville. Man. What, Sir, drinking by yourself?


Ca. I Am sure that is not my fault -- I shall be very glad if you will sit down
and keep me company: I expect Johnson every minute with the other bottle.


Man. I suppose. Sir, Johnson has been your companion?


Ca. Yes; and a choice companion he is; only apt to get muzz'd too soon. --
Come, come, let me fill you a glass.


Man. I Will drink none, Sir; nor shall you drink any more; your father desires
to see you instantly.


Ca. You Will let me finish the bottle?


Man. You must drink no more! He puts me beyond all patience.


[Aside. Ca. Ecod, then I Will take it with me.


[Takes it up. Man. Set it down, Sir.


[Lays bold on him violently. Caleb, in a fright, drops and breaks the Bottle.
Ca. There, (looking at it), I have set it down, and am ready to go with you; we
must be good friends again now we have cracked a bottle together.


[Exeunt. SCENE, A Library.
Crevelt, seated, with a Book. Crevelt. (Throws the Book down.) It is to no
purpose -- I cannot read -- This adorable girl has taken such entire possession
of my mind, it has'nt room for any other object; when Mr. Mandeville told me
she was going to be married, and to whom, my hope died within me, for then I
knew all hope was lost; but grant there was no dishonor, no ingratitude in
harboring a passion for a woman intended for the son of my benefactor; how
should a low-born, abject thing, like me, aspite to one so much above him?
Would not my birth be an insurmountable bar to my hopes? She comes this way --
I would avoid her, but have not the power.


Enter Charlotte ( with a Volume of Shakespeare in her Hand. Char. (Reading).
-- She never told her love;
But let concealment, like a worm i'th'bud,
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief --
Bless me! Captain Crevelt (starting.) I did not see you -- I was quite absorbed
in poor Viola's melancholy relation of undivulged love; this little picture is
so highly finished, so delicately colored with touches of the true pathetic,
that I never read it without being wonderfully affected -- Don't you think it
one of the finest passages in all Shakespeare?


Crev. I so much admire it, Madam, that I would give the world this moment for
the pencil of its immortal writer, to paint one of our sex in the same state of
uncomplaining despondency.


Char. I protest you spoke those last words with so serious an air, that I Am
half inclined to think you're in love yourself: if that be the case, come, make
me your confidante; I Will be as secret and as silent as Shakespeare's own marble
Grief and Patience: I have the music of the Avon swan this moment at my heart,
and could hear a lover whisper his tale under a tree in which the nightingale
sung, and the moon tipped its boughs with silver.


Crev. You speak, Madam, like one well versed in the passion.


Char. And is that strange, Sir, when I come with Shakespeare in my hand; a
master who teaches the whole history of the passions? His keen and ardent eye
in a fine frenzy rolling, pierced into the secret chambers of the heart where
the passions slumber; and woke them, as he swept his lyre divine to all their
changeful moods of pain and joy, till kindled up to madness, or to ecstasy;
but, when he touches upon love, though the flash be momentary, it resembles
lightning, suddenly rifting the surface of the earth, and disclosing the
radiant portal of a diamond quarry.


Crev. Were I to wish another laurel on the grave of Shakespeare, it should be
planted by the hand of so charming a commentator.


Char. Sir, there is a laurel already planted on his grave by one of our sex,
which will flourish till the spirit of his genius, and his writings are no more
remembered -- but to the point -- I have pronoune'd you in love; now let me
know who your mistress is?


Crev. Madam, I dare not.


Char. Dare not! Is that a soldier's phrase? Courage, man; there is nothing
impossible to spirit and perseverance: besides, the more difficulties lay in
the road to your mistress, the better she will like you for surmounting them.


Crev. But suppose there was a difficulty not to be surmounted?


Char. If your mistress does not dislike you, I now of no other difficulty
which is not to be surmounted.


Crev. But even presuming that were the case, which I have by no means reason
to imagine, I cannot think of her without condemning myself.


Char. Is she so much beneath you?


Crev. She Is above my praise, and above my hopes.


Char. If she deserves all this adoration, she never will think herself above a
man of merit.


Crev. Then, Madam, you don't think marrying for love entirely out of fashion?


Char. I never would marry for any thing else.


Crev. (Aside.) Then I Am undone; she loves the man for whom she is intended;
and the assurance of that I have now received from her own lips, was meant as a
reproach to a passion she has discovered, in spite of all my efforts to conceal
it.


Char. (Seeing his disorder) What Is the matter, Sir?


Crev. I fear, Madam, I only interrupt your studies.


[Going. Char. How can you talk so! I don't know any one whose conversation, on
so short an acquaintance, is so agreeable to me; this last has been
particularly interesting.


Crev. It is plain from the sarcasm of that reply, that she understands me --
but I am justly punished for my apostasy to honor, in daring to think of her.


[Aside. Char. He appears confused and embarrassed all of a sudden; I fear my
vanity has betrayed me too far, and that I have been mistaken in the object of
his affections.


[Aside. Crev. I have not power to speak to her.


[Aside. Char. No, no; I Am not the object.


[Aside. Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, the Colonel wishes to see you immediately.


Crev. What a release from torture! (Aside.) I shall wait on him. (Exit
Servant.) Madam, your most obedient.


[Exit. Manet Charlotte.

Char. So, I have as good as told a man I like him, who, it is plain, is in
love with another woman: unhappy Charlotte!


Enter Sir Oliver (Speaks as he comes on.) Sir O. Charlotte!


Char. Sir!


Sir O. Sir! How melancholy a monosyllable comes from a woman's mouth; it
sounds as dismal as a single bell after a full peal. But, Charlotte, what is the
matter? I never saw you so thoughtful before: I hope it is not your marriage
that makes you uneasy.


Char. It never gave me an uneasy moment. I had made up my mind on the subject.


Sir O. Well, well; let the matter rest then: however, I must confess I should
like to see my girl well married and settled before I left the world.


Char. I don't think I shall ever marry.


Sir O. Never marry!


Char. No.


Sir O. Confound those monosyllables! Charlotte, let me have no more of them;
the laconic style does not become you: I wonder from whom you take it; for my
part I Am fond of the figure of amplification in discourse; and I Am sure your
mother deals in an eloquence copious at times, even to redundancy.


Char. Sir, I have not spirits for conversation.


Sir O. I am surprised at that, when you have every thing your own way: you
will not marry this body, nor you will not marry the other; and I, like an easy,
indulgent old soul, humor you in every thing, fond as I am of contradiction.


Char. Hav'nt you all is one as held me up to sale to the highest bidder? -- I
was first intended for Mr. Mandeville, next destined to Colonel Talbot's
newfound heir.


Sir O. His newfound bear you should say; but Charlotte, Charlotte, how
uncandid you are! when I proposed the last match I had not seen the man.


Char. Sir, you change your mind so often, and band me about in so
extraordinary a manner, that I shall become a topic for public ridicule.


Sir O. Well, and if I do change my mind often, is not it for your good? As one
project starts up in my mind better than another, in order to take advantage of
that, I must naturally contradict myself. The Spanish proverb says, a wise man
often changes his mind, a fool never.


Char. According to that proverb you should be a second Solomon: who you intend
for me next I cannot possibly guess; but as I never will marry without your
consent, I trust it will not be deemed undutiful, if I always retain a negative
to myself, in a matter which so nearly concerns my happiness as the choice of a
husband.


[Exit. Sir O. I fear, like all great projectors and politicians, I resine too
much; I spin the wires that compose my nets so fine, that though they answer
the purpose of deceiving the eye, when their strength is tried, a touch breaks
them. -- What Is to be done? she actually sets my authority at defiance; but
this comes of rich uncles leaving fat legacies to their nieces; it converts a
father into a cipher.


Enter Lady Oldstock and Harriet. Lady O. Sir Oliver, Sir Oliver, the whole
world is condemning you.


Sir O. So much the better; a quarter of the world never was right, but the
whole, is always wrong; you have brought me this good news, I suppose, knowing
I was out of spirits.


Har. To contract for me, without my knowledge, and with an utter stranger too!
as if I had, not the common privilege of a thinking rational creature?


Sir O. Ecod, I think you have too much of that privilege: why, you ungrateful
minx, do you fly in my face for endeavoring to get a count for you.


Lady O. A count! A strange kind of count -- the fellow made love to me.


Sir O. Then indeed must he be a strange kind of count.


Lady O. I shall sue for a separate maintenance.


Har. And I shall sue for the little property my father left in his hands.


Sir O. Damn it, since you have begun, come, fire away from both sides, volley
after volley; don't spare me, I Will make you raise the siege at last;
contradiction's my element, as fire is the Salamander's. I cannot have too much
of it; my opinion is impregnable.


Har. It Is in vain to speak to him.


Lady O. Speak to him, child! now he is in all his glory.


Sir O. Hobbs maintains that the whole world is in a state of warfare, and I
believe him.

[Speaking to himself.
Lady O. I say, Sir Oliver, are you deaf?


Sir O. But it is a wise law in nature.


Har. Dear uncle, will you listen to me?


Sir O. Opposition calls forth the latent powers of the mind.


La. O. Was there ever any thing so provoking!


Sir O. Your greatest men have been formed by difficulties.


Har. Every moment is big with danger to my happiness.


Sir O. Methinks I now resemble the memorable column of English infantry at
Fontenoy, marching down between two forts, with all their batteries playing
upon it: whiz, fly the small shot from the left; and bang go the great guns
from the right; but on we march, firm as a wedge; without confusion, without
disorder, without dismay; and quit the field of battle with honor.


[Exit. Har. My principal fear, is a quarrel between Count Pierpoint and Mr.
Mandeville.


La. O. You had better speak to his friend, Captain Crevelt; for my part, I
have no influence! with the Count.


Har. Dear aunt, how can you talk thus? So fine a woman will never lose her
influence.


La. O. Pray, Harriet, have you ever read that elegant fellow St. Everemond's
account of the lovely Ninon; She who retained her beauty and power of
fascination to the age of eighty?


Har. I have never read St. Everemond, Madam.


La. O. Then you have read nothing: he was the intimate friend of Fontaine,
Racine, and Corneille; all the great men of his time valued his friendship: but
what most endears him to me was his esteem for the lovely Ninon -- I shall
never forget one of her letters, in which she mentions he first wearing
spectacles; but, said that charming woman, as I had always a grave look,
spectacle become me.


Har. I declare, aunt, I have always thought the same of you, when I have seen
you with your spectacles on.


La. O. But you're mistaken, Harriet, if you suppose I wear spectacles from any
necessity I have for them -- I wear them by way of prevention.


Har. As I hope to live, here comes the Count; he will teaze me to death if I
stay -- I never saw you look so well, aunt.


La. O. You may go, Harriet, and find Captain Crevelt -- I Will once more try my
influence with this Frenchman.


[ Exit Harriet. Enter Count Pierpoint. La. O. Well, Count; I hope you have
changed your opinion since our last conversation, and that you're become a
little more Anglicised.


Count. Eh bien! Madam, je ne puis pas comprendre, I no understand.


La. O. Why, we have changed characters; you cannot understand me now, and I
could not understand you before: but, Count, I Would advise you to consider you are
in England; and though it may be the etiquette in France to treat a married lady
with as much attention as a single, it is in this country of jealous
circumspection, very dangerous: it is almost sufficient to cause a separation.


Count. Ah, Madam! have a some pity on those whom your charms enslave, quand
I'amour est dans le coeur; il fait l'esprit comme lui meme; dat is, ven love is
in de heart, he make a dey understand blind as himself, by Gar.


La. O. The French are certainly the most agreeable people in the world; if
they transgress, they make reparation with so good a grace, that it is
delightful to be on good or bad terms with them.


Count. I made von grand faux pas; but like good general, me vill profit by my
loss. (Aside.) -- Madam Oldstock is vat you call von grand bastion, or outwork:
I will take a that first; and la petite citadel, Mademoiselle Harriet, follow
of course, by Gar.


La. O. Well, Count, I forgive you; but it is on condition that you are more
circumspect in future.


Enter Sir Oliver at the Back of the Stage. Sir O. If I could lay my hand on
Burn's Justice in the library, that would set me right: but I think it is a
question for gentlemen of the common law. -- Eh! what is all this?


[Seeing the Count and Lady O. Count. Madam, permettez moi baiser votte main; I
must kiss a your von pretty hand in sign of reconciliation.


[Kissing her hand. Sir O. I was thinking of the common law; but here promises
to arise a question for gentlemen of the civil law.


La. O. Jealousy, Count, is a tree of English growth.


Sir O. It may be a tree of English growth; but it is a tree would never
flourish, if a taste for French gardening did not so often make the branches
sprout.


Count. Mon Dieu! quelle grand disproportion in your age and the Chevalier
Oldstock!


La. O. When a woman marries very young, my Lord, a dozen years difference is
nothing in the age of a husband.


Sir O. A dozen years! Damme, if there is a dozen months between us.


Lady O. That Is a most beautiful brilliant, Count on your finger -- I think I
never saw so large a one the rich cluster of its rays cast a light actually
celestial.


Sir O. If that poor diamond cou'ds peak now perhaps we'd find it was not very
celestially come by.


Count. To reconcile me complete, permettez moi to make you von present.


La. O. Dear Count, I cannot think of accepting a ring of such immense value --
No, no, Count, I am not such an infant as to wish to possess every thing that I
admire.


Sir O. No, to be sure, you an't. -- Why, Count, how is all this?

[Coming forward.
La. O. Oh! heavens! Sir Oliver!


Sir O. Yes, my Lady; does the great disproportion of our years frighten you?


Count. Upon my vord, Monsieur Oldstock, this is not behave with your usual
politesse.


Sir O. Why, what the devil, man! aren't you content with one of my chickens,
but you must have my old hen into the bargain?


La. O. Old hen!


Sir O. Yes, my Lady; when I had you first you were no pullet.


La. O. Now there will be no end to his suspicions.


Sir O. Ecod, I think this is putting suspicion out of the question, -- Well,
my Lady, what have you to say for yourself? You asked me if I was not deaf; now
are you dumb? -- Damn it, say something, if it is only to contradict me.


Count. Monsieur Oldstock, je suis -- I am your very good friend.


Sir O. You are, Count; and, what is more, I find you're my wife's friend.


La. O. Sir Oliver, conscious as I am of the purity of my thoughts, I could
look down with contempt on every extravagance to which your jealous temper
hurries you; but when I consider how the fairest reputations are every day
injured from the slightest foundations -- if it should creep into the public
prints --


Sir. O. Then I Will give you a little comfort -- nobody will believe it.


La. O. The cool malignity of his temper is even more provoking than his
jealousy -- I cannot bear to have been all my life reproached for nothing.


[Exit Count. Monsieur Oldstock.
Sir O. Count Pierpoint, no apologies: I am not at all angry with you, nor do I
entertain any suspicion of, my wife -- Love of admiration is her ruling
passion; and as long as she lives, she will fancy herself an object of that
admiration.


Count. Vous savez tres bien my passion pour Mademoiselle Harriet.


Sir O. I know every thing -- I now see your view, in all this attention to
Lady Oldstock: you imprudently made her your enemy, not knowing her character;
but you have very wisely rectified your mistake. -- You see, Count, I Am a keen
old fellow; I haven't lived for nothing so many years in the world.


Count. Mon Dieu! vous etes un Machiavel.


Sir O. Come along, Count. -- But before you go, how do you think your friend
Colonel Talbot stands affected as to matrimony? Do you imagine, if a fine girl
was thrown in his way, that he would marry her?


Count. Nothing more like, on my vord; il est un homme de gallantrie; sans dout
he has a de son, if dat be no objection.


Sir O. Objection! he should marry for that very reason, and get more sons, if
it was only to convince the world that he has mended his hand in the business.


[Exeunt. End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE continues at Mandeville's.
Enter Harriet and Charlotte. Harriet. I AM half in love with Count Pierpoint
for his noble behavior -- The moment matters were properly explained to him,
he withdrew his claim instantly -- Well, I never more will hear the French
spoken ill of; they carry the point of honor to a pitch of heroism -- but,
Charlotte, what is the matter? Your spirits are intolerably depressed!


Char. You only fancy so from the unusual gaiety of your own.


Har. I have a great mind to send Captain Crevelt to you; you are just fit
company for each other: two moping, melancholy fools.


Char. From some conversation I have had with him, I take it that he is in love.


Har. And I fancy I have a fair friend much in the same situation.


Char. He leaves town to day.


Har. Unless you issue your sovereign commands to the contrary.


Char. My sovereign commands! How you trifle: what influence have I over him?


Har. That influence which a beautiful woman will always have over a man of
exquisite sensibility -- Mandeville told me he was eternally talking of you.


Char. Talking of me! Lord, I wonder what the man can have to say about me!


Har. Oh! a thousand handsome things, I dare say: but if you wish to be
satisfied as to the particulars, you may have them from the gentleman's own
mouth, for here he comes; so I Will leave you together.


Char. Then you will be so ill natured?


Har. Good natured, sweet cousin. --


[Exit. Char. Eternally talking of me! Whence, then, arose his sudden coldness
and reserve, when I but too plainly discovered my partiality for him? Yet I may
have been mistaken; a mind possessed of so much delicacy as his, might have
deemed it criminal to address me on the score of love, at a time h^ thought I
was intended for the son of his friend Colonel Talbot -- it is, it must be so
-- the pulses o^ my heart quicken at the thought -- but he is here.


Enter Crevelt. Crev. Miss Oldstock, as I mean to quit tow this evening, and
possibly may never see you again I am come to solicit the honor of a few
minute conversation.


Char. Never see me again! I hope you are no going back to India.


Crev. No, Madam, that is not my intention.


Char. Oh! then I understand you; it is the compound of every female
excellence, of who you spoke to me in such raptures, who is the cau^^ of your
leaving us.


Crev. I own it, Madam.


Char. But you talked of never seeing me again is your mistress that jealous
creature as to exa^^ such a promise from you?


Crev. No, Madam; that is a punishment I v^luntarily inflict upon myself.


Char. You do say the most gallant things, wi^^ the most sombre countenance;
your wit and yo^^ face, Captain Crevelt, are the diamond and soil; the dark
shade of the one, lends a more vivid glow to the other's sparkling brilliancy:
-- what an alteration the presence of your mistress would make in your looks;
Could you look thus in her presence?


Crev. In the present state of my heart, I could hot look otherwise.


Char. No! not if she smiled upon you?


Crev. A smile from her would raise me from despair: but that, Madam --
Confusion! yonder I see Colonel Talbot; this is the second time to day he has
found me in earnest conversation with her.


Char. I didn't think it possible till now, Colonel Talbot could put me out of
temper.


Crev. Will he not suspect that I am meanly stealing myself upon her
affections, and attribute her dislike of his son to me? -- But he comes; I
cannot meet his eye in the present state of my feelings. -- Adieu, dear Miss
Oldstock!


Char. But are we never to meet again?


Crev. It is a sacrifice, Madam, that pierces, and widows my heart for ever;
but honor and gratitude demand it.


[Exit. Enter Colonel Talbot. Col. Was Not that Captain Crevelt, Miss Oldstock,
that parted from you?


Char. Yes, Sir; he has just taken his leave of me, and said I shall never see
him again.


Col. There is a resinement in Crevelt's temper, that to strangers makes his
conduct at times appear very unaccountable; but I fancy I have discovered the
cause of this extraordinary resolution.


Char. And sure, Sir, you can prevail upon him to alter it?


Col. Then my lovely girl wishes he should alter his resolution?


Char. Oh, Sir! is it possible to be acquainted with so noble, so accomplished,
so brave a youth, and not esteem him? Never see me more! --


Col. It is as I suspected; and, indeed, as I wish; for who but Crevelt is
worthy of such a woman? -- (Aside.) I hope, Miss Oldstock, you are now
perfectly convinced, that I would not purchase the greatest earthly happiness
at the price of your peace of mind -- highly as my pride, and natural affection
would be gratified to call you daughter, I trust I can turn my eye with manly
firmness from the bright, the flattering prospect; and, resigned to the
dispensations of a Power who never afflicts his creature but for wise and good
purposes, point out a man in every respect but birth and fortune deserving of
you.


Char. Birth and fortune, Colonel! despicable distinctions! when nature asserts
her superior claims to reverence, by ennobling the spirit, how low it lays the
insolence of ancestry, and humbles the vanity of wealth.


Col. Madam, your words penetrate my very soul; with an aching, joyless heart,
I look back to those imaginary scenes of happiness, fancy had painted in
meeting with a son; the only pledge of love from the first object of my
affections, and whose image still warms this desolated bosom -- Birth! when I
survey my own offspring, and behold poor Crevelt, I am ashamed to think so
empty a thing as family pride had ever any insluence over me.


Char. But you will prevail upon him to alter his resolution?


Col. On one condition, Madam.


Char. What is that, Colonel?


Cat. That you will receive him as my adopted son -- Your father's objections I
will remove, by making him your equal in fortune.


Char. I don't know how to thank you, Colonel; but, perhaps, he is already gone.


Col. Gone, without seeing me first, impossible! -- But what says my sweet girl
to the proposal I have made her?


Char. You are so good, so disinterested, and so generous, that it is
impossible not to acquiesce in any proposal of yours: but yet I will not make
you an absolute promise; mind that, Colonel; till I find you have effectually
accomplished my request, and induced Captain Crevelt to alter his resolution.


[Exit. Col. Luckily, Sir Oliver has taken a very great liking to him; and told
me that he would insist upon his passing a few days at his house, previous to
visiting his relations -- Though Crevelt possesses the spirit of a lion, there is
a gentleness and flexibility in his nature, which cannot resist solicitation
from a friend -- Oh, my heart, be still! though I am denied happiness in that
quarter whence I fondly expected it, let me enjoy it as Heaven thinks proper to
bestow the boon, by exerting my best efforts to impart it to the truly
deserving.


Enter Count and Mandeville. Count. J'espere, Monsieur Mandeville, you are
perfectly satisfy -- sur mon honneur, had I know Mademoiselle Harriet was
engage, I never would pay l'addresse.


Mand. I believe it, Count; and hope you will forgive the warmth, I was at
first: betrayed into.


Count. Mon Dieu! il est l'evervescence d'un grande ame no brave man ever
resign sa maitresse avec sang froid.


Lol. Now Mandeville, to completely remove your fears in regard to Harriet,
know, I have made your peace with her uncle -- would you believe it? he
actually proposed his daughter to me -- however by the dint of argument, added
to the influence of an old friendship, I at last brought him to reason.


Enter Sir Qliver. Sir O. Colonel, Colonel, is this strict observance of
treaty? the carriages are waiting for us at the door -- were we not all to set
off for my house immediately; did you not promise to pass ten days with me when
you had contradicted me into consent at last?


Court. Monsieur Oldstock, your niece was very pretty to be sure; mais, mon
Dieu! votre fille be very pretty aussi; me understand she ville not marry young
Monsieur Talbot, and mon ami the Colonel will not have her -- ch bien, vat you
say to me for von husband.


Sir O. With all my heart and soul, Count -- I don't know a French gentleman of
a long time I have taken such a liking to -- damn me! if you have not a fine
roast-beef countenance.


Col. I fancy, Count, that lady's affections are also engaged.


Count. Je suis tres malheureux! all de English lady be engaged! but me be not
surprised; for if de foreigner set so much value on de English lady, vat must
their own countrymen who know them better, do?


Sir O. Why, what the deuce, Colonel, is all this? You will not marry my daughter
yourself; you will not suffer your son, whatever her inclinations may be, to marry
her; and now you put the Count against her.


Col. Will you leave the lady to her own choice?


Sir O. The worst of it is, I must do that -- Count, a word in your ear -- to
her yourself -- you're a devilish straight, well looking fellow; no appearance
of frogs about you, except upon your coat -- I should like to see an union
between France and England, if it were only because it has been so long thought
a contradiction in politics.


Col. How unsubstantial are all the prospects of man, in whatever hope flatters
him with happiness -- this unhappy boy distracts me!


Sir O. Damn me! if I would not send him down into Wales or Yorkshire -- for
about fifteen pounds a year, you may get him decently boarded and clad, and
educated into the bargain.


Enter a Servant. Serve. I have been in search of Mr. Talbot, Sir, since you
spoke to me; and have just heard that he is gone to one Jacob Wilkins's, an
innkeeper, near Smithfield.


Col. I am exposed, you see, already.


Sir O. It Is your own fault if you continue to be exposed; come along, Colonel;
yonder I see Captain Crevelt putting the women into the carriages: We'll drive
round by this "Wilkins's; and take this young mohawk by surprise; the moment
you get possession of him, banish him into Wales.


Col. I will myself go in person to Wilkins's; and from his own lips learn
every particular respecting this unhappy youth, from the hour I left him in his
care; and as you propose going home that way, Sir Oliver, I will trespass so
far upon your patience as to request you will wait for me, whilst I make this
inquiry.


Mand. Dear Sir, don't make yourself so unhappy.


Col. What is there wealth can purchase I cannot possess? my feelings are at
once a satire, and a lesson to avarice.


[Exeunt. SCENE, a Room at Jacob Wilkins's.
Johnson and Mrs. Wilkins discovered at Tea. Mrs. Wilk. I Am sure I shall never
forget the first time I was in this room; where you see Mr. Wilkins has his
Honor the Colonel's picture hung up -- dear heart, what a handsome man he is!
it is a great pity he does not marry.


John's. He Is very much altered -- consider, it is many years since that picture
was painted; his face is parched to the complexion of an old drum head, and his
hair is perfectly silver.


Mrs. Wilk. What effect silver hair may have upon your great ladies I will not
pretend to say; but this I Will swear to; bait your hook properly with gold, and
a poor girl is a trout you may take with a single hair of any color. If it
was not for his money, do you think I Would ever have married old Jacob Wilkins?


John's. Why no, I hardly think you would; but why, my dear creature, has his
name escaped your lips? should he possess such a treasure! the man worthy of
you should always meet you with the ardour of a lover, and dart as I do with
transport into your arms.


Enter Betty. Betty. Oh! madam! madam! my matter is come home, and is raving
like mad at your leaving the bar, and drinking tea up stairs.


Mrs. Wilk. He does not know I have any body with me?


Bett. Lord! ma'am, to be sure he does not; I told him you were not well, and
that you found the bar too cold for you.


Mrs. Wilk. You're an excellent girl.


John's. How the devil will you get me out?


Bett. I hear his cough at the foot of the stairs -- dear Madam he is coming up.


John's. 'S'death I Will run and shut myself up in hat little room yonder.


Mrs. Wilk. By no means! that is our own bed chamber; his bureau is in it; and
as he pays his brewer to day, perhaps it is there he is going now or money.


Bett. I have it Madam; I Will let down this window curtain, and the gentleman
may get behind it; if my master asks why it is down, you may say you were so
ill, the light was too much for you.


[ Drops the window curtain before Johnson. Mrs. Wilk. Such a servant is worth
her weight in gold.


Bett. Here, Madam; tie this handkerchief about your head; appear very bad
indeed -- there, Madam, let him come now when he pleases, we are ready for him.


Enter Wilkins and Amber. Wilk. So, Mr. Amber; you have a curiosity to see the
upper part of my house; you cannot think how pleasant it is; my wife can tell
you what a prospect there is on my upper story.


Amber. Poor Mrs. Wilkins is quite muffled up; he is very bad poor woman; I Am
sorry we disturbed her.


Wilk. Why, Fanny, my love, what is the matter? you were very well when I went
out.


Mrs. Wilk. I have been seized all of a sudden, with such a terrible pain in
one side of my face I can hardly get my words out.


Wilk. I am sorry to hear this, Fanny -- but what wiseacre has let this,
curtain down? I cannot bear to shut out the light of a fine day.


Mrs. Wilk. Has the brute a mind to be the death of me?


[Seizing him by the arm. Wilk. Will it do you any good to keep me in the dark?


Mrs. Wilk. To be sure it will when I cannot bear the light.


Amber. Friend Wilkins, friend Wilkins, the light is too much for her.


Mrs. Wilk. You're a considerate man, Mr, Amber, and I dare say make an
excellent husband.


Wilk. Well, well, then let the curtain remain down -- come, Fanny, give your
old Jacob a kiss.


Mrs. Wilk. I Am too fond of you, Jacob, and you take advantage of that.


Wilk. No, but I don't -- kiss me again, you fond fool, it will do you good.


Amber. Ah! you're a happy couple; but you take the right method to be so, by
giving way to one another.


Wilk. But now we are up stairs, friend Amber sit down, and I Will go bring some
money out of the next room and pay you.


Mrs. Wilk. I beg of you, Jacob, to take him down stairs and pay him; even your
talking sets my head distracted.


Wilk. My dear, I shall not be two minutes settling with him; it will affront him
if you turn him out of the room; you shall have the place to yoursel^
immediately.


[Exit Re-enter Betty. Bett. Madam, you're undone; if you don't come down
stairs immediately; Ned, the new waiter, saw Mr. Johnson, and He as good as
told me he would acquaint my master.


Mrs. Wilk. What shall I do? I Am afraid to leave the room.


Bett. You need'nt stop a minute; it is only squeezing Ned's hand, and slipping
a sly half guinea into it, and all will be right.


Mrs. Wilk. Oh! Betty, I wish he was well out of the house -- you will excuse me,
Mr. Amber, a little; I Am wanted down stairs.


[ Exeunt Mrs. Wilkins and Betty. Amb. Don't notice me, child, business must be
minded; but let me see; suppose I sign my receipt and have it ready for him.


[Taking out his pocket book and inkhorn. Enter Wilkins. Wilk. Here is the
money, my old boy; have you got your receipt ready?


Amb. I was going to sign it; but my eyes are so dim, I cannot see with that
curtain down.


Wilk. As my wise's not here to complain of the light, I Will draw it up for you.


[Draws up the curtain. Amb. That will do, I have light enough now.


Wilk. And I have too much -- Oh! the Jezabel.


Enter Mrs. Wilkins. Mrs. Wilk. Ruined!


Amb. My dear Mrs. Wilkins I beg ten thousand pardons for letting so much light
into the room, but I declare I could not see to write my receipt.


Wilk. Well, Mr. Johnson! what brought you here; what have you to say for
yourself; are you come to rob my house?


Amb. Oh! ho! I fear the dimness of my eyes have made others too clear sight
-- but, friend Wilkins, don't be too hasty in judging.


Wilk. 'S'death and fire, man, shall not I believe my own eyes?


Amb. Not always.


Wilk. You're devilish considerate!


Amb But we are all apt to be suspicious at times -- I Will wish you a good
evening -- there is my receipt: the fondest couples will spar now and then --
but I never like to meddle in family quarrels.


[Exit. Wilk. Go, Madam; pack up your alls; and leave my house immediately; if
you are in want of a morsel of bread, it would give me pleasure to refuse it to
you. As for you, Sir, I Will take care your business shall be done with Colonel
Talbot -- I Will see you both beggars, and that will be some satisfaction to me.


Enter Servant. Serve. Colonel Talbot is coming up stairs, Sir, to speak to you.


John's. Confusion! I Am undone!


Enter Colonel Talbot. Col. Johnson, here!


Wilk. Yes, Sir, Johnson; your worthy gentleman is here on a visit to that
wretch my wife.


Mrs. Wilk. Wretch, Mr. Wilkins!


Wilk. Yes, Madam, an ungrateful wretch.


Col. I Am sorry, Johnson -- for this; I was given to understand you were come
in search of my son.


Mrs. Wilk. Wretch! I Will discover all, if I Am ruined for ever. (Aside.) He Is
not your son, Sir --


[Going up to the Colonel. Wilk. Devil! Devil! what is she going to say?


Col. Not my son! speak again, woman.


Wilk. But dear Colonel, sure you will not believe what this wicked woman will say?


Col. Away, villain, and let me hear her -- alarmed nature starts up in my
heart, and opens a thousand ears to listen to her.


Mrs. Wilk. He lost your son, Sir, when he was a boy of twelve years old; and
you may be sure. Sir, it was not the kindest usage made the child leave him; the
booby he palmed upon you is his own.


Col. Unprincipled, inhuman villain! let me hear the whole truth from your own
lips, or by every power that is sacred and divine, this moment is your last.


Will. Dear Sir, put up your sword, and I Will tell you every thing -- What she
says is partly true; your son strayed from me when he was about twelve years
old; but had he been my own, I could not have used him better: as a proof of it,
his mother, in her last illness, came, as she often did, privately to see him,
and was so well pleased with my wife's and my treatment of her son, that she
gave me a fifty-pound Bank note -- I shall never forget the day; it was the
last time I ever saw her: she hung a small picture of herself, set in gold,
about the child's neck, and wept bitterly over him.


Col. Can you produce that picture?


Will. Your son took it with him; he was so fond of it, I could never keep it
out of his hands but by locking it up; which I sometimes did, as the severest
of all punishments I could inflict upon him.


Col. I must have better proof this tale is true, before I let you escape that
justice I fear is due to your wickedness. -- Johnson, take him from my sight,
and let him be secured; I cannot bear to look at him. -- Tell the company
waiting for me in carriages at the door, to come in; for I am so agitated, and
anxious for more particulars, I cannot quit this detested spot.


John's. They are here, Sir.


[Exeunt Johson, Wilkins, and Wife. Enter Crevelt, Mandeville, Charlotte,
Harriet, Sir Oliver, Lady Oldstock, and Count. Crev. Dear Sir, what is the
matter? Observing a confusion in the house immediately after you went in, we
were alarmed for your safety.


Col. Oh, Crevelt! I am the unhappiest of fathers; that creature whom you all
suppose my son, is not so.


Char. Good fortune be praised!


Col. He Is son to the fellow who keeps this house -- He says, my poor child
strayed from him when a boy; but this tale is so improbable, that I rather fear
he has fallen a victim to this fellow's villainy and avarice.


Crev. Dear Sir, compose yourself, and hope human nature cannot be so depraved;
it wrings my heart to see you in this distress -- But who is this villain?


Col. His name is Wilkins. -- When I committed my child to his care, he lived
at Henly: he pretends he lost him at twelve years old; and, oh! agony to think!
if he, indeed, be living, he is at this moment a wandering outcast and a beggar.


Crev. Merciful heaven! What do I hear? Can it be possible! Shall I, to my
loved and honored patron, find a fond and living father? Sir, did that man
lose a son of yours at twelve years of age?


Col. Yes, Crevelt; I have no son but you now.


Crev. I am your son, Sir -- your happy son! that son you lost.


Col. You! You, Crevelt!


Crev. Yes, Sir, the veteran, whose name I bear, took me with him at the age
you mention from Henly; where I lived with the man you have just named, whom I
always thought my father; it was the pride of poor Crevelt's heart to have me
believed his son: I bore his name, and publicly acknowledged him as my father;
for you, Sir, could not have loved me better; his dying request to me was,
still to retain the name of Crevelt, and never forget the man who made me a
soldier.


Col. My son! my son! The hand of Providence has surely directed every
circumstance of your life; you were brought to me a stranger and a child; I
became your parent by resistless instinct; in battle once I owed my life to
you, and now a second time you save it.


Char. O! Harriet. There is a chord of delight in my heart never touched
before: and sure, he who made that heart, now moves its springs to ecstasy by
the finger of an angel.


Col. He talked of your taking with you a picture of your mother -- had you
ever any such thing?


Crev. I have it still, Sir, and ever wore it next my heart. (Producing the
picture from his bosom.) You see the frame is shattered; -- it was by a musket
ball the day every body thought I was killed.


Col. It is indeed your mother; and see here those specks under the eye; are
they my child's blood, or the tears of a fond parent?


Johnson (to Caleb without,) You must not come in; I have already explained
every thing sufficiently.


Enter Caleb (very abruptly) and Johnson. Ca. I tell you I will come in:
zounds! will nobody father me?


Col. Young man you have been deceived; you are Wilkins's son, not mine.


Ca. Pho, pho! Father, do you think I know no better?


John's. If you don't come out this moment, and no longer disturb my master,
I Will take you by the shoulder.


Ca. Why here is a fellow for you -- forgets he is talking to a captain!


Col. That is a rank you are so utterly unfit for, that it would only expose
you to unhappiness and ridicule; therefore your commission shall be sold; and
for being one day my son, the purchase money shall be appropriated to setting
you up in business.


John's. Well, what keeps you now?


Ca. You are in a devil of a hurry, Mr. Johnson: I find I must put up with old
Jacob again; but let me ask you one question, an't I to be entitled to half-pay
for my services.


John's. You shall have full pay if you do'nt go about your business.


[Shakes his cane at him. Ca. Well, if I cannot be a half-pay captain I Will be a
no-pay captain -- for once a captain and always a captain.


[ Exit Caleb. Sir O. Captain Crevelt -- I beg your pardon, captain Talbot,
give me your hand; you want nothing now but a wife, and if my daughter
Charlotte --


Count. Eh bien! Monsieur Chevalier, you have forgot?


Sir O. Why, no, Count, I have not forgot; but you must know, whatever my
respect for you may be, there is not that man living whose alliance I so much
desire as colonel Talbot's; besides, I understand there is another branch of
the family of my mind.


Count. Chevalier, I love and I respect the English, and by gar me vil have a
wife among you.


Mand. It is not in words to express my pleasure -- to make a bosom friend, and
find a near relation, in less time than others form a common acquaintance,
overflows my heart with transport.


Lady O. I could wish also to show this affecting discovery touches me, if I
was not apprehensive, Sir Oliver, of your unfortunate suspicious temper.


Sir O. Captain Talbot, be so good as to step this way -- Do give my wife a
kiss; I know, my dear, your lips itch for it; and, with all her faults, believe
me, she has a heart that beats in unison to the feelings of all present, and a
tear for misery and friendship.


Col. Tal. Miss Oldstock, it is your father's wish and mine to unite our
families -- now that I have a son I can propose to you, there is only your
acceptance of him necessary to make me happy.


Char. Why, Sir, if the gentleman has but courage to speak for himself --


Sir O. As I don't expect the pleasure of contradiction from either party on
this occasion, I Will join their hands, (Joining their hands.) without waiting
for an answer -- there -- Colonel, you are now one of my family.


Col. Tal. That assurance, Sir Oliver, seals, and completes my happiness --
you, Mandeville, shall share a portion of my fortune as a son, and may
happiness still wait on you and your lovely Harriot -- and now (Addressing the
audience.) if this court martial, to whom we appeal, acquit us with honor, I
shall bless the hour my boy said, "He would be a Soldier."


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR OF THE COMEDY, AND SPOKEN BY MRS. POPE.
NOW critic Jove the scale aloft suspends;
On whose dread beam the poet's fate depends:
Ye gods above, high arbiters of wit,
Who on your shilling thrones in council sit;
You I implore, for our poor bard afraid,
To grant celestial, upper-gall'ry aid;
If you approve, with Cato I shall cry
The gods take care of poets in the sky!
As for the ladies -- they will sure hear my prayer,
New charms goodnature lends the fairest fair;
Besides, I hardly think they can be foes,
To a fond maid who a brave soldier chose.
Who like a soldier charms the fair one's eyes,
The queen of beauty was a soldier's prize?
In love as war, the brave man best succeeds,
Our sex reveres that valor which it needs.
Ye beaux, so finely waisted nowadays,
That one would almost swear you put on stays;
You, I confess, create no great alarm,
You hav'nt spirit to do good, or harm.
But yonder I espy some dangerous faces;
Good critics, I entreat your favoring graces:
All I request is, when a fault's set down,
Its neighboring beauty may be told the town;
But after this, if you attempt to growl,
I Will excommunicate you, every soul!
In my lawn sleeves and shirt, I Will come so big,
In every thing a bishop, but his wig:
Nay, if you doubt, an army I will bring
Of bishops, who may crown the greatest king:
Their sleeves of lawn, the down-wings of the dove;
Their sash, the cestus of the queen of love:
With aid like this, and aid you will own divine,
Who would not think success were surely mine?
In anxious hope I wait the dread decree,
That must be final both to bard and me.


