THE FATAL FALSEHOOD: A TRAGEDY. AS IT IS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, IN
COVENT GARDEN. BY THE AUTHOR OF PERCY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. M DCC LXXIX.

(Price One Shilling and Six Pence.)

TO COUNTESS BATHURST, THIS TRAGEDY, IS VERY RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, AS A SMALL
TRIBUTE TO HER MANY VIRTUES; AND AS A GRATEFUL TESTIMONY OF THE FRIENDSHIP WITH
WHICH SHE HONORS

HER MOST OBEDIENT, AND MOST OBLIGED, HUMBLE SERVANT, H. MORE.

PROLOGUE.
Written by the AUTHOR,
and spoken by Mr. HULL. OUR modern Poets scarce know how to choose
A subject worthy of the Tragic Muse;
For Bards so well have gleaned the Historic field,
That scarce one sheaf the exhausted ancients yield;
And these, our timid author leaves to men,
For classic themes demand a classic pen:
Yet still the wilds of fiction open lie,
A flowery prospect, and a boundless sky:
But hard the task the sober path to choose,
And wandering Fancy's treacherous baits refuse.
-- She dares not touch the Drama's nobler strings,
The fate of nations, and the fall of Kings;
The humbler scenes of private life she shows,
A simple story of domestic woes.
The weight of crowns, a kingdom's weal or woe,
How few can judge, because how few can know!
But here you all may boast the Critic's art,
Here, all are judges -- who possess a heart.
To govern Empires is the lot of few,
But all who live have passions to subdue;
And, even by Patriots let it be confessed,
These Rebel Subjects ought to be suppressed,
These Ravagers which spoil the human breast.
Oh! deign to learn this obvious lesson here!
The verse is feeble, but the moral clear.
Your candor once endured our Author's lays,
Endure them now -- that will be ample praise.

EPILOGUE.
Written by R. B. SHERIDAN, Esquire
and spoken by Mr. LEE JEWS. UNHAND me, gentlemen, by Heaven, I say,
I Will make a ghost of him who bars my way.
Behind the scenes.
Forth let me come -- A Poetaster true,
As lean as Envy, and as baneful too;
On the dull audience let me vent my rage,
Or drive these female scribblers from the stage:
For scene or history, we have none but these,
The law of Liberty and Wit they seize
In Tragic -- Comic -- Pastoral -- they dare to please.
Each puny Bard must surely burst with spite,
To find that women with such fame can write:
But, oh, your partial favor is the cause,
Who feed their follies with such full applause;
Yet still our tribe shall seek to blast their fame,
And ridicule each fair pretender's aim;
Where the dull duties of domestic life,
Wage with the Muse's toils eternal strife.
What motley cares Corilla's mind perplex,
While maids and metaphors conspire to vex!
In studious deshabille behold her sit,
A lettered gossip, and a housewife wit;
At once invoking, though for different views,
Her gods, her cook, her millener, and muse,
Round her strewn room, a frippery chaos lies,
A checkered wreck of notable and wise;
Bills, Books, Caps, Couplets, Combs, a varied mass,
Oppress the toilet, and obscure the glass;
Unfinished here an Epigram is laid,
And there, a mantua-maker's Bill unpaid;
Here newborn Plays fore taste the town's applause,
There, dormant Patterns pine for future gauze;
A moral Essay now is all her care,
A Satire next, and then a Bill of Fare:
A Scene she now projects, and now a Dish,
Here Is Act the First -- and here -- remove with Fish.
Now while this Eye in a fine phrenzy rolls,
That, soberly casts up a Bill for Coals;
Black Pins and Daggers in one leaf she sticks,
And Tears and Thread, and Balls and Thimbles mix.
Sappho, it is true, long versed in epic song,
For years esteemed all household studies wrong;
When dire mishep, though neither shame nor sin,
Sappho herself, and not her Muse, lies in.
The virgin Nine in terror fly the bower,
And matron Juno claims despotic power;
Soon Gothic hags the classic pile o'erturn,
A caudle-cup supplants the sacred urn;
Nor books, nor implements escape their rage,
They spike the ink-stand, and they rend the page;
Poems and Plays one barbarous fate partake,
Ovid and Plautus suffer at the stake,
And Aristotle's only saved -- to wrap plumb cake.
Yet, shall a woman tempt the Tragic Scene?
And dare -- but hold -- I must repress my spleen;
I see your hearts are pledged to her applause,
White Shakespeare's spirit seems to aid her cause;
Well pleased to aid -- since over his sacred bier
A semale hand did ample trophies rear,
And gave the greenest laurel that is worshipped there.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Earl Guildford, Mr. Clarke. Rivers, his son, Mr. Lewis. Orlando, a young
Italian Count, Mr. Wroughton. Bertrand, Mr. Aickin.
WOMEN.
Emmelina, Miss Young. Julia, Mrs. Hartley.
SCENE, Earl Guildford's Castle.

THE FATAL FALSEHOOD: A TRAGEDY.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE, an Apartment in Guildford Castle. Enter BERTRAND. WHAT fools are
serious melancholy villains
I play a surer game, and screen my heart
With easy looks, and undesigning smiles;
And while my actions spring from sober thought,
They still appear the effect of wild caprice,
And I, the thoughtless slave of giddy chance.
What but this frankness has engaged the promise
Of young Orlando, to confide to me,
That secret grief which preys upon his heart?
It Is dangerous, indiscreet hypocrisy
To seem too good: I am the careless Bertrand,
The honest, undesigning, plain, blunt man:
The follies I avow cloak those I hide,
For who will search where nothing seems concealed?
It Is rogues of solid, prudent, grave demeanor
Excite suspicion; men on whose dark brow
Discretion, with his iron hand has engraved
The deep-mark'd characters of thoughtfulness.
Here comes my uncle, venerable Guildford,
Whom I could honor, were he not the father
Of that aspiring boy, who fills the gap
'Twixt me and fortune; -- Rivers, how I hate thee!
Enter GUILDFORD. How fares my noble uncle?

GUILDFORD. Honest Bertrand!
I must complain we have so seldom met;
Where do you keep? believe me we have missed you.

BERTRAND. O, my good Lord, your pardon -- spare me, Sir,
For there are follies in a young man's life,
And idle thoughtless hours which I should blush
To lay before your wife and temperate age.

GUILDFORD. Well, be it so -- youth has a privilege,
And I should be ashamed could I forget
I have myself been young, and harshly chide
The not ungraceful levity of youth.
Prudence becomes moroseness, when it makes
A rigid inquisition of the fault,
Not of the man, perhaps, but of his youth:
Foibles that shame the head on which old Time
Has shower'd his snow, are then most pardonable,
And age has many a weakness of its own.

BERTRAND. Your gentleness, my Lord, and mild reproof,
Correct the wanderings of misguided youth,
More than rebuke, and shame it into virtue.

GUILDFORD. Saw you my beauteous ward, the Lady Julia?


BERTRAND. She past this way, and with her your fair daughter,
Your Emmelina.

GUILDFORD. Call them both my daughters,
For scarce is Emmelina dearer to me,
Than Julia, the loved child of my adoption;
The hour approaches too, (and bless it, heaven,
With thy benignest, kindliest influence!)
When Julia shall indeed become my daughter,
Shall, in obedience to her father's will,
Crown the impatient vows of my brave son,
And richly pay him for his dangers past.

BERTRAND. Often have I wondered how the gallant Rivers,
Youthful and ardent, doting to excess,
Could dare the dangers of uncertain war,
Ever marriage had confirmed his claim to Julia.

GUILDFORD. 'Twas the condition of her father's will,
My brave old fellow-soldier, and my friend;
He wished to see our ancient houses joined
By this, our children's union; but the veteran
So highly valued military prowess,
That he bequeathed his fortunes and his daughter
To my young Rivers, on these terms alone,
That he should early seek renown in arms;
And if he from the field returned a conqueror,
That sun which saw him come victorious home
Should witness their espousals. Yet he comes not!
The event of war is to the brave uncertain,
Nor can desert in arms ensure success.

BERTRAND. Yet fame speaks loudly of his early valor.


GUILDFORD. Ever since the Italian Count, the young Orlando,
My Rivers' bosom friend has been my guest,
The glory of my son is all his theme:
Oh! he recounts his virtues with such joy,
Dwells on his merit with a zeal so warm,
As to his generous heart pays back again
The praises he bestows.

BERTRAND. Orlando's noble,
He Is of a tender, brave, and gallant nature,
Of honor most romantic, with such graces,
As charm all womankind.

GUILDFORD. And here comes one,
To whom the story of Orlando's praise
Sounds like sweet music.

BERTRAND. What, yourcharming daughter?
Yes, I suspect she loves the Italian Count Aside.
That must not be. Now to observe her closely.

Enter EMMELINA. GUILDFORD. Come hither, Emmelina: we were speaking
Of the young Count Orlando. What think you
Of this accomplished stranger?

EMMELINA. (Confused.) Sir, your pardon --
But as my father's guest, my brother's friend,
I do esteem the Count.

GUILDFORD. Nay, he has merit
Might justify thy friendship if he wanted
The claims thou mention'st; yet I mean to blame him.

EMMELINA. What has he done that could offend my father?
For you are just and are not angry lightly,
And he is mild, unapt to give offense,
As you to be offended.

GUILDFORD. Nay it is not much:
Why does Orlando shun of late my presence?
Why lose that cheerful and becoming spirit
Which lately charmed us all? Rivers will chide us,
Should he return, and find his friend unhappy.
He is not what he was. What says my child?

EMMELINA. My Lord, when first my brother's friend arrived --
Be still, my heart. Aside.

BERTRAND. She dares not use his name,
Her brother's friend! Aside.

EMMELINA. When first your noble guest
Came from that voyage, he kindly undertook
To ease our terrors for my Rivers' safety,
When we believed him dead, he seemed most happy,
And shared the universal joy he gave.
Of late he is less gay; my brother's absence
(Or I mistake) disturbs his friend's repose;
Nor is it strange, one mind informs them both,
Each is the very soul that warms the other,
And both are wretched, or are blessed together.

BERTRAND. Why trembles my fair cousin?


EMMELINA. Can I think
That my loved brother's life has been in danger,
Nor feel a strong emotion!

BERTRAND. (Ironically.) Generous pity!
But when that danger has so long been past,
You should forget your terrors.

EMMELINA. I shall never;
For when I think that danger sprung from friendship,
That Rivers, to preserve another's life,
Incurred this peril, still my wonder rises.

BERTRAND. And why another's life? Why not Orlando's?
Such caution more betrays than honest freedom.

GUILDFORD. He Is still the same, the gibing thoughtless Bertrand,
Severe of speech, but ignorant of malice.

Exit Guildford: Emmelina going. BERTRAND. Stay, my fair cousin; still with
adverse eyes
You view me. Say had I Orlando's form,
I mean, were I like him your brother's friend,
Then would your looks be turned thus coldly on me?

EMMELINA. But that I know your levity means nothing,
And that your heart accords not with your tongue,
This would offend me.

BERTRAND. Come, confess the truth,
That this gay Florentine, this Tuscan rover,
Has won your easy heart, and given you his:
I know the whole, I Am of his secret council,
He has confessed --

EMMELINA. Ha! what has he confessed.


BERTRAND. That you are wondrous fair: nay, nothing farther;
How disappointment fires her angry cheek!
Yourself have told the rest, your looks avow it,
Your eyes are honest, nor conceal the secret.

EMMELINA. Conceal! Virtue has nothing to conceal;
So far from dreading, it solicits notice,
And wishes every secret thought it harbors,
Bare to the eye of men, as it is to heaven.

BERTRAND. Yet mark me well, trust not Orlando's truth;
The citron groves have heard his amorous vows
Breathed out to many a beauteous maid of Florence;
Bred in those soster climes, his roving heart
Never learned to think fidelity a virtue,
But laughs at tales of British constancy.
But see Orlando comes -- perhaps to seek you,
With eyes bent downwards, and with folded arms,
Disordered looks, and negligent attire,
And all the careless equipage of love,
He bends this way. Why does the mounting blood
Thus crimson your fair cheek? He does not see us;
I Will venture to disturb his meditations,
And instantly return.

Exit Bertrand. EMMELINA. No more, but leave me.
He Is talkative but harmless, rude but honest,
Fuller of mirth than mischief. See they meet --
This way they come; why am I thus alarmed?
Oh for a little portion of that art,
Ungenerous men ascribe to our whole sex!
A little artifice were prudence now:
But I have none; my poor unpracticed heart,
Is so unknowing of dissimulation,
So little skilled to seem the thing it is not,
That if my lips are still, my looks betray me.

Enter ORLANDO and BERTRAND. BERTRAND. Now to alarm her heart, and search out
his.


Aside. ORLANDO. We crave your pardon, beauteous Emmelina,
If rudely we intrude upon your thoughts;
Thoughts pure as infants' dreams, or angels' wishes,
And gentle as the breast from whence they spring.

EMMELINA. Be still, my heart, nor let him see thy weakness.
Aside. We are much bound to thank you, cousin Bertrand,
That since your late return, the Count Orlando
Appears once more among us. -- Say, my Lord,
Why have you shunned your friends' society?
Was it well done? My father bade me chide you;
I am not made for chiding, but he bade me;
He says, no more you rise at early dawn
With him to chase the boar; I pleaded for you,
Told him 'twas savage sport.

ORLANDO. What was his answer?


EMMELINA. He said 'twas sport for heroes, and made heroes;
That hunting was the very school of war,
Taught our brave youth to shine in nobler fields,
Preserved 'em from the rust of dull inaction,
Trained 'em for arms, and fitted them for conquest.

ORLANDO. O, my fair advocate! scarce can I grieve
To have done wrong, since my offense has gained
So sweet a pleader.

BERTRAND. (Aside.) So, I like this well;
Full of respect, but cold.

EMMELINA. My lord, your pardon;
My father waits my coming, I attend him.

Exit. BERTRAND. In truth, my Lord, you're a right happy man;
Her parting look proclaims that you are blessed;
The crimson blushes on her cheek displayed
A gentle strife 'twixt modesty and love:
Discretion strove to dash the rising joy,
But conquering love prevailed and told the tale.
My Lord, you answer not.

ORLANDO. What shall I say?
Oh, could thou read my heart!

BERTRAND. The hour is come
When my impatient friendship claims that trust
Which I so often have pressed, and you have promised.

ORLANDO. I cannot tell thee; it is a tale of guilt;
How shall I speak? my resolution sickens;
All virtuous men will shun me, thou wiltscorn me,
And fly the foul contagion of my crime.

BERTRAND. My bosom is not steeled with that harsh prudence
Which would reproach thy failings; tell me all;
The proudest heart loves to repose its faults
Upon a breast that has itself a tincture
Of human weakness; I have frailties too,
Frailties that teach me how to pity thine.
What, silent still? Thou love my beauteous cousin!
Have I not guessed?

ORLANDO. I own that she has charms
Might warm a frozen stoic into love,
Tempt hermits back again to that bad world
They had renounced, and make religious men
Forgetful of their holy vows to heaven;
Yet Bertrand -- come, I Will tell thee all my weakness:
Thou have a tender sympathising heart,
And art not rigid to a friend's defects.
That heavenly form I view with eyes as cold
As marble images of lifeless saints;
I see, and know the workmanship divine,
My judgment owns her exquisite perfections,
But my rebellious heart denies her claim.

BERTRAND. What do I hear! you love her not!


ORLANDO. Oh, Bertrand!
For pity do not hate me; but thou must,
For am I not at variance with myself?
Yet shall I wrong her gentle trusting nature,
And spurn the heart I labored to obtain?
She loves me, Bertrand, Oh! too fure she loves me,
Loves me with tenderest, truest, chastest passion;
Loves me, oh my cursed fate! as I love -- Julia.

BERTRAND. Heard I aright? Did you not speak of Julia?
Julia, the lovely ward of my good uncle?
Julia! the mistress of your friend, of Rivers?

ORLANDO. Go on, go on, and urge me with my guilt,
Display my crime in all its native horrors;
Tell me some legend of infernal falschood,
Tell me some dreadful tale of perjured friendship,
Of trust betrayed, and innocence deceived;
Place the black chronicle before my eyes,
With added guilt and aggravated horror,
That I may see the evils which await me,
Nor pull such fatal mischiefs on my head,
As with my ruin must involve the fate
Of all I love on earth.

BERTRAND. Just as I wish. Aside.


ORLANDO. Thou know I left my native Italy,
Directed hither by the noble Rivers,
To ease his father's fears, who thought he fell
In that engagement where we both were wounded;
His was a glorious wound, gained in the cause
Of generous friendship, for an hostile spear
Aimed at my breast, Rivers in his received,
Saved my devoted life, and won my soul.

BERTRAND. So far I knew, but what of Emmelina?


ORLANDO. Whether her gentle beauties first allured me,
Or whether peaceful scenes, and rural shades,
Or leisure, or the want of other objects,
Or solitude, apt to engender love,
Engaged my soul, I know not, but I loved her.
We were together always, till the habit
Grew into something like necessity:
When Emmelina left me I was sad,
Nor knew a joy till Emmelina came,
Her soft society amused my mind,
Filled up my vacant heart, and touched my soul.
'Twas gratitude, 'twas friendship, 'twas esteem,
'Twas reason, 'twas persuasion, nay 'twas love.

BERTRAND. But where was Julia?


ORLANDO. Oh! too soon she came,
For when I saw that wondrous form of beauty,
I stood entranced, like some astronomer,
Who, as he views the bright expanse of heaven,
Finds a new star. I gazed, and was undone;
Gazed, and forgot the tender Emmelina,
Gazed, and forgot the generous, trusting Rivers,
Forgot my faith, my friendship and my honor.

BERTRAND. Does Julia know your love?


ORLANDO. Forbid it heaven!
What! think thou I am so far gone in guilt
As boldly to avow it? Bertrand, no,
For all the kingdoms of the spacious earth,
I would not wrong my friend, or damn my honor.

BERTRAND. Trust me, you judge too hardly of yourself.


ORLANDO. Think I have lodged a secret in thy breast,
On which my peace, my fame, my all depends;
Long have I struggled with the fatal truth,
And scarce have dared to breathe it to myself;
For oh! too surely the first downward step,
The treacherous path that leads to guilty deeds,
Is, to make vice familiar to the mind.

Exit. BERTRAND. Am I awake? No, it is delusion all!
My wildest wishes never soared to this;
Fortune anticipates my plot; he loves her,
Not Emmelina, but the Lady Julia.
Orlando, yes, I Will play thee at my will;
Poor puppet! thou have trusted to my hand
The strings by which I Will move thee to thy ruin,
And make thee too the instrument of vengeance,
Of glorious vengeance on the man I hate.

Exit. End of the First Act.
ACT THE SECOND.
Enter JULIA and EMMELINA. JULIA. HOW many cares perplex the maid who loves!
Cares, which the vacant heart can never know.
You fondly tremble for a brother's life,
Orlando mourns the absence of a friend,
Guildford is anxious for a son's renown;
In my poor heart your various terrors meet,
With added fears, and fonder apprehensions;
They all unite in me, I feel for all,
His life, his fame, his absence, and his love:
For he may live to bless a sister's hopes,
May live to gratify impatient friendship,
May live to crown a father's house with honor,
May live to glory, and be dead to love.

EMMELINA. Forbear these fears, they wound my brother's honor,
Julia! a brave man must be ever faithful;
Cowards alone dare venture to be false,
Cowards alone dare injure trusting innocence,
And with bold perjuries affront high heaven.

JULIA. I know his faith, and venerate his virtues;
I know his heart is tender as it is brave,
That all his father's worth, his sister's softness,
Meet in his generous breast -- and yet I fear --
Whoever loved like me, and did not fear?

Enter GUILDFORD. GUILDFORD. Where are my Friends, my daughter, where is Julia?
How shall I speak the fullness of my heart?
My son, my Rivers, will this day return.

EMMELINA. My dearest brother!


JULIA. Ha! my Rivers comes!
Propitious heaven!

EMMELINA. And yet my Julia trembles.


JULIA. Have I not cause? my Rivers comes! but how?
I dread to ask, and yet I die to hear.
My Lord -- you know the terms --

GUILDFORD. He comes a conqueror!
He comes as Guildford's son should ever come!
The battle's over, the English arms successful,
And Rivers, like an English warrior, hastens
To lay his laurels at the feet of beauty.

Exit. JULIA. My joy oppresses me!


EMMELINA. And see, Orlando!
How will the welcome news transport his soul,
And raise his drooping heart! with caution tell him,
Lest the o'erwhelming rapture be too much
For his dejected mind.

Enter ORLANDO and BERTRAND. JULIA. My Lord Orlando,
Wherefore that troubled air? no more you dwell
On your once darling theme, you speak no more
The praises of your Rivers; is he changed?
Is he not still the gallant friend you loved,
As virtuous, and as valiant?

ORLANDO. Still the same,
He must be ever virtuous, ever valiant.

EMMELINA. If Rivers is the same, then must I think
Orlando greatly changed; you speak not of him,
Nor long for his return, as you were wont.
How did you use to spend the live-long day,
In telling some new wonders of your friend,
Till night broke in upon the unfinished tale,
And when 'twas over you would begin again,
And we again would listen with delight,
With fresh delight, as if we had not heard it!
Does Rivers less deserve, or you less love?

ORLANDO. Have I not loved him? was my friendship cold?
When any praised his glories in the field,
My raptured heart has bounded at the tale!
Methought I grew illustrious from his glory,
And rich from his renown; to hear him praised,
More proud than if I had achieved his deeds,
And reaped the full-blown harvest of his fame.
How have I trembled for a life so dear,
When his too ardent soul, despising caution,
Has plunged him in the foremost ranks of war,
As if in love with danger.

JULIA. Valiant Rivers!
How does thy greatness justify my love!

BERTRAND. He Is distant far, so I may sasely praise him.
Aside. I claim some merit in my love of Rivers,
Since I admire the virtues that eclipse me;
With pleasure I survey those dazzling heights
My gay, inactive temper cannot reach.

EMMELINA. Spoke like my honest cousin. Then, Orlando,
Since such the love you bear your noble friend,
How will your heart sustain the mighty joy
The news I tell will give you? Yes, Orlando,
Restrain the transports of your grateful friendship,
And hear, with moderation, hear me tell you
That Rivers will return --

ORLANDO. How? when?


EMMELINA. This day.


ORLANDO. Impossible!


BERTRAND. Then all my schemes are air.


Aside. EMMELINA. Today I shall embrace my valiant brother!


JULIA. You droop, my Lord: did you not hear her right?
She told you that your Rivers would return,
To bless your friendship, and to crown our hopes

ORLANDO. He is most welcome! Is he not my friend?
You say my Rivers comes. -- Thy arm, good Bertrand.

BERTRAND. Joy to us all! joy to the Count Orlando!
Weak man, take care. Aside to Orlando.

EMMELINA. My Lord! you are not well.


BERTRAND. Surprise and joy oppress him; I myself
Partake his transports. Rouse, my Lord, for shame.

EMMELINA. How is it with you now?


ORLANDO. Quite well -- it is past.


BERTRAND. The wonder's past, and naught but joy remains.


Enter GUILDFORD and RIVERS. GUILDFORD. He Is come! he is here! I have embraced
my warrior;
Now take me, heaven, I have lived long enough.

JULIA. My Lord, my Rivers!


RIVERS. It Is my Julia's self!
My life!

JULIA. My hero! Do I then behold thee?


RIVERS. Oh my full heart! expect not words, my Julia!


EMMELINA. Rivers!


RIVERS. My sister! what an hour is this!
My own Orlando too!

ORLANDO. My noble friend!


RIVERS. This is such prodigality of bliss,
I scarce can think it real. Honest Bertrand,
Your hand, yours, my Orlando, yours, my father;
And as a hand, I have a heart for all;
Love has enlarged it, from excess of love
I am become more capable of friendship.
My dearest Julia!

GUILDFORD. She is thine, my son,
Thou have deserved her nobly; thou have won her,
Fulfilled the terms --

RIVERS. Therefore I dare not ask her;
I would not claim my Julia as a debt,
But take her as a gift; and oh! I swear
The dearest, richest, choicest, noblest gift,
The bounty of indulgent heaven bestows.

Guildford joins their hand. JULIA. Spare me, my Lord, you scarcely are
returned --
Confusion stops my tongue -- yet I will own
If there be truth or faith in woman's vows,
Then you have still been present to this heart,
And not a thought has wandered from its duty.

Exeunt Julia and Emmelina. RIVERS. (Looking after Julia.) Oh, generous Julia!


ORLANDO. (Aside to Bertrand.) Mark how much she loves him!


BERTRAND. (Aside to Orlando.) Mere words, which the fond sex have always ready.


RIVERS. Forgive me, good Orlando, best of friends!
How my soul joys to meet thee on this shore!
Thus to embrace thee in my much loved England!

GUILDFORD. England! the native soil, the land of heroes,
Where great Elizabeth the scepter sways,
Over a free, glorious, rich and happy people!
Philosophy, not cloistered up in schools,
The speculative dream of idle monks,
Attired in attic robe, here roams at large,
Wisdom is wealth, and science is renown.
Here sacred laws protect the meanest subject,
The bread that toil procures fair freedom sweetens,
And every peasant eats his homely meal,
Content and free, Lord of his small domain.

RIVERS. Past are those gothic days, and grant, kind heaven,
They be forever past, when English subjects
Were born the vassals of some tyrant lord!
When free-soul'd men were basely handed down
To the next heir, transmitted with their lands,
The shameful legacy from sire to son!

GUILDFORD. But while thy generous soul, my noble boy,
Justly abhors oppression, yet revere
The plain stern virtues of our rough forefathers:
O never may the gallant sons of England
Lose their plain, manly, native character,
Forego the glorious charter nature gave'em,
Beyond what kings can give, or laws bestow,
Of candor, courage, constancy, and truth!

Exeunt Guildford and Rivers. ORLANDO. Stay, Bertrand, stay -- Oh, pity my
distraction!
This heart was never made to hide its feelings;
I had near betrayed myself.

BERTRAND. I trembled for you;
Remember that the eye of love is piercing,
And Emmelina marked you.

ORLANDO. It Is too much!
My artless nature cannot bear disguise.
Think what I felt when unsuspecting Rivers
Pressed me with generous rapture to his bosom,
Professed an honest joy, and called me friend!
I felt myself a traitor: yet I swear,
Yes, by that power who sees the thoughts of men,
I swear I love the gallant Rivers more
Than light or life! I love, but yet I fear him:
I shrunk before the luster of his virtue --
I felt as I had wronged him -- felt abashed.
I cannot bear this conflict in my soul,
And therefore have resolved --

BERTRAND. On what?


ORLANDO. To fly.


BERTRAND. To fly from Julia?


ORLANDO. Yes, to fly from all,
From every thing I love; to fly from Rivers,
From Emmelina, from myself, from thee:
From Julia? no -- that were impossible,
For I shall bear her image in my soul,
It is a part of me, the dearest part,
So closely interwoven with my being,
That I can never lose the dear remembrance,
Till I am robbed of life and her together.

BERTRAND. It Is cowardly to fly.


ORLANDO. To stay is base.


BERTRAND. Where would you go? How lost in thought he stands! Aside.
A vulgar villain now would use persuasion,
And by his very earnestness betray
The thing he meant to hide; I Will coolly wait,
Till the occasion shows me how to act,
Then turn it to my purpose. Ho! Orlando!
Where would you go?

ORLANDO. To everlasting solitude!
Yes, I will shroud my youth in some dark cell,
Where Disappointment steals Devotion's name,
To cheat the wretched votary into ruin;
There will I live, in love with misery;
Never shall the sight of mirth profane my grief,
The sound of joy shall never charm my ear,
Nor music reach it, save when the slow bell
Wakes the dull brotherhood to lifeless prayer.
Then, when the slow-retreating world recedes,
Desires are dead, and burning passions cold,
And all things, but my Julia, are forgotten,
One thought of her shall fire my languid soul,
Warm the faint orison, and feed despair.

BERTRAND. What! with monastic, lazy drones retire,
And chaunt cold hymns with holy hypocrites?
First perish all the sex! forbid it manhood!
Where is your nobler self? for shame, Orlando,
Renounce this superstitious, whining weakness,
Or I shall blush to think I called you friend.

ORLANDO. What can I do?


BERTRAND. (After a pause.) Beg she will defer the marriage
But for one single day; do this, and leave
The rest to me: she shall be thine.

ORLANDO. How say thou?
What, wrong her virtue?

BERTRAND. Still this cant of virtue!
This pompous show of words without a meaning!
I grant that honor's something, manly honor,
I Would fight, I Would burn, I Would bleed, I Would die for honor,
But what is this virtue?

ORLANDO. Ask you what it is?
Why it is what libertines themselves adore;
It Is the celestial coloring of beauty,
Which wakens gallantry, and fans desire
Beyond the rosy lip, or starry eye;
Nay, she who ministers to guilty pleasures
Puts on its semblance when she most would please.
It Is heaven's own energy, th'aetherial flame
Which animates cold beauty into spirit.

Exit. Manet BERTRAND. Curse on his principles! Yet I shall shake them,
And bend his pliant spirit to my will,
Now while it is warm with passion, and will take
Whatever mould my forming hand will give it.
It Is worthy of my genius! Then I love
This Emmelina -- true she loves not me --
But should young Rivers die, his father's lands
On me devolve -- Is Rivers then immortal?
Come -- Guildford's lands, and his proud daughter's hand
Are worth some thought: why what sharp spurs to genius,
Are mischief, poverty, revenge and love!

Exit Bertrand. Enter EMMELINA and RIVERS talking. EMMELINA. Yet do not blame
Orlando, good my brother,
He Is still the same, that brave, frank heart you loved;
Only his temper's changed, he is grown sad,
But that is no fault, I only am to blame;
Fond foolish heart, to give itself away
To one who gives me nothing in return!

RIVERS. How Is this! my father said Orlando loved thee.


EMMELINA. Indeed I thought so -- he was kinder once;
Nay still he loves, or my poor heart deceives me.

RIVERS. If he has wronged thee! yet I know he could not;
His gallant soul is all made up of virtues,
And I would rather doubt myself than him.
Yet tell me all the story of your loves,
And let a brother's fondness sooth thy cares.

EMMELINA. When to this castle first Orlando came,
A welcome guest to all, to me most welcome;
Yes, spite of maiden shame, and burning blushes,
Let me confess he was most welcome to me!
At first my foolish heart so much deceived me,
I thought I loved him for my brother's sake;
But when I closely searched this bosom traitor,
I found, alas! I loved him for his own.

RIVERS. Blush not to own it, 'twas a well placed flame!
I glory in the merit of my friend,
And love my sister more for loving him.

EMMELINA. He talked of you, I listened with delight,
And thought it was the subject only charmed me;
But when Orlando chose another theme,
Forgive me, Rivers, but I listened still
With undiminish'd joy -- he talked of love,
Nor was that theme less grateful than the former.
I seemed the very idol of his soul;
Rivers, he said, would thank me for the friendship
I bore to his Orlando; I believed him.
Julia was absent then -- but what of Julia?

RIVERS. Aye, what of her indeed? why named you Julia?
You could not surely think? no that were wild.
Why did you mention Julia?

EMMELINA. Nay 'twas nothing,
'Twas accident, nor had my words a meaning;
If I did name her, 'twas to note the time,
To mark the period of Orlando's coldness,
The circumstance was casual, and but meant
To date the time, it aimed at nothing farther.

RIVERS. It Is very like, no more, I Am satisfied;
You talk as I had doubts; I have no doubts;
Why do you labor to destroy suspicions
Which never had a birth? is she not mine?
Mine by the fondest ties of dear affection?
But did Orlando change at her return?
Did he grow cold? It could not be for that,
And yet you say 'twas at that time it happened.
Was it just then? I have no cause for asking,
But for the love I bear my dearest sister.

EMMELINA. 'Twas as I said.


RIVERS. He loves thee, Emmelina:
These starts of passion, this unquiet temper
Betray how much he loves thee: yes, my sister,
He fears to lose thee, fears his father's will
May dash his rising hopes, nor give thee to him.

EMMELINA. Oh, flatterer! thus to sooth my easy nature
With tales of possible though doubtful bliss!
Because it may be true, my credulous heart
Whispers it is, and fondly loves to cherish
The feeble glimmering of a sickly hope.

RIVERS. This precious moment, worth a tedious age
Of vulgar time, I Have stolen from love and Jusia;
She waits my coming, and a longer stay
Were treason to her beauty, and my love.

Exeunt. End of the Second Act.
ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE, a Garden. EMMELINA. WHY do my feet unbidden seek this grove?
Why do I trace his steps? I thought him here?
This is his hour of walking, and these shades
His daily haunt; often have they heard his vows:
Ah! fatal vows which stole my peace away!
But now he shun's my presence; yet who knows,
He may not be ungrateful, but unhappy;
Yes, he will come to clear his past offenses,
With such prevailing eloquence will plead,
So mourn his former coldness and neglect,
And by ten thousand graceful ways repair them,
That I shall think I never was offended.
He comes, and every doubt's at once dispelled;
'Twas fancy all, he never meant to wrong me.

Enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO. Why at this hour of universal joy,
When every heart beats high with grateful rapture,
And pleasure dances her enchanting round,
O tell me why, at this auspicious hour,
You quit the joyful circle of your friends?
"Rob social pleasures of its sweetest charm,
"And leave a void even in the happiest hearts,
"An aching void which only you can fill?"
Why seek alone these unfrequented shades.
These gloomy haunts unfit for blooming beauty,
But made for meditation and misfortune?

EMMELINA. I might retort the charge, my lord Orlando,
And ask you how the bosom-friend of Rivers,
Whom he has held deep-rooted in his heart,
Beyond a brother's dearness, saved his life,
And cherished it when saved beyond his own,
I might enquire, why when this Rivers comes,
After long tedious months of expectation,
Alive, victorious, and as firm in friendship
As fondness could have wished, or f^ncy feigned;
I might enquire why thus Orlando shuns him,
Why thus he courts this melancholy gloom,
As if he were at variance with delight,
And scorned to mingle in the general joy?

ORLANDO. Oh, my fair monitress! I have desery'd
Your gentle censure.

EMMELINA. You will then grow cheerful,
Nor give your friends, who love you, room for blame.
Julia complains too of you.

ORLANDO. Ah! does Julia?
If Julia chides me I have erred indeed,
For harshness is a stranger to her nature.
But why does she complain? O tell me wherefore?
That I may soon repair the unwilling crime,
And prove my heart was guiltless of the offense.

EMMELINA. Why so alarmed?


ORLANDO. Alarmed!


EMMELINA. Indeed you seemed so.


ORLANDO. Sure you mistake. Alarmed? oh no I was not;
There was no cause -- I could not be alarmed
Upon so slight a ground. Something you said,
But what I know not of your friend.

EMMELINA. Did I?


ORLANDO. That Julia was displeased -- was it not so?
'Twas that, or something like it.

EMMELINA. She complains
That you avoid her.

ORLANDO. How! that I avoid her?
Did Julia say so? ah! you have forgot --
It could not be.

EMMELINA. Why are you terrified?


ORLANDO. No.
Not terrified -- I am not -- but were those
Her very words? you might mistake her meaning;
Did Julia say Orlando shunned her presence?
Oh, did she, could she say so?

EMMELINA. If she did,
Why this disorder? there is no cause.

ORLANDO. No cause?
O there is a cause of dearer worth than empire!
Quick let me fly, and find the fair upbraider,
Tell her she wrongs me, tell her I would die
Rather than meet her anger.
Emmelina faints. Ah, you faint!
What have I said? curse my imprudent tongue!
Look up, sweet innocence! my Emmelina --
My gentle friend awake! look up, fair creature!
It Is your Orlando calls.

EMMELINA. Orlando's voice!
Methought he talked of love -- nay do not mock me,
My heart is but a weak, a very weak one;
I am not weil -- perhaps I Have been to blame.
Spare my confusion.

Exit Emmelina. ORLANDO. So! I Have betrayed my secret,
And struck a poisoned dagger to her heart,
Her innocent heart. Why what a wretch am I!
Ruin approaches, shall I tamely meet it,
And (...) with destruction till it blast me?
No I will sly thee, Julia, fly for ever.
He, sly! what then becomes of Emmelina?
Shah I abandon her? it must be so,
Better escape with this poor wreck of honor,
Than hazard all by staying. -- Rivers here?

Enter RIVERS. RIVERS. The same. My other self! my own Orlando!
I came to seek thee; 'twas in thy kind bosom,
My suffering soul reposed its secret cares,
When doubts and difficulties stood before me;
And now, now when my prosperous fortune shines,
And gilds the smiling hour with her bright beams,
Shall I become a niggard of my bliss,
Defraud thee of thy portion of my joys,
And rob thee of thy well-earn'd claim to share them?

ORLANDO. That I have ever loved thee, witness Heaven!
That I have thought thy friendship the best blessing
That marked the fortune of my happier days,
I here attest the sovereign judge of hearts!
Then think, O think what anguish I endure,
When I declare, in bitterness of spirit,
That we must part --

RIVERS. What does Orlando mean?


ORLANDO. That I must leave thee, Rivers, must renounce
Thy loved society.

RIVERS. Thou have been wronged,
Thy merit has been slighted; sure, my father,
Who knew how dear I held thee -- but he could not --

ORLANDO. He is all goodness; no -- there is a cause --
Seek not to know it.

RIVERS. Now, by holy friendship!
I swear thou shall not leave me; what, just now?
When I have safely passed so many perils,
Escaped so many threatening deaths? returned
To the kind arms of long desiring friendship;
And now, when I expected such a welcome,
As happy souls in paradise bestow,
Upon a new inhabitant, who comes
To taste their blessedness, you coldly tell me,
You will depart; it must not be, Orlando.

ORLANDO. It must, it must.


RIVERS. Ah, must! then tell me wherefore?


ORLANDO. I would not dim thy dawn of happiness,
Nor shade the brighter beams of thy good fortune,
With the dark sullen cloud that hangs over mine.

RIVERS. Is this the heart of him I called my friend?
Full of the graceful weakness of affection,
How have I known it bend at my request!
How lose the power of obstinate resistance,
Because his friend entreated! This, Orlando?
How is he changed!

ORLANDO. Alas, how changed indeed!
How dead to every relish of delight?
How changed in all but in his love for thee!
Yet think not that my nature is grown harder,
That I have lost that ductile, yielding heart;
Rivers, I have not -- oh! it is still too soft;
Even now it melts, it bleeds in tenderness --
Farewell! -- I dare not trust myself -- farewell!

RIVERS. Then thou resolv'st to go?


ORLANDO. This very day.


RIVERS. What do I hear? Today? It must not be;
This is the day that makes my Julia mine.

ORLANDO. Wed her today?


RIVERS. This day unites me to her;
Then stay at least till thou behold'st her mine.

ORLANDO. Impossible! another day were ruin.


RIVERS. Then let me fly to Julia, and conjure her
To bless me with her hand this very hour.

ORLANDO. Oh! no, no, no.


RIVERS. I will: in such a cause
Surely she will forego the rigid forms
Of cold decorum; then, my best Orlando,
I shall receive my Julia from thy hand;
The blessing will be doubled! I shall owe
The precious gift of love to sacred friendship!

ORLANDO. Can thou bear this, my heart?


RIVERS. Then, my Orlando,
Since thy unkind reserve denies my heart
Its partnership in this thy hoard of sorrows,
I will not press to know it; thou shall go,
Soon as the holy priest has made us one:
For oh! 'twill sooth thee in the hour of parting,
To know l'm in possession of my love,
To think I Am blessed with Julia, to reflect
Thou gav'st her to my arms, my bride! my wife!

ORLANDO. Ah! my brain turns!


RIVERS. It Is as I thought; I Will try him.
Aside. Now answer me, Orlando, and with truth;
Hide nothing from thy friend -- do thou not love?

ORLANDO. Ha! how! I am betrayed! he reads my soul.


RIVERS. Have thou with all that tenderness of nature,
Preserved thy bosom from love's soft infection?
Has conquering beauty never touched thy soul?
Come, come, I know full well --

ORLANDO. Ha! do thou know?
And knowing, do thou suffer me to live?
And do thou know my guilt, and call me friend?
He mocks but to destroy me!

RIVERS. Come, no more;
Love is a proud, an arbitrary God,
And will not choose as rigid fathers bid;
I know that thine has destined for thy bride
A Tuscan maid, but hearts disdain all force.

ORLANDO. How Is this? what, do thou justify my passion?


RIVERS. Applaud it -- glory in it -- will assist it.
She is so fair, so worthy to be loved,
That I should be thy rival, were not she
My sister.

ORLANDO. How?


RIVERS. She is another Julia.


ORLANDO. I stood upon a fearful precipice --
I Am giddy still -- oh, yes! I understand thee --
Thy beauteous sister! what a wretch I Have been!
Oh, Rivers! too much softness has undone me.
Yet I will never wrong the maid I love,
Nor injure thee; first let Orlando perish!

RIVERS. Be more explicit.


ORLANDO. For the present spare me.
Think not too hardly of me, noble Rivers!
I am a man, and full of human frailties.
When I am ready to depart, I Will see thee,
Clear all my long accounts of love and honor,
Remove thy doubts, embrace thee, and expire.

Exit Orlando. Manet RIVERS. It must be so -- to what excess he loves her!
Yet wherefore not demand her? for his birth
May claim alliance with the proudest fortune.
Sure there is some hidden cause -- perhaps -- ah, no!
Turn from that thought, my soul! 'twas vile suspicion.
It Is true their faiths are different -- then his father,
Austere and rigid, dooms him to another.
That must not be -- these bars shall be removed;
I Will serve him with my life, nor taste of bliss.
'Till I have sought to make Orlando happy.

Exit. Re-enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO. Wed her today? wed her perhaps this hour?
Hasten the rites for me? I give her to him?
I stand a tame spectator of their bliss?
I live a patient witness of their joy?
First let this dagger drink my heart's warm blood.
Takes a dagger from his bosom, then sees Julia. The sorceress comes! oh,
there is a charm about her,
Which holds my hand, and makes me wish to live.
I shudder at her sight! open thou earth,
And save me from the peril of her charms!

Puts up the dagger. Enter JULIA. JULIA. Methought I heard the cry of one in
pain,
From hence it came; ah, me! my lord, Orlando!
What means that sad, that agonizing voice?
Those sighs which rend your heart? those frantic looks?
Indeed, I Am terrified. What would you do?

ORLANDO. Die.


JULIA. Talk you of death? renounce the fatal thought;
Live for my sake, Orlando.

ORLANDO. Yes, whole ages,
Would nature but extend the narrow limits
Of human life so far.

JULIA. And for the sake
Of Rivers; live for both; he sends me here
To beg you would delay your purposed parting;
His happiness, he swears, if you are absent
Will be but half complete.

ORLANDO. Is it to night?
This marriage, Julia, did you say tonight?

JULIA. It is, and yet you leave us.


ORLANDO. No -- I Will stay,
Since you command, stay and expire before you.

JULIA. What mean you?


ORLANDO. That I Will perish at the feet
Of -- Rivers.

JULIA. Tell your sorrows to my lord;
Upon his faithful breast, repose the weight
That presses you to earth.

ORLANDO. Tell him? Tell Rivers?
Is he not yours? Does not the priest now wait
To make you one? take care, take care, my heart:
What leisure can a happy bridegroom find,
To think upon so lost a wretch as I am?
You hate me, Julia.

JULIA. Hate you? how you wrong me!
Live to partake our joy.

ORLANDO. Hope you for joy?


JULIA. Have I not cause? am I not loved by Rivers?
Rivers, the best, the bravest of his sex!
Whose valor fabled heroes never surpassed,
Whose virtues teach the young, and charm the old;
Whose graces are the wonder of our sex,
And envy of his own.

ORLANDO. Enough! enough!
But, Julia, if you would not here behold me,
Stretched at your feet a lifeless bloody corse,
Promise what I shall now request.

JULIA. What is it?


ORLANDO. That till tomorrow's sun, I ask no longer,
You will defer this marriage.

JULIA. Ha! defer it?
Impossible; what would my Rivers think?

ORLANDO. No matter what; it is for his sake I ask it;
His peace, his happiness, perhaps his life
Depends on what I ask.

JULIA. His life! his life!
Some dreadful thought seems laboring in your breast;
Explain this horrid mystery.

ORLANDO. I dare not.
If you comply, before tomorrow's dawn,
All will be well, the danger past, then finish
These -- happy nuptials; but if you refuse
Tremble for him you love, the altar's self
Will be no safeguard from a madman's rage.

JULIA. What rage? what madman? what remorseless villain?
Orlando -- will not you protect your friend?
Think how he loves you -- he would die for you --
Then save him, on my knees, I beg you save him --
Kneels. Oh! guard my Rivers from this bloody foe.

ORLANDO. Dearer than life I love him -- ask no more,
But promise in the awful face of heaven,
To do what I request -- and promise further,
Not to disclose the cause.

JULIA. Oh save him! save him!


ORLANDO. It Is to preserve him that I ask it: promise
Or see me fall before you

He draws the dagger, she still kneeling. JULIA. I do promise.
Hide, hide that deadly weapon -- I do promise.
Rises. How wild you look! you tremble more than I.
I Will call my Rivers hither.

ORLANDO. Not for worlds.
If you have mercy in your nature, Julia,
Retire. Oh leave me quickly to myself;
Do not expose me to the strong temptation
Which now assaults me; -- Yet you are not gone.

JULIA. Be more composed; I leave you with regret.
As she goes out. His noble mind is shaken from its seat!
What may these transports mean? heaven guard my Rivers!

As Julia goes out, enter Bertrand, he speaks behind. BERTRAND. Why, this is
well; this has a face; she weeps,
He seems disordered. -- Now to learn the cause,
And then make use of what I hear by chance,
As of a thing I knew.
He listens.
ORLANDO. After a pause. And is she gone?
Her parting words shot fire into my soul,
Did she not say she left me with regret?
Her look was tender, and the starting tear,
Filled her bright eye; she left me with regret --
She owned it too.

BERTRAND. 'Twill do.
Comes forward. What have you done?
The charming Julia is dissolved in woe,
Her radiant eyes are quenched in floods of tears,
For you they fall; her blushes have confessed it.

ORLANDO. For me? what say thou? Julia weep for me!
Yet she is gentle, and she would have wept
For thee, for any who but seemed unhappy.

BERTRAND. Ungrateful!


ORLANDO. How?


BERTRAND. Not by her tears, I judge,
But by her words not meant for me to hear.

ORLANDO. What did she say? What did thou hear, good Bertrand?
Speak -- I Am on fire.

BERTRAND. It is not safe to tell you.
Farewell! I would not injure Rivers.

ORLANDO. Stay,
Or tell me all, or I renounce thy friendship.

BERTRAND. That threat unlocks my tongue, I must not lose thee.
Sweet Julia wept, clasped her fair hands, and cried
Why was I left a legacy to Rivers,
Robbed of the power of choice? seeing me she started,
Would have recal'd her words, blushed, and retired.

ORLANDO. No more; thou shall not tempt me to my ruin;
Deny what thou have said, deny it quickly,
Ever I am quite undone; for oh! I feel
Retreating virtue touches its last post,
And my lost soul now verges on destruction.
-- Bertrand! she promised to defer the marriage.

BERTRAND. Then my point's gained, that will make Rivers jealous.
Aside. She loves you.

ORLANDO. No, and even if she did
I have no hope.

BERTRAND. You are too scrupulous.
Be bold and be successful, sure of this,
There is no fault a woman sooner pardons
Than that of which her beauty is the cause.

ORLANDO. Shall I defraud my friend? he bled to gain her?
What! rob the dear preserver of my life
Of all that makes the happiness of his?
And yet her wondrous beauty might excuse.
Nay almost sanctify a perjury.
My soul is up in arms, my reason's lost,
And love and rage, and jealousy and honor,
Pull my divided heart, and tear my soul.

Exit. Manet BERTRAND. Rave on, and beat thy wings; poor bird! you are lim'd,
And vain will be thy struggles to get loose.
-- How much your very honest men lack prudence!
Though all the nobler virtues fill one scale,
Yet place but indiscretion in the other,
In worldly business, and the ways of men,
That single folly shall weigh down the balance,
While the ascending virtues kick the beam.
Here Is this Orlando now, of rarest parts,
Honest, heroic, frank and generous,
As inexperience of mankind can make him:
Yet shall this single weakness, this imprudence
Pull down the heaviest plagues upon his head,
And snare his heedless soul beyond redemption:
While dull unfeeling hearts, and frozen spirits,
Sordidly safe, secure, because untempted,
Look up, and wonder at the generous vice,
They wanted wit to form, and souls to dare.

End of the Third Act.
ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE, an Apartment. EMMELINA. HOW many ways there are of being wretched!
The avenues to happiness how few!
When will this busy, fluttering heart be still?
When will it cease to feel, and beat no more?
Even now it shudders with a dire presage
Of something terrible it fears to know.
Entering, I saw my venerable father,
In earnest conference with the Count Orlando;
Shame and confusion filled Orlando's eye,
While stern resentment fired my father's cheek.
And look, he comes, with terror on his brow!
He sees me, he beholds his child, and now
The terror of his look is lost in love,
In fond, paternal love.

Enter GUILDFORD. GUILDFORD. Come to my arms,
And there conceal, that sweet, that asking eye,
Lest it should read what I would hide for ever,
Would hide from all, but most would hide from thee,
Thy father's grief, his shame, his rage, his tears.

EMMELINA. Tears! heaven and earth! behold my father weeps!


GUILDFORD. He who has drawn this sorrow from my eyes,
Shall pay me back again in tears of blood.
It Is for thy sake, my child.

EMMELINA. For me, for me?
Hear, heaven, and judge; hear, heaven, and punish me!
If any crime of mine --

GUILDFORD. Thou art all innocence,
Just what a parent's fondest wish would frame;
No fault of thine ever stained thy father's cheek,
For if I blushed it was to hear thy virtues,
And think that thou wast mine; and if I wept
It was from joy and gratitude to heaven,
That made me father of a child like thee.
Orlando! --

EMMELINA. What of him?


GUILDFORD. I cannot tell thee;
An honest shame, a virtuous pride forbids.

EMMELINA. Speak.


GUILDFORD. Can thou not guess and spare thy father?


EMMELINA. Perhaps -- perhaps I can -- and yet I will not:
Tell me the worst while I have sense to hear.
Thou will not speak -- nay never turn away;
Do thou not know that fear is worse than grief?
There may be bounds to grief, fear knows no bounds;
"In grief we know the worst of what we feel,
"But who can tell the end of what we fear?"
Grief mourns some sorrow past, and therefore known,
But fear runs wild with horrible conjecture.

GUILDFORD. Then hear the worst, and arm thy soul to bear it.
He has -- he has -- Orlando has refused thee.

EMMELINA. (After a long pause.) It Is well -- it is very well -- it is as it
should be.


GUILDFORD. Oh, there is an eloquence in that mute woe,
Which mocks all language. Speak, relieve thy heart,
Thy bursting heart; thy father cannot bear it.
Am I a man? no more of this, fond eyes!
I am grown weaker than a chidden infant,
While not a sigh escapes to tell thy pain.

EMMELINA. See, I am calm; I do not shed a tear;
The warrior weeps, the woman is a hero!

GUILDFORD. (Embraces her.) My glorious child! now thou art mine indeed!
Forgive me, if I thought thee fond and weak.
I have a Roman matron for my daughter,
And not a feeble girl. And yet I fear,
For oh! I know thy tenderness of soul,
I fear this silent anguish but portends
Some dread convulsion fatal to thy peace.

EMMELINA. I will not shame thy blood; and yet, my father
Methinks thy daughter should not be refused?
Refused? It has a harsh, ungrateful sound;
Thou shoud'st have found a softer term; refused?
And have I then been held so cheap? Refused?
Been treated like the light ones of my sex,
Held up to sale? been offered, and refused?

GUILDFORD. Long have I known thy love, I thought it mutual;
To spare thy blushes met the Count --

EMMELINA. No more:
I am content to know I am rejected;
But save my pride the mortifying tale,
Spare me particulars of how, and when,
And do not parcel out thy daughter's shame.
No flowers of rhetoric, no arts of speech
Can change the fact -- Orlando has refused me.

GUILDFORD. He shall repent this outrage.

EMMELINA. Think no more on it:
I Will teach thee how to bear it; I Will grow proud,
As gentle spirits still are apt to do
When cruel slight, or killing scorn falls on them.
Come virgin dignity, come female pride,
Come wounded modesty, come slighted love,
Come scorn, come conscious worth, come, black despair!
Support me, arm me, fill me with my wrongs!
Sustain this feeble spirit! -- But for thee,
But for thy sake, my dear, fond, injured father,
I think I could have borne it.

GUILDFORD. Thou have a brother;
He shall assert thy cause.

EMMELINA. First strike me dead!
No, in the wild distraction of my spirit,
This mad, conflicting tumult of my soul,
Hear my fond pleading -- save me from that curse;
Thus I adjure thee by the dearest ties,
Kneels. Which link society; by the sweet names
Of Parent and of Child; by all the joys
These tender claims have yielded, I adjure thee
Breathe not this fatal secret to my brother;
Oh tell him not his sister was refused,
That were consummate woe, full, perfect ruin!
I cannot speak the rest, but thou can guess it
And tremble to become a childless father.

Exit Emmelina. GUILDFORD. What art thou, Life! thou lying vanity!
Thou promiser, who never mean to pay!
Yet let me not complain; I have a son,
Just such a son as heaven in mercy gives,
When it would bless supremely; he is happy;
His ardent wishes will this day be crowned,
He weds the maid he loves; in him, at least,
My soul will taste felicity. -- He Is here;
He seems disordered.

Enter RIVERS. Not seeing Guildford. RIVERS. Yes, I fondly thought
Not all the tales which malice might devise,
Not all the leagues combined hell might form
Could shake her steady soul.

GUILDFORD. What means my son?
Where is thy bride?

RIVERS. O name her not.


GUILDFORD. Not name her?


RIVERS. No: if possible, not think of her,
Would I could help it: -- Julia! oh my Julia!
Curse my fond tongue! I said I would not name her;
I did not think to do it, but my heart
Is full of her idea; her loved image
Fills all my soul, and shuts out other thoughts;
My lips enamored of the darling sound,
Dwell on her name, and all my talk is Julia.

GUILDFORD. It Is as it should be; ever the midnight bell
Sound in thy raptured ear, this charming Julia
Will be thy wife.

RIVERS. No.


GUILDFORD. How?


RIVERS. She has refused.


GUILDFORD. Say thou?


RIVERS. She has.


GUILDFORD. Why who would be a father!
Who that could guess the wretchedness it brings,
But would entreat of heaven to write him childless?

RIVERS. 'Twas but a little hour ago we parted,
As happy lovers should; but when again
I sought her presence, with impatient haste,
Told her the priest, the altar, all was ready,
She blushed, she wept, and vowed it could not be;
That reasons of importance to our peace
Forbad the nuptial rites to be performed
Before tomorrow.

GUILDFORD. She consents tomorrow?
She but defers the marriage, not declines it.

RIVERS. Mere subterfuge! mere female artifice!
What reason should forbid our instant union?
Wherefore tomorrow? wherefore not tonight?
What difference could a few short hours have made?
Or if they could, why not avow the cause?

GUILDFORD. I have grown old in camps, have lived in courts;
The toils of bright ambition have I known,
Wooed greatness and enjoyed it, till disgust
Followed possession; still I fondly looked
Beyond the present pain for distant joy,
Looked for the hour of honorable ease
When, safe from all the storms and wrecks of fate,
My shattered bark at rest, I might enjoy
An old man's blessings, liberty and leisure,
Domestic happiness, and smiling peace.
The hour of age is come! I feel it here,
Its sorrows, pains, infirmities and cares,
But where, oh where is the untasted peace it promised?

Exit Guildford. RIVERS. I would not deeper wound my father's peace
By telling him the cause of my resentment.
I must seek further; yet I know too much.
It must be so -- his grief, his sudden parting:
Fool that I was, not to perceive at once --
But friendship blinded me, and love betrayed.
Bertrand was right, he told me she was changed,
And would, on some pretense, delay the marriage,
I hoped 'twas malice all. -- Yonder she comes,
Dissolved in tears; I cannot see them fall,
And be a man; I will not, dare not meet her,
Her blandishments would sooth me to false peace,
And if she asked it, I should pardon all.

Exit. Enter JULIA. JULIA. Stay, Rivers, stay, barbarian! hear me speak;
Return, inhuman! -- best beloved! return,
Oh! I will tell thee all, restore thy peace,
Kneel at thy feet, and sue for thy forgiveness.
He hears me not -- alas! he will not hear.
Break, thou poor heart, since Rivers is unkind.

Enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO. Julia in tears?


JULIA. Alas! you have undone me!
Behold the wretched victim of her promise?
I urged, at your request, the fatal suit
Which has destroyed my peace; Rivers suspects me,
And I am wretched.

ORLANDO. Better it is to weep
A temporary ill, than weep forever;
That anguish must be mine.

JULIA. Ha! weep for ever?
Can they know wretchedness who know not love?

ORLANDO. Not love! oh, cruel friendship! tyrant honor!


JULIA. Friendship! alas, how cold is that to love!


ORLANDO. Too well I know it; both alike destroy me,
I am the save of both, and more than either
The slave of honor.

JULIA. If you then have felt
The bitter agonies --

ORLANDO. Talk you of agonies?
You who are loved again? oh, they are mine,
The pangs, the agonies of hopeless passion,
Yes, I do love -- I dote, I die for love.

JULIA. I understand you -- Emmelina!


ORLANDO. (Falls at her feet.) Julia!


JULIA. How?


ORLANDO. Nay never start -- I know I am a villain;
I know thy hand is destined to another,
That other is my friend, that friend the man
To whom I owe my life. Yes, I adore thee;
Spite of the black ingratitude adore thee;
I dote upon my friend, and yet betray him,
I Am bound to Emmelina, yet forsake her,
I love the noble Rivers more than life,
But Julia more than honor.

JULIA. Hold? astonishment
Has sealed my lips; whence sprung this monstrous daring?

ORLANDO. (Rises.) From despair.


JULIA. What can you hope from me?


ORLANDO. Death! I nor hope, nor look for aught but death.
Think thou I need reproof? think thou I need
To be reminded that my love's a crime?
That every moral tie forbids my passion,
And angry heaven will shower it is vengeance on me?
But mark -- I do not, will not, cannot repent;
I do not even wish to love thee less;
I glory in my crime. Come, crown my misery,
Triumph, exult in thy pernicious beauty,
Then stab me with the praises of my rival,
The man on earth -- whom most I ought to love.

JULIA. I leave thee to remorse, and to that penitence
Thy crime demands.
(Going.)
ORLANDO. A moment stay.


JULIA. I dare not.


ORLANDO. Hear all my rival's worth, and all my guilt.
The unsuspecting Rivers sent me to thee,
To plead ^is cause; I basely broke my trust,
And, like a villain, pleaded for myself.

JULIA. Did he? Did Rivers? Then he loves me still --
Quick let me seek him out.

ORLANDO. (Takes out the dagger.) First take this dagger,
Had you not forced it from my hand today,
I had not lived to know this guilty moment:
Take it, present it to the happy Rivers,
Tell him to plunge it in a traytor's heart,
Tell him his friend, Orlando, is that traitor,
"Tell him Orlando forged the guilty tale,
"Tell him Orlando is the only foe,"
Who at the altar would have murdered Rivers,
And then have died himself.

JULIA. Farewell -- repent -- think better.


Exit Julia. As she goes out, he still looks after her. Enter RIVERS. RIVERS.
Turn, villain, turn.


ORLANDO. Ha! Rivers here?


RIVERS. Yes, Rivers.


ORLANDO. Gape wide, thou friendly earth, for ever hide me,
Rife Alps, ye crushing mountains bury me.

RIVERS. Nay, turn, look on me.


ORLANDO. Rivers! oh, I cannot,
I dare not, I have wronged thee.

RIVERS. Doubly wronged me;
Thy complicated crimes cry out for vengeance,

ORLANDO. Take it.


RIVERS. But I would take it as a man.
Draw. Rivers Draws.

ORLANDO. Not for a thousand worlds.


RIVERS. Not fight?
Why you are a coward too as well as villain:
I shall despise as well as hate thee.

ORLANDO. Do;
Yet wrong me not, for if I am a coward,
It Is but to thee; there does not breathe the man,
Thyself excepted, who durst call me so
And live; but, oh! it is sure to heaven and thee.
I am the veriest coward guilt ever made.
Now as thou art a man revenge thyself;
Strike!

RIVERS. No, not stab thee like a base assassin,
But meet thee as a foe.

ORLANDO. Think of thy wrongs.


RIVERS. I feel them here.


ORLANDO. Think of my treachery.


RIVERS. Oh, wherefore wast thou false? how have I loved thee!


ORLANDO. Of that no more: think of thy father's grief,
Of Emmelina's wrongs --

RIVERS. Provoke me not.


ORLANDO. Of Julia --


RIVERS. Ha! I shall forget my honor,
And do a brutal violence upon thee,
Would tarnish my fair fame. Villain, and coward!
Traitor! will nothing rouse thee.

ORLANDO. (Drawing.) Swelling heart!
Yet this I have deserved, all this, and more.

As they prepare to fight, enter EMMELINA hastily. EMMELINA. Lend me your
swiftness lightnings -- it is too late.
See they are engaged -- oh no -- they live, both live.
Hold, cruel men!

RIVERS. Unlucky! it is my sister.


EMMELINA. Ye men of blood! if yet you have not lost,
All sense of human kindness, all compassion,
If ever you were dear to one another,
If ever you desire or look for mercy.
When in the wild extremity of anguish,
You supplicate that judge who has declared
That vengeance is his own -- Oh, hear me now,
Hear a fond wretch whom misery has made bold,
Spare, spare each other's life -- spare your own souls.

ORLANDO. (To Rivers.) Why has thy lagging vengeance been so slow?


EMMELINA. Does death want engines? is his power grown weak?
"Has fell disease forgotten to destroy?"
Are there not pestilence, and spotted plagues?
Devouring deluges, consuming fires,
Earthquakes, and hurricanes, and haggard famine,
That man must perish by the hand of man,
Nay, to complete the horror, friend by friend?

RIVERS. What! shall I then endure this outrage tamely?
Is honor nothing?

EMMELINA. Honor! it is a phantom,
Who having nothing solid in himself,
Decks his thin form in the bright robe of virtue:
Honor! I know him well, it is the fell demon
Who seeds on orphans tears, and widows groans,
And slakes his impious thirst in human blood.
"It Is the arch-fiend's prime instrument of mischief,
"His grand device to people his dark realms
"With noble spirits, who but for this cursed honor
"Had been at peace on earth, or blessed in heaven."
With this false honor Christians have no commerce,
Religion disavows, and truth disowns it.

ORLANDO. (Throws away his sword.) An angel speaks, and angels claim obedience.


RIVERS. (To Orlando.) This is the heart thou have wronged.


EMMELINA. (Comes up to Orlando.) I pity thee;
Calamity has taught me how to pity;
Before I knew distress my heart was hard,
But now it melts at every touch of woe,
"Baneful prosperity corrupts the heart,
"But wholesome sufferings bring it back to virtue;
Rivers, he once was good and just like thee.
Who shall be proud and think he stands secure,
If thy Orlando's false?

RIVERS. Think of his crime.


EMMELINA. Oh, think of his temptation! think'twas Julia;
Thy heart could not resist her, how should his?
It is the very error of his friendship;
Your souls were framed so very much alike,
He could not choose but love whom Rivers loved.

ORLANO. Think thou there is in death a pang like this?
Strike, my brave friend, be sudden and be silent.
Death, which is terrible to happy men,
To me will be a blessing; I have lost
All that could make life dear; I Have lost my friend,
I Have stabbed the peace of mind of that fair creature,
I have survived my honor; this is dying!
The mournful fondness of officious love
Will plant no thorns upon my dying pillow,
No precious tears embalm my memory,
But curses follow it.

EMMELINA. See Rivers melts;
He pities thee.

ORLANDO. I Will spare thy noble heart
The pain of punishing; Orlando's self
Revenges both.

Goes to stab himself with the dagger. EMMELINA. Barbarian! kill me first.


RIVERS. (Snatching the dagger. Thou shall not die, I swear I love thee still;
That secret sympathy which long has bound us,
Pleads for thy life with sweet but strong entreaty.
Thou shall repair the wrongs of that dear saint,
And be again my friend.

ORLANDO. Oh, hear me.


EMMELINA. No.
I cannot stoop to live on charity,
And what but charity is love compelled?
I Have been a weak, a fond, believing woman,
Easy, it is true, beyond my sexes softness,
But with a woman's weakness, I Have her pride;
I loved with virtue, yet I fondly loved;
That passion fixed my fate, determined all,
And stained the color of my life with woe.
Hearts that love well, love long, they love but once.
My peace thou have destroyed, my honor's mine:
She who aspired to gain Orlando's heart,
Shall never owe Orlando's hand to pity.

Exit Emmelina. ORLANDO. (After a pause) And I still live!


RIVERS. Farewell! should I stay longer
I might forget my vow.

ORLANDO. Yet hear me, Rivers.


Exit Rivers, Orlando following. Enter BERTRAND on the other side. BERTRAND.
How Is this? my fortune fails me, both alive!
I thought by stirring Rivers to this quarrel,
There was at least an equal chance against him.
I work invisible, and like the tempter,
My agency is seen in its effects.
Well, honest Bertrand! now for Julia's letter.
Takes ok! a letter. This fond epistle of a love sick maid.
I Have sworn to give, but did not swear to whom.
Give it my love, said she, my dearest lord:
Riv^rs she ^^ant; there is no address -- that is lucky.
Then where is the harm? Orlando is a lord,
As well as Rivers, loves her too as well.
Breaks open the letter. I must admire your style -- your pardon, fair one.
Runs over it. Do I not tread in air, and walk on stars?
There Is not a word but fits Orlando's case
As well as Rivers'; -- tender to excess --
No name -- 'twill do; his faith in me is boundless;
Then, as the brave are still, he is unsuspecting,
And credulous beyond a woman's weakness.
Going out he spies the dagger. Orlando's dagger -- ha! it is greatly thought.
This may do noble service; such a scheme!
My genius catches fire! the bright idea
Is formed at once, and fit for glorious action.

Exit. End of the Fourth Act.
ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE, the Garden. BERTRAND. IT WAS here we were to meet; where does he stay?
This compound of strange contradicting parts,
Too flexible for virtue, yet too virtuous
To make a glorious, bold, successful villain.
Conscience, be still; preach not remorse to me;
Remorse is for the luckless, failing villain:
He who succeeds repents not; penitence
Is but another name for ill success.
Was Nero penitent when Rome was burnt?
No: but had Nero been a petty villain,
Subject to laws and liable to fear,
Nero perchance had been a penitent.
He comes: -- This paper makes him all my own.

Enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO. At length this wretched, tempest beaten bark
Seems to have found its haven: I Am resolved;
My wavering principles are fixed to honor;
My virtue gathers force, my mind grows strong,
I feel an honest confidence within,
A precious earnest of returning peace.

BERTRAND. Who feels secure stands on the verge of ruin.
[Aside. Trust me it joys my heart to see you thus:
What have I not attempted for your sake!
My love for you has warped my honest nature,
And friendship has infringed on higher duties.

ORLANDO. It was a generous fault.


BERTRAND. Yet 'twas a fault.
Oh for a flinty heart that knows no weakness,
But moves right onward, unseduc'd by friendship,
And all the soft affections of the soul!

ORLANDO. This is my last farewell; absence alone
Can prop my stagg'ring virtue.

BERTRAND. You're resolved:
Then Julia's favors come too late.

ORLANDO. What mean thou?


BERTRAND. Nay, nothing: I renounce those weak affections
Which have misled us both; I too repent,
And will return the letter back to Julia.

ORLANDO. Letter? what letter? Julia write to me?
I will not see it. -- What would Rivers say?
Bertrand! he saved my life: -- I will not see it.

BERTRAND. I do not mean you should; nay I refused
To bring it you.

ORLANDO. Refused to bring the letter?


BERTRAND. Yes, I refused at first.


ORLANDO. Then thou have brought it?
My faithful Bertand! -- come.

BERTRAND. 'Twere best not to see it.


ORLANDO. Not see it? how, not read my Julia's letter?
An empire should not bribe me to forbear.
Come, come.

BERTRAND. Alas how frail is human virtue:
My resolution melts, and though I mean not
To trust you with the letter, I must tell you
With what a thousand, thousand charms she gave it.
Take this, said she, and as Orlando reads it,
Attend to every accent of his voice,
Watch every little motion of his eye,
Mark if it sparkles when he talks of Julia,
If when he speaks, poor Julia be the theme,
If when he sighs his bosom heave for Julia;
Note every trisling act, each little look,
For, oh! of what importance is the least
To hapless Julia.

ORLANDO. The delicious poison
Has tainted all my soul! give me the letter.
Bertrand offers it, Orlando refuses Ha! where is the virtue which but now I
boasted?
It Is lost, it is gone -- conflicting passions tear me,
I am again a villain. -- Give it -- no;
A spark of honor strikes upon my soul.
Take back the letter; take it back, good Bertrand!
Spite of myself compel me to be just:
I will not read it.

BERTRAND. How your friend will thank you!
Another day makes Julia his for ever.
Even now the great pavilion is prepared,
There will the nuptial rites be solemnized,
Julia already dressed in bridal robes,
Like some fair victim. --

ORLANDO. O no more, no more.
What can she write to me?

BERTRAND. Some prudent counsel.


ORLANDO. Then wherefore fear to read it? come, I Will venture:
What wondrous harm can one poor letter do?
The letter -- quick -- the letter.

BERTRAND. Since you force me.


Gives it. ORLANDO. Be firm, ye shivering nerves. It is her hand.
Reads. "To spare my blushes Bertand brings you this.
How have you wronged me! you believed me false;
'Twas my compassion for your friend deceived you.
Meet me at midnight in the great Pavilion;
Till then avoid my presence; from that hour
My future life is yours; your once-lov'd friend
I pity and esteem, but you alone
Possess the heart of Julia."
This to me!
I dream, I rave, it is all Elysium round me,
And thou, my better angel! this to me?

BERTRAND. I Am dumb: oh Julia, what a fall is thine?


ORLANDO. What is it such a crime to love? away --
Thy moral comes too late; thou shoud'st have urged
Thy caution sooner, or not urged at all;
Thou shoud'st -- alas! I know not what I say --
But this I know, the charming Julia loves me,
Appoints a meeting at the dead of night!
She loves! The rest is all beneath my care.

BERTRAND. Be circumspect; the hour is just at hand;
Since all is ready for your purposed parting,
See your attendants be disposed aright,
Near the Pavilion Gate.

ORLANDO. Why so?


BERTRAND. Why so?
Make Julia the companion of your flight;
It Is what she means, you must not mind her struggles;
A little gentle violence perhaps,
To make her yield to what she had resolved,
And save her pride, she will thank you for it after.

ORLANDO. Take her by force? I like not that; O Bertrand,
There is a mutinous spirit in my blood,
That wars against my conscience. -- Tell my Julia,
I will not fail to meet her.

BERTRAND. I obey.
Be near the garden; I shall soon return.

Exit Bertrand. ORLANDO. This giant sin whose bulk so lately scared me,
Shrinks to a common size; I now embrace
What I but lately feared to look upon.
Why what a progress have I made in guilt!
Where is the hideous form it lately wore?
It grows familiar to me; I can think,
Contrive, and calmly mediate on mischief,
Talk temp'rately of sin, and cherish crimes
I lately so abhorred, that had they once
But glanced upon the surface of my fancy
I had been terrified. Oh conscience! conscience!

Exit Orlando. Scene changes to another part of the Garden. A grand Pavilion.
The moon shining. Enter RIVERS in a melancholy attitude. RIVERS. Ye dear, ye
well known scenes of former bliss!
Scenes which I hoped were fated to bestow
Still dearer blessings in a beauteous bride!
Thou gay pavilion which art dressed so fair
To witness my espousals, why, ah! why
Art thou adorned in vain? Yet still I court thee,
For Julia loved thee once: -- dear faithless Julia!
Yet is she false? Orlando swore she was not:
It may be so; yet she avoids my presence,
Keeps close from every eye, but most from mine.

Enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO. Ha! Rivers here? would I had shunned his walks?
How shall I meet the man I mean to wrong?

RIVERS. Why does Orlando thus expose his health
To this cold air?

ORLANDO. I ask the same of Rivers?


RIVERS. Because this solitude, this silent hour
Feeds melancholy thoughts, and sooths my soul.
My Julia will not see me.

ORLANDO. How?


RIVERS. She denies me
Admittance to her presence.

ORLANDO. Aside. Then I Am lost,
Confirmed a villain, now it is plain she loves me.

RIVERS. She will not pardon me this single fault
Of jealous love, though thou had cleared up all.

ORLANDO. Wait 'till tomorrow, all will then be known.

RIVERS. Wait 'till tomorrow! Look at that pavilion;
All was prepared; yes, I dare tell thee all,
For thou art honest now.

ORLANDO. Aside. That wounds too deeply.


RIVERS. Soon as the midnight bell gave the glad summons,
This dear pavilion had beheld her mine.

ORLANDO. All will be well tomorrow. -- (Aside.) -- If I stay
I shall betray the whole. -- Good night, my Rivers.

RIVERS. Good night; go you to rest; I still shall walk.


Exit Orlando. RIVERS. Yes, I will trace her haunts; my too fond heart
Like a poor bird that is hunted from its nest,
Dares not return, and knows not how to go;
Still it delights to hover round the spot
Which lately held its treasure; eyes it still,
And with heartbreaking tenderness surveys
The scene of joys which never may return.

Exit. Scene changes to another Part of the Garden. Re-enter ORLANDO. ORLANDO.
Did he say rest? talked he of rest to me?
Can rest and guilt associate? but no matter,
I cannot now go back; then such a prize
Would make archangels forfeit their allegiance.
I dare not think; reflection leads to madness.

Enter BERTRAND. Bertrand! I was not made for this dark work;
My heart recoils -- poor Rivers!
BERTRAND. What of Rivers?


ORLANDO. I Have seen him.


BERTRAND. Where?


ORLANDO. Before the great pavilion.


BERTRAND. (Aside.) That Is lucky, saves me trouble, were he absent,
Half of my scheme had failed.

ORLANDO. He Is most unhappy;
He wished me rest, spoke kindly to me, Bertrand;
How, how can I betray him?

BERTRAND. He deceives you;
He Is on the watch, else wherefore now abroad,
At this late hour? beware of treachery.

ORLANDO. I am myself a traitor.


BERTRAND. Come, no more,
The time draws near, you know the cypress walk,
It Is dark.

ORLANDO. The fitter for dark deeds like mine.


BERTRAND. I have prepared your men, when the bell strikes
Go into the pavilion; there you will find
The blushing maid, who with faint screams perhaps
Will feign resentment. But you want a sword.

ORLANDO. A sword! -- I Will murder no one -- why a sword?


BERTRAND. It Is prudent to be armed; no words, take mine;
There may be danger, Julia may be lost,
This night secures or loses her for ever.
The cypress walk -- spare none who look like spies.

ORLANDO. (Looking at the sword.) How deeply is that soul involved in guilt,
Who does not hold communion with it is thought,
Nor ask itself what it designs to do!

Exit Orlando. BERTRAND. Thus far propitious fortune fills my sails;
Yet still I doubt his milkiness of soul;
My next exploit must be to find out Rivers,
And, as from Julia, give him a feigned message,
To come in haste to the pavilion gate;
There shall Orlando's well-arm'd servants meet him,
And take his righteous soul from this bad world;
If they should fail, his honest cousin Bertrand
Will help him onward in his way to heaven.
Then, this good dagger which I Will leave beside him,
Will, while it proves the deed, conceal the doer;
It Is not an English instrument of mischief,
And who will suspect good Bertrand wore a dagger?
To clear me further, l've no sword -- unarmed --
Poor helpless Bertrand! Then no longer poor.
But Guildford's heir, and lord of these fair lands.

Exit Bertrand. Enter ORLANDO on the other side. ORLANDO. Draw thy dun curtain
round, oh, night! black night!
Inspirer and concealer of foul crimes!
Thou wizard night! who conjur'st up foul thoughts,
And make him bold who elle would start at guilt;
Beneath thy horrid veil he dares to act,
What in broad day he would not dare to think.
Oh, night! thou hid'st the dagger's point from men,
But can thou screen the assassin from himself?
Shut out the eye of heaven? extinguish conscience?
Or heal the wounds of honor? Oh, no, no, no!
Yonder she goes -- the guilty, charming Julia!
My genius drives me on -- Julia, I come.

Runs off. SCENE, the Pavilion. An arched Door, through which JULIA and her
Maid come forward on the Stage. JULIA. Not here? not come? look out, my
faithful Anna.
There was a time -- oh, time for ever dear!
When Rivers would not make his Julia wait.
Perhaps he blames me, thinks the appointment bold,
Too daring, too unlike his bashful Julia;
But 'twas the only means my faithful love
Devised to save him from Orlando's rashness.
I have kept close, refused to see my Rivers;
Now all is still, and I have ventured forth,
With this kind maid, and virtue for my guard.
Come, we'll go in, he cannot sure be long.

They go into the Pavilion. Enter ORLANDO, his sword drawn and bloody, his hair
dishevelled. ORLANDO. What have I done? a deed that earns damnation.
Where shall I fly? Ha! the pavilion door!
It Is open -- it invites me to fresh guilt;
I Will not go in -- let that fallen angel wait,
And curse her stars as I do.
The midnight Bell strikes. Hark! the bell!
Demons of darkness, what a peal is that!
Again! 'twill wake the dead -- I cannot bear it.
It Is terrible as the last trumpet's sound!
That was the marriage signal! powers of hell,
What blessings have I blasted! Rivers! -- Julia!

Julia comes out. JULIA. My Rivers calls; I come, I come. -- Orlando!


ORLANDO. Yes,
Thou beautiful deceiver! it is that wretch.

JULIA. That perjured friend.


ORLANDO. That devil!


JULIA. I Am betrayed.
Why art thou here?

ORLANDO. Thou can make ruin lovely,
Or I would ask, why did thou bring me here?

JULIA. I bring thee here?


ORLANDO. Yes, thou, bright falsehood! thou.


JULIA. No, by my hopes of heaven! where is my Rivers?
Some crime is meant.

ORLANDO. (Catches her hand.) Julia! the crime is done.
Do thou not shudder? art thou not amazed?
Art thou not cold, and blasted with my touch?
Is not thy blood congealed? does no black horror
Fill thy presaging soul? look at these hands;
Julia! they are stained with blood; blood, Julia, blood!
Nay, look upon them.

JULIA. Ah! I dare not. -- Blood!


ORLANDO. Yes, thou dear false one, with the noblest blood,
That ever stained a dark assassin's hand.
Had not thy letter with the guilty message
To meet thee here this hour, blinded my honor,
And wrought my passion into burning phrenzy,
Whole worlds should not have bribed me.

JULIA. Letter and message?
I sent thee none.

ORLANDO. Then Bertrand has betrayed me,
And I have done a deed beyond all reach,
All hope of mercy -- I have murdered Rivers.

JULIA. Oh! (She falls into her maid's arms.)


ORLANDO. Here Is the reward which love prepared for murder!
Thus hell rewards its instruments!

Enter GUILDFORD, with Servants. GUILDFORD. Where is he?
Where is this midnight murderer? this assassin?
This is the place Orlando's servant named.

ORLANDO. The storm comes on. It Is Guildford, good old man!
Behold the wretch accursed of heaven and thee.

GUILDFORD. Accursed of both indeed. How, Julia fainting?


ORLANDO. She Is pure as holy truth; she was deceived,
And so was I.

GUILDFORD. Who tempted thee to this?


ORLANDO. Love, hell, and Bertrand.


JULIA. (Recovering.) Give me back my Rivers,
I will not live without him. -- Oh, my father!

GUILDFORD. Father! I Am none; I am no more a father;
I have no child; my son is basely murdered,
And my sweet daughter at the fatal news
Is quite bereft of reason.

ORLANDO. Seize me, bind me:
If death's too great a mercy let me live:
Drag me to some damp dungeon's horrid gloom,
Deep as the center, dark as my offenses;
Come, do your office, take my sword: oh, Bertrand,
Yet, ever I perish, could it reach thy heart!

hey seize Orlando. JULIA. I will not long survive thee, oh, my Rivers.


Enter RIVERS with the Dagger. RIVERS. Who calls on Rivers with a voice so sad,
So full of sweetness?

GUILDFORD. Ah, my son!


JULIA. It Is he, it is he!


[Julia and Rivers run into cach other's arms. Orlando breaks from the guards
and falls on his knees.] ORLANDO. He lives, he lives, the god-like Rivers lives!
Hear it, ye host of heaven! witness ye saints,
Recording angels tell it in your songs,
Breathe it celestial spirits to your lutes,
That Rivers lives!

JULIA. Explain this wondrous happiness.


RIVERS. 'Twas Bertrand whom Orlando killed; the traitor
Has with his dying breath confessed the whole.

ORLANDO. Good sword, I thank thee!


RIVERS. In his confusion
Orlando missed the path he was to take,
And passed through that where Bertrand lay concealed,
To watch the event; Orlando thought 'twas me,
And that I played him false; the walk was dark.
In Bertrand's bloody hand I found this dagger,
With which he meant to take my life; but how
Were you alarmed?

GUILDFORD. One of Orlando's men,
Whom wealth could never bribe to join in murder --

ORLANDO. Murder! I bribe to murder?


RIVERS. No, 'twas Bertrand
Bribed them to that cursed deed; he loved my sister.

ORLANDO. Exquisite villain!


GUILDFORD. Fly to Emmelina,
If any spark of reason yet remain,
Tell her the joyful news. -- Alas she is here!
Wildly she flies -- Ah, my distracted child!

Enter EMMELINA distracted. EMMELINA. Off, off! I will have way! ye shall not
hold me:
I come to seek my love; is he not here?
Tell me, ye virgins, have ye seen my love,
Or know you where his flocks repose at noon?
My love is comely -- sure you must have seen him,
It Is the great promiser! he who vows and swears,
In truth he might deceive a wiser maid.
I loved him once, he then was innocent,
He was no murderer then, indeed he was not,
He had not killed my brother.

RIVERS. Nor has now;
Thy brother lives.

EMMELINA. I know it -- yes, he lives
Among the cherubim. Murd'rers too will live:
But where? I Will tell you where -- down, down, down down.
How deep it is! it is fathomless -- it is dark!
No -- there is a pale blue flame -- ah, poor Orlando!

GUILDFORD. My heart will burst.


ORLANDO. Pierce mine and that will ease it.


EMMELINA. (Comes up to her father.) I knew a maid who loved -- but she was mad
--
Fond foolish girl! Thank heaven I am not mad;
Yet the afflicting angel has been with me;
But do not tell my father, he would grieve,
Sweet, good, old man -- perhaps he would weep to hear it:
I never saw my father weep but once,
I Will tell you when it was -- I did not weep;
'Twas when -- but soft, my brother must not know it,
'Twas when his poor fond daughter was refused.

GUILDFORD. Who can bear this?


ORLANDO. I will not live to bear it.


EMMELINA. (Comes up to Orlando.) Take comfort, thou poor wretch! I Will not
appear
Against thee, nor shall Rivers; but blood must,
Blood will appear; there is no concealing blood.
What Is that? my brother's ghost -- it vanishes;
Catches hold of Rivers. Stay, take me with thee, take me to the skies;
I have thee fast; thou shall not go without me.
But hold -- may we not take the murderer with us?
That look says no. Why then I Will not go with thee.
Yet hold me fast -- it is dark -- I Am lost -- I Am gone.

Dies. ORLANDO. One crime makes many needful: this day's sin
Blots out a life of virtue. Good old man!
My bosom bleeds for thee; thy child is dead,
And I the cause. It Is but a poor atonement,
But I can make no other.
Stabs himself.
RIVERS. What have thou done?


ORLANDO. Filled up the measure of my sins. Oh, mercy!
Eternal goodness pardon this last guilt!
Rivers, thy hand -- ah me! farewell! forgive.

Dies. The curtain falls to soft music. End of the Fifth Act.
Lately published, by the same Author.
I. Essays on various Subjects, principally dedesigned for young ladies, 3d
edition, price 3s. sewed. II. Percy: a Tragedy. 2d edition. 1s 6d III. Sir
Eldred of the Bower, and the Bleeding Rock, Legendary Tales. 2d edition. 1s 6d
IV. Ode to Dragon, Mr. Garrick's house dog at Hampton, price 6d V. The Search
after Happiness, a pastoral drama. 7th edition, price 1s 6d VI. The Inflexible
Captive, a Tragedy. 3d edition, 1s 6d.
Printed for T. Cadell in the Strand.


