HECUBA, A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

Rectius Iliacum carmen deducis in Actus
Quam si proferres ignota indictaque primus.
LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall. MDCCLXII. [Price One
Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO THOMAS BARRETT, Esquire THE FOLLOWING TRAGEDY IS INSCRIBED, BY HIS OBLIGED, AND
VERY AFFECTIONATE, HUMBLE SERVANT, The AUTHOR.

Advertisement.
IT may perhaps be necessary to acquaint the reader, that the author has
ventured to make Polydore a person of the Drama, on the authority of Hyginus, a
Greek grammarian, who tells us in one of his fables, that Ilione, by a feigned
murder, deceived Polymestor, and preserved her brother's life.

PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. LLOYD.
And spoken by Mr. GARRICK. A Grecian bard, two thousand years ago,
Plan'd this sad fable, of illustrious woe;
Wakened each soft emotion of the breast,
And called forth tears, that would not be suppressed.
Yet, O ye mighty sirs, of judgment chaste,
Who, lacking genius, have a deal of taste,
Can you forgive our modern ancient piece,
Which brings no chorus, though it comes from Greece;
Kind social chorus, which all humors meets,
And sings and dances, up and down the streets.
-- Oh! might true taste in these unclassic days,
Revive the Grecian fashions, with their plays!
Then raised on stilts, our player's would stalk and rage,
And at three steps, stride over a modern stage;
Each gesture then would boast unusual charms,
From lengthened legs, stuffed body, sprawling arms!
Your critic eye would then no pigmies see,
But buskin's make a giant, even of Me.
No features then the poet's mind would trace,
But one blank vizor blot out all the face.
O! glorious times, when actors thus could strike
Expressive, inexpressive, all alike!
Less change of face, than in our Punch they saw,
For Punch can roll his eyes, and wag his jaw;
With one set glare they mouthed the rumbling verse,
Our Gog and Magog look not half so fierce!
Yet though deprived of instruments like these,
Nature, perhaps, may find a way to please;
Which, wheresoe'er she glows with genuine flame,
In Greece, in Rome, in England, is the same.
Of raillery then, ye modern wits beware,
Nor damn the Grecian poet, for the player.
Theirs was the skill, with honest help of art,
To win by just degrees, the yielding heart.
What if our Shakespeare claims the magic throne,
And in one instant makes us all his own,
They differ only, in the point of view,
For Shakespeare's nature, was their nature too.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
ULYSSES, Mr. DAVIES. ERIPHILUS, Mr. HOLLAND. MELANTHUS, Mr. HAVARD.
TALTHYBIUS, Mr. CASTLE. LYCUS, Mr. ACKMAN. CRATANDER, Mr. MOODY. PAEONIAN, Mr.
FOX. OFFICER, Mr. SCRASE.
WOMEN.
HECUBA, Mrs. PRITCHARD. POLYXENA, Miss BRIDE. SICEA, Miss HIPPISLY.
VIRGINS, GUARDS, etc.

SCENE, CHERSONESUS.

HECUBA A TRAGEDY*
ACT I.
ULYSSES, TALTHYBIU^* ULYSSES. WHAT -- when the peace, the future fa^^ (...)
Greece,
Hang on the event, does Nestor thus advise?
Thou must mistake him, herald.

TALTHYBIUS. With due defere^^^
He hears Ulysses' counsel; yet compassion
Prompts him to listen to Pyrechmes' suit,
And yield up Hecuba.

ULYSSES. Compassion! -- weakness!
Mere womanish weakness! call it nothing bett^^
I feel a crimson blush burn on my cheek
Even at the thought. Was it for this, dread I
We led our Argives to Scamander's banks
To toil ten tedious years? was it for this,
You crowned those toils with conquest? oh for pity,
Send thy sage spirit to direct our councils,
That veer as passion drives. See where our sails
Stand bent at Chersonesus, to transport
Us and our spoils to Greece: and shall we leave
The noblest, most important part behind,
The queen of Troy and her young dangerous daughter,
Because Pyrechmes bids? What is Pyrechmes,
That Greece in her full glory fears his frown?
Greece has more cause to fear a future foe.
Yes, from released Polyxena may spring
New Hectors, armed to wreak revenge hereafter,
And send our sons to people Pluto's realms.
By force, I must detain her, or by fraud:
For my own sake I must: for on Ulysses
The shame, the weakness, want of policy,
All fall upon Ulysses.

TALTHYBIUS. Yet the queen's
Distressful state --

ULYSSES. Talthybius, do not think,
That ten long years of bloodshed stop up here
The passages to pity. No, the groans
Of reverend, wretched age, the tears that gush
From the sad eyes of supplicating beauty,
Would melt my heart too at less dangerous times:
But now -- back herald to the king; inform him --
Yet stay. -- Have these ambassadors with Nestor
Held private conference?

TALTHYBIUS. Young Eriphilus
Entered his tent at daybreak. Till which time,
With Iphitus alone has he conferred.

ULYSSES. That lowering leader of a Trojan troop,
Just ripe for a revolt?

TALTHYBIUS. He, royal sir,
The queen's chief oracle -- as for Melanthus --

ULYSSES. Aye, what of him? what know thou of Melanthus?


TALTHYBIUS. Nothing. He shuns all converse, and seems rapt
In melancholy musings.

ULYSSES. Yes, the old man
Seems close and crafty; bears himself a loof;
Keeps his young charge, as 'twere, beneath his wing.
I do not like that caution: it means mischief.
Else wherefore ventured not the youth alone?
What needed this grey-bearded monitor
To help him pay the ransom? -- Say to Nestor,
I Will meet him at his tent.
Exit Tal. My doubts were just!
Danger does lurk beneath the hoary locks
Of this Melanthus. There Is some secret plot --
It Is scarce engendered yet; and prudence bids
We crush the dangerous birth. Yes, if the wizard
I Have conjured up, wave skilfully his wand,
The princess shall be fettered with a charm
Faster than his fond efforts can undo.
And for the queen -- why, let the queen go free.
It harms not us: her barren womb no more
Shall teem with Trojan pests: and such an act
May smooth the roughness of our enterprise,
And calm Pyrechmes. True, we fear him not;
Yet policy forbids us to despise
Even a weak foe, till we recruit our powers,
Thin'd by a ten years siege.

OFFICER, ULYSSES. OFFICER. At great Achilles' tomb, Calchas, dread sir,
Awaits your royal will.

Exit. ULYSSES. I follow thee. --
Aye, now I will inspire that holy seer
With counsel, that from his prophetic mouth
Shall seem heaven's voice. -- But first let me assail
This boy -- ambassador. And therefore come I
To the queen's tent. Open he seems and free:
And from his shallow mind my art may draw
The dangerous schemes of his grave monitor,
And do the chiefs rich service. -- He approaches.
But with him the old man. I will withdraw
Till a fit time, and muse on some device
To lure this youngling from his tutor's beck.

Exit. ERIPHILUS, MELANTHUS, AETHRON. AETHRON. Here does my guidance end.
Behold the place
Where all the live-long day the royal captives
Pour forth their piteous plaints. That little tent,
Spread in the darksom gloom of yon lone beech,
Contains all Troy.

ERIPHILUS. Thanks for thy conduct, soldier.
Yet sure it needed not. This far-off station,
These interrupted bursts of female sorrow,
Proclaim it the queen's dwelling. There she lies,
The daughter of affliction! whelmed with woes
So vast, humanity trembles to think her
Of its own species.

MELANTHUS. From the book of fate,
Jove's equal hand to every mortal man
Deals his due portion; be it bliss or woe.
Think not I mean to check thy noble nature:
Thou too art born a man; and as thou art,
Thy soul perforce must melt at human sufferings.
But learn, dear youth, with reverential awe
To kiss heaven's ministering rod.

ERIPHILUS. Oh good Melanthus,
Cast but a thought on that illustrious scene
Which once was Troy. Where now her menacing bulwarks?
Rich palaces, proud towers that propt the skies?
Where her intrepid heroes, reverend seers?
All, all are fallen. Even godlike Priam's fallen,
The good old king. Death's ruthless scythe has swept him,
Amid the general carnage, to the tomb;
Him and his numerous race. But oh ye powers,
If I Am ordained to save these royal captives --
If I am sent your aweful delegate
To counteract their fate -- they shall be free.
I feel they shall. I come heaven's minister,
And glory in the sacred embassy.

MELANTHUS. Hear me Eriphilus --


AETHRON. Do not repress
His noble ardor. Here at Chersonesus
The Greeks but stay to raise Achilles' tomb.
That finished, the first favoring wind transports
Their fleet to Greece. Go then, illustrious strangers,
Go, like two guardian gods, and sooth their souls.

Exit. ERIPHILUS. I go. -- come on, Melanthus; my soul burns
To tell the joyful tidings.

MELANTHUS. Yet bethink thee,
When at Achilles' tomb thou did unfold
Pyrechmes' will, did Hecuba's redemption
Meet a full promise? Thy impetuous zeal,
Even in the cause of virtue, makes me tremble.
Oh temper it, dear youth. Think on the perils
That lurk around thee on this dreadful isle.
There Is not a Greek but, were thy secret known,
Wears for thy life a dagger.

ERIPHILUS. I Will be calm.
Soon shall thou find I will. -- But should Atrides
Refuse the ransom -- by the immortal powers,
Distress like Hecuba's --

MELANTHUS. The queen's distress
Sinks in my heart as deep as thine, which prompts
My steadiest caution. Trust me, this compliance
With each rash impulse, howsoe'er disguised
In friendship's or in virtue's specious form,
Is but mean incense to our own fond passions.
Then calmly to the tent. Back from the port
I shall return, before thou have dispatched
Thy business with the queen. Be quick, be cautious,
Be secret too. -- Remember thou have sworn.

Exit. ERIPHILUS. I have. And powerful must the pang be found,
That scorn my soul the secret does extort.

ULYSSES, ERIPHILUS. ULYSSES. Well have thou sped, brave youth. Soon as the
tomb,
Raised by our chiefs to great Achilles' shade,
Is finished, thou shall tender to Troy's queen
The first, best gift of Jove, her liberty.

ERIPHILUS. Thanks to the Greeks, the queen will soon be free.


ULYSSES. The princess too thy happy hand leads forth
To gay Paeonia's court. Her eyes will dart
New luster 'mid the charms that glitter there,
In beauty's brilliant circle.

ERIPHILUS. Every tongue
Grows rapturous in her praise; speaks her most fair.
Yet not more fair than wise; more wise than virtuous.
The powers of love and wisdom seem to vie,
Which most should deck her minion.

ULYSSES. Blessed the youth,
Who could inspire a heart like hers with love!

ERIPHILUS. Oh blessed indeed, if there be such a youth,
Whose peerless qualities --

ULYSSES. Sometimes it is seen,
That modest worth shrinks from the proffered bliss
Which the soul inly pines for. That Is false shame.
There is a time when merit may step forth,
And claim its due reward.

ERIPHILUS. Surely there is.


ULYSSES. Then fear not, gallant youth, that thy mild virtues
Want power to draw from her enchanting eyes
A favoring smile on thee.

ERIPHILUS. On me? good heavens,
A favoring smile on me!

ULYSSES. And wherefore not?
Large is her worth; but she is of mortal mould.
And know, that on this sublunary scene
Perfection dwells not. Nature's purest ore
Bears some alloy: nay even yon glorious sun,
Whose quickening beams all nature animate,
Often sends forth barren droughts and purple deaths.

ERIPHILUS. But she, the princess --


ULYSSES. Think thou she enjoys
A sole exemption from a general fate?

ERIPHILUS. Yes, virtue white as hers --


ULYSSES. The whitest virtue
Escapes not unblemished. Envy's baleful breath
Soils even the snow that circles Dian's heart:
What wonder therefore, should it brand the princess?

ERIPHILUS. Oh heavens, for what?


ULYSSES. For that she was accomplice
With Paris in the murder of Achilles,
Even at the sacred shrine, where her base tongue
Plighted the full assurance of her faith.

ERIPHILUS. Infernal falsehood!


ULYSSES. How -- this bold behavior
I Will suits thy humble birth.

ERIPHILUS. I am to blame --
But were the villain here, whose sland'rous tongue
Thus wounds my honor --

ULYSSES. Wounds your honor? -- yours? --


ERIPHILUS. Did I say mine? it was too proud a word.
Yet -- virtue's is the general cause; it is mine;
It Is yours, oh king; and each affront it bears
Wounds both our honors, and demands revenge.
Polyxena's no murderer. --

ULYSSES. But should Pyrrhus
Credit the babbling rumor; where were then
Thy embassy, young man? might not revenge
Devote her virgin beauties to the bed
Of a vile slave?

ERIPHILUS. By heaven he dares not! --


ULYSSES. Dares not?


ERIPHILUS. Is he a king, and dares he prostitute
A subject's virtue? for she is now his subject.

ULYSSES. She is his slave, and not his subject, youth.


ERIPHILUS. Is he a man, and dares he do a deed
Humanity must shudder but to hear!

ULYSSES. Yet duty to his father's reverend shade
May prompt him to confine the captive princess,
Till the doubt's cleared. -- Or happily she may gain
Permission to depart, so the queen stays
A hostage in her stead. And what imports it,
Where Hecuba dreams out her few last hours?

ERIPHILUS. Ye powers, imports it not to the poor queen,
Who tends her sickening age? what pious hands
Pay the last dismal office to her shade;
Wash her pale corse, and in the hallowed urn
Her sacred ashes close?

ULYSSES. Much do I love
Thy mild humanity, that thus can melt
At even a stranger's woe: for hardly cou'd'st thou
Show tend'rer feelings for a Trojan's fate,
Were thou of Trojan birth. -- How now, Talthybius?

TALTHYBIUS, ULYSSES, ERIPHILUS. TALTHYBIUS. Great Agamemnon, and the Grecian
chiefs
Entreat your royal presence.

ULYSSES. At my tent
To Eriphilus. Meet me anon; and do not fear success.
But yet take heed, young man: be not too sure;
For danger loves to lurk close by the side
Of negligent security. Repeat
Thy suit no more, till the due rites are done
To great Achilles. Importunity
Creates suspicion. Know, thou can not act
With too much caution: even the surest step
May lose its footing on this slippery world.

Exit Uly, and Tal. ERIPHILUS. False coz'ning Greek! -- But, ah! what fairy
vision
Breaks on m' enchanted sight? -- it comes upon me;
The floating form of some divinity,
That tends this mansion!
ERIPHILUS, POLYXENA. Say, thou beauteous virgin.
If to the presence of the queen of Troy
Thy guidance can conduct my friendly step:
I bring her welcome tidings.

POLYXENA. Stranger, no.
She shuns each human eye.

ERIPHILUS. If thou art Polyxena,
As something in my soul does more than whisper)
O royal maid, permit an unknown youth
One moment's converse. Never till this hour,
Did his heart melt with such soft sympathy.

POLYXENA. Brief be thy speech, young stranger.


ERIPHILUS. Hapless princess!
Of fire, of kingdom, liberty bereft!
With scarce a friend to save thee from the scoffs
Of cruel conqu'rors --

POLYXENA. True, I have no friend.
My fire, my brethren all, have left the sun!
But why should my distress wake in thy breast
These sighs of pity? -- had thou known the queen --

ERIPHILUS. I know the iron hand of destiny
Lies heavy on the queen. But would fain hope
My tidings might relume her lamp of life,
Had grief its flame extinguished.

POLYXENA. Vain attempt!
-- But say, whence come thou, youth, and what thy errand?

ERIPHILUS. From blessed Paeonia's king, sweet maid, I come.
Bear, says Pyrechmes, to the queen of Troy,
And to her peerless daughter, our best greetings.
Inform them that the rugged blasts of fortune
Have firmer in my soul that friendship rooted,
Their virtues planted there. And if the calm
That lulls my court, can blunt the edge of grief,
Tell them my kingdom opens all its gates
To give them entrance.

POLYXENA. He Is a friend indeed!


ERIPHILUS. Unworthy he to bear the name of king!
Unworthy even to bear the name of man,
Who shares not such distress! -- To stop the ears
Of pity to the cries of common misery,
Were a disgrace to nature: but when fate
Frowns on an aged queen -- a beauteous princess --
I meant not to offend. Believe me, fair one,
This tongue never learned to gloze in flatt'ry's school.

POLYXENA. I do believe thee. Flattery may fawn,
Lackey the heels of fortune's golden minions,
And kiss the stool of majesty -- but, oh!
Can Hecuba, can I, her child, be flattered!

ERIPHILUS. Hear my soul speak! -- dear as my own, I hold
Your welfares: nearest to my heart they lie,
Mixed with my own: and, stranger as I seem,
I for your precious lives would pour my blood.
-- Thou wonder'st at my words! and my fond heart
Is all on fire to tell thee -- but an oath,
A solemn oath, in silence locks my lips,
Till we quit Chersonesus. Quickly therefore
Lead to the queen.

POLYXENA. Oh! still, I fear, I fear,
The attempt were vain! Believe me, gentle youth,
No power on earth can aid her: and in heaven
No power will aid her! an inhuman wretch
Has murdered every hope.

ERIPHILUS. And has no hand
Planted a poniard in the villain's heart?

POLYXENA. No, he still walks the earth; drinks the pure breath
Of morn; and on his breast the sun of heaven
Darts a warm ray of gladness, as it shone
For him alone --

ERIPHILUS. Oh name the inhuman foe --


POLYXENA. Alas! the fellest rancour of a foe
Patience might bear -- but when the open heart,
Unarmed with caution's or suspicion's shield,
Receives a stab from friendship -- nay, from duty --
From filial duty -- for oh earth and heaven!
The villain Polymestor was her son --
Her daughter's husband --

ERIPHILIS. What, the Thracian king,
Who wedded her Ilione?

POLYXENA. To him,
Guarded by good Eumelus, at the time
When Troy was first besieged, she sent her son,
Her infant Polydore; and with him sent
Treasures of such vast value, as might raise
Another kingdom, should Troy yield to fate.
Tempted by these, the barbarous monster murdered
His innocent brother. -- Oh had you beheld
The queen's dread transports when she first received
The fatal tidings --

ERIPHILUS. Fluttering heart be still!


POLYXENA. Prone on the earth she fell with one deep groan,
Deep as if life went in it. Then, as struck
By some quick impulse, steadfast gazed on heaven
In speechless agony: her bosom heaved,
She grasped her hands, and bursting into tears,
Fell tranc'd into my arms!

ERIPHILUS. My struggling soul
Will bear no more -- thy Polydore, sweet maid --
Hah! whither would my frenzy?

POLYXENA. What of him?
What of my Polydore? thy words; thy actions;
Thy looks; I Have marked a mystery in all!
Oh answer me, good youth! say, did thou know
My Polydore? thou tremblest; thy mild nature
Melts at the mention of that tragic tale.
Alas who knows, but thy fast-flowing eyes
Did see the ruthless dagger rend his breast,
And let out his sweet life! while vainly thou
Did wish for vengeance on the bloody villain!

ERIPHILUS. Vengeance shall overtake him. Else were I
As very a slave, sweet maid, as he a villain.

POLYXENA. Good youth! -- and will thou purge the groaning earth
Of such a wretch? --

ERIPHILUS. Else should I blush to live!


POLYXENA. Then hie thee to the queen. For the blessed hope
Of such revenge may rouse her sorrowing soul
To listen to thy suit. -- Ah go, and prosper!

ERIPHILUS. Lead on, lead on. -- Now bloody Polymestor,
Tremble! -- thy fate approaches --

POLYXENA. May the spirit
Of my dead Hector march with thee along,
Thrice noble youth! bear a broad shield before thee!
And edge thy mortal sword! -- Now to the tent.
For happily ere this time the dewy finger
Of morn has beckoned from the queen's sad couch
The friendly sleep that crept upon her woe.
And lo she comes; -- perhaps 'twere best retire
For a short space. Anon thou may return.
Why do thou tremble? why thus gaze upon her?
Haste, screen thyself behind yon spreading beech.

Exit Eriphilus. HECUBA, SIGEA, VIRGINS. HECUBA. Lend, virgins, lend your aid.
A little onward
Lead from the tent. Support your queen; support
Your fellow-slave! -- Oh! dearer far to me,
To Polyxena. Than life, than liberty! child of my heart,
What have I seen! -- all cheering light of heaven:
And thou, tremendous night! why these dread visions
That rouse me from my couch, and chill my breast
With fearful drops like these! -- thou sable mother
Of dusky-pinion'd dreams! my soul abhors
The ominous phantom. Thrice it stalked before me
A terrible spectre! stern Achilles' ghost!

POLYXENA. His ghost!


HECUBA. It stopped; and pointed at its wound.
Then grinn'd a horrid smile, and disappeared!

POLYXENA. It Is the mere coinage of a troubled mind.


HECUBA. But then, my virgins, then -- oh! would to heaven
Sage Helenus were here, whose piercing eye
Does look into futurity's dark womb --
Methought, Sigea, a gaunt ravening wolf
Did from my bosom tear with bloody tooth
A milk-white hind! -- ye ever gracious gods,
Protect my dearest child!

POLYXENA. The gracious gods
Will for thy sake protect me. Trust their care,
And give these visions to the passing wind.
Even now, by their permission, is arrived
A stranger, with good tidings. Does it please you
To hear his errand?

HECUBA. No, I Will not be seen,
Not speak, Polyxena. A stranger-eye
Will but insult my woe. Here let me sit,
And ponder on my Polydore and Death.

ERIPHILUS, HECUBA, POLYXENA, SIGEA, etc. ERIPHILUS. Heart-piercing sight! How
deep has sorrow dug
Its furrows on that venerable brow!
My powers all lose their functions at her presence.
Oh at this sad, this tender hour of trial,
Aid me some pitying god.

HECUBA. Unmanner'd stranger,
Whence this intrusion?

ERIPHILUS. Think not, honored queen,
That my unbidden presence violates
Thy sanctity of sorrow. I but claim
The privilege of mild humanity
To wipe the tears of virtue.

HECUBA. Lead me hence
For ever, from all eyes.

ERIPHILUS. This blessed end
Draws me to Chersonesus; and I bring
Most welcome tidings.

HECUBA. What have I to do
With welcome tidings? -- Pray ye lead me hence.

ERIPHILUS. I will retire.


POLYXENA. And will thou not vouchsafe
A moment's audience? well he knows thy wrongs;
And kindly comes to mingle with thy grief
His social tears; and to revenge thy wrongs.
He from Paeonia comes --

ERIPHILUS. To bring thee freedom,
From good Pyrechmes.

HECUBA. Say thou, youth? Pyrechmes?
I knew him well. He was my Priam's friend.
Thou see my memory's sound. The good old king!
I hope he lives most happy! -- as I think,
He never had a child!

ERIPHILUS. His only child
Died in the womb: and all the father's fondness,
His charitable friendship showers on me.
From him I come, not rudely to restrain
Thy grief, but give its tide a freer flow.
It Is nature's kind relief to her poor children.
She bids affliction weep away its woe.

HECUBA. Friend, (if I yet can call one mortal friend)
Be not deceived. Nor let the good Pyrechmes,
Thy sovereign, be deceived. Indeed I would not
Your kindness should misdeem poor Hecuba
An object fit for pity. Generous youth,
I Will tell thee what I will not tell the Greeks!
But should it ever 'scape thee --

ERIPHILUS. It shall never.
But your heart will not suffer you to speak.
The tear starts in your eye. Repress the secret
Till happier times permit.

HECUBA. Till happier times!


ERIPHILUS. Oh rest on hope; that heaven-born champion
Which never forsakes the virtuous; but in perils
Lends confidence, and leads them unappall'd
Even to the gates of death.

POLYXENA. She heeds thee not.
But I will watch the first calm interval:
For now her mind seems hurrying through the waste
Of desolate despair, too fast to mark
Compassion's call. -- Ah see!

HECUBA. The dreadful gods,
Who, in their ireful mood, have turned me forth
This terrible example to mankind,
Doubtless have cause! wretched mortality
Believes, and trembles; but perforce must yield.
I yield me too; I bow to your dread wills!
Yet when my mind, with scrutiny severe,
Tries, judges a long life of fourscore years,
And finds no crime but what dares look at pardon;
Forgive, forgive me, if my bursting heart
Wishes that Hecuba had never been born!

ERIPHILUS. Oh yet try friendship's power; it is precious balm,
Often though it fails to cure, yet ever calms
The rage of sorrow's wounds. Oh it is a ray
Can melt the sable gloom of deep despair
Into the milder shade of melancholy.

HECUBA. I prithee leave me, youth. -- My mind's disturbed
Thine eye does burden me. It looks too deep
Into the secret sorrow of my soul.
There Is something in thy gesture -- in thy mien!
I prithee, leave me youth. My mind's disturbed

ERIPHILUS. Vast are thy woes: yet shall sweet liberty
Lighten the load. Then suffer my blessed hand
Swift to conduct thee to Paeonia's court.

HECUBA. See thou that urn?


ERIPHILUS. Alas --


HECUBA. That little urn,
Is it not large enough for my few ashes?
Why wou'd'st thou bear this mockery of a queen
To gay Paeonia's court? I can die here.

ERIPHILUS. Wou'd'st thou die here a slave? wou'd'st thou bequeath
To hostile hands the venerable relics
Of royal Priam? Heavens, can Hector's mother
Rest undisturbed beneath the horrid gloom
Of dire Achilles' shrine?

HECUBA. Distracting thought!


POLYXENA. Oh hear the voice of Heaven, in this good youth,
Inviting thee to peace.

ERIPHILUS. Though thy own life
Has lost it is value, heavens, can Hecuba
See that fair flower thus droop its languid head?
Oh save the princess, save thy only child,
From pining grief that preys upon her youth!

HECUBA. My dearest child. --


POLYXENA. Quit but this horrid isle,
And I Am thy sad associate in despair;
Choose life or death!

HECUBA. Thy death? my daughter's death?
Dry, dry thy tears: I will no more provoke them.
I Will go with thee, my child, to good Pyrechmes.
There in the social sweets of friendly converse,
Lose each sad moment; save when thou and I
Sometime retire beneath the pensive gloom
Of some sequestered poplar; there we'll sit,
And talk together over the buried virtues
Of some loved friend. -- Lead then, ingenuous youth,
Whoever thou art; lead us where social peace
Sits smiling at the hospitable board
Of good Pyrechmes.

POLYXENA. Oh that blessed resolve
Drives hence despair: and makes the sun shine on me
With a sweet gracious eye.

ERIPHILUS. Back to your tent,
Please you, retire awhile. To Agamemnon
I Will haste; lay down the ransom; and with joy
Lead you to liberty.

HECUBA. For thy reward,
May he who sits on high, in thunder throned,
Pour from his um those blessings upon thee,
That never more must visit my sad heart.

Exeunt. End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
HECUBA, VIRGINS. HECUBA. THANKS, gentle virgin. This sweet-breathing bank
Shall ease thee of thy load. Yes, Hecuba
Shall lay her woes awhile on nature's lap,
And try to sooth her soul --
Kind heaven, who sent this youth, has willed it so,
Marked you his mien my virgin? seemed he not
A messenger of heaven, sent to conduct
Troy's poor remains, the mother and the child,
To a safe harbor from the storms of fate?
Enter an ATTENDANT. What means this breathless haste? Thou do not speak.
Horror is in thine eyes, death on thy cheeks.
Say, wherefore -- why is this?
Enter another ATTENDANT. Oh thou, whose woes
No child of sorrow ever felt and lived!
How shall I speak the tidings? -- Calchas, Calchas,
To cursed Achilles' shrine oh he has doomed --

HECUBA. Doomed me the victim?


ATTENDANT. Thou art not the victim!


HECUBA. Stay, I command thee, stay.


Enter MELANTHUS. MELANTHUS. This moment fly,
Fly to the temple. Fall before the altar
Invoke each power above; each power below.

HECUBA. Speak, tell me. Ease my agonizing soul!


MELANTHUS. With a firm heart prepare thee then, oh queen,
To hear the dreadful tale. Achilles' ghost,
Even in the realms of death thirsting for blood,
Demands thy daughter's life -- What, not one word:
Speak, wretched queen; the heart that feels such pangs
Must give them vent, or break.

HECUBA. It will not break.
Oh would to heaven it could! what, not one child

Enter POLYXENA. VIRGIN. Alas, Polyxena!


SIGEA. Oh ill-star'd maid!


POLYXENA. Turn not thine eyes away; weep not for me;
Oh wretched mother of a wretched race!
I Have heard it all! the lowering storm of fate
Bursts on thy head, and whelms thee with despair.
Thou have no friend on earth! thou have no child,
To tend thy widowed age, and close thine eyes!
Weep not for me. I weep not my own fate.
I shall rest quiet with the shades below.
Thee, only thee I mourn. For thee my eyes
Pour these sad tears, that else unmoved could see
The dagger lifted up to shed my blood.

Enter ULYSSES and Guards. HECUBA. Shield me, sweet powers! -- close, closer to
my breast --


ULYSSES. Thy pardon, queen. With sympathizing soul
I come the mournful messenger of death.
Pyrrhus performs the solemn sacrifice
To his dread fire; and now demands the princess.
Oh summon that firm fortitude, which triumphs
Over nature's weakness. Painful is the struggle
In a fond mother's breast. --

HECUBA. Am I a mother!
Oh insupportable! I was a mother.
'Twas the sole comfort left my widowed age.
But what the furies in their wrath had spared,
These human fiends tear from me.

ULYSSES. Calmly hear me.
Think, if the chance of war --

HECUBA. Heaven's! was my daughter
Achilles' murderer? She never wronged him.
No, if he thirsts for blood, it is Helen's blood:
He fought for Helen, he for Helen died.

ULYSSES. Yet think a moment. Shall we wear the laurels
Won with his life, and cast a cold contempt
On his dead ashes? -- What, if Agamemnon
Once more should call to arms? Would the brave soldiers
Rouse at his voice, and rush on fate, to share
Th'inglorious treatment of their valiant dead!

HECUBA. Patience, sweet heaven! -- What, must ye tear to pieces
Humanity? Be murd'rers to display
Your guilty gratitude?

POLYXENA. Oh Hecuba,
Let not thy rage provoke a potent victor!

HECUBA. No, I will not provoke a potent victor.
I Will check these foolish transports of despair.
See, my rage melts to miserable tears.
I Will but remind him of that hour, when Helen
Discerned him through a vagrant's dark disguise,
And to Troy's queen disclosed the daring treason.
I Will but remind him how his reverend age
Softened my soul, and saved his forfeit life.

ULYSSES. No time shall from my grateful memory raze
That moment when I clasped thy royal knees --

HECUBA. Lo, in my turn, thus prostrate on the ground
I clasp thy royal knees. -- By thy good genius!
The guardian god, who from thy natal hour
Chased the black influence of my baleful star,
Have mercy on my age! spare my dear child!
As I preserved thy life, preserve thou hers!
There Is blood enough of mine already shed!
Spare my dear child! in thy last hour of anguish
That action shall sit smiling on thy soul,
Shall gild the trophies of thy honored tomb.
Oh spare her, spare her! so may thy dear queen
Never feel the pangs I feel!

ULYSSES. Much I regard
The unhappy princess; gratitude and pity
Prompt me to save her. But till she is devoted
To great Achilles' shrine, no favoring wind
Shall from this island loose our fast-bound fleet.
Thus spoke his mighty shade; at the dread menace,
Calchas pronounced her doom. Vain then were prayers;
Vain every mortal aid.

HECUBA. Do not abuse
A victor's power. Great as thou art, oh king,
Remember you are a man. Tell, tell the Greeks,
Honor would bleed to see weak helpless women
Murdered before their altars by that fury
Which spared them in the battle's bloody horrors.
Plead, plead with all thy powers my poor child's cause,
Oh plead the widow's cause!

ULYSSES. See through yon camp
Hundreds of hoary matrons; some thy equals
In misery: as many youthful brides
Wailing their murdered lords. Think on their fate,
And calmly bear thy own. Greece owes her glory
To the high reverence paid her buried heroes.
This last great duty Troy despised, and lo,
Her towers are tumbled!

HECUBA. My dear child, my prayers
Are poured in vain. Speak thou, thy tender age
Perhaps has power to move him: speak whatever
The love of thy dear mother's life inspires.
Fall at his knees: tell this hard-hearted prince,
He is a father, he too has a child!

POLYXENA. Nay turn not from me, prince; fear not my prayers,
I follow thee to death. For what has life
To wake in me a wish? Me, who was born
Daughter of Priam, Phrygia's wealthy king,
And destined by my birth to kingly spousals?
Once 'mid my virgin troop of beauteous Trojans
I sat almost a goddess: now behold me
Sunk into a vile slave. Then welcome, Death.
Oh Hecuba, my queen, my mother, do not,
In pity, do not melt me thus. Oh! rather
Strengthen my weakness: bid me bear my fame
Unblemished to the tomb; bid stern Ulysses
Lead me to sacrifice.

HECUBA. She Is my sole hope.
While to my heart I clasp her youth, the wounds
My murdered lord, my murdered children made,
Stream not so fast.

ULYSSES. Guards --


HECUBA. Wou'd'st thou give indeed
A grateful sacrifice? lo, here the victim!
I Am Paris' mother; lead me to the tomb.
'Twas Paris killed Achilles; murder me!

ULYSSES. Thy daughter's blood, not thine, his shade demands.


HECUBA. Shed mine with hers, and glut his barbarous ghost.


ULYSSES. Rash queen, retire --


POLYXENA. Oh reverence her white hairs!
Pity the pangs that wring a mother's heart!
Behold I follow thee. -- Oh! Hecuba,
Oh! thou from whose fond breast I drew my life --

SIGEA. Grief holds her dumb.


POLYXENA. No eye again shall see us
Mix our fond souls. Oh! mother most revered,
Farewell. -- Bright God of day, resigned I quit
Thy sov'rain lamp. -- Shed there thy beams of comfort

Ex. Ul. Pol. guards. VIRGIN. Oh wretched queen. --


SIGEA. Oh mistress most adored. -- --


MELANTHUS. See, she recovers. --


HECUBA. Wherefore do you cast
After a pause. Such fearful looks on me? think ye the loss
Of one poor child sharpens the rav'ning beak
That gnaws my ulcer'd heart! --
I pray ye count my numerous progeny,
And tell me where they are. -- Cast not on me
Such fearful looks. Ye shall not see a tear.
I will not struggle with the opposeless might
Of stern necessity. Now to my breast
Comes resolution unappall'd by nature:
No more a mother now, but queen of Troy.
Or if -- great Hector's mother. -- Hector's gone!
His spirit was too noble to stay here.
And my Polyxena, my dear, last child,
-- My last! -- my last, Sigea! -- my last child!
Oh in thy bosom let me hide my tears!
Yes, they are tears!

MELANTHUS. Oh yet a little longer
Bear up against this storm; and I Will impart
Tidings may kindle in thy sinking soul
A spark of comfort.

HECUBA. This to Hecuba!
Shall she know comfort? -- prithee, mock me not.
Alas distraction will not come to give it!

Runs out, Virgins, etc. MELANTHUS. Oh miserable queen. -- Is this the mistress
Of wealthy Phrygia? this the imperial consort
Of royal Priam? --

TALTHYBIUS, MELANTHUS. MELANTHUS. Nay, boldly do thy bidding. The poor wretch,
Like Hecuba, who outlives every hope,
Has outlived every fear. Pause not, but speak.

TALTHYBIUS. Thus to Melanthus speaks Atrides; Soon
As Pyrrhus has performed the sacrifice,
The queen has our full license to depart
Unransom'd to Paeonia.

Exit. MELANTHUS. That revives
My drooping expectations. She shall go.
Yes, with Eriphilus the queen shall go,
Who will make up to her a daughter's loss.
But wherefore is he absent? these dire horrors
Made me unmindful of my precious charge,
The only prop of Troy. -- How fares the queen?

SIGEA, MELANTHUS. SIGEA. Nothing can harm her further.


MELANTHUS. Heaven forbid!
She is not dead! --

SIGEA. Once her sad soul seemed past
The goal of life; and happy had she been,
Had it no more returned.

MELANTHUS. But she recovered --


SIGEA. She did. And had thou seen what these eyes saw --
Solemn and mute, her folded hands close clasped
Despair to her sad heart. Once her child's name
Broke forth; and once she cast a casual glance
On her dear statue. At the sight she started;
Her pale lips trembled, her distorted mien,
Changed with the violent conflict, gave sad signs
Of desperation; keenest curses then
Against the vile king she poured, tore her white hairs,
And called them pitiless gods. -- A sight so horrid
I could not bear; but hither ran to vent
The anguish of my heart. -- Oh heavens, see there!
She comes -- despair and madness in her looks!

HECUBA, SIGEA, MELANTHUS. HECUBA. I live! I breathe! my cumber'd soul still
drags
Mortality's vile clog! it is the same world!
It Is the same sun that saw the ruthless dagger
Plunged in her heart! and yet the infernal deed
Eclipsed not the bright orb: still, still it shines!
Still throws its flaring beams through my weak brain!
-- Earth will not yawn to hide me! I must stand
Still as I do, on its detested surface;
The scorn, the sport of an insulting world!
-- They shall not hear me groan -- I Will choke these sighs!
I Will seem as all were peace! no Grecian eye
Shall pry into these mighty realms of woe,
And see how vast they are!

VIRGIN. Oh speak to her!


SIGEA. Speak, good Melanthus. Some way try to calm
This tempest in her soul.

MELANTHUS. Dire is the doom
Thy destiny decrees. Yet 'mid thy grief,
Oh hear me hapless queen!

HECUBA. Why, what art thou?
Say, did thou feel for her a mother's pang?
Ah, did thou feel for her a mother's joy!
She never milk'd thy breast! else stead of tears,
And womanish sighs, thy voice, to terror turned,
Had roused Alecto from the depth of hell
To blast her murderer! Oh he derides
This impotence of rage. Ye vengeful bolts,
Hurled on the light'ning's blaze through the red air,
To atoms shatter him. -- Or me, dread gods,
Bear me to the cursed wretch! weak though I am,
I am a mother: and the feebleness
Of fourscore years, inspired by wrongs like mine,
May sink his guilty soul!

MELANTHUS. As safely might thou
Approach the tiger's den. The sword of Pyrrhus
That strikes the life of thy Polyxena,
Stands drawn for Hecuba.

HECUBA. Here let him sheath it!
But yet he will not. 'Twere a friendly blow.
'Twou'd kill remembrance, stifle painful thought,
And make me of a piece with this dull clod!
-- Now I am cursed with sense! -- but I will go!
Something I Will do -- Away old man, away.
Thy blood runs cold -- thy bosom never burned
With royal fire -- Where Is the Paeonian youth?
Fly, find him. Bid him rush on their cursed rites --
Snatch her from fate --

MELANTHUS. For heaven's sake hold --


HECUBA. Stand off --


MELANTHUS. As thou regard'st thy everlasting peace --
For know, should thy rash rage destroy this youth,
Thy present pangs are poor to the fierce horrors
That then will seize thy soul.

HECUBA. Eternal powers!
What mean thou?

MELANTHUS. Summon all thy fortitude;
While to thy wondering ears my tongue unfolds --
-- No more -- no more --

CRATANDER, HECUBA, MELANTHUS, etc. CRATANDER. Polyxena, thy daughter --


HECUBA. Barbarous man,
How dare thou triumph at despair like mine!

CRATANDER. Let not thy anger --


HECUBA. Though in this bad world
Virtue may weep beneath the scourge of vice,
Woe on his soul who dares deride such tears.
Wretch, there are terrible gods!

CRATANDER. I am not, queen,
The wretch thou think me. Though I reverence gods
Averse from Troy, yet nature in my heart
A spark has lighted of humanity,
That shines for every mortal in distress.
If never enemy worse tidings bring
He merits not thy wrath. -- Thy daughter lives.

HECUBA. Lives!


CRATANDER. The guards scarce had born her from thy tent
To yonder narrow pass, when from a copse
Of thick-set thorns, that climb the sloping bank,
Sudden, with furious shout, and clashing sabres,
Forth rushed a desperate band of bold Paeonians,
Led by Eriphilus. Full through the midst
Dauntless he mowed his way. The Grecian bands
Confounded, scarce unsheathed their swords, and fell
The victims of his valor.

HECUBA. For these tidings
Take my soul's dearest thanks. But my poor daughter!
Whither could she betake her?

CRATANDER. The bold youth,
Swift as the bird of Jove, flew to her rescue,
And bore her off triumphant toward the port
Where his ships anchor. But before my eyes
Lost sight of them, a troop of light-armed Greeks,
Who viewed the routed guards, pursued their flight.
I saw them sink the hill that overhangs
The Hellespont: yet sure they came too late
To overtake their speed. These tidings, queen,
Moved by the touch of nature, even a foe
Imparts to thee with joy.

Exit. HECUBA. Oh joy indeed!
Blessed be that godlike youth! -- Ah quickly tell me,
Who, what he is. Unfold the wondrous secret
That my soul burns to know. -- Why do thou kneel?

MELANTHUS. Oh royal queen!


HECUBA. Who is this more than friend,
This brother to my child?

MELANTHUS. This brother?


HECUBA. Tell me.
And my last prayers shall draw down blessings on him!

MELANTHUS. Yes, bless him, bless him! -- For he is her brother.
He is thy Polydore, whom I preserved
From Polymestor.

Hecuba faints. SIGEA. Oh what have thou done!


HECUBA. Where is he? My dear Polydore restored
Recovering To life and me? Impossible! my heart
Wants power to credit thee. And yet -- and yet --
Can falsehood lurk beneath those silver hairs?
It never can. No, I do credit thee,
Whoever thou art, old man.

MELANTHUS. Now, queen, behold me.
And if thou still can doubt Eumelus' truth --

HECUBA. Eumelus! --


MELANTHUS. This shall witness.


Gives a wreath. HECUBA. Heavenly powers!
It Is he. It is Eumelus! Ah this token
Beyond ten thousand proofs confirms the truth.
It Is the same wreath that bound his infant brow,
The work of my own hands. -- Where is my boy?
Bring me my Polydore. -- All-gracious heaven,
How 'scap'd he Polymestor? What good god
Preserved his precious life? Tell, tell me all,
And turn me mad with joy.

EUMELUS. Some other time
Thou shall know all; know how Ilione
Deceived the cruel king. Now calm thy transport,
The least word may undo thee. Let the secret --
But see he comes. -- Ah no, with other looks
This hateful harbinger of wrath approaches!
-- By heavens, it is Ulysses!

HECUBA. Let him come.
Now I defy his malice.

EUMELUS. To your tent.
Oh see him not. His cursed wiles will draw
The fatal secret from you.

HECUBA. He has seen me.
I cannot now retire. -- Fly to the field;
To my dear children fly! -- regard not me.
Thy presence will add vigor to their valor;
Shoot a new soul through every soldier's breast.

EUMELUS. No. To your tent will I retire: there wait
The event of this dread conference.

HECUBA. Fear me not.
Piercing as are his eyes, they cannot dive
Into my soul. There smothered lies the secret.

EUMELUS. Quick then repress thy joys, repress thy fears. --
This dreadful hour must prove thee more than woman.

Exit. ULYSSES, HECUBA, SIGEA, Guards. ULYSSES. Well may the fearful blood
forsake thy cheeks
At our approach. Rash queen! to perpetrate
An act, whose sole conception in the mind
Were guilt against the gods. Yet would I hope
My counsel from the uplifted arm of vengeance
Might still withdraw thee. Hear it, and obey.
Recall the princess.

HECUBA. Hah!


ULYSSES. Bid that bold youth
Surrender.

HECUBA. What, pronounce my daughter's doom
With my own tongue!

ULYSSES. Such prompt submission, queen,
Will 'vail thee more with Pyrrhus' rigid virtue
Than thrice the force of this foolhardy boy.
Presume not she will escape. Let not thy soul
Soar on that air-blown hope; 'twill burst, and drop thee
Deeper into despair. Nay, had she reached
Paeonia's palace, still she could not 'scape.
Think thou Pyrechmes will defy the force
Of our embattled hosts? provoke their fury
To waste his kingdom's wealth? and urge Atrides
To drag her from the temple to the tomb?

HECUBA. Have thou a child, and can thy cruel tongue
With such keen accents wound a parent's ear?
Am I to blame if nature bids me love,
Dear as myself, the offspring of my blood?

ULYSSES. Therefore I counsel thus. I would make sound
Thy daughter's sickly life. But when would passion
Hearken to reason's voice? Take thy own bent,
But tremble at the event. Her breathless corse,
That might lie decent on the funeral pile,
May feed the famished vultures.

HECUBA. Barbarous man.
But yet ye will not -- butchers as ye are
Ye will not, dare not do so dire a deed,
As the good gods would shudder to behold.

ULYSSES. Thy madness does the deed, that sets at naught
Our salutary counsel; which pursued
Might end thy woes; might move the gallant Pyrrhus
To sooth his sire with a new sacrifice;
-- Perhaps Eriphilus --

HECUBA. Eriphilus!


ULYSSES. Yes, he may bleed thy daughter's substitute.


HECUBA. Oh horror!


ULYSSES. Hah --


SIGEA. For heaven's sake, be yourself.
Aside to Hecuba. Beware, beware.

HECUBA. What -- murder the poor youth,
Who for my daughter's life did risk his own!
Forbid it honor! -- If his youthful fire
Urged him too far, oh let his youth plead for him.
The passions at that season snatch the reins
From reason's feeble hand! the impetuous blood
Then flows not with that equal temperature,
As when it holds its slow and languid course
Through the cold veins of age.

ULYSSES. Death is the doom
For sacrilege.

HECUBA. Alas I Will die to save
His noble life!

ULYSSES. Indeed! --


HECUBA. Yes -- the strong ties
Of gratitude and friendship --

ULYSSES. Strong indeed,
Stronger than nature's ties with thee they seem.
To save his noble life thyself would die:
Would give thy child to death; -- to save a youth,
An unknown youth? -- Who is he? Strange conjectures
Do open on my mind. -- What is his name?
His extract, country, what? -- Hah! these emotions
Now by sage Pallas, he is some vile Trojan,
Who hid in this disguise --
ULYSSES, EUMELUS, HECUBA, SIGEA. Insolent man,
Who thus uncalled break'st on our privacy.
Retire. -- Yet stay. Thou did consort him hither.
Thou art a partner in his perfidy;
The accomplice of this youth; and thou shall share
His punishment. Traitor, I see the treason
Thy cunning would conceal.

EUMELUS. Ill do thy words
Become the sacred character I bear.
I am no traitor, king.

ULYSSES. What art thou then?


EUMELUS. Melanthus. --


HECUBA. Guardian to that hapless youth,
Whom I alas -- but on my knees, Ulysses --

EUMELUS. Oh queen, let not thy gratitude compel thee
To ought unworthy of thy royal self.
Fear not his life; the laws of nations guard it.

ULYSSES. No law can guard the sacrilegious villain.
-- Bid Licias, when they seize Eriphilus,
To drag him to that altar he profaned.

HECUBA. Forbear forbear. --


ULYSSES. Disclose the traitorous plot.


HECUBA. Oh spare his youth --


ULYSSUS. Thou, only thou, can spare him.
Instant disclose the treason. 'Scape he cannot.
Our troops have rushed between him and his ships.
Ere this he is captive. Speak, or death's his doom.

HECUBA. Oh gracious gods --


EUMELUS. Return; and in your tent
Reason will recollect its scattered powers.

ULYSSUS. Guards. --


HECUBA. Hold -- and I will tell --


EUMELUS. What can thou tell?
-- Unhappy queen, retire.

ULYSSES. Do thou retire;
Or --

HECUBA. Hear then --


OFFICER, ULYSSES, HECUBA, etc. OFFICER. Royal sir, the bold Paeonians
Have beat our soldiers backward to the tent.
Shouting. Hark their loud shouts. --

ULYSSES. Call forth the guards. --


Enter another OFFICER. OFFICER. Oh king.
Scarce do our faithful followers make a stand
Against the fierce onset of that fiery youth.
Without quick reinforcement he will bear off
The princess.

ULYSSES. Guard that traitor to the tomb.
Eumelus carried off. Follow me to the field.

Exit Ulysses with guards. HECUBA. Heard you, Sigea?
They live -- they live -- both live -- was ever mother
So exquisitely blessed? it is not illusion.
The brightest powers of rich imagination
Never formed a dream like this. My dear, dear children!
These eyes shall see, these arms again shall clasp you
Close to my heart. -- Hear then, immortal Juno!
And thou, Troy's deadliest foe, tremendous Pallas,
Suspend your wrath! oh let a nation's blood
Quench your fell fury! think on my poor children,
Sent ere their hour to night's eternal gloom,
Dread Pallas think! and over my daughter's life
Oh spread the terror of thy sevenfold aegis!
Save her! and save the only hope of Troy,
My Polydore! oh save my life in theirs!

Exit. End of the Second ACT.
ACT III. A Tower.
Enter GREEK OFFICER and Guard. OFFICER. GUard well your prisoner: it is the
king's command
He stirs not from this tower. See, he approaches.
This way with me, and further I Will inform thee.

Enter POLYDORE and a PAEONIAN. POLYDORE. It Is a short race, my friend, but do
not grieve.
Fair fame runs with me to the mortal goal.
And by yon golden god, it is far more noble.
To blaze the meteor of an hour, and vanish,
Than shine whole ages an inglorious star
On the world's drowzy eye. And oh be witness,
Demons of death, who struck my shivered sword,
I yielded not ignobly. My firm arm
Fo^ght to the last to save Polyxena,
And I have saved her. -- Hah! what thing of blood
With clinking chains stalks toward us?
LYCUS, POLYDORE, PAEONIAN. Lycus prisoner?
Mang'ed and bleeding thus?

LYCUS. It Is my life's blood
^^ed for Polyxena, but shed in vain.

POLYDORE. They have not forced her back? --


LYCUS. Thou noble youth,
Hear what I Have life to utter. -- Near the ships
A secret band of Greeks unwarily
Rushed on us. Front opposed to front we stood:
Fierce Eurycles bore onwards: five bold soldiers
Sunk in the fury of his mortal sword:
Covered at length with wounds, he fell to earth;
When to the altar they bore off the Princess;
And ere this time the bloody deed is done.

POLYDORE. Thy wounds demand relief. -- Farewell, farewell.


Exit Lycus. PAEONIAN. Oh prince --


POLYDORE. Be gone. --
Exit Paeonian. Oh destiny, thy dealings
Urge me to rush into the house of death,
My last, best friend. Polyxena's free spirit
Stops and looks back on me with pitying eyes;
Points me to where unhappy souls find peace.
-- Loosen from thy foundation, ponderous arch,
And crush the wretch who cannot find a sword
To end him. -- Open earth, and bury me
Deep in thy monstrous womb. -- And will thou not?
Then thus perforce against thy stony breast
I dash me. --

EUMELUS, POLYDORE. EUMELUS. Heavens guard my prince --


POLYDORE. Eumelus! -- Ah that look --
Whence come thou?

EUMELUS. From the tomb. -- Spare me the rest.


POLYDORE. Nay speak. I guess thy errand. -- I Am prepared.
I Will listen still as night --

EUMELUS. The Greecian host,
Circling the tomb, in solemn silence stood.
Pyrrhus, high on the front, the royal victim
Placed with due reverence; a selected band
Of Grecian youth followed with pensive pace.
While with slow hand, crowned to the brim, he poured
A golden goblet to his father's ghost.
Then waving thrice his arm, the priest proclaimed
Silence. -- A death-like silence stilled the shore.
When Pyrrhus thus. "Oh father most revered!
Receive this due libation to thy shade.
This pure immaculate stream of virgin's blood,
Rise, son of Peleus, to our vows propitious,
Rise and receive! thy son's, the army's offering.
Unmoor the fleet; and to our longing eyes
Restore our country?" -- Every soldier echoed
"Restore our country." -- Sudden then his hand
Unsheathed the fatal sword.

POLYDORE. Oh barbarous villain!
But could he? dared he? dared the murderer strike?
How looked the guilty savage when he met
The eye of such celestial innocence?
Fell not the trembling faulchion? No, that hand
Which shed the lifeblood of Polyxena,
Still reek'd with Priam's gore. -- Where was thy sword?
What coward-palsey thy old arm unnerv'd?
I was not there. I could not burst these bonds:
Could not with these vile chains dash him to atoms.
Fate bound me fast; fate feared I should unfix
Its cursed decree, and ransom innocent blood!

EUMELUS. Let patience moderate thy rage. The princess
Died --

POLYDORE. Died! -- And do thou talk of moderation?
Died! -- And do think this heart shall ever treat
With patience more? -- I prithee draw thy sword,
That sword, old man, which spared the accursed Pyrrhus,
And strike it here. That sword will give me patience.

EUMELUS. I pity, not upbraid thee. Yet I hoped,
When thou should hear with what a steady eye,
What decent dignity she looked on death,
Dressed in the aweful pomp of sacrifice;
That the last acts which crowned her close of life,
And drew a sigh from every hostile heart,
Might mitigate thy anguish.

POLYDORE. My loved friend!
Nothing can mitigate, nothing can sharpen
The anguish of my mind: Yet I Will hear all:
That her last words may sink into my soul;
That her last look may languish in my eyes;
That inexpressive look, when fugitive life
Dropped its lost colors. -- That I now might see her,
Wan as she is, and cold! Oh there is a tender,
A melancholy charm, which death's pale touch
Casts over the features of the face we love.
Give, give me all, each look, each word relate.

EUMELUS. Pyrrhus unsheathed the sword -- Quick at the sight,
The youth approached. -- She saw, and thus she spoke.
Heroes of Greece! You who in ashes laid
My conquered country! Let no hand profane
Touch me. My heart unshrinking meets the blow!
Not like a slave. -- Heroes of Greece forbid!
But like great Priam's daughter, oh permit me,
Free as my birth to approach the gods below;
Not like a slave. -- Heroes of Greece forbid!
A favoring murmur followed; and the youth
Drew back at Pyrrhus' nod. -- Down from her shoulders
With rosy shame, she stripped her virgin veil,
And barred her beauteous breast, that far surpast
Even Dian's statue. Then upon one knee
These mournful words she spoke; Lo, prince my bosom,
Deep in my heart the friendly faulchion fix --
One wretched boon I beg -- My breathless corse
Unbought restore to my dear mother's arms.
Oh let her tears the precious purchase pay!
She said -- Tears gushed from every Grecian eye.
Even Pyrrhus paused. -- Irresolute, aghast,
He rolled his eyes, and wildly struck the blow.
She fell; and falling, carefully composed
Her decent limbs. --

POLYDORE. Yes, swell, swell on, my soul!
Lose not, my heart, a single agony!
I Am proud to be this wretch!

EUMELUS. Instruct me Jove,
To calm his troubled mind.

POLYDORE. I am most calm.
Draw forth thy sword, and let it search my breast,
And see how calm I am.

EUMELUS. Distracting fight!
Is this the end of all my care? Is this
Thy close of life? -- How did my old heart swell
With the proud hope that I had reared for Troy
Another Hector!

POLYDORE. And by heaven thou have.
Soon shall thou find thou have. I Will prove myself
Another Hector on the lives of Greece;
Rush through their camp, and to each Trojan ghost
My sword shall sacrifice a hecatomb.
-- I have no sword; -- oh curse on these vile bonds,
They chain my soul. Some god, some god assist,
Breathe through my breast a more than mortal might,
New-nerve my arm, that with one glorious effort --

TALTHYBIUS, POLYDORE, EUMELUS. TALTHYBIUS. The king --


POLYDORE. Heaven's curses on him --


EUMELUS. Dearest youth --


TALTHYBIUS. Atrides thus by me -- --


POLYDORE. Go tell Atrides --


EUMELUS. For heaven's sake, peace. -- Herald, what would Atrides?


TALTHYBIUS. Strait to Achilles' tomb his royal mandate
Summons Eriphilus.

POLYDORE. I will die here!


TALTHYBIUS. He may not doom thy death --


POLYDORE. I will not go.


TALTHYBIUS. Not go? Alas what can thy unarmed valor
Against yon approaching guard? Haste to the tomb,
Where he with Pyrrhus waits --

POLYDORE. Is Pyrrhus there?


TALTHYBIUS. left him there.


POLYDORE. Lead on -- Herald, I follow --


TALTHYBIUS. I will but summon the Paeonian prisoners,
And instant wait thee here.

Exit. EUMELUS. Merciless powers!
What has he done that your black cloud of wrath
O'er-shadows every hope!

POLYDORE. One glorious hope,
Bright as the midday sun, beams on my soul.
-- Nearer, my friend! -- Talthybius soon returns --
This moment's mine -- I would not ask in vain.
Thou have a dagger --

EUMELUS. Oh! upon my knees --
Dear youth --

POLYDORE By heaven, I do not mean --


EUMELUS. Shall I,
I, who from cruel Polymestor's sword
Snatched thy devoted life, ah, shall thy guardian
Give thee the murderous dagger!

POLYDORE. Thou mistak'st me.
A nobler action --

EUMELUS. Oh revere, revere
The good Pyrechmes! With a father's fondness
He waits thy blessed return; and holds in life,
'Till Priam's godlike son shall close his eyes.
-- Do not forsake thy mother's reverend age.
Helpless, and wretched, if her dearest son
Flies from her woes. -- Ah! drive her not to madness.
Have pity on thy friend! for by yon heaven,
I Will not survive thy death.

POLYDORE. Hear my resolve,
And give the dagger. -- For my life, let fate
Dispose it, as it may; yet for thy sake
I Will keep it to the last. -- The infernal Pyrrhus
Murdered my fire. The villian stabbed my sister.
Will thou withold the dagger from his heart?
Even now her gentle spirit hovers over me;
Summons her tardy brother to swift vengeance!
She shall to Priam, in the Elysian groves,
Present her Polydore who died to avenge them.
-- Give me the dagger --

EUMELUS. Thou true son of Priam!
Thou gallant brother of the godlike Hector!
What shall I say? -- Oh! rather bid me plunge it
In my own breast. -- Unfortunate old man!
Nay look not on me thus. -- Here, take the dagger,
A friend's last gift to his soul's better part.
Take it. I Will wait thee to Achilles' tomb.
If thou should fall; a thousand path-ways point
To death's dark cave: The readiest is for me.
-- Oh heavens! the queen --

POLYDORE. She never could have come
At a worse hour. -- Is here a heart to meet
A mother's transports?

EUMELUS. I but now informed her
Thy life was safe; I told her too the princess
Had reached the ships. Oh undeceive her not.
I will retire. --

Exit. POLYDORE. Well as I may, my friend,
I Will counterfeit a calm. Yet much I fear me,
A mother's fondness will pierce through the veil
That a faint watery smile throws over my grief.
-- What inexpressive bliss lightens her looks;
I see the story of my birth portrayed
In her dear eyes. -- Oh nature, how I feel,
Through every nerve, thy more than magic power.

HECUBA, POLYDORE, SIGEA, etc. POLYDORE. My soul springs from beneath it is
ponderous load,
And triumphs to behold her! Bless me, bless
Your son, your Polydore.

POLYDORE. Art thou my Polydore?
Art thou indeed returned to life and me?
-- Then wherefore swims thy shape before my eyes?
Oh for ten thousand worlds, this should not be
A dream, a false unreal form of air!
It Is not a dream! it is no unreal form!
It Is my own Polydore! -- Yes, my own eyes,
Dim as they are, can trace those living lines
That mark thee Hector's brother! -- My dear boy,
Thou do not join my transports! in thine eye
I see the image of a gloomy grief
That lives within thy heart.

POLYDORE. Can such a guest
Find entrance to a heart so full as mine?

HECUBA. To mine it cannot. No, while thus I clasp thee,
Methinks each god leans forward from the sky
To hail my happiness! Pride of my soul!
How does the sight of thee raise to my mind
Past joys, o'erlaid with many a dismal woe!
-- What pleasure for Polyxena, whose life
Thy valor has preserved!

POLYDORE. A nobler champion
Her virtues merited. Yet what my sword
Could do, it did, to save her precious life.

HECUBA. Dear youth! -- but is she safe beyond the reach
Of accident? Alas that fearful pause!
Is she not quite secure?

POLYDORE. She Is quite secure
From every mortal chance. No power on earth
Can harm her more.

HECUBA. Ye bloody butchers! now,
Where Is now your victim? -- how I long to see them,
Robbed of their prey, with sullen indignation,
Gaze on the empty altar!

POLYDORE. What a dagger
She strikes into my soul!

HECUBA. Thou turn'st away.
-- Now heaven protect my son! -- Eumelus told me
Thy life was safe.

POLYDORE. It is, and that it is,
For thy dear sake I Am thankful.

HECUBA. With what transport
Shall we run over these scenes, when dark bleak winter
Shuts out society! How shall thy sister
Hang on thy bosom, and with fondness call thee
Her second sire, who gave her a new life!

POLYDORE. Oh would to heaven I could --


HECUBA. Why, have thou not?


POLYDORE. Who --


HECUBA. Thou. --


POLYDORE. Done what? --


HECUBA. Preserved her life --


POLYDORE. Hark! -- heard you
That noise? --

HECUBA. Thy look appalls me!


POLYDORE. 'Twas a groan;
The hollow groan of death!

HECUBA. Thou could not hear,
So distant from the tomb, the victim's groans.

POLYDORE. The victim's groans! --


HECUBA. Ah! do not speak thy words
So terribly. -- Alas the horrid thought
Of thy dear sister's danger has impressed
Thy mind so strong --

POLYDORE. It has. --


HECUBA. That it disturbs
The happiest hour that Hecuba can know.

POLYDORE. But it no longer shall. For from this hour,
I do defy the darts of destiny.

HECUBA. It has no darts for thee, my son, nor me,
Nor thy dear sister. -- Would to heaven thou were
Safe as she is, my child!

POLYDORE. Oh mother, mother --


HECUBA. For while those cruel chains oppress thy limbs,
I cannot think thee safe. Would thou were with her.

POLYDORE. Burst tears, and ease my heart. -- The pang is past,
And I Am myself again. Nay, look not pale;
My mother, my sole joy. All now is well.
One hour shall set us free. Let me now beg thee
To leave me; lest this visit should awake
Suspicions here. These strange tempestuous times
Crave cautious apprehensions; make it dangerous
For poor humanity to feel those passions,
Which by the strict condition of our nature
We all are born to feel. The time will come,
When to these Greeks I shall proclaim myself
The prince of Troy, thy guardian, and thy son.

HECUBA. Oh joy too great! -- I Will go, my son; but first
To Jove's high throne address a mother's prayer.
Tremendous god; since destiny decrees*
My son shall over these perils pass secure,
Lengthen my life! let not the fatal sheers
Cut my old thread in twain. For now my joys,
Too vast for words, fix heaven within my heart;
While thus in ecstacies my fond arms clasp
My life, my soul, my newborn Polydore!

ULYSSES, EUMELUS, HECUBA, POLYDORE, Guards, etc. ULYSSES. Now Pallas aid thy
votary. With success
Crown this deceit, and make my name immortal!
Nay start not. This behavior but confirms
What needed not fresh proof. Rash queen, I Have learned
Your traitorous secret. With her dying voice
Polyxena proclaimed it.

EUMELUS. Dying voice!


POLYDORE. Oh cast not on me that soul-piercing look.
Yes, she is dead. -- The fatal truth had come
Less dreadful from my lips: but my fond heart
Forbad my tongue to speak it. Oh forgive
The only falsehood it can ever tell thee.

ULYSSES. The only one indeed. For the next hour
Will lay thee dumb for ever. This disguise
Avails thee not. I know thee --

POLYDORE. Then thou know
The man, whose look should turn thee into stone.
Think on my wrongs, and tremble at my vengeance!

ULYSSES. Thy vengeance, wretched boy! but that you are placed
So far beneath our wrath --

POLYDORE. Beneath thy wrath!
Heard you, dread Mars? -- I placed beneath thy wrath!
Proud Greek! were thou thrice king of Ithaca,
Me thou were placed beneath.

ULYSSES. Be this the proof --
Guards, bear him to the altar. --

POLYDORE. Off, vile slaves --


HECUBA. Oh spare him, spare him --


ULYSSES. Heard you my command?


To the Guard. HECUBA. On the bare earth, lo a queen kneels to thee;
Dead Priam's wretched queen --

ULYSSES. Take hence the traitor --


HECUBA. Have thou no drop of pity in thy heart
For a poor mother? -- Give me back my daughter. --
Thou will not -- can not. -- Give me then my son --

EUMELUS. All Is lost for ever!


HECUBA. Look upon me. -- Tremble
At my despair: my agonizing soul
Stands on distraction's brink! -- while sense remains
Oh spare him, spare my son.

ULYSSES. Thy son? --


EUMELUS. Yes, king,
But for the sacrifice, Eriphilus
Polyxena had wedded. Thus, Ulysses,
He would have been her son.

POLYDORE. I am her son!
And my soul triumphs in the thought! -- No more --
All falsehood is beneath the prince of Troy!
Yes, Polydore disdains it. --

ULYSSES. Polydore! --
-- By Pallas, it is a stroke beyond my hope!
Thus I arrest thee --

POLYDORE. Off old man --


ULYSSES. Nay then,
Die.

POLYDORE. No, false villain. -- First die thou --


Offers to stab Ulysses. ULYSSES. -- Bear down his weapon. Seize him --


POLYDORE. How beset?
Then farewell life --
Stabs himself. Oh faithful dagger!
It Is well, I Am free again. The son of Priam
Falls as he ought to fall.

ULYSSES. Sage Pallas, thanks!
Here end the fears of Greece. I Will to Atrides
With this important news.

Exit. HECUBA. It Is done, it is done! --


She faints. POLYDORE. Heart breaking sight! she dies. My mother dies!
All lend your aid; for I have none to lend!
She breathes again -- my life flows fast away --
Raise me. -- Heaven has decreed thy son must fall.
Oh then forgive me, if my hasty hand
Has executed the stern will of fate!
Could I have lived -- could I have given thee freedom!
-- I was not born to bless thee --

EUMELUS. Help, support him.
See, see the queen. Not one tear -- not one word --
My hard heart bears it!

POLYDORE. The same day that gives
Robs me of my dear mother. Rigid fate
Permits me but to see thee, and to die.
I asked not a long life -- but one hour more --
It would not be. -- Now Pyrrhus lives, he triumphs!
-- The gods are terrible! If they have mercy --
If they have justice -- thou will live -- wilt see
Revenge -- revenge.

Dies. HECUBA. He Is dead. I know he is dead.
After a silence. I know that ghastly paleness is proud Death's
Triumphant robe! -- Those lips shall breathe no more!
-- But tears are bootless now. -- Come, virgins, come,
We'll bear him to the Greeks. The star of Troy
Should, as it falls, leave its last luster there.
-- Come virgins, come, -- nay bring Polyxena,
Her corse upon my left; his on my right;
Like a fond mother I will go to Death.
He Will come to meet me from the Grecian camp,
And gently lay me 'twixt my son and daughter;
My murdered daughter, and my murdered son!
-- But soft -- revenge, -- revenge! -- Oh his sweet soul
Went with that word. -- Shall I live to revenge?
My spirits catch the alarm. -- Come, follow, follow:
Let Us do the noble deed! Come on, my maidens,
My virtuous maidens, blithe in beauty's bloom:
Shall we not love this gallant lord of Troy?
Nor pluck green myrtles from Elysian groves,
And wreath his warrior-brow? What, shall we steal
On my old Priam, sporting with his troop
Of demigods? My boys, my own bold boys!
-- Who would not be a mother? -- glorious hour! --

She runs off. EUMELUS. Oh melancholy sight! -- That wretched man,
Who to this world's vain pomp devotes his soul,
Here let him come -- gaze on these dread remains,
This monument of ruined royalty!

Exeunt. EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
And Spoken by Miss BRIDE. Stripped of my tragic weeds, and raised from death;
In freedom's land, again I draw my breath:
Though late a Trojan ghost, in Charon's ferry;
I Am now an English girl, alive, and merry!
Hey! -- Presto! -- I Am in Greece a maiden slain --
Now! -- stranger still! -- a maid, in Drury Lane!
No more by barbarous men, and laws confined,
I claim my native rights -- to speak my mind.
Though poring pedants should applaud this piece,
Behold a champion, -- foe professed of Greece!
I throw my gauntlet to the critic race:
Throws down her glove. Come forth, bold Grecians! -- Meet me face to face!
Come forth, ye men of learning, at my call!
Learning! a little feeling's worth it all!
And you of taste, and fashion, I defy!
Throws down another glove. But hold -- You hate the Greek as much as I;
Then, let us join our force, and boldly speak --
That English every thing surpasses Greek.
Kill a young virgin, to resist unable! --
Kill her, like house-lamb, for a dead man's ta^le!
Well may you tremble, ladies, and look pale!
Do you not shudder, parents, at this tale?
You sacrifice a daughter now and then,
To rich, old, withered, half-departed men;
With us, there is no compulsive law, that can
Make a live girl, to wed a quite dead man;
Had I been wedded to some ancient king!
I mean a Grecian -- Ancient's not the thing:
Then had our Bard made ample reparation!
Then had you seen a Grecian Coronation!
Sneer not, ye critics, at this rage for show,
That honest hearts at coronations glow!
Nor snarl that our faint copies glad their eyes,
When from the thing itself, such blessings rise.
The END.

