ISIS. AN ELEGY.

[Price Sixpence.]

ISIS. AN ELEGY.

Written in the Year 1748, By Mr. MASON.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
SOPHOCLES in Antig. LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in
Pall Mall, and Sold by M. COOPER in Paternoster Row.

MDCCXLIX.

Advertisement.
THE following Poem would never have appeared in print, had not an interpolated
copy of it, published in a country news-paper, scandalously misrepresented the
principles of the Author.

ISIS.
FAR from her hallowed grot, where mildly bright
The pointed crystals shot their trembling light,
From dripping moss where sparkling dew-drops fell,
Where coral glowed, where twined the wreathed shell,
Pale Isis lay; a willow's lowly shade
Spread it is thin foliage over the pensive maid;
Closed was her eye, and from her heaving breast
In careless folds loose flowed her zoneless vest;
While down her neck her vagrant tresses flow
In all the awful negligence of woe;
Her urn sustained her arm, that sculptured vase
Where Vulcan's art had lavished all it is grace;
Here, full with life was heav'n-taught Science seen,
Known by the laurel wreath and musing mein:
There cloud-crown'd Fame, here Peace sedate and bland,
Swelled the loud trump, and waved the olive wand;
While solemn domes, arched shades, and vista's green
At well-mark'd distance close the sacred scene.
On this the Goddess cast an anxious look,
Then dropped a tender tear, and thus she spoke:
Yes, I could once with pleased attention trace
The mimic charms of this prophetic vase;
Then lift my head, and with enraptured eyes
View on yon plain the real glories rise.
Yes, Isis! often have thou rejoiced to lead
Thy liquid treasures over yon favorite mead,
Often have thou stopped thy pearly car to gaze,
While every Science nursed it is growing bays;
While every Youth with fame's strong impulse fired,
Pressed to the goal, and at the goal untir'd,
Snatched each celestial wreath to bind his brow
The Muses, Graces, Virtues could bestow.
Even now fond Fancy leads th'ideal train,
And ranks her troops on Mem'ry's ample plain;
See! the firm leaders of my patriot line,
See! SIDNEY, RALEIGH, HAMDEN, SUMMERS shine.
See HOUGH superior to a tyrant's doom
Smile at the menace of the slave of Rome.
Each soul whom truth could fire, or virtue move,
Each breast strong panting with it is country's love,
All that to Albion gave the heart or head,
That wisely counseled, or that bravely bled,
All, all appear; on me they grateful smile,
The well-earn'd prize of every virtuous toil
To me with filial reverence they bring,
And hang fresh trophies over my honored spring.
Ah! I remember well yon beachen spray,
There ADDISON first tuned his polished lay;
'Twas there great Cato's form first met his eye,
In all the pomp of freeborn majesty.
"My Son, he cried, observe this mein with awe,
"In solemn lines the strong resemblance draw;
"The piercing notes shall strike each British ear,
"Each British eye shall drop the patriot tear;
"And roused to glory by the nervous strain,
"Each Youth shall spurn at slav'ry's abject reign,
"Shall guard with Cato's zeal Britannia's laws,
"And speak, and act, and bleed, in freedom's cause."
The Hero spoke, the Bard assenting bowed,
The lay to liberty and Cato flowed;
While Echo, as she roved the vale along,
Joined the strong cadence of his Roman song.
But ah! how Stillness slept upon the ground,
How mute Attention checked each rising sound;
Scarce stole a breeze to wave the leafy spray,
Scarce trill'd sweet Philomel her softest lay,
When LOCK walked musing forth; even now I view
Majestic Wisdom throned upon his brow,
View Candor smile upon his modest cheek,
And from his eye all Judgment's radiance break.
'Twas here the sage his manly zeal expressed,
Here stripped vain Falsehood of her gaudy vest;
Here Truth's collected beams first filled his mind,
Ever long to burst in blessings on mankind;
Ever long to show to reason's purged eye,
That "NATURE'S FIRST BEST GIFT WAS LIBERTY."
Proud of this wondrous son, sublime I stood,
(While louder surges swelled my rapid flood)
Then vain as Niobe, exulting cried,
Ilissus! roll thy famed Athenian tide;
Though Plato's steps often marked thy neighboring glade,
Though fair Lycaeum lent it is awful shade,
Though every Academic green impressed
It Is image full on thy reflecting breast,
Yet my pure stream shall boast as proud a name,
And Britain's Isis flow with Attic fame.
Alas! how changed! where now that Attic boast?
See! Gothic License rage over all my coast.
See! Hydra Faction spread it is impious reign,
Poison each breast, and madden every brain.
Hence frontless crowds that not content to fright
The blushing Cynthia from her throne of night,
Blast the fair face of day; and madly bold,
To Freedom's foes infernal orgies hold;
To Freedom's foes, ah! see the goblet crowned,
Hear plausive shouts to Freedom's foes resound;
The horrid notes my refluent waters daunt,
The Echoes groan, the Dryads quit their haunt;
Learning that once to all diffused her beam,
Now sheds by stealth a partial private gleam,
In some lone cloister's melancholy shade
Where a firm few support her sickly head;
Despised, insulted by the barbarous train,
Who scour like Thracia's moon-struck rout the plain,
Sworn foes like them to all the Muse approves,
All Phoebus favors, or Minerva loves.
Are these the sons my fost'ring breast must rear?
Graced with my name, and nurtured by my care,
Must these go forth from my maternal hand
To deal their insults through a peaceful land,
And boast while Freedom bleeds, and Virtue groans,
That " Isis taught Rebellion to her Sons?"
Forbid it heaven! and let my rising waves
Indignant swell, and whelm the recreant slaves,
In England's cause their patriot floods employ,
As Xanthus deluged in the cause of Troy.
Is this denied? then point some secret way
Where far far hence these guiltless streams may stray,
Some unknown channel lend where nature spreads
Inglorious vales and unfrequented meads,
There where a Hind scarce tunes his rustic strain,
Where scarce a Pilgrim treads the pathless plain
Content I Will flow; forget that ever my tide
Saw yon majesty structures crown its side;
Forget that ever my wrapped attention hung
Or on the Sage's or the Poet's tongue,
Calm and resigned my humbler lot embrace,
And pleased prefer oblivion to disgrace.
FINIS.

