I WILL TELL YOU WHAT. A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

I WILL TELL YOU WHAT. A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS, AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER
ROYAL, HAYMARKET. By Mrs. INCHBALD.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON PATERNOSTER ROW. M DCC LXXXVI.

PROLOGUE.
Written by GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
Spoken by Mr. PALMER.
LADIES and Gentlemen, I Will tell you what!
Yet not, like ancient Prologue, tell the Plot;
But, like a modern Prologue, try each way
To win your Favor toward the coming Play.
Our Author, is a Woman -- that is a Charm
Of Power to guard herself and Play from harm.
The Muses, Ladies Regent of the Pen,
Grant Women Skill, and Force, to write like Men.
Yet they, like the AEolian Maid of old,
Their Sex's Character will ever hold:
Not with bold Quill too roughly strike the Lyre,
But with the Feather raise a soft Desire.
Our Poetess has gained sublimest heights:
Not Sapho's Self has soared to nobler Flights;
For she, bright Spirit, the first British Fair,
Climbed unappall'd, the unsubstantial Air;
And here, beneath the Changes of the Moon,
Wondering you saw her launch a grand Balloon; Alluding to the Farce of the
"Mogul Tale, or Descent of the Balloon," produced the Year before by the
Authosess.

While she with steady Course, and Flight not dull,
Paid a short Visit to the Great Mogul.
Shrink not, Nabobs! Our Poetess tonight
Wakes not the Genius of Sir Matthew Mite.
Beyond our Hemisphere she will not roam,
Keeps in the Line, and touches nearer Home;
Nay will not, as before, however you scorn her,
Reach even the Turnpike-gate at Hyde Park Corner.
But hold -- I say too much -- I quite forgot --
And so I Will tell you -- No -- SHE WILL tell you what.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Major Cyprus, Mr. PALMER. Mr. Anthony Euston, Mr. BENSLEY. Colonel Downright,
Mr. AICKIN. Charles Euston, Mr. BANNISTER, Jun. Sir George Euston, Mr.
WILLIAMSON. Sir Harry Harmless, Mr. R. PALMER. Servants, Messrs. LEDGER,
GAUDRY, and LIONS. Mr. Euston, Mr. PARSONS. Lady Euston, Mrs. BULKLEY. Lady
Harriet Cyprus, Mrs. BATES. Bloom, Mrs. RILEY. A Young Lady, Miss FARREN.
EPILOGUE.
Written by GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
Spoken by Miss FARREN.
MALE Critics applaud to the Skies the Male Scribblers --
When a Woman attempts, they turn Carpers and Nibblers;
But a true Patriot Female, there is nothing so vexes.
As this haughty Pre-eminence claim'd'twixt the Sexes.
The free Spirit revolts at each hard Proposition,
And meets the whole System with loud Opposition.
Men, it is true, in their Noddles huge Treasures may hoard,
But the Heart of a Woman with Passions is stored.
With Passions not copied from Latin or Greek,
Which the Language of Nature in plain English speak.
Girls who grieve, or rejoice, from true Feeling, as I do,
Never dream of Calypso, or Helen, or Dido.
To the End of our Life, from the Hour we begin it,
Woman's Fate all depends on the Critical Minute.
A Minute unknown to the dull Pedant Tribe,
And which never feeling, they never describe.
It Is no Work of Science, or Sparkle of Wit,
But a Point which mere Nature must teach us to hit;
And which, in the Changes and Turns of my Story,
A weak Woman's Pen has tonight laid before ye.
And say, ye grave Prudes! Gay Coquettes too, ah say,
What a Critical Minute was mine in the Play!
Here Poverty, Famine, and Shame, and Reproach;
There Plenty and Ease, and a Lord and a Coach.
But perhaps our Bard held Mrs. Euston too mean,
And conceived her Disgrace would but lower the Scene;
Let us then, better pleased to acquit than convict her,
On the Ground of High Life, sketch the very same Picture!
Imagine some Fair, plunged in modish Distress,
Her Wants not less than mine, nor her Agony less.
At Hazard, suppose, an unfortunate Cast,
Has swept her last Guinea, nay, more than her last.
Her Diamonds all mortgaged, her Equipage sold,
Her Husband undone, genteel Friends looking cold;
At her Feet his sweet Person, Lord Foppington throws,
The most handsome of Nobles, the richest of Beaux!
At once too his Love and his Bounty dispenses,
Sooths with Thousands her Grief, lulls with Flattery her Senses.
Alas, what a Minute! Ah! What can be done?
All Means must be tried, and our Drama shows one.
Let Papa in that Minute, that so frowns upon her,
Redeem the vile Debts that encumber her Honor!
Let Papa in that Minute that teems with undoing,
Step in like my Father, and mar a Lord's wooing!
Let her know, as I Have known, all the Horror that is in it,
And feel the true Force of the Critical Minute!
Thus wishes our Bard, as she bids me declare;
And such is my Wish, by my Honor I swear.

I WILL TELL YOU WHAT.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room at Sir GEORGE, EUSTON's. Enter Mr. EUSTON followed by Sir GEORGE. Sir
George. BUT, my dear Uncle, why in such a passion? --


Mr. EUSTON. I cannot help it -- I am out of all patience! -- Did not I leave
you one of the happiest men in the world? --


Sir GEORGE. Well, and so you find me, Sir.


Mr. EUSTON. It Is false -- you are not happy -- you cannot be happy -- it is
false -- and you shall not be happy.


Sir GEORGE. If you are resolved to make me otherwise, Sir --


Mr. EUSTON. No, I am not resolved -- it is yourself that is resolved -- Did not
I leave you one of the happiest of men? -- married to one of the most beautiful
women in the world? -- Did not I give you my blessing and a large fortune, and
did I not stay and see you father of a fine boy? -- Then only just stepped over
to visit my estate in St. Kitts, and, now I Am come back, here I find you
married to another woman -- and your first wife still living -- and, egad, she
is married to another man.


Sir GEORGE. Dear Uncle, I should certainly have asked your opinion and my
Uncle Anthony's on the subject, but your absence put it out of my power, and it
was universally believed the ship in which you sailed was lost.


Mr. EUSTON. Well, you will hear what my brother will say to it.


Sir GEORGE. I trust, Sir, when I have explained every thing, you will not only
think me worthy of your pardon but even of being pleaded for to my Uncle.


Mr. EUSTON. Not I, indeed -- Nay, were it in my power to do you any good, I
would not -- I shall not forgive you myself -- much less ask him -- But you are
right in fixing on me for a mediator; my brother pays much regard to me truly
-- I have been of infinite service, to be sure, in reconciling him to his own
poor boy. Nay, did he not even (for my brother Anthony would always be master,
although he was the youngest) when I went to him to persuade him to forgive
poor Charles, his son, did he not even (instead of my gaining him over and
getting something for the poor boy) did he not even draw me into a promise
never to do any thing for him myself? -- My brother does what he pleases with
me -- but nobody else shall -- No, what I want in resolution, to him, I Will make
up in obstinacy, to other people.


Sir GEORGE. Sir, if you will but hear the just pleas I have to offer --


Mr. EUSTON. I will hear no pleas -- What do you think my brother will say? Why
you inconsiderate boy! He had designed you for his heir!


Sir GEORGE. I should be as sorry, Sir, to excite his displeasure as I am at
incurring yours; yet, give me leave to add, I should derive very little
enjoyment from the possession of a fortune which his son, my poor cousin, (but
for a single act of imprudence) had a right to expect. And be assured, Sir,
that if this seeming indiscretion of mine, when compared with that of his
son's, should be regarded so unfavorably as to make his offense appear lighter
to my Uncle, and move him to forgiveness -- I will contentedly support the
burden of his resentment.


Mr. EUSTON. Why now that is well spoken -- You silly young rogue, I am not
angry with you for getting rid of your wife -- (for that I dare say is what
every sensible man in the world would do, if he could) I am only angry with you
for getting another -- Could not you know when you were well off, you blockhead?


Sir GEORGE. Dear Uncle, as you are a bachelor, and can only speak of wives
from theory, suppose we drop the subject? -- Is my Uncle Anthony come to his
house? He knows nothing of the alteration that has taken place in my family,
you tell me. -- Should I wait on him, or do you think he will favor me with a
visit first?


Mr. EUSTON. Now what a deal of ceremony! -- It Is a fine thing to look like a
man of consequence. My brother Anthony has had more privilege^ from his looks
than I ever had from being eldest son -- even you, whom I love so well, and
have given half my fortune to (and it is not long you know that you have
expected a six pence from Anthony) yet you never meet him without a low bow.
"How do you do Sir? -- I hope you are well, Uncle! -- I am glad to see you!" --
And you stumble over me, with "So Uncle, how is it? how is it Uncle" -- And
when you invite us both, "Uncle Anthony, I hope I shall have the honor of your
company" -- While you give me a nod, "Uncle, I shall see you."


Sir GEORGE. Dear Sir --


Mr. EUSTON. Nay, with every other person it is the same thing -- If we are
stuffed into a coach, with a little chattering pert Miss, "Oh dear, Mr. Anthony
Euston, you must not ride backwards, here is room for you on this seat -- and
Mr. Euston, I know, will like one seat as well as another" -- ad then am I put
with my back to the horses, though my head is whirling all the time like one of
the coach wheels. Then if any thing be lost, or wanted, when no servant is by,
"Mr. Anthony Euston must not stir for the world -- but Mr. Euston, they know,
will be so kind as to go for it." -- And this is all because I am good natured.
Egad! if this is my reward, no wonder there are so few in the world of my
temper.


Sir GEORGE. But, dear Sir, no jesting -- Does my Uncle intend to call on me or
not?


Mr. EUSTON. Yes, I dare say he did intend it; and, if he does not hear of what
you have been doing, before he gets to your house, he will.


Sir GEORGE. Why then, my dear Uncle, will you step home, and give orders that
none of the servants mention any thing to him this morning?


Mr. EUSTON. There now! -- " I step home and give orders!" There it is, again!
-- Would you ask my brother to "step home, and give orders?" No, I fancy not!
-- But I -- poor I -- will be so good as to do it you think -- But for once I
will not -- Besides, Anthony never asks questions of servants. We enquired of our
housekeeper, indeed, how you did, last night; she told us both you and your
Lady were well, and so we thought all safe. Anthony will ask no more questions,
therefore you may have the pleasure of explaining matters to him yourself, as
you have to me.


Sir GEORGE. I should be sorry if any imperfect account should reach him; for,
so sincere is my respect for him, I would not even suffer for a moment in his
esteem. I will be with him in half an hour, but I am afraid --


Mr. EUSTON. No, no, he will not be out, nor have had any company in that time --
for my brother is no sailor, and he will be too fond of the exchange of a bed for
a hammock to be stirring so soon. However, I think I will step home and give a
caution to the servants that they don't mention your divorce to him. -- As for
myself, I Will keep out of his way -- I Will not go near him -- for I will say this
for my brother, although it was never in my power to persuade him to forgive an
injury or an indiscretion in my life, yet I never said to him, "Brother Anthony
don't forgive a thing," that he did not take my advice.


Sir GEORGE. Come, Uncle, walk into the parlor before you go -- Let me
introduce you to Lady Euston -- Do step in and take your chocolate with her.


Mr. EUSTON. And, by the time I have taken a turn in the Park, and eaten a
mouthful of dinner, you will, perhaps, have a new Lady Euston to introduce me to,
and I may drink tea with her.


Sir GEORGE. Well, Uncle, whether you stay or go, I must bid you a good
morning, for I am obliged to attend a friend, who has a lawsuit depending, and
I fear I shall be waited for -- my presence will not be required long, and I Will be
with my Uncle Anthony within half an hour.


Mr. EUSTON. Very well, [Going] but you had better take an hour -- Let me
advise you to take an hour. Anthony is devilish sharp -- he is not to be
imposed upon. Take an hour, or an hour and half, before you see him -- Anthony
is a deep man, he is not to be deceived -- for, I dare say, in his time, he has
been as idle as yourself -- and I will go on your errand.


(Exeunt Mr. Euston and Sir George, separately.) SCENE II.
A Room at Major CYPRUS's. Lady HARRIET CYPRUS, and BLOOM waiting. Lady
HARRIET. Married!


BLOOM. Yes, my Lady, as sure as death.


Lady HARRIET. Amazing! It cannot be.


BLOOM. O yes, my Lady, I have known of it these three months; but, as they
kept out of town till within this fortnight, and your Ladyship has been abroad
most of that time, I thought I would not tell your Ladyship till we returned to
London, when your Ladyship was sure to hear of it. Why they live but just by,
madam; and my master, I know, has been several times in company where they have
been visiting.


Lady HARRIET. Ay, she was your master's intended.


BLOOM. O yes, my Lady, I know that.


Lady HARRIET. Insignificant girl -- I triumphed, when I snatched him from her,
and now I suppose she thinks to triumph equally.


BLOOM. No doubt, madam -- But, if I was you, I would let her see I cared
nothing about him.


Lady HARRIET. And do you imagine I do care? No, indeed, Bloom; my exchange is
for the better, I am certain; and [sighing] entirely to my satisfaction.


BLOOM. Indeed I think so, madam: you certainly have changed for the better --
and, bless me, I think, of all the husbands I ever saw, my present master is
sure the fondest.


Lady HARRIET. As for that -- no one could be fonder than Sir George, at first.


BLOOM. Ay, my Lady, but Major Cyprus is not so flighty as Sir George.


Lady HARRIET. Not so slighty -- ( sighs.) I have been envied Sir George's
gaiety a thousand times.


BLOOM. Yes, my Lady, when your Ladyship married first, I suppose; but you
know, in a few months, Sir George altered so much, and seemed so miserable, I
protest every single rap that came at the door made my blood run cold, for I
took it for the report of a pistol.


Lady HARRIET. You need not have feared him, Bloom -- he is too fond of the
pleasures of this life. Dear pleasures which he wanted to retrench me in.


BLOOM. More shame for him, madam. -- Now my present master is a soldier; and,
what is more, I dare say will soon be called on to go abroad.


Lady HARRIET. Hah!


BLOOM. Nay, I beg your Ladyship's pardon -- I thought perhaps your Ladyship
wished to see the Major show himself a courageous gentleman in the field; and
that that was the reason of your presering him to Sir George.


Lady HARRIET. I prefer! Did not my brother, from Sir George's humiliating
suspicions and cruel treatment of me, compel us to a divorce; and then, as a
defense for my weakness, forced me into the arms of the Major; being, I
suppose, convinced that nothing less than a soldier, should undertake the guard
of a Lady's honor!


BLOOM. Very true, madam -- and I heard the Major say, this morning, as your
Ladyship left the room, that "your Ladyship's honor would reqnire the guard of
a file of musketeers."


Lady HARRIET. Ungenerous man -- even worse to me than Sir George -- for poor
Sir George, from my indiscreet partiality to this ingrate, had some pretense
for his unkind apprehensions; but Mr. Cyprus, who knows what proofs of
affection I have given him, even in preference to the man I had sworn to love
--


BLOOM. Nay, I fancy, that is what frightens my master; for I believe he is a
little fearful lest your Ladyship should chance to be forsworn again.


Lady HARRIET. Insolent supposition -- He knows the delicacy of my sentiments
-- my honor to Sir George -- knows that, although his unwearied artifices
conquered my too susceptible heart, and hurried me to indiscretions, I merited
not that severe contumely I have endured.


BLOOM. Bless my soul! -- Well now I assure you, you surprise me! -- And so, my
Lady, there was nothing at all in it, when Sir George found my master in the
closet?


Lady HARRIET. What did you suppose?


BLOOM. Oh, my Lady, nothing -- I hope I did not distress your Ladyship by the
mention of Sir George's second marriage.


Lady HARRIET. Ridiculous!


BLOOM. Nay, indeed, I always thought, as your Ladyship would not live with him
yourself, your Ladyship did not wish to prevent them that would.


Lady HARRIET. Don't mention that insignificant woman!


BLOOM. If I was your Ladyship, I am sure I would not care -- especially as I
got married before him.


Lady HARRIET. Leave me.


BLOOM. ( Aside) She Will have another husband within half a year -- and so have
three all alive at once -- Well, I will say, it is very hard that, because I am
poor, I never can have above one at a time.


( Exit Bloom.) Lady HARRIET. And so Sir George has been married these three
months to another, and entirely forgot me -- To be so soon forgotten! -- I
shall never now forget him, I am certain. He has behaved like a man of
resolution and spirit in casting me from his heart, and I feel the irreparable
loss. Why were we divorced? I should have disliked him still had be been my
husband; and yet how tender, how patient to my failings to what Mr. Cyprus is
-- His cruel and unjust suspicions of me are not to be borne. -- How
provokingly did he treat me last night -- I was too tame -- but the next time
he insults me, with his jealousy, I will endeavor to augment rather than pacify
it -- I Will try a reverse of conduct -- Though, indeed, I am tolerably provoking
in all our wrangles: -- yes, thank heaven, I can say as cool spiteful things as
any woman in the world.


( Exit.) SCENE III.
Another Apartment in Major Cyprus's House. Enter COLONEL DOWNRIGHT, followed
by the MAJOR. Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I assure you, Major, this is the first visit I
have made since I set my foot in London. -- Nay, and faith, no great compliment
to you, neither; for, as I parted with my fellow passengers at Portsmouth, I
don't know that I have a friend or acquaintance in the whole town but yourself.


Major CYPRUS. I am happy in your want of friends, Colonel, if it gives you
occasion to consider me as one.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. As for that, I don't want friends neither, I believe; only
they are not here, at present. I have plenty of friends on the other side the
Atlantic. -- Zounds, I think it would be hard for a man, who has been so long
in the army, and borne a post like mine in it, not to have a regiment of
friends, at least.


Major CYPRUS. Which is a great consolation to you, no doubt, Colonel.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. The greatest in the world, Major. But what! -- you have
changed your house since I was last in England -- this is not the same, I
think, though near the same spot.


Major CYPRUS. Yes -- I have changed my house -- and, what is more, changed my
state too, Colonel.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why, you are not married?


Major CYPRUS What surprises you? --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Nay, I am not surprised at your marrying, only at your
appearing so easy about it.


Major CYPRUS. And why not, Colonel? A valuable woman --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Very true -- very true -- and so I wish you joy with all my
heart. ( Shaking hands). But, who is the Lady, pray? Do I know her, or any of
her family?


Major CYPRUS. Did you know Sir George Euston? --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I have heard of him.


Major CYPRUS. She was his Lady.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. A widow!


Major CYPRUS. No -- she was no widow.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Did not you say she was Sir George Euston's wife?


Major CYPRUS. Very true -- but Sir George is still living.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. What, the devil, is the man living, and you married to his
wife?


Major CYPRUS. It was a divorce, Colonel.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. A divorce! -- Whu! -- Now I understand you. -- Why that is
marriage en militaire. -- You might well appear so easy.


Major CYPRUS. Fie, Colonel -- I assure you Lady Harriet Cyprus and I are a most
happy couple -- and my having snatched her from "a dull doting husband" gives
superior pleasure and triumph to our bliss.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. The husband is much obliged to you both.


Major CYPRUS. Why, poor fellow, that is the worst -- In spite of the
congratulations I receive from my friends, and my natural desire of fame, and
propensity to conquest, I do feel, and cannot help it, a most deep sorrow and
compassion for the thorns I have planted in his bosom.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. But, I suppose, he used his Lady very ill, before he
provoked her to the divorce, and certainly preferred some other?


Major CYPRUS. Oh no, by no means! -- He doated on her, even to the day of
their separation, notwithstanding it was he who sued for the divorce.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He who sued for the divorce -- Oh! that was it! I
understood you, that you had planted thorns -- but you said horns I suppose.


Major CYPRUS. ( Smiles) Ha! ha!


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Oh! I wish you much joy --


Major CYPRUS. Why ironically, Colonel? Depend upon it, I am the envy of all
the men in town -- Lady Harriet Cyprus is a perfect beauty.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I am glad she is perfect in some respect.


Major CYPRUS. Oh! ( With some inquietude) ridiculous, Colonel -- Divorces
happen now every day -- and the favored lover is the most admired and envied
of mortals, while the poor husband becomes an object of general pity.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, the husband?


Major CYPRUS. Yes, the husband.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, and you are the husband now.


Major CYPRUS. Pshaw! the forsaken husband.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. You pity him?


Major DOWNRIGHT. Certainly.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And, if he is a tender hearted man, I suppose, he pities
you.


Major CYPRUS. Ha, ha, ha -- Let me describe a scene to you, where poor Sir
George's situation must affect the most obdurate heart. Lady Harriet Euston
(now Lady Harriet Cyprus) was, when I first became acquainted with her, a very
loving wife: (we are friends, Colonel, and I will venture to recount a few
anecdotes to you) a very loving wife indeed; and but for my insinuations --
artful insinuations I may call them -- had continued her conjugal regard -- she
had been to this hour an example to wives, if I had not tempted her to stray.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, you! -- or somebody else.


Major CYPRUS. ( Disturbed) Hear me out, Colonel -- she was long an example to
wives -- she was I assure you. -- But to describe to you Sir George's pitiable
situation, and what was chiefly the cause of the divorce -- One evening we had
prolonged the tete-a-tete rather beyond the usual time; when, unexpectedly, Sir
George and a party of beaux and belles were rushing up stairs, -- "Dear Major,"
cried my wife --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Your wife? -- Sir George's you mean.


Major CYRPUS. Yes, Sir George's then -- but my wife now.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, ay, and I most sincerely give you joy!

( Ironically.)
Major CYPRUS. Pshaw, you put me out -- "Dear Major," cried my wife: or Sir
George's! if you will have it so -- "What will become of us," (for Sir George
had given us some little proofs of his jealousy) "what will become of us!"
exclaimed the then Lady Harriet Euston -- "Put me into your thimble; into the
eye of your needle, madam," said I -- Instead of which, crammed I was into that
closet.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. That closet!


Major CYPRUS. That very identical closet, which you see there -- for Sir
George never loved the house after, and so settled it on her Ladyship --
Screwed up in that closet, I believe I remained ten minuets; when old Lady
Downfall, who was of the party, called for drops, the door was opened, -- and
out dropped your humble servant.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Zounds, it was enough to make you wish yourself --


Major CYPRUS. Nay, it was Sir George's place to wish. Every beau in the room
was round me in a moment; and, in a whisper, "Give you joy Major" -- "The
happiest man in the world" -- "An Alexander" -- "A conqueror every where." --
Even old Sir Samson Shrivel, shook his head and wished to be in my place.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Zounds I would have thrust him into the closet, and kept
him there for a month. But what did the husband say all this time?


Major CYPRUS. That is what I was going to tell you -- What did he say? Why, he
said nothing. You may depend upon it, he heard and saw all the half stifled
laughs, and was wise enough to know to whom they were directed -- so poor
fellow he turned pale -- bit his lips -- looked at her Ladyship -- looked at me
-- looked at his sword -- and then cried, "Heigh ho!"


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Heigh ho! -- And what the deuce did you say?


MAJOR. What do you think I said? Egad I was a little confused.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Confused!


Major CYPRUS. And do you know I said -- Faith it was an odd speech, and has
been laughed at since in a thousand sashionable circles -- the conclusion of it
has been particularly marked. Dear Sir George, said I -- He was standing where
you may be (here, a little more this way) and I just where I am at present --
"Dear Sir George," said I (half stifling a laugh, for by my soul I could not
help it, though I pitied the poor devil too) Dear Sir George, said I, "I Will
tell you what" -- you will find nobody to blame in this affair -- I protest my
being in that closet was entirely owing to "I Will tell you what" -- In short to
an -- an undescribable something -- There I made a full stop.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. "An undescribable something."


Major CYPRUS. It Is true upon my soul; those were the very words.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Owing to an, "Undescribable something," and "I Will tell you
what," that I got into this closet: and so I suppose the next day Sir George
left both his wife and the closet, and you have ever since held possession.


Major CYPRUS. After some other explanations, and regular proceedings, I became
the happy husband he was never formed to be.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. But I hope you keep the key of the closet.


Major CYPRUS. You will have your joke, Colonel -- Sir George, out of despair,
is just married again -- and Lady Harriet's affection for me is such -- yet
faith I must confess, to you, too Colonel, that noth with standing I am so very
happy in my marriage -- my wife so very beautiful and so affectionate -- yet I
am a sad wicked fellow; I have not forgot my old ways -- no, I am going
tomorrow evening to meet a Lady of untarnished reputation -- a married lady --
Faith it is wrong -- I know it is -- but I cannot withstand the temptation --
no, I cannot forget my old ways.

( Yawning.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And do you suppose her Ladyship can forget her old ways
either?

( Yawning.)
Major CYPRUS. For shame, Colonel -- but you are so fond of a joke -- egad I
have a great mind to make you laugh most heartily at the business I have now on
my hands -- you would say it was the most impudent thing of me -- I Will tell you
another time, on puporse to make you laugh; no other design whatever. ( A bell
rings) That is her Ladyship's bell -- come I will introduce you to her
directly; and, I flatter myself, you will admire my choice.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. It does ideed excite my admiration, most prodigiously.


( Exeunt.) END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Room at Sir GEORGE EUSTON's. Enter Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON, and a SERVANT.
SERVANT. I WILL let my master know immediately, Sir.


( Exit.) Mr. ANTHONY. Sir George has changed all his servants, I think, as
well as his house, for I have not seen one that I know; and not one of them
seems to know their old friend Anthony Euston.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. I beg your pardon, Sir, I thought my master had been
at home; but he is not.


Mr. ANTHONY. Is not he?


SERVANT. No, Sir; he has been gone out this half hour.


Mr. ANTHONY. He is gone to my house, then, I dare say -- Is your Lady at home?


SERVANT. Yes, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. Be so kind as to let her know I should be glad to see her.


SERVANT. What name, pray Sir?


Mr. ANTHONY. Only say a relation, she will be glad to see. ( Exit. Servant.)
Sir George may not be gone to my house, neither; for, perhaps, my brother has
not yet called on him, and he may be ignorant of our arrival. -- This house is
a handsome one -- yet, I wonder Sir George should leave his other -- for I
remember my neice was remarkably fond of its situation -- Poor girl -- if she
knew it was Anthony, Anthony Euston, I believe she would not be so long in
coming. ( Goes to the side of the scene and calls) Come, come, my dear! it is an
old friend that wants to see you -- ( He walks to the opposite side, and, when
he hears Lady Euston entering, he returns and calls.) Come, come -- sure you
have kept me long enough!


Enter Lady EUSTON. ( As Mr. Anthony is going with great eagerness to
saluteber. he stops short, and she courtesies.) Mr. ANTHONY. I beg your pardon,
madam! I thought I had been speaking to my niece.


Lady EUSTON. Your niece, Sir?


Mr. ANTHONY. The Lady of the house, madam.


Lady EUSTON. I have the honor to be mistress of this house, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. Madam?


Lady EUSTON. My name is Euston, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. Good Heaven! Is then my niece, that beautiful young woman dead?


Lady EUSTON. The Lady that was Lady Harriet Ogle, Sir? --


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes. --


Lady EUSTON. No, Sir, she is still living, and very well -- I saw her the
other morning.


Mr. ANTHONY. Madam, you rejoice me.


Lady EUSTON. You are only mistaken in the house, Sir; that is all.


Mr. ANTHONY. Madam, you make me happier than I can express. -- But how could
the mistake happen? -- They told me my nephew lived here -- Indeed, I named no
names at the door, but only asked the man if his master was within; and your
name being Euston, madam, I suppose, first cased the mistake.


Lady EUSTON. Very likely, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. I beg pardon for the trouble I have given you.


Lady EUSTON. No apologies, Sir -- Permit me to let one of my servants show you
to Lady Harriet's.


Mr. ANTHONY. No, I am much obliged to you. -- If it is the same house that Sir
George Euston lived in, about two years ago, I know it very well.


Lady EUSTON. It is, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. Madam, I thank you -- and once more beg pardon for the trouble I
have given you, through a mistake.


Lady EUSTON. Dear Sir, no apology -- petmit the servant to show you to Lady
Harriet's.


Mr. ANTHONY. No, madam, I thank you; I have been often there, and know the
house very well. -- Madam good morning to you -- I beg your pardon -- good
morning, madam.


( Exit. Mr. Anthony.) Lady EUSTON. Good morning to you, Sir -- This is
certainly an Uncle of Lady Harriet's, who is unacquainted with her divorce --
and I could not inform him of it, 'twould have led to such disagreeable
explanations, and such a long round-about story it must have caused -- "Sir, I
am second wise to your present niece's first husband." -- Lud! Lud! how ashamed
I should have been -- Lady Harriet had better explain it by far.


( Exit. Lady Euston.) SCENE II.
A Room at Major CYPRUS's. Enter Colonel DOWNRIGHT, and Sir Harry HARMLESS. Sir
HARRY. Now the Major is gone, Colonel -- notwithstanding all he has been
talking, of love, and his vast happiness -- you will hardly believe it, perhaps
-- but he is not so very happy.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. No!


Sir HARRY. No, poor man -- you will hardly think it -- but he is jealous.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. What already? And, for Heaven sake, of whom?


Sir HARRY. Nay, I assure you he has no cause -- Nor is he jealous of one,
alone -- he is so of every body -- and will be so of you -- therefore, I tell
you, that you may be on your guard. -- I am constantly with his Lady and him,
and, because the poor woman once shut him up in her closet, he now suspects a
lover concealed in every part of the house -- and I have known him, when the
mad fit has been upon him, search for a supposed rival even in her drawers and
bandboxes.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Pray Sir, do you live in the house?


Sir HARRY. I have been on a visit here these six weeks.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And during that time --


Sir HARRY. I have seen such things! Enough to terrify me from marrying -- for
wives are sometimes so provoking, I am sure I could not keep my temper -- Now,
here is Lady Harriet Cyprus -- you cannot think how provoking she is -- she
sometimes says such terrible things to her husband that, I am sure, if she was
my wife --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why you would not beat her, would you? or lock her up?


Sir HARRY. No -- but perhaps I might kick her lap dog, or do some outrage to
her dress.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. You would make an admirable soldier, Sir Harry.


Sir HARRY. I must own, Colonel, I should have no objection to a commission,
where the regimentals were becoming.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Really! --


Sir HARRY. And indeed, Colonel, I am positive you would be obliged to press
commissioned officers, if it were not for the becomingness of some of their
dresses.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Give me your hand, Sir Harry. -- I like you much -- and
could I see you master of a firelock, or a wife --


Sir HARRY. No. -- While my neighbors marry, I never shall.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why so, Sir Harry?


Sir HARRY. Their wives will do for me.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I am amazed, Sir Harry, that the Major, jealous as you
describe him, should suffer you to remain in his house!


Sir HARRY. I have often been surprised at it myself.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. You have!


Sir HARRY. But he never was jealous of me. Zounds it piques me sometimes. --
The ladies are fond of me, and yet the gentlemen are not jealous of me -- But,
indeed, my amors have all been managed so secretly that none of them have ever
yet come to light.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. But who has been to blame there, Sir Harry?


Sir HARRY. I have paid regard to the reputation of the ladies, and none to my
own. I expect an assignation tomorrow evening -- and I question whether I
shall men ion it to above three or four of my acquaintance, notwithstanding the
lady is reputed a woman of honor, and is besides a married lady.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And would you divulge the appointment sooner on that
account?


Sir HARRY. Certainly! Had I a wish to build a reputation.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Who have we here?


( Looking out.) Sir HARRY. The Major and her Ladyship! He has been following
her into the Park, and is now conducting her home. I assure you their company
at present will not be very desirable, so step this way, dear Colonel, and I
will indulge you with a few more particulars. -- Egad, I can surprise you.


( Exeunt Colonel Downright and Sir Harry.) Enter Lady HARRIET CYPRUS, followed
by Major CYPRUS. Major CYPRUS. So, madam, I have followed you home, and now
should be glad to know, what unusual whim brought you into the Park so early?


Lady HARRIET. How can you be so teazing as to ask questions? Especially when
you see I am too fatigued to answer.


Major CYPRUS. Fatigued, madam? -- How is it possible --


Lady HARRIET. Don't speak so loud. -- I Am thinking of something else.


Major CYPRUS. Zounds, madam, I say --


Lady HARRIET. How can you, Major? -- Sir George Euston, with all his faults,
never asked me such impertinent questions!


Major CYPRUS. Sir George, madam! -- How dare you mention his name to me,
madam? -- How dare you mention to me that contemptible --?


Lady HARRIET. Dear Major, do not be severe -- consider you are -- a married
man yourself now.


Major CYPRUS. Heavens! Madam, do not imagine --


Lady HARRIET. And you know every gentleman is liable to --


Major CYPRUS. What, madam?


Lady HARRIET. Be married. -- There is nothing certain in this world.


Major CYPRUS. Very well, madam! -- Very well -- I believe I understand your
infinuation; and I deserve it. -- I justly deserve it for venturing my
happiness with a woman whose principles I knew.


Lady HARRIET. How dare you, Major Cyprus, upbraid me, or think, because my
unhappy partiality for you once betrayed me into indiscretions, I am not now an
altered woman? -- I am sure I have most heartily repented of all my faults, and
wished a thousand times I had never s;even you.


Major CYPRUS. Exceedingly well, indeed, madam! -- Exceedingly well. -- Repent
you ever saw me! What am I to expect after such a declaration? -- And why
repent you ever saw me? -- What, you will not speak! -- I believe you are the only
woman who could call me her husband, and be insensible of her happiness. --
When you consider, too, your release from Sir George. -- What makes you smile,
madam? -- Surely, after all your seeming contempt for Sir George, you would
not, even in idea, put him in competition with me? -- Though, by heaven, your
continual mention of him is enough -- did I not know how much you despise him.
-- I am amazed how you could ever consent to marry such a being, and so I have
told you a hundred times -- Not one accomplishment.


Lady HARRIET. Now you provoke me -- he had a thousand! --


Major CYPRUS. That I am destitute of?


Lady HARRIET. ( Sighs.) Oh!


Major CYPRUS. Zounds, madam, what do you mean by that sigh? -- And in what
quality pray did your first husband, your first husband, madam -- in what
quality did he eclipse your humble servant?


Lady HARRIET. ( After a pause.) He danced better than any man I ever saw.


Major CYPRUS. Danced better!


Lady HARRIET. And his bow was exquisite. --


Major CYPRUS. ( Bowing.) O -- your most obedient!


Lady HARRIET. Then, sometimes, he was the most entertaining --


Major CYPRUS. You would have a husband entertain his wife then?


Lady HARRIET. Certainly -- and entertain himself, at the same time.


Major CYPRUS. I wish to heaven you had kept him, with all his accomplishments!


Lady HARRIET. ( Sighs and shakes her head.) Oh! --


Major CYPRUS. Damnation! -- (After a pause, comes up to her with a sostened
tone of voice.) Come hither. -- Come, tell me, -- would you? -- and so you
would really prefer your old husband to me? --


Lady HARRIET. Old! -- He was the youngest.


Major CYPRUS. Madam, madam, I Will hear no more -- I Will suffer no more. -- Since
you can compare that contemptible animal to me, I have done with you -- you are
below even my resentment.


Lady HARRIET. Dear Major, say what you will, Sir George had his virtues -- He
seldom asked me where I was going; or who visited me in his absence? -- Where I
had been walking? -- What made me so remarkably cheerful, or why I looked so
very ill-natured? -- In short, he was truly and literally, in every respect, a
fashionable husband.


Major CYPRUS. You are --


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Sir, a gentleman below desires to see you; I did not
know whether you chose to be at home or not, so I told him I believed you were
gone out, but that I would come and see.


Major CYPRUS. I am gone out -- go and tell him so. (Exit Servant.) I am in too
ill a humor to see any body -- my temper is spoiled. -- I am neither fit for
company, peasure, business, nor any thing.


Lady HARRIET. Nor I -- I am spoiled too.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. The gentleman, madam, begs to see you. -- Do you chose
I should show him up?


Lady HARRIET. Yes, show him up -- he may be of service to my spirits. -- Who
is he? -- What is his name?


SERVANT. I asked him, madam, but he would not say. -- He first asked me if my
master was within; and when I returned, and told him no, he said, tell your
Lady, Lady Harriet, I desire to see her -- He spoke as if he was acquainted
with your Ladyship.


Lady HARRIET. Show him up. --


Major CYPRUS. You will please to take him into another room.


Lady HARRIET. It is not my intention to leave this room till dinner.


Major CYPRUS. Nor mine.


Lady HARRIET. Then you will have an opportunity of assuring the gentleman,
yourself, you are not at home.


SERVANT. Should I show the gentleman into another room, madam?


Major CYPRUS. No.

(Exit angrily.)
Lady HARRIET. Show the gentleman up. -- ( Exit Servant.) Who in the name of
wonder can it be, that wants both the Major and me? I thought our acquaintance
had been all separate visitors.


Enter the SERVANT, with Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON following. Lady HARRIET. Mr.
Anthony Euston! -- (Mr. Anthony salutes her.) -- Is it possible I should have
the honor of a visit from you?


Mr. ANTHONY. My dear Lady, and why not? What you heard, I suppose, I was lost;
But have not you heard again that I was found?


Lady HARRIET. No, upon my word, Sir, and the sight of you amazes me.


Mr. ANTHONY. Was not my brother here this morning?


Lady HARRIET. No, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. Nor did not your husband expect me?


Lady HARRIET. No, indeed, Sir!


Mr. ANTHONY. My brother not here to tell your husband of our satety, after all
the perils of shipwreck, imprisonment, and a story fit for a romance!


Lady HARRIET. Is Mr. Euston too returned safe?


Mr. ANTHONY. Certainly. -- It Is strange he has not been here before me! Where
is your husband?


Lady HARRIET. Did you ask for him when you came in?


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, I asked the Servant if his master was at home, but he
returned and said, no; -- so I then asked him for his mistress -- and here I
find you, my dear Lady, as beautiful as ever! -- But where is my nephew? I am
all impatience till I see him.


Lady HARRIET. (Aside.) He does not know what has happened I find.


Mr. ANTHONY. What is the matter, my dear?


Lady HARRIET. You are just arrived from abroad, Sir?


Mr. ANTHONY. Only left the ship yesterday morning, came to London late in the
evening, and, not having had a night's rest on shore for many months, went to
bed as soon as I arrived; and, as soon as I rose this morning, came with my
respects to you.


Lady HARRIET. Then you have seen no accquaintance since you came to town?


Mr. ANTHONY. You are the first. -- Can you suppose I should visit any one
before I had seen you; or do you think any of my friends would find me out the
very night of my arrival?


Lady HARRIET. And have you met with none of your English acquaintance while
you have been abroad -- nor read any of our English newspapers?


Mr. ANTHONY. I have seen neither since I left England. -- Indeed, when I am at
a distance from my friends, as I hate to be imposed on, I seldom ask a question
concerning them, and never read a paragraph where their names are mentioned:


Enter COLONEL DOWNRIGHT. Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I beg your Ladyship's pardon -- I
thought the Major had been here; -- he promised he would go with me into the
city on some business -- He is not gone out, I hope?


Lady HARRIET. Mr. Euston, you will excuse me a moment -- I will send ( To the
Colonel) the Major to you immediately, Sir. ( Aside.) Let him explain to Mr.
Euston -- the task would be too much for me.


( Exit Lady Harriet.) Mr. ANTHONY. My fellow traveller! Have you forgot me?

( Going up to the Colonel.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. My good friend! Is it you? -- I am heartily glad to see you
-- I thought it was you! and then again -- Where is my friend your brother? Why
you got to town before me -- I am glad to meet you, faith! -- So unexpectedly
too!


Enter MAJOR CYPRUS, and hows to Mr. ANTHONY. Major CYPRUS. Colonel I beg your
pardon, I am afraid I have tired your patience?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Not at all -- Sir Harry Harmless has been an excellent
companion, but he has just left me. ( To Mr. Anthony.) I should have called on
you in the afternoon -- Who would have thought of meeting you here?


Mr. ANTHONY. Why faith, Colonel, I do not know a more likely place to find a
man at, than a relation's house.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. What, are the Major and you related?


Mr. ANTHONY. Sir!


Major CYPRUS. Have I the honor of being related to you, Sir?

(Bowing.)
Mr. ANTHONY. Not that I know of, Sir. --

( Bowing.)
Major CYPRUS. If Lady Harriet has that honor, Sir, I presume to claim the same.


Mr. ANTHONY. You are related to Lady Harriet then, Sir?


Major CYPRUS. By very close ties. --


Mr. ANTHONY. Sir I shall be happy to be better acquainted.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. ( Aside to the Major.) Tell him the story of the closet --
Egad 'twill make him laugh.


Major CYPRUS. ( Aside to the Colonel.) Fie, fie! -- He is a relation of my
wife's.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. ( Aside.) He would not like a good story the worse for that
-- Would you, Mr. Anthony, have any dislike to a good story?


Mr. ANTHONY. A story, Sir? --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, a good story of a -- a -- zounds "I Will tell you what:"
and "an undescribable something" --


Major CYPRUS. For shame, for shame, Colonel!


Mr. ANTHONY. Why, my fellow traveller, you are at your jokes, the same as ever
I find. -- What is all this?


Major CYPRUS. Nothing, Sir; nothing, I assure you.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. As good a story as ever was told. Tell it, Major; I would,
but I cannot look it as you do. -- Egad you look it to the life.


Mr. ANTHONY. Well, gentlemen, I should be very happy to hear this story, but I
am obliged to defer it till some other time. -- I have waited for Sir George as
long as possible, and, as I find he does not come, I Am resolved to go in search
of him -- So, gentlemen, your humble servant -- If I meet with Sir George, I
shall return, I dare say, immediately; and, if not, I shall certainly call in
the afternoon -- My compliments to her Ladyship -- Your servant, gentlemen.


Major CYPRUS. Pray, Sir, who did you expect to meet here?


Mr. ANTHONY. Only Sir George, Sir.


Major CYPRUS. What Sir George, pray Sir?


Mr. ANTHONY. Sir George Euston, Sir.


Major CYPRUS. Sir George Euston, Sir! -- Did you expect to meet Sir George
Euston here.


Mr. ANTHONY. Certainly I did, Sir.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. That Is all for want of hearing the story. -- Do, my good
friend, come back and hear the story of the "undescribable something," -- and
of the closet -- that little closet -- and, "I Will tell you what!"


Major CYPRUS. Colonel, permit me to speak seriously to the gentleman. -- Sir,
( To Mr. Anthony.) you will never see Sir George Euston in this house, I am
certain.


Mr. ANTHONY. How so, pray Sir?


Major CYPRUS. I am now master of this house, and --


Mr. ANTHONY. You are master of this house!


Major CYPRUS. Yes, Sir.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He took possession of the closet, some time ago.


Mr. ANTHONY. But pray, Sir, does not Lady Harriet Euston then live here?


Major CYPRUS. That lady is no longer Lady Harriet Euston, Sir, but Cyprus --
she is my wife.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. You have spoiled the whole story, by beginning at the wrong
end.


Mr. ANTHONY. You astonish me! -- I beg your pardon -- I came but last night
from the West Indies, where I have been for some time, and where not the
smailest intelligence from England has ever reached me; therefore you will
excuse my ignorance. -- But I think her Ladyship, knowing how great a stranger
I was, ought to have dealt a little more openly with me. --


Major CYPRUS. I dare say, Sir, her Ladyship --


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, I suppose her Ladyship was unwilling to be the first to
acquaint me with the death of Sir George.


Major CYPRUS. The death of Sir George Sir!


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, Sir -- for, while I give you joy on your marriage, give me
leave to say that, mine is all damped by the loss of him -- and my grief is
doubly poignant; because, till this moment, I was not only unacquainted with
Lady Harriet's second marriage, but, till this moment, I did not even know Sir
George was dead!


Major CYPRUS. Sir George is not dead, Sir.


Mr. ANTHONY. What do you mean? -- Did you not tell me you were married to his
wife?


Major CYPRUS. Very true, Sir -- but you know that is no reason, nowadays,
why the Lady's first husband should be dead.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why, my brother messmate, you are just like me -- I had
forgot that a man in England might marry his neighbor's wife, and his
neighbor living in the next street. -- And it is not the wives of their
neighbors, only, these generous gentlement assail, but more especially the
wives of their friends.


Mr. ANTHONY. Shame on such friendship! Shame on such neighborhood! -- Let
every tender husband and virtuous wife desert it! -- ( To the Major.) Sir, I
wish you joy; and, though I know not who are the parties to be censured in this
business, I wish her Ladyship joy -- But more, in particular, I wish myself
joy, with the sincerest congratulation, that, amidst the depravity of the
times, I have followed a beloved wife to her peaceful grave, (mournful as the
day was) without seeing her wrested from my arms by the insinuations of a
villain: or being myself that villain to force her to seek a refuge from my
perjuries, in the protection of another! --


Major CYPRUS. Dear Sir, let me assure you that, however Lady Harriet's conduct
may meet censure from the unfeeling prude, the woman of sensibility and taste
must applaud her spirit, which could no longer submit to the tyranny of Sir
George.


Mr. ANTHONY. Did her Ladyship then sue for the divorce?


Major CYPRUS. No -- Sir George, on some frivolous suspicion, was pleased to
sue for it.


Mr. ANTHONY. Is Sir George married again?


Major CYPRUS. Yes, Sir, he is married -- He has won the lady -- and he has won
her fortune -- but for her affection -- there, I believe, we must excuse Sir
George -- that is a stake now playing for by many noblemen of fashion.


Mr. ANTHONY. I suspect Sir George is the dupe of a fashionable gallantry. -- I
know his virtues -- and am sorry to find a man of merit so betrayed.


Major CYPRUS. Dear Sir, think on Lady Harriet, your relation.


Mr. ANTHONY. Thank heaven, all ties between Lady Harriet and me were dissolved
when she was divorced from Sir George -- and so they should, Sir, had she been
my own daughter, and Sir George, with the principles I know he possesses, an
utter stranger to me.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why then, I believe, my friend, you are not at a relation's
house.


Mr. ANTHONY. Colonel, you will call on me shortly. -- Sir, (Mr. Cyprus, I
think you call yourself) I assure you, Sir, as a particular friend of my
nephew's, and of the family in general -- I am, Sir, your most obedient servant
-- your humble servant, Sir.

( With contempt.)
( Exit Mr. Anthony.) Major CYPRUS. For heaven's sake, who is this man? I took
him to be Lady Harriet's uncle! Explain to me who the brute is.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He came passenger from the West Indies in the same ship
with me, and that was the first of our acquaintance. -- As he was no more
reserved than I, we soon became intimate; and I learnt from him that his
fortune (a pretty good one) was designed for a nephew, whom I now recollect
(though the deuce take me if I thought of it before) to be this very Sir George
Euston -- and a son, an only child, by that wife he speaks so tenderly of, he
disinherits.


Major CYPRUS. This is the very savage I heard Lady Harriet say the other day
was drowned. -- What, has his son been guilty of the criminality of a divorce?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. No -- his guilt is in being married -- married to some poor
girl -- without friends or fortune. -- Thank heaven I have neither child nor
wife to offend me; but, if I had, I don't know which I would make the most
obedient.


Major CYPRUS. And were you never a lover, Colonel? Never in the service of the
ladies?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. O yes -- I have been in a closet before now -- and under a
bed too -- but then I was never pulled out by a husband; and, on a discovery, I
could always describe the something that brought me there.


Major CYPRUS. By heaven, you are so taken with that joke, I cannot reserve
that which I before hinted at from you any longer -- Rat me if I have not an
appointment for tomorrow evening with Euston's other wife! -- Is it not the
most impudent thing of me --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I Will be shot if I don't think so! --


Major CYPRUS. The poor fellow thinks her as chaste as Diana; and so she is at
present, as far as I know. -- I was happy in her favor a few years ago -- but,
marriage not being then convenient, my passion was postponed -- On her becoming
Euston's wife, I renewed my addresses, and she has kindly allotted tomorrow
evening for our first tete-a-tete.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Zounds, have a care, or you will be obliged to marry her
too.


Major CYPRUS. No, no -- we shall be very circumspect in our conduct. -- But
laugh! -- Why the devil don't you laugh?


Golonel DOWNRIGHT. No, I was thinking --


Major CYPRUS. On what? --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Come, I must be gone, or I shall be too late for my
business.


Major CYPRUS. I Will attend you immediately -- But what were you thinking on?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I was thinking on the happiness -- of a married man.


( Exeunt Colonel Downright and Major Cyprus.) END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A Room at Sir GEORGE EUSTON's. Enter Mr. EUSTON and Sir GEORGE. Mr. Euston.
BLESS my soul! -- Bless my soul! Why, what did my brother Anthony say? -- Was
not he in a dreadful passion? -- Only think of his being made such a fool of!
-- It would not have signified had it been me. It had been a good joke if the
mistake had happened to me; then you would have had something to have laughed
at.


Sir GEORGE. Dear Sir, let us think no more about it -- my Uncle has listened
to reason, and approves my conduct in every circumstance.


Mr. EUSTON. Ay, it is very well, George -- it is all very well -- but I know,
had you been his son, he would not have forgiven you -- he loved that boy so
well he would never forgive him the smallest fault.


Sir GEORGE. A very cruel proof of his affection.


Mr. EUSTON. It Is true, notwithstanding -- you know it is -- Poor Charles! --
George you must do something for him -- You know your Uncle will not -- and I am
tied from it by a solemn promise. Many a letter and petition came from his wife
to my brother and me, before we went abroad, but all in vain; for I had but
just then given Anthony my word, and would not equivocate, by causing the poor
boy or his family to be relieved, in any shape, through my means; and therefore
I forebore to mention their distress to you -- However, now, though I have not
forgot my promise, I will not be so particular about it -- and, when the
deviation from my word disturbs my conscience, I Will hush it to rest with having
relieved a destitute family.


Sir GEORGE. Say no more, Sir -- I understand you -- and to find out my cousin
and his family shall immediately be my care.


Mr. EUSTON. ( Shaking hands with Sir George.) That Is right, George -- Poor
Charles is a Lieutenant in the East Indies. -- His wife must be the first
object of your bounty -- Just before I left England she wrote me a letter from
a village near York -- where he left her, with two children, and she styles
them, in her letter, "the offspring of want and wretchedness." I was a hard
hearted fellow not to listen to her complaint -- but, I think, since I have
been at sea, I have been more compassionate -- I never knew, before, what it
was to be cold or hungry.


Sir GEORGE. Can you tell me the name of the village, Sir, where I am to seek
her?


Mr, EUSTON. Write to her at the post office, Selby -- If she should have left
the place, they may still know where to send her letters. I wish some friend,
that had not made a promise, would speak to my brother Anthony about them at
present; perhaps, going to sea has changed his heart too.


Sir GEORGE. No, Sir, I touched on that subject when I was with him this
morning.


Mr. EUSTON. Did you? -- Did you? -- And what did he say? --


Sir GEORGE. Asked if I meant to make him forbid me his sight -- and, on my
apologizing, commanded me never to mention my poor cousin in his hearing again.


Mr. EUSTON. Ay, that is what I must never do -- Well, so much the better --
for now, George, neither you nor I can tell tales one of another.


Sir GEORGE. You are right, Sir -- Had my Uncle Anthony an estate to bestow on
each of his family, he could not exact more obedience to his will than he does
at present.


Mr. EUSTON. It Is very true, George. But what keeps him so long away? -- I
expected he would have been with your Lady before this time, acknowledging her
for his niece: though they have had one meeting it seems.


Sir GEORGE. My Uncle cannot be introduced to Lady Euston till tomorrow, Sir.
Lord Layton, for whom he settled some business when he was abroad, called on
him just as I came away, and, as his Lordship is going to Italy in a day or
two, he entreated my Uncle to accompany him immediately to his country house
(about ten miles from town) in order to look over some papers he has there.


Mr. EUSTON. Here comes your Lady, so I Will leave you.


Enter Lady EUSTON. Lady EUSTON. Dear Mr. Euston, I hope I do not frighten you
away -- Sir George will be offended with me if I do.


Mr. EUSTON. No, madam -- I am sure no man could be offended at being left in
such charming company.


( Exit. Mr. Euston.) Sir GEORGE. My Uncle is grown a man of gallantry!


Lady EUSTON. Yes, I inspire all the men.


Lady Euston. Yes, I insire all the men.


Sir GEORGE. I believe you do.


Lady EUSTON. Could I only inspire you with reason to listen to my arguments --


Sir GEORGE. It Is in vain. -- The Major shall now feel my resentment -- Did he
imagine, because I was indifferent to the conduct of an undesserving woman,
that I am not to be roused at such an injury as this? -- An attempt on the
principles of a woman of virtue! -- It Is done on purpose to try me, and by
Heaven he shall find -- That wretch too Sir Harry! --


Lady EUSTON. Oh, pray have pity on poor Sir Harry.


Sir GEORGE. No, madam. -- I only defer my resentment till I have had some
conversation with my Uncle Anthony.


Lady EUSTON. Do, my dear Sir George, suffer me to revenge my own cause this
once -- and ever after --


Sir GEORGE. I positively must!


Lady EUSTON. Nay, Sir George, in a year or two, I may, perhaps, have no
objection to your sighting a duel -- but only three months married -- I do wish
to keep you a little longer.


Sir GEORGE. Depend upon it, Lady Euston, death had never half the terrors I
have beheld it with since I called you mine -- but that life you have endeared
to me --


Lady EUSTON. You would throw away immediately in my service -- No, no, Sir
George, a fond wife will never suffer her husband to revenge her wrongs at so
great a risk. Besides, the exertion of a little thought and fancy will more
powerfully vindicate innocence, than that brilliant piece of steel, I assure
you.


Sir GEORGE. Perhaps you are right.


Lady EUSTON. Certainly I am -- Now, suppose a gentleman makes love to me -- I
divulge the affront to you, you call my insulter to an account -- Your ball
misses; he fires into the air; and, to the same of having dared to wound your
honor, he gains that of presenting you with your life. --


Sir GEORGE. But, why must these circumstances take place?


Lady EUSTON. Well, then, we will suppose he kills you; how do you like that?


Sir GEORGE. ( Smiling) Hem!


Lady EUSTON. Or, we will suppose, you kill him -- Even how do you like that?


Sir GEORGE. Well, I confess that, if a severe punishment could be thought of,
for such insolence --


Lady EUSTON. There is as severe a punnishment to men of gallantry (as they
call themselves) as sword or pistol; laugh at them -- that is a ball which
cannot miss; and yet kills only their vanity.


Sir GEORGE. You are right.


Lady EUSTON. Let me see -- we have been now only three months married; and, in
that short time, I have had no less than five or six men of fashion to turn
into ridicule. -- The first who ventured to declare his passion was Lord
William Bloomly -- his rank, joined to his uncommon beauty, had insured him
success; and, wherever I went, I was certain to hear his distress whispered in
my ear -- at every opportunity he fell even upon his knees; and, as a tender
earnest of my pity for him, begged, with all the eloquence of love, for "a
single lock of my hair, which he would value more than any other woman's
person; the wealth of worlds; or (he is a great patriot you know) even the
welfare of his country."


Sir GEORGE. I am out of patience!


Lady EUSTON. You will be more so -- For I promised him this single lock.


Sir GEORGE. You did not!


Lady EUSTON. But I did -- and added, with a blush, that I must insist on a few
hairs from one of his eyebrows in return -- which he absolutely refused; --
and, on my urging it, was obliged to confess, "he valued that little brown arch
more than the lock he had been begging for; consequently, more than any woman's
person; the wealth of worlds; or even the welfare of his country." -- I
immediately circulated this anecdote, and exhibited the gentleman, both as a
gallant and a patriot; and now his Lordship's eye-brow, which was once the
admiration, is become the ridicule of every drawing room.


Sir GEORGE. Your Ladyship then would not menace your lover? --


Lady EUSTON. Certainly not -- "You are the most beautiful woman I ever saw,"
said Lord Bandy; "and your Lordship is positively the most lovely of mankind"
-- "What eyes," cried he; "what hair," cried I; "what lips," continued he;
"what teeth," added I; "what a hand and arm," said he; "and what a leg and
foot," said I -- "Your Ladyship is jesting," was his Lordship's last reply; and
he has never since even paid me one compliment. Prudes censure my conduct -- I
am too free -- while their favorite, Lady Strenuous, in another corner of the
ball-room, cries to her admirer -- "Desist, my Lord, or my dear Sir Charles
shall know that you dare thus to wound my ears with your licentious passion --
if you ever presume to breath in again, I will acquaint him with it -- depend
upon it I will. ( Sighs and languishes) Oh! you have destroyed my peace of mind
for ever."


Sir GEORGE. There are too many such ladies, but no such would I hazard my life
for -- that I have proved.


Lady EUSTON. And, upon my word, Sir George, even the virtuous wife, who would
not have some regard to her husband's life, as well as his honor, if I were a
gentleman, I should not feel myself under many obligations to.


Sir GEORGE. You would protect both? --


Lady EUSTON. And the guilty not escape -- Now (with your consent) what must be
the confusion, shame, and disappointment, of my two masked lovers tomorrow
evening -- the brutal audacity of one, and isignificance of the other; both
beneath your resentment, yet deserving objects of mine. And, indeed, Sir
George, it is my fixed opinion that, the man who would endeavor to wrong a
virtuous wife should be held too despicable for the resentment of the husband,
and only worthy the debasement inflicted by our sex. I have already sent a
letter to Sir Harry with the appointment at the masquerade, and the Major has
my promise of a meeting at the same time -- Come, come, Sir George, it is the
first petition I ever presented; do not refuse me! --


Sir GEORGE. Give me till the morning to consider of it?


Lady EUSTON. With all my heart -- and in the mean time reflect on this --
that, in regard to your terrible sex, whether as licentious lovers or valiant
champions -- women, of real honor, are not in danger from the one; and,
therefore, like me, ought to forego the assistance of the other.


( Exeunt Lady Euston and Sir George.) SCENE II.
A Room at Colonel DOWNRIGHT's. Enter Colonel DOWNRIGHT and Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON.
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. My good friend, I was just going to bed -- but I am glad of
your company, though I did not expect it.


Mr. ANTHONY. Colonel, my errand at this time was merely to ask a favor of you.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Command it, and you will make me proud.


Mr. ANTHONY. Why then, Colonel, with Lord Layton today (at whose house I
dined) a circumstance happened on which account I expect his Lordship will call
on me tomorrow for a fashionable satisfaction; and though, depend upon it, I
wish for no such rash means of ending a dispute, yet, if his Lordship should
call upon me, it is fit I be prepared with a second; and I thank you for the
friendly assurance you have now given me of your service.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. You are as welcome to it -- I was going to say, as my king
-- but, zounds, if I should be killed in a pitiful quarrel at home, I should
blush even in my grave -- for, when I die, I hope to have my knell rung by the
groans of a score or two of our country's treacherous foes.


Mr. ANTHONY. The service I shall put you to, Colonel, will not prevent that
hope.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. But what, for Heaven's sake, has brought you into a quarrel?


Mr. ANTHONY. The cause of our quarrel was -- you will call it a very trivial
one, I dare say -- a woman!


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why, my old friend, you have not been quarrelling about a
woman -- Oh, if I should be killed for a woman, I should cut a noble figure,
indeed! --


Mr. ANTHONY. Hear me, Colonel, hear me -- and, as you may question my
prudence, let me tell you the whole adventure. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Nay, nay, I did not mean to question your prudence, nor to
speak against the women either. I like them as well as you do --


Mr. ANTHONY. I own I have a respect for their sex, which unites me to them as
their father, their friend, and admirer. -- And I beg you will give me your
sentiments upon the character of one whose behavior, this day, has surprised
me beyond measure -- I will describe it to you, and you will then tell me
whether you believe me imposed upon, or whether you think she really clims that
extraordinary attention I have, some how, been compelled to give her. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Well, let me hear.


Mr. ANTHONY. Lord Layton and I had no sooner placed ourselves in his
Lordship's coach than he exclaimed, he had just seen the most beautiful girl
his eyes ever beheld, to whom he had given a look of solicitation, and that she
was returning her answer by making up to the coach -- He begged a thousand
pardons, but, with my permission, (as he expected no other company at his
country house) he would take her down to dine with us. -- I, knowing his
Lordship well, (and the girl being now arrived at the coach door) reluctantly
assented, and she was immediately handed in.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Zounds, he should have taken a companion for you too!


Mr. ANTHONY. Don't interrupt me. -- When she had been seated about a minute, I
cast my eyes upon her. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. 'Sdeath, I should not have staid half so long.


Mr. ANTHONY. I was struck with her beauty --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And wished his Lordship out of the way, I suppose. --


Mr. ANTHONY. No -- no. -- There was a senfibility in her countenance that
amazed me -- blushes on her cheeks -- tears in her eyes -- When his Lordship
spoke to her, she answered him with a forced smile, and a tremor on her voice.
-- She avoided all conversation; and, when we alighted, I handed her out of the
coach.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Ay, ay, I thought how it was.


Mr. ANTHONY. You misunderstand me. -- I perceived her hand tremble --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And so, I suppose, did yours.


Mr. ANTHONY. If you interrupt me, Sir, you shall hear no more.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And, I believe, it will be for your credit if I don't. --


Mr. ANTHONY. Let me tell you all that passed.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. With all my heart -- if you don't blush at it, I shall not.


Mr. ANTHONY. I believe her to be a woman of virtue. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Then what the devil were my Lord and you --


Mr. ANTHONY. I have rescued her from him.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why then, the deuce take me if you are not more in love
than I thought you were.


Mr. ANTHONY. Oh, had you seen her countenance, so expressive of anguish! --
The hope with which she lifted up her eyes to me, for deliverance! -- The
horror painted in her face, when I left the room! Heard her piercing cries,
that called me back to her protection? The despair and earnest supplication
that hung upon her tongue, while she entreated him to view her, not as an
object of love, but charity! -- The grief! the pathetic tenoerness with which
she declared herself, "a virtuous though forsaken wife! -- A poor, indigent,
forlorn mother; perishing, with her children, -- for whose sake she had been
tempted by the first lure that offered (prompted by more than common grief) to
add the sense of guilt to all her other miseries!" --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. 'Sdeath --


Mr. ANTHONY. Could I? Ought I to have gone and left her?-


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Left her! No. But what did you do?


Mr. ANTHONY. Returned to the chamber, and insisted on his Lordship's resigning
her to me. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And did he? --


Mr. ANTHONY. She hung upon me; and, in spite of his menaces, I led her to my
coach, (which was then come for me) and brought her safe away. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I hope she got safe home too. --


Mr. ANTHONY. Perfectly so -- As her tears interrupted her, whenever she
attempted to tell me where she lived, or explain any circumstance of her life
to me, I asked no questions, but took her to my own house -- desired my
housekeeper to show her an apartment, and treat her with attention -- and,
promising to see and speak with her in the morning, left her to the repose
which she must greatly want. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. And now you think his Lordship will send you to repose, for
all this.


Mr. ANTHONY. He may attempt it, for which I wish to be prepared. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Well then, here is my hand -- and, though I must
acknowledge that you have had too little of the man of the world about you in
the business, yet, as I said before, command me. --


Mr. ANTHONY. Come then, Colonel, my coach is waiting for me at the door; will
you go with me to the next coffee-house? -- I have to meet a gentleman there on
a little business; and afterward we will enjoy half an hour's conversation
together. --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. With all my heart.


( Exeunt Mr. Antbony and Colonel.) END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
A Room at Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON'S. Enter Mr. EUSTON. Mr. EUSTON. WONDERS will
never cease! Who would have thought it! -- Why surely it cannot be! -- My
brother Anthony to bring home a girl! -- What would he have said to me if I had
done such a thing? -- For my part, I never durst think of such a thing. --
Perhaps it is some neighbor's child! -- But if she is -- the servant tells me
she is very handsome, and Anthony would not bring her home without some
meaning. -- What would my nephew George say to this? -- Why he would not
believe it! -- He would a great deal sooner believe it of me -- And yet I -- I!
-- Lord bless me -- how people may be mistaken! -- Here he comes.


Enter Mr. ANTHONY. Mr. ANTHONY. Brother, good morning to you. -- Have you seen
George this morning?


Mr. EUSTON. No, brother.


Mr. ANTHONY. Are you going there?


Mr. EUSTON. I believe I shall be presently, brother.


Mr. EUSTON. ( Sitting down.) Perhaps he may, brother.


( Mr. Anthony appears thoughtful, and leans on the table.) Mr. EUSTON. (After
a long pause, and with significant looks.) It was a fine moon-shining night,
last night.


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, a fine night.


Mr. EUSTON. (After another pause.) And it is a very fine day, today.


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes -- it is.


Mr. EUSTON. We have very fine weather, indeed.


Mr. ANTHONY. We have. -- You have breakfasted, I suppose?


Mr. EUSTON. Yes -- and so, I suppose, have you?


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, some time. --

( He begins writing.)
Mr. EUSTON. I interrupt you, brother -- but I am going. --

( Rises.)
Mr. ANTHONY. No, you do not. -- But tell Sir George, if you should see him,
that I cannot call on him this morning, because I shall be busy.


Mr. EUSTON. You shall be busy!


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes, I have got a little business to settle.


Mr. EUSTON. To be sure, business must be minded.


Mr. ANTHONY. But be particular in delivering my apology, for I would not have
his Lady affronted.


Mr. EUSTON. One would not affront a Lady to be sure. -- No -- no -- no!


Mr. ANTHONY. I would not have her think I slight her.


Mr. EUSTON. No! -- I am sure you would not slight a Lady! -- ( He coughs.) --
Good morning, brother!


Mr. ANTHONY. Good morning.


Mr. EUSTON. We shall see you, perhaps, when your business is done! -- Good
morning, brother. --


( Exit Mr. Euston, cougking.) Mr. Anthony pulls a letter out of his pocket.
Mr. ANTHONY. Yes -- here is the challenge; and, truly, something noble in it.
-- He applauds my taking away the Lady, but says my manner was too rough. -- I
must retract some words. -- My Lord, that cannot be. -- ( Puts up the letter.)
And now for a few bequests to my relations, in case his Lordship should prove
victorious. -- It is well my will is already made -- for he has scarcely given
me time to -- ( He writes, then throws down the pen.) -- What paternal
weakness! ( Rises.) How strange it is that, although I have resisted, and can,
with manly firmness, resist every innare pleading for that ungrateful boy I
once called my son; that careless prodigal of a father's peace, and his own
welfare -- yet -- when I consider myself as shortly to be an inhabitant of
another world, and without the power to assist him -- I wish -- I wish -- What?
-- Why, that heaven may then raise him up a friend to deal more gently with him
than I have done. -- A friend, whose temper, whose place in better may become
to forgive his faults than an offended father. -- ( He takes the paper.) In
vain are the strugglings of Nature. -- Justice -- example -- and my word,
irrevocably past, silence its pretenses. -- ( He seals the paper, directs it,
and looks at his watch.) The time is almost expired, and I must pay a short
visit to my new lodger, and be gone. -- John!


Enter SERVANT. Mr. ANTHONY. Is not this the time that the Lady gave me
permission to wait n her?


SERVANT. The Lady sent word she would wait on you, Sir. -- This is the time;
and, Sir, she is coming.


Mr. ANTHONY. Show her in.


( Exit Servant) ( Mr. Anthony walks two or three turns, and then the Lady is
shown in) Mr. ANTHONY. I hope, Madam, my message did not disturb you?


LADY. Not at all, Sir. -- I had asked permission to see you before I received
it.

( He draws chairs, and they sit.)
Mr. ANTHONY. Well, Madam -- Unless you have enquired of the servants, you are
yet a stranger to my name and connections.


LADY. I am a stranger to them, Sir. -- But your humanity must ever be engraved
on my heart.


Mr. ANTHONY. Then, Madam, for the service you are pleased to acknowledge I
have rendered you, all I request, in return, is your considence -- Explain
clearly to me the circumstances, the temptations that brought you into the
situation from whence I released you! -- Declare them with frankness, and tax
my humanity yet further; it shall not forsake you. -- To encourage you to this
confession, my name is --


LADY. Hold, Sir! -- That is an information I cannot return -- therefore let us
wave it -- and, as I can remain grateful for your goodness without knowing to
whom I am indebted, so pity still my weakness and my miseries, without a
further knowledge of the wretched sufferer.


Mr. ANTHONY. Madam, you have imposed on me a task too hard. -- It Is true you
have won my pity; but it is fit you should secure it too. -- And while
explanations are reserved, Doubt, that hardener of the human heart, must be
your enemy.


LADY. Alas! -- (Rises.)


Mr. ANTHONY. Come -- I wish not to enact too much -- but I am a man, Madam,
and with every frailty incident to the species: suspicion has its place.


LADY. I know I am an object of suspicion -- but you are deceived in me --
indeed you are. -- Guilt never harbored in my heart. -- Maternal tenderness,
for two helpless infants, hurried me in a moment to do I know not what, rather
than lose them. -- A deed! the horror of which (although by the mercy of eternal
Providence I have escaped its direst consequences) must ever cover me with
blushes; and, should indulgent heaven reserve me for a meeting with my husband,
must, with remorse, damp every joy the fond, fond, interview would give!


Mr. ANTHONY. Be comforted. -- (Leading her to her scat.) I mean not to
increase, but sooth your grief -- Tell me but who you are, and why (...)
abandoned by all your relations, friends, and husband? -- I can excuse the
feelings of a mother -- the sudden starts, or rather madness of resolotion,
formed by the excessive anguish of she soul. -- Trust me, I can deal tenderly
with human fallings. -- No frivolous curiofity, but a desare to serve you thus
orges me to entreat you will unfold yourself.


LADY. Oh, Sir, I have a husband, I think, who loves me. -- Once I am sure the
did. -- My heart has never strayed from him, since our fatal union. -- What
must that poor heart suffer, torn with remorse for the rash step my mad despair
sggested to preserve my children? -- Oh! in my bosom let his name lie hid, that
none may know his wretched fortune in a hapless wife.


Mr. ANTHONY. Your reasons have satisfied me -- I do not ask your name. -- Tell
me but the circumstances that drove you to the state from whence I released you
-- Be so far explicit, and I will ask no more.


LADY. Most willingly. -- When first my husband saw me, I was friendless. --
Compassion caused his love for me -- Gratitude mine for him. -- Forlorn and
destitute, no kind relation, no tender benefactor taught my heart affection. --
Unused to all the little offices of kindness, could they but endear the object
who bestowed them? -- Sense of obligation, never before excited, pressed on my
thoughts, and soon was changed to love. -- He scorned to violate the heart that
was his own, and we were married.


Mr. ANTHONY. I find no room for accusation here. -- Go on -- go on, Madam. --
What has alienated your husband from you, and left you thus destitute at
present? -- If you can resolve me that -- if you still have acted with equal
propriety, I am your friend -- I have no censure for you.


LADY. But you will condemn my husband -- even I must own he was to blame. Born
of wealthy parents, the heir to large possessions, and I to none, when he
married, all were given up, and he changed his state for mine. -- We had no
friend but in each other -- yet happy was that state to me, till poverty
surprised us; and the fond hope (which once he cherished) of paternal
forgiveness, vanished from my husband. -- Then all our days were bitter as they
had before been happy -- tears were my only food, and sighs were his -- even
reproach I have endured from him, for making him the friendless wretch he
called himslef. -- Yet -- yet, at our parting, oh! then he cancelled all -- for
when the regiment, in which he served, was ordered from the kingdom, he hung
upon me, clasped his poor children, begged our forgiveness for the thousand
outrages distress at our misfortunes had caused him to commit -- swore that
affection for us was the source of his impatience -- prayed heaven to bless us,
whatever might be his fate -- nay, prayed that death might speedily be his
doom, so that it turned his father's heart to us.


Mr. ANTHONY. And have you never applied to his father?


LADY. Yes; but all in vain; and two months since, hearing my husband was made
prisoner, (and destitute of every relief and every hope while he remained so) I
left my children and came to London, resolved, in person, to supplicate his
father's bounty; when I learnt (dire news) his father, visiting an estate
abroad, was lost, and we left to despair.


Mr. ANTHONY. What do you say?


LADY. Nay, do not blame him -- I pardon him from my soul. -- And as my
husband, spite of his disobedience, loved him tenderly, I will ever give a tear
in tribute to his memory.


Mr. ANTHONY. Without hesitation! -- without the smallest reserve, tell me your
husband's name! Is it Euston?


LADY. It is!


Mr. ANTHONY. His father is not dead! -- He lives, and pardons him this moment!

( Embracing her.)
Mrs. EUSTON. You are his father! -- I know it! -- I see it in your loos!

(Kneeling.)
Mr. ANTHONY. And you shall henceforth see it in my actions! -- Rise, rise, and
behold (Taking the paper from his pocket.) where I this moment again disowned
him for my son, while the poor of every kind (except himself) I ever styled my
children -- Oh! charity, partially dealt, never more receive that heavenly
virtue's ritle. -- Here ( Pointing to the paper.) I provide for you, as a poor
stranger, who never asked, and might not have deserved my bounty; while, as a
daughter, begging for an alms, I shut my heart, and sent your supplications
back. -- Where was the merit of my thousands given, while one poor wretch, from
proud resentment, petitioned me in vain?


Mrs. EUSTON. I dare not call myself your daughter!


Mr. ANTHONY. You are my daughter -- and, when I have supplicated heaven to
pardon my neglect of you, I Will ask your pardon, too. -- You are my daughter --
and let the infamy you have escaped serve only to make you more amiable -- make
you compassionate -- compassionate to your own weak sex, in whatsoever
suffering state you see them -- They all were virtuous once, as well as you --
and, had they met a father, might have been saved, like you. -- For me --
(Pulls out his watch.) Bless me, how has the time flown! -- My dear, I have an
engagement I cannot postpone above half an hour -- and that time I must
dedicate to -- Now, methinks, I would wish to live. ( Aside.) Retire to your
chamber. -- I will, if possible, be with you speedily. -- Where your husband
is, and in what poor place your children, I am impatient till I know -- but now
I cannot wait. -- Retire my child. -- May we meet again in safety --

(He leads her to the door and she withdraws.)
Mr. ANTHONY. Now where is the Colonel? -- I have just time to draw up a writing
for him to sign when he arrives -- and I Will about it instantly. -- Oh! with
what transport does the human heart dislodge the unnatural guests, Malice and
Resentment, to take to its warm recesses the mild inhabitant, peaceful Charity.
-- Yet even more welcome is the returning virtue when thus'tis strengthened by
parental fondness.


( Exit.) END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
An Apartment at Major CYPUS's Enter Lady HARRIET, and BLOOM meeting. Lady
HARRIET. WHAT success? -- Will Sir George come? -- What a tedious time have you
been gone!


BLOOM. Dear madam, if you could suppose how obstinate Sir George was -- and
how I had to beg, and to pray --


Lady HARRIET. But will he come?


BLOOM. Yes, madam -- at last he said he would.


Lady HARRIET. Thank Heaven -- Then I shall have the unspeakable joy of giving
him this! --

( Pulling out a letter.)
BLOOM. What; Sir George, madam? -- Well, I declare, I was at my wit's ends to
know what you could want with Sir George.


Lady HARRIET. To give him this letter, Bloom, from Lady Euston to the Major,
which you so luckily found, and to have the extreme pleasure of informing him
that I am not the only object deserving his resentment -- but that even his
wife of a few months -- she whom the world says he doats upon, and who has
driven me from his remembrance, is indiscreet as I have been -- to see with my
own eyes his confusion -- hear him reproach her conduct, and make him own -- He
promised he would come?


BLOOM. Yes, ma'am -- but not till I knelt down and swore your Ladyship was
dying; suddenly taken ill; and con'd not leave the world in peace till you had
communicated something from your own lips to him.


Lady HARRIET. You did right -- just as I ordered you -- And what did he say to
that?


BLOOM. (After a long pause) Why, he said, -- "I will come to the poor unhappy
wretch!"


Lady HARRIET. Wretch! -- Are you sure he said so?


BLOOM. I am sure he said, "Poor" and "unhappy," and then, you know, "wretch"
follows of course.


Lady HARRIET. Who will be most wretched, in a few moments, he or I?


BLOOM. Very true, madam -- I believe he will find he has not changed for the
better.


Lady HARRIET. (Looking at the letter) Confusion! What have you made me do? --
You told me this letter was for the Major -- it is directed to Sir Harry
Harmless.


BLOOM. Oh that I should not look at the direction!


Lady HARRIET. No matter -- this is even a greater dishonor to Sir George than
were it to the Major, and will wound him deeper -- But where is the Major then?
He will not be engaged as I supposed -- and may return.


BLOOM. Oh, no, my Lady, that I dare say he will not -- you need not fear -- go
into your chamber, madam, and make yourself easy till Sir George comes, and
make yourself easy when he does come too -- for, though the Major may not be
with Lady Euston, I dare say he has his appointments in some corner or another,
as well as your Ladyship.


( Exeunt.) SCENE II.
Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON's. Enter Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON, and Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Mr.
ANTHONY. I have been waiting for you all day -- What meant the few words in
your letter? -- Why is my meeting with his Lordship deferred?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. I am just come from Lord Layton -- a friend of his
Lordship's, knowing I was acquainted with you, called and took me there -- and,
to tell you the truth, I think this business between you and his Lordship might
be amicably and honorably settled -- However, if you don't fight with him, you
must fight with a mad headed fellow I have left below -- so which do you choose?


Mr. ANTHONY. What do you mean?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Nay, you will have a worse chance than you would have had
with his Lordship; for this man is a soldier, one who has been fighting for
these four or five years past -- besides, he is desperate -- half mad; and has
sworn, he will either kill or be killed by you, instantly.


Mr. ANTHONY. Let him come -- Who, and what is he? -- What has he to demand of
me?

( Angrily.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Nay, don't be too violent neither -- He Is a poor
unfortunate lad, I fancy -- and, notwithstanding all his blustering -- henow
and then looks so heart-wounded I cannot help pitying him.


Mr. ANTHONY. But what is his business? What is his quarrel with me?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Lord Layton is the innocent cause of it -- he told the
young man, who came to his Lordship's (somewhat sooner than I did) in search of
the Lady whom you took away, that the Lady had confessed herself poor -- and
even perishing for subsistence -- and that, consequently, she was willing to
resign herself to the most liberal -- which you proving, in spite of his
Lordship's generosity, you carried off the prize -- and, egad, I owned it was
what I had suspected, notwithstanding your grave countenance last night.


Mr. ANTHONY. You told him you thought so?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Yes -- for I wished to turn the whole matter into a joke
with his Lordship -- I did not think, at the time, that the young fellow would
have been so violent -- for till this was explained he was as patient as a
lamb; and only inquired, with trembling and sighs, for the Lady -- but, when he
heard what I said, egad, he laid hold of me, and swore, till I brought him to
my friend, the "unpitying, vile purchaser of innocence," (meaning you) he would
not quit me -- So here he has followed me through the streets -- and, on
condition that he would be patient while I came and announced him to you, I
have promised him you shall give him satisfaction.


Mr. ANTHONY. What is this gentleman's name?

( Anxiously.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He did not tell us.


Mr. ANTHONY. Does he know mine?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. No; I thought it most prudent not to tell him; for, he is
such a madman, he might have bawled it as we came in the streets.


Mr. ANTHONY. ( Much embarrassed) What is he to the Lady? -- Her brother? --
her cousin?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why, faith, I Have a notion (though he did not say so) I have
a notion he is her husband.


Mr. ANTHONY. Indeed!

( Starting.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Why you don't like the business the worse for that? It Is
crim. con. now, and you will be quite in the fashion.


Mr. ANTHONY. Let the young man come up -- I Will withdraw for a moment -- but do
not give him to suppose I have not injured him.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. That you may depend upon -- I never tell a falsehood for
myself, much less for another.


Mr. ANTHONY. Neither let him know my name. I Will first send the Lady to him,
and then return myself.


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He Is coming.


( Exit Mr. Anthony.) CHARLES. ( Without) Where is this gentleman?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Walk in here, Sir.


Enter CHARLES EUSTON. Colonel DOWNRIGHT. The man you wish to see -- and whom
you say has injured you -- will be here and give you satisfaction immediately.


CHARLES. I thank him -- Then I shall die and never see her more. ( Aside) --
Oh, Sir! cooled with the restraint you have thus long imposed on me! I wish to
ask a favor -- I thought I was resolved never again to behold the wretch I
have been deprived of; but, my rage for a moment gone, I cannot think of dying,
and she so near me, without once looking on her -- I have come far to see her
-- suffered much -- crossed half the Eastern clime in poverty -- have endured
more pain, more toil, to gain my freedom, but to starve with her -- and, dying,
comfort her, than, had a throne been my waiting reward, my spirits could have
struggled with. -- And, after all, I feel, I feel I could be repaid with a mere
look -- Then, why refuse me? -- If I escape my antagonist, I have resolved on
death! Let me then see her! I will not exchange a word with her -- will they
refuse her coming?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT No -- for here she is --


Enter Mrs. EUSTON and stops (with emotion) as soon as she enters. Mrs. EUSTON.
Oh! -- But I am commanded not to fly to your arms -- I must not run to you, and
tell you all I feel!


CHARLES. ( After a pause) I said -- I thought -- I would not speak to you --
but pity for your crimes and miseries compel me -- And, I tell you, to
alleviate your remorse, I pardon you -- nay, perhaps, love you better, even in
this agony of affliction, than if we had been blessed with prosperous, virtuous
days! -- I know what you have suffered! -- Your guilt convinces me! -- I want
no other plea from a heart like yours. -- But where is your vile purchaser? --
My rage returns! -- I must die soon -- but first in his breast!

( Draws his sword)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. He Is here! --


Enter Mr. ANTHONY. CHARLES. Then to his heart -- ( Going to flab him, sees it
is his father, and after a pause falls an his knees.) May father! --


Mr. ANTHONY. Yes -- I am the man whose life you seek. -- And, as your father,
you might pursue your purpose -- But, as your wife's friend and preserver,
still kneel to me; and receive her, virtuous, from my hands. --


CHARLES. ( Embracing her.) Virtuous! -- Virtuous! -- O my father -- Even
groaning under your displeasure, ever dear, and revered! -- What are you now,
while heavenly consolation pours from your lips? --


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Father and son! -- Why then there is to be no battle at
last? --


Mr. ANTHONY. No -- Hostilities are past -- and may their future days known
only peace! -- My son --

( Embracing him.)
CHARLES. That tender name distracts me! -- Let me be more composed -- prepared
-- before I experience such unexpected happiness. -- Maria, lead me from my
father -- Hereaster I will thank him; but now, I cannot. --


Mrs. EUSTON. Oh! Yes, my husband, kneel to him again! -- Kneel for me! For
your poor children! Saved from want and wretchedness! -- From being orphans! --
Kneel to him for us all! -- preserved from infamy! --


CHARLES. O spare the recollection -- I feel too much! -- A poor, forsaken,
desperate, dying man, restored to love, to life, to him too -- whose anger,
(even while blessed with thee) plunged me in constant sorrow. -- It is too much!


Mr. ANTHONY I thought my heart had been -- but --

(He faulters and wipes his eyes.)
Colonel DOWNRIGHT. What? Do you weep? -- Now that affects me more than any
thing that has been said or done yet. -- I don't like to see a woman cry, but I
cannot bear to see a man -- a man's tears flow from so deep a source -- they
always appear to have come a long journey, and therefore I notice them as
strangers, that have gone through fatigue, and trouble, on their way -- While a
woman's tears I consider as mere neighbors, that can call upon you when they
like, and generally drop in on all occasions.


( Exeunt.) SCENE III.
MAJOR CYPRUS's. Enter LADY HARRIET and BLOOM. Lady HARRIET. ( Aloud rap.) That
is Sir George -- Heavens! --


BLOOM. Yes, my Lady, that it is --


Lady HARRIET. Heavens! What a sensation -- How am I agitated at his approach!
-- Could I have thought, a few hours ago, I should ever see him again? -- Speak
to him again! -- Oh this shame --


BLOOM. Shame! Bless me! -- One does feel a little ashamed sometimes on seeing
a stranger; but, my Lady, Sir George is (as one may say) an old acquiantance.


Lady HARRIET. I must retire for a moment -- Do you receive him -- and, before
I return, give him to understand that I am not dying; but will come to him
immediately.


(Exit.) BLOOM. Well, now I declare I begin to be ashamed myself -- Own all I
swore to him on my knees was a falsehood? -- Why, what will he say? Dear me,
I Am quite alarmed! I must retire for a moment too! --

( Goes to the back of the slage. A servant shows Sir George in, and retires.)
Sir GEORGE. How strange does it seem to me to find myself once more in this
house, especially when I consider who resides here -- Who? Perhaps, by this
time, poor Lady Harriet is no more -- How amiably did my dear Lady Euton
enforce her dying request -- I doubted the rectitude of complying with it --
but she surmounted all my scruples, and her tenderness and generosity have
endeared her to me more than ever.

Bloom comes down.
Sir GEORGE. How does Lady Harriet?


BLOOM. As well as can be expected, Sir.


Sir GEORE. How!


BLOOM. I hope you will not be angry, Sir -- but she is a little better.


Sir GEORGE. Angry! -- No; I am very glad to hear it!


BLOOM. Are you indeed, Sir? Why then I believe she is a great deal better.


Sir GEORGE, Indeed! -- I am very glad; but then, if my attendance can be
dispensed with -- I may as well --


Major CYPRUS. (Without) Let the chariot wait -- perhaps, I may go out again.


BLOOM. Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! -- that is the Major -- that is my master! -- my
other master! -- Oh, what will become of us all?


Sir GEORGE. How unlucky!


BLOOM. Sir! -- Dear Sir, hide yourself!


Sir GEORGE. Hide!


BLOOM. On my knees I beg -- Consider my poor dying Lady!


Mjor CYPRUS. (On the stairs.) Go with that note immediately.


BLOOM. Here! -- in here, Sir, for Heavens sake.

( Opening the closet door.)
Sir GEORGE. 'Sdeath! -- What shall I do? See him? Damnation! -- And see him
here too? No, I cannot bear it -- I must avoid him.

( Going toward the closet.)
BLOOM. Here, Sir -- here, quick!

( She puts Sir George into the closet and shuts the door.)
BLOOM. There, there he is! thank Heaven! For, if my poor Lady had lost the
Major, she might never have got a third husband. Lord bless me, I Am just as
terrified as if I had never been used to these sort of things!


( Exit to Lady Harriet.) Enter Major CYPRUS. Major CYPRUS. Ridiculed, baffled
-- laughed at -- disappointed! How Sir George will enjoy this! A fine figure I
cut on my knees to Sir Harry, when the Colonel and his friends were shown in!
And then my ridiculous vanity in wishing him to be unmasked, confidently
expecting it was Euston's wife! -- Oh, damn it! I Will think no more of it; but
as I am deprived the satisfaction of revenge on the Lady abroad, I Will even
torment my Lady at home! ( Calls) Lady Harriet -- Lady Harriet.


Enter Lady HARRIET, and BLOOM. Major CYPRUS. What Is the matter? You tremble --
you look pale!


Lady HARRIET. (Trembling) Tremble! -- Bless me -- I Have been fast asleep -- and
such a dream! I thought I was falling --


BLOOM. Ay, my Lady, I always dream of falling too!


Lady HARRIET. (Yawns and rubs her eyes.) How long have you been come home? --
What Is o'clock? How long do you think I have slept, Bloom?


BLOOM. I dare say, pretty near an hour and half, my Lady.


Lady HARRIET. A miserable dull book -- fell out of my hand! and I dropped
insensibly --


BLOOM. And with the candles so near your Ladyship! I Am sure your Ladyship was
very lucky, you did not set yourself on fire!


Major CYPRUS. Aye; does your Ladyship consider the danger with the lights so
near you? You might have caught fire, and I should have had all my valuable
pictures, and library consumed in an instant!


Lady HARRIET. And I consumed too.


Major CYPURS. Aye -- and your Ladyship.


Lady HARRIET. Very true -- but I am fond of reading melancholy books, that set
me to fleep.


Major CYPRUS. Then I desire, for the future, you would not read.


Lady HARRIET. And don't you desire I would not sleep too! I Am very sorry you
disturbed me. -- Bloom, come and dispose the sofa, and the lights -- I Am
resolved I Will finish my nap.


Major CYPRUS. But, Mrs. Bloom, first order the French horns up -- I Am out of
spirits.


( Exit. Bloom.) Lady HARRIET. And do you imagine your horns will disturb my
repose? -- I shall like them of all things -- they will lull me to sleep.


Major CYPRUS. Like them or not -- I will have them.


Lady HARRIET. You shall -- you shall have them.

( Significantly.)
( Exit.) Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Colonel Downright, Sir, with two gentlemen,
strangers, desire to be admitted.


Major CYPRUS. (Aside.) What can bring them here? They dare not come to laugh
at me! No matter -- I Will see them. ( Aloud.) Show them up


Enter Colonel DOWNRIGHT, Mr. EUSTON, and Mr. ANTHONY EUSTON. Colonel
DOWNRIGHT. Major, these gentlemen, the Mr. Euston's, have begged me to
introduce them to you, late as it is, on business in which they are materially
--


Mr. ANTHONY. Sir -- Major Cyprus, I beg your pardon -- but I have received
intelligence that my nephew, Sir George Euston, is in this house, and I am come
to conduct him safe out of it.


Major CYPRUS. Sir! --


Mr. ANTHONY. In short, Sir -- Sir George Euston has been, by some
unwarrantable means, led to pay a visit here, and I cannot leave the house
until I see him. -- If I should, my niece, Lady Euston, will be highly alarmed
(knowing you are at home) for her husband's safety. --


Major CYPRUS. Sir George in this house! Ridiculous supposition!


Mr. EUSTON. Call her Ladyship's woman -- She delivered the message of
invitation -- I shall know her again, for I saw her -- and I saw Sir George
soon after follow her. --


Major CYPRUS. Bloom! -- Bloom! -- Where Is Bloom?


Enter BLOOM. Pray were you at Sir George Euston's today, or this evening? --

BLOOM. I! At Sir George Euston's, Sir! --


Mr. EUSTON. Yes: I saw you there. --


BLOOM. Oh! Oh! Oh! ( crying) Oh dear! -- I was not there indeed, Sir!


Major CYPRUS. You see she denies it, and confirms the truth with her tears.


Mr. ANTHONY. I distrust them both -- Both her truth and her tears. --


Major CYPRUS. Come, come, Mr. Anthony Euston, confess you were not brought
hither to seek Sir George -- Clear yourself, in your turn, from the suspicions
I entertain of you. -- But, if you dare to avow yourself the contriver, or even
abettor of the affront offered me at the masquerade --


Mr. EUSTON. Major Cyprus! -- My brother Anthony knew no more of the
appointment at the masquerade than the child unborn. -- But, bless you, my
niece and we meant you no ill by it; we only meant to have a joke at your and
Sir Harry's expense -- that was all.


Major CYPRUS. Then give me leave to tell you, Mr. Euston, and you also Mr.
Anthony, that your present visit --


Mr. ANTHONY. We understand you, Sir -- only assure us that Sir George Euston
is safe and we'll leave your house immediately --


Major CYPRUS. I! assure you that Sir George Euston is safe!


Mr. ANTHONY. You seem surprised -- Let me then speak a word with Lady Harriet,
whom the servants tell me is at home. Is she or not? --


Major CYPRUS. ( To a servant without) Defire your Lady to come hither. -- But
have a care, gentlemen, how far you provoke me by your suspicons! -- For, by
Heaven --


Mr. ANTHONY. I have no fears but for Sir George -- nor will now your utmost
rage induce me to quit the house till I am assured of his safety. --


Major CYPRUS. And pray, Sir, who in this house is to assure you of it? --


Sir GEORGE. ( Bursting from the closet -- Himself! --


Major CYPRUS: Confusion! --


Mr. ANTHONY. You see, Sir, my intelligence was good. --


Sir GEORGE. Strange as my concealment may appear, the cause was such as I can
with honor reveal.


Major CYPRUS. Then, pray Sir, with "honor reveal it."


Sir GEORGE. Why then I assure you, Major -- and I assure you all -- upon my
honor -- and on the word of a gentleman -- that my being here -- was --
entirely -- owing -- to -- to --


Major CYPRUS. ( Warmly.) -- To what? -- To what, Sir?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. "I Will tell you what" -- to "an undescribable something" --
to be sure!


Major CYPRUS. Damnation!


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. Did not I tell you to keep the key of the closet? --


Major CYPRUS. Colonel, I beg -- this is not a time --


Enter BLOOM. BLOOM. ( To the Major.) The horns are ready, Sir -- would you
choose to have them?


Major CYPRUS. No. --


( In a fury. Exit Bloom.) Enter Lady EUSTON, and Lady HARRIET, at opposite
doors. Lady EUSTON. Where is Sir George?


Mr. EUSTON. Here, my dear -- just stepped out of the closet.


Lady EUSTON. What closet?


Colonel DOWNRIGHT. That -- that very identical closet.


Major CYPRUS. Heigh ho! --


Mr. EUSTON. Indeed, Lady Euston, you have cause to reproach him.


Lady EUSTON. I fear he will rather reproach me for this abrupt intrusion --
but my apprehensions for his safety (hearing no tidings from his uncle's) have
alone impelled me to it.


Lady HABRIET. Had your Ladyship not written this letter to the amiable Sir
Harry Harmless, (which I unfortunately supposed intended for Major Cyprus) your
Ladyship's alarming "apprehensions" might have been spared, as I sent for Sir
George but to show him this letter.


Mr. EUSTON. And that letter was only a joke -- a scheme to mortify the Major
and Sir Harry.


Lady EUSTON. It was so -- I own it. -- And the confusion the scheme has
occasioned, Sir George, needs all your forgiveness.


Sir GEORGE. I sincerely pardon it -- and hope the whole company will do me the
justice to believe that my sole motive, for entering this house, was a
compliance with, what I then thought, the dying request of that Lady. -- And I
now believe that her Ladyship's sole motive for wishing to see me was merely to
show me the etter of which she speaks -- a copy of which, not without my
knowledge, but against my opinion, was written by Lady euston to Major Cyprus,
appointing a fictitious interview, in return for his having dared to offend her
with the profession of a licentious passion!


Major CYPRUS. Sir George, I am perfectly satisfied with this explantation. --
But, after what has happened, the world may despise me for being so, and
therefore, Lady Harriet, from this moment we separate -- And we had been wifer,
as well as happier, if we had never met.


Lady HARRIET. Most willingly separate -- Your unkind treatment -- and my own
constant inquietude -- have long since taught a woman of the world too
feelingly to acknowledge, "No lasting friendship is formed on vice."


Mr. ANTHONY. Preach this, my dear Lady, to all your fair countrywomen --
enforce your words by your future conduct, and they shall draw a veil over the
frailty of your past life.


Lady HARRIET. Oh! Mr.Anthony, could I but retrieve my innocence, my honor,
for ever lost!


Mr. ANTHONY. Yet, do not despair. -- You can still possess one inestimable
good -- that inborn virtue which never perishes -- which never leaves us but to
return. -- For, when you think it extinguished, feel but due remorse and it
rises again in the soul.


Mr. EUSTON. That Is right, brother Anthony -- comfort her -- it is your duty.
-- And we are all relations, you know -- the whole company are related to one
another. -- Though it is in an odd kind of a jumbled way -- I wish some learned
gentleman, of the law, would tell us what relations we all are -- and what
relation the child of a first husband is to his mother's second husband, while
his own father is living.


Mr. ANTHONY. Brother, you think too deeply.


Mr. EUSTON. Not at all, brother Anthony! -- And, for fear the gentlemen of the
long robe should not be able to find out the present company's affinity, let us
apply to the kindred ties of each others passions, weaknesses, and
imperfections; and, thereupon, agree to part, this evening, not only near
relations but good friends.


THE END.

