CHEAP REPOSITORY.

THE LADY and the PIE; OR, KNOW THYSELF.



Sold by J. MARSHALL, (PRINTER to the CHEAP REPOSITORY for Moral and Religious
Tracts) No. 17, Queen Street, Cheapside, and No. 4, Aldermary Churchyard, and
R. WHITE, Piccadilly, London.

By S. HAZARD, at Bath; J. Elder, at Edinburgh, and by all Booksellers,
Newsmen, and Hawkers, in Town and Country.

PRICE ONE HALFPENNY, Or 2s. 3d. per 100. -- 1s. 3d. for 50. 9d. for 25. A
Cheaper Edition for Hawkers.

[ Entered at Stationers Hall.]

The LADY, etc.
A WORTHY Squire of sober life,
Had a conceited boasting wise;
Of him she daily made complaint,
Herself she thought a very saint.
She loved to load mankind with blame,
And on their errors build her fame.
Her favorite subject of dispute
Was Eve and the forbidden fruit.
"Had I been Eve," she often cried,
"Man had not fallen nor woman died;
"I still had kept the orders given,
"Nor for an apple lost my heaven;
"To gratify my curious mind,
"I never had ruined all mankind;
"Nor from a vain desire to know,
"Entailed on all my race such woe.
The Squire replied, "I fear it is true,
"The same ill spirit lives in you:
"Tempted alike, I dare believe,
"You would have disobeyed like Eve."
The lady stormed and still denied
Both curiosity and pride.
The Squire some future day at dinner,
Resolved to try this boastful sinner;
He grieved such vanity possessed her,
And thus in serious terms addressed her.
"Madam, the usual splendid feast,
"With which our wedding day is graced,
"With you I must not share today,
"For business summons me away.
"Of all the dainties on the table,
"Pray eat as long as you are able;
"Indulge in every costly dish;
"Enjoy, it is what I really wish;
"Only observe one prohibition,
"Nor think it a severe condition;
"On one small dish which covered stands,
"You must not dare to lay your hands;
"Go -- disobey not on your life,
"Or henceforth you're no more my wife."
The treat was served, the Squire was gone,
The murmuring lady dined alone:
She saw whatever could grace a feast,
Or charm the eye, or please the taste.
But while she ranged from this to that,
From ven'son haunch to turtle fat;
On one small dish she chanced to light,
By a deep cover hid from sight.
"Oh! here it is -- yet not for me!
"I must not taste, nay, dare not see.
"Why place it there? or why forbid
"That I so much as lift the lid?
"Prohibited of this to eat,
"I care not for the sumptuous treat.
"I wonder if it is fowl or fish,
"To know what is there I merely wish.
"I Will look -- O no, I lose for ever,
"If I Am betrayed my husband's favor.
"I own I think it vastly hard,
"Nay, tyranny, to be debarred.
"John you may go -- the wine's decanted
"I Will ring or call you when you're wanted."
Now left alone, she waits no longer,
Temptation presses more and stronger.
"I Will peep -- the harm can never be much,
"For though I peep I will not touch;
"Why I Am forbid to lift this cover
"One glance will tell, and then it is over.
"My husband's absent, so is John,
"My peeping never can be known."
Trembling, she yielded to her wish,
And raised the cover from the dish:
She starts -- for lo! an open pie
From which six living sparrows fly.
She calls, she screams, with wild surprise,
"Haste John and catch these birds," she cries;
John hears not, but to crown her shame,
In at her call, her husband came.
Sternly he frowned as thus he spoke,
"Thus is your vowed allegiance broke!
"Self-ign'rance led you to believe
"You did not share the sin of Eve.
"Like here is, how blessed was your condition!
"How small my gentle prohibition!
"Yet you, though fed with every dainty,
"Sat pining in the midst of plenty.
"This dish, thus singled from the rest,
"Of your obedience was the test.
"Your mind, unbroke by self denial,
"Could not sustain this slender trial.
"Humility from hence be taught,
"Learn candor to another's fault;
"Go know, like Eve, from this sad dinner,
"You're both a vain and curious sinner."
Z.

THE END.

