A LECTURE ON The Preservation of Health.

A LECTURE ON THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH.

BY T. GARNETT, M. D.

Member of the Royal Medical, Physical, and Natural History Societies of
Edinburgh; the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester; the Medical
Society of London; the Royal Irish Academy, and Professor of Physics and
Philosophy in Anderson's Institution, Glasgow.

LIVERPOOL, PRINTED BY J. M'CREERY, AND SOLD BY CADELL AND DAVIES, LONPON.

1797.

TO ERASMUS DARWIN, M. D.

The Ornament of Science, And the Friend of Mankind, This Lecture, As a small
Testimony Of Respect and Esteem, Is inscribed By THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
MOST medical gentlemen will, it is supposed, agree, that the greater part of
the numerous train of diseases to which their patients are subject, have been
brought on by improper conduct and imprudence. That this conduct often proceeds
from ignorance of its bad effects, may be presumed; for though it cannot be
denied that some persons are perfectly regardless with respect to their h^alth,
yet the great mass of mankind are too sensible of the enjoyment and loss of
this greatest of blessings, to run headlong into danger, with their eyes open.

It was with the hope of making the laws of life more generally known, and
better understood, and from thence deducing such rules for the preservation of
health, as would be evident to every capacity, that the author was induced to
deliver this lecture. It has been honored with the attention of numerous
audiences, in some of the most populous towns in England, where it has
generally been read for the benefit of charitable institutions.

The author flatters himself, that besides the benefit produced by his humble
endeavou^ to serve these institutions, those endeavors have not totally failed
in the grand object of preserving health; and with the hope that the influence
of the precepts here given, may be farther extended, he has concurred in the
ideas of those who have advised the publication of this lecture.

It is to be feared, that notwithstanding all which can be done, disease will
continue to be a heavy tax, which civilized society must pay for its comforts;
and the valetudinarian will often be tempted to envy the savage the strength
and soundness his constitution. Much however may be done toward the prevention
of a number of diseases. If this lecture should contribute to the attainment of
so desirable an end, it will afford the highest gratification to the author.

The first part of the lecture is the substance of an essay which was read by
the author before the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh, intended as a defense
of the general principles of the system of Dr. Brown, whose pupil he then was.
It was, according to custom, transcribed into the books of the society, and the
public have now an opportunity of judging how far Dr. Girtanner, in his first
essay published in the Journal de Physique, about two years after, in which he
gives the theory as his own, without the least acknowledgement to the much
injured and unfortunate author of the Elementa Medicinae, has borrowed from
this essay.

In public lectures, novelty is not to be expected, the principal object of the
lecturer being to place in a proper point of view, what has been before
discovered. The author has therefore freely availed himself of the labors of
others, particularly of the publications of the philanthropic Dr. Beddoes,
which he takes this opportunity of acknowledging.

A LECTURE, etc.
THE greatest blessing we enjoy is health, without it, wealth, honors, and
every other consideration, would be insipid, and even irksome; the preservation
of this state therefore, naturally concerns us all. In this lecture, I shall
not attempt to teach you to become your own physicians, for when the barriers
of health are once broken down, and disease has established itself, it requires
the deepest attention, and an accurate acquaintance with the extensive science
of medicine, to combat it; to attain this knowledge demands the labor of
years. But, a majority of the diseases to which we are subject, are the effects
of our own ignorance or imprudence, and it is often very easy to prevent them;
mere precepts however, have seldom much effect, unless the reasoning upon them
be rendered evident; on this account, I shall first endeavor, in as plain and
easy a manner as possible, to explain to you the laws by which life is
governed; and when we see in what health consists, we shall be better enabled
to take such methods as may preserve it. Health is the easy and pleasant
exercise of all the functions of the body and mind; and disease consists in the
uneasy and disproportioned exercise of all, or some of the functions.

When dead matter acts upon dead matter, the only effects we perceive are
mechanical, or chemical; for though there may appear to be other kinds of
attraction, or repulsion, such as electric and magnetic, yet these come under
the head of mechanical attraction, as producing motion; we may therefore lay it
down as a law, that when dead, or inanimate bodies act upon each other, no
other than mechanical, or chemical effects are produced; that is, either
motion, or the decomposition, and new combination of their parts. If one ball
strike another, it communicates to it a certain quantity of motion, this is
called mechanical action; and if a quantity of salt, or sugar, be put into
water, the particles of the salt or sugar will separate from each other, and
join themselves to the particles of the water; the salt and water in these
instances, are said to act on each other chemically; and in all cases whatever,
in which inanimate, or dead bodies act on each other, the effects produced are,
motion, or chemical attraction.

But, when dead matter acts on those bodies which we call living, the effects
are much different; let us take for example a very simple instance. -- Snakes,
at least some species of them, pass the winter in a torpid state, which has all
the appearance of death; now heat, if applied to dead matter, will only produce
motion, or chemical combination; but if it be applied to the snake, let us see
what will be the consequence; the reptile first begins to move, and opens its
eyes and mouth; when the heat has been applied for some time, it crawls about
in search of food, and performs all the functions of life. Here then, dead
matter, when applied to a living body, produces living functions; for if the
heat had not been applied, the snake would have continued senseless, and
apparently lifeless. In more perfect animals, the effects produced by the
action of dead matter on them, are more numerous, and are different in
different living systems, but are in general the following -- sense and motion
in almost all animals, and in many the power of thinking, and other affections
of the mind. The powers, or dead matters, which are applied, and which produce
these functions, are chiefly, heat, food, and air. The proof that these powers
do produce the living functions, is in my opinion a very convincing one,
namely, that when their actions are suspended, the living functions cease; take
away, for instance, heat, air, and food from animals, and they soon become dead
matter; and it is not necessary that an animal should be deprived of all those
to put a stop to the living functions; if any one of them be taken away, the
body sooner or later becomes dead matter: it is found by experience, that if a
man be deprived of air, he dies in about three or four minutes; for instance,
if he be immersed under water, if he be deprived of heat, or in other words,
exposed to a very severe degree of cold, he likewise soon dies; or if he be
deprived of food, his death is equally certain, though more slow. It is
sufficiently evident then, that the living functions are owing to the action of
these external powers upon the body. What I have here said, is not confined to
animals, but the living functions of vegetables are likewise caused by the
action of dead matter upon them. The dead matters, which by their action
produce these functions, are principally heat, moisture, light, and air. It
clearly follows therefore, from what I have said, that living bodies must have
some property different from dead matter, which renders them capable of being
acted upon by these external powers, so as to produce the living functions; for
if they had not, the only effects which these powers could produce, would be
mechanical, or chemical. Though we know not exactly in what this property
consists, or in what manner it is acted on, yet we see, that when bodies are
possessed of it, they become capable of being acted upon by external powers,
and thus the living functions are produced; we shall therefore call this
property excitability, and in using this term it is necessary to mention, that
I mean only to express a fact, without the least intention of pointing out the
nature of that property which distinguishes living from dead matter, and in
this we have the example of the great Newton, who called the property which
causes bodies in certain situations to approach each other, gravitation,
without in the least hinting at its nature; yet, though he knew not what
gravitation was, he investigated the laws by which bodies were acted on by it;
in the same manner, though we are ignorant of excitability, or the nature of
that property which distinguishes living from dead matter, we can investigate
the laws by which dead matter acts on living bodies through this medium. We
know not what magnetic attraction is, and yet we can investigate its laws; the
same holds good with regard to electricity; if we ever should attain a
knowledge of the nature of this property, it would make no alteration in the
laws which we had before discovered.

I shall now proceed to the investigation of the laws by which the excitability
is acted on; but I must first define some terms which it will be necessary to
use, to avoid circumlocution, and at the same time to give us more distinct
ideas on the subject.

When the excitability is in such a state as to be very susceptible of the
action of external powers, I shall call it abundant, or accumulated; but when
it is found not very capable of receiving their action, I shall say, it is
deficient, or exhausted. I would not wish however, to have it thought, that by
these terms I mean in the least to hint at the nature of excitability, nor that
it is really one while increased, and at another diminished in quantity, for
the abstract question is in no shape considered; we know not whether the
excitability, or the vital principle, depends on a particular arrangement of
matter, or from whatever cause it may originate; by the terms here used, I mean
only to say, that the excitability is easily acted on when I call it abundant,
or accumulated; at other times the living body is with more difficulty excited,
and then I say, the vital principle is deficient, or exhausted.

The laws by which external powers act on living bodies, will, on a careful
examination, be found to be the following --

First, when the powerful action of the exciting powers ceases for some time,
the excitability accumulates, or becomes more capable of receiving their
action, and is more powerfully affected by them.

If we examine separately the different exciting powers, which act on the body,
we shall find abundant confirmation of this law. Let us first consider Light;
if a person be kept in darkness for some time, and be then brought into a room
in which there is only an ordinary degree of light, it will be almost too
oppressive for him, and appear excessively bright; and if he have been kept for
a considerable time in a very dark place, the sensation will be very painful.
In this case, while the retina, or optic nerve, was deprived of light, its
excitability accumulated, or became more easily affected by light; for if a
person goes out of one room, into another which has an equal degree of light,
he will feel no effect. You may convince yourselves of this law by a very
simple experiment -- shut your eyes, and cover them for a minute or two with
your hand, and endeavor not to think of the light, or of what you are doing;
then open them, and the daylight will for a short time appear brighter. If you
look attentively at a window, for about two minutes, and then cast your eyes
upon a sheet of white paper, the shape of the window-frames will be perfectly
visible upon the paper; those parts which express the wood-work, appearing
brighter than the other parts. The parts of the optic nerve on which the image
of the frame falls, are covered by the wood-work from the action of the light;
the excitability of these parts of the nerve will therefore accumulate, and the
parts of the paper which fall upon them, must of course appear brighter. If a
person be brought out of a dark room where he has been confined, into a field
covered with snow, when the sun shines, it has been known to affect him so
much, as to deprive him of sight altogether.

Let us next consider what happens with respect to heat; if heat be for some
time abstracted, the excitability accumulates, or in other words, if the body
be for some time exposed to cold, it is more liable to be affected by heat,
afterward applied; of this also you may be convinced by an easy experiment --
put one of your hands into cold water, and then put both into water which is
considerably warm; the hand which has been in cold water, will feel much warmer
than the other. If you handle some snow with one hand, while you keep the other
in your bosom, that it may be of the same heat as the body, then bring both
within the same distance of the fire, the heat will affect the cold hand
infinitely more than the warm one. This is a circumstance of the utmost
importance, and ought always to be carefully attended to. When a person has
been exposed to a severe degree of cold for some time, he ought to be cautious
how he comes near a fire, for his excitability will be so much accumulated,
that the heat will act violently; often producing a great degree of
inflammation, and even sometimes mortification. We may be the way observe, that
this is a very common cause of chilblains, and other inflammations. When the
hands, or any other parts of the body have been exposed to violent cold, they
ought first to be put into cold water, or even rubbed with the snow, and
exposed to warmth in the gentlest manner possible.

Exactly the same takes place with respect to food, if a person have for some
time been deprived of food, or have taken it in small quantity, whether it be
meat or drink; or if he have taken it of a less stimulating quality, he will
find, that when he returns to his ordinary mode of living, it will have more
effect upon him than before he lived abstemiously.

Persons who have been shut up in a coal-work from the falling in of the pit,
and have had nothing to eat for two or three days, have been as much
intoxicated by a basin of broth, as a person in common circumstances with two
or three bottles of wine; and we all know that spirituous, or vinous liquors
affect the head more in the morning, than after dinner.

This circumstance was particularly evident among the poor sailors who were in
the boat with Captain Bligh after the mutiny. The Captain was sent by
government to convey some plants of the bread-fruit tree from Otaheite, to the
West Indies; soon after he left Otaheite, the crew mutinied, and put the
captain and most of the officers, with some of the men, on board the ship's
boat, with a very short allowance of provisions, and particularly of liquors,
for they had only six quarts of rum, and six bottles of wine, for nineteen
people, who were driven by storms about the south sea, exposed to wet and cold
all the time, for nearly a month; each man was allowed only a tea-spoon full of
rum a day, but this tea-spoon full refreshed the poor men, benumbed as they
were with cold, and faint with hunger, more than twenty times the quantity
would have done those who were warm, and well fed; and had it not been for the
spirit having such power to act upon men in their condition, they never could
have outlived the hardships they experienced. All these facts, and many others
which might be brought, establish beyond a doubt the truth of the law I have
mentioned, namely, that when the powerful action of the exciting powers ceases
for some time, the excitability accumulates, or becomes more capable of
receiving their actions.

The second law is, that when the exciting powers have acted with violence, or
for a considerable time, the excitability becomes exhausted, or less fit to be
acted on, and this we shall be able to prove by a similar induction. Let us
take the effects of light upon the eye; when it has acted violently for some
time upon the optic nerve, it diminishes the excitability of that nerve, and
renders it incapable of being affected by a quantity of light that would at
other times affect it. When you have been walking out in the snow, if you come
into your room, you will be scarcely able to see any thing for some minutes.
Look steadfastly at a candle for a minute or two, and you will with difficulty
discern the letters of a book, which you were before reading distinctly; and if
you happen to cast your eyes upon the sun, you will not see any thing
dustinctly for some time afterward.

Let us next consider the matter of heat: suppose water to be heated lukewarm,
if you put one hand into it, it will feel warm; if you now put the other hand
into water, heated for instance to 120 or 130, and keep it there some time, we
will say, two minutes, if then you take it out, and put it into the lukewarm
water, that water will feel cold, though still it will seem warm to the other
hand; for, the hand which had been in the heated water, has had its
excitability exhausted by the application of heat. Before you go into a warm
bath, the temperature of the air may seem warm and agreeable to you, but after
you have remained for some time in a bath that is rather hot, when you come
out, you feel the air uncommonly cool and chilling.

Let us now examine the effects of substances taken into the stomach; and as
the effects of spirituous, and vinous liquors, are a little more remarkable
than food, we shall make our observations upon them.

A person who is unaccustomed to drink these liquors, will be intoxicated by a
quantity that will produce no effect upon one who has been some time accustomed
to take them; and when a person has used himself to these stimulants for some
time, the ordinary powers which in common support life, will not have their
proper effects upon him, because his excitability has been in some measure
exhausted by the stimulants.

The same holds good with respect to tobacco and opium; a person accustomed to
take opium will not be affected by a quantity that would completely intoxicate
one not used to it; because the excitability has been so far exhausted by the
use of that drug, that it cannot be acted on by a small quantity.

These facts, with innumerable others, which will easily suggest themselves to
you, prove the truth of our second proposition, namely, that when the exciting
powers have acted violently, or for a considerable time, the excitability is
exhausted, or less fit to be acted on.

This exhaustion of the excitability, may, however, be either finite, or
temporary; we see animals, while the exciting powers continue to act, at first
appear in their greatest vigor, then gradually decay, and at last come into
that state, in which, from the long continued action of the exciting powers,
the excitability is entirely exhausted, and death takes place.

We likewise see plants in the spring, while the exciting powers have acted on
them, moderately, and for a short time, arrayed in their verdant robes, and
adorned with flowers of "many mingling hues;" but, as the exciting powers which
support the life of the plant, continue to be applied, and some of them, for
instance heat, as the summer advances become increased, they first loose their
verdure, then grow brown, and at the end of summer cease to live; because their
excitability is exhausted by the long continued action of the exciting powers;
and this does not happen merely in consequence of the heat of summer
decreasing, for they grow brown and die, even in a greater degree of heat than
that which in spring made them grow luxuriantly.

These are examples of the finite, or irreparable exhaustion of the
excitability; but we find also, that it may be exhausted for a time, and
accumulated again. Though the eye has been so dazzled by the splendor of
light, that it cannot see an object moderately illuminated, yet, if it be shut
for some time, the excitability of the optic nerve accumulates again, and we
are again capable of seeing with an ordinary light.

We find, that we are not always equally capable of performing the functions of
life. When we have been engaged in any exertion, either mental or corporeal,
for some hours only, we find ourselves fatigued, and unfit to pursue our
labors much longer; if in this state, several of the exciting powers,
particularly light and noise, be withdrawn; and if we are laid in a posture
which does not require much muscular exertion, we soon fall into that state
which nature intended for the accumulation of the excitability, and which we
call sleep. In this state, many of the exciting powers cannot act upon us,
unless applied with some violence, for we are insensible to their moderate
action. A moderate light, or a moderate noise, does not affect us, and the
power of thinking, which exhausts the excitability very much, is in a great
measure suspended. When the action of these powers has been suspended for six
or eight hours, the excitability is again capable of being acted on, and we
rise fresh, and vigorous, and fit to engage in our occupations.

Sleep then, is the method which nature has provided to repair the exhausted
constitution, and restore the vital energy; without its refreshing aid, our
worn out habits would scarcely be able to drag on a few days, or at most a few
weeks, before the vital spring was quite run down; how properly therefore has
the great poet of nature called sleep the chief nourisher in life's feast. --
'Sleep, that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care,
the death of each day's life, sore labor's bath,
balm of hurt minds, great Nature's second course,
chief nourisher in life's feast'.


From the internal sensations often excited, it is natural to conclude that the
nerves of sense are not torpid during sleep; but that they are only precluded
from the perception of external objects, by the external organs being rendered
unfit to transmit to them the impulses of bodies, during the suspension of the
power of volition; thus, the eyelids are closed in sleep, to prevent the
impulse of the light from acting on the optic nerve; and it is very probable
that the drum of the ear is not stretched; it is likewise probable that
something similar happens to the external apparatus of all our organs of sense,
which may make them unfit for their office of perception during sleep.

The more violently the exciting powers have acted, the sooner is sleep brought
on; because the excitability is sooner exhausted, and therefore, sooner
requires the means of renewing it; and on the contrary, the more weakly the
exciting powers have acted, the less is a person inclined to sleep. Instances
of the first are, excess of exercise, strong liquors, or study; and of the
latter, an under proportion of these.

A person who has been daily accustomed to much exercise, whether mental or
corporeal, if he omit it, will find little or no inclination to sleep; he may
however be made to sleep by taking a little diffusible stimulus; for instance,
a little warm punch, or opium; which act entirely by exhausting the
excitability to that degree which is compatible with sleep; and when the
stimulant effect of these substances is over, the person soon falls into that
state.

But though the excitability may have been sufficiently exhausted, and the
action of the external powers considerably moderated, yet there are some things
within ourselves, which stimulate violently, and prevent sleep, such as pain,
thirst, and strong passions and emotions of the mind. These all tend to drive
away sleep, but it may be induced, by withdrawing the mind from these
impressions; particularly from uneasy emotions, and employing it on something
which makes a less impression; sleep, in such cases, is frequently brought on
by listening to the humming of bees, or the murmuring of a rivulet; by
employing the mind on subjects which do not require much exertion, nor produce
too much commotion; such as counting to a thousand, or counting drops of water
which fall slowly.

It sometimes happens, as has been well observed by Dr. Franklin, that an
uneasy heat of the skin, from a want of perspiration, occasioned by the heat of
the bed-cloaths, will prevent sleep; in this case, he recommends a method,
which I believe will often succeed -- namely, to get up and walk about the room
'till you are considerably cooled; when you get into bed again, the heat of the
skin will be diminished, and perspiration become more free, and you will
probably sleep in a very few minutes. May not the heat, and want of
perspiration, depend on an exhausted irritability of the subcutaneous vessels,
which will be accumulated by the method here recommended?


By induction we have discovered two of the principal laws by which living
bodies are governed; the first is, that when the ordinary powers which support
life have been suspended, or their action lessened for a time, the
excitability, or vital principle accumulates, or becomes more fit to receive
their actions; and secondly, when these powers have be^^ acted upon violently,
or for a considerable time, the excitability is exhausted, or becomes less fit
to receive their actions. There are therefore three states in which living
bodies exist. --

First, a state of accumulated excitability.

Second, a state of exhausted excitability.

Third, when it is in such a state as to produce the strongest and most healthy
actions, when acted upon by the external powers.

From what I have said, it must appear, that life is a forced state, depending
on the action of external powers upon the excitability; and that, by their
continued action, if they are properly regulated, the excitability will be
gradually and insensibly exhausted; and life will be resigned into the hands of
him who gave it, without a struggle, and without a groan.

We see then, that that nature operates in supporting the living part of the
creation, by laws as simple and beautiful as those by which the inanimate world
is governed. In the latter we see the order and harmony which is observed by
the planets, and their satellities, in their revolution round the great source
of heat and light.

' -- All conbin'd
and ruled unerring, by that single power
which draws the stone projected, to the ground.'
In the animated part of the creation, we observe those beautiful phenomena,
which are exhibited by an almost infinite variety of individuals, all depending
upon one simple law, the action of the exciting powers on the excitability.

I cannot express my admiration of the wisdom of the creator better than in the
words of Thompson.

'O unprofuse magnificence divine!
O wisdom truly perfect! thus to call
from a few causes, such a scheme of things;
effects so various, beautiful, and great.'
Life then, or those functions which we call living, are the effects of certain
exciting powers, acting on the excitability, or property distinguishing living
from dead matter. When those effects, namely, the functions, flow easily,
pleasantly, and completely, from the action of the exciting powers, they
indicate that state which we call Health.

I have detained you a long time on this subject, but it is of importance to
make you acquainted with these laws; for it is from a knowledge of them, that
the rules for preserving health must be deduced; and having rendered them, as I
hope, intelligible to you, I shall proceed to point out such necessary cautions
for our conduct, as are easily deduced from them; and which, experience
confirms; and I shall follow an arrangement in the consideration of the
subject, which naturally presents itself to us. The chief exciting powers which
act upon us are, air and food; these I shall respectively consider, and
afterward make a few remarks on exercise.

The air is the main-spring in the animal machine; the source of heat and
activity, without which our blood would soon become a black and stagnant mass,
and life would soon stop.

It is now known, that only a part of atmospheric air, is necessary for
respiration: the atmosphere near the surface of the earth, consists of two
kinds of air; one, which is highly proper for respiration, and combustion, and
in which, an animal immersed, will live much longer than in the same quantity
of common air; and one, which is perfectly improper for supporting respiration,
or combustion for an instant.

The first of these airs, has been called vital air, from its property of
supporting life, and constitutes about one fourth of the atmosphere. Oxygen
gas, according to the new Nomenclature.
The other, from its property of destroying life, is called azote, and forms of
course the remaining three fourths of the atmosphere.

These two airs may be separated from each other by various methods. If a
candle be enclosed in a given quantity of atmospheric air, it will burn only
for a certain time, and then be extinguished; and from the rising up of the
water in the vessel in which it is enclosed, it is evident that a quantity of
air has been absorbed. What has been absorbed is the vital air, and what
remains, the azote; which is incapable of supporting flame. If an animal be
immersed in a given quantity of common air, it will only live a certain time;
at the end of this time, the air will be found diminished, about one fourth
being extracted from it, and the remainder will neither support flame nor
animal life; this experiment might easily be made, but it seems a piece of
unnecessary cruelty.

By similar experiments to those I have mentioned, we get the azote pure; here
is some, in which a candle has burnt out, and in which nothing but azote, or
the impure part of the atmosphere is left The fixed air, or carbonic acid gas,
formed during the combustion, having been separated by agitation in contact
with lime water.
. I shall plunge a lighted match into it, and you see it is instantly
extinguished.

Many metals, and particularly manganese, when exposed to the atmosphere,
attract the vital air from it, without touching the azote; and it may be
procured from these metals by the application of heat, in very great purity.
Here is a bottle of that kind of air, which I have expelled by heat from
manganese; I shall plunge a taper into it, and you will perceive that it burns
with great brilliancy. An animal shut up in it, would live about four times as
long as if shut up in an equal quantity of atmospheric air.

If I take three parts of azote, and one of vital air, I shall form a compound
which is similar to the atmosphere, and which is the mixture best suited to
support the health of the body; for if there were a much greater proportion of
vital air, it would act too powerfully upon the system, and bring on
inflammatory diseases; it would likewise by its stimulus exhaust the
excitability, and bring us sooner to death; and in the same manner that a
candle burns brighter in vital air, and would therefore be sooner extinguished,
so would the flame of life be sooner burnt out.

On the contrary, if the atmosphere contained a much less proportion of vital
air, it would not stimulate the body sufficiently; the excitability would
morbidly accumulate, and diseases of debility would occur.

Combustion, putrefaction, and the breathing of animals, are processes which
are continually diminishing the quantity of vital air contained in the
atmosphere; and if the all-wise author of nature had not provided for its
continual re-production, the atmosphere would in all probability have long
since become too impure to support life; but this is guarded against in a most
beautiful manner.

Water is not a simple element, as has been supposed, but is composed of vital
air, and a particular kind of air which is called inflammable; the same that is
used to fill balloons. It has been found by experiment, than one hundred pounds
of water, are composed of eighty-five pounds of vital-air, and fifteen of
inflammable air. Strictly speaking, water is composed of the bases of these
airs, the greatest part of the caloric being given out on their union.


Water may be decompounded by a variety of means, and its component parts
separated from each other.

Vegetables effect this decomposition; they absorb water, and decompose it in
their glands; and taking the inflammable air for their nourishment, breathe out
the vital air in a state of very great purity; this may be ascertained by a
very easy experiment.

This vital air is received by animals into their lungs, gives them their heat,
and communicates a red color to their blood; when animals die for want of
vital air, their blood is always found black.

From what I have said, it is evident, that in large and populous towns, where
combustion and respiration are continually performed on a large scale, the air
must be much less pure than in the country, where there are few of these causes
to contaminate the atmosphere, and where vegetables are continually tending to
render it more pure; and if it was not for the winds which agitate this
element, and continually occasion its change of place; the air of large towns
would probably soon become unfit for respiration. Winds bring us the pure air
of the country, and take away that from which the vital air has been in a great
measure extracted; but still, from the immense quantity of fuel which is daily
burnt, and the number of people breathing in large towns, the air very soon
becomes impure.

From the greater purity of the air in the country, proceeds the rosy bloom
found in the rural cottage, which we in vain look for in the stately palace, or
the splendid drawing room. Here then are reasons for preferring the country,
which no one will dispute; and whenever it can be done, such a situation ought
always to be chosen in preference to a large town; this cannot be better
enforced than in the words of Dr. Armstrong. --

'Ye, who amid the feverish world would wear.
a body free of pain, of cares a mind;
fly the rank city, shun its turbid air;
breathe not the chaos of eternal smoke,
and volatile corruption, from the dead,
the dying, sickening, and the living world
exhaled, to sully heaven's transparent dome
with dim mortality.
While yet you breathe, away; the rural wilds
invite; the mountains call you, and the vales;
the woods, the streams, and each ambrosial breeze
that fans the ever undulating sky.'
But there are many whose occupations oblige them to reside in large towns;
they, therefore should make frequent excursions into the country, or to such
situations as will enable them to enjoy, and to breathe air of a little more
purity. I say enjoy, for who that has been for some time shut up in the town,
without breathing the pure air of the country, does not feel his spirits
revived the moment he emerges from the azote of the town. Let not therefore, if
possible, a single day pass, without enjoying, if but for an hour, the pure air
of the country. Doing this, only for a short time every day, would be much more
effecttual than spending whole days, or even weeks in the country, and then
returning into the corrupt atmosphere of the town; for when you have for a long
time breathed an impure air, the excitability becomes so morbidly accumulated,
from the want of the stimulus of pure air, that the air of the country will
have too great an effect upon you; it will frequently in the course of a day or
two, bring on an inflammatory fever, attended with stuffing of the nose,
hoarseness, a great degree of heat, and dryness of the skin, with other
symptoms of a violent cold.

Large towns are the graves of the human species; they would perish in a few
generations, if not constantly recruited from the country. The confined, putrid
air, which most of their inhabitants breathe, their want of natural exercise,
but above all their dissipation, shorten their lives, and ruin their
constitutions.

Children particularly, require a pure air, every circumstance points out the
country as the proper place for the education of children; the purity of the
air, the variety of rustic sports, the plainness of diet, the simplicity and
innocence of manners, all concur to recommend it. It is a melancholy fact, that
above half the children born in London, die before they are two years old.

To show how indispensable fresh air is to children, I shall mention one
example which sets the fact in the clearest light. In the lying-in hospital at
Dublin, 2944 infants, out of 7650, died in the year 1782, within the first
fortnight after their birth, which is nearly every third child; they almost all
died in convulsions; many of them foamed at the mouth, their thumbs were drawn
into the palms of their hands, their jaws were locked, the face was swelled and
looked blue, as though they were choked. This last circumstance led the
physicians to conclude that the rooms in the hospital were too close, and
hence, that the infants had not a sufficient quantity of good air to breathe;
they therefore set about ventilating them better, which was done very
completely. The consequence has been, that not one child dies now where three
used to die.

Fewer children indeed die convulsed now, than formerly; this is because the
rich learn, either from books, or conversation with physicians, how necessary
fresh air is to life and health; hence they keep their houses well aired; but
the poor, and servants, are not made to comprehend this matter properly; and
therefore from neglecting to open their windows, and breathing a foul, tainted
air, the greatest part of their time, many disorders are brought on, and others
rendered worse than they naturally would be. Where manufactures are carried on
to a great extent, the air is rendered still worse, and every precaution ought
to be used to preserve the health of the inhabitants. Places where manufactures
are carried on, ought, therefore, to be constructed in such a manner as to be
very lofty, and capable of being easily ventilated. Night working is
undoubtedly a perversion of the laws of nature, renders the constitution
feeble, and lays a foundation for bad health and disease: for it not only gives
no time for ventilation, and in consequence the quantity of oxygen becomes more
and more exhausted, but the number of candles used, contributes very much to
contaminate the air. It has been found by experiment that a candle contaminates
more air than a man. By persons who are interested in the welfare of the
succeeding generation, night-work will never be urged, and it will be right to
ventilate the manufactories every night, as well as during breakfast and dinner.


Having considered the purity of the air, let us next take a view of the
changes in temperature which it undergoes, and the effects which these have
upon the constitution.

We find the air sometimes considerably below the freezing point; nay, even so
much as 20 or 30 degrees; it is then intensely cold; and on the other hand, it
sometimes rises to a great degree of heat. We then find ourselves much relaxed,
and our constitutions exhausted.

To understand how this happens, let us consider for a moment the nature of
heat, and cold. -- Heat is one of those stimuli which act upon the
excitability, and support life: for if it was totally withdrawn, we should not
be able to exist even a few minutes; and cold, is only a diminution of heat.
When heat is present, in a proper degree, or the atmosphere is about that
degree of heat which we call temperate, it just gives such a degree of
stimulus, and keeps the excitability exhausted to such a degree, as to preserve
the body in health; but if it continue for a considerable time to be much
warmer than this temperature, the consequence must be, from the laws already
laid down, an exhaustion of the excitability, and a consequent relaxation and
debility; for, when the excitability has been exhausted by the violent
application of heat, long continued, the common stimulant powers which support
life, cannot produce a sufficient effect upon it, to give to the body that tone
which is compatible with health. On the contrary, when the heat of the air
falls below what we call temperate, or when cold is applied to the body, from
the accustomed stimulus of heat being diminished, the excitability must
accumulate, or become more liable to be affected by the action of the external
powers.

This, however, very seldom produces bad effects, unless the exciting powers be
improperly or quickly applied; for we can bear a considerable diminution of
heat without any bad consequences; and in all cases I hope I shall be able to
make it appear, that much more mischief arises from the too great action of
heat, than from the diminution of it. Nature never made any country too cold
for its inhabitants. In cold climates, she has made exercise, and even fatigue
habitual to them, not only from the necessity of their situation, but from
choice, their natural diversions being all of the athletic or violent kind. But
the softness and effeminacy of modern manners, has both deprived us of our
natural defense against the diseases most incident to our climate, and
subjected us to all the inconveniences of a warm one.

People are afraid of going out into the cold air; but if they conduct
themselves properly afterward, they will never be in the least danger from it.
Indeed the action of cold, unless it be excessive, never produces any bad
effects.

Many of you will, no doubt, think me here in an error; but I hope you will not
long entertain that opinion. You will say that you have had frequent experience
to the contrary; that you have often gone out into the cold air, and have
caught dreadful colds. That this is owing to the action of cold, I will deny;
nay, I will assert, that if a person go out into air which is very cold, and
remain in it for a very long time, he will never perceive any symptoms of what
is called a cold so long as he remains there.

A common cold is attended with a running of the nose, hoarseness, and cough,
with a considerable degree of feverish heat, and dryness of the skin. -- Now it
is universally agreed, that this disorder is an inflammation, or is of an
inflammatory nature; it is an inflammation of the smooth, moist skin which
lines the nostrils, and goes down the windpipe into the lungs; but as cold is
only a diminution of heat, or a diminution of a stimulus acting upon the body,
it is impossible that such a diminution can cause a greater action or
excitement; we might as well expect to fill a vessel by taking water out of it.
But let us see how a cold, as it is commonly called, is usually produced. When
a person in cold weather goes out into the air, every time he draws in his
breath, the cold air passes through his nostrils and windpipe into the lungs,
and in thus diminishing the heat of the parts, allows their excitability to
accumulate, and renders them more liable to be affected by the succeeding heat.
So long as that person continues in the cold air, he feels no bad effects; but
if he come into a warm room, he first perceives a glow within his nostrils and
breast, as well as all over the surface of the body. Soon afterward, a
disagreeable dryness and huskiness will be felt in the nostrils and breast. By
and by a short, dry, tickling cough comes on. He feels a shivering, which makes
him draw nearer to the fire, but all to no purpose; the more he tries to heat
himself, the more chill he becomes. All the mischief is here caused by the
violent action of the heat on the accumulated excitability. For want of a
knowledge of this law, these disagreeable, and often dangerous complaints are
brought on; when they might be avoided with the greatest ease.

When you take a ride into the country on a cold day, you find yourselves very
cold; as soon as you go into a house, you are invited to come to the fire, and
warm yourselves; and what is still worse, to drink something warm and
comfortable, to keep out the cold, as the saying is. The inevitable consequence
of this, is, to bring on the complaints which I have just described, which
might with more propriety, be called heats than colds. But how easily might
these complaints have been avoided! When you come out of a very cold
atmosphere, you should not at first go into a room that has a fire in it, or if
you cannot avoid that, you should keep for a considerable time at as great a
distance from the fire as possible, that the accumulated excitability may be
gradually exhausted, by the moderate and gentle action of heat; and then you
may bear the heat of the fire without any danger: but, above all, refrain from
taking warm or strong liquors while you are cold. If a person have his hands or
feet exposed to a very severe cold, the excitability of those parts will be so
much accumulated, that if they should be brought suddenly near the fire, a
violent inflammation, and even a mortification will take place, which has often
happened; or, at any rate, that inflammation called Chilblains will be
produced, from the violent action of the heat upon the accumulated excitability
of those parts; but, if a person so circumstanced, was to put his hands or feet
into cold water, very little warmer than the atmosphere to which he had been
exposed, or rub them with snow, which is not often colder than 32 or 30
degrees, the morbid excitability will be gradually exhausted, and no bad
consequences will ensue.

When a part of the body only has been exposed to the action of cold, and the
rest kept heated, if, for instance, a person in a warm room sits so that a
current of air coming through a broken pane, should fall upon any part of the
body, that part would be soon affected with an inflammation, which is usually
called a rheumatic inflammation.

From what has been said, it will be easy to account for this circumstance. The
excitability of the part is accumulated by the diminution of its heat; but at
the same time, the rest of the body and blood is warm; and this warm blood
acting upon a part where the excitability is accumulated, will cause an
inflammation; to which, the more you apply heat, the worse you make it. -- From
these considerations, we may lay it down as a fact, and experience supports us
in so doing, that you may in general go out of warm into cold air without much
danger; but, that you can never return suddenly from the cold into the warm air
with perfect impunity.

Hence, we may lay down the following rule, which, if strictly observed, would
prevent the frequent colds we meet with in winter. When the whole body, or any
part of it, is chilled, bring it to its natural feeling and warmth by degrees.

But if, for want of observing this necessary caution, a cold, as it is called,
should have seized a person, let us consider what is proper to be done.

It will, from the preceding reasoning, appear very improper to make the room
where you sit warmer than usual, to increase the quantity of bed-cloaths, to
wrap yourself up in flannel, or particularly to drink a large quantity of
barleywater, gruel, or tea, almost boiling hot, by way of diluting, as it is
called, and forcing a perspiration; this will infalliably make the disorder
worse, in the same manner as confining inoculated persons in warm rooms would
make their smallpox more violent.

Perhaps there would be scarcely such a thing as a bad cold, if people, when
they found it coming on, were to keep cool, and avoid wine and strong liquors,
and confine themselves for a short time to a simple diet of vegetable food,
drinking only toast and water. Instances are by no means uncommon, where a heat
of the nostrils, difficulty of breathing, a short, tickling cough, and other
symptoms, threatening a violent cold, have gone off entirely in consequence of
this plan being pursued.

Colds would be much less frequent, were we to take more pains to accommodate
our dress to the season: if we were warmly clothed in cold weather, our
excitability would not be accumulated by the action of the cold. If a greater
proportion of females fall victims to this disease, is it not because, losing
sight, more than men, of its primary purpose, they regulate their dress solely
by fantastic ideas of elegance? If happily, as is observed by Dr. Beddoes, our
regret should recall the age of chivalry, to break the spell of fashion would
be an achievement worthy the most gallant of our future Knights. Common sense
has always failed in the adventure; and our ladies, alas! are still compelled,
whenever the enchantress waves her wand, to expose themselves half undressed,
to the fogs and frosts of our island.

Besides the effects of the air, we ought by no means to be indifferent with
regard to what we take into the stomach as food and drink; since these have
even a greater influence on our health, than the circumstances I have already
mentioned. Among the causes which excite the body, and support life, I have
formerly mentioned food, or the matters taken into the stomach. It is from
these matters that all the animal solids and fluids are formed; these are
stimuli, which if totally withdrawn, we could not exist many days. These
stimuli are subject to the same laws with all the others which act upon the
body. When they act properly in concert with the other powers, they produce the
healthy state; but if they act in an undue degree, whether that action be too
great or too little, disease will be the consequence. When they act too feebly,
the excitability will accumulate; and diseases of debility, attended with a
very great degree of irritability, will take place: this has been instanced in
those who have been without food for some time. Persons who have been shut up
in a coal-work by the falling-in of the pit, and have consequently been without
food for some days, have had their excitability so much accumulated, as to be
toxicated with a basin of broth.

To this source we may attribute many of the diseases with which the poor are
afflicted; but they are by no means so common as diseases of an opposite
nature, which arise from a too free use of food. I shall confine myself here to
the consideration of what is more strictly called food, and afterward consider
the effects of strong liquors.

When we take food in too great quantity, or of too nourishing a quality, it
will either produce inflammatory diseases, such as pleurisy, or by exhausting
the excitability, it will bring on stomach complaints, gout, and all the
symptoms of premature old age. This follows so evidently from the laws we have
investigated, that it is scarcely necessary to say more on the subject; and I
am sure there are few who have not seen examples of it.

Be therefore temperate in eating, and eat only of such foods as are the
plainest; and let a proper quantity of vegetable food be mixed with animal. If
you value the preservation of health, never satiate yourselves with eating; but
let it be a rule from which you ought never to depart, always to rise from
table with some remains of appetite: for, when the stomach is loaded with more
food than it can easily digest, a crude and unassimilated chyle is taken into
the blood, pregnant with diseases. Nor is the quantity the only object of
attention; the quality of the food is to be carefully studied; made dishes,
enriched with hot sauces, stimulate infinitely more than plain food, and
therefore exhaust the excitability, bringing on diseases of indirect debility;
such as the worst kind of gout, apoplexy, and paralytic complaints. "For my
part," says an elegant writer, "when I behold a fashionable table set out in
all its magnificence, I fancy that I see gouts and dropsies, fevers and
lethargies, with other innumerable distempers, lying in ambuscade among the
dishes." Let it be therefore laid down as a rule by those who wish to preserve
their health, and I have nothing to say to those who are indifferent on that
head, to make their chief repast on one plain dish, and trifle with the rest.

It is by no means uncommon for a medical man to have patients, chiefly among
people of fashion and fortune, who complain of being hot and restless all
night, and having a foul taste in the mouth every morning: on examination it is
found, that in nineteen cases out of twenty, it has arisen from their having
overloaded their stomachs, and at the same time neglected to take proper
exercise; for it must always be observed, that more may be eaten with safety,
nay, more is even necessary, when a person takes a good deal of exercise.

When people take little exercise, and overload their stomachs, there lies
within them a fermenting mass of undigested aliment; and it is not surprising
that this should irritate and heat the body during the night. This is likewise
the foundation of stomach complaints, flatulencies, and all other symptoms of
indigestion; which more frequently proceed from intemperance in eating and
drinking than any other cause. The benefits arising from temperance are set in
a striking light in the following allegory, which may be found in the
adventurer.

Esculapius, after his deification or admittance among the Gods, having
revisited his native country, and being one day (as curiosity led him a
rambling,) in danger of being benighted, made the best of his way to a house he
saw at some distance, where he was hospitably received by the master of it.
Cremes, for that was the master's name, though but a young man, was infirm and
sickly. Of several dishes served up to supper, Cremes observed that his guest
ate but of one, and that the most simple; nor could all his entreaties prevail
upon him to do otherwise. He was, notwithstanding, highly delighted with
Esculapius's conversation, in which he observed a cheerfulness and knowledge
superior to any thing he had hitherto met with.

The next morning, Esculapius took his leave, but not till he had engaged his
good-natured host to pay him a visit at a small villa, a few miles from thence.
Cremes came accordingly, and was most kindly received; but how great was his
amazement when supper was served up, to see nothing but milk, honey, and a few
roots, dressed in the plainest, but neatest manner, to which hunger,
cheerfulness, and good sense, were the only sauces. Esculapius seemed to eat
with pleasure, while Cremes scarcely tasted of them. On which a repast was
ordered more suitable to the taste of our guest. Immediately there succeeded a
banquet composed of the most artful dishes that luxury could invent, with great
plenty and variety of the richest and most intoxicating wines. These too were
accompanied by damsels of the most bewitching beauty. Cremes now gave a loose
to his appetites, and every thing he tasted raised exstasies beyond what he had
ever known. During the repast, the damsels sung and danced to entertain them;
their charms enchanted the enraptured guest, already flushed with what he had
drank; his senses were lost in exstatic confusion. Every thing around him
seemed Elysium, and he was on the point of indulging the most boundless
freedoms, when on a sudden their beauty, which was but a vizard, fell off, and
discovered forms the most hideous and forbidding imaginable. Lust, revenge,
folly, murder, meagre poverty, and despair, now appeared in the most odious
shapes, and the place instantly became a most dire scene of misery and
confusion. How often did Cremes wish himself far distant from such a diabolical
company, and now dreaded the fatal consequence which threatened him. His blood
ran chill at his heart, and joy and rapture were perverted to amazement and
horror! -- When Esculapius perceived it had made a sufficient impression on his
guest, he thus addressed him: "Know, Cremes, it is Esculapius who has thus
entertained you, and what you have beheld is a true image of the deceitfulness
and misery inseparable from luxury and intemperance. Would you be happy, be
temperate: temperance is the parent of health, virtue, wisdom, plenty, and
every thing that can make you happy in this or the world to come. It is indeed
the true luxury of life, for without it life cannot be enjoyed." This said, he
disappeared, and left Cremes (instead of an elegant apartment) in an open
plain, full of ideas quite different from those he had brought with him.

On his return home, from the most luxurious, he became one of the most
temperate men, by which wise method he soon regained health. Frugality produced
riches, and from an infirm and crazy constitution, and almost ruined estate, by
virtue of this infallible elixir, he became one of the happiest men breathing,
and lived to a healthy old age, revered as an oracle for his wisdom throughout
all Greece.

If temperance be necessary with regard to food, it is still more so with
respect to strong liquors; these diffusible stimuli, by quickly exhausting the
excitability, soon blast the vigor, and sap the foundation of the strongest
constitution. Their immediate effects you know are stimulant; they raise the
animal spirits, produce a cheerful state of mind, and if taken in greater
quantity, cause intoxication, or that temporary derangement of the thinking
powers which arises from too great a degree of excitement: but let us see what
happens the next day; the animal spirits are exhausted, and the person thus
situated, finds himself languid and enervated to a great degree; for it seems a
law of the human body, that the spirits are never artificially raised, without
being afterward proportionably depressed; and to show clearly that in this
state the excitability is exhausted, the ordinary powers which in general
support life, will not have their due effect; and a person thus situated finds
most relief the next day, from taking some of the same stimulus which
occasioned the exhaustion; because the common exciting powers can scarcely act
upon his exhausted excitability.

But though the excitability be in this way exhausted, it will in the course of
a day or two be again accumulated, and it may, perhaps, be suspected that this
exhaustion can do no harm at all to the constitution; but this is a premature
conclusion, and quite contrary to fact and experience, as well as to reason;
for, just in the same manner that a pendulum, made to vibrate in the arc of a
circle, will never return exactly to the same height, but fall a little short
of it every time; so, though the excitability may be again accumulated, it
never can be brought back to what it was before; and every fresh debauch will
shorten life, probably two or three weeks at least, besides debilitating the
body, and bringing on a variety of diseases, with premature old age.

Those who drink only a moderate quantity of wine, so as to make them cheerful,
as they call it, but not absolutely to intoxicate, may imagine that it will do
them no harm. The strong and robust may enjoy the pleasures of the bottle and
table with seeming impunity, and sometimes for many years, may not find any bad
effects from them; but depend upon it, if a full diet of animal food be every
day indulged in, with only a moderate portion of wine, its baneful influence
will blast the vigor of the strongest constitution.

While we are eating, water is the best beverage. The custom of drinking
fermented liquors, and particularly wine, during dinner, is a very pernicious
one. The idea that it assists digestion, is false; those who are acquainted
with chemistry know, that food is hardened, and rendered less digestible by
these means, and the stimulus which wine gives to the stomach is not necessary,
excepting to those who have exhausted the excitability of that organ by the
excessive use of strong liquors. In these, the stomach can scarcely be excited
to any action without the assistance of such a stimulus. If food wants
diluting, water is the best diluent, and will prevent the rising, as it is
called, of strong food, much better than wine or spirits.

Before I finish this subject, I shall say a few words on the pernicious custom
of suffering children to drink wine, or other fermented liquors. Nothing is
more common than to see, even very young children come to the table after
dinner, to drink a glass of wine. The least quantity produces violent effects
on their accumulated excitability, and by quickly exhausting it, ruins their
constitutions through life, and often renders them habitual drinkers.

I can scarcely help attributing in some degree the many stomach complaints we
meet with, among young people in the present age, and which were unknown to our
forefathers, to the abominable practice of suffering children to drink
fermented, or spirituous liquors. You must all have observed how soon children
are intoxicated and inflamed by spirituous liquors; you may judge then, that if
these liquors be only a slow poison to us, they are a very quick one to them. A
glass of wine, on account of the accumulated excitability of children, will
have more effect upon them, than a bottle will have upon an adult accustomed to
drink wine. If therefore, the health of a child, and its happiness through life
be an object, never suffer it to taste fermented, or spirituous liquors, till
it be fifteen or sixteen years of age, unless a little wine be necessary as a
medicine.

It now only remains for me to take some notice of exercise. Of all the various
methods of preserving health, and of preventing diseases, which nature has
suggested, there is none more efficacious than exercise, it puts the fluids all
in motion, strengthens the solids, promotes perspiration, and occasions the
decomposition of a larger quantity of atmospheric air in the lungs. Hence, in
order to preserve the health of the body, the author of nature has made
exercise absolutely necessary to the greater part of mankind for obtaining the
means of existence. -- Had not exercise been absolutely necessary for our
well-being says the elegant Addison, nature would not have made the body so
proper for it, by giving such an activity to the limbs, and such a pliancy to
every part, as necessarily produce those compressions, extensions, contortions,
dilatations, and all other kinds of motions that are necessary for the
preservation of such a system of tubes and glands. -- And that we might not
want inducement to engage us in such exercise of the body as is proper for its
welfare, it is so ordered, that nothing valuable can be procured without it.
Not to mention riches and honors, even food and raiment are not to be come at
without the toil of the hands and sweat of the brow. Providence furnishes
materials, but expects that we should work them up ourselves. The earth must be
labored before it gives its increase, and when it is forced into its several
products, how many hands must they pass through before they are fit for use?
Manufactures, trade, and agriculture, naturally employ more than nineteen parts
of the species out of twenty; and as for those who are not obliged to labor by
the condition in which they are born, they are more miserable than the rest of
mankind, unless they indulge themselves in that voluntary labor which goes by
the name of exercise.

Of all the different kinds of exercise, there is none that conduces so much to
health as riding; it is not attended with the fatigue of walking, and the free
air is more enjoyed in this way than by any other mode of exercise. Where it
cannot be used, walking, or exercise in a carriage, ought to be substituted.

The best time for taking exercise is before dinner, for the body is then more
vigorous and alert, and the mind more cheerful, and better disposed to enjoy
the pleasure of a ride or walk. Exercise after a full meal disturbs digestion,
and causes painful sensations in the stomach and bowels, with heart burn, and
acid eructations.

But whatever mode of exercise you use, it ought not at first to be too
violent. Dr. Armstrong has given us an excellent rule --

'Begin with gentle toils, and as your nerves
grow firm, to hardier, by just steps aspire.
The prudent, even in every moderate walk,
at first but saunter, and by slow degrees
increase their pace.'
THE END.

