THE NATIONAL ADVOCATES, A POEM. AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED TO THE NONOURABLE
THOMAS ERSKINE, AND VICARY GIBBS, ESQUIRE.

Mirum, qua intention, quibus clamoribus omnia exceperint, qui modo
reclamabant: tanta conversio vel negotii dignitatem, vel proventum orationis,
vel actoris constantiam subsecuta est. PLIN. Epist. lib. ix. ep. 13. LONDON:
PRINTED FOR J. DEBRETT, OPPOSITE BURLINGION-HOUSE, PICCADILLY. MDCCXC^.

THE NATIONAL ADVOCATES.
Spirits divine! who, pleased at Nature's birth,
Took your kind station round the recent earth
To watch the world, in viewless state sublime,
A guardian each of each allotted clime --
Ye, who with pity have had cause to melt,
And anguish, such as angels feel, have felt,
To witness evils that ye most abhor,
The fiend-like phrensy of insatiate war,
Leagues without justice, without glory strife,
And mad profusion of envenomed life;
Though crimes, from which your hallowed optics shrink,
Hurry the vexed globe to perdition's brink,
Ye will not yet your guilty charge abjure,
And fly from evils that ye fail to cure --
No, Ye have heard from Britain's favored isle,
Sounds to excite a troubled Seraph's smile,
And draw to earth, on just protection's plan,
Pure spirits, friendly to the weal of man.
The sound of joy that town to town repeats,
Circling from London and her crowded streets,
As Echo guides it, with exulting hand,
To every confine of the enfranchised land, --
That sound of joy was not the frantic roar
Of martial triumph pampered high with gore,
That giving murder a gigantic frame,
Rears the grim idol decked with Glory's name,
When sanguinary man, with impious pride,
In false devotion real guilt to hide,
With inconsistence not to Pagans known,
Presents preposterous thanks to Mercy's throne,
For having tainted both the earth and air,
With blood that Heaven commanded him to spare. --
The sound of joy, this sympathetic song
Would with fond zeal to distant time prolong,
Spoke not of war, but peace's nobler palm;
In civic tempests it announc'd a calm;
Assuring Britain, in her worst alarm,
That Law's bright aegis blazes on her arm;
That round her sons the snares of legal death
Burst at the hallowed touch of Virtue's breath.
Ye nameless powers, who Reason's voice inspire,
Who give to Eloquence her patriot fire;
Ye, who when man, in fields of spotless fame,
Strains noble faculties with noblest aim,
Haste to refresh him at true honor's goal
With eulogy, the music of the soul;
Grant in this verse such lucid praise to live,
As only Truth, fair child of Light, can give,
They only merit, who, of spirit clear,
And, deaf to interest, as exempt from fear,
Exert, while Power's presumptuous claims they scan,
Celestial gifts in aid of suffering man;
Show splendid talents sanctified by worth,
And made a blessing to the admiring earth: --
To you, entitled to the world's applause,
Fraternal advocates in Freedom's cause: --
To you, whom Friendship with fond pride unites,
With all the luster of her ancient rites,
Of equal probity and varied powers,
In arduous duty's spirit-trying hours,
Each to the other a benignant star,
The Scipio and the Laelius of the bar: --
To you, illustrious friends, whose legal fame
Shall last, while Law herself, a sacred name,
Holds her primaeval right, her blessed employ,
Parent of peace, and cherisher of joy: --
To you I offer, nor will you refuse,
You, who as Freedom's child caress the Muse,
Tribute, no power commands, no treasures buy,
Pure as the tear of joy in true Love's eye;
Verse undebas'd by adulation's art,
Fresh from the fountain of a feeling heart,
That scorns all Party rage of either side,
Faction's fierce spleen, and Pow'r's suspicious pride,
And, loving England, that her laws display
The blessed beneficence of temperate sway,
Honors her advocates, whose truth and zeal
Stand the firm pillars of the public weal: --
Yes, ye brave pleaders in a cause, whose weight
Pressed on the vitals of a panting State,
'Twas not alone the being of a few
Black with false guilt, in dim suspicion's view,
Whose lives, in deference to minds so rare,
Justice consigned to your defensive care:
'Twas Britain's honor, 'twas her noblest wealth,
The very essence of the public health,
For which your patriot eloquence displayed
Those matchless powers, that bold yet temperate aid,
Which Themis sanctioned with a sacred smile,
And rightful joy convulsed her rescued isle.
Whence is the generous pride, a test of worth,
That makes a Briton glory in his birth?
Not that his country, Nature's favored isle,
Is fenced by commerce with a golden pile;
And can impel, with rich temptation's flood,
Poor continental kings to trade in blood,
Though reaping, as their fruit of martial care,
Discomfiture, disgrace, dismay, despair:
No: he exults that in his native land,
Hearts by the warmth of Liberty expand;
And Intellect, a tree that loves the light,
Shoots like a cedar of imperial height;
While fearless Freedom, with an eagle's ken,
Searching the soul of measures and of men,
Alike contemns, in their unmasking hour,
The dupe of Party, and the slave of Power;
And celebrates, what here she still can find,
True public virtue in a potent mind.
When a sick nation, like a feverish child,
Sinks in a panick, wayward, dark, and wild;
From fear to fear in blind confusion runs,
Mistakes for foreign imps her genuine sons;
Calls Loyalty a Traitor, Truth a Liar,
And Freedom's vital warmth Sedition's fire:
When rampant Power, beyond Ixion proud,
Impregnates with chimeras every cloud,
Blessed be the minds, whose virtuous labors serve
To save their darkling country's visual nerve;
While fancied plots and shadowy perils fly
Distemper's film, that dimmed the nation's eye,
Who, with recovered sight, exults to see
It is not treason, still to wish her free.
Reason may smile, if sophistry would show
A faithful subject is a treacherous foe;
And those, who strike at vices in the State,
Must mean a Monarch's fall, and seek his fate;
As if corruption were the vital spring
Of that effulgent mortal styled a King.
Unguarded Poet, in this troubled time,
Beware, cries Caution, how you rant in rhyme,
Lest you should find there is treason in the meter,
That deems a Monarch a mere earthly creature.
With rational respect, not stupid awe,
As the just offspring and the guard of law,
The voice of England, her creative voice,
Hails in a King the ruler of her choice.
And Nature here, as if inclined to claim
Immortal reverence for the regal name,
Bade Alfred's virtues to the world evince
How rightfully we prize a Patriot Prince:
Model of Kings! in a benighted age,
All that adorns the Hero and the Sage;
Lycurgus, Caesar, Antonine in one,
With all their talents, of their errors none:
Thou, whose pure spirit to thy subjects taught,
The sons of England should be free as thought:
Thy arm preserved, and thy more potent mind,
With sapient aid, established or refined,
For scenes more perilous than martial strife,
Our guardian Juries, as the friends of life!
With fond delight, and with parental love,
Thy people's Father! from the realms above,
Thy sainted spirit may exult to see,
That people guarding what they owe to thee:
Law's soundest buckler, Freedom's brightest dower,
Shielding bold Truth from irritable Power.
Ye Great, whose souls to genuine glory spring,
With such ambition as becomes a king,
Mark how true greatness may in every clime
Command unceasing life through distant time!
Gifts, that Beneficence, on Wisdom's plan,
Confers to meliorate the lot of man,
Live unimpair'd, unconscious of decay,
While Pride's ignoble pageants pass away.
The heart of Alfred still our love excites,
He lives, he breathes in every Jury's rights!
Though of his line no Prince upholds the name,
He still exists the favorite of Fame!
Though following kings, of ampler pomp and power,
Finished in fume their transitory hour:
Tudors of hot, and Stuarts of cold blood,
Have sunk like wrecks in a tempestuous flood:
For, at the will of Heaven's Almighty Sire,
Palaces fall, and dynasties expire. --
The noble Line, that, with Religion's smile,
Freedom invited to this far-fam'd Isle;
Whom Honor wafted on his golden wings
To this his favorite throne, and cried: "Be Kings!
Rule with mild sway whom Force shall never enslave,
And long may Virtue guard what Freedom gave!" --
This Line, that boasts the purest claim to power,
May fail -- Avert, just Heaven! their final hour;
And keep them as they keep their regal vow! --
Yet they may fail, and mortals know not how:
But if -- in times no living eye can see,
Distant, far distant may that period be!
If England must perceive with fond regret
The star of Brunswick is for ever set;
A George with Alfred may this glory share,
That Law's pure current was his sovereign care:
If from great Alfred's reign free Juries flow,
The independent Judge to George we owe.
Mild Sovereign! doomed, in life's tumultuous dream,
To feel of bliss and woe each wide extreme,
Justice could well thy youthful care engage,
May Heaven make Peace an idol of thy age!
O bid this wheel of War revolve no more,
This frantic lottery of guilt and gore!
Where, when Truth weighs the profit and the pain,
None but the Fiends of desolation gain.
Let not false policy, to Nature blind,
And deaf to Reason pleading for mankind,
Precipitately urge a barbarous war,
That Equity and Truth alike abhor,
As weak in conduct, as devoid of right,
And boding certain ill in every light:
Speed as it may, each opposite event
Freedom must fear, Humanity lament.
No, cry the advocates for lasting strife,
Let us be prodigal of wealth and life;
Let Britain's treasure round the globe be hurled,
Long let her subsidise the regal world;
Rather than see the Gallic rage advance,
And madd'ning Europe ape the crimes of France!
England, brave nation, of an honest mind,
Yet often dup'd as credulously blind;
Too apt, when artifice obstructs thy view,
To shrink from fancied ills, and scorn the true;
Learn, when thy neighbor of superb pretense,
Whose feelings are too quick for sober sense;
Learn, when assuming France, by Folly led,
Might best awaken thy judicious dread:
Not in the hour when, spurning base control,
She plucked the iron from her wounded soul;
Not in the hour when Indignation's arm
O'erthrew her proud Bastile, as with a charm,
And gave to festive Joy the vacant space,
Nobly disburthen'd of Earth's dark disgrace:
No -- in her ancient calm, her nerveless hour
Of tame submission to despotic power,
France might excite more reasonable fear,
Than all her armies in their first career;
For, when in Tyranny's cold grasp she lay,
And strove to smile her sense of wrongs away,
On her soft breast a specious Fiend she nursed,
Of all insinuating fiends the worst:
Pleased to empoison nations with her breath,
And sow the viewless seeds of public death;
To deaden virtue, to dispirit joy,
And all the energies of life destroy.
For in the minds that, fearsul of deceit,
Slowly embrace this fascinating cheat,
Reason, self-puzzled, loses all its skill,
To mark the eternal bounds of good and ill;
To them Religion's sweet seraphic face
Appears the sickly mask of sour grimace:
Man, her dear charge, they deem a moving clod,
And, deaf to the paternal voice of God,
Despise the gift his gracious power bestowed,
Feeling existence a lethargic load.
Whence sprung the fiend, whose tyrannous control
Thus robs of every joy the palsied soul?
Born to avenge what Greece endured from Rome,
Amidst an attic garden's baneful bloom
Rose the fair pest, in beauty and in power
A new Pandora! wretchedness her dower:
Sweet was the wreath of fading flowers she wore,
And gay The doctrine of Epicurus ever ruinous to society; it had its rise when
Greece was declining, and perhaps hastened its dissolution, as also that of
Rome. It is now propagated in France and England, and seems likely to produce
the same effect in both. GRAY's Works, 4to. page 202.
Philosophy the name she bore.
Two kindred forms, wherever she moves, are seen,
The sure attendants of their potent Queen:
First, bloated Indolence, whose cheeks disclose
The sickly colors of the withered rose;
Whose languid arm scarce bears the light employ,
To lift the bubbling cup of mimic joy;
Whose lips deride, with a contemptuous sneer,
Firm Virtue struggling in Contention's sphere.
Behind her, Apathy, whose half-glaz'd eyes
Never melt with love, or sparkle with surprise;
Whose touch, more cold than Terror's icy breath,
Shoots through the withered heart petrific Death.
With these, her ministers, to Rome she fled,
And struck the nerve of Roman vigor dead;
The towering Eagle fell her palsied prey,
And dying Freedom cursed her baleful sway.
Awhile she sat with Triumph's flag unfurled,
The laughing Vict'ress of the Roman world;
In pomp Circean, there she joy'd to shine,
Her cave the palace, Emperors her swine!
But soon her nerveless slaves, unfit for war,
Sunk into dust before the sons of Thor;
The Sorceress fell, with all her feeble charms,
Crushed by the brave barbarians' massive arms.
Through many an age she lay in lifeless trance,
But waked to wider ill in servile France;
Gallia's proud Genius, who by force in vain
Had toiled to forge an universal chain,
Tried over the earth his empire to extend,
By the smooth arts of this insidious friend;
Snare Virtue's sons by Pleasure's siren form,
And sap those bulwarks that he failed to storm.
Brave generous Britons, who have less to fear
From open enmity's uplifted spear,
Beware this smiling pestilence, and know
In French Philosophy your deadliest foe!
O for that warning lyre, whose solemn swell
Loudly proclaimed the advancing Lord of Hell,
When first that prime Artificer of Ill
Leaped with light bound over Eden's highest hill! --
For not more hostile to those happy bowers,
Came the fierce Chief of Falsehood's treacherous Powers,
Than the gay Siren, fraught with impious guile,
To the frank virtues of this fearless Isle.
Yet vain such warning! -- As a welcome guest,
Deluded Britain met the smiling pest;
And oh how wide new scenes of woe extend,
Since the base stranger grew her bosom friend!
Vain Dissipation, in her wild abyss,
O'erwhelms the temperate guards of genuine bliss:
No more Fidelity, with Seraph's power,
Spreads her firm wing around the nuptial bower,
That heirs of Truth, of Virtue, Health, and Grace
May spring to life from Passion's pure embrace;
Prepared to cherish with affection fond
Each private duty, and each public bond:
No more Content, and Gratitude, whose light
Turns Earth to Paradise in mental sight,
Through dark'ning scenes bewildered Reason guide,
And make Humility more strong than Pride:
To French Philosophy these fall a prey,
And Life's prime blessings are all laughed away: --
Nay, Life itself! For, when the Sophist tribes
With the keen stroke of their sarcastic gibes
Have cut the cordage, for our safety given,
By which the anchored spirit rests on Heaven --
What gulphs the vessel of the Mind overwhelm,
When spleenful Phrensy has usurped the helm!
Have we not seen a France-taught Sophist here
To impious Suicide a refuge rear,
And give, with argument's delusive air,
A treacherous sanction to her mad despair?
Tempestuous England! Though we often surmise,
The heavy vapors of thy varying skies
Breed in our sadden'd frames the mental strife,
Where fancy sickens with disgust of life:
Not all thy fogs, however damp and dense,
Can fix such languor on our loaded sense,
As false Philosophers by stealth impart,
To the cold fibers of the hard'ning heart;
When their base maxims on our spirit steal,
And quench our native flames of love and zeal.
No, though around us exhalations run,
That seem to smother the enfeebled Sun;
True English minds, that England still admire,
And feel the genuine glow of patriot fire,
Defy the storm from southern caves released,
And the raw vapors of the blighting East.
Within themselves an antidote they bear
Against all the dark caprices of the air;
It Is fervent gratitude, and fond esteem
For names still bright with Public Virtue's beam;
It Is generous pride, of reason the result,
That makes a Briton in his birth exult,
As the compatriot of minds, whose worth
Has given such splendor to this speck of earth;
That, while over other realms in Slavery's chain,
An heavy mental twilight seemed to reign,
Here, and here only, with meridian ray
Glowed the full warmth of intellectual day;
And generous thoughts, that no damp winds control,
Form the pure climate of the healthy soul.
"Aye, in old time, cries Age-engender'd Spleen,
Such England was! -- but mark her altered scene:
See Lux'ry's torrents like hot lava shoot,
Withering all Genius, killing Virtue's root;
Nor leaving ought unblasted by their fire,
That Sense can praise, or Honesty admire."
This fretful humor of the fancied Sage
Has in each polished era spent its rage;
While credulous Simplicity, aghast,
Has heard of present shame, and glory past;
Of nerveless bodies, of enfeebled minds,
And every ill that sickly Fancy finds;
When all is inverted that her optics see,
And nothing is, but what has ceased to be.
But come, Historic Truth, whose hand enrolls
Each splendid record of exalted souls;
Come, Moral Fiction, over whose mimic glass
Bright pageants of ideal merit pass:
Come hand in hand, fair friends to Virtue, come,
And strike this murmuring detraction dumb!
Say, in each group your blended scenes unfold,
Keen Admiration can no names behold,
That claim in public love a nobler part,
Or win more honor from the upright heart,
Than you, ye Legal Heroes of my song,
As dear to fancy, as in reason strong;
Who, in despite of mental toil and pain,
That seem to threaten the o'er-burden'd brain,
Breathed the pure soul of manly eloquence,
Simple in language, liberal in sense;
And, with intrepid Virtue's guardian care,
Rescued the Captives tangled in the snare
Of blood-hound spies, whose prostituted mind
Toiled to create the guilt it could not find.
No: proud Antiquity's departed host,
Whose shadowy marvels Learning loves to boast,
Show not, in civic glory's favorite days,
Pleaders more worthy of a People's praise.
When by rapt Greece Demosthenes was heard,
And thunder seemed less potent than his word;
The stormy passions of revenge and ire
Tinged his bright language with intemp'rate fire:
When Tully, destined to the Grecian's doom,
Poured forth philippics to applauding Rome;
Personal hate, with patriot virtue warm,
Gave force and fury to his verbal storm.
These heroes of the hot forensic scene
Blended with public zeal their private spleen: --
Not so the Pleaders who this verse inspire,
Who merit paeans, from a nobler lyre:
As free from virulence, as void of fear,
In conduct graceful, as in motive clear.
They paid just homage to presiding Law,
With manly deference, and decent awe.
No selfish pride, in which light minds rejoice,
Raised to victorious sway their temperate voice:
But England's welfare, on their heart impressed,
Pure public virtue, glowing in their breast,
Armed their just souls with intellectual force,
To check Authority's vindictive course,
And turn Delusion's tide in Danger's hour,
Reckless of frowns from Prejudice and Power.
ERSKINE and GIBBS! whose names, to Nature dear,
Ages unborn may gratesully revere;
While this memorial of your worth I raise,
And firmly credit what I fondly praise;
One hateful truth shall Memory dare suggest,
Engraved on the deep recesses of her breast:
Rudely she teaches, from her ample range,
That Public Virtue is most apt to change.
The faithful hand, that these frank lines supplied,
Never lavished incense by the heart belied;
But, with fond zeal to court in joyous youth
A public idol of imagined truth,
Has often discarded an unfinished task,
Finding Apostasy in Virtue's mask;
For ere my fingers could the garland weave,
Like that our hapless Father twined for Eve,
It dropped, and all its faded roses shed,
Scorning to garnish an Apostate's head.
But may this civic wreath, in eager haste
Formed of wild flowers, by Merit's smile be graced!
For lives preserved unquestionably due,
(The nameless donor proves the tribute true;)
Bays from Sincerity's obscure retreat
May cherish Virtue in Contention's heat.
Ye, to whom England owes a pleasing debt,
That English gratitude should never forget;
Thus Freedom prays, to recompense your care,
Deign, righteous Heaven! to ratify the prayer:
"Live my firm aids to life's serenest end,
Friends to each other, each the people's friend;
Live beyond life of Briton's glory part,
Enshrined for ever in the public heart!"
FINIS.

