The Man's bewitched; OR, The Devil to do about Her. A COMEDY, As it is Acted
at the NEW-THEATRE IN THE HAY-MARKET; BY HER MAJESTY's SERVANTS.

By SUSANNA CENT-LIVRE.

LONDON, Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT, between the Two Temple-Gates in
Fleet Street.

To His GRACE WILLIAM Duke of Devonshire; Lord Steward of Her Majesty's
Household, Lord in Air, North of Trent, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Derby;
and One of Her Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your GRACE,
THE Muses were ever ambitious of being distinguished, by shrouding themselves
under the Patronage of the greatest Men in all Ages; not made so by Titles or
Preferment; but such, whose innate Principles of Honor, truly supported those
their Prince had crowned them with. From hence sprung my Presumption of laying
the following Scenes at Your Grace's Feet; since the World must allow, that all
those Virtues, which complete a perfect good, as well as great Man, are
centered in the Duke of Devonshire; the loyalest Subject, the tenderest
Husband, and the kindest Master, that ever Monarch, Wife, or Servant had;
Briliant Graces, but such as do not shine in every Man of Quality. From such
Patriots, what may not Britain hope? Nay, what might not She command, were all
her Sons as fervent for her Interest, and discharged their respective Trusts
with that Fidelity, and due Regard to the public Good, as Your Grace has ever
done in Yours: Then the hated Name of Faction would be heard no more, and the
scandalous Wounds of hotheaded Parties healed; which is the only way to secure
this Island from foreign Insults, and establish Peace more firmly, than Armies,
though vast as Xerxes led, can do.

To attempt your Grace's Character, is the superior business of a Masculine
Pen, and not to be reached by mine: But since my Husband has the Honor to
serve Her Majesty, under the Command of Your Grace, as he did the late King of
glorious Memory, under that of your noble Father, I could not be prevailed upon
to alter my Resolution of prefixing your Grace's Name in the front of this
Poem, at once to show my Gratitude, and my Ambition: And if, when Your Grace's
Mind's unbended from the Care and Business of the State, it finds the way in
some leisure Hour to divert Your Grace, and the Author meet your Pardon for
this Liberty, my Wishes are all answered; as I hope my Prayers will be, that
Your Grace may enjoy a perfect Health, free from Pain in Mind, and Body; and
see as many flourishing happy New Years, as your best and dearest Friends can
desire; and every one add fresh Honors to those that are so deservedly worn by
Your Grace at present, which are the earnest Wishes of

MY LORD, Your Grace's Most Obedient, and Most Devoted, Humble Servant, SUSANNA
CENT-LIVRE.

THE PREFACE.
I Should not have troubled my Courteous Reader with a Preface, had I not lain
under the Necessity of Clearing my self of what some People have been pleased
to charge me with, viz. of being the Author of a Paper called, The Female
Tattler, consequently of a Paragraph in that of the 14th Instant, relating to
this Comedy; though I think no reasonable Person will believe I could be guilty
of so much Folly. Though Vanity is said to be the darling Vice of Womankind, yet
nothing but an Idiot would express themselves so openly; and I hope the World
will not think me guilty of Printing, what I must blush to Read, nor imagine it
Wrote even by any Friend of mine, for two Reasons; First, the Grossness of the
Flattery. Secondly, the Injury it must of course do me, in the Run of my Play,
by putting those People out of Humor, whose Action was to give Life to the
Piece. I suppose these Reasons are sufficient to convince the Judicious part,
that I was no ways concerned in those Reflections, but own I was treated with
all the seeming Civility in the World, till the second Night of my Comedy. I
willingly submitted to Mr. Cibber's Superior Judgment in shortning the Scene
of the Ghost in the last Act, and believed him perfectly in the Right, because
too much Repetition is tiresome. Indeed when Mr. Estcourt sliced most of it
out, I could not help interposing my Desires to the contrary, which the rest
readily complied with; and I had the Satisfaction to see I was not deceived in
my Opinion, of its pleasing. This Passage I happened to mention among my
Acquaintance; for it is Natural to have a kind of a Tender for our own
Productions, but especially if they have the good Fortune to divert others.
Now, if from this the Author of the Tattler gathered his Account, I am guilty
of speaking, but not designedly; for who they are that Write that Paper, or how
Distinguished, I am perfectly ignorant, and declare I never was concerned,
either in Writing, or Publishing, any of the Tattlers.

I never had the Vanity to think, much less to publish, that any thing I am
capable of doing, could support the Stage, though I have had the good Fortune to
please, or to find the Town willing to be pleased; though at present it seems a
certain Author has entered a Caveat against all Plays running to a sixth Night,
but his own. Though an Opera interfer'd with this Comedy, yet it brought above
Forty Pounds the second Night, which showed it had some Merit; for I have known
many a Play kept up, that failed of half that Money the second Night. Now by
the Rules of the House, it ought to have been played on: But who can secure the
Life of a Play, when that of a Man is often Sacrificed to the Malice of
Parties? This Play met with a kind Reception in general, and notwithstanding
the Disadvantages it had to struggle with, by raising the Prices the first Day,
and the Nearness of Christmas, it would have made its way to a sixth Night, if
it had had fair Play. Mistake me not, I do not mean from the Representation;
for I must do the Players Reason: Had I searched all the Theaters in the World,
I could not have selected a better Company, nor had more Justice done me in the
Action, though they have not dealt honorably by me in my Bargain; for they ought
not to have stopped the Run, upon any Pique whatever. It Is small Encouragment to
Write for the Stage, when the Actors, according to the Caprice of their
Humors, mangre the Taste of the Town, have power to sink the Reputation of a
Play; for if they resolve not to Act it, the Town cannot support it.

Well, if there is any Merit in suffering wrongfully, I shall find my Account
in it one time or other; in the mean while I entreat the Female Tattler to be
Witty no more at my Expense. I desire I may not be ranked in the Number of
those that support the Stage, since the Stage is become a Noun Substantive, and
resolves to show it is able to stand by itself.

PROLOGUE. By a GENTLEMAN. Spoken by Mr. WILKS.
OUR Female Author trembling stands within,
Her Fear arises from another's Sin;
One of her Sex has so abused the Town,
That on her Score she dreads your angry Frown:
Though I dare say, poor Soul, she never writ
Lampoon, or Satyr on the Box or Pit;
A harmless hum'rous Play is her Extent of Wit.
Though Bickerstaff's vast Genius may engage,
And lash the Vice and Follies of the Age;
Why should tender Delia tax the Nation?
Stickle, and make a Noise for Reformation,
Who always gave a Loose, her self, to Inclination.
Scandal and Satyr's thrown aside to Day,
And Humor the sole Business of our Play.
Beaux may dress on to catch the Ladies Hearts,
And good Assurance pass for mighty Parts:
The Citts may bring their Spouses without Fear,
We show no Wife that is poaching for an Heir,
Nor teach the Use of fine Gause Handkercheir.
Cowards may huff, and talk of mighty Wonders,
And Jilts set up -- for Twenty thousand Pounders.
Our Author, even though she knows full well,
Is so Good-natured, she forbears to tell
What Colonels, lately, have found out the Knack
To Muster Madam, still, by Ned, or Jack,
To keep their Pleasures up; a Frugal way,
They give her -- Subaltern's Subsistence for her Pay.
In short, what ever your Darling Vices are,
They pass untouched in this Night's Bill of Fare.
But if all this cannot your good Nature wake,
Though here and there, a Scene should fail to take,
Yet spare her for the Busie-Body's sake.
EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD. Written by Mr. Cibber. A Porter delivers a
Letter just as she is going to speak.
What Is this? a Billet-Deaux? from Hands unknown?
It Is new to send it thus before all the Town:
But since the poor Man's Passion's so agog,
I Will read it out by way of Epilogue.
Reads, Madam,
Permit a Wretch to let you know,
That he is no more in Statu Quo.
My Ruin from this Night commences,
Unless your Smiles refund my Senses;
For with one Thrust of Cupid's Dart,
You Have whipped your Slave quite through the Heart:
Therefore, I beg you, cast your Eye
Over Boxes, Pit and Gallery,
In Pity of my Pains and Doubt,
And try if you can find me out.

Poor Soul! He seems indeed in dismal Plight;
Let Us see! it cannot be, sure! from the upper Flight;
No, no -- that is plain -- for -- None of them can Write:
Nor can I think it from the Middle fell;
For I Am afraid -- as few of them can Spell:
Beside, their Haggling Passions never gain,
Beyond the Passage-walking Nymphs of Drury Lane:
And then the Pit's more stocked with Rakes and Rovers,
Than any of these senseless, whining Lovers.
The Backs of the Boxes too seem mostly lined
With Souls, whose Passion's to themselves confined.
I^ s^ort, I cannot perceive, amongst all you Sparks,
The Wretch distinguished, by these bloody Marks.
But since the Town has heard your kind Commands, Sir,
The Town shall even be Witness of my Answer.
First then, Beware you prove no Spark in Red,
With empty Purse, and Regimental Head;
That thinks no Woman can refuse t'engage in it,
While Love's advanced with offered Bills on Agent;
That swears he will settle from his Joy's commencing,
And make the Babe, the Day he is Born, an Ensign.
Nor could I bear a Titl'd Beau, that steals
From fasting Spouse her Matrimonial Meals;
That Modish sends next Morn to her Apartment,
A Civil How-deye -- far alas! from the Heart meant:
Then Powdered for the ensuing Day's Delights,
Bows through his Crowd of Duns, and drives to White's.
Nor could I like the Wretch, that all Night plays,
And only takes his Rest on Winning Days;
That sets up from a lucky Hit, his Rattler
Then Is traced from his Orig'nal -- in the Tattler.
To tell you all that are my fixed Aversion,
Would tire the Tongue of Malice, or Aspersion.
But if I find amongst All One generous Heart,
That Deaf to Stories takes this Stage's Part;
That thinks that Purse deserves to keep the Plays,
Whose Fortune's bound for the Support of Opera's;
That thinks our Constitution here is justly fixed,
And now no more with Lawyers Brawls perplexed.
He, I declare, shall my whole Heart receive;
And (what is more strange) I Will love him while I live.
Drammatis Personae.
Men.
Sir Jeffry Constant, Mr. Bowman. Father to Captain Constant. Captain Constant,
Mr. Mills. In Love with Belinda. Lovely, Mr. Husband. Friend to Captain
Constant. Faithful, Mr. Wilks. A Gentleman of Fortune in Love with Laura. Sir
David Watchum, Mr. Johnson. Guardian to Laura. Trusty, Mr. Estcourt. Steward to
Sir Jeffry. Number, Mr. Dogget. A Country Squire in Love with Belinda. Slouch, Mr.
Cross. Servant to Number. Clinch, Mr. Pinkeman. Servant to Captain Constant.
Roger, Mr. Bullock. Farmer to Sir Jeffry. Manage, Mr. Cibber. Servant to
Faithful. Coachman, Mr. Harris. Sam -- Another Servant.
Women.
Belinda, Mrs. Oldfield. Supposed Daughter to Trusty. Laura, Mrs. Cross. An
Heiress in Love with Faithful. Maria, Mrs. Porter. A Gentlewoman of Fortune.
Dorothy, Mrs. Saunders. Belinda 's Maid. Lucy, Mrs. Bicknell. Laura 's Maid.
SCENE, the Minster-yard in Peterborough. The Hour Six in the Morning.

ACT I.
SCENE I. The Minster-yard in Peterborough.
Enter Captain Constant and Clinch in Mourning, with Riding Habit over it.
Capt. CLinch! Where are you Sirrah? Why don't you come along?


Clin. Ah! Pox of this riding Post, -- Look ye, Captain; if you have threescore
Miles farther to go, I am your most humble Servant.


Capt. No, Sirrah, I am at my Journey's end -- This Town of Peterborough is the
bound of all my Wishes.


Clin. Say you so, Sir! Pray be pleased to make it mine too.


Capt. Why! what is your wish?


Clin. Why, with submission, Sir, to know the reason of your Expedition, and
gravity of Habit: Have you a mind to set up the Business of an Undertaker here
in the Country?


Constable. No, Clinch, my business is with the Living, not with the Dead, I Will
assure you.


Clin. Then cannot I for my blood imagine why you are thus dressed; your Father,
nay your whole Family are well; not so much as a Nephew, or second Cousin dead;
nay, nor no fear of Peace. -- -- Then why the Devil are we in black? You laugh
-- Can these Clothes cause Joy, without the Perquisite that belongs to it: It Is
a mournful Equipage, and shocks my Soul, I am sure.


Constable. Perquisite! Why what Perquisite does Mourning bring with it to cause
Joy? ha!


Clin. Oh, Sir, several -- As when a Wife buries her Husband, she has Sorrow in
one hand, and Joy in the other; a short Widowhood cures such a Grief -- Or a rich
Heir at the last Gasp of his Parent, when there is a Years Rent in the
Steward's hands -- But, Sir, to the point; either let me into the Secret, or
discharge me.


Constable. Ha, ha, ha; Why then if I must tell thee; this Habit, if Fortune
favors me, will be worth to me two thousand Pounds.


Clin. Say you so, Sir; and pray how much will it be worth to me? For I am
dressed like you -- If I have not the same Privileges, why should I be confined
to the same Garb?


Constable. Oh! you shall have your part, Clinch, never fear.


Clin. Ay, Sir, but there are some parts I don't care for -- -- I hope you have
no design to rob upon the Highway.


Constable. Rascal!


Clin. Nay, ben't angry Sir; if there should be Peace, it is what many an honest
Gentleman must come to. I have no aversion for the Name; but I have for the
Punishment -- I Will not strike a stroke -- therefore what good can I do you?


Constable. Ha, ha, ha, I shall have more occasion for your Eyes, than your Arm --
You can weep, Sirrah, cannot you?


Clin. Ay, Sir, I shall weep, that is certain, to see you come to the Gallows --


Constable. Ye Dog you, I tell you there is no danger.


Clin. No danger -- Why then I shall weep for Joy, Sir -- -- but how, Sir, how;
must I roar, or shed Tears?


Constable. So you do but counterfeit well, no matter which.


Clin. Ah, let me alone for counterfeiting, I defy a Woman to outdo me in
that -- Look ye Sir, you shall hear -- -- hem, hem. Roars out.


Constable. Very well -- be sure when I weep --


Clin. I Will make terrible Faces -- What think you; Sir, Is not my Pipe very
musical for weeping?


Constable. Oh! Excellent.


Clin. But what does this signify! Where lies the Mystery?


Constable. Well then -- Since you must know it; You are not insensible how my
Father has treated me, ever since I refused to marry Mrs. Homebred, whose
Manners suited with her Name, and her Face was courser than either; and because
I drew a Bill upon him for fifty Pounds last Campaign, he threatens to
disinherit me; nay, and swears, that if for the future I don't make it appear I
live upon half my Pay, He Will make my Sergeant his Heir, who was once his
Footman. In short, I can bear his ill usage no longer.


Clin. Ah! Sir, had you married that Lady with twenty thousand Pounds, you need
not have drawn upon him for fifty.


Constable. If she had twenty times as much, I should refuse her for Belinda's sake.


Clin. But Sir Jeffrey resolves against that Match -- You must not marry his
Steward's Daughter.


Constable. I hope to prove you a Liar, Sir; and by this Dress to carry my design;
which is to persuade Trusty, that my Father dyed of an Apoplexy, by which means
he must account with me for the half Years Rent, he sent the old Gentleman word
was ready for him.


Constable. Two thousand Pound, Clinch -- This Letter I surpised by an Accident;
it is from my Father to him. Reads.


Mr. Trusty,
The several Sums which you have returned me without any Receipt, amounts to
eight hundred Pounds, there remains behind two thousand two hundred Pounds,
which you tell me is ready for me; don't give your self any trouble about
remitting that, for I design to be down my self in a Fortnight; and then the
Leases which you mentioned, shall be renewed. You need write no more, till you
see

Your real Friend Jeffrey Constant.


Clin. Excellent, Sir! Why here may be a pretty Penny toward, if the Devil
don't cross it. But, Sir, if my old Master should take a Maggot, and write to
Trusty, to return his Money after all -- His Letter and our Story would have
small connection; we should be obliged to alter our Note. I would advise you to
take the old Steward to the Tavern, and stay as little in his House as you can,
for fear of discovery: Besides, Sir, a Glass of Wine and a Fowl, makes business
go on cheerfully, Sir.


Constable. Cheerfully, Sirrah! -- You don't consider that it is not my business to
be cheerful -- I admire Faithful stays so long.


Clin. Perhaps he cannot find Mr. Lovely, Sir.


Constable. I directed him to the Coffee-house, where he seldom fails to be at this
time of the Morning.


Clin. Poor Gentleman! I warrant he is ruminating upon his Misfortunes. Well!
it is sometimes a Blessing to want Money -- -- You 'scap'd the Highway-men, Sir!


Constable. What am I the better for that, Sirrah? My Pockets are as empty as my
Friends, who fell into their Hands: But here comes my Fellow Traveller -- and
Lovely with him; He has found him at last -- Dear Lovely, how is it?


Enter Lovely, Faithful, and Manage, in Riding habit. Lov. Captain Constant!
Welcome! Who expected to see you here? Why did ^^t you send me word of your
coming?


Clin. He hardly knew it himself two hours before he got on Horseback, Sir;
nay, I much question if he knows it yet.


Constable. My Journey indeed was something Precipitate.


Clin. Ay, Sir, don't you see we are in Mourning?


Lov. Mr. Faithful has informed me of every Particular; and I wish I could
really give thee Joy of six thousand a Year, Boy.


Clin. At the rate of half a Years Rent you may -- If Fortune proves not an
errand Jilt indeed, Sir.


Lov. Come Gentlemen; What think you of my House? I Will get something for
Breakfast, whilst you change your Linen.


Constable. It Is near Six -- I have a mind to see if Belinda comes to Church this
Morning.


Lov. She seldom fails --


Faith. Prithee, Lovely; Can you inform me, if a young Lady that lives at Sir
David Watchum's will be here too?


Lov. Mrs. Laura Wealthy, Your Mistress you mean.


Faith. The same.


Lov. We have heard of the Lady; but I believe no body in Peterborough has seen
her, except his own Servants.


Constable. What kind of a temper is the old Fellow of?


Lov. The most peevish, splenetick, mistrustful, ill-natured Wretch in the
whole County: He comes to the Coffee-house every Morning in an old rusty
Chariot for haste, the longest Journey he takes in the Year: He seldom comes to
Church; nay, since that Lady came he has not once been seen there; we fancy he
dares not stay two hours from home, for fear she should be stolen away.


Man. Ah! Sir, this account is most uncomfortable in our Affairs --


Faith. It gives me more Chagrin, than the Rogues did, when they stripped me of
my Money this Morning -- Which way shall I give Laura notice of my being in
Town?


Constable. Have Courage, Faithful, I warrant we prosper.


Lov. Nothing like a good Heart; you shall not want a small Sum of Money, Sir.


Faith. I thank you, Sir.


Constable. I Will be as diligent in thy Affairs, as in my own -- if any lucky
Opportunity offers, I Will be ready to serve thee.


Lov. I Will be the same to both.


Constable. I know it; and when I am able; as I hope if my design succeeds, thou
shal't meet returns in me.


Faith. I am obliged to both -- But who have we here?


Several People cross the Stage to Church. Lov. Here comes Belinda, and with
her my Tyrant Maria.


Faith. Well, Gentlemen; you will best entertain your Mistresses alone; I Will back
to the Coffee-house, and over a Dish of Tea think what Course to steer --


Constable. Mind if the Courant be there, wherein I got my Father's Death inserted,
the better to favor my Plot.


Faith. I will, Captain, and be sure to confirm the News. --


Exit. Faith* and Manage, Lov. We'll call of you there presently --


The Bell rings. Constable. But is Maria obdurate still Lovely?


Lov. Not in reality, Constant -- But she has so much of the Woman in her, to
keep up her Rule till the last.


Enter Belinda and Maria. Constable. Ladies, good morrow! The sound of the Saint's
Bell brings Angels abroad. Salutes 'em.


Bell. Constant! and in Mourning! Pray who is dead?


Constable. One for whom I ought to grieve, did it not smooth a Passage to
Belinda's Arms, through the Hearts of our inexorable Parents.


Bell. Your Father! Sir.


Clin. The same, Madam! He Is as dead as an Herring, I promise you --


Mar. Now don't I know, whether I had best say I Am sorry for your Loss, or wish
you much Joy of your Gain.


Clin. I dare swear, Madam, he cannot tell you yet.


Constable. Peace, Blockhead.


Mar. Mr. Lovely, are you for Prayers?


Constable. You are the Shrine he kneels to, Madam; if you will vouchsafe to hear
him, he can pray most devoutly.


Mar. And dissemble most fervently --


Lov. No faith, Madam, that Quality does not belong to us -- that is the Women's
Prerogative.


Bell. And do you never encroach upon our Privileges, sweet Sir?


Lov. Yes, yes faith; I have encroach'd upon some of the Sexes Privileges in my
time, I must own. Curiosity -- Madam, seldom leads us to put on Masking Habits;
but a Lady cannot dress without 'em; Dissimulation is as necessary as her
Patches.


Bell. Ay! How do you prove that?


Lov. Why thus: When you would gain a Man you like, you appear what you are not
-- We believe you Angels, but don't always find you so.


Mar. We always find you Angels, but of the fallen kind.


Constable. It Is impossible to be otherwise, whilst Beauty keeps her Court below,
you charm our Eyes, and all our Senses wait you.


Lov. Pride and Vanity predominate in your Sex, and like Sentinels relieve one
another; Pride has made a Lady swear she has Hated such a Man, though she was
dying for the Sight of him -- And Vanity made her Caress a Fop, that at the
same time she wished at the Devil.


Mar. And are not you even with us? Will not you sigh, ogle, cringe, flatter,
swear, kneel, nay give it under your hand, you Love to desperation; but let the
poor mistaken Nymph once yield, and you would give Bond and Judgment to that Old
Gentleman you named but now, in two Days to take her off your hands.


Constable. I hope you don't include the whole Sex, Madam.


Lov. That she does not, I Am sure; for she knows I never swore any thing to
her, but what I am ready to make good -- And if she be not the most
unconscionable Woman living, she will own I love her heartily.


Constable. That I dare witness for thee, Lovely.


Bell. Ay! Why, what Proofs has he given?


Lov. Proofs! Why I talk of her all Day -- And dream, of her all Night -- --
When she is absent, sigh for her, and am transported when I see her. If these be
not proofs of Love, let the Parson say Grace and I Will give her better.


Bell. All this may be done without one Grain of Love, may it not Captain?


Constable. Not when you are the Object, Madam; and you are too well acquainted
with my Heart, to ask that Question out of scruple, I Am certain.


Mar. These are no Proofs; you must grow Lean and Meagre -- Eat little, and
Sleep less -- Write fifty Letters in a Day, and burn them all again -- Then
start up, and draw your Sword; hold it to your Breast; then throw it away again
-- Then take your Pen and write your last Farewell -- Dispatch it to your
Mistress -- Then take a Turn by some melancholy purling Stream, with Hat pulled
over your Eyes, in deep Contemplation resolve through what Door to let in Death,
if the Messenger return without Success -- When I see you do this, I Will write
Lover upon your Brow.


Lov. When I do, you shall write Fool upon my Forehead.

Hang this whining way of Wooing,
Loving was designed a Sport, etc. Sings.

Constable. Come, come Madam, a Truce; you know he loves you.


Lov. As well as I know she loves me; we were born for one another, Child; no
Man in the Kingdom shall have thee, but my self. -- Then if you will eat Chalk,
and die of the Pip, I cannot help it. Ha, ha, ha.


Mar. Be not so positive Lovely. -- One Sect of Philosophers tells you, you
ought to doubt of every thing.


Lov. But the Topic was not a Woman in that Assertion; but if it were, Women
in their Days were no more like Women in ours, than a Clodhopper is to a
Captain of Foot. Our Ladies are like two Negatives, to be understood in the
Affimative, ha, ha. Madam, does not my Friend here look like one of those
Lovers you described? Faith, I think a Woman cannot wish a simpler Figure --
Now has he a thousand Things to say to Belinda alone.


Constable. You guess right, Lovely -- I am going to your Father's, Madam, to
settle our Accounts; I hope you will return as soon as Prayers are over.


Bell. Directly --


Constable. Oh Belinda!
Now is the Crisis of our Good or Ill;
Turn for me, Fate, or let thy Wheel stand still.

Lov. You Will remember us in your Prayers, Ladies -- --


Mar. Amongst Jews, Turks and Infidels -- Exit.


Lov. Come, now for my House -- We'll call on Faithful.


Constable. Lead on -- I Will change my Linen and to Trusty's immediately -- But hold
-- Clinch, hark ye.


Clin. Sir --


Constable. I had no Opportunity to inform Belinda of my Project; you must away to
Trusty's and let her Maid into the Secret, I would not impose upon her -- The
Man that truly Loves, cannot deceive the Object of his Vows.

He never felt the Force of Cupid's Dart,
Who lets his Tongue run counter to his Heart;
Or ever can deserve the Charming Maid,
That is by Falsehood to his Arms betrayed.
For mutual Passions in all States agree,
And lines the Yoke with true Felicity.
She shall my Project with my Love compare.
If she approves it, I Am indeed an Heir.

Clin. Or at the worst, we are but as we were.


Enter 'Squire Number, and his Man Slouch. Number. What think you Slouch! Had we best
go into the Minster, or tarry here whilst Mrs. Belinda comes out; for her Maid
says she is here: Lord, Lord, how Religious Folk are in this Town! Why they rise
as early to Church here, as our Parson's Wife does to Milking, I think -- Well,
but what had we best to do, ha?


Slou. Why go in, I think -- Or tarry here; which you will, Master.


Number. Nay, nay mun, I don't know which is best, that makes me ask you; for I
know, Slouch, you understand Breeding and Haviours; for you have been at London
with fat Bullocks, and so was never I; but I resolve to go next time, ha!
Slouch!


Slou. Ay Master; but an you Marry this same Mrs. Belinda, as sure as your Name
is 'Squire Number, she will not let you budge a Step.


Number, Marry her! Nay, nay, I shall Marry her, that is sure enough, I think; and
yet I Will see London for all that -- Why, what do thou think I Will be tied to a
Wife's Tail all Days of my Life? No, no; the Family of the Nums will not be
Wife-rid, Slouch -- But hark ye, an her Father should chop up the Wedding to
Day, before my New Clothes are made; for he likes me woundily mun.


Slou. Od well thought on Master! don't go into the Church, I say; who knows
but when the Parson has done his Prayers, but he may begin your Plagues, Master
ha!


Number. Od that is smart now -- Ha, ha, hush, hush, Slouch, they are here -- Now
show your Manners --


Enter Trusty, Belinda and Maria. Several others cross the Stage as from
Church. True. I have met a Report in the Church, that the News says Sir Jeffry
Constant is Dead; if it be true, there is a better Husband for Belinda than this
Fool -- Od! I Will for London as soon as I have Dined; my Heart aches; pray Heaven
he settled his Affairs before he died: I have no Receipt for the Money I paid
him.


Number. Sir, your Servant; Father has sent me again to see Mrs. Belinda, and bid
me tell you, That he would come over himself, I think, next Week, an do what
you would have him do, I think -- And so, I suppose, we are agreed, forsooth --
-- Only I must desire you to stay till my New Clothes are made. Father bought
the Cloth last Sturbich Fair; and the Tailor comes to Morrow, don't he Slouch?


Slou. Ay, and his Man Staytape too; an he works like a Dragon -- My Master
will soon be fit, forsooth.


Mar. Fit quotha! for what? ha, ha.


Number. For what! nay, nay, let me alone for that, an I don't show her for what,
when I have her once, I Will be flayed.


Bell. Heaven defend me from the Trial.


True. Sir, since I saw you last, I have considered my Daughter is no proper
Match for you; and therefore I desire you to return with all possible Speed,
and acquaint your Father, that he may not undertake an unnecessary Journey.


Bell. Ten thousand Blessings on that Voice.


Number. High day: What Is the matter now! Why you don't pretend to make a Fool of
me, do ye?


Mar. No, thou art made to his hands -- ha, ha, ha --


Number. Who speaks to you Mistress, I was not made for you I Am sure.


Mar. No, I thank my Stars!


Number. I Will not be choused at this rate, mun: Did you not tell me, if my Father
would settle so, and so, that I should have her -- And now you come with a
Consider -- when it has cost me the Lord knows what in Journeys, as Slouch can
testify.


Slou. Yes, with a safe Conscience, I can swear it has cost my Master -- and
me, above Thirty Shillings upon you.


Bell. What did you Club with your Master then, Mr. Slouch?


Slou. Now and then, for a Flagon of Ale, an it please you.


Bell. Oh you shall be no Loser, Friend -- There Is something to defray your
Expenses -- gives him Money.


Slou. Thank you kindly, Forsooth -- Od, this it is to be Sharp -- Now would I
give Sixpence to know if this be a good Guinea, or a Counter -- aside.


True. As to your Charges, Mr. Number -- If you please to give me a Bill, they
shall be discharged -- But for my Daughter, I have designed her otherways.


Number. A Bill! I scorn your Words; I Am as well able, de you see, to spend Thirty
Shillings as you, for ought I know; yet I Am not angry neither; only what makes
me mad, is, that you should think me such a Fool to be fob'd off I know not how
-- Why mun, all our Town knows that I Am to have her, and they have promised me
the Bells should Ring a whole Day -- And now you would have me go home with the
Tale of a Tub, like a Dog that has lost his Ears -- What did you come bouncing
to our House for! and say I should have your Daughter -- I did not come after
her, nor you neither mun.


True. What I said I thought at that time, Sir; but no Man can blame me for
changing my Mind to Advantage in disposing of my Child -- I have a better
Prospect both in Birth and Estate, than you, or your Father can offer.
Therefore I say without any Passion, I desire you would give your self no farther
Trouble about this matter, Mr. Number.


Bell. Birth, and Estate! What means my Father? how I tremble!


Mar. He has certainly heard of Sir Jeffry's Death, and designs to make thee
Happy.


Bell. Impossible! He was in the Minster before us.


Number. Birth, and Estate! Slouch, come hither Sirrah! han't my Father a Thousand
a Year?


Slou. Yes that he has, an more too: He has Ten hundred, I Will swear it.


Number. I believe he has, as you say, Slouch.


Om. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Number. An I am all the Children he has, am I not, Slouch?


Slou. Ay, all that he dares own, Sir.


Number. Look ye there now! An I Will hold you a Bottle of Cider that I Am as well
born as he; my Father's Churchwarden and Captain of the Militia, as it is known
very well; and I Am called the Young Captain, so I am.


Slou. Aye, that every Body knows.


True. Sir, I have nothing to say to that, and am your humble Servant -- Come
Belinda.


Bell. I wish you a good Journey, Sir.


Mar. Captain, your Servant. Exit.


Number. A murrain take your Fleer -- --


Slou. You may go to London now, Sir.


Number. Go to London, go to the Devil! 'Slife I Will follow them mun, mehap he does
but joke; and Father will break my Head, because I did not understand a Joke --
Therefore come along, Slouch -- Exit.


The End of the First Act.
ACT. II.
SCENE, Sir David Watchum's House.
Enter Sir David into a Garden before the Door. Sir Dav. I Have surveyed my
House round and round to Night, from Door to Door, and Gate to Gate -- -- He
that would keep a handsome Woman of Twenty thousand Pound, must learn the
Gamester's Art, to live without Sleep -- Methought, from my Garret Window, I
saw a Man sauntring about my Ground, and seemed to pry too narrowly into my
House -- It may be a Rogue -- I would not lose Mrs. Laura; for, if possible,
she shall fill no Arms but mine. I have kept her from the sight of Man these
twelve Months; and now I design to offer her Liberty, provided she will consent
to be my Wife; if she refuses, I Will have the Lights quite stopped up, and she
shall not so much as see the Sun -- Ha! who is here! Ho, it is Lucy, her Maid; I
wish I could make this Jade of my Interest -- What the Vengeance does she do up
so early?


Enter Lucy. Lu. This old Fellow is certainly the Devil -- One can go no where,
but one is sure to meet him.


Sir Dav. What makes you here, ha Mistress? -- Now am I afraid of venturing to
the Coffee-House, though my Coach is at the Door.


Lu. Too much Sleep is unwholesome, you know Sir, by your own Rule; so hearing
the Door open, I came down to breath the Morning Air.


Sir Dav. That you might have done at your Window; no, no, you have some Plot
in hand now I warrant! Where Is your Mistress?


Lu. In her Chamber. Where should she be?


Sir Dav. In her Bed would be a fitter Place -- Women of Virtue, that have no
Intrigues, are fast asleep in their Beds at this time a day


Lucy. A sleep! That Is impossible in this House -- Pray how can any body s^eep,
as long as you are awake; are you not rambling all Night; up Stairs, down
Stairs, locking one Door, and opening another; heming, coughing, spitting,
sneezing, yawning, stamping, mutt'ring -- One no sooner shuts ones Eyes -- but
slap goes a Door, clatter goes a Key -- down tumbles a Stool, bow wow goes the
Dog -- This is the constant Music you make, Sir: 'Slife, if one were a Slave
in Turkey, one should sometimes rest in quiet.


Sir Dav. Good lack, good lack, all this I get for my care -- -- Why all this
is for your Lady's good, Lucy.


Lucy. Nay, if you call this Good! Then pray Sir employ your Study for the
future, to do her ill Offices; for nothing can be more disagreeable, than your
present treatment both to my Lady and me.


Sir Dav. Say you so! What, you don't like your way of living then? ha.


Lucy. Not at all I assure you, Sir -- Living! do you call it -- We would have
Liberty, Sir.


Sir Dav. You shall have Liberty, if your Lady is not her own Enemy -- -- and
for your part, if you please, you may serve your self, and her, by being
serviceable to me.


Lucy. Which way, pray Sir? For there is not many things I would refuse to
procure my Lady, her dear, dear Liberty; pray inform me, I Am impatient to know
it.


Sir Dav. Why thus -- I have a very Cordial Affection for Mrs. Laura, out of
pure Consideration of her youth -- I would not have a young Woman fall into ill
hands at first; therefore I design to marry her my self.


Lucy. Heaven forbid! that would be falling into ill hands indeed. Aside.


Sir Dav. Now I would have you break this matter to her; and second it with all
the force of Argument you are capable of -- When we are married, you shall both
take what Liberty you please.


Lucy. Why sure a Person of your experienced Years, would not be guilty of such
a Folly.


Sir Dav. What do you call Folly? I had no Ch^ldren by my last Wife, and I
would willingly have an Heir to keep up my Name -- and do you call this Folly?


Lucy. Heirs! Why do you hope for an Heir of your own getting, Sir?


Sir Dav. Why not, pray?


Lucy. What, upon such a fine Woman as she is -- In my Conscience, were I in
your place, I should dread being the errantest, you know what, in Christendom.


Sir Dav. Oh Mrs. Pert! that is not your business, I shall dread no such thing
-- All I desire of you, is to tell her, my Estate, Prudence, Wisdom and
Temperance, out-weighs Youth, Folly, Titles, and Debauchery.


Lucy. Yes, for one that is in Love with her Grave. Certainly, Sir, you are not
in your right Senses -- Why your Request is so abominable, so vile, so
ridiculous, and so unjust; that I would not be concerned in it for a thousand
Pounds -- Indeed you have pitched upon the wrong Person, Sir.


Sir. Dav. Say you so! Good lack -- So I have pitched upon the wrong Person you
say! ha! If I had desired you to say your Prayers, I Will be hanged, if I had not
pitched upon the wrong Person too, Gossip prate apace -- but I Will hamper ye, I
warrant you; I Will cross your Designs, till I have finished my own -- go, get
out of my sight.


Lucy. Well, surely this Life will not last always. Exit.


Enter Manage. Man. My Master stays at the Coffee-house, and has sent me to
survey this Dome, and try to give Mrs. Laura's Maid notice of his Arrival; but
how far I may be serviceable to him, I know not -- Ha! who have we yonder? The
old Guardian himself I doubt -- So, he has found me -- What the duce must I
pretend now?


Sir Dav. What do you want Friend, ha?


Man. Good morrow, Sir.


Sir Dav. Well, Good morrow; what more?


Man. I hope you are well, Sir.


Sir Dav. Yes, thank Heaven, Sir! what then?


Man. Why then I am very glad of it, Sir.


Sir Dav. You are very glad of it, Sir! Why what a Pox is my Health to you? Who
are you? What are you? And from whence come you, ha Sir?


Man. Faith, Sir, your Questions are so copious, that they require a
considerable Study to answer: let me recollect a little -- I have gone through
so many Trades, that without my Diary (which I have not about me at present) I
cannot remember half of them; nor indeed can I tell how to style my self
otherwise than an universal Man -- The World is my Country; and for want of an
Estate, I live by my Wits --


Sir Dav. A Rogue, I warrant him. Aside.


Man. Sometimes an honest Man, sometimes a Knave; just as occasions fall out.


Sir Dav. Ay! and you oftener happen to be a Knave, than an honest Man, I doubt,
Friend.


Man. Why look ye, Sir, that is just as I abound, or want Money; for my present
Profession is Physic -- Now when my Pockets are full, I cure a Patient in
three Days -- -- when they are empty, I keep him three Months.


Sir Dav. An excellent Principle truly -- But pray what is your business at my
House? -- We are all in a good state of health at present.


Man. Nay no very great business, only I looked in, as I passed by, Sir, that is
all.


Sir Dav. Now in my Opinion you have another Reason; for you have the Aspect of
one of those Sparks that comes in at a Window, or down a Chimney at two in the
Morning --


Man. Have a care what you say, Sir, I Am known very well not far off.


Sir Dav. Ay, too well perhaps! Zounds, Sir, what business have you here, speak.


Man. A queer old Duke this -- Why, Sir, if you must know, I am in search of
some Simples which I have occasion for --


Sir Dav. Simples!


Man. Yes, Sir.


Sir Dav. Simples! A very simple Excuse, says --


Man. Sir, I have many Years practiced Chemistry, and there is scarce any
Disease incident to Humanity, but I have cured; Stone, Gravel, Spleen, Vapors,
fits of the Mother, and so forth --


Sir Dav. Rather Fits of the Father, I fancy.


Man. I had attained to such perfections in the Chemical Art, that I wanted but
one degree of heat to reach the Philosopher's Stone.


Sir Dav. That Habit methinks does not answer this mighty Skill.


Man. Oh! Sir, Skill does not lie in Clothes -- And the most ingenuous, are not
always the most fortunate -- I have had many Crosses in my time -- Which has
reduced me much below my Birth, I assure you -- I serve an Officer at present,
in the Quality of a Valet de Chamber, whose Life I saved at the Battle of
Audenard, when he was shot through with a Cannon Ball.


Sir Dav. How! shot through with a Cannon Ball?


Man. Yes, Sir; what, do you wonder at that? Why, Sir, I have a Water, that if
your Head were off, I Would but wash it with that, and clap it upon your Shoulders
again; and you should grow as perfectly well in half an hour, as ever you was
in your Life; I have made the Experiment upon Thousands; my Master's Brother
was one of them --


Sir Dav. If you were in Petticoats, I should take you for the Kentish Miracle
-- What is this Officer's Name, Friend, that you serve?


Man. Captain Bounce, Sir.


Sir Dav. Bounce! I fancy you are related to him, are you not, Friend?


Man. No, Sir, not at all; indeed he uses me more like a Relation, than a
Servant, for the reason before mentioned.


Sir Dav. Ha! And where is he, pray?


Man. At the Talbot, Sir; if you please I Will fetch him hither?


Sir Dav. By no means, Sir; but what business have you here in Peterborough?


Man. We have been raising Recruits, Sir -- A Pox of this old Dog; how many
impertinent Questions does he ask -- Here Is no hopes of seeing Lucy --


Sir Dav. Well, Sir, I desire you would look your Simples elsewhere; for I don't
like you, notwithstanding your fair Pretenses.


Man. Sir, I shall obey you -- But pray who does this House belong to?


Sir Dav. Why, this House belongs to -- its Master.


Man. Indeed, Sir -- -- Pray who is that Master? if I may be so bold to ask.


Sir Dav. Why that Master is -- a Man^ Friend.


Man. Really, Sir, your Answers are so concise and so ingenious, that it is
impossible to quit your Company -- -- We design for Cambridge to Night, pray
what time do you think we shall get in?


Sir Dav, The Town Clock will tell you, when you come there.


Man. Is it possible! -- I humbly thank you, Sir -- -- one thing more I would
gladly be resolved -- I have a Brother bound for Portugal; pray is the Wind
fair, Sir?


Sir Dav. What do you take me for, a Weather Cock, Sirrah? Hark ye, the Wind
will blow you no good, if you don't get about your business, remember that, and
so farewell. Exit.


Man. Very well -- -- this must be Sir David his own self -- -- 'Egad he has
all his Paces, it will be hard to bring matters about here; I Am just as wise as
I was when I came -- and have told fifty Lies to no purpose -- -- Ha! his Coach
at the Door, I Will watch whither he goes, I Am resolved --


Re-enter Sir David. Sir Dav. What, are you not gone yet, Sirrah? I Will have you
laid by the Heels, if you don't get off my ground this moment.


Man. Sir, I am going this moment -- A Pox of his Leathern Jaws -- Well, I Will
inform my Master what has passed, and leave him to think on what is to come --
Exit.


Sir Dav. So, he is gone -- I don't like the Countenance of this Fellow -- Sam
--


Enter Servant. Sam. Sir.


Sir Dav. Lock my Doors, do you hear; till I return from the Coffee-house, let no
body in or out --


Sam. I shall observe, Sir. Ex. severally.


SCENE Changes to the Coffee-house, Lovely, Constant, and Faithful.
Faith. I have confirmed the whole Town in the belief of thy Father's Death.


Constable. Then thou have done me Service -- Come, you will both go with me to
Trusty's --


Faith. No, I have a mind to stay here; to see if Sir David comes; this Morning
I will try to get acquainted with him; perhaps my being a Stranger, he may
invite me to Dinner.


Lov. Ha, ha, He would as soon give thee his Estate.


Enter Manage. Faith. Ha! Manage, what News? Have thou seen Lucy?


Man. No, Sir, but I have seen the Knight.


Faith. Well, and what have you discovered?


Man. That it was not worth your while to come Post from London, to return the
same way -- Ah Pox of the last Horse I rid; what a cursed Fall had I in
Stangate-hole -- -- don't you remember, Sir, how I lay over Head and Ears in
Mire; whilst the Gentlemen of the Pad disburthen'd you of a hundred Pounds?


Faith. Hang your unseasonable Memory, Sirrah; leave fooling, and tell me --
You see Sir David, did you speak to him?


Man. Yes, Sir, but he answered me with a damned sour Air; and I assure you it
will require Cannon to reduce his Citadel.


Faith, Love has taught me to surmount all Difficulties.


Man. But here the Knight will be immediately; for I heard him give Orders to
lock up the Doors, till he returned from the Coffee-house.


Lov. Ay, that is right Sir David! ha, ha.


Faith. Lock up the Doors! Ah poor Laura! how shall I give thee notice of my
being here --


Constable. I have a thought in my Head, if it could be put in practice -- --
Hark, I hear the Coach -- -- had here is no b^dy in the Room to discover the
Trick -- -- Let as pretend a Quarrel -- -- Draw, Faithful.


Faith. To what purpose?


Constable. You shall know instantly -- -- Lovely, do you seem to part us; he is
here -- -- Damn you Sir, you Lie. draw^. I have not lost, nor will I pay -- --


Faith. Take your Lie back, Sir, seem to fight.


Enter Sir David. Lov. Why Gentlemen, Gentlemen; what do you mean?


Faith. Damn you, Sir, you shall pay me --


Constable. There is the Money then, you have it -- -- pretend to be wounded with
that Thrust, Faithful. Aside to him.


Faith. I am wounded -- -- pray help to lead me home --


Lov. Oh Friend! what have you done?


Sir Dav. What Is here, Murder?


Constable. I hope the Wound's not mortal -- -- Curse on my unlucky Arm; how do
thou, Ned?


Sir Dav. Do quotha! If the Gentleman is wounded, I must secure you, Sir,


Constable. Secure me, Sir! Alas! Sir, I don't intend to fly; a Pox of all Wagers I
say.


Faith. Pray lead me to my Inn, for I feel my Spirits very faint.


Lov. Lead you! Alas, I doubt you cannot walk so far.


Constable. What, is there not a Chair or a Coach to be got?


Lov. Sir David has a Coach at the Door, if you could prevail with him to lend
it you a little.


Constable. Sir, pray oblige us with your Coach, it shall return immediately.


Sir Dav. With all my heart -- Goes to the Door, and speaks to his Coachman
aloud.

Tom, Here, carry this Gentleman home -- do you hear, and make haste back again,


Faith. Oh! Friend, I understand you now; my Soul dances with the bare Idea.


Constable. It has succeeded to my Wish -- Lovely, help l^^d him to the Coach.


Sir Dav. If there be any Danger, Mr. Lovely, take care to secure the Murderer.


Lov. Oh! They are intimate Friends, Sir David, he will not flinch, I know.


Sir Dav. Well, well, look you to that -- Ex. into the House.


Constable. Manage! Come you along with us, I have some Instructions for you.
Exeunt.


SCENE Changes to the out side of Trusty's House.
Enter Lovely, Constant, Clinch and Manage. Lov. He Will certainly get admittance
to his Mistress by this Stratagem; but if the Knight should find him there, how
will he come off?


Constable. Nay, let him look to that -- but Manage shall take Clinch's great Coat,
it is like a Livery -- Sweet Sir, can you condescend to wear a Livery an hour or
two?


Man. To serve my Master's Amor I will, Sir -- else I scorn a Livery --. I
must have that black Wig too.


Constable. Well, well! Here, Clinch, change, change with him. they change Clothes.


Clin. So, Sir! Now I am your Valet de Chamber.


Man. Well, Sir, what am I to do now?


Constable. Why, go watch about Sir David's Door, and as you see occasion, employ
your Wits.


Man. Very well, Sir, let me alone for that; your humble Servant, Gentlemen.
Exit.


Enter Dolly, out of the House. Dolly. Oh! Are you come Captain; I have told my
Mistress every particular -- please to walk in, Sir, I Will inform my Master you
are here. They go in.


The SCENE draws, and discovers them in a Room.
Lov. It Is an admirable Project, Captain, if you are not discovered; but your
Father will certainly know it in a little time.


Constable. If possible, I Will marry the Woman to Night.


Lov. I fear Sir Jeffrey will resent the Trick.


Constable. I hope to convince him the Trick was upon Trusty; for he may recover
the Money of him, if he pleases, and with me it may pass for his Daughter's
Portion; but rather than fail, I Will give the Steward my Bond, when it is
discovered, to refund the Money, when I become Master of my Father's Estate;
for without Belinda, nothing can make me Happy.


Clin. Ah, Sir, you will scarce find a Man in the Army of your Mind -- Prefer a
Woman to Money! Why Sir, Money is the very Hinge the whole World turns upon --
-- A Soldier, and not love Money! -- Money has power to alter all
Constitutions, and in spite of Custom, stamp what Form it pleases -- 'Twill
make an honest Man a Knave; nay, 'twill make a Knave an honest Man -- 'Twill
make a Coward Valiant -- an Old Woman Young -- -- a Young Woman a Saint -- -- a
Lawyer Just -- a Statesman Loyal -- -- and a Courtier keep his Word.


Lov. Ha, ha, Clinch is a Wit.


Clin. Faith, I always thought so by my Poverty.


Constable. Well hinted Clinch -- -- I Am in thy Debt -- --


gives him half a Guinea. Clin. Oh Sir, I Am yours in all respects -- Oh! this
dear Color!

What can there be that this dear Coin cannot buy?
For thee Men toil and sweat, swear, cheat and lie;
For thee does Friend his dearest Friend betray,
And Women give their very Souls away.
Join but Ambition to this glittering Evil,
And in an Instant Man is made a Devil.

Constable. Ha, ha. ha.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha.


Clin. Ad's heart, Sir, set your weeping Face in Order -- Here comes the
Steward --


Enter Trusty. True. Captain Constant, your Servant! you are welcome into the
Country. What, you are in want of Men; I warrant you are going to raise
Recruits.


Constable. Not at this time, Sir; it is a more unwelcome Accident that brought me
down. takes out his Handkerchief, and seems to weep.


Trust. Good lack! the News is really true then, Sir Jeffry is Dead.


Clin. Ay, poor Gentleman, he is laid low --


True. I confess I heard so, but I hoped it might be Report only; I did design
to have set out for London as soon as I had D^n'd -- My Heart aches -- Bless me!
What have I paid him without any Receipt -- I loved Sir Jeffry like a Brother;
truly I am very much troubled -- seems to weep.


Clin. Grief is very catching, I find; it makes me weep too -- Be comforted,
Sir to Constant. Fathers must go as well as Sons -- Why do you afflict your
self at this ^ate, Sir? Since Death is Death, who can help it?


Lov. Pray be comforted, Sir John -- to Constant.


True. Pray of what Distemper did he die?


Clin. Ah! duce on it! What was that hard Word? Now cannot I think on it, as I
hope to be Great --


Lov. Of an Apoplexy -- A Pox of the Doctors, for giving Death so many strange
Names. aside.


Clin. Right, Sir -- He died of Apoplexy, Sir.


True. Of an Apoplexy! Why then I doubt he died suddenly.


Constable. In a Moment's time, Sir, he was alive and dead --


Clin. Ay, without ever speaking one Word, Sir --


True. Roars out. Oh, oh, oh. Did he settle his Affairs in his Health? Did he
make any Will? --


Constable. Not any, Sir.


Clin. No, Sir: He has left all at sixes and sevens.


True. Oh, oh, oh -- faints.


Lov. Ha! Help, Clinch, I hope he is not Dead.


Clin. No, no; he breaths, thank Heaven; pray you look up, Sir.


Constable. Why are you thus concerned?


Lov. You really increase Sir John's Grief, Sir.


True. Oh what have I lost!


Constable. I know you have lost a Friend in my Father; but you shall find him
again in me.


True, Oh but he has left all things at fixe^ and se^^^s, Clinch says -- Did he
say nothing to you about me before he died?


Constable. Not a Syllable -- But I suppose your Concern proceeds from having paid
him M^ney without any thin^^ show for it under his hand.


True. Ay, Sir, there is my Misfortune -- Oh, oh.


Clin. It Is the Money, not the Man -- Let not that trouble you, Sir, my young
Master has been informed to a Farthing what it was -- Tell him, tell him, Sir,
your Father appeared, and let me alone to clinch it. aside to Constant.


True. Informed!


Constable. Yes Mr. Trusty; my Father could not rest till (...) had disclosed your
Affair.


Clin. Ah good honest Soul; seeing he was snatched away so suddenly he has
several times appeared.


True. How! appeared, say you?


Clin. Ask my Master else.


Constable. Most certain, Sir --


Clin. He haunted us six Days like the Devil; sometimes like a shag Dog --
Sometimes like a white Pidgeon -- At last he took his own Shape. Clinch, said
he, don't you know me? Then addressing himself to my Master; don't be afra^^,
said he, I come to tell you, that at several times I have ^^ceiv'd from Mr.
Trusty. --


True. Ah dear Ghost, dear Ghost; how much did he say^


Constable. Eight hundred Pound.


True. Right to a Penny, look ye there now, see what it is to deal with honest
Men; one loses nothing by them, though (...) their Graves.


Clin, Oh, the Dead, Sir, are always Generous; they value Money no more than
that -- snapping his Finger^.


True. Poor Gentleman, that he should take a Journey sic^ the other World upon
my account.


Clin. Ah, Sir, the Dead ride post upon the Winds -- He charged me to tell you,
for your Satisfaction, he wou^d come and give you an Acquittance himself.


True. By no means, I am content, let the Dead visit wh^ they will for me.


Constable. Oh fear not, Sir, he will not trouble you; but to out Business, Sir, what
you have paid I will discount.


True. And the rest of the Money is at your Service, and my Daughter too, Sir
John, if you have not lost the Remembrance of her.


Constable. To show you that I have not, Mr. Trusty, I assure you she will be the
welcomest Present of the two.


Lov. Thy Business is done, Constant.


True. Say you so, Sir John! Well, I Will fetch the Writings, and dispatch some
Affairs, and then I Will carry you to my Daughter -- But upon second Thoughts,
please to walk into my Study, it is more convenient.


Constable. With all my Heart, I Will follow you -- Exit Trusty.


Lov. Matters go as you could wish; you will be Married to Night, Captain.


Constable. I wish 'twere over; Egad I Would rather fight half a dozen Men, than
descend to this Rascally way of Lying, were there any help for i^, it is
beneath a Soldier --

A Soldier scorns the whining Lover's Art;
His Courage takes Possession of the Heart:
Disdains by Treachery to raise his Name,
But boldly owns the bright ambitious Flame,
And courts his Mistress as he courts his Fame.

End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, Trusty in his Study, with Constant, Lovely and Clinch. Papers and Money
upon the Table.
Trusty. THere, Sir John, there are in these Bags Two and twenty hundred Pound,
which, with the Eight hundred I remitted Sir Jeffry, is just Three thousand
Pound; if you please you may count it, it is most in Gold.


Constable. No, I Will take your Word f^r^t^ here, (...) to Drive the Carrier, he is
just now going to (...); Ord^^ him where to pay it in, do you heat?


Clin. Yes, Sir -- -- Exit with the Bags.


Lov. He is laden with it, ha, ha, ha. -- --


True. Poor Sir Jeffry, rest his Soul, did promise to have me Twenty Pound a
Year; for I have paid him Two hundred Pounds a Year these sixteen Years, for
that Land which is not worth an Hundred and fourscore.


Lov. Say you so, Mr. Trusty? Then you must perform your Father's Promise, Sir
John.


Constable. Ay, when he has paid me as much as he has my F^ther.


Lov. Come, shall I settle Matters between you? Advance Sir John a Hundred
Pounds; you know he has been kept short, and doubtless ^^s ^^casion for ready
Money, and he shall 'bate you Twenty Pound a Year.


True. Oh, that is all one, Mr. L^^^ly -- -- I cannot do that.


Constable. Nay, since Mr. Lovely has proposed it, if you will not do that --


True. Well, but Sir John, perhaps you will expect a large Fortune with my
Daughter; I cannot tell how to -- --


Constable. I ask you for none, Sir.


True. Why then there is the Hundred Pound; but you must signify at the bottom
of this Lease our Bargain.


Enter Roger, a Farmer. Constable. Give it me, I Will do it -- sits down to write.


Rog. Morrow Landlord, I have brought you a little Rent, and in froth it is but a
little neither; for we have had but sorr^ Crop of Barley, and the Crows, a
murrain take 'em, have eat up all my Beans, I think.


True. But you have a new Landlord, Roger. Old Sir Jeffry is dead, and there is
his Son.


Rog. Say you so, Master! Bless you, Sir, I did not know your Father, not I,
though I have paid him many a fair Pound -- Nor I dan't know you; but an you be
my Landlord, I Am an honest Man; and though I say it, pay my Rent (...) well as
any Body.


Constable. I don't doubt it, Friend -- I am sorry your Harvest has not proved so
good as you expected.


Rog. I hope, Master, for Luck's sake now, you will 'bate me something of my Rent.


Constable. I cannot do that, Roger -- For the Taxes take away all my Money --


Rog. Nay, as you say, Master, these Taxes are sad things, that is the Truth
on it -- Od they find out strange ways; they had got a Trick here once to make
one pay for one's Head -- Mercy on us, I was afraid they would make one pay for
one's Tail too -- My Neighbor What de call um -- says it cost him the Lord
knows what in Buryings and Christnings -- Adod it is a sore Thing, a Man must
pay for Lying with his own Wife.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha, 'twas a Grievance indeed; but Taxes cannot be helped, so long
as the Wars continue.


Rog. Wars! Why what need there be any Wars? Cannot People live peaceably and
quietly among themselves -- If they will squable, and play the Rogue, let 'em
go to Law,; cannot they set the Lawyers to work; I warrant they will quickly make
them as quiet as Lambs.


Constable. Ha, ha, ha; but we are at Wars with a Prince that cares for no Laws but
his own, nay he breaks them too, when it is his Interest --


Rog. Why then Mercy upon us, I say -- Well an how! may one wish you much Joy?
Ha, you got a Wife, Landlord? By the Mess you are a pretty Man --


Constable. I Am not so happy yet, Roger.


Rog. Say you so? Good lack, I Am sorry for it -- Why now here is Master Trusty
has a good* sweatly looked* Gentlewoman to his Daughter -- What think you of
her, Landlord? -- Od, and all Parties were agreed, she would make a rare Bedfellow,
I Am persuaded.


Lov. I believe Sir John is of your mind; have you any Interest with her,
Father?


Rog. Not I, in troth, Master Lovely -- but the Gentlewoman is of a sweet
temper.


Lov. Do you think you could persuade her to run away with him?


Rog. Would I could, Sir -- for a pretty Woman i^ the best Luggage in the World
-- for when a Man in w^^ry, he may rest upon it; ha, ha.


Constable. You are waggish, Roger.


Trusty. Yes, yes, Roger will joke; there is your Acquittance, if Sir John
please to sign it --


Constable. It Is the same thing if you sign it, Mr. Trusty.


Trusty. I find my Daughter signs the Note. stands fair in your Opinion, Roger.


Rog. Look ye, Sir -- I hope you ar'n't angry! I meant no harm -- I spoke as I
thought; an I had a hundred Daughters -- my Landlord, and Mr. Lovely, should
have them all, and they would, ha, ha.


Constable. I am obliged to you truly.


Lov. Oh! a hundred would be too many.


Constable. Prithee have thou never a single one at present?


Rog. Not that I know of, in troth, Sir; but an you will do me a small kindness,
Sir, I may chance get you one about fourteen Years hence.


Lov. That will be something too long to stay.


Constable. But what can I serve thee in, Roger?


Rog. Why, Mrs. Belinda has a kind of a Maid c^ll'd ^^r^^in, I have had a
hankering mind after her these two Y^ars, (...) the sliving Baggage will not
come to a Resolution yet.


Trusty. You must apply your self to my Daughter, Roger, she will be the best
Advocate; but I doubt she is to (...) for you.


Rog. Too fine! nay, nay, I Will never quarrel ^ith (...) that; an she can win
Gold, as the Saying is, (...) let her wear it.


Trusty. But I doubt you are not fine enough for her.


Rog. Mehap so, as y^u say; indeed I have you such ^ay Clothes as these
Gentlefolk have, because I cannot afford it, do ye see? else I should like 'em
well enough -- In troth, I believe I have some Seeds of a Gentleman in me; for
methinks now I like broad Cloth better than my Leathern Breeches; and a
Holland Shirt, far before a Hempen one -- -- adod methinks, I, I, I, could be
well enough contented with a Bottle of Wine every day -- I am m^inly inclined
to strong Beer -- and don't care a Farthing i^ I never were to drink any small.


Lov. Oh! extraordinary Symptoms of a Gentleman, I Will assure you -- Well, we'll
speak to Dolly for you.


Trusty. Ay, ay, we'll all speak for you; go, go into the Cellar then, and
drink thy Belly full.


Constable. Be sure to drink Dolly's Health.


Rog. Thank you kindly, Sir -- Ay, ay, Master, that I will I promise you, in a
full Horn -- So Landlord, good by to you with all my heart Exit.


Trust. Now, Sir John, I Will send my Daughter to keep you Company, till I look
for some Leases your Father ordered me to get drawn, which if you think fit to
sign --


Constable. If the Tenants are able Men, with all my heart.


Trusty, Oh! very sufficient Men, Sir John. Ex. Trusty.


Lov. Well, thou have secured the Money, Constant; and my Advice is to dispatch
the Woman, as fast as you can, and find some pretense to defer these Leases for
two or three days -- Sir Jeffrey is whimsical, and if he should alter his mind,
and come down --


Constable. Here would be no staying for me, if he should; therefore I design to be
as quick as possible -- but here comes the Star that guides me to Happiness.


Enter Belinda and Maria. Lov. And my Pilot --


Mar. What Voyage are you for, pray?


Lov. The everlasting Voyage of Matrimony, Child -- and your Eyes are two such
dangerous Rocks, that nothing. ^ut your Tongue can steer me into Harbor.


Mar. But any of my Sex can steer you out, you will be for crossing from Port to
Port, to make that everlasting Voyage agreeable.


Lov. No, faith, where I drop my Anchor, there my Vesse^ is moored for Life --
Well, Constant, what says the Lady? will she let thy Habeas Corpus remove her?


Bell. Out of one Prison into another, is it not so, Constant?


Lov. Interrogating! nay then it is proper to be alone; there is a very pretty
Collection of Prints in the next Room, Madam, will you give me leave to explain
them to you?


Mar. Any thing that may divert your Love Subject. Ex.


Constable. Can Belinda term my Arms a Prison?


Bell. But Marriage is a Better, Constant.


Constable. I Will not make it one; I Am a true British Subject, I Am for Liberty and
Property --


Bell. And Self-interest, for they are insepara^l^.


Constable. I hope our Interests are the same, and when l^nk'^, will be the
stronger. Come, Madam, con^^d^r our opportutunity may be short, we ought to be
quick, to prevent discovery; I have your Father's consent.


Bell. Discovery! Why what is a (...) but reasonable I be let into the Secret,
if I Am in danger of ^^ating the Punishment, Sir John.


Constable. Why that Sir John, Belinda? I know you are informed of all, then (...)
ridicule my (...) my Love for you that first inspired me with this Stratagem;
then prithee come, my dearest -- -- taking her hand.


Bell. Not a step, sweet Servant -- I Will know (...) terms I capitulate, ever I
surrender.


Constable. Terms! Madam! Has not Dolly told you of the Plot?


Bell. Yes, upon your Father and mine. Captain, but I don't think it safe to
join in it: Suppose my Father be ^bl^g^^ to pay back this Money; may not that
be provocation enough to disown me? and i^ yours should for this trick
disinherit you? -- What Jointure can you make me?


Constable. My Heart, Madam.


Bell. Pshaw! that is the slippery'st piece in all Fortune's Treasure -- we
never can be certain of that -- --


Constable. Then my Soul.


Bell. Where shall I find it? the Learned c^n't agree where to place it;
therefore I Will have no trouble ab^ut th^^.


Constable. Then take my Body for Bail, that I Am sure is forth coming.


Bell. Ay, but there is No -- No exeat Regnum in Love's Court --


Constable. To cut off all Objections, I settle this Money upon you; and either put
it out to Interest, or purchase some pretty Retirement; where, if Belinda loves
but half so well, as I flattered my self she did, I can forsake all Courts and
Company -- and prefer a Grott with Her, before all the trappings of the Fools
of Fortune --


Bell. Generously said! I have tried thee, Constant; and find thy Nature like
thy Name; there, take my Hand -- my Heart was thine before.


Constable. It Is sympathy of Souls that join us two,
Death only shall our Gordian Knot undo.

Bell. Until that Hour, Belinda will be true.


Re-enter Lovely and Maria. Lov. Joy to thee, my Friend; and you, Madam, we
overheard your Protestations --


Constable. Prithee let us fetch the Parson this Minute --


Lov. To choose -- Ladies, we'll return instantly. Ex.


Mar. Prosperity to Belinda!


Bell. Dare not you bear me Company, Girl?
Have you the Heart to let me run this Hazard alone?

Mar. Why, what would you have me do?


Bell. Even what I design to do -- Marry -- for I Am sure thou love that
hansome young Fellow.


Mar. I find you understand your own Constitution, Belinda.


Bell. So well; that if you follow my Example, you will act as resolutely.


Mar. Thine is a rash Venture, if Sir Jeffrey should not forgive him.


Bell. The more honorable; we have Love, and that is the best Estate in a
married Life.


Mar. True, but what can we poor Women do, whose Parents are not inclined to
gratify our Wishes; -- you know mine are set against this Match --


Bell. Pugh, Parents will relent in time -- If not, Mr. Lovely has Fortune
enough to make you happy -- You love him, and he loves you; were I in your
place, I Would fain see a third should part us.


Mar. True, I do love him -- but will not marry him, without a Portion; he
shall never throw that in my Dish, I resolve.


Bell. An admirable Resolution truly -- Then you will go on; hang your Head, cross
your Arms, sigh your Soul into the Air -- sit up all Night like a Watch Candle,
and distill your Brains through your Eyelids -- for so I have done -- no, no,
Girl, even let us save our T^^rs t^ll (...) ^arried.


Mar, What, you think like most Wives, we shall have occasion for them then,
ha, ha.


Bell. As it may fall out -- Then let us marry whil^t we are young, that we may
be able to bear it with the better Courage -- But here is my Father over head
and ears in Papers; I tremble though, to think what he will say when he finds
the Cheat.


Enter Trusty, with Papers in his hand. Mar. And see who is behind him -- --
Enter Number and Slouch.


Bell. I have a sudden thought how to divert my Father's Anger; when all is
discovered, I Will put it in practice -- -- Sir, your humble Servant.


Number. Od, She speaks, Slouch -- -- Nay, Madam, I Am your humble Servant.


Trusty. Ha! what is that -- Why, Sir, I admire -- hey day, where are the
Gentlemen, Daughter?


Number. Gentlemen, Sir, why here is one Gentleman; indeed I cannot say much for
Slouch --


Trusty. Why don't you answer me, ha?


Bell. I know not, Sir, they went out soon after we entered.


Mar. They whispered, Sir, and left the Room.


Trusty. Ha! I don't like that --


Slou. Mehap they are gone to fight for Mrs. Belinda. A^ she would marry you,
Master now, how rarely they would be ^h^ (...) ha, ha.


Number. Od, so they would, as you say, Slouch -- -- Madam, what say you? Mr.
Trusty, shall we make an end on it? I know you are a merry Man, and did but joke
wo' me.


Trusty: Say you so! I doubt you will not find it so, Sir.


Number. No! why I verify believe the Gentlewoman has ^ kindness for me, by her
Looks; how say you, Mistress? speak the Truth, and shame the Devil, as the
saying is -- have not you?


Bell. Well, if I must speak the Truth, 'Squire, I have as much kindness for
you, as for any body; my Father commanded me to love.


Trusty. Ay! why what say you to Sir John Constant? don't you like him better?


Bell. I did once, Sir, but I don't remember I ever had your Consent in that.


Trusty. You have it now then -- it is time enough; it is good to know what one
has to trust to.


Bell. Your Leave now, Sir, comes too late, he may have changed his Mind.


Trusty. No, no, you shall be married to Night, he shall not have time to think of
Change.


Number. Look ye, Sir, fair and softly -- he shall not have her to Night, mehap --
for all your haste; Slouch, stand by me.


Slou. That I will, Master, in any Ground in England.


Mar. Humph! I guess her drift -- Aside.


Bell. Then it is time for me to think on it, Sir.


Trusty. Hey day, What Is here now!


Bell. I don't like Marches huddled up in haste; and I learnt from your
Instructions, Sir, to consult my future Happiness in a Married State.


Number. Good again, In Faith, ha, ha.


Trusty. Your future Hapiness why what can cross your future Happiness,
Mistress?


Number. What, will they quarrel about me now, Slouch, ha?


Slou. The Woman has a woundy mind to you, I see that, Master.


Bell. Sir John^ Carriage is more loose and familiar than formerly -- from which
I draw this Conclusion, Sir; that he thinks his Quality may now command, and
when a Lover loses respect, his Sincerity quickly follows. I like not the
method of our Quality -- The Name of Husband without the Fonddness, is like a
Title without an Estate, of no value with the Wise.


Mar. I am of her Opinion, Sir.


Number. And I too, faith -- Od, she talks rarely; I shall have her, I find -- In
my Conscience I love her ten times the better, because I see she loves me --
and let me tell you, Sir, your Daughter is honester than you are -- Why should
you pretend to cross her Will? You plainly see, she has a mind to no body but
me -- Mun --


True. I plainly see you are a Fool, and she is another --


Number. Look ye, say what you will of me, but don't affront her; for all you ^re
her Father, I will not let my Wife be called Names, de ye see.


True. Zounds, get out of my Doors.


Number. Ay, but who is the Fool then?


Bell. Pray be calm; since you once liked the 'Squire for a Son-in-law, I hope I
shall not disoblige you in preferring him before Sir John for a Husband.


Number. Disoblige him! Who cares if it d^^s, M^dam, (...) along --


Mar. Ha, ha. If thy Father should take thee at thy Word, Belinda?


Bell. My Stars forbid --


True. Did you ever see such a provoking Creature?

Enter Constant and Lovely. Oh, Sir John, It Is well you are come -- Where have
you been? You are in danger of losing your Mistress here.


Constable. I hope, Sir, I have taken the best way to secure her.


Lov. If the Parson can do it, for we have got him in the next Room.


Bell. To Constant. Humor what I say --


True. Now Mistress, You had best bring your Objections again, and spoil your
Fortune.


Bell. To Number. If you dare maintain your Ch^^m to me. I am yours -- I say again,
Sir. I like the 'Squire best.


Number. Dare! od I, I, I, I, dare a, a.


Constable. What dare you do, Sir?


Number. What a Plague do you stare at so?


Constable. What was that you muttered! what dare you do?


Number. I dare do as much as you dare do -- What a Po^. I Am not to be frighted
wi' Looks, mun.


Slou. Od, take heed Master, he has a woundy long Sword.


Number. A Sword! I care not a -- for his Sword, nor him neither. Walks about in a
heat.


Mar. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, Sir John, this Gentleman is a Person whom I esteem.


Number. Ay, Sir, and one that She intends to marry too.


Constable. Marry! when, Sir?


Number. When she pleases, Sir; now, an you will lend us your Parson?


Lov. Ay, it is fit you ask him leave indeed!


Constable. I Will lend you my Sword in your Guts first.


Number. Your Sword in my Guts -- Slouch, give me your Cudgel. Snatches his Stick.


Slou. Ads blead, clear the way, clear the way; I Will turn the 'Squire loose to
any Man in Zomersetshire.


Number. Come, out with your Spit, mun -- Wounds, an I don't make ye put it up
again, I Will never strike stroke more.


Constable. The Devil, he will knock me down. Lays his hand on his Sword.


Trusty. Oh don't draw, Sir John -- lay down your Stick, Sir, and get you about
your business, or you will oblige me to use you worse than I am willing to do.


Mar. Excellent Sport, ha, ha.


Lov. Incomparable, ha, ha.


Bell. Who could have thought the Lout so courageous -- -- Oh pray let us have
no fighting.


Trusty. You have had your Answer, Sir, therefore pray be gone quietly.


Bell. You 'fright me out of my Wits, 'Squire; pray go out of my Father's House
peaceably; if you love me, do, we'll find some other way.


Number. Love ye, yes, I do love you; or what makes me in such a Passion, think
you? Well, well, I will go out -- Look ye, Sir, an you be a Man, follow me;
I Will box fairly with you now, for half a Crown, and this Gentleman shall hold
Stakes, and see fair play -- If you dare now?


Lov. Fie, fie, 'Squire, Gentlemen don't use to Box.


Constable. Box, ye Blockhead, ha, ha, ha.


Number. Blockhead! -- Zounds, I Will learn you to call Names.


strips off his Coat. Slou. Come on, Sirrah, I Will fight with you at the same
time -- begins to strip I Will stand by Master, for the honor of Zomersetshire.


Clin. Death, you shamble ham'd Dog! I Will beat your Head off -- Gives him a box
of the Ear.


Number. Ay! are you there? faith, come on -- come on.


falls foul upon Clinch. Lov. Hold, hold, two to one is odds. parts them.


Clin. Let me alone, Sir, egad I Will fight'em both.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, what do you do, 'Squire, fight with a Footman! pray leave
off, or you will disoblige me for ever.


Trusty. Oh Lord, oh Lord! what shall I do?


Number. What care I.


Mar. What, don't you care for your Mistress?


Number. Yes, yes, but I will not be made a Fool on; but I will go -- an I were sure
you would not be forced to marry this same Spark -- I will not leave you in the
lurch, Madam.


Bell. No, no, 'Squire, they shall not force me, I promise you.


Number. Then I go -- but look to it, an I catch you out of this House; by the Mass
I Will rib you. Ex.


Om. Ha, ha, ha.


Trusty. Adod, I was out of all Patience with the Fool -- Come, take her by the
hand, Sir John, you shall be married this Minute, we'll settle business
afterward.


Bell. Indeed, Sir, you will repent this hasty Match.


Constable. What means Belinda?


Bell. You shall know within.


Trusty. Get along -- in my Soul, I think the whole Composition of Women is
Contradiction. Ex. omnes.


SCENE Sir David's House.
Enter Faithful and Coachman. Faith. There, honest Coachman, drink my Health;
but pray cannot I speak with the Gentlewoman of the House?


Coach. Sir David has no Wife, Sir; but here is a young Lady, I Will call her
Maid; Mrs. Lucy, Mrs. Lucy, here is a Gentleman would speak with your Mistress
--


Enter Lucy. Lucy. A Gentleman! bless me, how came you to let a Man in, Thomas,
in Sir David's absence?


Coach. Sir David bad me himself, or you may be sure I had not done it -- I
thank you, Sir. Ex. Coachman.


Lucy. What do I see? Mr. Faithful!


Faith. The same! How fares my Love, my dearest Laura? Quick, bring me to her,
I am impatient till I see her.


Lucy. Nay, nay, she would be as impatient as you, if she knew you were here --
But by what Miracle did you prevail with Sir David?


Faith. Prithee ask no Questions -- I Will inform thy Lady; haste, my time's but
short, therefore must improve it.


Lucy. Well, follow me then. Ex.


The SCENE draws, and discovers Mrs. Laura at her Spinet.
After the Song, Enter Lucy and Faithful. Lau. What did that Blockhead bawl so
for, Lucy?


Lucy. To have an Acquaintance of yours admitted, Madam.


Lau. An Acquaintance of mine! -- -- ha! my dear Faithful! am I awake? and is
it really he?


Faith. My dearest Love -- run into one another's Arms. Oh let me hold thee
here for ever, for ever taste the Nectar on these Lips -- -- There is still the
same Fragrancy, as when we parted last.


Lau. Oh! it was a fatal parting -- say my Love, how came thou here? for the
old Monster allows no Mortal to visit me.


Faith. By Stratagem, my Dear; he sent me hither in his Coach, yet knows not I
am come; thou shal't have the Story at more convenient leisure; but now let us
employ our time to advantage.


Lau. Heavens! how I tremble! he will soon be back, for he is never out above half
an Hour -- Lucy, watch below. Ex. What can this short interview avail us? which
way shall I get out of his power? The nauseous Goat told Lucy he designed to
marry me himself -- and casts such loving Looks every time he sees me, that I
am half distracted, lest he should give his horrid Passion vent.


Faith. Ha! Confound his Passion with himself -- -- consent to fly with me to a
Friend's House in Town, where we'll be married, and put it out of his Power to
confine thee.


Lau. With all my heart -- My Prison is so odious to me, I need but small
entreaties to make me quit it -- this is the Closet he keeps my Writings in; if
we could contrive to get them along with us, or he will give us trouble enough to
get 'em out of his hands, here -- don't you think one might wrinch it open?


Faith. So he may prosecute us for a Robbery.


Lau. Let him, I Will meddle with (...)


Enter (...) Lucy. Oh, Madam! there is S^r David (...) ^ent Passion, beating all
the Servants in before him.


Lau. Undone! What shall I ^s;ay^ what will become of thee?


Faith. Sink the Villain -- h^^e (...) Deare^^* take no thought for me; seem
not to know me; pretend surprise, and beg me to be gone; leave the rest to me.


Enter Sir David, beating his Men in upon the Stage. Sir. Dav. Ye Dogs, what
have ye done, ha?


Coach. What do you beat me for? Did you not bid me carry him home?


Sir Dav. Zounds, not to my home* ye Rascal. bea^^ (...).


Faith. What do you mean, Madam, by saying you don't know me; 'sdeath, did not
I lodge here last Night?


Sir Dav. How Is this? how is this?


Lau. No indeed, Sir, I never saw you before; neither do we let Lodgings, then
pray be answered.


Faith. A very pretty trick, says* What, have you a m^^^ to cheat me of (...)
Ho^^^s, and my P^rtman^^a^ -- Look ye, Madam, this will not pass upon me.


Sir Dav. No, nor upon me, neither, Sir.


Faith. Sir, your humble Servant; I think I have had the Honor to see you
somewhere. I am in dispute with this Gentlewom^n here; she would fain persuade me I
have must (...) my Inn, -- -- and that I did not lie here last Night.


Sir Dav. Lie here! Why, do you take this Lady for an Hostess, (...)


Faith. Nay, Sir, she is very handsome -- but why the Devil must ^eauty make
her deny her Calling -- Ad, you Country Gentlemen, do so kiss and flatter your
Landladies, that egad, they don^^ know where their Tails hang -- but we make
them know th^mselves in London -- Once more, will you call your Servants.


Sir Dav. Oh the Devil! ye Dogs, I Will be revenged on you.


beats his Servants, they run (...). Sam. The Fault's not mine, Sir; Tomas bad
me let him in.


Faith. What no Attendance yet? So, he, T^pster, Chamberlain -- -- Pray Sir sit
down -- I w^rr^nt I^ll ^^ke (...) Body hear -- Hark ye, you Mistress -- You
are not above your Business too, are you? to Lucy.


Sir Dav. Oh, oh, oh, I shall go distracted.


Lu. Pray Sir know your way out, don't think I Am one of your Wenches.


Faith. Good lack, ha, ha, what are you a fine Lady too? the Devil! Sure this
is a Bawdy House --


Sir Dav. I dare swear you would make it one if you could --


Faith. Sir, I take this for an extraordinary Inn -- Pray do me the favor to
sit -- I Will beat the Chamber down, but I Will make some Body come up. So, ho, the
House here --


Stamps. Sir Dav. A plague split you, what do you make all this Noise for? oh,
oh.


Lau. Pray, Sir David, humor the Gentleman, for I fancy he is a little beside
himself.


Sir Dav. Humor the Devil! Hell and Furies! This must be some Rogue -- Here,
where are you Rascals?


Enter Servants. Faith. Ay Scoundrels, where are you? Ye Dogs, what is the
reason we can have no Attendance? Strikes one of them. Fetch us a Bottle of
Claret, Sirrah, and bring us word what we can have to Eat --


Sir Dav. Bring a Bottle of Claret! bring a Halter -- What do you strike my
Servants for? ha, Sir.


Faith, Your Servants, Sir! They are my Servants, as long as I pay for what I
call for -- Ho! I find you are the Landlord of this well-governed Inn -- Make
your People more tractable, de you hear, Sir? Or I shall not only beat them,
but you too -- -- Death ye Villains, why don't you stir? Strikes another.


Lau. What will be the end of this? All my Comfort lies in his Assurance --


Sir Dav. Zounds, let him stir if he dares -- Get out of my House, Sirrah, or
I Will lay you by the Heels; don't put your Shams upon us -- Don't Bully here; I
thought you was wounded when I lent you my Coach -- But I find you are a Rogue,
and either designed to Rob my House, or Ravish this Lady -- Fetch me a
Constable (...) the Devil! I Will Box with you, if you're for Boxing -- -- Get
into that Room Laura, I Will deal with him I warrant ye. Put^ Laura in.


Lau. Oh unfortunate! How shall I ever see him again?


Exit. Faith. I Will be here about an Hour hence before this Door.


To Lucy. Lu. Ay! But to what purpose?


Sir Dav. I thought you was wounded when I lent you my Coach.


Faith. Wounded, Sir! why so I am, and my Wounds bleed afresh with Vexation --
-- Was it your Coach! I and I was mistaken then, you are not my Landlord; I ask
your pardon, Sir.


Enter Manage, running. Sir Dav. Rot your Pardon -- How now, who the Devil are
you, Sir?


Man. I am this Gentleman's Servant -- Bless me, Sir, what do you do here? Why
Sir John and Mr. Lovely has been searching all the Town for you; they brought a
Surgeon to the Talbot, and not finding you there, nor no where else, sent me to
ask this Gentleman's Coachman where he drove you to, and swear if you be not
found presently, they will Indict the Coachman for your Murder.


Sir Dav. I would you were all Hanged for Company; why what a Plaguey Mistake
was here? --


Faith. Ha! a lucky Hint -- Bless me, Sir, I am under the greatest Confusion
imaginable, can you forgive me, Sir? Upon my Honor, I thought I had been in my
Inn; I ask a thousand Pardons, pray excuse me to the Lady.


Sir Dav. Oh Sir, never trouble your Head about the Lady.


Faith. Why Sir? I Am a Gentleman.


Sir Dav. A Gentleman Sir! And what then Sir?


Faith. And am Master of an Estate to support that Character Sir.


Sir Dav. Zounds, was ever Man so plagued, to have his Servants kicked about
like Foot-balls, his House thundered about his Ears like a common Inn, then to
be told impudently, I Am a Gentleman, and have an Estate to support that
Character?


Faith. I ask your pardon again Sir, for the unlucky Accident, in mistaking your
House, but cannot apprehend what Crime I have committed in my Apology.


Sir Dav. Sir, without any manner of Apology, I would be very proud to wait on
you down Stairs.


Faith. By no means, Sir -- I must not permit that.


Sir Dav. Death and the Devil, be gone without it, then.


Faith. That I will Sir; but entreat the favor of seeing the Lady first; upon
Honor I was never so concerned in my Life: I would not for Five hundred Pound
quit the House, till I have convinced her of my Error, and made my
Acknowledgment upon my Knees.


Sir Dav. Zounds, here is the Devil to do about her -- Which way shall I get rid
of him?


Faith. Pray Mrs. inform the Lady of my Resolution.


To Lucy. Sir Dav. Hark ye Huswife, stir out of this place, and I Will break
your Neck down Stairs.


Faith. Why then I must be guilty of a second Rudeness to acquit my self of the
first, I think that is the Room the Lady went into, Sir. Going toward the Door.


Sir Dav. Hold, hold, hold, Sir; where the Devil are you going -- Zounds,
advance one Step farther, and I Will indict you for a Robbery.


Faith. Well, since you are so positive, Sir, I will be gone; but pray Sir, is
that Lady your Granddaughter, Daughter, Neice, Cousin, or, or --


Sir Dav. It Is my Wife, my Wife, my Wife, my Wife Sir, do you hear that and
tremble.


Faith. Ods my Life, Sir, I beg your pardon with all my Heart and Soul -- Your
most Obedient, humble Servant.


Exit. Sir Dav. The Devil go with you.


Man. To Lucy. My Master has not a Souse of Money, else you would not want your
Fee. We were Robbed coming down. Exit.


Sir Dav. Zounds Sir, What do you loyter here for? Why don't you get after your
Master. Go, troop. Turns him out.


Sir Dav. What do you sauntring here, get in to your Mistress! What does your
Chops water at the sight of a Man, ha?


Lu. I Am sure you are the worst Sight I (...) h^^ seen (...) sent. (...).


Sir Dav. I don't understand this Mistake though -- He is a strapping young Dog;
I wish Laura had not seen him -- -- But I Will go see if he is gone, lest there
should be more Reg^^^y at the ^^ttom. Exit.


End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
Enter on one side Faithful and Manage; on the other Constant and Clinch.
Constable. FAithful, well met, I was going in search of thee; my Affairs are ended,
what Hopes of thine? Did the Project turn to thy Advantage?


Faith. It gave me entrance to the Charming Fair, who received me with equal
Transport; but just as she consented to come away with me, the old Fox returned
-- A Curse of his Diligence --


Man. I came timely to my Master's Rescue, Sir; and when his Pockets are
replenished, I hope he will own it.


Faith. That I will, Manage.


Constable. It Is now in my Power to lend thee Twenty Pieces, Friend -- There they
are -- Gives Money.


Faith. I thankfully accept them; and next the finishing my own Wishes, I am
pleased thou have gained thine; but after what Method to pursue mine, Heaven
knows: I told Lucy I would be about the Door in an Hour, but I know not if
'twill be in Laura's power to get out, or what can disguise me, S^r David will
certainly know me again, if he sees me -- The ^^me is well nigh expired,


Man. I have a Thought! -- Could you procure my Master a Red, or Blue Coat, in
this Town, think you, Sir?


Constable. I have my Regimental Surtout I rid down in, you know.


Man. Right, that will do; I told him I served an Officer; I warrant we'll pass
upon him -- Come, strip Clinch, strips give me my Clothes again -- Strips and
Champer with Clinch (...) But it is necessary, Sir, that you change your (...).


Constable. And what if you put a Patch cross your Cheek, like a Scar?


Faith. With all my Heart -- I must, and will redeem her, or cut his Throat.


Constable. Nay, Twenty thousand Pound gives an edge to Invention.


Clin. So now I am in Statu qu^.


Faith. Were she not Mistress of a Groat, I should prefer her before the most
celebrated Beauty in the Kingdom; our infant Years first sowed the Seeds of
Love, which as we grew, ripened to a perfect Passion; her Parents dying, left
her to the Care of mine; oh in what Pleasure have we past the Day, and
quarreled with the Night that called us from each other. Whilst I made the
Campaign with you, Captain, my Father died! Oh fatal Thought, her Friends
removed her to this Sir David Watchum's, it is twelve Months since, during which
time, till now, I never could find means to see or hear from her.


Constable. I know the Story perfectly well, and wish thou may succeed with all
my Soul; but I find he is upon his Guard --


Faith. If he could summon Hell to guard her, I will by Policy or Force release
her.


Man. Why then, pray resolve upon which immediately; shall we lay open Siege or
Blockade his Citadel. The Head must always work before the Hands -- Now it is
necessary, e're we attempt, to know the weakest and strongest Parrs; then we
open our Trenches and Cannonade the Place, ruin their Ramparts, make a Breach,
and then give the Assault, take the old Rogue by the Throat, plunder his
Castle, and carry off the Booty -- Which is the Lady, Sir. --


Constable. Ha, ha, ha, Manage talks like a Soldier.


Faith. Ah, if we could do that, Manage! I have good Interest in the Town --
And they have notice of my Coming --


Man. So much the better; the more Friends we have in the Garrison, the sooner
we shall become Masters of it -- Well, as I am chief Engineer, and half the
Artillery, I must survey the Ground to find the most convenient Place to raise
my Battery. But away, away, Sir, and disguise your self; the Drum beats --
leave the rest to Fortune, she cannot always run against us -- I have known the
Sun rise upon a private Sentinel, who before his Setting was a Captain of Foot
-- Nothing like Diligence and Courage to nick the fickle Jade.


Constable. Come, thou shall be dressed in a Moment Ex. (...).


SCENE, The Outside ^f Sir David's House, Sir David in the Garden before his
Door.
Sir Dav. I remember* Saving of a certain Phil^s^^her. (...) thing is harder to
keep than a Secret; but I think it is (...) harder to keep a handsome Woman -- I
am strangely affected with this last Accident; and then the the other Rogue that
was here in the Morning, that serves an Officer -- A pox on these Office^ (...)
for they have more Stratagems in their Heads, than all the Kingdom besides. But
I have ordered the Smith to Barrica^e my Windows, from the Cellar to the (...),
he'l^ (...) but Laura must not see him (...) Girl, (...) ^ted at my Dog of a
Co^^hman's Mistake; I have invited h^^ into the Garden, here the (...)
M^i^^^nes.


(...). Lau. What favour^d ^ Davil, (...), h^s procured us this Liberty? It
happens as I wou^d have it, if Faithful he but here now*


Lucy. I Am am^n^d -- For it is the fast fresh open Air you have breathed these
twelve Months, Madam. But suppose Mr. Faithful should be here! Yonder Is the old
Argus, he resolves to watch you I see.


Lau. Nay then!


Sir Dav. Well Madam, How do you after your Fright? I sent for you into the
Garden, to take the Air -- The Air is g^^d after a Fright --


Lau. Ay, if one could change the Place too, Sir David, but the Air of my
Chamber and this is much the same -- But let (...) where I will, if you are
there, I find no Difference in the Air -- I know not what ails me, but when I
see you* I (...) draw Breath.


Sir Dav. Ha! she loves me* Oh happy (...) -- -- Ir^^^^, Madam! And are those
Sighs pleasant or painful, pray?


Lau. Oh very painful, Sir --


Sir Dav. Then you must have a Husband to care those Sighs. Child.


Faithful and Manage appear between the Scenes. Faith. She Is here! Oh the
charming Maid -- but that old Monster is with her.


Sir Dav. What think you of a married Life, L^^ra*


Lau. Of nothing better -- I might dissemble like many of my Sex; exclaim
against Marriage and Mankind; profess to dye in a Cloister, or a Maid at large
-- Mask my real Inclinations, fain Indifference to Love, and place all my
Happiness in my own Sex -- But I have a Heart too sincere; and therefore
frankly own, that the utmost of my Ambition is to be a Wife.


Faith. To me she means -- Oh how shall I deliver her!


Lucy. Well said, Madam; why should a Lady lose the prime of her youth, when
she may do so much good in her Generation; I resolve to follow your Example to
a hair.


Sir Dav. Good Wits jump -- I resolve to marry too; I have every day fresh
Offers, very advantageous Offers, but my Heart is prepossessed, dear Laura, for
I will own it now, I love you exceedingly.


Lucy. So, now it is out.


Sir Dav. More, if possible, than you love me.


Lau. That Is very possible, truly.


Faith. Love her! Oh the rank old Goat; Death! that Confession has made me
loose all Patience.


Man. Hold, hold, Sir, pray be content a little.


Sir Dav. Come, don't blush, Laura; thy Sighs betrayed thy Love, but I Am
discreet.


Faith. Now do I long to tell him he lies in his Throat.


Man. 'Egad, Sir, you had better lose your longing at this time.


Lau. What do you say, Sir -- that I love you! your Opinion is small proof of
your Discretion.


Sir Dav. Why so, Child?


Lau. Because you never was more mistaken in your Life; for instead of loving
you, I hate you mortally.


Faith. Oh blessed Sound!


Sir Dav. Really! but why so, prithee?


Lau. Nay, you love without Reason; and perhaps I hate by the same Rule.


Lau. Well, Sir, if her declaration be not so kind as you would have it, it* is
not the less sincere.


Sir Dav. Is it not, Gilflirt, after what I have done for her?


Lau. Yes, you have done for me, I thank you, Sir.


Lucy. Nay, pray be not angry, but state the Case right.


Lau. If Love has rendered me charming in your Eyes, consider how he has drawn
you in mine.


Lucy. She Is amiable, you ugly -- -- She Is gay, you morose -- She Is Generous --
you a Miser -- She Is sixteen -- You sixty -- She has the finest Teeth in the
World -- -- You but one in your Head, and that shakes, and the first Fit of
Coughing, good by to it.


Man. A Devilish Wench -- -- She has drawn him to a Hair.


Lau. Mark Lucy's Description, and then tell me if these be not irresistible
Charms, for one of my Age and Constitution.


Lucy. What Woman do you think, Sir, on this side fourscore, would have such a
Bedfellow?


Sir Dav. She shall, Mistress, or she shall have no body, mark that; and your
Witticisms, Mrs. Frippery, shall get you nothing -- How now! who do you want?
Faithful and Manage come forward.


Lau. My dear Faithful! I know him in all Disguises; how shall I forbear
running into his Arms?


Lucy. Have a care, Madam, if you discover you know him, you will never see him
more; Manage has some Plot in his Head, by his winking.


Sir Dav. What is it you look at, Sir! why don't you speak?


Man. Be calm, Sir, and take no notice of the Lady.


Faith. I was so charmed with the fineness of the Prospect in that Moment you
spoke, Sir, I was not master of my Tongue.


Sir Dav. And now you are Master of it, Sir, what have you to say?


Faith. Nothing, Sir; only having the misfortune to break my Chariot -- I took
a walk this way, till it is put in order again; and coming by this House, my
Man told me that you entertained some hard thoughts of him, from some discourse
that passed between you to day -- So I presumed to call, to clear his
Reputation.


Sir Dav. This is the Officer! A Rogue in red now; and the Simple-hunter with
him -- I don't like 'em -- As for that, Sir, you need not give your self any
farther trouble, for I have nothing to do with his Reputation, nor yours
neither.


Faith. I hope it is no offense to look about me a little; this House is finely
situated -- It Is the best Air I have breathed this Twelvemonth.


Sir Dav. Pox of your Compliment -- That Is your Mistake, Sir; it is the worst
Air in the Universe -- Let me advise you to get out of it as fast as you can;
for it is very fatal to Strangers.


Lau. He tells you truth, Sir; for ever since I breathed this Air, I have
neither eat, drank, or slept with Ease.


Faith. I am sorry for that, Madam; but I find a quite contrary effect;
methinks I feel new Life, and I have a strong hope to carry off the Health I
wish.


Sir Dav. I wish, Sir, your Legs would be pleased to carry off your Body.


Faith. Sir, I will not be troublesome -- but I desire you would give me leave
to take a view of your Gardens; I have bought me a small Seat in a Country
Village, and I design to have a pretty Garden made.


Sir Dav. Ah! would you were buried in the Garden -- go, get in, Gentlewoman,
go -- he has no business with you, you don't belong to the Garden.


Man. To Lucy. Find some way to bring your Lady down again; do you hear? and
let her pretend -- Whispers to Lucy.


Lucy. Yes, yes, I hear; but how to put it in practice, I know not.


Lau. I am distracted! Oh Invention! where art thou? help me Brains, or cease
to think.


Sir Dav. What do you loiter for, ha? get in --


Lucy. Sir David, you use us like Slaves; send us in and out at pleasure -- Is
my Lady a Person to be treated so by her Guardian? These twelve Months we have
not seen the shadow of any Hat but yours -- I Am sure nothing that is Male has
reached our Eyes.


Sir Dav. Why how now, Mrs. Prate-apace; if you don't like your living, troop
off. Go -- There are more Servants to be had.


Faith. I shall certainly discover my self, if he goes on at this Rate -- Sir,
I had rather quit this place immediately, than you should incommode the Ladies.


Lau. Pray Sir David, mind your own Servants, you shall never have any power
over mine. Sir, let me advise you to tarry till to morrow; it is dangerous
traveling too late; let me entreat you stay in this Town till to morrow --
What said Manage to you Lucy?


Lucy. Ay, pray take my Lady's advice, Sir. You shall know within; take
Courage, Madam.


Sir Dav. Zounds, get in, I believe you want to lie with him all Night, you are
so concerned for his stay.


Lucy. I hope some brave Man will attempt the rescue of my Mistress. He pushes
'em in.


Faith. My Heart swells at these Indignities, and I could shake his detested
rotten Soul, out of its withered sapless Carcass.


Man. Be easy, Sir, Passion will do us no good -- I have something in my Head
may hit, perhaps.


Faith. I am sorry, Sir, I should be the cause of your being angry with your
Daughter.


Sir Dav. My Daughter!


Faith. I ask your Pardon, Sir, may be it is your Wife.


Sir Dav. She shall be ever long, Sir.


Faith. You shall be Worms meat first. Aside.
I had better knock him down, and fetch her out this moment.

Man. And the next moment fetches you to Goal. Indeed, Sir, you had better keep
your temper: -- You have made a very excellent Choice, Sir, would all Hust
(...) m^nage their Wi^es so, (...) should not have so many C^^quers bread.


Sir Dav. I don't design my Wife shall follow the way of the World.


Man. Second him, Sir, keep him in talk a l^ttle --


Faith. You do well, Sir, it is below a Man to let his Wife rule, and rattle
where she pleases; to visit, and be visited by half the Fops; in the Nation;
for my part, had I a Wife, I should follow your Method.


Sir Dav. 'Egad, I believe I was mistaken in this Gentleman. I wish, Sir, I had
this Lecture read to some that blame me for my Conduct.


Man. If you please, Sir, I Will go into your House, and write it down this
moment; it shall not cost you a Farthing, Sir.


Sir Dav. I Will not give you the trouble, Sir, I shall remember (...).


Enter Lucy, hastily. Lucy. Oh! undone, undone; help, help; oh Sir David! what
have you brought upon us?


Sir Dav. What the Devil do you bawl so for?


Lucy. Oh! the saddest Accident has befallen my poor Lady! --


Faith. Ha! her Lady, said She?


Man. Peace, Sir, and mind the Plot -- Aside to Faithful.


Sir Dav. What accident, ha? You roar as she had broke a Leg, or an Arm.


Lucy. Worse, Sir, worse, much worse; She Is mad, Sir --


Sir Dav. Mad!


Lucy. Ay, Distracted, Sir -- When you thrust us in, she found the Smith
barricading her Windows; as soon as ever she l^id her Eyes upon the Ir^n ^ars;
her looks grow wild, her (...) Starts and broken Speeches, convince me of her
Brain being turned -- When before I was aware -- She caught up an Iron Bar,
and broke the Blacksmith's Pate; She beat her head against the Wall -- runs,
skips, sings, dances, stamps, raves, and throws all the things about the Room
-- I would have shut her in, but she set up such a Roar, that I left the Door
open, and fled for my Life. -- Make the best of your Plot, Manage -- Aside.


Man. Ay, ay, let me alone.


Sir Dav. Mercy on us! what shall I do?


Lucy. Here she comes, oh my poor Lady! -- with your great Base Viol in her
hand; oh, oh, oh!


Sir Dav. Oh the Devil! if she breaks my Base, I had rather lose five Pounds:
Oh, oh, oh!


Man. Have Patience, Sir, I may be serviceable to you in this Affair, as little
Opinion as you had of my skill to day.


Enter Laura, with a Base and Papers; her Clothes aukwardly hanging. Lau. Give
me Liberty and Love,
Give me Love and Liberty,
From an Iron Grate,
And the Man I hate,
Dear Fortune set me free.

Faith. What design you by this, Manage?


Man. To put you in possession of your Mistress, before I have done, Sir, if
you will be quiet.


Lau. What, are you a Blacksmith? To Sir David.


Sir Dav. Oh pox of the Blacksmith, how she harps upon him! --


Lau. Ho! now I know you, you are a Singing-master.


Sir Dav. A Singing-master! good lack, good lack --


Lau. Here is a piece of Music, which I have just now received from London;
it is part of the last new Opera -- there, there, there is a Part for you. gives
Sir David a Paper. Ha! are not you the new Eunuch? Ay, it is he! here, here,
here is your part.


Gives Faith, a Letter. Faith. A Letter, Oh! for an opportunity to read it.
draws off by degrees.


Lau. Give me Liberty and Love.
Give me Love and Liberty -- Come, why don't you sing. To Sir David. She beats
time all this while, with her hand upon his head, and with her foot upon his
toes.

Sir Dav. Poor Laura, I cannot sing, Child -- Zounds, Death and the Devil, she
has killed my Toe.


Lau. What, will not you sing, I Will break the Fiddle then.


Lucy. Pray, Sir David, humor her.


Man. Let me advise you comply with her, Sir; she is possessed, and with a very
mischievous Demon.


Lau. Come, begin. Give me Liberty and Love.


Sir Dav. Give me Liberty and Love. They all sing whilst Faithful reads.


Lucy. Give me Liberty and Love.


Man. Give me Liberty and Love.


Faith. Reads Dear Faithful, find some way to deliver me, or what I now act in
jest, will follow in earnest; I have all my Jewels and Writings about me; for I
have broke the old Man's Closet for them, and I Will find a way to get money
presently. Yours entirely,

Laura.


Yes, I will deliver thee, or dye for it. Manage, read that.


Gives him the Letter. Man. Recommend me for a white Witch to Sir David; let me
alone for the rest.


Faith. Poor Lady! I am extremely concerned for her, Sir; pray consult my
Servant about her Distemper; in my Opinion she is bewitched.


Sir Dav. I doubt so too, Sir; has he really skill in these matters?


Faith. No Man in the Kingdom more, I assure you, he has cured several to my
Knowledge, both in Spain and Flanders.


Lau. Why do you look at me so? Did you never see an old Woman before? I Would have
you to know, Mistress, I have been as handsome as you -- but Age alters every
body -- I have been the Mother of sixteen Children -- all Boys -- -- Hark ye,
let me council you -- don't marry an old Fellow.


Lucy. No, why so pray?


Lau. Because your Youth will renew his Age -- and you will be plagued with him
to eternity -- I married an old fusty Guardian, because I could not get out of
his hands; which is the reason why you see so many Wrinkles in my Face, ha, ha,
ha. In my conscience there he stands -- What, can I go no where, but you must
follow me -- ye old cripling Cuckold you -- Look ye how angry he is now at
being called Cuckold -- -- Yet he would marry a young Wife -- -- ha, ha, ha.


Sir Dav. Mercy upon us! how does such things come in her head?


Faith. The Wildness of her Fancy --


Enter Manage. Man. I Will do your business for you, Sir; I have consulted the
Stars, and find she is bewitched by an old Woman.


Sir Dav. By an old Woman! Ay indeed she talks of an old Woman.


Man. It is a very troublesome Spirit that is in her, and must be charmed out
into another, or she cannot be cured -- Tell me, Sir, can you procure any body
for that purpose?


Sir Dav. Here Is her Maid, will not she do?


Lucy. What! Do you think I Would have the Devil put into me, Sir, I ask you pardon
for that.


Lau. Hark! There Is my Drum beating up for Volunteers -- What say you my Lads,
are you for the Wars? Her Majesty has honored me with a Collonel's Commission;
I Am just now raising my Regiment -- you shall all serve under me. Come -- hold,
now I think on it, I want a hundred Guineas to raise Men with -- Hark ye, will not
you lend me a hundred Guineas? To Sir David.


Sir Dav. Lack a day, it makes me weep, to see how many sorts of Madnesses
possess her.


Man. A good thought for some Money -- Humor her, Sir, whatever she asks for,
let her have.


Lau. Lend me a hundred Guineas, I say, or my Soldiers shall batter your House
about your Ears.


Lucy. For Heavens sake, Sir, give 'em her, you will have them again safe.


Faith. I would advise you to let her have 'em, Sir.


Sir Dav. Well, be sure you take care of them; there, there is threescore in
that Purse, you may tell her there is a hundred; but take care I have them
again. to Lucy.


Man. Ay, when we have nothing else to do with 'em. Aside.


Lau. Give it me -- so, now my Boys will you serve the Queen?


Man. Ay, with all my heart, under you, Sir.


Lau. There then, there is Gold for you, Sirrah; gives him a Guinea. and what
say you, you are a handsome proper Fellow, six foot high -- I Will make you
Sergeant of the Grenadiers -- What say you, will you serve under me?


Man. Humph! He would rather serve her another way, I dare swear. Aside.


Faith. And know no Joy beyond it; serve ye! -- by Heaven, that I will, with my
Life, (...) through all Difficulties and Danger; and die by your side, or (...)
you off safe.


Lau. Then there is M^ney, my (...) to (...)


(...) Sir Dav. Hold, hold, Laura, you must (...) ^ney; Lu^y take care (...). I
hope, Sir, you will (...)


Faith. Certainly, Sir.


Lucy. I Will see to that, Sir.


Lau. Return the Money, to whom? They are my Soldiers, (...) the Money mine --
I borrowed it of the most confounded old Rogue in Peterborough; tell him I say
so -- -- but you look (...) an honest Man, I Will mak^ your (...): -- (...) you
exercise, Sergeant.


Sir Dav. Oh Lord, oh Lord!


Lau. Sergeant t^ke heed; to the right and left by half (...) form Files upon
the Flanks of the Battalion -- March -- ha, ha, you are cursed dull, Sergeant
--


Faith. I am a little awkward at first, Colonel, but I shall learn.


Sir Dav. Oh, oh, oh! Sta^^^.


Lau. Well, well, I Will teach you then -- Silence, Join your right hand to your
Firelock -- Cock your Firelock -- -- Present; Fire -- Excellent.

Give me Liberty and Love,
Give me Love and Liberty. Sing^.

Sir Dav. Oh sad, oh sad! what shall I do? Pray Sir desire y^^r Man to try his
skill,


Faith. Manage, the Gentleman implores your Aid.


Man. I am ready, if he can find any body to make the F^^^^^ment; it must be a
Man, Sir -- will you endure it your self?


Sir Dav. No, faith and troth not I!


Faith. Well, Sir, to do you and the Lady service. I Will venture -- -- but take
care, Manage, that you bring the Devil out of (...) again -- --


Man. Yes, Sir, that I can easily; for he is not half so hard to get out of a
Man, as he is out of a Woman.


Sir Dav. Good lack! what should the reason of that be, I ^^^der! Aside. Sir, I
thank you heartily -- a very ^^^thy Gentleman thi^, -- -- Well, what (...), Sir?


Man. Stand still, I charge you -- And do you fetch us an easy Chair,
Mistress. -- to Lucy.


Lucy. Yes, Sir. Ex.


Man. Stay, I must limit your bounds; there Sir, you must not for your Life
cross this Circle.


Sir Dav. Well, Sir, I shall observe you.


Enter Lucy, with a Chair. Lucy. Here, Sir.


Man. Very well; Pray, Madam, be pleased to fit down.


Lau. Sit down! why is Dinner coming? -- Ho, cry a Mercy! you are a Barber;
hold, hold, you shall shave my Corporal first, to try your Razor.


Sir Dav. Oh Lord, oh Lord! what shall I say to her?


Man. Keep your place, Sir -- -- No, no, Sir, I am a Shoemaker, and if I fit
your Foot, and please you, I desire your Honor would let me have the business
of your Regiment.


Lau. With all my heart.


Man. Then pray sit down, Sir, that I may take measure. She sits down. Now for
you, Sir, you must kneel right before her -- closer -- closer yet; there, look
full in her Eyes -- Clasp both her Hands in yours. Manage pulls a Book out of
his pocket, and looks on it.


Lau. Give me Liberty and Love,
Give me Love and Liberty. Sings

Faith. My Charming Angel, Oh let me kneel here for ever, for ever gaze on
those dear Eyes; how I have languish'd for thee, Heaven only knows.


Lau. And what I have born for thee, Hell cannot match; Oh, if Manage fail in
his Plot, I Am undone for ever.


Faith. Fear not, my Love, he is lucky at Contrivance.


Sir Dav. What are they doing?


Man. Alpha, Beta, Gama, Delta.


Sir Dav. Bless me, what are those the Names of the Spirits?


Man. Philo se en pasias, glossais, kai en to panti poto, kai en to panti topo
-- Now do you be well, Madam; and do you seem to be Mad, Sir, quick, quick --


Sir Dav. Why what a many Devils there are! certainly she has a Legion in her.


Lau. Where am I, Lucy? Methinks I wake from some untoward Dream.


Lucy. She recovers, Sir. How do you, (...)


Sir Dav. I Am glad on it. How do thou do, (...)


Laura. Pretty well.


Man. Death, Sir, keep your Place, or you will ^poil (...)


Faith. Ha! my Brain-pan splits -- I Am all ^fam^, my (...) boils over, give me
room, I Will scale the Region of the (...), and (...) the Winds down headlong on
us all.


Sir Dav. Oh, oh, oh, he is stark Mad; What shall we do (...) him now?


Man. We shall do well enough with him; but keep your Pl^^^ for he is very
Desperate.


Lau. Defend me Heaven, what ails the Gentlem^^*


Lucy. He Will kill us all; the Man's bewitched.


Man. Here, here, Ladies stand in this Circle, and don't (...) it for your
Lives. Sets 'em in a (...).


Sir Dav. Oh pray Sir, read again --


Faith, What Is here, old Beelzebub! No, it is his S^^^h (...) Cracker; I Will set
fire to it and blow it up -- Ho, lo, where (...) you Scoundrels, Dogs, Rogues,
Cooks, the Devil wants his Dinner, and you must spit this Swine, Hell dines on
Hog's Flesh to Day. Draws his Sword.


Man. Undone, undone; the Spirit grows too strong for ^y Art! fly, fly, Sir,
for Life --


Sir Dav. Oh, oh, oh, save me, save me. Runs in and slaps the Door.


Man. Now, now, make your Escape; he has slap'd the Door after him -- Quick*
quick --


Faith. My Life, my Soul!


Lau. My Angel, my All. End race.


Man. Oh the Devil! Don't stand Lifeing and Dearing now, but make haste to Mr.
Trusty's, I Will bring the Parson after you.


Lucy. Ay, good Madam, be quick.


Lau. Any where, good Manage.


Faith. Fly Manage, and bring Lovely with thee too, to be Witness of my good
Fortune, this Hour makes thee mine for ever:

Now in thy Arms immortal Joys I Will taste,
And quite forget our anxious Sorrows past.

Lu. Now Heaven be praised, we have Liberty at last. Exeunt.


Sir David above. Sir Dav. Oh, I Am Robbed, Ravished, Dead and Buried -- My
Closet is broke open, and all my Writings gone; Mr. Conjurer, Mr. Conjurer, can
you help me to the Thief? Ha! no Body to be seen! Bless me -- Lucy -- Laura,
why Laura? Ah Murder, Murder, Thieves, Thieves. Cries out till he comes down.

Enter Sir David. Here, where are all my Servants? Enter Servants. Run some one
way, some another; make enquiry through the whole Town for Mrs. Laura; she is
carried away by two Rogues or Devils, I know not which, run, run --


Serve. Why if the Devil has carried her away, Sir, where can we run?


Sir Dav. To Hell, ye Dog, do you stand to prate? --


Beats him. Serve. Marry look her there your self an you will -- Exit.


Sir Dav. Oh that I should believe these Conjuring, Soldiering Rascals; but
I Will find 'em, if they are above ground; and if they are mortal, I Will hang 'em,
that is my Comfort. Exit.


End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE, The Street before Mr, Trusty's Door; Roger comes out of the House with
a Pitch-fork on his Shoulder, and a Lantern in his Hand.
Rog. IT will be very dark ever I get home -- Od, I Am main Merry, Master Trusty
keeps rare Nappy Ale, and Dick the Butler is an honest Fellow; Lord, Sirs, how
bravely these Gentlefolk live -- Methinks I like it hugely; and I Am persuaded,
I was designed for a Gentleman, but was spoiled in the making; nay, nay, I was
made well enough too, that is the Truth on it; but it is that Damned Jade Fortune
that has spoiled me; for an I had an Estate now, I know how to live like a
Gentleman -- I could scorn the Poor, and screw up my Tenants, and would sooner
give Ten Pound to a Wench, than Two Pence for Charity; I could quickly turn --
My Cart into a Coach, and my Man Plod into a Coachman -- I could hurry into the
Tradesmen's Books -- Wear fine Clothes, and never pay for them -- Lie with
their Wives, and make my Footmen beat their Husbands, when they come to ask me
for Money. Get drunk with Lords, and break the Watchmen's Heads -- Scour the
Streets, and sleep in a Bawdy House -- Sell my Lands, and pay no Debts -- Get a
Charge of Bastards for the Parish to maintain -- Then, by the help of a
Commission, Transport my self out of their Reach --


Enter Sir Jeffry Constant, in Riding Habit. Sir Jeff. Do you hear, Friend?


Rog. Mehap I do -- And mehap I do not; What then, Sir?


Sir Jeff. Nay, the Matter's not great -- Do you live at that House?


Rog. I did a little while ago -- -- When I was in the Cellar.


Sir Jeff. A Comical Fellow. Then you don't serve Mr. Trusty?


Rog. No, Sir, I serve his Master, though as most Farmers do their Landlords.


Sir Jeff. I understand you: You Rent one of the Knight's Farms?


Rog. Ay, and a Plaguey Dear one too -- --


Sir Jeff. Say you so! That Is pity; I Will speak a good Word for thee -- -- Is
Mr. Trusty at home?


Rog. I thank you heartily. Yes, Sir, he is at home. Runs to the Door and
knocks. Trusty opens the Door and shrieks out, and throws it to again. Wookers,
what is the Matter now?


Sir Jeff. Was not that Mr. Trusty?


Rog. Yes, Sir, I think so.


Clin. Within. Oh undone, undone; Clinch peeps out as affrighted. here is my old
Master.


Sir Jeff. What Is that?


Rog. Nay, I heard a Noise, but cannot tell what they said -- -- But on you
please to come wo' me, Sir, I Will carry you in the Back-way.


Sir Jeff. The Back-way -- -- What can be the meaning of this? Why should he
start at sight of me? There must be something more in it than I can fathom; and
yet I think he is an honest Man. I never found any thing to the contrary.
Prithee, Friend, knock again. Roger knocks, then listens.


Rog. They are all asleep, Sir -- For I cannot so much as hear a Mouse stir --
--


Sir Jeff. Asleep! That Is impossible -- -- But come, Friend, show me the
Backdoor you spoke of -- --


Rog. Ay, Sir: But upon second Thoughts, -- -- I must be a little wary too. Are
not you some Rogue, that comes to rob the House with half a dozen Pistols about
you? For look ye, I Am an honest Man, and will not be drawn in for a Halter.


Sir Jeff. You Rascal, Do I look like a Thief?


Rog. Nay, nay, as for Looks -- That Is no matter, de ye see -- I have known
many a Rogue with as good a Countenance -- No Disparagement to yours, I
promise you. So that I shall not stir one step without you will stand search --


Sir Jeff. I shall break your Head, Sirrah, if you provoke me, I tell you but
that.


Rog. And what must I be doing on the mean time, -- Ha! old Gentleman? -- Break
my Head, quotha! -- You are mistaken -- -- We don't use to take broken heads in
our Country, mun -- Ha, ha, I will not show you the Backdoor now, and how will
you help your self? --


Sir Jeff. I know all the Doors of this House as well as you -- And can show my
self in -- Going.


Rog. Can you so -- But I Will watch you -- I wonder who this old Fellow is.


Sir Jeff. Sure some Madness has seized the Family; for certainly I Am not
changed -- Without Dispute, Trusty knows me; but I Will find the Cause presently.
Exit.


Rog. And so will I -- Exit.


Enter out of the House Captain Constant, Lovely and Clinch. Clin. So, Sir,
here is Music to your Wedding, with a Witness. What do you intend to do now? --
Do you think it possible to persuade your Father too, that he died of an
Apoplexy?


Lov. I fear, Clinch, that is beyond the Art of thy Impudence to do --


Clin. Nay, this Plot was none of my Impudence's contriving, that is my Comfort
-- I Am but a Servant; my Master told me, he was in Mourning for his Father --
And faith I resolve not to believe the Father to the contrary. Such an entire
Deference have I for all your Commands, Sir.


Constable. Why thou can not sure have the Confidence to stand it out to his
Face.


Clin. Never fear me, Sir -- You don't know what I can do -- What say you, Sir?
Shall we persuade the old Gentleman into a Ghost; or will you own your Fault,
and refund the Money?


Constable. Neither, Clinch -- I have more Duty, than to attempt the (...); and
more Necessity, than to submit to the other --


Clin. Nay, if you be so divided -- What do you propose?


Constable. I know not what to do -- I Am glad the Ceremony was over, before he came.


Lov. And the Money sent away -- What think you of my House, till the Heat of
the Discovery be over? It Is my Opinion your Presence will not be proper -- I
warrant Sir David will be in pursuit of Mrs. Laura presently too -- But we have
seen her fairly Married; so that Faithful is out of Danger; we'll leave him
here --


Constable. Shall I not take Belinda with us? I fear as much for her, as for my
self --


Clin. So there is no Body fears for me, I find -- Aside.
I am like to have my Part truly.

Lov. No, trust to her Management -- She turned the Act upon her Father, you
know, and made him impose her own Choice upon her. Let Clinch stay and use his
own Discretion -- If he can banter Sir Jeffry, and save his Bones, let him: But
be sure to give us notice of all that passes.


Clin. What if my Bones are broke? -- I thank you heartily for your Love, Sir.


Constable. No, no, Clinch; take heed you keep out of the reach of his Cane.


Clin. Or he will make me feel; he is Flesh and Blood -- Hark, I hear him coming,
Good bye to you, Sir -- Runs in.


Lov. It Is time for us to fly -- Exeunt.


Enter Dolly. Dolly. Well, I Am glad my Lady's Married; for if this old Spark
had come three Hours sooner, I would not have ventured Two to Ten of the Match
-- I cannot imagine where the Bridegroom's gone -- Nor what he will do, when my
Master comes to have a right Understanding; but I resolve to keep him ignorant
as long as I can. Ho, here he comes.

Enter Trusty. Oh, Sir, I am frighted out of my Wits; I went to serve my Lady's
Italian Greyhound, and I found a great swinging Dog, as large as an Ox, with
two great Eyes, as big as Bushels; and before I could call out, -- Whip it was
vanished --


Trusty. Mercy upon us -- 'Twas certainly Sir Jeffry, -- Clinch. Enter Clinch.


Clin. Sir, did you call --


Trusty. Did not you say your old Master appeared in the Shape of a Dog?


Clin. Ay, Sir, several times.


Dolly. In a huge great Dog?


Trusty. As big as an Ox.


Clin. Ay, Sir, as big as an Elephant.


Dolly. Ah! then it was certainly him I saw. Oh dear, oh dear, if the House be
haunted, I must leave it. I cannot live in it, if I might have a Thousand
Pounds; and may be, he will appear to no Body but me -- I am sure I never did him
any harm; it is true, I did not love him, because he was something Stingey -- --
He never gave me a Farthing in his Life --


Trusty. Nay, for that matter, I have got many a fair Pound by him, and yet he
appeared to me to Day.


Clin. Indeed, Sir. In what Shape, pray?


Dolly. Like an Ox, or an Elephant.


Trusty. No, in his own Shape; but I wish I may never see him more, for I was
horribly feared.


Clin. What had he a Cloven Foot, Sir, did you mind?


Trusty. Nay, for my part, -- I know not whether he had any Feet or no, -- Ha!
bless me, defend me, -- Protect me -- Avoid, Satan -- Retreating all this
while. I never wronged that Form, which thou have taken; so tell him -- And for
my Money, I have accounted for that; and all Things are rectified -- Exit.


Enter Sir Jeffry, amazed. Dolly. Oh! shield me ye Stars. runs in.


Clin. O Legs! save me, save me. runs in.


Enter Roger. Sir Jeff. What? Am I become a Monster! Do I affright all I come
near? What can be the Reason of this? The Doors are all Barricaded; and when I
knock, none will answer -- Prithee, Friend, ask some Body the Cause of these
Disorders?


Rog. No! Sir, I Will not budge a Foot; for I dan't know what to say to you. The
Family were all well, and in their right Senses, when I left them; and now upon
Sight of you, they are all distracted, I think -- I wish you be'n't a Conjurer,
or hark ye, Sir, -- Is not your Name Emmes -- Raised by the French Prophets to
Life again?


Sir Jeff. Sirrah, I believe you are the Devil: This Fellow will make me Mad.
This must be some Stratagem to abuse me; and this Rogue is in their Interest.
Why don't you go about your Business, Sirrah? What do you hanker after me for?


Rog. Nay -- an you go to that, what do you lounge about this House for? -- Oh!
Dolly, are you there; here is an old Gentleman is quite out of Patience.


Dolly. Trembling above. Oh, oh, oh, oh --


Rog. Hey day! What have you got the Palsy?


Sir Jeff. What ails you to tremble so, Sweetheart? Is Mr. Trusty within?


Dolly. I, I, I, I, I, o, o, o, o, Roger -- Ha, ha, have a care, ca, care --
Don't yo, yo, you come near him -- Nor let him to, to, to, touch you, even with
his Little Finger --


Sir Jeff. Bless me! What ails the Wench?


Rog. No, why what is the Matter? He has not the Plague about him, has he? Or is
he a Spy from the King of France -- Od an he be, I Will maul him --


Dolly. Oh, oh, -- -- it is a, a, Ghost.


Rog. The Devil it is -- Takes his Pitchfork off his Shoulder, and holds it out
at Sir Jeffry.


Sir Jeff. A Ghost, where? -- Who -- What Is a Ghost? Death, what means she?


Rog. Od's flesh, my Hair stands an end. Look ye -- Keep off Mr. Beelzebub, or
-- or --


Sir Jeff. Look ye, Sweetheart, what Frenzy has possessed you, I know not --
But if you take me for a Ghost -- You are deceived. Therefore look well at me
-- Do I not appear like Flesh and Blood?


Dolly. Ay, bo, bo, bo, but we, we, we know yo, yo, you a, a, a, a, are not so,
Sir --


Sir Jeff. Zounds, will they persuade me out of my Life? See, Friend, -- Do I
walk like a Spirit? Does the Dead move, and talk as I do?


Rog. When I am Dead, -- If you ask me, I Will resolve you, if I can.


Sir Jeff. Why? Feel me, feel me --


Rog. Feel the Devil -- Mercy upon me -- Keep off, I say -- Will ye -- Or I Will
stick your Ghostship through the Guts -- --


Sir Jeff. What shall I do -- Nay, prithee, Friend.


Rog. Friend me no Friends -- Look ye, I am not to be coax'd by the Devil, when
I know it is the Devil. Indeed when you are got into a Lawyer, or a handsome
Woman, one may be trapan'd.


Sir Jeff. Why will you be so positive? Has any Body imposed upon you? -- Pray
who told you I was dead?


Dolly. Those that knew very well, Sir

Enter Clinch. But I am not able to bear the fight of you any longer -- Now let
Clinch take his Part.


Sir Jeff. Go to be Hanged -- Hell and Furies! -- Ha, what do I see -- My Son's
Man! Sirrah, Sirrah, what makes you here? --


Clin. Mercy upon me --


Sir Jeff. What do you stare at, Rascal, ha?


Clin. But that I believe you are dead, Sir, or I should swear you are alive --


Sir Jeff. You believe I am dead, Rogue, -- How dare you believe such an
impud^^^ Lie? -- Where Is the Rake your Master? I find now who has raised this
Report. Sirrah, what is your Business here?


Clin. To wait on my Master, Sir --


Sir Jeff. To wait on your Master -- -- And where is your Master, pray?


Clin. Nay, for my part, Sir, I am not qualified to answer a Spirit -- There Is
Mr. Anthem, the Afternoon Lecturer, within. He has just Married Mr. Faithful to
a great Heiress which he brought in just now -- Roger here may step and call
him out a little.


Rog. With all my Heart -- If there be any thing that troubles his Mind, I Will
go this Minute --


Sir Jeff. Sirrah -- I Will qualify you for an Hospital -- I will ye Dog -- Runs
after him.


Clin. Oh, oh, oh


Rog. Well run, Clinch; Well run, Ghost! -- Ad it is a Plaguey Malicious Spirit
though.


Clin. Oh, oh, oh. Runs in.


Rog. I Will venture to speak to it once more -- -- In the Name of Goodness --
What is it that disturbs your Rest? Pray tell me; and as I Am an honest Man,
I Will do you Justice as far as Twenty Pounds a Year Free-Land, and all the Crops
of my Fa^^ goes -- For I perceive you was my Landlord, whilst you was Living;
and though your Son seems to be a very honest Gentleman, yet I don't know what he
may prove for a Landlord -- Then pray speak, can I serve you?


Sir Jeff. It Is in vain to be angry -- I must seem to comply with this Fellow
-- Yes, Friend, it is in thy power to serve me; if thou can procure me the
sight of Mr. Trusty, it is with him my (...)


Rog. I Will do my best Endeavors, Sir -- but keep your distance -- He goes a
little way, then turns back. But hark ye, Sir, suppose he will not come out,
cannot I tell him your Mind?


Sir Jeff. No, no; I must speak with him my self -- Death! --


Rog. Good lack -- what, perhaps -- your Soul will not rest else --


Sir Jeff. Heaven give me Patience!


Rog. Going, turns back. But after you have spoken with him, will you be quiet,
and haunt this House no more? That Is the Question, look ye!


Sir Jeff. A Pox of thy impertinent Interrogations; no --


Rog. That Is enough! -- but hold, must he come out, or speak to you through the
Window?


Sir Jeff. Any way, so I do but speak to him -- Oh, oh! --


Rog. Very well, very well. Going. But hark ye, Sir Ghost -- you will be here --
or Mr. Trusty will be woundy angry with me.


Sir Jeff. Oh Patience, Patience! or I shall burst. Aside. Ay, ay, I Will not
stir.


Rog. Well, I Will take your word. Going. Hold, hold, one thing more, and I have
done -- Pray tell me the Nature of a Ghost -- do you troubled Spirits fly in
the Air, or swim in the Water, pray?


Sir Jeff. Oh! the Devil --


Rog. Mercy upon us! what, are you with the Devil, say you; Oh Heaven help you!
Well then, are you sure he will see you? for every body cannot see a Ghost, they
say, especially if the Devil be in it.


Sir Jeff. Zounds, I tell you, he will see me as plain as you see me.


Rog. Nay, nay, that is plain enough -- Well, I Will knock, but, but, but don't
you come an Inch nearer me, I charge you Knocks.


Sir Jeff. Would I had been a hundred Miles off, when I first saw thee. What
has my graceless Son been doing!


Dolly. Who Is there? Speaks within.


Rog. It Is I, Dolly, prithee tell Master Trusty that he must speak to this
Ghost, or there is nothing to be done --


Dolly. I doubt he will not be persuaded to it.


Rog. Why, let him speak to it through the Window, or from the top of the House
-- so he does but speak to it; but in short, it must be spoke to, and by him,
for it is a confounded sullen Spirit, and will tell its mind to no body else --
He smells cursedly of Brimstone -- Look ye, if Master will come out, it shall not
hurt him -- for I Will keep it off with my Fork, so tell him, Dolly.


Dolly. I Will inform him.


Trusty opens the Window. Rog. So, I have done it you see -- Here Is Master
Trusty.


Sir Jeff. I thank you. Going toward the Window.


Trusty. I am not able to stand, if it comes near me -- Why are you thus
disturbed, Sir Jeffrey? -- I assure you, your Son has done every thing very
justly.


Sir Jeff. Why are you thus imposed upon, Mr. Trusty, to believe I am dead? --
My Son, quotha! -- Oh that I had never got that Son -- Weeps.


Trusty. I know not what to think; sure it is no Ghost.


Rog. Well, this thing is the likest Flesh and Blood, that ever I saw --


Sir Jeff. Pray do but touch me, Mr. Trusty, -- it is very odd, you will not be
persuaded to touch me. Puts out his hand toward the Window.


Rog. Take heed, Mr. Trusty.


Trusty. Why should I fear, I never wronged him -- I Will venture; but first --
Holds up his hand as if he prayed now -- ha! it is a real Hand, -- He Is living;
-- Sir, I am convinced.


Rog. Say you so -- why then if you are alive, the Fright's over, and I Am glad
on it with all my Heart.


Trusty. I ask your pardon, Sir; I have been abused -- grossly abused; Sir
Jeffrey your Son came down in Mourning, and assured me you was dead.


Sir Jeff. I Will make him mourn for something, I warrant him.


Trusty. Ah! that he does already, Sir, for I have paid him all the Rents in my
hands.


Sir Jeff. Have you so? -- It Is the last Rents he shall ever take for any Land
of mine -- I Will disinherit him this Day.


Trusty. Oh! undone, undone for ever -- Oh, oh, oh! Weeps.


Rog. Here Is small Mirth toward, as far as I can find. I Will even take the other
Horn of Ale, and the other Buss of Dolly -- Ex. into the House.


Clinch, Listening. Sir Jeff. What has that Rogue's Extravagance cost me? But
if he starves for the future, I care not; he never shall get a Groat from me.


Clin. Nay, then we may all go for Soldiers. Aside.


Sir Jeff. Where is he?


Trusty. Oh, oh, oh! I know not; but wherever he is -- I am wretched, he has
made me miserable, I Am sure. Oh, oh, oh!


Sir Jeff. No, Mr. Trusty; though you have used me dirtily, in making me the
Jest of your Family; for you might have discovered the Imposture with less
precaution; yet I Will not take that advantage which the Laws allow. You have
served me long, and I believe you honest. I Will discharge you from what you have
paid my undutiful Child -- Let him take what he has got, and make the best on it.


Clin. That Is something however. Aside.


Trusty. You are generous, Sir Jeffry, even beyond my hopes: But Oh! there is
yet a greater offense behind, which cuts me deeper than the Money -- Alas! my
Daughter --


Sir Jeff. What of her?


Trusty. Is married to your Son; Oh, oh, oh!


Sir Jeff. Then he is completely wretched -- A Wife, and no Estate; ha, ha, ha;
I Am glad on it with all my Heart.


Clin. There Is a kind Father now -- I must give my Master notice of his good
Fortune. Exit.


Trusty. Oh! say not so, Sir; be not glad of my Child's Ruin; had I known you
lived, the Match had never been.


Sir Jeff. Go; You are not the Man I took you for -- you are but a Knave. You
ought to have been as just to my Heir, as to my self -- What, was your Blood
fit to be popt into my Estate? Ha! or have you been really a Steward, and
cheated me out of a Fortune for your Daughter?


Trusty. Sir, what I am Master off, I got fairly under you, part, and part
under my Lord Belville in Ireland, whom I served twenty Years in the same Post
I do you; when he died, he trusted me with a Secret, which yet I have divulged
to no Man; and when I do, the World will say I am an honest Man. Love first
joined their Hearts, and my Ignorance their Hands; use me as you please, but
pardon them.


Enter Lovely, etc. Lov. I must become an Intercessor in that too, Sir Jeffrey;
Love is the great Cementer of the Marriage State; it reconciles all Differences
-- it bends the Stubborn -- and it tames the Bold, it wins the Haughty, softens
the Savage, and reclaims the Libertine; then will you cast off your Son for a
Virtue, you ought rather to prize him for?


Sir Jeff. That Love can never be a Virtue, Mr. Lovely, that teaches a Child to
trick his Parents.


Lov. Stratagems ever were allowed of in Love and War; Sir, you must forgive
him.


Enter Captain Constant, Belinda and Maria. Mar. And I must second Mr. Lovely,
Sir, the Captain has married a virtuous Woman, and I believe you will confess a
handsome one too.


Sir Jeff. Nay, I have nothing to say against her Virtue, nor her Beauty
neither; she is a pretty Woman, that is the truth on it; if she had married any
Body's Son but mine, I should have wished her Joy with all my heart -- -- Oh
thou graceless Wretch, get out of my sight.


Constable. Kneeling. I confess, Sir, I am unworthy of your Mercy, but throw my
self wholly upon your good Nature and fatherly Affection, with this Resolution,
never to attempt ought against your Pleasure more.


Sir Jeff. No, Sir, nothing you can do for the future, shall either please, or
displease me; mark that.


Bell. Give us but your Blessing, Sir, and we shall never quarrel with Fortune
for her Favors, Love shall supply that defect; my chief Concern shall be to
show my Duty, and by my Care to please you, prove the entire Affection I have
for your Son; and that way make up the inequality of my Birth and Fortune.


Sir Jeff. You shall never make up any thing with me, I promise you, Madam,
whilst he is your Father -- Death, marry my Slave?


Trusty. The name of Slave belongs not to us freeborn People, Sir Jeffrey; but
were I your Slave, she is not; for since the truth must out, she is no Child of
mine, but Daughter to my Lord Belville; which I have brought up ever since she
was three days old; her Mother dying in her Labor, and her Marriage being
private, because she was much below my Lord's Quality; and He at that time
under the tuition of a Father; He never made it public, but put her into my
hands to breed up as my own; when he came to his Estate, he purchased a
thousand Pounds a Year, and settled it on her; which I have managed ever since,
and now will deliver it up to Captain Constant. This I had told in the Infancy
of their Loves; but that I saw your Son was not well with you, and did not then
think him a Match good enough for her; but since he has over reached me, I hope
you will prove a Father.


Sir Jeff. Is it possible! Od, Madam, I wish you Joy with all my Soul, Faith I
do; and if this is matter of Fact, you shall find me a Father, Jack: You shall
go to Flanders no more.


Lov. Dear Constant, I congratulate thy good For^une --


Mar. And I yours, Madam, since I (...) Cousin.


Bell. Still let me hold that Name; for since I never know my Father, I shall
acknowledge this good Man as such.


Mar. Sir Jeffrey, I was positive you would not report.


Sir Jeff. You that are so positive in these matters; why don't you and Mr.
Lovely strike up a Bargain? he has followed you a considerable time.


Lov. That Question is A-propos, Sir Je^^^^^; What can you say, Madam? must I
dangle after your two or three Ye^rs (...), I wish I hold out.


Trusty. Give him the (...) Father, or (...)


Sir Jeff. Why (...)


Trusty. Only Principles (...), and th^s honest Gentleman's a Whi^^ (...)


Sir Jeff. Ha, h^, (...)


Trusty. I Will ^ring (...) th^^, (...).


Mar. Upon that Condition, there is my hand.


Lov. And here is my Heart. (...)


Sir Jeff. Why that (...) only ^^nt the (...) now.


Enter Faithful and L^ura, Lucy and Manage. Faith. We (...) with ou^; he (...)
still.


Trusty. Dear Mr. (...), I with thee (...) ^ll my heart, and you, Madam.


Om. We all do the same.


Faith. I think y^^ all, (...) your^ I would have the whole (...)


Lau. There (...)


Bell. I hope, (...)


Lau. I shall be very ambitious ^f the Ho^^^r.


(...) Sir D^^. (...) and you, (...) you all in the Queen's Name, (...) in so
^^rin^ thi^ (...)


Trusty. (...) are (...)


Sir Da^. (...) they are.


Mar. (...)


(...). (...).


Lau. And with my own Consent, Passure you -- You may barricade your Windows
now, Sir David, I shall run mad no more; Ha, ha, ha.


Faith. I shall trouble your House no more, Sir, I am dispossessed, Sir David,
you need not run from me now; ha, ha, ha.


Constable. And he will know his Inn for the future, Sir, ha, ha.


Faith. And am perfectly recovered of my Wound, Sir; and shall have no occasion
to borrow your Coach again; without you will do me the favor to let it carry my
Wife to London.


Sir Dav. Carry her to Hell -- Here Is a shuffling cutting Rascal in all his
Tropes and Figures: Zounds, how I am tricked; But you have robbed me, Mistress.


Lau. Of nothing but my Writings, Sir, mark that.


Sir Dav. The Law shall tell you that; and so, may the itch of Variety seize
you, and the Curse of Cuckoldom fall on him, Arrests and Poverty on you all. Ex.


Trusty. Ha, ha, ha; now Lovely, for the Parson.


Enter 'Squire Number and Slouch. Number. Hold! I forbid the Banes; you shall not have
her, mun, for all you are so Cock sure.


Sir Jeff. What Banes do you forbid, Friend?


Number. Why Mr. Trusty's Daughter's Banes.


Om. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Lov. Alas! 'Squire, you come too late; She that was Mr. Trusty's Daughter, is
married; and I am just going to it.


Number. That was! what do you mean?


Lov. Why I mean that Mrs. Belinda, that has snapt your Heart, 'Squire, proves
to be a Lord's Daughter, and not Mr. Trusty's, as you believe; and now is
Captain Constant's Wife, here.


Number. A Lord's Daughter! Nounds, I Am glad* I Am rid of her -- Captain, I wish
you much Joy with all my heart -- Od, I Will engage she shakes your Commission
for you; ha, ha.


Om. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Number. Why, what Luck have I had, Slouch! Mercy on us; what a Ruin had I brought
upon all our Country Gentlemen innocently? For she would have corrupted all
their Wives; the Devil a one would have made her own Butter, after being
acquainted with her.


Bell. Oh! you mistake, 'Squire, I am an excellent Housewife; ha, ha, ha.


Number. Yes, yes, some in our Country knows by woeful Experience, what Housewifes
you Quality make; Nounds, 'twou'd undo the High Sheriff of the County to find
you in clean Cards; then your plaguey O^tlandish Liquors, your Coff^e and Tea,
sucks up the Cr^^^r (...) whole D^ry, and your (...) Collips would confound all
the (...) and (...) you game away, would ruin a Lord of a Manor, No, no, no
Quality Breed for us Country Gentlemen (...) worse than double Tax^ ^ ha, ha.


Constable. Ha, ha; Well then, 'Squire, I have done you a (...) of Service; I hope
all Animosities are forgot.


Number. They are i^ says, Sir; and if you will (...) me low (...) heartily merry
with you.


Trusty. You shall b^ (...) Music -- Hark, I hear^ (...)


Number. Music! 'Egad, if they can play my ^an^ I Will give y^^ (...)


Trusty. Come, let us in then, (...).


SCENE, The in-(...) ^f the (...).
Enter Roger and D^lly. Rog. Save you all -- Master and Landlord that was, and
Maste^ and Landlord that is, I Am glad to hear all i^ eve^ wi^h (...) Soul -- I
hope you will not forget your promise th^^ to (...) Tena^nt Roger -- -- which was
to speak to Master -- -- no, no, no speak to your self now* Sir -- My Farm is
woundy dear.


Trusty. You are wondre^^ merry, Roger.


Rog. So is every body you know, Sir, when they are prepare^ for the Parson;
are they not, Mrs. Belinda? I hope I shall h^v^ your Consent; for I have got
D^lly in the mind at last.


Bell. I wish you Joy with all my heart, R^g^^.


Constable. I Am glad to see you follow your Lady's Example, Mrs. ^^rothy.


Dolly. She set t^ (...).


Constable. Here (...) Clinch, Lucy, and (...).


Lucy. The best Provision I desire, is to wait on my Lady still, (...).


Man. And (...) my (...), who kno^^ (...) Wedding between you and I, ^hild.
(...)


Faith. Your Desires (...) what says (...)?


Clin. I had a kin^ (...) of, I Will stand as I do.


Constable. Then we are all (...)


Sir (...) Well, (...) Song now, I Will (...) the Rent for the next (...).


Rog. Say you so? I thank you heartily, Master, I Will do my best, I cannot sing
like your Londoners -- But it is a new Ballad; and 'twas made at London, by a
very honest Country Gentleman, last Sessions of Parliament. Hum, hum. Sings.


S^^uch. Ads blead, you sing, Sir; and the 'Squire by, that is more than any Man
in Zumersetshire will venture to do: Master, Ods Wounds, hold your own, Master.


A SONG, by the Author, and sung by Mr. Dogget.
Would you ch^se a Wife f^r a happy Life,
Leave the Court, and the C^untry take,
Where Dolly and She, young Molly and Prue,
Follow Roger and John, a ^ilst Harvest goes on,
And merrily, merrily Rake.
Leave the London Dames, be it spoke to their Shames,
To lig in their Beds till Noon;
Then get up and firetch, then paint too and patch,
Some Widgeon to catch, then look on their Watch,
And wonder they rise up so soon.
Then Coffee and Tea, both Green and Bohea,
Is served to their Tables in Plate;
Where their Tattles do run, as swift as the Sun,
Of what they have wone, and who is undone,
By their gaming, and sitting up late.
The Lass give me here, though brown as my Beer,
That knows how to govern her House;
That can milk her Cow, or Farrow her Sow;
Make Butter, or Cheese, or gather green Pease,
And values fine Clothes not a Louse.
This, this is the Girl, worth Rubies and Pearl;
This the Wife that will make a Man rich:
We Gentlemen need, no Quality Breed,
To squander away, what Taxes would pay,
In troth we care for none such.


Constable. Now I am happy --
Belinda mine, and you my faults forgive;
It Is from this moment I begin to live.
Love sprung the Mine, and made the Breach in Duty,
No Cannon Ball can execute like Beauty.
But I Will no more in search of Pleasures rove,
Since every Blessing is co^mpriz'd in Love. Exeunt.

FINIS.

