THE MAID OF ARRAGON; A TALE.

By MRS. COWLEY.

PART I.

LONDON: Printed by T. SPILSBURY, For L. DAVIS, T. LONGMAN, J. DODSLEY, T.
CADELL, W. OWEN, S. CROWDER, T. DAVIES, T. BECKET, G. KEARSLEY, C. DILLY, T.
EVANS, RICHARDSON and URQUHART, and R. FAULDER. M,DCC,LXXX.

TO MR. PARKHOUSE, Of TIVERTON, DEVON.
ACCEPT, dear Parent! from a filial pen,
The humble offering of my pensive Muse:
She painted on my mind a Daughter's woes,
Nor could my heart the tender theme refuse.
The rightful Patron of th'eventful tale,
To you I dedicate the scenes she drew;
My soul she searched to find OSMIDA's thoughts,
And colored her from what I feel for you.
Yours then the meed -- if meed kind Fame will grant,
The tale to you -- to you the bays belong;
You gave my youthful fancy wings to soar;
From your indulgence flows my wild-note song.
Its music in your ear will sweetly sound;
Its page, with fond delight, you will traverse over:
With half your pleasure may the world peruse!
My muse, my vanity can ask no more.
Dear other Parent! guiltless hold my heart,
Though unadorned my numbers with your name;
Your worth, your goodness, in its center lives,
And there shall perish only with my frame.
H. COWLEY.

It is near three years since the above lines were written, and the First Part
of THE MAID OF ARRAGON finished; though other avocations have prevented the
publication till now. This circumstance is mentioned, to show that they were
prompted by the heart, and not by the desire of imitating the Author of an
admirable Novel, which was addressed to a Father since that period.

DEPRECATION.
I ENTREAT the Reviewers to have compassion on me. From the beginning of my
literary warfare, these unmerciful Wits have pursued me with the sharpest
arrows of Criticism; and I have had nothing to console me, alas! -- but the
approbation of the Public. How shall I escape now, when to all my other faults
are added, so many outrages in Geography? With what triumph of critical
sagacity will they say, (after the necessary strictures on the story, thoughts,
and verses) "If our Author was determined to send her Pegasus into Spain, in
quest of adventures, she ought to have consulted Salmon about the situation of
its provinces. She would there have found that Arragon is fifty miles from the
sea; and that the Moors could not possibly have debarked on its confines,
unless, like fish to the London markets, their fleet had arrived by
land-carriage. With equal facility, the troops of the King of Leon are brought
across Old Castile to Saragossa in about thirty hours -- another miracle; which
was doubtless accomplished by the interposition of a friendly necromancer, who
furnished the army with wings, in exchange for some chaste damsel, or
beautiful princess. Had this Lady-Writer's reading extended to a translation
of the Iliad, she would have found no examples of such liberties there. Homer
gives an exact map of the countries he carries us through; and from Ithaca to
Troy, not a village or river is misplaced."

True: but Homer (I name him as a modern Painter mentions a Correggio, and a
Raphael) Homer united the Historian with the Poet -- I deal entirely in
fiction. It was enough for me, that Spain, through a succession of ages, had
been subject to the ravages of Africa; and that during this period, sovereigns
had been robbed of their crowns, and been obliged to resign their sceptres to
their swarthy conquerors. The relation of the particular events of these remote
times, the Historic Muse has generally left to her creative Sister, who never
fails to profit by their obscurity, in relating them to the world in her own
manner; the geography of the heart, and the history of the passions, are the
only realities to which she attends. If, in describing these, I shall be found
deviating from the laws of Truth, and Nature, I shall have failed in my
intention; but I protest, if the cacoethes scribendi should continue on me, or
if I should ever wander again into the regions of Romance, I shall treat oceans
and provinces with as little ceremony as rivulets and meadows: I will avail
myself of the established privileges, and raise mountains, seas, or kingdoms,
in any part of the habitable globe that hits my fancy; or, if it strikes me,
build a temple to Dullness -- in the chamber of a Reviewer.

THE MAID OF ARRAGON.
OH, ye! whose sympathetic hearts are formed
To woe responsive, and whose trem'lous nerves
Vibrate to Sorrow's mournful airs -- attend!
Not you, ye gay! not you, ye vacant crowds!
Who labor through the pleasures of the world,
Nor feel existence when they cease t'impel;
I call not you! -- for, oh, your callous bosoms
Fell Dissipation steels, and robs your minds
Of the sweet energies bestowed by Heaven:
But, come, ye few! who love the lonely hour;
Who know the sense refined, the charming agony,
Which Pity gives the hallowed hearts she fills;
To you I call! oh, come, and trace with me
(Whilst glittering Hesperus holds high his torch)
The mazy windings of yon solemn wood.
Behold the lawn, which opens on the left,
With crocus bordered, aromatic thyme,
And every fragrant shrub that tempts the be
Down from the liquid air, to bathe in sweets.
The opening wicket of that humble cot,
By slow degrees, moves gently on its hinge:
And now, with cautious tread, the soft OSMIDA,
Looking a blessing on her slumbering Sire,
The threshold quits; when, from his short repose,
Aged ALMANZOR starts: -- Where art thou, Child?
Where is my darling? Oh! return, OSMIDA!
Why will thou wander in Night's chilly air,
And trust thy bosom to its piercing dews?
Return, my Child! the unpitying winds will shake
Thy tender frame. --
The night is calm, my Father!
Scarcely a zephyr moves the restless aspin;
And the clear moon, with soft inviting beam,
Looks through the foliage of the lofty pines.
A moment let me breathe the balmy air!
Confined beneath the cottage roof by fear,
And more confined by duteous cares for thee,
All day I live immured. Then let me now
Taste Nature's blessings -- exercise and air.
Heaven guard my Child! But soon return, OSMIDA;
And downy sleep shake slumbers on thy pillow!
OSMIDA quits the cot, and bends her steps
Toward the margin of a neighboring lake:
But not its lucid bosom tempts her steps,
Nor moon inviting through the lofty pines,
Nor balmy air, nor healthful exercise;
Ah, no! -- it is to breathe her bosomed anguish,
Where Grief, though audible, wastes her sad voice
In ambient air -- not torturing the ear
Of the revered ALMANZOR, Sire beloved!
Bending to earth, with eyes that penetrate
The glowing canopy of heaven; in sounds
More mournful than the widowed stock-dove's plaints
-- Tender as youthful mother's lulling song,
She thus addressed Omnipotence divine:
Oh, Thou! in whose eternal, boundless sight,
The woes, or happiness, that overpower
The mind of finite man, seem but as drops,
That in the vast abyss unite their littleness,
To form one mighty whole -- to Thee I pray!
Not for myself I pray, but for my Father;
For him whose care-worn heart, drooping, oppressed,
And torn with barbed griefs, seems torn from thee.
His soul her wonted confidence forsakes;
He falls from thee; he leans not on the rock,
The sacred rock, by which alone he stands
-- And quitting, sinks to measureless despair.
Oh, Thou, accept my humble heart for his!
Hear, hear ALMANZOR, in OSMIDA's voice!
It Is he implores. Bless, comfort, heal his griefs;
And to thyself attach his sorrow-tempted heart!
Next for my Country, Heaven, oh, hear my prayer!
Behold her struggles with a pitying eye!
Drive from thy temple-gates the mocking infidel!
Restore thy altars! Send --
The pious Virgin's voice, with terror choked,
Unfinished left her prayer. Forth, from the shade
Of the surrounding thicket, rushed a Knight,
In shining armor clad, borne on a steed
Who seemed to scorn the earth, his light heel passed,
As though his element had been the air:
Swift, as the breath of fierce Euroclydon
He bore his master to the spangled lake,
Whose borders, by OSMIDA's knee still pressed,
In thousand glowing colors bloomed around her,
In thousand scents perfumed the tranquil air.
Light vaulting on the ground, the Knight approached,
And in such courteous phrase addressed the Maid,
That half her terrors ended with his words.
Leave me, Sir Knight! with firmness she replied;
And as she spoke, her voice, though sweet, expressed
A custom to command. Leave me, Sir Knight!
This solitude is to Misfortune sacred;
None ever tread these unfrequented wilds,
But those to whom the door of sweet Society,
And Friendship's holy gate, are shut forever.
And can the social door, and Friendship's gate,
To thee oppose their brazen locks? O Heaven!
The peopled world thy angels have sorsook,
And here in deserts dwell -- in human form,
But in celestial beauty! Tell me, Virgin!
-- For sure the awe, with which thy eye inspires,
Bespeaks thy vestal state -- tell me, fair Maid!
What ills, what sore affliction, thee have driven
To seek, in these sequestered shades, felicity
By man refused?
My sorrows, gentle Knight!
I dare not whisper to the speechless air
-- Still less entrust them to a stranger's ear:
Yet, from your courtesy, I must demand
My solitude again; and, as you hope
For blessing from the Power who hears my voice,
Swear never to divulge, that in these glades
A Maid you found -- by outward beauty graced,
But whose sad heart, Sorrow has called her own,
And stern Affliction long enrolled a sister!
The Stranger paused: and then, as if to win
Her confidence, and woo her from reserve
By frank example, thus the Nymph addressed:
To whom should I reveal this blessed abode?
Whose feet conduct to violate your haunts?
I, who, like you, by keen misfortunes pressed,
Seek shelter from the world; and even now
Forsake my native skies; quit Gallia's shores,
Her purple vineyards leave, her fertile meads,
Her ever blooming fields -- all these I quit --
For these, to wretched hearts, bloom, swell, and fertilise, in vain.
Unhappy Youth! breathed forth the sad OSMIDA;
And is Affliction's appetite so vast,
That daily victims cannot allay her rage?
But, gentle Knight! where will your journey end?
What Porter waits to hear your bugle sound,
And open the gates, with welcome in his face
To greet his honored Lord's expected guest?
Alas! sweet Maid! no hospitable gate
DE COURCI seeks; no welcome waits his steps:
To Eastern climes I bend my weary course;
-- Jerusalem the home which ends my progress.
There let me bear your woes. Instruct me, Lady!
That at the Holy Sepulcher your name
May animate my prayers; that there your griefs
May, sanctified, ascend the porch of heaven,
And, in their stead, soft peace, and blooming joy,
Return into your breast. That duty passed,
My sword shall lend its vigor to the cause
-- The sacred cause, which arms our Christian legions,
And drains our cities of their val'rous Knights.
OSMIDA's eye, beaming with newborn hope,
And gratitude awaked, shot forth her thoughts,
Ere from her vermeil lips these accents stole
-- In breath more fragrant than an Eastern morn:
Will thou remember me at Zion's gate?
And shall my sorrows from the holy cave,
In which the Savior drew his second breath,
Ascend to the Almighty's throne? -- Again
She stopped, and checked her growing frankness.
The Stranger saw instinctive prudence rise,
And feared to give the virtue time to act.
Yes, he rejoined, with zeal more pure and ardent
Than converts feel, who, at the holy altar,
Bewail a life of cursed idolatry,
Will I your sorrows pour, in that blessed spot
Where Sorrow surely cannot plead in vain.
Struck with the piety which decked his words,
Yet doubting still, the timid, trusting Virgin,
In silence, with herself thus cogitates:
A Christian Knight he is, and with his life
Now hastening to support the Christian cause.
Oceans and continents will soon divide us:
Why then the knowledge of my woes withold,
When blessed Benevolence demands the tale?
Then, turning to the Stranger, meekly said
-- Such kind persuasion confidence demands;
Yet patience will you need, whilst I relate
Events so strong, they fitter would become
A manly tongue. Of battles I must speak,
Of falling kingdoms, and victorious arms.
These strains accord not with a female voice;
Yet will I strive to nerve my thoughts and language,
And raise my fancy to the lofty theme.
But not alone of war shall I discourse,
Of meeting armies, or contending states.
-- Here on this sloping bank, Sir Knight, repose;
And I a tale -- for Pity -- will unfold,
Were Pity's tears innum'rous as the sands.
The Knight, with token of respect, obeyed.
OSMIDA, with the grace of sweet reserve,
At gentle distance, near the moss-grown roots
Of an expanding beech, a Wood-nymph seemed
-- A woodland goddess! and her grassy seat
Chaste Dian's rural throne. Grave Recollection
On her sweet features spread an air composed;
Whilst in Night's zenith -- 'midst her radiant court,
The crystal Moon seemed fixed in still attention:
The silent waters of the lake more silent flowed:
The Zephyrs, drawing close their silken wings,
In soft subjection held the rustling branches:
The wheeling bat far off her circles draws;
Whilst the Night's sweet musician stilled her song,
To learn a sadder note -- from fair OSMIDA.
All thus in silence wrapped, the thoughtful Maid,
With tone sedate, begins the promised tale.
This happy clime -- this Arragonian realm,
Had late a Monarch, whom her Sons revered;
-- As King revered him, as a Father loved:
He loved his People, knew no care but theirs;
And the fond blessings, which they gave his name,
Blunted the thorns a diadem conceals.
Peace, in this happy reign, her throne established,
And brought her proper blessings in her train;
Fair Commerce waved her pennons in our ports;
The fertile plough subdued our sterile fields;
Our granaries, like those of Egypt, drew
From neighboring countries, riches and renown.
The cottage Peasant, round his well-fill'd board,
Saw thankful faces and contented hearts:
No iron taxes gripped his pallid frame,
Nor tore the morsel from his children's mouths:
Blithe as the morn he rose to healthful labor,
And hailed, with joy, the approach of festive eve.
Such once the favored lot of envied Arragon.
Her fame, her riches, spreading to the East,
Enticed the Moors from their polluted home:
Sudden their prows invade our peaceful seas;
-- Sudden the bold Barbarians crowd our shores;
Defenseless hamlets turn unnatural beacons,
And blaze the woe-fraught tidings through the land.
Like a night-torrent, fierce, uncheck'd, they come
With devastation at their coursers heels;
Death, rapine, ruin, mark their dreadful progress,
And reach the bulwarks of the royal city.
Deep consternation spreads through every street;
The Affrighted virgins to the temples run;
The mother grasps her child, and shrieking flies;
Whilst husbands, fathers, brothers, all in arms,
Chide the dear mourners who retard their speed,
Snatch last adieus, and rush upon the walls.
But from the walls, what image strikes the view!
A turban'd phalanx on the hill appeared,
Rapid descending to the plain below.
Upon the right advanced a mighty column,
Of armed chariots formed -- so thickly set
With scythes, and swords, and barbed spears, each seemed
A steely porcupine; whose burnished quills,
Catching the rays of the meridian sun,
Gleam'd back upon the town refulgent horror.
Upon the left hand moved the tawny marksmen,
Whose ebon bows, and quivers richly stored,
They sung, were given by Death -- unerring archer!
The dreadful pomp descended to the plain,
Fixed their bold standards, and entrenchments formed,
-- Whilst our scared citizens observed their works,
Like trembling birds, who, looking from their nests
Upon the charming cockatrice, behold
Inevitable fate. But black despair,
That first enerv'd, next lent their courage fury:
Lead us! they cried -- lead to the Moorish camp!
What are their numbers, single as they come?
With us, our parents, children, lovers, laws,
Religion, liberty -- all join the battle,
-- Brace our firm arms, and give ten thousand points,
Ten thousand deaths, to every Christian sword.
This holy rage, like sparks electric, flew
From man to man. Each urged his valiant friend,
To save their city, matrons, daughters, wives,
-- As if on each their preservation hung.
Scarce could the pious King restrain their ardor,
So sure they seemed of conquest and revenge.
But he, who knew that from the almighty arm
Their foes' destruction only could proceed,
The gates of every temple open threw,
And, with humiliation deep, repaired
Before the sacred altar of our God.
The soldiers, citizens, the nobles crowd,
And every holy roof grew instant vocal.
Prostrate and weeping, they implored the High
For Gideon's sword, and mighty Joshua's arm.
"Shield us!" they cried -- "Oh, save thy faithful people!
Nor give us to the mockers, for a scorn!
Omnipotence! preserve us from the yoke
The foe prepares for our devoted necks!
Humble the boasters, who repose their strength,
Not on thy arm, but in their own frail numbers!
To Thee! O God of Battles! we appeal.
Hear, hear our voice!" -- When lo! from Heaven's bright concave,
In gracious intimation, that their prayers,
Wafted by guardian spirits, reached the throne,
A mighty peal of thunder rapt their ears,
And purple lightnings quiver in the sky.
The Arragons, with hopes thus sanctified,
Rushed from the temples, like impetuous flames;
-- Or like fierce tigers, who their destined prey
At distance see; and pant, and foam, and rage,
With pride of certain conquest. But their prince
Strove this incautious ardor to restrain.
-- All-bounteous Heaven, he cried, by means, not miracles,
Decides the fate of armies, and of kings.
Let prudent foresight, then, direct your aims,
Lest rashness blights the harvest of your courage!
The haughty Moors, contemptuous of our strength,
Doubtless expect to see our opening gates
Receive them, masters, at the trumpet's signal:
To aid their blindness, we will offers make,
Of terms too humble for a state in freedom,
And yet too high for Conqu'rors to accept.
Then, in the night's meridian, when no star,
With tell-tale beams upon our polished mail,
Shall show us to the watchful sentinel,
-- Then will we rouse the lion from his den,
And prove our courage worthy of our cause.
The humming notes of growing apprchation,
Like distant thunder, gaining on the ear,
Broke forth at once into applausive shouts.
Live! live the King! re-echoed every mouth;
O guard my People! said the heart-touch'd King.
The heralds sent, and their misleading terms,
To blind, with fears unfelt, the Moorish camp,
All now prepare, for the wished hour of onset.
The sounding anvils beat their clanging music;
Peace-rusted swords regain their edge and polish;
The nervous archer tries his idle bow,
And gives new plumage to his missile darts.
The matrons, virgins, catch the martial fire:
These songs prepare, these rosy garlands twine,
To greet, on their return, the conquering heroes.
Yet, amongst the virgins, one sad heart was found;
'Twas in the bosom of the royal Princess.
Her vows, her plighted troth, had long been given
To young MONTENOS, Duke Medina's Heir.
He, only he, could melt her icy breast;
-- None could so well deserve an untouched heart.
His mind, more noble than his princely birth,
Lent glory to his name: matchless his form!
As poets feign celestial Virtue wears,
When visible to man. Oh! wonder not,
The Princess loved with strength no common flame
Could have inspired! Her soul was full of love:
She lived, she breathed, she thought, but for MONTENOS.
Ten thousand terrors now besieged her soul;
Ten thousand nothings, which her fancy dressed
In color, substance, circumstance, and form.
Yet, from her lover, 'twas her care to hide
The tender weakness which her heart confessed.
Shall I, she cried, a mighty kingdom's heir,
Show terrors that the humbler maids despise?
My Country rocks upon a precipice.
-- Go then, MONTENOS! prop her falling state!
Repel th'invader! tread on Slav'ry's neck!
And amongst her dear preservers be thou Chief!
The shades of eve advance, and from the camp
The subtle messengers return -- return
With insult loaded, and contemptuous threats.
No less the Moors demand than general vassalage;
That conquered Arragon -- so proud their style!
Should yield them homage, and perpetual tribute.
A day they grant us to resolve on slavery,
-- To turn apostates, and revolt from Heaven,
Or see our towers extended in the dust.
No terms or messengers they will receive;
But opened gates, and crescents on our spires,
The answer they expect. This lofty menace
Less with surprise than anger was received;
-- It spoke the spirit of the fierce invaders.
Some hours -- tremendous pause! were yet to pass
Between this period, and that meant for action:
Gloomy suspense sat brooding over the army,
And hid, not damped, the ardor of their courage.
All, self-collected, seemed retired within,
And the full mind had rendered language mute.
At this grand moment, when no thought of aid,
-- Of human aid, had glanced across the soul,
In from the Western gate -- like bees returning
From their diurnal circuit -- rushed amain
Ten thousand sons of war. At this blessed sight,
Such transport seized the citizens, and troops,
It seemed triumphant holiday, and joy
Would even in frolic sport -- so sudden the effect.
To Leon's King we owed this grateful succor:
He heard the Moors were hovering on our coasts,
And, as a Christian king, the cause adopted.
But now the streets, choked up with armed men,
Pour back their warriors through the Western portal:
There, in the marshy vale, that to the North
Extends its rich campaign, the army grew
In form. Pardon if I, a simple Maid,
Cannot relate, Sir Knight! in artful terms,
How, in what order grew. I have not skill
To use the phrases chance has given mine ear*
Were I to speak of flank, and rear, and van,
You Would find my tongue to wild confusion lead.
-- Learn then but this: the King the center kept;
MONTENOS, stately pine! led on the front.
The Stranger bowed reply, in mute respect.
OSMIDA, gently pausing, thus resumed:
The tender Twilight, which till now had looked
With timid eye upon the martial plain,
Withdrew her beam, to follow distant day:
Night, often invoked, advanced her ebon standard,
To which all Nature yields well-pleased obeisance:
But iron War, scornful of Nature's laws,
Makes Rest his captive, and the ear of Silence
Frequent invades, whilst from the throne of Night,
Coeval power! she rules the drowsy world.
So now through Arragonia's streets, his march
-- Unmeasured by the drum's imperious notes,
In aweful pomp he takes. Balconies crowded
Shower down their blessings as the soldiers pass,
Whilst thousand voices spend themselves in prayer,
And thousand ardent eyes appeal to Heaven.
At length arrived toward the Eastern towers,
The army made a momentary halt.
When, lo! the holy Prelate, with a train
Of cloistered saints, barefooted, robbed in white,
And holding each a crucifix, advanced.
Ye more than warriors, said the Man of God,
Ye Christian soldiers, think whose sword you bear!
The barbarous nations of the earth, whose ears
Were never blessed with sounds of Gospel Truths,
Have yet achieved such wondrous deeds in arms,
As will convey their names, with glory decked,
To the remotest age in Time's dark womb.
A thousand nations have for freedom fought,
A thousand others for revenge have armed,
And given destruction to th'offending foe:
To save their matrons from the brutal rape,
Their daughters from Pollution's arms, have sent
Victorious myriads to th'imbattled field.
All these you fight for; but you fight for MORE --
-- You fight for CHRIST. See here! behold your Savior!
Torn on the racking cross! These wounds for you
Were given. This blood -- this sacred blood! for you
Gushed forth, and mingled with corruption. Go then!
Bleed, agonize, and die for Him! Rapt Seraphims
Are now preparing your celestial crowns:
-- Go and atchieve them! Choirs of holy angels
Now tune their golden harps, and hymns prepare
To greet ye conqu'rors in the gates of Heaven:
-- Go! blessed soldiers -- Go!
The Father ceased.
From every mouth burst forth -- as if one soul,
One voice, through all the army reigned -- "We go!"
Inspired thus by the Priest's heroic charge,
Each seemed to press to be the earliest victim;
Their souls on fire, were eager to depart
The earthly sphere, and seize on their immortal crowns.
Thus rapt, the soldiers pass; and through the gates,
Like mists exhaling from the earth's moist bosom,
Spread on the surface of the hostile plain.
The gates shut close their wide-extended jaws,
-- Shut close for ever, on the valiant youths,
Whose feet now leave them -- to return no more:
But they, by other hopes than life inspired,
March on; whilst Night her curtain closer draws
To hide their progress from the watchful foe.
In vain the night her sable curtain draws,
And bids the stars keep hoodwinked in their course;
For faithless Echo to the Moorish guard
Betrayed the distant sound of pacing steps.
From guard to guard the hasty signals fly,
And shoot like meteors through the dark expanse.
The Infidels, alarmed, seem all in motion,
Whilst the faint quivering lights, that lately served
To guide the hunters in their dangerous chase,
Now blaze and multiply, till all the camp
A vast illumination seems, that gilds
With dreadful splendour the surrounding gloom.
Our troops, undaunted, quicken as they tread,
And hasty marching grows to eager speed.
To arms! to arms! the scared besiegers cry.
Your arms are here! th'advancing foe replies,
-- Thirsting to drench their swords in Moorish blood!
Silence, no longer useful, now gives way
To all the dreadful din that battle loves.
The haughty trumpet, and the vigorous drum,
With the shrill fife's acuter voice, accord
To summon valor in the fearfull'st heart.
The Moors rush forth, impetuous and confused.
No orders thought on, and no orders heard:
Some to the trench, some to the chariots fly
To buckle to the shafts the frighted horses:
-- The restive steeds reject th'accustom'd yoke,
Dash their fierce leaders wildly to the earth,
Then, plunging, bound along the beamy plain.
Our troops had gained the ditch, and to the beards
Of the besiegers -- now besieged, advanced,
Ere the first panic left their courage calm
-- The battlo's fury in an instant spreads,
And all its horrors rage mature at once.
The bows are useless; throat to throat they fight;
-- Foes mix with foes, ranks press on hostile ranks,
Till each are lost, and form one dreadful whole.
Death never triumphed as he triumphed now;
-- With hasty victims never was so gorged:
He who is killing, by another's slain;
And he, in finishing his blow, partakes
The fate he gives. Scarce had the armies joined
Ere thousand souls had passed the eternal bourn:
On every side bulwarks of dead appear
-- Torrents of reeking gore. The blood of Moors
And Christians forms one common flood, and rolls
Its heavy tide in stagnant streams along.
Say, Stranger, have thou seen the warlike sports.
Yearly presented in our vast Steccado?
Superior to the rest, the Bull-fight claims
Glorious pre-eminence. Forth from their dens
The bellowing monsters rush, and the earth rings
Beneath their haughty hooss. The ireful foam
Runs from their churning jaws; their burnished horns
Now raze the earth, now proudly tossed in air,
Challenge the waiting warriors to the combat:
The waiting warriors, ardent for the sign,
Dart on their foes: the lordly beasts evade
The well-aim'd spear, and, clad in native might,
Scorn the bright corslet and the nodding helm:
Onward they rush -- whilst deathful fury bursts
In livid sparkles from their blood-red eyes;
They gore the generous steeds, their riders crush,
Or send them clashing through the dusty air.
Throughout the concave, sound the eager plaudits,
And boisterous admiration speaks the joy:
At length the favorite bull -- he whom the keepers,
For fire and strength, superior to the rest,
Had long marked out, is loosed upon the plain:
All marvels cease the instant he appears;
And what seemed wondrous but a moment since,
Has now no tongue to speak the mighty act
-- So much beyond all thought his deeds excel
The glorious devastation of his peers.
Just so MONTENOS shone among the heroes
Whose bitter chastisement the Moors endured.
Wherever he moved, destruction marked his progress,
And death seemed couchant on his ponderous axe.
The Night, so dreadful! lengthened out her hours,
As though she staid to view the battle's conflict,
Or hide its horrors from the springing day.
At length the glowing portals of the East
Disclosed the Morn -- in splendour she arose;
But, as if grief-struck at the murderous scene,
Her face in humid clouds she instant wrapped,
And seemed to weep in drops of sacred pity.
Yet Conquest ceased not, with her vigorous arm,
To plant her banners over the reeking field:
-- For us her banners waved -- for us she triumphed,
And Victory sung loud Io's for the Christians.
The Moor, now seeing that his scattered host
Had their chief leaders lost -- their numbers wasted,
Like sifted corn before the driving tempest,
For quarter calls. His troops, upon their knees,
Yield up their arms, and Mahomet invoke,
To screen his worshipers from dreaded vengeance;
But Christian soldiers war not for revenge,
Nor know to trample on a vanquished foe.
Their homage is accepted, and their chiefs,
With lowering fronts, and hearts by malice gnawed,
Follow the victors in their march triumphant.
Strait to the city-gates they bend their course,
Where from the walls the holy priests had watched
The issue of the fight. There too, the Princess
-- In horrors exquisite! had passed the night.
Judge then her rapture, her exalted joy,
When she beheld, on their victorious march,
Betrothed MONTENOS, and her royal Sire!
Forth to the plain -- heedless of form, she rushed:
Her Virgins followed, and the reverend Priests,
Led by the holy Bishop, formed her train.
The day -- as if she bore an active part
In all th'events her teeming hours brought forth --
Chased the dark clouds, unveiled her radiant face,
And gave new glories to the scene she viewed.
The King approached -- the Princess, at his feet,
Adored the mighty arm which thus restored him,
Loaded with laurels, from the deathful field:
Her valiant Lover, leading in his hand
The Moorish Prince, with eager pace advanced,
To claim his share of her enraptured welcome.
Receive, he cried, a conquest which your eyes,
And not my sword, achieved. Inspired by you,
Who could resist my arm? This princely foe,
Who wonders acted, and whose arm deserved
A righteous cause; by you, bright maid, subdued,
Your victim I present. The sullen Prince
Scarce deigned to lift his eye; when, with a grace
No fancy can pourtray, the gallant youth
Made to his mistress this heroic gift.
Oh fatal present! gift replete with woes!
Why did not heaven in its mercy send
Its winged shafts, and at that instant strike
The royal Maid, where, fixed with joy, she stood!
Then had her breast, untorn with throbbing anguish,
Sunk peacefully -- alas! where roves my tongue!
Let me, in order, lead you to the sequel.
It needless were my story to prolong
In painting scenes your fancy will supply:
The joyful entry, and triumphant feasts,
Devout processions, and heroic sports,
All these are fruitful themes, and would demand
A time the waning night denies. In brief,
The captive Prince a mighty ransom offered,
With league of amity and lasting peace.
The terms accepted, galleys were dispatched
To bring the bartered price of his redemption.
Mean while he joined the games, and seemed to lose
His barbarous roughness in the toils of pleasure.
Alas! in other toils his mind was caught;
The Princess seemed too lovely to ZORADOR,
Whose sensual soul she touched with fiercest passion.
He dared to speak of love, and to herself
Vaunt his bold hopes; whilst he beheld approach
The day, which was to join in nuptial bands
The Royal Maiden and her loved MONTENOS:
The marriage sports already were prepared,
And yet the Moor, audacious! talked of love.
-- Repulsed with just disdain, he to the King
His lovesick tale, with sullen port, addressed:
I am not used, he cried, to offer crowns,
And have them spurned, like vulgar lovers' toys.
Give me your Daughter! I Will give her a throne:
Dominions she shall have, to which your Arragon,
With all its boasted fields, and blushing vineyards,
Seems but a fertile spot; so vast the country
Whose scepter I command! The King's firm answer
Showed the proud Infidel, his suit was vain;
And, that a Christian Princess, to a subject
More fitly would be matched, than with the Monarch
Of wide-stretch'd continents -- whose wretched Sons
Were taught to scorn the doctrines of a CHRIST.
ZORADOR's fury to such transports grew
At this destruction of his hopes, he seemed
No longer man -- His eye balls glar'd with madness;
His foamy rage -- like a tempestuous sea
Lashing her shores in vain -- spared not himself:
His beard in frightful fragments strewn the floor;
Whilst his inflated bosom racked within,
Without resounded from his barbarous blows.
He cursed, blasphemed, and wept: his strength exhausted
Left him at length, as though a wakeful sleep
Had seized his faculties, and numbed the fire
Which filled his torrid veins. His slaves, who often
Beheld their lord a victim to himself,
Bore to his couch the prostrate harmless tyrant;
And there, with trem'lous lutes and vocal harmony,
In sweet enchantment woke him from his trance.
His haughty soul, that scorns all other laws,
Will yield to music all her boisterous passions
-- Hang on each strain, melt at each magic note,
And transient virtues catch from trilling airs.
Composed, at length, or masking what he felt,
Again ZORADOR sought the pensive King;
Pardon, he cried, Oh Prince! a wretch undone!
Forgive the frenzy of a heart unsteel'd
By disappointment's shocks. Nursed by prosperity,
By fortune followed, I had learnt -- fond man!
That fate, that earth, that heaven, for me combined,
And from misfortune hallowed my encircled head.
Your powerful arms, O King of Arragon!
First taught ZORADOR that he was a man;
And now your Daughter's still more powerful eyes
Have taught ZORADOR, that he is a slave.
Master and tyrant of a thousand beauties,
Who court my passions, live for my delight,
I breathed, unknowing that I had a heart,
Till cruel love, wrapped in Despair's wild torments,
Gave all its nerves a sense of cursed existence!
I love -- with agony -- with madness, love!
Oh, spare me then the horror of a sight
My fiery brain splits but to think on! Save,
-- Father of her whose charms thus abject make me,
Save from the tortures of her marriage rites,
The heart which burns and wastes with hopeless ardors!
The lingering moon has numbered all the hours
That I allotted for my fleet's return:
Soon as the eastern wind invades their canvass,
The bellying sails will whiten all your channel,
And their red streamers blush along your shores.
My ransom paid, I quit these hostile walls,
-- Where my lost peace will stay enchain'd for ever.
Then, whilst I bear my woes to distant seas,
Then may the spousals be triumphant sung,
And not one wretch remain to curse the sound.
Here ceased ZORADOR; whilst the melting King,
Unable to withstand a claim so urged,
Granted his royal suitor all he asked.
The Moor, impressed with thankfulness, retired,
And the good Monarch gave Medina's Heir
Command to curb his warm, impetuous wishes,
Until his rival sought his native skies.
The shifting winds soon wafted to our ports
The Moorish squadron. To the capital
The fleeter camels bore the various treasures
Meant for redemption of their captive Prince.
Stuffs, ingots, ivory, formed their precious burden;
Carpets of Persia, hangings wrought with gold,
Muscovian sables, scarves enriched with pearl;
Silk robes, by Grecian damsels taught to glow
In flowers of vivid tints, and buds so prompt,
They seemed to blow beneath the gazer's eye;
Sabres with glittering hilts of curious art,
And scymeters whose sheaths di'monds illum'd,
And sanguine rubies died; all these were borne
In pompous march, through Saragossa's streets;
Whilst haughty coursers, from Arabia's hills,
Champing gold bits, adorned with sumptuous housings,
-- Or bearing Turkish tents of gaudy drapery,
Shut, from the wonder-loving crowd, the long procession.
And now approached the joyful, wished for morn,
Whose breath upon our happy plains the Moors
Were doomed to leave. ZORADOR, with such port
As disappointment gives to tumid spirits,
Made to the King and Princess his adieus.
He left the city with a train of slaves,
Shedding profusely, as they passed along,
Rich showers of gold upon the gaping rabble,
-- Whose venal voice pierced Heaven with "Live ZORADOR!
Soon as the tidings of the Moors' departure
Our speedy couriers brought, the word was given
To make all ready for the royal marriage.
Raptured MONTENOS, madd'ning with his bliss,
Could scarce support the intermediate hours
That led, with lagging steps, the nuptial morn.
The nuptial Morn arrived -- roused from her slumbers
By the shrill voice of silver clarions, joined
By the soft hautboy, the seducive lute,
And sweeter pipe of choral maids, symphonious.
Forth from the palace to the church, through streets
With carpets laid, and myrtle garlands hung,
The glad procession led its lengthening train.
The King, beneath his canopy of state,
Preceded by his guards, first object moved:
Next to his suite the Princess, blushing, followed;
Her train upheld by twenty noble maids,
Whose beauty, in their snowy robes, seemed chastity
Incarnate. Next, at distance -- as of rank
That yet allowed not of a royal state,
MONTENOS walked, succeeded by the court.
The King had almost reached the holy portals,
When from the crowd a youth advanced, who caught
Each wondering eye. His face, a mask -- designed
For youthful beauty, hid. His airy form
Seemed worthy such a face. His habit tissue,
Embossed with purple studs. His flowing hair
With knots of pearl was tied, and on his head
A garland bloomed. An ivory flute he held,
Through which he breathed such melting, touching, strains,
That Harmony herself had staid to listen.
As he approached, the soldiers cleared his way,
Till in the front before the guards he stood.
The Princess came, whilst he, with reverence low,
And softer breathings, seemed to great her presence.
She passed; the Bridegroom came -- in quicker notes
He bad his music flow; and, forward stepping,
Offered, with courteous air, the tuneful pipe.
MONTENOS, smiling, stretched his hand, when -- horror!
His breast received the flute, which hid a poniard --
-- A second blow, ere thought could be recalled;
The third, the murderer on himself bestowed,
And welt'ring dropped into the arms of Death.
Astonishment usurped each vital faculty,
And rooted all who saw the bloody deed.
The Bridegroom, sinking on th'assassin's corpse,
Roused from their trance his horror-struck attendants;
Whilst the chill sounds of Death! Montenos! Murder!
Fled to the wretched Maid -- almost a wife.
Not daring to demand the cause; her pulse,
Stopped by congealing fear, forbore its office,
And a kind stupor hid her from her woes.
Back to the palace, now, the dying Bridegroom,
By Knights in hymeneal robes was borne,
Whilst others dragged his murd'rer's mangled corpse,
To search for motives to the cruel deed.
His mask unclasp'd, disclosed a well-known face
-- A mute he was, and in ZORADOR's train.
A fiend-like scroll, concealed within his vest,
Develop'd all the murderous hell-born project.
These were its words: "'It Is not the slave, but I,
Who give the blow. Vengeance, if not my love,
Shall be appeased. Learn, King of Arragon!
Learn both to know and dread the scorned ZORADOR!"
Such were the lines which bore the stamp of fate.
The lovely victim of the Moor's revenge,
Breathed not a word, but strained his beamless eye
To find the object that his heart's last pulse
Adored -- not seeing her, they seemed to shut
All others out -- and Death, with hasty seal,
Closed their dim lids in everlasting sleep.
Here paused the Virgin, as immersed in thought;
The story, fraught with woe, had cast a shade
Of deeper sorrow over her pensive brow:
Her laboring bosom sent forth heavy sighs,
And her sad mind seemed lost in one idea.
The Knight, who eager grew to know the tale
She promised of herself, presumed at length
To bring her recollection to the point;
At which her rosy lips their portal closed,
And ceased to charm him with their touching accents.
I will not, Stranger! said the fair narrator,
Tax your attention with events unneedful,
The Court's distress, the sorrow of the King,
The Bride's, th'unwedded Bride's, forlorn distraction.
Long tedious months led round their joyless suns,
Ere comfort beamed upon her widowed heart;
Nor then, till, at the tomb of her lost Lord,
Her solemn vows she made, never to hear
A lover's soothing tale; but, in virginity
Perpetual, wait the hour that should unite
Her faithful spirit with her murdered Lord's.
This duty paid, a dawn, like that of peace,
By soft degrees illum'd the mourner's mind.
The Court, prompt in expedients to divest
Misfortune of her stings, ransacked all pleasures,
Invented fresh delights, new joys invoked,
For their sweet antidotes to poisonous grief.
Thus had two years their slow-revolving hours
Brought to the great account; when from the east
A dark portentous cloud, laboring with ills,
Pregnant with thousand woes, obscured th'horizon.
ZORADOR -- he whose soul from inmost hell
Was sent to scourge the earth -- not glutted yet
With all the horrid joys that wait on vengeance,
Not yet forgiving our triumphant arms,
Which shear'd the laurels his whole life had reaped,
-- Again came pouring, like a mighty deluge,
To overwhelm the land in lasting ruin.
He came. -- Why should I lengthen out my tale?
Our nation's force, opposed to the Moor's army,
Was kindling torches to obscure the sun.
Again we saw them hover on the hill:
Again we saw -- like famine-bringing locusts,
Their hosts descend, and spread upon the plain.
No parley, as at first, they would allow:
Their batt'ring-rams the messengers they used;
-- Arrows and catapults, their killing words.
A dreadful day our troops sustained the siege,
And filled the breaches with their slaughtered foes.
At length, a billet on a javelin's point
The ramparts passed, denouncing rape and sackage,
If stubbornly our citizens delayed
To own ZORADOR conqueror and king.
The threat effected all the Moor had hoped,
And Arragon's gray Monarch was abandoned
By those whose rights he would guarded with his blood,
-- By those his smiles had cherished, and his honors graced.
The throneless Sovereign, when he saw his gates
Open their faithless jaws t'admit the foe,
Rushed, in distraction, to his Daughter's chamber:
Fly! let us instant fly! he gasping said;
The Moors have vanquished, and my Child's a slave.
Their standards now insult our conquered streets,
And cursed ZORADOR will not long delay,
Within my palace walls t'assert his rights.
Come then, my Daughter! lest dishonor find thee,
And kill they parent with a thousand deaths!
The Princess, whom affliction had subdued,
And taught a firmness stranger to her years,
Grasped her loved Father's hand -- Lead me, she cried,
Where Providence ordains! my duteous steps
Shall ever follow yours, soften your path,
And cheer, to life's last sigh, your rugged journey.
A golden casket, as she spoke, she seized,
That held, till now, a hoarded useless treasure;
And through the galleries, with breathless haste,
And step precipitate, followed the King,
-- Unknowing to what corner of the earth
To point their feet, or whom they should entrust
With their adventurous flight. A faithful Lord,
In this sad exigence, with cordial words,
The royal fugitives thus met and cheered.
"O Sire! from Arlos take the only duty
That stormy fate now suffers him to pay:
My horses wait, close to the garden walls,
With trusty knights to guide you to my castle.
Dreading the worst, I had prepared this refuge,
When the fell Moor began his fierce assault.
For me, I Will stay and greet, with smiles deceitful,
ZORADOR, whom I hate, to ward, if possible,
What further ills his malice may devise."
The King embraced, with servent gratitude,
The noble youth -- and followed where he led.
There a close chariot, harnessed and attended,
Waited to bear them from the dangerous spot.
The flying steeds seemed conscious of their office,
And instant cleft the air with eagle swiftness.
Mean while the Moorish troops rushed through the gates,
And on our bulwarks fixed their haughty standards.
No terms the citizens obtained, but those
Of vassalage and uncondition'd slavery;
Whilst their chief officers were instant sworn
To be allegiant to the swarthy Infidel.
Mean time, with speed, toward the royal palace,
As to his home, ZORADOR bent his course;
Vaunting, that now the Christian King should, kneeling,
Ask him to wed the Daughter whom he wooed
With offered thrones, and was, with scorn, rejected.
But, when he found no Sovereign to insult,
No Princess to affront with odious passion,
His furious transports made a thousand victims.
The Nobles' houses were with strictness searched:
The churches, monast'ries, were all defiled
By the unhallowed infidels, in vain.
Three days the search continued, when the Moor,
Foaming with disappointed pride, made oath,
That, if the Princess in eight days appeared not,
The convents-walls should to the ground be rased,
And their pure vestals sat his savage soldiers.
These dreadful tidings to the King and Princess
The faithful ARLOS sent. "My castle walls,"
He said, "no longer will protect my Sovereign.
The church itself will aid the keen pursuit,
-- Deeming it better that one royal Maid
Should feed the lust of a detested tyrant,
Than that their holy virgins should become
The prey of the licentious soldiery.
Fly then, my Prince! The loyal Knight, whose hand
Presents this testimony of my faith,
Will to a secret spot (where he himself
Asylum found) attend your wandering steps;
-- Not wandering long! for surely Heaven, that tries
The virtue which it loves, will reconduct you
To your lost people's arms, and rightful throne."
The darkest robe of night overspread the hemisphere,
When at the castle GONZALES arrived.
The royal pair, in humble weeds disguised,
Instant forsook the hospitable roof,
And sought untravell'd wilds, and gloomy deserts.
The spirits of the King, weighed down with sorrow,
Had sunk beneath accumulated ills,
Had not wise Heaven endu'd his Daughter's mind
With strength to bear her griefs, and cheer her Father's.
With tender talk the tedious way she shortened;
And, when exhausted Nature asked recruit,
Hymn'd him to sleep beneath umbrageous trees.
A whole day's sun beheld her duteous cares:
The moon arose, and still they journey'd on;
But the succeeding sun, with earliest beam,
Guided the travelers to a forest's verge.
Here GONZALES the steeds unrein'd, and drove,
In envied freedom, to a neighboring mountain,
Lest their betraying hoofs should guide pursuers
To the asylum of the hunted King.
In the wood's center they a cottage found,
Formed, by Misfortune's hand, of humble clay:
Two rooms it had, in each a rustic bed;
For stately chairs, a bench; a rough-hewn table,
That never with other dainties had been filled,
Than labor culled from the surrounding herbs;
Or from the vines -- that in the desert air,
With their delicious burdens long had swelled,
Nor found one tempted hand to ease the load.
Such the retreat the fugitives had found.
Adieu to gilded roofs, and chorded minstrelsy!
Adieu to greatness, and unhealthful pomp!
The winds now rustle through their straw-crown'd cot,
And birds, with wild-note sweet, compose their concert!
Full seven slow moons have turned their monthly orbs,
Since GONZALES the cottage left, and since
No human sound, but their own pensive tones,
Have reached the Princess and her Father's ears.
What can I more? If my eventful tale
Has touched the chords of pity in your heart,
And swelled the sympathetic tear -- soft tribute!
By gentle minds, to sorrow ever paid,
-- Know, it is no stranger's woes I have related;
I am the object of my own sad story --
It is the Princess speaks --
Enough! exclaimed
The Knight, springing with ardor from the bank,
Enough! our prize is found! and wealth and rank,
And bright ZULEDA's smiles, are now DE COURCI's!
Thus speaking, to his lips he fixed a bugle,
Whose piercing sounds ten thousand echoes bore
On airy wings, through the surrounding woods.
The signal heard, six Moors obeyed its voice,
And spurred their horses headlong through the glades.
For these OSMIDA stayed not. The false Knight
No sooner spoke his joy, than, like a fawn
Who from the neighboring thicket hears the voice.
Of the fierce wolf -- she bounding left her seat,
And fled to safer shades. A starting star
Less rapid cleaves the air, when Ethiop Night
Shows on her wanton breast his lucid trail.
Meanwhile, the royal cottager, whom Sleep,
Spite of his cares, had wooed to her embrace,
Broke from her tempting arms. He called OSMIDA.
Listening in vain, to hear her cheering voice,
He started from his couch, and, robbed in haste,
Rushed forth to seek her in her favorite haunts:
Darting his fearful eye across the lawn
On which their cottage stood, close on its edge,
-- Panting and breathless he beheld his darling.
With all the little strength that age had left,
He hastened to receive her. What his dread!
When at his feet he saw the Princess drop,
Exclaiming, as she fell, in fainting voice,
Father! ALMANZOR! King! -- The fear-struck Monarch,
Unable from the mossy grass to raise
Its lovely burden, sinking by her side,
Strove by his tears, and fond paternal voice,
To rouse her torpid sense, and wake her soul.
Not guessing at th'extremity of woe,
Which soon must burst upon his hoary head,
He thought some frightful reptile had surprised,
And chilled, with female fears, her timorous mind.
But, oh! how short a while his fate allowed
This soft delusion! Through the night's still air
The sound of human voices, and the clank
Of iron hoofs, revealed a scene at once,
That almost shook his soul from her frail tenement.
The Gallic leader of the Moorish band,
(And sure no soil but Gallia's could produce
A Knight thus treacherous, thus completely formed
To guide a project hatched in nether hell!)
Marked with his eye OSMIDA's flying course.
Courage! he cried -- as the base slaves advanced:
All our past trouble, and our long fatigues,
This happy hour repays. OSMIDA's found!
Found at the instant that my famished hopes
Scarce lent a ray to guide me in the chase.
When, through the tissu'd thicket, to my eye
The friendly moon revealed her, hope prophetic
Called her OSMIDA -- yet my eager tongue
I dared not with that hope entrust, lest Fear
Should draw her veil upon the dangerous truth.
In prayer she was employed; which instant taught me
That piety must be the bait to snare her,
-- So won her confidence, and read her heart.
Allah be praised! rejoined a bearded Infidel,
Freedom is ours -- ZORADOR's favor thine!
But, Christian, art thou sure thou have beheld
ALMANZOR's Daughter? One fair maid, alas!
We have already to our master borne
For her he sought, and scarce with life escaped,
So fierce and rageful was ZORADOR's anger!
The Princess, self-acknowledg'd, said the Knight,
Fled from this spot, scared at my bugle's sound.
A cottage, somewhere in the sombrous forest,
Conceals the trembler, and her aged Sire.
I marked the road she took, and now will guide you
To those who will not hail us -- welcome guests.
Thus speaking, he pushed onwards through the wood,
And soon espied the little peaceful dwelling,
In which, for seven long months, the exiled King
Had sighed his anguish to the passing winds.
Upon the earth they saw the hoary Monarch,
Supporting on his knee the drooping head
Of his unhappy child: his hands were clasped,
And raised toward that Heaven which now allowed
Sorrow to drain her vial on his brow.
This moving picture, even DE COURCI's eye
Could scarcely see, with pity unsuffus'd.
Skilled in deceit, and hiding a bad heart
With all the polish learnt in faithless courts,
He, with an air so meek, approached ALMANZOR,
As though he sought him only to bewail
The sad events that shut him from the world.
The King, perhaps, had yielded for a moment
To the delusive hope his look inspired,
Had not the group of Moors -- who yet approached not,
Explained the dreadful purport of the visit.
Unhappy Monarch! said the soft-tongued Knight,
Much it afflicts me that my barbarous fortune,
From all ZORADOR's court, DE COURCI chose
T'explore the sacred spot of your retirement.
Had not the tyrant at his hateful nod
Devoted Moors enough, and callous slaves,
Used to the work of infamy and guilt,
But I, a Christian knight, must be selected,
To guide an enterprise so cursed? -- Oh Fate!
Thou never loadedst me with ills till now!
The King, experienced in mankind, saw through
The thin disguise of this most florid speech:
He saw the serpent in the spicy shrub;
-- He saw the villain in the gentle eye.
Not deigning a reply, he bent his head
Over the reviving Princess. Oh, OSMIDA!
Exclaimed the afflicted Prince, thy beating pulse,
Thy dear returning breath is now unwelcome.
Rather I Would see those eyes for ever closed,
This fluttering heart fixed by Death's potent voice,
Than thus receive thee back again to life.
The royal Virgin's scarce-recover'd faculties
Announc'd themselves in fears: "Oh! let us fly,
My Father! -- let us fly!" she murmured forth:
"We are pursued -- the Knight! the wiley Knight!"
Pursued, indeed! replied the weeping King;
Pursued and caught. O! my heart's dear OSMIDA!
They have us in their toils -- we are lost! we are lost!
Roused at this dreadful sound, the wakened Princess,
Starting, threw round her eyes -- they met DE COURCI's!
A grave-sent spectre, in the deep of night,
Scarce gives such horror to the shrinking sinner,
As did DE COURCI's form, to shocked OSMIDA.
Speechless, she hid her face, and clasped her father;
Who strove t'inspire a calm his heart disowned.
The polished villain, who the blackest crimes
With impoliteness could not stain, withdrew,
That the bewailing mourners, unrestrained,
Might pour their anguish in each other's breast.
-- Vain were the task, to paint th'impassion'd scene
Which grief, and fear, and thousand racking thoughts,
With glowing horrors, all conspired to fill.
The courteous Knight, observing where he stood,
That the first torrent of their grief was spent,
Ventured again t'approach the wretched pair.
Pardon, illustrious Prince! he cried, the slave,
Whom harsh necessity, alas! compels
To stop your converse with your beauteous Daughter.
ZORADOR -- he, who knows no law but will,
The smallest breach of whose commands, the rack,
Or more inevitable death awaits --
-- Ordained, that soon as your retreat was found,
A moment to delay should not be given;
But instant! maugre circumstance, or tears,
That we should bear to their forsaken home
The Unwilling Princess, and her royal Sire.
Now, if it please you, we must leave this desert,
For haunts more fitted to your royal rank.
This mock'ry of respect, returned the King,
To those whom you command, adds points to insult.
Our masters you; then treat us as your slaves!
The only boon I can descend to ask,
Is, that my Daughter, in this fatal journey,
May not be torn from me. From thee! ah, no,
Precipitant exclaimed the royal Maid.
Together let us go, whatever our fate!
Still let my filial voice my Father cheer,
And pierce the night of his collected sorrows!
DE COURCI seemed to pause, when strait a Moor,
Of port superior to the rest, thus answered --
It is our Sovereign's will, that you, fair Lady!
Should hold no converse with your princely Sire,
'Till your arrival in your native city.
Doubt not, but then, each boon you ask, and all
Your fruitful fancy can devise, our master,
Gracious to charms like yours, will grant with rapture.
When Beauty sues, he knows not to deny.
What then will be your Beauty's power? You --
The King, impatient and enraged, broke in
Upon the Moor. Cease, Saracen! he cried,
Nor dare thus violate my Daughter's ears!
Or thou shall find, that in a desert, old,
-- Unarmed, ALMANZOR is a King. Lead on!
And since high Heaven ordains, thy impious Master
Should hold the balance of our fate, obey
His harsh command! tear us asunder! yes!
Drag from the old man's heart, the last sole joy
His woes had left to save him from despair.
Plunge me at once in horror's deep abyss.
Not long -- not long, my friends, will you afflict me.
A shower of tears, that down his furrowed cheeks
Upon the bosom of OSMIDA fell,
Ended a speech -- which men steeled by long use
Against the touching voice of heaven-born pity,
Could not unsoften'd hear; but strove to palliate
To their own hearts, in coarse-spun sophistry,
The baseness of their voluntary task.
Sprightly Aurora looking through the clouds,
Which blushed with pleasure at her near approach,
Chased from the hemisphere the pale-ey'd moon,
-- Who had so sweetly shone, she seemed 'till now
The morning's counterfeit. But Oh! to misery
Whether the pale-ey'd Moon, or sprightly Morn,
Or Sun refulgent leads the passing hours;
All, all alike, they undistinguished roll,
One cheerless chaos, one impervious gloom.
If to DE COURCI, and the wondering Moors,
OSMIDA lovely seemed -- how lovely now!
When bright'ning day disclosed her to their view,
One blaze of charms -- charms of that tender cast,
Which sorrow did not sully, but become!
Her polished form was graceful as the antelope's;
Her air majestic, as the sailing eagle's --
When amongst the fleecy clouds he gently waves,
And views high Skiddaw, like a shrub below.
Her face a Raphael would have caught, to form
A young Madonna, bending over her Child
With brow serene, and love-distilling eyes.
Her locks -- such locks as Nature only gives
Once in an age, to perfect some rare beauty,
Seemed like a golden veil -- part hung before,
Shading a polished neck; which looked, between
The burnished threads, like purest ivory
Through gilded network: part the Zephyrs snatched,
Playing enamored in the beauteous toils:
The rest in dropping ringlets fell behind,
And kissed the foldings of her flowing robe.
Such was the Princess; whom a Moor now seized,
And on DE COURCI's steed securely fixed.
A silken sash, held by the treacherous Knight,
Passed through OSMIDA's girdle, and enchain'd
The mourning Virgin, and her deadliest foe.
Upon another steed was placed ALMANZOR,
Behind a guiding Moor. This was the state
The kingdom's Monarch, and the kingdom's Heir,
Were now constrained to use. No pompous guards,
No blessing populace, no proud grandees,
Their steps attend; -- but oh! how small that grief,
Weighed with the horrid fears, the torturing doubts,
Which fill their bosoms, and absorb their thoughts!
The leafy desert -- which so long had seemed
A cheerless prison to the illustrious pair
-- They quit, with aching hearts, and heavy sighs.
Its solitary shades -- how welcome, now!
Its humble turf-form'd cot, its devious glades,
Its choral groves, they would with rapture greet,
And hail them, as the dear abodes of Peace.
But these they have for ever -- ever left;
And soon the forest's verdant roof grows dun
Upon the distant eye. The eager Moors,
With spur and slackened reins, kept pouring on,
Leaving whole leagues obscured with floating dust.
The royal Prisoners, scarcely with a glance,
Can speak a thought, much less converse, and share,
With kind participance, each other's woe.
Thus they continued through untrodden wilds,
Whose savage echoes never yet had learnt
To imitate the cordial voice of man:
-- The churning boar, and howling midnight wolves,
Had taught them all the language that they knew.
At length the Sun, behind the western mountains,
Hid his pervading eye: the humid Eve
Led on her deep'ning shades, to quench the thirst,
The fev'rish orb had left, on plants and flowers.
The Moors now strain their wistful eyes,
To meet some woodland, or some sheltering cave,
In which to court their strength-restoring sleep.
The last they found -- it seemed to have been the haunt
Of fierce banditti -- or more peaceful home
Of some sequestered hermit; for its floor
The chissel's edge had smoothed, and its low roof
Was rudely fashioned to a semi-dome.
Here the sad trav'lers were allowed the rest
Which through the fervid day they would asked in vain.
The Princess, whose soft limbs were not inured
To such extreme fatigue, sunk lifeless down,
Soon as her feet had touched the solid earth.
The aged King, with scarce more strength, approached
To catch his falling Child -- The flinty floor
Received them both -- OSMIDA and her Sire.
With care officious, the attending slaves
The duties of humanity performed.
The Princess they recovered; and a spot,
With their own garments, spread, to form a seat
Less rig'rous than the rock, for its high inmates.
Parched corn, sun-candied grapes, and racy wine,
They placed, respectfully, before the King:
Exhausted Nature craved the cordial draught;
Whilst to her Sire's request OSMIDA yielded,
And of the patriarchal feast partook.
DE COURCI and the Moors dared not resign
Their heavy lids to sleep, but in rotation.
Two, the cave's entrance guarded; and the third,
Placed near ALMANZOR, interruption gave,
Whenever the royal Parent and his Child
Strove to beguile the melancholy hours
With such sad converse as their griefs allowed.
This had ZORADOR ordered, lest OSMIDA
Should from her Father catch more fortitude
To Oppose his furious passion, than he thought
A female could possess. Celestial chastity
He held a phantom bred from Custom's laws,
And that the magic of licentious love
Could melt its airy form -- for now he meant
T'assert a conqu'ror's rights, and place the Princess
-- Not on a Throne, but amongst his favorite slaves,
And make her Sovereign of his loose seraglio.
Constrained to silence; Sorrow's blessed physician
Stole by degrees upon their aching eyes.
O soft enchanter, Sleep! why did Idolaters
Never build thee temples? Thee, whose sweet dominion
Boundless extends, wherever Nature breathes!
Thee, in whose arms Anguish forgets her throbs;
Chill Want, the nipping blast; and wild Despair
Finds gleams of comfort -- I sing Paeans to thee, Sleep!
Scarce had the mettled coursers of the Morn
Brought her gay chariot to th'horizon's edge,
And coif'd the mountains with her ruddy gold,
-- Ere prompt DE COURCI, and the watching Moors,
Flew to caparison their grazing steeds.
Returning quick, they roused their torpid fellows,
And last awaked OSMIDA and the King.
What an awakening! Touch not, O my pen!
Upon the catching theme! Of woe enamored,
Thou Wilt hang too long upon the tears, the sighs,
The grief-fraught words, with which they hailed the day.
-- Events more active ask thy little skill.
Some hours they had pursued their steady course,
When, from a coppice bord'ring on the road,
An armed troop rushed forth. So quick their motion,
DE COURCI's band, ere they beheld their danger,
Were in a circle drawn -- more dreadfully portentous,
Than wand of witch or wizard ever formed.
The gallant Knight, who at his girdle wore
Unwilling beauty, seemed at once the object.
Three vizor'd warriors at his stirrups stood;
Two held their lances to his throat; the third
Destroyed the magic zone which held the Princess,
And snatched her instant from DE COURCI's side.
With such dispatch was this achievement made,
The Knight had scarcely drawn to save his prize,
Ere he beheld her ravished from his arms
-- And at a distance from th'astonish'd troop.
Turning, with fury, on his foes -- who thus
Had all his splendid hopes reft from his heart,
He raised his arm, and aimed a ponderous sword,
Where guiltless it could not have fallen; when instant
His unpois'd body, with Herculean force,
Was to the earth propell'd: breathless he lay,
And trampling steeds soon fixed him to the spot,
From whence the unhappy youth never rose again.
The Moors, undaunted at their leader's fate,
Sustained th'assailant's shock, as if resolved
Their prisoners and their lives should both be lost,
Or undivided kept. Two forced their way
Toward the spot where, guarded by her Knight,
The Princess stood; three of the foe pursued,
And made the path which led to her, the road
To death inglorious. The remaining Saracens
Fought as those fight, who, knowing they must die,
Resolve the victors shall buy conquest dearly.
But he who at his crupper held the King,
More fiercely than the rest -- more madly fought.
His fellows too hemmed in the struggling Monarch;
And, turning to the Prince their horses haunches,
Formed with their spears a threatening glory round him.
When he who held him -- watching for the moment,
Broke from the rest, and on the distant winds
Seemed borne away. The demon who presides
Over evil acts, and aids the deeds that most
Partake of Hell -- surely his steed impelled,
And braced his sinews with unnatural vigor.
His fiery eye, darting over hills and plains,
Scarcely outstripp'd his hoofs; the vales, the woods,
His glance devoured, were in an instant left
Behind his feath'ry heels, that onward pressed --
Whilst the pursuing, stretching, mad'ning foe,
Beheld new hills, new plains, new woods, arise
Between their coursers and their ravished Prince.
Meanwhile OSMIDA, in amazement lost,
Beheld herself unchain'd, and yet not free.
Those who had held her pris'ne^, she saw slain;
But who are these, who risk, thus gallantly,
Their lives for her and the dethroned King?
Perchance new masters; perhaps again they are slaves.
Scarce had this question, in her whirl of thought,
Had time to firm itself, ere at her side
She saw the noble ARLOS. -- Hence! vain fears.
The magic touch of hope her bosom swelled,
And confidence chased every doubt away.
Raising the snowy veil which hid her face,
She beamed a smile upon the loyal Knight,
That in his mind o'erpaid ten thousand dangers.
Fly, my best ARLOS! said the charming maid,
(As at her feet he knelt) and save the King!
See where he sits, unarmed, amidst his foes!
Were he in safety, all my thoughts were peace.
The Knight up-springing, staid not to reply,
But instant horsed, spurred onward to his troop:
His troop he joined, but not till the rich prize
He flew to save, was ravished from his hopes.
Three of the band he instantly dispatched,
To stop the progress of the flying Saracen.
The few remaining Moors, urged by despair,
Still madly fought, preferring present death
To the slow tortures, which they knew their Tyrant
Would fail not to inflict, on those who lost
The beauteous object of his brutal love.
Their wish they soon received, and their freed spirits
Sought the eternal shores. The Princess now
Remained sole object of the cares of ARLOS.
With eager speed he sought the trembling maid,
Who saw her Parent borne over distant wilds,
And in that sight lost every newborn comfort.
Her tears bedewed the senseless earth; her cries
Rent Heaven, and her unconscious feet moved quick
Toward the course, in which she saw her Father.
ARLOS, in soothing terms, implored the fair-one
To moderate her grief. Doubtless, he cried,
The gallant youths, who now pursue the Moor,
Will not pursue the flying slave in vain.
They know the mazy roads -- each devious path,
Each secret turning -- and will meet the villain
When least he can suspect his danger. Now,
Sweet Princess! to my castle let me lead you.
There, if not happier, yet at least securely
Your tears you may indulge, and feed your sorrows.
Scarce sensible to what was urged, OSMIDA
Allowed herself once more upon a steed
To be replac'd: her horseman, noble ARLOS;
Who through morasses, underwoods, and roads
Almost impervious, brought his royal ward
In safety to his mansion. Oh! how blessed
This moment had appeared, had the same roof
That sheltered her, been shelter to her Father!
That solace wanting, others lost their taste.
Her sorrows to suspend, ARLOS related
Events that yet could not have reached her ear.
The faithful GONZALES, he told the Princess,
Suspected by ZORADOR, bore the rack
With undiminish'd courage, nor confessed,
-- Though life was promised, and immense rewards,
The place of her retreat: that he, Lord ARLOS,
By wiles and arts, the jealous Tyrant blinded,
Who held him truest servant of the Christians.
Thus, unsuspected, he had watched the roads
Which led toward her forest; with his life
To rescue from the Moors the royal ^gitives,
If fate malevolent should ever betray them.
Another tale in pity he withheld:
That the cursed Moor, insatiate in revenge,
Had caused MONTENOS' Father, Duke Medina,
To die upon the block -- on stale pretense,
That he had formed a plot to wrest the crown.
His family he banished, their rich lands
Confiscate made -- and yet the Tyrant lived!
As the sad Princess heard, with growing horror,
Repeated acts of cruelty scarce human;
The Knights returned who had pursued her Father.
It was enough: she saw them pass the gates,
Without the King; no circumstance was needful;
None could her anguish lessen -- none her woe increase.
Their tale scarce won attention. Much they talked
Of hot pursuit, and of the villain's speed;
-- That once his flagging courser raised their hopes,
When sudden on a neighboring plain appeared
A troop of Spahies in a mock engagement:
The Saracen gained vigor at the sight;
Whilst those who followed, measured back their road,
Knowing the ruin of their Lord inevitable,
Should they, his faithful vassals, be discovered.
Vain were th'attempts of ARLOS, to dispel
The deep distress which seized OSMIDA's heart.
The sweetest words, ever framed by consolation,
Were spent upon the air. The young ELVERA,
Sister to ARLOS, lent her infant aid
To cheer the royal guest; and with soft prattle,
-- Kissing the drowning roses on her cheek,
Strove to divide her sorrow-fixt attention.
But, oh! her Father was a wretched captive:
What could abate the anguish of that thought?
In vain surrounding slaves watched every motion;
In vain the cielings rose on stately columns,
Forcing their grandeur on the awe-struck eye;
In vain the downy beds invited rest,
Beneath rich canopies imboss'd with gold.
Dearer the russet pillars of the forest,
Whose meeting branches canopied the earth
Where stood her lonely cot. Oh! dearer far
The humble couch on which her Father's head
Securely rested; where her ready hand
His pillow smoothed, and filial cares excited
Sweeter slumbers! Who, now, will watch his sleep,
Or sooth his griefs to rest? Who waits his waking,
To cheer, with tender voice, the lengthened day?
So spoke the heart of the unhappy Princess. --
Now to the hospitable cares, her fate affords,
We leave the Mourner, and pursue the King.
END OF PART I.
LINES IN IMITATION OF COWLEY.
TOUCHED by thy wit, my soul's on fire,
My bosom throbs with young desire.
What! though thy form I never saw,
Is there to man divulged a law
That only what he sees must touch his heart?
The vulgar rule I disallow,
And in my passion feel even now,
That wit, like beauty, gives the tender smart.
Methinks thy form I would not know,
Nor to thy face the pleasure owe
Of these delicious melting pains,
Which when a mortal once attains,
He knows the greatest bliss for man designed.
No, to my fancy I Will apply,
There find thy form, thy air, thy eye,
And feast my frenzy with a zest refined.
When in a pensive mood I sit,
And Melancholy takes her fit,
Mild, tender, soft, thou shall appear,
Like the first blossoms of the year:
But when in brisker tides my spirits run,
L'Allegro shall the pencil take,
Describe thy look, thy step, thy make,
And show thee lively as bright MAIA's son.
A MONOLOGUE.
OCHATTERTON! for thee the pensive song I raise,
Thou object of my wonder, pity, envy, praise!
Bright Star of Genius! -- torn from life and fame,
My tears, my verse, shall consecrate thy name!
Ye Muses! who around his natal bed
Triumphant sung, and all your influence shed;
APOLLO! thou who rapt his infant breast,
And, in his daedal numbers, shone confessed,
Ah! why, in vain, such mighty gifts bestow
-- Why give fresh tortures to the Child of Woe?
Why thus, with barbarous care, illume his mind,
Adding new sense to all the ills behind?
Thou haggard! Poverty! whose cheerless eye
Transforms young rapture to the ponderous sigh;
In whose drear cave no Muse ever struck the lyre,
Nor Bard ever madden'd with poetic fire;
Why all thy spells for CHATTERTON combine?
His thought creative, why must thou confine?
Subdued by thee, his pen no more obeys,
No longer gives the song of ancient days;
Nor paints in glowing tints from distant skies,
Nor bids wild scen'ry rush upon our eyes --
Checked in her flight, his rapid genius cowers,
Drops her sad plumes, and yields to thee her powers.
Behold him, Muses! see your favorite son
The prey of WANT, ere manhood is begun!
The bosom ye have filled, with anguish torn --
The mind you cherished, drooping and forlorn!
And now Despair her sable form extends,
Creeps to his couch, and over his pillow bends.
Ah, see! a deadly bowl the fiend concealed,
Which to his eye with caution is revealed --
Seize it, APOLLO! -- seize the liquid snare!
Dash it to earth, or dissipate in air!
Stay, hapless Youth! refrain -- abhor the draught,
With pangs, with racks, with deep repentance fraught!
Oh, hold! the cup with woe ETERNAL flows,
More -- more than Death the poisonous juice bestows!
In vain! -- he drinks -- and now the searching fires
Rush through his veins, and writhing he expires!
No sorrowing friend, no sister, parent, nigh,
To sooth his pangs, or catch his parting sigh;
Alone, unknown, the Muses' darling dies,
And with the vulgar dead unnoted lies!
Bright Star of Genius! -- torn from life and fame,
My tears, my verse, shall consecrate thy name!

