NARCISSA AND ELIZA. A DRAMATIC TALE.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

This Day are published, SEJANUS, A TRAGEDY, altered from BEN JOHNSON; AND
Religious and Political LIBERTY, An ORATION; By FRANCIS GENTLEMAN.

The Former printed for R. MANBY and H. S. COX, the Latter for J. BOUQUET.

Also this Day are published, A VOYAGE to the MOON, Translated from the French
of BERGERAC: AND A RHAPSODY on FORTUNE, inscribed to Mr. GARRICK.

By SAMUEL DERRICK.

To be had of J. BOUQUET in PATERNOSTER ROW.

NARCISSA AND ELIZA. A DRAMATIC TALE.

By FRANCIS GENTLEMAN.

Wise Wretch! with Pleasures too refined to please,
With too much Spirit to be ever at Ease;
With too much Quickness ever to be taught,
With too much Thinking to have common Thought;
You purchase Pain with all that Joy can give,
And die of Nothing but a Rage to live.
POPE. LONDON: Printed for J. BOUQUET, at the WHITE-HART in PATERNOSTER ROW.

MDCCLIV.

Speedily will be published, CAMILLO: A DRAMATIC TALE In VERSE.

Wealth makes the Man, and Want of it the Fellow,
The Rest is all but Leather and Prunella.
POPE. TO THE GREATEST COXCOMB AND MOST FINISHED COQUETTE Living.
SIR and MADAM,
IT has long been, and still remains a settled Rule with AUTHORS, to choose the
most conspicuous Characters for Patrons; thus far I comply with general Custom,
which, however ridiculous, it is dangerous to break through; as to the trite
Panegyrics of Dedication, they seem absolutely unnecessary upon the present
Occasion, for your Virtues, -- Qualifications I mean, are so very generally
known, that they require not any Illustration, being sufficient Blazon to
themselves; therefore it will be sufficient to observe, that to your great
Predecessors, the DRAMA is obliged for many of its most striking Characters. To
you, and your courtly Tribe of Imitators, we stand indebted for the frequent,
curious Amendments of FASHION, and Machinations of LOVE; also for OPERAS,
BURLETTAS, MASQUERADES, PANTOMIMES, DRUMS, ROUTS, with a long etc. of
Time-killing Amusements; and last, though not least in Love, for the following
Tale founded on your Systems of Life, which Circumstance must particularly
recommend it to your most indulgent Patronage.

IT IS true I may appear in this Address as an INDIAN worshipping the Devil,
however that may be, it will evidently follow from One Consideration, that I
have an undoubted Right to claim your Patronage, when I declare that many
Actions of my own Life have been truly Coxcomical, and perhaps not One of them
more so than my Compliance with the Cacoethes Scribendi, which urged me to
commence AUTHOR* especially a Poetical or Versifying One.

I am, with all due Respect, as a Writer, and sincere Affection, as Relation,

Your most obedient, And devoted Servant, The AUTHOR.
I had almost dated this Address, April the First, but being sensible that it
was giving the CRITICS a fair Opportunity to honor me with the Title of the
Day, I step Four and Twenty Hours forward in the Year 1754.



ADVERTISEMENT TO THE PUBLIC.
KNOWING from personal Experience how apt prefatory Matter is to pall, I shall
no farther intrude upon the Leisure of my Readers than briefly to observe, that
the following Narration is founded on Truth; that it is related, exclusive of
an Alteration in the Catastrophe of NARCISSA, with strict Fidelity. What Merit
there may be in it, I shall leave the Public to decide; I am well apprized that
the Characters will seem somewhat imperfect, particularly ELIZA, who does not
appear sufficiently to constitute a Principal; but I hope to be excused any
Error of this Kind, though voluntary, as I found Prolixity stealing in upon me,
which I was resolved at any Rate to avoid.

I should perhaps have thrown the Incidents together in Prose, but that I think
the Town already too much harrassed with MEMOIRS, ADVENTURES, etc. This is a
Sort of Deviation, and I hope some Persons of stronger Genius than I imagine
myself to be will communicate Pictures of Life in poetical Narratives.

Upon the Whole, as I know many Faults must appear, I earnestly request that
every judicious Reader will make such Amendments as seem necessary, and render
it, if possible, agreeable to his or her Taste, believing I should have done
the same, had it been in my Power.

London, April 2, 1754.
This Day are published, PROPOSALS FOR PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION, A COLLECTION
OF ORIGINAL POEMS. By SAMUEL DERRICK. WITH Several LETTERS Critical and
Entertaining, TO and FROM the AUTHOR.
Ingenium Mala saepe movent.
OVID.
SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in by R. MANBY on Ludgate Hill, PAUL VAILLANT in the
Strand, H. S. Cox and J. BOUQUET in Paternoster Row, and B. BOURN under the
Royal Exchange, Booksellers; J. BROOK in Change-Alley, and by the AUTHOR.

CONDITIONS.
I. THAT the Work shall be put to the Press as soon as two Hundred are
subscribed for. II. That it shall be printed off with all Expedition
afterward, on superfine Paper and an elegant Letter. III. The Price to
Subscribers will be Six Shillings; Three to be paid at the Time of subscribing,
and Three on the Delivery of the Work, in one Octavo Volume, stitched in Blue
Paper. IV. The Subscribers Names to be printed, as Encouragers of the Work. V.
A few will be printed off, for the Curious, on Royal Paper, and delivered
neatly Bound, at Ten Shillings and Sixpence Each, Five Shillings to be paid on
subscribing. VI. The Price will be raised to those who don't subscribe.
NARCISSA AND ELIZA.
INDULGENT Muse, to whom my Soul repairs,
As gentle Antidote of all its Cares;
Thou calm Recess of an o'erburthen'd Mind,
The Chains of rough Adversity unbind.
Then to forget myself I ask thy Aid,
Oh! snatch me from the Gloom of Fortune's Shade;
For tender Fancy struggles hard to rise,
Through the sharp Gales and Frosts of wint'ry Skies,
Bear from dull Earth on thy expanded Wing,
And teach thy humble Proselyte to sing;
With sprightly Elegance of Thought inspire,
Inflame my Bosom with poetic Fire,
Strike with bold Imag'ry, and tune my Verse,
While fabled Truths a moral Tale rehearse.
ANSELMO wearied with a trading Life,
Resolved to fly Solicitude and Strife;
To lay the anxious Cares of Business down,
And shun the Bustle of the noisy Town.
Nature had mingled in ANSELMO'S Frame,
A Love of Virtue, and Contempt of Fame;
Grave without Pride, though prudent, not severe,
Of Honor boundless, and of Judgment clear;
To Censure slow, to Pardon always free,
The Friend of Mankind, and of Liberty:
Who could, with equal Honesty, despise
The Fools of Power, or the corrupted Wise;
A venal Commoner, or lordly Knave,
A mitred Deist, or a willing Slave.
A grapling Miser, or a Spendthrift Heir,
An impious Rake-hell, or abandoned Fair,
A shameless Sinner, or affected Saint,
A Mind of Fallacy, or Face of Paint.
FORTUNE had blessed him with sufficient Store,
And REASON wisely told him, seek no more.
HE chose a lonely, yet delightful Seat,
Where every Comfort crowned the blessed Retreat;
Where Joys, unknown to pompous Pride and Power,
Danced on the Wings of every passing Hour.
Content, the Goddess of supreme Delight,
Still cheered the Day, and balm'd the happy Night.
Here safe calm Peace could smile at distant Wars,
The Cannon's Thunder and loud Statesmen's Jars.
Religion here divested of all Art,
Conjoined with Reason to amend the Heart,
Just in her Tenets, in her Doctrine clear,
Placid in Zeal, not formally severe.
HERE Charity, in all her native Charms,
Called faint Distress to her enlivening Arms;
Dispersed the Cloud of Woe with sun-like Beams,
And scattered Bounty in diffusive Streams.
No Widow here, ever bootless told her Pain,
No helpless Orphan streamed with Tears in vain.
ANSELMO had but one remaining Care,
Of which two Daughters claimed an equal Share,
The Elder deemed beyond Description fair.
NARCISSA, so the lovely Nymph we call,
In Shape was delicate, in Stature tall;
Her blooming Cheeks made pale the Tyrian Dye,
And Cupids ambush'd in each sparkling Eye;
With every Glance flew forth a golden Dart,
The certain Conquest of a wounded Heart.
Her Charms diffused a World of pleasing Pains,
And fettered, half Mankind in amorous Chains.
Each public Place re-echo'd with her Fame,
And thriving Vintners blessed her lucky Name;
For Sons of Bacchus holding her Divine,
Pouring Libations, empti'd Tons of Wine.
To show his Taste in panegyric Lays;
Each Witling strove to celebrate her Praise.
BEAUS with their Taylors', and their Barbers' Aid,
For Beaus are but mechanically made;
In foppish Emulation vainly strove,
To catch the Fair One's Eye, and win her Love.
While she convinced of her extensive Power,
Studied to gain new Conquests every Hour.
A Thousand little practiced Arts she tries;
CUPID the PROTEUS of her varying Eyes,
Veiled in the Ambush of their dazzling Rays,
Filled each Beholder with an amorous blaze,
While she with Pride beheld each subject Swain,
With Rapture saw, and triumphed in his Pain.
PALE Envy sat on every Female Brow,
To see those Charms which Envy must allow,
NARCISSA'S Beauty Rivals would not see,
But thus anatomized her over Tea.
HERE One can plainly in Complexion trace,
Undoubted Symptons of a borrowed Face;
The next a Dart of Criticism throws,
Against the Disproportion of her Nose;
A Third's sarcastic on her jetty Hair,
A Fourth discovers her immodest Stare;
A Fifth, for not one Atom can escape,
Distorts maliciously her matchless Shape;
A Sixth, to sum up all, with Heart elate
Descants at large upon her awkward Gait.
THUS feeble Envy like a sable Cloud,
Which strives the Sun's enlivening Rays to shroud
Labored t'envelop with its tainting Shade,
The radiant Beauties of this lovely Maid;
But as the God of Day triumphant reigns,
His Beams unsullied with polluting Stains,
Thus shone the Maid through Scandal's poisonous Gloom,
In all the Luster of Meridian Bloom;
Though clogged with Malice, still she soared above,
Hailed as the Shrine of universal Love.
No Wonder, if NARCISSA forced to leave,
The Mart of Beauty, should reluctant grieve;
To yield the Spoil of Three coquetted Years,
Called forth the Tribute of some pearly Tears.
She wept, she murmured at the hard Decree,
So inconsistent with her Gaiety:
She found no Pleasure in the rural Plains;
Reflection suited not her want of Brains;
For oh! -- though sad the Truth we must declare,
This lovely Maid so exquisitely fair;
Whose sparkling Eyes could Joy, or Pain dispense,
Wanted the Attribute of Common-Sense;
And self-sufficient, like all other Fools,
Still soared beyond the mean constraint of Rules.
Reason's sage dictates still she could resist,
And just had Head enough to play at WHIST.
ANSELMO saw her Levity with Pain,
And often spoke, but always spoke in vain.
She had been told a Sire declined in Age,
Near to his Exit from this mortal Stage;
Should not with antiquated Rules control,
The modish Sallies of a Daughter's Soul.
The Joys of boundless Liberty she chose,
And looked on prudent Friends, as envious Foes:
A Father's Care, her Folly deemed his Vice,
And called restraining Love his Avarice.
ELIZA, Sister to this witless Thing,
This flimsey Butterfly with gilded Wing,
Fell far beneath in the external Part,
Yet rose superior in an honest Heart.
THOUGH Nature furnished not those fleeting Charms,
Which Sickness often, but surely Age disarms;
Those Eye-delighting Beauties of an Hour,
Which one rough Blast can instantly devour;
A Mind, to no unruly Passion, Slave,
The great, and just Equivalent she gave.
IN strict Compliance did ELIZA move,
With filial Piety, and kindred Love;
Though youngest, took a Housewife's homely Care,
Nor would her Sister ever deign to share:
Received her Father's Precepts, as her Guide,
And prudently a Mother's Place supplied.
Domestics, with her mild Deportment won,
With Emulation to their Duty run;
The humble Villagers who lived around,
From her good Humor gentle Treatment found.
With cheerful Countenance she would resort,
To rural Festivals, and share their Sport;
And sometimes gaily join, as if by Chance,
In the rude Measures of the rustic Dance:
While vain NARCISSA, with disdainful Brow,
From Pride's high Throne o'erlook'd the poor below.
SCARCE had ANSELMO been three Months at Rest,
Three little Months with Solitude been blessed,
When this unthinking Object of his Love,
Tormented her fond Parent to remove;
To quit the Country for the gayer Town,
Where various Pleasures, various Minutes crown,
Where, as she said, there are a thousand Ways,
As Drums and Balls, and Masquerades and Plays,
To plume with Joy the drooping Wings of Time,
And waft direct to Happiness sublime.
"THOU know my Child, replies the tender Sire,
"I still have gratified each fond Desire,
"Review thy scanty Catalogue of Years,
"Behold my Tenderness, my anxious Fears;
"When did thou task my utmost Power in vain?
"Did thou ever singly feel, or Joy, or Pain?
"Why wou'd'st thou then a wished Repose deny,
"To see a Father happy, do thou sigh?
"Why sits that moody Frontlet on thy Brow?
"Does Gratitude thy Discontent allow?
"Think, my NARCISSA, of thy wild Demand,
"Nor seek for Ruin at ANSELMO'S Hand:
"If my Indulgence let thy Spirits roam,
"Discretion urges me to call 'em Home.
"LIFE Nature's turbulent and dangerous Sea,
"Is formed of complicate Variety;
"Here wanton Sunbeams on smooth Waters play,
"And all within the calm Horizon's Gay:
"But farther on a furious Tempest roars,
"While watery Mountains burst on trembling Shores;
"Ten Thousand Shoals and Rocks, in Ambush wait,
"The secret, sudden Ministers of Fate.
"Youth's fragile Barks with silken Tackle Ride,
"On the smooth Stream of Folly's faithless Tide;
"Unnumber'd Prospects of Delusion Glare,
"Which lead into the Eddies of Despair;
"Vice guiding rash Adventurers along,
"To Fate allures them with her Siren Song;
"Experience only can through Dangers steer,
"And wisely with the Turns of Fortune veer;
"Then slight not the Affection that would save,
"Thy tender Youth from Fate's o'erwhelming Wave."
ANSELMO here gave Admonition over,
NARCISSA wearied, long had Wish no more.
Her flighty Soul could modishly despise,
The prudent Hints of being sometimes Wise;
And all the Knowledge, which her Father taught,
A tedious, tasteless Homily she thought.
Not long she grieved at her eclipsing State,
Her Freedom came upon the Wing of Fate;
For Six revolving Moons had scarcely past,
Before the good ANSELMO breathed his last.
In a malignant Fever's deadly Guise,
Pale ATROPOS sealed up her Father's Eyes.
WHILE on the Bed of gloomy Death he lay,
In all the Agony of swift Decay;
His Eyes overflowing with Affection's Tide,
To see his Daughters mourning by his Side;
He snatched from vast Eternity and Prayer,
A few short Moments for his worldly Care;
Spoke all the Precepts of a happy Life,
Adapted to the Maiden and the Wife;
And recommended with his dying Voice,
Untainted Virtue as the wisest Choice;
A strict Compliance with her Laws required,
Then sunk at once, and blessing them expired.
THIS fatal Chance, this unexpected Dart,
Shot Pains unnumber'd through ELIZA'S Heart;
Her Breast full fraught with Love's abundant Store,
In bursting Groans re-eccho'd, "He Is no mre.
"Ye Nymphs and Swains in solemn Chorus join,
"And let your Voices catch the Tone of mine;
"Let me, deprived of Comfort's cheering Beam,
"Let me instruct your pious Eyes to stream;
"For none like me the mighty Loss can tell,
"How many Virtues with ANSELMO fell:
"Weep, weep, ye Indigent, your Bosoms rend,
"Like me you have lost a Father and a Friend."
In such sad Wailings, her Affection spoke
Her filial Sorrow for the fatal Stroke.
NARCISSA, marble-hearted to all Woe,
But such as could from Disappointment flow;
She, who had never minister'd Relief,
Who never was gloom'd, but with a selfish Grief;
Even she vouchsafed some pious Tears to shed,
Nature's last Tribute to a Parent dead.
But soon the Cloud of fleeting Care gave Way,
When sighed for Pleasures beamed their dazzling Ray;
Fresh Conquests danced before her raptured View,
She longed her lost Dominion to renew;
And Fortune joined with Inclination here,
To give that Liberty she held so dear;
For upon Fate's unalterable Page,
She stood recorded of a legal Age.
No Guardian's sage Impertinence she fears,
To rule the Conduct of Discretion's Years,
And on a careful Scrutiny she found,
Her Portion counted twice ten thousand Pound.
WINGED with the Gold, she took a sudden Flight,
And quickly gained the Region of Delight;
LONDON, dear LONDON, that bewitching Place,
That happy Market for a lovely Face;
LONDON, the Seat of Industry and Play,
LONDON, the great, the populous and gay;
LONDON possessed of Worthies, and of Knaves,
Of every Clime, and each Degree, but Slaves;
LONDON, where Trade, and lighter Pleasures smile,
LONDON, the Pride, the Glory of this Isle.
NARCISSA blessed with absolute Command,
Sets up an Equipage with lavish Hand;
Her Splendor more than former Fame restores,
Each Milliner admires, each Fop adores.
The brilliant Fair, all Connoisseurs confess,
The Soul of Fashion, and the Life of Dress.
Two Years a Life of Elegance she led,
Passed Nights in Revelry, and Days in Bed;
Suitors unnumber'd pleaded Love sincere,
But none with Titles, suited to her Ear;
She thought her boundless Charms might justly claim,
Some honorable prelude to her Name;
Your Ladyship. -- "No, no, a higher Place,
"Hail me kind Fortune with the Title, Grace."
This was the constant Subject of her Care,
Her sole remaining Wish and only Prayer.
For though she went to Church each Sabbath Day,
Her Business was to Ogle not to Pray.
AT length Fate joined to her admiring Train,
The wished for Conquest of a lorded Swain;
The gay CAMILLO; Master of those Arts,
Which serve to triumph over coquetish Hearts;
Who though in Parliament he always sat,
A perfect Monosyllable of State;
In Politics a very harmless Peer,
In Love still thundered on with bold Career;
Through each Degree of Galantry he roved,
And now a Countess, then a Milk-Maid loved:
With equal Ardour flew at any Game,
For high and low possessed an equal Flame.
While Fortune still, throughout his amorous Round,
The noble Peer with countless Conquests crowned.
Nor should we wonder at his boundless Reign,
No less his happy Attributes could gain;
For though the Knowledge of this titled Prig,
Could climb but to a fashionable Wig;
Though Books he little knew, and Virtue less;
He was an Adept in the Art of Dress;
His Clothes were glaring; he could dance and game,
Swear, fawn, and lie, untouched with conscious Shame;
To these, a paltry Cunning we may add,
Which showed a worthless Head, and Heart as bad.
HE saw the Failings of NARCISSA'S Mind,
To all the Dictates of Discretion, blind;
At Cards he watched the Motions of her Soul,
And saw her variegated Passions roll;
Saw gay Success her lovely Face embloom,
And Disappointment all her Beauties gloom;
With Love of Play he joined her boundless Pride,
And craftily appointed them his Guide;
By their Assistance he resolved to move,
And humble this proud Citadel of Love.
HIS Scheme proposed, at length the Siege began;
The Lady too had formed a previous Plan;
And all the Motions of each Side confess,
Both Parties well acquainted with Finesse.
He still approached in Love's sincerest 'Guise,
She played th'Artillery of sparkling Eyes;
He breathed his Vows with a pathetic Grace,
She deigned to listen with a smiling Face;
And then was most particularly gay,
When he politely lost his Stakes at Play.
Much Time elapsed without a Conquest gained,
For both alike invincible remained;
NARCISSA would have yielded as a Wife,
But then CAMILLO loved a single Life.
WHILE Matters thus remained in dubious Sense,
And both were almost wearied with Suspense;
Misfortune, which too often will prevail,
Cast a large Balance in his Lordship's Scale.
NARCISSSA rising from her Bed one Morn,
Gay as those Beams which Eastern Hills adorn;
Successive Pleasures justling in her Brain,
Found the gay Prospect of Idea vain;
And with a sudden Shock of ruthless Fate,
Fell from the Glory of her dazzling Height.
A LETTER came, supposed the Sacrifise,
Of some poor Swain, the Captive of her Eyes.
She cried, -- A Lady FANCIFUL in Mind, --
"Oh wherefore was I born to plague Mankind."
With gentle Indolence she broke the Seal,
Unknowing what her Vanity must feel;
When lo! in fatal Characters she read,
That Bankrupt PHILO, her Trustee, was fled;
That with her Fortune all her Hopes were dead.
AMAZE and Madness trembled in her Face,
And crowding Passions gave each other Chase;
First silent Horror took its chilly Reign,
And icicled her Blood through every Vein;
Her shudd'ring Limbs an aguish Soul confessed,
Then climbing Rage enflamed her tender Breast;
At last the Thunder-cloud of Nature breaks,
In briny Torrents down her pallid Cheeks.
In hopes to mitigate her raging Pain,
At Intervals she read her Fate again;
But where the unhappy Fair One sought Relief,
She met the Confirmation of her Grief.
Four restless Days and sleepless Nights she passed,
And wished each Woe fraught Minute was her last.
A CROWD of Visitors approached her Door,
Yet unacquainted with her being Poor;
But all the Servants were desired to tell,
Each courtly Friend, their Lady was not well;
A Thousand Cards of Compliments there came,
In Language and Sincerity the same.
Perplexed NARCISSA no Asylum knew,
Through the mazed Labyrinth of Thought she flew;
But no kind Hope its cheering Beam would show,
Through the Dark Cloud of her obscuring Woe.
THUS hunted by Misfortune to a Bay,
Distraction led, and she pursued the Way;
Resolved by des'prate Means to keep her State,
Or fall a Victim of relentless Fate.
So acts the lordly Tyrant of the Wood,
When Hunters seek to revel in his Blood,
A dangerous, unequal Fight he tries,
And lives triumphant, or triumphant dies.
THE fair unfortunate her Stock looked over,
And found two hundred Guineas all her Store;
On this small Pittance strait she sallied out,
With eager Haste to Lady GAMEWELL'S Route;
In all the Splendour of an Eastern Bride,
And her false Spirits decked in falser Pride.
Each told how much her Absence had been mourned,
And complimented on her Health returned;
But above all CAMILLO vowed his Pain,
And said that Joy returned with her again.
To Cards in Parties all with Speed retired,
Each Bosom with a Love of Gain inspired;
Here eager Hope appears in eager Eyes;
See, in one Trick the gay Delusion flies.
There angry Looks dark Discontent betray,
One luckless Card can strike with pale Dismay.
Now some with jocund Hearts their Bets receive,
While those who lose, with trembling Fingers give.
A general Silence ruled external Parts,
Yet various Tumults reigned in various Hearts.
FORTUNE reviews their anxious Fears and Wiles,
And justly at the mad Assembly smiles.
Yet undetermined where Success to bring,
Sometime she fluttered on a dubious Wing;
At length by Accident she chanced to light,
Blessing NARCISSA with a golden Flight.
Five Hundred Guineas with harmonious Notes,
Beyond the Warblings of Italian Throats,
Chink'd in her Ears, and to th'enliv'ning Sound
Her newborn Spirits beat a nimble Round;
Her Joy-fill'd Eyes looked eminently gay,
And though unrested, rivaled rising Day.
CAMILLO saw the Transports of her Breast,
And with mean Art a Sympathy professed;
Swore her Success much greater Pleasure gave,
Than any Flow of Fortune he could have;
Vowed her Content superior to his own,
And that her Joys to him were Joys alone;
Then proudly ushered the victorious Fair,
And led the Way to her attending Chair.
Requested Leave to visit her at Home,
She smiled Assent, and told him, "He might come."
Now all departing to their Beds retreated,
Both those with Conquest crowned, and those defeated;
But different Fortunes, different Vigils kept,
And hardly one of either Party slept.
Here Rest was murdered in the Loser's Pain,
There conquered by exhilerating Gain.
TRUE to the Touch, that Day his Lordship came,
To paint his inextinguishable Flame;
NARCISSA on precarious Footing placed,
Thought it imprudent to be coyly c h ste,
Therefore politically cast aside,
Affected Levity and distant Pride.
Therefore with grave Attention heard his Tale,
Convinced her Eyes must certainly prevail;
Convinced, the Lover to escape his Pains,
Would nooze himself in matrimonial Chains,
Each Day he visited, each Day she thought
The Period of Advancement nearer brought;
But, ah! weak Maid, in all her Projects vain,
Love struck her Heart, without a Sense of Pain;
Love of the gay Deceiver gently stole,
And unperceived enthralled her roving Soul;
The Sigh affected once, sincerely heaves,
CAMILLO flatters, and NARCISSA b'lieves.
WHEN he beheld the Captive in his Power,
He villainously seized a pliant Hour;
When powerful Nature bore imperial Sway,
And her dilated Mind was freely gay:
Then with the Force of stimulative Art,
Enfeebl'd Reason, and enflamed her Heart;
Down, with false Vows, her struggling Virtue bore,
Enjoyed his utmost Wish, and sighed no more.
Then left her hastily with cold Respect,
LOTHARIO like, at leisure to reflect.
THIS was NARCISSA'S Era of Distress,
Her little Comfort grew each Moment less;
Tortured with Love and disappointed Hope,
She gave the Fury of her Madness Scope;
Wild as a Tempest of the North she raved,
And from avenging Heaven Assistance craved.
While her Gallant divulged to babbling Fame,
The Secret of his Villainy, -- her Shame.
His dauntless Infamy Remorse defies,
And the black Tale on blacker Scandal flies;
In one short Day through Thousands swiftly goes,
A standing Jest for Prudes, Coquets and Beaus;
Hastes to the Knowledge of the Grub-street Throng,
And strait becomes the Subject of a Song.
THUS the bewitching, but uncautious Maid,
By Fortune and by Fallacy betrayed;
Rent with the Rage of agonizing Thought,
When past the Nine Days' Wonder of her Fault;
Was metamorphos'd, as by magic Spell,
And to the Shade of dark Oblivion fell*
APPROACHING Penury again assailed,
Which with lost Fame over Penitence prevailed;
Another Lover she at length obtained,
And he too shortly all his Wishes gained;
Then soon revolted from her fading Charms,
And left for others, her incircling Arms:
A Third, a Fourth succeeded, and were blessed,
But each one proved inconstant as the rest.
Thus half a Bedlamite through Shame she ran,
The justly irritated Foe of Man;
To Vice a Captive, and afraid to think,
Took the sad Refuge of oblivious Drink:
In Bacchanalian Chains her Reason bound,
Thus sealed her Ruin, thus Destruction crowned;
For soon her blooming Beauty felt Decay,
And with her Charms Subsistence dropped away;
Yet to the last her Follies she pursued,
Till dreaded Poverty at length ensued;
Till she was placed by Fate's relentless Power,
Where human Wretchedness could fall no lower.
PROSPERITY here turn thy sparkling Eye,
And view the Ravage of Adversity;
See Desolation spread over every Part,
Glare in her Eyes, and rankle in her Heart.
See those soft Limbs which in full Fortune wore,
The richest Produce of each trading Shore;
For Maintenance their gaudy Raiment fold,
(...) now, and shivering with the Cold.
(...) that nice Palate with rich Viands fed,
Enjoy the simple Sustenance of Bread;
With no Dilution to imbibe when dry,
But such as Springs and friendly Streams supply;
See her beneath a dropping Penthouse creep,
There in sad Exigence behold her sleep;
A damp, uncomfortable Stone her Bed,
And the rude Pillow of her houseless Head.
That Soul, which lightest Trifles could affright,
Sleeps in the Horrors of a Winter's Night.
Though Hurricanes the Face of Heaven deform,
Sleeps in the Tumult of the raging Storm.
TELL thy gay Minions of their empty Pride,
Borne on the Waves of Fortune's golden Tide.
How near Mortality's allied to Woe,
In the sad Prospect of NARCISSA show.
See that wrecked Form so late admired by all,
See her Distress, and tremble at her fall.
ELIZA, whom we have so long forgot,
On Life's vast Stage had found a milder Lot,
We meet her settled in a rural Life,
A tender Mother and a prudent Wife.
Though she too lost her patrimonial Right,
Discretion guarded her against Fortune's Spite;
For by the Help of Industry she gained,
A Mansion where Contentment ever reigned;
Where Neatness shone, beyond a splendid Glare,
And void of Grandeur, it was void of Care.
NARCISSA'S stubborn Pride, though fallen so low,
Disdained to let her tender Sister know
The tragic Story of her matchless Woe.
OFTEN had ELIZA wrote, but still in vain,
Her Love could never friendly Answer gain;
Removed from Town, she knew not what had past,
But the sad Tidings reached her Ears at last.
Winged on Affection swift as fleeting Thought,
To Town she flew, and poor NARCISSA sought.
From Street to Street incessantly she went,
Yet a long Week in fruitless Searches spent;
At length the Object of her Care she found,
In wretched State upon the flinty Ground;
Struck with the Sight, immovable she stood,
While Horror, Shame and Anguish, thrilled her Blood.
Soon as Speech triumphed over the Bonds of Grief,
Look up, she cried, "I come to give Relief,
"Come, wretched Sister, from the Earth arise,",
At this NARCISSA raised her languid Eyes;
Dropped a few silent Tears, let fall her Head,
While in a Sigh her shattered Spirit fled.
ELIZA thought 'twas only Strength that failed,
She knew not that tyrannic Death prevailed;
But soon was told that his unerring Dart
Had pierced incurably her Sister's Heart.
Convinced no Care, no human Power could save,
With pious Tears she wet NARCISSA'S Grave;
Then hasted homeward to her humble Seat,
To taste the Comforts of her calm Retreat
There still remains contented there to live,
On those Enjoyments Heaven is pleased to give;
Nor does her humble Gratitude aspire,
And cultivate irregular Desire;
No idle Wishes envious Poison mix,
Unmoved she views a Neighbor's Coach-and-Six.
BEHOLD her, ye NARCISSAS of the Age,
Who gayly flutter on Life's transient Stage;
To imitate her Virtues be your Care,
Prefer a perfect Mind to Grandeur's Glare,
For she that is best is Fairest of the Fair.
FINIS.

