LOVE IN A MIST. A FARCE Now Acting at the CITY-THEATRE IN DUBLIN, With great
Applause.

DUBLIN Printed: LONDON Reprinted for W. REEVE, at Shakespeare's Head,
Serjeants-Inn Gate, in Fleet Street. MDCCXLVII.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mr. WRIGHT. IN short -- good Folk -- a dismal Truth to tell
I come to toll our Author's passing Bell.
His Farce will not do -- the Reason, would you know it?
(For sure the Spark has something of the Poet)
The Muse cries out, such sad Examples taught her,
No Bard can thrive -- unless he cross the Water.
Severe Decree! -- no homeborn Muse delights,
Nothing shall please -- but what a Stranger writes!
Let us exert ourselves -- assume a Spirit,
And think our Title -- good as theirs -- to Merit.
What Heaven loved Clime -- but our thrice happy Coast
Of such successful Patriots can boast,
With one collected Force the Arts to nourish,
Make Trade survive, and sacred Culture flourish;
And yet -- to future Times 'twill seem surprising,
While each deserving Artist's sure of rising;
While a Mechanic Merit's well rewarded,
The tattered Muse repines -- not once regarded.
To this August Assembly we submit;
To you -- we recommend the Cause of Wit:
Arise -- nor see a native Genius braved,
Too long have such been banished -- or enslaved;
And though our Author makes a weak Endeavor,
He Will Mend upon the Sunshine of your Favor.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir William Willmore, Mr. Mynitt. Young Willmore, Mr. Wright. Jerry, Mr.
Mason.
WOMEN.
Charlotte Lovely, Mrs. Mynitt. Kitty, a kept Mistress, Mrs. Farrel.
LOVE IN A MIST.
SCENE the Street.
Enter WILLMORE and JERRY. JERRY. ON my Soul, Sir, I cannot but Admire this
extreme Vivacity of your Inclinations: Scarce six Days since you were dying for
a Baby-fac'd Thing at Oxford, and scarce six Hours in London, till you are
over-head and Ears in Love with a --


Will. God's Death, Jerry, I Am all on Fire -- well -- the dear Minute of
Appointment is just at hand; this Letter in Answer to the One you delivered
her, informs me, that she is kept by an old Jealous Knight in the City -- she is
a fine Woman by Heaven -- and if it be in the Power of her Sex to drive that
intolerable Coquet Charlott out of my Head, I think it is she can do it.


Jer. Heaven send there comes a good End on it -- well, if I should have my
Bones shattered in this Rencounter, 'twill not be the first Time I have been
paid for my Ingenuity.


Will. Peace, Scoundrel, and learn to bear Misfortunes with a Pimplike Patience.


Jer. Patience! yes you may talk of Patience truly, while all the Pleasure of
the Sin belongs to yourself, and all the Punishment to your humble Servant --
how often have these unfortunate Bones of mine been beaten to a Jelly in your
Service!


Will. Why, Sirrah, if your Ill-Stars condemn you to Disappointments, can I
prevent them? If ever you suffered in your Vocation, some unfortunate Blunder
of your own occasioned it; you remember the Letter you gave to Charlott's
Jealous Guardian? When in the overflowing of your Wisdom you mistook him for
her Footman.


Jer. Remember it! I do, by all that is unfortunate: confound the old Dog -- he
laid on me like an Hercules. He had put on her Footman's Livery on purpose to
lay wait for me; yet all this I could have borne with the Patience of an
Alderman, but the insupportable Weight of your Honor's Oaken Cudgel!


Will. My Resentment was reasonable, Sirrah, such a preposterous Mistake! but
tell me Jerry, don't you think Charlott will be confoundedly piqu'd at my so
sudden Departure fron Oxford, without sending her one single Line, or whining
out the least tender Adieu at Parting?


Jer. Piqu'd, Sir! Lord, Sir, I thought you understood the inside of a Coquet
better, though it might puzzle one of a longer standing at Oxford, to tell what
to make of her -- why, Sir, a Coquet is always so well pleased with herself
that nothing in Nature is capable of discomposing her.


Will. And yet, Jerry, though she used me with such a studied ill Nature, I
sometimes thought she did not hate me.


Jer. Hate you! no, no, Sir, in my humble Opinion she was extremely well
pleased with you; at least she has Reason to be very well pleased with herself
since she had it in her Power to make so fine a Gentleman a downright --.


Will. Come, out with it Sirrah, I shall not be angry.


Jer. A downright Ass -- begging your Honor's Pardon.


Will. Why, really Sir, you do make something Free with me, but will your
Worship be pleased to explain what you mean by honoring me with that
extraordinary Title?


Jer. Nay, Sir, I beg you will not take it ill that I said so, for on my Honor,
Sir, I assure you I have seen Persons of great Rank and Distinction act over
all the pretty Follies of that sagacious Animal, and value themselves extremely
upon it.


Will. Pray then, most Philosophical Sir, will you please to inform me, what
one Action of mine happens to fall under the Lash of your Satire?


Jer. Why, really Sir, as you have been so long notorious in the Class of
Lovers, I think your Question is easily resolved: Lovers since the Creation
have been generally esteemed little better than -- but since the Title of the
forementioned Animal seems to affect you so nearly, I Will forbear repeating it,
and leave it to yourself to consider, what are the Motives which hurried you so
suddenly to London, with scarce a single Guinea in your Pocket, unknown to your
Father, or Friends, and I may even venture to say almost unknown to yourself.


Will. Why Jerry, I think my coming to London a Masterpiece of Resolution, and
I applaud myself for it extremely. I doated even to Folly on that Charlott, the
greatest Tyrant of her Sex. You are sensible how she used me -- in short I was
become ridiculous even to myself, and judging with a great deal of Justice that
in dear London alone I might hope to recover my Reason, I resolved to break my
Chains at once, and let the Coquet see that Beauty without Merit had lost all
Power to make a Fool of me.


Jer. So we take Horse in a Pet, Whip, Spur, and away; leave being silly at
Oxford to come and play the downright Fool at London; for Curse me, Sir, still
begging your Honor's Pardon, if I can at present see that your Intentions are
conducted with the least Appearance of common Sense.


Will. Since I must explain my Intentions, Sir, to make a Man of your vast
Judgment approve them, you must know that by a Variety of Pleasures here in
London, I design to lose even the Remembrance of my Oxford Mistress; and least
the Presence of an old peevish Father might Interrupt those Pleasures, I am
positively resolved to avoid all Places where 'twere probable I might meet with
him.


Jer. And so, Sir, you begin this fine Variety of Pleasures by an Intrigue with
Mistress what is her Name here, this fine kept Mistress -- and that too with a
Pair of Pockets Damnably badly lined -- a likely Prospect of succeeding, truly!


Will. If you exert yourself Jerry, our Plot upon my Father cannot miscarry;
then, if she be a mercenary Whore? Damn Money, 'twas made to purchase Pleasure
-- it is now just Six.


Locks at his Watch. Jer. And pray, Sir, what is to be your humble Servant's
Duty while you amuse yourself with the Lady? You Will please to give Orders that
the Waiting-Maid may entertain me I hope.


Will. You have Business enough upon you Hands, Sirrah; now you see me lodged,
find out my Father, and if Fortune smiles on you, you will find me here, ready to
receive her Favors.


Going out, Charlott enters in Boys Clothes, and jostles him. Char. Zouns, Sir,
en't the Street wide enough? or did you design to affront me?


Will. I have other Business in hand, Sir, than either to affront you, or stay
to make an Apology.


Char. Business? what Business can he have, into that House too? Oh, here is his
Hangdog, of a Man, his Pimp and Prime Minister; it is certainly some Intrigue
has brought him there: If I don't mistake that down-look, that Fellow is a Pimp
and a Coward, so may I either Bully or Bribe him out of his Master's Secrets.
Harkee me, you Sir, Prithee what Business have you lurking about this House
here?


Jer. Lurking about, Sir! I Would have you to know I Am a Man of Honor, Sir, and
not used to answer such Questions -- Lurking about! Tum, tum, tum, I walk here,
Sir, for the Recreation of my Legs, and the Procreation of my Appetite.


Char. I mistake Friend, or your walking here tends to the Procreation of
something else -- come, Sir, no equivocating, answer me directly, upon what
Design are you stationed at this Corner, and what Business your commanding
Officer has in yonder Citadel?


Jer. Who the Devil have we here? some young Don Quixote enamored with the
fair and virtuous Lady of the Castle, I Will warrant you.


Char. Zouns, Sir, no trifling, confess, or by this Sword I Will pin you to the
Wall: come, there is a Lady in the Case?


Jer. Why truly Sir, as you say, there is a Lady in the Case, a Woman of great
Honor and Reputation, I assure you; and my Master whom you saw just now enter,
is a very honorable Man, and by this Time I suppose them engaged in a very
honorable Affair. Now, Sir, I have satisfied your Curiosity, you will please to
withdraw and leave me to my Meditations.


Char. So, you are to defend the out Works, while the General beats up the
Quarters within.


Jer. A Man of shrewd Penetration truly!


Char. A few Words more with you, good Mr. Pimp, and we shall come to a
Conclusion. In short who is this Lady? her Name? her Fortune? is she Young,
Handsome, a Maid, or married, is she --


Jer. Hold: hold, Sir, not so fast, I Have a devilish short Memory, and shall
never be able to answer so many Questions in Order -- it must be the Devil
himself, or a Lawyer, for he would fain puzzle me with cross Questions.


Char. Dammee, Scoundrel, speak at once to the Purpose or -- here is the most
persuasive little Blade in Christendom.


Jer. It Is strange now, Sir, what a wonderful Antipathy, I Have ever had even to
the Sight of Cold Iron; it is a treacherous Sort of a Crocodile Companion,
that is the Truth on it, while it smiles in a Man's Face, whip it has him through
the Lungs in a twinkling.


Bantering. Char. God's Death -- do you Play on me Rascal?


Jer. Play on you! ah Lord, Sir, you mistake me entirely, Play on you! no, no,
Sir, but it is my way, Sir, to moralize a little on every Subject that offers:
You must know, Sir, I have had Part of my Education at Oxford, that Seat of the
Muses! That Theater of Learning! That Fountain of Erudition! now, Sir, in my
Opinion as I have an undoubted Right to make Use of the great Share of
Knowledge and Wisdom I therein acquired, I should think it quite opposite to
Prudence and common Sense to trifle any longer with so worthy a little
Gentleman, so by your Leave, Sir.


Comes nearer and nearer, till he wrests the Sword from her. Char. The Devil!
the Villain has almost broke my Arm.


Jer. And now, Sir, will you please to let me know what Business you have
lurking about this House here?


Char. Come, come, Jeremy, you will find I know you and your Master too; be
assured my Care for his Safety is my chief Motive for enquiring after him;
perhaps there may be Danger in his venturing into yonder House. Come, Jerry,
depend upon my Honor, I Will not betray you; let this persuade you of my
Sincerity. There Is a Wench in Chase -- Ha! what says my little Mercury?


Gives him Money. Jer. Arguments drawn from the Mint are certainly the most
prevailing in Logic, an excellent Sentence by all that is Eloquent -- Sir you
have rivetted Jeremy Ply, Gentleman, eternally to your Service; and though I have
not the Honor of knowing you, I Am so well convinced of your Friendship for me
and my Master, that without more Preamble, I plead Guilty.


Char. Is she a Woman of Fortune, or Family? a Widow perhaps, or --


Jer. No, no, Sir, neither Maid, Wife, nor Widow, I Will assure you, but a true
Daughter of the Game: A kept Mistress, Sir, and as free of her Favors as any
young Rake of ye all could wish for.


Char. So much the better, Jerry, for I cannot possibly resist the Temptation of
paying my Respects to her.


Jer. Oh Lord, Sir, by no means, Sir; my Master will certainly murder me:
Consider, Sir, he fixed me here on purpose to hinder every thing in Breeches
from disturbing him, besides, Sir, your Honor, your Honor is pledged.


Char. And my Pocket alone can release it.


Throws him Money and Exit. Jer. Well little London, I Will say that for thee,
there is no Place under the Sun where Pimps have a better Prospect of thriving.


Enter Sir WILLIAM WILLMORE. Sir Will. An expensive Affair, by the Lord Harry --
but it is the Misfortune of old Age -- the Purse must still make Amends for the
Inability of the Person -- how the Gypsy will leer at these little Pictures,
and how fond, and how wanton she will be, till she nibbles them out of the old
Fool's Clutches.


Jer. The old Knight by all that is ominous. Damnation! what Devil led him to
this End of the Town?


Aside Sir Will. Hah -- is not that Bob's Jerry -- sure the young Dog is not
come up to London without acquainting me --


Jer. Yes, the Kite has discovered me; if my Master should come Bolt out of his
Borough, what a sweet piece of Work have we made on it? well I must on now in my
own Defense [As if not seeing him] alas a Day, my poor old Master, it is for him
my very Heart and Bowels ache -- the melancholy News will certainly be the
Death of the poor old Gentleman.


Sir Will. What does he Mutter -- what melancholy News is the Blockhead
dreaming about?


Jer. His very Soul was in that Son of his, and an hopeful, dutiful Youth he
was as one might meet in a Summer Day's riding.


Sir Will. Ad, so Jerry -- why Jerry -- are you distracted or drunk, or what
Devil's the matter with you.


Jer. Ads heart my old Master! the very Gentleman I Would look for -- ah, Sir, the
most pitiful News! poor Mr. Robert!


Sir Will. What, is he Dead?


Jer. No, Sir, not absolutely Dead neither, but --


Sir Will. But! but what Blockhead? he has played the Fool I suppose and married
his Bed-maker, or his Millener.


Jer. Would to Heaven it was no worse, Sir: though Matrimony be a Noose, and a
Devil of a one, poor Mr. Robert is in a fair Way of being tied up in a quite
different Manner I assure you.


Sir Will. What do you say, Sirrah, my Son Bob in a fair Way to be hanged?


Jer. In short, Sir, he has killed his Man, fairly killed him, a Dispute
happened, a Challenge was sent, the Gentlemen met, and it was my young Master's
very good Fortune, Sir, to pink the very Soul of his Antagonist: for to besure,
Sir, Mr. Robert, as he has the Honor of being your Son, must be a Man of
Courage.


Sir Will. Courage! what the Devil had he to do with Courage? A fine talk about
Courage, truly: so good Robert Willmore, Esquire Son of Sir William Willmore of
Willmore Hall, in Comitatu Bucks, must be hanged forsooth, because he is a Man
of Courage!


Jer. His Duty, Sir, and this Letter.


Sir Will. Hum, Hum -- According to the Principles of Honor, Sir, I could not
avoid calling an Insolent young Officer to a close Account for publicly
affronting me: It was his Misfortune to fall by my Sword, (fine Principles of
Honor truly) I am now under an Arrest; yet, if any Thing hinders the Affair
being immediately made up, it is a Deficiency of ready Money, (so) which I Am
positive you will prevent with your accustomed Indulgence.

A mighty pretty Request! a very reasonable Demand truly! Hearkee, my good Mr.
Squire, you will let your Man of Courage know from me, that I don't at all
approve of his Principles of Honor; and that I Am resolved not to part with a
single Farthing, and if he has no other Way to Escape, but by the help of my
broad Pieces, he may even say his Prayers, and prepare for another World, for
I Will not part with a Souse, tell him so, and so farewell, good Mr. Man of
Courage!


Jer. For Heaven's Sake, Sir, consider, the poor young Gentleman will break his
Heart, if you treat him with so much Inhumanity.


Sir Will. Break his Heart, Sir, Ouns, let him; better he should break his
Heart, than be hanged: Courage, quotha: so if he thinks fit to Kill half the
Town in his Courage, I have Nothing to do but open my Bags and scatter my old
Gold to save him from the Gallows, a good Jest! a very good Jest! by the Lord
Harry.


Jer. Besides, Sir, as his Annuity becomes due you may repay yourself, what you
are pleased to advance upon this Occasion, you were always indulgent, Sir,
consider he is young --


Sir Will. He Is young, and I Am old, Sir, he is a Fool and I Am a wise Man, Sir,
he is a Man of Courage, and I Am a Man that must pay for it, it seems; here
Scoundrel, here are two Ten Pound Bags, ready sealed, and yet I Have a wonderful
Temptation to let the young Rascal Hang for it: here are twenty Pieces, Sirrah,
and let me hear that he makes a proper Use of them, and not one Word more of
his Courage -- or --


Jer. Oh Lord, Sir, not a Tittle, we shall take a quite different Method, Sir,
when those are expired. And so Sir, with all Submission, and Respect, I return
to my Master, who will be overjoyed at the agreeable News of your good Health and
the Success of his Courage, and my Parts.


Exit Jerry. Sir Will. God's Death, a young Dog, I wonder what Devil possesses these
young Fellows! Nothing but cutting of Throats, Bloodshed and Battery upon
every fiddle faddle Occasion: But let me see, I must away to my Banker for a
fresh Supply, no Reception from my Danae, but when I descend in a golden Shower.


Exit. SCENE Kitty's Lodgings.
KITTY and WILLMORE. Kitty. It Is all in vain I assure you, Sir, notwithstanding
your good Opinion of yourself, you will find I shall make no Difference as to
Persons between you and my old Keeper, every Lover that can purchase a Favor,
has a right to demand it; it is my Trade, Sir, and like the Lawyer or Physician,
nothing but a Fee can soften me.


Will. Come, come, God's Death, what means this fooling? Ouns, I took you for one of
the Kindest of your Sex, and I will not be disappointed.


Kitty. In short I Am not to be charmed with the outside of a Scarlet Breeches,
if the Pockets are properly lined, why, perhaps we might come to an Agreement,
but while you sue in Pauper, my good unfurnished Captain, there is but small
Hopes of succeeding in these Quarters.


Will. What! have I nothing about me to Tempt you? Come, I know by these Eyes,
these smiling, speaking Eyes, that you cannot be Cruel: God's Death, my Dear, which
is your Bedchamber.


Enter CHARLOTT. Char. Damme, Madam, If I spoil any Sport; I beg a Million of
Pardons, but upon the slightest of your Commands I retire to whatever Corner of
your Lodgings your Ladyship thinks proper to assign me.


Kitty. How now, my good familiar Spark, who are you? Whence came you? who let
you in, or what is your Business here?


Char. Heyday! an Inundation of Questions! on my Soul, Madam, you must excuse
me, you see there is Company, but in private I Will give you all the Satisfaction
you can Desire, Ratt me.


Kitty. An agreeable Fellow, on my Conscience.


Char. Come, Madam, Alons, no doubt the Pictures in your Ruelle, are the most
A-la-mode De l'Italian, Monsieur Permittez moy.


[leading her off] Will. God's Death this is one of the most impertinent little
Fops! Sir, as the Lady don't seem to allow you for an old Acquaintance, give me
Leave to tell you, Freedoms, if carried too far may disoblige her.


Char. Ha, ha, ha! that Speech is so Angloi, so full of Spleen, and the ill
Nature of the Climate, that Curse me, I must laugh in his Face: be it known
unto you then, most serious Sir, that I have a Violent tender for the Lady, in
Consequence of which, whatever Freedoms I may happen to make Use of, the Lady
is bound in Honor to excuse them. Adieu, adieu, mon chere, Madame ou est votre
Chamber? Alons.


Kitty. The Devil is in the Fellow, I believe he has certainly bewitched me.


Will. Ouns, Sir, what Privilege have you to make free in these Lodgings?


Char. Privilege! oh Lord, Sir, I have been at Paris; I can dance, dress, talk
French, and take Snuff with an Air: I know all the News of the Town, Sir; all
the Intrigues and all the Scandal; can tell which Lord is great with his Lady's
Woman, and which Lady with her Husband's Valet De Chamber: In short, Sir, I Am
Master of a thousand Qualifications that always gives a Man some Privilege
amongst the Ladies.


Will. The excellent Privilege of a superior Impudence, and a French Education.


Enter JERRY. Jer. Sir, Sir, I Have succeeded even beyond our Hopes; here, Sir,
here are the singing Birds. The good old Gentleman had not the least Suspicion;
but one Word, Sir, beware of Sharpers, I don't much like that little Mercury at
your Elbow.


Will. A troublesome Coxcomb; but this, was Luck Jerry; for without this
Ammunition the Siege had been certainly raised. Be gone, and wait for me at my
Lodgings, I Will thank thee there.


Jer. Now, is my wise Master going to prove himself an errant Blockhead, and
throw away all the Fruits of our honest Industry on yonder Jezabell.


Exit. Will. Well, Madam, now you see I Am in a proper Condition to address you,
and since I could not prevail by myself, let those little eloquent Gentlemen
plead for me; [gives her a Purse] come, come, my Dear, we'll finish this
Bargain within; for curse me, if I can hold out any longer.


Kitty. Hold, Sir, perhaps this Gentleman has an equal Pretension, at least we
should give him fair Play: What do you say, Sir, you see I Am for the best
Bidder.


Cher. Damme, Madam, I Am but a younger Brother, and forced to live by my Parts,
and the Favor of the Ladies; but if you will accept of my Devotions, tout jour
Pret, by the Lord, what say you Monsieur L'Argent, pouvez vous Dancer. Will you
dance for the Lady?


Will. Sir, I Will fight for the Lady -- so without further Impertinence, desire
you to withdraw.


Char. Damme, Sir, do you think to frighten me.


Kitty. Hold, Gentlemen, let me decide this Affair; I Will send him a packing
I Will warrant ye, an impudent Fop! [ Aside to Charlott] Sir, though I had not the
Pleasure of an earlier Acquaintance with you, I don't know how it is, I must
confess I like you, your Manner has something so engaging, that I find I shall
be Fool enough to grow fond of you. I could not take it ill, should you doubt
my Sincerity, but if this Purse, just given me by your Rival, can convince you
I Am in earnest, I beg you to make Use on it, and an Hour hence I Will expect you;
we'll laugh at all such Coxcombs as this is, and sacrifice an Hour or two to
our mutual Satisfaction.


Char. Curse me, my Dear, but you have the most adroit Way of making a Present!
Sir, Monsieur, you had as good march off, for on my Soul, it is only Time lost,
the Lady bids me tell you so; I have done her Business, Sir, she doats on me,
dies for me, and vous etes un Malhereaux, as a Proof of the poor Creature's
Fondness, this Bagatelle, this Trifle, you see, Sir, she did me the Honor to
present me with it from her own fair Hand, Sir.


Will. The Jilt -- Damnation! God's Death, you young Dog, do you make a Jest of me?
Ouns, to lose my Money, and my Mistress too! Draw, Sir.


Char. With all my Heart, Sir, yet, upon second Thought, what if we divide
Stakes in a more peaceable Manner; do you keep the Woman, Sir, and I Am
satisfied to walk off with my Bargain.


Enter JERRY. Jer. Ah, Lord, Sir, we are ruined, we are undone, some Devil or
other has directed your Father here, I met him just at the Threshold, and ran
back in such Confusion, I don't know whether I Am discovered or not. This comes
of intriguing, with a Pox to it! Unfortunate Jeremy Ply, what the Devil will
become of thee? thou were certainly born to be hanged without Benefit of
Clergy.


Will. God's Death, my Father? you amaze me -- how, how shall I escape?


Jer. Escape, Sir, it is impossible, he is here, Sir, I hear him on the Stairs,
in the Name of all that is impudent, Sir, face him downright that he mistakes
you; persuade him out of his Senses, and let us make a Retreat as decently as
we can; he has not seen you this long Time, Sir, and may be easily imposed on;
I Will hide behind this Screen; for if he sees me, all is over.


Enter Sir WILLIAM. Kitty. My Keeper!


Will. It Is he, by Heaven! my own natural Father.


Sir Will. Hey day! we have got Company here, fine Doings, rare Doings, by the
Lord Harry! ah -- ah -- thou Crocodile, thou Messalina, have I found thee out,
is it thus you employ yourself in my Absence, thou Toad, thou Serpent, that
I Have nourished so long in my Bosom.


Kitty. Indeed, and indeed now, you must not be jealous, Dear, these are only
some Cousins from the Country, Dear, nobody else indeed! come buss thy own
Kitty.


Sir Will. Cousins; ah Cousins, with a Vengeance! you have cousin'd me to some
Purpose, truly. Pray, little Gentleman, may I make bold to ask, who, or what
you are?


Char. A Rake, rat me.


Sir Will. And your Business here?


Char. To lie with that Lady. Nothing else on my Soul, Sir.


Sir Will. Very concise truly. And you Sir? ah -- may I believe my Eyes, roguery
upon roguery! I shall run distracted! ah thou Reprobate; look me full in the
Face, Sir, and tell me what Business you have in London, and what is become of
the Money I sent you by your Rogue of a Servant, this Evening. Why don't you
speak, Sirrah, how his Guilt confounds him!


Will. God's Death, what do you mean old Gentleman? for Damn me if I can understand
one Syllable of all this.


Sir Will. What Is this? what is this? your Worship will not vouchsafe to know me
then; oh Impudence unparalled! with Submission, Sir, is not your Name Robert
Willmore, educated these three Years at Oxford, who fought a Duel the other
Day, killed your Man, and sent an honest Valet de Chamber you keep, in
Post-haste to London, to cozen a good old foolish Knight, who has the Honor to
be your Father, to cheat him, and bambouzle him out of twenty good Pieces of
Gold, which he foolishly, very foolishly sent by the aforesaid honest Valet not
an Hour ago: Pray, Sir, are you this worthy Gentleman or not?


Will. Ha, ha, ha! distracted by all that is Lunatic, quite beside himself!
however, to humor your Frenzy, my queer old Fellow, Curse me if I Have the least
Knowledge of the Gentleman you talk of, or his honest Valet, or the foolish old
Knight his Father, if I have, Damn me.


Sir Will. How, how, do I dote, am I asleep, or distracted, or have you lost
your Senses Bob, and don't know your own natural Father?


Will. And for a College Education, I Am a Beau, Sir; and of Consequence a
professed Enemy to all kind of Learning, unless it be the Manage of the Snuff
Box, or the je ne scay quoi of the Rigadoon.


Char. This is an extraordinary Piece of Humor, of my Conscience.


Will. My Name is Careless, Sir, commonly called Beau Careless, by all the
Tavern and Coffee-Waiters in and about London! ha, ha, ha, killed his Man, you
don't know me, Sir, I find you don't know me; ha, ha, ha.


Sir Will. Can I be mistaken -- I must -- and yet I could have sworn 'twas Bob;
his very Shape and Physiognomy, his very outside indeed, but for the inside,
thank Heaven, it is quite different.


Char. Come, Sir, I can see you no longer imposed on: Be satisfied this
Gentleman is no other than your Son, educated as you said at Oxford, and now
come up incog to London; because it is here he expects to find a larger Variety
of Pleasures. I know not what you mean by his Duel, and killing his Man, but am
assured, Sir, it is all a Fable, and I believe I can produce the Author, at
least the Manager of this, and all his other Extravagance, do you know this
Face, Sir?


Discovers Jerry. Will. You are to be met I suppose, Sir, I shall find a Time.


Char. Damn your Time, Sir; or will you let this honest Gentleman impose on you
as your dutiful Son has done? if you will believe him, Sir, I Will engage he will
tell you he is not the Rogue you take him for, but a Person of some
Consequence, and Honesty. Pray, Sir, are you a Beau too, and by what Name is
your Honor distinguished amongst the Tavern and Coffee Waiters, in and about
London? ha, ha, ha.


Jer. Really, Sir, I do seem Guilty, I confess I do, but if I am not as
innocent, and as much imposed on as yourself, may I be condemned to the Service
of some half famished Lawyer, never more to know the dear Pleasures of
Board-wages, but keep an eternal Lent upon sour small Beer and Parchment.


Char. Why, Sir! are you so Mad to believe this?


Sir Will. Rascal, what can you say for yourself? he shall swing, by the Lord
Harry.


Jer. I spied this Gentleman here, this wonderful Likeness of my young Master,
just turning a Corner of the Street, Sir, as I parted from your Worship, you
may very well think I was surprised, Sir; yes, Sir, my very Hair stood an End,
I Will assure you.


Char. Sirrah, thou art an Original of Impudence.


Jer. However, Sir, I plucked up my Spirits, and followed him (as I thought,
unperceived) into this very Chamber, where I was soon convinced of my Mistake,
for upon a nearer Examination, they are not like one another at all, the Voice,
Sir, immediately undeceives one, and so I was sneaking away when your Honor
came in, quite ashamed, Sir, for making so ridiculous a Blunder.


Will. It Is in vain, Sir, to. make Apologies; I throw myself at your Feet. Can
you forgive a Son whom Youth, and a Vivacity of Sentiments have led astray? my
future Conduct shall never give you Occasion to repent your Indulgence.


Sir Will. Distracted by all that is Lunatic, quite beside himself.


Will. Will you, Sir? can you be Deaf to my Repentance?


Sir Will. My Name is Careless, Sir, commonly called Beau Careless! you don't
know me, Sir, I find you don't know me, ha, ha, ha.


Mimicking young Willmore. Char. Rise, Mr. Willmore, Folly in you may be
excusable; but how monstrous does it appear on the venerable Shoulders of
threescore! These are pretty Lodgings, Sir William, and your Choice in a
Play-Fellow no Disgrace to your Judgment, had you been one forty Years younger.
Come, come, Sir, take your Son immediately into Favor, or your scandalous
Intrigue here shall be made the Sport of the whole Town. Nay, Sir, I Will post up
your Character in all the public Coffee-Houses; I Will make you ridiculous to
such a Degree, that all the World shall point at you -- I will, Sir, Damn me.


Kitty. This is a wonderful Spark truly, he certainly deals with the Devil, for
he knows every Body, and has a Finger in every Body's Business.


Char. For you, Madam, I Will take upon me in Sir William's Name to discharge
you; you see he has found you out; here is a Purse you vouchsafed to honor me
with, take it, Madam, I Am not for your Purpose; and, but that I Am certain you would
laugh at my Advice, I Would desire you to be honest. Your Lodging shall be
discharged, look out for fresh ones as soon as possible. And now Mr. Willmore,
what do you think of me?


Will. That you are the most extraordinary Person I ever met in my Life.


Char. Look me full in the Face; do you see nothing there to make you tremble?


Will. Hah -- by all my Hopes it is she! it is Charlott -- dull Coxcomb that I
was, I Am confounded.


Char. Courage, Mr. Willmore, you see what unaccountable Creatures we Women
are; while I had you in my Power, I used you as ill as I could, and for no
other Reason that I can tell, but because you were in my Power, and since I
have gone so far, it must all out: When I heard you had left Oxford, I must own
I was quite desperate; and after making and unmaking a thousand Resolutions, I
contrived to steal away the Writings of my Fortune, which my Guardian refused
to give up to me, and thus accoutred, pursued you to London. Now, if my Frolic
has not made you think light of me, and if my Hand that gives those Papers to
your Protection can give you any farther Pleasure, my Heart is yours.


Will. Dear, dear Creature! Excess of Joy transports me, it is you, Sir, must
confirm my Happiness.


Sir Will. By the Lord Harry, I believe I Am distracted in earnest.


Char. My Name, Sir, is Charlott Lovely, Daughter and Heiress of Sir William
Lovely deceased: I Am now of Age, and of consequence my own Mistress, which
Title with Pleasure I give up in Favor of your Son; if you approve of our
Union, Sir, confirm it by taking us to your Arms.


Sir Will. Egad you are a mettled Girl, and I wish I were young for thy Sake:
Well Bob, we must forgive one another, I Have been an old Fool, and you, a young
one. Your Father, Madam, was my intimate Friend, and had he lived, Nothing
could have pleased him better than uniting our Families, so, Heaven bless ye
together.


Jer. Huzza! a Jubilee, a Jubilee!


Sir Will. Jeremy here has been a sad Dog, but as Things have happened, I cannot
be angry; well Jeremy, what do you think of a Wife, shall I make your Fortune
you Dog? Mrs. Kitty here, with a little looking after, may make an excellent
House-Wife; and I Will throw you a Brace of Hundreds into the Bargain. Nay
Sirrah, you need not look so Arch, for 'twill be your own Fault if you don't
keep her all to yourself.


Will. With your Leave, Sir, we'll all adjourn to your House, where every Thing
may be completed with Satisfaction; and now my Charmer

Could thy uncertain Sex attain thy Merit
Did each, like thee, with so much Ease inherit
A wondrous Stock of Beauty, Wit, and Spirit;
No more should fickle Man be fond of Ranging,
But every Youth be fixed, beyond the Power of changing.

EPILOGUE,
Spoke by Mrs. MYNITT, In the Character of CHARLOTTE. TELL me, ye gentle Sparks
-- and tell me truly,
Is n't Charlott, in her Frolicks -- too Unruly?
Well, if this Manly Outside should amaze ye,
I Will be in Petticoats again -- to Please ye,
You Will say, no Doubt, some rampant Fiend bewitches
When Ladies 'gin to woe, and woe in Breeches.
It Is strange indeed -- a wondrous Revolution,
And quite destroys our Ancient Constitution.
In former Times -- her secret Wish Dissembling,
The curtsy'ing Dame scarce answered yes -- for trembling;
Though all on Fire -- her Spark's Address disdaining
She looked demure -- nor understood his Meaning.
'Twas Farce, 'twas Folly all -- for let me perish,
We Girls have Blood -- warm Flesh and Blood to cherish;
And since that either Sex was made to tally,
She Is half a Fool that stands, with shilly shally.
Why should a Girl of Sense her Passion stifle,
And lose the Man she likes -- for just a Trifle?
We Are so experienced now, so deep in Knowledge,
Gad I don't fear the Ripest in your College:
But I Would forgot -- our Author's quite Uneasy,
At least, he bid me say -- he strove to Please ye;
If you will accept the Will -- for real Merit,
With one Consent Applaud his Lass of Spirit.

Just published, (Price Five Shillings,) With a curious Frontispiece, and a
Copper-Plate Cut of the chief Scene in every Act, SCANDERBEG; or Love and
Liberty. A TRAGEDY.

Wrote by the late THOMAS WHINCOP, Esquire With some Account of the Life of
SCANDERBEG.

To which are added,

The Lives of all the English Dramatick Poets, and an Account of all the Plays
ever printed in the English Language, divided into two Periods; the first
ending at the Time of the Restoration, and the other continued from thence to
the present Year 1747.

Which contains an ample History of the Stage, and the Lives of the principal
Actors, as well as Authors.

Embellished likewise with Copper-plate Cuts of the Heads of most of the chief
Dramatick Writers, viz. Shakespeare, Beaumont, Fletcher, Ben. Johnson, Milton,
Cowley, Dryden, Addison, Congreve, Otway, Steel, Vanbrugh, Wycherley, Lord
Lansdown, Cibber, Garrick, etc.

Also just Published, Price Sixpence Each, Beautifully Printed in Twelves,
with a curious Frontispiece to Each, the Three following Dramatick Pieces, viz.

* The TRAGEDY of SIR WALTER RALEIGH. By Mr. Sewel. The Sixth Edition*

KING HENRY the Fifth, or the Conquest of France by the English, a Tragedy. By
Aaron Hill, Esquire The Second Edition.

ATHALIAH, a Tragedy. Translated from the French of Monsieur Racine. By Mr.
Duncombe. The Third Edition Revised and Corrected.

Printed for W. Reeve, at Shakespeare's Head, Sergeants Inn Gate, Fleet Street


