THE MAID of the OAKS: A New Dramatic Entertainment. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, in DRURY LANE.

-- nec dulces amores
Sperne Puer, neque tu choreas;
Donec virenti canities abest
Morosa.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand;
Bookseller to their Royal Highnesses the PRINCE of WALES, BISHOP of OSNABRUG,
PRINCE WILLIAM, and PRINCE EDWARD. MDCCLXXIV. [PRICE ONE SHILLING AND
SIXPENCE.]

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Scenes, fully sensible how much he owes to the
talents of the Actor, the Musician, and the Painter, can derive no confidence
from the success of the representation, when he delivers them over to the
judgment of the closet: But deficient as he may be in the execution of this
essay, he cannot submit to be thought ignorant in the principles of Dramatic
Writing; and would willingly premise the origin and progress of his design, as
an explanation, if not a justification, of some of its imperfections.

Every one may remember how much the Fete Champetre, given by a noble Lord last
summer, engaged the public curiosity: It was thought, that to preserve for a
more general display, an entertainment of so singular and elegant a kind, would
be not only pleasing to the public, but serviceable to the polite arts.
Accordingly, permission having been obtained to employ the music, and to copy
some of the decorations, a plan was projected for adapting them to the Stage.

The Fable, by the means of which they were to be introduced, being only the
secondary object, and the intention then to confine the representation to two
acts, a plot of the utmost simplicity was judged the most proper; and in that
decision the Author rests upon the example of Moliere, and many of the best
critics, of, perhaps, the best age in Theatrical History; who, in pieces of
this nature, though they introduced characters of comedy, purposely avoided, in
several instances, those intricacies and combinations of incidents, which
generally, but perhaps falsely, are supposed essential to a regular Drama.

It is not the business of this preface to draw a parallel between the English
and French Stages, but it may not be out of place, just to touch the characters
of each, provided it be permitted to lay Shakespeare out of the question: He
stands single and inimitable; his excellencies cannot be weighed, because it is
impossible to counter-ballance the scale. Without appeal therefore to his
almost supernatural powers, we may pronounce the properties of our Stage,
whether considered in Tragedy or Comedy, to consist in energy, spirit,
sublimity, force of character, and of expression -- like the Hercules of
Farnese, all is muscle and nerve -- with equal truth it must be confessed, that
a few examples excepted, and those not much in the course of acting at present,
we must turn to France to find the graces of the Apollo -- art, regularity,
elegance, delicacy, touches of sentiment, adapted only to the most polished
manners, distinguish their Theaters. In literary warfare, we call their
compositions insipid; they describe ours as barbarous -- both are unjust -- all
will agree, that to blend strength and refinement would be to attain perfection.

No candid reader will suppose the Author of this piece means to infer, that he
has in any degree accomplished this union, in the part which has fallen to his
share; but, he will be bold to say, it is the only part which has been wanting
to complete a species of entertainment new to this country; elegant in its
principle, and innocent, if not beneficial, in its tendency. He will be amply
rewarded, even in the failure of his specimen, if it excites others, who may be
better qualified, to pursue the same ideas.

They who suppose an English audience, because used to plain entertainment, are
incapable of relishing the most refined, are greatly mistaken. It is true,
there will ever be spectators in the two extremes of the house, who are
tasteless and despicable -- to the honor of the town be it said, they are but
few -- and whether they bawl for a hornpipe from the Upper Gallery, or yawn in
the weariness of dissipapation in the Boxes, they equally betray stupidity,
prejudice, or caprice: But the middle class and bulk of the assembly, like that
of the kingdom at large, will ever be on the side of nature, truth, and sense.
Let the piece be founded upon those principles, and applause will follow every
circumstance of elegance and decoration that can accompany them.

A sincere zeal for the improvement of the stage, has prompted this digression.
It is requisite now to return, for a moment, to the history of the undertaking.

Mr. Garrick, after perusing the outlines of the two original acts, thought he
discovered in the writer some talents for the higher species of comedy, and
encouraged him to extend his plan. The scenery also, which in the first
sketches promised a brilliant effect; the composition of the music, and the
names of the dancers who were engaged, all seemed to require more distinction
than could be given to them in an afterpiece. But the most prevalent incentive
to the Author, was the promise of Mr. Garrick's assistance; his judgment
pervaded the whole, and though it may diminish the poet, it is the pride of the
friend, to make a public acknowledgement to that gentleman, in the words of
Horace to Melpomene, Quod spiro, et placeo, si placeo, tuum est.


PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. KING.
UNLIKE to ancient Fame, all eyes, tongues, ears,
See modern Fame, dressed cap-a-pee, appears,
In Ledgers, Chronicles, Gazettes, and Gazetteers:
My soaring wings are fine Election Speeches,
And puffs of Candidates supply my breeches:
My Cap is Satire, Criticism, Wit;
Is there a head that wants it in the Pit? [Offering it.
No flowing robe and trumpet me adorn;
I wear a jacket, and I wind a horn,
Pipe, Song, and Pastoral, for five months past,
Puffed well by me, have been the general taste.
Now Marybone shines forth to gaping crowds!
Now Highgate glitters from her hill of clouds!
St. George's Fields, with taste and fashion struck,
Display Arcadia at the Dog and Duck!
And Drury Misses -- " here in carmine pride,
" Are there Pastoras by the fountain side!" Arcadia's Countess, here in ermine
pride,
Is there Pastora by a fountain side.
POPE.

To frouzy bowers they reel through midnight damps,
With Fauns half drunk, and Driads breaking lamps;
Both far and near did this new whimsy run,
One night it frisk'd, forsooth, at Islington:
And now, as for the public bound to cater,
Our Manager must have his Fete Champetre --
How is the weather? pretty clear and bright? [Looking about.
A storm's the devil on Champetre night!
Lest it should fall to spoil the Author's scenes,
I Will catch this gleam to tell you what he means:
He means a show, as brilliant as at Cox's --
Laugh for the Pit -- and may be at the Boxes --
Touches of passion, tender, though not tragic,
Strokes at the times -- a kind of Lantern Magic;
Song, chorus, frolic, dance, and rural play,
The merry-making of a wedding day;
Whose is this piece? -- it is all surmise -- suggestion --
Is It his? -- or here is? -- or yours, Sir? -- that is the question:
The parent, bashful, whimsical, or poor,
Left it a puling infant at the door:
'Twas laid on flowers, and wrapped in fancied cloaks,
And on the breast was written -- MAID OF THE OAKS.
The actors crowded round; the girls caressed it,
"Lord! the sweet pretty babe!" -- they praised and blessed it,
The Master peeped -- smiled -- took it in and dressed it.
Whatever its birth, protect it from the curse,
Of being smothered by a parish nurse!
As you're kind, rear it -- if you're curious, praise it,
And ten to one but vanity betrays it.
EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mrs. ABINGTON,
IN Parliament, whenever a question comes,
Which makes the Chief look grave, and bite his thumbs,
A knowing-one is sent, sly as a mouse,
To peep into the humor of the house:
I am that mouse; peeping at friends and foes,
To find which carry it -- the Ayes or Noes:
With more than power of parliament you sit,
Despotic representatives of wit!
For in a moment, and without much pother,
You can dissolve this piece, and call another!
As it is no treason, let us frankly see,
In what they differ, and in what agree,
The said supreme assembly of the nation,
With this our great Dramatic Convocation!
Business in both often meets with interruption:
In both, we trust, no brib'ry or corruption;
Both proud of freedom, have a turn to riot,
And the best Speaker cannot keep you quiet:
Nay, there as here he knows not how to steer him --
When order, order's drowned in hear him, hear him!
We have, unlike to them, one constant rule,
We open doors, and choose our Gall'ries full:
For a full house both send abroad their summons;
With us together sit the Lords and Commons.
You Ladies here have votes -- debate, dispute,
There if you go (O fie for shame!) you're mute:
Never was heard of such a persecution,
It Is the great blemish of the constitution!
No human laws should nature's rights abridge,
Freedom of speech! our dearest privilege:
Ours is the wiser sex, though deemed the weaker;
I Will put the question -- if you choose me speaker:
Suppose me now be-wigg'd, and seated here,
I call to Order! -- you, the Chair! the Chair!
Is it your pleasure that this Bill should pass --
Which grants this Poet, upon Mount Parnass',
A certain spot, where never grew or corn, or grass?
You that would pass this play, say Aye, and save it;
You that say No would damn it -- the Ayes have it.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. Oldworth, Mr. AIKIN. Old Groveby, Mr. KING. Sir Harry Groveby, Mr.
BRERETON. Mr. Dupeley, Mr. DODD. Hurry, Mr. WESTON. Painter, Mr. MOODY.
Architect, Mr. FAWCETT. Druid, Mr. BANISTER. Shepherds, Mr. VERNON, Mr. DAVIS,
etc.
WOMEN.
Lady Bab Lardoon, Mrs. ABINGTON. Maria, Mrs. BADDELEY. Shepherdesses, Mrs.
SMITH, Mrs. Scott, etc.
Gardeners, Carpenters, Painters, etc.
THE MAID of the OAKS.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Part of an ornamented Farm. Enter Sir HARRY GROVEBY and Mr. DUPELEY, meeting.
Sir HARRY. DEAR Charles, welcome to England! and doubly welcome to Oldsworth's
Oaks -- Friendship I see has wings, as well as love -- you arrive at the moment
I wished; I hope in your haste you have not forgot a fancy dress.


DUPELEY. No, no; I am a true friend, and prepared for all your whimsies,
amorous and poetical. Your summons found me the day after my arrival, and I
took post immediately -- next to my eagerness to see you, was that of being in
time for the Fete Champetre -- Novelty and pleasure are the beings I pursue --
They have led me half the world over already, and for ought I know they may
sometime or other carry me to the Otaheite.


Sir HARRY. You have pursued but their shadows -- here they reign, in the
manners of this New Arcadia, and the smiles of the sweet Maid of the Oaks.


DUPELEY. Who, in the name of curiosity, is she that bears this romantic title?
for your letter was a mere eclogue; the devil a thing could I make out, but a
rhapsody upon rural innocence, and an invitation from a gentleman I did not
know, to an entertainment I never saw -- What, are we to have a representation
of the Pastor-fido in a Garden?


Sir HARRY. The Pastor-fido is before you in propria persona; the business of
the day is a wedding, and Charles Dupeley is invited to see his friend, Sir
Harry Grovebey, united to the most charming of her sex.


DUPELEY. The devil it is! What a young fellow of your hopes and fortune,
sacrificed to a marriage of romance! But, prithee, relieve my impatience, and
tell me who she is.


Sir HARRY. An orphan ward of the worthy old gentleman, at whose seat you now
are: His character is singular, and as amiable in its way as here is. Inheriting
a great estate, and liberally educated, his disposition led him early to a
country life, where his benevolence and hospitality are boundless; and these
qualities, joined with an imagination bordering upon the whimsical, have given
a peculiar turn to the manners of the neighborhood, that, in my opinion,
degrades the polish of courts -- but judge of the original.


Enter OLDWORTH. Mr. Oldworth, I present you my friend; he is just arrived from
abroad; I will not repeat how much he is worthy of your friendship.


OLDWORTH. To be worthy of yours, Sir Harry, is the best recommendation. (To
Dupeley) -- Sir, your friend is going to receive from my hands, a lovely girl,
whose merit he has discerned and loved for its own sake: Such nuptials should
recall the ideas of a better age; he has permitted me to celebrate them upon my
own plan, and I shall be happy to receive the judgment of an accomplished
critic.


DUPELEY. Sir, by what I already see of Oldworth's Oaks, and know of the
character of the master, I am persuaded the talent most necessary for the
company will be that of giving due praise.


Enter HURRY. HURRY. Lord, Sir, come down to the building directly -- all the
trades are together by the ears -- it is for all the world like the tower of
Babylon -- they have drove a broad-wheel wagon over two hampers of wine, and
it is all running among lilies and honeysuckles -- one of the cooks stumbled
over one of the clouds, and threw a ham and chickens into a tub of white wash
-- a lamp-lighter spilt a gallon of oil into a cream'd apple-tart, and they
have sent for more roses, and there is not one left within twenty miles.


OLDWORTH. Why, honest Hurry, if there is none to be had, you need not be in
such haste about 'em -- Mercy on us! my Fete has turned this poor fellow's head
already, he will certainly get a fever.


HURRY. Get a favor, Sir! -- why there has not been one left these three
hours; all the girls in the parish have been scrambling for them, and I must
get a hundred yards more -- Lord a mercy! there is so much to do at once, and
nobody to do it, that it is enough to moider one's head.

(Oldworth and Hurry talk together.
DUPELEY. Ha, ha, ha, is this one of the examples you produce, Sir Harry, to
degrade the polish of courts?


Sir HARRY. If I did, have you never met with a courtier in your travels, as
busy, as important, and as insignificant, upon yet more trifling occasions? --
Why, my friend Hurry's is the true bustle of an antichamber, with this
difference, that there is rather more attachment and fidelity to the master at
the bottom of it.

(During this speech Hurry is expressing by his action his impatience for
Oldworth to go.
HURRY. Law, Sir, if you loiter longer, I tell you they will all be at
loggerheads -- they were very near it when I came away.

[Exit.
OLDWORTH. Mr. Dupeley, you will excuse me -- Hurry convinces me, my presence is
necessary elsewhere -- this is a busy day!


DUPELY. The greatest compliment you can pay me, is not not to look upon me as
a stranger.


OLDWORTH. I forgot to tell you, Sir Harry, that Lady Bab Lardoon is in the
neighborhood, and I expect her every moment -- she promised to be with us long
before the hour of general invitation.


DUPELY. Who is she, pray?


Sir HARRY. Oh, she is a superior! -- a phoenix! -- more worthy your curiosity
than any object of your travels! -- She is an epitome, or rather a caricature
of what is called very fine life, and the first female gamester of the time.


OLDWORTH. For all that, she is amiable -- one cannot help discerning and
admiring the natural excellence of her heart and understanding; though she is
an example, that neither is proof against a false education, and a rage for
fashionable excesses -- But when you see her, she will best explain herself --
This fellow will give me no rest.


HURRY returns. Rest, Sir, why I have not slept this fortnight; come along,
Sir, pray make haste -- nothing's to be done without it.


OLDWORTH. Nor with it, honest Hurry.

[Exit with Hurry.
DUPELEY. A cunning old fellow, I warrant! -- with his ward and his love of
merit for its own sake -- ha, ha, ha! -- pr'ythee how came your acquaintance in
this odd family?


Sir HARRY. Don't sneer, and I will tell you -- By mere chance' in a progress
of amusement to this side the country: The story is too delicate for thy
relish, suffice it that I came, saw, and loved -- I laid my rank and fortune at
the fair one's feet, and would have married instantly; but that Oldworth
opposed my precipitancy, and insisted upon a probation of six months absence --
It has been a purgatory!


DUPELEY. All this is perfectly en regle for a man of home education -- I
should like to see the woman that could entangle me in this manner.


Sir HARRY. There is not a fellow in England has a more susceptible heart: You
may have learnt in your foreign tour to disguise it, but if you have lost it,
put all your acquisitions together, and the balance will be against you.


DUPELEY. I have learned at least, not to have it imposed upon: Show me but a
woman from an Italian Princess, to a figurante at the French opera; or change
the scene, and carry me to the rural nymphs from a vintage in Burgundy, to a
dance round a may pole at Oldsworth's Oaks -- and at the first glance I will
discover the whole extent of their artifice, find their true lure, and bring
them to my hand as easily as a tame sparrow.


Sir HARRY. And pray, my sagacious friend, upon what circumstances have you
formed your suspicions that I am more likely to be imposed upon than yourself?


DUPELEY. Upon every one I have seen and heard; but above all upon that natural
propensity of every true homebred Englishman, to think one woman different from
another -- Now I hold there is but one woman in the world.


Sir HARRY. I perfectly agree, and Maria is that charming one.


DUPELEY. Ay, but Maria, and Lady Bab, and Pamela Andrews, and Clarissa
Harlowe, and the girl that steals a heart in a country church, or she that
picks your pocket in Covent Garden, are one and the same creature for all that
-- I am always too quick for them, and make fools of them first -- Oh do but
try them by the principle I have laid down; you will find them as transparent as
glass.


Sir HARRY. My own principle will answer my purpose just as well; with that
perspective I have looked through the woman, and discovered the angel; and you
will do the same when you see her, or never brag of your eyesight more.


DUPELEY. Rhapsody and enthusiasm! -- I should as soon discover Mahomet's
seventh heaven; but what says your uncle, old Groveby, to this match?


Sir HARRY. Faith I have asked him no questions, and why should I? when I know
what must be his answer.


DUPELEY. Oh, he can never disapprove a passion that soars above the stars!


Sir HARRY. He has all the prejudices of his years, and wordly knowledge; the
common old Gentleman's character -- You may see it in every drama from the days
of Terence, to those of Congreve; though not perhaps with quite so much good
humor, and so little obstinacy as my Uncle shows. He is ever most impetuous,
when most kind; and I dare trust his resentment will end with a dramatic
forgiveness. Should it not, I may have pride in the sacrifice of his estate,
but no regret. -- So much for fortune, Charles -- are there any other means to
reconcile me to your approbation?


DUPELEY. 'Gad I know but one more -- Have you laid any plan for succeeding at
the divorce-shop next winter? It would be some comfort to your friends, to see
you had a retreat in your head.


Sir HARRY. Charles, I have listened to your raillery with more patience than
it deserves, and should at last be out of humor with such an importation of
conceit and affectation, if I was not sure your good sense would soon get the
better of it. This is called knowing the world -- to form notions without,
perhaps, ever seeing a man in his natural character, or conversing with a woman
of principle: and then, for fear of being imposed upon, be really dup'd out of
the most valuable feelings in human nature, confidence in friendship, and
esteem in love.


Enter HURRY. Lord, Sir, I am out of breath to find you, why almost every thing
is ready, except yourself, and Madam Maria is gone to the Grove, and she is so
dressed, and looks so charming!


Sir HARRY. Propitious be the hour! -- here, Hurry, find out this Gentleman's
servant, and show him where he is to dress.

[Exit.
DUPELEY. Oh, take care of yourself, Corydon, the first, I shall be time
enough; Hurry shall first show me a little of the preparation -- what is going
forward here? (Approaching the side scene.)


HURRY. Hold, Sir, not that way; my Master lets no body see his devices and
figaries there.


DUPELEY. Why, what is he doing there, Hurry?


HURRY. Doing! -- as you are a gentleman, I will tell you what he is doing -- I
hope no body hears us. (Looking about.) Why, he is going to make the sun shin
at midnight, and he is covering it with a thousand yards of sail-cloth, for
fear the rain should put it out -- lord, such doings! -- here, this way, your
honor.


DUPELEY. But hark'ee, honest Hurry, do stand still a moment to oblige me.


HURRY. Stand still, Sir! -- lord, Sir, if I stand still, every thing stands
still; and then what a fine Sham-Peter should we make of it! (Always restless.)


DUPELEY. You seem to know every thing here?


HURRY. To be sure I do -- I am no fool I believe -- what think you, Sir?


DUPELEY. He that takes you for a fool, is not over wise, I warrant him;
therefore let me ask you a question or two.


HURRY. Tomorrow, Sir, with all my heart; but I have so many questions to ask
myself, and so many answers to give, that I have not five minutes to spare.


DUPELEY. Three minutes will do my business: Who is this Maid of the Oaks,
friend Hurry?


HURRY. A young lady, Sir.


DUPELEY. I thought as much. (Smiling.) You are a courtier, friend Hurry.


HURRY. I court her! -- heaven forbid! -- she is going to be married, Sir.


DUPELEY. Well said simplicity! If you will not tell me who she is, tell me what
she is?


HURRY. She is one of the most charmingest, sweetest, delightfulest, mildest,
beutifulest, modestest, genteelest, never to be praised enough young creature
in all the world!


DUPELEY. True courtier again! Who is her father, pray?


HURRY. It Is a wise child that knows its own father; lord bless her! she does
not want a father.


DUPELEY. Not while Mr. Oldworth lives.


HURRY. Nor when he is dead neither; every body would be glad to be her father,
and every body wishes to be her husband; and so, Sir, if you have more
questions to ask, I Will answer them another time, for I am wanted here, and
there, and every where. (Bustles about.


DUPELEY. Show me my chamber to dress, and I Will desire no more of you at
present.


HURRY. Bless your honor for letting me go; I have been very miserable all the
while you were talking to me -- this way, this way, Sir.

[Exit.
DUPELEY. What a character! -- yet he has his cunning, though the simplest
swain in this region of perfect innocence, as Sir Harry calls it -- ha, ha, ha!

[Exit.
SCENE II.
An outside Building, workmen of all sorts passing to-and-fro. ARCHITECT, (As
speaking to persons at work behind the Side-scene. Come, bustle away, my lads,
strike the scaffold, and then for the twelve o'clock tankard; up with the rest
of the festoons there on the top of the columns.


First GARDENER. Holloa! you Sir! where are you running with those flowers?


Second GARDENER. They Are wanted for the Arcades; we can have no deceit there
-- if you want more here, you may make them of paper -- any thing will go off
by candlelight.


First LAMP-LIGHTER, (running.) They want above a hundred more lamps yonder,
for the illumination of the Portico.


Second LAMP-LIGHTER. Then they may get tallow-candles; I shall not have enough to
make the sky clear in the saloon -- that damned Irish painter has made his
ground so dingy, one might as soon make his head transparent as his portico.


Enter Irish PAINTER. PAINTER. Arrah! what is that you say of my head, Mr.
Lamp-lighter?


Second LAMP-LIGHTER. I say you have spoiled the transparency by putting black,
where you should have put blue.


PAINTER, (Dabbing his brush across his face. There Is a black eye for you; and
you may be thankful you got it so easily -- Trot away with your ladder upon
your shoulder, or the devil fire me but you shall have black and blue both, my
dear.


ARCHITECT, (returning.) Good words, good words, gentlemen; no quarrelling --
Your servant, Mr. O'Daub; upon my word you have hit off those ornaments very
well -- the first painter we have here could not have done better.


PAINTER. No faith, I believe not, for all his hard name; sure O'Daub was a
scene painter before he was born, though I believe he is older than I too.


ARCHITECT. You a scene painter!


PAINTER. Ay, by my soul was I, and for foreign countries too.


ARCHITECT. Where was that pray?


PAINTER. Faith, I painted a whole set for the Swish, who carries the temple of
Jerusalem about upon his back, and it made his fortune, though he got but a
halfpenny a-piece for his show.


ARCHITECT. (ironically.) I wish we had known your merits, you should certainly
have been employed in greater parts of the work.


PAINTER. And, by my soul, it would have been better for you if you had -- I
would have put out Mr. Lanternbug's stars with one dash of my pincil, by making
them five times more bright -- Ho! if you had seen the sign of a setting sun,
that I painted for a linen-draper, in Bread-street, in Dublin -- Devil burn me
but the Auroree of O'Guide was a fool to it.


ARCHITECT. O'Guide! -- who is he? Guid-o, I suppose you mean.


PAINTER. And if he has an O to his name, what signifies whether it comes
before or behind -- Faith I put it like my own of O'Daub, on the right side, to
make him sound more like a gentleman -- besides it is more melodious in the
mouth, honey.


Enter CARPENTERS, etc. First CARPENTER. Well, Sir, the scaffold's down, and we
are woundy dry -- we have toiled like horses.


ARCHITECT. Rest you merry, Master Carpenter -- take a draught of the 'Squire's
liquor, and welcome, you shall swim in it, when all is over.


PAINTER. Fait let me have one merry quarter of an hour before we at it again,
and it will be no loss of time neither -- we will make the next quarter after,
as good as an hour -- and so his honor and the shampater will gain by the loss.


First GARDENER. Well said, O'Daub! and if you will give us the song you made,
the quarter of an hour will be merrier still.


ARCHITECT. Can you rhyme, O'Daub?


PAINTER. Yes fait, as well as paint -- all the difference is, I do one with a
brush, and the other with a pen; I do one with my head, and both with my hands --
and if any of the poets of 'em all can produce better rhymes and raisins too
within the gardens, I Will be content to have one of my own brushes ramm'd down
my throat, and so spoil me for a singer as well as a poet hereafter.


ARCHITECT. Well said, Master Painter!


Enter the several TRADESMEN. SONG.
By the IRISH PAINTER, to an Irish Tune.
Then away to Champetre, Champetre come all away,
To work at Champetre is nothing at all but play;
As I know nothing of it, no more, my dear, will I say,
But Champetre for ever, for ever, and ay, I say!
II.
You may guess what a sight, for it never has yet been seen,
Heaven bless her sweet face! it is a sight for the lovely Queen;
For Lords, and for Earls, and for Gentlefolks too,
And the busy Beau Monde, who have nothing to do.
Then away to Champetre, etc.
III.
While it is light you will see nothing, when darker, O then you will see,
That the darker it is, the more light it will quickly be;
The moon and the stars, they may twinkle and go to bed,
We can make better sunshine, than such as they ever made.
Then away to Champetre, etc.
IV.
Such crowds and confusions, such uproar and such delight,
With lamps hung by thousands, to turn the day into night;
There will be Russians, Turks, Prussians, and Dutchmen, so bright and gay,
And they will all be so fine, they will have nothing at all to say.
Then away to Champetre, etc.
V.
Then let us take a drink to the 'Squire of the Jolly Oaks,
May no crabbed critics come here with their gibes or jokes;
If they did I could make the dear craters soon change their notes,
With my little black brush I could sweep clean their noisy throats!
Then away to Champetre, etc.
(Exeunt singing.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE the OAKS.
MARIA sitting under a great Tree. SINGS.
COME sing round my favorite tree,
Ye songsters that visit the grove,
'Twas the haunt of my shepherd and me,
And the bark is a record of love.
II.
Reclined on the turf by my side,
He tenderly pleaded his cause;
I only with blushes replied,
And the nightingale filled up the pause.
DA CAPO. Come sing, etc.

Enter OLDWORTH. OLDWORTH. Joy to my sweet Maria! may long succeeding years
resemble this, her bridal hour! may health, and peace, and love still inspire
her song, and make the harmony of her voice an emblem of her life! but come, my
girl, if there is a wish remaining in your heart within my power to gratify, I
hope, in this last hour of my cares, I shall not be a stranger to it.


MARIA. If I have a wish you have not indulged, Sir, I fear it must be an
improper one, or it would not have escaped you.


OLDWORTH. You seem disconcerted, Maria, be more explicit.


MARIA. My mind is incapable of reserve with you; the most generous of men, is
on the point of giving his hand to your -- what shall I call myself? I am
almost nameless, but as the creature of your bounty and cares, this title gives
me a value in my own eyes; but I fear it is all I have to boast. The mystery
you have kept, makes me apprehensive there is something in my origin ought to
be concealed -- what am I to interpret from your smiles?


OLDWORTH. Every thing that is contrary to your surmises: be patient, sweet
Maid of the Oaks; before night all mysteries shall be cleared. It is not an
ordinary wedding I celebrate, I prepare a feast for the heart -- Lady Bab
Lardoon, as I live! -- the princess of dissipation! catch an observation of her
while you can, Maria; for though she has been but three days out of London, she
is as uneasy as a mole in sunshine, and would expire, if she did not soon dive
into her old element again.


Enter Lady BAB. Lady BAB. Dear Maria, I am happy to be the first of your
company to congratulate you -- well, Mr. Oldworth, I am delighted with the idea
of your Fete; it is so novel, so French, so expressive of what every body
understands, and nobody can explain; then there is something so spirited in an
undertaking of expense, where a shower of rain would spoil it all.


OLDWORTH. I did not expect to escape from so fine a lady, but you and the
world have free leave to comment upon all you see here.

Laugh where you must, be candid where you can. I only hope that to celebrate a
joyful event upon any plan, that neither hurts the morals, or politeness of the
company, and at the same time sets thousands of the industrious to work, cannot
be thought blame worthy.


Lady BAB. Oh, quite the contrary, and I am sure it will have a run; a force
upon the seasons and the manners is the true test of a refined taste, and it
holds good from a cucumber at Christmas, to an Italian opera.


MARIA. Is the rule the same among the ladies, lady Bab; is it also a
definition of their refinement to act in all things contrary to nature?


Lady BAB. Not absolutely in all things, though more so than people are apt to
imagine; for even in circumstances that seem most natural, fashion prompts ten
times, where inclination prompts once; and there would be an end of gallantry
in this country, if it was not for the sake of reputation.


OLDWORTH. What do you mean?


Lady BAB. Why, that a woman without a connection, grows every day a more
awkward personage; one might as well go into company without powder -- if one
does not really despise old vulgar prejudices, it is absolutely necessary to
affect it, or one must sit at home alone.


OLDWORTH. Indeed!


Lady BAB. Yes, like lady Sprose, and talk morals to the parrot.


MARIA. This is new, indeed; I always supposed that in places where freedom of
manners was most countenanced, a woman of unimpeachable conduct carried a
certain respect.


Lady BAB. Only fit for sheep-walks and Oakeries! -- I beg your pardon, Mr.
Oldworth -- in town it would just raise you to the whist-party of old lady
Cipher, Mrs. Squabble and lord Flimzey; and at every public place, you would
stand among the footmen to call your own chair, while all the maccaronies
passed by, whistling a song through their tooth-picks, and giving a shrug --
them it, it is pity that so fine a woman should be lost to all common decency.


MARIA, (smiling) I believe I had better stay in the Oakery, as you call it;
for I am afraid I shall never procure any civility in town, upon the terms
required.


Lady BAB. Oh, my dear, you have chose a horrid word to express the intercourse
of the bon ton; civility may be very proper in a mercer, when one is choosing a
silk, but familiarity is the life of good company. I believe this is quite
since your time Mr. Oldworth, but it is by far the greatest improvement the beau
monde ever made.


OLDWORTH. A certain ease was always an essential part of good breeding, but
lady Bab must explain her meaning a little further, before we can decide upon
the improvement.


Lady BAB. I mean that participation of society, in which the French used to
excel, and we have now so much outdone our models -- I maintain, that among the
superior set -- mind, I only speak of them -- our men and women are put more
upon a footing together in London, than they ever were before in any age or
country.


OLDWORTH. And pray how has this happy resolution been effected?


Lady BAB. By the most charming of all institutions, wherein we show the world,
that liberty is as well understood by our women as by our men; we have our Bill
of Rights and our Constitution too, as well as they -- we drop in at all hours,
play at all parties, pay our own reckonings, and in every circumstance
(petticoats excepted) are true lively jolly fellows.


MARIA. But does not this give occasion to a thousand malicious insinuations?


Lady BAB. Ten thousand, my dear -- but no great measures can be effected
without a contempt of popular clamor.


OLDWORTH. Paying of reckonings is I confess new since my time; and I should be
afraid it might sometimes be a little heavy upon a lady's pocket.


Lady BAB. A mere trifle -- one generally wins them -- Jack Saunter of the
guards, lost a hundred and thirty to me upon score at one time; I have not eat
him half out yet -- he will keep me best part of next winter; but exclusive of
that, the club is the greatest system of economy for married families, ever
yet established.


OLDWORTH. Indeed! but how so, pray?


Lady BAB. Why, all the servants may be put to board wages, or sent into the
country, except the footmen -- no plunder of housekeepers, or maitres de
hotel, no long butcher's bills -- Lady Squander protests she has wanted no
provision in her family these six months, except potatoes to feed the children,
and a few frogs for the French governess -- then our dinner-societies are so
amusing, all the doves and hawks together, and one converses so freely; there is
no topic of White's or Almack's, in which we do not bear a part.


MARIA. Upon my word I should be a little afraid, that some of those subjects
might not always be managed with sufficient delicacy for a lady's ear,
especially an unmarried one.


Lady BAB. Bless me! why where is the difference? Miss must have had a strange
education indeed, not to know as much as her Chapron: I hope you would not have
the daughters black-ball'd, when the mothers are chose: Why it is almost the
only place where some of them are likely to see each other.


Enter Sir HARRY GROVEBY. Sir HARRY. I come to claim my lovely bride -- here at
her favorite tree I claim her mine! -- the hour is almost on the point, the
whole country is beginning to assemble; every preparation of Mr. Oldworth's
fancy is preparing,

And while the priest accuse the Bride's delay,
Roses and myrtles shall obstruct her way.

MARIA. Repugnance would be affectation, my heart is all your own, and I scorn
the look or action that does not avow it.


OLDWORTH. Come, Sir Harry, leave your protestations, which my girl does not
want; and see a fair stranger.


Lady BAB. Sir Harry, I rejoice at your happiness -- and do not think me so
tasteless, Maria, as not to acknowledge an attachment like yours, preferable to
all others, when it can be had -- filer le parfait amor, is the first
happiness in life: But that you know is totally out of the question in town;
the matrimonial comforts in our way, are absolutely reduced to two; to plague a
man, and to bury him; the glory is to plague him first, and bury him afterward.


Sir HARRY. I heartily congratulate Lady Bab. and all who are to partake of her
conversation, upon her being able to bring so much vivacity into the country.


Lady BAB. Nothing but the Fete Champetre could have effected it, for I set out
in miserable spirits -- I had a horrid run before I left town -- I suppose you
saw my name in the papers.


Sir HARRY. I did, and therefore concluded there was not a word of truth in the
report.


MARIA. Your name in the papers! Lady Bab, for what pray?


Lady BAB. The old story -- it is a mark of insignificance now to be left out:
Have not they begun with you yet, Maria?


MARIA. Not that I know of; and I am not at all ambitious of the honor.


Lady BAB. Oh, but you will have it -- the Fete Champetre will be a delightful
subject! -- To be complimented one day, laughed at the next, and abused the
third; you cannot imagine how amusing it is to read one's own name at breakfast
in a morning paper.


MARIA. Pray, how long may your ladyship have been accustomed to this pleasure?


Lady BAB. Lord, a great while, and in all its stages: They first began with a
modest inuendo, " we hear a certain Lady, not a hundred miles from
Hanoversquare, lost, at one sitting, some nights ago, two thousund guineas -- O
tempora! O mores!"


OLDWORTH, (laughing) Pray, Lady Bab, is this concluding ejaculation your own,
or was it the Printer's?


Lady BAB. His, you may be sure; a dab of Latin adds surprising force to a
paragraph, besides showing the learning of the author.


OLDWORTH. Well, but really I don't see such a great matter in this; why should
you suppose any body applied this paragraph to you?


Lady BAB. None but my intimates did, for it was applicable to half St.
George's parish; but about a week after they honored me with initials and
italicks: "It is said, Lady B. L's ill success still continues at the quinze
table: it was observed, the same Lady appeared yesterday at court, in a ribband
collier, having laid aside her diamond necklace, (diamond in italicks) as
totally bourgeoise and unnecessary for the dress of a woman of fashion."


OLDWORTH. To be sure this was advancing a little in familiarity.


Lady BAB. At last, to my infinite amusement, out I came at full length: " Lady
Bab. Lardoon has tumbled down three nights successively; a certain colonel has
done the same, and we hear that both parties keep house with sprained ancles."


OLDWORTH. This last paragraph sounds a little enigmatical.


MARIA. And do you really feel no resentment at all this?


Lady BAB. Resentment! -- poor silly devils, if they did but know with what
thorough contempt those of my circle treat a remonstrance -- but hark, I hear
the pastoral's beginning. (Music behind) Lord, I hope I shall find a shepherd!


OLDWORTH. The most elegant one in the world, Mr. Dupeley, Sir Harry's friend.


Lady BAB. You don't mean Charles Dupeley, who has been so long abroad?


Sir HARRY. The very same; but I Am afraid he will never do, he is but half a
maccaroni.


Lady BAB. And very possibly the worst half: It is a vulgar idea to think
foreign accomplishments fit a man for the polite world.


Sir HARRY. Lady Bab, I wish you would undertake him; he seems to have
contracted all the commonplace affectation of travel, and thinks himself quite
an over-match for the fair sex, of whom his opinion is as ill founded as it is
degrading.


Lady BAB. O, is that his turn? what, he has been studying some late posthumous
letters I suppose? -- 'twould be a delight to make a fool of such a fellow! --
where is he?


Sir HARRY. He is only gone to dress; I appointed to meet him on the other side
the Grove; he will be here in twenty minutes.


Lady BAB. I Will attend him there in your place -- I have it -- I Will try my hand
a little at naivete -- he never saw me -- the dress I am going to put on for
the Fete will do admirably to impose upon him: I Will make an example of his
hypocrisy, and his graces, and his usage du monde.


Sir HARRY. My life for it he will begin an acquaintance with you.


Lady BAB. If he don't, I Will begin with him: There are two characters, under
which one may say any thing to a man; that of perfect assurance, and of perfect
innocence: Maria may be the best critic of the last; but under the appearance
of it, lord have mercy! -- I have heard and seen such things!


Enter HURRY, (running.) HURRY. Here they come! here they come! give them room!
pray, Sir, stand a little back -- a little further, your honorable ladyship,
let the happy couple stand foremost -- here they come!


OLDWORTH. And, pray, when you can find breath to be understood, who or what is
coming, Hurry?


HURRY. All the cleverest lads and girls that could be picked out within ten
miles round; they have garlands in one hand, and roses in another, and their
pretty partners in another, and some are singing, and all so merry!


OLDWORTH. Stand still, Hurry; I foresaw you would be a sad master of the
ceremonies; why they should not have appeared till the Lawn was full of
company; they were to have danced there -- you have let them in too soon by an
hour.


HURRY. Lord, Sir! 'twas impossible to keep them out.


OLDWORTH. Impossible! why, I am sure they did not knock you down.


HURRY. No, but they did worse; for the pretty maids smiled, and smirked, and
were so coaxing; and they called me dear Hurry, and sweet Hurry, and one called
me pretty Hurry, and I did but just open the d^or a moment, flesh and blood
could not resist it, and so they all rushed by.


OLDWORTH. Ay, and now we shall have the whole crowd of the country break in.


HURRY. No, Sir, no, never be afraid; we keep out all the old ones.


Sir HARRY. Ay, here they come cross the lawn -- I agree with Hurry, flesh and
blood could not stop them -- Joy and gratitude are overbearing arguments, and
they must have their course.


HURRY. Now, Sir Harry! now, your ladyship! you shall see such dancing, and
hear such singing!


Enter First Shepherd, very gayly, followed by a group of Shepherds and
Shepherdesses. SONG.
SHEPHERD. Hither, ye swains, with dance and song,
Join your bands in sportive measure;
Hither, ye swains, with dance and song,
Merrily, merrily, trip it along:
It Is holiday, lads, from the cares of your tillage,
Life, health, and joy, to the Lord of the village.
Scenes of delight,
Round you invite,
Harmony, beauty, love and pleasure:
Hither, ye swains, with dance and song.
Join your bands in sportive measure.
CHORUS. Hither, ye swains, etc.
SHEPHERDESS. Hither, ye nymphs, and scatter around
Every sweet the spring discloses;
Hither, ye nymphs, and scatter them round,
With the bloom of the hour enamel the ground
The feast of the day is devoted to beauty,
Sorrow is treason, and pleasure a duty:
Love shall preside,
Sovereign guide!
Fetter his wings with links of roses:
Hither, ye nymphs, and scatter around,
Every sweet the spring discloses.
CHORUS. Hither, ye nymphs, etc.
BOTH. Lasses and lads, with dance and song,
Join your bands in sportive measure:
Lasses and lads, with dance and song,
Merrily, merrily trip it along:
An hour of youth is worth ages of reason,
It Is the sunshine of life, take the gift of the season,
Scenes of delight,
Round you invite,
Harmony, beauty, love and pleasure.
CHORUS. Lasses and lads, etc.

HURRY. So much for singing, and now for dancing; pray, give 'em room, Ladies
and Gentlemen.


Here a GRAND DANCE, Of SHEPHERDS and SHEPHERDESSES, Which finishes the Second
Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, the Garden Gate.
(Noise without,) INDEED, Sir, we cannot! it is as much as our places are worth:
Pray don't insist upon it.


Enter Old GROVEBY, booted and splash'd, pushing in HURRY. GROVEBY. I must see
Sir Harry Groveby, and I will see him. Do ye think, ye Jackanapes, that I come
to rob the house?


HURRY. That is not the case, Sir; nobody visits my master today without
tickets; all the world will be here, and how shall we find room for all the
world, if people were to come how they please, and when they please?


GROVEBY. What, have you a stage play here, that one cannot be admitted without
a ticket?


HURRY. As you don't know what we have here today, I must desire you to come
tomorrow -- Sir Harry will not see you today, he has a great deal of business
upon his hands; and you cannot be admitted without a ticket; and moreover you
are in such a pickle, and nobody will be admitted but in a fanciful dress.


GROVEBY. This is a dress after my own fancy, Sirrah; and whatever pickle I am
in, I will put you in a worse, if you don't immediately show me to Sir Harry
Groveby -- (Shaking his whip.


HURRY. Sir Harry's going to be married -- What would the man have?


GROVEBY. I would have a sight of him before he goes to be married. I shall
mar his marriage, I believe. (aside) I am his uncle, puppy, and ought to be at
the wedding.


HURRY. Are you so, Sir? Bless my heart! why would you not say so? -- This way,
good Sir! it was impossible to know you, in such a figure; I could sooner have
taken you for a smuggler than his uncle; no offense, Sir -- If you will please
to walk in that Grove there, I Will find him directly -- I Am sorry for what has
happened -- but you did not say you were a gentleman, and it was impossible to
take you for one -- no offense, I hope.


GROVEBY. None at all, if you do as I bid you.


HURRY. That I will, to be sure. I hope you are come to be merry, Sir.

[Exit.
GROVEBY. O, ay to be sure -- It is true, I see; I come at the very instant of
his perdition -- whether I succeed or not, I shall do my duty, and let other
folks be merry if they like it -- Going to be married! and to whom? to a young
girl, without birth, fortune, or without any body's knowing any thing about
her; and without so much as saying to me, his uncle, with your leave, or by
your leave: If he will prefer the indulgence of a boyish passion, to my
affection and two thousand pounds per annum; let him be as merry as he pleases.
I shall return to Gloomstock-hall, and make a new will directly.

[Exit.
SCENE changes to a GROVE.
Enter MARIA. MARIA. I wish I may have strength to support my happiness: I
cannot get the better of my agitation; and though this day is to complete my
wishes, my heart, I don't know how, feels something like distress -- But what
strange person is coming this way? How got he admitted in that strange dress?


Enter GROVEBY. GROVEBY. Madam, your servant; I hope I don't intrude: I am
waiting here for a young gentleman -- If I disturb you, I Will walk at the other
end.


MARIA. Indeed, Sir, you don't disturb me. Shall I call any body to you, Sir?


GROVEBY. Not for the world, fair lady; an odd kind of a pert, bustling,
restless fellow, is gone to do my business: and if I might be permitted to say
a word or two, in the mean time, to so fair a creature, I should acknowledge it
a most particular favor: But I intrude, I fear.


MARIA. Indeed you don't, Sir -- I should be happy to oblige you.


GROVEBY. And you make me happy by such civility -- This is a most lovely
creature! (aside.


MARIA. Who can this be? (aside.


GROVEBY. I find, Madam, there is going to be a wedding here today.


MARIA. Yes, Sir; a very splendid one, by the preparations.


GROVEBY. A very foolish business to make such a fuss about a matter which both
parties may have reason to curse this time twelve month.


MARIA. I hope not, Sir -- Do you know the parties?


GROVEBY. One of them, too well, by being a near relation -- Do you know the
bride, young lady?


MARIA. Pretty well, Sir: my near acquaintance with her makes me attend here
today. (Maria seems confused.


GROVEBY. Might I, without being impertinent, beg to know something about her
-- but you are partial to her, and will not speak your mind.


MARIA. I am, indeed, partial to her -- every body is too partial to her -- her
fortune is much above her deserts.


GROVEBY. Ay, ay, I thought so -- sweet lady, your sincerity is as lovely as
your person -- you really think then, she does not deserve so good a match?


MARIA. Deserve it, Sir! so far from deserving it, that I don't know that human
creature that can deserve Sir Harry Groveby.


GROVEBY. What a sensible sweet creature this is! (aside.) Young lady, your
understanding is very extraordinary for your age -- you sincerely think then,
that this is a very unequal match?


MARIA. Indeed I do, very sincerely --


GROVEBY. And that it ought not to be.


MARIA. Ought not to be, Sir! (hesitating.) That, Sir, is another question --
If Sir Harry has promised -- and the young lady's affections --


GROVEBY. Ay, to be sure, the young lady's affections! (...) are more to be
considered than the young man's cr^ or the old man's happiness -- But pray,
fair y^ lady, what are your real sentiments of this incog^


MARIA. Upon my word, Sir -- (hesitates.) I scarce know how to answer your
question -- (much confused.


GROVEBY. Your delicacy to your friend will not let you speak out; but I
understand your objections -- Nay, I feel 'em so much, that I am come on
purpose to break the match.


MARIA. (astonished.) Indeed, Sir!


GROVEBY. Ay, indeed am I -- a silly young puppy! without acquainting me with
it, to go so far -- I suppose some interested creature, with a little beauty
and more cunning, has laid hold of this precious fool of a nephew of mine --


MARIA. Your nephew, Sir!


GROVEBY. Yes, yes, my nephew; but he must give up his girl, or renounce the
relationship.


MARIA. But consider, Sir; what the poor young woman must suffer!


GROVEBY. She ought to suffer, a designing baggage! I Will be ^g'd if it is not
some demure looking chit, with a (...) skin and a couple of dimples in her
cheeks, that ^one all this mischief; you think so too, but you (...) speak out.


MARIA. But if Sir Harry is contented with such small accomplishments --


GROVEBY. He contented, a simpleton! don't say a word in his favor; have not
you confessed, though her friend, that she does not deserve him? I Will take your
word for it; you have good sense, and can see his folly: You cannot give up your
friend to be sure; I see your affection struggling with your understanding; but
you have convinced me that the fellow's undone.


MARIA. For heaven's sake, Sir! -- I convinced you!


GROVEBY. Had the young blockhead but half an eye he would have fallen in love
with you; and if he had, there had been some excuse for his folly; on my word
you are so sensible and sincere, I could fall in love with you myself -- don't
blush, maiden -- I protest I never was half so much smitten in so short a time,
when I was as young a fool as my Nephew -- don't blush, damsel --


MARIA. You overpower me with your goodness; but, Sir, pray, let me plead for
him.


GROVEBY. Nay, nay, sweet young lady, don't contradict yourself; you spoke your
sentiments at first -- truth is a charming thing, and you're a charming
creature, and you should never be asunder. My nephew, (as you hinted at first)
is a very silly fellow, and in short it is a damned match.


Enter Sir HARRY. (Who starts at seeing his Uncle, and looks ashamed) MARIA. I
cannot stand this interview.

(Exit.
GROVEBY. O, your humble servant, Sir Harry Groveby.


Sir HARRY. My dear Uncle, I am so happy --


GROVEBY. O, to be sure -- you are very happy to see me here. (Sir Harry looks
confused) O, ho, you have some modesty left -- And so you are going to be
married, and forgot that you had an uncle living, did you?


Sir HARRY. Indeed, Sir, I was afraid to trust your prudence with my seeming
indiscretion; but were you to know the object of my choice --


GROVEBY. Ay, to be sure, I shall be bamboozeled as you have been; but where is
the old fox, that has made a chicken of you? I shall let him know a piece of my
mind.


Sir HARRY. Mr. Oldworth, Sir, is all probity, he knew nothing of my having an
uncle, or he would never have given his consent, without yours.


GROVEBY. Ay, to be sure, they have set a simpleton-trap, and you have popp'd
your head into it; but I have but a short word to say to you, give up the lady,
or give up me.


Sir HARRY. Let me entreat you to see her first.


GROVEBY. I have seen a young lady; and I am so put upon my mettle by your
ingratitude, that if she would but talk to me half an hour longer, I Would take her
without a petticoat to Gloomstock-Hall, and have my Champetre-wedding too.


Sir HARRY. You are at liberty, Sir --


GROVEBY. To play the fool, as you have done -- her own friend and companion
told me she was undeserving!


Sir HARRY. That Maria was undeserving! where is she who told you so? who is
she?


GROVEBY. Your aunt, Sir, that may be; if I could get to talk to her again --
so don't be in your airs --


Sir HARRY. Should she dare to hint, or utter the least injurious syllable of
my Maria, I would forget her sex, and treat her --


GROVEBY. And if you should dare to hint, or mutter the least injurious
syllable of my passion, I should forget our relationship, and treat you --
zounds, I don't know how I should treat you.


Sir HARRY. But, dear Sir, who is the slanderer? she has deceived you.


GROVEBY. I don't know her name, and you must not call her names.


Sir HARRY. Where did you see her?


GROVEBY. Here, here.


Sir HARRY. When, Sir?


GROVEBY. This moment, Sir.


Sir HARRY. As I came in, Sir?


GROVEBY. Yes, Sir, yes -- she could not bear the sight of you, and went away.


Sir HARRY. Dear, Sir, that was Maria herself.


GROVEBY. Maria! what Maria?


GROVEBY. Maria, the Maid of the Oaks, my bride that is to be.


GROVEBY. That Is a fib, Harry, it cannot be, and it shall not be.


Sir HARRY. It can be no other, and she is the only person upon earth, that
could speak without rapture of herself.


GROVEBY. And she is the person you are going to marry?


Sir HARRY. I cannot deny it.


GROVEBY. If you did, you ought to be hanged -- follow me, Sir, follow me, Sir
-- show me to her this moment -- don't look with that foolish face, but lead
the way, and bring me to her, I say.


Sir HARRY. What do you mean, Sir?


GROVEBY. What Is that to you, Sir -- show me the girl, I say; she has
bamboozled you and me too, and I will be revenged.


Sir HARRY. But, dear Sir?


GROVEBY. Don't dear me, I will not rest a moment 'till I have seen her; either
follow me, or lead the way, for I must and will see her directly, and then you
shall know, and she too, that I am -- zounds! I Will show you what I am -- and so
come along, you puppy you.

(Exeunt.
SCENE III. A Flower-Garden.
Enter Lady BAB, dressed as a Shepherdess, passing over the Stage, OLDWORTH
following. OLDWORTH. Hist, hist! Lady Bab, Here comes your prize; for the sake
of mirth, and the revenge of your sex, don't miss the opportunity.


Lady BAB. Not for the world; you see I am dressed for the purpose. I have been
out of my wits this half hour, for fear the scene should be lost, by the
interruption of the company -- what is that he?


OLDWORTH. Yes, he is looking out for us.


Lady BAB. Step behind that stump of shrubs, and you shall see what an
excellent actress I should have made, if fortune had not unluckily brought me
into the world an Earl's daughter.


OLDWORTH. Don't be too hasty, for it is a pity Sir Harry should not be a
witness; he owes him vengeance too.


Lady BAB. Away, away --

(Exit Oldworth. Lady Bab retires to a corner of the stage.
Enter DUPELEY. DUPELEY. Where the devil is Sir Harry? this is certainly the
place where I was appointed to find him; but I suppose I shall spring him and
his bride from under a rose-bush by and by, like two pheasants in pairingtime
-- (observing Lady Bab) Hah! I wish that was a piece of game, she should not
want a mate: is that a dress now for the day, or is she one of the natives of
this extraordinary region? -- Oh! I see now, it is all pure Arcadian; her eyes
have been used to nothing but daisy hunting; they are as awkward to her, when
she looks at a man, as her elbows would be in a French Berline.


Lady BAB, (aside) My spark does not seem to want observation, he is only
deficient in expression; but I will help him to that presently. Now to my
character. (settles herself)


DUPELEY, (aside) What a neck she has? how beautifully nature works, when she
is not spoiled by a damned town stay-maker; what a pity she is so awkward; I
hope she is not foolish.

(During this observation, he keeps his eye fixed upon her neck; Lady Bab looks
first at him, then at herself; unpins her nosegay, and with an air of the most
perfect naivete, presents it to him)
Lady BAB. You seem to wish for my nosegay, Sir, it is much at your service.

(Offers the flowers, and curtseys awkward.
DUPELEY. Oh, the charming innocent! -- my wishes extend a little further. A
thousand thanks, my fair one; I accept it as a faint image of your own sweets.
To whom am I so much obliged?


Lady BAB. To the garden-man, to be sure; he has made flowers grow all over the
garden, and they smell so sweet; pray smell 'em, they are charming sweet I
assure you, and have such fine colors -- law! you are a fine nosegay yourself,
I think.

(simpers, and looks at him.
DUPELEY. Exquisite simplicity! (half aside) sweet contrast to fashionable
affectation -- Ah, I knew at first glance you were a compound of innocence and
sensibility.


Lady BAB. Lack-a-dazy heart! how could you hit upon my temper so exactly?


DUPELEY. By a certain instinct I have, for I have seen few, or none of the
sort before; but, my dear girl, what is your name and situation?


Lady BAB. Situation!


DUPELEY. Ay, what are you?


Lady BAB. I am a bride maid.


DUPELEY. But, my sweet image of simplicity, when you are not a bride maid,
what is your way of life? how do you pass your time?


Lady BAB. I rise with the lark, keep my hands always employed, dance upon a
holiday, and eat brown bread with content.

(With an innocent curtsey.)
DUPELEY. O, the delicious description! -- beachen shades, bleating flocks,
Pan, pipes, and pastorals. (Aside.) What an acquisition to my fame, as well as
pleasure, to carry off this quintessence of Champetre! -- it is but an annuity
job -- I Will do it.

(During this soliloquy she examines him round and round.
Lady BAB. And pray, what may you be? for I never saw any thing so out of the
way in all my life! -- he, he, he! (Simpering.)


DUPELEY. Be, my dear -- I am a gentleman.


Lady BAB. What a fine gentleman! bless me, what a thing it is! -- this is a
fine gentleman! -- ha, ha, ha! I never saw any thing so comical in all my life
-- ha, ha, ha! and this is a fine gentleman, of which I have heard so much!


DUPELEY. What is the matter, my dear? is there any thing ridiculous about me,
that makes you laugh? What have you heard of fine gentlemen, my sweet innocence?


Lady BAB. That they are as gaudy as peacocks, as mischievous as jays, as
chattering as magpies, as wild as hawks --


DUPELEY. And as loving as sparrows -- my beauteous Delia, do not leave out the
best property of the feathered creation.


Lady BAB. No, no, I did not mean to leave out that; I know you are very loving
-- of yourselves; ha, ha, ha! You are a sort of birds, that flock, but never
pair.


DUPELEY. Why, you are satirical, my fairest; and have you heard any thing else
of fine gentlemen?


Lady BAB. Yes, a great deal more -- That they take wives for fortunes, and
mistresses for show; squander their money among tailors, barbers, cooks, and
fiddlers; pawn their honor to sharpers, and their estates to Jews; and at last
run to foreign countries to repair a pale face, a flimzy carcass, and an empty
pocket -- that is a fine gentleman for you!


DUPELEY. (Surprised.) Hey-day! where has my Arcadian picked up this jumble?


Lady BAB. I am afraid I have gone to far. (Aside.)


DUPELEY. (Still surprised.) Pray, my dear, what is really your name?


Lady BAB. (Resuming her simplicity.) My name is Philly.


DUPELEY. Philly!


Lady BAB. Philly Nettletop, of the vale.


DUPELEY. (Still suspicious.) And pray, my sweet Philly, where did you learn
this character of a fine gentleman?


Lady BAB. O, I learnt it with my catechism -- Mr. Oldworth has it taught to
all the young maidens here about.


DUPELEY. (Aside.) O, the glutton! -- have I found at last the clue -- I Will be
hanged if old sly-boots has not a rural seraglio, and this is the favorite
sultana!


Lady BAB. (Aside.) I fancy I have put him upon a new scent -- why, a real fool
now would not have afforded half this diversion.


DUPELEY. (significantly.) So it is from Mr. Oldworth, is it, my charming
innocence, that you have learnt to be so much afraid of fine gentlemen?


Lady BAB. No, not at all afraid; I believe you are perfectly harmless if one
treats you right, as I do our young mastiff at home.


DUPELEY. And how is that, pray?


Lady BAB. Why, while one keeps at a distance, he frisks, and he flies, and he
barks, and tears, and grumbles, and makes a sad rout about it -- Lord you would
think he would devour one at a mouthful! but if one does but walk boldly up and
look him in the face, and ask him what he wants, he drops his ears and runs
away directly.


DUPELEY. Well said, rural simplicity again! -- Oh damn it, I need not be so
squeamish here! -- Well but, my dear heavenly creature, don't commit such a
sin, as to waste your youth, and your charms upon a set of rusticks here; fly
with me to the true region of pleasure -- my chaise and four shall be ready at
the back gate of the park, and we will take the opportunity, when all the
servants are drunk, as they certainly will be, and the company is gone tired to
bed.


Lady BAB. (fondly.) And would you really love me dearly now, Saturdays and
Sundays and all.


DUPELEY. (aside. Oh, this will do without an annuity, I see!


Lady BAB. You Will forget all this prittle-prattle gibberish to me now, as soon
as you see the fine strange ladies, by and by -- there is Lady Bab Larpoon, I
think they call her, from London.


DUPELEY. Lady Bab Lardoon, indeed! -- Oh, you have named a special object for
a passion -- I should as soon be in love with the figure of the Great Mogul at
the back of a pack of cards -- If she has any thing to do with hearts, it must
be when they are trumps, and she pulls them out of her pocket -- No, sweet
Philly; thank heaven that gave me insight into the sex, and reserved me for a
woman in her native charms -- here alone she is to be found, and paradise is on
her lips! (struggling to kiss her.) Thus let me thank you for my nosegay.


During the struggle enter HURRY. HURRY. Oh, Lady Bab, I come to call your
ladyship (pauses.) Lord, I thought they never kissed at a wedding till after
the ceremony; but they cannot begin too soon -- I ask pardon for interruption.
(going.

(Dupeley stares, Lady Bab laughs.)
DUPELEY. Stay, Hurry; who was you looking for?


HURRY. Why, I came with a message for Lady Bab Larder, and would have carried
her answer, but you stopped her mouth.


DUPELEY. Who! what! who! -- This is Philly Nettletop!


HURRY. Philly Fiddlestick -- It Is Lady Bab Larder, I tell you; do you think I
don't know her, because she has got a new dress? But you are surpised and
busy, and I am in haste, so your servant.

[Exit.
DUPELEY. Surpised indeed! -- Lady Bab Lardoon!


Lady BAB. No, no, Philly Nettletop! (curtseys.


DUPELEY. Here Is a damned scrape! (aside.


Lady BAB. In every capacity, Sir -- a rural innocent, Mr. Oldworth's mistress,
or the Great Mogul, equally grateful for your favorable opinion. (Slowly, and
with a low curtsey.


Enter OLDWORTH and Sir HARRY, (laughing.) Mr. Oldworth, give me leave to
present to you a gentleman remarkable for second sight; he knows all women by
instinct,


Sir HARRY. From a Princess to a figurante, from a vintage to a May Pole -- I
am rejoiced, I came in time for the catastrophe.


Lady BAB. Mr. Oldworth, there is your traveled man for you! and I think I
have given a pretty good account of him. (Pointing at Dupeley, who is
disconcerted.)


OLDWORTH. I hope the ladies are not the only characters in which Mr. Dupeley
has been mistaken!


Lady BAB. Upon my word, Mr. Dupeley, considering you have not been two hours
in the house, you have succeeded admirably, to recommend yourself to your
company; why you look as if you had gone your va toute upon a false card.


DUPELEY. The devil's in her, I believe; she overbears me so, that I have not a
word to say for myself.


Lady BAB. Well, though I laugh now, I am sure I have most reason to be
disconcerted, for that blundering fellow spoiled my fortune.


Sir HARRY. How so?


Lady BAB. Why, I should have had an annuity


OLDWORTH. Come, come, my good folks, you have both acquitted yourselves
admirably: Mr. Dupeley must forgive the innocent deceit; and you, Lady Bab,
like a generous conqueror, should bear the triumph moderately.


DUPELEY. I own myself her captive, bound in her chains, and thus I lay all my
former laurels at her feet. (Kneels.


Lady BAB. The laurels have been mostly poetical -- gathered in imagination
only; he, he, he!


DUPELEY. Quarter, quarter, my dear invincible!


Sir HARRY. Now this scene is finished, let me open another to you -- Maria's
charms have been as much signalized as her ladyship's wit -- my old uncle
Groveby --


Lady BAB. Of Gloomstock-hall.


Sir HARRY. The same, and full primed with the rhetoric of sixty-five, against
a marriage of inclination; but such a conversion! such a revolution!


OLDWORTH. Your uncle here! I must chide you, Sir Harry, for concealing from
me, that you had a relation, so well entitled to be consulted -- which way is
he?


Sir HARRY. I left him all in transport with my bride; he kisses her, and
squeezes her hand -- 'gad, I shall not get her away from him, without your help.


DUPELEY. Poor Sir Harry!


Lady BAB. If she has sweetened that old Crab, that his sourness will not set
our teeth an edge, she has worked miracles indeed.


Sir HARRY. There you totally mistake his character, Lady Bab: -- no -- he has
the heart of an Oldworth. (addressing himself to Mr. Oldworth) Though I confess
with very different manners; his expression often puts me in mind of the harsh
preparation of instruments; your ear is jarred, before it is delighted -- but
attend to his sentiments, and as Hamlet says, He will discourse most excellent
Music.
He never said or did an ill-natured thing in his life.


Lady BAB. I wish I had him in town, to contrast with some smooth successful
characters of my acquaintance, who will smile upon you, even though you affront
them, and always flatter your judgment, when they mean to pick your pocket --
but here he is, I declare, and looks if he was quite in tune.


Enter GROVEBY with MARIA under his arm. Sir HARRY, (running to her) I was
coming to seek you, my Maria.


GROVEBY. Your Maria! Sir, my Maria -- she will own me, if you will not -- there,
Sir, let her teach you your duty.

(Quitting Maria, who retires with Sir Harry to the bottom of the stage.
OLDWORTH. Sir, I have many pardons to ask of you; but Sir Harry will be my
witness, that my fault was in my ignorance; had I known your name and
situation, I should have paid you my respects months ago.


GROVEBY. Sir, I don't wonder the graceless rogue forgot me, but I shall be
even with him; he shall not have a guinea from me.


OLDWORTH. Good Sir, you are not serious that he has offended you --


GROVEBY. I am serious, that I have found another inheritor for Gloomstock-Hall
-- I have got a niece, worth twenty such nephews, (Maria and Sir Harry
approaching) Ay, you may look, Sir, but she shall have every acre of it.
(taking Maria by the hand)


Sir HARRY. I ever found your kindness paternal, and you now give me the best
proof of it.


GROVEBY. No, Sir, had I been your father, and you had surprised me with a
match like this, I should have taken another method.


Sir HARRY. What would that have been, my dear Uncle?


GROVEBY. I would have loaded you with all the rents, and you should have been
forced to keep me, at your own expense, for the rest of my life, Sirrah.


Lady BAB. There is a sort of humor about this old fellow, that is not
unpleasant; I must have a little laugh with her before the day is over.


GROVEBY. Well, Mr. Oldworth, I intend there shall be no more ceremony between
us; I shall not quit your Champetre, I assure you -- but what shall I do, to
equip myself; one shall look like a fool, it seems, dressed in one's own
clothes.


OLDWORTH. Sir, your good humor and compliance will be a new compliment to the
day -- you shall be supplied -- I took care to be provided with plenty of
habits for chance comers.


GROVEBY. Why, then, this lady, who looks like a merry one, shall choose for
me, if she will do me that favor?


Lady BAB. With great pleasure, Sir; and before I have done with you, I Will make
you look --


GROVEBY. Ay, what shall I look, fair lady?


Lady BAB. Why, like Old Burliegh, revived from the Champetre, Leicester gave
to Queen Elizabeth, at Kennelworth-Castle.


GROVEBY. And no bad compliment, neither -- Gad, fair lady, if you could revive
more of 'em, it would do the country no harm, I believe.


OLDWORTH. Well, my good friends -- now for a slight refreshment, and then for
the happy rites. Who must lead the bride?


GROVEBY. That will I -- she is my neice, and only your ward. Give me your
hand, Lady Paramount, of Gloomstock-Hall. (Leads Maria off.)


DUPELEY. And may I be thought worthy to offer mine to the lovely Phillida?


Lady BAB. She accepts of your sagacity as Cavalier Servante and Cecisbo (going
off) and as we go along, we will talk of the annuity.


DUPELEY, (half aside) Gad, you deserve one -- and, if I durst, I Would make it a
jointure -- and now, if you please, you may over hear that, my Lady Quickears.

(Exeunt.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A GROVE.
Enter HURRY (In great spirits.) HERE, lass, take this basket, and run away to
the church, or you will be thrown out, and then you will not be married this year --
tell all the girls to be sure they strew in time to the music; and bid Dolly
Dump smile, and not look as if she was at a funeral.

[Exit Girl. What a day of joy is this! I could leap out of my skin, and into
it again -- here, you, Robin --


Enter ROBIN. ROBIN. What say you, Master Hurry?


HURRY. What signifies what I say, when you are running and flustering about,
that you can neither hear, see, nor understand!


ROBIN. Law, Master, I try to do every thing after you -- where shall I go next?


HURRY. Run away to the ringers, and set the bells a-going directly -- and do
you hear (Robin returns) Huzza all of you, till no body can hear the bells.
[Exit Robin. What have I to do now? -- ho, I must go down to the Tents.
(Going.) No, I Will go first to the Shrubbery, and tell the musicianers --
(Going, and returns.) That I have done already -- I must take care that none of
the servants -- that will do by-and-by. I must bid the maids -- 'gad I must not
go near them neither in these rampant spirits -- I am so full of every thing,
that I can think for nothing but to be mad with joy!

[Exit singing and capering.
SCENE II. Arcades of Flowers.
Procession from the Marriage, Bells ringing, Music playing, and Huzzas at a
distance. SONG.
FEMALE VOICE. Breezes that attend the spring,
Bear the sound on rosy wing,
Waft the swelling notes away,
It Is Maria's wedding day.
CHORUS of FEMALE VOICES. Spread the tidings over the plain,
Call around each maid and swain,
Dressed in garlands fresh and gay,
It Is Maria's bridal day.
MALE VOICE. Hence suspicion, envy, strife,
Every ill that poisons life,
Skulking vice, and specious art,
All that spoils, or cheats the heart.
CHORUS of MALE VOICES. Here the chastened Loves invite.
Harmless dalliance, pure delight,
Choral sonnet, festive play,
It Is Maria's bridal day.
MALE VOICE. PLENTY come with ceaseless board,
MIRTH to crown the evening board,
TRUTH the nuptial bed to guard,
JOY and PEACE, its bright reward.
FEMALE VOICES. But the chief invited guest,
HEALTH in rosy mantle dressed,
Come, and with the lengthened stay,
Make her life a bridal day.
CHORUS. Spread the tidings over the plain,
Call around each maid and swain,
Dressed in garlands fresh and gay,
It Is Maria's bridal day.

OLDWORTH. Thank you, my honest friends and neighbors; if your hearts overflow
with joy, how must it be with mine? I beg you to retire a moment.

(they retire. (He walks about greatly agitated.) Oh, my heart! my heart! what
a moment is this? I cannot bear it! the tide's too strong, and will overwhelm
me.


MARIA. What is the cause of this?


OLDWORTH. You are, Maria -- you!


MARIA. Am I, Sir? -- heaven forbid!


OLDWORTH Heaven has granted it, and I avow it -- I have lived to see in these
times, successful merit, and disinterested love -- my hopes and wishes are
accomplished! my long projected joys are full, and I will proclaim 'em! I have
a child!


MARIA, Sir!


OLDWORTH. Come to my arms, Maria! thy father's arms! If my lips fail me, let
my heart, in throbs, speak the discovery.


MARIA. O, Sir! explain this mystery!


OLDWORTH. I have a father's right! my child's conduct has made it a proud one.


MARIA. How, how, Sir! -- I am lost in rapture and amazement!


GROVEBY. So we are all.


OLDWORTH. Excuse me, brother, Madam, all -- my story is very short, Maria; the
hour of your birth made me a widower, and you a splendid heiress; I trembled at
the dangers of that situation, made more dangerous by the loss of your mother
-- to be the object of flattery, in the very cradle, and made a prey to
interest is the common lot attending it -- These reflections, call them whim,
call them singularities, what you please, induced me to conceal your birth;
being abroad at the time, the plan was easily executed.


MARIA. How blind have I been? Benevolent as you are to all, I might still have
perceived and interpreted the distinction of your unremitting tenderness -- how
could I mistake the parent's partiality, the parent's fondness?


OLDWORTH. Your happiness has been the motive of my actions, be it my excuse --
The design has answered wonderfully -- for though Maria's virtues would have
found their luster under any trial, there would have wanted the humble station
of the Maid of the Oaks to give her due proof of a disinterested lover.


MARIA. O, Sir! expect not words -- where shall I find even sentiments of
tenderness, gratitude, and duty, that were not yours before.


OLDWORTH. The life of my ward, is a pledge for that of the daughter and the
wife -- To you, Sir Harry, I shall make no apology for my secrecy; it has
served to give scope and exercise to your generosity, a sensation more
gratifying to minds, like yours, than any acquisition of fortune -- that
pleasure past, accept now, with Maria's hand, the inheritance of Oldworth's
Oaks.


Sir HARRY. Sir, your conduct does not surprise, but it overwhelms me -- long
may you remain the possessor of Oldworth's Oaks! when you cease to be so, he
will ill deserve to succeed you, who does not make your example the chief
object of his imitation.


DUPELEY. New joy to the disinterested lover, and to the destined Queen of the
Oaks!


Lady BAB. To the amiable pair, and the rewarder of their merits -- Mr.
Oldworth, you promised us a singular regale, but you have outdone yourself.


GROVEBY. Regale! egad I don't know what to call it -- he has almost turned the
Champetre into a tragedy, I think -- I never felt my eyes twinkle so oddly
before, but I shall be merry by and by; and when I begin, have at you double
bottles and long corks!


OLDWORTH. My worthy friend, brother let me call you! I have robbed you of a
pleasure; I know you also had your eye upon my Maid of the Oaks, for an
exercise of your generosity.


GROVEBY. It is very true, I should have been as well pleased as her lover to
receive her only with an under petticoat, though not quite for the same reason
-- but you may perceive how cursedly vexed I am at the disappointment.
(pauses.) Ay, I must alter the disposition of my acres once more -- I will have
no Nabobs nor Nabobbesses in my family.


Lady BAB. The females would be the better of the two, for all that; they would
not be guilty of so much rapacity to acquire a fortune, and they would spend it
to better purposes.


DUPELEY. By as much as a province is better disposed of in a jewel at the
breast of a Cleopatra, than when it is melted down in the fat guts of mayors
and burgesses of country corporations.


GROVEBY. I agree in your preference between the two; but an honest country
gentleman, and a plain English wife, is more respectable and useful than both
-- so do you hear, Madam, take care to provide me a second son, fit for that
sort of family -- let him be an honest fellow, and a jolly fellow, and in every
respect a proper representative for Gloomstock-hall.


Enter HURRY. HURRY. An't please your honor and worship, here are all the
quality persons in fanciful dresses -- you never saw such a sight, they are for
all the world like the Turks and Prussians -- do but look at 'em, how they come
prancing along through the grove; I never saw any thing so fine, and so proud,
and so fantastical -- Lord, I wonder any body will ever wear a coat and
waistcoat again -- This is shampeter indeed!


GROVEBY. My friend Hurry is in the right -- Harry, come and help to dress me,
for 'till I have got my fool's coat on, I cannot make one among 'em.


Sir HARRY. I Will wait upon you -- My sweet Maria, I must leave you for a few
minutes -- for an age.


OLDWORTH. My heart is now disburthen'd, and free to entertain my friends --
Come, Maria, let us meet 'em, and show in our faces the joy of our hearts --
Will your ladyship and Mr. Dupeley assist us?

[Exit Oldworth and Sir Harry.
Lady BAB. O, most willingly, Mr. Oldworth!

(As she is going out, she sees Actaea coming. "Angels and ministers of grace
defend us!"


DUPELEY. Hey-day! what is coming, Lady Bab?


Lady BAB. O, that most hideous of all goblins, a country cousin -- and I can
neither avoid her, nor overlook her, as I should to do in town.


DUPELEY. Where is the barbarian?


Lady BAB. Mistake her if you can -- the lovely Diana there that is talking to
Maria, with a tin crescent upon her head, big enough for a Turkish mosque.


DUPELEY, (looking through his glass.) Oh, I have her --

By her step, the goddess is revealed.

Lady BAB. What can I do with her? she will suffocate me if you don't take her
off my hands.


Enter ACTAEA, followed by six hunters. ACTAEA. O cousin! Lady Bab! here am I
at the head of my hunters -- I left the company to come to you -- I want to
practice my song before I sing it in public, you shall hear me. Ha! ha! ha!


Lady BAB. O you delicate creature! pray let us hear it -- while she is singing
we'll steal off and join the company. (aside to Dupeley.) Come, my dear, pray
begin.


ACTAEA sings her HUNTING SONG.
(During which Lady Bab and Dupeley steal off laughing.) Come, rouse from your
trances!
The sly morn advances,
To catch sluggish mortals in bed;
Let the horn's jocund note
In the wind sweetly float,
While the fox from the brake lifts his head;
Now creeping,
Now peeping,
The fox from the brake lifts his head:
Each away to his steed,
Your Goddess shall lead,
Come follow, my worshippers, follow;
For the chase all prepare,
See the hounds snuff the air,
Hark, hark, to the huntsman's sweet hollow!
Hark Jowler, hark Rover,
See Reynard breaks cover,
The hunters fly over the ground;
Now they skim over the plain,
Now they dart down the lane,
And the hills, woods, and valleys resound;
With dashing,
And splashing,
The hills, woods, and valleys resound:
Then away with full speed,
Your Goddess shall lead,
Come follow, my worshippers, follow;
Over hedge, ditch, and gate,
If you stop you're too late,
Hark, hark, to the huntsman's sweet hollow!

After the Song, the The painting of this Scene is taken from a Portico, in the
Gardens of Lord Stanly, as illuminated at his entertainment last summer.
Scene opens, and discovers The GARDENS illuminated. ACTAEA and her FOLLOWERS,
join the Company. Another set of Company dance a Country-Dance. Enter OLDWROTH.
OLDWORTH. This is as it should be -- a dance, or a song, or a shout of joy,
meets me at every turn; but come, ladies, I shall trust you no more in the
gardens; at least not my fair dancers; though the evening is fine it may be
deceitful, we have prepared a place under cover for the rest of the
entertainment.


Enter HURRY. HURRY. Gentlemen, nobility, ladies and gentry, you are all wanted
in the Temple of Venice, to -- but I Will not say what, that you may be more
surpised; and if you are surpised here, you will be more surprised there, and
we shall not have done with you there neither -- pray make haste or you will get no
places.

(They all crowd off.
HURRY, (Alone.) Bless my heart, how the whole place goes round with me! -- my
head seems quite illuminationed as well as that there. (Points to the
building.) See what it is to have more business than one's brains can bear; I
am as giddy as a goose; yet I have not touched a drop of liquor to day -- but
three glasses of punch, a pint of hot negus to warm me, a bottle of cider to
cool me again, and a dram of cherry-bounce to keep all quiet -- I should like
to lie down a little -- but then what would become of the Sham-Peter -- no, as
I am entrusted with a high office, I scorn to flinch; I will keep my eyes open,
and my head clear -- ay, and my hands too -- and I wish all my countrymen had
done the same at this general election. (Reels off.)


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE The Saloon. This Scene is also a representation of the temporary saloon,
as designed by Mr. Adam, and erected at Lord Stanley's.

A MINUET. After the Minuet, enter a SHEPHERDESS, drawing forward a SHEPHERD by
the arm. DUETTO.
SHE. SIMON, why so lost in wonder,
At these folk of high degree?
If they are finer, we are fonder;
Love is wealth to you and me.
HE. Phoebe stop, and learn more duty,
We Are too lowly here to please:
Oh, how splendour brightens beauty!
Who'd not wish to be like these?
SHE. Prithee, Simon, cease this gazing,
They Are deceitful, as they are fair;
HE. But their looks are all so pleasing,
Phoebe, how can I forbear?
SHE. Simon, stop, and learn more duty;
HE. Honest freedom cannot displease;
BOTH. HE. Riches give new charms to beauty.
SHE. Riches give no charms to beauty.
HE. Who'd not wish to be like these?
SHE. Who would wish to be like these?

This song is omitted in the representation.
SONG.
I.
O Simon, simple Simon, know,
The finest garments cover woe;
The outside glitter never tells
The grief of heart, that inward dwells.
II.
We rustic folk so true and plain,
Shall never allure the light and vain;
Whatever without our fortune wears,
Within no pang our bosom tears.
III.
O Simon, simple Simon, know,
That lack of wealth, is lack of woe;
Then homeward go, and let us prove,
The greatest bliss, content with love.

The Character of FOLLY enters from the Top of the Stage to lively Symphony.
SONG.
Make room, my good neighbors, of every degree,
My name it is FOLLY, who does not know me?
Of high ones, and low ones, of great and of small,
I Have been the companion, and friend of you all:
Wherever I come, I drive away care,
And if there is a crowd, I Am sure to be there.
I Am here, and there,
And every where,
All know me -- all know me --
Wherever I come,
Nobody's dumb;
Prating, prancing,
Singing, dancing;
Running over with mirth and glee.
II.
From country elections, I gallop post haste,
For there, I am always the most busy guest;
And whether it be in the country or town,
I Am hugged very close, by the cit and the clown:
The courtier, the patriot, the turn-coat and all,
If I do not sweeten -- breed nothing but gall.
I Am here, and there, etc. etc.
III.
The statesman, without me, unhappy would be;
No lady, so chaste, but gallants it with me;
The gravest of faces, who physic the land,
For all their grimaces, shake me by the hand;
At the playhouse, a friend to the author, I sit,
And clap in the gallery, the boxes and pit.
I Am here, and there, etc. etc.

(A slow symphony -- all the company retire to the wings on each side; the
curtains of the saloon are drawn up, and discovers the company at supper.)
Enter DRUID. DRUID. FOLLY, away! nor taint this nuptial feast!
I come, a friendly, self-invited guest;
The Druid of these Oaks, long doomed to dwell
Invisible, 'till beauty broke the spell;
Beauty, which here erects her throne,
And every spell dissolves, except her own.
Intended to be sung. Beauty breaks the magic spell,
Her power can every power subdue;
Can charm the Druid from his cell,
To revel and rejoice with you!
What cannot beauty, spotless beauty do?
Stand all apart, while mortals learn
The recompense their virtues earn;
When thus the generous court their power,
Celestial guardians find the dower,
And these are mansions they prepare,
For the disint'rested and fair.
(He waves his wand.)
The Scene breaks away, and discovers the PALACE OF CELESTIAL LOVE. MARIA, take
this oaken crown,
The region round is all your own:
See every Driad of the groves,
With bending head, salute your loves;
And Naiads, decked in constant green,
With homage due, avow their queen;
Here all of autumn, all of spring,
The flower and fruit to you they bring;
And, while they heap the lavish store,
A father's blessing makes it more.

MARIA. It does, indeed! my heart overflows with happiness.

OLDWORTH. Long, long, may it do so! my dear, my matchless daughter! -- Come
then, my friends and children; I see our joys are too sincere and spirited to
be any longer celebrated in magic and allegory.


GROVEBY. I ask your pardon, friend Oldworth; this reverend old gentleman Druid
has charmed me, and I hope we shall have more of his company -- A contempt for
old times may be fashionable, but I am pleased with every thing that brings
them to my remembrance -- I love an old oak at my heart, and can sit under its
shade 'till. I dream of Cressy and Agincourt; it is the emblem of British
fortitude, and like the heroic spirits of the island, while it o'ertops, it
protects the undergrowth -- And now, old son of Misletoe, set that sentiment to
music.


OLDWORTH. And he shall, brother.

(Druid gives signs to the musicians.
SONG.
TWO VOICES. Grace and strength of Britain's isle,
May thou long thy glories keep,
Make her hills with verdure smile,
Bear her triumphs over the deep.
CHORUS. Grace and strength, etc.

DUPELEY. Well, Lady Bab, are your spirits quite exhausted, or have the events
of the day made you pensive? I begin to believe there are more rational systems
of happiness than ours -- should my fair instructress become a convert, my
ambition would be still to follow her.


Lady BAB. I am no convert -- my mind has ever been on the side of reason,
though the torrent in which I have lived has not allowed me time to practice,
or even to contemplate it as I ought -- but to follow fashion, where we feel
shame, is surely the strongest of all hypocrisy, and from this moment I
renounce it.


GROVEBY. And you never made a better renounce in your life.


Lady BAB. Lady Groveby, accept the friendship of one sincerely desirous to
imitate your virtues -- Mr. Oldworth, you do not know me yet; you forbad your
company masks upon their faces, I have worn one upon my character, to you, and
to the world.


OLDWORTH. Lady Bab wanted but the resolution to appear in her genuine charms,
to make her a model to her rank, and to the age.


DUPELEY. To those charms I owe my conversion -- and my heart, hitherto a
prodigal, justly fixes with her, from whom it received the first impression of
love and reason -- There wants but the hand of Lady Bab, to make Oldworth's
Oaks distinguished by another union, founded on merit in her sex, and
discernment in mine.


Lady BAB. Sir, your proposal does me honor; but it is time enough to talk of
hearts and hands -- Let us follow the example before us in every thing -- after
the life we have led, six months probation may be very proper for us both.


OLDWORTH. Amiable Lady Bab! -- Confer the gift when you please; but my Fete
Champetre shall be remembered as the date of the promise -- and now for such a
song and dance as will best conclude so happy a day.


(Short flourish of Instruments.) VAUDEVILLE.
SHEPHERD. Ye fine fangled folks, who from cities and courts,
By your presence enliven the fields,
Accept for your welcome our innocent sports,
And the fruits that our industry yields.
CHORUS. Ye fine fangled folks, etc.
No temple we raise to the idol of wealth,
No alter to interest smokes,
To the blessing of love, kind seasons and health,
Is devoted the Feast of the Oaks.
CHORUS. No temple we raise, etc.
SHEPHERDESS. From the thicket and plain, each favorite haunt,
The villagers hasten away,
Your encouraging smile is the bounty they want,
To compensate the toils of the day;
CHORUS. From the thicket, etc.
The milk-maid abandons her pail and her cow,
In the furrow the plowman unyokes,
From the valley and meadow all press to the brow,
To assist at the Feast of the Oaks.
CHORUS. The milk maid, etc.
SHEPHERD. The precept we teach is contentment and truth,
That our girls may not learn to beguile,
By reason to govern the pleasures of youth,
And decorate age with a smile;
CHORUS. The precept we teach, etc.
No serpent approaches with venomous tooth,
No raven with ominous croaks,
Nor rancorous critic, more fatal than both,
Shall poison the Feast of the Oaks.
CHORUS. No serpent approaches, etc.
SHEPHERDESS. Bring roses, and myrtles, new circlets to weave,
Ply the flutes in new measures to move,
And lengthen the song to the star of the eve,
The favoring planet of love.
CHORUS. Bring roses, and myrtles, etc.
Oh Venus! propitious attend to the lay,
Each shepherd the blessing invokes;
May he who is true, like the youth of today,
Find a prize like the Maid of the Oaks.
CHORUS. Oh Venus! propitious, etc.

DRUID. (Stopping the Musicians.) Yet hold -- though Druid now no more,
He Is wrong who thinks my spells are over,
Thus midst you all I throw them round,
Oh, may they fall on genial ground!
May every breast their influence prove
The magic lies in truth of Love.
It Is that irradiates every scene,
Restores from clouds the blue serene,
And makes, without a regal dome,
A palace of each humble home.
(Exeunt.
The Whole finishes with A GRAND DANCE.
FINIS.

