MARCELLUS: A MONODY.

Humbly inscribed to Her Royal Highness THE PRINCESS of WALES.

By Mr. DELAP, M. A. Fellow of Magdalen College, CAMBRIDGE.

Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit
Nulli flebilior quam tibi.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY in Pall Mall; And sold by M. COOPER in
Paternoster Row. 1751.

MARCELLUS: A MONODY.
YE virgin-train, that whilom waked your lyres,
Fast by the crystal springs of Helicon,
To heavenly strains of joy those dulcet Notes
Ill suit a Nation's universal moan,
When every hope with their lost Prince is gone.
The thrilling voice of joy no longer floats
Over pale Britannia's sadly-silent shore;
MARCELLUS is no more!
But oh, the doleful change! the plaintive muse,
In cypress crowned, must pour her piteous loan
Of sigh, and tear, and heart-empiercing groan!
Come then, Melpomene, begin the Lay,
With rueful Tears your sorrowing Dirges steep,
Such tears as erst your sister-muse did weep
For her dear twin -Palici: every stream
Shall stop to hear your theme,
Then sadly murmur to the plaintive shore
MARCELLUS is no more!
And feeble Echo from her aerie cave
Shall back return the note, and every vale,
With all its flowers shall droop to hear the tale.
How can he lie unwept who knew to raise
Esteem and love in every loyal heart.
He was the pride of every Shepherd's praise,
Graced with each decent and each princely part.
Nor did the muse ungrateful pour her lays;
He often would listen to the poet's art:
And often alone, beneath the muse's grot,
Hid from a nation's eye, he sat and thought.
Full many an hour, his Offspring prattling round,
In gentle dalliance has he fondly smiled;
Full many an hour, sequestered from annoys,
In tender amorous talk, has he beguiled,
With the dear Partner of his dearest joys.
Mean while the foe of Life, with treacherous art,
In sly destruction preyed upon his heart;
And yet no fatal symptom did appear;
The blood still mantled on his rosy cheek.
As Phoebus often the clouds with gold does streak,
While brooding storms engender in the air.
Where was your knowledge then, you sapient Tribe,
That boast commandment over the pulse of life?
Was not a Princess' tears sufficient bribe,
Could not a King's, a Nation's prayers prevail
To make your nicest skill explore his ail?
Some few more Years the breath of Life supply,
And keep him from the Sky --
Ah me, what boots your skill? -- Not all the prayers
That pale Britannia, and her King might pour;
Not all Augusta's sadly-flowing Tears,
Not Aesculapius' Sons with all their care,
Might ward the black inevitable hour.
Or could their Prince's vital Band repair,
Which in their mood the fatal Sisters tore.
Alas, he drooped in life's maturest age,
While Albion's scepter hung before his view;
And thrice the wise Machaon did presage
That Febris her inflaming rage withdrew;
Yet then renewing her malignant strife,
The deadly Fiend unhous'd his tender Life.
Then streamed the tear from every British eye.
But chief the unhappy sire, in dismal plight,
Detests the odious light,
And with loud wailings tears the arched sky.
And calls on death to bring a kind reprieve,
And lay his cruel sorrows in the grave.
But ah! my Muse, how may thy voice record,
Though well I ween thou shar'st her piteous state,
The tender unimaginable woe,
Of his dear Consort for her ravished Lord,
Torn by the hand of unrelenting Fate!
Then hide the tears thou can not give to flow.
Enough, that when reviving life did chase
Death's dismal image from her pallid face;
With manly show she masked her sorrows dread;
And greatly strove to cheer with kind relief
Her tender Offspring's sympathetic grief,
Who at their Mother's wretched plight grew sad.
What heart so stony but did melt in tears?
See pale Britannia wears,
Through all her Sons, one dismal face of woe.
Nor British eyes alone do overflow;
See even the Orcades and frozen Realms
By Ocean's watery barrier sunder'd far,
Pay their full tribute of a tender tear.
Mean while the awful tongue of death does pierce
Night's drowzy ear, with tollings, deep and slow;
And now the solemn pealing Organs blow.
The winking Lamps a dusky luster shed
Along the Mansions of the Dead,
Where mouldering Kings in silent dust repose.
And now with often interrupted sighs,
The Lawn-rob'd Prelate his last duty pays,
And dust to dust conveys:
And now entombed his sacred body lies,
Free from the cares, that this vain life enclose.
Up to yon regions of eternal day,
The free, unbodied spirit wings its way;
There in the bosom of its god does bide
In pure, immaculate, unshaken bliss;
Nor recks the loss of earthly Kingdom's pride,
Enthroned for aye in heavenly paradise.
And thou, sad Consort of a Prince too good
Longer to visit this forsaken clime;
Ah! cease to weary the relentless sky,
With bitter penance and with bootless tears.
Nor deem with vainly-pious prayers
To draw him from his blissful dear abode;
Where now he never more may fear to die,
Nor grieve, save when your plaints would him recall,
Not lent for aye to your fond hopes, I ween!
And oh! forgive the muse, whose daring lays
Would grateful pour her artless loyal teen;
Reckless that true to draw a Prince's praise,
Asks the nice touches of a master-hand,
Since she may see in your fair Offspring planned
The graceful dowries of their Father's mind;
See Mercy, Truth, Religion, Liberty,
Beneath the shine of your enlivening eye,
And every virtue that may bless mankind.
FINIS.

