MAY DAY: OR, THE LITTLE GIPSY.

(Price One-Shilling.)

MAY DAY: OR, THE LITTLE GIPSY. A MUSICAL FARCE, OF ONE ACT.

TO WHICH IS ADDED THE THEATRICAL CANDIDATES. A MUSICAL PRELUDE.

AS THEY ARE BOTH PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, in DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand. 1775.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of this Musical Farce, begs leave to inform the readers, if there
should be any, that it was merely intended to introduce the Little Gipsy to the
public, whose youth and total inexperience of the stage, made it necessary to
give as little dialogue to her character as possible, her success depending
wholly upon her singing -- This reason added to another, which is, that the
piece was produced at an early part of the season, when better writers are not
willing to come forth, is the best apology the Author can make for its defects.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
FURROW, a rich farmer. Mr. PARSONS. WILLIAM, his son. Mr. VERNON. CLOD, his
servant. Mr. BANNISTER. DOZEY. Mr. WESTON. CRIER. Mr. WRIGHTEN.
WOMEN.
LITTLE GIPSY. Miss ABRAMS. DOLLY. Mrs. WRIGHTEN.
Country Lads and Lasses.
MAY DAY: OR, THE LITTLE GIPSY.
SCENE I.
Enter WILLIAM and DOLLY. WILLIAM. GO on, dear sister Dolly -- And so my sweet
girl was brought to the Widow Gadly's, as a relation of here is from Shropshire,
and went by the name of Belton?


DOL. Yes, yes -- you had not been gone to London two days, before your father
and she met in the Widow's garden; I was with him, he was very inquisitive
indeed, and was struck with her lively manner; I could hardly get him home to
dinner.


WM. Why this was beyond expectation; and so, Dolly --


DOL. Yes, his liking went much beyond my expectation, or your wishes: In a
week he fell in love with her, and is at this time a very dangerous rival.


WM. I am sure to have some mischief happen in all my schemes.


DOL. Her singing, and twenty little agreeable fooleries she puts, on have
bewitched him: Her mimiking the Gypsies has so enchanted him, that he has
prevailed upon her to come to the May Pole today among the holiday lads and
lasses, and tell their fortunes. She has dressed up herself often and been
among 'em, without their knowing who she is -- in short, she has bewitched the
whole village -- I am to be there too as her mother -- My father will have it
so.


WM. So much the better, while you are telling fortunes, I may talk to her
without being observed; send but a fortune tellers, or a mountebank, among
country people, and they have no eyes, and ears, for any thing else: Where is
my father now?


DOL. Upon some knotty point with Roger Dozey, the clerk -- I must go, and
prepare for the frolic: don't be melancholy, Will; the worst that can happen
is to marry the girl without your father's consent, turn gipsy with your wife,
and send your children to steal his poultry.


WM. But harkee, Dolly, who is to have Mr. Goodwill's May Day legacy? A hundred
pounds is a tolerable foundation to build upon -- What is become of George,
Dolly?


DOL. I have not time to tell you -- He is a rogue like the rest of you: But as
I have a heart that can make an honest man happy that possesses it, so it has a
spirit within it to despise a knave, or a coxcomb.

Would women do as I do;
With spirit scorn dejection,
The men no arts could fly to,
They Would keep 'em in subjection:
But if we sigh or simper,
The lovesick farce is over,
They Will bring us soon to whimper,
And then good night the lover.
Would women do as I do,
No knaves or fools could cheat 'em,
They Would passion bid good bye to,
And trick for trick would meet 'em:
But if we sigh or simper,
The lovesick farce is over,
They Will bring us soon to whimper,
And then good night the lover.



WM. Well said, Dolly! -- but I am afraid in my situation, I must give up all
hope.


DOL. Then you will give up the best friend you have; make much of her, or with a
true female spirit, like mine, she will leave you the moment you seem to neglect
her.

[Exit Dolly.
WILLIAM. How can my heart rest, when I see from the land,
Fanny's arms opened wide to receive me?
If hope cast her anchor to fix on the sand,
The winds, and the waves both deceive me.
My love to its duly, still constant and true,
Though of fortune and tempest the sport,
Shall beat round the shore, the dear object in view,
'Till it sinks, or is safe in the port.



SCENE, a Hall in FURROW'S House. Enter FURROW and DOZEY. FUR. Well, but Dozey,
think a little, and hear a little before you speak, and understand my question.


DOZ. Put it. --


FUR. You know that Walter Goodwill, Esquire. left a legacy of one hundred pounds,
to the couple who shall be married upon certain conditions, in this parish, on
the first of May.


DOZ. I have 'em in my hand here, a true copy.


FUR. You told me so before.


DOZ. Truth may be told at any time.


FUR. Zounds! hold your tongue or we shall keep talking all day.


DOZ. Keep your temper, which is a better thing.


FUR. But I cannot, if you will not hear me.


DOZ. I say nothing, and will say nothing. [twirling his thumbs.


FUR. I know you are my friend Dozey, and I have been your friend -- I found
you a good companion and a scholar, and got you raised from sexton to clerk.


DOZ. Necessity! There was but one person more in the parish beside myself who
could read, and he stammer'd.


FUR. Well, well, no matter, we shall never come to the point.


DOZ. Never, if you travel out of the way so.


FUR. I say then --


DOZ. And I am silent.


FUR. I am over head and ears in love.


DOZ. You had better be over head and ears in your horse-pond, for that might
cool you -- Put no more upon an old horse than he can bear -- An excellent
saying!


FUR. You put more upon me than I can bear: I want no advice but your opinion.
If I marry Fanny Belton, may I demand 'Squire Goodwill's hundred pound legacy?


DOZ. I will read it. [Searching for his spectacles.


FUR. Zounds, I have read it a thousand times; and the bellman cries it all
about the parish.


DOZ. Are you her free choice?


FUR. To be sure I am, as she is mine.


DOZ. What age has she?


FUR. About twenty


DOZ. Has she her senses perfect?


FUR. To be sure.


DOZ. I doubt it! -- a girl of twenty marry threescore and five, a free choice,
and in her senses, it cannot be.


FUR. You are grown old and stupid.


DOZ. She must be young and stupid, which is worse.


FUR. May I claim the legacy, if I marry her?


DOZ. You say the choice is free?


FUR. I do.


DOZ. But is it not fit, another of the conditions -- The choice must be both
free and fit -- Ergo I say you cannot have a penny of it.


FUR. Why will you vex me so, Roger Dozey? I am always helping you out of
scrapes and difficulties, and why will not you assist me?


DOZ. I am getting you out of a scrape now, by preventing your marrying.


FUR. I Will tell you what Roger -- there is something so perverse about you,
that though I am your friend, you are always thwarting me.


DOZ. Because you're always wrong -- You are so blinded with passion, that you
would thrust your hand in the fire, if I did not take care that you should not
burn your fingers.


FUR, Well, but dear Dozey, you are the forehorse of this parish, and can lead
the rest of the team as you please. Pray now con over this matter by yourself,
you shall sit in my little smoking room, and have a bottle of my best October
to help your study, and when you have finished the bottle, and settled your
mind with a dram afterward, meet me at the maypole, and give your opinion. I
shall be there by that time, to claim the girl, and the legacy -- If it is
mine, a good large fee out of it shall be yours. Remember that. --

[Exit.
DOZ. It is the only thing you have said worth remembering -- let me see -- a
large fee, and a good bottle of October will do wonders -- and yet to make the
union of one and twenty, with sixty-five fit, will require more fees than his
purse can furnish, and more October than ever was, or ever will be in his
cellar -- However, not to be rash -- I Will drink the bottle, and consider the
case.

[Exit.
SCENE II.
A Country Prospect, A VILLAGE and a MAY POLE, with a GARLAND. Lads and Lasses
are discovered dancing, while others are playing on the ground. After the
Dance, they surround the May Pole and sing the following CHORUS.
O lovely sweet May!
The first of sweet May!
Spring opens her treasure,
Of mirth, love and pleasure
The earth is dressed gay,
We see all around, and we hear from each spray,
That nature proclaims it a festival day.



CLOD. Well sung my lasses -- which of you all will have 'Squire Goodwill's
legacy? I don't believe that any of you are in the right road to it -- it must
be turned over to the next year, and then I shall marry one of you out of pity,
and get double by it.


BET. I Will assure you, Goodman Clod -- I would not have you for double, and
double, and double --


CLOD. The grapes are sour, Betty --


NAN. What a sin, and a shame is it -- that a poor girl should miss such a fine
fortune, for want of a sweetheart.


BET. It Is a sin, and a shame that there is no young fellow to be had for love
or money -- The devil is in 'em I believe.


NAN. They are like their betters in London -- they marry, as they would do any
thing for money -- but then they yawn, and had rather let it alone.


CLOD. What the duce, have we got any maccatonies in the country?


BET. Maccatonies! What are them, Clod?


CLOD. Tho'f I saw a power of them, when I was up among 'em, yet I hardly know
what to make of 'em. --


BET. What were they living creters?


CLOD. Yea, and upon two legs, too -- Such as they were.


NAN. What like christians?


CLOD. 'Ecod I don't know what they are alike, not I -- they look like something
-- and yet they are nothing -- I heard a person say, I sat next to at the show
play (for I would see every thing) that these maccatonies, say themselves they
have no souls, and I say they have no bodies, and so we may well say that they
look like something, and are nothing, 'ecod.


BET. Come prithee Clod, let us hear all about what you saw in London, and about
the fine ladies too, what did they look like pray?


CLOD. Like a hundred things, all in one day, but my song that I got there,
will tell you better all about it, than I can.


I.
What Is a poor simple clown,
To do in the town,
Of their freaks, and fagaries, I Will none,
The folks I saw there,
Two faces did wear,
An honest man never has but one.
CHORUS.
Let others to London go roam,
I love my neighbor,
To sing and to labor,
To me there is nothing like country and home.
II.
Nay the ladies, I vow,
I cannot tell how,
Were now white as curd, and now red;
Law! how would you stare,
At their huge crop of hair,
It Is a haycock o'top of their head!
CHO. Let others, etc.
III.
Then it is so dizen'd out,
An with trinkets about,
With Ribbands and flippets between;
They so noddle and toss,
Just like a fore horse,
With tossels, and bells in a team.
CHO. Let others, etc.
IV.
Then the fops are so fine,
With lank wasted chine,
A nd a littleskimp bit of a hat;
Which from sun, wind, and rain,
Will not shelter their brain,
Though there is no need to take care of that.
CHO. Let others, etc.
V.
" Would you these creatures ape,
" In looks, and their shape,
" Teach a calf on his hind legs to go;
" Let him waddle in gait,
" A skim-dish on his pate,
" And he will look all the world like a Beau.
CHO. " Let others, etc.
VI.
" To keep my brains right,
" My bones whole and tight,
" To speak, nor to look, would I dare;
" As they bake they shall brew,
" Old Nick and his crew,
" At London keep Vanity Fair.
CHO. " Let others, etc.



ALL. Well sung, Clod --


BET. But, tell us, Clod -- how did young Will Furrow behave in London? -- he
raked it about, I suppose, and that makes him so scornful to us.


CLOD. Poor lad! he was more mop'd than I was; he is not scornful -- His Father,
shame upon him, crossed him in love, and he sent him there to forget it.


NAN. And he ought to be crossed in love; what does he mean by taking his love
out of the parish? if he has lost one there, he may find another here, egad,
and I had liked to have said a better.


CLOD. Ay, but that is as he thinks -- if he loves lamb, he will not like to be
crammed with Pork -- Ha, ha, ha!


BET. His father would send him to the market town to make a schollard of him,
which only gave him a hankering to be proud, to wear a tucker and despise his
neighbors.


CLOD. Here he comes, and let him speak for himself -- he looks as gay as the
best of us.


Enter WILLIAM. WM. My sweet lasses, a merry May to you all -- I must have the
privilege of the day -- Kisses and the first of May have ever gone together in
our Village, and I hate to break through a good old custom.

[Kisses 'em]
BET. Old customs are good all the year round, and there cannot be a better than
this --

[Curtsy's and Kisses him.
[The tabor and pipe is heard.] CLOD. Come, come, adon with your kissing, for
here comes the crier to proclaim 'Squire Goodwill's legacy.


Enter CRIER, tabor and pipe playing. CRY. O yes! O yes! O yes! Be it known to
all lads lasses of this Village of Couple-Well, that George Goodwill, Esquire late
of Bounty-Hall, in this County, has made the following bequest -- You, my lads,
open your ears, and you, my lasses, hold your tongues, and hear his worship's
legacy.


CLOD. Silence -- Silence.


CRIER, reads. Is there a maid, and maid she be,
But how to find her out, who knows?

CLOD. Who knows indeed!


CRY. Silence, and don't disturb the court.

Is there a maid, and maid she be, [reads.
But how to find her out, who knows?
Who makes a choice that is fit and free,
To buy the wedding clothes;
If such rare maid and match be found,
Within the Parish bound,
The first of May,
Shall be the day,
I give this pair a hundred pound,
God save the King!
[Exit Crier, the lads and lasses huzzaing!
WM. Well, my good girls, and which of you is to have the hundred pound legacy?


NAN. Any of us, if you will give us a right and title -- what say you to that
Mr. William? The money ought not to go out of the parish.


BET. Ay come now -- here are choice; you must be very nice indeed, if one of
us, and a hundred pound will not satisfy you.


CLOD. 'Ecod but he knows a trick worth two of that. ( aside.


BET. Well, what say you, Mr. Will?


WM. I like you all so well, that I cannot find in my heart to take one of you
without the others.


NAN. What, would you make a great Turk of us, and live like a heathen in a
serallery?


WILLIAM. I.
Yes, I Will give my heart away,
To her will not forsake it,
Softly maidens, softly pray,
You must not snatch,
Nor fight, nor scratch,
But gently, gently take it.
II.
Ever constant warm and true,
The toy is worth the keeping,
It Is not spoild with fashions new;
But full of love,
It will not rove --
The corn is worth the reaping.
III.
Maidens, come, put in your claim,
I will not give it blindly:
My heart a lamb, though brisk is tame;
So let each lass,
Before me pass,
Who wins, pray use it kindly.
IV.
All have such bewitching ways,
To give to one would wrong ye;
In turns to each my fancy strays;
So let each fair,
Take equal share,
I throw my heart among ye.



CLOD. You may as well throw your hat among 'em, Master William; these lasses
cannot live upon such slender fare, as a bit of your heart.


WM. Then they must fast, Clod; for I have not even a bit of my heart to give
them. ( aside.) What in the name of May, neighbors, comes tripping through
Farmer Danby's gate, and looks like May from top to toe.


CLOD. As I hope to be married it is the Little Gipsy that has got a bit of your
father's heart; aye, and a good bit too, and holds it fast.


JEN. I Will be hanged if she is not going to the Grange now -- Your father casts
a sheep's eye at her -- He hinders his own son from wedding lawfully, while he
is running after this Little Gipsy -- I hope she will run away with his silver
tankard.


WM. Upon my word I think my father has a good taste. How long has she been
amongst you? who is she? what is she? and whence comes she?


JEN. That we neither know, nor can guess -- She always comes out of 'Squire
Grinly's Copse, but nobody knows how she gets there -- Clod dogged her the other
night, but she took care to throw something in his eyes, that struck fire, and
half blinded him.


CLOD. Ay, feath, did she; and while I was rubbing 'em, she vanished away, and
left me up to my middle in a bog.


WM. Poor Clod! you paid dearly for peeping.


BET. I wish she would sing! she is a perfect nightingale.


WM. Hush! hark! I hear something -- let us go back, or she may be shamed faced
-- She Is very young, and seems very modest -- True merit is always bashful, and
should never want for encouragement: She comes this way -- let us keep back a
little.

( They retire.
Enter LITTLE GIPSY. GIPSY. Hail, Spring! whose charms make nature gay,
O breathe some charm on me,
That I may bless this joyful day,
Inspired by Love, and thee!
O Love! be all thy magic mine,
Two faithful hearts to save;
The glory as the cause be thine,
And heal the wounds you gave.


What a character am I obliged to support? I shall certainly be discovered --
the country folks I see are retired to watch me, and my sweet heart among 'em
-- I am more afraid of a discovery from these, than from wiser people --
Cunning will very often overshoot the mark, while simplicity hits it. I must
rely upon my dress and manner -- if I can but manage to tell other people's
fortune, though but falsely, I may really make my own.


CLOD. She mutters something to herself; I wish I could hear what she is
maundring about.


WM. Fortune Tellers always do so -- the devil must be always talked to very
civilly, and not loud, or he will not be at their elbow.


CLOD. Lord bless her, there is no harm in her -- I wish I was the devil to be
so talked to.


GIP. What a frolic have I begun! should I succeed, our present distress will
double our succeeding happiness --

( The country people come forward. Your servant, pretty maids, and to you also
young men, if you are good, for naughtiness, they say, has found its way into
the country -- I hope none of you have seen it.


WM. O, yes; I have seen enough of it, it hangs about one like a pest; and for
fear my clothes should be infected, I ordered that they should be burnt before
I left London.


CLOD. Ay, ay, wickedness there sticks to a body like pitch.


GIP. Then I Will fly away from the infection. ( going.


WM. No, no, you little Gipsy, that will not do, we must hear that sweet voice
again, and have our fortunes told before you go away.

( They lay hold upon her.
JEN. I vow, neighbors, I think I have seen this face before.


GIP. It is not worth looking upon a second time.


WM. Indeed but it is, I could look at it for ever.


CLOD. 'Ecod and so could I, and buss it into the bargain.

BET Law, don't make such a fuss with the poor girl, as if nobody was worth
kissing but a Gipsy -- sing away, child, and don't mind 'em.


GIP. No more I will, mistress.

( Curtseys.
GYPSY. I.
O spread thy rich mantle, sweet May, over the ground,
Drive the blasts of keen winter away;
Let the birds sweetly carol, thy flowerets smile round,
And let us with all nature be gay.
II.
Let spleen, spite, and envy, those clouds of the mind,
Be dispersed by the sunshine of joy;
The pleasures of Eden had blessed human kind,
Had no fiend entered there to destroy.
III.
As May with her sunshine can warm the cold earth,
Let each fair with the season improve;
Be widows restored from their mourning to mirth,
And hard-hearted maids yield to love.
IV.
With the treasures of spring, let the village be dressed,
Its joys let the season impart;
When rapture swells high, and overflows from each breast,
It Is the May of the mind and the heart.



WM. Now you have charmed our ears one way, my sweet Gipsy, delight our hearts
by telling us our fortunes.


CLOD. Here are fine cross doings in my hond. ( showing it.


JEN. Pray look into mine first. ( Cleaning her hand)


DOL. Here Is a hand for you, Gipsy! ( showing hers.


GIP. I never saw a worse in all my life; bless me! here is -- it frights me to
see it!


DOL. Then I am sure it will fright me to hear it, so I Will stay till another
time.


WM. Little pretty Gipsy, what say you to mine?


GIP. ( Looking into his hand) You have a dozen lasses in love with you, and
are in love with none of 'em.


CLOD. There Is a little witch for you!


WM. There you are out, Gipsy; I do love one truly and sincerely.


GIP. As much as you love me -- don't believe him, lasses -- Come, come, let me
see your hand again -- by the faith of a Gipsy, you are in love, and the lass
that you love --


ALL. Who is she? ( Getting about her.


GIP. She is in this parish, and not above twenty yards from the maypole.


CLOD. The dickens she is! who? who is it?

( All looking out.
WILL. Say no more, Gipsy; you know nothing at all of the matter; you should be
whipped for fibbing.


CLOD. And I Will be the constable; but 'ecod I would not hurt her.


GIP. Ay, but I do know, and she is about my size.

( They all measure with her.
WM. Hold your tongue I say -- here comes your mother I suppose.


Enter DOLLY, like an old Gipsy. DOL. What, did you run away from me you little
baggage? Have I not warned you from wandering in the fields by yourself these
wicked times?


GIP. Pray, mother, don't be angry; the morning was so fine, the fields so
charming, and the lads and lasses so merry, I could not stay at home, and I
knew you would come limping after --


DOL. Hussy, hussy! have not I told you, that when the kid wanders from its
dam, the fox will have a breakfast.


CLOD. 'Ecod, and a good breakfast too -- it makes my mouth water.


DOL. I don't much like the company you are in -- who is that young rake there?


WM One that hates kid mother, and is only giving your daughter a little good
advice.


DOL. Indeed the young fellows of this age are not so rampant as they were in
my days. -- Well, my lads and lasses, who among you longs to know their
fortunes? I am the oldest, and the best fortune tellers under the sun.

( They all gather about her.
WM. Now, my dear little Gipsy, you must tell me my fortune.

( They retire, and the rest get about Dolly.
JEN. Now for it, mother.


DOLLY. Young maids, and young swains, if you're curious to know,
What husbaads you will have, and what wives;
From above I can know, what you will do here below,
And what you have done all your lives:
Don't blush and don't fear,
As I Am old I am wise,
And I read in your eyes --
I must whisper the rest in your ear.
If you, a false man, should betray a fond maid,
I Will read what the stars have decreed;
If you, a fond maid, should be ever betrayed,
You Will be sorry that page I should read.
Don't blush, and don't fear, etc.
If youth weds old age, though it wallows in gold,
With sattins, and silks, and fine watch;
Yet when for base gold, youth and beauty is sold,
The devil alone makes the match.
Don't blush, and don't fear, etc.
" If an old man's so rash, to wed a young wife,
" Or an old woman wed a young man;
" For such husband and wife, I read danger and strife,
" For nature detests such a plan.
" Don't blush, and don't fear, etc."



CLOD. There Is a slap of the chops for old measter, 'ecod, I wish he was here to
take it.


JEN. But now, come to particulars, goody Gipsy.


NAN. Ay, ay, to particulars, we must have particulars.


CLOD. Ay, zooks, let us understand your gibberish.


DOL. Let me sit down upon the bench under yonder tree, and I Will tell you all I
know.


CLOD. And he that desires to know more is a fool -- come along, Dame
D^al-Devil.

( They retire with Dolly, and then William and Gipsy come forward.
WM. May heaven prosper what love has invented; and may this joyful day finish
our cares for ever!


WILLIAM and GIPSY. DUETTO.
Passion of the purest nature,
Glows within this faithful breast,
While I gaze on each loved feature,
Love will let me know no rest.
Thus the ewe her lamb caressing,
Watches with a mother's fear,
While she eyes her little blessing,
Thinks the cruel wolf is near.



FUR. ( without) Where is the Gipsy? where is my little Gipsy, I say?


WM. The wolf is near indeed, for here comes my father.


GIP. What shall we do?


Enter FURROW. FUR. Where are the lads and lasses, and what are you two doing
here alone?


WM. Had I my will, we should not long have been here alone: I would have put
her into the hands of the constable, and sent her to her parish.

( Gipsy looks grave.
FUR. She has cheated him too -- that is excellent! this is a rare frolic, faith
( aside.) You send her to the constable, you booby! -- I should have put you in
the stocks if you had, Sirrah -- don't be grave, my little pretty Gipsy, that
bumkin shall not hurt you -- what a fine may game this is! -- I love her more than
ever! -- I Will marry her today, and have the hundred pounds too -- ( aside.


GIP. I Will go home directly, I cannot bear to see that young man look so cross (
going.


FUR. You shall go to my home, my dainty sweet Gipsy, and make him look crosser.


WM. I wonder, father, you are not ashamed of yourself, to be imposed upon by
such a little pilfering creature, she ought to be whipped from village to
village, and made an example of. --


FUR. How the fool is taken in! -- I Am out of my wits ( aside.) I Will make an
example of you, rascal, if you don't speak more tenderly to that lady.


WM. Lady! a fine lady! ha! ha! ha!


GIP. Don't put yourself into a rage with him, he is mad they say, mad for love.


FUR. So am I too -- I am his father, and have more right to be mad than he has.


WM. A lady! -- A Gipsy lady! -- ha, ha, ha!


FUR. And what is more, Mr. Impudence, she shall be my lady -- and then what
will you say to that, rascal?


WM. That you have got a fine lady.


FUR. Have I given you a good education, you ungrateful whelp you, to laugh at
me? Get out of my sight, or I Will spoil your mummery -- I will -- ( Holding up
his stick.


WM. I am gone, Sir -- one word if you please -- You prevented me from being
happy with the choice of my heart, and to one superior to her sex in every
quality of the mind, and now without the excuse of youth on your part, or the
least merit on here is -- As you have made me miserable with great cruelty, you
are going to make yourself so without reason. And so, Sir, I am yours, and
that fair lady's very humble servant -- Ha, ha, ha!

( Exit William.
FUR. If I had not resolved not to be in a passion this first of May, the
festival of our Village, I should have sent him to the bottom of our
horse-pond; but I cannot help laughing neither, you have done it so featly --
How the poor boy was taken in; he! he! he! -- fine frolic, faith! And now,
Miss, I will open my mind more to you; why should we lose a hundred pounds? --
I Will marry you to day -- the better day, the better deed. -- What say you, my
little Gipsy?


GIP. It will make a great noise!


FUR. I love a noise -- what is any body good for, without noise -- besides we
shall be the happiest couple for a hundred miles round.


GIP. Not while your son is miserable -- make him happy first, and then nobody
can blame you.


FUR. What a sweet creature you are! Don't trouble your head about such a
fellow, I Will turn him out of the house to seek his fortune, and so he will be
provided for.


GIP. If he is not happy, I shall be miserable, nor would I be a Queen at the
expense of another's happiness, for all the world.


FUR. What a sweet creature you are! -- and how happy shall I be; the rascal
shall know your kindness to him, and how little he deserves it -- it shall be
done, and the Village shall know it is all your doings. And here they come! now
for it! I am ten times happier than I was this morning!

Enter all the Lads and Lasses. Come, where is my son, where is Scapegrace?


CLOD. Here, Master William!

Enter WILLIAM. Here Is Scapegrace, Sir.


FUR. Now you shall know what a fine lady this is, or rather how unlike a fine
lady she is. This pilferer, wretch, baggage, and so on -- she vows not to be
made happy till you are so -- and so being prevailed upon by her -- and her
alone -- I give you my consent to marry the girl you were so fond of, or any
girl of character, and before all my neighbors here, on this joyful holiday,
the first of May, and I likewise consent to give you the Bilberry-farm, to
maintain her and my grand children.


WM. If you indulge my inclination, I have no right to find fault with yours
-- be my choice where it will, you will be satisfied.


FUR. More than satisfied -- I will rejoice at it, and reward it -- name the
party, boy.

( The girls stand all round with great seeming anxiety.)
WM. I always did obey you, and will now. ( looking at, and passing by the
other girls, This -- this is my choice. takes the Little Gipsy by the hand.)


CLOD. Zooks! here is a fine over-turn in a horse-pond. ( aside.)


FUR. He Is cracked, sure!


WM. I was, Sir, and almost broken hearted; but your kindness, consent, and
generosity, have made me a man again, and thus we thank you.

( They kneel to him.)
FUR. This is some may game -- do you know her? -- and does she know you?


WM. We have known each other long -- this is she father, I saw, loved, and was
betrothed to; but your command separated us for a time -- in my absence to
London, she was here under the name of Belton; you saw her often, and liked
her, nay loved her -- it was our innocent device, that you might see her
merits, and not think 'em unworthy of your son -- You overrun our
expectations, and we delayed the discovery till this, we hope, happy moment.


CLOD. You must forgive 'em, measter.


ALL. To be sure.


FUR. I cannot -- I am tricked and cheated -- I cannot recall the farm; but I can,
and I will --

( walks about angrily.
CLOD. Be more foolish if you please -- you have tricked, and cheated yourself,
measter -- but heaven has been kind to you, and set all to rights again --


GIPSY. (Addressing herself to Furrow.) I.
Love reigns this season, makes his choice,
And shall not we with birds rejoice?
O calm your rage, hear nature say,
Be kind with me the first of May.
II.
Would you, like misers, hate to bless,
Keep wealth from youth you cannot possess?
To nature hark, you will hear her say,
Be kind with me the first of May.
III.
Oh! then be bounteous, like the spring,
Which makes creation sport and sing,
With nature let your heart be gay,
And both be kind this first of May.



FUR. I will not be sung out of my senses --


Enter DOZEY, drunk. DOZ. Where is he? where is the bridegroom? I have it, I
have it -- October has done it! -- it has inspired me! and the legacy shall be
old George Furrow's, or I will never taste October again -- I have got you the
money, old boy! ( claps him on the shoulder.)


FUR. You are got drunk, you old fool, and I don't want the money.

( sulky.)
DOZ. What, you are sick of marriage, and don't want the wife perhaps -- did
not I tell you, it was not fit? was not I free enough to tell you so? -- it is
not fit.


FUR. This drunken old fool compleats my misery.


DOZ. Old fool! what Mr. Pot, do you abuse your friend kettle? -- old fool am
I? -- now judge, neighbors -- I have been drinking October to make this a
joyful May Day, and he wants to marry a young girl to turn it into sackcloth
and ashes -- who is old fool now?


FUR. Take him away.


DOZ. I shall take myself away -- Lasses, if any of you long for the legacy,
and are not engaged, I am your man -- that old fellow, there, would have
married a child in sober sadness; but I have been courting a good bottle of
October, and now, having lost my senses, I am free and fit to marry any body --

( Exit reeling.)
ALL. Ha, ha, ha!


FUR. Where Is Dolly? -- was she in this plot?


WM. In that part of it you gave her: she performed the old Gipsy to a miracle,
as these lasses can testify, and then went home to prepare the May feast.


FUR. I will have no feast.

( sulky.)
JEN. Was she the old Gipsy?


BET. It is all a dream to me!


FUR. I cannot come to rights again. --

( The lads and lasses push the Gipsy and William toward him, saying -- to
him, to him.)
CLOD. Never was known such a thing as ill nature and unkindness in our
village, on the first of May, for these ten thousand years.


FINALE.
CLOD. Shall our hearts on May Day,
Lack and a well a day!
Want their recreation?
No, no, no, it cannot be so,
Love with us must bud and blow,
Unblighted by vexation.

WILLIAM. Shall a maid on May Day,
Lack and a well a day!
Die of desperation?
No, no, no, for pity's sake,
To your care a couple take,
And give 'em consolation.

GIPSY. Shall a youth on May Day,
Lack and a well a day!
Lament a separation?
No, no, no, the lad is true,
Let him have of love his due,
Indulge his inclination.

FURROW. Shall my heart on May Day,
Lack and a well a day!
Refuse its approbation?
No, no, no, within our breast,
Rage, revenge, and such like guests,
Should never have habitation.

WILLIAM and GIPSY. We no more on May Day,
O, what a happy day!
Shall never know vexation:
No, no, no, your worth we'll sing,
Join your name to bounteous spring,
In kind commemoration!




GRAND CHORUS.
" Cold winter will fly,
" When spring's warmer sky,
" The charms of young nature display:
" When the heart is unkind,
" With the frost of the mind,
" Benevolence melts it like May."



END OF MAY DAY.
THE Theatrical Candidates: A MUSICAL PRELUDE, UPON THE OPENING AND ALTERATIONS
OF THE THEATER.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
MERCURY, Mr. VERNON. HARLEQUIN, Mr. DODD.
WOMEN.
TRAGEDY, Mrs. SMITH. COMEDY, Mrs. WRIGHTEN.
Followers of Tragedy, Comedy, and Harlequin.
THE THEATRICAL CANDIDATES.
Enter MERCURY. MERCURY. I, God of Wits and Thieves -- birds of a feather,
(For Wit and Thieving often go together)
Am sent to see this House's transformation,
Ask if the Critics give their approbation,
Or as in other cases -- "Yawn at alteration."
Old Lady Drury, like some other ladies,
To charm by false appearances, whose trade is,
By help of paint, new boddice, and new gown,
Hopes a new face to pass upon the town:
By such like art, stale toasts and Maccaronies,
Have made out many a Venus and Adonis:
To business now -- Two Rival Dames above,
Have prayed for leave to quit their father Jove;
And hearing in the papers -- we have there,
Morning and Evening as you have 'em here;
Juno loves scandal, as all good wives do,
If it be fresh, no matter whether true;
Momus writes paragraphs, and I find squibs,
And Pluto keeps a press to print the fibs:
Hearing this house was now made as good as new,
And thinking each that she was sure of you;
They came full speed, these Rival Petticoats,
To canvas for your interest and your votes:
They will not join, but separate beg your favor,
To take possession and live here for ever.
Full of their merits, they are waiting near;
Is it your pleasure that they now appear?
I Will call 'em in; and while they urge their claims,
And Critics, you examine well the dames,
I Will to Apollo, and beg his direction;
The God of Wisdom's new at an election!
SONG.
Hark! the pipe, the trumpet, drum;
See, the Sister Muses come!
It Is time to haste away!
When the female tongues begin,
Who has ears to hear the din,
And wings to fly, will stay?
I Will away, I Will away.
When the female tongues begin,
Who has cars to hear the din,
And wings to fly, will stay?


[runs of^
Enter TRAGEDY and Followers to a March. TRAG. Britons, your votes and
interest, both I claim,
They Are mine by right, -- MELPOMENE my name.
SONG,
If still your hearts can swell with glory,
Those passions feel, your Sires have known;
Can glow with deeds of ancient story,
Or beat with transport at your own!
Success is mine,
My rival must resign,
And here I fix my empire, and my throne!
My nobler powers shall Britons move,
If Britons still they are;
And softer passions melt the fair,
To pity, tenderness and love!


My merits told -- who dares contend with me?

Enter COMEDY and Followers. COM. I dare, proud Dame; my name is COMEDY!
Think you, your strutting, straddling, puffy pride,
Your rolling eyes, arms kimbo'd, tragic stride,
Can frighten me? -- Britons, it is yours to choose,
That murdering lady, or this laughing muse?
Now make your choice; -- with smiles I Will strive to win ye:
If you choose Her, she will stick a dagger in ye!
SONG.
It Is wit, love, and laughter, that Britons control,
Away with your dungeons, your dagger and bowl;
Sportive humor is now on the wing!
It Is true comic mirth,
To pleasure gives birth,
As sunshine unfolds the sweet buds of the spring:
No grief shall annoy,
Our hearts light as air,
In full tides of joy,
We drown sorrow and care:
Away with your dungeons, etc.



TRAG. Such flippant flirts, grave Britons will despise,

COM. No but they wont; -- they are merry and are wise:

TRAG. You can be wise too; nay a thief can be!
Wise with stale sentiments all stolen from me:
Which long cast off, from my heroic verses,
Have stuffed your motley, dull sententious farces:
The town grew sick!

COM. For all this mighty pother,
Have you not laughed with one eye, cried with the other?

TRAG. In all the realms of nonsense, can there be,
A monster, like your comic-tragedy?

COM. O yes, my dear! -- your tragic-comedy.

DUETTO.
TRAG. Would you lose your power and weight?
With this flirt-gill, laugh and prate.

COM. Let this lady rage and weep;
Would you choose to go to sleep?

TRAG. You're a thief, and wbip'd should be.

COM. You're a thief, have stolen from me.

BOTH. Ever distant will we be.
Never can, or will agree.




TRAG. I beg relief -- such company's a curse!

COM. And so do I -- I never yet kept worse?

TRAG. Which will you choose?

COM. Sour Her, or smiling Me?
There are but two of us.

Enter HARLEQUIN, etc. HAR. O yes, we are three!
Your votes and interest, pray, for me! [to the pit.]

TRAG. What fallen so low to cope with thee?

HAR. Ouy, Ouy!

COM. Alas, poor We!
[shrugs her shoulders and laughs.]
HAR. Though this maid scorns me, this with passion flies out,
Though you may laugh, and you may cry your eyes out;
For all your airs, sharp looks, and sharper nails,
Draggled you were, till I held up your tails:
Each friend I have above, whose voice so loud is,
Will never give me up for two such dowdies;
She Is grown so grave, and she so cross and bloody,
Without my help, your brains will all be muddy:
Deep thought, and politics, so stir your gall,
When you come here, you should not think at all;
And I Am the best for that; be my protectors!
And let friend Punch here talk to the electors.

I.
Should Harlequin be banished hence,
Quit the place to wit and sense,
What would be the consequence?
Empty houses,
You and spouses,
And your pretty children dear,
Never would come,
Leave your home,
Unless that I came after;
Frisking here,
Whisking there;
Tripping, skipping, every where,
To crack your sides with laughter.
II.
Though Comedy may make you grin,
And Tragedy move all within,
Why not poll for Harlequin?
My patched jacket,
Makes a racket,
O, the joy when I appear!
House is full!
Never dull!
Brisk, wanton, wild and cleaver!
Frisking here,
Whisking there,
Tripping, skipping, every where,
Harlequin for ever!



Enter MERCURY, out of breath. MER. Apollo, God of wisdom and this Isle,
Upon your quarrel Ladies deigns to smile,
With your permission, Sirs, and approbation,
Determines thus, this sister altercation. --
You, Tragedy, must weep, and love and rage,
And keep your turn, but not engross the stage;
And you, gay madam, gay to give delight,
Must not, turned prude, encroach upon her right:
Each separate charm: you grave, you light as feather,
Unless that Shakespeare bring you both together;
On both by nature's grant, that Conq'ror seizes,
To use you when, and where and how he pleases:
For you, Monsieur! ( to Har.) whenever farce or song,
Are sick or tired -- then you, without a tongue,
Or with one if you please -- in Drury Lane,
As Locum Tenens, may hold up their train.
Thus spoke Apollo -- but he added too,
Vain his decrees until confirmed by you! [to the audience.]

SONG AND CHORUS.
MERCURY. The Muses may sing and Apollo inspire,
But fruitless their song and his lyre,
Till you shall their raptures proclaim:
It Is you must decree,
For your praise is the key,
To open the Temple of Fame.

MELPOMENE. My thunders may roll, and my voice shake the stage,
But fruitless my tears and my rage,
Till you shall my triumphs proclaim!
It Is you must decree, etc.

THALIA. Though poignant my wit, and my satire is true,
My fable and characters new;
It Is you must my genius proclaim!
It Is you must decree, etc.

HARLEQUIN. With heels light as air, though about I may frisk,
No monkey more nimble and brisk,
Yet you must my merits proclaim;
It Is you must decree,
You may send me to be,
Tom Fool to the Temple of Fame.




FINIS.

