NECK OR NOTHING* A FARCE. IN TWO ACTS. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL
IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET and Co. near Surry-Street, in the Strand.
MDCCLXVI. [Price One Shilling.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of the following Piece will claim no Merit that does not belong to
him. -- He therefore takes this opportunity of acknowleging his obligation to
the celebrated Author of Gil Blas. -- Trifling as it is, the following Farce is
an imitation of the Crispin Rival de Son Maitre of LE SAGE.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. Stockwell, Citizen, Mr. HARTRY. Sir Harry Harlowe, a country Gentleman,
Mr. PARSONS. Mr. Belford, (in love with Miss Nancy) Mr. PACKER. Martin,
(Belford's servant) Mr. PALMER. Slip, (servant to Harlowe) Mr. YATES.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Stockwell, Mrs. BRADSHAW. Miss Nancy Stockwell, Miss PLYM. Jenny, (her
Maid) Miss POPE.
NECK OR NOTHING, A FARCE.
ACT I.
SCENE, a street.
Enter Martin. Mart. I am sick as a dog of being a valet! -- running after
other people's business and neglecting my own -- this low life is the devil! --
I Have had a taste of the gentleman, and shall never lose it. It Is thy own fault,
my little Martin. -- Thou wou'd'st always play small games; when, had you but
had the face to put yourself forward a little, some well jointur'd widow had
taken you into her post-chariot, and made your fortune at once. A fellow of my
wit and spirit, should have broke twice, and set up again by this time.


Enter Slip. Slip. Hey! is not that, that rascal, Martin, yonder?


Mart. Can that be my modest friend, Slip? [aside.


Slip. The same, in faith!


Mart. It Is he, as I live!


Slip. My friend, happily met. --


Mart. My dear, I embrace you! -- Not seeing you among the beau-monde, I was
afraid there had been some fresh misunderstanding between you and the law.


Slip. Faith, my dear, I have had a narrow escape since I saw you. I had like
to have been preferred in some of our settlements abroad -- but I found there
was no doing the business by deputy -- so --


Mart. Did not accept of the place, ha! -- why, what little mischief had
thou been at?


Slip. Why, I don't know -- meeting one night with a certain Portuguese
Jew-merchant, in one of the back streets here by the Exchange -- (I was a
little in liquor I believe -- piping hot from a turtle-feast) it came into my
giddy head to stop him, out of mere curiosity to ask what news from Germany --
nothing more -- and the fellow, not understanding good English, would needs
have it that I asked him for something else. -- He bawled out, up came the
watch, down was I laid in the kennel, and then carried before a magistrate. --
He clapped me on a stone doublet, that I could not get off my back for two
months.


Mart. Two months, say you?


Slip. And there I might have rotted, if I had not had great friends; a certain
lady of quality's woman's cousin that was kept by Mr. Quirk, of Thavies-Inn,
you must know, was in love with me, and she --


Mart. Brought you in, Not Guilty, I warrant. Oh! great friends is a great
matter.


Slip. This affair really gave me some serious reflections. --


Mart. No doubt, it spoiled you for a news-monger: no more intelligence from
foreign countries, ha!


Slip Well but, Martin, what is thy history since I saw thee?


Mart. Um! -- a novel only, Sir: why, I am ashamed to say it; I am but an
honorary rascal, as well as yourself. -- I did try my luck indeed at Epsom, and
Newmarket -- but the knowing ones were taken in, and I was obliged to return to
service again. -- But a master without money, implies a servant without wages;
I am not in love with my condition, I promise you.


Slip. I am with mine, I assure you: I am retired from the great world, --
that is my taste now -- and live in the country, with one Mr Harlowe -- piping
hot from his travels -- It Is a charming young fellow! Drinking, hunting, and
wenching, my boy! -- a man of universal knowledge. Then I am his privy
counselor, and we always play the devil together. -- That amuses one, you
know, and keeps one out of mischief. --


Mart. Yes, pretty lambs! But what makes you at London now? whither are you
bound?


Slip. To yonder great house.


Mart. What, Mr. Stockwell's?


Slip. The same. You must know his daughter is engaged to my master.


Mart. Miss Stockwell, to your master?


Slip. It Is not above six weeks ago, that my master's father, Sir Harry
Harlowe, was here upon a visit to his old friend, and then the matter was
settled between 'em, -- quite a-la-mode, I assure you.


Mart. How do you mean?


Slip. The old folk struck the bargain, without the consent of the young ones,
or even their seeing one another.


Mart. Tip top, I assure you; and every thing's agreed?


Slip. Signed and sealed by the two fathers; the lady, and her fortune both
ready to be delivered. -- Twenty thousand, you rogue! -- ready rhino down! and
only wait for young master to write a receipt.


Mart. Whew! -- Then my young master may even make a leg to his fortune, and
set up his staff somewhere else. --


Slip. Thy master!


Mart. Ay, he is dying for the -- twenty thousand -- that is all; -- but since
your master -- [going.


Slip. Oh! there you're safe enough, my master will never marry Miss Stockwell:
there happens to be a small rub in the way.


Mart. What rub?


Slip. Only married already.


Mart. How!


Slip. Why, his father would marry him here in town, it seems, and he -- chose
to be married in the country -- that is all. The truth is, our young gentleman
managed matters with the young lady so ill -- or so well -- that upon his
father's return there was hot consulting among the relations; and the lady
being of a good family, and having a smart, fighting fellow of a brother in the
army -- why, my matter, who hates quarrelling, spoke to the old gentleman, and
the affair's hushed up by a marriage, that is all.


Mart. Um! an entire new face of affairs!


Slip. My master's wedding-cloaths, and mine, are all ordered for the country,
and I am to follow them, as soon as I have seen the family here, and redeemed
my old master's promise, that lies in pawn.


Mart. Old master's promise! -- let me think --


Slip. 'Twas what brought me to town, or I had not shook my honest friend by
the fist. -- Martin, good morrow! -- what, in the dumps? -- we shall meet again
man.


Mart. Let me alone -- I have a thought -- hark you, my dear; is thy master
known to old Stockwell?


Slip. Never saw him in his life.


Mart. That Is brave, my boy! [hits him a slap on the back.

Art thou still a cock of the game, Slip? and shall we? -- No: I doubt -- I
doubt that damned Jew-merchant sticks in thy stomach, and you are turned
dunghill, you dog!


Slip. Try me. A good sailor will not die a dry death at land for one hurricane.
Speak out! -- yo^ would pass your master upon the family for min^ and marry him
to the lady? is not that the trick?


Mart. That! -- I have a trick worth two on'^ I know Miss Nancy is a girl of
taste, and I have ^ prettier fellow in my eye for her.


Slip. Ay, who is he?


Mart. Myself, you puppy.


Slip. That Is brave, my boy! [ slaps him on the bac^


Mart. I Am in love with her to --


Slip. To the value of twenty thousand pounds. -- ^ approve your flame.


Mart. I will take the name and shape of you^ master. --


Slip. Very well!


Mart. Marry Miss Stockwell. --


Slip. Agreed.


Mart. Touch the twenty thousand. --


Slip. Um! -- Well, well!


Mart. And disappear, before matters come to a^ ecclaircissement.


Slip. Um! -- That article wants a little explanation, my honest friend.


Mart. How so?


Slip. You talk of disappearing with the lady's fortune, and never mention Slip
in the treaty.


Mart. Oh! we shall disappear together, to b^ sure. -- I have more honor than
to go without you.


Slip. Well, on that condition, I am content to pla^ your back hand. -- But
hold, hold! -- how wi^ you pass yourself for my master, in a family where you
are so well known?


Mart. Hold your fool's tongue -- this is my fir^ visit to 'em. I returned but
yesterday to my maste^ -- You must know, I asked his leave to be absent a week,
and I made free with a month: 'twa^ a party of pleasure, so I made bold. During
my absence, he saw this lady, liked her person -- ador'^ ^er fortune, and now,
by my help, hopes to be in ^ossession of both in a few days.


Slip. And you will do the lady the honor to help her ^o a better match.


Mart. She Will think so, I believe.


Slip. Well said, Conceit! -- But what sort of people are your father and
mother-in-law?


Mart. I am told he is a mere citizen -- who ^inking himself very wise, is
often outwitted; and ^is lady has as much vanity in her way; will never ^e old,
though turned of sixty; and as irresolute and ^apricious as a girl of fifteen.
And Miss, I suppose, ^like all other misfes, wants to be her own mistress, and
her husband's; and in the mean time is governed ^y her chambermaid, who will be
too hard for us ^oth, if we don't look about us.


Mart. A fig for dangers! I am prepared for 'em.


Slip. But hearkee! -- what shall we do with the ^ld gentleman's letter that
I Am to deliver? This will ^ock us all up!


Mart. Write another.


Slip. That Is easier said than done; -- but I Will ^o my best, as you cannot write.


Mart. Do you see after my wedding-cloaths, that ^ey do not set out for the
country. -- We have ^o time to lose.


Slip. My master's will fit you to a hair.


Mart. But stay, stay, I must see my master first. -- ^ he should appear and
surprise us, we are in a fine ^ickle. I must make him keep house for a few days
-- ^ll think of a lie as I go -- 'Egad I have it al^ady -- I Will to him, and
meet you afterward at ^e tavern, there, take a glass, cast this coarse skin,
^hip on the gentleman, and shame the first men ^f fashion in the kingdom. [
Exit Martin.


Slip. If impudence will do our business, it is done,
And the twenty thousand are our own. [ Exit Slip.

SCENE, an apartment in Mr. Stockwell 's house.
Enter Miss Nancy and Jenny. Nancy. You know, Jenny, that Belford has got into
my heart, and if I consent to marry this man, 'twill be the death of me. --
Advise me then, and don't be so teizing.


Jenny. Lud! what advice can I give you? I have but two in the world; one is,
to forget your lover, and the other to disobey your father. -- You have too much
love to take the one, and I too much conscience to give the other; -- so we are
just where we were, madam.


Nancy. Don't torment me, Jenny.


Jenny. Why, I fancy, we might find a way to reconcile your love and my
conscience.


Nancy. How, how! my dear girl?


Jenny. Suppose we were to open the affair to your mama?


Nancy. Nay, now your jesting is cruel.


Jenny. I never was more in earnest, madam. -- She loves flattery dearly; and
she loves her daughter dearly; I Will warrant, with a sigh, and a tear, and a
handkerchief, she makes her husband break his word with young Harlowe in a
quarter of an hour after his arrival.


Nancy. Not unlikely, but if --


Jenny. What at your ifs? -- no doubts, I beg, where I am concerned.


Nancy. But you know my poor mother is so unsettled a creature.


Jenny. Why, that is true enough, the last speaker is her oracle, so let us lose
no time to bring her over to -- Hark! -- Here she comes -- do you retire, till
I have prepared her for you. [Exit Miss Nancy.


Enter Mrs. Stockwell. Jenny. Well, of all the women in London, sure there
never was such a temper, as my lady's.


Mrs. Stock. What can have set this girl against me? [Aside.


Jenny. Such good humor, and good sense together, seldom meet -- then such a
perpetual smile upon her features. Well, here is is a sort of face, that can
never grow old; what would I give for such a lasting face as she has.


Mrs. Stock. Hussy, hussy! you're a flatterer. [Taps her on the shoulder.


Jenny. Ah! -- Madam, is it you? I vow you made me start. Miss Nancy and I had
just been talking of you, and we agreed you were one of the best of women, the
most reasonable friend, the tenderest mother, and the -- the -- the --


Mrs. Stock. Nay, that is too much -- I have my failings, and my virtues too,
Jenny -- in one thing indeed I am very unlike other women; I always hearken to
reason.


Jenny. That Is what I said, madam. --


Mrs. Stock. I am neither headstrong nor fantastical, -- neither --


Jenny. No, sweet lady, the smallest twine may lead you. Miss, says I, hear
reason, like your mama; will so good a mother, do you think, force her daughter
to marry against her inclinations?


Mrs. Stock. I force my child's inclinations! -- No, I make the case my own.
But tell me, (there is a good girl) has my daughter an aversion to young
Harelowe?


Jenny. I don't say that, madam -- that is -- aversion -- to be sure -- but I
believe she hates him like the devil.


Mrs. Stock. Poor thing! poor thing! -- and perhaps her little heart is beating
for another?


Jenny. Oh, that is a certain rule! -- when a young woman hates her husband,
it is taken for granted she loves another man. For example, you yourself, as you
have often told me, hated the sight of Mr. Stockwell, when first he was
proposed for your husband -- Why? only because you were in love, poor lady,
with captain -- you know who -- that was killed at the siege -- you know where.


Mrs. Stock. Why will you name him, Jenny? [wipes her eyes.


Jenny. Tender lady!


Mrs. Stock. Why, indeed, had that fine young creature survived his wounds, I
should never have married Mr. Stockwell -- that I will say.


Jenny. Then you know how to pity your daughter. Her heart suffers now, what
yours did -- before that siege, madam.


Mrs. Stock. Say you so? -- poor girl! -- and who is it has found the way to
her heart?


Jenny. No other than the young gentleman that has been so constant at cards
with you lately.


Mrs. Stock. Who, Belford?


Jenny. The same, and a fine spirited young fellow it is.


Enter Miss Nancy. Miss Nan. Pardon my folly, my misfortunes, dear madam, if I
cannot conform in all my sentiments with yours, and my father's --


Mrs. Stock. It will happen, child, sometimes, that a daughter's heart may not
be disposed to comply exactly with the views and schemes of a parent -- but
then, a parent should act with tenderness. -- My dear, I pity your distress:
Belford has my approbation, I assure you.


Nancy. You are too good, madam!


Jenny. Your approbation is not enough, madam; will you answer for master's
too? (He Is a stubborn bit of stuff, you know) he will not always hearken to
reason.


Mrs. Stock. But he shall, Jenny; stubborn as he is, I Will soften him. I Will take
Belford under my protection -- Here comes my husband -- I have taken my
resolutions, and you shall see how I Will bring him about presently.

Enter Mr. Stockwell. My dear, you're come in the very nick of time, I have
just changed my mind.


Mr. Stock. You are always changing it, I think.


Mrs. Stock. I always hearken to reason, Mr. Stockwell.


Mr. Stock. Well, and which way does the wind s^ now?


Mrs. Stock. Why, I have taken a resolution not to marry my daughter to young
Harlowe.


Mr. Stock. Hey! that is chopping about, indeed!


Mrs. Stock. Nay, but my dear, hear me, and let us reason a little; here is a
better offer for Nancy -- Belford has asked her of me.


Mr. Stock. Belford a better?


Mrs. Stock. Nay, but don't be obstinate, child! he is not indeed so rich as
the other; but what are riches to content, Mr. Stockwell?


Mr. Stock. And what is content without riches, Mrs. Stockwell?


Mrs. Stock. But he is a gentleman, my dear, and out of regard to his family, we
may very well excuse his fortune.


Jenny. Well said, madam! this will do. [aside.


Mr. Stock. Ha, ha, ha! that is because you were a gentlewoman -- but I, being a
downright cit, think just the reverse; and out of regard to his fortune, if he
had one, might excuse his family -- I have no great objection to the man; but
is not our word and honor engaged to another?


Mrs. Stock. Eh! that is true, indeed; but --


Mr. Stock. Has my old friend, Sir Harry Harlowe, done any thing to --


Mrs. Stock. I don't accuse him, my dear.


Mr. Stock. Or has his son refused to comply?


Mrs. Stock. Not in the least, that I know of.


Jenny. Never flinch, madam.


Mrs. Stock. Never fear, Jenny. -- [aside.


Nancy. But I have never seen him, papa.


Mrs. Stock. No, Mr. Stockwell, she has never seen him --


Mr. Stock. So much the better, Mrs. Stockwell, he will be a greater novelty, and
please her the better, and the longer for it.


Mrs. Stock. There is some reason in that, Jenny.


Jenny. Is there, madam? then I have not a bit about me.


Nancy. But to marry without inclination, Sir, think of that.


Mrs. Stock. Ay, think of that, Mr. Stockwell.


Mr. Stock. I never thought of it for myself, nor you neither, my dear; and why
should our daughter think herself wiser than her parents.


Mrs. Stock. Ay, why, indeed? -- there is no answering that, Jenny.


Jenny. I see there is not -- What a woman! [aside.


Mr. Stock. It would be such an affront, as never could be forgiven. Consider,
dame, the instruments are signed, preparations made, and the bridegroom
expected every minute; it is too far gone to be recalled with any honor.


Mrs. Stock. Good lack a day! very true, very true!


Jenny. Well said, weathercock, about and about we go; this woman betrays the
whole sex -- She will not contradict her own husband. [aside.


Mrs. Stock. You are witness, Jenny, I did all I could for poor Belford.


Jenny. To be sure; you took him under your protection -- a noble patroness,
truly!


Mr. Stock. Hey! whom have we got here? -- I Will be hanged if this is not my
son-in-law's servant -- Now, girl, we shall hear.


Enter Slip, in a hurry. Slip. Ladies and gentlemen, I am come -- let me
recover my breath -- I come -- Oh! I come with mine, and my master's
compliments to your honor, and my lady, our best love and services to pretty
Miss, and -- madam, I Am your obedient Black a-moor. [ to Jenny.


Mr. Stock. Um! the fellow has humor, I promise you. -- Well, Sirrah; where is
your master?


Slip. My master, and your son, is on his way to throw himself at the feet of
this angelic creature -- His impatience, madam, can equal nothing but your
beauty.


Mr. Stock. Well, but where is he, where is he?


Slip. He Is but just arrived from the country; he treads upon my heels and I
had only the start of him to tell you, that he will but whip on clean linen,
and wait on you in the snapping of a finger.


Mr. Stock. O, fie upon him, what need all this ceremony between us; why did
not he come hither directly? He knows he may make my house his own.


Slip. Oh, Sir, he designs it; but the first time -- pardon me, Sir -- He knows
the world better than to treat you so cavalierly as that -- No, no, he is not
that man, I can assure you; though I Am his valet, yet I Would give the devil his
due.


Mrs. Stock. Is he so extremely well bred? Daughter, you will be infinitely happy.


Mr. Stock. Does not my old friend, Harlowe, his father, come with him?


Slip. Sir, I grieve to tell it you; such was his design, but an unforeseen
accident has prevented him; which I assure you gives him great pain.


Mr. Stock. Ay! what is the matter?


Slip. The gout, Sir, the gout!


Mrs. Stock. Poor gentleman!


Slip. He was seized in his right foot, the evening before we set out, but -- I
have a letter from him. [gives a letter.


Mr. Stock. [puts on his spectacles, and reads.] "To Doctor, Doctor Clackit,
physician, near St. Sepulchre's church."


Slip. Lud! lud! that is not it, [takes out letters.] Let me see.


Mr. Stock. St. Sepulchre's church! -- I find the doctor chooses to live among
his patients.


Slip. Eh! eh! that is so good! -- you're a very wag, Sir! -- He, he, he! -- let
me see -- Oh, here is one like it. -- To Mr. Stockwell; the same. I am afraid
you will hardly be able to make it out -- shall I read it to you? Oh, this
unlucky gout!


Mr. Stock. I see it has affected his hands too. -- Wyh it is scarce legible;
and ill spelt too.


Slip. The gout, Sir, -- may it never affect you, Sir, nor madam Stockwell,
Miss Nancy, that young woman there, nor any of the good company.


Mr. Stock. [reads.] "My much honored friend -- few words are best in my
condition; this damned gout has laid hold upon me, and will not let me attend my
son, for to be present at his matrimony." -- For to be present at his
matrimony! -- I think his hand and style too much altered.


Slip. The gout, Sir.


Mr. Stock. [reading.] "I look upon this conjuncture of our families."
Conjuncture! -- a very odd phrase!


Slip. The gout, dear Sir, the gout! He Is quite another man in it.


Mr. Stock. "I look upon this conjuncture of our families, as the comfort of my
age -- The sooner it is done the more comfort I shall have -- I don't doubt but
you will like my son, whom I have sent with a most trusty and faithful servant,
who deserves your friendship and favor."


Slip. O law, Sir! -- I am quite ashamed.


Mr. Stock. "I am, my dear brother, yours, etc. till death, Henry Harlowe." ^
am very sorry we cannot have the old gentleman's company. -- But who is this gay
young fellow coming ^o'ards us? -- Can this be my son-in-law?


Slip. What the devil should ail him? Look at him, Miss; observe him, madam --
Is not he a pretty fellow?


Mr. Stock. What is he doing?


Slip. Only paying his chairman. -- Generous as a prince. [ to Jenny.


Mrs. Stock. Not ill made, indeed! -- You Will only be too happy, child.


Nancy. I wish I could think so, madam.


Slip. Dress us but as well, and we'll cut out our masters, ten to one. All my
fancy, I assure you, ladies. [aside.


Enter Martin, as young Harlowe. Mart. Slip!


Slip. Your honor!


Mart. Mr. Stockwell, I presume, my illustrious father --


Slip. The same, Sir, in proprium personum.


Mr. Stock. My dear son, welcome! -- let me embrace you.


Mart. You do me too much honor; my superabundant joy is too inexpressible to
express the -- This I flatter myself [ to Mrs. Stockwell.] is the brilliant
beauty, destined to the arms of happy Mart -- Harlowe -- Gad! I Would like to have
forgot my own name. [aside.


Nancy. An impertinent, absurd coxcomb! [aside.


Mr. Stock. Nay, nay, son-in-law, not so fast -- that is my wife. Here Is my
daughter Nancy!


Mart. A fine creature! [salutes her.] Madam, I have seen the world! and from
all the world, here would I choose a wife, and a mistress -- a family of
beauties; let me die!


Mrs. Stock. Excessively gallant! He has wit, I assure you, daughter.


Jenny. And taste too, madam.


Nancy. And impudence, I Am sure!


Mart. [ singing to Mrs. Stockwell.] "With a shape, and a face, and an air, and
a grace!" Ha, ha! -- Just, just as our old gentleman told me. There you will see
madam Stockwell, says he, the agreeable still -- take care of your heart, boy;
she is a dangerous beauty, though her daughter may be by.


Mrs. Stock. O fie, fie, fie!


Mart. I but repeat my father's words, madam, confirmed by my own observation.
Ah boy, says he, I wish with all my heart, that my dear friend Mr. Stockwell
was dead, I Would marry her tomorrow.


Mr. Stock. I Am much obliged to him, faith!


Mrs. Stock. And so am I, I am sure, Sir.


Mart. I but repeat my father's words, Sir.


Mrs. Stock. My esteem for your father, Sir, is mutual, and I am heartily sorry
we could not have the pleasure of his company.


Mart. Oh! madam, he was damned mad, that he could not be at the wedding. He
had flattered himself these two months with the hopes of dancing a minuet with
Mrs. Stockwell.


Slip. Two months -- Whew! -- and it is but six weeks he has known her; he will
knock us all up if I don't interfere. -- [aside.] -- Sir, Sir Harry begs you will
hasten the ceremonials, that he may have the pleasure of his daughter's company
as soon as possible.


Mr. Stock. Well, well, every thing is signed and sealed; nothing remains, that
I know of, but to finish the affair at once, and pay you my daughter's portion.


Mart. "Pay you my daughter's portion," -- that is all, Sir; come along, Sir, I
wait on you to your closet. -- Slip, go with my civilities to the marquis of --
[aloud.] go this moment, you dog, and secure us horses, and let 'em be bridled
and saddled, and ready at a minute's warning, [softly.] -- and don't forget my
compliments to the marchioness. [aloud.


Slip. I fly, Sir -- Ladies, your most obedient. [ exit Slip.


Mart. Come along, Sir, to your closet.


Mr. Stock. Stay, son, stay! -- to return to the old gentleman.


Mart. Oh, Sir, we'll return to him when the portion's paid.


Mr. Stock. No, no; first satisfy my curiosity about this unlucky lawsuit of
his.


Mart. O lud! -- Slip not here now! [aside.


Mr. Stock. You seem disturbed, son-in-law, has any thing --


Mart. Eh! pox of this question. [aside.] I have such a memory! -- [puts his
hand to his forehead.] as much forgot to send Slip to the duke of -- as if I
had no manner of acquaintance with him. I Will call him back -- Slip!


Mr. Stock. He Will be back again presently -- but, Sir --


Mart. He should have told me of this damned lawsuit. [aside.


Mr. Stock. Has it been brought to a hearing?


Mart. O, yes, Sir, and the affair is quite over.


Mr. Stock. Ay, already!


Mart. The wrong box, I Am afraid! [aside.


Mr. Stock. And I hope you have got your cause?


Mart. With costs of suit, I assure you, Sir.


Mr. Stock. I am extremely glad of it.


Mrs. Stock. Thank heaven it is so well over.


Mart. Oh, the family had the lawsuit so much at heart, the lawyers should
have had every farthing we were worth in the world, before we'd have been cast.


Mr. Stock. Um! that would have been carrying it a little too far, -- but as it
was, it cost him a pretty penny, ha?


Mart. That it did, Sir: but justice -- Oh, justice, Sir, is so fine a thing,
we cannot pay too dear for it.


Mr. Stock. Very true; but exclusive of the expense, this has been a
troublesome affair to my friend.


Mart. You can have no idea of it, Sir -- especially with such a tricking son
of a whore, as he had to do with.


Mr. Stock. Son of a whore! He told me, his antagonist was a lady.


Mart. I thought I was in the wrong box. [aside.] A lady call you her? Yes,
yes, a fine lady! but she had got an old pettifogging rascal for her attorney,
and he -- it was he that was such a plague to our old gentleman -- But damn
this cause, let us call another -- I Am for nothing now but flames, darts,
daggers, Cupids and Venusses, and madam Stockwell, and Miss Nancy -- [bowing to
'em.


Mrs. Stock. The pink of complaisance!


Nancy. The fellow's a fool, and I Will die before I Will have him. [aside.


Mr. Stock. Well said, son-in-law, a spirited fellow, faith! Come, we'll in and
see things ready.


Mart. Shall Not I wait upon you to your closet first, Sir?


Mr. Stock. As soon as the cerernony's over, son. -- Come, I Will show you the
way.


Mart. Eh! if I could but have touched beforehand, I Would have waved the ceremony.
[aside.] -- Madam, [ to Mrs. Stockwell.] may I hope for the honor. [offering
to lead her out.


Mrs. Stock. Oh, sweet Sir -- Daughter, you will have a pretty fellow for your
husband. [ aside to Nancy.]

[exeunt.
Nancy. There Is a lover for you, Jenny!


Jenny. Not for me, madam, I assure you. What, snap at the old kite, when such
a tender chick is before him!


Nancy. Not a civil word to his mistress, but quite gallant to her mother.


Jenny. As much as to say, A fig for you -- I Am in love with your fortune.


Nancy. A fig for him, a conceited puppy; I Am in love with Belford; but how to
get at him, Jenny?


Jenny. Ah! poor bird, you're limed by the wing, and struggling will but make
it worse.


Nancy. Not struggle! Ruin is better than this coxcomb! Prithee, advise me.


Jenny. Don't tempt me. -- I pity you so, that I could give you a sprightly
piece of advice; and you are in so desperate a way that I know you would follow it.


Nancy. Follow it! -- I Will follow any advice, Jenny.


Jenny. O, yes, to follow your own inclinations; that is a good young lady. --
Well, I am at present much given to mischief. -- So, if you will go into your
chamber, lock the door, and let us lay our little heads together for half an
hour, if we don't counterplot your wise papa, and his intended son-in-law -- we
deserve never to be married, or if we are, to be governed by our husbands.

[exeunt.
End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, a hall in Stockwell 's house.
Enter Belford. Bell. I Am surpised that Martin has not returned to tell me his
success with Jenny -- He advised me not to stir from home, and said I might be
assured every thing goes well, and I should hear from him -- But still the
impatience of my heart cannot bear this delay -- I must be near the field of
battle, let what will be the consequence -- I hope I shall get a sight of
Martin, and not unluckily light on the old gentleman; 'sdeath! he is here! -- O,
no, it is Jenny, my heart was in my mouth.

Enter Jenny. Dear Jenny, where is your mistress?


Jenny. Winding herself up for your sake, and by my advice, to a proper pitch
of disobedience, that is all -- but --


Bell. But what? You hesitate, Jenny, and seem concerned.


Jenny. Concerned! why, we are undone, that is all. Your rival is come to town.


Bell. How!


Jenny. And is this morning to marry madam.


Bell. Not while I Am alive, I can tell him that. -- But, prithee, who is this
happy rival of mine?


Jenny. It Is one Mr. Harlowe.


Bell. Harlowe!


Jenny. A gentleman of Dorsetshire.


Bell. I know all of that country, and can recollect no Harlowe, but the son of
Sir Harry Harlowe, and he --


Jenny. Ay, and he is your rival.


Bell. If I had no more to fear from your mistress, than from my rival, as you
call him --


Jenny. Oh, you are very clever now, an't you? What would you be at now?


Bell. The truth only -- the real certain truth.


Jenny. Ay, what is that?


Bell. Why, that this Harlowe is the son of Sir Harry Harlowe of Dorsetshire,
and my friend, my particular friend.


Jenny. Yes, and so particular, that he will take your mistress from you.


Bell. He shall take my life first.


Jenny. You sai^ that before, have you nothing else to say?


Bell. I say, that this Harlowe, my friend, was married last week in the
country, that is all.


Jenny. And that is enough, if it is true, but I have a small addition to your
news.


Bell. What Is that?


Jenny. That the aforesaid John Harlowe, Esquire your particular friend, and son to
Sir Harry Harlowe of Dorsetshire, is now within, waiting for my young lady's
hand, that is all.


Bell. Jenny, no jesting, you distract me!


Jenny. It Is but too true, he is this minute gone in with my master and
mistress, to settle preliminaries.


Bell. Impossible! he is my intimate acquaintance, and writ to me, not a week
ago, as I tell you. I have his letter at my lodgings.


Jenny. And what says he there?


Bell. That he is privately married to a lady of condition.


Jenny. How can this be reconciled? Go fetch that letter, we have no time to
lose.


Bell. But what is Martin doing?


Jenny. Martin, who is he?


Bell. Martin, my servant, whom I sent to assist you.


Jenny. Why, sure love has turned your brain, Sir; -- I have seen no Martin,
not I. --


Bell. The rascal then is run away from me again. -- I have spoiled him by my
indulgence -- He left me for a month, and returned but yesterday; then I sent
him hither to assist you, and now the scoundrel has left me again.


Jenny. It Is the luxury of the times, Sir; -- though we are poor we have good
tastes, and can be out of the way now and then, as well as our betters.


Bell. How this villain has used me! But we must lose no time; I Will fetch the
letter, and be back in an instant. [Exit.


Jenny. Let me see; cannot I strike some mischief out of this intelligence? I
warrant me -- I can delay the marriage at least -- Here Is my master, I Will try
my skill upon him -- If I don't quite bring him about, I Will set his brains in
such a ferment, they shall not settle in haste again.


Enter Stockwell. Stock. I think I saw a glimpse of young Belford, but now --
what business has he here?


Jenny. Business enough, Sir; the best friend you have, that is all -- He has
been telling me a piece of news that will surprise you.


Stock. Let Us hear this piece of news.


Jenny. OF my word, a bold man, this Mr. Harlowe, to take two wives at once,
when most folk we see have enough of one.


Stock. Two wives! bless us, what do you mean?


Jenny. Why, the poor man's married already, Sir, that is all.


Stock. Married!


Jenny. Married, I say, to a young lady in the country, and very near marrying
another in town; a new fashion, I suppose.


Stock. Pooh, pooh, the thing's impossible I tel^ you.


Jenny. That may be, but so it is. He has writ to Belford, who is his friend.


Stock. All romance and invention!


Jenny. All truth, I say, Belford is gone to fetch the letter, and he will
convince you.


Stock. I will never be convinced that --


Jenny. Why not, Sir? -- the young fellows of this age are capable of any thing.


Stock. Very true, Jenny, they are abominable!


Jenny. And for aught we know, this Mr. Harlowe here may be one of those
gentlemen that make no scruple of a plurality of wives, provided they bring a
plurality of portions. -- But by your leave, good Sir, as this young lady, (she
in the country I mean) has the first and best title, we must look a little
about us for the sake of our young lady in town.


Stock. Very true -- it is worth attending to.


Jenny. Attending to! if I were you, Sir, before I delivered up my daughter, I
should insist upon the affair's being cleared up to my satisfaction.


Stock. You're in the right, Jenny; here is his man, I Will sound him about his
master's marriage, and then -- leave us together -- Go -- I Will make him speak,
I warrant you.


Jenny. If this marriage is but confirmed, I shall leap out of my skin. [Exit.


Enter Slip. Stock. Mr. Slip, come hither -- My old friend Sir Harry has
recommended you to me, and I like your physiognomy -- You have an honest face;
it pleases me much.


Slip. Your humble servant, Sir -- That Is your goodness, -- but if I was no
honester than my face, gad a mercy poor me!


Stock. Well, well -- hark you me! this master of yours is a lad of spirit -- a
favorite of the ladies, I warrant him, ha?


Slip. That he is, I can tell you, Sir, a pretty fellow, no woman can resist
him -- I Will warrant, this marriage in your family will set you the hearts of
thirty families at ease all round the country.


Stock. Odd! -- a terrible man, I profess -- I don't wonder now that one wife
cannot serve him.


Slip. Wife, Sir! what wife, Sir?


Stock. You see I know all, my friend; so you may as well confess.


Slip. Confess! what, Sir?


Stock. I know all the conspiracy; and will take care that you, rascal, shall
have your desert as an accomplice.


Slip. Accomplice! -- Rascal! and a conspiracy! -- Let me die if I comprehend a
word you say.


Stock. But I Will make you, villain. --


Slip. O very well, Sir -- ha! ha! ha! -- I protest you half frightened me --
Very well, indeed! ha! ha! ha!


Stock. Do you laugh at me, Sirrah?


Slip. If I had not remembered to have heard my old master say, what a dry
joker you were -- I protest I should have been taken in -- Very good, indeed,
ha! ha! ha!


Stock. None of your buffoon'ry, Sirrah; but confess the whole affair this
minute, or be sent to Newgate the next.


Slip. Newgate! sure, Sir, that would be carrying the joke too far.


Stock. You will not confess, then -- Who wait^ there? Send for a constable this
moment.


Slip. Nay, good Sir, no noise, I beseech you* Though I am innocent as the
child unborn, yet tha^ severe tone of voice is apt to disconcert one. Wha^ was
it your honor was pleased to hint about m^ master's being married? Who could
possibly inven^ such a fib as that?


Stock. No fib, Sirrah! he wrote it himself to ^ friend of his at London -- to
Belford.


Slip. Oh, oh! -- your humble servant, Mr. Belford! a fine fetch, in faith! nay,
I cannot blame the man neither, ha, ha. Pray, Sir, is not this same Mr. Belford
in love with your daughter?


Stock. Suppose he is, puppy; and what then?


Slip. Why then, Jenny is his friend, and at the bottom of all his fetches;
I Will lay a wager that she is author of this whopper.


Stock. Um!


Slip. Our arrival put 'em to their trumps -- and then -- Slap, my poor master
must be married; and Belford must show a forged letter, forsooth, under his own
hand to prove it -- and, and, and, you understand me, Sir --


Stock. Why, this has a face.


Slip. A face! ay, like a full moon: and while you're upon a false scent after
this story, Jenny will gain time to work upon your daughter -- I heard her say
myself that she could lead you by the nose.


Stock. Oh, she could, could she? Well, well, we'll see that. --


Slip. By the bye, Sir, where did you meet with this Mrs. Jenny?


Stock. How should I know? -- I believe my wife hired her half a year ago out
of the country -- She had a good character; and is very notable; but pert, very
pert.


Slip. Yes, yes, she is notable -- Out of the country! and a good character!
well said, Mrs. Jenny! [half aside.


Stock. What Is the matter, Slip? -- You have something in your head, I Am sure.
--


Slip. No, nothing at all -- but the luck of some people! -- out of the country!


Stock. You must tell me -- I shall not think you nean me well, if you conceal any
thing from me.


Slip. Why, among ourselves, Sir -- I knew Mrs. Jenny the last year very well
-- born and bred a Covent Garden -- Some time ago bar-maid to a Jelly-house,
and two children, (very fine ones indeed) by little Tom the waiter. I knew when
I saw her here that we should have some sport.


Stock. Ay, ay! -- I know enough -- well said, Mrs. Jenny, indeed! But mind the
cunning of this fellow, this Belford -- he says he is the most intimate friend
your master has.


Slip. Ay, Sir! -- ha! ha! ha! and I dare say my master would not know him if
he met him -- however, that is well observed, Sir -- Um! nothing escapes you.


Stock. Why, I am seldom out, seldom --


Slip. Never.


Stock. I don't say never -- But here is your master, I must have a laugh with
him about this marriage; ha! ha! ha!


Slip. 'Twill be rare sport for him; he, he, he!


Enter Martin. Stock. So, son-in-law! do you hear what the world say of you? --
I have had intelligence here, (ay, and certain intelligence too) that you are
married, it seems -- privately married to a young lady of Dorsetshire. What say
you, Sir? -- Is not this fine! ha, ha, ha!


Slip. Very merry, faith! [ laughing, and making signs to Martin.]


Mart. Ha, ha, ha! -- it is such a joke! -- What, you have heard so? -- This Mr.
World is a facetious gentleman.


Stock. Another man now would have given plumb into this foolish story, but I
-- No, no, your humble servant for that.


Slip. No, plague! Mr. Stockwell has a long head! He -- [Pointing still.


Mart. I would fain know who could be the author of such a ridiculous story.


Slip. Mr. Stockwell tells me, it is one Belford, I think he calls him; is not
that his name, Sir?


Mart. Belford! Belford! I never heard of his ^ame in my life.


Slip. As I said, Sir; you see master knows nothing ^f the fellow. -- Stay,
stay, is it not the young^er that -- you know whom I mean; -- that, that --


Mart. Rot me, if I do!


Slip. He that -- you must know him -- that is ^our rival here, as the report
goes.


Mart. O, ay! now I recollect. -- By the same ^oken, they said he had but
little, and owed much. That this match was to wipe off old scores, and that his
creditors had stopped proceedings till he is married.


Stock. Ay! ay! there let 'em stop. Ha, ha, ha! They Will be tired of stopping, I
believe, if they are to stop till he has married my daughter, ha, ha, ha.


Slip. He Is no fool, let me tell you, this Mr. Belford.


Stock. No; nor Mr. Stockwell neither: -- and to convince them of that, I will
go this instant to my banker's, and --


Mart. Sir, -- I Will wait on you.


Stock. Stay, son-in-law, I have a proposal to make -- I own, I agreed with my
old friend to give you 10,000 l. down.


Mart. Ay, down, was the word, Sir -- it was so -- down.


Stock. Now, could you conveniently take some houses, that I have in the
Borough, instead of half that sum -- They are worth a great deal more than
that, I assure you.


Mart. O dear Sir, -- your word is not to be disputed: I Will take any thing. --
but between friends, ready money is the truth -- Down, you know, Si^; that was
the word, down.


Slip. Specious, your honor knows, is of easier conveyance.


Stock. Yes, sure, that is true; but --


Mart. Ay, ay, one cannot put houses in one's portmanteau, you, know -- he! he!
he! -- Besides, there is a pretty estate to be sold in Dorsetshire, near my
father's, and I have my eye upon that.


Slip. As pretty a conditioned thing, as any in the country, and then so
contagious, that a hedge only parts 'em.


Mart. I may have it for 9000 l and I Am told it is worth ten at least.


Slip. The least penny, Sir; -- the timber's worth half the money.


Stock. Well, well -- Look you, son; I have a round 10,000 l. now in my
banker's hands, which I thought to have made immediate advantage of. -- You
shall have a moiety of it.


Mart. Sir, I am infinitely obliged to you. -- Are you a going to your banker's
now, Sir?


Stock. I will but step and let my wife know of it; fetch the cash directly;
and you shall marry my daughter in an hour.


Mart. Sir, suppose we invite Mr. Belford to the wedding? Ha, ha, ha!


Slip. Ha! ha! ha! What a droll devil my master is!


Stock. Ha! ha! ha! [ Exit Stockwell


Mart. Wind and tide, my boy! -- My maste^ has certainly had an interview with
Miss Nancy Stockwell.


Slip. And as certainly knows Harlowe too.


Mart. They correspond, you see.


Slip. But, thanks to my wit, I have so set the ol^ man against Belford, that I
am in hopes we shall pac^ up madam's fortune in the portmanteau before he'^ set
to rights again; and -- [Martin going, stops


Mart. Zounds! my master!


Slip. Where?


Mart. Don't you see him reading a letter?


Slip. This is my unlucky star! What will becom^ of us?


Enter Belford. Bell. This letter gets me admittance to Miss Stockwell at least:
and if I can but save her from ruin, I shall be happy; but I hope this may have
better consequences. Ha! what is this? -- It Is he! it is Martin, as I live.


Martin. Ay, it is I: -- and well for you it is. -- What do you here?


Bell. Nay, what are you doing here, and what have you done here? -- What
clothes are these? -- What Is your scheme? and why have I not know it?


Mart. Not so fast and so loud, good master of mine -- walls have ears. These
are your rival's clothes, who is to follow them in a few days: but his servant
there is an old friend of mine, and so, as they fit me so well -- he is -- I
pass upon the family for the young fellow himself.


Bell. Well, and where is the joke of that?


Mart. A very good joke, I think. -- I Will undertake to put these two old fools
(your papa and mama that shall be) so out of conceit with their son-in-law,
that -- why, already I have heard the old folks agreeing, that you were much
the properer match for their daughter; so that I expect every moment they will
send for you to deliver them from me: and nothing can prevent our success but
your being --


Bell. Ha, ha, ha! a very good stratagem: but there is no need of it now; -- for
this rival, as you call him, is my particular friend, and married to another
woman: -- so I tell you we have nothing to fear.


Mart. But I tell you, you will knock us all to pieces. -- The finest plot that
ever was laid, and you will spoil it in the hatching.


Bell. But what occasion is there? He cannot marry em both.


Mart. Speak lower! You think yourself mighty wise now; but here is Harlowe's
servant, whom I have tickled in the palm, will tell you another story.


Bell. Why, here is a letter under his own hand. -- Read it.


Martin. [Reading.] Um -- um -- "Some days! privately married" -- Slip. [ apart
to Slip.


Slip. This is easily cleared up, Sir! There was such a thing proposed by my
young master; but you must understand, Sir -- that Mr. Harlowe, not approving
of the terms, has tipped the young woman's father a good round sum, and so the
affair is made up.


Bell. Can it be possible that he ^s not married?


Slip. I Will take my oath of it before any magistrate in England.


Mart. Pooh -- married! what! his old boots!


Bell. Well, -- I Will decamp then: but why is not Jenny in your plot?


Mart. She! no, no; she is not to be trusted. -- I soon found out that. --
Tooth and nail against us.


Bell. Good heavens! how have I been deceived!


Mart. You have indeed, master: but we have no time for reflections. If Jenny
should see you, we are undone.


Bell. Well, well, I go. -- I Will make both your fortunes if you succeed.


Mart. Succeed! nothing can prevent us, but your being seen.


Bell. I Will away then.


Mart. And come not near this house to day. If you do, I must decamp.


Bell. Well; but my dear lads, take care; I depend on you.


Slip. That Is all you have to do -- put your fortune into our hands; --


Mart. And I Will warrant, we give a good account of it.


Bell. Think how my happiness --


Mart. Prithee, no more. --


Bell. Depends on you.


Mart. Begone, I say; or I Will throw up the cards.


Slip. At last he is gone! [ Exit Belford.


Mart. And we have time to take a little breath: for this was a hot alarm,
faith!


Slip. I was only afraid the old gentleman, or Jenny, would have surprised us
together.


Mart. That would have been a clincher: but now I must after the old gentleman
for the money. [Exit.


Slip. And I Will be upon the watch, for fear of mischief. [Exit.


SCENE, an apartment in Stockwell 's house.
Enter Stockwell and Jenny. Jenny. Still I say, Sir --


Stock. And still I say, madam --


Jenny. That Mr. Belford's a very honest gentleman, and you ought to search it.
--


Stock. I tell you, I have searched, and prob'd it to the quick -- and that he
shall feel. I know well enough you are in his interest, and have your interest
in so doing; and I Am sorry you could find no prettier plot than this to defer
the wedding.


Jenny. Lud, Sir, do you believe? --


Stock. No -- but I Am sure on it -- that is better.


Jenny. Lud! -- You Would make one mad.


Stock. And you would make me a fool if you could; no, no; I Am an ass, a poor
simpleton, that may be led by the nose; -- but you may tell my daughter, that
she shall marry Harlowe this night. -- And you may tell your friend Belford, to
let his creditors know that they need not stop proceedings. -- And you, madam,
may return to your Jelly-shop, and give my compliments to little Tom, and all
the little family, ha, ha, ha! [Exit.


Jenny. What does he mean by his Jelly-house -- little Tom -- and all the
little family! -- There Is something at the bottom of this, I cannot yet fathom:
-- but I will fathom it. -- I never was out of a secret yet, that I had a mind
to find out; and that is all that have come across me, -- and my pride will not
let me be long out of this. -- I will go directly to Mr. Belford's, where we'll
lay our heads together, and beget such a piece of mischief, that shall be hard
for the devil himself, if he has the impudence to try confusions with me. [Exit.


SCENE, the street before Stockwell 's house.
Stockwell, Martin, and Slip. Stock. Come, son-in-law, we'll go to my banker's,
and see how our cash stands, and settle matters as well as we can.


Mart. I Will attend you, Sir, with pleasure -- cash or notes -- all the same to
me.


Stock. I wish you would take the houses, son-in-law, 'twould be more convenient
for me, and a greater advantage to you.


Mart. Advantage, Sir! -- I scorn to take any advantage of you -- I hate mean
views. -- I desire nothing better than my bargain. -- The money and your
daughter's charms, are sufficient for your poor Mart -- humble servant.


Stock. Well, well, come along; we don't quite understand one another. [Exit.


Mart. But we do. -- ( to Slip.) The day's our own; get every thing ready to
make our retreat good.


Slip. Ay, ay, get you the money, and I Will be ready with the equipage. [ Exit
Martin.

" Thus far our arms have with success been crowned;"
I have only one doubt remaining, and that is about this same portion. I don't
relish this dividing a booty. -- How shall I cheat Martin? -- I should deserve
to be canonized, could I but cheat that rogue of rogues. -- I must even throw
the young lady in his way, and persuade him for our better security, to pass
the night with her: so leave him with the shell, while I slip off with the
kernel. A tempting bait! -- But no -- stand off, Satan! -- It Is against our
fundamental laws. We adventurers have ten times the honor of your fair
traders. ( Going, and stops.) Why, what! -- Sure it cannot be? -- Zounds, if it
should! -- It is the very man! -- Our little, old, withered, fiery gentleman,
by all that is terrible! from what a fine dream will this gouty spitfire awake
us! -- He Is certainly going to Mr. Stockwell's, and his gunpowder will blow up
all at once! If Martin and Mr. Stockwell don't return too soon from the
banker's, I may send him away; it is our last stake, and I must play it like a
gamester.


Enter Sir Harry Harlowe. Sir Har. I don't know how my old friend Stockwell may
receive me after this disappointment.


Slip. Stay till you see Mr. Stockwell, my old friend. ( aside) Bless me, what
do I see! Sir Harry, is it you? -- Indeed your honor? -- Your very humble
servant.


Sir Har. I don't know you, friend, keep your distance. [Claps his hands on his
pockets.


Slip. Don't you know me, Sir? --


Sir Har. It cannot be Slip, sure! Is this the fool's coat my son ordered you
for his wedding?


Slip. Yes, Sir; and a genteel thing it is upon me. What, you had a mind to
surprise your friends? -- Who thought of you at London, Sir?


Sir Har. I set out soon after you, lame as I was. -- ^ bethought me, it looked
better to settle matters of ^uch consequence with Mr. Stockwell viva voce, ^an
to trust it to a servant.


Slip. You were always a nice observer of deco^ms: -- you are going now to Mr.
Stockwell's?


Sir Har. Directly. -- ( Going to knock.)


Slip. Hold your desperate hand! and thank fortune that brought me hither for
your rescue.


Sir Har. Why, what is the matter? Rescue me, quoth-a! Have you seen 'em, Slip?


Slip. Seen 'em! ay, and felt 'em too. I am just escaped. -- The old lady is in
a damned passion with you, I can tell you.


Sir Har. With me!


Slip. Ay, that she is. How, says she, does the old fool think to fob us off
with a flam, and a sham, of a dirty trollop? -- Must my daughter's reputation
-- and then she bridled and stalked up to me thus, Sir.


Sir Har. How! -- but there is no answering a silly woman: how can this affect
her daughter's character?


Slip. That Is what I said. -- Madam, says I -- but you cannot expect a woman in
a fury to hear reason: -- it is almost as much as they can do when they are
cool. No, no; as for her argument, it was sad stuff! Will the world, says she,
believe such a -- no, no; they will think the old hunks has found some flaw in
our circumstances, and so will not stand to his bargain.


Sir Har. Poh! Nothing disguises a woman like passion. -- Though it may become
a man sometimes. --


Slip. Lud, Sir; you would not know her again -- her eyes stare in her head,
and she cannot see a creature. -- On a sudden, (for I pushed the argument pretty
home) she caught hold of my throat, thus, Sir; and knocked me down with the
butt end of her fan.


Sir Har. Did she? -- But what did her husband say to this? Let us hear that.


Slip. Oh, Sir; I found him pretty reasonable. -- He only showed me the door,
and kicked me down stairs.


Sir Har. If he is for that work, we can kick too.


Slip. Dear Sir, consider your gout.


Sir Har. No, Sir; when my blood is up, I never ^eel the gout. -- But could
they possibly take it ^miss, that I consented to my son's marriage? -- ^ doubt
you did not explain circumstances.


Slip. I told 'em plain enough, I thought, that my young master, having begun
the ceremony at the wrong end, the family were going ding-dong to law; and that
you had behaved like a man of honor, and -- very wisely compounded matters.


Sir Har. And did not this convince 'em?


Slip. I say convince! -- They Are in a pretty temper to be convinced. -- If
you would take a fool's counsel, you should return to your inn, and never think of
convincing them.


Sir Har. They are for kicking, are they? I could have kicked pretty well my
self once. -- We shall see what they would be at -- [ going, is stopped by Slip.


Slip. Indeed, Sir, you shall not. -- What! have your face scratched by an old
woman, or be run through the body with a rusty sword? Indeed you shall not. --


Sir Har. ( endeavoring to draw his sword) -- We have swords, that run through
bodies, as well as they; ay, and pistols too. -- If he will quarrel, I Am his
man. -- Steel or lead, it is all one to me. -- A passionate old fool! I Will cool
him; kick me down stairs --!


Slip. Lord! Sir; you are so hot! -- You forget, it was me he kicked down
stairs, -- not you.


Sir Har. It Is the same thing, Sir. -- Whoever kicks you, kicks me by proxy --
nay worse; -- you have only the kicks, but I have the affront. --


Slip. If the kicks are the best, I shall be content with the worst another
time. -- Undone, undone! This way, this way, Sir. -- Let us go this way --
there will certainly be bloodshed.


Sir Har. What is the matter, you fool? What art afraid of?


Slip. Don't you see Mr. Stockwell coming thi^ way? Bless me, how he stares!
He Is mad with passion. -- Don't meet him, Sir Harry. -- Yo^ are out of wind,
and have not pushed a great while* and he will certainly be too much for you. --


Sir Har. I will not avoid him. -- My blood's up as well as his; -- if the fool
will be for fighting -- let him take what follows. -- Hold my cane, Slip. -- (
Cocks his hat.


Slip. Ay, it is all over. -- If Martin has but go^ the money, we may retire
while the champions are at it. --


Enter old Stockwell and Martin. Stockwell with a bag, and notes in his hand.
Stock. We will count our money and bills ove^ again, sign the writings; and
then, son, for singing and dancing, and --


Mart. Don't give yourself that trouble, Mr. Stockwell; -- among friends, you
know -- pray, let me ease you of that weight. ( offers to take the money.)


Stock. No, no, son; you shall not have a farthing more or less than your bargain.
-- We citizens are exact, and must have our way, in form.


Slip. Zounds! he has not got the money! -- We must have a scramble for it at
last then.


Sir Har. Now he eyes me! -- I Will be as fierce as he; -- now for it -- hem,
hem! ( brustles up.)


( During this Martin and Slip make signs, and approach each other by degrees.)
Stock. Eh! sure, if my eyes don't deceive me, there is somebody very like my
old friend and your father* Sir Harlowe!


Slip. Damnably like indeed, Sir.


Sir Har. He looks like the devil at me; but I'l^ be even with him.


Stock. What, my dear friend, is it you?


Sir Har. None of your hypocritical palavers with ^e. -- Keep your distance,
you dissembling old ^ool you, or I Will teach you better manners, than to ^ick my
servant down stairs.


Stock. What do you mean, Sir Harry? -- He Is ^ad sure!


[ They stand and stare at each other, and Sir Harry shakes his sword.] Mart.
Nothing can save us now, Slip!


Slip. Trip up his heels, and fly with the money to ^he post-chaise; while I
tread upon my old master's ^oes, that he may not follow us.


Mart. We have nothing else for it. -- Have at em.


Stock. Nay, but Sir Harry!


[ As they approach the old gentleman, Belford comes in behind with constables,
and seizes them.] Bell. Have I caught you, rascals! -- in the very nick too!
Secure 'em, constables.


Stock. What, in the name of wonder, are you about?


Bell. I have a double pleasure in this; -- for I have not only discovered two
villains, but at the very time, Sir, their villainy was taking effect, to make
you miserable.


Sir Har. Two villains! Mr. Stockwell, do you hear this? Explain yourself, Sir;
or blood and brimstone --


Stock. Explain, Mr. Belford: -- Sir Harry Harlowe! What is all this! -- I am
all stupefaction! --


Bell. Is this Sir Harry? -- I am your humble servant, Sir. -- I have not the
honor to be known to you, but am a particular acquaintance of your son's; who
has been misrepresented here, by that pretty gentleman, once a rascal of mine.


Sir Har. I Am in a wood, and don't know how to get out of it!


Stock. Is not this your son, Sir Harry?


Sir Har. No, you passionate old fool; but this is my servant, and my son's
pimp, whom I understand you have been kicking down stairs!


Stock. Here Is a fine heap of roguery!


Bell. It was my good fortune, by the intelligence and instigation of Mrs.
Jenny, to discover the whole before these wretches had accomplished their
designs.


Stock. What a hair-breadth 'scape have I had! as the poet says, the very brink
of destruction! for I should have given him the cash in five minutes. -- I Am in
a cold sweat at the thoughts of it. Dear Mr. Belford! [shakes him by the hand.


Enter Mrs. Stockwell, Miss, and Jenny. Mrs. Stock. O, Mr. Stockwell! here are
fine doings going forward. -- Did not I tell you, that I was for Mr. Belford
from the beginning?


Stock. Don't trouble us now, wife; you have been for and against him twenty
times in four and twenty hours.


Jen. ( to Martin and Slip) Your humble servant, gentlemen! What, dumb and
ashamed too! -- the next scheme you go about, take care that there is not such
a girl as I within twenty miles of you.


Mart. I wish we were twenty miles from you, with all my soul.


Slip. As you don't like our company, Madam, we'll retire. ( going away.)


Bell. Hold 'em fast, constables: -- They must give some account of themselves
at the Old Bailey, and then perhaps they may retire to our plantations.


Sir Har. But what have they done? or what will you do? or what am I to do? --
I Am all in the dark -- pitch-dark. --


Stock. Is your son married, Sir Harry?


Sir Har. Yes, a fortnight ago: -- and this fellow you kicked down stairs, was
sent with my excuses.


Stock. I kicked him down stairs! -- You villain you. --


Bell. Don't disturb yourself with what is past, but rejoice at your
deliverance. -- If you and Sir Harry will permit me to attend you within, I
will acquaint you with the whole business.


Sir Har. I see the whole business now, Sir. We have been their fools.


Stock. And they are our knaves; and shall suffer as such. -- Thanks to Mr.
Belford here -- My good angel, that has saved my 10,000l. --


Sir Har. He has saved your family, Mr. Stockwell.


Bell. Could you but think, Sir, my good services to your family, might entitle
me to be one of it. --


Miss Nancy. You Would make your daughter happy, by giving her to your best friend.


Mrs. Stock. My dear; for once hear me and reason, and make 'em both happy.


Stock. You shall be happy, Belford. -- Take my daughter's hand. -- You have
her heart. -- You have deserved her fortune, and shall have that too. -- Come,
let us go in and examine these culprits. --


Sir Har. Right, Mr. Stockwell. It Is a good thing to punish villainy; but it is
a better to make virtue happy: -- and so let us about it.


FINIS.

