A NEW ANALYSIS OF THE BRISTOL WATERS: Together with the CAUSE OF THE DIABETES
and HECTIC.

And their Cure, as it results from those WATERS, experimantally considered.

By JOHN SHEBBEARE, Chemist.

Front sub adversa scopulis pendentibus antrum:
Intus aquae dulces. --
VIRG. Aeneis. LONDON: Printed for THO. COX, at the Lamb under the
Royal Exchange. MDCCXL. [Price One Shilling.]

TO THE PHYSICIANS OF THE CITY of BRISTOL.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Reason of my undertaking the following Analysis, will be plainly enough
seen in the Introduction; but whether I have succeeded or failed in my Account
of the Diabetes and it is Cure, as it arises from the Bristol Waters, is left
entirely to your Determination.

It has never once entered into my Imagination, that those Waters will more
effectually cure a Diabetes and Hectic now than heretofore, or any great
Advantage accrue to Mankind from this Account; yet it has ever been agreeable
to find the Theory of any Science, corresponding to the Facts arising from the
Practice of it.

You will excuse me, if through this Account of the Diabetes, etc. I incline to
my Profession. Every Man has some Bias, and the Business in which he is most
engaged is naturally most apt to draw him.

There was a time you perfectly well know, when almost every thing in Physic
was accounted for from Chemical Principles. There was also, when every Disease
and the Cure of it, was reduced to Mathematical and Hydrostatical Accounts: And
all these in their different Turns have disappeared, and Observation and the
History of Diseases have again succeeded.

But methinks there is a Degree of Truth annexed to every Manner of accounting
for Disorders, though not an absolute one, and they seem to be mostly false, only
when they deny a Truth to each other. Anatomy will discover to us, that the
Arteries and Veins contain what we call Blood, but what that Fluid is, and what
Alterations arise in it from different Degrees of Heat, and the Addition of
different Medicines, Chemistry alone can inform us. It informs us also
experimentally, whether our Secretions, some of them, are perfectly secern'd or
not. And though we cannot venture to ascertain, that because such and such
Phenomenon arise from the Mixture of different Medicines with the Animal
Fluids, apart from the Body, that they will be similar there to, when within
the Laws of Circulation; yet we must not altogether despise the Experimental
and Analogical Manner of reasoning; since we very often see that very fatal
Consequences are brought on by Medicine, and very probably too in the same
Manner within us, as without, in the Experiments. It would be as ridiculous,
just, as if we should contemn the Advantages accruing from Numbers because we
cannot attain to Infinity.

Whatever has been said here in the Chemical Hypothesis, may be said with equal
Truth in another View of the Mathematical and Hydrostatical Account.

It may perhaps seem at first Sight that the Situation of the Well is too
poetically described, for any thing in which Physic is concerned; but I imagine
when it is considered that it was designed as a Picture, and as it relieves the
Mind from the Dryness of the Experiments, such a Liberty may be allowed me;
especially since when the Description ends, that kind of Style is no longer
continued.

If this Essay should have the good Fortune of being liked by you, it will
amply reward the Care I took in the Experimental Part; where to be just was my
strictest Endeavor, as it shall always be in preparing those Medicines which
may come under your Administration: And for those Reasons, that every Physician
may receive the due Honor of a just Prescription, and every Patient the true
Effect of a good Medicine.

I am, GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient Servant,J. SHEBBEARE.

THE INTRODUCTION.
IT is more than a Year since I began a Course of Experiments on the Bristol
Waters; but upon knowing that Dr Keir had undertaken the Analysis, I
immediately stopped my Enquiry, and awaited his Publication, in Expectation of
something quite accurate and satisfactory. Upon perusal of his Book I found my
self disappointed, and continued my Experiments for these Reasons.

First, because I see no Account for the Heat and other Phenomenon of the
Waters.

Next, I apprehend the Conclusions drawn from his Experiments are not just.

And lastly, If the Waters do contain what the Doctor affirms, they will ever
be irreconcilable with the Cure of a Diabetes.

I think then, there needs no Apology for an Enquiry of this Kind. It rather
becomes necessary that some other should be made which may bring the Rationale
and Practice of those Waters to coincide, and satisfy the Patient of the Truth
of some Principles, upon which he may ground his Expectation of a Cure. Now let
us suppose they contain Nitre and Limestone Powder with an exceeding subtle
Spirit. Is there in this City any Physician that would heartily prescribe these
Waters: Or any distant Physician that would send a Patient to a Mineral either
trifling, inefficacious, or of a Nature quite opposite the Cure? If then this
should be the Event, which is not unlikely, it will be fatal to the Health, if
not Lives, of great Numbers.

As the following Experiments are of my own making, I can the better answer for
the Truth of the Facts. There has been no Accuracy wanting in discovering the
Contents of the Waters, and ascertaining them from Phenomenon quite definitive.
I have produced also analogous Appearances by different Experiments, with
Conjectures of their Causes; then having considered the Source of a Diabetes, I
show the Effects of those Contents on animal Solids and Fluids as they produce
the Cure.

Whatever Contradictions may be found in this Analysis to that of Dr Keir, they
must not be understood to arise from any Inclination I have to contradict, but
from the Truth of the Examination. And where that is the Supposition every Man
will be satisfied with it, however contrary to his Sentiments.

THE SITUATION OF THE HOT-WELL.
THE Situation of the Hot-Well is as picturesque perhaps as can be imagined; it
lies on the Side of the River Avon, about a Mile and half distant from the City
of Bristol. The Stream issues from a very high Clift of Lime Rock, perhaps two
hundred Feet below the Summit, and ten above the Level of Low Water, but as the
Water rises here in the lowest Tides thirty Feet, and in the Spring much more,
it was of Necessity rendered inaccessible some hours every Day, till Mr
Padmore, (a Man well known for his Genius in Mechanics) enclosed it with a
Cistern, and affixed Pumps to the Spring, by means of these the Stream is
elevated almost thirty Feet in all its native Heat, Purity, and Perfection:
Notwithstanding this Care the River Water, when it rises above the Spring,
mixes with the Medicinal and renders it unfit for Use; this is perfectly well
known by those that pump at the Well, and consequently as soon as perceived
they abstain till it recovers its former Purity.

The River Avon flows here till it falls into the Severn Sea, between two
Cliffs, in some Places vastly high, craggy and overhanging, in others
perpendicular or gently sloping; here covered with Woods and flowering Shrubs,
of all the different Shades of Green, filled with Music of our Singing Birds;
There gloomy and obscure, contrasted by strong Lights, and various Colors of
the Marble Rocks, which are as variegated as the foreign, and admit as
beautiful a Polish. Add to this the flowing of the Tide which enhanses the
Beauty, by bringing Vessels of every Kind close to the Windows of the
Water-Room, and compleats as agreeable Landscape as can be seen any where. And
as the Mind and Body reciprocally affect each other, how proper an
Entertainment is it for the Imaginations of Men indisposed, and how Salutary an
Avocation to those Thoughts which every Valetudinarian is too apt to indulge?
Hence it is in some greater degree conducive to Health, than Places altogether
void of these Amusements.

On the Summit of the Rocks there formerly stood a Chapel, dedicated to St
Vincent, it is equally uncertain whether he was canonized for the Discovery of
the Medicinal Spring, and the Cures thence resulting to Mankind, or from
clearing the River of huge Rocks that distressed the Sailors in their
Navigation near this Place. Whatever was the Cause, he constantly received
their Vows for fafety as their tutelar Saint, and was of no small Distinction.

The Downs which are on a Level with the Cliffs are of a dry healthy Soil, and
much frequented by Company; they are open to the reviving Breezes of the Sea,
which refresh them every Summer's Day. Here too you may adapt your Prospects
and Situation to every Humor, whither you choose to be concealed beneath the
Shade of Rocks and Woods, reclined beside some murmuring Rivulet, which
naturally return our Thoughts upon ourselves; or whether you prefer the exalted
Situation, where the Mind widens with the View into Benevolence and good
Wishes. That Prospects have a kind of Moral Effect on the Thought I presume no
one will deny, since Light and Colors are to the Eye, what Sound and Harmony
is to the Ear. Hence too it was that the Temples of the ancient Deities were
situated according to their Attributes: That of Pluto in a Cavern all sad and
gloomy, by the Side of rumbling Waters; whilst that of the Muses was placed on
the Point of Parnassus all gay and enlivening; perhaps the most elevated
Eminence of this Cliff was made the Seat of St Vincent's Chapel, because his
Beneficence was more extensive than that of other Men.

The essential Difference of the Air in this Place, from most other dry and
elevated Situations is, that it has but little, if any, of that vague Acid, so
generally dispersed through the Earth, which in some Places is even deadly, as at
the Grotto Dei Cani in Italy. We may be assured of this from the Nature of the
Waters and Fossils in both, which, an Alcalescence prevails. Now every thing
offensive in the Atmosphere must arise from Exhalation, but it is scarce
probable that there are any acid Effluvia here, because if the acid was in any
Quantity there must be more Salts found in the Water, since it is evident there
is no want of Limestone: Now Limestone and a mineral Acid for ever produce
Alum, and consequently as there is little Alum found here, the Air must be void
of acid Effluvia: Notwithstanding this this great Advantage, it must not be
thought that this Air is agreeable to every Indispsition, it can be of Service
to none but those of a cold pituitous nervous Habit, and detrimental to all
whose Juices tend to Alcalescence and Putrefaction from a sanguine Constitution.

The Lodging-Houses are neat and well situated, having a pleasant Prospect, and
as they are near a large City it is easy to be provided with every Necessary:
Here are Baths too, both private and well contrived, and a Long Room with the
usual Diversions attending such Places.

It seems but of little Significancy to determine the Quantity of Water
discharged in any certain Time, because it conduces nothing toward an Account
of it is Properties, and since there is more wasted than used, notwithstanding
the great Demand for it. But should there be any one curious enough to enquire,
he may be satisfied by the following Experiment: it has been experimentally
found by Monsieur Mariotte, that Water flowing from the Surface of a Pool through
a Hole an Inch square, and always full, runs off thirty Cubic Feet in an Hour,
Paris Measure. Upon this Experiment having taken the mean Proportion of the
Depth of the Stream, where it runs out over the Rock, it may be nearly known
how many square Inches it contains, and consequently what Aperture it would
pass through naturally; then considering that the Contents of Circles are to
each other as the Squares of their Diameters, the whole Discharge in one Hour
may be pretty justly known.

How long this Medicinal Water has been prescribed by Physicians, for those
Maladies it is now so deservedly esteemed to cure, is uncertain. We know
however, that they have been administered with great Success, and their
Character much heightened by the present Physicians of Bristol.

EXPERIMENTS ON THE BRISTOL WATER.
THE more accurately to distinguish the Genus of the Waters, I shall consider
the Phenomenon as they naturally appear. The first of which are its sparkling
and whiteness in the Glass. Upon growing cold this whiteness disappears, and is
precipitated to the Bottom of the Bottle in white Flakes, after being kept some
Time.

Experiment I.
To the Bottom of a Glass, by means of some Wax, having fixed a Thermometer The
Thermometer was of Farenheit's Contrivance, and measured from Iceland Cold to
Hot by a Scale of 112 Degrees.
, it was pumped on till the Spirits rose to the utmost from the Heat, upon
Examination it was found to the Heat of Health as Seventy-seven is to
Ninety-four, the Heat of the Atmosphere being at that Time Fifty-two.

Experiment II.
To a Glass of the Water recent from the Spring was poured Syrup of Violets,
and it became green; with a Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis, Sugar of Lead in
common Water, Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, it turned milky and precipitated.
Quicksilver dissolved in strong Spirit of Nitre, turned yellow with the
Hot-Well Water; with a Solution of Sublimate in Water, Spirit of Hartshorn, and
Tincture of Steel, the Water continued transparent. With Oil of Vitriol a brisk
Agitation and Effervescence arose, with Galls no Difference.

Experiment III.
In order to know whether there were any Spirits escaped from the Waters in
cooling, I fixed a Receiver to a Retort, and well luted the Juncture; then
through a Hole made in the Crown of the Retort, by a Glass Funnel the Retort was
filled with Water as it ran warm from the Spring; the Hole then being stopped, I
waited to see if there would any Spirit come over into the Receiver: In all the
cooling there appeared not the least Evaporation or Dew, and if there was any,
it escaped like Light through the Pores of the Glass, a Thing scarce credible.

Experiment IV.
The Bristol Water examined statically, and compared with Rain Water received
very pure on an Eminence, scarce differed from it in weight, it was ten Grains
in a Pint lighter than common Spring Water.

Experiment V.
Having distilled five Gallons of Bristol Water from a clean Glass Retort, in a
gentle Heat of Sand, there remained 280 Grains of a whitish Salt Powder, and
consequently 7 Grains to a Pint, now a Pint containing 28 Cubic Inches, and a
Cubic Inch weighing 253 2/10 Grains nearly, the Water is to the Residuum as
7310 to 7, or 1044 to 1.

Experiment VI.
Two Drams of the Remains being dissolved in Water and filtered, the Salt was
found after Evaporation, to the Earth as eleven to thirteen, with another
Solution of the Remains after Filtration, all the Experiments were repeated
that were made by different Menstrua at the Well. The Difference was, that
Syrup of Violets did not turn green, nor the Solution of Mercury yellow, but
Spirits of Hartshorn became milky, and Oil of Vitriol discovered no
Effervescence.

Experiment VII.
Another Part of the filtered Solution was evaporated till a Pellicle appeared,
and then was placed in a cold Cellar that the Salts might shoot: After a few
Days the Glass was covered with Crystals, which being examined by a Microscope
appeared octogonal, interspersed with cubical ones.

Experiment VIII.
Having separated the octogonal Crystals from the Square, I put them in a
Crucible on the Fire, at first they melted, then dried and blister'd, and
became white, after taking off the Crucible there appeared a light spongy
Substance, acrid to the Taste.

Experiment IX.
The Salts obtained from an Evaporation of the filtered Solution were put into
a very small Retort, and then pouring Oil of Vitriol on them, the Receiver was
immediately fixed and luted, and both placed in a Sand-Heat; upon the gradual
Application of Fire, there ascended a white Fume, and a genuine Spirit of Salt
came over into the Receiver.

Experiment X.
To an equal Quantity of the octogonal Crystals, and common Tartar powdered and
well mixed, I applied a red hot Iron, but there ensued no Fulmination or firing.

Experiment XI.
Upon the insipid Earth that remained in Filter there was poured Oil of
Vitriol, and it raised a strong Ebullition, and with Syrup Violets turned
green, and showed every Appearance of Alkalescence, upon Application of a
Loadstone there were no ferruginous Particles attracted.

Experiments producing Phenomenon analogous to the Bristol Waters.
Experiment I.
TO one Ounce of unslak'd Lime I poured cold Water, instantly there arose
little Bubbles from the Lime, and upon Application the Thermometer arose very
fast. The Heat was brought as nigh as possible to that of the Hot-Well, by the
Affusion of more Water. Uncalcin'd Limestone produces no Warmth; Nitre, Alum,
and all fossile Salts produce Cold.

Experiment II.
Having filtered the Lime Water, and prepared separate Solutions of Nitre,
Roche Alum, and Sea Salt, I first mixed the Solution of Nitre with the Lime
Water and the Transparency continued, then was added the Solution of Sea Salt,
and it continued unaltered as before; to another Glass of Lime Water was the
Solution of Alum poured, and immediately it became milky and precipitated white
Flakes. No other Mineral Salt but Alum can produce this Phenomenon, because it
is the only one in which the Acid prevails in a natural State, nor any other
but Lime Water.

Experiment III.
With a Solution of Alum and common Salt, the same Experiments were repeated
that were made with the filtered Solution of the Hot-Well Remains, they
answered in every Trial, particularly with Spirit of Hartshorn and Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium: This is characteristic to Alum, and can be produced by no
other fossile Salt. Et si e saxo aere and igne, materies aqua solvitur, affusu
alcali fixi vel volatilis praecipitatur cum effervescentia.

BOER. de Alumine.




Experiment IV.
To the Solution of Alum and Sea Salt I poured the Solution of Quicksilver, and
it became milky, but upon adding Lime Water it turned yellow as it does at the
Hot-Well. This then is another definitive Proof of it is being Aq. Calcis. the
Water in which an unburnt Limestone taken from the Spot had been laid produced
no Alteration.

Experiment V.
The Crystals of Alum being examined by a Microscope, were found of the same
Dat Crystallos albas, vel rubellas, octohedras.
Figure with those of the Bristol Water. To those Crystals of Alum I added
Sea Salt, and then putting them both in a small Retort proceeded as in the
ninth Process on the Hot-well Water, the Effect was the same as in the former,
nothing came over but true Spirit of Salt: The Alum imparts no Spirit to the
Salt, but acts only by Means of its predominating Acid, much like Oil of
Vitriol, had this been Nitre instead of Alum the Production would have been an
Aqua Regia.

Experiment VI.
I put a Crucible into the Fire, in which was first put some Alum, it melted,
then dried and blister'd, and upon being taken out resembled in every Respect
the Salt of the Hot-Well Water, as it was after the eighth Experiment. Had it
been Nitrum, Crucibulo puro inditum, igne leni funditur totum; sine
Crepitatione, stat fusum in Catino instar aquae purae. BOER. de Alumine and
Nitro.
Nitre in the room of Alum, it would have flowed for ever in the Crucible, and
upon cooling would have been a Sal Prunella.

Experiment VII.
After having mixed equal Quantities of Alum and Tartar well dried and powdered,
I put to it a red hot Iron Rod, there was no firing ensued; Nitre mixed with
Tartar would have fulminated and become a fixed Alcaline Salt.

Experiment VIII.
To the Earth left after the Evaporation of Lime Water, I added Oil of Vitriol,
it excited an Effervescence, and was not to be distinguished in any Respect, or
Experiment, from the Earth of the Hot-Well.

From the foregoing Experiments it pretty plainly appears, that instead of
Nitre and Limestone Powder with an exceeding subtle Spirit, there is contained
in the Water Alum and Lime in the Act of Slaking; and from thence only I shall
deduce the Cure of a Diabetes; and then show if it was Nitre and a Volatile
Spirit they would be absolutely mischievous, and if Limestone inefficacious:
But before I proceed to account for the Cause of a Diabetes and its Cure, I
shall advance some Conjectures about the Cause of the Heat, as it arises from
Lime in the slaking.

Conjectures on the Cause of the Heat of the HOT-WELL Water.
BEFORE I begin, I foresee the most material Objection, which is, that
naturally there is no Limestone calcined, and consequently the Heat must arise
from some other Cause; and as that Acid which is every where floating through the
Earth, resembles Oil of Vitriol, it will, like that Oil meeting with Water,
produce Heat; this may be granted, but then the Stream would taste acid, and
turn Syrup of Violets red, and the Alum must be in greater Proportion, since
here is more alcaline Earth than the Acid can sat: Which is demonstrated by
the alcaline Qualities predominating at the Well. Neither can the Warmth arise
from the Solution of the Salts, for all fossile Salts produce Cold in
Dissolution, much less can it come from the Attrition of the Water, because
that is experimentally known not to affect Water. If in the polishing two
Marble Stones you rub one against the other dry, they will conceive an intense
Heat, but add the least Water and it is impossible to produce it.

These Objections then being got over, I beg leave to take back my own
Sentiments wherever I find them, and endeavor to prove, that it is probable,
at some distant Time this Lime Rock was partially calcined by a subterraneous
Fire, and has supplied the Stream with Warmth ever since.

It must be considered at the same Time, that this Subject will admit of no
experimental Proof, and whether I succeed or not in the Account of the Cause of
the Heat, it has already been definitively proved to be a Lime Water, in which
is dissolved Alum and Sea Salt; but as Natural Philosophy is in great Part but
Analogy, and as Probability is equal to Demonstration in all Cases where a
downright Negative without any Support is the Opposition, it may be allowed me
here. To instance, suppose yourself in any Country in which there was not the
least Trace of any human Presence but some very antique and ruined
Architecture, what would you conclude? Why that as those Structures were as far
as ever you had observed, the Effects of Men, this must be so likewise, the
Parallel will hold, for it is as certain that subterraneous Fires have broke
Hills asunder, and altered the Course of Rivers; and that Fire will burn
Limestone according to its Degree and Duration, as that Ruins are the Proofs of
human Means: Especially when it is supported by all the collateral Phenomenon
left after such Convulsions.

Now let us see whether we have Appearance in the present Case to support us.
Whoever considers the Situation of the Hot-Well, that it lies between two
Precipices, between which also the River runs, will directly imagine that in
the Place of this River there was once a continued Hill, and that the Chasm was
caused by something preternatural and violent. Add the corresponding
Inequalities of the Cliffs on each Side, and that the Heat arises from Lime in
the Act of slaking, and that naturally there is no Lime without Fire. The
Inclination of the River is most evidently through the Valley of Long Ashton,
which leads to the Severn Sea, and there is a faint Tradition that it once ran
that Way, till St Vincent by cleaving the Rocks formed the Channel through
which it now runs. Those Traditions however Fabulous they may appear, have
generally some real Foundations, though traced with Difficulty fond amongst the
numerous Years that cover them, and obscured by the Imaginations of Mankind too
apt to run into the mavelous. I should scarce have insisted on this, had it
not made this Essay approach nearer to a System, though it has at least as great
a Probability on it is Side as that Dover and Calais were ever joined, which I
have seen very gravely asserted.

Had I contented myself without Experiment, that the Hot-Well Water contained
Alum and not Nitre Quintus inter fossiles simples sales est acidus, vagus,
volatilis, liquidus, forte ubique in fodinis obvius, hic -- cum Metallis
diversa Chaicantha, com terris calcariis alumina differentia, componit.

BOER. de Alumine.

Comme il y a des eaux minerales qui sont remplies d'une terre Alkaline, and
d'une Esprit Vitriolique on pent en retirer de l'alun par l'Evaporation.

Nouveau Course de Chymie.


, I should have had an indisputable Authority on my Side, the Sea Salt which it
has is left from the Mixture of the Tide Water.

Of the DIABETES.
EVERY Disease to which we are subjected must necessarily arise from some
Alteration in the Solids or Fluids, a Diabetes may arise from either; but I
believe the most frequent and most fatal arises from the want of Digestion in
the Primae Viae, or from what may be safely enough called the Secondary
Digestion in the minuter Vessels. My Meaning will be better understood by what
follows. Digestion, I apprehend, is nothing more than preparing the Aliments
for a Separation to be made by the Lacteals: Now when this Separation is
performed, and the secreted Chyle brought into the Blood, there remains another
Process of Nature; which is to assimilate the nutritious and throw off the
detrimental Particles by the Kidneys and cuticular Glands. For unless the
Urinous Salts etc. are secreted, it is no more Nutriment in the Blood than it
was Chyle before it was secreted from the Faeces, and this is what is meant by
the Secondary Digestion.

It follows now, that a Fault in either of these Functions may be the Source of
many Distempers, and as it is universally allowed that the weakest Part suffers
in every Assault, there may be various Diseases from one and the same Cause,
according as Constitutions are differently disposed to receive Impressions.
Particularly suppose any one has spent a Life gay enough, "Bottle and Friend
too much indulging." Upon any Fault in either of the Functions, a Disease will
likely enough fall on the Kidneys, as those have been the Glands mostly
distended and weakened by frequent use.

It is notorious also, that the continued use of spirituous Liquors indurates
all Aliments, and stiffens the Fibers of the Stomach. Nay that Spirit of Wine
injected into the Arteries of a living Animal, immediately congeals the Serum,
impedes Circulation, and Death ensues. This is in some Degree the Case,
whenever we indulge too freely in Spirituous Liquors, and at last totally
deprives us of Appetite and Digestion. If Digestion then is but illy performed
in the Primae Viae, instead of Chyle the Secretion will be crude and imperfect,
and consequently the Fault will never be amended when it gets within the Laws
of Circulation. Nor will the Vis Naturae of itself avail to separate those
Salts by the Kidneys; thence it will result, that through want of this Separation
there be will no Nutriment assimilated, and an Accumulation of Fluids
supervening, the Vessels and Glands are distended, and the Serum, with all the
Nutritious Juice, passes off by the Kidneys.

It has been, I know not how, always thought, that a Diabetes Diuturna est
hujus morbi creatio, and longo tempore parturitur in principio os humore
privatur, saliva albida est, ac spumans, paulo plus lotii, quam moris erat,
effunditur; sitis adest sed nondum vehemens, calefactio parva quidem, sed
mordax, visceribus inherens exoritur; habitus corporis gracilis evadit, and
homo anxius and animi dubious existit, progressu temporis sitis insigniter
augetur, and velox est Carnium and Membrorum in Urinam colliquatio; neque enim
cum intermissione lotium reddit, sed, perinde ut canales laxati sint,
indesinens est profusio; sitis intolerabilis est, potus copiosus, multitudini
tamen lotii non respondens, si parvum tempus a meiendo abstinuerit, intumescunt
lumbi, testes, and ilia, postremo cum dolor meit, and festina mors adventura
est. Urinae quidem gustus lenis, and minime, quantum memini dulcis, paulatim
tamen dulcescere in confesso est, quod primum aquosior. Seri pars affunditur,
and postea ipsa seri pars chylosior. Huic autem rei fidem facit, nempe
Phthisicorum plurimorum ultimis mensibus insignis spiriti dulcedo, ad Nauseam
usque molesta (lac etiam muliebre, a chylo parvulum discrepans, dulcescit.)

LISTERI Sententia. Succi sanguini illati per vias urinarias crudi and incocti
exitum sibi quaerunt, unde sensim labefactantur vires, colliquescit corpus, and
quasi substantia ejus per hanc cloacam exinanitur, cum siti, ardore Viscerum,
Lumboram Coxarumque intumescentia, and salivae spumosae exspuitione crebia.

SYDENHAMI Sententia.
was a too profuse Discharge of Urine. But there cannot be a greater Mistake,
the Disorder is not from too great a Discharge of Urine, but quite contrary,
because there is no Urine at all discharged, but Serum or Chyle in it is Room:
For it is scarce possible to secret too much Urine, or any natural Secretion,
but the Danger ever is, when something that is not the true Secretion is
carried off. This holds equally true in Hectic Fevers, and profuse Sweats, and
I shall endeavor to show that Hectic Sweats are through the Cuticular Glands,
what a Diabetes is by the Kidneys.

That what has already been said is the true Cause of a Diabetes, will
evidently appear from the History of that Malady, as laid down by our best
Physicians, and every Symptom is easily deduced from that Original. Whoever
will take the least trouble to review the above Quotations, will easily deduce
every Symptom from the Cause which has been assigned before; and must observe
that the Cure wholly depends upon bringing back the true Secretion of Urine,
which is no more than separating the animal Salts from the Fluids, and
restoring the Strength and Elasticity of the over-distended Fibers.

There remains now that we examine, if Lime in the Act of slaking will separate
those urinous Salts, and whether Alum will restore the Tone of the weakened
Fibers. What the Effects of Lime will be cannot be better seen than by the
XCVIIth Experiment of the learned Boerhaave, with his Observations of it is Use.

Hence are plainly discovered the Effects of Lime on animal Fluids, and that it
exactly executes what a Medicine must do to cure a Diabetes, which is to
extricate, and prepare an easy Secretion for the more fixed muriatic Salts
sticking in the Blood. Let us now suppose that this Separation of the Salts is
brought about, what must be added to finish the Cure? It must be some Medicine
which may bring the Fibers into a contractile State, and recover that Elasticy
they had lost from too great Distention; that Alum will answer in all this Part
is notorious; from it is Astringency it will bring the Stomach into stronger
Contractions, and improve Digestion; in the Glands it will lessen the Diameters
of the secreting Vessels; in the Arteries it will shorten their Fibers, improve
their Spring, and accelerate the Circulation; and as, according to the Laws of
Hydrostatics, Fluids circulating in Tubes have their lightest Parts driven to
the Sides, whilst the more heavy are propell'd, the emulgent Arteries lying at
right Angles must receive the lightest Parts of the Fluid, and bring it to the
Kidneys, which from the aluminous Particles are contracted to let nothing through
but these Salts dissolved in the aqueous Menstrum, which the Lime had before
disengaged.

We can now assign a good Reason for the drinking those Waters warm at the
Spring, without being obliged to a Ficton for their Virtues. Since it is
demonstrated, that all the salutary Effects arise from the slaking Lime, and
that after that Action ceases by cooling, it produces no Alteration on animal
Solids and Fluids, but as a mere alcaline Earth. The aluminous Part indeed,
though the same at a Distance as when on the Spot, avails nothing without the
previous Separation of the Salts, which can be effected by the slaking Lime
only.

Let us now examine what would have been the Consequences in the foregoing
Indisposition, if the Contents of the Hot-Well had been a subtle Spirit, Nitre,
and Limestone Powder; if that had been a Spirit it must be a Mineral one, if a
Mineral Spirit an Acid one, now all Mineral Acids coagulate the Blood, and
hinder Secretions arising from Alcalescence Spiritus Vitrioli Sulphurisque
paritur cogit in massam constrictam plerumque albescentem.

BOER. CXXVII. Exp. Sang. Phae. a acidis, etc.


, Nitre absolutely hinders a Separation of the Animal Salts from an alcalescent
Cause, and is beneficial only when the Juices are in the quite opposite State
to that of a Diabetes, as in a Pleurisy and all inflammatory Fevers. Limestone,
like all other Stone, is absolutely no more than a Terra damnata BOER. CXXVIII.
Exp. de Nitro.
.

It may be objected here, that, instead of proceeding on Boerhave's Experiment
on Urine, I should have tried whether it would have answered with the Bristol
Waters, and if it would not, my Conclusions are all false and supposititious
only. Suppose this Objection true, it has a plausible Appearance, yet upon
Examination does not stand the Test.

It is certain we can conceive no Alteration by our Senses in any thing, unless
it be strong enough to create a distinct Perception. The Atmosphere differs in
Pressure from the heaviest to the lightest many Degrees, yet I believe no one
will say that he feels any Diminution or Increase of Weight in the Alteration,
the Reason is because this Alteration is not a sufficient Avocation to the
general Attention we must allow the general Atmosphere. Now with Respect to the
Bristol Water, were it ten times as strongly impregnated with Lime, it would
create a very visible Effect in the foregoing Experiment, but though it should
not as it is, yet it must not be concluded from thence that it is quite
inefficacious, we must say notwithstanding that it has every proportional
Appearance with the other. Another Instance will better explain my Meaning. You
have a Bundle of Straw under your Arm, I take one secretly from you, yet by the
strictest Scrutiny of your Eye and Hand you neither perceive the Weight nor
Number much lessened; but it is lessened in both respects, or the Weight is
compounded from an aggregate of no Weights, and the Number of no Numbers, which
is impossible. Well then, should I repeat the Theft it will at last appear very
plain in both Senses, and you were hindered from observing it in the first, by
what was said of the Atmosphere, the Difference was not great enough to create
a distinct Perception, and call off your Attention from the greater Weight of
the Bundle. The same may be said of the Bristol Waters, that though it should
create no perceivable Alteration at any one time taken singly, yet often
repeated it would have the same Effects with the other, but in a slower Way.

From the slight Impregnation of Lime, we may easily deduce it is most salutary
Effects, as it is Alterations are silently and mildly carried on, without
producing those violent Symptoms which would follow from a larger Quantity, as
Fevers, Deliriums, etc. the very same is true as to the Quantity of the Alum.

Of a HECTIC FEVER.
IT has already been mentioned, that the Sweats of a Hectic were through the
Miliary Glands, what a Diabetes is through the Kidneys; and if we attend
diligently, we shall find that, like the Diabetes, the Danger in a Hectic Fever
does not arise from too profuse a Secretion of Sweat, but from the nutritious
Particles passing off this way: For there is no Instance of a too large
Discharge by Sweat, provided it is really that Secretion. Now what has been
said with respect to a Diabetes, that there can be no Nutriment assimilated,
unless the excrementitious Fluids are secern'd, holds true here, for this
Reason, all attempts are vain which endeavor to check those Hectic Sweats,
without altering the Juices, and generating the natural Discharge. Is it not
always observed as often as you endeavor to stop those Sweats, if you succeed
in that particular, a Diarrhaea constantly succeeds, equally fatal as the
former Symptom? It has been observed by the ingenious Dr Allen, that a Diabetes
and Ptyalismus have alternately succeeded the Suppression of each other, and
that the Cure of one was the Cure of the other: It is the same in a Hectic, if
you cure the Sweats you suppress the Diarrhaea, but if you only derive it from
the Glands of the Skin to those of the Intestines, you have not proceeded one
Step toward the Patient's Recovery; nor can he possibly recover till he
produce the natural Discharges, that the nutritious Particles may be laid aside
for the Support of Life, and this seems likely to be effected by the slaking
Lime, as in the Diabetes; for the Salts of the animal Fluids are the same in
every Secretion, and the State of the Fluids the same in each Disorder, only
the Secretion passes through different Emunctories, according as the Constitution
is disposed from a particular Texture of the Glands. I need not apply the use
of the Alum, because every one will see it is use as plainly here as in the
Diabetes. There can no Objection arise from the Lime, as if it should produce a
putrefact State of the Blood, because then the Salts in the BOER. Process.
XCVII.
Experiment on the Urine would have been Volatile Alkalies, whereas it is
neither Acid nor Alcali, but quite akin to the Human.

What Advantage may not arise from the Use of this Bristol Water, if the
Patient would apply to them before he is gone beyond the reach of Medicine?
Nay, even in the last State of a Pulmonary Consumption I cannot see but it must
be serviceable, for it is certain Human Nature cannot be sustained without
Nutrition, and no Nutrition can be formed without the previous Separation of
the excrementitious Salts: Nor can the Ulcers of the Lungs incarne, unless the
true Balsam be brought to them, which I apprehend to be no more than true
Nutriment.

There may be many other Diseases in which it may be beneficial, as in the
Elephantiasis from a cold Cause, Chlorosis, and all Cachexies, where the Fluids
are too viscous and the Fibers too much relaxed.

OF THE EFFECTS OF THE WATERS IN NEPHRITIC DISORDERS.
IT has of late been an Objection to the Bristol Waters, that upon the Use of
them they have increased the Gravel in those Subjects liable to that Complaint,
and for that Reason not to be drank safely by such Persons. A stricter
Attention, and a fair State of the Case will set the Matter in a quite opposite
Light.

It has been found by some subject to Nephritic Complaints, that at their first
coming to the Well and drinking the Waters, the Paroxysms have oftener succeeded
each other, and with more Violence than before, and thence they have concluded
that the Waters increase these Disorders: But how unjust is this when we
consider that the Pain is not the Disease, but a Consequence of it is passing
off by Means of Medicine, or the Efforts of Nature throwing off the already
generated Concretions. Suppose any Quantity of Gravel lodged in the Basin of
the Kidneys, is it not manifest that Pains must succeed upon it is removal from
thence through the Ureters into the Bladder? And is it not equally certain, that
whatever promotes the dislodging this Gravel from the Kidneys is a salutary
Medicine? And the more efficacious it is, the oftener the Paroxysms will follow
each other, till the whole is brought away? This is directly the Case in the
Hot Well Water, and seen in this true Light removes the Objection.

Now let us see whether our Theory will not vindicate this Fact. Every one
allows that Nephitic Diseases arise from some Fault in the Urinary Secretion;
it has been already experimentally observed, that slaking Lime produces that
true Secretion; hence it follows that no Alterative can be more successfully
pursued than this Medicinal Water, since it washes off the already concreted
Gravel, and hinders it from being generated anew, by producing the genuine
Discharge.

It does not belong to me to say what Medicine or Diet is best adapted in each
Case with these Waters, whatever Physician shall have the Care of those that
drink this Medicinal Water, will inform them in these and many other things,
altogether beyond any thing that can be said by me.

FINIS.

