LUCIUS, THE FIRST Christian King of Britain. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane. BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

By Mrs. MANLEY.

LONDON: Printed for John Barber on Lambeth-hill, and sold by Benj. Took at
the Middle Temple Gate, Henry Clements in St. Paul's Churchyard, and John
Walthoe, jun. over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, 1717.

TO Sir RICHARD STEEL.
WHEN Men cast their Eyes upon Epistles of this Kind, from the Name of the
Person who makes the Address, and of Him who receives it, they usually have
Reason to expect Applauses improper either to be given or accepted by the
Parties concerned. I fear it will, at first Sight, be much more so in this
Address, than any other which has at any Time appeared; but while common
Dedications are stuffed with painful Panegyricks, the plain and honest Business
of this, is, only to do an Act of Justice, and to End a former Misunderstanding
between the Author, and Him, whom She, here, makes Her Patron. In Consideration
that one knows not how far what We have said of each other, may affect our
Character in the World, I take it for an Act of Honor to declare, on my Part,
that I have not known a greater Mortification than when I have reflected upon
the Severities which have flowed from a Pen, which is now, You see, disposed as
much to celebrate and commend You. On Your Part, Your sincere Endeavor to
promote the Reputation and Success of this TRAGEDY, are infallible Testimonies
of the Candor and Friendship you retain for Me. I rejoice in this public
Retribution, and with Pleasure acknowledge, That I find by Experience, that
some useful Notices which I had the good Fortune to give You for Your Conduct
in former Life, with some hazard to my Self, were not to be blotted out of Your
Memory by any Hardships that followed them.

I KNOW You so well, that I am assured You already think I have, on this
Subject, said too much; and I am confident You believe of Me, that did I not
conceal much more, I should not say so much. Be then the very Memory of
disagreeable Things forgotten for ever, and give Me leave to Thank You for Your
Kindness to this PLAY, and in return, to show toward Your Merit the same
Good Will. But when my Heart is full, and my Pen ready to express the kindest
Sentiments to Your Advantage, I reflect upon what I have formerly heard You
say, That the Fame of a Gentleman, like the Credit of a Merchant, must flow
from his own intrinsic Value; and that all Means to enlarge it, which do not
arise naturally from That real Worth, instead of promoting the Character of
either, did but lessen and render it suspicious. I leave You therefore, to the
great Opportunities, which are daily in Your Power, of bestowing on Your Self,
what no Body else can give You; and wishing You Health and Prosperity, I omit
to dwell upon some very late Actions of Yours in Public, which unhappy
Prejudices made, as little expected from You, as the Zeal and Solicitude which
You showed for my private Interests in the Success of this PLAY. I shall say no
more, trusting to the Gallantry of Your Temper for further Proofs of
Friendship; and allowing You, like a true Woman, all the good Qualities in the
World now I am Pleased with You, as well as I gave You all the ill One's when I
was Angry with You: I remain with the greatest Truth,

SIR, Your most humble, most faithful, and most obliged Servant, De la Rivier
Manley.

THE PREFACE.
I Cannot suffer this PLAY to pass into the World, without expressing my
Gratitude to the Ladies, who, in such a distinguishing Manner, graced and
supported it. So much Beauty and good Nature, could not fail of rend'ring that
Person happy, for whose Benefit they were employed: I think my self infinitely
blessed in their Smiles, since I can be sensible of no greater Glory, than to
hear, that I have had the Honor to Please Them.

TO tell the World that Mr. Booth and Mrs. Oldfield's Action was admirable, in
the Parts of LUCIUS and ROSALINDA, is saying nothing New; they are so used to
Charm the Audience, and Delight the best Judges of the Theater: However, I beg
leave to make them my public Acknowledgments, and to please my self with what
I have heard reported of their Performance in this PLAY, which is, That though
they have often shined in several greater Parts, yet, none ever became them
better. Mr. Booth's masterly and graceful Action supported LUCIUS; whilst Mrs.
Oldfield's Charms, and enchanting Manner, gave Life and Beauty to the QUEEN.

PROLOGUE,
By Sir RICHARD STEEL.
NOT Lee, for Buskins famed, would often say,
To Stage-Success He had a certain Way;
Something for all the People must be done,
And with some Circumstance each Order won;
This He thought easy, as to make a Treat,
And, for a Tragedy, gave this Receipt.
Take me, said He, a Princess Young and Fair,
Then take a Blooming Victor flushed with War;
Let Him not owe, to vain Report, Renown,
But in the Ladies Sight cut Squadrons down;
Let Him, whom they themselves saw win the Field,
Him to whose Sword they saw whole Armies yield,
Approach the Heroin with dread Surprise,
And own no Valor Proof against bright Eyes:
The Boxes are Your own -- the Thing is hit,
And Ladies, as they near each other sit,
Cry, oh! How movingly that Scene is writ?
For all the Rest, with Ease, Delights you will sbape,
Write for the Heroes in the Pit, a Rape:
Give the First Gallery a Ghost; on the Upper,
Bestow, though at that distance, a good Supper.
Thus all their Fancies, working their own Way,
They Are Pleased, and think they owe it to the Play.
But the Ambitious Author of these Scenes,
With no low Arts, to court your Favor means;
With Her Success, and Disappointment, move,
On the just Laws of Empire, and of Love!
PROLOGUE.
By a Young GENTLEMAN.
Spoken by Mr. Walker. IN ancient Days (the Time we do not know,
It is so very, very long ago)
Envy was forced to lead an harmless Life,
To stay at home, a mere Italian Wife.
Would ye believe it, Ladies? Tet, it is true,
She had not learned to Dress like One of Tou:
Nor did she then appear a thoughtless Beau,
Nor wore Cockades, nor into Armies go.
To Play Houses she never presumed to come,
And rarely visited the Drawing Room:
Even Masquerades, where no One shows the Face,
Would not admit of Envy in the Place.
Ah! happy Days, when Dullness feared no Lash,
The Author gave no Wit, yet got his Cash:
When an Attempt to Please, was taken well,
And, on weak Woman, never Critic fell.
But our new Taste, brings on a new Demand,
For Wit alone, at present, cannot stand;
You must have Scandal, Politics, and Traps,
To raise the Ladies Blush, and Footmens Claps.
What can poor We expect, in such a Case?
Dare English Tragedy plead Hopes of Grace?
No Party favored, no Designs in view,
To make Old Times, club Faction with the New.
No double soft Entenders to excite,
No Politics to please the Wise to Night,
Such a dull Play, could any Modern write?
Alas! we own the Allegation just,
But it is to You, the shining Fair we trust;
As You are Fair, our Author hopes to find,
You can Forgive, and then You will be Kind.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
HOnorius, King of Gallia, Mr. Thurmond. Vortimer, Usurper of Britain, Mr.
Ryan. Lucius, Prince of Britain, Mr. Booth. Arminius, Prince of Albany, Mr.
Mills. Prince of Cambria, Mr. Bowman. Sylvius, Page to the Queen, Miss Tounger.
An Alban Lord,
WOMEN.
Rosalinda, Queen of Albany and Aquitain, Mrs. Oldfield. Emmelin, Princess of
Gallia, Mrs. Horton. Irene, Lady to the Queen, Mrs. Baker.
Flamens, Guards, Soldiers.
Scene the Capital of AQUITAIN.

LUCIUS.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The PALACE-GARDEN.
Enter Lucius and Arminius. Arm. WHY does the conquering Lucius now despond;
Why does my Lord, with secret Sorrow mourn,
Why thus averse to every Sound of Joy;
When Fortune crowns you with her choicest Favors,
Makes you the Soldiers Pride, and Wish of Beauty?
The coldest Maid that ever graced a Court,
At your approach, drops all her haughty Airs;
New rolls her Eyes, new coins her Face in Smiles,
And her long-practis'd Scorn is then no more.

Luc. O Albany! I cannot bear thy search.

Arm. I must proceed, and name the beauteous Queen.

Luc. Ha! say thou? What of her, Arminius?

Arm. The mourning Rosalind in Sorrow dressed,
Can charm beyond the gaudy Smiles of others!

Luc. I view, indeed, the captive Queen with Pity.

Arm. My Friend, does she not rule thy Soul?

Luc. She does! she does! my charming Queen reigns here,
Triumphant in her native Throne, my Heart:
Diffusive is her Sway, War yields to Love,
Nor know I any Wish, but for her Beauty.

Arm. Oh sure Despair, as certain Death for me!
[Aside.
Luc. Why sighs my Friend? Is she not heavenly Fair?

Arm. Oh Guardian Powers of Britain! save him now,
Oh save the lovely Youth from pleasing Ruin!
Have thou forgot? alas! the Queen's a Christian,
Apostate to our Altars, and our Worship.

Luc. In her alone all my Devotion centers;
My Heart (when I such wondrous Charms survey)
In her adores the All-creating Power.
Nor can Perfections, great as hers, mislead;
She cannot be mistaken; cannot err:
Or if she could, with Rosalind to err,
Were better than believing with another!

Arm. Beware the Mischiefs which attend her Love.
Thy Father, styled, the cruel King of Britain,
Is to the Christian Sect a most invet'rate Foe.

Luc. Love were not Love, could it admit of Fear.

Arm. Think how, when Lord of Verulam, he slew
The good, the rightful Majesty of Britain;
Slew, at a peaceful Banquet, that brave Monarch.
The Queen (scarce up from Childbed of a Son,
Who soon expired) he forced to his loathed Bed,
In hopes the Prince of Cambria, her Brother,
Would prove a Friend, to his bold Usurpation:
And yet Heaven smiled upon the horrid Nuptials,
And blessed the Tyrant with the God-like Lucius.

Luc. Though sprung from one, I have no Tyrant's Soul,
Am I to blame? Could I direct my Birth?
Could I concur to Be? Was the Choice mine?
My Mother early paid the Debt of Nature;
Of me she died: may that atone the Crime
Of wedding with her Husband's Murderer.

Arm. Still, there is a Secret will thy Hopes destroy,
Thy Father does himself the Queen adore;
His Love began, soon after thou were sent
To aid the Gallick King against his Brother.

Luc. O fatal War! would I had never seen it.

Arm. Thy Father, at a Royal Interview,
Received a Dart from Rosalinda's Eyes,
The beauteous Heiress of my Uncle's Crown,
Then to the King of Aquitain betrothed:
He strove in vain to cross the promised Nuptials,
For his own Bed courting the destined Bride.
Long Enmity between the Picts and Britons,
Their native Hate, and Contract with Otharius,
Caused the Refusal of your Father's Suit.

Luc. The Fame of this Affront reached us abroad.

Arm. Love was the secret Motive of the War;
Hence he invaded Albany with Fury:
And with my Uncle's Death the Slight revenged.
How has he galled the Picts with heavy Yokes!
How every Day oppressed our conquered People!
How in these foreign Wars, and distant Climes
Forced us for him to carry hated Arms!
Eager to prosecute his furious Love,
He crossed the Seas to make the Queen a Widow.
Too well his Chance in War succeeded here;
Otharius, he was slain, and we the Victors.

Luc. This Morning with the Gallick King he comes
Triumphant over the Fate of Aquitain.

Arm. Soon as your conquering Arms had forced this City,
With Orders I was sent to plead his Love:
But she, with Indignation, has refused him.
I dread to say, how ill I have succeeded.
His Tyrant Temper will not yield to Reason,
Nor can the Name of Son, abate his Rage.
Cure or conceal your Love, or you are lost.

Luc. Conceal my Love? conceal a raging Fire,
Conceal the Blaze, when it invades the Sky:
As well unbounded Storms may be concealed.

Arm. Sure this Etherial Fire was struck by Jove.
Oh no! the God of Love has greater force;
He animates you thus; thus moves your Frame,
And brings inimitable Graces with him.
Feels not the Queen the Force of all those Charms?
A Dawn of Joy breaks from her gathering Smiles,
With all the Softness, which fore-runs her Sex's Yielding.

Luc. Ten Months I Have offered ineffectual Vows;
Ten Months pursued the Fair with ardent Love.
No more -- the Princess Emmelin appears:
I Will go this very Hour, and urge my Fate;
Ere my stern Father comes, I must be blessed,
Be ever blessed, or else for ever wretched.
Haste all ye Loves, and Graces to my aid;
Dwell on my Voice, and languish in my Eyes;
Bright Cytherea, from thy Heaven look down,
Grant, Venus, grant, that I her Heart may move;
For me thy Slave, make her thy Votary.
Propitious now, thou shall my Goddess be,
And I Will Devote my happy Hours to thee.
[ Exit Luc.
Enter the Princess Emmelin. Emm. I met the Prince -- how has thy search
succeeded?

Arm. Alas! too well.

Emm. And grows the Hero, Lucius, sick for Love?
That stubborn Heart in Camps, and Slaughter bred,
Unused to Beauty and its soft Delights?
Oh Sympathy of Sex! oh Force of Nature!
What haughty Victor stops not at thy Call?
What Courage melts not at the sight of Beauty?
Oh Rosalind! how glorious are thy Chains!
How much superior to the Crowns of others!

Arm. As next of Kindred to the Alban Throne,
Whilst none but elder Rivals had declared,
I had some distant Hopes of being heard.

Emm. If I have Credit with the King, you shall;
We are my Brother's Captives, not the Britons.
But oh! what Hope have thou to gain her Heart?
Where is the Hero, that dares rival Lucius?
At the young Warrior's Sight, each Virgin Breast
Throbs with an Extacy unutterable.
Scarce Venus feels more Transport in her Grove,
When kindling Wishes hurry on to Love.

Arm. I own the Danger of superior Charms;
I own, his Power and Valor, Youth and Form,
Are Rivals dreadful to my boldest Hopes:
And yet, in Counsel with my kinder Stars,
Cunning and Conduct may out-wit the Hero,
And aid my feeble Hand to reach his Heart.

Emm. Thou strik'st not there, Arminius; I oppose;
And, like his better Genius, guard the Warrior.
Know, I have seen him with indulgent Eyes;
As thou for Rosalind, I sigh for him.

Arm. Be he immortal then, as are your Charms,
Within that beauteous Empire ever safe.

Emm. Thou have resolved his Fate, I read thy Soul,
This ten long Months I Have studied thy dark Breast
And know the Want of Virtue in thy Frame,
Which must subject thee to the Mind, that knows thee:
Wherefore, I left my Modesty awhile,
Revealed my virgin Love to guard its Object.
Honorius comes; with him the British King:
Protect my Lucius from his Father's Rage,
Or by our Nation's Gods, thy Queen shall know,
'Twas thy ill-fated Arm, which slew Otharius.

Arm. Why, with Reproaches, does your Highness load me,
For what to you alone I have disclosed?
Is this the End of all your promised Favor?
That promised Favor, which upheld my Hopes.
Yet, wherefore should I shrink at your reproach?
In Battle, bravely did I take his Life;
That bar to Rosalinda's Throne and Bed.

Emm. Spare but young Lucius, and your Secret's safe:
Nay, all that I can do to gain the Queen.

Arm. Well does the King your Brother love his Sister.
Honorius rules the Fate of Rosalinda:
Direct her to my Arms; and Vortimer
(Whose Ear I Have gained by flattering of his Love)
Shall give the Prince to yours.

Emm. Oh Albany! that soars above my Hopes,
My haughty Soul would not reveal its Weakness;
Yet something must be done, I Will think again.
But thou, my careful Genius, guard me well,
And thou, my Modesty, be faithful to me;
Heave not, my Bosom, when the Invader's nigh;
Throb not, fond Heart, to beat to him thy Secret:
My Eyes, take heed how ye my Pain express,
Strike not one Spark that may the Flame confess.
He cannot despise, who does not know our Store:
It Is proffered Love makes all our Beauties poor.
[Exit Emm.
Arm. Ha, is it so? Princess I was to blame,
To think a Woman's Friendship void of Interest:
The Advances which she made, are now explained.
She watched Prince Lucius with a jealous Eye,
And taught even me, first to suspect his Passion:
Be cautious of thy Fate! I fear her Cunning;
Guard thee my Heart, be wary of her search,
Else shall thou never steer amidst these Dangers.

Enter Sylvius. Oh Sister! I have News: The Prince of Britain
Adores the widowed Queen of Aquitain.
Did thy soft Sex and Royal Blood descend
To wear the humble Habit of a Page;
To watch each lucky Minute of the Fates,
And let another blast thy Brother's Hopes?
Syl. I love my Brother with a Sister's Love,
As much as ever a Sister loved a Brother:
But when compared to what I feel for Lucius,
How weak, how lambent is the kindred Flame!
Then not for thee, but him, I left my Sex,
Left the gay Pleasures of the British Court,
Thus in a servile Garb to follow Lucius,
To hear his Voice, and view his lovely Person:
For with the Dawn I took his Beauties in;
The vital Air, the Sighs which first I breathed,
Were all informed, were all inspired by Lucius.

Arm. Shall Rosalinda then possess thy Lover?

Syl. Not till Alenia dies.

Arm. Earth, Hell and all aerial Demons join,
Join they with us, to blast his hated Passion.
Born on the Wings of the Wind, the Wizard Alm'rin,
Mighty in Spells, in Charms and Magic Lore,
From Norway came, to aid our hapless Loves.
Ten sleepless Nights in Magic Rites have past,
And thus, this Morn, he has our Doom pronounced;
"Divide the Lueen and Lucius, ye are blessed,
"And in his Arms Alenia's Grief shall rest:
"For Rosalinda thou shall sigh no more,
"If thou with her can touch thy native Shore:
"But oh! be swift, their stronger Stars may join;
"Employ Force, Fraud: This Day and Night are thine.

Syl. The Fates are kind, their Oracle is good.

Arm. If Scruples weak and vain sway not thy Mind,
Alenia, we may yet be blessed. Oh say,
Will thou unerring with thy Brother join,
In mutual Aid to gain our mutual Loves?

Syl. Implicitly I will.

Arm. Give me thy Vow.

Syl. I swear to act in Concert with my Brother.

Arm. Hold'st thou thy Favor with the Queen?

Syl. I do. She calls me faithful Boy, the only one
Of all her vast Retinue she can trust.
Emboldened by this Grace, I told the Queen,
There was a Prince, who always mourned her Fate,
In Words so tender, with a Voice so sweet,
I loved, yet grieved to hear the moving Story.
She asked me all transported, Is it Lucius?
I sighed and paused, not daring then to name you.

Arm. Back dearest Maid, and watch their every Glance,
Bring, me if possible, their very Thoughts;
That all transparent I may view their Souls.
[Exit Sylvia. Her Heart for Lucius touched! the Idol bleeds:
Though it is not fit, this Girl should know my Purpose.
Arise Invention, aid my laboring Soul;
Fair are all Ways, which carry to the Goal.
So, fired by Venus Son, the Thund'rer Jove,
Of right regardless, rushes on his Love;
By Fraud or Force he gains the Beauteous Prize,
Tasting, in various Forms, as various Joys.
Now, as Alcmena's Lord, their Bed he stains;
Then Spartan Laeda, like a Swan, he gains:
Europa by a lovely Bull's betrayed,
And in a golden Shower the imprisoned Maid:
A Dragon curls in bright Olympia's Arms,
Nor can chaste Vows protect Calisto's Charms.
Hence Men, by Fraud and Artifice, succeed;
And Jove's Example justifies the Deed.
[Exeunt omnes.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The Queen and Irene.
Irene. WHY does my charming Mistress thus devote
Her Beauty's Bloom to Sorrow, Sighs and Tears?

Que. My Husband slain, my Country made a Prey,
My Guards my Jaylors, every Room a Prison,
No faithful Servant left, but Thee and Sylvius:
The rest are Spies devoted to the Victors.

Ire. And yet those Victors come to break your Chains.

Que. Alas! they come indeed, but it is in Triumph.
Honorius, called the Good, has well revenged
The unjust Attempt, which King Otharius made,
T'enlarge his Empire, at his Brother's Cost.
Compelled to wed that most ambitious Prince,
I never knew one peaceful Hour in Marriage.
Honorius by his Death, the Romans vanquished,
Becomes the first sole Monarch of the Gauls:
A Widow I, without a Dower or Name;
No more the Queen of Albany or Aquitain.

Enter Sylvius. Syl. The Prince of Britain, to attend your Majesty.

Que. Against my self my rebel Passions arm;
They bound within my Breast to meet this Victor.
Were not my Mind enslaved, were that but free,
How could I brave my Chains? how calm look down
On those lost Glories, which adorn a Crown?
Enter Lucius. He kneels. Why does the conquering Prince of Britain kneel
To me, no more a Queen, a wretched Captive?
What would my Lord? for I am all Confusion.

Luc. I beg a parting Audience, and alone.

Que. You, Sylvius and Irene, both withdraw.

Syl. I Will bring the Prince of Albany to part ye.
(Aside. [Ex. with Irene.
Que. Oh my Heart! -- Sure, Sir, I heard you not aright.
Where next does the victorious Lucius shine?
And which the Kingdom marked for Desolation?

Luc. I would, but oh! it dies upon my Tongue;
To my loved Queen, I would discourse of Parting;
I would discourse of Night, and horrid Gloom,
Of dismal Groans, and the deep Vault of Death;
And when the bitter Cup of Woe is full,
I Will sum it all in One, and call it Parting!

Qu. Beat gently, Heart -- Who sends you hence my Lord?

Luc. That awful Virtue, which destroys my Hopes;
That chilling Coldness, which repels my Flame.
Henceforth the Joys of Life shall charm no more;
No more the dusty Field shall give delight,
Triumphant Laurels, or the Praise of Beauty:
These Robes I Will change to some poor Hermit's Weed;
And Herbs and Roots shall be my only Food,
My daily Thirst quenched by some common Stream;
No Beam of Light to cheer my dismal Cell,
But all be dark, and joyless as my Fortune.

Qu. Why choose you these Extremes, my Lord?

Luc. A Convert to that Being, which you worship,
And which I with my pious Queen adore;
I am Christian, Follower of your Virtue.
At your Command, I Have heard those holy Men,
By that good Prelate Eleutherius sent.
I Have heard their Potent and Celestial Reasons:
Enlightened from above, my glowing Breast
Bids me undaunted own the sacred Faith,
Which, when prosess'd, I Will take my leave, for ever,
Of the too cruel Alban Queen, for ever!

Que. What, part, my Lord, when this exalted Change
(For which I bow to the informing Powers)
Calls you, the first of Christian Kings, to shine
Over all the Western World, like a bright Star,
To bless your People with eternal Knowledge?

Luc. For you, I quit the Hope of making Converts;
For you, resign the foremost Rank in Fame;
For you, I leave the Glories of a Crown.
I can no more support this wretched Being,
To see such Charms shine forth, but not on me.
Oh! think, how absolute my Rival is.
Can I from a stern Father's Force preserve you,
Unless you will descend to fix my Claim,
And let me call you mine, e're he arrive?

Que. How shall I teach my Tongue against my Heart?
[Aside.
Luc. Am I not worth a Word, the least Regard?
How many anxious Days, and sleepless Nights,
Have I devoted, to afflicted Beauty?
But she regardless, pities not my Pain,
Or she ungrateful triumphs in my Ruin:
Though I, for her, first felt the Sting of Passion,
First felt the Force of Charms, what strong Desires,
And eager Longings, are inspired by Beauty.

Qu. My suffering Heart, by Sorrow quite possessed,
Can make no Room for any other Thought.

Luc. Oh, blessed Otharius! happier in thy Death,
More happy than the living, hated Lucius.
Therefore, my Heart, be this thy last Effort;
Part, part, and die! -- From those dear Eyes remove
This wretched Object of despairing Love.

Qu. We cannot, must not part. Ye mighty Powers,
Tear not this only Good from my poor Heart.
Take all besides, leave me but him alone,
And I no more will think of Crowns and Empires.

Luc. Oh full Reward of all my former Pain!
Oppressed, I saint beneath this Flush of Joy.
Oh Love, receive the Honor! thou have blessed me.
Alas my Queen! -- she sinks -- she faints -- she dies!
My Rosalind, my Soul! return, return.
Come back my Love. Again she breaths -- she lives!
The Roses gather to her Cheeks and Lips!
The kind'ling Fire is glimmering in her Eyes!
New Warmth, new Life, re-animates the Fair!
And with her living Beauties, I am blessed!

Queen. Oh force of Modesty! oh force of Love!
It Is fought, and thou have gained the Victory.
The Struggles past; though vanquished, yet grown bold,
I must -- I do declare -- I cannot speak it:
Leave me to blush alone for this Confession.

Luc. Not 'till the holy Priest has joined our Hands;
Oh, my fair Queen! -- this Night must see me blessed.

Queen. To Morrow, gentle Lucius!

Luc. Let those who set no Value on the Present,
With easy Idleness expect to Morrow.
Suppose the King, grown furious to possess,
Should force you to his Bed, should force his Joys;
As once he did my Royal suffering Mother.
A Captive you, oh how may you resist?
Think but of Lucius then, and his despair:
O think, my Queen! what I would then exchange
For but a Moment of that precious Time,
You will not now employ?
The conquering Monarch's come, I hear their Trumpets:
Oh sound! sound on! it is for Lucius Triumph.
Yield, yield my Fair, and all my Fears remove;
Quick to thy inmost Chamber, fly my Love,
Where binding Vows my lasting Truth shall prove.

Queen. But if the cruel King command my Death? Swear, Lucius, at the Peril of
thy Life, To guard thy Rosalinda's.

Luc. I swear, my Queen, by Glory and by Love,
I will protect thee, though against my Father.
But now, my Fair, my circling Blood rebounds;
My laboring Heart, as in the Pangs of Death,
Beats an Alarm, and all the Passions answer:
I can no more: Impatient of delay,
The God of Love himself prepares the Way,
He brings us Joys, which never shall decay.
Joys! which the truly Constant only know,
Our All of Bliss, worth living for below.

Going, they are met by Emmelin and Arminius. Arm. They love! they love! I read
it in their Eyes,
Softness in hers, and Transport shine in his. [Aside. Madam, the Princess
Emmelin is come,
Moved by your Sorrows to entreat her Brother,
(Whose Captives the rough Chance of War has made ye)
That Vortimer may not dispose your Fate:
Should the stern Briton get you in his Power,
Our Hopes of freeing Albany were lost.

Enter Sylvius. Syl. Oh! that unhappy Sylvius, to his Queen,
Should be the Speaker of Honorius's Triumph!
The gaudy Chariots have discharged their Load,
And now, the Palace-hall receives the Monarchs.
I Have seen the Prosperous laugh, the Wretched mourn;
These gracing their proud Victors gilded Wheels,
Are sent, for change of Woe, to groan in Dungeons.
How many Alban, Gaul, and Roman Chiefs,
The Relicts of Otharius Royal Power,
Shall never, never see the Light again.
These Tears be witness, how I grieve their Fate.
Pardon this Tenderness -- The Kings have sent
To tell your Majesty, they wait for Audience.

Queen. Cousin of Albany, I pray attend them.
Fate, thou art busy now for Rosalinda. I
've but one dear Concern, one Wish in Life,
One secret Pain, or one important Joy,
To make the Royal Lucius ever mine!
Or else, ye Powers, contract my narrow Span:
From your Eternal Loom tear short my Thread;
I cannot taste of Happiness without him.

Introduced by Albany and Train, Enter, in Triumph, Honorius King of Gallia,
Vortimer King of Britain, Prince of Cambria, Attendants and Guards. K. Hon.
Here let our Triumphs end; you beauteous Queen,
Enough have mourned a Royal Husband dead.
My Brother, to increase the Blessed, is gone:
Death has atton'd his breach of Royal Faith,
And Time consents to mitigate your Sorrows:
Let your sad Heart, at length, give Way to Joy.

Queen. I Have all the Joy that my sad State can give,
Since I was doomed to Chains, that you're the Victor.
[K. Hon. and Emmelin embrace.
K. Vor. When you appear, who can be called Victorious?
The Sun, that with diffusive Beams shines over
The rolling Globe, to every Age a Wonder,
Reigns not more absolute, than do your Eyes.
Like him, you rule with universal Sway,
Like him, you conquer all -- Rise, warlike Lucius;
We did expect an earlier Meeting from thee.

Luc. Great Sir, It was my Post to guard the Queen.

Pr. of Came. My Nephew! dearer than my Life!

Luc. My honored Uncle!

K. Vor. Oh Albany! thou Partner of my Heart,
The Charmer shines on us with stronger Glory,
As she would been gathering a fresh Stock of Brightness:
How has our Suit succeeded?
[ K. Vortimer talks apart to Arminius, K. Honorius with Emmelin, whilst Lucius
speaks aside to the Queen.
Luc. After the Audience, where shall I be blessed?

Queen. I am going to the Cell of Fabianus,
But trust not our important Fate to any.

K. Vor. What! Lucius love the Queen: Beloved of her?
My Lord of Albany, you have our Thanks.
We have to offer to thee, King Honorius,
That which may make our League inviolable.

K. Hon. To which, great Prince, we gladly shall accord.

K. Vor. When we had scarcely tasted Royal Power,
The Sweets of Empire, or our Consort's Charms,
We left our Crown and Queen, to aid this State:
Six Years were wasted in the Gallick War,
Without re-visiting our native Coast.
By us, and our brave Troops, thy Father vanquished,
And drove the Roman Tyranny away.
The Romans! who had, since great Caesar's Conquest,
Left ye but Titular Kings, and Gaul a Province.

K. Hon. I have heard the Obligation.

K. Vor. After his Death, the warlike Prince your Brother,
Deemed Aquitain too small a Share of Empire;
With hostile Arms he entered your Dominions,
And took you unprepared; the Field he won,
Subdued your strongest Cities in your Sight:
Till braving foamy Seas, and winter Storms,
In spite of Winds, or adverse Deities,
Lucius transported to your Shore our Aid.

K. Hon. All this I thankfully remember.

K. Vor. Without a Rival now, you fill the Throne;
Nay more, have joined your Brother's Crown to yours.
If this, to our victorious Arms be due;
Say, happy Monarch, what may he expect,
By whom you wear these Benefits?

K. Hon. Speak, King of Britain, what is it thou wou'd'st ask?

K. Vor. For all our Toils in War, our Soldiers Loss,
Our friendly lavish waste, of Blood and Treasure,
We ask the Captive Queen; that she, this Night,
Set forward, where our Royal Navy rides;
So to be wafted over to Britain's Shore,
With Honor.

Queen. Oh Brother! let me lowly thus entreat,
That I may answer this Tyrannick King:
With his great Merit, how are you upbraided?
He has recited all his warlike Deeds,
To make Impression on your grateful Heart.
But Sir! consider, I Am a Queen, was doubly Crowned:
By Birth and Marriage, I am twice a Sovereign.
Think whose I was -- Oh! pity Kindred Grief,
And Royal Woes! Mine Is not a vulgar Fate,
To be weighed out by every common Hand,
Or at a Moment's Call, to be determined.

K. Vor. What Phantoms, what Illusions, beauteous Queen,
(By melancholy Vapors fed) affright you?
Were Caesar yours, and all that vast Dominion
Of which he once could call himself the Lord,
Less sure, less absolute would be your Sway,
Than now in Britain.

Queen. In Death, I may possess an ample Power:
It Is there that I must follow, when thou lead'st.
I had a Father, 'till thy cruel Thirst
Of Blood and Empire left him but a Name.
I had a Husband too, of Kingly Sway:
Now made an helpless Orphan, and a Widow:
My Country seized, my noble Friends enslaved,
Groaning in Dungeons, courting Death in vain:
The next is mine, my Fate may be the last.
In me thy Tyranny will be accomplished.

K. Vor. In you the War, in you what is dreadful ends;
The Prison-Doors fly open, as you pass;
And the despairing Captive drops his Chain:
No more your Albans shall be counted Foes,
But with our Britons equally esteemed.

Emm. Let me entreat, great Sir, you would not insist
So soon upon the mourning Queen's departure.

Vor. Long since, our Adoration has been fixed
On an inexorable haughty Fair,
Which has deferred the Homage due to you;
But Lucius shall atone -- our Son, draw near.

Emm. What means the King? -- oh my disordered Heart!

Luc. What would my Royal Father?

K. Vor. Of what I wish, great Sir, be this the Cement,
And this between us be our Pledge of Peace.
Lucius, my Son, the Hopes and Heir of Britain,
I give to the fair Princess Emmelin,
To be her happy Lord.

K. Hon. With the same View, I give the Royal Bride:
To Morrow, see their Happiness complete.
Next, let us seek to sooth this lovely Mourner:
Nor should thou, King of Britain, bar our Justice.
The Queen was not a Warrior, like her Lord,
Nor Partner of his Arms, or his Injustice:
Wherefore, we have resolved, she shall be free.
Madam, this Moment gives you Liberty;
And, as our Brother's Royal Dowager,
You Have leave to sojourn in our Court at Pleasure.

Emm. For this, the mighty Gods reward the King.

Arm. And may he meet no Hour of new Distress.

Queen. May Fortune here fix her inconstant Wheel,
And never know a Change to your Dishonor.

K. Vor. That she is free, is what my Soul designed:
But oh! I wished it not another's Gift.
Ungrateful King, when thy last Stake was set,
And Fortune threw the Dye of War against thee;
Did we not send thee, Lucius, at thy Call?
Lucius! who made the haughty Roman tremble,
And chased him from the liquid Fence of Britain:
We followed, to retrieve thy lost Affairs,
When pale Despair filled thy distracted Court,
And the bright Goddess, Victory,
Sought to espouse thy Brother.

K. Hon. Why do thou stain the Service with Reproaches?
What thou have done, was like a Monarch done,
As we had done for thee, if thou had needed.

K. Vor. Madam, I take my leave; false King beware;
Revenge but nods, 'till it can safely rouse;
And then, unthankful Monarch, thou shall find
An injured Briton's Rage. Attend us Albany.
[ Ex. K. Vort. and Arm.
K. Hon. Lead to the Temple, there to thank the Gods,
For Peace, the sweet Reward of Victory.
He, who is truly called his Country's Lord,
The End obtained, with Joy returns the Sword;
Superior to the Glories of the Field,
He makes the Hero to the Patriot yield;
Forms, on his People's Good, the King's Renown,
And quits the Laurel, for the Olive Crown.
[Exeunt all but Lucius.
Luc. Whilst, after all these Storms, I seek for Rest
In the safe Harbor of my Charmer's Breast;
Though foamy Billows threaten from afar,
And gathering Clouds proclaim the watery War;
Though Waves around me dash, and Tempests roar,
I Will perish in the Deep, or gain the wished for Shore.
[Exeunt omnes,
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter King Vortimer and Arminius. K. Vor. WHat Power, to awe the Mind, have
Women's Charms,
Make the Bold fearful, and the Coward brave!
Unequal to the fawning Task, our Age
Begins too late to learn the Trade of Courtship;
Too late to study Flattery and Praise,
Or how, with Snares and Art, to catch the Sex.

Arm. Deal we like Statesmen, for a while, in Cunning;
Your End but gained, no Matter what the Means:
If once the Queen be parted from the Prince,
The Luster of a Crown will soon efface
The Impression made upon a Woman's Heart.

K. Vor. Instruct us how, since the ungrateful Gaul,
In spite of our Desert, has dared to free her.

Arm. Lend me your Guards, and strait prepare a Ship
Well-mann'd, and fitted to the nearest Port;
I Will tell the Queen of Dangers imminent,
Of Plots and Treason in this Court against her.
Nay more, that Albany is up in Arms,
And ready to receive her, as their Queen.
Your faithful Creature, when she is once embarked,
Dares answer with his Head, to land her safe
(Swift as the Winds and Waters will permit)
On Britain's Shore.

K. Vor. How shall I praise thy Care?
Who serves my Heart, does more than serve my Crown:
A nearer, dearer Interest by far.

Arm. Give then immediate Orders for our flight,
Lest Lucius, young and lucky, should prevail,
And Rosalind be made the Prince's Bride.

K. Vor. Perish the Thought. Lucius, no more my Son,
For him I have decreed another Nuptial:
He cannot, shall not dare to rival me.
Nature would plead, in vain, against my Rage.
Within this Breast, a Power superior sway,
And Nature's self, the Laws of Love obeys:
Nor Floods nor Flames can stop his headlong Course;
Even Tyrants yield to more Tyrannick Force.
[Ex. K. Vor.
Arm. Our warlike Picts, in Arms will aid our Claim,
And, with unbounded Joy, receive their Queen.
Oh Almerin, thus far Success attends us.
Tyrant, it is just, I should thy Hopes elude:
Whilst thou shall vainly look for us in Britain,
With thy own Sails we gain our native Coast.
But how shall this proud Dame be wrought to fly?
She Will not, with Ease, consent to part from Lucius.

Enter Sylvius. Syl. My Lord, the Queen's returned, and the Prince with her.

Arm. Where did he meet her, Sylvius?

Syl. I do not know, my Lord. She always goes in private to the Cell,
Whilst I, although her Favorite, am excluded there.

Arm. Oh Jealousy! thou Torment of the Mind,
How, in a Moment, art thou entered here?
My Breast, my inward Soul is glowing hot,
It burns, it rages with devouring Fires.

Syl. My Lord, what means this most unwonted Rage?

Arm. Alas! do not thou see the Queen is wedded?
This last sad Hour has ruined us for ever.
Lucius was wanting at the Temple Rites:
Oh Fate! where could he be, but with the Queen?
And she was praying with her trusty Priest.
But if, indeed, thour't wedded to my Love,
Rival! thou bed'st her not, whilst I am living.

Syl. Sleep yet our Rage, and hear what I have done:
Irene says, the Queen preserves the Sword
Found in Otharius's Body, when he fell.

Arm. In this distracted State of our Affairs,
It Is all that Heaven could grant.
Wedded! Married!
O! who can know the double Heart of Woman?
If ever the Sex be true,
It Is in an early Bloom, before the Mind
Perceives the Warmth of Love, the Taint of Wishes:
Then they will, at Will, ensnare, betray, destroy!
What motly Changes, do their Faces wear!
How far from Sight, lie their deceitful Souls!

Syl. You Are blind with Rage: I pray behold this Letter,
It Is most exactly like the Queen's own Writing;
Scarce to be known by him, who taught us both.

Arm. It Is very like.
The Queen her self, can scarce this Hand disown.
On the Success of this, this and the Sword,
Thine and thy Brother's Fortune hangs.

Syl. But if the Prince should kill me?

Arm. Fear not, I Will guard thy Life with mine.

Syl. Or the Queen find the Cheat?

Arm. Suppose she should?
She knows thee only as her Page, as Sylvius:
Not for Alenia, whom she thinks in Britain.
Remember Almerin!
Can thou fear ought, but losing of thy Lover?
She comes! my Rival too! oh hated Name!
I Will rally my disordered, scattered Thoughts,
And then return with Arms for his Destruction.
[Ex. omnes.
Lucius enters, leading the Queen. Luc. Sure, my fair Queen, when Hearts, like
mine, have touched
The Summit of their Hopes, the Height of Bliss
Collected all within, they find the Joy
Too big to be expressed! but thus to speak,
But thus to tell thee of thy Husband's Transport!

Queen. Oh that these Raptures could for ever last!
Oh changing Deity! oh fickle Love!
Why are thy Joys not permanent, as great?

Luc. In thee for ever blooming, ever young,
Thou great Renewer of the Spring of Love!
Thou everlasting Charmer! in thy Arms,
Though Ages hence, those distant happy Hours
Will seem, but as the first transporting Moment.

Queen. Great Love, how arbitary is thy Sway!
How do thou give such Harmony to Words!
My Coldness all dissolves upon the Sound:
With conscious rising Warmth, my Bosom glows
To meet thy Voice, thy Breath, thy melting Touches!

Luc. What hinders me to bear my yielding Fair,
This blissful Moment to the Royal Bed?
There where the Sun, in all his gaudy Round,
Shall not behold a Man so blessed as Lucius.

Queen. Loose me, my Lord, or we are all undone:
Our Secret told, and both the Kings informed.
At the first Fall of Night, Irene shall admit thee,
Without the Knowledge of another Creature.

Luc. Mean time, my Queen, I Will wander in the Grove,
And count the Minutes of expecting Love:
On fragrant Banks I Will lay me wishing down,
And rave on Joys, which thou, anon, shall crown:
For oh! it is Pain to see, and own such Charms,
And be delayed the Blessing of thy Arms.
To pause on Beauty, when Desires are high;
And only gaze, when we should all enjoy.

Lucius leads the Queen to the Scene; returning, is met by Arminius. Arm. It Is
you, my dearest Lord, I have been seeking:
I come to rail against the faithless Sex:
I would inveigh against inconstant Charms,
Against the flattering Gales, and changing Winds;
Against the April-Season of the Year;
Against false Hopes, false Vows, and falser Beauty.

Luc. Arminius thus concerned! thus strangely moved!
Tears in his Eyes, Distraction in his Looks.
What mean thou, Albany, strait let me know?
Depend upon thy Friend, upon his Love.
You Are next of Kindred to our charming Queen;
And have a double Title to our Service.

Arm. Behold, my Lord, and view me, as a Lover:
As One who, long, has worn the Victor's Chain:
As One who, once, did think himself beloved:
But oh! no sooner did Temptation come.
But the Fair false One, broke her promised Faith,
And publicly exchanged me for another.

Luc. The common Frailty of the Sex.

Arm. To pity me, oh! make the Case your own.
Give me some Time for Tears. Suppose your Hopes
By mutual Love, by mutual Transports fired!
Just in the wished for Moment of Possession,
When every eager Pulse beat high with Joy,
And her dear Heart ready to join in Rapture;
Then! then to find a rival Youth preferred,
Wou'd'st thou not groan? Wou'd'st thou not weep like me?

Luc. Why do thou pause?

Arm. The Queen! alas!

Luc. Immortal Powers! what Queen?

Arm. The faithless Queen of Albany.

Luc. It Is impossible! Do thou adore her?

Arm. Too fatally, I did.

Luc. 'Twas wronging me, when I had owned my Flame.

Arm. Long, long before she left the Alban Court,
The Virgin Charmer's Vows were mixed with mine.
False from her Youth, she broke her early Faith:
Soon as her Father had his Choice declared,
With easy Resignation, she became
The Royal Bride of Aquitain.

Luc. Go on, I Will hear thee out with Patience.

Arm. What Wretch like me, so doting, or despairing!
I fought in War, as one who longed to die:
Your self can witness how I valued Danger.
Otharius slain, and free to choose again:
What said she not for her late Breach of Faith?
How did she swear she never had ceased to Love!
That I was dearer to her than the Light;
But in the tenderest Moment of her Vows,
The Wanderer strayed again, and I was lost.

Luc. Oh Heaven and Earth! sure I can bear no more!

Arm. Of your great Merit, jealous, I prevailed,
And from your self drew the abhorred Confession.
I warned you of the Danger, but in vain:
I durst no more, as tender of her Fame,
As willing yet to doubt of my Misfortune.
For when I but reproached the wavering Fair,
She used such various soothings to my Mind,
Such Vows, that Lucius never had spoke of Love,
That scarce was it a Merit to believe her:
Thus was my easy Faith abused.

Luc. What Proof have thou of this?

Arm. Oh! I had every Proof: Her Virgin Heart,
Her speaking Eyes, her Lips, her charming Tongue;
And the pale Queen of Night (on flowery Banks,
Whilst we invoked her Beams) beheld our Loves.
Each happy Moment witnessed to our Joys,
True Emblems of the Sex, and her frail Vows.
For as the Moon so weaned her fickle Passion,
The fleeting Moments bore her Truth away,
And only I am left to speak her Falsehood;
An hated Evidence of broken Faith.
And yet some Proof remains;
[Pulls a Bracelet from his Arm. This Bracelet's of her Hair, wove with her
Hand,
Which, to the Present, gave a double Value:
View well the Clasp, see her fair Self enshrined,
The Altar where my constant Vows I paid:
These were the Gifts she gave me with her Heart.
Why do I still such worthless Toys retain,
When the chief Jewel is recalled?
Why yet (as sacred Relics of our Love)
Worship the Shrine of an apostate Fair?
Hence, vain Remembrancers of past Delight,
[Stamps upon the Bracelet and Picture. I Will tread you into Dust; live, live no
more!
Her faithless Charms shall be revered no more!

Luc. Why do thou tell, and show these Things to me?

Arm. That you may lead me through the wandering Maze;
That you may give me present Death, or Ease.
By those true Tears, that truest Lovers shed;
By all the Sweets of Rosalinda's Arms:
Have pity on my Royal Birth and Sufferings:
Confess what I alas! too much suspect;
Confess, you do succeed me in her Favor:
That I may wander to the utmost Verge;
That ceasing to esteem, I may despise,
And never regret, nor see the Bliss I lost.

Luc. But that thy Breath has tainted her clear Fame,
I should, with Pride, allow my self the Man,
On whom the beauteous Rosalind has smiled.

Arm. Then all is over: I Have no more to manage.
Take, take that Letter, which has racked my Soul;
It could be only writ by her to Lucius,
And yet (prepost'rous Weakness of the Mind)
So much, so blindly 'twas, I loved the Queen,
That though I saw the false One's Name and Hand,
My doubting Soul would scarce my Eyes believe:
In Triumph bear it to her, and reproach
For me, the Heart of faithless Rosalinda:
She never shall see the lost Arminius more.

Luc. Yet stay, and tell me where thou had this Letter.

Arm. I found it in the Lodgings: Though not inscribed to you,
I thought it yours, Because writ by the Queen.

Luc. And yet, as sure as it is her Character,
'Twas not addressed to me.
Lucius reads the Letter. I Will retire, this Evening, into the Grove: Do you,
my Love, attend me there, and destroy this Note at the Command of

ROSALINDA.


Sylvius enters, he kneels. Syl. Most mighty Lords, I beg you on my Knees,
If Tears, Youth, Innocence can move your Pity,
Restore that sacred Letter you were reading:
From me, heedless, it dropped; wild with the Loss,
Around the Court I Have wept, and sought in vain,
With utmost Care and Diligence to find it.
Should the Queen know it, I were lost for ever.

Luc. To whom is it addressed?

Syl. My Lord!

Luc. To whom were thou to carry it?

Syl. Alas! I understand you not my Lord.

Luc. Young Traitor speak, or die.

Syl. Oh Heavens! what shall I say? It is my own:
A Favor of the Queen's bestowed on me.

Arm. Is this the Ground of her Excess of Grace?
This the true Motive of her wondrous Kindness?
The faithful Sylvius proved a Minion.

Luc. Now, where are those Delights, my Passion formed?
Those Scenes of Bliss, which Beauty set before me,
So hard to gain, and yet so quickly lost?
O that bright Mind (for so it seemed to me)
Where Purity, and all the Virtues dwelt,
As at their native Home: How tarnish'd, now
Despoiled of Luster; hateful to the Sight?
Farewell, enchanting Sex; false are your Joys:
Delusion all; no Happiness is in you.
Not one was ever True, since She could fall:
Never shall my Peace of Mind return to bless me:
My Royal Father's Favor I have lost,
Renowned, till now, for Piety and Duty.
I broke those filial Bars for faithless Love;
I Have changed a Parent's Blessing into Curses;
My Fame has taken Wing, and flies before me;
My Glory's blasted; all my Laurels wither;
And nothing now remains for me, but Vengeance
On her -- on him -- on them -- on all, who wronged me.
Dye Slave! and boast it in another World --
Arminius, why do you oppose me?

Arm. Were such a Wretch an Object fit for Rage,
My self, as most abused, would end him.

Luc. He shall not 'scape with Life.

Enter the Queen. Queen. Sure, it is the Prince of Britain's Voice.
Alas! against my faithful Boy his Sword.
Is this well done, my Lord? Or know ye not, that he is mine?

Luc. Too well, too well! I know thy Shame and mine.

Arm. Now Fortune work: It must be all Confusion.
[Aside.
Luc. Unworthy of my Truth, or Tenderness!
Think not of Lucius more, nor I of Rosalind.
Mountains fall down, yawn wide thou Earth between us;
With molten Waves roll up ye sulfurous Lakes.
Divide us Earth and Seas.
Let all Antipathies be reconciled,
But never the Queen of Albany to Lucius!
[ Ex. Luc.
Queen. Oh Heavens and Earth! what can he mean, ye Powers?
Or said he not, that we must meet no more.

Arm. Now, who shall dare to tell the Queen?

Queen. Alas! whence can proceed this sudden Change?
My Lord of Albany, you are our Kinsman,
And Sylvius, thou art of our Household sworn:
By that Allegiance that is due to us,
We charge ye speak, or see our Face no more.

Syl. Perish the Tongue, that gives my Mistress Pain,

Queen. Speak Wretch, or by the Power that governs all,
You Are from our Royal Presence, banished ever.

Arm. When I by cruel Vortimer was sent;
First sent to court you to his cursed Embrace,
What said you not against the Tyrant's Love?
Which I but urged, to prove your Strength of Mind:
For know, young Queen, your Father's Ghost would rise,
Leaving immortal Peace, and the blessed Shades
With horrid Screams, to fright your impious Bed,
If ever his Murderer should clasp you there.

Queen. Shield me, ye Powers, from Vortimer's cursed Love.

Arm. But not his Son's? Confession most abhorred!
The Queen, with Guilt, turns pale. Oh beauteous Frailty!
How hard below it is to find Perfection.
Antipathy to all the hated Race
Should work your Blood in Agonies against 'em.

Queen. You are too bold, uncalled, thus to advise;
Lucius most free, from his bad Father's Crimes,
Should not, in Justice, suffer for another.

Arm. With my dear Uncle's Death I do not charge him;
On Vortimer the weighty Vengeance fall!
Lucius has Guilt of an inherent Dye:
Crimes all his own, which Nature most abhorrs;
Such as must bar him from your Arms for ever.

Queen. Now all that is blessed forbid it!
[Aside.
Arm. Madam, draw near: With steadfast Eyes behold
The Handle of this Sword; survey it well;
The high Ennamel, where the curious Workman
Has cast, in Miniature, your Father's Form;
Which, with the Jewels that enrich the Gift,
He gave me on that memorable Day,
When I attended you to Aquitain.

Queen. I well remember it; most precious Relick,
The Representative of my dear Father.
Alas, alas! how ye recall my Woes:
How ye awake that killing Pain, that Grief
Which Time, in part, had hushed.

Arm. If for my Uncle thus, what for Otharius,
By whom you were so ardently beloved?
But now prepare your Courage for the Shock.
Prince Lucius begged this fatal Sword of me:
What can a vanquished Man refuse the Victor?
Though high as Life, I prized the dear Remains,
Yet I was forced to give it, on that Morn,
When last our Army fought with your Otharius.

Queen. Ha! whither is he going?

Arm. I, through the bloody Field, with this brave Youth,
Moved, fighting, by the warlike Lucius side,
But his immortal Deeds can scarce be told:
Let it suffice, he met the fated King,
The Royal Majesty of Aquitain.
Some moments Fortune held an equal Scale,
Which soon inclined to the young Briton's Side;
Through the King's Heart he thrust this Alban Sword:
Sylvius and I, the dreadful Deed beheld;
The Sword was broke in two; this Piece with him,
The other in the Wound remained.

Queen. Oh heavenly Powers!

Arm. The Victor charged us to conceal the Fact,
Lest Vortimer (grown jealous of his Glory)
Should think he had performed too well.

Queen. Alas! no more. I am a Wretch, Arminius,
Why told'st thou not thy happ'less Queen before?
Where was thy Duty, thy Allegiance then?
Thou shou'd'st have shown my Husband's Murderer,
That I, with detestation, might have shunned him.
Fatal Neglect! Oh Knowledge found too late!
Unhappy Ignorance! accursed Bride,
Never till now undone!

Arm. Beholding you, Prince Lucius grew inflamed,
Which, of the Secret, made him doubly careful.
Long, with a painful Silence, I obliged him:
Long labored 'twixt my Friendship and my Duty:
At last, grown big with our approaching Hopes
(The Picts being up in Arms, and wanting Aid)
Duty prevailed; for I was bound to speak,
Your Page attended with the Sword, the Prince
(Coming from you) perceived it in his Hand,
And conscious where it was designed, drew his
(With many foul Reproaches) on the Boy.
I interposed: Your Majesty appeared,
When Lucius, filled with jealous Rage, departed.

Queen. The World's united Woes are in this Breast:
And yet, perhaps, Arminius is mistaken.
Nay, King Otharius too, fought in disguise:
Six were alike him armed; it was
One of them. I have a Proof: Irene, bring the Sword,
Found in the murdered Body of my Lord:
If they should join, Lucius and I must part.

Arm. Dear prosperous Mischief, lag not now behind;
And then, oh Almerin! the Race is mine. [Aside.

Queen. And yet it cannot be, my search rest here.
Impossible! Fate cannot be so angry. I will not put it to the dreadful Test.
Arminius does, oh Heaven! I can no more.
Perish all Demonstration! unkind,
[The Sword brought and joined. And cruel Prince! oh! why do thou destroy me?
And arm Otharius to my Lucius Ruin.
My living Husband's vanished by the Dead.
My Lord, my Lucius, see thy wretched Bride,
The most forlorn, disconsolate of Women:
I am his Wife, Arminius.

Arm. Forbid it Hecate, with all her Train:
Incessant Furies yell around such Nuptials:
Catch his deceitful Soul, ye bluest Plagues:
Snatch him by Piecemeals, ye avenging Fiends.
Treason and Death! oh impious Parricide!
What! wed Otharius Murderer?
Possessed by one, steeped in your Husband's Blood.

Queen. I sink -- the most unhappy of my Race.
Come near, my Sylvius; I would rest upon thee:
Nay, Albany, thou art too good:
Will thou weep too?

Arm. These bitter Tears, by Strength of Anguish wrung,
Prove, how Arminius loves his happ'less Queen.
It Is I must guard you from impending Ruin:
Lucius has Charms to sway the strongest Mind:
Fly the Seducer, and assert your Glory.
Take Scorpions to your Bed, but take not Lucius.
Lucius! triumphant in his Sin, all gay in Blood;
Dreadfully gay with your dear Husband's Blood:
Unprecedented Horror! fly to Death,
But mingle not with him who slew your Lord:
Light up your Torch at any other Love,
None are debarred your Arms, but that cursed Race
Who murdered poor Otharius, and your Father.

Queen. Thus greatly Wretched, what can save thy Queen?

Arm. Your Albans are already up in Arms;
Sieze on this moment, and be yet a Queen;
A virtuous, innocent, though wretched Queen.
A Guard and Ship stand ready for your Flight,
Whilst, on this Royal Hand, once more I swear,
Only to live, only to die for you.
[Kneels, kissing her Hand.
Enter Lucius behind. Luc. How wildly are we hurried by our Passions!
I was to blame not to explain my Wrongs,
And tell the false One all her Perjuries.
Confront her with her Minion, and the Letter,
Till she confess our Parting is but just.
Ha! what do I see? the faithless Rosalind,
On one reclined, the other at her Feet.
What, have they bargained to divide her Favors?

Queen. Yes, I will go, left Fate should join with Love,
Lest I should wound Otharius over again,
Lest I should view his Murderer with Indulgence;
Lead, lead, Arminius,
I Will follow thee, surrounded with Misfortunes.
Ha! Lucius here! that bloody Conqu'ror, Lucius.
Save me, Arminius; take me from his Sight:
My Eyes! my Soul is fastened! tear me hence;
Bear thy lost Queen, where Tempests loudest roar,
And never let me see the cruel Lucius more.
[Ex. all but Lucius.
Luc. Cursed Weakness of the Mind, which brought me back,
Hence tender Thoughts, hence all Remains of Love;
Hence Jealousy, thou certain Proof of Passion.
Of Hope and Tenderness henceforth disarmed,
My Breast shall pant no more for faithless Beauty;
No more for perjured Woman let us mourn,
To War, to Glory! now my Heart return.
So great Ulysses, soothed by Circe's Charms,
Sighed on her Breast, and melted in her Arms.
What wondrous Transports did her Eyes inspire?
Soft was her Voice, and raging was his Fire:
But when he found her false and cruel Soul,
And in a Form so fair, a Mind so foul;
With Glory and Disdain the Hero burned,
Broke her Enchantments, and the Sex he scorned.
[Exeunt omnes.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
A FOREST.
Enter Lucius alone. Luc. HAIL to the savage Horrors of this Forest!
Receive into thy hospitable Arms,
The wretched, and forsaken Lucius;
Driven from the Commerce of all human Kind,
And never to return.
Oh impious Woman! on thy nuptial Day,
Even on that Day, in which thy Faith was plighted,
To fly, and leave me in the last Despair.
All Joys farewell: The Blossom of my Youth,
Blighted by an unkindly, cruel Frost,
Shall never spring again.
Pressed by this Weight of Woe, I bend to Earth,
From thence to rise no more.
In Wilds and Deserts waste my future Hours,
Falling, inglorious, by a Woman's Falsehood.
Farewell my People, whom I wished to bless,
With all those Virtues that best Kings possess;
My Fame, my Passion, and my Hopes resigned,
With that exalted Ardor of the Mind,
Which swelled my Soul, and made it greatly dare,
And, dauntless, bore me through the fiercest War;
In their cold Bed, unanimated lie,
And like extinguished Fires in darkness die.
[Walks down the Scene, and Exit.
Enter, at another Door, Arminius and Sylvius. Arm. Sylvius, thus far our
Fortune has been fair,
But I grow jealous of a Counter-turn.
Methinks the Captain who commands the Guard,
Has much of Vortimer, the cunning Briton;
I more than fear, it is the King himself:
The Care he takes to shun my Speech and Eyes:
I Am caught in the same Net I cast for others.

Enter an Alban Lord. Alb. Lord. My Lord, it is certainly the King of Britain,
He bears the Royal Signet on his Finger:
The Queen, and you, and we are now his Captives.

Arm. Shall Rosalinda know this fatal Turn?
It will too much her tender Heart affright;
My Resolution must be very sudden.
The Gallick King hunts near, I Will hasten thither;
His Guards are thrice more numerous than ours:
Sylvius, mean time, do thou the Queen amuse.
'Till I return, my Lord, oppose their Flight;
She is our Sovereign, thou art born her Subject:
All Is now at stake; kill him, or fall thy self.
[Ex. omnes.
Enter King Vortimer. K. Vor. What does Arminius mean, by halting here?
With Eyes that darted strong, he viewed me over,
As he would look me through.
If thou have found, and yet avoid'st me, Prince,
It Is Proof thy Soul had formed an Enterprise,
To what thou did pretend most opposite.
I durst not yield a Foe so large a Trust;
'Twere weak, indeed, to put it in his Power,
The Queen to bear away with our own Ships,
To raise a War in Albany against us.
Therefore, like Jove, disguised to gain our Love,
We veil our Majesty, and drop our Thunder.
The Queen appears! that glorious Prize is mine.

Enter the Queen. Madam, forgive this seeming bold Intrusion,
'Till once embarked, your Majesty's not safe.
Why do you squander Time irrevocable?
Queen. Arminius would awhile take shelter here.

K. Vor. The Ports will instantly be stopped,
By Noon your Flight must be the public Theme;
Yet a few Hours, and you have the Waves in view.

Queen. Go find Arminius, tell to him thy Reasons,
And we will instantly depart. [Ex. K. Vor. Depart, for what? or where? my
Torment's fixed,
No Change of Scene can vary my Misfortunes;
The Princess now, may gain the Vows of Lucius,
That solemn Faith he plighted first to me;
Their Hands may join, and she have all his Transports,
That Height of Wish! that Extacy of Soul!
When his bright Eyes spoke better than his Tongue,
Darting delight; for Love was all their Language.
Ah! wretched Rosalinda, whither now?
Think on Otharius: there you are lost indeed:
Thy Lord was slain by him, whom thou have wedded.
Blot out with your, 'till now, unerring Hand;
Blot out, ye Powers, that single murdering Thought.
Tear from the destined Book, that cursed Deed,
All other Woes for ever stand recorded.

Re-enter King Vortimer. K. Vor. Madam, the Prince is no where to be found,
We must proceed without him, or you're lost.

Queen. And, what art thou (unused to such a Presence)
That, with rude Sounds, presum'st t'affront our Ears?

K Vor. Come willingly, for fear you should be forced.

Queen. Who waits? my Guards! Arminius, help!

K. Vor. Thou call'st in vain, a greater Force is here:
It is the King of Britain, who conducts thee.

Queen. Ha! my haughty Foe, the cruel Vortimer!

K. Vor. You're now within my Power, and cannot escape.

Queen. No! I will never stir, I Will grow to Earth.
Heaven! let me change my Being with the Brutes:
Nay, welcome Death! rather than go with thee.

K. Vor. Take heed, how you provoke a King like me:
Mine is a surly, uninvited Cupid:
No willing Harbor finds he in my Breast.
On War, on Empire, all my Thoughts were fixed,
'Till thy malignant. Form intruded here.
Give me my self! I ask but to forget thee.

Queen. A never-failing Cure for Love, is absence.

K. Vor. Oh! it is a tedious One, and racks the Mind;
Nor has it wrought the wished for Cure on me.
Thou'st been my cursed Tormentor, since the Time
I first beheld thee, with my Foe, thy Father:
Now I Will revenge me on that Tyrant Beauty.

Queen. Oh! hear me, King: I am already married.

K. Vor. Then Furies seize thy Husband! what is to be done?
Yield thou to be divorced, and reign our Queen.

Queen. Thy Queen! not to command the Universe;
And yet I wish, that I had never wedded.

K. Vor. Born of an hated Race, and lost to me.
May I not ravish her, I could not win?
May I not seize, what would not be bestowed?
I dream of blessed Enchantment in her Arms:
I, restless, burn, and rave on furious Joy.
And nothing but Possession can assuage
The Lovesick, raging Fever of my Soul.

Queen. Ruffian, forbear! whence comes this Profanation?

K. Vor. Revenge and Love, are both in Arms within.
Thy Eyes, and Scorn, burn me with different Fires.
Urged on to War, and eager for the Conquest,
I cannot part inglorious from the Field.
[Struggles with her, she falls at his Feet.
Queen. Oh! Woe for me.
Thus far I Am vanquished, and thus low subdued.
I clasp thy Knees, I grasp thy Feet with Horror.
Do not assault the Honor of thy Daughter;
I am the Wife of Lucius.

K. Vor. Of Lucius! of that Rebel!
Supplanted by my Son! when were thou wedded?

Queen. Not one kind Hour has our sad Hymen known.
Nay, scarce the Moment smiled, that joined our Hands:
Successive Woes have parted us already.

K. Vor. Thou go with us, to see the Prince no more.
A banished Traitor, shall he always live:
The Hour he lands in Britain, he shall die.

Queen. What, your victorious, loyal, Godlike Son?

K. Vor. Unhappy Queen! thy Praises wing his Fate.
Cursed, as I am, thus burning for thy Charms;
My vital Blood, drank up by thirsty Love,
Seizes the cordial Beauty to revive me.
Lucius has wedded thee, but not enjoyed.
Possession is a better Claim than his:
Then instant let me make the Prize secure.
What follows, we at leisure may debate;
The present Moment takes up all our Thoughts;
This Struggle past, we are our Self again,
And our Heart free from an ungrateful Passion.

Queen. Give me my Death, be there a Conqueror.
Arminius, Albany, help! oh help!

K Vor. Thou rav'st, thou call'st in vain; he hears thee not.
Rich Love, repay me now the Peace I lost.

Queen. Whom shall I next invoke, ye mighty Powers?
Lucius! where art thou now, in my Distress?
My Lord! my Lucius! where art thou my Lucius?
He comes! my Husband comes to save my Honor.
[ Lucius appears at the lower End of the Scene.
Luc. Through the wide ecchoing Forest, who resounds
The Name of Lucius? the Queen of Albany!
And in a Ruffian's Hand! dye, Ravisher!

Queen. Oh! hold. Oh! horror, Lucius: It Is against thy Father.
[The Queen interposes, and Lucius falls at King Vortimer's Feet.
Luc. What, was I armed against my Royal Father?
Against that precious Source of my own Life?
My Heart bleeds inward at the racking Thought.
If this be Fear, I never feared till now.

K. Vor. Retire, and leave us with the Queen.

Luc. Sir.

K. Vor. Traitor be gone; thou have no Business here.

Queen. Oh do not Lucius, as you once loved Virtue;
As once you loved your poor unhappy Bride,
E're adverse Fate could teach thy Heart to change.

K. Vor. Some other Method must be found to part you.
[Exit.
Queen. Above, to those bright Mansions of the Blessed,
The grateful Rosalind, her Thanks returns.
[Kneels. This Day, in each revolving Year, be praised:
Let it be marked the Happy, and the Fair,
And may I cease to live, when I profane it.

Luc. Can Falsehood seem so graceful?

Queen. To thee, my Husband, next, with like regard
(The Instrument of my Deliverance)
I cannot say enough, my Heart is thine.

Luc. Oh! it is a very false One.

Queen. Who Is false, my Lord?

Luc. The perjured Queen.

Queen. Turn not on me, the Errors of our Fate:
Joy at thy Sight, and for my late Escape,
Caused me some Moments to forget my Griefs;
But they return, full blown, with sharp Reproach.
Yes, Lucius, we must part; fly hence for ever:
I too must go, and make my widowed Bed,
Where Winds and Seas, eternally at War,
Have left no Landing-place for Murderers.

Luc. The like Forgetfulness has seized on me.
Almighty Beauty quite becalms my Rage:
In looking on thee, I forget thy Crimes:
Forget, thou gav'st my Honor to the Winds;
Stuck foul Discredit on my spotless Name:
Left me to drink the bitter Dregs of Wrath,
Of burning Jealousy, and cold Despair,
Regardless of the Right, that I claimed in thee.

Queen. Since I am false, have I not need to fly?
Bad Woman as I am, I own my Crime;
But oh! for whom is it, that I am guilty?
In thee, it is most inhumane to reproach me;
Thou made me Criminal, and yet upbraid'st me.
False to Otharius, Murd'ress as I am,
Even now I kill him over again! even now!
Whilst thy too gracious Form is dear to Sight;
Whilst all of thee is precious to my Heart,
And Love o'erwhelms Resentment in my Soul.

Luc. O well dissembled Falsehood.

Queen. Fly thou, lest we should never part:
Though all Regards, divine and humane, plead:
Though Blood cries out aloud, be gone, Revenge:
Though Men and Angels have decreed against thee:
Though Shame, Remorse, and Vengeance, call me hence,
Strong as thou art in Charms, how can I go?

Luc, Yes, thou would go
Around the World to bear my Infamy:
The odious Load, which thou have heaped on me,
On me, and on thy self.
Oh! what art thou become? how art thou called?
The Wife of Lucius, a known Prostitute.
She who fled from him, on his Marriage-day.
Arise Revenge! arise; and force out Love.
Come Indignation, Honor, Glory come;
Strengthen my Arm, and show me how to punish.

Queen. Ah, Heavens! my Lord, you will not kill your Wife.

Luc. Is there another Way to clear my Honor?

Queen. What have I done? or why am I suspected?

Luc. Arminius has thy Virgin-Shame disclosed;
And of thy early Hours the secret Practice:
With the same Rage, as once he loved, he hates.
Behold this Letter -- fair Perdition.
A Boy! a poor domestic Slave! low Sin!
Vile Woman! vicious Sex!
Why was I chosen? I, for this Dishonor?

Queen. Has traitorous Albany traduced my Virtue?

Luc. Thy Self, against thy Self: See here, these Lines;
My Shame and thine! this wicked Scroll is thine.

Queen. By Heaven and Earth it is not! I am wronged.
Hear me, my Lord. Alas! where are your Eyes?
What means that Arm, uplifted to my Death?
Why do you stare, as you were turned to Stone?

Luc. An unseen Power disarms me:
I idly gaze, am lost, but cannot strike.
Away, away! lest I should love to Madness;
Lest I should take Perdition to my Bed;
The Blot of Glory, stained with abject Joys.

Queen. I never writ this! never loved Albany!
Never heard, or thought I was beloved by him.
Oh! Torment of the Mind, to be suspected:
I, who love Honor, Innocence, and Truth,
Next Heaven and thee, that I should be suspected.

Luc. Is it not plain? See there thy Hand, false Woman.
In spite of Charms, I shall relapse to Rage:
In spite of Love, destroy thee -- Let me go.
A Miracle can only clear thy Fame,
And heal my wounded Heart.

[As Lucius is breaking from the Queen, Sylvius enters, his Breast open, torn
and bloody; he falls at the Queen's Feet, Lucius supports him. Syl. Fly, Madam,
I am wounded unto Death:
The King of Britain's Sword has pierced my Heart:
He Is fighting with our Party, and must conquer.
My gracious Queen, I beg you would forgive me.
Lucius, the Letter thou have seen, I wrote:
Thou were thy self the Cause -- I loved thee,
Lucius: Loved thee in Britain:
Followed thee to Aquitain;
Now, in thy Arms, unpitied, dies Alenia.
Oh Almerin! are thus thy Words explained?
[Dies.
Queen. Thy Death's a Miracle to clear my Fame.
My jealous Lord required a Miracle:
It is Alenia, false Arminius's Sister.
Base Man! how deeply were thy Treasons laid?

Luc. With conscious Guilt, for being so misled;
With conscious Shame, for having thus offended;
With all the Penitence of Men convinced,
When they, like me, are tortured by Remorse,
I prostrate fall, to hear your equal Doom.
Pronounce a Sentence heavy as my Crime:
Oh! banish me from Life, but not from Love:
Send me to die, but not to live from you.

Queen. Could Fate as easily be reconciled,
Then might we meet in Joy. But oh! the Fates,
The Fates are angry with us, Lucius.
With thee, for murdering the brave Otharius;
With me, for wedding with his Murderer!

Luc. I kill the King! Who dares accuse the Innocent?

Queen. Albany does.
Arminius and Alenia saw thee kill him:
The Sword found, broken, in Otharius's Body,
Was given thee by Arminius.

Luc. Oh! well-invented Malice:
It Is false, it is false: So may the Traitor die,
Or Lucius perish.

Queen. Did thou not beg of him, my Father's Sword?

Luc. Never! that Villain has traduced us both.

Queen. Oh! I believe thee, Lucius: But the World!
Clear there thy Fame, and I am still thy Bride.

Enter Irene haistily. Irene. Madam, the King has slain the Alban Lord,
Left, by the Prince, to guard your Majesty:
He has fought a bloody Battle with our Party,
But cruel Vortimer, at length has conquered.

Queen. Alas! then I am once again his Captive.
Remember, Lucius, that which thou have sworn;
Protect me from his Love, or thou art perjured.

K. Vortimer enters with Soldiers, they go to seize the Queen; Lucius draws and
defends her. K. Vor. What! arm against thy King! against thy Father!
Will thou? dare thou? then kill the horrid Villain,
That I may curse, I ever had a Son.

Luc. Your Life, great Sir, to me, be always sacred:
I but defend the Honor of my Wife.

K. Vor. Then, Soldiers, strike, strike through the Traytor's Heart.
[They are going to kill the Prince, the Queen comes from behind, and
interposes.
Queen. Through me you strike; I guard my Husband's Life.

K. Vor. Thee I cannot hurt: my Eyes disarm my Hand.
Slaves, tear him thence! but do not touch the Queen, Y
our Lives shall answer it, but kill the Rebel.

Queen. Kill your Son! oh, impious, cursed Command!
Soldiers, stand off, or else you pass through me.

K. Vor. Slaves, Villains, Cowards, are you hers, or mine?

Queen. I cannot long defend him, he must fall:
Yield, Lucius, I release thee from thy Vow.
Oh! save his Life, and I Will consent to go:
Spare but thy Son, I am thy willing Captive.

Luc. What, have thou given thy Honor for my Life?
A vast exchange, and better I had died.

Queen. My Honor, no! That is the Care of Heaven;
My Life I Would always give for thine.

Luc. Oh! sacred Sir.
By all those Ties that keep bad Men from Crimes,
From acting what their wicked Hearts conceive,
I charge you not to think of Violation,
I am your Son; she is my wedded Wife;
More were superfluous.

K. Vor. Away. Now for the Sea.

Queen. And may it with unbounded Rage receive us.
Blow Winds, exert on us your utmost Force,
All Nature else be free; Plunge us beneath,
Dash us on Rocks: ye cannot be too cruel;
Yet spare my Husband, amidst all your Storms.
But for this impious King and me,
War, Fire, Fury, Blood and Devastation
Pursue us, as ye did my wretched Father;
Overtake us, as ye have the slain Otharius:
And when ye come, I shall account it Gain,
That the cursed Briton suffers in my Pain.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The Outer-part of the Temple of Jupiter, Emmelin and Arminius meeting; She
with a Dagger. Emm. UNfaithful Albany, is this the Trust?
Are these the Promises thou made to me?
I feel the Strength of Nations in this Arm,
And thou shall taste my Dagger.

Arm. A Hand so fair, should never menance Danger,
And Peace and Joy should be the Gifts of Beauty:
Were I not yet of Use to Emmelin, [Wrests it from her. I Would not oppose, but
meet the destined Blow.

Emm. Say, fawning Traitor, have thou not undone me?

Arm. Why are you thus against your Slave enraged?
How can your Creature merit Death from you?

Emm. Accomplished Villain! plead'st thou Ignorance,
And Lucius (whom my Soul is fond of) sentenced?
By thy cursed Accusation he is condemned.
Thou told'st the Kings and Priests, he was a Christian;
For That he dies, nor can my Brother save him.

Arm. Oh! hear me: I have served you to the utmost:
No other Way could gain him a Reprieve
From Vortimer, his jealous Father.

Emm. Speak on --

Arm. When first the King, your Brother, and my self
(With all his Guards, and Train of noble Huntsmen)
O'ertook the flying Tyrant, with the Captives,
He halted, to consider of their Death.

Emm. New Horror! murder his only Son!

Arm. I thought what, by his Loss, your Heart would suffer,
And therefore sent for Audience from the Tyrant,
In which, I soon his Confidence regained:
For, whilst the Action passed, I boldly swore,
Within the shady Forest I was sleeping,
'Till wakened by Honorius numerous Train,
I was by them constrained to join his Party.

Emm. Did he credit this?

Arm. He seemed to do it, yet was all Confusion:
Nay, vowed he would, himself, the Captives slay,
Rather than from his Power they should be wrested.

Emm. Cruel Tyrant! most unnatural Father!

Arm. To gain a Pause of Time, some Hours to serve you,
'Twas my advice, that he should yield them up
As Christian Converts, to the Flamen's Hands;
From whence, he afterward, might save the Queen,
Should he design to let his Rival perish.

Emm. Our Laws are such, if Christians are convicted,
They must abjure, or die!
The Queen, by all our People is beloved:
For, though they long have guessed she was a Convert,
'Till now, alas! she never was accused:
Thy Breath has killed her: Thou have slain thy Queen.
The Gods will hunt thee round the World for this,
Rebel and Traitor as thou art.

Arm. To you I am no Traitor.

Emm. How did thou know that Lucius was a Christian?

Arm. I thought the Queen might have converted him;
And he, with Pride, upon the first Demand,
Above his Father's Hopes, acknowledged it.

Emm. This, then, is the Result: But if he die,
(Mark me, my cunning Lord of Albany,
For by Diana's Chastity I swear)
I will have Vengeance for the Prince's Death.

Arm. They have refused the Druids offered Mercy:
The jealous Briton urges for a Sentence:
His Guards have got possession of this Temple;
Nor dares the King, for fear of popular Rage,
Wrest Christian-Convicts from the Flamen's Hands.
What can we then project to save the Prince?

Emm. The Prince of Cambria, and the King my Brother,
With pressing, yet unprosperous Tears and Prayers,
Have sought the Tyrant to release the Captives;
But, by the superstitious People joined,
He Lords it here, as if he were in Britain.
In this Extremity some Hopes remain,
That we may yet surprise the British Guard,
Which, if by thee, and by the Prince performed,
May, from the public Hate, preserve my Brother:
A chosen Party of the Gallick Troops,
Have Orders to obey you.
Haste then, with these, and save the Royal Prisoners;
Relieve my Love, though he be never for me.
Fly -- tear him from his Rival -- set him free,
Or my Revenge shall center all in thee.

[The Curtain drawn up, discovers an Altar to Jupiter; Flamens attending:
Lucius and the Queen under the British Guard. Luc. Yet, ere my Father shall
pronounce our Doom,
Let me, this Once, enfold thee in my Arms;
Take from my Wife, this first and last Embrace.
Oh! sweet to Sense -- O yet untasted Beauty:
To die is nothing -- but resigning thee,
I merit more than ever Man could merit.

Queen. So fast these troubled watery Bubbles rise,
I cannot see thee through 'em. Oh! farewell.

Luc. Farewell, my Queen: May the sharp Pangs of Death
Fall gently on thee, as when Children slumber.

Queen. May Angels bear thee on their golden Wings,
Without the intermediate Pains between.

Luc. My Father comes, and now we part for ever.

Enter K. Vortimer, Priests and Train. K. Vor. Christians! once more, do ye
Abjure or Die?

Luc. Die.

Queen. Both die.

Luc. But first, great Sir, I beg, in Death, forgiveness,
[Kneels. In what (as erring Man) I have offended;
Though never, willingly, did I displease
My awful King and Father:
As to my Love, it was involuntary;
Hearts do not give themselves; for that I die.

Queen. As of my dearest Lord, you are the Parent,
Pardon those Words I may in Rage have spoke;
[Kneels. But sure the Provocation was extreme,
I do forgive, and would be so forgiven.

Luc. I wish you Length of Days, and to forget me:
Forget you ever had an unhappy Son;
But may you still, with never-ending Grief,
Remember Rosalinda.

Queen. Long may you live, repenting Lucius Death:
To you I recommend my helpless People,
If ever their Queen you loved (as much you flattered)
Govern with Clemency.

K. Vor. They shake my Heart:
Yet, never from Love, could Pity gain the Ground.
Yield up thy Bride to us, and thou shall live;
[Aside to Luc. Thy cursed Marriage may be disannul'd,
And thou proclaimed our Kingdom's Heir.

Luc. Forsake my Wife! it is not in my Power:
Mercy is Cruelty, when so disguised.

K. Vor. Then thou shall die, rebellious hardened Boy.
You know your Charms, exert 'em now, be mine,
And Lucius, my cursed Rival, too shall live.
[Aside to the Queen.
Queen. To save the Prince's Life, I would do all
But break the sacred Vow, I plighted to him.

K. Vor. Since thus I Am braved by their fantastic Passion,
Their Death shall be an instant Cure for mine.
Take hence, to different Prisons, both these Christians,
The Woman strait shall die by Fire:
But first, The common Deathsman riots in her Charms;
Whilst Lucius, on a lofty Scaffold bleeds.
Their Sentence is irrevocable.

Luc. A Queen condemned to suffer as a Slave,
Oh awful Judge! I cannot call you Father.
Let savage Beasts hunt down my wearied Life;
Tear off my Flesh, or bury me alive;
Rack only me, and I will bless the King;
But save, unhurt, the Honor of my Wife.

Queen. Sacred to Virtue and immortal Glory,
Sacred to chaste and holy Purity,
Who is it dares to sentence our high Honor?
Our spotless Fame aspires to reach the Skies.
Our Life we willingly resign; there glut your Rage.

K. Vor. Hence. Bear 'em to their Prisons.

Queen. Oh! Lucius, Lucius, they would drag me from thee.

Luc. Slaves, Ravishers, forbear to touch my Wife.

Queen. He is my Lord; we cannot part, and live.

Luc. Oh! Father, Monarch, Royal Vortimer,
By my dear Mother's Honor, save the Queen's.

K. Vor. Down, down with him to the Temple-dungeon.
[The Stage opens, and Lucius is carried down by the Priests and Soldiers.
Queen. Upwards to Heaven, where he shall rise a Saint.
Oh! mighty Powers, my Breast (by you inspired)
Foretells some Miracle, vouchsafed to me,
Shall guard my Chastity from brutal Rage.
All worldly Pomp I willingly forego;
My Husband too, the dearest Gift of Life.
Through Fire I Will gladly pass, my Faith to prove,
If Fire can save me from an impious Love.
[Ex. guarded.
K. Vor. Now laugh, proud Queen, and scorn our proffered Throne.

Enter Arminius. Lord Albany, what you advised, is done.
Arm. It is Revenge befitting a great Soul:
Oh! 'twill be great, be Extacy indeed,
If you can personate the happy Slave
Sentenced to ravish this nice Piece of Beauty,
And like brave Tarquin, clasp your far-fam'd Lucrece.

K. Vor. Revenge and Love shall be together sated:
Under the vile Appearance of that Wretch,
We will possess the Fair, yet shroud our Glory.

Arm. How bears Honorius such a foul Decree?

K. Vor. The Coward Gaul, durst not release the Christians,
Durst not command, even in his Capital,
Lest his good People should, forsooth, grow angry.
We laughed to see the Royal Dastard's Fears;
Whilst, by our seeming Zeal, and Gold well-plac'd,
We gained a Sentence hateful to their King.
Were she not fair, what were her Gods to me?
Let Nations wonder at the horrid Deed:
Let all the Monarchs of the World unite,
To pour down Vengeance on our guilty Head,
We'll meet the Torrent, when we have quenched our Flame.
Yes, Rosalind! thy Beauties are devoted,
Through Laws we wade, to reach thy cruel Arms,
Through thy own Blood to taste thy boasted Charms.
If Love alone can wisest Counsels blast,
Unpeople Kingdoms, and lay Nations waste;
With Indignation when the God is fired,
At once by Fury and Revenge inspired;
Like Lightning from the Hand of Jove he flies,
All Danger, and all Rule, his Rage defies,
Nor dreads the threat'ned Vengeance of the Skies.
[Ex. King Vor.
Arm. Fortune, once more, let me invoke thy Aid.
Oh! thou great Goddess, be propitious now,
And stand reversed for ever!
[Exit. [The Scene shifts to the Dungeon, Lucius discovered, Arminius enters to
him.
Arm. Long live the Prince of Britain.

Luc. Who Is there?

Arm. A Friend to Lucius.

Luc. Thou! guilty, treacherous Lord of Albany! C
an'st thou, who wronged the Queen, and wronged our Fame
Presume to be a Friend? Oh! for a Sword.

Arm. There, have your Wish: But turn it not on me,
'Till Fate has leisure for so vile a Life.

Luc. Speak on: What was thy Errand hither?

Arm. Hope to preserve the Queen from Violation.
Measure my Zeal by her Distress: Alas!
Both are too great for Words.

Luc. Albany's Zeal! an ignominious Traitor
Who has traduced us both; stained the Queen's Glory,
And fixed on me the Murder of Otharius.

Arm. Wild to possess what most my Soul adored,
What would not a poor lost, despairing Lover?
But oh! no more she lives for you, nor me:
No more her Honor lives, without our Succor.
By an unheard of, monstrous, vile Decree,
A sordid Slave possesses all her Charms,
Unless, this Instant, we the Wretch can slay.
I Will lead you where you may the Deed perform:
Time calls on me to head Honorius Troops,
Disposed, by him, and Emmelin, to aid you:
Perhaps, some lucky Moment may look forth
To save her sacred Life, as well as Honor.
What Vengeance Then, a noble Foe can ask,
All the Revenge that Arm can take, be thine.

Luc. Hope, once again, re-kindles in my Soul:
This Deed performed, and the bright Queen preserved,
I claim the Justice of thy Sword: 'Till when,
In the ensuing Tumult, spare my Father.
[Exeunt
The Scene shifts, they re-enter. Arm. That Door conducts you to the Queen;
The British Guards are drawn around the Temple;
The Priests themselves, as loath to hear her Shrieks,
Retire to Corners, to bewail the Event.
There Is the Way; be sure you kill the Ravisher.

Luc. Farewell: Inevitable Death pursues him.
[Luc. goes in.
Arm. This is, indeed, a Masterpiece of Cunning:
This is a most accomplished Strain of Thought.
The Father kill the Son, the Son the Father:
Either fall, or both; but one must perish:
I head the Gauls, and murder the Survivor,
And then the Crown and Queen may yet be mine.
[Ex. Arm. [The Scene changes.
Enter Vortimer disguised in a sordid Habit: As he is going out at the opposite
Door, Lucius pursues him, pulls him back, and stabs him. Luc. Stay, Ruffian,
take thy Death from Lucius Hand.
Where is my Rosalinda? where is my Love?
My dearest Queen? the Ravisher's no more: [the Queen enters. The sordid,
ignominious Slave is dead.

K. Vor. Yet, but a moment's Space, and I am gone;
The God's have proved themselves, and I am slain.

Luc. That Voice has something sacred in the Sound.

K. Vor. It is thy Father: Thou have slain me, Lucius.
Killed him, who gave thee Life: Curse on the Deed.
[Dies.
Luc. Oh! it is he, it is he; the Royal Vortimer:
Even now, his angry Soul has forced its Passage:
Swiftly his Breath fleets upwards from my Sight.
Now he arraigns me at the Bar of Justice,
Now he accuses his ill-fated Son;
Now he pulls down the righteous Vengeance on me,
Invokes the Thunder, and all-piercing Lightning.
How full it glares on my defective Sight:
Overwhelmed by dreadful Bolts, the Wrath of Heaven,
Down, down I sink to meet the Fate of Parricides:
Avenge my Father's Blood, Despair and Death:
A King's, a Parent's Blood! Despair and Die!
[Falls in a Trance.
Queen. Oh! great unhappy Hero, born for Woe:
Oh! fatal Moment, that inclined thy Heart,
To think the wretched Rosalinda fair.
Dear, lovely Eyes, admit no more of Day:
Eternal be this Lethargy of Grief:
Do not return to conscious, racking Thought.
He comes again to Miseries untold:
To Life, to Sense, to Reason, to Distraction!

Luc. Say, thou bright fair One, who first taught me Truth,
May not this Hand avenge a Parent's Blood?

Queen. The Gates of Mercy are for ever shut
Against Self-murtherers.

Luc. What, cut a Father's Thread,
And calmly wait the breaking of my own?
Not Years of strictest Penance can atone;
Can expiate, for snedding sacred Blood.
Oh King! thy Usurpation and bad Deeds,
The Murder of thy Prince, are here revenged:
For ever Scarlet, those deep-tinctur'd Crimes
(By an irrevocable, righteous Doom)
Have made thy Son thy Executioner.
On me thy Sins descend, for thee I am cursed.

Queen. Arise, my Lord, new Mischiefs are at hand.

Luc. It Is false Arminius fighting with the Guards.
Arminius says, I slew the great Otharius,
Arminius stained the Honor of the Queen,
Arminius urged me on to kill my Father,
Arminius comes for Payment of his Crimes:
Traitor! have at thy Heart!

An Alarm and fighting within: Arminius enters at the Head of a Party, goes to
kill Lucius, is killed by him: Then enter the Prince of Cambria, leading
Emmelin, Irene, etc. Arm. Oh! I am slain.
I Have justly met my Death from Lucius Hand.

Queen. Yet, as thou hop'st for Pardon of thy Crimes,
If thou have Breath, tell me who killed Otharius?

Arm. I slew your Lord, and fixed it upon Lucius;
Wild Love and false Ambition were my Guides:
The Gods forgive us all.
[Dies.
Prince of Camb. Dear noble Youth,
The Powers have brought us to preserve thy Life,
From the hard Sentence of a cruel Father.

Luc. Oh Uncle! shroud me from an impious Deed:
Oh! hide me in your Bosom from the Light.
Behold that sacred Body! There Is my Father:
Behold, in Lucius, the cursed Parricide.

Pr. of Camb. Vortimer slain, and by my Nephew's Hand!
Thou great, illustrious, happy, happy Youth,
The Fates have now been busy for thy Glory.
Hear all, and tremble at this righteous Justice.
Thou have slain thy Father's Murderer, Lucius;
Avenged his Death, and punished the Usurper.

Luc. Oh Uncle! was not Vortimer my Father?

Pr. of Camb. This Monster could not have a Son, like Lucius.
Thou ow'st thy Birth to the late Royal King,
Whom this vile Traitor, at a Banquet slew:
The Queen was then in Childbed; You her Offspring.
To save you from a cruel Tyrant's Sword,
We spread the Rumor of your sudden Death,
And with feigned Tears, wept over an empty Tomb:
The War in Gallia drew him from the Throne,
In foreign Fields to bury loyal Chiefs,
Who ill could bear the Murder of their King.

Luc. But how, great Sir, was I supposed his Son?

Pr. of Camb. He forced a Marriage with the Queen my Sister.
By my Advice, you seemed to spring from thence:
The Queen's retir'dness barred intruding Eyes;
'Till broke with Sorrow, shortly she expired.
Six Years the Tyrant passed in foreign War:
At his return, I gave you to his Arms,
Who, as a forward Miracle, received you.
Thus the just Powers have led you by the Hand,
To punish, in cursed Vortimer, the Man,
Who caused the Death of both your Royal Parents.

Luc. Oh holy Angels! tune it in your Choir;
Echo it Heaven, through all yon azure Sky;
The happy Lucius has not slain his Father.
To you, bright beauteous Princess's, I sue:
To you, my noble Uncle, and our Friends,
Kneel all, and kiss the Dust in Adoration,
Kneel all, and praise the Eternal Power with me:
The happy Lucius has revenged his Father.

Queen. My Life, my Honor, and my People rescued,
Could only be the Work of Heaven, and Lucius.

Luc. Once more thou art my Wife.

Queen. Once more and ever be my Love.

Emm. Here, Emmelin, thy Hopes of Lucius die;
Be then no more misled by fatal Love,
But to Diana's Train, devote thy self
For ever.
[Aside.
Luc. What Thanks, bright Princess, shall I pay to you,
And your great Brother, who has helped to save me? [to Emm.
That I have passed the threat'ned Storms of Fate,
Avenged my Parents, and preserved my Wife,
Are Blessings first derived to me from Beauty.
Benighted, groveling on my Mother Earth,
'Till Beauty called, I unenlightned lay:
By Beauty lead, I sought eternal Day.
I view those shining Realms of Light above,
And gain immortal Happiness by Love.
[Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.

