THE London Merchant: OR, THE HISTORY OF GEORGE BARNWELL. As it is Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE. By HIS MAJESTY's Servants.

By Mr. LILLO.

Learn to be wise from others Harm,
And you shall do full well.
Old Ballad of the Lady's Fall. LONDON: Printed for J. GRAY, at the Cross-Keys
in the Poultry; and sold by J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXXI. [Price
One-Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO Sir John Eyles, Bar. Member of Parliament for, and Alderman of the City of
London, and Sub-Governor of the South Sea Company.
SIR,
IF Tragic Poetry be, as Mr. Dryden has some where said, the most excellent
and most useful Kind of Writing, the more extensively useful the Moral of any
Tragedy is, the more excellent that Piece must be of its Kind.

I hope I shall not be thought to insinuate that this, to which I have presumed
to prefix your Name, is such; that depends on its Fitness to answer the End of
Tragedy, the exciting of the Passions, in order to the correcting such of them
as are criminal, either in their Nature, or through their Excess. Whether the
following Scenes do this in any tolerable Degree, is, with the Deference, that
becomes one who would not be thought vain, submitted to your candid and
impartial Judgment.

What I would infer is this, I think, evident Truth; that Tragedy is so far
from losing its Dignity, by being accommodated to the Circumstances of the
Generality of Mankind, that it is more truly august in Proportion to the Extent
of its Influence, and the Numbers that are properly affected by it. As it is
more truly great to be the Instrument of Good to many, who stand in need of our
Assistance, than to a very small Part of that Number.

If Princes, etc. were alone liable to Misfortunes, arising from Vice, or
Weakness in themselves, or others, there would be good Reason for confining the
Characters in Tragedy to those of superior Rank; but, since the contrary is
evident, nothing can be more reasonable than to proportion the Remedy to the
Disease.

I am far from denying that Tragedies, founded on any instructive and
extraordinary Events in History, or a well-invented Fable, where the Persons
introduced are of the highest Rank, are without their Use, even to the Bulk of
the Audience. The strong Contrast between a Tamerlane and a Bajazet, may have
its Weight with an unsteady People, and contribute to the fixing of them in the
Interest of a Prince of the Character of the former, when, through their own
Levity, or the Arts of designing Men, they are rendered factious and uneasy,
though they have the highest Reason to be satisfied. The Sentiments and Example
of a Cato, may inspire his Spectators with a just Sense of the Value of
Liberty, when they see that honest Patriot prefer Death to an Obligation from a
Tyrant, who would sacrifice the Constitution of his Country, and the Liberties
of Mankind, to his Ambition or Revenge. I have attempted, indeed, to enlarge
the Province of the graver Kind of Poetry, and should be glad to see it carried
on by some abler Hand. Plays, founded on moral Tales in private Life, may be of
admirable Use, by carrying Conviction to the Mind, with such irresistible
Force, as to engage all the Faculties and Powers of the Soul in the Cause of
Virtue, by stifling Vice in its first Principles. They who imagine this to be
too much to be attributed to Tragedy, must be Strangers to the Energy of that
noble Species of Poetry. Shakespeare, who has given such amazing Proofs of his
Genius, in that as well as in Comedy, in his Hamlet, has the following Lines.
Had he the Motive and the Cause for Passion
That I have; he would drown the Stage with Tears
And cleave the general Ear with horrid Speech;
Make mad the Guilty, and appale the Free,
Confound the Ignorant, and amaze indeed
The very Faculty of Eyes and Ears.
And farther, in the same Speech, I Have heard that guilty Creatures at a Play,
Have, by the very cunning of the Scene,
Been so struck to the Soul, that presently
They have proclaimed their Malefactions.
Prodigious! yet strictly just. But I shall not take up your valuable Time with my
Remarks; only give me Leave just to observe, that he seems so firmly persuaded
of the Power of a well wrote Piece to produce the Effect here ascribed to it,
as to make Hamlet venture his Soul on the Event, and rather trust that, than a
Messenger from the other World, though it assumed, as he expresses it, his noble
Father's Form, and assured him, that it was his Spirit. I Will have, says Hamlet,
Grounds more relative. -- The Play's the Thing,
Wherein I Will catch the Conscience of the King.
Such Plays are the best Answers to them who deny the Lawfulness of the Stage.

Considering the Novelty of this Attempt, I thought it would be expected from
me to say something in its Excuse; and I was unwilling to lose the Opportunity
of saying something of the Usefulness of Tragedy in general, and what may be
reasonably expected from the farther Improvement of this excellent Kind of
Poetry.

Sir, I hope you will not think I have said too much of an Art, a mean Specimen
of which I am ambitious enough to recommend to your Favor and Protection. A
Mind, conscious of superior Worth, as much despises Flattery, as it is above
it. Had I found in my self an Inclination to so contemptible a Vice, I should
not have chose Sir JOHN EYLES for my Patron. And indeed the best writ
Panegyric, though strictly true, must place you in a Light, much inferior to
that in which you have long been fixed, by the Love and Esteem of your Fellow
Citizens; whose Choice of you for one of their Representatives in Parliament,
has sufficiently declared their Sense of your Merit. Nor has the Knowledge of
your Worth been confined to the City. The Proprietors in the South Sea Company,
in which are included Numbers of Persons; as considerable for their Rank,
Fortune, and Understanding, as any in the Kingdom, gave the greatest Proof of
their Confidence, in your Capacity and Probity, when they chose you
Sub-Governor of their Company, at a Time when their Affairs were in the utmost
Confusion, and their Properties in the greatest Danger. Nor is the Court
insensible of your Importance. I shall not therefore attempt your Character,
nor pretend to add any Thing to a Reputation so well established.

Whatever others may think of a Dedication, wherein there is so much said of
other Things, and so little of the Person to whom it is addressed, I have
Reason to believe that you will the more easily pardon it on that very Account.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, GEORGE LILLO.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mr. CIBBER, Jun.
THE Tragic Muse, sublime, delights to show
Princes distressed, and Scenes of Royal Woe;
In awful Pomp, Majestic, to relate
The Fall of Nations, or some Hero's Fate:
That Sceptered Chiefs may by Example know
The strange Vicissitude of Things below:
What Dangers on Security attend;
How Pride and Cruelty in Ruin end:
Hence Providence Supreme to know; and own
Humanity adds Glory to a Throne.
In every former Age, and Foreign Tongue,
With Native Grandeur thus the Goddess sung.
Upon our Stage indeed, with wished Success,
You Have sometimes seen her in a humbler Dress;
Great only in Distress. When she complains
In Southern's, Rowe's, or Otway's moving Strains,
The Brillant Drops, that fall from each bright Eye,
The absent Pomp, with brighter Jems, supply.
Forgive us then, if we attempt to show,
In artless Strains, a Tale of private Woe.
A London Prentice ruined is our Theme,
Drawn from the famed old Song, that bears his Name.
We hope your Taste is not so high to scorn
A moral Tale, esteemed ever you were born;
Which for a Century of rolling Years,
Has filled a thousand-thousand Eyes with Tears.
If thoughtless Youth to warn, and shame the Age
From Vice destructive, well becomes the Stage;
If this Example Innocence secure,
Prevent our Guilt, or by Reflection cure;
If Millwood's dreadful Guilt, and sad Despair,
Commend the Virtue of the Good and Fair,
Though Art be wanting, and our Numbers fail,
Indulge the Attempt in Justice to the Tale.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Thorowgood, Mr. Bridgwater. Barnwell, Uncle to George Mr. Roberts. George
Barnwell, Mr. Cibber, Jun. Trueman, Mr. W. Mills. Blunt, Mr. R. Wetherilt.
WOMEN.
Maria, Mrs. Cibber. Millwood, Mrs. Butler. Lucy, Mrs. Charke.
Officers with their Attendants, Keeper, and Footmen.
SCENE London, and an adjacent Village. THE London Merchant: OR, THE HISTORY OF
GEORGE BARNWELL.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room in Thorowgood 's House. Thorowgood and Trueman. Tr. SIR, the Packet
from Genoa is arrived. [Gives Letters.


Thor. Heaven be praised, the Storm that threatened our Royal Mistress, pure
Religion, Liberty, and Laws, is for a Time diverted; the haughty and revengeful
Spaniard, disappointed of the Loan on which he depended from Genoa, must now
attend the slow return of Wealth from his new World, to supply his empty
Coffers, ever he can execute his purposed Invasion of our happy Island; by
which means Time is gained to make such Preparations on our Part, as may,
Heaven concurring, prevent his Malice, or turn the meditated Mischief on
himself.


Tr. He must be insensible indeed, who is not affected when the Safety of his
Country is concerned. -- Sir, may I know by what means -- if I am too bold --


Thor. Your Curiosity is laudable; and I gratify it with the greater Pleasure,
because from thence you may learn, how honest Merchants, as such, may sometimes
contribute to the Safety of their Country, as they do at all times to its
Happiness; that if hereafter you should be tempted to any Action that has the
Appearance of Vice or Meanness in it, upon reflecting on the Dignity of our
Profession, you may with honest Scorn reject whatever is unworthy of it.


Tr. Should Barnwell, or I, who have the Benefit of your Example, by our ill
Conduct bring any Imputation on that honorable Name, we must be left without
excuse.


Thor. You complement, young Man. -- [Trueman bows respectfully. Nay, I Am not
offended. As the Name of Merchant never degrades the Gentleman, so by no means
does it exclude him; only take heed not to purchase the Character of
Complai^ant at the Expense of your Sincerity. -- But to answer your Question,
-- The Bank of Genoa had agreed, at excessive Interest and on good Security, to
advance the King of Spain a Sum of Money sufficient to equip his vast Armado,
-- of which our peerless Elizabeth (more than in Name the Mother of her People)
being well informed, sent Walsingham, her wise and faithful Secretary, to
consult the Merchants of this loyal City, who all agreed to direct their
several Agents to influence, if possible, the Genoese to break their Contract
with the Spanish Court. It Is done, the State and Bank of Genoa, having maturely
weighed and rightly judged of their true Interest, prefer the Friendship of the
Merchants of London, to that of a Monarch, who proudly styles himself King of
both Indies.


Tr. Happy Success of prudent Councils. What an Expense of Blood and Treasure
is here saved? -- Excellent Queen! O how unlike to former Princes, who made the
Danger of foreign Enemies a Pretense to oppress their Subjects, by Taxes great
and grievous to be born.


Thor. Not so our gracious Queen, whose richest Exchequer is her Peoples Love,
as their Happiness her greatest Glory.


Tr. On these Terms to defend us, is to make our Protection a Benefit worthy
her who confers it, and well worth our Acceptance.


Tr. Sir, have you any Commands for me at this Time?


Thor. Only to look carefully over the Files to see whether there are any
Trades-mens Bills unpaid; and if there are, to send and discharge 'em. We must
not let Artificers lose their Time, so useful to the Public and their
Families, in unnecessary Attendance.


SCENE II.
Thorowgood and Maria. Th. Well, Maria, have you given Orders for the
Entertainment? I would have it in some measure worthy the Guests. Let there be
plenty, and of the best; that the Courtiers, though they should deny us Citizens
Politeness, may at least commend our Hospitality.


Ma. Sir, I have endeavored not to wrong your well-known Generosity by an
ill-timed Parsimony.


Thor. Nay, 'twas a needless Caution, I have no cause to doubt your Prudence.


Ma. Sir! I find my self unfit for Conversation at present, I should but
increase the Number of the Company, without adding to their Satisfaction.


Thor. Nay, my Child, this Melancholy must not be indulged.


Ma. Company will but increase it. I wish you would dispense with my Absence;
Solitude best suits my present Temper.


Thor. You are not insensible that it is chiefly on your Account these noble
Lords do me the Honor so frequently to grace my Board; should you be absent,
the Disappointment may make them repent their Condescension, and think their
Labor lost.


Ma. He that shall think his Time or Honor lost in visiting you, can set no
real Value on your Daughter's Company, whose only Merit is that she is yours.
The Man of Quality, who chooses to converse with a Gentleman and Merchant of
your Worth and Character, may confer Honor by so doing, but he loses none.


Thor. Come, come, Maria, I need not tell you that a young Gentleman may prefer
your Conversation to mine, yet intend me no Disrespect at all; for though he may
lose no Honor in my Company, it is very natural for him to expect more Pleasure
in yours. I remember the Time, when the Company of the greatest and wisest Man
in the Kingdom would have been insipid and tiresome to me, if it had deprived
me of an Opportunity of enjoying your Mother's.


Ma. Yours no doubt was as agreeable to her; for generous Minds know no
Pleasure in Society but where it is mutual.


Thor. Thou know I have no Heir, no Child but thee; the Fruits of many Years
successful Industry must all be thine, now it would give me Pleasure great as
my Love, to see on whom you would bestow it. I am daily solicited by Men of the
greatest Rank and Merit for leave to address you, but I have hitherto declined
it, in hopes that by Observation I should learn which way your Inclination
tends; for as I know Love to be essential to Happiness in the Marriage State, I
had rather my Approbation should confirm your Choice, than direct it.


Ma. What can I say? How shall I answer, as I ought, this Tenderness, so
uncommon, even in the best of Parents: But you are without Example; yet had you
been less indulgent, I had been most wretched. That I look on the Crowd of
Courtiers, that visit here, with equal Esteem, but equal Indifference, you have
observed, and I must needs confess; yet had you asserted your Authority, and
insisted on a Parent's Right to be obeyed, I had submitted, and to my Duty
sacrificed my Peace.


Thor. From your perfect Obedience in every other Instance, I feared as much;
and therefore would leave you without a Bias in an Affair wherein your
Happiness is so immediately concerned.


Ma. Whether from a Want of that just Ambition that would become your Daughter,
or from some other Cause I know not; but, I find high Birth and Titles don't
recommend the Man, who owns them, to my Affections.


Thor. I would not that they should, unless his Merit recommends him more. A
noble Birth and Fortune, though they make not a bad Man good, yet they are a real
Advantage to a worthy one, and place his Virtues in the fairest Light.


Ma. I cannot answer for my Inclinations, but they shall ever be submitted to
your Wisdom and Authority; and as you will not compel me to marry where I
cannot love, so Love shall never make me act contrary to my Duty. Sir, have I
your Permission to retire.


Thor. I Will see you to your Chamber.


SCENE III.
A Room in Millwood 's House. Millwood. Lucy Waiting. Mill. How do I look to
Day, Lucy?


Lucy. O, killingly, Madam! -- A little more Red, and you will be irresistible!
-- But why this more than ordinary Care of your Dress and Complexion? What new
Conquest are you aiming at?


Mill. A Conquest, would be new indeed!


Lucy. Not to you, who make 'em every Day, -- but to me. -- Well! it is what I Am
never to expect, -- unfortunate as I am: -- But your Wit and Beauty --


Mill. First made me a Wretch, and still continue me so. -- Men, however
generous or sincere to one another, are all selfish Hypocrites in their Affairs
with us. We are no otherwise esteemed or regarded by them, but as we contribute
to their Satisfaction.


Lucy. You are certainly, Madam, on the wrong Side in this Argument: Is not the
Expense all theirs? And I am sure it is our own Fault if we hav'n't our Share
of the Pleasure.


Mill. We are but Slaves to Men.


Lucy. Nay, it is they that are Slaves most certainly; for we lay them under
Contribution.


Mill. Slaves have no Property; no, not even in themselves. -- All is the
Victors.


Lucy. You are strangely arbitrary in your Principles, Madam.


Mill. I would have my Conquests complete, like those of the Spaniards in the
New World; who first plundered the Natives of all the Wealth they had, and then
condemned the Wretches to the Mines for Life, to work for more.


Lucy. Well, I shall never approve of your Scheme of Government: I should think
it much more politic, as well as just, to find my Subjects an easier
Employment.


Mill. It Is a general Maxim among the knowing Part of Mankind, that a Woman
without Virtue, like a Man without Honor or Honesty, is capable of any Action,
though never so vile: And yet what Pains will they not take, what Arts not use,
to seduce us from our Innocence, and make us contemptible and wicked, even in
their own Opinions? Then is it not just, the Villains, to their Cost, should
find us so. -- But Guilt makes them suspicious, and keeps them on their Guard;
therefore we can take Advantage only of the young and innocent Part of the Sex,
who having never injured Women, apprehend no Injury from them.


Lucy. Ay, they must be young indeed.


Mill. Such a one, I think, I have found. -- As I Have passed through the City, I
have often observed him receiving and paying considerable Sums of Money; from
thence I conclude he is employed in Affairs of Consequence.


Lucy. Is he handsome?


Mill. Ay, ay, the Stripling is well made.


Lucy. About --


Mill. Eighteen --


Lucy. Innocent, Handsome, and about Eighteen. -- You Will be vastly happy. --
Why, if you manage well, you may keep him to your self these two or three Years.


Mill. If I manage well, I shall have done with him much sooner, having long
had a Design on him; and meeting him Yesterday, I made a full Stop, and gazing
wishfully on his Face, asked him his Name: He blushed, and bowing very low,
answered, George Barnwell. I begged his Pardon for the Freedom I had taken, and
told him, that he was the Person I had long wished to see, and to whom I had an
Affair of Importance to communicate, at a proper Time and Place. He named a
Tavern; I talked of Honor and Reputation, and invited him to my House: He
swallowed the Bait, promised to come, and this is the Time I expect him,
[knocking at the Door.] Some Body knocks, -- do you hear; I am at Home to no Body
to Day, but him. --


SCENE IV.
Millwood. Mill. Less Affairs must give Way to those of more Consequence; and I
am strangely mistaken if this does not prove of great Importance to me and him
too, before I have done with him. -- Now, after what Manner shall I receive
him? Let me consider -- what manner of Person am I to receive? -- He is young,
innocent, and bashful; therefore I must take Care not to shock him at first. --
But then, if I have any Skill in Phisiognomy, he is amorous, and, with a little
Assistance, will soon get the better of his Modesty, -- I Will trust to Nature,
who does Wonders in these Matters. -- If to seem what one is not, in order to
be the better liked for what one really is; if to speak one thing, and mean the
direct contrary, be Art in a Woman, I know nothing of Nature.


SCENE V.
To her, Barnwell bowing very low, Lucy at a Distance. Mill. Sir! the Surprise
and Joy! --


Barn. Madam. --


Mill. This is such a Favor, -- [advancing.


Barn. Pardon me, Madam, --


Mill. So unhop'd for, -- [still advances.

[Barnwell salutes her, and retires in Confusion.
Mill. To see you here. -- Excuse the Confusion. --


Barn. I fear I am too bold. --


Mill. Alas, Sir! All my Apprehensions proceed from my Fears of your thinking
me so. -- Please, Sir, to sit. -- I am as much at a Loss how to receive this
Honor as I ought, as I am surpised at your Goodness in confering it.


Barn. I thought you had expected me -- I promised to come.


Mill. That is the more surprising; few Men are such religious Observers of
their Word.


Barn. All, who are honest, are.


Mill. To one another: -- But we silly Women are seldom thought of Consequence
enough to gain a Place in your Remembrance. [Laying her Hand on his, as by
Accident.


Barn. Her Disorder is so great, she don't perceive she has laid her Hand on
mine. -- Heaven! how she trembles! -- What can this mean! [Aside.


Mill. The Interest I have in all that relates to you, (the Reason of which you
shall know hereafter) excites my Curiosity; and, were I sure you would pardon
my Presumption, I should desire to know your real Sentiments on a very
particular Affair.


Barn. Madam, you may command my poor Thoughts on any Subject; -- I have none
that I would conceal.


Mill. You Will think me bold.


Barn. No, indeed.


Mill. What then are your Thoughts of Love?


Barn. If you mean the Love of Women, I have not thought of it all. -- My Youth
and Circumstances make such Thoughts improper in me yet: But if you mean the
general Love we owe to Mankind, I think no one has more of it in his Temper
than my self. -- I don't know that Person in the World whose Happiness I don't
wish, and would n't promote, were it in my Power. -- In an especial manner I
love my Uncle, and my Master, but, above all, my Friend.


Mill. You have a Friend then, whom you love?


Barn. As he does me, sincerely.


Mill. He is, no doubt, often blessed with your Company and Conversation. --


Barn. We live in one House together, and both serve the same worthy Merchant.


Mill. Happy, happy Youth! -- who ever thou art, I envy thee, and so must all,
who see and know this Youth. -- What have I lost, by being formed a Woman! -- I
hate my Sex, my self. -- Had I been a Man, I might, perhaps, have been as happy
in your Friendship, as he who now enjoys it: -- But as it is, -- Oh! --


Barn. I never observed Women before, or this is sure the most beautiful of her
Sex, [Aside.] You seem disordered, Madam! May I know the Cause?


Mill. Do not ask me, -- I can never speak it, whatever is the Cause; -- I wish
for Things impossible: -- I would be a Servant, bound to the same Master as you
are, to live in one House with you.


Barn. How strange, and yet how kind, her Words and Actions are? -- And the
Effect they have on me is as strange. -- I feel Desires I never knew before; --
I must be gone, while I have Power to go, [Aside.] Madam, I humbly take my
Leave. --


Mill. You will not sure leave me so soon!


Barn. Indeed I must.


Mill. You cannot be so cruel! -- I have prepared a poor Supper, at which I
promised my self your Company.


Barn. I am sorry I must refuse the Honor that you designed me; -- But my Duty
to my Master calls me hence. -- I never yet neglected his Service: He is so
gentle, and so good a Master, that should I wrong him, though he might forgive
me, I never should forgive my self.


Mill. Am I refused, by the first Man, the second Favor I ever stooped to ask?
-- Go then thou proud hard-hearted Youth. -- But know, you are the only Man
that could be found, who would let me sue twice for greater Favors.


Barn. What shall I do! -- How shall I go or stay!


Mill. Yet do not, do not, leave me. -- I wish my Sex's Pride would meet your
Scorn: -- But when I look upon you, -- When I behold those Eyes, -- Oh! spare
my Tongue, and let my Blushes speak. -- This Flood of Tears to that will force
their way, and declare -- what Woman's Modesty should hide.


Barn. Oh, Heavens! she loves me, worthless as I am; her Looks, her Words, her
flowing Tears confess it: -- And can I leave her then? -- Oh, never, -- never.
-- Madam, dry up those Tears. -- You shall command me always; -- I will stay
here for ever, if you would have me.


Lucy. So! she has wheedled him out of his Virtue of Obedience already, and
will strip him of all the rest, one after another, 'till she has left him as
few as her Ladyship, or my self. [Aside.


Mill. Now you are kind, indeed; but I mean not to detain you always: I would
have you shake off all slavish Obedience to your Master; -- but you may serve
him still.


Lucy. Serve him still! -- Aye, or he will have no Opportunity of fingering his
Cash, and then he will not serve your End, I Will be sworn. [Aside.


SCENE VI.
( To them.) Blunt. Blunt. Madam, Supper's on the Table.


Mill. Come, Sir, You Will excuse all Defects. -- My Thoughts were too much
employed on my Guest to observe the Entertainment.


SCENE VII.
Lucy and Blunt. Blunt. What is all this Preparation, this elegant Supper,
Variety of Wines, and Music, for the Entertainment of that young Fellow!


Lucy. So it seems.


Blunt. What is our Mistress turned Fool at last! She Is in Love with him, I
suppose.


Lucy. I suppose not, -- but she designs to make him in Love with her, if she
can.


Blunt. What will she get by that? He seems under Age, and cannot be supposed to
have much Money.


Lucy. But his Master has; and that is the same thing, as she will manage it.


Blunt. I don't like this fooling with a handsome young Fellow; while she is
endeavoring to ensnare him, she may be caught her self.


Lucy. Nay, were she like me, that would certainly be the Consequence; -- for,
I confess, there is something in Youth and Innocence that moves me mightily.


Blunt. Yes, so does the Smoothness and Plumpness of a Patridge move a mighty
Desire in the Hawk to be the Destruction of it.


Lucy. Why, Birds are their Prey, as Men are ours; though, as you observed, we
are sometimes caught our selves: -- But that I dare say will never be the Case
with our Mistress.


Blunt. I wish it may prove so; for you know we all depend upon her: Should she
trifle away her Time with a young Fellow, that there is nothing to be got by, we
must all starve.


Lucy. There Is no Danger of that, for I am sure she has no View in this Affair,
but Interest.


Blunt. Well, and what Hopes are there of Success in that?


Lucy. The most promising that can be. -- It Is true, the Youth has his
Scruples; but she will soon teach him to answer them, by stifling his Conscience.
-- O, the Lad is in a hopeful Way, depend upon it.


SCENE VIII.
Barnwell and Millwood at an Entertainment. Barn. What can I answer! -- All
that I know is, that you are fair, and I am miserable.


Mill. We are both so, and yet the Fault is in our selves.


Barn. To ease our present Anguish, by plunging into Guilt, is to buy a
Moment's Pleasure with an Age of Pain.


Mill. I should have thought the Joys of Love as lasting as they are great: If
ours prove otherwise, it is your Inconstancy must make them so.


Barn. The Law of Heaven will not be reversed; and that requires us to govern
our Passions.


Mill. To give us Sense of Beauty and Desires, and yet forbid us to taste and
be happy, is Cruelty to Nature. -- Have we Passions only to torment us!


Barn. To hear you talk, -- though in the Cause of Vice, -- to gaze, upon your
Beauty, -- press your Hand, -- and see your Snow-white Bosom heave and fall, --
enflames my Wishes; -- my Pulse beats high, -- my Senses all are in a Hurry,
and I am on the Rack of wild Desire; -- yet for a Moment's guilty Pleasure,
shall I lose my Innocence, my Peace of Mind, and Hopes of solid Happiness?


Mill. Chimeras all, --

-- Come on with me and prove,
No Joy's like Woman kind, nor Heaven like Love.

Barn. I would not, -- yet I must on. --

Reluctant thus, the Merchant quits his Ease,
And trusts to Rocks, and Sands, and stormy Seas;
In Hopes some unknown golden Coast to find,
Commits himself, though doubtful, to the Wind,
Longs much for Joys to come, yet mourns those left behind.

The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A Room in Thorowgood 's House. Barnwell. Barn. HOW strange are all Things
round me? Like some Thief, who treads forbidden Ground, fearful I enter each
Apartment of this well known House. To guilty Love, as if that was too little,
already have I added Breach of Trust. -- A Thief! -- Can I know my self that
wretched Thing, and look my honest Friend and injured Master in the Face? --
Though Hypocrisy may a while conceal my Guilt, at length it will be known, and
public Shame and Ruin must ensue. In the mean time, what must be my Life? ever
to speak a Language foreign to my Heart; hourly to add to the Number of my
Crimes in order to conceal 'em. -- Sure such was the Condition of the grand
Apostate, when first he lost his Purity; like me disconsolate he wandered, and
while yet in Heaven, bore all his future Hell about him.


SCENE II.
Barnwell and Trueman. Tr. Barnwell! O how I rejoice to see you safe! so will
our Master and his gentle Daughter, who during your Absence often inquired
after you.


Barn. Would he were gone, his officious Love will pry into the Secrets of my
Soul. [Aside.


Tr. Unless you knew the Pain the whole Family has felt on your Account, you
cannot conceive how much you are beloved; but why thus cold and silent? when my
Heart is full of Joy for your Return, why do you turn away? why thus avoid me?
what have I done? how am I altered since you saw me last? Or rather what have
you done? and why are you thus changed? for I am still the same.


Barn. What have I done indeed? [Aside.


Tr. Not speak nor look upon me.


Barn. By my Face he will discover all I would conceal; methinks already I
begin to hate him. [Aside.


Tr. I cannot bear this Usage from a Friend, one whom till now I ever found so
loving, whom yet I love, though this Unkindness strikes at the Root of
Friendship, and might destroy it in any Breast but mine.


Bar. I am not well, [Turning to him. Sleep has been a Stranger to these Eyes
since you beheld them last.


Tr. Heavy they look indeed, and swollen with Tears; -- now they overflow; --
rightly did my sympathizing Heart forebode last Night when thou wast absent,
something fatal to our Peace.


Barn. Your Friendship ingages you too far. My Troubles, whatever they are, are
mine alone, you have no Interest in them, nor ought your Concern for me give
you a Moment's Pain.


Tr. You speak as if you knew of Friendship nothing but the Name. Before I saw
your Grief I felt it. Since we parted last I have slept no more than you, but
pensive in my Chamber sat alone, and spent the tedious Night in Wishes for your
Safety and Return; even now, though ignorant of the Cause, your Sorrow wounds me
to the Heart.


Barn. 'Twill nor be always thus, Friendship and all Engagements cease, as
Circumstances and Occasions vary; and since you once may hate me, perhaps it
might be better for us both that now you loved me less.


Tr. Sure I but dream! without a Cause would Barnwell use me thus, ungenerous
and ungrateful Youth farewell, -- I shall endeavor to follow your Advice, --
[Going.] Yet stay, perhaps I am too rash, and angry when the Cause demands
Compassion. Some unforeseen Calamity may have befaln him too great to bear.


Barn. What Part am I reduced to act; -- it is vile and base to move his Temper
thus, the best of Friends and Men.


Tr. I am to blame, prithee forgive me Barnwell. -- Try to compose your ruffled
Mind, and let me know the Cause that thus transports you from your Self; my
friendly Counsel may restore your Peace.


Barn. All that is possible for Man to do for Man, your generous Friendship may
effect; but here even that is in Vain.


Tr. Something dreadful is laboring in your Breast, O give it vent and let me
share your Grief, 'twill ease your Pain should it admit no cure; and make it
lighter by the Part I bear.


Barn. Vain Supposition! my Woes increase by being observed, should the Cause
be known they would exceed all Bounds.


Tr. So well I know thy honest Heart, Guilt cannot harbor there.


Barn. O Torture insupportable! [Aside.


Tr. Then why am I excluded, have I a Thought I would conceal from you.


Barn. If still you urge me on this hated Subject, I Will never enter more
beneath this Roof, nor see your Face again.


Tr. It Is strange, -- but I have done, say but you hate me not.


Barn. Hate you! -- I am not that Monster yet.


Tr. Shall our Friendship still continue.


Barn. It Is a Blessing I never was worthy of, yet now must stand on Terms; and
but upon Conditions can confirm it.


Tr. What are they?


Barn. Never hereafter, though you should wonder at my Conduct, desire to know
more than I am willing to reveal.


Tr. It Is hard, but upon any Conditions I must be your Friend.


Barn. Then, as much as one lost to himself can be another's, I am yours.
[Embracing.


Tr. Be ever so, and may Heaven restore your Peace.


Bar. Will Yesterday return. -- We have heard the glorious Sun, that till then
incessant rolled, once stopped his rapid Course, and once went back: The Dead
have risen; and parched Rocks poured forth a liquid Stream to quench a Peoples
Thirst: The Sea divided, and formed Walls of Water, while a whole Nation passed
in safety through its sandy Bosom: Hungry Lions have refused their Prey: And Men
unhurt have walked amidst consuming Flames; but never yet did Time once past,
return.


Tr. Though the continued Chain of Time has never once been broke, nor ever will,
but uninterrupted must keep on its Course, till lost in Eternity it ends there
where it first begun; yet as Heaven can repair whatever Evils Time can bring
upon us, he who trusts Heaven ought never to despair. But Business requires our
Attendance; Business the Youth's best Preservative from ill, as Idleness his
worst of Snares. Will you go with me?


Barn. I Will take a little Time to reflect on what has past, and follow you.


SCENE III.
Barnwell. I might have trusted Trueman to have applied to my Uncle to have
repaired the Wrong I have done my Master; but what of Millwood? must I expose
her too? ungenerous and base! then Heaven requires it not. -- But Heaven
requires that I forsake her. What! never see her more! Does Heaven require
that, -- I hope I may see her, and Heaven not be offended. Presumptuous Hope,
-- dearly already have I proved my Frailty; should I once more tempt Heaven, I
may be left to fall never to rise again. Yet shall I leave her, for ever leave
her, and not let her know the Cause? She who loves me with such a boundless
Passion; can Cruelty be Duty? I judge of what she then must feel, by what I now
endure. The love of Life and fear of Shame, opposed by Inclination strong as
Death or Shame, like Wind and Tide in raging Conflict met, when neither can
prevail, keep me in doubt. -- How then can I determines.


SCENE IV.
Thorowgood and Barnwell. Thor. Without a Cause assigned, or Notice given, to
absent your self last Night was a Fault, young Man, and I came to chide you for
it, but hope I am prevented; that modest Blush, the Confusion so visible in
your Face, speak Grief and Shame: When we have offended Heaven, it requires no
more; and shall Man, who needs himself to be forgiven, be harder to appease: If
my Pardon or Love be of moment to your Peace, look up secure of both.


Barn. This Goodness has over come me. [Aside.] O Sir! you know not the Nature
and Extent of my Offense; and I should abuse your mistaken Bounty to receive
'em. Though I had rather die than speak my Shame; though Racks could not have
forced the guilty Secret from my Breast, your Kindness has.


Thor. Enough, enough, whatever it be, this Concern shows you're convinced, and
I am satisfied. How painful is the Sense of Guilt to an ingenuous Mind; -- some
youthful Folly, which it were prudent not to enquire into. -- When we consider
the frail Condition of Humanity, it may raise our Pity, not our Wonder, that
Youth should go astray; when Reason, weak at the best when opposed to
Inclination, scarce formed, and wholly unassisted by Experience, faintly
contends, or willingly becomes the Slave of Sense. The State of Youth is much
to be deplored; and the more so because they see it not; they being then to
danger most exposed, when they are least prepared for their Defense.


Barn. It will be known, and you recall your Pardon and abhor me.


Thor. I never will; so Heaven confirm to me the Pardon of my Offenses. Yet be
upon your Guard in this gay thoughtless Season of your Life; now, when the
Sense of Pleasure's quick, and Passion high, the voluptuous Appetites raging
and fierce demand the strongest Curb; take heed of a Relapse: When Vice becomes
habitual, the very Power of leaving it is lost.


Barn. Hear me then on my Knees confess.


Thor. I will not hear a Syllable more upon this Subject; it were not Mercy,
but Cruelty, to hear what must give you such Torment to reveal.


Barn. This Generosity amazes and distracts me.


Thor. This Remorse makes thee dearer to me than if thou had never offended;
whatever is your Fault, of this I Am certain, 'twas harder for you to offend
than me to pardon.


SCENE V.
Barnwell. Barn. Villain, Villain, Villain! basely to wrong so excellent a Man:
Should I again return to Folly -- detested Thought; -- but what of Millwood
then? -- Why, I renounce her; -- I give her up; -- the Struggle's over, and
Virtue has prevailed. Reason may convince, but Gratitude compels. This unlooked
for Generosity has saved me from Destruction. [Going.


SCENE VI.
To him a Footman. Foot. Sir, two Ladies, from your Uncle in the Country,
desire to see you.


Barn. Who should they be? [Aside.] Tell them I Will wait upon 'em.


SCENE VII.
Barnwell. Barn. Methinks I dread to see 'em. -- Guilt, what a Coward have thou
made me? -- Now every Thing alarms me.


SCENE VIII.
Another Room in Thorowgood's House. Millwood and Lucy, and to them a Footman.
Foot. Ladies, he will wait upon you immediately.


Mill. It Is very well. -- I thank you.


SCENE IX.
Barnwell, Millwood, and Lucy. Barn. Confusion! Millwood.


Mill. That angry Look tells me that here I Am an unwelcome Guest; I feared as
much, -- the Unhappy are so every where.


Barn. Will nothing but my utter Ruin content you?


Mill. Unkind and cruel! lost my self, your Happiness is now my only Care.


Barn. How did you gain Admission?


Mill. Saying we were desired by your Uncle to visit and deliver a Message to
you, we were received by the Family without suspicion, and with much respect
directed here.


Barn. Why did you come at all?


Mill. I never shall trouble you more, I Am come to take my Leave for ever. Such
is the Malice of my Fate. I go hopeless, despairing ever to return. This Hour
is all I have left me. One short Hour is all I have to bestow on Love and you,
for whom I thought the longest Life too short.


Barn. Then we are met to part for ever?


Mill. It must be so; -- yet think not that Time or Absence ever shall put a
Period to my Grief, or make me love you less; though I must leave you, yet
condemn me not.


Barn. Condemn you? No, I approve your Resolution, and rejoice to hear it; it is
just, -- it is necessary, -- I have well weighed, and found it so.


Lucy. I Am afraid the young Man has more Sense than she thought he had. [Aside.


Barn. Before you came I had determined never to see you more.


Mill. Confusion! [Aside.


Lucy. Ay! we are all out; this is a Turn so unexpected, that I shall make
nothing of my Part, they must even play the Scene betwixt themselves. [Aside.


Mill. 'Twas some relief to think, though absent, you would love me still; but to
find, though Fortune had been kind, that you, more cruel and inconstant, had
resolved to cast me off. -- This, as I never could expect, I have not learnt to
bear.


Barn. I am sorry to hear you blame in me, a Resolution that so well becomes us
both.


Mill. I have Reason for what I do, but you have none.


Barn. Can we want a Reason for parting, who have so many to wish we never had
met.


Mill. Look on me Barnwell, am I deformed or old, that Satiety so soon succeeds
Enjoyment? nay, look again, am I not she whom Yesterday you thought the fairest
and the kindest of her Sex? whose Hand, trembling with Extacy, you pressed and
molded thus, while on my Eyes you gazed with such delight, as if Desire
increased by being fed.


Barn. No more, let me repent my former Follies, if possible, without
remembering what they were.


Mill. Why?


Barn. Such is my Frailty that it is dangerous.


Mill. Where is the Danger, since we are to part?


Barn. The Thought of that already is too painful.


Mill. If it be painful to part, then I may hope at least you do not hate me?


Barn. No, -- no, -- I never said I did, -- O my Heart! --


Mill. Perhaps you pity me?


Barn. I do, -- I do, -- indeed, I do.


Mill. You Will think upon me?


Barn. Doubt it not while I can think at all.


Mill. You may judge an Embrace at parting too great a Favor, though it would
be the last? [He draws back.] A Look shall then suffice, -- farewell for ever.


SCENE X.
Barnwell. Barn. If to resolve to suffer be to conquer, I have conquered.
Painful Victory!


SCENE XI.
Barnwell, Millwood and Lucy. Mill. One thing I had forgot, -- I never must
return to my own House again. This I thought proper to let you know, lest your
Mind should change, and you should seek in vain to find me there. Forgive me
this second Intrusion; I only came to give you this Caution, and that perhaps
was needless.


Barn. I hope it was, yet it is kind, and I must thank you for it.


Mill. My Friend, your Arm. [ To Lucy.] Now I am gone for ever. [Going.


Barn. One thing more; -- sure there is no danger in my knowing where you go? If
you think otherwise? --


Mill. Alas! [Weeping.


Lucy. We are right I find, that is my Cue. [Aside. Ah; dear Sir, she is going
she knows not whether; but go she must.


Barn. Humanity obliges me to wish you well; why will you thus expose your self
to needless Troubles?


Lucy. Nay, there is no help for it: She must quit the Town immediately, and the
Kingdom as soon as possible; it was no small Matter you may be sure, that could
make her resolve to leave you.


Mill. No more, my Friend; since he for whose dear Sake alone I suffer, and am
content to suffer, is kind and pities me. Wheree'er I wander through Wiles and
Deserts, benighted and forlorn, that Thought shall give me comfort.


Barn. For my Sake! O tell me how; which way am I so cursed as to bring such
Ruin on thee?


Mill. No matter, I am contented with my Lot.


Barn. Leave me not in this Incertainty.


Mill. I have said too much.


Barn. How, how am I the Cause of your Undoing?


Mill. 'Twill but increase your Troubles.


Barn. My Troubles cannot be greater than they are.


Lucy. Well, well, Sir, if she will not satisfy you, I will.


Barn. I am bound to you beyond Expression.


Mill. Remember, Sir, that I desired you not to hear it.


Barn. Begin, and ease my racking Expectation.


Lucy. Why you must know, my Lady here was an only Child; but her Parents dying
while she was young, left her and her Fortune, (no inconsiderable one, I assure
you) to the Care of a Gentleman, who has a good Estate of his own.


Mill. Ay, ay, the barbarous Man is rich enough; -- but what are Riches when
compared to Love?


Lucy. For a while he performed the Office of a faithful Guardian, settled her
in a House, hired her Servants; -- but you have seen in what manner she lived,
so I need say no more of that.


Mill. How I shall live hereafter, Heaven knows.


Lucy. All Things went on as one could wish, till, some Time ago, his Wife
dying, he fell violently in love with his Charge, and would fain have married
her: Now the Man is neither old nor ugly, but a good personable sort of a Man,
but I don't know how it was she could never endure him; in short, her ill Usage
so provoked him, that he brought in an Account of his Executorship, wherein he
makes her Debtor to him. --


Mill. A Trifle in it self, but more than enough to ruin me, whom, by this
unjust Account, he had stripped of all before.


Lucy. Now she having neither Money, nor Friend, except me, who am as
unfortunate as her self, he compelled her to pass his Account, and give Bond
for the Sum he demanded; but still provided handsomely for her, and continued
his Courtship, till being informed by his Spies (truly I suspect some in her
own Family) that you were entertained at her House, and stayed with her all
Night, he came this Morning raving, and storming like a Madman, talks no more
of Marriage; so there is no Hopes of making up Matters that Way, but vows her
Ruin, unless she will allow him the same Favor that he supposes she granted you.


Barn. Must she be ruined, or find her Refuge in another's Arms?


Mill. He gave me but an Hour to resolve in, that is happily spent with you; --
and now I go. --


Barn. To be exposed to all the Rigours of the various Seasons; the Summer's
parching Heat, and Winter's Cold, unhous'd to wander Friendless through the
unhospitable World, in Misery and Want; attended with Fear and Danger, and
pursued by Malice and Revenge, would thou endure all this for me, and can I
do nothing, nothing to prevent it?


Lucy. It Is really a Pity, there can be no Way found out.


Barn. O where are all my Resolutions now; like early Vapors, or the Morning
Dew, chased by the Sun's warm Beams they are vanished and lost, as though they had
never been.


Lucy. Now I advised her, Sir, to comply with the Gentleman, that would not
only put an End to her Troubles, but make her Fortune at once.


Barn. Tormenting Fiend, away. -- I had rather perish, nay, see her perish,
than have her saved by him; I will my self prevent her Ruin, though with my own.
A Moment's Patience, I Will return immediately. --


SCENE. XII.
Millwood and Lucy. Lucy. 'Twas well you came, or, by what I can perceive, you
had lost him.


Mill. That, I must confess, was a Danger I did not foresee; I was only afraid
he should have come without Money. You know a House of Entertainment, like
mine, is not kept with nothing.


Lucy. That Is very true; but then you should be reasonable in your Demands;
it is pity to discourage a young Man.


SCENE XIII.
Barnwell, Millwood, and Lucy. Barn. What am I about to do! -- Now you, who
boast your Reason all-sufficient, suppose your selves in my Condition, and
determine for me; whether it is right to let her suffer for my Faults, or, by
this small Addition to my Guilt, prevent the ill Effects of what is past.


Lucy. These young Sinners think every Thing in the Ways of Wickedness so
strange, -- but I could tell him that this is nothing but what is very common;
for one Vice as naturally begets another, as a Father a Son: -- But he will find
out that himself, if he lives long enough.


Barn. Here take this, and with it purchase your Deliverance; return to your
House, and live in Peace and Safety.


Mill. So I may hope to see you there again.


Barn. Answer me not, -- but fly, -- least, in the Agonies of my Remorse, I
take again what is not mine to give, and abandon thee to Want and Misery.


Mill. Say but you will come. --


Barn. You are my Fate, my Heaven, or my Hell; only leave me now, dispose of me
hereafter as you please.


SCENE XIV.
Barnwell. What have I done. -- Were my Resolutions founded on Reason, and
sincerely made, -- why then has Heaven suffered me to fall? I sought not the
Occasion; and, if my Heart deceives me not, Compassion and Generosity were my
Motives. -- Is Virtue inconsistent with it self, or are Vice and Virtue only
empty Names? Or do they depend on Accidents, beyond our Power to produce, or to
prevent, -- wherein we have no Part, and yet must be determined by the Event?
-- But why should I attempt to reason? All is Confusion, Horror, and Remorse;
-- I find I am lost, cast down from all my late erected Hopes, and plunged
again in Guilt, yet scarce know how or why --

Such undistinguished Horrors make my Brain,
Like Hell, the Seat of Darkness, and of Pain.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Thorowgood and Trueman. Thor. MEthinks I would not have you only learn the
Method of Merchandise, and practice it hereafter, merely as a Means of getting
Wealth. -- 'Twill be well worth your Pains to study it as a Science. -- See how
it is founded in Reason, and the Nature of Things. -- How it has promoted
Humanity, as it has opened and yet keeps up an Intercourse between Nations, far
remote from one another in Situation, Customs and Religion; promoting Arts,
Industry, Peace and Plenty; by mutual Benefits diffusing mutual Love from Pole
to Pole.


Tr. Something of this I have considered, and hope, by your Assistance, to
extend my Thoughts much farther. -- I have observed those Countries, where
Trade is promoted and encouraged, do not make Discoveries to destroy, but to
improve Mankind, -- by Love and Friendship, to tame the fierce, and polish the
most savage, -- to teach them the Advantages of honest Traffic, -- by taking
from them, with their own Consent, their useless Superfluities, and giving
them, in Return, what, from their Ignorance in manual Arts, their Situation, or
some other Accident they stand in need of.


Thor. It Is justly observed: -- The populous East, luxuriant, abounds with
glittering Gems, bright Pearls, aromatic Spices, and Health-restoring Drugs:
The late found Western World glows with unnumber'd Veins of Gold and Silver
Ore. -- On every Climate, and on every Country, Heaven has bestowed some good
peculiar to it self. -- It is the industrious Merchant's Business to collect
the various Blessings of each Soil and Climate, and, with the Product of the
whole, to enrich his native Country. -- Well! I have examined your Accounts:
They are not only just, as I have always found them, but regularly kept, and
fairly entered. -- I commend your Diligence. Method in Business is the surest
Guide. He, who neglects it, frequently stumbles, and always wanders perplexed,
uncertain, and in Danger. Are Barnwell's Accounts ready for my Inspection; he
does not use to be the last on these Occasions.


Tr. Upon receiving your Orders he retired, I thought in some Confusion. -- If
you please, I Will go and hasten him. -- I hope he has n't been guilty of any
Neglect.


Thor. I Am now going to the Exchange; let him know, at my Return, I expect to
find him ready.


SCENE II.
Maria with a Book sits and reads. Ma. How forcible is Truth? The weakest Mind,
inspired with Love of that, -- fixed and collected in it self, -- with
Indifference beholds -- the united Force of Earth and Hell opposing: Such Souls
are raised above the Sense of Pain, or so supported, that they regard it not.
The Martyr cheaply purchases his Heaven. -- Small are his Sufferings, great is
his Reward; -- not so the Wretch, who combats Love with Duty; when the Mind,
weakened and dissolved by the soft Passion, feeble and hopeless opposes its own
Desires. -- What is an Hour, a Day, a Year of Pain, to a whole Life of
Tortures, such as these?


SCENE III.
Trueman and Maria. Tr. O, Barnwell! -- O, my Friend, how art thou fallen?


Ma. Ha! Barnwell! What of him? Speak, say what of Barnwell.


Tr. It Is not to be concealed. -- Iv'e News to tell of him that will afflict
your generous Father, your self, and all who knew him.


Ma. Defend us Heaven!


Tr. I cannot speak it. -- See there.

[ Gives a Letter, Maria reads.
Trueman,
I Know my Absence will surprise my honored Master, and your self; and the
more, when you shall understand that the Reason of my withdrawing, is my having
embezzled part of the Cash with which I was entrusted. After this, it is
needless to inform you that I intend never to return again: Though this might
have been known, by examining my Accounts; yet, to prevent that unnecessary
Trouble, and to cut off all fruitless Expectations of my Return, I have left
this from the lost

George Barnwell.



Tr. Lost indeed! Yet how he should be guilty of what he there charges himself
withal, raises my Wonder equal to my Grief. -- Never had Youth a higher Sense
of Virtue -- Justly he thought, and as he thought he practiced; never was Life
more regular than his; an Understanding uncommon at his Years; an open,
generous, manliness of Temper; his Manners easy, unaffected and engaging.


Ma. This and much more you might have said with Truth. -- He was the delight
of every Eye, and Joy of every Heart that knew him.


Tr. Since such he was, and was my Friend, can I support his Loss? -- See the
fairest and happiest Maid this wealthy City boasts, kindly condescends to weep
for thy unhappy Fate, poor ruined Barnwell!


Ma. Trueman, Do you think a Soul so delicate as his, so sensible of Shame, can
ever submit to live a Slave to Vice?


Tr. Never, never. So well I know him, I Am sure this Act of his, so contrary to
his Nature, must have been caused by some unavoidable Necessity.


Ma. Is there no Means yet to preserve him?


Tr. O! that there were. -- But few Men recover Reputation lost. -- A Merchant
never. -- Nor would he, I fear, though I should find him, ever be brought to
look his injured Master in the Face.


Ma. I fear as much, -- and therefore would never have my Father know it.


Tr. That Is impossible.


Ma. What Is the Sum?


Tr. It Is considerable. -- I Have marked it here, to show it, with the Letter, to
your Father, at his Return.


Ma. If I should supply the Money, could you so dispose of that, and the
Account, as to conceal this unhappy Mismanagement from my Father.


Tr. Nothing more easy: -- But can you intend it? Will you save a helpless
Wretch from Ruin? Oh! 'twere an Act worthy such exalted Virtue, as Maria's. --
Sure Heaven, in Mercy to my Friend, inspired the generous Thought.


Ma. Doubt not but I would purchase so great a Happiness at a much dearer
Price. -- But how shall he be found?


Tr. Trust to my Diligence for that. -- In the mean time, I Will conceal his
Absence from your Father, or find such Excuses for it, that the real Cause
shall never be suspected.


Ma. In attempting to save from Shame, one whom we hope may yet return to
Virtue, to Heaven, and you, the Judges of this Action, I appeal, whether I have
done any thing misbecoming my Sex and Character.


Tr. Earth must approve the Deed, and Heaven, I doubt not, will reward it.


Ma. If Heaven succeed it, I am well rewarded. A Virgin's Fame is sullied by
Suspicion's slightest Breath; and therefore as this must be a Secret from my
Father, and the World, for Barnwell's sake, for mine let it be so to him.


SCENE IV.
Milwood 's House. Lucy and Blunt. Lucy. Well! what do you think of Millwood's
Conduct now!


Blunt. I own it is surprising: -- I don't know which to admire most, her
feigned, or his real Passion; though I have sometimes been afraid that her
Avarice would discover her: -- But his Youth and want of Experience make it the
easier to impose on him.


Lucy. No, it is his Love. To do him Justice, notwithstanding his Youth, he
don't want Understanding; but you Men are much easier imposed on, in these
Affairs, than your Vanity will allow you to believe. -- Let me see the wisest
of you all, as much in Love with me, as Barnwell is with Millwood, and I Will
engage to make as great a Fool of him.


Blunt. And all Circumstances considered, to make as much Money of him too.


Lucy. I cannot answer for that. Her Artifice in making him rob his Master at
first, and the various Stratagems, by which she has obliged him to continue in
that Course, astonish even me, who know her so well. --


Blunt. But then you are to consider that the Money was his Master's.


Lucy. There was the Difficulty of it. -- Had it been his own, it had been
nothing. -- Were the World his, she might have it for a Smile: -- But those
golden Days are done; -- he is ruined, and Millwood's Hopes of farther Profits
there, are at an End.


Blunt. That Is no more than we all expected.


Lucy. Being called, by his Master, to make up his Accounts, he was forced to
quit his House and Service, and wisely flies to Millwood for Relief and
Entertainment.


Blunt. I have not heard of this before! How did she receive him?


Lucy. As you would expect. -- She wondered what he meant, was astonished at
his Impudence, -- and, with an Air of Modesty peculiar to her self, swore so
heartily, that she never saw him before, -- that she put me out of Countenance.


Blunt. That Is much indeed! But how did Barnwell behave?


Lucy. He grieved, and, at length, enraged at this barbarous Treatment, was
preparing to be gone; and, making toward the Door, showed a Bag of Money, which
he had stolen from his Master, -- the last he is ever like to have from thence.


Blunt. But then Millwood?


Lucy. Aye, she, with her usual Address, returned to her old Arts of lying,
swearing, and dissembling. -- Hung on his Neck, and wept, and swore 'twas meant
in Jest; till this easy Fool, melted into Tears, threw the Money into her Lap,
and swore he had rather die, than think her false.


Blunt. Strange Infatuation!


Lucy. But what followed was stranger still. As Doubts and Fears, followed by
Reconcilement, ever increase Love, where the Passion is sincere; so in him it
caused so wild a Transport of excessive Fondness, such Joy, such Grief, such
Pleasure, and such Anguish, that Nature in him seemed sinking with the Weight,
and the charmed Soul disposed to quit his Breast for hers, -- just then, when
every Passion with lawless Anarchy prevailed, -- and Reason was in the raging
Tempest lost; -- the cruel artful Millwood prevailed upon the wretched Youth to
promise what I tremble but to think on.


Blunt. I am amazed! what can it be?


Lucy. You will be more so, to hear it is to attempt the Life of his nearest
Relation, and best Benefactor. --


Blunt. His Uncle, whom we have often heard him speak of, as a Gentleman of a
large Estate and fair Character in the Country, where he lives.


Lucy. The same. -- She was no sooner possessed of the last dear Purchase of
his Ruin, but her Avarice, insatiate as the Grave, demands this horrid
Sacrifice, -- Barnwell's near Relation, and unsuspected Virtue must give too
easy Means to seize the good Man's Treasure; whose Blood must seal the dreadful
Secret, and prevent the Terrors of her guilty Fears.


Blunt. Is it possible she could persuade him to do an Act like that! He is, by
Nature, honest, grateful, compassionate, and generous: And though his Love, and
her artful Persuasions, have wrought him to practice what he most abhors; yet
we all can witness for him, with what Reluctance he has still complied! So many
Tears he shed over each Offense, as might, if possible, sanctify Theft, and
make a Merit of a Crime.


Lucy. It Is true, at the naming the Murder of his Uncle, he started into Rage;
and, breaking from her Arms, where she till then had held him, with well
dissembled Love and false Endearments, called her, cruel Monster, Devil, and
told her she was born for his Destruction. -- She thought it not for her
Purpose to meet his Rage with Rage, but affected a most passionate Fit of
Grief; -- railed at her Fate, and cursed her wayward Stars, -- that still her
Wants should force her to press him to act such Deeds, as she must needs abhor,
as well as he; but told him Necessity had no Law, and Love no Bounds; that
therefore he never truly loved, but meant, in her Necessity, to forsake her; --
then kneeled and swore, that since, by his Refusal, he had given her Cause to
doubt his Love, she never would see him more; unless, to prove it true, he
robbed his Uncle to supply her Wants, and murdered him, to keep it from
Discovery.


Blunt. I am astonished! What said he?


Lucy. Speechless he stood; but in his Face you might have read, that various
Passions tore his very Soul. Often he, in Anguish, threw his Eyes toward Heaven,
and then as often bent their Beams on her; then wept and groaned, and beat his
Breast; at length, with Horror, not to be expressed, he cried, Thou cursed
Fair! have I not given dreadful Proofs of Love! What drew me from my youthful
Innocence, to stain my then unspotted Soul, but Love? What caused me to rob my
gentle Master, but cursed Love? What makes me now a Fugitive from his Service,
loathed by my self, and scorned by all the World, but Love? What fills my Eyes
with Tears, my Soul with Torture, never felt on this side Death before? Why
Love, Love, Love. And why, above all, do I resolve, (for, tearing his Hair, he
cried I do resolve) to kill my Uncle.


Blunt. Was she not moved? It makes me weep to hear the sad Relation.


Lucy. Yes, with Joy, that she had gained her Point. -- She gave him no Time to
cool, but urged him to attempt it instantly. He Is now gone; if he performs it,
and escapes, there is more Money for her; if not, he will never return, and then
she is fairly rid of him.


Blunt. It Is time the World was rid of such a Monster. --


Lucy. If we don't do our Endeavors to prevent this Murder, we are as bad as
she.


Blunt. I Am afraid it is too late.


Lucy. Perhaps not. -- Her Barbarity to Barnwell makes me hate her. -- We Have
run too great a Length with her already. -- I did not think her or my self so
wicked, as I find, upon Reflection, we are.


Blunt. It Is true, we have all been too much so. -- But there is something so
horrid in Murder, -- that all other Crimes seem nothing when compared to that.
-- I would not be involved in the Guilt of that for all the World.


Lucy. Nor I, Heaven knows; -- therefore let us clear our selves, by doing all
that is in our Power to prevent it. I have just thought of a Way, that, to me,
seems probable. -- Will you join with me to detect this cursed Design?


Blunt. With all my Heart. -- How else shall I clear my self? He who knows of a
Murder intended to be committed, and does not discover it, in the Eye of the
Law, and Reason, is a Murderer.


Lucy. Let us lose no Time; -- I Will acquaint you with the Particulars as we go.


SCENE V.
A Walk at some Distance from a Country Seat. Barnwell. A dismal Gloom obscures
the Face of Day; either the Sun has slipped behind a Cloud, or journeys down the
West of Heaven, with more than common Speed, to avoid the Sight of what I Am
doomed to act. Since I set forth on this accursed Design, wherever I tread,
methinks, the solid Earth trembles beneath my Feet. -- Yonder limpid Stream,
whose hoary Fall has made a natural Cascade, as I passed by, in doleful Accents
seemed to murmur, Murder. The Earth, the Air, and Water, seem concerned; but
that is not strange, the World is punished, and Nature feels the Shock, when
Providence permits a good Man's Fall! -- Just Heaven! Then what should I be!
for him that was my Father's only Brother, and since his Death has been to me a
Father, who took me up an Infant, and an Orphan; reared me with tenderest Care,
and still indulged me with most paternal Fondness; -- yet here I stand avowed
his destined Murderer: -- I stiffen with Horror at my own Impiety; -- it is yet
unperform'd. -- What if I quit my bloody Purpose, and fly the Place! [Going,
then stops.] -- But whether, O whether, shall I fly! -- My Master's once
friendly Doors are ever shut against me; and without Money Millwood will never
see me more, and Life is not to be endured without her: -- She Is got such firm
Possession of my Heart, and governs there with such despotick Sway; -- Aye,
there is the Cause of all my Sin and Sorrow: -- It Is more than Love; it is the
Fever of the Soul, and Madness of Desire. -- In vain does Nature, Reason,
Conscience, all oppose it; the impetuous Passion bears down all before it, and
drives me on to Lust, to Theft, and Murder. -- Oh Conscience! feeble Guide to
Virtue, who only shows us when we go astray, but wants the Power to stop us in
our Course. -- Ha! in yonder shady Walk I see my Uncle. -- He Is alone. -- Now
for my Disguise. -- [Plucks out a Vizor.] This is his Hour of private
Meditation. Thus daily he prepares his Soul for Heaven, -- whilst I -- But what
have I to do with Heaven! -- Ha! No Struggles, Conscience. --

Hence! Hence Remorse, and every Thought that is good;
The Storm that Lust began, must end in Blood.
[Puts on the Vizor, and draws a Pistol.
SCENE VI.
A close Walk in a Wood. Uncle. If I was superstitious, I should fear some
Danger lurked unseen, or Death were nigh: -- A heavy Melancholy clouds my
Spirits; my Imagination is filled with gashly Forms of dreary Graves, and
Bodies changed by Death, -- when the pale lengthened Visage attracks each
weeping Eye, -- and fills the musing Soul, at once, with Grief and Horror, Pity
and Aversion. -- I will indulge the Thought. The wise Man prepares himself for
Death, by making it familiar to his Mind. -- When strong Reflections hold the
Mirror near, -- and the Living in the Dead behold their future selves, how does
each inordinate Passion and Desire cease or sicken at the View? -- The Mind
scarce moves; -- The Blood, curdling, and chilled, creeps slowly through the
Veins, -- fixed, still, and motionless, like the solemn Object of our Thoughts.
-- We are almost at present -- what we must be hereafter, 'till Curiosity
awakes the Soul, and sets it on Inquiry. --


SCENE VII.
Uncle, George Barnwell at a Distance. Uncle. O Death, thou strange mysterious
Power, -- seen every Day, yet never understood -- but by the incommunicative
Dead, What art thou? -- The extensive Mind of Man, that with a Thought circles
the Earth's vast Globe, -- sinks to the Center, or ascends above the Stars;
that World's exotic finds, or thinks it finds, -- thy thick Clouds attempts to
pass in vain, lost and bewildered in the horrid Gloom, -- defeated she returns
more doubtful than before; of nothing certain, but of Labor lost.

[ During this Speech, Barnwell sometimes presents the Pistol, and draws it
back again; at last he drops it, -- at which his Uncle starts, and draws his
Sword.
Barn. Oh, it is impossible!


Uncle. A Man so near me, armed and masqu'd!


Barn. Nay, then there is no Retreat.

[Plucks a Poniard from his Bosom, and stabs him.
Uncle. Oh! I am slain! All gracious Heaven regard the Prayer of thy dying
Servant. Bless, with thy choicest Blessings, my dearest Nephew; forgive my
Murderer, and take my fleeting Soul to endless Mercy.

[Barnwell throws off his Mask, runs to him, and, kneeling by him, raises and
chafes him.
Barn. Expiring Saint! Oh, murdered, martyred Uncle! Lift up your dying Eyes,
and view your Nephew in your Murderer. -- O do not look so tenderly upon me. --
Let Indignation lighten from your Eyes, and blast me e're you die. -- By
Heaven, he weeps in Pity of my Woes. -- Tears, -- Tears, for Blood. -- The
Murdered, in the Agonies of Death, weeps for his Murderer. -- O, speak your
pious Purpose, -- pronounce my Pardon then, -- and take me with you. -- He
would, but cannot. -- O why, with such fond Affection do you press my murdering
Hand! -- What! will you kiss me! [Kisses him.


Uncle. Groans and dies.
Barn. He Is gone for ever, -- and oh! I follow. -- [Swoons away upon his
Uncle's dead Body.] Do I still live to press the suffering Bosom of the Earth?
-- Do I still breath, and taint with my infectious Breath the wholesome Air! --
Let Heaven, from its high Throne, in Justice or in Mercy, now look down on that
dear murdered Saint, and me the Murderer. -- And, if his Vengeance spares, --
let Pity strike and end my wretched Being. -- Murder the worst of Crimes, and
Parricide the worst of Murders, and this the worst of Parricides. Cain, who
stands on Record from the Birth of Time, and must to its last final Period, as
accursed, ^lew a Brother, favored above him. -- Detested Nero, by another's
Hand, dispatched a Mother, that he feared and hated. -- But I, with my own
Hand, have murdered a Brother, Mother, Father, and a Friend; most loving and
beloved. -- This execrable Act of mine is without a Parallel. -- O may it ever
stand alone, -- the last of Murders, as it is the worst. --

The rich Man thus, in Torment and Despair,
Preferred his vain, but charitable Prayer.
The Fool, his own Soul lost, would fain be wise
For others Good; but Heaven his Suit denies.
By Laws and Means well known we stand or fall,
And one eternal Rule remains for all.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Maria. Ma. HOW falsely do they judge who censure or applaud, as we are afflicted
or rewarded here. I know I am unhappy, yet cannot charge my self with any
Crime, more than the common Frailties of our Kind, that should provoke just
Heaven to mark me out for Sufferings so uncommon and severe. Falsely to accuse
our selves, Heaven must abhor, then it is just and right that Innocence should
suffer; for Heaven must be just in all its Ways. -- Perhaps by that they are
kept from moral Evils, much worse than penal, or more improved in Virtue: Or
may not the lesser Ills that they sustain, be the Means of greater Good to
others? Might all the joyless Days and sleepless Nights that I have past, but
purchase Peace for thee --

Thou dear, dear Cause of all my Grief and Pain,
Small were the Loss, and infinite the Gain:
Though to the Grave in secret Love I pine,
So Life, and Fame, and Happiness were thine.

SCENE II.
Trueman and Maria. Ma. What News of Barnwell?


Tr. None. -- I have sought him with the greatest Diligence, but all in vain.


Ma. Does my Father yet suspect the Cause of his absenting himself?


Tr. All appeared so just and fair to him, it is not possible he ever should;
but his Absence will no longer be concealed. Your Father's wise; and though he
seems to hearken to the friendly Excuses, I would make for Barnwell; yet, I am
afraid, he regards 'em only as such, without suffering them to influence his
Judgment.


Ma. How does the unhappy Youth defeat all our Designs to serve him, yet I can
never repent what we have done. Should he return, 'twill make his
Reconciliation with my Father easier, and preserve him from future Reproach
from a malicious unforgiving World.


SCENE III.
( To them.) Thorowgood and Lucy. Thor. This Woman here has given me a sad,
(and bating some Circumstances) too probable Account of Barnwell's Defection.


Lucy. I am sorry, Sir, that my frank Confession of my former unhappy Course of
Life should cause you to suspect my Truth on this Occasion.


Thor. It is not that; your Confession has in it all the Appearance of Truth,
[To them.] Among many other Particulars, she informs me that Barnwell has been
influenced to break his Trust, and wrong me, at several Times, of considerable
Sums of Money; now, as I know this to be false, I would fain doubt the whole of
her Relation, -- too dreadful -- to be willingly believed.


Ma. Sir, your Pardon; I find my self on a sudden so indisposed, that I must
retire. -- Providence opposes all Attempts to save him. -- Poor ruined
Barnwell! -- Wretched lost Maria! -- [Aside.


SCENE IV.
Thorowgood, Trueman and Lucy. Thor. How am I distressed on every Side? Pity
for that unhappy Youth, fear for the Life of a much valued Friend -- and then
my Child -- the only Joy and Hope of my declining Life. Her Melancholy
increases hourly, and gives me painful Apprehensions of her Loss. -- O Trueman!
this Person informs me, that your Friend, at the Instigation of an impious
Woman, is gone to rob and murder his venerable Uncle.


Tr. O execrable Deed, I am blasted with the Horror of the Thought.


Lucy. This Delay may ruin all.


Thor. What to do or think I know not; that he ever wronged me, I know is
false, -- the rest may be so too, there is all my Hope.


Tr. Trust not to that, rather suppose all true than lose a Moment's Time; even
now the horrid Deed may be a doing; -- dreadful Imagination; -- or it may be
done, and we are vainly debating on the Means to prevent what is already past.


Thor. This Earnestness convinces me that he knows more than he has yet
discovered. What ho! without there! who waits?


SCENE V.
( To them.) A Servant. Thor. Order the Groom to saddle the swiftest Horse, and
prepare himself to set out with Speed. -- An Affair of Life and Death demands
his Diligence.


SCENE VI.
Thorowgood, Trueman and Lucy. Thor. For you, whose Behavior on this Occasion
I have no Time to commend as it deserves, I most engage your farther
Assistance. -- Return and observe this Millwood till I come. I have your
Directions, and will follow you as soon as possible.


SCENE VII.
Thorowgood and Trueman. Thor. Trueman, you I am sure would not be idle on this
Occasion.


SCENE VIII.
Trueman. He only who is a Friend can judge of my Distress.


SCENE IX.
Millwood 's House. Millwood. I wish I knew the Event of his Design; -- the
Attempt without Success would ruin him. -- Well! what have I to apprehend from
that? I fear too much. The Mischief being only intended, his Friends, in pity
of his Youth, turn all their Rage on me. I should have thought of that before.
-- Suppose the Deed done, then, and then only I shall be secure; or what if he
returns without attempting it at all?


SCENE X.
Millwood, and Barnwell bloody. Mill. But he is here, and I have done him
wrong; his bloody Hands show he has done the Deed, but show he wants the
Prudence to conceal it.


Barn. Where shall I hide me? whether shall I fly to avoid the swift unerring
Hand of Justice?


Mill. Dismiss those Fears; though Thousands had pursued you to the Door, yet
being entered here you are safe as Innocence; I have such a Cavern, by Art so
cunningly contrived, that the piercing Eyes of Jealousy and Revenge may search
in vain, nor find the Entrance to the safe Retreat, there will I hide you if
any Danger's near.


Barn. O hide me from my self if it be possible; for while I bear my Conscience
in my Bosom, though I were hid where Man's Eye never saw, nor Light ever dawned,
'twere all in vain. For that inmate, -- that impartial Judge, will try,
convict, and sentence me for Murder; and execute me with never ending Torments.
Behold these Hands all crimsoned over with my dear Uncle's Blood! Here Is a
Sight to make a Statue start with Horror, or turn a living Man into a Statue.


Mill. Ridiculous! Then it seems you are afraid of your own Shadow; or what is
less than a Shadow, your Conscience.


Barn. Though to Man unknown I did the accursed Act, what can we hide from
Heavens omniscient Eye?


Mill. No more of this Stuff; -- what advantage have you made of his Death? or
what advantage may yet be made of it? -- did you secure the Keys of his
Treasure, -- those no doubt were about him? -- what Gold, what Jewels, or what
else of Value have you brought me?


Barn. Think you I added Sacrilege to Murder? Oh! had you seen him as his Life
flowed from him in a Crimson Flood, and heard him praying for me by the double
Name of Nephew and of Murderer; alas, alas! he knew not then that his Nephew
was his Murderer; how would you have wished as I did, though you had a thousand
Years of Life to come, to have given them all to have lengthened his one Hour.
But being dead, I fled the Sight of what my Hands had done, nor could I to have
gained the Empire of the World, have violated by Theft his sacred Corpse.


Mill. Whining preposterous canting Villain, to murder your Uncle, rob him of
Life, Natures first, last, dear Prerogative, after which there is no Injury,
then fear to take what he no longer wanted; and bring to me your Penury and
Guilt. Do you think I Will hazard my Reputation; nay my Life to entertain you?


Barn. Oh! -- Millwood! -- this from thee; -- but I have done, -- if you hate
me, if you wish me dead; then are you happy, -- for Oh! it is sure my Grief will
quickly end me.


Mill. In his Madness he will discover all, and involve me in his Ruin; -- we
are on a Precipice from whence there is no Retreat for both, -- then to preserve
my self. -- [Pauses.] There is no other Way, -- it is dreadful, -- but
Reflection comes too late when Danger's pressing, -- and there is no room for
Choice. -- It must be done. [Stamps.


SCENE XI.
( To them) A Servant. Mill. Fetch me an Officer and seize this Villain, he has
confessed himself a Murderer, should I let him escape, I justly might be
thought as bad as he.


SCENE XII.
Millwood and Barnwell. Barn. O Millwood! sure thou do not, cannot mean it.
Stop the Messenger, upon my Knees I beg you, call him back. It Is fit I die
indeed, but not by you. I will this Instant deliver my self into the Hands of
Justice, indeed I will, for Death is all I wish. But thy Ingratitude so tears
my wounded Soul, it is worse ten thousand times than Death with Torture.


Mill. Call it what you will, I am willing to live; and live secure; which
nothing but your Death can warrant.


Barn. If there be a Pitch of Wickedness that seats the Author beyond the reach
of Vengeance, you must be secure. But what remains for me, but a dismal
Dungeon, hard-galling Fetters, an awful Trial, and ignominious Death, justly to
fall unpitied and abhorred? -- After Death to be suspended between Heaven and
Earth, a dreadful Spectacle, the warning and horror of a gaping Crowd. This I
could bear, nay wish not to avoid, had it but come from any Hand but thine. --


SCENE XIII.
Millwood, Barnwell, Blunt, Officer and Attendants. Mill. Heaven defend me!
Conceal a Murderer! here, Sir, take this Youth into your Custody, I accuse him
of Murder; and will appear to make good my Charge. [They seize him.


Barn. To whom, of what, or how shall I complain; I Will not accuse her, the Hand
of Heaven is in it, and this the Punishment of Lust and Parricide; yet Heaven
that justly cuts me off, still suffers her to live, perhaps to punish others;
tremendous Mercy! so Fiends are cursed with Immortality, to be the Executioners
of Heaven. --

Be warned ye Youths, who see my sad Despair,
Avoid lewd Women, False as they are Fair,
By Reason guided, honest Joys pursue,
The Fair to Honor, and to Virtue true,
Just to her self, will never be false to you.
By my Example learn to shun my Fate,
(How wretched is the Man who is wise too late?)
Ever Innocence, and Fame, and Life be lost,
Here purchase Wisdom, cheaply, at my Cost.

SCENE XIV.
Millwood and Blunt. Mill. Where Is Lucy, why is she absent at such a Time?


Blunt. Would I had been so too, thou Devil!


Mill. Insolent! this to me?


Blunt. The worst that we know of the Devil is, that he first seduces to Sin,
and then betrays to Punishment.


SCENE XV.
Millwood. They disapprove of my Conduct, -- and mean to take this Opportunity
to set up for themselves. -- My Ruin is resolved, -- I see my Danger, but scorn
both it and them. -- I was not born to fall by such weak Instruments. -- [Going.


SCENE XVI.
Thorowgood and Millwood. Thor. Where is this Scandal of her own Sex, and Curse
of ours?


Mill. What means this Insolence? Who do you seek?


Thor. Millwood:


Mill. Well, you have found her then. -- I am Millwood. --


Thor. Then you are the most impious Wretch that ever the Sun beheld.


Mill. From your Appearance I should have expected Wisdom and Moderation, but
your Manners belly your Aspect. -- What is your Business here? I know you not.


Thor. Hereafter you may know me better; I am Barnwell's Master.


Mill. Then you are Master to a Villain; which, I think, is not much to your
Credit.


Thor. Had he been as much above thy Arts, as my Credit is superior to thy
Malice, I need not blush to own him.


Mill. My Arts; -- I don't understand you, Sir! If he has done amiss, what is
that to me? Was he my Servant, or yours? -- You should have taught him better.


Thor. Why should I wonder to find such uncommon Impudence in one arrived to
such a Height of Wickedness. -- When Innocence is banished, Modesty soon
follows. Know, Sorceress, I Am not ignorant of any of your Arts, by which you
first deceived the unwary Youth: I know how, Step by Step, you have led him on,
(reluctant and unwilling) from Crime to Crime, to this last horrid Act, which
you contrived, and, by your cursed Wiles, even forced him to commit, and then
betrayed him.


Mill. Ha! Lucy has got the Advantage of me, and accused me first, unless I can
turn the Accusation, and fix it upon her and Blunt, I am lost. [Aside.


Thor. Had I known your cruel Design sooner, it had been prevented. To see you
punished as the Law directs, is all that now remains. -- Poor Satisfaction, --
for he, innocent as he is, compared to you, must suffer too. But Heaven, who
knows our Frame, and graciously distinguishes between Frailty and Presumption,
will make a Difference, though Man cannot, who sees not the Heart, but only
judges by the outward Action. --


Mill. I find, Sir, we are both unhappy in our Servants. I was surpised at
such ill Treatment, from a Gentleman of your Appearance, without Cause, and
therefore too hastily returned it; for which I ask your Pardon. I now perceive
you have been so far imposed on, as to think me engaged in a former
Correspondence with your Servant, and, some Way or other, accessory to his
Undoing.


Thor. I charge you as the Cause, the sole Cause of all his Guilt, and all his
Suffering, of all he now endures, and must endure, till a violent and shameful
Death shall put a dreadful Period to his Life and Miseries together.


Mill. It Is very strange; but who is secure from Scandal and Detraction? -- So
far from contributing to his Ruin, I never spoke to him till since that fatal
Accident, which I lament as much as you: It Is true, I have a Servant, on whose
Account he has of late frequented my House; if she has abused my good Opinion
of her, am I to blame? Has n't Barnwell done the same by you?


Thor. I hear you; pray go on.


Mill. I have been informed he had a violent Passion for her, and she for him;
but I always thought it innocent; I know her poor, and given to expensive
Pleasures. Now who can tell but she may have influenced the amorous Youth to
commit this Murder, to supply her Extravagancies, it must be so. -- I now
recollect a thousand Circumstances that confirm it: I Will have her and a Man
Servant, that I suspect as an Accomplice, secured immediately. I hope, Sir, you
will lay aside your ill-grounded Suspicions of me, and join to punish the real
Contrivers of this bloody Deed. [Offers to go.


Thor. Madam, you pass not this Way: I see your Design, but shall protect them
from your Malice.


Mill. I hope you will not use your Influence, and the Credit of your Name, to
skreen such guilty Wretches. Consider, Sir! the Wickedness of persuading a
thoughtless Youth to such a Crime.


Thor. I do, -- and of betraying him when it was done.


Mill. That which you call betraying him, may convince, you of my Innocence.
She who loves him, though she contrived the Murder, would never have delivered
him into the Hands of Justice, as I (struck with the Horror of his Crimes) have
done. --


Thor. How should an unexperienced Youth escape her Snares; the powerful Magic
of her Wit and Form, might betray the wisest to simple Dotage, and fire the
Blood that Age had froze long since. Even I, that with just Prejudice came
prepared, had, by her artful Story, been deceived, but that my strong
Conviction of her Guilt makes even a Doubt impossible. Those whom subtly you
would accuse, you know are your Accusers; and what proves unanswerably, their
Innocence, and your Guilt; they accused you before the Deed was done, and did
all that was in their Power to have prevented it.


Mill. Sir, you are very hard to be convinced; but I have such a Proof, which,
when produced, will silence all Objections.


SCENE XVII.
Thorowgood, Lucy, Trueman, Blunt, Officers, etc. Lucy. Gentlemen, pray place
your selves, some on one Side of that Door, and some on the other; watch her
Entrance, and act as your Prudence shall direct you. -- This Way -- [ to
Thorowgood] and note her Behavior; I have observed her, she is driven to the
last Extremity, and is forming some desperate Resolution. -- I guess at her
Design. --


SCENE XVIII.
To them, Millwood with a Pistol, -- Trueman secures her. Tr. Here thy Power of
doing Mischief ends; deceitful, cruel, bloody Woman!


Mill. Fool, Hypocrite, Villain. -- Man! thou can not call me that.


Tr. To call thee Woman, were to wrong the Sex, thou Devil!


Mill. That imaginary Being is an Emblem of thy cursed Sex collected. A
Mirror, wherein each particular Man may see his own Likeness, and that of all
Mankind.


Tr. Think not by aggravating the Fault of others to extenuate thy own, of
which the Abuse of such uncommon Perfections of Mind and Body is not the least.


Mill. If such I had, well may I curse your barbarous Sex, who robbed me of
'em, ever I knew their Worth, then left me, too late, to count their Value by
their Loss. Another and another Spoiler came, and all my Gain was Poverty and
Reproach. My Soul disdained, and yet disdains Dependence and Contempt. Riches,
no Matter by what Means obtained, I saw secured the worst of Men from both; I
found it therefore necessary to be rich; and, to that End, I summoned all my
Arts. You call 'em wicked, be it so, they were such as my Conversation with
your Sex had furnished me withal.


Thor. Sure none but the worst of Men conversed with thee.


Mill. Men of all Degrees and all Professions I have known, yet found no
Difference, but in their several Capacities; all were alike wicked to the
utmost of their Power. In Pride, Contention, Avarice, Cruelty, and Revenge, the
Reverend Priesthood were my unering Guides. From Suburb-Magistrates, who live
by ruined Reputations, as the unhospitable Natives of Cornwall do by
Ship-wrecks, I learned, that to charge my innocent Neighbors with my Crimes,
was to merit their Protection; for to skreen the Guilty, is the less
scandalous, when many are suspected, and Detraction, like Darkness and Death,
blackens all Objects, and levels all Distinction. Such are your venal
Magistrates, who favor none but such as, by their Office, they are sworn to
punish: With them not to be guilty, is the worst of Crimes; and large Fees
privately paid, is every needful Virtue.


Thor. Your Practice has sufficiently discovered your Contempt of Laws, both
human and divine; no wonder then that you should hate the Officers of both.


Mill. I hate you all, I know you, and expect no Mercy; nay, I ask for none; I
have done nothing that I am sorry for; I followed my Inclinations, and that the
best of you does every Day. All Actions are alike natural and indifferent to
Man and Beast, who devour, or are devoured, as they meet with others weaker or
stronger than themselves.


Thor. What Pity it is, a Mind so comprehensive, daring and inquisitive, should
be a Stranger to Religion's sweet, but powerful Charms.


Mill. I am not Fool enough to be an Atheist, though I have known enough of Men's
Hypocrisy to make a thousand simple Women so. Whatever Religion is in it self,
as practiced by Mankind, it has caused the Evils, you say, it was designed to
cure. War, Plague, and Famine, has not destroyed so many of the human Race, as
this pretended Piety has done; and with such barbarous Cruelty, as if the only
Way to honor Heaven, were to turn the present World into Hell.


Thor. Truth is Truth, though from an Enemy, and spoke in Malice. You bloody,
blind, and superstitious Bigots, how will you answer this?


Mill. What are your Laws, of which you make your Boast, but the Fool's Wisdom,
and the Coward's Valor; the Instrument and Skreen of all your Villainies, by
which you punish in others what you act your selves, or would have acted, had
you been in their Circumstances. The Judge who condemns the poor Man for being
a Thief, had been a Thief himself had he been poor. Thus you go on deceiving,
and being deceived, harrassing, plaguing, and destroying one another; but Women
are your universal Prey.

Women, by whom you are, the Source of Joy,
With cruel Arts you labor to destroy:
A thousand Ways our Ruin you pursue,
Yet blame in us those Arts, first taught by you.
O may, from hence, each violated Maid,
By flattering, faithless, barbarous Man betrayed;
When robbed of Innocence, and Virgin Fame,
From your Destruction raise a nobler Name;
To right their Sex's Wrongs devote their Mind,
And future Millwoods prove to plague Mankind.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
A Room in a Prison. Thorowgood, Blunt and Lucy. Thor. I Have recommended to
Barnwell a Reverend Divine, whose Judgment and Integrity I am well acquainted
with; nor has Millwood been neglected, but she, unhappy Woman, still obstinate,
refuses his Assistance.


Lucy. This pious Charity to the Afflicted well becomes your Character; yet
pardon me, Sir, if I wonder you were not at their Trial.


Thor. I knew it was impossible to save him, and I and my Family bear so great
a Part in his Distress, that to have been present would have aggravated our
Sorrows without relieving his.


Blunt. It was mournful indeed. Barnwell's Youth and modest Deportment, as he
past, drew Tears from every Eye: When placed at the Bar, and arraigned before
the Reverend Judges, with many Tears and interrupting Sobs he confessed and
aggravated his Offenses, without accusing, or once reflecting on Millwood, the
shameless Author of his Ruin; who dauntless and unconcerned stood by his Side,
viewing with visible Pride and Contempt the vast Assembly, who all with
sympathizing Sorrow wept for the wretched Youth. Millwood when called upon to
answer, loudly insisted upon her Innocence, and made an artful and a bold
Defense; but finding all in vain, the impartial Jury and the learned Bench
concurring to find her guilty, how did she curse her self, poor Barnwell, us,
her Judges, all Mankind; but what could that avail? she was condemned, and is
this Day to suffer with him.


Thor. The Time draws on, I am going to visit Barnwell, as you are Millwood.


Lucy. We have not wronged her, yet I dread this Interview. She Is proud,
impatient, wrathful, and unforgiving. To be the branded Instruments of
Vengeance, to suffer in her Shame, and sympathize with her in all she suffers,
is the Tribute we must pay for our former ill spent Lives, and long confederacy
with her in Wickedness.


Thor. Happy for you it ended when it did. What you have done against Millwood
I know proceeded from a just Abhorrence of her Crimes, free from Interest,
Malice, or Revenge. Proselytes to Virtue should be encouraged. Pursue your
proposed Reformation, and know me hereafter for your Friend.


Lucy. This is a Blessing as unhop'd for as unmerited, but Heaven that snatched
us from impending Ruin, sure intends you as its Instrument to secure us from
Apostasy.


Thor. With Gratitude to impute your Deliverance to Heaven is just. Many, less
virtuously disposed than Barnwell was, have never fallen in the Manner he has
done, -- may not such owe their Safety rather to Providence than to themselves.
With Pity and Compassion let us judge him. Great were his Faults, but strong
was the Temptation. Let his Ruin learn us Diffidence, Humanity and
Circumspection; -- for we, -- who wonder at his Fate, -- perhaps had we like
him, been tried, -- like him, we had fallen too.


SCENE II.
A Dungeon, a Table and Lamp. Thorowgood, Barnwell reading. Thor. See there the
bitter Fruits of Passion's detested Reign, and sensual Appetite indulged.
Severe Reflections, Penitence and Tears.


Barn. My honored injured Master, whose Goodness has covered me a thousand
times with Shame, forgive this last unwilling Disrespect, -- indeed I saw you
not.


Thor. It Is well, I hope you were better employed in viewing of your self; --
your Journey's long, your Time for preparation almost spent. -- I sent a
Reverend Divine to teach you to improve it, and should be glad to hear of his
Success.


Barn. The Word of Truth, which he recommended for my constant Companion in
this my sad Retirement, has at length removed the Doubts I labored under. From
thence I Have learned the infinite Extent of heavenly Mercy; that my Offenses,
though great, are not unpardonable; and that it is not my Interest only, but my
Duty to believe and to rejoice in that Hope, -- So shall Heaven receive the
Glory, and future Penitents the Profit of my Example.


Thor. Go on. -- How happy am I who live to see this?


Barn. It Is wonderful, -- that Words should charm Despair, speak Peace and
Pardon to a Murderer's Conscience; -- but Truth and Mercy flow in every
Sentence, attended with Force and Energy divine. How shall I describe my
present State of Mind? I hope in doubt, -- and trembling I rejoice. -- I feel
my Grief increase, even as my Fears give way. -- Joy and Gratitude now supply
more Tears, than the Horror and Anguish of Despair before.


Thor. These are the genuine Signs of true Repentance, the only Preparatory,
certain Way to everlasting Peace. -- O the Joy it gives to see a Soul formed
and prepared for Heaven! -- For this the faithful Minister devotes himself to
Meditation, Abstinence and Prayer, shuning the vain Delights of sensual Joys,
and daily dies that others may live for ever. -- For this he turns the sacred
Volumes over, and spends his Life in painful Search of Truth. -- The Love of
Riches and the Lust of Power, he looks on with just Contempt and Detestation;
who only counts for Wealth the Souls he wins; and whose highest Ambition is to
serve Mankind. -- If the Reward of all his Pains be to preserve one Soul from
wandering, or turn one from the Error of his Ways, how does he then rejoice,
and own his little Labors over paid.


Barn. What do I owe for all your generous Kindness? but though I cannot, Heaven
can and will reward you.


Thor. To see thee thus, is Joy too great for Words. Farewell, -- Heaven
strengthen thee. -- Farewell.


Barn. O! Sir, there is something I could say, if my sad swelling Heart would
give me leave.


Thor. Give it vent a while, and try.


Barn. I had a Friend, -- it is true I am unworthy, yet methinks your generous
Example might persuade; -- could I not see him once before I go from whence
there is no return.


Thor. He Is coming, -- and as much thy Friend as ever; -- but I Will not
anticipate his Sorrow, -- too soon he will see the sad Effect of his contagious
Ruin. This Torrent of Domestic Misery bears too hard upon me, -- I must retire
to indulge a Weakness I find impossible to overcome. [Aside.] -- Much loved --
and much lamented Youth -- Farewell -- Heaven strengthen thee -- Eternally
Farewell.


Barn. The best of Masters and of Men -- Farewell -- while I live let me not
want your Prayers.


Thor. Thou shall not; -- thy Peace being made with Heaven, Death's already
vanquished; -- bear a little longer the Pains that attend this transitory Life,
and cease from Pain for ever.


SCENE III.
Barnwell. I find a Power within that bears my Soul above the Fears of Death,
and, spite of conscious Shame and Guilt, gives me a Taste of Pleasure more
than Mortal.


SCENE IV.
( To him.) Trueman and Keeper. Keep. Sir, there is the Prisoner.


SCENE V.
Barnwell and Trueman. Barn. Trueman, -- My Friend, whom I so wished to see, yet
now he is here I dare not look upon him. [Weeps.


Tr. O Barnwell! Barnwell!


Barn. Mercy! Mercy! gracious Heaven! for Death, but not for this, was I
prepared.


Tr. What have I suffered since I saw you last? -- what Pain has Absence given
me? -- But oh! to see thee thus!


Barn. I know it is dreadful! I feel the Anguish of thy generous Soul, -- but I
was born to murder all who love me. [Both weep.


Tr. I came not to reproach you; -- I thought to bring you Comfort, -- but I Am
deceived, for I have none to give; -- I came to share thy Sorrow, but cannot
bear my own.


Barn. My Sense of Guilt indeed you cannot know, -- it is what the Good and
Innocent, like you, can never conceive; -- but other Griefs at present I have
none, but what I feel for you. -- In your Sorrow I read you love me still, --
but yet methinks it is strange -- when I consider what I am.


Tr. No more of that, -- I can remember nothing but thy Virtues, -- thy honest,
tender Friendship, our former happy State and present Misery. -- O had you
trusted me when first the Fair Seducer tempted you, all might have been
prevented.


Barn. Alas, thou know not what a Wretch I Have been! Breach of Friendship was
my first and least Offense. -- So far was I lost to Goodness, -- so devoted to
the Author of my Ruin, -- that had she insisted on my murdering thee, -- I
think, -- I should have done it.


Tr. Prithee aggravate thy Faults no more.


Barn. I think I should! -- thus Good and Generous as you are, I should have
murdered you!


Tr. We have not yet embraced, and may be interrupted. Come to my Arms.


Barn. Never, never will I taste such Joys on Earth; never will I so sooth my
just Remorse. Are those honest Arms, and faithful Bosom, fit to embrace and to
support a Murderer. -- These Iron Fetters only shall clasp, and flinty Pavement
bear me, -- [Throwing himself on the Ground,] even these too good for such a
bloody Monster.


Tr. Shall Fortune sever those whom Friendship joined! -- Thy Miseries cannot
lay thee so low, but Love will find thee, [Lies down by him.] Upon this rugged
Couch then let us lie, for well it suits our most deplorable Condition. -- Here
will we offer to stern Calamity, -- this Earth the Altar, and our selves the
Sacrifice. -- Our mutual Groans shall echo to each other through the dreary
Vault. -- Our Sighs shall number the Moments as they pass, -- and mingling
Tears communicate such Anguish, as Words were never made to express.


Barn. Then be it so. -- Since you propose an Intercourse of Woe, pour all your
Griefs into my Breast, -- and in exchange take mine, [Embracing.] Where Is now
the Anguish that you promised? -- You Have taken mine, and make me no Return. --
Sure Peace and Comfort dwell within these Arms, and Sorrow cannot approach me
while I Am here! -- This too is the Work of Heaven, who, having before spoke
Peace and Pardon to me, now sends thee to confirm it. -- O take, take some of
the Joy that overflows my Breast!


Tr. I do, I do. Almighty Power, how have you made us capable to bear, at once,
the Extremes of Pleasure and of Pain?


SCENE VI.
To them, Keeper. Keeper. Sir.


Tr. I come.


SCENE VII.
Barnwell and Trueman. Barn. Must you leave me! -- Death would soon have parted
us for ever.


Tr. O, my Barnwell, there is yet another Task behind: -- Again your Heart must
bleed for others Woes.


Barn. To meet and part with you, I thought was all I had to do on Earth! What
is there more for me to do or suffer?


Tr. I dread to tell thee, yet it must be known. -- Maria.


Barn. Our Master's fair and virtuous Daughter!


Tr. The same.


Barn. No Misfortune, I hope, has reached that lovely Maid! Preserve her,
Heaven, from every Ill, to show Mankind that Goodness is your Care.


Tr. Thy, thy Misfortunes, my unhappy Friend, have reached her. Whatever you
and I have felt, and more, if more be possible, she feels for you.


Barn. I know he does abhor a Lie, and would not trifle with his dying Friend.
-- This is, indeed, the Bitterness of Death! [Aside.


Tr. You must remember, for we all observed it, for some Time past, a heavy
Melancholy weighed her down. -- Disconsolate she seemed, and pined and
languish'd from a Cause unknown; -- till hearing of your dreadful Fate, -- the
long stifled Flame blazed out. -- She wept, she wrung her Hands, and tore her
Hair, and, in the Transport of her Grief, discovered her own lost State, whilst
she lamented yours.


Barn. Will all the Pain I feel restore thy Ease, lovely unhappy Maid?
[Weeping] Why did n't you let me die and never know it?


Tr. It was impossible; -- she makes no Secret of her Passion for you, and is
determined to see you ever you die; -- she waits for me to introduce her. --


SCENE VIII.
Barnwell. Barn. Vain busy Thoughts be still! -- What avails it to think on
what I might have been, -- I now am, -- What I Have made my self.


SCENE IX.
To him, Trueman and Maria. Tr. Madam, reluctant I lead you to this dismal
Scene: This is the Seat of Misery and Guilt. -- Here awful Justice reserves her
public Victims. -- This is the Entrance to shameful Death. --


Ma. To this sad Place, then no improper Guest, the abandoned lost Maria brings
Despair, and see the Subject and the Cause of all this World of Woe. -- Silent
and motionless he stands, as if his Soul had quitted her Abode, -- and the
lifeless Form alone was left behind; -- yet that so perfect, that Beauty and
Death, -- ever at Enmity, -- now seem united there.


Barn. I groan, but murmur not. -- Just Heaven, I am your own; do with me what
you please.


Ma. Why are your streaming Eyes still fixed below? -- as though thoud'st give
the greedy Earth thy Sorrows, and rob me of my Due. -- Were Happiness within
your Power, you should bestow it where you pleased; -- but in your Misery I
must and will partake.


Barn. Oh! say not so, but fly, abhor, and leave me to my Fate. -- Consider
what you are: -- How vast your Fortune, and how bright your Fame: -- Have Pity
on your Youth, your Beauty, and unequalled Virtue, -- for which so many noble
Peers have sighed in vain. Bless with your Charms some honorable Lord. --
Adorn with your Beauty; and, by your Example, improve the English Court, that
justly claims such Merit; so shall I quickly be to you as though I had never
been. --


Ma. When I forget you, I must be so indeed. -- Reason, Choice, Virtue, all
forbid it. -- Let Women, like Millwood, if there be more such Women, smile in
Prosperity, and in Adversity forsake. Be it the Pride of Virtue to repair, or
to partake, the Ruin such have made.


Tr. Lovely, ill-fated Maid! -- Was there ever such generous Distress before?
-- How must this pierce his grateful Heart, and aggravate his Woes?


Barn. Ever I knew Guilt or Shame, when Fortune smiled, and when my youthful
Hopes were at the highest; if then to have raised my Thoughts to you, had been
Presumption in me, never to have been pardoned, -- think how much beneath your
self you condescend to regard me now.


Ma. Let her blush who, professing Love, invades the Freedom of your Sex's
Choice, and meanly sues in Hopes of a Return. -- Your inevitable Fate has
rendered Hope impossible as vain. -- Then why should I fear to avow a Passion
so just and so disinterested?


Tr. If any should take Occasion, from Millwood's Crimes, to libel the best and
fairest Part of the Creation, here let them see their Error. -- The most
distant Hopes of such a tender Passion, from so bright a Maid, might add to the
Happiness of the most happy, and make the greatest proud. -- Yet here it is
lavished in vain: -- Though by the rich Present, the generous Donor is undone, --
he, on whom it is bestowed, receives no Benefit.


Barn. So the Aromatic Spices of the East, which all the Living covet and
esteem, are, with unavailing Kindness, wasted on the Dead.


Ma. Yes, fruitless is my Love, and unavailing all my Sighs and Tears. -- Can
they save thee from approaching Death? -- from such a Death? -- O terrible
Idea! -- What is her Misery and Distress, who sees the first last Object of her
Love, for whom alone she would live, -- for whom she would die a thousand, thousand
Deaths, if it were possible, -- expiring in her Arms? -- Yet she is happy, when
compared to me. -- Were Millions of Worlds mine, I Would gladly give them in
exchange for her Condition. -- The most consummate Woe is light to mine. The
last of Curses to other miserable Maids, is all I ask; and that is denied me.


Tr. Time and Reflection cure all Ills.


Ma. All but this; -- his dreadful Catastrophe Virtue her self abhors. -- To
give a Holiday to suburb Slaves, and passing entertain the savage Herd, who,
elbowing each other for a Sight, pursue and press upon him like his Fate. -- A
Mind with Piety and Resolution armed, may smile on Death. -- But public
Ignominy, -- everlasting Shame, -- Shame the Death of Souls, -- to die a
thousand Times, and yet survive even Death it self, in never dying Infamy, is
this to be endured? -- Can I, who live in him, and must, each Hour of my
devoted Life, feel all these Woes renewed, -- can I endure this! --


Tr. Grief has impaired her Spirits; she pants, as in the Agonies of Death. --


Barn. Preserve her, Heaven, and restore her Peace, -- nor let her Death be
added to my Crimes, -- [Bell tolls.] I am summoned to my Fate.


SCENE X.
( To them.) Keeper. Keep. The Officers attend you, Sir. -- Mrs. Millwood is
already summoned.


Barn. Tell 'em I Am ready. -- And now, my Friend, farewell, [Embracing.]
Support and comfort the best you can this Mourning Fair. -- No more. -- Forget
not to pray, for me, -- [ Turning to Maria] would you, bright Excellence,
permit me the Honor of a chaste Embrace, -- the last Happiness this World
could give were mine, [She enclines toward him; they embrace.] Exalted
Goodness! -- O turn your Eyes from Earth, and me, to Heaven, -- where Virtue,
like yours, is ever heard. -- Pray for this Peace of my departing Soul. --
Early my Race of Wickedness began, and soon has reached the Summet: -- Ever
Nature has finished her Work, and stamped me Man, -- just at the Time that
others begin to stray, -- my Course is finished; though short my Span of Life,
and few my Days; yet count my Crimes for Years, and I have lived whole Ages. --
Justice and Mercy are in Heaven the same: Its utmost Severity is Mercy to the
whole, -- thereby to cure Man's Folly and Presumption, which else would render
even infinite Mercy vain and ineffectual. -- Thus Justice, in Compassion to
Mankind, cuts off a Wretch like me, by one such Example to secure Thousands
from future Ruin.

If any Youth, like you, -- in future Times,
Shall mourn my Fate, -- though he abhor my Crimes;
Or tender Maid, like you, -- my Tale shall hear,
And to my Sorrows give a pitying Tear:
To each such melting Eye, and throbbing Heart,
Would gracious Heaven this Benefit impart,
Never to know my Guilt, -- nor feel my Pain,
Then must you own, you ought not to complain;
Since you nor weep, -- nor shall I die in vain.

SCENE XI.
Trueman, Blunt, and Lucy. Lucy. Heartbreaking Sight. -- O wretched, wretched
Millwood.


Tr. You came from her then: -- How is she disposed to meet her Fate?


Blunt. Who can describe unalterable Woe?


Lucy. She goes to Death encompassed with Horror, loathing Life, and yet afraid
to die; no Tongue can tell her Anguish and Despair.


Tr. Heaven be better to her than her Fears; may she prove a Warning to others,
a Monument of Mercy in her self.


Lucy. O Sorrow, insupportable! break, break my Heart.


Tr. In vain.

With bleeding Hearts, and weeping Eyes we show
A human generous Sense of others Woe;
Unless we mark what drew their Ruin on,
And by avoiding that, prevent our own.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Written by COLLEY CIBBER, Esquire and spoke by Mrs. CIBBER.
SINCE Fate has robbed me of the hapless Youth,
For whom my Heart had hoarded up its Truth;
By all the Laws of Love and Honor, now,
I Am free again to choose, -- and one of you.
But soft, -- With Caution first I Will round me peep;
Maids, in my Case, should look, before they leap:
Here Is Choice enough, of various Sorts, and Hue,
The Cit, the Wit, the Rake cocked up in Cue,
The fair spruce Mercer, and the tawney Jew.
Suppose I search the sober Gallery; -- No,
There Is none but Prentices, -- and Cuckolds all a Row;
And these, I doubt, are those that make 'em so.
[Pointing to the Boxes. It Is very well, enjoy the Jest: -- But you,
Fine powdered Sparks; -- nay, I Am told it is true,
Your happy Spouses -- can make Cuckolds too.
'Twixt you and them, the Difference this perhaps,
The Cit's ashamed whenever his Duck he traps;
But you, when Madam's tripping, let her fall,
Cock up your Hats, and take no Shame at all.
What if some favored Poet I could meet?
Whose Love would lay his Laurels at my Feet.
No, -- Painted Passion real Love abhors, --
His Flame would prove the Suit of Creditors.
Not to detain you then with longer Pause,
In short, my Heart to this Conclusion draws,
A yield it to the Hand, that is loudest in Applause.

