Liberty Asserted. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at the NEW THEATER IN Little
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mr. DENNIS.

LONDON: Printed for George Strahan at the Golden Ball, against the Royal
Exchange, in Cornhill; and Bernard Lintott at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1704. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Liberty Asserted.

A TRAGEDY.

TO ANTHONY HENLEY, Esquire
SIR,
THIS Play of Liberty Asserted, is by the right of Nature Yours, not only as
You are a zealous Lover of Your Country, and a generous Assertor of Liberty,
but as it owes its Birth and its very Being to You. For it was You, Sir, who
gave the happy Hint upon which this Poem was formed; from You (...) from a
Source of noble Sentiments it descended to Me, and it is from Me that with a
just Ambition it ascends to You.

If I had had the Happiness to be nearer to You during the time that I was
writing this Tragedy; if, as I at first received the Hint from You, I could
have received Your Instructions about the Design and the Working of the Scenes,
the Faults in this Poem had then been fewer; and the Present more worthy You.
But I know that the Nobleness of Your English Principles will oblige You to
excuse its Faults, on Consideration of the just Intention with the which it was
writ; and that was no less than to do good to Your Country; to open the Eyes of
deluded Men, to inspire them with the Love of Liberty, and unite and animate
them against the Common Foe of Europe. But yet, if at last I did not flatter my
self that this Play had many more Beauties than Faults, You should be the very
last Person to whom I would choose to address it. If You appear to be of the
same Opinion, I have gained the chief Ends which I propose to my self in
Writing, and that is to do a little Good, to distinguish my self by what I
write, and by those to whom I address my self. I shall look upon Your
Approbation as a glorious Earnest of Fame, for Truth will be sure at last to
prevail; and that which we call Taste in Writing, is nothing but a fine
Discernment of Truth. But as Truth must be always one, and always the same to
all who have Eyes to discern it; he who pleases one of a true Taste at first,
is sure of pleasing all the World at last. But I who have sometimes had the
Honor to hear You talk of Criticism, have been a long time thoroughly convinced
that from an Intimacy with the Ancients, and a just Knowledge of the Moderns,
You have formed that fine and admirable Taste, which is so rarely found among
us. But I ought to consider that while I commend it, I may perhaps displease
it, and ought in Discretion to say no more. I am,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

PREFACE.
AS the Entertainments of our Theaters are public, and supported by public
Authority, it is but just that the Instruction, which is the ultimate end of
them, should tend to the public Advantage. It Is true, indeed, the Stage, by
correcting particular Persons, has a natural tendency to the improving the
Public. But when, I say, that the Public ought to receive Advantage from the
Entertainments of our Theaters, I mean, that it ought to do so immediately, and
that the Instructions which we receive from the Stage ought to be for the
Benefit of the lawful established Government.

That this was the Case among the Athenians appears plain to me; and the reason
why they settled so vast a Fund upon the Tragic Stage, was because they
regarded it as the very Barrier of Liberty, which it supported by exposing the
Misfortunes of Tyrants, and the Calamities that attended upon Arbitrary Power.
And it seems to me to be for this reason that they had that high Esteem for
Oedipus, and were at so uncommon an Expense in the Decoration of it, because
both the Crimes and the Calamities of Oedipus were the Consequences of his
assuming unlimited Power. It Is true, he killed his Father before he came to be
King, but it was by ascending the Throne that he committed Incest, and that he
came to the knowledge of what he had done; and had he continued a private Man,
he had neither known the Guilt of his Actions, nor had he felt the Punishment
of them.

As the Athenians had Liberty with a Commonwealth, the English enjoy the very
same Liberty under the Government of the best of Queens, and in so doing are
the happiest People in the World. I thought therefore that I could not do a
thing that would be more acceptable to all true Englishmen, than to cas^ in my
Mite toward the defending and supporting of that Liberty.

That the Liberties of Europe, and of this Island particularly, are in no small
Danger at present from the growing Power of France, will be easily granted by
all but such who are either Fools or Knaves too incorrigible to be talked too.
But this is plain, that they are not so much in danger, from what some call the
Greatness of the French, as from the Baseness of the rest of Europe. If we were
but as true to Liberty, as the French are to Tyranny, they would soon be as
despicable in their Circumstances as they are now in their Principles. It Is the
want of public Spirit that ruins us, and the Design of this Tragedy is to
inculcate that, this being its important Moral; that the want of public Spirit
in the Members of any Community makes not only the public, but very often
those private Persons who want it* very unhappy; that whoeven sells or betrays
his Country either to a foreign Tyrant, as some of the Confederates, or to a
homebred one, as the whole Body of the French do; whoever does this upon the
account of advancing his Family, which is the general Motive to such public
Treasons, is sure to have himself and his Family suffer with the rest, and
perhaps with the foremost. And this Moral is proved by the Dramatick Action
both ways. It shows a Man who makes a Treaty with the French upon private
Interest, made by that Treaty the most wretched of Mankind, of the happiest
that he was before; and it shows the very Frenchman who breaks it, about to be
plunged by the Breach of it, in the most deplorable Calamity; and it shows
something farther too, that the French, who are the Instruments of promoting
Tyranny upon a private Interest, are so only because they are so far blinded by
their Passions, that they know not what they do; that is, they know not that
they are sacrificing to their Tyrant their very Children and Families, for
whose Support they pretend to act; that if their other Passions did not conccal
this from them, all of them who have any thing of natural Affection, would be
so far from being guilty of so unnatural a Villainy, that they would immediately
declare for Liberty.

Some People may perhaps admire, that I who have been accused of repeating the
same thing in the Play, the Prologue and Epilogue, should yet appear to be
farther guilty of that very Fault in the Preface. To whom I answer, That since
after all the Care I had taken in the Play, the Prologue and Epilogue, to
assure the World that this was an English and not a Party Play; there were some
malicious enough to affirm that this was a Play writ purposely to oblige the
Whigs, I thought it lay upon me to prove what I had affirmed before, that this
was not a Whig but an English Play, which I shall manifestly, I believe, make
out, unless they will urge, that because it is an English therefore it is a
Whiggish Play.

If this Play is writ for a Party, why then it must be writ against a Party.
Now it will be pretty plain from what has been said above, considered with the
Play it self, that the Design of this Tragedy is to make Men in Love with
Liberty, by showing them that nothing can be more according to Nature, and by
showing this not by such forcible and extraordinary Arguments as require more
than ordinary Penetration to be understood, for that has been already done so
incomparably by Mr. Lock that nothing need or can be added to it; but by
something so plain that every Understanding is capable of it, and that is, by
the most Tender of all Sentiments which Nature has implanted in the Minds of
Men, and that is, the Love of their Children. The Party therefore that this
Play was writ to oblige, are all those who have any concern for their Country,
their Religion, their Relations, their Friends and their Children; and the
Party it was writ against, are all those who care not one farthing for any or
all of these. Now I would give a good deal to behold so abominable a Wretch as
to own himself of such a Party.

He who writes for a Party writes for Interest; now I would fain ask any one
where can be my Interest in writing for the Party for which it is supposed that
I write. The first thing that I wrote which had relation to the Public was a
Poem called The Court of Death, in which I lamented the Death of the late Queen
of happy and glorious Memory. And though both the Design and Spirit of that Poem
were thought by some of the best Judges, to be above the common level of
Poetry, yet I was almost the only Person of all the Writers who appeared upon
that Subject, of whom the Court took no notice. My Friends can bear me Witness
that I was so far from being mortified at it, that I was resolved to persevere
in what I thought my Duty, and of all the foresaid Writers I was afterward the
only Person who bewailed the Death of the late King in the same public manner
that I had before lamented that of his Royal Consort. I had almost the same
Fortune with that Poem that I had with the former: It brought me indeed a
little more Reputation, but just as much Advantage.

He who after this could be induced to expect any thing from those whom they
call the Whigs, must be of a more sanguine Temper than I am. I know indeed that
there are a great many People whom they call Whigs, who are really Englishmen,
and to oblige Englishmen I shall be always proud, by what Names soever they may
be distinguished; By a real Englishman I mean one who is for the present
Establishment, and the Protestant Succession, upon the view of the good of his
Country, and his own no farther than as it depends on the other.

But upon the first acting this Tragedy there were not wanting some worthy
Persons who made it their Business to report about the Town that it was a
Republican Play. Now to give them an Answer to which nothing can be replied, I
have ordered the last Scene of the Play to be printed, which on the account of
Length was left out in Acting, though it yet remains in the Play-house-copy. At
the same time I desire the Reader to believe, that I am not such a Fool to
contend for Names but for Things; that Liberty is Liberty under a limited
Monarchy, as much as under a Commonwealth; that we enjoy enough under the
present Queen to make us the happiest of People; that I have as high a
Veneration for Her as any Subject She has, and would venture as much to serve
Her, because I am perfectly convinced, that all that She aims at by Her
perpetual Care and the Wisdom of Her Conduct, is to support and defend these
Liberties which Her glorious Predecessor delivered to us; and which it is the
Business of this Play to assert and vindicate. So that the Design of this
Tragedy being only to promote the good Intentions of the Queen, it is more Her
Interest than it is any Persons in England that it should make the Impression
which it was designed to make; though I believe it at the same time to be the
Interest of every Person in England, excepting those who are wishing for a
French Government or contriving to bring it in.

This is not the first time that since Her Majesty's happy Accession to Her
Throne I have endeavored to serve Her. And all the world knows that it is not
my Fault that I have not done Her a most important Service. Proposal for
putting a speedy end to the War, etc. sold by Mrs. Baldwin.
Had that been done, there had been no need of writing the following Tragedy.
There had been no need of firing People with the Love of Liberty, or animating
them against the common Foe. Had that been done the Liberties of Europe and our
own had been sufficiently secured.

I know very well that the foregoing Declaration is not over politic; that to
declare for the Public against Parties is to make no Friends. I am perfectly
convinced that if I could be brought to espouse any Party warmly, that Party
might be brought to espouse me, but that till I make that step I must be left
to my self; of this, I say, I am perfectly convinced, and yet notwithstanding
that Conviction, I hope in God I shall not change my Conduct.

The Success of this Play has been so favorable notwithstanding Malice and ill
Accidents; it has had the Felicity of having so many illustrious Voices for it,
that I may spare my self the Trouble of answering Objections. However, since
good Manners appear to be concerned in two of them, I shall say a word to those.

The first is, that there are in this Play National Reflections, which ought
not to be made. To which I answer, that I plainly perceive that the Art of the
following Tragedy is by no means all understood. That part of it consists in
this, that what some mistake for a National Satyr, is only a Satyr upon
Arbitrary Power, a Satyr upon the Government of the French, and not upon their
Manners as they proceed from their Climate. The French are in themselves a
brave and a gallant Nation; but the Submission which they fondly pay to
unlimited Power has plunged them in Vices which their Natures abhor, and
rendered them odious and despicable. To show this, I have introduced the
Characters of two Frenchmen, Frontenac and Miramont, who are both of them Men
of Honor; but the difference between them is this, that Miramont, who declares
against Arbitrary Power, is altogether without Blemish, and the Faults and
Defects in Frontenac's Character, are plainly derived from his Zeal for their
present Government.

The other Objection is this, that the Satyr in the Ambassadors Scene is too
course for delicate Ears. I know it very well, and in complaisance to some
Gentlemen whom I esteem, I ordered it to be left out after the first Night, but
I have printed it with the rest because they who do not like it may turn over
it, and because it is likely to be subservient to the end for which this Poem
was writ, and that is, to animate our English against the French; for I believe
it may not be unacceptable to some honest downright Englishmen, who while we
and the French are cutting one another Throats, will not take it ill, that we
do it without Ceremony.

The Scene of this Tragedy lies at Agnie in Canada; which, for the sake of the
better sound, I call Angie. Canada is a vast Tract of Land in Northern America,
on the Back of New England and New York. As New England and New York, and the
Country about them belong to the English, a considerable part of Canada is
possessed by the French; and as the English and French divide the Country, they
divide the Natives. The most considerable Nation of Canada, next to the
Iroquois, are the Hurons, who are Friends to the French. But the five Warlike
Nations of the Iroquois are our Confederates; of those five Nations, Agnies or
Angies is one; and the chief Place of the Nation is Agnie or Angie, and thus
much I thought fit to premise for the Sake of those who have never read either
Hennepin or La Hontan.

But now it will be convenient to say a word concerning the Scenes as they are
marked in the printed Play, and here* by the word Scene, I do not mean so much
the Place, as the Number of Persons who are in Action upon that Place at a
time. I have therefore distinguished the Scenes in the following Play, as they
have been always distinguished by the Ancients and by the Moderns of other
Countries, and by our own Ben. Johnson. Any Person who comes upon the Place of
Action, or leaves it, makes a different Scene, and that new Scene is marked by
the Figure of its respective Number, and the Names of the Persons who are upon
the Place of Action. I thought that agreeable Delusion into which the Reader
willingly and gladly enters, for the sake of his Pleasure, would be both
greater and easier if he were not put in mind of a Stage by Entrances and
Exits, which are nothing but Direrections that are given to a Play House
Prompter.

The Design of this Play was much improved by the Remonstrances which I
received from my valued Friend Mr. Southern, who besides his Zeal to do good to
his Friends, and a noble Sincerity, uncommon among the Writers of this Age, by
the ex tempore Remarks which he made upon my reading this Play to him in a very
hasty manner, showed at once so much penetrating Quickness, as well as so much
Solidity, and so much sureness, as could belong to no Man but one who has a
thorough Understanding of Nature, and who has that admirable Talent for
touching the Passions which he has shown in his Tragedies. I must own the
Obligation too which I have to Mr. Betterton for the Hints I received from him,
as well as for his excellent Action.

This Play indeed received all the Grace and Ornament of Action in most of the
principal Parts, and in all the Women's. But that of Sakia by Mrs. Barry was
acted so admirably and inimitably, as that no Stage in Europe can boast of any
thing that comes near to her Performance; or if the Foreign Stages can show any
thing like it, they are at least prodigiously improved since I was upon the
Continent. That incomparable Actress changing like Nature which she represents,
from Passion to Passion, from Extreme to Extreme, with piercing Force, and with
(...) Grace, changes the Hearts of all who see her with irresistible Pleasure.

ERRATA.
Page 33. for commends read commands. p. 38. for the glorious Spears, r. that
glorious Sphere. p. 56. for more at variance, r. never at variance. p. 63. for
again is an, r. again in an.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mr. Betterton. THIS of deep Tragedies is sure the Age,
When Mars each day displays with swelling Rage
His bloody Scenes upon the Worlds great Stage.
Ye Brittons, from your Thames's Silver Flood
Turn, turn your Eyes to Streams distained with Blood;
And to discover Scenes of mortal Woe,
Survey the Rhine, the Danube and the Poe.
No fancied Tragedies are acting there,
There the distracted Native rends his Hair,
And shrieks and wrings his Hands in true Despair.
While no vexatious Griefs to you are known,
But here you meet to attend our pleasing moan,
And gently figh with Sorrow not your own.
By grateful Turns, with Fear and Pity seized,
And when most terrified are then most pleased;
But Tragic Scenes may come where this Delight
Shall yield to Horror and to mortal Fright:
When impious Mars shall with a dreadful Roar
Descend to visit pale Britannia's Shore.
Already Treason whispers come away,
And clamorous Discord cries make no delay.
That Hour would show a Tragedy indeed,
Whose sad Spectators would not weep but bleed.
Which to prevent all Patriots should contend,
These Scenes were wrought to serve so just an end;
To show our inbred Foes ere it is too late
That they and theirs must share the common Fate.
For France its Blood exhausts, its Wealth expends
T'obtain its own and not our Plotters ends.
They who their Country for themselves enthrall,
Will see themselves and Children with it fall.
Would they reflect on this while yet they may
Themselves and Children they would never betray,
As in the following Scenes we show to Day.
For what Remains --
To please and to instruct we have done our best,
Then boldly let us make this just Request,
With silent care to the first Act attend,
Then you with Pleasure may perhaps unbend.
EPILOGUE.
THus have we shown what we proposed to show,
All would fall off from Tyrants did they know,
That with their wretched Country they betray
Themselves and Children to tyrannick Sway.
They who placed haughty Lewis on the Throne
Would have declared against Him, had they known
That their Soul's Darlings by his dire Commands
In Torments should expire by bloody Hands,
Or live a banished Race in Foreign Lands.
The fiercest Creatures that the Woods contain
What they bring forth with pleasing Love maintain.
That Love the Lion softens, and the Bear,
The Worlds supported by that tender Care,
All Savages but Men their Offspring spare.
But Man, grown blind by Lust, of Power or Pelf,
Will sell his Darling Offspring and himself.
To reclaim such our Author bad me say
He wrote this English and no Party Play:
He minds not who is of Whig or Tory Clan
But who for Lewis is, or who for ANN?
For the same Friends have Lawless Rage and He,
As ANN has the same Foes with Liberty.
Oh may she long command these happy Isles!
Where she with Freedom Empire reconciles!
Long over your Hearts may yon bright Circle, Reign
Oh may you never feel a ruder Chain!
And of no other Tyranny complain!
But Beauties Reign on Liberty depends
When the French Reign begins, the Reign of Beauty ends,
The French are Slaves to Man's Despotick Sway,
But with Profaneness acted every Day
They force Celestial Beauty to obey.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Frontenac, Governor of New France. By Mr. Bowman. Miramont, his Kinsman. By
Mr. Betterton. Beaufort, General of the English that come to the Assistance of
the Iroquois against the French. By Mr. Powell. Ulamar, General of the five
Nations of the Iroquois. By Mr. Booth. Zephario, Head of the Angians, one of
the five Nations of the Iroquois. By Mr. Freeman. Arimat an Angian. Two
Ambassadors.
Officers, Guards, Messengers.
WOMEN.
Sakia, Mother to Ulamar. By Mrs. Barry. Irene, Daughter to Zephario. By Mrs.
Bracegirdle. Okima, Confident to Sakia. By Mrs. Porter.
SCENE Angie in Canada. Liberty Asserted.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, Angie in Canada.
SCENE I.
Sakia and Okima. Sak. SPeak on,
Thy Looks seem big with something that is important.

Okim. Then briefly thus:
Beaufort, that jointly with your valiant Son,
Led forth his English, and our Iroquois,
To stop the Incursions of the French and Hurons,
Is just from our Confederate Troops arrived.

Sak. Alas! how fares my Ulamar?

Okim. Before the Sun which now declines is set,
You may expect to hear it from himself,
For Beaufort left him just prepared to follow.

Sak. Now the great Mind be praised!
My Son has lost then, and the French are Victors.

Okim. No, my Sakia,
The Ruler of the World is not so partial,
Nor are the Guardian Spirits so remiss,
Which hover with their golden Wings over Canada:
Your lovely Son, the auspicious Ulamar,
No less the Darling is of Heaven than ours.
A thousand French and Hurons pale and breathless,
Extended on yon Plain proclaim him Victor,
And in the bloody Business of the Day.
No single Arm dealt Fate so much as Ulamar's.

Sak. Ah! wretched me! thou have rowz'd all my Griefs.

Okim. How, my Sabia?
Is your Son's Triumph then become your Grief?
His Death had been your Joy then?

Sak. Ah no! thou know I dote upon my Ulamar,
And when the Graces of his Mind and Person,
With Reason's Eye severely I survey,
Reason severely judging yet assures me,
That I have cause for all the Mother's Fondness:
Yet know, my Okima,
His Death and Victory I feared alike.

Okim. You utter Mysteries beyond my Reach.

Sak. Thou know my Son, that with the generous Beaufort
Now leads the bloody Iroquois to Battle,
No Iroquois by Birth, no Native is of Angie.

Okim. I know you both indeed by Birth are Hurons.

Sak. Hurons we once were called, and once were thought
To be descended from no Vulgar Stock,
But now, alas! are sunk to wretched Slaves*

Okim. To Slaves, Sakia!
Your Son at least has other Sentiments.

Sak. However alas, my Son may be deceived,
I am a Slave, a miserable Slave;
Who far removed from my sweet Native Soil,
Far from the dearer Partner of my Heart,
Have for twelve tedious Years been now confined
To drag the galling Yoke of loathsome Life,
In this accursed Place:
A Burden which I never could support,
But that I had some glimpse of Hope remaining;
That cruel Fortune might at length relent,
And might at length restore me with my Ulamar,
To the dear Partner of my faithful Heart:
Those Hopes have lately been revived and animated
By the prophetic Visions of the Night,
And Expectation of this fatal Action;
But this Relation has overthrown them all:
My Son's mistaken Valor has undone us,
And thou, O Miramont, art lost for ever!

Okim. Forget your Hurons and become an Angian.

Sak. O may the whole accursed Race by Fate
Be rooted even from Human Memory!
Perish their very Names too with their Persons,
Excepting thine, for thou art wondrous good.

Okim. Sakia, you forget,
To curse your Benefactors thus is impious.

Sak. To curse our mortal Enemies is just.

Okim. The Angians are your Friends and your Defenders.

Sak. My Country's mortal Enemies are mine.

Okim. Iroquian Angie is your Country now.

Sak. My Prison never can be called my Country.

Okim. The Angians gave you Liberty at first;
The Hour that made you Captives, saw you free.

Sak. Why am I then with my unhappy Son
Detained ever since in this detested Clime,
Enjoying nothing but the Name of Liberty,
Which hourly brings the thing to my Remembrance,
And makes the Yoke of Slavery wring me more?
Know that I Am not deluded by a Word,
And even this Shadow of the Angians Favor
Is due to the Request of generous Beaufort;
For he the fatal Expedition led,
To which I owe this long Captivity,
To which I owe a twelve Years mortal Woe
Confined by barbarous Iroquois to Angie;
Which may just Heaven by sharpest Plagues revenge!

Okim. You curse the Victors, Heaven has cursed the vanquished.

Sak. Now they are Conquerors I Will hate them more.

Okim. Think that our Conquest to your Son we owe,
Then curse us if you can.

Sak. Therefore the barbarous Iroquois I curse.

Okim. Upon your Son's account you ought to bless us,
Think on our Bounties heaped upon his Head.

Sak. Think on the Trophies by his Valor won,
With which tenfold your Bounty he repays.

Okim. It Is to our Favor that he owes his Glory,
Which, though he scarce has reached his twentieth Year,
Surpasses that of all our ancient Warriors.

Sak. It Is by his Glory you exist, but he
To Fortune and himself his Glory owes,
And the Instructions of the generous Beaufort.

Okim. Leading our Forces he acquired his Fame.

Sak. Yes, against the Hurons,
Our Obligations there indeed are great,
For causing him to turn his fatal Sword
Upon the bleeding Bowels of his Country,
And its Confederate Friends the Warlike French;
Who for strong Reasons ought to be most dear to him.

Okim. Poorly your partial Mind affects the French,
While he detests the false perfidious Race,
And threatens to extirpate all those gay,
But rank and filthy Weeds from Canada;
Which lately crept usurping through the Corn,
T'oppress the genuine and the noble Seed.

Sak. Tho know him not, he is ignorant of himself,
And both are blind alike; but one Day Fate
Will dissipate the impenetrable Cloud
That now obscures his Sight, and then too late
His fond and fatal Error he will detest.

Okim. But why!
For he who does his Duty, first must know it.

Sak. But this he knows at present that the French
Are strictly to his Countrymen allied,

Okim. He owns no Country but Iroquian Angie,
Who to the French must prove eternal Foes.

Sak. Time will instruct him better.

Okim. Yes, for our Angie will become to morrow
His Country by a stricter dearer tie.

Sak. What meanest thou?

Okim. A Tie that will for ever fix him ours.

Sak. Explain thy self.

Okim. To morrow's Sun, will see that Beauty his,
For whom the loveliest of our Indian Swains
Have sighed and sighed in vain.

Sak. Thou mean the blooming Daughter of Zephario,
Head of the Iroquian Tribes.

Okim. Who can be meant but blessed Irene, whom
Divided Canada consents to adore,
And they who come from distant Climes admire?
The Adoration of two Worlds, the English,
To whom uncommon Beauty is familiar,
Astonished gaze at her amazing Form,
As at a Wonder never seen before.

Sak. Yes, the brave Beaufort too admires Irene,
And to her lays an equal Claim with Ulamar;
And for that Reason thou art wrong informed,
For Angie dares not disoblige the English.

Okim. But when the rival Friends went out to Battle,
Thus said the wise Zephario,
Ye matchless Friends, thou Beaufort and thou Ulamar,
Ye great and fair Supports of Liberty,
And Canada against a faithless Race,
Who have perfidiously surpised our Angians,
And in full Peace with Sword and Fire attacked them;
Lead forth our Arms against the perjured Foe,
And know that he who for the common Cause,
Against that Foe performs the noblest Deeds,
At his return shall call Irene his.
The Father said, the charming Daughter blushed,
And to the just Decree the Friends consented.

Sak. My Ulamar is not returned from fight,
How can that Difference be determined then?

Okim. By the Relation of impartial Beaufort,
By which he owns that your unequalled Son,
By his wise Conduct and his brave Example,
Saved both his English and our Iroquois.

Sak. That was the Modesty of generous Beaufort,
But when he owned this was Irene present?

Okim. Yes, and in spite of all her shy Demureness,
Joy lightened on a sudden from her Eyes,
Which struggling she suppressed and blushing frowned,
Or I Am mistaken, or she loves your Ulamar.

Sak. Confusion!

Okim. Come, she is worthy of the first of Men.

Sak. It Is true, so fair a Creature I never saw.
Even I, whom powerful Reasons force to hate her,
Even I with Pleasure gaze upon her Face,
And viewing grow insensibly her Friend.
But may she perish ever she weds my Ulamar,
Nay, may they perish both.

Okim. To both you're cruel.

Sak. No, for if once their Hands are joined he is lost,
To me and to the best of Fathers lost,
Who loved him as the Darling of his Soul;
And to restore him to whose tender Arms,
I have endured to live thus long a Slave.

Okim. But see, the noble Beaufort comes to attend you.

SCENE II.
Sakia, Okima, Beaufort. Sak. You're welcome, worthy Beaufort.

Okim. They who bring Victory are always welcome.

Sak. Had he been vanquished he had been more welcome.
Is Ulamar arrived?

Beauf. Each Minute he is expected.

Sak. Well, you have conquered then.

Beauf. Yes; impartial Heaven has heard our just Appeal,
And has supported Innocence and Faith,
Against Injustice, Treason, Violence,
Against Oppression, Perjury and Fraud,
And all the Crimes of the perfidious French.

Sak. They needs must conquer for whom Heaven declares,
In spite of all the Valor of their Foes.

Beauf. Madam, their Valor much you over rate,
They know themselves, and to themselves are just,
While they are false to all the World beside.
They feel themselves too guilty to be brave.
It Is a shrewd Sign their Valor they mistrust,
Who still on Treason or on Odds depend.
But against Odds and Treasons both we conquered,
Such Force derived we from the just Disdain
That Honor, Innocence, and heavenly Truth,
Should yield to Falsehood, and to Hell-born Crimes,
That Thought alone sustained our sinking Troops,
That Thought inflamed them in extreme Distress,
When one of them cried suddenly aloud,
Lifting his wounded, wearied Arms to Heaven,
Thou Maker of the World to whom we bow,
If it be Thou and not blind Chance that governs,
To thee we appeal, here manifest thy Justice.

Okim. Now by that Power thou have set my Soul on Fire,
What followed?

Beauf. Not the last Trumpet that must rowse the dead,
To them more sudden Vigor shall convey,
Than did to ours that animating Voice,
All thought that Heaven declared it self aloud,
Strange Sights were seen, and wondrous Sounds were heard,
It Is said a Flame descended upon Ulamar,
And round his Temples spread its lambent Glory;
But this is sure, his Deeds were more than Human.
And Conquest lightning in his Eyes, and Thundering in his Arm,
Roused all our Vigor in our fainting Troops,
And struck a fatal Damp upon the Foe.

Sak. Beaufort, thou art too partial to thy Friend.

Beauf. I am not partial, I am barely just.

Sak. He who is so magnanimously just,
Must have done greater Wonders of his own:
Do Justice to thy self then.

Beauf. What I performed I did not in the dark,
But Earth and conscious Heaven were both Spectators,
I therefore need not speak.

Sak. Remember the Reward.
Think on Irene.

Beauf. She Is always in my Thoughts.

Sak. And do you love her?

Beauf. Have I my sight? To see her is to love her.

Sak. And can you poorly quit her to another?

Beauf. No, nor would I basely win her.

Sak. Yet you exalt your Rival to the Skies.

Beauf. That Rival is your Son and is my Friend.
And still is partial when he mentions me.

Sak. Think of what Love requires.

Beauf. There is a Duty due to Friendship too;
A thousand Lovers worship fair Irene,
But who but I has such a Friend as Ulamar?

Sak. The greatest Friendship you can show my Son
Is to deprive him of this fatal Beauty.
I had rather see him in the Arms of Death,
Than of Zephario's Daughter.

Beauf. But he had rather die than not possess her.

Sak. Then let him die, no, let him live, ye Powers!
But let him live without her.
You love Irene, tell me, would you win her?

Beauf. I would, by Heaven, but would not loose my Ulamar.

Sak. Then let us jointly urge him to desist.

Beauf. On what Pretense?

Sak. On that of Gratitude.
The strongest in the World to a brave Spirit,
Can he be said to bear a grateful Mind,
Who strives against his Benefactor's Bliss?
Remind him of his Obligations.

Beauf. What Obligations?

Sak. He well remembers them though you forget,
Too generous Beaufort.
Who snatched the Dagger from his Infant Breast,
In that accursed Hour that made us Captives?
When only we of all the Slaves were saved.
Who forced the Iroquois to give us Liberty,
At least a show of Liberty?
Who since instructed him in glorious Arms?
Instructed him in European Arts?
To whose dear Friendship is his Glory owing,
His noble Acts, and his accomplished Greatness?
Tell him aloud he owes all this to Beaufort.

Beauf. Why should I tell him this?

Sak. To urge him,
By the remembrance of these mighty Benefits,
To quit his fond Pretensions to Irene,
And not impeach his Happiness, to whom,
Whatever he has, whate'r he is he owes.

Beauf. He owes his Greatness to himself alone,
And carries an Instructor in his Breast,
Beyond what all the World can ever supply;
For Ulamar seems sent express from Heaven.
To civilize this rugged Indian Clime;
But grant to me alone he owed his Greatness,
How base, how barbarous would it be to upbraid him?
Besides all this, how vain? for know your Sons
No vulgar Passion is that force acquires,
By just Degrees, and kindles into Flame;
His the first moment blasted him, like Lightning
That falls from Heaven when Jove with his own Fire,
That Tree that is sacred to himself consumes.

Sak. I but too well remember it.

Beauf. Immediately he had recourse to me,
Who saw, and therefore loved Irene first;
Then Sorrow streaming from his humid Eyes,
That sparkled with Desire, my Friend, says he,
I come to take my leave, for I must die,
Since only Death can make me just to Beaufort;
For only his cold Hand can quench the Flame
That is injurious to my Friend, to whom
The best of Mothers and my self I owe,
And then I love, said he, with faltring Tongue,
And with a Heart about to break with Grief,
I love Irene, and for Beaufort die.

Sak. And how received you this?

Beauf With some Surprise, but yet with firm Resolve,
In height of Friendship not to be surpassed,
But rather choose to hazard her than lose
So faithful and so brave a Friend as Ulamar.

Sak. O noble Friendship! Unexampl'd Rivalship!
Were all thy Countrymen like thee, brave Beaufort,
The Sun himself in all his shining Round,
Since first his Progress from the East began,
Would never have seen a greater nobler People.
But still my Soul from this disastrous Love
Forebodes much Mischief.

SCENE III.
Sak. Okim. Beauf. Messengers, Shouts. Beauf. What Shouts of Joy are these?

Mess. Just now victorious Ulamar's arrived,
And with these Shouts the joyful Angians welcome him.

Beauf. Kind Heaven be praised!

Mess. Within an hour the Angians meet in Council,
Mean while your Friend attends you at your House.

Sak. O Heavens, my Son refuses then to see me.

Mess. The French by Ambassadors now proffer Peace,
Concerning which he would confer with you
Before the Council meets.

Beauf. Tell him I come.

SCENE IV.
Sak. Okim. Beaufort. Beauf. This proffered Peace shall be refused with Scorn,
If I have any Credit with the Angians.
They proffer Peace!
Their frontless European Insolence!
When Heaven against their Perjuries declares,
And halting Vengeance like a Blood-hound, slow,
But stanch o'ertakes them with his deep mouthed Cry,
Confounds their Treasure, and their Troops consumes;
First they sing Songs of Triumph for their Losses,
And then, forsooth, they give the World a Peace.
Oh! it is a blessed Peace that binds our Hands,
And leaves theirs loose, whom neither plighted Faith,
Nor Vows, nor solemn'st Oaths could ever restrain,
Strong Bonds, if Bonds perfidious Men could tie!

Sak. Beaufort, To you I now a Suppliant come,
T'a thousand Obligations add one more,
Which if you grant me not, the rest are vain.

Beauf. But name it and it is yours.

Sak. Provide that I may with my Son confer
Before the Council meet; who will, I know, decide this famous Rivalship.

Beauf. That, Madam, shall be my immediate Care,

SCENE V.
Sakia, Okima. Sak. Ah! Okima! I sink, I die with Grief,
On this Important now depends my all;
For should my Ulamar obstruct this Peace,
And obstinately should espouse Irene,
Then name a Wretch that is so accursed as I.

Okim. Come, you provoke the indulgent Powers to leave you,
And lose your Sons Advantage and your own;
For both you will in this happy Marriage find.

Sak. Once more thou know him not, nor he himself,
For hitherto within this wretched Breast,
From all the World I Have kept the important Mystery.
But now my Spirit groans beneath its Load
And I would ease my over-burthen'd Soul.

Okim. Discharge it then upon this faithful Breast.

Sak. But first by that eternal Spirit swear,
Swear by that awful, that all-seeing Mind,
That conscious is alone to the dread Secret,
To let no Time, nor Art, nor Force
Extort it from thy Mind.

Okim. By that eternal conscious Power I swear.

Sak. Know then my Son, who thinks himself a Huron,
And whom too thou believ'st of Indian Birth,
No Huron is, nor of Canadian Kind;
Know he descended of a Christian Sire,
Young, valiant, beautiful, of noble Race.

Okim. A Christian! you amaze me! of what Nation?

Sak. Consult my Passions, and let those inform thee.

Okim. What say thou? Then by Nation he is French.

Sak. French is his Nation, Miramont his Name.

Okim. Why is this Secret from your Son concealed?

Sak. Let Time and Fate reveal it to him.

Okim. Why not his Mother?

Sak. I dare not.

Okim. What should deter you?

Sak. Know that my Guardian Spirit in my Dreams
Has more than once with fearful Threats forbid me.
Besides, the important Secret should I tell,
Before my Son has seen and known his Father,
So deadly is his Hatred to the French,
The which, together with his Years grew up,
It might a criminal Aversion cause
To him who gave him Being; and besides,
All hopes of Peace it surely would destroy:
For that upon his Sentiment depends,
But he who Angie to the World prefers,
Will do his utmost to obstruct a Peace,
That needs must tear him from this cursed Clime.
He Will know that Peace will soon divnlge his Birth,
And knows the Angians never will endure
To have a Frenchman lead their Troops to Battle.
Besides, should Ulamar this Secret hear
Before he sees and knows his noble Father,
It might produce an impious Thought of me.

Okim. This is but one of those fantastic Fears
To which long Melancholy makes you subject;
For why should it produce that impious Thought?

Sak. In secret Miramont and I were matched,
And thrice three Years in Bonds clandestine lived;
In secret too I brought forth Ulamar;
And for three Years in private was he nursed,
And five I bred him with me as my Slave,
By Miramont presented to my Father,
And then your Angians made us real Captives.
When first my Husband's Hands and mine were joined,
No Soul was conscious to my plighted Troth,
But Heaven, and Miramont, and the poor Priest.
That kindly tied the indissoluble Bond.
Should Miramont, avert it Heaven, be gone
To that strange Land where Souls departed dwell,
What Thoughts might such a Tale produce in Ulamar?

Okim. The Priest who joined you might attest your Marriage.

Sak. Long since, alas! that faithful Friend is dead.

Okim. But why that tedious nine Years Mystery?

Sak. Know that my Miramont, of noble Race,
Was yet a younger Brother of his House,
And therefore he depended on his King,
Now with that King those haughty Priests have Power,
Who style themselves Companions of their God,
And they, unless I would embrace their Faith,
Forbad all Nuptial League 'twixt me and Miramont,
Upon the penance of his King's Displeasure.

Okim. When you were taken where was Miramont?

Sak. He then was in a distant Fort besieged,
Which for his Monarch bravely he maintained.

Okim. Have you never since had Tidings of him;

Sak. Ah! there thou prob'st me to the very Heart,
I since have never, never heard of him.

Okim. Perhaps by Fortune of that War he fell.

Sak. Should I believe thee my sad Heart would break,
And I, dear Miramont, once more should join thee;
But the great Mind is merciful and good,
And may have Comfort yet for poor Sakia.
That I from Miramont have never heard,
Proceeds from the vast Tract of Land between us,
Or want of Commerce 'twixt the French and you,
Or from the unusual Names your Nation gave us,
When first they brought us mourful Slaves to Angie;
For I whom the Angians now Sakia call,
Nikaia was through all the Huronian Land,
And Ulamar young Miramont was there.

Okim. But should he live, you three can never meet,
For as this Secret to the World divulged,
Ruins your Son with these five Warlike Nations;
So 'twill disgrace your Husband with the French,
Their Priests offended would incense their King.

Sak. My Okima, know things are altered much*
For by long Conferences here with Beaufort,
My Son and I both strongly are inclined
To Embrace the Christian Faith.

Okim. Ye Powers! who ever in so short a time
Displayed such various Wonders?
Yet Miramont by strong Presumptions dead,
And it is your Safety to promote this Match.

Sab. What! with my Husband's mortal Enemies?

Okim. The dead have none, Death reconciles us all.

Sak. But know that once
My Miramont, when in a dangerous State,
Upon the Bed of Languishment he lay,
Caused me to swear by all that I revered,
Even by the sacred Bond that joined our Hands,
By Love, the sacred Tie that joined our Souls,
And by the bright eternal Source of Love;
That when my Ulamar arrived to Manhood,
I never would wed him to an Indian Maid;
But would transport him to those happy Climes,
That the Ocean from our Canada divides.
Besides, in the dread Visions of the Night,
I now for three successive Nights have seen
Miramont threatening with a dreadful Frown
Irene, and the Lovesick Ulamar.
These Dreams are to my Son of dire Presage,
And here remind me ever it be too late,
To run and tear him from impending Fate.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Sakia, Beaufort. Sak. WHen meets the Council?

Beauf. Already they are assembled,
And now dispose of mine and your Son's Fate,
The beautiful Irene,
And in an hour here we expect Zephario,
Who must impart their final Resolution to us.

Sak. Have they debated yet of Peace and War?

Beauf. That the Angian Council have referred to me,
And to your Son, and to the wise Zephario.

Sak. When will my Son vouchsafe to hear his Mother?

Beauf. See, where he comes to attend you.

SCENE II.
Sakia, Ulamar. Ulam. My Mother!

Sak. My Son!
Oh may the Bounty of the eternal Mind
Shower down his choicest Blessings on my Ulamar!

Ulam. Oh may he but prolong the present Blessing!
That I may iong behold the best of Mothers.

Sak. And yet you could desert this Mother, Ulamar,
And could resist her absolute Commands,
And all her soft Entreaties could despise;
And I behold thee here in spite of both,
All dismal with the precious Blood of Hurons
And their Allies, Heaven knows, alas, whose Blood!
Why would thou thus against my softest Prayers,
Do an unnatural Deed that thus should pierce
The tender Bowels of the Wretch that bore thee?

Ulam. And how could I avoid it? how resist
The Almighty Voice of God, and the great Call
Of Nature urging me to repel Force
By Force, and to defend my self and you?

Sak. O name not me! for me thou have undone.

Ulam. And how could I resist my Country's Call?
That awful Call that in extreme Distress
Aloud implored my Aid?

Sak. Thy Country! Ah! thou fought'st against it, Ulamar,
And have embru'd thy Hands in its dear Blood.

Ulam. My Hands are nobly painted with the Blood
Of Hurons and of French, its mortal Foes.

Sak. And can thou then so utterly forget
That thou were born upon the Huronian Lake?

Ulam. No, but I know that I am an Angian now,
My Hand, my Heart, my Soul are Angians all.

Sak. And has a twelve Years Bondage so estranged thee,
That thou esteem'st thy Countrymen thy Foes?
O Weakness to be pitied or despised!

Ulam. For ever blessed be that eternal Power
That gave me a human comprehensive Soul,
That can look down upon all narrow Principles.
For every brave Man's Country is the Universe,
His Countrymen Mankind, but chiefly those
Who wish the Happiness of all the rest,
And who are Friends to all their Fellow Creatures:
And such are all the brave Iroquian Tribes,
Such are the unconquered English, free themselves,
And loving all who actually are free,
And all who sadly sigh for Liberty;
But hating Tyrants and their Slaves alike,
And equally contemning both as fallen
Below the Dignity of Human Nature.

Sak. Tyrants are odious, Slaves are to be pitied,
Our own sad Fate has told us so.

Ulam. To me all Slaves are odious as their Tyrants,
I mean all Slaves who are the Tools of Tyrants,
They are true Slaves, who have the Souls of Slaves,
And worse than Beasts make use of their own Hands,
To clinch the Chains which first their Masters tied.
Such tame and wretched things are all your Hurons,
No Countrymen for me who here disown them,
Such are those Pests of Human Race the French,
Damned to eternal Slavery themselves,
And therefore would like Devils damn Mankind.

Sak. The Hurons thou disown'st, disown them still,
But know amongst them are thy dear Relations,
Whom God and Nature charges thee to cherish:
How can thou tell that in the late fought Field
Thou did not meet thy Father in thy Foe?
Yes, how can thou be sure thou did not lift
Thy impious Head against his sacred Life,
And stabbing me in him in whom I live,
Act in one blow a double paracide!

Ulam. When ever I cease to hearken to the Dictates
Of the World's Ruler and his Servant Nature,
I shall deserve to be a thing accursed;
In the late Fight that I might spare my Kindred,
I shunned your Hurons and attacked the French,
And urging through their troops my glorious Way,
I made a slaughter of their bravest Chiefs,
Which they will long with bitter Woe remember.

Sak. Ha! have a care! thou say Mankind's thy Kindred,
Among the French too thou might find Relations.

Ulam. It Is true we were created Brothers all,
And all descend from one eternal Sire;
But whom the Father for his Sons disowns,
I (...) not for my Brethren; no, the Brave
And Just are only Brethren worthy me,
And such I shall respect where ever I find them.

Sak. And can thou fondly think there are no such
Among the Squadrons of the warlike French?

Ulam. I know there are.
When first in the late Fight with my good Sword,
I carried Death among the Faithless French;
One of their foremost Leaders I observed,
Who mowed our Iroquois like ripened Corn,
Extending them in Ranks along the Plain;
With him went all his Soldiers Hearts and Eyes;
And long live Miramont aloud they cried.

Sak. Ha! Miramont! Ah Gods! [Apart] speak that again!

Ulam. Yes, long live Miramont aloud they cried.

Sak. Speak on, [ Apart] though something dire is on thy Tongue.

Ulam. In short, that Frenchman showed himself so brave,
That he appeared a Conquest worthy me.

Sak. By Heaven the very dismal thing I feared. [Apart.

Ulam. With Indignation stung I on him flew,
And in my first Attack was so successful,
That from his wounded Arm his Weapon dropped.

Sak. What will become of the forlorn Sakia! [Apart.

Ulam. Then with Revenge inflamed I on him rushed,
And my good Sword presenting to his Heart.

Sak. O Heaven and Earth! O Nature can thou bear it! [Apart.

Ulam. Die, die, said I, perfidious Villain die!

Sak. O Miramont, thou Darling of my Soul,
Would I had never heard of thee again! [Apart
O wretched Father! and O cursed Son!

Ulam. Madam, you tremble, and a deadly Pale
O'erspreads your Face; what strange Disorder's this?

Sak. I Am always on the wrack when Blood is spilt.

Ulam. Then now be calm, for here no Blood was spilt.

Sak. How Is that? indeed! is it possible! just Heaven.

Ulam. Madam, it is certain.
For looking sternly in the Frenchman's Face,
While Fate stood threatening on my lifted Arm,
Through his undaunted Eyes I saw his Soul,
So great, so awful and so truly noble,
That I revered the Sight, and checked my Hand,
And gave him Liberty, the Salt of Life,
And sent him to his own; and now you see,
I can acknowledge Virtue in a Foe,
And can respect it, and reward it too.

Sak. Ha! what a turn of wondrous Fate is here?
And how shall I conceal my impetuous Joy?
Miramont lives, my Soul's Desire is near me, [Apart
And Happiness begins to dawn from Heaven;
He lives; and Love and I shall meet again.
Oh! unexpected ravishing return,
To Bliss, too swift and mighty to be born!
'Twas but last moment that I felt Despair,
The very worst of ills; and now I hope,
Ay now I entertain the charming Hope,
Of holding him of whom my Soul is fond,
Of holding him in these desiring Arms,
And I shall see, O I shall die with Joy!
Yes, I shall see my Love, my Life again.
O let me see him, Gods, and let me die!

Ulam. Madam, your Looks discover great Disorder.
She hears me not, nor sees me; now her Eyes
Seem deeply fixed upon some absent object;
And now they wildly roll.
What mean these Musings, and these sudden Starts?
And these Convulsions that thus shake her Soul!
Heaven long preserve my Mother! Madam hear me,
Some body comes, retire before they appproach,
And be not seen in this extreme Disorder. [Leads her out, and returns.

SCENE III.
Ulamar, Beaufort. Beauf. My Ulamar!

Ulam. My Friend.
Ha! thou look sad, whenever thou art grieved,
Alas I find it is I my self that suffer;
What Thought disturbs my Friend?

Beauf. Thy sympathizing Grief disturbs thy Friend,
But when I think of losing thee, oh then!

Ulam. That loss would quickly be repaired, for thou,
Who made me what I am can make another;
And form him fit for Friendship and for thee.

Beauf. 'Twas Heaven alone could make thee what thou art,
A Jewel of inestimable Price,
I added to thy Luster, not thy Worth,
And the small Pains I took to make thee shine,
Makes thee more precious in my joyful Eyes;
But when I think of losing thee.

Ulam. I will not think of losing thee,
I cannot bear the Thought.

Beauf. Whose must Irene be?

Ulam. Heaven only knows,
But will alas in one half Hour declare.

Beauf. Whose is her Heart, for thou have often inquired.

Ulam. But never yet could find.

Beauf. To me she still has too respectful been,
And much too cold and too indifferent.

Ulam. And too uneasy and reserved to me.

Beauf. Perhaps some happier Man among the Crow'd,
Of her Adorers while we sigh in vain,
Possesses all her Soul; it is hard to think,
That she whose Beauty captivates all Hearts,
Should be like Virtue, with her self content,
And never know desire.
Try her once more at this important Juncture,
For I have searched into her Heart in vain;
It Is true, my Soul is of her Beauty fond,
As even of Glory, with whose noble fire,
It twenty Years succesfully has burned;
Yet I who see my fortieth Sun renewed;
Will entertain no Passion that revolts,
From Reasons sovereign and eternal Law.
It Is true I would, for who would not be blessed?
But will not by her Misery be blessed.

Ulam. Nor I by Heaven!

Beauf. But now let me conjure thee Ulamar,
Even by that charming Hope that makes us languish,
By holy Friendship's venerable Bond
That now confines us in this strict Embrace,
By the Remembrance of those happy Hours
Which we have past exciting one another
To elevated Thoughts and glorious Deeds;
For whomsoever Fate reserves Irene,
Oh let him not be blessed by halves,
Let him not lose his Friend?
May never any Coldness come till Death,
Between our Loves and us!

Ulam. Not Death himself Unless he quite extinguishes my Mind,
Shall make me cold to Beaufort.

Beauf. But our Fate comes, and I must disappear.

SCENE IV.
Ulamar, Irene. Iren. Was not that Beaufort? why does he avoid us?
What makes him look so sad?

Ulam. By Heaven she seems concerned for him. [Apart.
Thrice happy Beaufort!
Whose Sorrow even in absence has the force,
To move your Soul, while I before your Eyes
Unpitied can despair.

Iren. Ah you mistake me, Ulamar!
Oh that I had the Power as I have the Will
To bring soft Peace to every troubled Breast!

Ulam. And it is that Virtue that undoes me more,
It Is not that Angel's Face, nor Angel's Form,
That Form surpassing all your lovely Sex;
It Is not that winning Pomp of outward Graces
Which upon you, as on their Queen attend;
But it is your mind that Captivates my Soul,
Your Mind in Youth's first Bloom with every Grace,
And every Virtue fraught, as if that Heaven
And Nature's self took pleasure to instruct you.
Before I beheld thee my restless Soul,
To something high, to something great aspired;
But what I never could tell, till seeing thee
And knowing thee informed and fixed my ravished Soul,
And showed it what with blind and restless search
Before it sought in vain; yes, showed it Virtue:
Virtue it self that by great Heavens Command,
Assumes that lovely Form t'attract Mankind,
And draw them to it self.
But while you captivate the gazing World
You still remain serene, as if that Heaven
Designed you not to love but be adored,
Appearing not to know how very warm
How sharply pointed are those fatal Eyes;
Smiling, you kill and know not that you strike,
And we with Pleasure die.

Iren. Oh fond mistaken Ulamar! oh never more deceived!
Know all the Extremities of Love I feel.

Ulam. You love?

Iren. I am all Love, I burn, I die with Love.

Ulam. It Is sure for some immortal Being then,
For mortal Man could never conceal his Joy.

Iren. Alas he knows it not no more than Ulamar.

Ulam. Let him be told it ever it be too late;
Is it for Beaufort? I Will resign to Beaufort,
For though I love thee more than Life it self,
Though it is impossible to live without thee;
To show thee how much I prefer thy Happiness
Before my own, I will to make thee happy,
I will leave thee the loveliest thing in Nature,
For Death the most detestable.

Iren. Beaufort, assure thy self has all my esteem,
But it is another that has all my Heart.

Ulam. O Man whose Happiness, even Gods might envy!
My Friend and I, for I for him dare answer,
Will no advantage take of what the Council,
And wise Zephario shall anon determine;
But both, oh Gods, to him resign our Claim!

Iren. [Aside.] O matchless Love! O proof of Godlike Virtue!
While he speaks this behold with what Convulsions
His struggling Passion shakes his generous Frame,
With whose excess he trembles and he dies.

Ulam. But oh! if ever thou could be too blame,
Thou would be so in this, for why? oh why
Have thou so long concealed the fatal Secret?

Iren. Because I never could 'till now declare it
Without exposing too much shameful Weakness;
Therefore my raging Passion I confined,
Which burning inward preyed upon my Life;
But from the Man I loved I hid it most.
In this alas I sympathize with you;
It Is not my Lover's Form ensnares my Heart,
Though his our Angian Virgins all adore;
But when I saw a Youth in his first Bloom
Lead our brave Iroquois with more success
Than our most ancient and experienced Warriors,
Perform such Wonders for his Countrey's Safety,
And for the Libertys of Humankind;
To which he sacrifices his Repose,
And even his Life, and Hazards the enjoyment
Of what he loves much dearer even than Life.

Ulam. Oh Gods! O Transport! whither is she going?

Iren. When I beheld all this you may be sure,
The Almighty Mind has given to me a Soul,
That could not see a Lover with these Virtues;
These Godlike Virtues, and remain insensible,
The Joy that lightens from thy humid Eyes
Informs me that thou understand'st me, Ulamar,
And I designed thou should; but then be sure
Thy godlike Virtue which inflamed my Heart
Has in my Breast produced the noble Pride
Of imitating so much Excellence.
As thou have sacrifiz'd Repose and Life,
And hazarded th'enjoyment even of me,
Whom thou love more than Life, for thy dear Country;
I though a Woman nobly will attempt
To emulate thy singular Example.
And though I love, nay dote, to Madness dote,
Though my Heart feels what never Tongue can utter,
Yet if my Country once decrees me Beauforts,
For Beaufort I Will retrieve my Heart,
And never see thee more.

Ulam. Oh too accomplished Beaufort! Oh my Friend!
What have I lost by thy transcendent Virtue?

SCENE V.
Zephario, Irene, Ulamar, Beaufort. Ulam. What has Fate determined?

Beauf. See its Interpreter, enquire of him.

Ulam. Beauf. Hail to Zephario.

Zeph. Ye matchless Friends, thou Beaufort, and thou Ulamar,
Are ye determined fully to consent
To what the Angians here by me pronounce.

Ulam. Beauf. We are.

Zeph. In full Assembly then they vote you Thanks
For all the Wonders ye this Day performed,
In the Defense of Liberty and Canada;
To thee particularly Thanks they pay,
Brave Youth, who by the Boldness of thy Conduct
(Boldness in desperate Extremes is Wisdom)
Rallying our routed Troops restored the Day,
And nobly raised us from Despair to Conquest:
For which the Conscience of the noble Deed
And everlasting Fame Reward the Doer;
But since in the first onset of the French
That fierce Attack that carried all before it;
Beaufort by wondrous Friendship moved preserved
Thee, Ulamar, by our own flying Troops
As by a Torrent, overborn, overwhelmed,
Trampled by Friends, surrounded by the Foe,
And stood the Barrier betwixt thee and Fate,
That threatened thee from Friends and Foes alike;
The Council wisely have decreed, that he
Who saved th'Heroick Youth to whom we owe
Our Conquest, did with him preserve the State;
And therefore have decreed him for Reward
A Trifle in it self, but dear to him My Daughter.

Beauf. Madam do you consent?

Iren. I do.

Beauf. My Ulamar do thou?

Ulam. Oh take her while I have Voice to say she is thine!

Beauf. Oh strange Consent!
Despair is in her Eyes, and Death in his.
Madam, your Tongue consents, your Soul denis.

Iren. It Is true, my Soul, brave Beaufort, is another's;
But soon, depend upon it, shall be thine,
And shall as true and faithful prove to thee,
As thou have been to Liberty and Angie:
True, were my Affections mine, and I my own
Then, Ulamar, I had been only thine,
But I was born for Angie not my self;
And Angie, Beaufort, has decreed me thine.
Thou, Ulamar, possess some happier Maid,
Who may deserve to live, to die with thee,
And bless the happy pair, all Bounteous Heaven
When I shall be no more.

Beauf. Apart. Was ever such a ^ight, and such a Hearing?
The accents dye upon her Charming Tongue,
And leave her Lovely overflowing Eyes
To pour out the abundance of her Soul.
I who could dye for Ulamar or her.
Shall I make both unhappy, nay my self too;
For I must doubly share in all their Woes.
No^ rouse thy self my Soul, and in one Act
Deliver three: I now am of an Age
In which the Passions* reasons Voice obey,
And Reason tells me Heaven and Nature formed
Irene for her Lovely Ulamar.
And therefore made them equal in their Loves,
Their Beauty and their years: Rouse Rouse my Soul!
It Is done, my Friend, and thou too charming Maid,
And wise Zephario Hear, I thank the Angians,
I thank them for the Inestimable gift
With which they have Rewarded my poor zeal,
And I accept it to bestow it Here.

Ul. Ha! Gods! What meanest thou? Mock me not my Friend!

Beauf. No, take her, by the Eternal mind she is thine,
And know that when I first bestowed my Heart
My very Soul upon thee I bestowed.
A gift that was less Dear to me.

Iren. Is It possible! And is not this a Dream?
Can there in Man be such a Godlike mind?

Zeph. And is your final Resolution this?

Beauf. It Is fixed as Natures Laws that nere can change.

Zeph. Do you accept Irene for your Wife?

Ul. Do I accept her?
With greater Rapture than the Wretch that is freed
From Deaths Convulsive pangs embraces Heaven:
^ut Oh the Man, who Loves to that degree
And can resign her; He alone deserves her.

Zeph. The Deed is Noble, for it is Wise and Just,
The English always were a Gallant Nation,
And Foes to Force, and Friends to Liberty.
They who without the Mind possess the Body,
Possess by Force, and Ravish, not Enjoy:
He who can Absolutely rule himself,
(...) can leave others free is truly Noble:
Young man prepare, this Night shall Join your Hands.

Ul. This very Night!
By the Immortal Powr's I Am scarce my self.
Fear, Hope, and Sorrow and Transporting Joy
And wonder at this unexpected Bliss,
Have all by turns so much disturbed my Soul:
This very Night my Father!

Zeph. This Night my Son, for an Important cause,
Frontenac Viceroy of this Indian France
Disowns the Treason of the late attempt,
And promises severely to chastize it;
Mean while a murmur runs among our Angians
Which from their Prisoners they derive they say,
That the late Damned surprise was first designed
By a French Officer who Loves Irene:
For every Band was charged to Seize on her:
Thou art a Valiant! And Successful Warrior,
And can defend the Darling of my Age,
Far better than her Father's feeble arms.

Ul. Defend her! Yes, what Beaufort has resigned
To me, I only will to Heaven resign.
Oh Beaufort, best of Men, and best of Friends!
Shall I refuse to die for such a Friend?
Shall ever I forget the boundless Debt
I owe to thee? Oh what shall I repay!
Thou have my Soul already.

[Zep. to Ul.] Come instantly, we'll join your hands, and then
See what these Messengers of Peace design,
And then --

Ul. And Immortality will then be mine.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Sakia, Ulamar. Sak. WHy have thou staid so long ungrateful Ulamer?
I sent thee word that thy late dreadful Tale,
Had raised such various suries in my Soul,
As left me impotent of Thought or Speech,
And snatched me so entirely from my self,
That the important business was unmention'd,
For which that conference was first designed.
Thou have often said, my Son, that thou desire
To know thy Father.

Ul. Yet you unkindly kept him still concealed.

Sak. Believe it Son, there was a wondrous cause:
But wherefore would thou know him?

Ul. That if he leads the Hurons out to fight,
I might in Battle shun him.

Sak. Is that the only cause of thy desire?
Know that in Battle, shoud'st thou meet thy Father,
Great Nature whispring with her Voice Divine,
Would make thee stop thy eager murdring Hand,
In spightof all thy sacred Thirst of Blood;
Or else some Genius with no mortal tone,
Would thunder in thy ears, forbear, it is He.
And would thou only know him to avoid Him?
Is that the only cause of thy desire?
Thou should desire to know him to Embrace him;
And to revere the Fountain of thy life;
From which the Graces of thy manly form,
And all thy boasted excellences flow.

Ul. Then name him.

Sak. The naming him on thee, my Son, depends.
Yet thus far thou shal'st know thy noble Father;
The best and bravest of Mankind is he;
And, oh, he loves thee Son, he loves the more
Than his own lovely Eyes, He lives for thee;
And me he loves with such an Air and Mien,
As if some God came down to adore his Creature:
Oh none can love but he! Oh none can show
Such Majesty with so much sweetness joined,
Such tenderness with fury reconciled,
So firm a constancy with so much flame,
Such rapture with inimitable Grace;
And then a Wisdom, and a Tongue might charm
The ears of listening Angels: Know my Son
Thou will be fond, be proud of such a Father.

Ul. Madam, his name?

Sak. Once more the naming him, on thee depends:
Before thou hear'st his name, thou must conclude
This proser'd Peace; and must renounce for ever --

Ul. Whom?

Sak. The Daughter of Zepharia.

Ul. Irene?

Sak. What; do thou start?
Yes disobedient Boy, thou must renounce Her.

Ul. My Wife?

Sak. Thy Wife? Impossible!

Ul. This hour our Hands were joined; this very hour
With solemn Invocation I implored
The eternal Mind, and every Power to witness
That naught but death should part my Love and me.

Sak. To thee thy Father then for ever's lost.

Ul. Wherefore.

Sak. He bears to every Angian mortal Hate.

Ul. Let him but look on her, that Hate will cease.

Sak. He often indulging his fond tender thoughts,
He often would please himself with thoughts of thee,
And of thy Fortune, and thy future deeds,
And of the Wife designed for thee; a Wife
Of quite a different Stamp, than thou have chose.

Ul. One who has greater Beauty than Irene?

Sak. No, to confess a truth, that cannot be.

Ul. Of greater Interest then, perhaps than she?

Sak. Of greater interest say thou?
Ah no! His generous Soul disdains the thought,
The Wife that He designed for thee, was one
Whom Education should with nature Join,
To form her an Associate worthy thee!
One fit to assist thee in the ways of Virtue,
And help to raise thy Soul, to glorious Acts.

Ul. What he designed then, Providence has done,
And Joined me to the very Lovely she,
Whom had my Father known, he would have chose.

Sak. Ha!

Ul. And has not Beaufort told you what Irene
Did at that Conference, that made her mine?

Sak. He told me that, but kept the March concealed.

Ul. Was ever any thing so Great, so Noble?

Sak. I must confess, it was no common Act.

Ul. Was ever so much Greatness seen before?
My Father will be pleased, will be Transported,
To be allied to such Transcendent Virtue.
Even Europeans Amorous of themselves,
And their own ways exalt it to the Skies,
And generous Beaufort freely has declared
He never heard of any thing so great,
Among their Godlike Romans.

Sak. Is It possible?

Ul. My Father when he sees her will be charmed,
My Father loudly will approve my Choice

Sak. O all ye Immortal Powers, I am convinced;
Remove one hindrance, which thou can remove,
And thy poor Mother may be happy still.

Ul. Name it.

Sak. This Marriage ties thee, to a hateful Interest,
Repugnant to thy Father's: But the French
Now proffer Peace, that Peace is in thy Power;
Conclude it, and your Interests will be one.

Ul. But that on me depends not.

Sak. That on thee!
On thee alone, assure thy self, depends
The Angians have instated thee and Beaufort,
And thy ^ew Father with unbounded Power
To make firm Peace, or to continue War.
And two of you decide the Important Business,
Zephario strongly is inclined to thee;
And the English Interest is so clearly known,
As may make Beaufort easily suspected.

Ul. But Madam.

Sak. Hear me yet my Son a while,
If with the French and Hurons, thou conclud'st,
A solid Peace: Survey the vast Advantages
Which will from thence Accrue, to thee and thine,
For let the Exchange of Captives be one clause,
And then that Peace restores thee to thy Father.

Ul. How are you sure he Lives?

Sak. He Lives, he Lives, the Darling Care of Heaven!
This I Am assured, by one, who in the Fight,
Both saw and felt, and wondered at his Valor:
And thee he says, he say so very near,
That by the asistance of thy Guardian Spirit,
Thou narrowly, Oh! narrowly did miss,
The Murder of thy Father.

Ul. Oh Heaven! I Am seized with Horror when I hear it.

Sak. Prevent it for the future,
Dread what may happen, and conclude a Peace;
And as that Peace restores thee to thy Father,
So it secures thy Fair, thy loved Irene,
For she may else while thou make distant War,
Be torn from thee, as I was from thy Father.

Ul. Ay that would make a Wretch of me indeed?

Sak. All my own Interest, I pass in Silence,
And all my Griefs, for I Am too well convinced,
That thou can look insensibly on both.

Ul. Madam you wrong me.

Sak. No, thou hat'st thy Mother.

Ul. Hate you?

Sak. And yet bear Witness Heaven and Earth, bear witness
My cruel'st Foes, with what a Tender care,
With what an ardent Love, I Have cherished thee,
Oh Ulamer, my Life is not so Dear to me,
For I have Lived for thee alone, Just Heaven
For Twenty years I Have placed my sole felicity,
Nay all my Wishes, all my Hopes of Happiness,
On two dear objects, on a Son and Husband:
From thy dear Father I have long been torn,
And kept a mournful Widow and a Slave
In insupportable Captivity,
Disconsolate, forlorn, and desolate
Among my Barbarous and Insulting Foes;
And have been forced to bear their Bloody taunts,
And all the malice of their murdering Eyes:
Yet thou for whom I have endured all this,
For whom I groan away my wretched hours:
Thou have refused to dry thy Mother's Eyes,
But prov'st a cruel and a bitter Child to me,
Untouched by all my Grief, unmoved by all my Love.

Ul. Once more you wrong me Madam;
I always have professed exact obedience to you,
Beyond the custom of our Indian Sons;
For such obedience my best friend has taught me,

Sab. Yes!
Witness the Battle Fought this Bloody morn.
And the Clandestine Match this Evening made*

Ul. I thought you had been satisfied in both.

Sab. Why do thou not Obey me, now Ingrate!
When thy Obedience is most necessary.
Thou know the sinking pressure under which
I for Twelve years have bowed my wretched Head
Have passed my tedious days in Tears, and Wails:
My Nights in fearful Dreams and broken Slumbers,
Thou see my faded Cheek, my Languid Eye,
And hear'st me breath the Rueful voice of Sorrow,
Thou know this Peace would end my killing Care,
And drive all sadness from my Eyes for ever.
For the bare thought of seeing thy Dear Father,
Makes Joy like lightning dart along my Soul;
And raises every Sense to Native vigor.
Oh yet thy Mother might be blessed to envy?
But her loved Son will have her wretched still;
Thou know this Peace is only in thy power;
Yet knowing this, have thou vouchsafed to give
One word of comfort to revive my Soul?
Yes, cruel, have thou once vouchsafed to assure me
That thou determin'st to conclude this Treaty?
Have thou not stood Insensible and Dumb?

Ul. But first'tis requisite to hear the French;
And then in what I can you shall be obeyed:

Sak. In what thou can; in what thou will, thou mean:
Yes, yes, my Son, thou shall be soon discharged
Of all the Duty which thou ow'st to me,
But yet a while, and thou will have no Mother,
And then too late thou may vouchsafe a Sigh
For all the Misery I Have undergone,
For all the Woe I yet must undergo,
In that strange Region of Departed Souls,
Where I must Languish out my Woeful hours
In Expectation of my Dearest Husband;
And of my Cruel, (...) my much loved Son.

Ul. Can thou ^ear this my Soul, and not be moved?

Sak. I never in this World shall see thee more,
And here* thou never wilt thy Father know,
Then to the Eternal mind, and his Protection
I leave thee, O my Son: Bless, bless him Heaven;
I have born Wretchedness enough for both;
I leave him to thy care. Adieu my Son!
A long Adieu in this Embrace receive.

Ul. Madam, by all that is Sacred I adjure you
Not to commit a rash and cursed deed;
Wait the result, at least of this Debate.

Sak. And do thou give me hope then?

Ul. I do.

Sak. Well then! Since thou will have it so, I Will wait,
But know on that result depends my Fate.

Scene Second.
Ulamer. Ul. She Is gone! Perhaps for ever! How; for ever!
And can thou name it? Can thou bear the thought?
The Kindest, Tender'st and the best of Mother's?
She who has lived for thee, for thee has born --
Oh what has she not born --
Yet her can st thou Desert? Can thou see her Dye?
By thy unkindness Dye? O Barbarous Son,
Ungreatful Ulamer! But then the Angians!
Can thou abandon them? Betray their Cause?
The Cause of Humankind? Of Godlike Liberty?
What can thou give up that to these ^ly Traitors:
Insidious Slaves who Insolently think
To Fool these Nations, and to obtain by Truce
What their base Fears restrain them from persuing;
By Honorable War, eternal mind,
Master of Life, great Mover of all Spirits;
O guide my Will, by thy unerring Light!
And by that Light, Illustrate my dark Reason:
Do thou inspire me with Expedient ways,
That I may neither give up thy great Cause,
Nor yet Betray my poor Afflicted Mother.
But see the French appear.

Flat Scene draws. Scene the Third,
Zephario, Ulamar, Beaufort. 1 Emb. 2 Emb. Ze. Well Frenchmen, here you come to
treat of Peace;
But first this Obvious question must be asked;
How comes it we have War?

Ul. Because the Truce they Treacherously broke,
Though by themselves proposed, and first begun.

Beau. As they will this; for Peace is of no use
To them, but to be Broke.
Five Solemn Leagues in European Climes,
Even in our own Remembrance have they Broke;
Though by themselves, those Treaties were begun;
And which with Damned Perfidiousness they Swore,
Even by that Power that saw their Faithless Hearts,
To keep eternally Inviolate.

Ul. It seems then, when they find themselves too weak
To hurt their Foes by Honorable War,
They oblige us then to Swear not to hurt them.

Beau. Nay more, they make us Swear to give them Time
And opportunity to urge our Fate;
That as false Friends, they may gain that by Treaty,
Which they could not by Enmity nor Force.

1. Emb. The breaking Truce, was a rash private Act,
Which Frontenac our Governor disowns.

2. Emb. And which he since severely has Chastised.

1. Emb. Know that the Mighty Monarch whom we serve,
Has sent strict Orders to Count Frontenac,
To make a solid and a lasting Peace,
With all the Warlike Five European Tribes;
A Peace so firm, that it is his Royal Will,
That you, and all his Subjects should be one.

Ul. That is, that we should be alike his Slaves.

2. Emb. Oh you mistake his bountiful design;
He sees and pities the Barbarity,
In which so Brave a Nation now lies plunged;
And he would Civilize your Rugged ways;
Therefore his faithful ^^bjects he commends,
To have one Heart, one Soul, one dwelling with you,

Ul. But that Proposal we reject with scorn.

Mel. Consider we shall teach you our own manners,
Those pleasing manners, which the World admires,
And which the wisest Nations have Embraced.

Beau The wisest Nations! Yes, the Fools of all*
Oh Europe, Europe! How have thou been dull
To thy undoing? How thy heedless Magistrates
Have suffered poor unthinking Sots, to unlearn,
Their native Customs, and their native Tongues,
To speak your Jargon, and assume your ways*

Mele. Which argues in us a Superior Genious.

Beau. I must confess it makes our Fools believe so;
Inclines their Grovling Souls to their worst Foes,
And makes them obvious to your shameful Arts;
Makes them admire you, makes them Imitate you,
Though aukwardly our Asses ape your Dogs.

Ul. What have you taught the Nations after all?
What have you taught them but Inglorious arts:
To emascalate their minds? But cursed Luxury,
Which makes them needy, venal, base, perfidious
Black Traitors to their Country, Friends to you.

Beauf. For you win Provinces, as Hell gains Souls;
It Is by corrupting them you make them yours:
They might defy your malice were they faithful*
But first you enslave them to their own base Passions;
And afterward to yours.

Scene the Fourth.
Zeph. Ula. Beaufort, 2 Emb. Slave. Ul. Ha! My Mother's Slave! What would
thou? [A part (...) him.

Sl. Your Mother --

Ul. Well --

Sl. Stands with her threatening Dagger in her hand.

Ul. Oh Horror! Horror!
My fancy cannot bear the murdring thought.
Tell her, her harsh command shall be obeyed.

Scene the Fifth.
Zeph. Ula. Beauf. 2 Emb. Ul. Now Gentlemen, we to our business come;
Such a Community as you propose
We utterly reject, because that Union
Would first corrupt our Angians, then enslave them;
The only Treaty to which we descend.

Beauf. How Ulamar.

Mel. Oh Englishman, your Separate Interest here
Is but too obvious.

Ul. Hold Frenchman?
My Friend, no more, anon thou shall be satisfied.

Beauf. In the mean while --

Ul. No more, by Holy Friendship I adjure thee,
Thou shall be satisfied; but to our business;
The Treaty to which we descend is this;
A Treaty of Commerce between us and you;
And a Cessation of Hostilities between our selves and you,
And your Confederates
The Hurons, and exchange of all the Captives:
To this you agree?

Zeph. I do, for this is Angies Interest.

Ul. And you?

2 Fr. And we.

Ul. And this to observe most solemnly you Swear;
By all that is awful in yon glittering Sky,
And all that is binding in the World below.

2. Fr. We Swear: And you?

Zeph. We Swear.

1. Emb. So then it is done; The English are dislodged?

Beau. They need not fright thee;
A League from hence they lie entrenched to Night,
And toward new York to morrow take their way.

2. Emb. And all your Angians have laid down their Arms.

Ul. E're we began to Treat, the English marched,
And ours dispersed according to our words.

1. Emb. The Remnant of the Night, lets wast in Joy then.

Ul. The public Deputies in yon Apartment
Attend to Entertain you.

1. Emb. We wait on you.

Ul. We follow you.

Scene the Sixth,
Ulamar* Beaufort. Ul. What turnst thou from thy Friend, O Beaufort, Beaufort.

Beau. What have thou done fond Youth?

Ul. O Look not with that Mornful coldness on me,
Thou art my Benefactor, Father, Friend;
It Is by thy Generous Friendship I have Lived;
Alas I cannot bear the freezing Gloom
That Is on thy Brow, it chills me to the Heart.

Beau. Reflect on what thou have done

Ul. Oh speak not Beaufort in that Cruel Tone!
Where is my Friend, my Warm, my tender Friend,
For in thy altered Mien I see him not,
Nor hear him in thy Voice.

Beau. Thou have betrayed him, lost him.

Ul. Not for the World, I would not loose my Beaufort
What 'ere I did, thy Friend was forced to do.

Beau. Forced?

Ul. Yes, forced, and with the only dreadful Force
That could compel my Soul,
My Mothers Life depended on the Deed.

Beau. Yes, yes, I guest the Cause;
Ay, This is what has Captivated Europe,
Where their Domestic Interest most prefer
Before the Weal and Honor of their Country,
Though private good on public Weal depends,
And he who for his House betrays his Country,
Betrays his Family, Betrays his Children,
All his Posterity to shameful Ruin,
And makes them Poor, Precarious, Abject, Base,
Instead of Happy, Rich, or Great, or Brave;
And this, fond Youth, thou will too surely fined

Ul. Oh spare me Beaufort, spare me.

Beau. Yes, I have done, this is Revenge enough,
For one who Loves thee.

Ul. Oh that blessed sound! How it revives my Soul?

Beau. This for a Friend, is Chastisement enough;
Or if thy Fault asks more, thy new Allies
Too surely will inflict it, for their Friends:
Their Friends are they, who feel their Barbarous Hands,
Most Grievous and most Bloody.

Ul. Nay, now thou Chid'st again;

Beau. Oh! No, my Friend, my Happiness, my Glory.
It Is now that I would chiefly show I Love thee;
For since with so much Tenderness, we have Lived,
And Fate at last obliges us to part,
And that for ever, let us part in Love.

Ul. What must we part?

Beau. Part Ulamar? Why that is the very thing
Thy new Allies designed.
It Is by dividing old and Faithful Friends
That they often ruin both; it is their old Cheat.

Ul. But sure thou did not say for Ever?

Beau. Too probably for ever!

Ul. Cursed unforeseen Calamity! But when?

Beau. This moment.

Ul. This moment! It Is Impossible.

Beau. This moment to my Troops, I take my way,
I doubt the French, and dare no longer Stay:
Adieu my Friend?

Ul. For ever Beaufort! Let us in part Hope.

Beau. England severely will Revenge this Peace,
And leave the Angians to their new Allies,
And to their Mercy, which is dreadful Cruelty;
And I as England's faithful Son am bound,
To enter into all her Sentiments.

Ul. But yet thou will not Hate me.

Beau. Oh never, never, it is not in my Power;
My valued Friend, adieu!

Ul. This partings death to me.

Beau. What is it to me then?
This Evening I resigned Irene to thee,
Did that declare a Vulgar Friendship, say.

Ul. Oh no! A Matchless, unexampled one.

Beau. And yet thou have deprived me of thy self too,
Irene now is thine, and thou art Hers;
She soon will comfort thee, for Beaufort's Abscence;
But only Death will drive away my Grief,
For I shall never never see thee more.

Ul. Why then thou will not sure begone to Night;
For I have still ten Thousand things to say.

Beau. I must be gone, even now I must begone;
I doubt the French, and dare no longer stay,
For my Brave Troops may all er'e morn be lost.

Ul. But it is a Gloomy and Tempestous Night;
And thou have a long League to March alone,
And yet thou say, there may be danger near.

Beau. Oh I have lost all that I held most Dear;
The entirely Wretched, need no danger Fear.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Ulamar. Ul. BEaufort; thy loss sits Heavy on my Soul!
For I shall never see thy like again;
In whom the Flame of English Spirit shone,
A Greatness that adorns those generous Nations,
That never Basely yet resigned their Liberty!
A Magnanimity unknown to Slaves!
Oh how unlike our new Confederates he?
But yet this Night I will have Truce with Grief;
This Night I Conscerate to Love and Joy:
Have then, my Fairest, my espoused, O have!
And cheer thy Languishing Impatient Ulamar.

Scene Second.
Sakia, Irene, Ulamar. Sak. It Is late, and we will leave thee to thy Bride.

Ul. Well Madam! Now I hope you are Satisfied!

Sak. Not thou thy self art more.

Ul. You own then, I have Reason to be satisfied.

Sak. Oh thou art Blessed above the Race of men,
Possessing all that is Good, and all that is Fair.

Ul. You have heard Irene talk, which till this Day,
Your strange Aversion never would permit you:
What think you of her Mind?

Sak. Oh it is the very Mind of all her Sex,
That Is fit to Animate that Lovely Person,
An Angel fit to inform the Glorious Spears;
Prepare thy self to Morrow for new Transports,
For then thou shall behold the best of Fathers,
And I the best of Loveas in a Husband.

Ul. He Will not refuss'd to see Irene sure,
Though born an Angian.

Sak. O no, My Son, He will not only see.
But will be Ravished with the Matchless sight;
For thou have Chose exactly to his wish;
And thy choice answers to the Fair Idea,
The Lovely Image, and the perfect mind
Which his rich Fancy formed for thee:
Once more, ten Thousand Blessings on you both.

Scene Third.
Ulamar, Irene. Ul. Come to my Arms, thou Charming wish of Souls!
The happy Night, the Auspicious hour is come
That I so long have wished, so long Dispair'd to see;
Make but this Bliss perpetual, O ye Powr's!
I ask no more, for I am Blessed as you.
What Is this? By all the Immortal Powers in Tears!
And art thou Grieved, that thy poor Lovers Blessed?
Is this thy Constancy? Is this thy Flame?

Ire. My Ulamar! Since I declared my Love
When Decency almost forbad the sound:
Now Heaven has made it Duty, I must own
My Passion, is my Darling Pride of Soul;
And never can Irene more be pleased
Than when her Lovely Ulamer is Blessed:
But ah, a sadness sits upon my Soul,
A fatal load, that weighs it down from Bliss,
To which it would aspire, a black Presage
That wispers to me, I must loose thee Ulamar,

Ul. The Gods forbid, that I should loose Irene,
Why should my Love give way to such a thought?

Ire. Oh Ulamar! My Happiness! My Life!
The blissful Days and Hours that I expect:
Now Joined in happy Nuptial League with thee,
Is surely what offends the Immortal Powers;
Such Bliss is far above a Mortal state,
For we should Live and be as Gods my Love
And that the Wrathful Powers above deny.

Ul. This is mere Melancholy fancy all.

Ire. Ah me! what dreadful Groan was that, as if
A Thousand wretches, in one Breath expired:
The Demons of the Air, sure catch my Grief
Confirming my Presage.

Ul. It Is Fancy all, or next to Fancy wind,
That raging makes the bending Forest roar,
No Dearest, if the Immortal Powers are Angry,
It Is not with thee, for thou art Spotless all,
In whom not Earth, nor Heaven a fault can see;
No, it is with me who see all Heaven before me,
And yet delay to taste of Immortality.
For Oh! I talk, I loiter out the Night
Too, too Inestimable to be lost
In words: If we must talk, to Bed my Fair,
Where I shall whisper something to thy Soul
That is a Secret for the Gods and thee.
O those bewitching Blushes! How they dart
Caelestial Fire through all my Trembling frame.
If there is cause to Fear the Immortal Powers
Should Snatch thee from me, let us Live to Night,
This Blissful Night whole Ages let us Live.

Ire. Bless me ye Powers! What dismal Screem is that?
Heard you not something?

Ul. Plainly I heard, and wonder what if means.

Ire. Hark! hark! Another shreek.

Ul. And now they groan.

Ire. Now shouts of Joy Succeed.
And now a Noise of Murder and of Fire.

Scene Fourth.
Ulamar, Irene, Arimat Wounded. Ul. Ha! What art thou, thus mangled, and thus
Pale?
Can thou be Arimat?

Ari. The poor remains of Arimat.

Ul. Alas! Thou art Dying.

Ari. Yes, there were two things
That I had left to do in this frail World;
To save thee Ulamar, and then to Dye.

Ul. Surprise has so Confounded all my Powers
That I want force to ask thee, who has done this.

Ari. Who but our new Allies.

Ul. The French?

Ari. The Faithless French.

Ul. Impossible! Thou rav'st poor Dying Arimat.

Ari. I would to Heaven I did: the Perjured French
Rallying their routed Troops, came back by stealth,
And for twelve Hours, insidiously sat down
Under the Brow of yonder Northern Mount,
And there sat Brooding over their black design.

Ul. How know thou this?

Ari. Aloud they boast it through our Flaming streets,
And how with ease by Night, they gained a Place,
Trusting to Solemn Oaths so lately Sworn;
Buried in Sleep, and quite dissolved in Luxury.

Ul. Confusion! Angiae on the Brink of Ruin,
And I stand loitering here, to Arms, to Arms.

Ari. Hold, Ulamar, I came not for that purpose;
It Is now to late to Fight; for all our Angians,
Except a few, are Fled, or Slain, or taken.

Ul. And why had I no sooner Notice?

Ari. Alas! All this has in few Minuets past,
For we were most without Defense surpised,
Depending on this Nights so Solemn Treaty.
Fly while thou can, Brave Ulamar, Oh Fly!
A dauntless handful still, of our Brave Warriors
With Matchless Valor keep the Dogs at Bay;
Yet they but Fight, to give thee time to Fly,
Their zeal to save their wretched sinking Country;
Against vast Numbers: For a while sustains them,
That they may save in thee, the Prop of Liberty,
The great support of all the Iroquian Tribes,
The only hope of Angiae. --
My fainting Limbs, no longer will support me;
Receive me Earth, the Refuse now of Nature. [Falls.
Fly Ulamar, e're yet it be to late,
Or thou and Angiae are like me no more. [Dies.

Iri. He Dies.
Begone my Love, without delay begone.

Ul. And where alas will thou go?

Ire. To Life or Death I Will follow thee.

Ul. To Life thou can not, it is impossible,
For I must Scale the Palisades t'escape.
The French possess the Gates; no, Flight for me,
No, I must Die; but will not tamely Fall;
Nor unrevenged, to Arms, to arms.

Scene 5.
Ulamar, Irene, Zephario Wounded. Zep. O Horror! Horror! it is too late my Son.

Ire. My Father bleeding? Stream my Eyes like fountains.

Zep. Angiae has been, and we are now no more.
Die Ulamer, and thou Irene Die:
If thou would Dye, as thou have Lived with Honor,
Die quickly, while thy wretched Countrymen:
The few remains of Angians scarce defend
The Entrance to this place -- I can no more. [Dies.

Ire. He dies, he dies, and Heaven looks calmly on.

Ul. Hark! hark! they come, Retire my Love retire,
Now for the welcome that such guests deserve.

Scene 6.
Ula. Ire. Front. Mir. Officers and Soldiers. Fight. Front. Ha! Who art thou
so young, yet do such wonders,
Thou art truly Brave by Heaven.

Mir. So Brave, that it is a most Opprobrious shame
That he should poorly be oppressed by Odds:
My Lord, give orders that your Men retire,
I am alone sufficient. (Advancing.

Front. Hold Kinsman, Miramont I charge thee hold.

Ul. Ha! Miramont!

Mir. Yes, what have thou to say to Miramont?

Ul. Come on, and twice in one Revolving Sun
Receive thy Life from me.

Mir. Ha! my Preserver?
These are the only Arms I Will use with thee; (...)
Resign thy Sword, and thy Defense to me:
This is Count Frontenac our Captain General,
Allied to me in Blood, allied in Soul,
Dearer then all Relations as my Friend,
And I have made Him Swear my Brave Deliverer
Should be both Safe and Free.

Ul. This morning by thy Looks I thought thee Honest,
And in thy words a Generous Mind appears,
How comes it that thou Vilely could descend
To share the Guilt of this Perfidious act?

Mir. I share it not,
For I returned not to attack the Angians,
But to deliver thee:
Know I detested this Perfidious Deed;
But what can one against a Multitude,
Or the Commands of Arbitary sway?
Our General too detests it in his Heart.

Ul. And yet performs it? What a Riddle's this?

Front. I dare not disobey Superior Power.

Ul. In all new France no Power excells thy own.

Front. From Europe the severe Command arrived.

Ul. But why this odious Treason?

Front. Thrice have I orders from the Court received,
To spare no Force, nor Art, nor Cost, nor Fraud
To seize upon the General of the Angians.

Ul. Ha! Wherefore?

Front. It Is He Is the furious Thunderbolt of War,
That maks the unconquered Iroquois so dreadful,
To us more Mortal then a General Plague,
Consumes our Colonies, destroys our Men,
Slaughters our faithful Friends and our Allies;
Nay Vows to Extirpate all the Gallick Race;
Their very Memories, and their Names from Canada.

Ul. D'ost thou know Him!

Front. His Deeds have made him, too much known to France,
But for his Face, I never yet beheld it,
Yet by the Angians obstinate defense
Before this place: I thought to have found him here,
Thou may discover where he lies concealed,
For the other Slaves are obstinately Dumb.

Ul. What would thou with him?

Front. When I have got him in my Power, he dies,
For so my Orders from the Court require,
And I have Sworn, he shall not Live an hour.

Ul. Then rashly have thou Sworn, and thou art Perjured:

Front. Presumtuous Boy!

Ul. Yes, thou art Perjured
For ^^ou have Sworn to thy Relation there,
The General of the Angians should be free.

Front. Yet more presumptuous!
Would thou, who art not old enough to serve;
Would thou pretend to lead an Army?

Ul. Yes;
They whom the Gods Inspire are never too young,
And they have set up me, to save my Country;
And drive out Tyrants, from this Indian World.

Front. I see thou have a Soul above thy years,
And that exalted Soul must scorn a Lie;
Thou art the General then, since thou have said it,
Here take him Guards, and lead him to his Fate.

Mir. Confusion! Hold there! What do you mean my Lord?

Front. I mean to take his Life.

Mir. But that you must not.

Front. How; must not?

Mir. No; shall not, dare not.

Front. And who dares hinder me? I here am Absolute.

Mir. You have given your solemn Oath, and dare not break it.

Front. I had given the King my Solemn word before:
Is It not the Kings Command?

Mir. No, it is unjust, the King can do no Wrong:
He who Commands injustice, is no King;
Nor are we bound to Obey.

Front. Always a Malcontent!

Mir. Am I alone?
Are there not Thousands here in Caneda?
O would you kearken to great Natures call.

Front. Away! I hear thee not,
But for this Angian, instantly he dies
Take him away there.

Mir. The Dog who first lays hold of him shall Perish;
As long as I have Life, I will defend him.

Front. Hold there!
That Life is forfeited if I would take it;
But fondly thou presum'st upon my Love.
Ungrateful Miramont! Art thou my Friend?
Who seek'st my Infamy, who seek'st my Ruin?

Mir. I seek your Honor.

Front. My Honor! mind your own.

Mir. I will, I do:
Whose Honor here is more concerned than mine;
Depending on your Faith, I gave my Honor
To see this Noble youth both Safe and Free;
And 'twas the trust that he reposed in that.
Made him deliver up his Sword to me:
I have given my Honor, and I will maintain it;
And yours, though you neglect it.

Front. Ha! have a care!

Mir. I will have no care; here take my Life,
It Is that I know you Thirst for, and it is yours.

Front. I am but too tender of it.

Mir. To tenderness thy Souls an utter Stranger:
He tender of my Life, who takes my Honor!

Front. Upon thy Life no more? Come yet I am thy Friend.

Mir. You never were.

Front. O thou will Rouse the Lion till he tears thee.

Mir. Here let him tear me! What Is this wretched Breast,
Without the unsullied Jewel, of the which
You basely would deprive it.

Front. Ha! Am I then defied, here Seize him Guards,
Kill him if he Resists: Hold, Gods he Bleeds!

Mit. Yes, it is the Blood so often I Have shed for you.

Front. It is indeed; that thought coolls all my rage:
What woulst thou have at last? My utter ruin?
Come, thou shall have thy wish.
But will thou then believe I am thy Friend?

Mir. How can you think that he desires your Ruin,
Who has so often shed his best Blood to serve you;
No, I will die before I will see that;
Nay he shall die too:
But come my Lord, consider e're you act;
Behold this noble Youth with all your Eyes,
Reflect upon his Worth, survey his Person.

Front. I have considered all.

Mir. Is not his Courage more than common?

Front. Heroic.

Mir. His Magnanimity?

Front. Godlike.

Mir. His Person?

Front. The pleasure of my Eyes;
And were he not my Country's mortal Foe*
How I could dote on such uncommon worth.

Mir. Come, come, my Lord, your Country's Foes are they,
Who trample under foot its Native Rights:
Not they who Fight against Tyrannick Sway;
But all this while this Fair one we neglect:
Yet She is Fair --

Front. A Miracle of Beauty;

Mir. And seems to have a Soul above her Sex:
Look how her mournful Eyes move melting pity!
In which the greatness of her mind appears,
That strugles to repress her mighty Woe;
So soft, so young, so tender; yet so firm!
By her this wretched Youth should be a Lover.
Is She thy Mistress or thy Wife?

Ul. Oh thou have found a way to break my Heart;
This stubborn Heart which Fate could not subdue!
For when I think of what She undergoes,
In my tumultous Breast it sinks and dies.

Mir. Is she thy Mistress or thy Wife? Nay speak.

Ul. Oh cruel Fate! Was ever Woe like mine?
Alas! She Is both my Mistress and my Wife

Mir. We are no strangers to the Power of Love,
Nor to the Grief that hapless Love attends;
We know how Cruel it is, to be thus torn
From all that is precious to our Bleeding Hearts;
And shall we inflict those piercing woes on others?
My Lord, my Lord, by powerful Love I charge you,
Whose Captive you have been, and yet remain,
Or is the Object of your Flame forgot?

Front. O Never, never shall she be forgot!

Mir. Then by great Love, whose Captive you remain,
I here conjure you, spare this Captive pair;
By the remembrance of that Lovely (...)
By all the Bliss you Enjoyed with her so long;
By all your bitter Woe for her sad Loss,
And by those sighs you now profoundly draw
From your sad Heart, the Exhaustless source of Woe.

Front. O Miramont forbear, my Friend forbear,
Thou have roused the Vultour slumbering in my Breast,
That gnaws my Heart asunder.

Mir. If Seperations hard to you my Lord,
Who long possessed the Darling of your Heart,
And who from Life's Meridian now decline;
What must it be to him, whose Youthful Blood
Feels all the stings, of violent Desire?
To him my Lord, to whom Possessions new;
He and his Wife, in their first Charming Bloom,
Can never have Enjoyed each other long,
How long have thou been Married?

Ul. Ye Gods, ye Gods, let me not think of it!

Mir. Nay answer me, I ask it but to serve thee.

Ul. Thou see that I am ready for my Fate;
But let me Dye, as I have Lived, a Man,
For thou will make a Woman of me,
This very fatal Evening joined our Hands.

Mir. This night! this very night! O Earth and Heaven,
Is It possible? No never was Woe like thine!
Thy Wife is then a Virgin, yet untouched,
And that thou Love her more than Life it self,
Thy ardent, and thy melting Eyes declare:
Thou for this Night perhaps have languish'd long,
Or long have been upon the painful Wreck,
Been tossed Alternately, from eager hope
To Mortal fear; from Fear to Hope again,
And we surpised thee in the last Impatience;
Eager for Bliss, and panting to the Goal;
And must Death cut off all thy charming Hope,
Even in the enchanting height of Expectation?
This is unheard of, this is monstrous Cruelty.
Come, you must melt, my Lord, you shall, you do,
We shall not else be looked upon as Men;
As men, the very Lion and the Tiger
Would be less Barbarous, would be less Inhumane,
And here is a sight, that in their Savage breasts
Might raise a tender sense of humane Woe.

Front. This is indeed deplorable.

Mir. My Lord, my Lord, you utterly forget,
That we our selves have Wives and Children too,
That languish if they Live in hard Captivity,
Though where we know not; yet the Powr's above
Behold them, and prepare with dreadful Plagues
To visit our Crimes upon their Innocence,
And all the injustice, and the crying Cruelty
Which we inflict on this unhappy Pair,
On those poor Innocents will be Revenged!

Front. I Will hear no more;
For thou will melt me, to my Ruin Miramont;
And these by my Destruction thou would Save;
Thou know the Kings Commands are most severe.

Mir. And most unjust*
But Arbitrary Kings, are always Slaves
To Interest: their Implicit grand Command
To all their Subjects, is to advance that,
To which all Orders are supposed to tend;
But it is the apparent Interest of the King,
To spare this Valiant Youth, which when you show.

Front. But how can I show that?

Mir. Why would the King destroy him?

Front. Once more I tell thee;
Because he is his Mortal Foe declared,
And is besides the universal Soul
That warms, and moves, and animates these Nations,
TO oppose his vast Designs, whom when they loose
The very Spirit, that supports them gone.

Mir. If he declares for us, they loose him more
Than if he Dies; because we gain him then.

Front. But he is too Lofty, and too Fierce for that,
He Will never declare for us.

Mir. (apart) I would not have him, but I must gain time,
which if I compass, I may yet preserve him
[To Front.] Not Instantly; His Souls too great for that;
But give him time my Lord.

Front. The English may return, the Angians Rally,
And then, he may be wrested from our hands;
How should I answer that?

Mir. Before the Morning they can never return;
Give him till point of Day, and let this Fair one
Try her persuasive Power.

Front. Captain?

Offi. My Lord!

Front. The Charge of these two Prisoners must be yours;
But keep your Guard, for Half an Hour at distance;
That their Discourse may not be overheard
If in that time he will declare for us,
Let him be left here with his Beauteous Bride;
But place a guard without that may protect them.
If he refuses, bring him strait to me
And her Convey to the other Female Captives.
Now Angian, Life or Death are in thy choice;
If thou will Swear to embrace our Interests,
A Glorious Instrument thou may become
To make these Nations Subject to our Sway,
And then thou shall be Happy, shall be great,
And under us Rule all the Jroquian Tribes:
If thou Refusest thou shall surely Die.

Scene the 6.
Ulamar, Irene. Ul. Ah poor Irene!

Ire. Wretched Ulamar!

Ul. We but just are met --

Ire. And we must part. Would thou not tell me so?

Ul. We must; for ever part.

Ire. Who could have thought it!

Ul. Who could have believed it?

Ire. That wished for Happiness should be so near.

Ul. And be so soon, and so entirely lost.

Ire. Ah cruel change!

Ul. O mortal Woe! one Kiss, and then farewell.

Ire. The Gods have given to others to fare well.
O miserably must Irene fare!
Art thou in have to leave thy Bride for ever?

Ul. My Life! can I avoid it? I must leave thee;
Thou see the Spousals Cruel Fate prepares for us,
These are the Wedding Joys that Heaven provides us;
Farewell! A longer stay will quite unman me,
Eternally Farewell -- O Cursed parting [Kisses her.
O Charming, earnest of Immortal Bliss,
Which I must never enjoy!

Ire. The Gods, the Gods reward this Faithless Race.

Ul. Me rather Curse, Yes, Curse my damned Credulity;
O Fool, fool, fool, to be thus grossly choused
By these vile tricking Slaves! O I am lost!
But Justly there is the Torment Justly lost,
I poorly ran the hazard of my Country
To save my House, and on my House the first
The greatest, and most dismal Vengeance Falls.

Ire. But lost Irene's most of all undone,
Consider what I am, and what I was
In the beginning of this Fatal Night;
Was I not Happy?

Ul. Thou wast indeed.

Ire. How am I fallen!

Ul. Oh thou art plunged in an Abiss of Woe!

Ire. If I appear to abraid thee Ulamar;
Think there is a wondrous reason for it, who caused
This dreadful Revolution in my Fate?

Ul. Who but a Dog, who but a Dog?
O I could tear my self!

Ire. Thine is the Fault, but whose must be the Pain?
But whose must be the Horror?

Ul. Oh that it might be mine! might all be mine?

Ire. Thy Enemies will soon deliver thee,
And Death will be thy Friend; his Icy hand
Will soon convey thee to that Blissful Land,
Where thou shall Swim in Everlasting Joy,
Where thou will soon forget thy Loved Irene.

Ul. Oh never! never!

Ire. The Transitory Pains of Death with thee
Will soon be over, but I shall feel them long;
Of thy sad Death how long may I be Dying,
For I have neither Enemy, nor Friend
That will deliver me; but must be left
Alone! Oh all alone, I shall be left
Without my Country, and my dear Relations,
Without my Faithful Friends, nay without thee,
Who were Relations, Country, all to me.
O that thou were! O that thou would be all!

Ul. Thou Miserablest of the Race of Women, What would thou?

Ire. Thou see in what Condition I am left,
In what Perfidious, in what Barbarout Hands;
Say, what am I to expect when thou art gone,
From such a Cruel, such a Faithless Race?

Ul. Oh Damn them -- damn them, O Revenge, Revenege!
I Would give the World that thou were in my Power

Ire. Say Ulamar, for thou have known me long;
Say, did I e're appear thus moved before?

Ul. No, Never, never, (...) is on thy Brow,
And thy Soul's teeming with some wondrous Birth;
Let it be never so dreadful bring it out,
The worst of Fate I have already felt.

Ire. If ever thou lov'd'st me with a Noble Passion,
It Is time to show it now.

Ul Whither art thou going?

Ire. Once more tell me,
Who brought this Load of Woe upon my Head.

Ul. Oh Damnation! oh!

Ire. From whom should my Delieverance then proceed?

Ul. Lightning this moment blast me! must I then
Betray my Country, or Abandon thee!

Ire. Say, though a poor distressful, Widowed Virgin,
Yet am I not thy Wife.

Ul. My Dearest Wife!
Dearer then is the Blood that warms my Heart,
But ruined Angiae is my Country still.

Ire. Will thou do nothing for Me Ulamar;
Is not my Honor thine?

Ul. It is, and mine is thine?
And therefore I ll preserve it, true to thee,
To Heaven and Nature, and to Ruined Angiae.

Ire. And I would have thee Constant to them all;
For if thou prov'st a Traitor to the Rest,
Thou will be so to me.

Ul. Ha! Is there another way to thy Deliverance?
I Will shed the Blood that is Dearest to my Heart
TO obtain it.

Ire. The Blood that is dearest to thy Heart?

Ul. By the great mind I will.

Ire. Is not that Blood Irene's?

Ul. Thy Blood! O Horror! what have thou proposed?

Ire. Yes thou must shed it, Ulamar, and Die.

Ul. Am I a Devil?

Ire. What can thou stay to expire in fearful Torments,
Insulted over by these inhuman Slaves;
Thou have a Poniard though thy Sword is gone.

Ul. I have, and thus I use it. Draws the Dagger, offers to Stab himself.

Ire. Hold, by Almighty Love ^^arge thee hold;
O Look upon me with an Eye of Mercy,
And plunge it here; le^ me not see thee Die:
Have Mercy Ulamar, and kill me first.

Ula. What give thee Death? Upon this Sacred Night?
Is that a Bridegroom's gift. The Gods the Gods
Deliver thee, while ^us I free my self. [Offers to stab (...)

Ire. Thou shault not die, inhumane as thou art;
How could you have the cruel heart to attempt it?
To leave me here to this perfidious Race:
My Father, Country, Friends, all, all are gone,
And can thou leave me too, my Life? Can thou?
Can thou? Thou shall not. I will die before thee.

Ul. O hold! (...)
That dismal blow I must not, dare not see.

Ire. Think what the French when thou art gone* Come death*
And free my Breast from this distracting thought.

Scene 7.
Ulamar, Irene, Officer, and Guards. Offi. Ha Slaves! Is this the use you make
of proffered Mercy?
Have! Tear them asunder.
Him to Count Frontenec in Bonds conduct,
And her convey to the other Female Captives:
Bring them away there.

Ul. Ah poor Irene? May the Gods protect thee:
Take in this Dying look my last Farewell;
Death's cruel'st Pang is parting thus from thee.

Ire. Oh Gods! What dreadful Fate's reserved for me!

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Ulamar, Frontenac, Miramont. Front. COme, be not guilty of thy own
Destruction!
Believe it, I would gladly be thy Friend;
Besides that, I respect thy wondrous Virtue;
There Is something so engaging in thy Person,
That I Am inclined with tenderness to Love thee;
But think the Irrevocable moments fly;
The time approaches when thou must resolve.

Ul. What to Betray my Trust? To be a Villian!

Front. Mistake me not fond Youth!
Assist us to subdue these Warlike Nations;
And under us thou shall Command them all.

Ula. What right have I to rule these Warlike Nations*

Front. The Justest in the World, the right of Nature:
Thou singly have more Virtue than them all;
And therefore art by Nature formed to rule them.

Ul. With bare Desert a generous mind is satisfied;
If I have Virtue give me leave to keep it?
Complying with thy offer would destroy it,
And I should then have more and blacker Crimes
Than all the warlike Iroquois together;
But thou mistak'st thy Man, I have a Soul
That scorns a Tyrant, and a Slave alike;
And thou would have me both:
But since thy offer kindly is designed;
Ingratitude I doubly will return it.

Front. Return it, say thou? How?

Ul. Set me but free, and I Will in kind return it.

Front. In kind?

Ul. Yes, Rouse thy self, and shake off this vile Yoke,
Under the which thou bow'st thy Neck and groan'st:
I Will make thee King of all Canadian France,
And the brave English, and the Warlike Iroquois
Shall both support thy Claim.

Front. I Will hear no more; say, will thou Live or Die.

Mir. Nay, hear him out; it is barbarous to refuse it:
Methinks that I could hear him talk for ever.

Front. Yet be advised and Live.

Ul. Not on thy terms, I Am not of Life so fond;
Weigh both our offers, and judge which is Juster;
Tyrant and Slave at once thoud'st have me (...)
And weaken and debase my freeborn mind;
That Is independent now of all but Heaven;
And a (...) in a Man (...)
The greatest, best of Men are but my equals:
The guilty like thy Master my Inferiors.

Front. Thou have a noble Soul by Heaven.

Mir. A Godlike one.

Ul. Oh how unlike is what I ask of thee?
I would Establish thee a Lawful King,
And over a happy People shall thou Reign,
Would break thy ignoble Bonds, and give thee means
TO assert thy Liberty, to assert thy Virtue;
For lurking in thy breast I see the Seeds
Of every noble Virtue; but by custom
And vain opinion choked, and blind obedience
To the unjust ambition of thy Master.
As thou art Man, thou art Generous and Brave,
True Maganimity adorns thy mind,
And thou art as Dearly awful to my Soul
As if thou were my Father.
But as thou art French, thou art Base, Perfidious, Perjured,
And Sacrificest to thy Tyrants will
Thy very Honor, and thy very Virtue.

Mir. Mind that my Lord.

Ul. Thou would have me Betray my Trust, my Country,
The Solemn'st and most Sacred of all Trusts.
I would have thee deliver those thou Rul'st,
And free them from the Bonds that wring their Hearts,
And from the Cruel Scourge that makes them Roar:
Should I comply with thee, and should undo
These Generous Nations, who are happy now
In Innocence and Freedom; but would then
Be plunged in Vice and endless Misery;
How when I afterward met woeful sights,
Deplorable misfortunes, melting Objects;
How would my Heart, within my bosom Die
To think that I had done this:
But thou who hitherto mistaken man,
Have prostituted to thy Monarchs Pride
The noblest Talents of thy mind and Person,
Thy Wisdom, and thy Courage have employed
To cast all other Nations into Chains,
And Clinch, and Rivet those that bind thy own,
Who have been Industrous to entail Destruction
Upon the Race of Men, to all Posterity,
Even thy Posterity, thy wretched Children,
If thou have Children --

Front. What Cruel griefs, has that Remembrance Roused?

Ul. How will thy Soul rejoice when thon shall come.
To turn those Talents to their Noblest use,
To bring the Nations round to Happy freedom,
And make Atonement to our Indian World,
For all the Woes thy Cursed Ambition caused!
What Inexpressive Joy will seize thy Breast,
When thou shall every where meet happy objects,
And think to thee, that Happiness they owe!
To hear the Shouts, the General Acclamations,
The unnumber'd Blessings poured upon thy Head:
O would thy Rouse thy self, and break thy Chain
How would thy Virtue, and thy Glory Shine!
And to what Height thy Happiness would Soar!
Then Impious War should here for ever cease
Which never came among these Happy Groves,
'Till thy false Race, first Landed on our Shore.
For it is for Liberty we War, not Empire;
While at the Blood we spill we hourly sigh,
And Curse the Falsehood of detested Slaves,
That rudely force us to Destroy our kind.
How shameful it is, that Men whom Heaven has formed
Of this vast Universe; the fellow Citizens
Should thus wage Civil and unnatural War:
All Creatures that have Life, but Men agree;
The fiercest and most Savage of the Beasts,
That makes the Forest tremble at his Roar,
Loves his own Figure, in another Beast,
And with him like a Brother Lives in Peace.
Even Fiends themselves with Fiends are more at Variance;
But Barbarous Man, makes Impious War on Man,
And Leagues with Fiends against his fellow Creatures.

Mir. O Godlike Youth! assist me all ye Powers [apart.
Who Love mankind, and who delight in Mercy,
Assist my Just design.

Ul. But if the Justice, of the Noble cause
The freedom of our Indian World will not move thee,
If giving lasting Happiness and Peace
To all the Race of men, will not Rouse thy Blood,
If thy own Fame and Greatness will not prevail,
And if a Crown acquired so Brave a way,
Have no Temptations for thy Grovling mind,
Have thou a Son to Inherit Bliss or Woe,
For some will for their Children more perform,
Than for themselves; and all the World besides.

Mir. A happy thought, ay, urge that motive Home.

Ul. Nay, answer me!

Front. Alas! thou hurt'st me, Probe that Wound no more

Ul. Nay, if thou have, consider while it is time,
On this Important now Depends his Fate,
And by thy Present choice he grows a King,
Becomes a happy and a Glorious King,
Or Lives and Dies a miserable Slave;
Come, I can plainly see thou have a Son.

Mir. Yes, yes, Brave Youth, we have Children, nay and VVive's,
But shamefully have been afraid to own them,
For fear our mighty Monarch should grow Angry,
And that Vile fear has lost them; if they Live,
They languish in a rude Captivity;
And to re^ive them, and to keep them ours,
We have no hope, but by thy Generous offer.
Come rouse my Lord, how long shall we have Patience:
Have Patience* have Stupidity I would say!
For Patience is a Virtue, this a Vileness,
A very want of Spirits in our Blood:
Come* how much longer shall we crouch and Fawn,
Yes Fawn like Dogs, the more, the more we are scourged:
But Dogs when Beaten only Fawn on Men
Who were to them Superior Creatures formed:
No Dog will fawn upon a Dog who tears him:
Yes, it is a sign we have Sacrificed our Virtue,
Nay, and our very Reason with our Virtue,
When we can thus resolve to offer up
Our Children to the Rage of Lawless Sway.
What is he? That he proudly thus commands us,
Not only to commit the basest Crimes,
To grow the scourge of God, and be the plagues
Of Humane Race, while the French name is grown
A Horror to each Corner of the Earth;
But that like Devils we our selves should feel
Doubly the Torments we inflict on others;
Should on our Children endless Woes entail,
And grow the Curse even of our own Posterity.
For what? That he over Europe may Insult:
Yes, by the Woes of us and our Insult.
What is it to us who Reigns, if we are Wretched?
And can we well be more? Is this our comfort,
That with our selves we make mankind too wretched?
A Comfort fit for Devils, not for Men.

Ul. Ay, now thou art my Friend indeed.

Mir. Pray where is his Power that aws us into this?
What force has he, but what we fondly give him?
For what he wrongly calls his Power is ours;
And shall we use our Power against our selves:
Would any but a Wretch deprived of Reason,
Employ his Limbs to Wound himself and Children,
Because another has the monstrous Cruelty
To tell him it is his pleasure.

Front. I Have heard too much.

Scene 2.
Ulamar, Frontenac, Miramont, Soldier. Soul. My Lord, to Arms, to Arms!

Front. What say thou?

Soul. As we advanced toward yonder Southern Gate,
Upon the Mountain fronting it, we spied
A Light ascending to the Vault of Heaven,
Which strait expanding in a general Blaze,
(...) the Mountain with a Flood of Flame*
And then descending with Impetuous course
Down to the Vale the Fiery Torrent rolled,
And now both Hill and Vale appear on Fire:
It Is thought the Routed Angians who escaped,
Are now returning with their English Friends,
And by these numerous Lights direct their Nightly March.

Front. Ha! We too in our turn shall be surpised;
And which way move they?

Soul. Directly toward the Southern Gate they advance.

Front. Give orders that my Forces be drawn up;
My self I Will lead them to the Southern Gate,
And warmly we'll receive this desperate Foe:
Take care another Band of Fuzileers
Be Planted at the entrance to this place;
They shall receive my pleasure as I pass.

Scene 3.
Ulamar, Frontenac, Miramont. Front. Hold! Let me sec! This Angian Captive yet
Is in my power; how long he may remain so
Heaven only knows! If he escapes I am lost,
My orders from the Court are so severe,
On this Alarm my Duty calls me hence. [To (...)
Ten Minutes yet thou have left thee to declare,
If before they expire, thou will be ours,
Thou may be happy, else thou know thy doom.

Scene 4.
Ulamar, Miramont. Mir. The time allowed thee to resolve is short;
Then I entreat thee make thy dearest use of it.

Ul. I was about it.
Thou say thou art my Friend.

Mir. I say I am thy Friend: Let Flatterers say
Brave Youth, for I have shown I am thy Friend;
Live but an hour and thou will find me such,
Find I have boldly ventured all to save thee;
Done more for thee than ever I would do,
Even for my nearest and most dear Relations;
Thou to my Soul are dearer than them all,
Related to me by a Nobler way;
My Kindred they in Blood, but thou in Virtue:

Ul. Then let me take my leave of my Irene.

Mir. Thou know not what thou ask'st, thy time is short,
And should thou see her, thy few precious moments
Would be in empty Lamentations lost.

Ul. Then bind thy self by Solemn Vows to Guard her
From all unworthy usage when I Am gone.

Mir. Come, I Will do more for thee;
For thou shall Live, and be thy self her Guardian:
What can thou poorly Die, and thy brave Friends
So near, who come to free thee from these Bonds,
To free us all from our Insulting Tyrant!
Can thou desert the great supports of Liberty,
And tamely Die?

Ul. Tamely?

Mir. Ay, Tamely!

Ul. Oh give me but a Sword, and thou shall see
How Tamely I will fall.

Mir. How would thou use it.

Ul. I Will through thy Numerous Sentries force my way,
And mounting over the Ramparts Join my Friends.

Mir. Impossible! Thou would betray thy self
And me to Fate, and would prevent thy Friends.

Ul. What can I do besides!

Mir. Declare.

Ul. What for the French!
Against whose Crimes so Justly thou Inveigh'st?

Mir. Do you think I ask thee to Declare for ever?
Thy Sentiments disemble but an Hour.

Ul. Is Death so Dreadful?

Mir. Consider but the happy Consequence.

Ul. The Consequence is Guilt, Remorse and Shame,
You punish with an Ignominious Death,
They who desert your false and guilty Cause,
And would have me a Fugitive from Truth,
A Fugitive from Virtue?

Mir. But for an Hour.

Ul. But Virtue often deserted for an Hour,
Resents it deeply, and upon the Wing
Is gone past all return.

Mir. Three minutes yet are left thee to Declare.

Ul. Then welcome Death the Fourth, for that brings Liberty.

Mir. Think that the happiness of even a World
Depends upon thy Life.

Ul. Know that Worlds Happiness depends on one
Who will not have it saved so base a way.

Mir. If thou art so hard hearted to thy self,
Do something yet for me, who have done for thee,
More than thou know, or would with ease believe.

Ul. Thou art so Generous, I could Die for thee,
Be satisfied with that.

Mir. Nay but thou shall not, thus continue obstinate,
Descend to be entreated for thy self.

Ul. It Is they are Obstinate, who are in the wrong:
I never was more Right.

Mir. It Is past; How vain it is to contend with Fate.

Scene 5.
Ulamar, Miramont, Officer and Guards. Offi. Where is this Angian?

Ul. Here.

Offi. Count Frontenac our Governor, has sent me
TO enquire of thee for whom thou will declare.

Ul. For Liberty.

Offi. Then Death shall set thee free:
Here bind him.

Mir. Stay yet a Moment.

Offi. I dare not stay,
Our General will be here Immediately,
And when he comes, expects to find him Dead.

Ul. Farewell my absent Dear, protect her Heaven,
And make this gentle to her tender Heart;
It Is a severe Divorse, but we must bear it.

Mir. How my Heart Bleeds for him.

Offi. Come, away with him

Ul. Will thou be good, and think of lost Irene?

Mir. Had I an only Daughter, Fair as Virtue,
She should be less my Care.

Ul. Farewell my Generous Friend.

Mir. Let me Embrace thee, Dearer than my Life,
Dear as my Fame, this Separation Wounds me,
And makes me Bleed, as if thou were a part of me,
Dear hapless Youth, eternally Farewell!

Scene 5.
Ulamar, Miramont, Sakia, Officer, and Guards. Sak. He Lives, and the Eternal
Powers are Just*
He Lives, stand off, and let a wretched Mother
Embrace the Joy and Comfort of her Life.
Oh Ulamar, thou darling of my Soul! --

Offi. What means this Woman with her clamorous fondness:
Present, dispatch him instantly.

Sak. Hurt him, and thou shall be Ten Years a dying.
Where Is Miramont?

Mir. Ha!

Offi. Shoot him ye Slaves; how dare ye disobey?

Mir. Hold! On thy Life forbear! She shall be heard first.

Offi. With this I shall acquaint our Governor.
Do you remain, and Guard your Prisoner well.

Scene 6.
Ulamar, Miramont, Sakia, and Guards. Mir. Who asks for Miramont?

Sak. Sakia.

Mir. Sakia?

Sak. Yes; so the Angians call me; but I had
Another Name upon the Huronian Lake.

Mir. Tell now I never saw thee.

Sak. I tell thee it is for Miramont I ask.

Mir. Men call me Miramont.

Sak. Thee? I know thee not.
How long have thou been here in Canada?

Mir. The Sun has five (...) rolled about the Year,
Since first I Landed on your (...) Shore.

Sak. I want another Captain of thy Name.

Mir. In Canada there is no other Miramont.

Sak. I hou art mistaken; I have often seen him,
And know him well.

Mir. Twelve Years ago you may have seen another;
But then his Elder Brother Childless died;
And he returned to France.

Sak. Ye have utterly abandoned us ye Heavens!
And what became of him?

Mir. In France Sev'n years with Honors Crowned he lived,
And then he left it for a better World.

Sak. Dead! Is he dead? O the most lost of Women!

Mir. Hear me.

Sak. Answer me.
Who was that Miramont that Fought this morn
With my poor dying Son?

Mir. 'Twas I: But hear me Madam.

Sak. Horror and Destraction seize me!
Henceforth I Will be as deaf to all the World,
As Heaven has been to me.

Mir. Hear me but a word!

Sak. At ^ength show mercy ye afflicting Powers,
And send more weight to crush the Wretch you have made*

Mir. Strange Prepossession!

Sak. This weight of Woe I cannot, will not bear!
I faint, I die, support thy wretched Mother,
And leave her not in this extreme necessity.
Ah Woe! Thou art thy self in dire necessity,
Hopeless, forlorn, of all the World mistaken*
But who has brought thee to this dismal end.
O wretch, the most Accursed of Heaven! Thus, thus
I dash against the Ground the fatal cause. [Falls,
And art thou gone, for ever gone my Miramont:
Then all the World is gone with wretched me;
Here let me end my miserable Life:
My miserable Life's already ended,
And I am in the number of those things
That were, and are no more. I come my Miramont! Methinks
I see thy awful Ghost appear,
And beckon me away to that strange Land.
From whence there is no return: Yes now I see thee
Just with that mournful look, that fatal frown,
With which thou now for three successive Nights
Have broke my dreadful Slumbers, to upbraid me
For my unkind delay: But I it seems
Flattered and cheated by false hope,
Mistook the mortal Summons.

Scene 7.
Frontenac, Ulamar, Miramont, Sakia, Officer and Guards. Sak. Ha! Gods! He
comes, with the same frown he comes;
Do you call this fancy! O I shall be mad,
I shall be mad with Joy, with Fear, with Wonder!
O thou who have the Charms to make Death lovely:
What would thou with that pale astonished look?
Such as the Dying wear, or Dead who arise:
Come thou to call thy miserable Wife?
She comes, in life and death thy own Nikaia. [Draws a Dagger.

Front. Nikaia!

Sak. Ha! more Astonishment! He speaks, he calls;
Do you hear? Do you see? Or is this Madness all?

Front. Oh my Astonished Soul! It is Nikaia:

Sak. Again is an afflicted Tone he calls,
I come.

Front. O hold! [Lays hold on the Dagger.

Sak. Ah Gods! He lives, I die; Ah Miramont!

Front. Thou shall die here then in these longing Arms;
Dear to my Heart, as the Lifeblood that warms it:
Feel how with Sprightly heats it calls thee back
To Life and Love again*

Sak. It is, it is my Miramont!
Oh it is too much ye Powers, I connot bear it,
I Die, the mighty Joy devours my Life;
My Love, my Life, my Miramont.

Front. And do thou Live? and art thou in my Arms?
Where have thou past so many Cruel years?
O let these Tears of flowing Joy acquaint thee,
How bitterly I Have mourned thy fatal Loss!
What have thou Suffered in this rude Captivity?
O thou have suffered what no Tongue can tell?
How have thou mourned for thy afflicted Mate!
For sure thy Grief was equal to thy Love,
And never any Flame could equal thine.

Sak. No we will never, never part again!
Alas I had forgot (...) Miramont --

Front. Ha! What of that dear Creature! how I tremble!
Thy looks inform me, that my dearest Hope
The Joy, and Comfort of my Life is lost.

Sak He Lives, but on the very Brink of Fate:
Alas! They Murder him!

Front. They? who!

Sak. The Barbarous Governor.

Front. The Governor! my Life! what Governor?

Sak. The Governor of this new France.

Front. Who has deluded thee?
The Governor of France is in thy Arms.

Sak. The Governor of France is Frontenac;
And art not thou my Miramont?

Front. I always was, I always will be thine,
And formerly I was thy Miramont,
But by my Brothers death am Frontenac,
Thus are our names by custom changed in France.

Sak. O Horror! horror!
O wretch, what dreadful Guilt have thou escaped?
Behold thy Son, whom thou art about to Murder?

Frone. Ha! Where?

Srk. There, there behold him.

Front. Ha, thy wonder and thy Joy distract thee!
He who stands there, is General of the Angians.

Sak. As sure as he is General of the Angians,
He is thy Son and mine, it is thy own Miramont.

Front. O I am lost and swallow d up in wonder!
Ye Gods, ye Gods!
These are events surpassing, all example;
These are the amazing Miracles of Fate!
Ha!
Perish all Tyrants, and their black Commands! [Embraces Ul.

Ul. Ay, in that Godlike Voice, I hear my Father.

Front. Oh Miramont! my Son, my Son, forgive me!

Ul. You gave me Life, and you may take it back.

Front. That Life I gave thee, to defend I Will die;
Dear to my Heart, and lovely to my Eyes!
Come to my Arms once more, Indulge thy Father's fondness,
My Wife, and Son recovered in an Hour;
And such a Son! O I am Blessed
Above my fondest Hope.
(...) a God, if nothing intervenes,
^^terrupt this more than Mortal Joy;
(...) thou brave Miramont, my generous Friend,
(...) to whose rare and unexampled Virtue,
(...) the Joy and darling of my Life.
^^^race the worth thou have saved, 'twas thy own Blood, Mira. Em^^^. Ula.
^^^ch to preserve, thou nobly did contend.

(...) Why woul'st thou drive me to despair by, saying Front. talks apart with
his Son.
(...) Miramont was in another World.

(...) You would not hear me out.
(...) esteem this a World distinct from ours.
(...) I must be gone, the appointed minutes come.

Scene 8.
Frontenac, Ulamar, Sakia, Guards. ^ront. Loose thee, I Will loose my self first.

(...) Your King will have it so, and I must die.

^ront. Where are the English?

(...) Ay, that is my Father's Voice, great Nature's Voice:
Voice of Heaven is that. What shout is that. [Shout.

^^ont. No Matter. Now the Angians are my Friends;
(...) thy flying Squadrons with the morn,

(...) Before the Sun has finished three Careers;
(...) Warlike English, and the united Iroquois,
(...) hail thee King of all Canadian France.

^^ont. What Sacrifice my Son to Lawless sway!

(...) For Fifty rolling Years the wretched French,
(...) to their Tyrants Sacrificed their Sons;
(...) rash thoughless Men the Horrors less,
(...) the effect insensibly comes on:
(...) have been the most abandoned of all Slaves.

^^ont. But I Am a Slave; my aspiring Boy no more.

(...) Oh the blessed sound!

^^ont. O I am roused from my Lethargick Dream;
(...) when we have been refreshed with short repose,
(...) will to Arms, to glorious Arms my Boy,
(...) Godlike Liberty shall be the word.

(...) O that some Angel with his Golden Trump
(...) make that Voice through the wide World resound;
That the Caelestial sound might rouse Mankind to Liberty!
But ah, these Transports are too Fierce to last;
And the Angry Gods remand me to my Griefs.
Where Is my Irene?

Scene 9.
Frontenac, Ulamar, Sakia, Irene. Ire. She comes, she flies to that Enchanting
Voice.

Ul O let me press thee to my very heart;
From which even Fate had not the power to tear thee.
Sir, I used no entreaty for my Life;
But for my Love thus low I humbly bow. [Knee^^
That you would consent to make it happy here.

Front. Take her, She Is thine; but cherish her like Life;
She merits all thy Love; and more I prize her
For the Rich Dowry of her matchless Virtue;
Than if extended Empire were her lot.

Sak. O the most blissful hour of all my Life!
My long Calamities be quite forgot,
And let me give up all my Soul to Joy!

Ul. Where have thou past this doleful dismal hour;
In dreadful expectation of what Fate
Was terribly about to execute?

Ire. Among a Crowd of miserable Slaves;
Where hearing of thy Death in wild Despair;
I made a dire attempt upon my Life,
When gracious Heaven by Miracle preserved me.

Ul. To preserve thee, what God would not appear?

Ire. No, 'twas no God, but 'twas a Godlike Man.

Scene 10.
Frontenac, Ulamar, Sakia, Irene, Miramont, Beaufort. Sho^^
Ul. 'Twas he, by Heaven, it could be none but he,
Beaufort, thou best of Men, thou best of Friends,
Come to my Arms, come to my Heart my Friend;
This is the wondrous Man to whom I owe [To Front.
My Life, my Liberty, my Fortune, Fame,
And it is to him that you my Mother owe.

Front. Too warmly then I never can receive him. [Embrace.

Ule. Art thou Returned? Art thou within our Walls?
Where have thou left thy Enshlish?

Beauf. The English, and your Rallied Angians now
Are most within the Town.

Ul. More Miracles! Astonishing event!

Front. Now by my Soul, they are truly welcome all;
And this exactly to my wish has happened;
But without Fighting, how could this be done!

Beauf. While on the South we made a false Attack,
Brave Miramont upon the appointed Signal
Gave us admirtance at the Northern Gate.

Front. The appointed Signal, you amaze me, Sir.

Beauf. Two hours are scarce elapsed since this brave Man
To me dispatched a Messenger express,
Inviting me to come and save my Ulamar,
And for my Entrance gave a certain Signal,
I on the warmest Wings of Frindship flew,
Yet had arrived too late with all my Speed,
Had not kind Heaven in Mercy interposed
By this so wonderful Discovery,
With which Brave Miramont has Entertained me.

Front. What say our Soldiers, Miramont?

Mir. They with the English, and the Angians mix,
And Peace and Joy, in all there looks appear:
Impatiently they wait for your Assent,
To cry Hail Frontenac, and Liberty.

Front. That shall not long be wanting.

Ul. But now unanimously, thanks we pay,
To thee Brave Miramont, and thee my Beaufort,
O Truly Great! O Truly worthy Son,
Of Great Britania through the World renowned,
For propping falling Liberty,
Supporting sinking Nations!
There is more Excellence, more Godlike greatness
In rescuing one poor wretch from Dire Calamities,
Than in subverting and destroying Empires,
And making Millions wretched.

Beauf. To Heaven unanimously praise return,
And thankful for this wonderful deliverance:
Resolve that Heaven alone shall over you Rule,
And cast not off your Makers sway for Man's;
Be Governed still by Reason and by Law,
And let your Monarch still be Heavens Vicegerent,
And execute his Masters will, not his:
Thus Governed, we are Absolutely Free,
Heaven and good Kings give prefect Liberty,
And from this wondrous Night, let all Men learn,
Never to Sacrifice the Public Good
Either to Foreign, or to Homebred Tyrants,
For the vile Interest of themselves and Families;
For that upon their Families and selves
Brings certain Ruin: May all France like you [To Front.
Have their Eyes opened, and with Horror see,
How to their Tyrants will they offer up
Their Children, and their whole Posterity
The thing which Heaven and Nature most abhors;
May they see this like you, like you detest it,
Then grow like you, Impatient to be Free,
With us Asserting Godlike Liberty.

FINIS.

