Mr. Maitland's ACCOUNT OF Inoculating THE SMALL POX.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, by J. DOWNING: And to be Sold by J. ROBERTS,
at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1722.

THIS ACCOUNT OF Inoculating the Smallpox, Is most humbly Inscribed TO THEIR
ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE Prince and Princess OF WALES,

By Their ROYAL HIGHNESSES Most faithful, and most obedient, humble Servant,
Charles Maitland.

Advertisement.
THIS short Account of Inoculating the Smallpox, bating the later Cases
annexed, was ready for the Press some four Months since, and would then have
been Published, had not their Royal Highnesses (at whose Command the Operation
at Newgate was performed) been all this while generously intending further to
oblige the Public, by encouraging and promoting other Trials of that kind,
both upon Parish Children and grown Persons. But these, for certain Reasons
having hitherto been obstructed, if yet they shall be brought to bear, Care
will be taken in due Time to give the World a true and faithful Relation of
them; or failing them, of any other observable Cases in this Practice.

It has also been thought fit, for a further Confirmation of the Truth, to
subjoin some Certificates from the Country, under the Hands of the Persons
immediately concerned: Those Trials not having been made, as the others here
related were, in the Presence of any one or more of the London Physicians.

Feb. 13. 1721-2.
Mr. Maitland's ACCOUNT Of INOCULATING the SMALL POX.
HAVING understood, since my Retirement into the Country, that the late
Experiment of Inoculating the Smallpox at Newgate, has been pretty much talked
of; and finding withal, that the Reports of that Matter are various, and
oftentimes contradictory: I thought it became me, to give the Public a plain
and honest Account of the Truth of Facts; both to prevent, if possible, any
one's being imposed upon, as to the Trials already made; or seared from the
Practice of it for the future.

It Is not here my Design to offer an Essay on the Theory of the Smallpox; or
to attempt the best Methods of Cure: I leave that to the learned Gentlemen of
the Profession; who, I do not question, notwithstanding all their best
Discoveries and Observations hitherto made, will certainly agree with me, That
it is a Distemper of the most fatal and destructive kind; and that, far from
being possessed of any infallible Method or Remedy, they will own, it is many
Times too too hard for them, and very often baffles the most celebrated Skill.

They cannot then be offended, (I am sure the better and more candid Part of
the Faculty will not) if, out of a single View of doing good, I here publish to
the World a certain Method of Relieving Mankind, and rescuing them from the
Fears and fatal Effects of that very loathsome and malignant Disease.

The Method I here propose, is no other than that very plain one of raising the
Small Pox by Inoculation. A Method, new indeed, and utterly unknown here, till
of late, though universally practiced with Success all over Turkey these
threescore Years past; and in other Parts of the East, an hundred, or, for
ought we know, some hundreds of Years before. The Practice having thus obtained
amongst an illiterate Sort of People, what I here offer to recommend it, shall
be delivered in the plainest Manner, and suited to the meanest Capacity,
without the labored Embellishments of Learning or Eloquence: And indeed, one
would think, these should not be here wanted, to reconcile to this very safe
and useful Method, even Persons or a higher Rank, and more delicate Taste;
especially since they, of all Sorts of People, generally speaking, suffer the
most; witness the Havoc made in great Families, not many Months since, by that
Mighty Disease, which seemed then to go forth like a destroying Angel, subduing
all before it, and contemning all human Means used to stop its Career.

It may therefore be hoped, that This Practice should meet with a kind
Reception even by them, who, of all others, are most terribly fearful of the
prodigious Loathsomeness of the Distemper, and of the ugly and monstrous
Effects it leaves, both on them, and their Children: Yet being apprehensive,
that Sloth and Laziness, illplaced Affection and Tenderness, and it may be,
some worse Dispositions too, which I am not willing to suggest, may possibly
stifle this safe and useful Method in its Birth; I shall here take a little
Pains to obviate the Scruples and Objections, which are commonly raised against
it. And in Order to this, shall, first of all, give a Short and Historical
Account of what I have seen and practiced, both in Turkey and at London.

In the Year 1717, when I had the Honor to attend the English Ambassador and
his Family at Constantinople, I had a fair Opportunity fully to inform my self
of what I had long before heard, namely, the famous Practice of Transplanting,
or raising the Small Pox by Inoculation.

My Enquiry chiefly turned upon two or three Particulars, which, I thought,
could I be well satisfied in, would go a great way toward convincing me of the
mighty Advantages and Safety of the Method, and resolving my greatest Scruples
and Difficulties against it.

Having heard that this contagious Disease, which for many Centuries of Years
has proved such a terrible Scourge to Mankind, had its first Rise in Egypt,
Arabia, and other Parts of the East, I thought it proper to enquire, First,
Whether it continues still to rage in the Turkish Dominions in that violent
Manner it was anciently observed to do; and as at times, it is known to attack
us here, and most other Parts of Europe: For should it be found to be always of
a milder and more temperate Sort than ours, why should that People take so very
strange and uncommon a Way to avoid it? I quickly found the Case to be quite
otherwise, being assured, besides what I saw with my Eyes; that the Small Pox
is rather more Malignant and Epidemic there, than with us; insomuch that, as
some have affirmed, one half, or at least one third Part of the Diseased, at
certain Times, do die of it; and they that escape, are terribly disfigured by
it Vid., D. Timoni and Pylarini Epist.
.

Again, I enquired what were the Symptoms which attend, this new and strange
Operation? And whether the Issue is always known to be salutary? The Disorder
both before and after the Eruption was so very slight and gentle, that, in
Strictness of Speech, it could not be called a Disease, having none of the
usual Complaints of Pain in the Back, Vomitings, Head-achs, Thirst, Inquietude,
and the like, the Pulse being only somewhat fuller and higher than before; yet
so far from a Fever, that it scarce deserves the Name of a Febricula, bating
some singular Instances, which are so rare, that they are not One to a
Thousand. And last of all, which I thought not a little material, The Pustules,
whether many or few, (and they commonly were from 10 to an 100, sometimes more)
never left any Marks or Pits behind them, except only in the Incisions, or
Parts Ingrafted.

But still I had one Difficulty left, which I took to be the most considerable;
and which, if not fully cleared, would render, in my Opinion, the whole of the
Process but trifling and precarious: And that is, whether every one who has
undergone this Operation, is really secured against all future Danger of
catching the Small Pox by Infection? Were I but well assured of this, I should
then, I thought, be at Liberty to practice it my self, and likewise with
Confidence recommend it to others. All my Enquiries here were fully answered
beyond Expression: For I was assured by all, and they could have no Design to
impose upon me, that there was not an Instance known of any one's being ever
infected, who had had any Pustules at all, how few so ever raised by
Inoculation; though for a further Trial, several had been once and again
Ingrafted; and others also had been confined to the Room, and in the same Bed
too with the Infected. This I rejoiced to hear, and from thence concluded the
Practice to be universally safe and useful. And indeed wondered not a little,
that, notwithstanding the Authentic Accounts thereof more than once transmitted
into England, there had never been hitherto any fair and full Trial made of it.

Hence also I could not forbear admiring the very great Sagacity of the Men who
first invented this Method; and the laudable and diligent Observation of them
too, who so carefully practiced it themselves, and so faithfully conveyed it to
their Neighbors: They all indeed were sensible of the Benefit, and found their
Account in it.

About this Time, the Ambassador's ingenious Lady, who had been at some Pains
to satisfy her Curiosity in this Matter, and had made some useful Observations
on the Practice, was so thoroughly convinced of the Safety of it, that She
resolved to submit her only Son to it, a very hopeful Boy of about Six Years of
Age: She first of all ordered me to find out a fit Subject to take the Matter
from; and then sent for an old Greek Woman, who had practiced this Way a great
many Years: After a good deal of Trouble and Pains, I found a proper Subject,
and then the good Woman went to work; but so awkwardly by the shaking of her
Hand, and put the Child to so much Torture with her blunt and rusty Needle,
that I pitied his Cries, who had ever been of such Spirit and Courage, that
hardly any Thing of Pain could make him cry before; and therefore Inoculated
the other Arm with my own Instrument, and with so little Pain to him, that he
did not in the least complain of it. The Operation took in both Arms, and
succeeded perfectly well. After the third Day, bright red Spots appeared in his
Face, then disappeared; and thus interchangeably (as it commonly happens) till
in the Night betwixt the Seventh and Eighth Day, he was observed to be a little
hot and thirsty, yet remained so but a few Hours; and then the Small Pox came
out fair: They became round and yellow, like those of the more gentle distinct
kind; and the Red Spots which appeared first, were the fullest and largest of
all: They began to crust a few Days after, and then gently died away; so that
the young Gentleman was quickly in a Condition to go Abroad with Safety. He had
above an hundred in all upon his Body; but without any the least Disorder but
what I have mentioned: And they all fell off, without leaving any one Mark or
Impression behind them. This Operation was performed at Pera near
Constantinople, in the Month of March 1717.

The Honorable Lady abovementioned, who had been happily delivered of a
Daughter some three Months before, seeing the great Success of the Operation
upon her Son, had a Mind to have it tried also upon the Infant: But this, for
certain Reasons, was then laid aside, and I hope very luckily, being reserved
to set the First and Great Example to England, of the perfect Safety of this
Practice, and especially to Persons of the First Rank and Quality, who have
ever suffered so much by that fatal Distemper.

This Noble Lady sent for me last April, and when I came, she told me, she was
now resolved to have her Daughter Inoculated, and desired me forthwith to find
out Matter for the Purpose. I pleaded for a Delay of a Week or two, the Weather
being then cold and wet; for indeed, I was unwilling to venture on an
Experiment altogether new and uncommon here, in a cold Season; though I am now
convinced it may, with due Care, be practiced at all Times and Seasons, but
still with more Safety in the temperate and favorable. I also prayed, that any
two Physicians, whom they thought fit, might be called, not only to consult the
Health and Safety of the Child, but likewise to be Eyewitnesses of the
Practice, and contribute to the Credit and Reputation of it. This indeed was at
first denied me, it may be, out of a Design to keep it secret, or least it
should come to nothing.

In the mean time having found proper Matter, I ingrafted it in both Arms,
after the usual Manner; the Child was neither blooded nor purged before, nor
indeed was it necessary, considering the clean Habit of Body, and the very
cool, regular Diet she had ever been kept to from her Infancy. She continued
easy and well, without any sensible Alteration, bateing the usual little Spots
and Flushings, till the tenth Night, when she was observed to be a little hot
and Feverish. An ancient Apothecary in the Neighborhood being then called,
prudently advised not to give the Child any Medicine, assuring them there was
no Danger, and that the Heat would quickly abate, which accordingly it did; and
the Small Pox began next Morning to appear, which was indeed some two Days
later than usual, by reason of the uncommon Discharge of Matter at the
Incisions from the Beginning. Three learned Physicians of the College were
admitted, one after another, to visit the young Lady; they are all Gentlemen of
Honor, and will on all Occasions declare, as they have hitherto done, that
they saw Miss Wortley playing about the Room, cheerful and well, with the Small
Pox raised upon her; and that in a few Days after she perfectly recovered of
them. Several Ladies, and other Persons of Distinction, visited also this young
Patient, and can attest the Truth of this Fact. I need not here be more
particular in determining the several Periods of this Cafe, they being the very
same with that abovementioned; except only that here the Pustules were not so
many, nor did they ripen so soon; which may be easily accounted for, without
having Regard to the Difference of Climates, for there is little or nothing in
that, seeing the Circassians, and others inhabiting the Banks of the Caspian
Sea, a Climate much colder and more difficult than ours, practice it with
Safety.

Another Instance I shall give for the further Confirmation of this Practice;
namely, one of the learned Physicians abovementioned, who had visited Miss
Wortley, having some Years since fully informed himself of this Method of
Practice, and being thoroughly satisfied of the Safety and Reasonableness of
it, at length resolved to try it in his own Family: He had formerly lost some
Children in a very malignant kind of the Small Pox, and therefore desired me to
lose no Time to ingraft the only Son he had left. The Boy (who was not quite
Six Years of Age) being of a pretty warm and sanguine Complexion, the Doctor
ordered about five Ounces of Blood to be taken from him; and then, in ten Days
after, having found Matter which he liked, I inoculated him in both Arms. This
was performed the 11 th of May; next Day having looked at the Incisions, I
found them both inflamed, which convinced me the Thing had taken. Some Red
Spots appeared about his Temples the third Day; and some two or three Pustules
between the seventh and eighth; the Boy being all the while without any Thing
of Thirst, Headache, or any other Disorder, only his Pulse was observed to be
fuller and quicker; and then about the 10 th or 11 th, some more Pustules
appeared round and yellow; and in two or three Days more died away: The
Incisions continuing all the while inflamed, and discharging a thick
well-digested Matter.

Here I could bring a great many Cases of Persons inoculated in Turkey, to prove
the constant and certain Success of this Practice; in all which I have never
seen any Miscarriage, except in One, which was wholly owing to the Rashness and
Inadvertence of a Surgeon at Constantinople. I would not here be thought to
pretend to a Secret, or to make a Mystery of this Operation; no, my Design is,
only to advise every one that attempts it to be cautious: For ill Consequences
may sometimes happen, and never more than in Things common and easy, and
adapted to vulgar Capacities. In it self indeed it is simple and obvious, and
may, like other plain Chirurgical Operations, be in a manner Mechanically
learned and practiced: For, not to mention several Surgeons, whose Business it
is; I knew an old Greek Woman, who, having been taught it from her Youth, had
practiced it with Success a great many Years.

Hence, if any Regard be due to Facts, and to the most certain Observation and
Experience of others; which, in Matters of Practice, have ever been counted the
best and surest Direction; I am persuaded, all impartial People will allow this
Method to be not only safe, but useful; and highly worthy to be received with
Esteem and Applause. Is it not a Matter of the greatest Importance to us, to
know how to prevent the mighty Contagion of the Small Pox; and how to preserve
our Children and Families from the violent Attacks, and fatal Effects of it?
What would not tender Parents give to secure to them the Lives and Features of
their beloved Offspring; when they behold them disfigured by the loathsome
Disease, and struggling with the Pangs of Death? Do not we oftentimes see great
Families extinguished by it, as by the Plague, and their Titles and Estates
thereby transmitted to Strangers? And if they have the good Fortune to escape
with their Lives, what an ugly Change from what they were before? What
Pittings, Seams, and Scars in their Faces? What Films and Fistula's, and
sometimes Blindness in their Eyes? What Ulcers and Imposthumes in their Bodies;
Contractions of the Nerves, and even Lameness for Life? Again, to avoid the
Infection, what Uneasiness and Disquiet of Mind, what Fears and Apprehensions
do not even grown People labor under, especially the more delicate and tender?
Don't they renounce all Commerce with their best Friends and dearest Relations?
And if by chance they meet an Object that has but lately recovered, how
susceptible then are they of the Distemper? And how few thus seized do ever
escape?

In short then, to prevent all these, and many the like Calamities, the almost
universal and inevitable Consequences of this fatal Disease; I may truly
venture to affirm, that the Method here recommended is, of all others hitherto
known, the safest; and I am sure far more infallible, than that of the most
learned and most cautious Practice.

I have, however, in Conversation, met with several Scruples and Objections
against this Method; some whereof relate to the manner of the Operation; which,
I hope, by the Account already given, are in some measure satisfied: Some again
concern the Lawfulness of it; and others would even seem to question the Fact,
denying that the Small Pox are hereby raised; or that the Eruptions ought to be
deemed of that kind; since they are not preceded by a Fever, nor attended with
the usual Periods of the Distemper.

They that scruple the Lawfulness of this Practice, are apt to call it, a
Presumption, a forcing of Nature, a tempting of Providence, and the like. True
indeed, were the Operation in it self dangerous; and the Issue generally
doubtful, as several, both in Physic and Surgery sometimes are, yet neither
presumptuous nor unlawful for all that; I should be ready to own the Charge,
and yield it at once to the tenderhearted and the scrupulous: But pray, what
are they afraid of? Is there any Thing here frightful, or shocking to the
nicest and the most delicate? The Practice is most plain, rational, and easy,
intended only to prevent the malignant Infection, and to preserve Life: not to
give a Disease, and in this Sense, to force Nature before its Time; but in
effect, to cleanse Nature from the latent Fomes or Seminium; and to secure
against that popular Contagion. We have heard, and indeed it were much to be
wished we had any that truly deserve the Name, of Preservatives against the
Plague; And why may not This, which has elsewhere been so universally tried and
approved, pass for One against the Small Pox?

But again, what do they mean by tempting of Providence? Can they imagine, that
using the fair and proper Means of avoiding and preventing a Disease, is
oftensive to Providence? Why then do they Bleed, Vomit, or Purge, or use any
other Remedy, to prevent a Fever? And why don't they trust that Providence,
rather than dare to abandon their Families, and desert the Distressed, to flee
from this or any other Disease? Nay, so far am I from counting this Method
tempting to Providence, that I rather esteem it a Motive of Thankfulness to the
divine Providence, and a great one too, for, the Discovery.

As to the Objection against the Fact, denying the Small Pox to be hereby
raised: Did the Eruptions come the natural and common way, I acknowledge it to
be highly reasonable: For the only way we have to distinguish between the
genuine Small Pox of the several kinds, and the spurious, or what they call the
Chicken Pox, is not only by observing the Nature and Periods of the Pustules,
but also by the first Invasion, and subsequent Progress of the Fever, and of
the usual Symptoms attending it. The known Periods of the Small Pox are
different, according to their different kinds; and this Difference arises, not
only from the various Dispositions of the Juices and Habits of the Bodies
affected; but likewise from the different Degrees and Qualities of the External
Infection, howsoever communicated, as it is more or less subtle, malignant and
epidemic.

Now in those raised by Inoculation, the Periods, though a little different from
the common and natural, are, in their kind, as certain and regular as the
other: A Difference indeed is observed of sometimes two or three Days, as to
the Time of Eruption; but that is no more than what is common in the natural
Sort. And thus too, it is with Respect to the other Stages of the Disease: I
mean those of the Invasion, Maturation, and Declination; they are equal and
regular, and what is more, the Process is certain, and the Prognostic
infallible.

But the principal and most material Difference of all lies in the Fever, which
here is so gentle, that it hardly deserves the Name; but in the natural, and
especially the confluent kind, it is always violent, and often the immediate
Cause of Death.

Were it not altogether foreign to my Design, and inconsistent with the Brevity
I here propose, I could easily demonstrate the Cause of this Difference; and
make it appear, that the small Quantity of the Matter inserted into the
Capillary Vessels of the Skin, is not capable of altering or dissolving the
Mass of Blood, as it happens in the Case of Infection; nor of raising an
Ebullition sufficient to produce a Fever, and the dangerous Symptoms which
always follow upon it: And yet it is certain, notwithstanding all this, that
the Matter thus inserted does produce Eruptions of the right Small Pox kind,
with good digested Matter, as hereafter described; and without any Thing of the
Danger and Loathsomeness, ever inseparable from the other.

That it is the right and genuine kind, may be further proved beyond all
Exception, by a few plain Instances here subjoined; by which it will appear,
that the Small Pox thus raised by Inoculation, is truly infectious and
catching; and that several Adult Persons, who never before had them, have been
actually seized, by means of kissing and caressing a Child, not quite three
Years of Age, while the Eruptions thus raised were upon it. What stronger Proof
can reasonably be desired of the genuine Small Pox? And what need is there of
more Words or Arguments to convince any one, that will not be persuaded by
Facts?

I am hastening to give you an Account of those Facts, and do assure you, it
shall be an honest and a true one. But before I come to it, I would briefly
take notice of a Question or two, which a learned Physician, one Day asked me,
on the Subject. As first, Whether I was always sure, thus to give the Small
Pox? And then, whether, when given, I could engage the Patient should never
take them again by Infection?

To the first, I answered, the Operation had never yet failed me, or any one
else, that I know of; nor do I believe, it ever can, when duly performed, but
upon Persons who have had them before: For I very much question, what some have
affirmed, namely, That there are People in the World, who are not susceptible
of the Disease. In the mean time, I had a Mind, with great Submission, to have
asked the Doctor a plain Question in Answer to his; and that is, Whether, when
he prescribes a Purge or a Vomit, he is always sure, it will answer his
Intention? For I have often heard, that Vomits have sometimes proved Purges;
and Purges, Vomits too; and, which is worse, that People have had the
Misfortune to die under both Operations; which has never yet happened, in the
Case of Ingrafting.

As to the Doctor's second Question, I have said somewhat already; and now can
add further, that besides the frequent Experiments which have been made in
Turkey; as, of Inoculating the fame Person a second and a third Time, and the
like; I my self have lately made open and repeated Trials, on one of the Six
Inoculated Criminals of Newgate, reserved for that purpose, sufficient to
convince any one, that there is no Danger of their Catching the Disease by any
future Infection. This is, One See the Journal annexed.
Elizabeth Harrison, of about nineteen Years of Age. Here I must observe to
you, that this Girl, had the fewest Eruptions upon her, of any of the five,
that were Inoculated at Newgate, but had a more than Ordinary Discharge at the
Incisions.

I first employed her as Nurse to a Servant Maid, very ill and full of the
continued-distinct Kind of the Small Pox, in the House of Mrs. Moss, in
Christ's Hospital Buildings at Hertford, whom she attended during the whole
Course of the Disease. This Maid had hardly recovered, when one of the Boys,
about ten Years Old, of the said Hospital, was also seized with the very same
Sort; I obliged her to lie every Night in the same Bed with this Boy, and to
attend him constantly from the first Beginning of the Distemper to the very
End: And thus she continued for Six Weeks together, without Intermission, or
feeling any the least Headache or other Disorder; though, indeed, I once saw some
Heats and little Pimples upon her, as Nurses commonly have under such
Confinements. There Is no Ground to question this Fact, being attested by a
Cloud of Witnesses.

For a further Confirmation of what I have said, I once intended to have here
subjoined D. Timoni and Pylarini's Letters, published in the Philosophical
Transactions, No. 339 and 347. But being unwilling to enlarge this Account
beyond its just Bounds, I must leave them to another Opportunity, and withal
take the Liberty to refer the Reader to them.

A Journal of the Experiment at Newgate.

London August 9. 1721.

IN Obedience to their Royal Highnesses Commands, I performed the Operation of
Inoculating the Small Pox, on Six condemated Criminals at Newgate; in Presence
of several eminent Physicians, Surgeons, and other.

The Names of the Criminals are, 1. Mary North Aged 36 Years. 2. Anne Tompion
Aged 25 Years. 3. Elizabeth Harrison Aged 19 Years. 4. John Cawthery Aged 25
Years. 5. John Alcock Aged 20 Years. 6. Richard Evans Aged 19 Years.


August 9. 1721. Being Wednesday, betwixt the Hours of 9 and 10 in the Morning,
I made Incisions in both Arms and the right Leg of all the Six.

10 and 11. Thursday and Friday, I find little or no Alteration in any of them,
except Mary North, who sometimes was troubled with Vapors, as usual to her:
They all sleep well, dress, and walk about all day, and are hungry for their
Food: Their Pulse a little raised, but without any sensible Disorder.

12. Saturday, In the Morning; observing the Incisions not so much inflamed,
and tending to Suppuration as usual; and thence suspecting the Matter ingrafted
to have been defective and languid, having been kept at least 15 or 16 Hours,
for a very good, but unavoidable Reason; I searched for fresh Matter, and
having found it in. Christ's Hospital, about 6 a Clock at Night I made new
Incisions in each Arm of five of them, and ingrafted it as before. I had no
Matter left for the sixth, Evans.

13. Sunday Morning, these five complain all of Pain in both Arms: Having taken
off the Dressings, I find all the first Incisions inflamed and fester'd, but
without any Sickness in the Patients; their Pulse sensibly higher, and their
Water turbid.

14. Monday Morning, red Spots and Flushings appear on all the five; but most
of all on Mary North, especially about her Face, Neck, and Breast: And so
likewise on Ann Tompion: But without any Sickness, Headache, or Thirst; except
a little they complained of in the Night; and a higher Pulse.

15. Tuesday, The same Spots and Flushings appear fresh in the Morning; but
turn paler and darker toward Night, yet without any Disorder.

It is here to be observed, That the sixth, viz. Richard Evans, who had had the
Small Pox in Prison last September, has had no manner of Pain, Heat, or
Inflammation in any of his Incisions, nor any manner of Alteration otherwise:
But all continuing pale from the Beginning, yesterday dried up entirely.

16. Wednesday, They all continue much as before, only their Incisions begin to
discharge a thick, purulent Matter. Anne Tompion has a large yellow Pustule on
the bending of her Thigh, and another on the outside of her right, Arm, like
Small Pox: And John Alcock has more fresh Pustules appearing on his Face and
Arms; having had a slight Febricula in the Night, with disturbed Water. And
John Cawthery has a large yellow Pustule on his left Cheek, and several small
ones on his Face.

17. Thursday, The said Alcock has these Pustules appearing now fairly, with a
yellow digested Matter, and red Bottoms, and a great many of them, but without
Sickness. Ann Tompion has the same yellow Pustules on her right Arm and Thigh,
with other fresh ones struck out about her Chin and Mouth.

18. Friday, Alcock's Small Pox appear still fair and yellow, but fuller and
larger, with a bright red round them. All the others much the same, with their
Incisions running.

19. Saturday, Last Night, this Alcock unaccountably pricks and opens all the
Pustules he could come at with a Pin; which occasions them to fall and crust
sooner: But they continue red at Bottom; and the Incisions in him abate of
their Running.

It is here to be noted, that though he has had by much the greatest Number of
Pustules or Small Pox upon him, yet the second Time he was touched in one Arm
only, there not being Matter enough for the other Arm; whereas the other four
had both Arms ingrafted, and Matter in Abundance.

20 and 21. Sunday and Monday, All of them continue as before: The Incisions on
the other four, run still a thick, digested, yellow Pus.

Here I must observe, that the second Incisions in both Arms, by which a vast
Discharge has been made, seem to me, in the Issue, to have been rather a
Prejudice and Impediment to the Eruption, than to have, in any Sort,
contributed toward it: But however, I believe them to be, in all Respects, as
safe from any future Infection as Alcock, who had 60 Small Pox, at least upon
him.

22 and 23. Tuesday and Wednesday, All of them continue well; and their
Incisions cease running, and dry up apace.

24. Thursday, I purged Alcock and Cawthery for the first Time; and did design
also to purge the three Women; but was prevented by their. Monthly Purgations,
which, I was not a little surpised to hear, seized them all about the same
Time; though some of them had been obstructed several Months before.

28. Monday, Mary North, before she was quite free, unaccountably washed in
cold Water, and thence caught a violent Colic, which lasted near two Days.

30. Wednesday, They all three take a purging Potion, which answers the
Intention, and perfectly carries off Mary North's Colic Pains.

31. The two Men are again purged, in Order to their being discharged: And so
likewise, next Day, are the Women.

And on the Sixth of September, they were all dismissed to their several
Counties and Habitations.

To conclude, The Thing has been successful on all the Five, far beyond my
Expectation, considering their Age, Habit of Body, and Circumstances; and it
has perfectly answered Doctor Timoni's Account of this Practice, and also the
Experience of all who have seen it in Turkey.

I cannot here forbear mentioning the very ample Testimony, which Mr. Cook, an
eminent Turkey Merchant, one Day gave to this Experiment, in my Hearing at
Newgate; After having seen the Persons ingrafted, and fully considered their
Incisions and Eruptions; He openly declared, they were the very same with what
he had ever observed in Turkey, of which he had seen a great many Instances: And
that we might be assured, none of these here would ever be infected with the
Small Pox again.

And it is particularly remarkable in this whole Affair, that though there was
not the least encouraging or favorable Circumstance attending it before the
Operation; yet after it, nothing in any sort dangerous or unsuccessful did
happen: Although no Art, nor stimulating Medicine, was made Use of to promote
the Eruptions; not so much as to oblige the Patients to keep their Bed; the
whole having been left to Nature, assisted by a strict and regular Diet.

October 2. 1721. After due Preparation of the Body, I ingrafted Mary Batt, an
Infant of two Years and an half old; Daughter of Thomas Batt, a Quaker, living
at Temple, within three Miles of Hertford: The red Spots and Flushings appeared
on her Face and Neck the fourth Day; and she kept playing about well till the
seventh or eighth, when she became a little heavy and thirsty, with a fuller
and quicker Pulse; then the Pustules came out fresh and full, and the Incisions
discharged a thick welldigested Matter. She had not above 20 in all upon her;
they continued about three or four Days, then dried away and fell off, and the
Child recovered perfectly.

Thus far all was well; but what happened afterward was, I must own, not a
little surprising to me, not having seen or observed any Thing like it before.
The Case was in short this; Six of Mr. Batt's Domestic Servants, viz. four Men
and two Maids, who all, in their Turns, were wont to hug and caress this Child
whilst under the Operation, and the Pustules were out upon her, never
suspecting them to be catching, nor indeed did I, were all feiz'd at once with
the right natural Small Pox, of several and very different kinds; for some had
the round distinct Sort, some the small continued, and others the confluent;
all of 'em had a great many, but especially the last, with the usual bad
Symptoms, and very narrowly escaped: But they all (God be thanked) did well,
(except one Maid, that would not be governed under the Distemper, who died of
it) and now enjoy a perfect State of Health See the Certificates annexed, page
34.
.

October 12. 1721. I Inoculated Joseph and Benjamin, Sons of William Heath of
Hertford; the first of about seven, and the second of three Years of Age; both
with the same Matter, and at the same Time: the last had a very gentle and
favorable kind, in all Respects like the abovenamed Mary Batt; but the first,
viz. Joseph, being a fat, foul, gluttonous Boy, who would not be confined to
the Rules and Directions I had strictly charged his Mother withal, as to Diet
and keeping warm; was taken very ill before the Eruption, and after it had a
great Load of the continued small kind, but at last recovered and did well.

What a mighty Difference is here to be observed between those two Boys! the
Reason of it seems to be plainly this; The younger, who had the favorable
kind, was of a clean Habit, moderate Appetite, and easily governed during the
whole Process. The elder was not only, as I have said, of a gross, foul
Constitution, but likewise had a voracious Appetite, always eating and filling
his Belly with the coarsest Food; as Cheese, fat Country Pudding, cold boiled
Beef, and the like; which I saw my self as I came in by chance, the third Day
after the Operation; nor was there any Care taken to restrain or keep him
within in cold, windy, frosty Weather; he once wet his Feet in the Water;
insomuch that had he taken the Small Pox by Infection, the World could not have
saved his Life. Hence it appears how necessary it is to cleanse thoroughly
those foul Habits before the Operation; and withal to keep them to a very
strict Regimen under it.

It Is also here very remarkable, further to evince the Power of Infection, and
the Genuineness of the Inoculated Small Pox; that an Infant of about four
Months old, then on Mrs. Heath's Breast, while she nursed her two Sons, and lay
in Bed with them, was also seized with the distinct natural Kind; and in due
Time perfectly recovered. Mrs. Heath also, by being Night and Day constantly
with her Children, and always embracing and caressing of 'em, though she had had
the Small Pox many Years before, struck out in several Pimples or Pustules on
her Face and Hands, but without any Thing of Sickness or Disorder: which, we
know, has often happened to Nurses, by attending People in this Distemper; and
even by washing their Linen.

Not many Days after this, I met Mr. Hughes, Judge Advocate General of his
Majesty's Forces, who requested me, upon my Return to Hertford, to visit his
two Children at his House in Herting for dbury, which I promised to do; and
found, when I came there, his Son, a Child of about 18 Months old, actually ill
of the Small Pox; I immediately acquainted Mr. Hughes, with this, and withal
removed the Daughter, who was about three Years of Age, to a neighboring
Gentleman's House. Mr. Hughes then recommended to me the particular Care of his
Son, and prayed me, if the Small Pox should prove of the favorable Kind, not
to fail to inoculate his Daughter from him. The Boy had indeed the fair
distinct Kind, and not a great many, and recovered perfectly of them; but
afterward died of a cancerous Tumor, which had been breeding in his Cheek and
upper Jaw, long before his Seizure with the Small Pox. But to return, I took
Matter from him, at the proper Time, and with it Inoculated his Sister,
November 17th, having first gently purged her. The Thing took; she sicken'd,
the 24 th, and two Days after the Small Pox appeared fair, and continued to
fill and ripen to December the 3 d, then crusted and gradually fell off in the
usual Manner.

This Young Patient had above two Thousand Pustules or Small Pox upon her, that
came out well, filled up, ripened and fell off, observing the most regular
Periods of the natural Small Pox of the distinct Kind; yet she did not keep her
Bed one Day, nor wanted a Nurse to watch with her one Night during the whole
Process; never having been affected with the usual Complaints and Symptoms of
the Natural Small Pox; nor in the least pitted or scared with them.

I thought it proper to be the more particular in relating this Case, because
of the very false Account which had been given of it in the Post Man of
December 2, which, in my Absence, the Gentleman himself was pleased to
contradict in the St. James's Evening Post, December 7 th.

December 17. I Inoculated two of Mr. John Colt's Children, at his House in
Clement's Lane, Lombard Street: The one a Boy of 7, the other a Girl of about 4
Years of Age; their Bodies having first been duly prepared by a Physician's
Order. They both sicken'd the 24 th, the Small Pox appeared on the Girl the 26
th, and on the Boy the 27 th; they came out gently, filled and ripened to the 3
d and 4 th of January; and then died away as usual. Those Children had at least
300 Small Pox each, all fair and round; but the Boy had rather more: His came
out later, and kept out longer too than his Sister's; which can only be
accounted for (the Ingrafted Matter having been the same, and in the same
Quantity) by the Difference of their Habits and Juices. In the mean Time,
neither of 'em from the Beginning could be said to be downright ill; nor was
obliged to lie in Bed; nor, in a Word, was affected with any of the dangerous
or bad Symptoms ordinarily attending that Disease, or consequential to it.

They being perfectly recovered; Saturday January 13 th, I performed the
Operation upon a third Child of the said Mr. Colt; a Boy of about 6 Years of
Age, who was also designed to have undergone it with the other two the Month
before, had it not been that he was then out of Order; he continued cheerful
and well till the 20 th, when he became ill and feverish; then the Small Pox
appeared the 22 d, and three Days after, the Eruption being quite over, they
grew fair, round, full and yellow; like the natural Small Pox of the distinct
Kind, and thus went on to the 29 th or 30 th, when they began to crust and fall
off after the usual Manner. This Child had a great many upon him, like the
abovenamed Miss Hughes; and is also perfectly well recovered of them: He was
visited, while under them (as indeed were the other two) by several eminent
Physicians, and other Persons of Distinction about the Town, who all unamiously
agreed that it was the right Small Pox, and declared themselves fully satisfied
with the Trial.

I do not here take notice of the little Heats and Flushings, which appeared
upon them in the Beginning; nor of the other more minute Circumstances
generally common to all; nor of the proper Evacuations prescribed before and
after; that I may avoid tedious Repetitions, as much as I am able. But I would
beg leave to add one Observation, the Reason of which is plain and obvious,
namely, that the greater the Discharge of Matter at the Incisions is, the fewer
commonly are the Eruptions; and on the contrary. Hence also the great Advantage
of Issues in This, and other cuticular Diseases, may with great Probability be
evinced and demonstrated.

But to conclude: From these few Instances, which I have here contracted into
the narrowest Compass, several very obvious and useful Observations might be
made, and unquestionable Proofs brought, to show, in the most Satisfactory
Manner, that the Small Pox thus raised are of the true and genuine Kind; that
they may be always given and communicated to proper Subjects, young or old,
without any Danger of a Relapse; and finally, that this whole Practice,
prudently managed, is always Safe and Useful, and the Issue ever Certain and
Salutary.

The Certificates from Hertfordshire.
THESE are to certify, That Elizabeth Harrison, one of the Five Persons
Inoculated at Newgate, has lived at our House in Christ's Hospital Buildings
at Hertford for above Ten Weeks, and has during that Time attended our Servant
Maid, and after her one of the Boys belonging to the said Hospital, both in the
natural Small Pox, and lay with the said Boy from the Beginning to the End of
that Distemper, without Sickness or receiving the least Infection from them.

As witness our Hands this 4th Day of December 1721. Signed thus, Pris. Moss,
the Mother. Sarah Moss, Daughter.

Signed in the Presence of us,

Robert Biscoe. Christopher Sharp.




THESE are to certify, That Mr. Charles Maitland, Surgeon, did about the
Beginning of October last, Inoculate the Small Pox upon my Daughter Mary, aged
two Years and an Half, who had but a few of them, and perfectly recovered in
about Fifteen Days. I do declare that six of my Domestic Servants were seized
with the Small Pox, which I believe was owing to their carrying about and
frequently conversing with my said Daughter, they having had no Correspondence
during that Time, with any Person or Family who had them, which inclines me to
think my Child had the true Small Pox:

As witness my Hand this 7 th Day of December 1721. Signed thus, Ann Batt.
Signed in the Presence of us, by our Mistress; and we likewise know the
Contents to be true:

Thomas Stimson his Mark. John Hutchins his Mark. Two Servants who received the
Small Pox from the Child. Witness. L. Oaks of Hertingforbury.




THESE are to certify, That upon the 12th Day of October last, Mr. Maitland,
Surgeon, Inoculated the Small Pox into my two Sons, Joseph and Benjamin Heath,
at Hertford, who are both perfectly recovered of that Distemper, which proved a
true Small Pox; and these are likewise to testify, that I had a little Boy
about four Months old, sucking at my Breast, while I attended my Inoculated
Children, who was seized with a vomiting fit, etc. and continued ill for some
Days, after which the Small Pox appeared fairly upon him; and is likewise
recovered:

As witness my Hand this 4 th Day of December 1721. Signed Eliz. Heath.
Signed in the Presence of us,

Not. Stratton. William Anderson. Thomas Stratton. The Mark N of Nurse Warner,
who attended the said Children.




FINIS.

