LONDON: OR, THE PROGRESS OF COMMERCE. A POEM. By Mr. GLOVER. THE SECOND
EDITION.

LONDON; Printed for T. COOPER, at the Globe, in Paternoster-Row. MDCCXXXIX.
(Price One Shilling.)

The ARGUMENT.
The following poem represents Commerce as the child of Neptune, and born on
the coast of Libya in an island, celebrated in fabulous antiquity for its
fruitfulness and plenty during the first uncultivated ages, whence the new
divinity is supposed to convey these blessings round the world. Her birth is
attended by many of the Gods, who endow her with their several gifts: among the
rest Apollo appoints her to be the inventress of letters; Sir Isaac Newton's
opinion being here alluded to, that merchandise gave rise to this wonderful
discovery. Commerce is then described as making her first appearance to the
world among the Phoenicians, the earliest people, who exercised an extensive
trade. From thence she proceeds to visit other parts of the globe, and
endeavors to erect her principal empire at Carthage, situated in Libya, the
country assigned for her nativity. Upon the destruction of that city she again
removes from place to place; but at length, allured by the vigor and singular
resolution of the Dutch in throwing off the Spanish yoke, she takes up her
residence with that indefatigable people. Lastly, by the good laws, which have
been made from time to time for the encouragement of trade among us, especially
by the act of navigation, which has transferred a great part of the Dutch
traffic to ourselves, she is supposed on our invitation to choose England for
her chief abode, more particularly London, our principal emporium, as well as
capital city. And upon this occasion an enquiry is made, how it has come to
pass, that, notwithstanding the great wealth and power attending Commerce, the
course of trade should so often have shifted its seat; and the means, conceived
most effectual to fix this wanderer here, are pointed out.

LONDON: OR, The Progress of Commerce.
YE northern blasts, and The east wind.
Eurus, wont to sweep
With rudest pinions over the furrowed waves,
Awhile suspend your violence, and waft
From sandy Bremen is situated on the Weser, and Hamburgh on the Elb.
Weser and the broad-mouth'd Elb
My freighted vessels to the destined shore,
Safe over the unruffled main; let every thought,
Which may disquiet, and alarm my breast,
Be absent now; that, dispossessed of care,
And free from every tumult of the mind,
With each disturbing passion hushed to peace,
I may pour all my spirit on the theme,
Which opens now before me, and demands
The loftiest strain. The eagle, when he towers
Beyond the clouds, the fleecy robes of heaven,
Disdains all objects but the golden sun,
Full on the effulgent orb directs his eye,
And sails exulting through the blaze of day;
So, while her wing attempts the boldest flight,
Rejecting each inferior theme of praise,
Thee, ornament of Europe, Albion's pride,
Fair seat of wealth and freedom, thee my Muse
Shall celebrate, O LONDON: thee she hails,
Thou loved abode of Commerce, last retreat,
Whence she contemplates with a tranquil mind
Her various wanderings from the fated hour,
That she abandoned her maternal clime;
Neptunian Commerce, whom Phoenice bore,
Illustrious nymph, that named the fertile plains,
Along the sounding main extended far,
Which flowery Carmel with its sweets perfumes,
And with its cedars Libanus o'ershades:
Her from the bottom of the watery world,
As once she stood, in radiant beauties graced,
To mark the heaving tide, the piercing eye
Of Neptune viewed enamored: from the deep
The God ascending rushes to the beach,
And clasps the affrighted virgin. From that day
Soon as the paly regent of the night
Nine times her monthly progress had renewed
Through heaven's illumined vault, Phoenice, led
By shame, once more the sea-worn margin sought,
There paced with painful steps the barren sands,
A solitary mourner, and, the surge,
Which gently rolled beside her, now no more
With placid eyes beholding, thus exclaimed.
YE fragrant shrubs, and cedars' lofty shade,
Which crown my native hills, ye spreading palms,
That rise majestic on these fruitful meads,
With you, who gave the lost Phoenice birth,
And you, who bear the endearing name of friends,
Once faithful partners of my chaster hours,
Farewell! To thee, perfidious God, I come,
Bent down with pain and anguish on thy sands,
I come thy suppliant; death is all, I crave;
Bid thy devouring waves inwrap my head;
And to the bottom whelm my cares and shame!
SHE ceased, when sudden from the unclosing deep
A crystal car emerg'd, with glittering shells,
Called from their oozy beds by Tethys' train,
And blushing coral decked, whose ruddy glow
Mixed with the watery luster of the pearl.
A smiling band of sea-born nymphs attend,
Who from the shore with gentle hands convey
The fear-subdu'd Phoenice, and along
The lucid chariot place. As there with dread
All mute, and struggling with her painful throes
She lay, the winds by Neptune's high command
Were silent round her; not a Zephyr dared
To wanton over the cedar's branching top,
Nor on the plain the stately palm was seen
To wave its graceful verdure; over the main
No undulation broke the smooth expanse,
But all was hushed and motionless around,
All but the lightly-sliding car, impelled
Along the level azure by the strength
Of active Tritons, rivalling in speed
The rapid meteor, whose sulphurous train
Glides over the brow of darkness, and appears
The livid ruins of a falling star.
BENEATH the Lybian skies a blissful isle,
By Triton, a river and lake of ancient Lybia.
Triton's floods encircled, Nysa lay.
Here youthful Nature wantoned in delights,
And here the guardians of the bounteous horn,
While it was now the infancy of time,
Nor yet the uncultivated globe had learned
To smile, Fruitfulness.
Eucarpe, Plenty.
Dapsilea dwelt,
With all the nymphs, whose secret care had nursed
The eldest Bacchus. From the flowery shore
A turf-clad valley opens, and along
Its verdure mild the willing feet allures;
While on its sloping sides ascends the pride
Of hoary groves, high-arching over the vale
With day-rejecting gloom. The solemn shade
Half round a spacious lawn at length expands,
This whole description of the rock and grotto is taken from Diod. Siculus,
lib. 3. page 202.
Closed by a towering cliff, whose forehead glows
With azure, purple, and ten thousand dies,
From its resplendent fragments beaming round;
Nor less irradiate colors from beneath
On every side an ample grot reflects,
As down the perforated rock the sun
Pours his meridian blaze; revered abode
Of Nysa's nymphs, with every plant attired,
That wears undying green, refreshed with rills
From ever-living fountains, and enriched
With all Pomona's bloom: unfading flowers
Glow on the mead, and spicy shrubs perfume
With inexhausted sweets the cooling gale,
Which breathes incessant there; while every bird
Of tuneful note his gay or plaintive song
Blends with the warble of meandring streams,
Which over their pebbled channels murmuring lave
The fruit-invested hills, that rise around.
The gentle Nereids to this calm recess
Phoenice bear; nor Dapsilea bland,
Nor good Eucarpe, studious to obey
Great Neptune's will, their hospitable care
Refuse; nor long Lucina is invoked.
Soon as the wondrous infant sprung to day,
Earth rocked around; with all their nodding woods,
And streams reverting to their troubled source,
The mountains shook; while Lybia's neighboring God,
Mysterious Ammon from his hollow cell
With deep-resounding accent thus to heaven,
To earth, and sea the mighty birth proclaimed.
A NEWBORN power behold! whom fate has called
The Gods' imperfect labor to complete,
This wide creation. She in lonely sands
Shall bid the tow'r-encircled city rise,
The barren sea shall people, and the wilds
Of dreary nature shall with plenty cloth;
She shall enlighten man's unlettered race,
And with endearing intercourse unite
Remotest nations, scorched by sultry suns,
Or freezing near the snow-encrusted pole:
Wherever the joyous vine disdains to grow,
The fruitful olive, or the golden ear;
Her hand divine with interposing aid
To every climate shall the gifts supply
Of Ceres, Bacchus, and Minerva, the tutelary Goddess of the Athenians, to whom
she gave the olive.
th'Athenian maid:
The graces, joys, emoluments of life
From her exhaustless bounty all shall flow.
THE heavenly prophet ceased. Olympus heard.
Straight from their star-bespangled thrones descend
On blooming Nysa a celestial band
The ocean's lord to honor in his child;
When over his offspring smiling thus began
The trident-ruler. Commerce be thy name:
To thee I give the empire of the main.
From where the morning breathes its eastern gale,
To the undiscovered limits of the west,
From chilling Boreas to extremest South
Thy sire's obsequious billows shall extend
Thy universal reign. Minerva next
With wisdom blessed her, Mercury with art,
Vulcan, the tutelary deity of Lemnos.
The Lemnian God with industry, and last
Majestic Phoebus, over the infant long
In contemplation pausing, thus declared
From his enraptured lip his matchless boon.
THEE with divine invention I endow,
That secret wonder, goddess, to disclose,
By which the wise, the virtuous, and the brave,
The heav'n-taught poet, and exploring sage
Shall pass recorded to the verge of time.
HER years of childhood now were numbered over,
When to her mother's natal soil repaired
The new divinity, whose parting step
Her sacred nurses followed, ever now
To her alone inseparably joined;
Then first deserting their Nyseian Shore
To spread their hoarded blessings round the world;
Who with them bore the inexhausted horn
Of ever-smiling plenty. Thus adorned,
Attended thus, great Goddess, thou beganst
Thy all-enlivening progress over the globe
Then rude and joyless, destined to repair
The various ills, which earliest ages ru'd
From one, like thee, distinguished by the gifts
Of heaven, Pandora, whose pernicious hand
From the dire vase released the imprisoned woes.
THOU, gracious Commerce, from his cheerless caves
In horrid rocks, and solitary woods,
The helpless wanderer man forlorn and wild
Did charm to sweet society; did cast
The deep foundations, where the future pride
Of mightiest cities rose; and over the main
Before the wondering Nereids did present
The surge-dividing keel, and stately mast,
Whose canvass wings, distending with the gale,
The bold Phoenician through Alcides' straits
To northern Albion's tin-embowel'd fields,
And often beneath the sea-obscuring brow
Of cloud-envelop'd Teneriff conveyed.
Next in sagacious thought the ethereal plains
Thou trodst, exploring each propitious star
The danger-braving mariner to guide;
Then all the latent and mysterious powers
Of number did unravel; last to crown
Thy bounties, Goddess, thy unrivaled toils
For man, still urging thy inventive mind,
Thou gav'st him Here the opinion of Sir Isaac Newton is followed, that letters
were first invented amongst the trading parts of the world.
letters; there imparting all,
Which lifts the ennobled spirit near to heaven,
Laws, learning, wisdom, nature's works revealed
By godlike sages, all Minerva's arts,
Apollo's music, and the eternal voice
Of Virtue, sounding from the historic roll,
The philosophic page, and poet's song.
NOW solitude and silence from the shores
Retreat on pathless mountains to reside,
Barbarity is polished, infant arts
Bloom in the desert, and benignant peace
With hospitality begin to sooth
Unsocial rapine, and the thirst of blood;
As, from his tumid urn when Nilus spreads
His genial tides abroad, the favored soil,
That joins his fruitful border, first imbibes
The kindly stream; anon the bounteous God
His waves extends, embracing Egypt round,
Dwells on the teeming champain, and endows
The sleeping grain with vigor to attire
In one bright harvest all the Pharian plains:
Thus, when Pygmalion from Phoenician Tire
Had banished freedom, with disdainful steps
Indignant Commerce, turning from the walls,
Herself had raised, her welcome sway enlarged
Among the nations, spreading round the globe
The fruits of all its climes; Athenian. Athens was called Cecropia from
Cecrops its first king.
Cecropian oil,
The Thracian vintage, and Panchaian gums,
Arabia's spices, and the golden grain,
Which old Osiris to his Egypt gave,
And Ceres to Sicily.
Sicania. Thou did raise
The Ionian name, O Commerce, thou the domes
Of sumptuous Corinth, and the ample round
Of Syracuse did people. -- All the wealth
Now thou assemblest from Iberia's mines,
And golden-channel'd Tagus, all the spoils
From fair Another name of Sicily, which was frequently ravaged by the
Carthaginians.
Trinacria wasted, all the powers
Of conquered Afric's tributary realms
To six thy empire on the Lybian verge,
Thy native tract; the nymphs of Nysa hail
Thy glad return, and echoing joy resounds
Over Triton's sacred waters, but in vain:
The irreversible decrees of heaven
To far more northern regions had ordained
Thy lasting seat; in vain the imperial port
Receives the gathered riches of the world;
In vain whole climates bow beneath its rule;
Behold the toil of centuries to Rome
Its glories yields, and mouldering leaves no trace
Of its deep-rooted greatness: thou with tears
From thy extinguished Carthage did retire,
And these thy perished honors long deplore.
What though rich Cadiz.
Gades, what though polished Rhodes,
With Alexandria, Aegypt's splendid mart,
The learned Marseilles, a Grecian colony, the most civilized, as well as the
greatest trading city of ancient Gaul.
Massylians, and Genoua.
Ligurian towers,
What though the potent Hanseatic league,
And Venice, mistress of the Grecian isles,
With all the Aegean floods, awhile might sooth
The sad remembrance; what though, led through climes
And seas unknown, with thee the adventurous sons
Of The Portuguese discovered the cape of Good Hope in 1487.
Tagus passed the stormy cape, which braves
The huge Atlantic; what though Antwerp grew
Beneath thy smiles, and thou propitious there
Did shower thy blessings with unsparing hands:
Still on thy grief-indented heart impressed
The great Amilcar's valor, still the deeds
Of Asdrubal and Mago, still the loss
Of thy unequaled Annibal remained:
Till from the sandy mouths of echoing Rhine,
And sounding margin of the Scheld and Maese,
With sudden roar the angry voice of war
Alarmed thy languor; wonder turned thy eye,
Lo! in bright arms a bold militia stood,
Arrang'd for battle: from afar thou saw
The snowy ridge of Apennine, the fields
Of wide Calabria, and Pyrene's hills,
The Guadiana, and the Duro's banks,
And rapid Ebro gathering all their powers
To crush this daring populace. The pride
Of fiercest kings with more inflamed revenge
Never menaced freedom; nor since dauntless Greece,
And Rome's stern offspring none has ever surpassed
The bold The Dutch.
Batavian in his glorious toil
For liberty, or death. At once the thought
Of long-lamented Carthage flies thy breast,
And ardent, Goddess, thou do speed to save
The generous people. Not the vernal showers,
Distilling copious from the morning clouds,
Descend more kindly on the tender flower,
Newborn and opening on the lap of spring,
Than on this rising state thy cheering smile,
And animating presence; while on Spain,
Prophetic thus, thy indignation broke.
INSATIATE race! the shame of polished lands!
Disgrace of Europe! for inhuman deeds
And insolence renowned! what demon led
Thee first to plough the undiscovered surge,
Which lav'd an hidden world? whose malice taught
Thee first to taint with rapine, and with rage,
With more than savage thirst of blood the arts,
By me for gentlest intercourse ordained,
For mutual aids, and hospitable ties
From shore to shore? Or, that pernicious hour,
Was Heaven disgusted with its wondrous works,
That to thy fell exterminating hand
The immense Peruvian empire it resigned,
And all, which lordly Montezeuma emperor of Mexico.
Montezeuma swayed?
And come thou, strengthened with the shining stores
Of that gold-teeming hemisphere, to waste
The smiling fields of Europe, and extend
Thy bloody shackles over these happy seats
Of liberty? Presumptuous nation, learn,
From this dire period shall thy glories fade,
Thy slaughtered youth shall fatten Belgium's sands,
And Victory against her Albion's cliffs
Shall see the blood-empurpled ocean dash
Thy weltring hosts, and stain the chalky shore:
Even those, whom now thy impious pride would bind
In servile chains, hereafter shall support
Thy weakened throne; when Heaven's afflicting hand
Of all thy power despoils thee, when alone
Of all, which ever has signalized thy name,
Thy insolence and cruelty remain.
THUS with her clouded visage, wrapped in frowns,
The Goddess threatened, and the daring train
Of her untamed militia, torn with wounds,
Despising fortune, from repeated foils
More fierce, and braving famine's keenest rage,
At length through deluges of blood she led
To envied greatness; even while clamorous Mars
With loudest clangor bade his trumpet shake
The Belgian champain, she their standard reared
On tributary Java, and the shores
Of huge Borneo; thou, Sumatra, heard'st
Her naval thunder, Ceylon's trembling sons
Their fragrant stores of cinnamon resigned,
And odour-breathing Ternate and Tidore
Their spicy groves: and O whatever coast
The Belgians trace, wherever their power is spread,
To hoary Zembla, or to Indian suns,
Still thither be extended thy renown,
O WILLIAM, pride of Orange, and adored
Thy virtues, which disdaining life, or wealth,
Or empire, whether in thy dawn of youth,
Thy glorious noon of manhood, or the night,
He was assassinated at Delf. His dying words were, Lord have mercy upon this
people. See Grot. de Bell. Belg.
The fatal night of death, no other care
Besides the public owned: and dear to fame
Be thou, harmonious Janus Douza, a famous poet, and the most learned man of
his time. He commanded in Leyden, when it was so obstinately besieged by the
Spaniards in 1570. See Meursii Athen. Bat.
Douza; every muse
Your laurel strew around this hero's urn,
Whom fond Minerva graced with all her arts,
Alike in letters and in arms to shine,
A dauntless warrior, and a learned bard.
Him Spain's surrounding host for slaughter marked,
With massacre yet reeking from the streets
Of blood-stained Harlem; he on Leyden's towers
With famine his companion, wan, subdued
In outward form, with patient virtue stood
Superior to despair; the heavenly Nine
His suffering soul with great examples cheered
Of memorable bards, by Mars adorned
With wreaths of fame, Orpheus, one of the Argonauts, who set sail from Iolcos,
a town in Thessalia.
Oeagrus' tuneful son,
Who with melodious praise to noblest deeds
Charmed the Iolchian heroes, and himself
Their danger shared, When the Spartans were greatly distressed in the
Messenian war, they applied to the Athenians for a general, who sent them the
poet Tyrtaeus.
Tyrtaeus, who revived
With animating verse the Spartan hopes,
Brave Aeschylus, one of the most ancient tragic poets, who signalized himself
in the battles of Marathon and Salamis.
Aeschylus and Sophocles commanded his countrymen the Athenians in several
expeditions.
Sophocles, around
Whose sacred brows the tragic ivy twined,
Mixed with the warrior's laurel; all surpassed
By Douza's valor: and the generous toil,
His and his country's labors soon received
Their high reward, when favoring Commerce raised
The invincible Batavians, till, revered
Among the mightiest, on the brightest roll
Of Fame they shone, by splendid wealth and power
Graced and supported; thus a genial soil
Diffusing vigor through the infant oak,
Affords it strength to flourish, till at last
Its lofty head, in verdant honors clad,
It rears amidst the proudest of the grove.
YET here the eternal Fates thy last retreat
Deny, a mightier nation they prepare
For thy reception, sufferers alike
By the unremitted insolence of power
From reign to reign, nor less than Belgium known
For bold contention often on crimson fields,
In free-tongu'd senates often with nervous laws
To circumscribe, or conquering to depose
Their sceptred tyrants: Albion sea-embrac'd,
The joy of Freedom, dread of treacherous kings,
The destined mistress of the subject main,
And arbitress of Europe, now demands
Thy presence, Goddess. It was now the time,
Ere yet perfidious Cromwell dared profane
The sacred senate, and with impious feet
Tread on the powers of magistrates and laws,
While every arm was chilled with cold amaze,
Nor one in all that dauntless train was found
To pierce the ruffian's heart; and now thy name
Was heard in thunder through the affrighted shores
Of pale Iberia, of submissive Gaul,
And Tagus, trembling to his utmost source,
O ever faithful, vigilant, and brave,
Thou bold asserter of Britannia's fame,
Unconquerable BLAKE: propitious heaven
At this great era, and The act of navigation.
the sage decree
Of Albion's senate, perfecting at once,
What by Queen Elizabeth was the first of our princes, who gave any
considerable encouragement to trade.
Eliza was so well begun,
So deeply founded, to this favored shore
The Goddess drew, where grateful she bestowed
The unbounded empire of her father's floods,
And chose thee, London, for her chief abode,
Pleased with the silver Thames, its gentle stream,
And smiling banks, its joy-diffusing hills,
Which, clad with splendor, and with beauty graced,
O'erlook his lucid bosom; pleased with thee,
Thou nurse of arts, and thy industrious race;
Pleased with their candid manners, with their free
Sagacious converse, to enquiry led,
And zeal for knowledge; hence the opening mind
Resigns its errors, and unseals the eye
Of blind opinion; merit hence is heard
Amidst its blushes, dawning arts arise,
The gloomy clouds, which ignorance or fear
Spread over the paths of virtue, are dispelled,
Servility retires, and every heart
With public cares is warmed; thy merchants hence,
Illustrious city, thou do raise to fame:
How many names of glory may thou trace
From earliest annals down to BARNARD's times!
And, O! if like that eloquence divine,
Which forth for Commerce, for Britannia's rights,
And her insulted majesty he poured,
These humble measures flowed, then too thy walls
Might undisgrac'd resound thy poet's name,
Who now all fearful to thy praise attunes
His lyre, and pays his grateful Song to thee,
Thy votary, O Commerce! Gracious power!
Continue still to hear my vows, and bless
My honorable industry, which courts
No other smile but thine; for thou alone
Can wealth bestow with independence crowned:
Nor yet exclude contemplative repose,
But to my dwelling grant the solemn calm
Of learned leisure, never to reject
The visitation of the tuneful maids,
Who seldom deign to leave their sacred haunts,
And grace a mortal mansion; thou divide
With them my labors; pleasure I resign,
And, all devoted to my midnight lamp,
Even now, when Albion over the foamy breast
Of groaning Tethys spreads its threatening fleets,
I grasp the sounding shell, prepared to sing
That hero's valor, who shall best confound
His injured country's foes: even now I feel
Celestial fires descending on my breast,
Which prompt thy daring suppliant to explore,
Why, though derived from Neptune, though revered
Among the nations, by the Gods endowed,
Thou never yet from eldest times have found
One permanent abode, why, often expelled
Thy favored seats, from clime to clime have borne
Thy wandering steps, why LONDON late has seen
(Thy loved, thy last retreat) desponding care
O'ercloud thy brow: O listen, while the Muse,
The immortal progeny of Jove, unfolds
The fatal cause. What Time in Nysa's cave
The ethereal train in honor to thy sire
Show'r'd on thy birth their blended gifts, the power
Of war was absent; hence, unblessed by Mars,
Thy sons relinquished arms, on other arts
Intent, and still to mercenary hands
The sword entrusting, vainly deemed, that wealth
Could purchase lasting safety, and protect
Unwarlike freedom; hence the Alps in vain
Were passed, their long-impenetrable snows
And dreary torrents; swollen with Roman dead,
Astonished Trebia, Trasimenus lacus, and Cannae, famous for the victories
gained by Annibal over the Romans.
Trebia overflowed its banks
In vain, and deep-dy'd Trasimenus rolled
Its crimson waters; Cannae's signal day
The fame alone of great Amilcar's son
Enlarged, while still undisciplined, dismayed,
Her head commercial Carthage bowed at last
To military Rome: the unaltered will
Of heaven in every climate has ordained,
And every age, that empire shall attend
The sword, and steel shall ever conquer gold.
Then from thy sufferings learn; the auspicious hour
Now smiles; our wary magistrates have armed
Our hands; thou, Goddess, animate our breasts
To cast inglorious indolence aside,
That once again, in bright battalions ranged,
Our thousands and ten thousands may be seen
Their country's only rampart, and the dread
Of wild ambition. Mark the Swedish hind;
He, on his native soil should danger lour,
Soon from the entrails of the dusky mine
Would rise to arms; and other fields and chiefs
With Helsingburg, a small town in Schonen, celebrated for the victory, which
Count Steinboch gained over the Danes with an army, for the most part composed
of Swedish peasants, who had never seen an enemy before; it is remarkable, that
the defeated troops were as complete a body of regular forces, as any in all
Europe.
Helsingburg and Steinboch soon would share
The admiration of the northern world:
Helvetia's hills behold, the aerial seat
Of long-supported Liberty, who thence,
Securely resting on her faithful shield,
The warrior's corselet flaming on her breast,
Looks down with scorn on spacious realms, which groan
In servitude around her, and, her sword
With dauntless skill high-brandishing, defies
The Austrian eagle, and imperious Gaul:
And O could those ill-fated shades arise,
Whose valiant ranks along the ensanguin'd dust
Of The London trained bands, and auxiliary regiments (of whose inexperience of
danger, or any kind of service, beyond the easy practice of their postures in
the artillery garden, men had till then too cheap an estimation) behaved
themselves to wonder; and were, in truth, the preservation of that army that
day. For they stood as a bulwark and rampire to defend the rest; and when their
wings of horse were scattered and dispersed, kept their ground so steadily,
that though prince Rupert himself led up the choice horse to charge them, and
endured their storm of small shot, he could make no impression on their stand
of pikes; but was forced to wheel about. Clarend. ^ook 7. page 347.
Newbury lay crowded, they could tell,
How their long-matchless cavalry, so often
Over hills of slain by ardent RUPERT led,
Whose dreaded standard victory had waved,
Till then triumphant, there with noblest blood
From their gored squadrons died the restive spear
Of London's firm militia, and resigned
The well-disputed field: then, Goddess, say,
Shall we be now more timid, when behold,
The blackning storm now gathers round our heads,
And England's angry genius sounds to arms?
For thee, remember, is the banner spread,
The naval tower to vindicate thy rights
Will sweep the curling foam, the thundering bomb
Will roar, and startle in their deepest grots
Old Nereus' daughters, with combustion stored
For thee our dire volcano's of the main,
Impregnated with horror, soon will pour
Their flaming ruin round each hostile fleet;
Thou then, great Goddess, summon all thy powers,
Arm all thy sons, thy vassals, every heart
Inflame: and you, ye fear-disclaiming race,
Ye mariners of Britain, chosen train
Of Liberty and Commerce, now no more
Secret your generous valor; hear the call
Of injured Albion; to her foes present
Those daring bosoms, which alike disdain
The death-disploding cannon, and the rage
Of warring tempests, mingling in their strife
The seas and clouds: though long, in silence hushed,
Has slept the British thunder; though the pride
Of weak Iberia has forgot the roar;
Soon shall her ancient terrors be recalled,
When your victorious shouts affright her shores:
None now ignobly will your warmth restrain,
Nor hazard more indignant valor's curse,
Their country's wrath, and Time's eternal scorn;
Then bid the furies of Bellona wake,
And silver-mantled Peace with welcome steps
Anon shall visit your triumphant isle.
And that perpetual safety may possess
Our joyous fields, thou, genius, who presid'st
Over this illustrious city, teach her sons
To wield the noble instruments of war;
And let the great example soon extend
Through every province, till Britannia sees
Her docile millions fill the martial plain.
Then, whatsoever our terrors now suggest
Of desolation and the invading sword,
Though with his massy trident Neptune heaved
A newborn isthmus from the British deep,
And to its parent continent rejoined
Our chalky shore; though Mahomet could league
His powerful crescent with the hostile Gaul,
And that new Cyrus of the conquered east,
Who now in trembling vassalage unites
The Ganges and Euphrates, could advance
With his auxiliar host; our warlike youth*
With If the computation, which allots near two millions of fighting men to
this kingdom, may be relied on; it is not easy to conceive, how the united
force of the whole world could assemble together, and subsist in an enemy's
country greater numbers, than they would find opposed to them here.
equal numbers, and with keener zeal
For children, parents, friends, for England fired,
Her fertile glebe, her wealthy towns, her laws,
Her liberty, her honor, should sustain
The dreadful onset, and resistless break
The immense array: thus even the lightest thought
Ever to invade Britannia's calm repose
Must die the moment, that auspicious Mars
Her sons shall bless with discipline and arms;
That exiled race, in superstition nursed,
The servile pupils of tyrannic Rome,
With distant gaze despairing shall behold
The guarded splendors of Britannia's crown;
Still from their abdicated sway estranged,
With all the attendance on despotic thrones,
Priests, ignorance, and bonds; with watchful step
Gigantic Terror, striding round our coast,
Shall shake his gorgon aegis, and the hearts
Of proudest kings appal; to other shores
Our angry fleets, when insolence and wrongs
To arms awaken our vindictive power,
Shall bear the hideous waste of ruthless war;
But liberty, security, and fame
Shall dwell for ever on our chosen plains.
FINIS
Erratum. Line 59. r. culled.


