POEMS ON Several Occasions.
By HENRY JONES.

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY, at Tully's Head, Pall Mall, and W. OWEN, at
Temple Bar. MDCCXLIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP, Earl of CHESTERFIELD,
The following POEMS are humbly inscribed by His LORDSHIP's Much Obliged, and
Ever Grateful Humble Servant, HENRY JONES.

Advertisement.
IT may be proper to inform the Reader, that the most Part of the following
Pieces were wrote without any Design of their ever appearing in Print; the
Author's Consciousness of the Disadvantage he lay under, hindering him from
aspiring to the Rank of a Poet: But the generous Encouragement he met with from
some Persons of Distinction, to whom he had the Honor of being made known,
determined him to offer his Productions to the Public. It will be needless,
perhaps, to declare, that he has had no Assistance from Learning. He takes this
Opportunity of returning Thanks to all his Subscribers, and generous
Benefactors, declaring his Ambition to extend no farther, than that of
producing something not altogether unworthy their Countenance and Favor.

A LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
THE Right Hon. the Earl of Ashburnham. The Right Hon. the Earl of Abercorn.
Lady Elizabeth Archer. Sir Stephen Anderson, Bart. Hon. Henry Archer, Esquire Ralph
Asheton of Cuerdali in Lancashire, Esquire James Armor, Esquire Thomas Allen, Esquire
Abraham Atkins of Clapham, Esquire William Andrews, Esquire Nicholas Aylward, Esquire
Thomas Adderley, Esquire Rev. Mr. Allen. John Averell. Mrs. Abernethy. Miss Kitty
Abernethy. Asheton. Mr. Samuel Allan. Atkinson, Coach-Painter. Aylward. William
Atkinson. Gilbert Austen.
B.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Buckingham The Right Hon. the Earl Brook The Right
Hon. Lady Brook The Right Hon. the Earl of Barrymore The Right Hon. the Earl
of Blessington, 6 Books The Right Hon. the Countess of Blessington, 6 Books The
Right Hon. the Lord Byron The Right Hon. the Lord Vere Beauclerc The Right Hon.
the Lady Blayney The Hon. Captain James Butler The Hon. Robert Brudenell, Esquire
The Hon. Mr. Birrel Sir Walter Wagstaff Bagot, of Blithfield near Litchfield,
Bart. William Bristow, Esquire one of the Commissioners of his Majesty's Revenue in
Ireland Major Charles Bucknal Francis Burton, Esquire -- Bull, Esquire Thomas Buckley,
Esquire at Bath Philip Barnes, Esquire at Derby Robert Bromfield, Esquire William Bumpfied,
Esquire 2 Books Master Bumpsted Miss Bumpsted Mr. Samuel Bumpsted Miss Bowen --
Binford, Esquire of Bridgwater Edward Bullinbroke, Esquire J. U. D. 21 Books Amyas
Bush, Esquire -- Brown, Esquire James Brocas, Esquire Edward Barker, Esquire Thomas Barlow, Esquire
George Buck, Esquire Norborne Berkeley, Esquire Henry Brook, Esquire Royal Paper Robert
Board, Esquire Paul Bane, Esquire Captain George Brisac John Butler, Esquire Augustus Boyd,
Esquire John Boyd, Esquire William Barton, Esquire Hugh Boyd, Esquire James Belcher, Esquire 14
Books William Brabazon, Esquire Middleton Bond, Esquire Thomas Burgh, Esquire Wallop
Brabazon, Esquire George Ball, Esquire Rev. Ardeacon Boyd Rev. Dr. Bowls Rev. Dr.
Bruce Rev. Ludlow Brabazon Rev. Benjamin Barrington Gerrard Byrne, Gent.
Attorney at Law, 6 Books Mrs. Borredale Miss Nancy Bean Mrs. Bentley Mrs.
Martha Bochin Mrs. Margaret Burton Mr. William Busby, Apothecary at Bath James
Bumbanous, Merchant in Bristol Barret John Bristo John Booth John Barrington
Astley Bransby Sprainger Barry, 6 Books Beard Bencraft Bevin, Chemist, 12 Books
Edmund Brown George Barker James Brown John Beardley Bacon Brook Barry James
Birch of Coventry Belcher John Bate Brooks Bindon Brisco Batt. Brerefoot Brown
William Beaty Francis Booker John Braynion George Byrne
C.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Chesterfield The Right Hon. the Countess of
Chesterfield The Right Hon. the Earl of Cholmondely The Right Hon. the Earl of
Carrick The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Clogher The Right Hon. the Lord
Charlemount The Right Hon. the Lady Anne Carmichael at Bath The Hon. Mrs.
Conolly The Hon. John Campbell, Esquire one of the Lords of the Treasury The Hon.
Col. Conyngham The Hon. Robert Cholmondely, Esquire Sir Nathaniel Curzon, Bart.
Lady Curzon Asheton Curzon, Esquire Gilbert Cooper, Esquire at Derby Godfrey Clarke of
Sutton in Derbyshire, Esquire Thomas Choun, Esquire Colethorpe Clayton, Esquire Daniel
Cunningham, Esquire Colley Cibber, Esquire Henry Chitty, Esquire Thomas Corbett, Esg; --
Craggit, Esquire William Coleman, Esquire Edward Crofts, Esquire Edmund Chambers, Esquire
Philip Coleman, Esquire Edward Cusack, Esquire Counselor Chamberlain Rev. Dr. Cobden,
Archdeacon of London Rev. Mr. Cope Rev. Mr. Cotterell The Lady Cairnes Mrs.
Choun Miss Crawford, at Bath Mrs. Corbett Mrs. Courtney Miss Curtis Miss
Claridge Mrs. Clements Mrs. Coddrington Miss Cooper Mrs. Clear Mrs. Coufens
Lieut. General Campbell Dr. Charlton of Bristol Mr. Archibald Cleland, Surgeon
at Bath James Connor, Merchant at Bristol John Cole Laurence Cole, 2 Books
Campbell Joseph Cole George Crawford James Cook Arthur Colly John Coghlan
William Cole Theophilus Cibber Charles Carlisle, Apothecary Dennis Conron,
Apothecary Cooper, Treasury-Office Thomas Coot, 4 Books Carpenter Hugh Cummin
Cooper Marcus Curtis Mr. Patrick Cardiff John Cosgrove Master Coghlin, 2 Books
D.
His Grace the Duke of Dorset The Right Honorable the Earl of Drogheda The
Right Honorable the Lady Dalkeith Hon. George Doddington, Esquire Dennis Delane,
Esquire Archibald Duff, Esquire Jeremiah Davenant, Esquire of the Exchequer Henry Dillon of
Bellgard, Esquire 2 Books Charles Delafaye, Esquire James Donaldson, Esquire 2 Books
William Dean, Esquire Deputy Master of the Rolls in Ireland, 10 Books Captain
Theophilus Desbrisay, 7 Books Richard Dudgeon, Esquire Captain Philip Denn of
Bristol Lieutenant William Douglas Dr. Drummond of Bristol Dr. Dickson of
Taunton Dr. Daly Dr. Edmund Delany Rev. Mr. Stephen Duck Rev. Mr. Deschamps
Rev. Mr. Snede Davis, Rector of Kingsland, Herefordshire Rev. Mr. Davis Rev.
Dr. Dunkin, 11 Books Miss Draper, at Bath Miss Ducasse, ditto Miss Dobbs Mr.
Joseph Daltera, Merchant at Bristol Dagneaux at Bath A. Donnelly Dowding P.
Ditcher William Door Downing Robert Donaldson Alexander Dobson Hugh Davis Luke
Spencer Dowell
E.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Elphin The Right Hon. the Lord Edgecumbe The
Right Hon. the Lord Elibank Henry Every, of Eggington in Derbyshire, Esquire Henry
Air, Esquire at Derby Anthony Air, Christ-Church, Oxford, Esquire Colonel Ellison Mr.
Francis Eastwood Mr. Richard Eustace
F.
The Right Honorable the Lady Viscountess Falmouth The Right Honorable the
Lord Feversham Richard Fitzherbert, of Somersell in Derbyshire, Esquire James
Fortescue, Esquire Samuel Forster, Esquire George Fitzgerald, Esquire Richard Fitzgerald,
Esquire Colonel Fraser Captain Fraser Counselor French, 6 Books Rev. Mr. Fuller of
Devizes Rev. Mr. Fuller Rev. Mr. Tatem Rev. Thomas Foster, D. D. Mrs.
Fitzherbert at Derby Mrs. Anne Foyster Mrs. Foster Mr. French, Merchant at
Bristol John Philipe Fuher Furnese George Faulkner Edward Fitzhenry
G.
Hon. George Grenville, Esquire one of the Lords of the Treasury Sir Ralph Gore,
Bart. Lieutenant General Guise Arthur Gore, Esquire 4 Books David Garrick, Esquire
Henry Gore, Esquire John Graham, Esquire John Gibbons, Esquire Edmund Gibbs, Esquire Richard
Gurst, Esquire Thomas Gordon, Esquire Samuel Greathead, Esquire John Gibson, Esquire Frederick
Gore, Esquire Henry Gold, Esquire William Goodwin, Esquire John Gore, Esquire Counsel to the
Commissioners of Ireland, 12 Books Bartholomew William Gilbert, Esquire Joseph
Gascoign, Esquire 6 Books Dr. Gusthart, 2 Books Major Geary Dr. Greenwood Dr. Green
of Drogheda Rev. John Griffith, D. D. Prebendary of Canterbury Rev. Mr. Grattan
Rev. Wood Gibson, D. D. S. F. T. C. D. 4 Books Rev. Ralph Grattan, A. M. 6
Books Mrs. Griffith Mrs. Gusthart, 2 Books Miss Gusthart Mrs. Margaret Gardener
Mrs. Susannah Goring Mrs. Griffith Mrs. Martha Gilbert Mr. Robert Gibson
Giffard Robert Gardener, Printer Geary, 4 Books Matthias Gore, 3 Books Green
Ross Gyles
H.
His Grace the Duke of Hamilton The Right Honorable the Earl of Huntingdon The
Right Honorable the Earl of Holderness The Right Honorable the Earl of
Hallifax The Rt. Hon. the Countess Dowager of Hyndford at Bath The Hon. Arthur
Hill, Esquire II Books The Hon. Frederick Hamilton, Esquire The Hon. Mrs. Hamilton The
Honorable Master Hobart Joseph Hicky, Esquire William Hicky, Esquire Henry Hamilton,
Esquire James Herbert, Esquire Nathaniel Hone, Esquire George Heathcote, Esquire Newburgh
Hamilton, Esquire -- Hatch, Esquire William Hedges, Esquire Carry Hamilton, Esquire Josiah
Hardy, Esquire Joseph Hewitt, Esquire James Hewitt of Coventry, Esquire Robert Hamilton,
Esquire Robert Hazard, Esquire 6 Books Charles Hamilton Esquire John Harper, Esquire Captain
Haldane Captain Hatch Captain Charles Hard Admiral Hillsly Colonel Honeywood
Lieutenant John Hatch Dr. Haddo Counselor Harrison Rev. Mr. Hindes Rev. Mr.
Philip Hughes, 4 Books Mr. Richard Houston John Halford John Haines Henry
Hawker Mr. John Hudson William Havard William Hoar Henry Holcomb Haldane Will.
Hewitt, of Coventry John Hewitt, jun. ditto Heath William Harrison Richard
Hughes William Herdman Joseph Hickey Messrs. Hickey and Palmer, Booksellers at
Bristo1, 2 Books Mrs. Hely, of Londonderry Mrs. Margaret Hays
I.
His Grace the Lord Primate of all Ireland The Rt. Hon. the Countess Dowager of
Inchiquin at Bath Paul Jodrel, Esquire Solicitor Genesis to the Prince of Wales
Lieutenant General John Johnson Nathan Johnson, Esquire 4 Books, Royal Paper
Gilbert Jodrell, Esquire Charles Joy, Esquire Robert Johnson, Esquire Dr. Jennings, at Bath
Rev. Mr. Jackson Rev. Mr. John Jones, at Bristol Miss Jones at Bath Miss
Jakeman Miss Fanny Joy Mrs. Isted Mrs. Jones Mr. Philip Jacob Mr. Henry Jones
John Innys, Bookseller Thomas Joy Jeffreys John Jebb William Johnson James
Jones
K.
The Right Hon. the Countess of Kerry The Right Honorable the Lord Kilmare
Honorable Baron Kregle, 2 Books Dr. King of St. Mary-Hall, Oxford Rev. James
Knight, D. D. F. T. C. D. 4 Books Captain Killegrew Captain Kennedy Surgeon
Kelly Mrs. Mary Knox of Bristol Mrs. Knox of Londonderry Mr. John Kively Thomas
Kanning M'Carrel King Kennon Knox James Kelburn Eugene Keeling Thomas Kennedy
Luke Kelly John Keely
L.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Lincoln The Right Hon. the Earl of
Londonderry The Right Hon. the Lord Viscount Lonsdale The Right Hon. the Lord
Viscount Limerick The Right Hon. the Lord Lewisham Peter Ludlow, Esquire Thomas
Lister, Esquire Humphry Littleton, Esquire William Lock, Esquire Thomas Lewis, Esquire Andrew
Legrange, Esquire George Lewis, Esquire Francis Leigh, Esquire 10 Books Richard Lyddell,
Esquire William Lee, Esquire Simon Lutterell, Esquire -- Lill, Esquire James Lacy, Esquire Rev. Mr.
Lions Rev. Dr. Lee, Master of Baliol College, Oxford Rev. Mr. John Lidgould
Admiral Leigh Miss Lister Miss Anne Lister Miss Lloyd Mrs. Lock Mrs. Lowry Mr.
Lewin Joshua Leathly, 12 Books Matthew Lawrence Thomas Leigh Thomas Low
Lambert Bartholomew Lynch James Lake Peter La Cost Thomas Lynch of Pall Mall
George Lewis Bookseller at Bristol Lynch Merchant at Bristol
M.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Mead The Right Hon. Lord Chief Justice
Marlay The Right Hon. the Lord Moor The Honorable Baron Mountney Mrs. Mountney
Miss Mountney Benjamin Mountney, Esquire The Honorable Mrs. Murray The Lady Bab.
Montague Lady Catharine Mead William Melmoth, Esquire Colonel M'Guire James Moor,
Esquire Lewis Charles Montelieu, Esquire George Metham, Esquire Stephen Moore, Esquire James
Moore, Esquire 2 Books Humphry Minchin, Esquire Luke Mercer, Esquire Owen M'Sweeny, Esquire
Adam Muir, Esquire near Dumfries Colonel Martin, 12 Books Francis Humphry Meredith,
Esquire Randal Moor, Esquire Thomas M'Cann, Esquire John Miller, Esquire Barrister at Law
Godfrey Meynell of Langly in Derbyshire, Esquire Edward Mundy of Shipley in
Derbyshire, Esquire Rev. Mr. Mather, Brazen Nose College, Oxford Rev. Mr. Edward
Morris Rev. Mr. Alexander Montgomery of Clogher Rev. Mr. Magill Rev. Isaac
Mann, D. D. Mrs. Martha Mitton Mrs. M'Culloch at Derby Mitchell Madden Miss
Maule Elizabeth Murray Colonel Mostyn Captain M'Cartney Mr. Daniel M'Carty
Silvester M'Aulay Alexander Matthews John Molloy Charles Macklin James M'Evoy
William Mills Moozeen Morris, 6 Books Henry Mattair Connor M'Gough Mitchell
Francis Miller Mason James Morris John Mould Murphy Robert Murray William
Moffet Andrew Matthews
N.
The Right Honorable the Lord North and Guilford. Arnold Nesbitt, Esquire John
Nugent, Esquire Albert Nesbitt, Esquire -- Nox, Esquire Giffard Nesbitt, Esquire Jones Nevill,
Esquire -- Norman, Esquire Dr. Christopher Nugent at Bath Rev. Mr. Needham of Bristol
Rev. Mr. John Naylor, Rector of Orton, Huntingdonsh. Mrs. Nesbitt, St. James's
Mr. Edward Norman M'Gauran Joseph Nesfield
O.
Vice Chancellor of Oxford President of Magdalene College, Oxford Vice
President ditto Charles OHara, Esquire Kene OHara, Esquire Rev. Mr. Osteaval Rev. John
Obbins, D. D. Mr. Hall Ogle, 6 Books
P.
The Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Palmerston The Right Honorable the
Lord Viscount Powerscourt Right Honorable William Pit, Esquire Paymaster General
of his Majesty's Forces German Pole, of Radbourn in Derbyshire, Esquire Uvedale
Price, Esquire at Bath Arthur Pomery, Esquire William Pit, Esquire Henry Pie, Esquire John
Potter, Esquire 2 Books William Palliser, Esquire 2 Books Joseph Plunket, Esquire Stephen
Page, Esquire George Pepper, Esquire Captain Pretty Lieutenant John Pain Colonel Paul
Rev. Dr. Philips Rev. Mr. Petipher Rev. Mr. Percival, 6 Books Rev. Dr.
Palliser, Vice-Provost of T.C.D. Rev. John Palliser, A. M. Mrs. Peterson at
Bath Pasqualino Pugh Pocock Pie, 2 Books Palliser Powell, St. Martin's-Lane,
Royal Paper Miss Plaisted Preston Mr. Philips, Pall Mall Will. Pickmore of
Chester Pie Robert Pie Pope Ellis Price, Merchant
R.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Radnor The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of
Rapho Brigadier General Richbell Colonel Henry Ravenhill Captain Rastall Edward
Rich, Esquire Lieutenant Colonel Rich John Rich, Esquire William Richardson, Esquire 6
Books -- Richison, Esquire Hercules Langford Rowley, Esquire Dr. Robert Roberts, Deputy
Remembrancer of his Majesty's Exchequer in Ireland Lewis Roberts, Esquire John
Roberts, Gent. Rev. Mr. Will. Richards of Bristol Rev. Paul Read,
D.D.S.F.T.C.D. Rev. Dr. Reily Miss Riggs at Bath Raveau, ditto Ruck Mr. John
Richmond at Bath James Reofern Raskoe Thomas Reyley, Brewer Roe Read Philip
Reiley Charles Read John Rencher, 2 Books George Rencher Michael Ryan Ralph
Roseingrave William Roseingrave Hugh Reiley, Attorney at Law, 6 Books
S.
Her Grace the Duchess of Somerset The Right Hon. the Earl of Shelburne The
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount St. John The Right Honorable the Lord
Southwell The Right Honorable Edward Southwell, Esquire Sir William Sanderson,
Bart. Lieutenant General Baron de St. Hippolite John Staunton of Lincoln's End,
Esquire Peter Storer of the Inner Temple, Esquire John Smith, Esquire Counselor at Law, 10
Books Charles Stanhope, Esquire John Stuart, Esquire Charles Stuart, Esquire -- Sturt, Esquire
Anderson Saunders, Esquire Andrew Sprowle, Esquire Tennison Smith, Esquire John Summers, Esquire
Robert Slaney, Esquire Timothy Storton, Esquire Anthony Langley Swimmere, Esquire Richard
Stevens, Esquire George Sturt, Esquire James Stuart, Esquire Robert Sing, Esquire Ralph
Sampson, Esquire Dr. Baptist Smart of Cheltenham Dr. Sutherland of Marlborough
Major Story of Chelsea College Dr. Smith Rev. Mr. Spence Mrs. Smith Strickland
Miss Saunders, at Bath Smith, ditto Mr. Stevens, 2 Books Luke Sparks Robert
Sparks Isaac Sparks Charles Storer George Sparks Stuart Mr. Nicholas Simpson,
Apothecary at Bristol, 2 Books John Sullivan John Smith, Royal Paper Smith
Smith, Crow-street, 6 Books David Shehan, 3 Books James Smith Swettenham Soople
John Sowdon Thomas Sheckleton James Shannon James Stevenson John Smith, 3 Books
Robert Sing, F.C.T.C.D. John Stevens Shean
T.
The Right Honorable the Lord Tyrawly The Right Honorable the Lord Tullamore
Honorable John Talbot, Esquire James Tilson, Esquire John Thornhill, Esquire Martin
Tucker, Esquire -- Tuack, Esquire Ryley Towers, Esquire 12 Books -- Tisdall, Esquire John
Tickell, Esquire Thomas Tailor, Esquire James Tailor, Esquire Richard Toler, Esquire Rev. Mr.
Josiah Tucker, Rector of All Saints, Bristol Tart Tisdall Rev. John Towers,
D.D. Dr. Thompson Captain Thickness Mrs. Tilson Elizabeth Tindall Talbot of
Collinborn, R. Paper Townshend Talbot Anne Tracey Trotter Miss Fanny Tilson
Nancy Tilson Tomkins of Londonderry Mr. William Thompson John Turner of Bristol
Tailor Joseph Tudor Temple of Trowbridge Temple Robert Tighe Thompson Nathaniel
Trumball Thomas Teellin
U.
Sir Walter Vavasor, Bart. Lady Vesey George Venables Vernon, of Sudbury in
Derbyshire, Esquire John Uniacke, Esquire Agmondisham Vesey, Esquire Mrs. Vesey of Lucan
Mr. Vesey Underwood
W.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Waldegrave The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop
of Waterford The Right Honorable Edward Walpole, Esquire The Right Honorable
Edward Weston, Esquire Lady Esther Westenra Sir Robert Willmot Secretary Wait --
Whitshed, Esquire Captain Alexander Wilson -- Wogan, Esquire 6 Books Edward Wright, Esquire
Richard Warburton, Esquire 2 Books Paul Whitehead, Esquire Alexander Wright, Esquire John
Wood of Bath, Esquire John White of Leixslip, Esquire Clotworthy Wade, Esquire Samuel
Whetcombe, Esquire John Eardley Wilmot, of Armarston in Derbyshire, Esquire William
Whittingham, Esquire Counselor at Law Daniel Wray, Esquire Deputy Teller of the
Exchequer Mountiford Westropp, Esquire Thomas Walpole, Esquire William Westby, Esquire
Richard Wright, Esquire Francis Wheeler, Esquire Matthew Wise, Esquire Edward Wills, Esquire
Thomas Walker, Esquire John Wood, Esquire Captain Wilson Dr. William Wall, 6 Books Rev.
Edward White, A.M. Rev. Mr. Arthur Webb Ethelred Powell Wogan, A. M. Rev. Mr.
Weinhouse Rev. John Whittingham, D. D. S.F.T.C.D. Mrs. Whitshed Margaret
Woffington Whalley Whorwood Miss White at Bath Whitehall, ditto Mr. George
Winstanly Wilson John Ward George Ward Charles Win James Worsdale Wagg
Worrall Philip Whittingham John Wiltshire Mr. William Wansey, Merchant in
Bristol John Whittle Whelan Charles Win Williams Waters Alborough Wrightson
Francis White Francis Watkins
Y
The Right Honorable Sir William Young, Knight of the Bath
POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
On his Excellency the Earl of CHESTERFIELD'S Arrival in Ireland.
A Midst The Applause which Art and Learning brings,
Listen, O STANHOPE, to what Nature sings;
Though rude the Notes, yet noble is the Choice;
The Subject only can support the Voice.
Illustrious Guest! whose happy Wisdom's known
To Belgian Councils, as to Britain's Throne;
Whose Tongue inspired an unresolving State,
And fixed Britannia's as Europa's Fate:
Fired with the Glories of thy splendid Name,
Through various Climates still pursued by Fame,
To thee a Muse, untaught in Latian Lays,
Or Grecian Style, her Voice obscure would raise;
Wrapped in the Theme sublime, would proudly soar,
And sound thy Welcome to her native Shore.
Thee even Factions with one Voice require,
And Heaven and George indulge the strong Desire.
See bending Crowds with willing Hearts obey,
And grateful own the delegated Sway.
Though never great Brunswick to Hibernia rise,
But shines afar, and gladens other Skies;
His godlike Power beneficent we view,
Effulgent, and reflected all from you.
Lo, thus the Silver Substitute of Day,
Supplies his Absence with a borrowed Ray;
Over the gay Globe with gentle Beam presides;
Chears the wild Waste, and rules the teeming Tides;
Whose heaving Bosom swells the public Store
With Wealth and Plenty from each distant Shore.
In Expectation flocks the tuneful Throng,
And glows to hail thee with a grateful Song:
As Birds exulting on the eager Wing,
Salute the Dawnings of the gladsome Spring;
Their pouring Throats employ from Spray to Spray,
To greet the Sun, and bless the genial Day.
Each raptured Muse shall now resume her Lyre,
Swell the full Chords, and sweep the sounding Wyre:
Sacred to thee the melting Strain shall flow;
To thee the Numbers, and the Strains they owe.
Thrice happy Genius! in whose Soul conspire
The Statesman's Wisdom and the Poet's Fire;
O Friend to Arts! revive our drooping Isle,
And make those Arts by thy Indulgence smile:
Even here, thy Presence shall their Strength restore,
Though Congreve, Steel, Roscommon, are no more;
Though Morris, modest, hides his heavenly Strains,
And Britain's Senate noble Boil detains;
Though Swift be dumb; for Swift Ierne weeps,
The Pride, the Parent of his Country, sleeps:
His clouded Soul now darts no dazzling Ray,
And faintly warms the animated Clay:
Not Rome's sad Ruins such Impressions leave,
As Reason buried in the Body's Grave:
His living Lines shall mix their sacred Fire
In Nature's Blaze, and with thy Works expire.
Nor you, great Sir, on these weak Numbers frown,
Which mourn a Swift, and sing thy just Renown:
Such Strains, alas! as my unlettered Hand,
Trembling would reach thee on the crowded Strand:
But thronging Thousands intercept my Way,
And deaf'ning Io's drown my feeble Lay.
Yet, if a Moment from the Toils of State,
And all the Burden of a Kingdom's Weight,
Some little Leisure to the Muse you lend,
(Each leisure Moment is the Muse's Friend)
Permit, my Lord, that my unpolished Lays,
May hope for Pardon, though they fail to please.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of CHFSTERFIELD, occasioned by her
procuring a Pardon for two Soldiers condemned for Desertion.
WHat means this dismal Sound, that March so slow,
This solemn Sadness, and this Pomp of Woe?
Behold two Victims pale and trembling led,
Already numbered with the unheeded Dead!
What ghastly Terrors on each Brow we trace!
See Death imprinted on each dying Face!
Yet Love of Life asserts its eager Claim,
But Hope, alas! affords no flattering Gleam.
Lo! the pale King in horrid Pomp appears:
What cruel Eye could then refrain from Tears?
What Heart relentless then forbear to melt?
Who saw their Sorrows, but like Sorrows felt?
How sad the Conflict, how severe the Strife
Of Wretches clinging to the Verge of Life!
When angry Justice claimed her promised Prey,
And frowned vindictive on the kind Delay;
Thy saving Mercy in that Moment flew,
(The darling Attribute of Heaven and You)
To soft Compassion won thy willing Lord,
His Justice temp'ring sheathed the uplifted Sword;
And, in that dismal, that tremendous Hour,
Snatched the pale Victims from the offended Power.
As when by adverse Stars, or Chance misled,
Enticed by Lucre, or impelled by Dread,
A Wretch from some high Rock's stupendous Brow
Hangs over the Waves and dreadful Depths below,
The slender Bough he grasps, his only Stay,
Yields to his Weight, and more and more gives Way;
Of Hope abandoned, as the Branch he tears,
He views the Abyss, and as he views, despairs;
'Till some unhop'd-for Hand prevents his Doom,
Lifts him to Life, and lengthened Years to come:
Redeemed from Fate, nor yet restored to Life,
They wondering pause, and feel a doubtful Strife,
If still on Earth they breathe with Human Race,
Or mix with Shades in Death's obscure Embrace;
'Till dawning Hope the dubious Horror clears,
Reveals their Safety, and dispels their Fears.
Loud Shouts of Triumph waft thy Name on high,
And Stanhope's Goodness fills the vaulted Sky.
Oh! had thou Power afflicted Realms to spare,
And rescue Europe from the Waste of War;
Fell Rage and Discord at thy Nod should cease,
And all Mankind enjoy the Sweets of Peace.
Then human Blood should deluge Earth no more,
But Leagues of Commerce join each distant Shore
You, like the Dove, the friendly Branch should bring,
And blooming Olives in each Climate spring:
A golden Age the guilty Globe should see,
And Scotia faithful as Hibernia, be.
No Feuds intestine in her Bosom jar,
No Breath rebellious wakes the Trump of War:
Her martial Tribe a generous Fervor feels,
And Virtue's Strength each steadfast Hero steels;
For Truth and Freedom firmly they unite,
And stand resolved to tempt the hardy Fight.
Thy Stanhope's Presence shall each Patriot fire,
And George's Glory all their Souls inspire.
On the SPRING.
THE mounting Sun with gladsome Ray
Makes wanton Nature smile;
Each Field looks green, each Garden gay,
And Birds rejoice the while.
The surly Winter's now no more,
The lovely Spring prevails;
No Tempests dash the sounding Shore,
Or burst the rending Sails.
Soft Breezes, breathing through the Grove,
Already decked in Green,
Invite the Thrush and Turtle Dove
With Philomel their Queen.
In Lays of Love they waste the Day,
While she enchants the Night;
Her Bosom leaning on some Spray,
To give the Gloom delight.
The smiling Shepherd now beholds
With Joy his teeming Flocks,
And drives them bleating to their Folds,
Amid the vocal Rocks.
The lusty Swain with Rapture steals
By yonder friendly Shade,
Where with Love Songs and soothing Tales
He charms the listening Maid.
Since Flora now her Mantle throws
On that tall Mountain's Head,
So lately crowned with Winter's Snows,
By surly Boreas shed:
To Phoebus' Praise let Poets sing,
And sweep their joyful Lyres,
Whose cheerful Beam restores the Spring,
And every Bard inspires.
On the Lying-in Hospital in Dublin.
ON out-stretch'd Wings of glorious Seraphs borne,
More bright than Evening Bow, or radiant Morn,
Lo! Charity from Heaven descends,
And Heavenly Joy her Train attends:
Serenely meek, in Smiles arrayed,
Seraphic Ardours on her wait,
Celestial Virtues shine displayed,
Celestial Pomp adorns her State.
Around her Throne obsequious move
Soft Compassion, pious Love,
Melting Pity, Hopes that cheer,
And from the Wretched drive Despair.
Divine Benevolence before her stands,
Grace in her Smiles and Bounty in her Hands,
She comes Religion to restore,
To banish Care from every Breast;
To raise the Sick, relieve the Poor,
And give the Weak and Wearied Rest.
All hail, celestial Goddess! hail!
O Charity sublime!
Propitious spread thy sacred Veil,
And cover every Crime.
Thy Sacrifice all Sin attones,
And still accepted, mounts on high:
You ease the laboring Mother's Groans,
You hush the Orphan's Cry:
You brighten every Mortal Gloom,
You soften Anguish, banish Strife;
You take the helpless Infant from the Womb,
And hand it smiling into Life.
Devote to thee,
Here, Goddess, see
Thy Vot'ries kneel;
They fervent feel
Thy Soul-exalting Fire:
Rejoiced they rise
Above the Skies,
Where heavenly Minds aspire.
Celestial Guest,
Inflame each Breast
With social Ardours, mutual Love;
Still more refined
Make Humankind,
Till each be like the Blessed above.
Lines to Lord Chief Justice SINGLETON.
WITH love of lasting Fame inspired,
I hung over Swift's immortal Page;
His matchless Energy admired,
And kindled with poetic Rage.
Methought, in A fine Seat near Drogheda, where his Lordship and the Author
were born.
Bewly's blissful Shade
I lay, near Boyne's smooth flowing Tide,
Where aged Elms their Arms displayed,
Close by a crystal Fountain Side.
There, to my ravished Sight arose
All Nature's Charms, all Eden's Spring;
The enameled Turf with Violets glows,
And Birds 'mid purple Fragrance sing.
When lo! a Form divine appears,
Advancing from a Laure! Gloom,
With all the reverend Marks of Years,
With all the Pomp of Greece and Rome.
His solemn Port sublime displays
Each public Worth, each lettered Grace;
His sacred Head was crowned with Bays,
And Virtue triumphed in his Face.
A pious Fear filled all my Mind,
As on the godlike Seer I gazed;
To Ecstacy and Awe resigned,
I lay transported and amazed.
The Muses all around him smile,
Each Nymph sustains a golden Lyre;
The Guardian Genius of this Isle
Sedate attends the sacred Sire.
The Shape etherial nearer drew,
In awful Dignity arrayed,
His Country's Father soon I knew,
The Drapier's ever-honour'd Shade!
The Illustrious Bard approached serene,
Inclining gracious erc he spoke;
Propitious Smiles adorn his Mien,
And from his Lips these Accents broke.
"To thee, even thee! my Care extends;
(He said, and reached his reverend Hand)
"To plume thy Muse, lo! Swift descends,
"To guide thy Flight, thy Fame expand.
"Let Virtue's Power thy Strains employ;
"Thy Country's Friends be always thine;
"Her faithful Sons still sing with Joy,
"And make the Patriot's Merit shine.
"High as thy native Towers upraise
"'Midst yonder Clouds their Tops sublime,
"His Virtues soar who wakes thy Lays,
"Inspires thy Muse, demands thy Rhyme.
"Not Athens' Walls more worth could boast,
"Though Plato there imbibed his Lore;
"Though Tully thence to Latium's Coast
"Transferred the bright immortal Store.
"A shining Sage, see! Boyne disclose,
"Who pours abroad bright Wisdom's Beams;
"From his rich Tongue Persuasion flows;
"And Science sheds her lucid Streams.
"Through distant Climes his Fame, outspread
"In wide expanding Rounds, prevails;
"He stands in lost Astrea's Stead
"To poize aloft the unerring Scales.
"A Worth like his, my Lyre might praise,
"Which Flatt'ry's Finger never debased;
"Such splendid Worth inspired my Lays,
"When Singleton my Numbers graced."
That honored Sound my Senses shook;
Sudden the instructive Vision fled;
Reposed on Swift's inspiring Book
I, waking, found my raptured Head.
On Mr. POPE's Death.
THESE Lines to Pope for ever sacred live,
The best a grateful mourning Muse can give;
To him, now numbered with the immortal Dead,
This Verse unfeigned with flowing Eyes be read.
O Thou! applauded by the Wise and Great!
Nor Worth, nor Genius could postpone thy Fate:
Too long an Exile from the Worlds of Bliss,
By envying Angels snatched too soon from this:
Thy Strains seraphick shall their Anthems raise,
Give Heaven new Harmony, and God new Praise.
On a PICTURE of Our Savior's Examination before Caiphas; sent to his Grace
Dr. GEORGE STONE, Lord Primate of Ireland.
ON hallowed Canvass, see! the Savior shine;
And lowliest Meekness temper Beams divine.
Unclouded Sapience in his Visage glows;
And from his Eyes benign Effulgence flows;
Resigned, and calm, the World's Redeemer stands,
And bears, with godlike Patience, impious Bands.
The Hebrew Priest beholds that Face with Fear;
And Pilate's Heart confessed a God was there!
No dread like this disturbs our Pontiff's Soul;
No conscious Fears his rising Joys control;
Wrapped in the Theme divine, his Bosom swells,
And on the sacred Scene, delighted, dwells.
What pure Emotions his warm Soul expand,
When Jesus stretches his appealing Hand!
The spotless Victim self-devoted dies,
Whilst Angels waft the eternal Sacrifice.
The glorious Groupe elates his raptured Mind,
By Faith inflamed, and Love of Humankind.
Hail, pious Pastor! thine's the exalted Rock,
The Crook is thine, and thine the sacred Flock:
Over barren Cliffs thy watchful Care extends;
On sun-burn'd Heaths the naked Fold defends.
Beneath thy genial Eye new Flowers shall grow,
From gushing Rocks the limpid Springs shall flow:
Ten thousand Hills, see! crowned with rich Increase,
Through vocal Vales the Lambs shall sport in Peace:
Repulsed by thee, the Wolf shall prowl in vain:
Nor shall the wily Fox infest the Plain.
No more misled the wandering Flock shall stray,
To ambush'd Snares, and erring Guides, a Prey:
Within one widening Pale, the increasing Sheep
Unharm'd shall feed by Day, secure by Night shail sleep.
To Doctor GREEN.
THE arduous Task, Infection to defeat,
Be thine; the Heart-corroding Pang remove,
And cheerful Health to drooping Life restore.
From all the Channels of the vital Stream
Successful drive the lurking Mischief forth,
By salutary Draught, or various Skill,
By Esculapius taught, with sovereign Power
To calm the Tempest of the raging Blood.
When dark seditious Vapors from the Lake
Of Life ascend, to blot bright Reason's Ray,
And dim the Eye of Thought: when wild Uproar
Confounds the intellectual Frame, and all
The raging Anarchy of Soul prevails,
How dismal then the Chaos of the Mind!
Each broken Sentiment and shattered Thought,
The fractur'd Phraze unhinged, and all the Wreck.
Of thinking Power! Can of immortal Minds
The Offspring, Thought, with noxious Fluids blend,
And tinge Ideas in the tainted Mass?
So closely tied is the connubial Knot,
Which weds with Flesh the intellectual Soul;
And so reciprocal their tender Springs,
So corresponding are their feeling Powers.
Amazing Laws! where Agents so unlike
United form the noble Creature Man. --
Man, after his Creator's Image made,
To Angels near akin; yet compassed round
(Sad Legacy!) with mortal Maladies
By Flesh inherited; a thousand Ills
His feeble Frame obnoxious find without,
Or dreadful raise rebellious Feuds within;
When Insurrections strong from Humors rise
Hostile, imbibed in soft respiring Gales,
The Vehicles of Death often found, or when
Excess, the Child of Appetite unrein'd,
Would act auxiliar to the Hand of Fate,
And midway snap the thin-spun Thread of Life;
Did not thy healing Hand with happy Skill
Retrieve the Wretch from Death's voracious Jaw,
Recall to Life, and disappoint the Grave.
PHILOSOPHY, a POEM, addressed to the LADIES who attended Mr. Booth' s Lectures
in Dublin.
TO Science sacred, Muse, exalt thy Lays;
Science of Nature, and to Nature's Praise:
Attend, ye Virtuous, and rejoice, to know
Her mystic Labors, and her Laws below;
Her Ways above with curious Eyes explore,
Admire her Treasures, and her God adore.
Behold, ye Fair! how radiant Colors glow,
What dies the Rose; what paints the heavenly Bow;
The purpling Shade, the rich refracted Ray,
And all the unblended Beams of various Day.
Lo! here, the Magnet's Magic charms the Sight,
And fills the Soul with Wonder and Delight:
In her coy Nature turns her Face aside,
And mocks the enquiring Sage's learned Pride.
Here, less reserved, she shows her plainer Course
In mutual Contest of elastick Force,
Which holds reciprocal in balanced Strife,
The Shield of Nature, and the Fence of Life:
The ambient Atmosphere, embracing all,
The wide Circumf'rence of this circling Ball,
Saving each vital Frame from crushing Fate;
For inward Act sustains external Weight:
The Vehicle of Life, to those that breathe
On solid Land, or liquid Waves beneath,
The Universe pervading, filling Space,
And, like its Maker, unconfined to Place.
What pleasing Fervours in each Bosom rise!
What deep Attention, and what fixed Surprise!
When, quick as Thought, the Electric Vigor springs
Swifter than Lightning on its rapid Wings;
A Flight so instant, to no Space confined,
Eludes Ideas, and outstrips the Mind.
Lo! to the Brain the bright Effluvium flies;
Glows in the Heart, and flashes from the Eyes.
Here, with new Raptures, the fond Youth shall gaze,
With Joy transmitting the ecstatick Blaze.
See! the coy Nymph partake his Flame by Turns,
See, like a Seraph, how she smiles and burns!
Contracted here, by wondrous Art, is seen
A boundless System in a small Machine.
Here, human Skill, to proud Perfection brought,
The mortal Mimick of Omnifick Thought;
The Almighty's Model, to the Mind conveys
The Universe, and all its Powers displays;
How wander Planets, how revolves the Year,
The Moon how changes, and how Comets glare:
The Sun's bright Globe illumes the unmeasured Space,
Whilst waiting Worlds enjoy, by Turns, his Face;
From his rich Presence drink the All-quick'ning Soul,
from him their Days ascend, their Seasons roll.
See! Wisdom, here, her brightest Beams display,
To fill the Mind with Philosophic Day:
The Springs unfolding of Mechanic Laws,
Tracing, through known Effects, the Eternal Cause,
Whose powerful Fiat, whose creative Will
First founded Nature, and supports her still.
Here, God-like Newton's all-capacious Mind,
The Glory, and the Guide of Humankind,
Shows wedded Worlds far distant Worlds embrace
With mutual Bands, yet keep their destined Space;
Roll endless Measures through the etherial Plain,
Linked by the social, strong, attractive Chain,
Whose latent Springs exert all Nature's Force,
Enwrap the Poles, and point the Stars their Course.
Mysterious Energy! stupendous Theme!
Immediate Mover of this boundless Frame!
Who can thy Essence, or thy Power explain?
The Sons of Wisdom seek thy Source in vain:
Thy Self invisible, yet seen thy Laws,
This glorious Fabric thy Effect, and God the Cause.
Thrice happy few! that wisely here attend
The Voice of Science, and her Cause befriend;
Let others, heedless of their youthful Prime,
Squander on empty Joys their fleeting Time;
It Is yours, with Reason's searching Eye to view
Great Nature's Laws, and trace her winding Clue.
Behold her Book, the instructive Page expand,
Filled with the Wonders of her Maker's Hand,
In awful Characters, which clearly shine
Worthy of Wisdom, and of Power Divine.
Peruse God's Ways, his perfect Workings trace;
In Nature's Mirror shines his heavenly Face.
To you, bright Nymphs, where Wisdom charms us most,
The Pride of Nature, and Creation's boast;
To you, Philosophy enamored flies,
And triumphs in the Plaudit of your Eyes.
When Worth, like yours, her shining Throne sustains,
The Queen of Science with true Splendour reigns;
By Beauty aided, she extends her Sway,
And won, by you, Mankind glad Homage pay.
On the vain Pursuits and imperfect Enjoyments of HUMAN LIFE.
LIFE, like a Play-thing, humors us awhile;
We prize the Bauble, at its Trinkets smile;
Each glittering Trifle stills us for a Day,
Then Children-like we throw that Toy away;
With froward Minds we long for something new,
And still a vain Variety pursue.
The distant Object which we covet most,
If once enjoyed, is in Possession lost:
Those Hills from far, with seeming Verdure crowned,
A closer View has bleak and barren found.
Led on by Hope, we tread the Fairy Maze,
And eager grasp at something still to please:
A dear-bought Wisdom Disappointment shows;
In Life's blank Lott'ry all may fear to lose.
The Miser, anxious for his hoarded Gold,
Starves in Abundance, and in Want grows old;
With squeezing Palm he gripes his Mammon fast,
And clinches closer as he breathes his last;
For Strangers hoards his Piles of moldy Pelf,
Who soon shall waste what he denies himself:
Penurious Madman, anxious for his Heap,
Laboring to sow what other Hands must reap.
By Midnight Lamps the poring Sage has past
His painful Life, and is deceived at last;
Huge Volumes from his teeming Thoughts he draws,
Imagined Monuments of vast Applause,
Which shall to distant Years transmit him down,
And teach Posterity his great Renown;
Pleased with the Prospect, he resigns his Breath,
And fondly triumphs over Time and Death;
When lo! his Works, an useless Lumber, rot,
And are, with him, in half an Age forgot.
Through Foes for Fame the Soldier hews his Way,
Provoking Fate, and Fame shall be his Pay;
For this young Ammon seeks to scale the Skies,
And frantic Charles impartial Fate defies:
'Twas this made Heroes in all Ages bleed,
That Men unborn might envy every Deed.
Deluded Mortals labor often in vain,
By Death prevented ere they count their Gain:
What Gain, alas! can be expected here,
Where all Things fail, and nothing's found sincere?
Yet human Vanity asserts her Claim,
And courts an empty Echo for a Name.
This Passion prone to lowest Ranks descends,
The coarsest Clown for clumsey Fame contends;
Ambition ebbing to its Vulgar Lee,
Ferments in Dregs, and warms each base Degree.
Since Life's Enjoyments weigh not half its ill,
And nothing here the human Soul can fill,
To distant Objects she must turn her Eye,
And present Wants by future Hopes supply;
Such Hopes, well grounded, speak her truly wise,
And lift her Wishes to their native Skies,
Above the Reach of Rumour's feeble Sounds,
And Fame that circles in surviving Rounds.
To grasp at Happiness is all our View,
Through different Tracks her Footsteps we pursue;
Whilst each his own fallacious Path approves,
As Interest leads, or Inclination moves:
Yet most through Error lose their wished for Way,
Who sets out wrong must wander far astray.
Some, plunged in Riot, seek their sovereign Good
From tilting Spirits and tumultuous Blood;
With large Potations Reason's Voice depress,
And drown her Clamours in the deep Excess;
'Midst reeking Fumes exhale their Lives away,
Whilst late Repentance and a swift Decay,
Pursuing close at Pleasure's lawless Heels,
Bring all the Woes despairing Frenzy feels:
When Lungs decayed, and Nerves convulsive shake,
Each pungent Pang confirms the mad Mistake:
Reflection then on Reason's Aid shall call,
Bid Prudence prop what Folly dooms to fall.
In vain much Wealth for Happiness we try;
Soft Pleasures pall, and soon as tasted die.
Ambition giddy on its Summit grows;
And Crowns sit heavy on the Monarch's Brows:
Our Knowledge too in narrow Bounds confined,
Defrauds our Hopes and disappoints the Mind:
Lo! all Enjoyments are imperfect here;
And Pleasure's Cup is ever mixed with Care.
Since all Conditions their own Wants proclaim,
Is then this Happiness an empty Name?
A mere Delusion in our warm Embrace?
A flitting Phantom which we fondly chase?
Can nothing here the eager Mind sustain?
Is Health a Shadow, or is Virtue vain?
The one in Absence we too late regard;
The other fails, nor is its own Reward:
Continued Health's true Value's seldom known,
And Virtue's strangely out of Fashion grown.
As they who sail by India's fragrant Shore,
Relax their Speed, and every Gale devour;
Bask in the Breezes breathed from Spicey Lands,
Yet sound the Rocks and shun the shelving Sands;
To their intended Coast they slowly steer.
Enjoy the Passage, but not anchor there.
So we through Life with calm Content should roam,
Endure the Journey, not mistake our Home.
What here we reap is for Refreshment given;
Convenient Stages in our Way to Heaven:
What Taste of Happiness we find below,
Must from Religion's sacred Fountain flow;
When gentle Passions move obedient still,
And Reason rules, and Wisdom guides the Will.
This Soul-felt Calm can every Ill remove,
And gives an Earnest of the Joys above,
Draws the bright Scene, unfolds the Gates of Bliss,
A Life Celestial, and begun in this.
To the Hon. Mr. Baron MOUNTNEY.
THOUGH Crowds, litigious, to the Town resort,
And eager Clients fill the noisy Court,
You Crier, -- silence yonder buzzing Throng;
Be hushed the Bar, for Lelius reads my Song.
Let Oaks and Acres undetermined stand,
No Cause be moved but of Poetic Land;
Parnassian Palms shall moneyed Suits retard,
And Jones in forma pauperis be heard:
Whilst he, still anxious for the Sentence, fears
His Loss of Laurels as a Loss of Ears:
Yet on his Judge's Friendship would depend;
But he in judging never knows a Friend.
Of Wit and Wealth impartial weighs the Claim;
What Mulct more grievous than a Fine on Fame?
Yet that, even that, I Will bear, if he decide,
Who heals my Weakness, whilst he wounds my Pride.
Begin, my Muse, Britannia claims thy Strains,
Her fertile Valleys, and her slow'ry Plains;
Thrice happy Britain, on whose Bosom grows
What Earth, all-bounteous, yields, or Art bestows;
Delighted here my wondering Eyes survey,
In Winter's Frown the smiling Groves look gay;
The Mountains mantl'd, in rich Bloom appear,
And Larks and Nightingales mistake the Year.
The Muse in vain would local Beauties sing,
Where all is Rapture, and where all is Spring;
Yet Hampton's copious Lawns demand my Song,
They charmed me early, and they charmed me long;
Within thy Shades, from scorching Suns secure,
Thy Noons were pleasing, and thy Morns were pure;
In Visions wrapped among thy Groves I lay,
Or on thy cool Canals enjoyed the Day:
The sweet Remembrance in my Bosom swells;
There Bliss untainted and my Tilson dwells:
Long there may Health endear each smiling Hour,
Bloom in the Beam, and bless the genial Bower;
Domestic Happiness from Heaven descend,
And every earthly Joy surround my Friend,
Who took me timely in his generous Hand,
Dismayed and wandering in a foreign Land;
Who made me, smiling, with a Soul confessed
His warm Associate, and his welcome Guest;
Beneath his hospitable Roof retired,
His Humor charmed me, and his Sense inspired.
His Mira there in Virtue's Form is seen,
Peace in her Smile, and Pleasure in her Mien;
Winning Attraction, and connubial Grace,
Breathe in her Air, and brighten in her Face:
Accomplished thus to cheer and temper Life,
To Pride a Stranger, and unknown to Strife;
Mild and harmonious as the Breath of May,
When Fv'ning Gales over Beds of Roses play;
She gently moves, and with her moves a Band,
Three smiling Graces at her guiding Hand;
Delightful Babes, whose lovely Faces show
The Morn's Vermilion, and the Noontide Glow,
Whose blooming Spring a Mother's Hope employs,
Her Pledge and Promise of maturer Joys;
Like tender Vines, whose Blossoms deck the Year,
Ere Boughs extend, or ripening Fruits appear,
The indulgent Warmth her genial Power supplies,
And bids the future Fragrance fill the Skies.
With her two Nymphs in lettered League combined,
Of virtuous Sentiment and Taste refined;
Sisters in Science joined, and polished Ease,
And each bright Talent to improve or please;
External Beauty seems their smallest Share,
Though none more lovely, and though few so fair;
Yet Strength of Mind, with Judgment's added Weight,
And gentlest Manners, make their Charms complete.
Take thou the Verse, accept the grateful Line,
Which to thy Tilson's Worth I pay, and thine;
To thee, O MOUNTNEY, let my Strains ascend,
Forgive my Freedom, when I call thee Friend.
Awed by thy Judgment, let my Conduct be
From mean Assurance and from Flattery free:
Though low my Station, let my Thoughts aspire;
You raised my Genius, and you fanned my Fire.
By your Example warmed, I took my Flight
On feeble Wings, yet kept you still in Sight;
Ambitious still your Path sublime to tread,
Where Wisdom pointed, and where Virtue led;
Fond of the Precept, I the Practice tried,
Proud to approach you, but with humble Pride.
The Character of a true Patriot, and a good Man.
HAIL, happy Man, for public Good designed,
Whose Tongue declares the Message of thy Mind,
In Language such as ancient Rome might hear,
When Caesar shook, and Tully thundered there!
Lo! awful Courts with solemn Silence bend,
And sacred Senates on your Voice attend,
When there you right the injured Orphan's Cause,
Or here promote a Nation's wholesome Laws:
What pleasing Fervor in each Bosom glows,
When, smooth as Boyne, your Elocution flows,
Your Sense as deep, as clear your happy Theme,
Your Style as strong, yet gentle as its Stream;
Blessed in each Thought, with every Virtue blessed,
Which warms the Patriot's or the Parent's Breast.
These sacred Dignities, illustrious Names,
Your Country honors, and your Offspring claims:
To both indulgent, you each Hour employ,
Abroad their Ornament, at home their Joy,
Your firm Integrity is still the same,
No Slave to Prejudice, no Fool to Fame;
Your steadfast Principles the Test abide,
Spurn at Corruption, or Ambition's Pride;
True to your Country, to your King sincere,
Detesting Flattery, and contemning Fear;
Scorning to swim down Faction's headlong Flood;
A Patriot only for the public Good:
In Worth accomplished, and to Truth resigned,
Humane to Failings, and to Merit kind.
Such were the Virtues, such their high Degree,
Which from bright Ancestors beam down on Thee;
Yet shin'st thou not with mere imputed Rays,
The faint Reflection of a borrowed Blaze;
Each envied Dignity you make more known,
Bright'ning their Luster as you spread your own;
No Gleam shall sink in Time's devouring Gloom,
They Will gild Oblivion, and survive the Tomb.
When falling Monuments their Trust betray,
And Marbles moulder like their Dust away;
When Nature's Frame a dreadful Ruin lies,
And all her Beauty, all her Order dies,
Immortal Virtue shall transcend her Date,
Look down on Death, and triumph over Fate,
And sure if Reason, with exalted Eye,
Pursues her Footsteps to the Realms on high,
Through Life's Vicissitudes still pressing on
With Speed unwearied, till the Prize is won;
That pious Ardour must true Wisdom be,
In those who seek it, and pursue like thee,
Firm to your Purpose, in resolving wise,
By Justice guided to the important Prize;
Above Misfortune's unexpected Blow,
That Lot of Mortals in this Vale below;
Resigned to Heaven when he to bless forbears,
And wisely thankful for the Good he spares:
And let me add, O may it not offend!
The Muse's Favorite, and the Muse's Friend,
On his Royal Highness the Duke of CUMBERLAND's Success at the Hague.
WHilst grateful Britons lift their loud Applause
For sacred Rights redeemed, and rescued Laws;
A People saved, the joyful Sound proclaim,
And every Bosom swells with William's Name,
His Country freed, he glows for Humankind,
And Europe's Safety fills his mighty Mind.
Lo! Belgian States the Royal Envoy warms,
Inflames their Breasts, and fires their Souls to Arms:
Roused by his Voice, the fatal Chain they broke,
And saw with Horror the impending Yoke.
To naked View each Gallick Scheme he shows;
That France and Freedom are eternal Foes:
Her luring Bait he strips of all Disguise,
Opening the deadly Snare to Europe's Eyes.
The mighty Chiefs, amazed, beheld with Fear
The Storm black frowning, and their Fate so near;
Their anxious Minds the God-like Prince allayed,
They court his Councils, and implore his Aid:
To him the Nations gathering from afar,
Entrust their Plans of Peace, their Hopes of War.
Hail, mighty Chief! hail! darling glorious Youth!
Guardian of Liberty, and injured Truth!
Britannia' s Boast, whose early Virtues stood
'Midst rending Thunders firm, in Fields of Blood
Wading victorious through the Crimson Tide,
And France defeated at thy Father's Side!
On thee our utmost Hopes, our Joys, depend;
On thee, the Tyrant's Foe, and Freedom's Friend.
Go forth invincible, assert the Field;
Justice shall lend her Sword, and Truth her Shield.
Go forth, great Prince, with conscious Worth elate,
Whilst Angels guard thee in the Files of Fate.
Thy Cause shall triumph over the destined Foe,
And Heaven shall guide, and strengthen every Blow:
When Battles rage, Success shall round thee play,
And each be like Culloden's glorious Day.
To a Young GENTLEMAN.
PRevailing Vice still fetters sordid Souls;
And yielding Virtue at her Will controuls;
An Over-match, alas! too frequent found,
When foiled Religion must herself give Ground.
Rebellious Nature with unbounded Sway,
Perverts the Will and leads the Mind astray,
Inflames the Soul, excites depraved Desires,
Kindles to Lust, and lights up fatal Fires;
Unruly Passions in the Heart arise,
And all that is rational before them flies;
Like restive Coursers we still headlong run,
Our Speed increasing, as the Goal we shun,
Whilst hot and hasty in the erroneous Track,
Our Strength we weary, and our Nerves we slack:
When boiling Blood fermenting in our Veins,
The raging Fever of the Soul sustains,
Wild and delirious in the frantic Stretch,
We drive at Happiness beyond our Reach;
'Till cooling Age affords us Time to think,
And pausing checks us on the utmost Brink.
When gray Experience makes us anxious mourn,
And points the Way by which we'd fain return:
But O! too steep the backward Brow appears;
And who can clamber with a Load of Years?
Our misspent Youth is then beyond our Power,
No Morning Ray can gild our Evening Hour;
Fearful and faint our Wand'rings we regret,
In Clouds decline, in total Darkness set.
Thrice happy he, who goes not young astray,
By Wisdom guided in his early Way:
Her radiant Lamp shall light his Footsteps on,
Where all the Good and Great are safely gone.
Though Wisdom's Summit we ascend with Pain,
The Labor ceases when the Point we gain;
Revolving Doubts no longer then retard,
When Hope is swallowed in the vast Reward.
Go on, my Friend, the exalted Palm secure;
Who seeks a Crown must generous Toils endure.
RATH-FARNHAM, a POEM. Addressed to WILLIAM PALISER, Esquire
AS in the moral World we, wondering, see
Such different Stations, yet such just Degree;
Which all contribute wisely to sustain
The mutual Intercourse, and social Chain,
Whose Links in regular Gradation fall,
Whilst all on one, and each depends on all:
Wise Nature, thus, proportions her Degrees,
From Shrubs to Cedars, and from Brooks to Seas;
As princely Dignities, exalted, rise,
So lofty Mountains meet the bending Skies;
Inferior Honors hold inferior State,
As lesser Hills upon those Mountains wait;
Things great and small, if small and great there be,
In Contrast stand; though opposite, agree;
The thundering Tempest and the rolling Whale,
The Be that murmurs in the Morning Gale,
All, all, one aptest Harmony combine,
And speak the Author of their Frame, Divine!
Hence, various Seasons, various Beauties bring,
The naked Winter, as the liv'ry'd Spring;
Hence, different Objects charm the expanded Soul,
And lift her Thoughts to one stupendous Whole!
Ten thousand Pleasures on my Senses pour;
The craggy Precipice, the blooming Bower,
The winding Rivulet, the flowery Vale,
The Grove that quivers in the fragrant Gale,
The glad'ning Vista, the extended View,
The Hills invellop'd in yon azure Blue.
Here, fair Dublin.
Eblana fills the wondering Eye,
Her stately Pillars prop the incumbent Sky;
Herself a Queen majestically great;
A thousand Villa's at her Levee wait;
A thousand Palaces her Pomps increase,
With Grecian Grandeur, and with Roman Grace;
Her opening Arms are socially displayed,
Inviting Commerce, and embracing Trade:
A floating Forest on her Bosom rides,
The daily Tribute of her swelling Tides;
Exulting Plenty warms her vigorous Veins;
And Health and Peace are hers; -- for Stanhope reigns*
There, eastward shines, fair Emblem of his Power,
Aloft, revered, great Lord Chancellor.
Atticus his Bower;
Though high in Place, yet easy to ascend,
Whose Shades give Shelter, and whose Courts defend;
Sublime Retreat! where Wisdom finds Repose,
To weigh the Widows Wrongs, and Orphans Woes;
Where easy Grandeur from the World withdraws;
And Goodness tempers Lenity with Laws.
Yon distant Mr. Baron Mountney.
Groves: warm Gratitude compels
To sing the Shades where lettered Lelius dwells;
To Justice dear, to Mercy still inclined,
Esteemed by Virtue, loved by all Mankind:
Whose Soul is Equity, whose Voice is Law,
Whose Words give Rapture, and whose Presence Awe;
Whose Judgment triumphs in the fairest Light,
And shines distinguished in a Nation's Sight;
Whose Wit enlivens every social Scene,
The best accomplished, and the most humane:
Forgive me, Lelius, that I once offend
My Patron, Guide, and let me add, my Friend.
From hence, my Muse, thy roving Eyes reclaim,
Contract thy Subject, and pursue thy Theme.
To yonder stately Pile direct thy Flight,
Whose Form looks lovely, and whose Parts delight;
Whose rich Embellishments true Taste display,
So dressed Sophronia in her youthful Day,
When like the golden Flower in Summer's Pride,
She shone, her Sister blooming at her Side;
'Till from the Crowd she pensive fled, to mourn
Her loved Eliza sleeping in her Urn,
And over her Tomb reclined, the live-long Day,
Forgets she ever was fair, or ever was gay.
There Pomp and Decency together reign,
Discreetly tempered in the justest Mean:
Here Hospitality, by Prudence crowned,
Deals her unerring Bounty all around.
In thee, Rath-farnham, Eden's Bloom revives,
And teeming Nature in thy Valley thrives:
Thy Hills, high raised above the extended Plain,
O'erlook a Continent, command the Main,
Feast the stretched Sight with Prospects unconfined,
And open endless Pleasures to the Mind:
Here, high with horrid Brows o'erhang the Rocks:
Beneath, lie Lawns out-stretch'd, and fleecy Flocks:
The gloomy Thickets, and the opening Glade,
The Arch magnifick, and the clear Cascade,
Whose Crystal Sheets in dazzling Circles play,
Pierced with the Effulgence of the Noontide Ray;
Whence vocal Streams over Silver Pebbles float,
Whilst dimpling Eddies dance to every Note.
How gay the Garden, how serene the Bower,
Where tranquil Thought enjoys the blissful Hour
Far from the World's tumultuous empty Noise,
Here, virtuous Luxury herself enjoys;
Waked by soft Zephyrs, and the purpling Dawn,
Inhales the Breezes over the dewy Lawn;
Intent the figured Fountain's Form to scan,
Or sketch the Embrio of some nobler Plan;
Genius still brings each grand Idea forth,
And happy Judgment crowns its rising Worth.
Lo! Nature, here, and Art, for ever vie;
And Art the Mind, and Nature charms the Eye:
Prolifick Earth disclaims the genial Skies;
And Chymick Heat the absent Sun supplies,
Exotic Blossoms, Northern Blasts that shun;
Nor own a Parent but the Southern Sun,
'Midst freezing Winds enjoy a sultry Clime,
And flourish fruitful with a Summer's Prime;
Births premature adorn the smiling Glebe,
And Nature wonders at each Foster Babe.
Enchanting Scene! here Paliser retires;
Here, sacred Science all his Soul inspires;
The Scene with Pleasure and Surprise we scan,
And every Thing admire; but most the Man.
To a FRIEND who had writ Verses to Mr. POPE, in the Person of APOLLO,
occasioned by hearing that Poet abused.
OH! wonder not, Varus, fell Cynicks should censure,
Who snarl by Retail, and who bark at a Venture,
As Beagles whose Jaws are wide open to swallow,
Can by one single Yelp make all the Pack follow:
Such Critics at random a Wit would devour;
Unhappy the Author who falls in their Power:
At his Person or Parts they still level their Fury;
When Envy is Judge you will need a good Jury:
For blind to those Beauties which dazzle our Sight,
Whose Glitter amazes and gives such Delight;
Like Moles in the Dark, while they grope for a Fault,
They throw up the Rubbish by which they are caught;
So ill Nature excites a dull Dunce in descanting,
And Malice provokes him where Judgment is wanting;
As Mastiffs in Fury will bark at the Moon,
And Frogs from their Quagmire dare croak at the Sun.
Dan Pope, who was nursed by the Muses and Graces,
Whose Worth with his Years still improves and increases,
Above their short Reach while over Pindus' high Head,
His Name in wide Circles immortal shall spread;
Yet him, the great Monarch of Genius and Wit,
A Bantling of Dennis endeavored to hit;
And labored to spatter just like his dull Sire,
What Asses will envy and Mankind admire.
So Madmen, when frantic, throw Dirt at the Skies,
Though the Filth in descending still falls in their Eyes.
It Is surely amazing such Fools should pursue
A Poet defended by Phoebus and you:
Defended by Phoebus who lends him his Lyre,
And brightens his Genius with all his own Fire;
Delighting to visit the Bard in his Way,
To smile over Twickenham with Pleasure each Day,
To dart down Effulgence, and from his high Noon
To gild the green Laurels, and shine on his Son:
While you in the Bower imbibing his Blaze,
Inspired by your Friendship and destined to please,
Resolving your eminent Leader to follow,
You listed for Pope, and you writ with Apollo,
Thus they by Alliance are bound to sustain
Your affable Talent and humorous Vein;
When impudent Scribblers, who Envy inherit,
Presume to invade or your Person or Merit.
Such Creatures whose Optics with Film are overspread,
Can only perceive what is gloomy and sad;
As Owls at high Noontide avoid the clear Ray,
And choose the brown Horror to seek for their Prey:
Or as Idiots, to form a Distinction unable,
Would trample on Corals in search of a Pebble.
To THOMAS ADDERLY, Esquire
THE Muse abashed thy leisure Hour attends,
To thee dismayed her thankful Tribute sends,
So long by timorous Diffidence delayed,
And now, though late, (alas!) thus poorly paid.
Yet still presuming humbly to appear
With grateful Wishes, and with Soul sincere,
She bids thee Welcome from the Waves and Wind,
Nor sings unmindful of thy Care behind;
From whom, with weeping Eyes, compelled to part,
Slowly you turned, and brought but half your Heart:
The illustrious The Right Hon. Lord Visc. Charlemount, now on his Travels.
Youth with Justice claims the rest,
Since all thy Image fills his filial Breast.
Him shall thy Precepts shield on every side,
Through every changing Clime his Guard and Guide;
Safely you send him with Ideas fraught,
Impressed by Science, and by Wisdom taught:
Of Rank though conscious, and to Power allied,
Yet bearing Titles with becoming Pride:
Whose Mind Religion's genuine Beauty warms;
Whom manly Piety, whom Reason charms:
Accomplished thus to stretch his early Ken,
And steer with Safety through the Ways of Men,
Secure he launches on the dangerous Tide,
And shuns the Shelves and Rocks on either Side;
Caught by no Syren's soft bewitching Mien;
In Calms still cautious, and in Storms serene;
Through Life's all-varying Course sedately steers,
His Pilot, Prudence, still improved by Years.
With Transport shall thou view the home-bound Sail
Gliding triumphant in the prosperous Gale,
Nor more by anxious tender Fears dismayed,
Thy generous Toils shall all be well repaid.
How few, like him, by wise Instruction awed,
At Home his Country's Pride, her Boast abroad!
Like him, how few make Learning's Heights their Aim,
And climb, and pant to grasp at virtuous Fame!
Go then, blessed Youth! expand thy curious Mind,
Go, and remark the Wiles of Humankind:
How Custom sways, how Power supports Applause,
How slavish Yokes are sanctified by Laws;
Where Nature charms, the Tyrant's Frown annoys;
And Priestly Pride the Heavenly Smile destroys.
If blooming Italy inchants thine Eye,
It Is flowery Summits, and its Crystal Sky,
With Pity view those Slaves whom Rigours goad,
Who groan and toil beneath the galling Load.
When Freedom's fled, what Joy to Man remains,
Who'd wish to drag in Paradise his Chains?
See ancient Rome, where Earth's grand Tyrants swayed,
Now Time's sad Prey, in Heaps of Ruin laid:
Recording Stone in dumb Confusion lies,
Whilst Virgil's deathless Song his Stroke defies.
Bright in the Lyrick Bard's immortal Page
Mecenas shines through every distant Age,
Through every Clime, in every Language known,
The Patron's Fame has with the Poet's flown.
How glows thy Breast to equal every Deed,
How kindles at his Glories as you read!
Oh! could my Muse insure her short-lived Song,
Like Horace sprightly, and like Virgil strong,
To Time's last Stage my envied Name should shine,
And bloom, immortal, by recording thine.
VERSES inscribed to the Rev. Dr. DELANY.
A Youth whom Folly long had led aside,
Was blessed with Reason, but o'er-run with Pride:
His Mind with Judgment and with Sense was fraught;
Piercing his Wit, sagacious was his Thought;
By Nature fitted to discern aright,
Whilst Science sharpened and improved his Sight:
But lost to Virtue in his early Way,
He walked the Path which led him wide astray:
An ill Example his strong Passion sways,
The foul Infection on his Morals preys:
Religion mocked he daily hears and sees,
Endures it first, then likes it by Degrees;
Till with the potent Poison all overspread,
His Conscience slumbers, and his Fears are fled.
Now plunged in Vice, he feels no Pang within,
But sports with Death, and basks secure in Sin:
With horrid Blasphemies is nightly pleased:
A dying Savior, and a God appeased,
Are Subjects made for shocking Ridicule,
When Wit runs wanton in the mad Mis-rule:
Religion fled, had left no feeble Trace;
Nor in his Heart remained one Mark of Grace.
Perverse, forlorn, O Death, he is wholly thine,
A ripening Victim to the Wrath Divine;
The angry Bolt in Heaven's right Hand grows red,
And aims Destruction at his guilty Head,
When gracious Providence with Smile serene,
Bade melting Mercy gently step between.
Some Angel guides him with celestial Care,
And leads him, heedless, to the House of Prayer,
Where happily Paulus, in fair Truth's Defense,
(His Armor, Reason; and his Weapon, Sense)
Awful arose, and with persuasive Art,
Displays the Preacher's, and the Apostle's Part;
Destined the hardened Sinner to subdue;
His Words resistless, as his Cause was true.
The listening Youth with conscious Tremblings heard,
The mighty Truths his powerful Tongue declared,
Alternate Changes in his Face arise,
The Crimson Blush in sudden Paleness dies;
He stands amazed, his Eyes with Horror roll,
Conviction flashes on his inmost Soul.
Now Hope and Fear are in his Heart at Strife,
Eternal Torments, and eternal Life;
Ideas, fearful, in his Mind renew,
And open, dreadful, to his anxious View:
His frozen Heart to Faith's warm Beam gives Way,
Like Snow dissolving in the Noontide Ray;
And from his Eyes repentant Drops distill:
Like hallowed Dew on Hermon's sacred Hill;
Virtue and Truth resume their native Place,
And Vice and Error now resign to Grace;
Convinced, subdued, the yielding Convert stands,
And lifts on high his supplicating Hands:
The humbl'd Penitent low bends to God,
And thanks the Hand which held the healing Rod:
This straying Lamb, whom Error long misled,
Now, sacred Shepherd, in thy Fold is fed:
Restored to taste, with thy well-tended few,
The living Fountain and the fragrant Dew.
A greater Triumph in his Change is won,
Than Julius earned, or Philip's haughty Son:
Not Indian Treasures yield so bright a Crown;
Not conquered Worlds can claim such true Renown.
Go on, admired, thy heavenly Power employ,
Give Sinners Comfort, and give Angels Joy:
Be still ambitious of such glorious Fame,
And add new Trophies to thy Reverend Name.
An ESSAY on the WEAKNESS of HUMAN KNOWLEDGE, and the Uncertainty of mortal
Life.
OF Truths involved we vainly boast to know,
Or Secrets sunk in Nature's Womb too low;
Where our short Sight affords a feeble Gleam,
Like flitting Visions in some wandering Dream.
There, wrapped in Mazes of Uncertainty,
Suspending Reason doubts her own Decree,
Discerns her Weakness, must her Search confine,
Too dim her Optics, and too short her Line
To fathom Depths that in thick Darkness lie,
And sink impervious to the mental Eye.
A Thousand Things correct our wanton Pride,
And Doubts on Doubts arise on every Side:
What are the universal Fabrick's Laws?
Or if Attraction be the immediate Cause,
That knits the Springs of the revolving Sphere,
Excites its Movements, makes its Parts cohere.
Through yonder Arch a trackless Space explore,
Or mark the Waves on this resounding Shore,
What guides the Stars in their stupendous Course,
Through complex Motion, and contending Force?
How ebbing Seas from shelving Shores subside?
Or circling Cynthia swells the foaming Tide?
What Doors pour forth the furious Northern Blast,
Or bitter Breezes from the chilling East?
Whence sudden Tempests toss the boistr'ous Deep,
Or Storms are hushed, and on its Surface sleep?
How rending Earthquakes make the Mountains rock,
And shrinking Nature feels the dreadful Shock?
Of Gravity the latent Cause reveal;
Why mounts the Smoke, or sinks the show'ry Hail?
How flows the Vein in yonder rocky Rill,
Or flash the Sparkles from the stubborn Steel?
What Instinct moves the parsimon'ous Ant,
Or dictates to the unwieldy Elephant?
How Mind and Matter strike such Harmony?
And Will and Motion in one Form agree?
Whence dawn Ideas? Whence Perception's Ray?
Whence gleams the Soul with intellectual Day?
Th'internal Essence of one Atom show:
Then boast of Science, and how much you know.
Here glimmering Reason lights our dubious Way,
This Twilight State forbids a brighter Day:
Through Nature's Mist, lo! Truth appears from far,
To few a fixed, to more a wandering Star:
Their Pole indeed who sail by Wisdom's Shore;
But lost to those who distant Depths explore;
Whose Rays illusive often our Sight misguide,
And lessen here what there they magnified.
Our Judgments vary, as our Passions bend,
Caprice the Motive, and Self-love the End.
Opinion's tinctured with Complexion's Stains,
The mottley Issue of discordant Brains,
When formed by Fancy in Affection's Dress,
Their differing Sires in different Shapes express.
From hence the fierce Polemick Hydra came,
From hence this System, and that Sect took Name:
Hence Epicurus made his Atoms dance,
And hence Descartes thy Physical Romance.
From hence Religion felt the wild Extremes,
The Bigot Fury, and Enthusiast's Dreams.
By dim Conjectures we indulge our Pride;
Such doubtful Knowledge is a dangerous Guide:
The winking Glimmer will our Hopes deceive,
Like dying Lamps in some perplexing Cave:
It lights us in while we with Wonder gaze,
But soon extinguished in the gloomy Maze,
Bewildered where the Lamp no more can burn,
We lose our Labor, and too late return.
Our prying Eyes would pierce all Nature's Store,
Unlock her Secrets, turn her Treasures over:
Yet far within she shuns the searching Ray;
Her mighty Master keeps the mystic Key;
A nearer View's denied to mortal Sight;
Newton' s transcendent Day must bound in Night.
Well did eternal Providence ordain,
In Life's short View to make the Prospect plain,
Where Man may answer Nature's wholesome Call,
Enjoy himself, and seek the Good of All:
Where known Effects result from stated Laws,
And loud proclaim the one Eternal Cause;
The Source from whence the vast Creation flows;
The Mind from which ten thousand Systems rose.
For these wise Ends our Faculties were made;
And God we see through all his Works displayed.
Beyond this Limit Man may spare his Pains,
Nor waste the Vigor of his laboring Brains,
In quest of Truths remote from human Sight,
Which 'scape our Ken, and mocked the Stagyrite.
The smallest Worm insults the Sage's Hand;
All Gresham's vanquished by a Grain of Sand.
The stinted Lot, allowed to Human Race,
The narrow Bounds of our contracted Space,
Can scarce our Minds with useful Thoughts supply;
Like After-fruits, we just appear and die.
Vain Searches here our Levity proclaim;
By Tempests tossed, who takes a steady Aim?
When Waves are dashing round the driven Bark,
The Pilot's Danger mocks his nice Remark.
Who would improve that knows no Term to come,
Or purchase Diamonds to adorn a Tomb?
By poor Endeavors we solicit Praise,
An empty Idol, which to Pride we raise;
A frail Defense to shield our Names from Death,
A fulsome Vapor made of vulgar Breath,
It Is Virtue lengthens out our mortal Span,
Immortal Fame shall crown the virtuous Man.
Religion's Eye can soften human Fate,
Whilst Hope, from far, beholds a better State.
If long, or short, it matters not our Stay;
While Reason smooths, and Peace prepares the Way:
This irksome Desert must be traveled through,
Ere Pisgah's Top, or Canaan's Vales we view.
Men glide, like Bubbles, on the Stream of Time,
Burst as they swell, and vanish in their Prime:
Or floating down the universal Tide,
Encount'ring join, and in the Shock subside.
Since God and Nature some wise Purpose plan
In all this lower World, but most in Man;
A Creature framed at such a vast Expense,
Enriched with Reason, and adorned with Sense;
Why would its Maker's Hand so close confine
To clogging Clay this Particle Divine;
Which outward Casualties can still annoy,
And whose own Motion must itself destroy;
When full-blown Faculties his Genius crown,
Lo! Death assails, and lops the Pigmy down:
Why all this Labor on a Thing that must
As soon as finished, fall again to Dust?
Thus reasons Man, whose Reas'nings often are vain,
And sees so little of the eternal Chain,
From whence contingent Destinies impend,
A Scale of Causes that in God must end,
The mystic Mazes of his own Decree,
In Wonders wrapped which He alone can see.
Yet Man, vile Reptile! with Presumption pryes
Where trembling Angels veil their wondering Eyes.
Imperious Emmet! know thy native Dust,
Thyself mistaken, and thy Maker just:
Who gives thee Rudiments of Knowledge here,
Then lifts thee upwards to a nobler Sphere;
Above the Stars to take thy high Degree,
And brighten on to all Eternity:
Where Truth, still shining in unclouded Day,
Shall all her Radiance on thy Soul display.
Forbear, vain Man! to murmur at thy Fate,
Nor mourn thy Passage to a better State.
Though Nature binds thee to this sordid Spot,
Break from her Bands, and seek a happier Lot:
To God alone let thy Affections tend,
Thy proper Center, and thy final End,
Who out of nothing made the World and thee,
His Wisdom formed, and Goodness bid it be.
Eternal Wisdom, whilst yet all was Night,
Called forth from Chaos his first Creature, Light,
And spread its Splendour over the wide Expanse,
Where Orbs unnumber'd move in mystic Dance.
Then smiled Omnipotence his Works to see;
He smiled in Light, and bid that Lamp still be:
Now blazed the Sun in his bright Orb above;
The Morning Stars in joyful Measures move;
The listening Angels in deep Wonder gaze;
Then joined the Hymn, and their first Work was Praise.
To the Hon. Mrs. CONOLLY.
HOW pious Worth exalted Rank endears;
What lovely Grandeur Virtue lends to Years!
What Dignity humane, what awful Grace,
Dwell in that Mien, and open in that Face!
A Mind thus blessed shall eye the last slow Sand,
When tardy Time uplifts his lenient Hand:
With dauntless Joy the untried State explore,
Quit Nature's Limits, and with Seraphs soar.
Why else would Piety her Palm display?
Why else invite us to the Realms of Day?
Sure Heaven had made the Christian Task too hard,
If Goodness here could claim no just Reward:
If Faith, far-seeing, found no chearing Gleam,
Nor Evening Hope enjoyed the Morning Beam.
Lo! dawning Glories gild this Vale of Strife,
And Heaven's own Lamp illumes the Bounds of Life.
Sedate, from thence thy tranquil Eye now cast
On future Pleasures, and enjoy the past.
Pleasures sublime and pure, still genuine glow,
Which only Hearts like thine can ever know;
Where every Virtue in warm League combined,
Are treasured up in Store for Humankind:
Thence flowing daily through thy generous Hand,
Relieve all Care, and glad a grateful Land.
For thee, incessant, breathes the Heartfelt Prayer,
The Wish unfeigned, and the Vow sincere;
For thee the Widow lifts her tearless Eyes,
For thee the Orphan's Incense mounts the Skies:
The public Voice for thee still fervent prays,
And begs each Blessing from thy length of Days;
Long here to flourish, long thy Power dispense,
Ere Heaven shall call, and Angels waft thee hence.
Take then the Plaudit to thy Merit due,
The Crown unfading, and the Triumph true.
How vain the tinsel Pomp, which Monarchs claim,
The Blaze of Grandeur, and the Blast of Fame,
Those useless Trappings of external State!
It Is Wisdom shines, it is Virtue makes them great:
Such virtuous Wisdom as adorns thy Mind
By Hope exalted, and by Faith refined.
With grateful Fervours must that Bosom swell,
Where pious Confidence, and Meekness dwell.
The Soul firm settled, and the Thought serene,
The Part well acted, and the closing Scene,
Appear triumphant to the exulting Eye,
Ere Angels draw the Curtain of the Sky.
It Is thine, the Debt of Nature thus to pay,
And close the Evening of thy splendid Day:
Thine, with Applause, to quit the mortal Stage;
Thy Part a Pattern for each future Age,
To teach Posterity the Track Divine,
And point the immortal Path which once was thine.
To the Reverend Dr. Mann, occasioned by the Author's asking him for a Subject
to write on, and his saying he could think of none.
IS every moral Subject found so trite?
Has wholesome Satire nothing new to write?
No Vice to lash, no Folly to expose?
Shall happier Pulpits do the Work in Prose?
Shall they reclaim the erring Sons of Men?
And Preachers Tongues supplant the Poet's Pen?
Shall distant Fears reform flagitious Times?
Nor present Shame give Sanction to my Rhimes?
How much would Breeding and Politeness fail,
Should Wits be frighted at a formal Tale!
Clear Truths, in such a Garb, would give Offense;
What! think, to scar with Bugbears Men of Sense!
Thank Heaven! they bid these Monkish Dreams good [Night.
The Clouds are gone, and all again looks bright.
Such Sentiments there are, such Humors spread
Their noxious Poison through the Heart and Head;
What learned Cure can Doctors here advise,
Since Fools extol what wiser Knaves despise?
An odd Experiment for once be tried,
Inlist a Poet on Religion's Side.
Let Verse with all her youthful Train appear,
And Wit to Virtue serve a Volunteer,
At her own Weapons foil the dext'rous Foe,
And shoot down Folly with her favorite Bow.
Decked in bright Arms, let Reason gaily tread,
First win the Fancy, then surprise the Head;
Since Truth must, like a pelted Pillar, stand
The Butt and Aim of each fantastic Hand,
That sacred Pile, whose Rock eternal bears
The Rage of hostile Storms, and sapping Years.
In vain the Floods assault its steadfast Base;
In vain would Hell its heavenly Form deface.
Though eighteen rolling Ages loud proclaim
Its Strength unshaken, and its Height the same;
Though half the Kings who rule this pendent Ball,
Bow down their Scepters, and before it fall:
Against it Knaves their impious Force will try,
And mimick Fools their feeble Bolts let fly.
Say then, my Friend! from whence this Humor springs,
This bloated Vice, this angry Form of Things,
Whose inbred Venom stirs such tumid Rage;
The Bane and Brand of this licentious Age?
Shall not the Muse the hidden Cause disclose,
Probe the proud Part, the putrid Plague expose?
Regardless she, who feels the pungent Smart;
The Head misguided, or the high-blown Heart;
If Priest or People most in Fault she finds,
If Pride oppresses, or if Envy blinds,
To both alike impartial, she proceeds,
And forms her Estimate of Men by Deeds.
Say first, Why rolls the Force of Fashion's Tide
So smoothly swift against Religion's Side,
Whilst down its Stream the Men of Power throng,
The Men of Pleasure, and the Men of Song
Drawn by the artful Lord Shaftsbury.
Peer's seducing Lore,
Join the gay Crowd, and seek the enchanting Shore:
There the abandoned, headlong, and profane,
With Pride press forwards, and of Priests complain.
Bright as the Beams that from the Ocean rise,
When radiant Rays adorn the Eastern Skies;
Fair as the Essence of Etherial Light,
Dawning over Chaos, and coeval Night;
Pure as the Gale that from Arabia blows,
Than Lillies whiter, or than falling Snows,
Religion shone, when first the Heaven-born Maid
With Virgin Truth and Purity arrayed,
Sublimely meek disclosed her Angel Face,
Beaming celestial Smiles and shedding Grace.
Her suffering Sons the scourging Rod sustain;
Their Province, Patience, and their Portion, Pain.
No Pomp they seek, no pageant Power they need,
Ambitious only for her Sake to bleed.
In Meekness robbed, thus humble was her State;
"She knew no Wish so mean, as to be great."
On Heaven alone she fixed her steadfast Eye,
Her Master's Kingdom was beyond the Sky.
She sought not Wealth, unanxious of her Store;
For his Example taught her to be poor.
Thus in her blooming Years oppressed, she grew,
By Patience armed, the Mighty to subdue.
How mild her Mien, how winning then her Ways,
How different from her Looks in later Days!
The Muse would spare what fullen Truth may blame,
Nor dwells delighted on so harsh a Theme.
Truth, like the genial Sun will still abide,
Though Vapors veil it, and the Clouds may hide.
Could prying Malice, or could Envy see
Religion leaning, in the least Degree,
To fetter Freedom, or bright Reason blind,
Or throw a tangling Snare on Humankind:
Could one Ingredient in that pure Compound
To Parts pernicious, or the Whole, be found;
The Fool of Wit, with some Pretense, might fleer,
The Coxcomb rally, and the Pedant sneer.
Smart Virro frankly owns it makes him grieve,
To see the floating Robe and swelling Sleeve:
The Chin high bolster'd, and the florid Face,
Are mighty Marks of Wisdom, and of Grace:
Pert in the wrong, and seldom right in Season;
Too much in Haste to hear or offer Reason,
At Creeds he mocks; how loud the Laughing Fit!
How willing to be damned, to show his Wit!
Sporus, forsooth! allows some pious Cheats,
But then, such clumsey Bugbears, gross Deceits,
Such Monkish Phantoms, make the Juggle clear,
To Men of Sense the Thing will still appear;
Such Arts, indeed, may Vulgar Minds restrain,
And graver Fools who like, may hug the Chain.
To talk of Fasting, Furity, and Grace,
With all that Sanctity, and Form of Face,
Which pampered Priests over Velvet Cushions wear,
Would make a Hermit smile, a Stoic stare.
When they aloft hold forth the Cake and Rod,
And point to Paths, which Paul and Peter trod,
To narrow Paths they point, and thorny Ways,
And those who like, may tread them, if they please.
Far other Objects their Affections fix,
In Stalls to snore, or in a Coach and six.
Mere Censure is at best a poor Pretense,
And Malice ill supplies the Place of Sense:
Reproach so keen, when vulgar found, and trite,
Shows less of Candor, than of partial Spite.
Since Pride in all, and Passions still abound,
Since few are Proof, and none are perfect found;
To Nature's Slips be kind Allowance made,
And over her Failings cast a friendly Shade.
Though Priests, indeed, should good Examples give,
Yet Priests have Appetites, and Priests must live.
"But why such Wealth and Grandeur? Why so great?
"Like Lords attended, and like Kings they eat."
This more betrays the Rancour of your Will,
You Would have the Clergy barefoot Beggars still,
Still homeless wander, through the World oppressed,
Without Protection, or a Place of Rest.
The Wealth they have was by the State bestowed;
Or rather paid them as a Debt it owed.
For Shame! no more such bitter Railings bring,
You Quarrel with the Men, and not the Thing.
Over Vices watchful, and to Virtues blind,
By Nature prone to Prejudice, inclined
With sharpened Sight each human Spot to spy,
On shining Worth to shut the indignant Eye,
Shall groping Pride in Error's Twilight stray,
While Truth directs, and Wisdom points her Way,
Self-wilder'd, still the glorious Lamp evade,
And seek with purblind Orbs the sullen Shade?
If Goodness charms, if Learning's Palm you prize,
To Boulter bow, to Berkeley lift your Eyes.
If public Virtue for Esteem may call,
Behold his Country's Pride in mitred Maul Lord Bishop of Mead.
,
Diffusing Truth on pious Plans, to raise
Her present Hope, her Joy in future Days;
Sacred to her his upright Life he spends,
Her winning Charms displays, her Cause defends.
Thee, reverend Patriot! thee the Muse should sing,
And rise, exulting, on thy Clio's Wing:
In Verse like thine, recording Numbers raise,
And Deeds, unequaled, sing with lasting Praise
See Science shine, see public Virtue bloom,
See Arts advance to rival Greece and Rome!
No more the steril Glebe shall stint the Swain,
See barren Mountains crowned with golden Grain,
The staple Web employs the industrious Hand,
For Madden bids, and Wealth overflows the Land.
Who dare such Worth with venomed Tongue invade?
Yet these are Priests, and this their daily Trade.
Nor Prelates only shall the Muse inspire,
Lo! Ranks subordinate her Strains require.
A shining Throng, whom raging Vice must spare,
Mild Virtue honor, and calm Sense revere;
Exalted Minds, that would Perfection reach,
Still living Lessons of the Truths they teach,
Whose Practice proves the Precept pure displayed,
Whose Words illustrate, and whose Lives persuade,
Whose blameless Breasts th'invidious World might scan
From Vice as distant, as thy Mind, O Mann!
Where Meekness, throned, her pious Scepter sways,
And Virtue's Power commands these feeble Lays,
Long, long esteemed with thy loved Lelius shine,
And give me leave, for once, to call him mine.
O! could my Verse to distant Years declare
The grateful Heart, the Sentiment sincere,
Which ill in Words, and worse in Deeds, I tell,
Felt only in that Bosom where they swell;
Then should this Strain on Time's last Period tend,
Worthy so bright a Guide, so good a Friend.
To a Person of fine Parts, but whimsical Humors, of a cruel Nature, and bad
Morals.
WHY would wild Nature with her Bounty play,
And throw such Treasures of her Charms away,
With wasteful Hand; why lavish half her Store,
Enriching one, while she left Thousands poor?
Or squander Blessings on a stubborn Land,
That ill requites the cheerful Giver's Hand?
The surly Glebe a mingled Product shows;
The hateful Hemlock, and the fragrant Rose
Shoot up, promiscuous, in our wondering Sight,
And give, at once, both Horror and Delight:
Bright Sparks of Diamond glitter through coarse Mold,
And vulgar Dross deforms the ductile Gold.
Lo! Nature there, and Providence proclaim
The strongest Contrast in the last Extreme:
Where good and bad lie mingled and confused,
A shocking Discord in a Breast abused.
When calm the Clime, O how serene the while!
Yet Storms lie brooding in a Winter's Smile.
The fell Hyena can the Shepherd call
With human Voice, designed his Prey to fall.
That Heaven should thus a reasoning Being arm
With seeming Virtue, and with every Charm,
Which Wit and Genius in their Prime bestow,
To gild Deceit, and give a treacherous Blow!
Such fickle Blandishments too often betray;
The faint Reflection of a dying Ray;
A feeble Flash, which earthy Vapors form;
The Smile of Wrath; as Lightning gilds a Storm.
No lasting Lustre's in its fading Mien,
An ignis fatuus, when'tis brightest seen.
Could thy good Genius in the Strife prevail,
When Destiny held up the doubtful Scale;
A finished Mortal had in thee appeared,
By all admired, and by all revered.
But then, alas! some unpropitious Power
Infused Malignance on thy natal Hour:
For when thy Soul did Jove's own Hand employ,
It dashed thy Essence with some cursed Alloy,
Which took The Impression of each baleful Ill
In crooked Traces, and retains them still.
Thy injured Virtues in some weak Essays,
Like tender Blades, their blooming Heads would raise:
But soon the stronger Cockle choaks the Grain,
And stifled Goodness lifts itself in vain.
A Fancy flowing, an Expression fit,
Invention blessed in every Charm of Wit;
With Humor envied for its Turn of Ease,
And Talents happy in the Art to please:
All these you have by Fate's uncommon Grant;
Yet solid Excellence, alas! you want.
Fair Justice, Chastity, from you are thrust,
Drove out by Cruelty, Revenge, and Lust:
While proud Oppression, base Distrust, and Fear,
The Coward's Bugbear, and the Tyrant's Snare,
Contend, alternate, in your stormy Breast,
And rob your Tempest-beaten Soul of Rest;
Huge Midnight Horrors by dark Vapors wrought
Hang over your Slumbers, and torment your Thought;
Confused Ideas in your Fancy roll,
The jumbling Chaos of a Brainsick Soul.
It Is this wild Medium shows you wrong, and right,
A Friend at Noon becomes your Foe at Night.
Those little Slips where Nature's Self must halt,
A Molehill Trip you make a Mountain Fault:
Deluded by a dark distempered Mind,
You form an Estimate of all Mankind:
Each frightful Phantom, which you there descry,
You dread in all Men, and to all apply:
The monstrous Shadows in your Mind still roam;
You judge abroad from what you find at home:
Your Friendship flashes like an April Sun,
A Moment's Glimmer, in a Moment gone.
Strange Groupes of Whimsies your wild Fancy frames,
Like Bedlam Pictures, or a Sick Man's Dreams.
A Weathercock, obedient to each Gale;
One single Blast can turn your Head and Tail.
You're fixed, indeed, in Malice and Disgust;
So stands your lofty Emblem, held by Rust.
Of Friends another Moon may leave you none,
When, like a Tiger, you may range alone.
What social Breast with such Extremes can join!
A savage Nature in a Soul Divine:
Such distant Qualities, so strange, and odd,
In Frowns a Monster, and in Smiles a God.
Why should such Blessings mingle with a Curse?
Why not all excellent; or why not worse?
To a young LADY on her Grotto.
THY Genius here in early Bloom appears
A hopeful Promise of thy riper Years.
If now thy Dawn of Thought such Light displays,
How strong the Luster of thy Noontide Blaze?
The Morning Star thus, with a milder Ray,
Does gently glimmer at the Gates of Day.
Unnumber'd Beauties in thy Grotto shine,
And Judgment triumphs in the fair Design;
The charming Incidents so aptly fall,
They look like Art, yet Nature shines through all.
Here mossy Mounds impending seem to swell,
That from their Veins effuse the gushing Rill;
The Rill over spangling Pebbles seems to glide,
With Shells of Amber glittering at its Side,
That mid the Gloom reflect a Silver Ray,
As Planets twinkle in the Dusk of Day.
Angels' Ideas in thy Mind arose,
And whispering Graces taught thee to dispose.
Nature's bright Mirror in thy Bosom shone,
And she, with Blushes, saw herself outdone:
To you, profuse, she lavished all her Store
Of Matter freely, but of Fancy more.
Not all the Gems, which Indian Mines prepare,
Can with that Ruby in thy Soul compare:
Its bright'ning Blaze like Aaron's Breast shall shine,
Alike refulgent, and alike divine.
Delightful Earnest of my future Lays,
Which wake my Wonder and excel my Praise
O could my Verse with equal Fervor flow!
My Bays immortal, mixed with thine, should grow.
Beneath the Indulgence of a Mother's Eyes,
Thy fruitful Genius early learned to rise:
The happy Influence on so rich a Soil
An Harvest yields, that crowns her tender Toil.
So where the Eastern Sun its Beams bestows,
The Brilliant brightens, and the Lilly glows.
A PROLOGUE for the Benefit of Old HUSBAND the Player.
WHAT various Forms must moral Wisdom wear,
To banish Vice, and Virtue's Charms endear!
When Precept fails, Example's Power she tries,
And decks forth Truth in Fiction's gay Disguise;
Through Fancy's Maze she leads, with honest Art,
The Head misguided, and the unsocial Heart.
For this the Stage has long illustrious been,
When Genius raised, and Judgment pruned the Scene,
When lettered Decency and Sense unite,
Wisdom adorns, and Virtue crowns Delight.
Such well-plan'd Theaters should ever bloom,
Esteemed and honored, as at Greece and Rome.
This Night, ye Fair! your generous Bounty cheers
Merit decayed, and Worth oppressed by Years.
Such Merit, and such conscious Worth may claim
The Soul-felt Plaudit of unspotted Fame.
Amidst Corruption's Streams unstained he stood,
Nor swam down Custom's foul defiling Flood.
Such Husbands was: for more than half an Age
The moral Guide, now Father of the Stage:
Dismissed by Time from every Scene of Strife,
He views that Curtain fall, which closes Life:
Fearless he views it with exulting Face,
Whilst your bright Presence shall his Exit grace.
On the King's Birthday,
Writ in the Year 1744.
A Uspicious Morn, thy joyful Beams display,
And glad the Nations with this glorious Day;
This Day, which deep in Time's mysterious Womb,
By Fate was promised to an Age to come.
When Heaven's Supreme the Embryon Years surveyed,
And future Kingdoms in the Balance weighed,
The Globe sustaining in his powerful Hand,
Which rolls obedient to his great Command,
Britain divided from the World he saw,
The Nurse of Liberty, and Land of Law:
Britain his own Almighty Fiat placed
In Ocean's Arms by circling Waves embraced,
Her Native Fence; from Foreign Foes secured,
By swelling Seas and rising Rocks immured,
Her liquid Wall, whose floating Towers shall ride,
Al1 Europe, S Terror, -- Albion's Strength and Pride.
Distinguished Isle! where Truth and Freedom dwell,
Whose Godlike Sons in Arts and Arms excel!
On thee the indulgent Power propitious smiles,
And makes this Promise to the Queen of Isles:
When Ages hence, and Years predestined roll,
When radiant Science gilds the frozen Pole;
A mighty Prince shall over thee mildly sway;
Whom foreign Realms are destined to obey;
A promised Prince by my secure Decree,
On Earth my Image, and beloved by me:
His potent Scepter shall serenely wield,
Prudent in Peace, and dreadful in the Field;
Religion's Friend, for Virtue's Shield designed,
To none a Foe, but Foes of Humankind;
The Tyrant's Terror, aiding the Distressed,
Europe' s Support, by rescued Nations blessed;
At Home the Bulwark of his People's Laws,
Abroad protecting every injured Cause.
Envy and Fraud shall in his Time decay,
And George and Justice willing Nations sway.
Behold the promised Prince we joyful own,
By Fate ordained to fill Britannia's Throne.
His Regal Hand her Scepter's Weight sustains,
The Monarch's come -- imperial Brunswick reigns.
Ye Angels bright! on heavenly Errands sent
To guard his Throne, and shield his awful Tent,
Around his sacred Person spread your Wings,
Preserve his Kingdoms in the best of Kings;
Drive hence Rebellion to Hell's Shades away,
Make hateful Factions at his Frown decay,
Let lasting Concord through Britannia smile,
And the World's Wealth overflow the happy Isle!
Grant it, ye Powers! who human Ways direct,
Who govern Kingdoms, and who Kings protect:
But chiefly thou! whom Britain's Monarch claims,
To smooth his Slumbers, and inspire his Dreams!
Around his Couch on downy Wings preside,
By Day his Guardian, and by Night his Guide;
As late at Dettingen, so still thy Care,
In Peace his Minister, his Shield in War!
To the Reverend Dr. MANN, occasioned by the Death of the Rev. Mr. HOLT, Senior
Fellow of T. C. D.
ENough of Tears! thy generous Grief suspend,
Cease to deplore thy dear departed Friend:
Let melting Nature Reason's Voice obey,
Nor bathe with fruitless Showers his sacred Clay.
In vain, alas! thy gushing Eyes overflow;
Vain are those Sighs, that unaffected Woe
For him, devoted by untimely Doom
To sleep long Ages in the silent Tomb.
From him the weeping World may learn to know,
No Worth prevents, no Wisdom wards the Blow,
The certain Blow from Death's uplifted Dart,
Whose Point, relentless, strikes the purest Heart:
No Science shields, no Piety can save
The destined Victim from the insatiate Grave.
There Youth, Age, Folly, Wisdom, Weakness, Power,
Fall undistinguished in one fatal Hour.
Whence springs this Chance beyond all mortal Ken,
This seeming Chance which rules the Fates of Men,
Thou best can tell: Why lengthened out to Woe
The Wretched loiter, and the Happy go.
But shall proud Man, inquisitive, arraign
The Ways of Providence with Thoughts profane!
Shall he seek Truths to human Search denied,
And, impious, draw the mystic Veil aside!
The dim-ey'd Knowledge to his Soul consigned
Puzzles his Judgment, and involves his Mind.
In Doubts perplexed, unconscious of her Way;
A dismal Twilight, and uncertain Day
Appears weak Nature's Gleam, by Sense discry'd;
Which shines illusive in the Lamp of Pride.
Religion's Beam can make this Gloom all bright,
Clear up Conjectures, and dispel the Night.
From her pure Fountain Truths eternal flow;
From her the Hope of Bliss, the Balm of Woe;
Grief, at her Shrine, lays her sad Burden down,
And views with upcast Eyes the promised Crown.
This Solace waits his Sire, this Lamp his Guide,
Robbed of his Age's Prop, his Country's Pride:
This firm Support, this faithful Staff shall stay
His Soul's sad Weight down Life's steep rugged Way:
The Christian Cordial given him to sustain
The Thought-felt Anguish, and the Pangs of Pain.
O, let him, leaning on thy Friendship, bear
This Load oppressive, and this Lot severe!
Friendship like thine springs from a faithful Heart:
You share his Sorrows, and you feel his Smart.
On seeing Mr. BARRY in the Character of Hamlet.
HOw Grief's sad Garb the Wearer's Worth endears,
When whelming Woe with decent Pomp appears;
When Strength of Mind superior to Redress,
Stems the big Torrent of supreme Distress,
Enjoys the Soul-felt Throb, the extatick Dart,
And all the pungent Pangs which pierce the Heart!
Brooding in secret on his Hopes overthrown,
There to himself makes all his manly Moan:
Scorning to whine out Grief in technick Strains,
He sobs with Dignity, with Sense complains.
Thus Hamlet mourns, and thus his Sorrow shines
In Barry's Action, and in Shakespeare's Lines:
His pleasing Form gives even to Anguish Grace,
And Grief sits lovely on his suffering Face.
But see! his Father's warlike Shade stalks near:
What quick-rais'd Passions in his Soul appear!
In Horror fixed, as Thunderstruck, he stands
With starting Eye Balls, and with out-stretch'd Hands,
Ten thousand Tumults struggling in his Breast,
Each strong Attempt by stronger Fear suppressed;
His Reason sunk, no guiding Gleams can cheer;
All is wild Anarchy and Chaos there:
His laboring Words can yet no Passage find,
Lost in the Floods and Whirlpools of his Mind,
Till by Degrees her dawning Beam she shows,
As first bright Order from Confusion rose:
Returning Sense resumes her wonted Sway,
And Courage prompts, and Judgment points the Way.
The horrid Silence, now resolved, he breaks
With eager Voice, and supplicating speaks.
Revenge provoked has all his Mind possessed,
And fell Resentment boils within his Breast,
His kindling Eyes with livid Lightnings roll,
And dart the Purpose of his steadfast Soul.
In Madness, even in that unpracticed Task,
The Part looks graceful, and adorns the Mask.
No sullen, dark, distempered Rage appears,
It Is Fancy's Frolic, and her Caprice chears.
Through every varying Scene great Nature warms,
And finished Art improves her pleasing Charms.
On the Death of a favorite Nightingale.
THOU sweetest Warbler of the gladsome Spring,
Whose trilling Music charmed the attentive Ear,
No more thy tuneful Throat shall joyful sing
An early Welcome to the Infant Year.
No more, alas! shall thy inspiring Flow
Beguile the Moments of the Midnight Hour,
What Time the Branches bend beneath the Snow,
And Birds for Safety seek the shadeless Bower.
Can I forget the Music of thy Tongue,
Which spread around such high harmonions Airs,
When circling Measures in the Portal rung,
And lofty Echo filled the sounding Stairs.
When dappl'd Cloe from the Hearthstone gazed;
The vanquished Linnet sadly silent stands;
And little George himself looked up amazed,
The Soop-dish shaking in his heedless Hands.
When Dublin Molly busy in the Bar,
With Wonder listened to his charming Lay,
Then blessed her happy Fate who came so far
To hear him sweetly sing, from Aston's Quay.
Nor could the Poet's Tongue his Praise forbear,
Who often came to hear his Strains divine;
And in his Cups would heartily declare,
His Notes were sweeter than the tuneful Nine.
Thus jovial danced the smiling Hours away,
When Philomela gave such true Delight;
Good Humor cheered the short thick-clouded Day,
And Punch and Pleasure crowned the live-long Night.
But Fate, alas! forbade our growing Joys;
What human Happiness can always last?
Relentless Fate, which every Life destroys,
At Philly's Breast his lifted Javelin cast.
Could no Delight his mortal Wrath assuage,
Nor Musick's Power his pointed Dart withstand?
In vain, alas! Clarinda cleaned the Cage;
In vain she fed him with her milk-white Hand.
How Gladness danced within his little Eyes,
Still as he saw her decent Cap and Gown,
As up the Steps she gently used to rise,
And in his high-hung House she took him down.
How tenderly she stroak'd his Neck and Bill,
How softly touched his taper Legs and Claws,
With lenient Finger soothed each smarting Ill,
And gently healed his little Hurts and Flaws.
But thou, fell Wretch, that in the open Street
With savage Hand our frighted Songster struck,
May thou with screaming Screech-Owls nightly meet,
With boding Batts, with Bailiffs, and bad Luck.
May braying Asses, Bitterns from the Mire,
And croaking Ravens, haunt thee all thy Life:
May baleful Cats and cack'ling Hens conspire,
And what is more dreadful still, a scolding Wife.
On a fine Crop of Peace being spoiled by a Storm,
WHen Morris views his prostrate Peace,
By raging Whirlwinds spread,
He wrings his Hands, and in amaze
He sadly shakes his Head.
Is this the Fruit of my fond Toil,
My Joy, my Pride, my Cheer!
Shall one tempestuous Hour thus spoil
The Labors of a Year!
Oh! what avails, that Day by Day
I nursed the thriving Crop,
And settled with my Foot the Clay,
And reared the social Prop!
Ambition's Pride had spurred me on
All Gardeners to excel;
I often called them one by one,
And boastingly would tell,
How I prepared the furrowed Ground,
And how the Grain did sow,
Then challenged all the Country round
For such an early Blow.
How did their Bloom my Wishes raise!
What Hopes did they afford,
To earn my honored Master's Praise,
And crown his cheerful Board!
Poor Morris, wrapped in sad Surprise,
Demands in sober Mood,
Should Storms molest a Man so wise,
A Man so just and good?
Ah! Morris, cease thy fruitless Moan,
Nor at Misfortunes spurn,
Misfortune's not thy Lot alone;
Each Neighbor has his Turn.
Thy prostrate Peace, which low recline
Beneath the Frowns of Fate,
May teach much wiser Heads than thine
Their own uncertain State.
The sprightly Youth in Beauty's Prime,
The lovely Nymph so gay,
Often Victims fall to early Time,
And in their Bloom decay.
In vain the indulgent Father's Care,
In vain wise Precepts form:
They droop, like Peace, in tainted Air,
Or perish in a Storm.
LESBIA and her Sparrow: Or Cupid turned Fowler.
AS little Cupid blithe and gay
Among the Roses flew,
Brushing the Vi'lets in his Way,
Impearl'd with Morning Dew,
His painted Wings he wanton spread,
To skim the daisi'd Lawn;
Then perching on a Lilly's Head
Stood smiling in the Dawn.
Young Lesbia now amid the Gales
The Breath of Morn bestows,
Fan'd by the Fragrance which it steals
From Cowslips and the Rose.
To yonder Grotto arched with Green
The lovely Nymph drew nigh;
The warbling Thrush inchants the Scene,
With Bees which humming fly.
Now placed within the blissfu1 Shade,
Her Sparrow fluttering round,
Cupid descries the unguarded Maid,
And meditates the Wound.
His glittering Bow he hasty bent,
Then from his Quiver drew
The pointed Shaft he twanging sent,
The Shaft which crring flew.
To pierce her Breast he speeds the Dart,
Yet Love himself shoots wide:
His Arrow entered Dickey's Heart;
He on her Bosom died.
Who would not envy his sweet Death,
And Dickey's Doom desire,
Within her Arms to yield his Breath,
And on her Breast expire!
To a young LADY on her performing upon the Harpsichord.
THE Muse who sung thy dawning Praise,
Now welcomes thy Meridian Rays;
The Beauties of thy early Prime
First fledged her Wings for Flights sublime;
She saw thee shine like opening Day,
Along the Tracts of Heaven's Highway:
The Muse, prophetic, saw thee there,
Still bright'ning in thy lucid Sphere,
Now far unequal in her Flight,
And lost in Beams of daz'ling Light,
On raptured Wing she hails thy Noon,
As soaring Eagles seek the Sun:
But, O! what Numbers can she find,
To sing the Beauties of thy Mind,
Where every Virtue Heaven bestows,
And every Grace from Heaven that flows!
A hallowed Treasure all combine
Within that spotless Ark divine,
Which beaming forth so often declare,
That God vouchsafes to visit there.
To deck thee with distinguished Love
He took from every Saint above
Ideas of the purest Kind,
And mixing all, composed thy Mind;
Then lodged it in the fairest Mold,
That should a Soul so rich infold,
A Mold with fairest Forms to vie
In finished Shape and Symmetry;
Harmonious to the ravished Sight,
Inspiring Joy and soft Delight,
Enchanting all to instant Love,
Who hear thy Voice, or see thee move:
But when the tuneful Keys you press,
And Musick's inmost Powers express,
What melting Strains extatick rise;
How every raptured Hearer dies.
See Love his purple Wings expand,
And flutter over the snowy Hand;
From every Finger flies a Dart,
In every Note he wounds a Heart;
Whilst conscious Blushes still confess
Your kind Concern for our Distress;
And yet by height'ning every Grace,
The Pain they would relieve, increase:
For as in Paintings Shadows lie
To raise the Picture to the Eye;
Thy Blushes thus but more reveal
The modest Worth they would conceal.
To CLOE.
KIND Nature has Cloe expressed,
To strike us with Joy and Surprise;
Each Grace in her Form is confessed,
And Cupids exult in her Eyes.
Her Form so erect, fair, and tall,
Such winning Attraction displays;
Her Mind, the best Beauty of all,
My Wish and Affections still raise.
The Nightingale chimes to her Voice,
The Sirens would yield to her Song;
In Echos the Valleys rejoice,
Her Music inchants the gay Throng.
Lo! Summer has spangl'd the Vales,
And Roses their Purple disclose,
The Vi'lets enrich the soft Gales,
And Harmony heightens all those.
Since Beauty and Rapture agree,
To ravish both Hearing and Sight,
O come, my deac Cloe, with me,
And crown the gay Scene with Delight.
Come with me, my Nymph, to yon Grove,
Where the Thrush and the Linnet resort,
Whose Bowers invite us to Love
Where Cupids still revel and sport.
In Bliss we'll enjoy the long Day,
To mutual Endearments resigned,
My Head on thy Bosom I Will lay,
And pity the rest of Mankind.
To Lord TYRAWLY, on his sending me to Lori CHESTERFIELD, when I durst not
knock at the Door.
Rejoiced, I went, of speeding sure,
My Lord! at your Command:
I boldly stood at STANHOPE'S Door,
And stoutly stretched my Hand.
The sounding Brass I rashly raised,
Resolved my Hopes to crown;
Some Power unseen my Senses seized;
I laid it silent down.
The Knocker thus I thrice upheld,
And thrice I made Essay:
For your Command my Arm impelled,
And I would fain obey.
But Fate fotbid the intruding Sound,
Which would his Ears assail:
By Greatness awed and Worth renowned,
Hibernian Front must fail.
To a young Lady, lately married, who had fine Eyes, but a frail Character.
THE Sun from whom your Eyes you stole,
Their Glances sure designed
To warm our Sex from Pole to Pole,
And shine on all Mankind.
Now one enjoys what all desire;
The World indeed may mourn;
Yet he like Phaeton may aspire,
And in Possession burn.
On his Excellency the Earl of CHESTERFIELD's Recovery from a dangerous Fever.
WHEN boiling Blood, dire Foe to rest,
Tumultuous rolled in STANHOPE's Breast,
Thence mounting furious, foamed on high,
Where Reason, heavenly Power, triumphant shone,
To dim her bright discerning Eye,
And wrap in stormy Clouds her radiant Throne.
Hibernia then, by filial Fears oppressed,
Sought with slow pensive Steps the lonely Shore,
Fixed on a Rock, her anxious Head she hung,
With Hands up-rais'd, she smote her aching Breast:
Britannia's Coast her mournful Eyes explore;
Her silent Harp neglected lay unstrung.
Impatient, she accused each tardy Gale,
Which on long-ling'ring lazy Pinions flew,
Each distant Cloud appeared a rising Sail,
Fraught with glad Tidings to her View.
Of STANHOPE's Bosom freed from Pain,
A grateful People's Triumph to restore:
Then damped by Doubts, she sighs, and droops again,
The imagined Joy, alas! appears no more.
Each public Virtue, and each private Grace,
Which warmed the Patriot's Godlike Mind,
His princely Wisdom, and his Love of Peace,
His generous Care of Humankind,
Awful arise within her grateful Soul;
Alternate Passions in her Bosom roll,
Now chearing Hopes prevail, now sad'ning Fears,
Now rise gay Smiles, now fall desponding Tears.
When lo! a darting Glory, blazing wide,
^^^us'd Effulgence of celestial Day;
(...) Eastern Sky with crimson Clouds was died,
(...) quivering Gleams gild all the watery Way.
When on a Throne, which orient Beams up-bore,
Aloft Britannia's awful Genius smiled;
Three kingly Crowns of brilliant Gems he wore,
And regal State composed his Aspect mild.
Descending slowly on his Wings outspread,
Now poised majestic in the etherial Space,
The Power propitious bows his sacred Head,
His Words were uttered with seraphick Grace.
Banish thy Grief, Ierne! weep no more!
Bathonia now her healing Stream employs!
Her balmy Spring shall thy loved Chies restore,
Renew his Vigor, and revive thy Joys.
From her warm Bosom's richest Veins
Maternal Nutriment shall flow;
And gushing Health, expelling Pains,
Shall daily give his Strength to grow.
And lo! like Morn new risen, he springs,
Propitious Health, on Dove-like Wings,
Flies hovering over his dawning Face;
And with her brings Delight and Peace;
Rekindling Joy each brilliant Orb supplies,
And lights anew the Splendour of his Eyes.
Too long their Beams, in Clouds concealed,
Lay hid from public Sight;
A People's Prayer at length prevailed,
Ierne's Vows dispelled the Night.
Eclipsed untimely, thus the mounting Sun
Encroaching Darkness shades,
Ere half his glorious Race is run,
Through Noontide Night the laboring Planet wades.
Astonished Nations lift their Eyes,
Deprived of his all-chearing Ray,
Ten thousand Prayers assail the Skies,
Till Heaven appeased restores the joyful Day.
All hail celestial Light!
Thy Smile each gloomy Cloud dispels:
Nature, revived by thee, looks bright;
Thy Blaze each raptured Bosom swells.
To thee, the grateful Muse shall sing,
Whilst joyful Millions bless thy Beam;
Hibernia' s echoing Valleys ring
With STANHOPE'S, STANHOPE'S loud applauded Name.
On taking a Lady's Picture in Church, whilst she sung the Psalm.
LET fair Fanilia kindly cease
To blame fond Strephon's Art,
He stole a Likeness of her Face,
Fanilia stole his Heart.
Those Features whence his Sketch he took
Shall soon, too soon! decay;
When Time shall rifle that soft Look,
And wear those Smiles away.
The blushing Tinct may longer glow,
But Nature's Strokes must wear;
The mimick Face can then but show
That Fanny once was fair,
Her Trophy, then, must nobler be,
Whilst Life, nay Thought remains;
His captive Soul shall never get free,
Nor Death shall break his Chains.
In blissful Worlds where Angels sing,
Inflamed with Love Divine,
When joyful Seraphs clap the Wing,
He Will mix his Voice with thine.
Forgive him, then, relentless Maid!
If more your Pride denies;
And let him clasp the painted Shade,
Who for the Substance dies.
To CLEON, on his Arrival at his Villa.
TO welcome thee a Muse unknown aspires,
Unequal far to what the Theme requires,
Yet humbly hopes to vindicate her Choice,
Who sings in Concert with the public Voice.
A Patriot's Deeds such high Encomiums claim,
As Cleon merits from the Mouth of Fame,
Who spreads his Bounty with unsparing Hand,
And Industry excites over all the Land;
His Canvass Wings each distant Coast explore,
And wast the Wealth of either India's Shore,
Which flows enlivening in his Country's Veins,
Still more the Publick's, than his private Gains:
So runs the sanguine Current through the Heart
Whilst every Member shares a wholesome Part.
Would they who swell in higher Rank and Place
(The Boast of Vice, the Blush of Human Race)
With virtuous Emulation wisely see
A People's Parent, and that Parent thee;
No more should Luxury licentious roam,
To waste abroad the Wealth we want at home;
No more should Wretchedness and Want prevail,
Nor Hunger tempt the starving Hand to steal;
Nor should Corruption with her gilded Claws,
Debauch our Senates, and debase the Laws;
Each wealthy Chief would then a Patriot be;
Who for his Country lives, must live like thee.
But see where Nature, with distinguished Grace,
Adorns the Prospect of this lovely Place;
The Birds harmonious chaunt on every Tree
To welcome to their Groves the Spring and thee;
There waving Woods on lofty Summits grow,
Here Silver Lakes reflect their Shades below:
The charming Landscape glads the Gazer's Heart,
And Nature's Hand assists the Hand of Art;
Yet Art alone behold triumphant smile,
With all her Pomp in yonder sacred Pile,
Whose solemn Brow the steadfast Eye commands,
The pious Labor of religious Hands,
Which raised to Heaven in these degenerate Days,
It Is Founder's Faith and Gratitude displays;
And shall inform remotest Years to come,
When Brunswick reigned, and Cleon reared the Dome.
A noble Task lies immature behind,
Though often revolved within your generous Mind;
Yet still in Embrio waits your powerful Hand,
To form the Symmetry, and bid it stand.
When Arches bend and swelling Columns rise,
The stately Edifice shall strike our Eyes
With simple Majesty and solemn Style,
At once to deck and dignify the Pile.
The noble Mass magnificent shall grow,
Not vainly high, nor yet ignobly low;
Shall shine a Medium clear of each Excess,
Its Master's Temper, and his Worth express;
Shall there erect in lasting Grandeur be
By Judges honored, though 'twas sung be me.
TEMPE, a POEM inscribed to SOLITUDE.
AT last, I find where Health her Bower has made,
To walk with Wisdom in the social Shade;
Each Sister Virtue in her Train is seen,
Rejoiced to wait on sweet Content, their Queen.
Around her Grott unfading Verdure grows;
And Bliss untainted from her Fountain flows;
By Nature called she quaffs the Morning Gale,
And sups with Science in the Muse's Vale.
Content, and Nature, in one Mansion dwell;
And Virtue near them builds her mossy Cell.
Happy the Man who seeks not Power, or Praise,
And with such meek Associates spends his Days;
From Envy safe, and wild Ambition's Sway,
No Camps allure him, and no Courts betray;
From Custom's Snares secure he turns aside,
The Baits of Passion, and the Springs of Pride;
By Prudence taught, he points his mental Ken
Through Wisdom's Glass, and views the Ways of Men,
Who grasp at fleeting Good in each Disguise,
And gaze on Shadows with insatiate Eyes;
With panting Hearts each false Delight pursue,
Through Fancy's Maze, but still neglect the true;
By Pride impelled, in Fairy Rounds they roam,
To seek that Bliss abroad which lives at home.
Misguided Man! to Passion's Power a Prey;
By Sense deceived, by Judgment led astray;
Thou Tool of Folly! in thy Reason's spite,
Renounce thy Knowledge, and do Nature right.
Did she the splendid Ills of Life impose?
Increase thy Wishes, or create thy Woes?
Did she thy Idol Pride advance on high?
Or lift thy daring Thoughts to scale the Sky?
Did she inchant thee in the mystic Glade
To build on Vapors, and dissect a Shade?
In fierce Opinion's Forge to toil in vain,
And mould the Phantoms of thy forming Brain?
For specter'd Whims which sanguine Fancy rears
Distort the Center, and confound the Spheres?
Did she the Bigot's furious Breast inspire
To spread his frantic Schemes with Sword and Fire?
Of all who breathe in Earth, in Air, or Tides,
Whom Reason governs, or whom Instinct guides,
Through Nature's Realms no Wretch like Man is found,
Who spurns her Barriers, and who breaks her Bound;
Still rushing lawless on, his headlong Mind
Leaves native Joy and gentle Peace behind:
He spreads the Snares of Fate in Fashion's Loom,
And, in each deep Refinement, digs his Tomb.
Ye Sons of Folly! hither bend your Eyes,
Compare Conditions, and for once be wise:
Here Art adorns the smiling Groves and Fields;
She rules over Nature, and to Nature yields:
With mutual Scepter and successive Sway,
By Turns they govern, and by Turns obey:
Bright Order first, and Truth coeval rose,
To Error still, and Discord, endless Foes;
Eternal Harmony through Nature sounds;
Gives Brooks their Borders, and gives Worlds their Bounds.
Established Rectitude in all appears;
Instinct the Ant, and Concord moves the Spheres.
Why else should Ecstasy my Breast overflow
When icy Winters frown, or Roses blow?
When raging Storms the Mountain Billows break,
Or gentlest Gales curl over the quivering Lake?
Here, Twilight Groves my Evening Fancy woo;
The Rook high cawing, while the Woodquests coo;
The colored Cloud enriched with golden Dies,
To crown yon blue-rob'd Hill which props the Skies;
The winding Vale that spreads her mantl'd Bloom,
The Lake that glimmers through the verdant Gloom;
Here, pendant Lawns the limpid Mirrors grace
With blooming Blushes, and with varied Face:
Reflected Beauties 'mid the Crystal Scene,
For ever purple, and for ever green,
The Sense and Judgment at one View delight,
Regale the Fancy, and surprise the Sight.
With Breast elate, I climb the shapely Mound,
An Eden smiling, where a Chaos frowned:
Over the grim Rock a flowery Mantle thrown,
With daisy'd Verdure decks the craggy Stone
From Quarries rent, which rugged rose, and rude,
By Rigor softened, and by Toil subdued.
The gentle Slopes so easy here uprise,
As Nature's Hand would human Art disguise.
So, when some awful Sage, whose manly Mind
By Virtue warmed, and Love of Humankind,
A savage Race in wild Disorder saw,
Of barbarous Manners fierce, and brutal Law;
With painful Steps, he wins his arduous Way,
By slow Degrees, and bends them to obey;
Till tamed at last, in social State they stand,
By Reason ruled, and bless the forming Hand.
On public Worth let each Delight attend;
Delight, the Means, but Worth be still the End;
The virtuous Cause shall wise Effects procure;
Who tills the fallow'd Glebe shall feed the Poor;
Shall make the Rustic smile, his Garners groan,
And in his Neighbor's Wealth enjoy his own.
For this, the Fields shall richer Blooms display,
The Groves shall gladden, and the Hills look gay;
For this, the Springs in lucid Lakes shall flow,
The Temples glitter, and the Gardens glow.
Let me amid thy Bowers delighted stray,
Or on thy breezy Summits waste the Day,
Wrapped in Elysium, wander through thy Groves,
Which calm Reflection courts, and Fancy loves;
There, in some murmuring Grott, my Folly lose;
And drink Oblivion with the sacred Muse:
From airy Hopes, and groundless Fears, secure
Enjoy Existence, or its Ills endure.
O Solitude Divine! where Reason dwells,
No Pride provokes thee, and no Passion swells;
Let me, reposed in thy serene Embrace,
From human Evils far, -- from human Race,
Let me, entranced, on thy soft Bosom lie,
And all the insulting Storms of Life defy:
There, to itself, restore the injured Mind;
And be what Nature, and what God designed.
Let then the Statesman hatch his gilded Schemes,
And canton Kingdoms in extatic Dreams;
In greedy Visions grasp the incircl'd Ball,
Whilst butchered Millions to his Frenzy fall;
Their Pelf, and Party, let the World pursue;
For what, my Friend, has Reason there to do?
From hostile Storms escaped, that harrass'd Dove
Now seeks her Safety in the silent Grove;
Where you tread Paths by thoughtful Science made,
And court the Muses in the lettered Shade.
There, at each towering System taught to smile,
Which erring Fancy founds, or Pride can pile;
There, still on Truth to fix your steadfast Eyes,
And point out Falsehood in her gay Disguise;
There, with your Country's Weal your Wishes blend,
To sacred Freedom, and her Cause, a Friend:
By public Virtue warmed, your Bosom glows,
And only Slaves and Tyrants are your Foes.
But waft, my Muse, to yonder Bower, thy Strains,
Where Wisdom governs, and where Reason reigns;
Where sweet Content each vital Blessing brings,
And over the genial Board extends her Wings;
There, smiling Concord fills her Halcyon Throne,
Of Joys sincere possessed -- to Kings unknown:
Harmonious Hearts her heavenly Laws obey,
And waiting Angels guide her peaceful Sway.
What pleasing Sounds thus circle through the Gale
What Sweets extatick over my Mind prevail!
Ye Zephyrs hush! O! sostly pant the Breeze!
Ye Doves, be dumb, Melinda strikes the Keys!
As near I move, my ravished Senses find
Her Music gives the Image of her Mind;
Where tuneful Passions gently rise and fall,
With tempered Energy, at Reason's Call;
That mental Melody which Art exceeds
Sounds in her Words, and varies in her Deeds:
Conn bial Symphony! whose equal Tone
Still in her Consort's Wishes finds her own;
Their circling Joys, in mutual Measures move,
And every added Day those Joys improve.
But see! their Hopes to distant Prospects run,
A blooming Daughter, and a darling Son;
That growing Bliss which ripening Youth endears,
The Pride and Promise of maturer Years;
By Meekness robbed, her gentle Garb they wear;
For Virtue formed them with peculiar Care;
To lodge true Worth their opening Minds she dressed,
And filial Duty came the foremost Guest;
Nor came alone; she soon engaged a Place
For Manly Talents, and for Female Grace;
Then Sense and Wit their fair Apartments fill,
By mild Discretion guided at her Will;
Breeding and Decency came next behind,
And Honor raised, and Goodness warmed the Mind:
Beauty indeed would fain her Place secure,
But Angel-like, she waits at Wisdom's Door.
Can there, on Earth, exist more true Delight?
Or gracious Heaven an happier Pair unite?
Esteem and Worth, in growing Commerce blend;
And each a Lover lives, and each a Friend.
To a FRIEND on his Marriage.
A Choice so blessed Heaven only could inspire
To give a Fore-taste of the Joys above;
How gaily native Innocence lights up
The Charms of Beauty's powerful Glance, and shines
Conspicuous in her lovely Smile! mature
In Wit, above her tender Years, she seems
Designed to show Perfection in her Dawn;
Where Fruits and Blossoms charm at once our View,
And all the Seasons meet the early Spring.
Let Wealth no more over tender Hearts prevail
With Magic Glitter, nor debase the Mind
To barter generous Love for sordid Gold;
Gold from reluctant Nature's Bowels rent,
The Bane of Peace and Pest of Humankind.
See here! ye Avaritious, treasured Gems
Through Crystal Caskets blaze, Gems brighter far
Than Orient Pearl or India's sparkling Stone,
Whose never-fading Luster needs no Foil,
On humble Ground in native Meekness set.
Can hoarded Pelf with such a Fund compare?
To thousands Slave, the Miser's Idol God,
The Spendthrift's Curse, when Beauty shines enriched
From Heaven's inestimable boundless Store,
With all the Virtues that adorn the Mind
For social Converse and the Joys of Life,
To sweeten Cares, and bless the married State:
When these united in one Bosom dwell,
What Monarch, on his gorgeous Throne elate,
Shall proudly dare to claim so rich a Prize?
And yet to thee her plighted Hand she gave;
Nor staid, I ween, her faithful Heart behind.
In her Embrace be thou as fully blessed,
As mortal Essences can be, who Bliss
Consummate never here can know,
Since Cares intruding thrust themselves between,
And Pain often petrifies the Couch of Down:
From these her Arms a sure Asylum yield,
Where every anxious Care shall refuge find,
And changed to Joy corrode the Heart no more.
May Years returning in soft Circles roll,
And lengthened Days increase your growing Loves,
Till Time shall Passion into Friendship turn;
When hoary Wisdom makes the good Exchange,
And Reason's Power those Hands shall faster tie,
Which Fancy first and tender Wishes joined.
LINES inscribed to the Right Honorable the Lord NEWPORT, Lord High Chancellor
of Ireland.
ON Fancy's Wings for distant Heights outspread,
Through vast etherial Tracts I towering fly,
To where bright Sol, with orient Blushes red,
Pours forth the Splendors of the Morning Sky.
There the wise Magi sought fair Truth of old,
And Virtue for their firm Companion chose;
There newborn Arts did Wisdom's Veil unfold,
And moral Science like the Sun arose.
Amidst the Memphian Shades in Thought retired,
Where pious Sages mystic Visions saw,
And blameless Priests and Patriots lay inspired
With Plans of sacred Faith and social Law.
The indulgent Goddess to my Eyes displayed
The Springs of Science, and the Seers of Nile;
Whence Amram's Son the Hebrew Host conveyed,
With Egypt's Wisdom fraught, and learned Spoil.
Amazed I viewed the Hieroglyphick Gloom,
Where dawning Knowledge over the Globe was spread,
Whose genial Rays illumined Greece and Rome,
And passed the towering Alps' eternal Head.
Then raised aloft through Fields of purple Air,
I joyful urge my intellectual Flight.
Now Sparta's Pillars unadorned appear;
Now Athens' Pomp distends my aching Sight.
Pleased through the Philosophic Glooms I strayed,
Led on by Contemplation's Hand to rove;
And Brutus' venerable Form surveyed,
Erected awful in the sacred Grove.
Methought before the Patriot's Image placed
The solemn Shade of Socrates I saw,
Whilst Plato's Form the Roman Hero graced,
Who fell beneath his Country's falling Law.
There Eloquence her dreaded Power displayed;
Demosthenes still thunders in my Ear,
Whose rapid Bolts the distant Foe dismayed,
And Philip's haughty Soul transfixed with Fear.
See, Sister Arts in mutual Triumph reign,
And rise through Ages with improving Grace;
The sculptured Marble, and the lofty Strain,
Offspring of Liberty and lasting Peace.
Till Iron Discord with her stern Alarms
Banished the Muses from their ancient Seat;
The Muses fled from Anarchy and Arms,
And found in Latium a secure Retreat.
There Clio to my mental Eye reveals
The Roman Glories and immortal Name,
Whilst Justice poised inviolate the Scales,
And warlike Virtues spread their matchless Fame.
Amidst the Senate Cato's Form I see
Stemming with Virtue's Power Corruption's Tide.
But say what bright distinguished Chief is he,
Adorned by Mantuan Maro at his Side?
Mecenas, him the immortal Muse has raised
Above the wasting Round of Time's Career,
His Patron's princely Worth by Flaccus praised,
Shall shine exalted as the starry Sphere.
Now wrapped in Tully's Tusculum retired,
I lay intranc'd within the sacred Bower,
Where every God his glowing Breast inspired,
And every Age shall claim his thoughtful Hour.
Remote from Rome to Britain's blissful Shore,
The guiding Goddess winged her radiant Flight,
Where Bacon's Hand unlocked the latent Store
Of Nature's richest Treasures to our Sight.
The important Volumes to my Mind disclose
The mighty Genius dawning in each Line,
In him the unclouded Sun of Science rose;
In him, the Philosophic Beam Divine.
Thence down my visionary Eye surveys
A checkered Century of rolling Years;
Rejoiced to fix on Hardwick's happy Days,
Whose high-rais'd Worth a thankful Age reveres.
Hardwick! whom Heaven for human Good designed,
For Virtue's Guardian and Religion's Friend;
In him the Oppressed a sacred Refuge find;
For him a grateful People's Vows ascend.
Wide-wafted thence over Seas that surging roll,
I passed the boisterous hoarse Iernian Flood,
Still pressing nearer to the frozen Pole,
And on a Mountain's lofty Summit stood;
From whose commanding Brow my Sight surveys
A Prospect copious as it is Master's Mind,
Where varying Nature all her Charms displays,
With every polished Art and Grace combined.
When lo! the Song-inspiring social Maid
Exulting, pointed to a stately Bower;
An awful Edifice, half hid in Shade,
Which seemed the Seat of Dignity and Power:
"Thither, she said, with humble Steps aspire;
"There ancient Piety and Wisdom dwell;
"There Charity still fans her sacred Fire,
"And generous Fervours in each Bosom swell.
"The Virtues there of every ancient Sage,
"Through Time resounded by the Trump of Fame,
"The gathered Glories of each rolling Age,
"Concentered in one shining Focus flame.
"There Cato's Soul and Tully's Tongue unite;
"There Hardwick's Heart and Bacon's Wisdom join;
"There Brutus' Firmness in his Country's Right
"Blends with immortal Plato's Warmth Divine."
Before the solemn Portal now I stand,
Where all the Virtues in their Stations wait:
But see, the illustrious Chief appears at Hand,
Lo! NEWPORT issues from the lofty Gate.
BATH, a POEM; inscribed to Dr. NUGENT, Physician at Bath.
BEneath the full-orb'd Moon's pale quivering Gleam,
Lonely I wandered with serene Delight,
Where Avon mute draws her slow winding Stream,
And dubious glides insensible to Sight.
Musing, along the ozier'd Banks I stray, d,
Whilst sounding Riv'lets sadly-pleasing roll,
The Vesper-warbling Bird inchants the Shade,
And brilliant Stars shine round the spangl'd Pole.
The awful Scene each solemn Thought inspired;
Of Good and Ill I pondered much the Cause;
Of Ill deep-felt, and Good in vain desired;
Of ruling Providence, and Nature's Laws:
If Bliss was meant the Lot of wailing Man:
If Bliss unbroken in this State below;
Where Heart-corroding Pains contract his Span,
And wasting Cares consign his Life to Woe.
Anxious, revolving in my hardy Breast,
Rashly arose the Sentiment profane;
Till Reason's Arm the rebel Thought represt,
And sacred Truth resumed her tranquil Reign.
Methought a radiant Form in Beauty's Bloom
Beckoned me gently to a Rustic Bower,
Where interwoven Fragrance formed a Gloom,
A Grotto sacred to some Sylvan Power:
'Twas rosy Health! she here her Dwelling had;
Health! fairest Daughter of the genial Skies;
Her beamy Smile made every Creature glad;
And with her dwelt her Sister Exercise,
The Nymph whom ancient Bards exulting sung,
When vigorous Fingers swept the sounding String,
When Temperance triumphed, and when Time was young,
In Virtue's Autumn, and in Nature's Spring.
From Crystal Rocks then living Streams ran clear,
And dimpling spread their glassy Mirrors round;
Immortal Verdure decked the smiling Year;
And bounteous Nature blessed the teeming Ground.
The Branches big with blushing Burdens bow;
And Flocks, unclaim'd, along the Valleys feed;
The Virgin Glebe nor felt the Sharing Plow,
Nor sportive Lambs beneath the Knife yet bleed:
The gushing Grape, unpress'd, yet harmless hung,
No reeking Lips the Crimson Nectars stain;
The jealous Ivy round its Clusters clung,
To skreen from guiltless Men the generous Bane.
Seasons, unbid, their various Viands spread;
And Herbs and Fruits compose the artless Treat;
Excess, as yet, nor reared her bloated Head,
Nor noxious lent her frantic Hand to Fate.
Thus bloomed the Goddess Health, serenely fair!
Then Peace presided, and then Passion slept;
Stranger alike to Discord, and to Care;
No Arm then injured, and no Eye then wept.
Content, her ever-constant Handmaid, stood
Obsequious, waiting at her cheerful Side;
Her Subjects loved her; for her Reign was good,
Of Envy fearless, and unknown to Pride:
Till Vice, fell Pest! advanced her baleful Head,
Through Virtue's District direful Inroads made;
Before her Strides the Virgin Goddess fled,
And sought for Safety in the sheltering Shade.
Excess usurps the Throne, and, lawless, reigns;
Riot and Luxury before her stand;
Disease and Death fly over the infected Plains,
And Pride and Pestilence deface the Land!
From Clime to Clime the vagrant Virtue fled;
From Clime to Clime the baneful Pest pursued;
In Albion's Isle she reared her Angel Head;
In Albion's Isle the golden Age renewed!
There, Reason ruled, and Temperance triumphed there,
There Health and Strength, a vigorous Offspring, rise;
Health in the Soil was found, and in the Air,
And Strength, in nervous Limbs, and manly Size.
But thou, sweet Bath! her loved Abode she makes;
Or on thy circling Hills she waves her Wings;
Or laves her brooding Bosom in thy Lakes;
Or rises glowing in thy hallowed Springs.
Thou, Source of Joy! whence cordial Bounty flows,
See, Life! See, Vigor! gushing from thy Veins;
Thou unexhausted Balm of human Woes!
To banish Sorrows, and to sooth all Pains.
Propitious Fountain of sincere Delight!
Beauties new kindled from thy Bosom rise;
As Stars, ascending from the Ocean bright,
With Rays relum'd adorn the Eastern Skies.
Ten thousand Pleasures on thy Summits sport;
And Gladness glides exulting in thy Gales;
The blooming Graces to thy Groves resort;
Or, wander joyful in thy winding Vales.
Take then the Lay a grateful Muse bestows;
The unlabored Lay, which to thy Fame she brings;
To thy inspiring Source her Song she owes;
Her Numbers warble from thy sacred Springs.
Nor thou, my Friend, the servent Strain refuse;
Since Virtue warms, and Merit claims the Lay;
A Worth like thine the chastest Bard may choose;
A Praise so just, with decent Pride display.
For Arts much honored, but for Virtue more,
Through Envy's Cloud shone forth thy generous Mind;
Thy Heart, as copious as thy healing Store,
Flows out with equal Force on Humankind.
Lo! Nature's deep-hid Springs to thee are known;
Her secret Workings and mysterious Laws;
Her winding Labyrinths you make your own;
You ward the fell Effect, you crush the Cause:
Nor Gain, nor Vanity, thy Mind can move
To lift the Weari'd, and the Anguish'd ease;
Thy ruling Avarice, the public Love;
Thy utmost Pride, a Heart humane to please.
And see! Success, thy happy Steps attend;
Success thy Goodness, and thy Talents claim;
Let then the feeble Efforts of a Friend
Join the strong Current of thy spreading Fame.
To a FRIEND.
SInce Knaves are captious, and since Fools are dull,
Who'd wish to wrangle with a Knave or Fool?
Fond of his Notions, let the Dunce be vain,
And his just Right to Emptiness maintain.
Stiff and conceited in his clumsey Pride,
And ever loudest on the erring Side;
By stupid Hearsay, not by Knowledge led,
Whole Heaps of vulgar Errors crowd his Head:
His Judgment too (for naught he understands)
Lies, like his Money, in some other Hands:
And yet the Self-admiring, silly Ass
Conceits that both alike should current pass:
Some crony Coxcomb over his Foible reigns,
From whom he borrows what supplies his Brains
With Sentiments absurd, and silly Views,
Which he with Pride precipitate pursues.
Such senseless Sots are ever rapid found,
Like Bodies bounding from a higher Ground:
Their headlong Haste slow trundling to a Stand
Is ever equal to the impressive Hand;
Who merely passive to Direction's Force,
One follows one, as Horse is linked to Horse;
Alternate tread the beaten Track they find,
The Father leads, the Son comes on behind,
And both are burdened still, and both are blind.
Whence comes this Prejudice that rules the Throng,
So absolute confounding Right with Wrong?
Is it from Fathers to their Sons effus'd,
Or is it Custom has the World abused?
Custom, that Reason's Foe so often appears,
Strengthened by Age, and reverend made by Years:
The hoary Sorceress with Magic Hand,
Inchants whole Millions to her wide Command.
Lo! gaping Multitudes her Nod attend,
Revere her Dictates, and her Laws defend.
Where Truth dethroned, to silent Shades must fly,
And Reason close her clear discerning Eye;
The Goddess banished from this peopled Ball,
By few is worshipped, and profaned by all.
Ten thousand various Shapes her Vot'ries wear;
The Shapes as various as the Vot'ries are.
Yet each with partial Pride his own surveys,
It Is Reason's Liv'ry, and must Reason please
He vainly thinks: For so Self-love descries
The tinsel Trappings with extatick Eyes,
Whose dazzl'd Rays imagined Splendors find,
Where Fancy glitters, and where Sense is blind.
Though Truth's a Sun, though Reason lends its Light,
Yet groping Mortals wander still in Night:
Such Fogs from Custom, and from Passions rise,
Which daily cloud their intellectual Skies.
Seduced by Pride, the Sons of Men are led:
Pride rules the Heart, and Pride supplies the Head.
It Is hence the Atheist scoffs at Faith and Creeds;
The Sage dies poring, and the Soldier bleeds:
Hence wicked Wits would laugh Religion down,
And surly Churchmen wear the indignant Frown.
Pride over the Passions holds despotick Rule,
Sneers in the Knave, and whispers in the Fool,
Decked in rich Robes with princely Pomp she dwells,
Yet lurks she not with Hermits in their Cells?
The same which mounts the glittering Persian Throne,
And creeps with cavern'd Anchorites unknown.
In some she labors Life's short Course to steer,
Sound the flat Shelves, and from the Rocks keep clear:
A decent Pride through opening Seas will sail,
Scorn the By-creek, and court the generous Gale.
It Is virtuous there, for Virtue fixed the Bound,
It Is vicious here, for Vice o'erleap'd the Mound.
Extremes with equal Energy conspire,
Like scorching Qualities of Frost and Fire.
Happy the few, which in the Middle stand,
A rigid Justice leans to neither Hand,
But nicely eyes when this or that prevails,
And ponders Life in Truth's unerring Scales.
Could Worth and Wisdom act a mutual Part,
Serene the Head, and social were the Heart;
Were Man a private and a public Friend,
And of his Being answered every End,
His Wishes free from every sensual Chain,
His Thoughts unruffl'd, and his Soul serene,
Blessed to enjoy what calm Content bestows,
Nor dreading still that calm Content to lose;
A State so blissful Mortals, never must know:
Who seeks an Eden finds a Waste below.
Look round, alas! the dismal Prospect scan,
This Sea tempestuous, and that Vessel, Man,
Tossed by his Wishes, by his Passions driven,
This Wretch of Reason, and this Heir of Heaven,
In giddy Whirls can find no certain Coast,
His Pilot blinded, and his Steerage lost.
Since hateful Vice in every Clime is found,
Shoots in each Soil, and choaks the burdened Ground,
Infects the Essence of the human Soul,
And sheds her spreading Plagues from Pole to Pole.
Can then strict Order with Confusion stay,
Or mortal Man the eternal Rule obey?
By Nature prone he takes the strongest Part,
And joins the Rebel Motions in his Heart;
Revolting daily to the intestine Foes;
What Precepts can the faithless Heart oppose?
Should mild Religion lend her sacred Hand,
To raise the sinking Wretch, and bid him stand;
Yet even she all-gracious and benign,
Must weep defeated, and her Claim resign:
So strong is Nature, and so weak is Grace,
So much misguided is this reasoning Race.
Though Folly has the madding World o'er-run;
Yet Wisdom here and there has saved a Son,
Selected sure by Heaven's peculiar Love,
To brighten Nature, and to shine above;
As Stars of larger Magnitude on high
The Earth enlighten and adorn the Sky.
Thus Plato glittered, godlike Newton shone,
Thus Bacon once, and once an Addison.
Illustrious Names! by Providence designed
To beam its Bounty, and direct Mankind.
A thousand lesser Lights in Life appear
Distinguished high in Nature's Hemisphere,
Hung out by Heaven to guide our Course below,
Correct our Wand'rings, and our Safeties show,
Whose Luster much, but whose true Progress more
Guides our frail Barks, and points to Wisdom's Shore.
On seeing a Picture of his Royal Highness the Prince of WALES, which was
presented to the University of Dublin.
IN Time's wide-wasting Walk with backward Tread,
Through Fancy's Retrospect I journey'd far,
Where human Glory in her Piles lay spread,
The Arch triumphal and the trophy'd Car.
Deep in the Abyss of that mysterious Gloom
Where Embryon Years and dire Contingents grow,
Like Twins matur'd in Time's all-teeming Womb,
Whence Pride's fell Progeny and Discord flow.
There laureled Chiefs and Heroes old I saw,
A headlong, hardy, dread, destructive Train,
Their God Ambition, and their Will their Law,
Tremendous Prodigies and Nature's Bane.
By Pride impelled and Fame's fallacious Blast,
In Virtue's Garb which Madmen Glory call,
At destined Life the deathful Spear they cast,
And tore the Vitals of this wounded Ball.
O Shame of Reason and her boastful Sons;
Instinct they scorn, whose Footstep never strays;
Yet she unerring to her Purpose runs:
Her Ends are certain, though unmarked her Ways.
Let human Arrogance from hence be taught
How wide from Rectitude her Passions roam;
Passions abroad for Happiness have sought:
But Happiness with Nature dwells at home.
Pensive I viewed through deep Reflection's Ken
Excentrick Reason and the Rounds of Time,
With all the mazy Labyrinths of Men,
Opinion's Frenzy, and Ambition's Crime.
With Eyes averted from the unsocial Scene,
The Muses led me to a sacred Shade,
Where laureled Grotto's bloomed for ever green,
And peaceful Olives in the Zephyrs played.
Secure, inwrapt beneath the embracing Wing
Of solemn Science and serene Repose,
Celestial Transports in my Fancy spring,
And glorious Visions to my Soul disclose.
Wasted, methought, where blissful Shades up-grow,
Amidst a flowery Vale intranc'd I lay,
Where winding Streams in limpid Mazes flow,
And crested Swans down Silver Currents stray.
There high-hung Rocks by crimson Fragrance crowned,
With gentle Force reflect the Noontide Beams,
Whilst gushing Springs from Crystal Caverns sound,
And floating Rills diffuse their falling Streams.
To pierce the Clouds the aspiring Cliffs uprose
From boisterous Storms and savage Man secure,
Beneath all Nature's Wealth uninjur'd grows,
Her Bounty blesses, and her Charms endure.
One downward Walk slow winding from on high,
By Virtue's Hand and willing Nature made,
Invites the curious Mind and searching Eye,
To seek with cautious Steps fair Wisdom's Shade.
But see the Goddess heavenly bright appears,
Persuasion pleading in her Smile serene;
A thousand Charms her graceful Form endears,
And Peace exults and Pleasure in her Mien.
A Crown, unfading, on her Brow she bore
With Virtues Emblems, and her Gems inlaid;
The Crown, immortal, which of old she wore;
Ere yet Ambition had the World dismayed.
Her favored Sons from 'midst the madding Crowd,
Her Sons select with gentle Hand she drew,
Secreted timely from the austere and proud,
Their Fame wide-spreading though their Numbers few.
Great Nature's Secrets in the Shade they sought,
Nor gazed attentive on the deep-hid Store
Of treasured Mischiefs in her Bosom wrought,
The dazzling Diamond and the enticing Ore.
Guiltless as yet within its darksome Bed,
Unrifl'd in the Virgin Globe it lay;
No sordid Fancy on its Splendors fed.
Nor dragged the deep Infection forth to Day.
Now by a Crystal Fountain's pure Expanse
They view the Windings of the starry Train,
That through the etherial Concave nightly dance,
Or rise refulgent from the purple Main.
So Wisdom's Sons sequestered from the Throng
Of Custom's Captives, and her Slaves misled,
In Freedom happy, and in Virtue strong,
From Crimes were shielded, and from conscious Dread.
Thus bloomed the Goddess in her Reign retired,
To Triumphs fell and fatal Fields unknown;
Her gentle Sway no sanguine Wreath required;
In Halcyon Hearts she fixed her friendly Throne,
Now mighty Monarchs by her Charms are won,
Who gaze enamored on her Face Divine,
And Slaves and Tyrants to her Temples run,
Embrace her Altars; and adore her Shrine.
The Muse attendant in her radiant Way,
Beholds her shining like the Morning Star,
Herself unfolding in a Flood of Day,
Diffusing Science and her Light from far.
From Egypt beaming, and the splendid East,
To Greece she traveled on the Wings of Fame;
Their opening Gates receive the glorious Guest,
And losty Pyramids her Praise proclaim.
Behold, on high the immortal Bard appears,
In every Region like the Sun surveyed,
Whose Fame shall vanquish Time's remotest Years,
When Brass and Marble are to Dust decayed.
What Laurel Wreaths at lettered Athens grew,
What Science there dispensed her sacred Store;
Desire was dazzl'd at the splendid View;
Ambition palled, and Pride could ask no more.
Who on his Country's Bosom gently trod?
Who fettered Freedom in his silken Bands?
Imperial Caesar, -- Rome's Desire and Rod,
With Tyrant Trophies in his Patriot Hands.
The World's dread Lord, Augustus, great in Fame
With open Arms embraced the Muses Lore;
The grateful Muse adorns the immortal Name,
And gilds the Stains his Conquests lest before.
Through far-stretch'd Years by Rage and Rapine spread,
The guilty Streams with human Slaughter swell,
The Muse from Discord hides her harmless Head,
And seeks the lonely Shade and pensive Cell.
In dismal Damps long Ages there she lay,
'Mid Glooms envellop'd and congenial Night,
Till Leo's lucid Beams brought back the Day,
And called forth Learning to her native Light.
With her each Virtue to the World returned,
And Truth once more unveiled her heavenly Face;
Usurping Error from her Throne was spurned,
And awful Justice filled her ancient Place.
In Britain's Isle, by Heaven's directing Voice,
Her bast loved Dwelling, and her Home she made;
Britain of old was Virtue's early Choice;
For Freedom nursed her in the friendly Shade.
Now opening wide an ambient Cloud retired,
When, lo! a Form in Female Pomp appears,
An awful Form with, regal Robes attired;
Her Mien majestic, and mature her Years.
Her Head a crown, a Scepter graced her Hand,
And public Care sat comely on her Face;
She looked Dominion and austere Command,
With Mercy tempered, and with manly Grace.
Her Throne of azure Gems and Pearl was made,
With Indian Gold and dazzling Diamonds graced;
Old Ocean's Trident at her Feet was laid;
Her Feet on vanquished Spain were firmly placed.
Before her Throne Britaimia's Genius bows,
Obsequious waiting at her powerful Hand,
Whilst kneeling Millions offer ardent Vows,
The servent Incense of a grateful Land.
On yonder distant Queen Elizabeth founded the University of Dublin
Shore behold a Pile,
A solemn Pile from sacred Ruins rise,
Eliza's Glory gilds the joyful Isle,
She bids the stately Structure pierce the Skies.
The noble Mass in solemn Form ascends;
The Muses Mansions charm my ravished Sight;
Ierne's Angel like the Noon descends,
And fills the lofty Dome with sacred Light.
I see! I see! the mystic Leaves unfold
And Time's vast Volume to my Eyes expand;
Rejoiced, I read the illustrious Names enrolled,
The Boast of Science and their native Land.
Great Usher's Fame his early Fame outspread,
Has reached the Limits of the rising Morn;
He drinks with Wisdom at her Fountain's Head,
Whilst orient Wreaths his awful Brows adorn.
In far-stretch'd Views with fainter Rays I see
Through Years remote and distant Clouds descried,
The Patriot-Genius doomed by Heaven to be
The Muse's Glory, and his Country's Guide:
Immortal Swift, with Wit's true Radiance crowned;
Near him bright Congreve and Roscommon shine;
There Parnel treads through Life's mysterious Round,
His Hermit leading in his Hand Divine.
With these a Train of laureled Sages spring,
Deserving Honors and unspotted Fame,
Surrounding Angels wait on miter'd King,
And sacred Wisdom bows to Berkeley's Name.
Wide, and more wide, my raptured Mind surveys
Auspicious Prospects dawning from afar,
The Joy and Triumph of succeeding Days,
Britannia' s rising Hope, and Virtue's Star.
A promised Prince rejoicing Time shall bring,
Assisting Heaven shall haste the important Hour;
On his just Brow no lawless Wreath shall spring,
Nor guilty Glory stain his tempered Power.
Religion's Charms shall all his Soul possess,
Her Charms unchanging, and celestial Hue,
His great Ambition shall be still to bless,
And Honor's Prize in Virtue's Path pursue.
Triumphant Justice on his Throne shall wait,
His Throne on Truth's eternal Base shall stand;
Meekness on high shall lift his glorious State,
And Godlike Mercy guide his sceptered Hand.
On him the Seasons shall their Bounty shed,
And smiling Plenty pour her teeming Horn;
His Fame with Time's descending Streams shall spread
To distant Years and Ages yet unborn.
See Learning's Sons the laureled Trophy bring,
See Arts exult in his prolific Beam,
Each raptured Muse the genial Power shall sing,
And Wisdom's Voice adorn the immortal Theme,
Virtue once more her drooping Head shall raise,
And smile secure within the Embrace of Power:
Merit revived shall meet with more than Praise,
And Genius then to glorious Heights shall tower.
Thou too, Hibernia, hail the approaching Year,
Prepare thy Voice, attune thy ancient Lyre;
Triumphant Notes thy echoing Vales shall cheer,
Augustus' Fame shall fill thy grateful Choir.
Sacred to thee, indulgent Heaven bestows
The Pledge prophetic of thy promised Day,
For thee on high the imperial Portrait glows,
Which Genius warms, and Godlike Arts array.
From Fancy's Eye, lo! Time's historic Hand
With gentle Force the mystic Veil updrew,
Behold serene the gracious Semblance stand
In awful Radiance to my raptured View,
ARDELIA, A POEM. Addressed to a very agreeable young Lady.
CLIO, fair Nymph of heavenly Race,
Declined for once her Bard's Embrace,
Like fickle Wantons here below,
Who random Favors wildly show.
He anxious courted her Return,
But she rejects his Vows with Scorn;
Those Vows which could but ill aspire
When she withheld her heavenly Fire.
In vain on Fancy he depends,
His heavy Fancy still descends.
The held-up Crown, the mighty Prize,
The Laurel green that never dies,
And all that on Parnassus grows,
Or from Pierian Fountains flows,
The Sons of Phoebus to reward,
And crown the visionary Bard,
At distance far he faintly views,
Then inward sighs, and blames the Muse:
But Mortals to vain Fears resigned,
In Darkness to what lies behind
The mystic Veil let down by Jove,
To screen his Purposes above,
When dusky Doubts desponding press
From present Ills the future guess,
Dismissing Hope when Succour's near,
They blindly rush upon Despair.
For lo! the Nymph of Form divine,
With Presence sweet and Smiles benign,
His Vows at length propitious hears,
And in a Vision bright appears,
As in a Gloom where Poplars rise,
A gentle Slumber closed his Eyes;
Her shape celestial she displays,
Her radiant Head was crowned with Bays,
Her Shoulders fledged with purple Wings,
And in one Hand a Laurel springs,
Which she extended held on high
Emblem of Fame and Victory;
A trembling Lyre the other shows,
Which on her Bard the Muse bestows;
But touching first the etherial Wire,
Inflamed his Soul with sacred Fire,
Diffusing Transport through each Part,
And melting Rapture round his Heart.
Descending now with yielding Eye,
And pointing to the Wreath on high,
Behold, she said, ambitious Bard!
The Prize you seek, the rich Reward,
Which shall employ the Trump of Fame
In sounding forth your envied Name.
Yet these high Favors which you court
Are not vouchsafed for trivial Sport;
A playful Fancy to employ,
Or glitter on some tinsel Toy:
A Theme distinguished I will find
That shall exalt thy ardent Mind,
Where Truth and Genius justly may
Each others Excellence display;
On such Foundations building Praise;
The polished Pile secure you will raise,
Embellished high in every Part
With all the beauteous Strokes of Art,
Where she and Nature both conspire,
And at their own Success admire.
Gross Flattery here can find no Place,
You need but copy every Grace:
A Nymph with Lineaments divine,
And envied by the tuneful Nine;
For sprightly Wit and Genius known,
And Judgment equal to their own;
A Critic nice; but not severe,
A Mind as tender as sincere,
Shall your successful Subject be,
In singing her you're sure of me.
The Graces too shall all attend,
And every Power thy Verse befriend.
Then happy Bard my Counsel choose,
Let bright Ardelia be thy Muse.
Her Voice divine still charmed my Ear,
Ardelia's Form approaches near,
With every native Beauty blessed
In Clio's heavenly Smile confessed;
Her Mien in Virtue's Air arrayed,
A thousand graceful Charms displayed,
Such Charms as genuine Raptures give,
And in Reflection's Eye shall live;
Lodged in the Soul unmixed and pure,
Shall lasting as itself endure.
Her outward Charms, her youthful Prime,
May yield at length to rifling Time,
But those within elude his Sway,
And late shall triumph over Decay.
If like the Sun she must decline,
Her Evening Rays shall richer shine,
With purple Splendours deck the Sky,
And look more lovely than on high.
Virtue alone such Power displays
When mortal Beauties lose their Blaze.
How happy then the accomplished Maid,
Where Virtue joins in Beauty's Aid!
Where Meekness makes true Merit rise
And heightens Charms it would disguise!
By busy Fancy thus employed,
The pleasing Dream I long enjoyed:
The Vision fled, I waking find
The lovely Image in my Mind.
My kindling Fancy soon took Fire,
I joyful snatch the sounding Lyre,
By Clio's heavenly Finger strung,
And all the extatic Vision sung.
Ardelia's Worth demands the Song,
To her my future Strains belong;
For she improves each Line I write,
Her Blots still make my Numbers bright;
Thrice happy Numbers, doomed to lie
Beneath the Influence of her Eye,
Imbibing thence, as from the Sun,
A Life and Vigor not their own.
To a young LADY, who had made an Epigram on TIME, but refused to give a Copy,
WHY will Ardelia still refuse
What she may grant with Pride,
Why study to suppress her Muse,
Why still her Numbers hide?
No more conceal that sparkling Vein,
Let your bright Treasure run;
Like current Gold your Sterling Strain
Should circle with the Sun.
In vain you mask in Housewife Airs,
In vain disguise your Wit;
Through every Look your Sense appears,
Through every Smile the Cheat.
Prithee no longer thus affect
Your Talents to conceal:
Let Wit its own bright Beam detect,
And throw aside the Veil.
Nor need you fear your Friends should blame,
They know your Worth too long;
That you on Sense build solid Fame,
Not on a trifling Song.
A furnished House your Mind appears,
Where Firmness claims a Place;
Yet Ornament the Fancy chears,
And Pictures give a Grace.
Your Subject, Time, will never stay
Then use it to kind Ends;
Nor think your Moments thrown away,
When you instruct your Friends.
On a Young LADY DANCING, Who did great EXECUTION without knowing it.
WHEN Stella glides with heedless Glance,
Obedient to the sprightly Sound;
Through all the Mazes of the Dance,
With Musick-moving Feet around:
Such Harmony is in her Air,
Such Grace each Attitude supplies;
In Transport lost no Sound we hear,
A sweeter Concord charms our Eyes.
Thus lovely Venus in her Sphere
Through winding Measures moves on high;
With golden Beams she glads the Year,
And gaily gilds the Morning Sky.
While raptured Mortals on her gaze,
Regardless by what Law she moves;
Still ravished by her splendid Rays,
The joyful World admires and loves.
Triumphant thus no Pang she feels,
No Pity melts her vacant Mind:
So youthful Victors at their Wheels
Unheeded Captives drag behind.
Ah Stella! know thy Power betimes,
Guiltless in thee, yet fatal found;
Thy Eyes indeed commit no Crimes,
Yet every Glance conveys a Wound.
With Caution use thy dangerous Charms,
Which now at Random thus annoy;
And gently wield those glittering Arms
By Beauty brightened to destroy.
At least behold thy Victims fall,
Their Fate should some Compassion move;
Thy pity may extend to all,
Though one alone enjoys thy Love.
MYRTILLA.
THE crimson Clouds, with Gold arrayed,
Over the rich Dawn their Pomp displayed;
The Sun in blushing Beams arose,
The Mountains glitter as he goes;
The towering Lark her Anthem sings,
And Heaven's blue Arch melodious rings;
The tuneful Thrush kept Time below,
The frisking Lambs leap to and fro;
Each feathered Warbler stretched his Throat,
And Echo answered every Note.
Myrtilla now, relenting Maid,
Was walking by a verdant Shade,
There loosely dressed in lovely Green,
Her Presence blessed the gladsome Scene;
Her Locks Love's Labyrinth reveal,
They wanton in the balmy Gale;
The balmy Gale her Locks unfurl,
And rifle Fragrance from each Curl,
Which scattered Odours as they played;
Her snowy Breasts such Charms betrayed,
As might the coldest Heart inspire,
And warm old Age with youthful Fire.
With Eyes intent she gently moves
Attended by a thousand Loves;
A Paper glitters in her Hands,
The Edge was Gold, and Gold the Sands
That over the soft Contents were shed,
The Letters spangled as she read;
Her Eyes enrich the lucid Lines,
A gentle Luster from them shines.
Then, blushing, sighs with silent Shame,
And seems her secret Wish to blame:
Her Wishes then themselves declare,
No Wish unkind possessed the Fair;
For mighty Love her Bosom swayed,
And sweet Myrtilla Love obeyed.
Damon, she said, how pure thy Flame!
(And as she said she kissed the Name)
How long did I thy Vows reprove,
Deaf to thy Sighs, and blind to Love!
Too proud thy Passion to exchange,
Regardless of the dread Revenge
Which Love's keen Arrows have infix'd,
When with my Soul thy Image mixed:
Ah! kneel no more, dear Youth arise,
Myrtilla now for Damon dies,
Young Damon, by some God conveyed,
Had sought, like her, the Morning Shade,
Where in a Gloom with Moss o'ergrown,
He makes his melancholy Moan;
He hears her speak, he sees her move,
And what he hears and sees is Love.
Quick in his Soul soft Tumults rose,
His Blood in rushing Currents flows;
His Pulse and Breath unequal play,
Deprived of Motion as he lay.
Myrtilla now approaches near,
His Bosom beats with Hope and Fear;
As nearer still the Damsel drew,
The tender Tumult thicker grew;
Her plaintive Voice on Damon calls,
She sees him pant, then starting falls,
And falling with disordered Charms
She drops into her Damon's Arms.
Thus Love, or Chance, or both, conspire,
And Fate indulged each fond Desire;
The little God exulting flew,
Who would his own soft Triumph view,
He clapped his Wings, his Quiver spurned,
And with a Laugh aloft returned.
On the Hospital for Lying-in Women, erected in Dublin, Inscribed to the
Founders.
CElestial Charity! thy Praise I sing,
O lift my Fancy on thy Angel Wing,
With thy pure Energy, propitious Guest,
Fill all my Faculties, and fire my Breast,
To raise the Soul, its tender Springs to move
To warm Benevolence, to kindle Love.
O Queen of Virtues! in whose Face we find
The living Traces of the Eternal Mind,
Where Pity beaming copious Bounty glows,
And sweet Benevolence for ever slows;
How are thy Attributes, celestial Maid,
Through all the Extent of Heaven and Earth displayed!
Lo! melting Mercy in thy Essence lives,
And pities first what she at last forgives.
Through each revolving Scene and changing Stage,
From cradl'd Infancy to crippled Age,
Thy friendly Hand supports the trembling Knee,
And Pain and Poverty still cry to thee.
Thine Eye well-pleased, propitious Goddess, turn,
Here kneel thy Vot'ries, here thy Altars burn,
Here breath thy Ardours, here thy Powers redress,
And reach the up-listing Hand to low Distress;
Remove fell Maladies, and soften Woe,
When teeming Nature feels the painful Throw;
Shelter the Matron from the naked Wild,
And save at once the Mother and the Child:
The Houseless Wretch no friendly Shade who finds,
Exposed to beating Rains and howling Winds,
Shall here from Anguish and Temptation free,
Enjoy her Innocence, her Babe, and Thee;
Shall here, secure from casual Ills, confess
Thy healing Comforts, and thy Bounty bless.
Auspicious Pile, preventing Pains and Guilt,
First planned by Piety, by Virtue built,
A public Virtue in thy Founder blazed,
A public Love thy sacred Mansions raised,
Mansions by Charity herself designed,
The sure Asylum of the suffering Kind,
Whom Poverty with meagre Mien pursues,
And ghastly Malady, with Pain, subdues;
In thee relieved, their fainting Souls revive,
The rescued mother and her Infant thrive;
Through timely care and Strength-restoring Food,
Those smiling Pledges of the public Good,
Thy Charity to early Light conveys,
To social Duties and to lengthened Days,
Strengthens for frequent Births the fruitful Womb,
And stores Community with Hands to come,
Training the Midnight Dame to save the Wife,
Nor strangle Nature in the Porch of Life.
O! need the Muse invite the generous Fair,
To make such Charity their constant Care;
By Nature taught, to pity they incline,
And cheerfully support the great Design;
Their winning Smiles shall every Bosom warm,
Inspire Compassion, and to Goodness charm,
Shall every human Heart with Joy engage,
And melt to Charity a generous Age.
On taking PORTO-BELLO by Storm. Inscribed to the Vernon Club in Drogheda.
Written in the Year 1740.
LET Albion's Rocks loud Paeans ring,
And let the surging Wave reply,
In hoarse resounding Tenors sing,
And send the Tidings to the Sky.
Triumphant Vernon is the Theme,
O! lift it to the tuneful Spheres;
Let distant Globes his Worth proclaim,
Whilst Britain's Guardian Angel hears.
Whilst he expands the mighty Blast
On his exulting Wings outspread,
Descending with celestial Haste
To shield the matchless Hero's Head.
Hark! mimic Thunders burst below,
To spread the joyful News around,
Proud Porto-bello feels the Blow,
And lies a Ruin on the Ground.
Let British Bosoms grateful flame,
For Honor and for Treasure won,
While smiling Babes lisp Vernon's Name,
And Kings applaud what he has done.
His Deed that shall enrich our Story,
When busy Fame herself grows old,
And sick Ambition's cloyed with Glory,
Great Vernon's Triumphs shall be told.
Let then the blushing Bumper flow,
Rich Spirits dance through every Vein,
Victorious Vernon has laid low
The boasted Strength and Pride of Spain.
Let all the illustrious Sons of War,
Who triumph in the glorious Task,
Be toasted in thy Wine Guymar,
And empty the inspiring Flask.
For as the Bumper goes its Rounds,
And each stout Hero's Health we ply,
Great Vernon answers in dread Sounds,
And gasping Spaniards sink and die.
SONG.
WHILE soft Zelinda from yon Hill
The Silver Tide surveys,
The Air so mild, the Wind so still,
It gently fans the Sprays.
The pensive Nymph arrayed in Green,
With golden Tresses spread,
Her snowy Arm reclined is seen,
On which she leans her Head.
To Love's Delights she tuned her Tongue,
The Turtles ceased to coo,
The Linnets listened as she sung,
And seemed to feel them too.
Alexis was the lovely Name
Which warbl'd through the Gale,
Echo returned the charming Theme,
Still vocal in the Vale.
Alexis! dear deceitful Swain,
Why to my Passion blind?
O! give me back that Heart again,
Which I so late resigned.
Or come, thou cruel conquering Boy,
Come crown the Vows you made,
Those Preludes to Love's raptured Joy,
When in the conscious Shade:
Where thy bewitching Language stole
Like Magic through my Breast,
Unlocked the Secrets of my Soul,
And rifled all the rest.
Yet still I watch thy dear Return,
Still haunt each happy Place,
Where mutual Flames did equal burn,
And mutual Arms embrace.
But fly, Inconstant, from me go;
Why should a Nymph pursue
A faithless Swain who shuns her so,
A Swain that is never true?
O yes! replied my yielding Heart,
Itself alas! thy Prize,
Who can resist thy tempting Art,
Or long withstand those Eyes?
On seeing Mrs. Woffington appear in several Characters.
DElightful Woffington! so formed to please,
Strikes every Taste, can every Passion raise,
In Shapes as various as her Sexes are,
And all the Woman seems comprised in her:
With easy Action and becoming Mien
She shines accomplished, bright'ning every Scene.
The Prude and the Coquet in her we find,
And all the Foibles of the fairer kind,
Expressed in Characters themselves would own,
The Manner such as might the Vice atone:
Her taking Graces gain them new Esteem;
They Are changed to Virtues, or like Virtues seem.
If, drowned in Grief, pathetic Sorrows flow,
The pitying Audience feels the mimic Woe;
The soft Infection swims in gushing Tears,
We weep the Ills of twice two thousand Years.
When warlike Pyrrbus woos the afficted Fair,
Then all Andromache's displayed in her:
The Springs of Nature feel her powerful Art,
She moves the Passions, and she melts the Heart:
Her noble Manner all the Soul alarms,
When Sorrow shakes us, and when Virtue charms;
Sincere Emotions in each Bosom rise,
And real Anguish knows no mock Disguise.
Who would not Beauty's falling Fate deplore,
Who sees her faint, and droop, and sink in Shore?
The dying Fair excites such generous Pain,
What Bosom bleeds not when she begs in vain?
Extreme Distress so feelingly she draws,
She seems to challenge, not to court Applause.
Secure of Worth, nor anxious of her Claim,
She cooly draws a careless Bill on Fame.
The noblest Sentiment, by her displayed,
In all the Pomp of Milton's Muse arrayed,
Emphatic Beauties from her Hand receive,
Adorned by Graces which they used to give:
Envy herself extorted Tribute pays,
And Candor spreads, and Justice crowns her Praise.
A Farewell to APOLLO James Belcher, Es; called by his Friends Apollo.
and the Muses, at Glassnevin.
ADIEU! ye green ambrosial Bowers!
Ye friendly calm Retreats, farewell!
Where Converse crowns the blissful Hours,
And blameless Mirth and Pleasure dwell.
Where often, intranc'd, I happy lay,
From every anxious Care retired,
In Fancy's Visions passed the Day,
By smiling Solitude inspired.
The Muses This alludes to Trees planted round a Well, which he calls Helicon,
and the Trees the Muses.
there exulting rise,
And spread alost their verdant Pride,
With Arms uprais'd repel the Skies,
Shading their sacred Fountain's Side;
Whose copious Spring inspiring slows,
A living Stream, for ever clear;
Where ever it glides each Flower grows,
And purple Daisies deck the Year.
There Phoebus, with unclouded Ray,
Propitious shines serenely bright;
His genial Power adoms the Day,
And warms with vital Beams the Night.
By Fortune forced to foreign Climes
From thy hospitious Shades to roam,
Accept, sweet Place! these parting Rhimes
I pay to thee, my friendly Home!
Sacred to thee, my grateful Lyre
Shall often thy absent Shades deplore;
Thy absent Shades shall wake its Wyre,
On Albion's wide refounding Shore.
No length of Time shall ever deface
Thy Image in my thankful Breast:
Reflection there thy Form shall trace,
In lasting Characters impressed.
In thee my Worth and Wit prevail!
In thee the blooming Laurel grow!
May Health be wasted in each Gale,
And Plenty's Cup still social flow!
Long thy Apollo there display
The Virtues of his generous Mind,
Diffusing, like the God of Day,
His bounteous Beams on all Mankind,
On viewing the Monument of the Right Honorable William Conolly, Esquire
AS on the Patriot's aweful Form we gaze,
The breathing Marble his great Soul displays;
Reclined and pale, with pungent Pains oppressed,
He feels his Country in his dying Breast:
For her dear Sake would ward the impending Dart;
From her reluctant, not from Life, to part.
For ever firm, to Heaven's high Will resigned,
He calmly cast the impartial Eye behind:
There the bright Virtue of each well-spent Year
Beams on his Soul, nor leaves one Cloud of Fear.
Blessed Shade! one Moment cease thy Bliss to know,
And view well-pleased that pious Form below.
Oh, see thy Country in thy Consort weep,
And over thy Ashes grateful Vigils keep!
Her servent Prayer to Heaven, like Incense, flew
On Angel Wings, a Sacrifice for you:
The pure Oblation passed the eternal Gate,
And rose sweet smelling round the Mercy-Scat;
But Heaven, alas! the Soul-breath'd Wish denies;
Heaven weighed thy Worth, and called thee to the Skies.
Still over thy Shrine thy faithful Consort bows,
Still to thy Memory pays her plighted Vows,
See Grandeur here by social Virtue graced;
The Manner noble, as refined the Taste!
Not Pride, but Piety there strikes our Eyes,
And Meekness lifts yon Pillar to the Skies.
Why smokes at Noon that hospitable Dome?
To feed the Fatherless, the Orphan's Home.
By thy Example thus she wings her Way,
Once more to meet thee in the Realms of Day:
She treads thy shining Path, keeps still in Sight,
Thy Beam illustrious, and reflects thy Light.
Thus in the crimson West the Lamp of Day
Resplendent sets, and sinks his radiant Ray:
In the Azure East, inrob'd with milder Beams,
The Queen of Night sends forth her chearing Gleams;
Connubial Luster over the Ocean sheds,
Glads the low Vales, and gilds the Mountain Heads.
To a FRIEND.
To thee in Tempe's blissful Shade,
From Bolesworth's Brow I write;
A happy Place, by Nature made
For Pleasure and Delight.
Here slow'ry Hills over fertile Vales
In gay Confusion rise:
Here smiling Health, amid the Gales,
On purple Pinions flies.
Here rural Sports the Mind engage
To pass the pleasing Day;
Here Tilson quits his Tully's Page,
To turn the tedded Hay.
From London far, and State Affairs,
Sagacious he retires:
Each tranquil Bliss serene he shares,
Which Solitude inspires.
No Passions rude can here annoy
His undissembled Smile;
Domestic Sweets, connubial Joy,
Must every Care beguile.
Still near her Side his Soul approves,
In Love and Friendship blessed,
Each tender Sentiment that moves
Within her faithful Breast.
His lovely Babes, like Lambkins play,
Sportive in April Sun:
Rejoicing meet him in his Way,
Or prattling round him run.
Thus lightly gay the Moments fly,
Which feel no Weight of Care;
Could Time but throw his Pinions by,
He Would wish to settle here.
Nor less Delight attends on thee,
My Bassus! in thy Bower;
Where Sense and Genius both agree
To crown thy classic Hour.
In quest of Truth, you only tread
The Path by Reason made;
By no delusive Guides misled,
Of no false Lights afraid.
What more could bount'ous Heaven bestow
Thy Blessings to secure?
It gave the sweetest Pledge below,
To make them long endure.
In thy accomplished, honored Fair,
Thy Bosom-bliss refined;
Whose winning Virtues all appear
Harmonious as her Mind.
And see! the beauteous blooming Maid,
Thy Hope, thy Joy, and Pride,
With every pleasing Charm arrayed,
With every Grace supplied,
Which Nature's Hand can gently frame,
Or polished Art refine,
To make her rich in Virtue's Fame,
And like her Mother shine!
Thou darling Youth, whose dawning Mind
The Muses all desire!
In thy bright Thoughts we early find
Thy Father's Sense and Fire.
To thee, my Clio, grateful still,
Shall consecrate her Theme,
And sing thee placed on Pindus' Hill,
Or at the sacred Stream.
Each lettered Art imbibing there
With every Grace combined,
To make thee to thy Country dear,
The Wish of Humankind.
To thee in Tempe's blissful Shade
This grateful Verse I send;
The Verse sincere, though poorly paid,
To thee, my honored Friend!
On a public Collection made for the distressed Remains of the Inniskillen and
Derry Men. Inscribed to the Right Honorable the Lord Tullamore.
SEE social Worth extend her copious Hand,
See public Virtue warm a faithful Land!
See Freedom's Sons in generous League combined,
Who ardent cast their grateful Eyes behind,
With kindling Hearts their Fathers Deeds survey,
Who snatched from lawless Power the important Prey;
Uplifting Liberty when prostrate spread,
They bravely conquered, or as bravely bled.
To you descends the Patriot's honored Name,
To you the Pledge of Truth, the Thirst of Fame;
The glorious Legacy, by you possessed,
Beams on each Brow, and burns in every Breast.
A Deed like this sure Heaven well-pleased shall see,
You loose those Hands which helped to make you free.
Nor you, whose Heart with generous Fervor glows,
The Joy of Want, and Balm of human Woes,
Your Country's Prop, nor you, my Lord, refuse,
Amid the public Praise, the grateful Muse.
Kind Heaven has planted in your noble Frame
What Worth can minister, what Want can claim:
Your bount'ous Hand is ever foremost found
To raise the Weak, and bind up every Wound.
When niggard Nature locked each vital Store,
When Land and Water gave their Growths no more,
When ghastly Famine over each Face was spread,
And pale Eblana drooped her dying Head,
Your saving Power the sickening Sun supplies,
Unbinds the Glebe, and thaws the inclement Skies.
Look back, my Lord! your pious Schemes enjoy;
Let warlike Chiefs, still anxious to destroy,
Spread Ruin round, and Death and Danger brave;
Your Fame from Mercy springs, your Pride's to save;
You seek that Crown whose Gems shall ever glow,
When Derry falls, and Boyn shall cease to flow:
With William's Worth your virtuous Deeds shall soar,
When Triumphs fail, and Albion sways no more
Above the fading Stars expiring Rays,
When Systems sink, and Suns withdraw their Blaze.
On his Excellency the Earl of CHESTERFIELD's resigning the Government of
Ireland.
WHere dismal Melancholy moping reigns,
'Midst a dark Vale which horrid Rocks surround,
Where steril Rigor rules the lonesome Plains,
Nor ever Verdure decks the blasted Ground:
Where howling Winds through clifted Caverns blow,
And Birds obscene their baleful Mansions keep;
Where mimick Echo mocks each Sound of Woe,
And humid Caves with Tears eternal weep:
Hibernia' s Guardian Goddess, prostrate there
Lay brooding over her mighty Grief retired;
Her reverend Head reclined, her Bosom bare,
In tragic Weeds disconsolate attired.
Each Native Attribute dejected stands,
Each Virtue sunk, each Orphan Art dismayed;
And widowed Science wrung her plaintive Hands;
And listless Sorrow fixed the Face of Trade.
The Muse, Attendant on the mournful Train,
With silent Grief the solemn Scene surveys;
In broken Sighs she breathes her Heartfelt Pain;
Her Lyre unstrung, and withered all her Bays.
As from a Trance the Goddess gently 'woke,
Then rising slowly with maternal Grace,
Thus in faint Sounds her laboring Anguish spoke,
Whilst copious Tears ran trickling down her Face.
Unhappy Isle! thy short-lived Triumph dies,
How scant the Sunshine of thy brightest Day!
What Cloud malign o'ercasts thy cheerful Skies!
What sudden Night obscures the Noontide Ray!
Too soon Britannia stretched her envious Hand;
Too soon (alas!) she snatched the Man so dear,
Whose Power serene in Perils could command,
Whose Skill through threatening Storms with Safety steer.
Each Art revived by his auspicious Smile,
Shone, with new Elegance and Pomp arrayed;
In decent State uprose the Regal Pile,
And the rich Column graced the newborn Glade.
Blessed with the Fruits of his paternal Toil,
My grateful Sons with joyful Hearts obey;
Exulting Concord crowns my fertile Soil,
And every Virtue waits on STANHOPE's Sway.
O Albion! to my longing Arms return
The godlike Patriot from thy warm Embrace;
With Pity hear thy faithful Sister mourn;
Calm her sad Conflict, and restore her Peace!
But if, alas! by Fate's severe Decree,
In thy bright Hemisphere this Star must shine,
Oh! may his Rays oblique yet glance on me,
Though his exalted Splendors still be thine.
FINIS.

