ODE TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM PIT.

[Price 1 s.]

ODE TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM PIT.

By WILLIAM MASON, M. A.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
PINDAR. Isthm. Ode 2. LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, PALL MALL.

M.DCC.LXXXII.

ODE.
I.
IT IS May's meridian reign; yet EURUS cold
Forbids each shrinking thorn its leaves unfold,
Or hang with silver buds her rural throne;
No primrose shower from her green lap she throws This expression is taken from
MILTON's song on May Morning, to which this stanza in general alludes, and the
4th verse in the next.
,
No daisy, violet, or cowslip blows,
And FLORA weeps her fragrant offspring gone.
Hoar frost arrests the genial dew;
To wake, to warble, and to woo
No Linnet calls his drooping love:
Shall then the Poet strike the lyre,
When mute are all the feathered quire,
And Nature fails to warm the Sirens of the grove?
II.
He shall: for what the sullen Spring denies
The orient beam of virtuous youth supplies;
That moral dawn be his inspiring flame.
Beyond the dancing radiance of the East
Thy glory, Son of CHATHAM! fires his breast,
And, proud to celebrate thy vernal fame,
Hark, from his lyre the strain ascends,
Which but to Freedom's favorite friends
That lyre disdains to sound.
Hark and approve, as did thy Sire The poem of Caractacus was read in MS. by
the late Earl of CHATHAM, who honored it with an approbation which the author
is here proud to record.

The Lays which once with kindred fire
His Muse in Attic mood made MONA's oaks rebound.
III.
Long silent since, save when, in KEPPEL's name,
Detraction, murdering Britain's naval fame,
Roused into sounds of scorn the indignant string See Ode to the Naval Officers
of Great Britain, written 1779.
.
But now, replenished with a richer theme,
The vase of Harmony shall pour its stream,
Fan'd by free Fancy's rainbow-tinctur'd wing.
Thy Country too shall hail the song,
Her ecchoing heart the notes prolong;
While they alone with See the motto from PINDAR.
envy sigh,
Whose rancour to thy parent dead
Aimed, ere his funeral rites were paid,
With vain vindictive rage to starve his progeny.
IV.
From Earth and These the Muse averts her view,
To meet in yonder sea of Either blue
A beam to which the blaze of noon is pale;
In purpling circles now the glory spreads,
A host of angels now unveil their heads,
While Heaven's own music triumphs on the gale.
Ah see, two white-rob'd Seraphs lead
Thy Father's venerable shade;
He bends from yonder cloud of gold,
While they, the ministers of light,
Bear from his breast a mantle bright,
And with the Heav'n-wove robe thy youthful limbs enfold.
V.
"Receive this mystic gift, my Son!" he cries,
"And, for so wills the Sovereign of the skies,
"With this receive, at ALBION's anxious hour,
"A double portion of my patriot zeal,
"Active to spread the fire it dared to feel
"Through raptured Senates, and with awful power
"From the full fountain of the tongue
"To roll the rapid tide along
"Till a whole nation caught the flame.
"So on thy Sire shall Heaven bestow
"A blessing TULLY failed to know,
"And redolent in thee diffuse thy Father's fame.
VI.
"Nor thou, ingenuous Boy! that Fame despise
"Which lives and spreads abroad in Heaven's pure eyes,
"The last best energy of noble mind In allusion to a fine and well-known
passage in MILTON's Lycidas.
;
"Revere thy Father's shade; like him disdain
"The tame, the timid, temporizing train,
"Awake to self, to social interest blind:
"Young as thou art, Occasion calls,
"Thy Country's scale or mounts or falls
"As thou and thy compatriots strive;
"Scarce is the fatal moment past
"That trembling ALBION deemed her last,
"O knit the union firm, and bid an Empire live.
VII.
"Proceed, and vindicate fair Freedom's claim,
"Give life, give strength, give substance to her name;
"The native rights of Man with Fraud contest;
"Yes, snatch them from Corruption's baleful power,
"Who dares, in Day's broad eye, those rights devour,
"While Prelates bow, and bless the Harpy feast.
"If foiled at first, resume thy course,
"Rise strengthened with Antaean force,
"So shall thy toil in conquest end.
"Let others court the tinsel things
"That hang upon the smile of Kings,
"Be thine the Muse's wreath; be thou THE PEOPLE's FRIEND."
ASTON, May 11th, 1782.
FINIS.

