THE PROPHECY of FAMINE. A SCOTS PASTORAL. BY C. CHURCHILL. INSCRIBED TO JOHN
WILKES, Esquire

Carmina tum melius, cum venerit IPSE, canemus.

Dr. KING. OXON. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, And Sold by G. KEARSLY, in
Ludgate Street. MDCCLXIII.

THE PROPHECY of FAMINE. A SCOTS PASTORAL.
WHEN CUPID first instructs his darts to fly
From the sly corner of some cook-maid's eye,
The stripling raw, just entered in his teens,
Receives the wound, and wonders what it means;
His heart, like dripping, melts, and new desire
Within him stirs, each time she stirs the fire;
Trembling and blushing he the fair one views,
And fain would speak, but cannot -- without a MUSE.
So, to the sacred mount he takes his way,
Prunes his young wings, and tunes his infant lay,
His oaten reed to rural ditties frames,
To flocks and rocks, to hills and rills proclaims,
In simplest notes, and all unpolished strains,
The loves of nymphs, and eke the loves of swains.
Clad, as your nymphs were always clad of yore,
In rustic weeds -- a cook-maid now no more --
Beneath an aged oak LARDELLA lies --
Green moss, her couch; her canopy, the skies.
From aromatic shrubs the roguish gale
Steals young perfumes, and wafts them through the vale.
The youth, turned swain, and skilled in rustic lays,
Fast by her side his amorous descant plays.
Herds low, Flocks bleat, Pies chatter, Ravens scream,
And the full chorus dies a-down the stream.
The streams, with music freighted, as they pass,
Present the fair LARDELLA with a glass,
And ZEPHYR, to complete the lovesick plan,
Waves his light wings, and serves her for a fan.
But when maturer Judgment takes the lead,
These childish toys on Reason's altar bleed,
Formed after some great man, whose name breeds awe,
Whose every sentence Fashion makes a law,
Who on mere credit his vain trophies rears,
And founds his merit on our servile fears;
Then we discard the workings of the heart,
And nature's banished by mechanic art.
Then, deeply read, our reading must be shown;
Vain is that knowledge which remains unknown.
Then OSTENTATION marches to our aid,
And lettered PRIDE stalks forth in full parade,
Beneath their care behold the work refine,
Pointed each sentence, polished every line.
Trifles are dignified, and taught to wear
The robes of Ancients with a Modern air,
NONSENSE with Classic ornaments is graced,
And passes current with the stamp of TASTE.
Then the rude THEOCRITE is ransacked over,
And courtly MARO called from MINCIO's shore;
Sicilian muses on our mountains roam,
Easy and free as if they were at home;
NYMPHS, NAIADS, NEREIDS, DRYADS, SATYRS, FAUNS,
Sport in our floods, and trip it over our lawns;
Flowers which once flourished fair in GREECE and ROME,
More fair revive in ENGLAND's meads to bloom;
Skies without cloud exotic suns adorn;
And roses blush, but blush without a thorn;
Landscapes, unknown to dowdy Nature, rise,
And new creations strike our wondering eyes.
For bards, like these, who neither sing nor say,
Grave without thought, and without feeling gay,
Whose numbers in one even tenor flow,
Attun'd to pleasure, and attun'd to woe,
Who, if plain COMMON-SENSE her visit pays,
And mars one couplet in their happy lays,
As at some Ghost affrighted, start and stare,
And ask the meaning of her coming there;
For bards like these a wreath shall MASON bring,
Lined with the softest down from FOLLY's wing;
In LOVE's PAGODA, shall they ever doze,
And GISBEL kindly rock them to repose;
My lord, -- to letters as to faith most true --
At once their patron and example too --
Shall quaintly fashion his love-labour'd dreams,
Sigh with sad winds, and weep with weeping streams,
Curious in grief, (for real grief we know
Is curious to dress up the tale of woe)
From the green umbrage of some DRUID's seat,
Shall his own works in his own way repeat.
Me, whom no muse of heavenly birth inspires,
No judgment tempers when rash genius fires,
Who boast no merit but mere knack of rhyme,
Short gleams of sense, and satire out of time,
Who cannot follow where trim fancy leads
By prattling streams over flow'r-empurpled meads;
Who often, but without success, have prayed
For apt ALLITERATION's artful aid,
Who would, but cannot, with a master's skill
Coin fine new epithets, which mean no ill,
Me, thus uncouth, thus every way unfit
For pacing poesy, and ambling wit,
TASTE with contempt beholds, nor deigns to place
Amongst the lowest of her favored race.
Thou NATURE, art my goddess -- to thy law
Myself I dedicate -- hence slavish awe
Which bends to fashion, and obeys the rules
Imposed at first, and since observed by fools.
Hence those vile tricks which mar fair NATURE's hue,
And bring the sober matron forth to view,
With all that artificial tawdry glare,
Which virtue scorns, and none but strumpets wear.
Sick of those pomps, those vanities, that waste
Of toil, which critics now mistake for taste,
Of false refinements sick, and labored ease
Which Art, too thinly veiled, forbids to please,
By Nature's charms (inglorious truth!) subdued,
However plain her dress, and haviour rude,
To northern climes my happier course I steer,
Climes where the Goddess reigns throughout the year,
Where, undisturbed by Art's rebellious plan,
She rules the loyal Lord, and faithful clan.
To that rare soil, where virtues clust'ring grow,
What mighty blessings does not ENGLAND owe,
What waggon-loads of courage, wit and sense,
Does each revolving day import from thence?
To us she gives, disinterested friend,
Faith without fraud and STUARTS without end.
When we prosperity's rich trappings wear,
Come not her generous sons, and take a share,
And if, by some disastrous turn of fate,
Change should ensue, and ruin sieze our state,
Shall we not find, safe in that hallowed ground,
Such refuge, as the HOLY MARTYR found?
Nor less our debt in SCIENCE, though denied
By the weak slaves of prejudice and pride.
Thence came the RAMSAYS, names of worthy note,
Of whom one paints, as well as the other wrote;
Thence HOME, disbanded from the sons of prayer,
For loving plays, though no dull DEAN was there;
Thence issued forth, at great MACPHERSON's call,
That old, new, Epic Pastoral, FINGAL;
Thence simple bards, by simple prudence taught,
To this wise town by simple patrons brought,
In simple manner utter simple lays,
And take, with simple pensions, simple praise.
Waft me some muse to TWEDE's inspiring stream,
Where all the little loves and graces dream,
Where slowly winding the dull waters creep,
And seem themselves to own the power of sleep,
Where on the surface Lead, like feathers, swims;
There let me bathe my yet unhallowed limbs,
As once a SYRIAN bathed in JORDAN's flood,
Wash off my native stains, correct that blood
Which mutinies at call of English pride,
And, deaf to prudence, rolls a patriot tide.
From solemn thought, which overhangs the brow
Of patriot care, when things are -- God knows how;
From nice trim points, where HONOR, slave to rule,
In compliment to folly, plays the fool;
From those gay scenes, where mirth exalts his power,
And easy Humor wings the laughing hour;
From those soft better moments, when desire
Beats high, and all the world of man's on fire,
When mutual ardours of the melting fair
More than repay us for whole years of care,
At Friendship's summons will my WILKES retreat,
And see, once seen before, that ancient seat,
That ancient seat, where majesty displayed
Her ensigns, long before the world was made?
Mean narrow maxims, which enslave mankind,
Never from its bias warp thy settled mind.
Not dup'd by party, nor opinion's slave,
Those faculties which bounteous Nature gave
Thy honest spirit into practice brings,
Nor courts the smile, nor dreads the frown of Kings.
Let rude licentious Englishmen comply
With tumult's voice, and curse they know not why;
Unwilling to condemn, thy soul disdains,
To wear vile faction's arbitrary chains,
And strictly weighs, in apprehension clear,
Things as they are, and not as they appear.
With thee GOOD HUMOR tempers lively WIT,
Enthroned with JUDGMENT, CANDOR loves to sit,
And Nature gave thee, open to distress,
A heart to pity, and a hand to bless.
Often have I heard thee mourn the wretched lot
Of the poor, mean, despised, insulted Scot,
Who, might calm reason credit idle tales,
By rancour forged where prejudice prevails,
Or starves at home, or practices, through fear
Of starving, arts which damn all conscience here.
When Scriblers, to the charge by interest led,
The fierce North-Briton foaming at their head,
Pour forth invectives, deaf to candour's call,
And, injured by one alien, rail at all;
On Northern Pisgah when they take their stand,
To mark the weakness of that Holy Land,
With needless truths their libels to adorn,
And hang a nation up to public scorn,
Thy generous soul condemns the frantic rage,
And hates the faithful, but ill-natured, page.
The Scots are poor, cries surly English pride;
True is the charge, nor by themselves denied.
Are they not then in strictest reason clear,
Who wisely come to mend their fortunes here?
If by low supple arts successful grown,
They sapp'd our vigor to increase their own,
If, mean in want, and insolent in power,
They only fawned, more surely to devour,
Roused by such wrongs should REASON take alarm,
And even the MUSE for public safety arm;
But if they own, ingenuous, virtue's sway,
And follow where true honor points the way,
If they revere the hand by which they are fed,
And bless the donors for their daily bread,
Or by vast debts of higher import bound,
Are always humble, always grateful found,
If they, directed by PAUL's holy pen,
Become discreetly all things to all men,
That all men may become all things to them,
Envy may hate, but justice cannot condemn.
"Into our places, states, and beds they creep:"
They Have sense to get, what we want sense to keep.
Once, be the hour accursed, accursed the place,
I ventured to blaspheme the chosen race.
Into those traps, which men, called PATRIOTS, laid,
By specious arts unwarily betrayed,
Madly I leagued against that sacred earth,
Vile parricide! which gave a parent birth.
But shall I meanly error's path pursue,
When heavenly TRUTH presents her friendly clue?
Once plunged in ill, shall I go farther in?
To make the oath, was rash; to keep it, sin.
Backward I tread the paths I trod before,
And calm reflection hates what passion swore.
Converted, (blessed are the souls which know
Those pleasures which from true conversion flow,
Whether to reason, who now rules my breast,
Or to pure faith, like LYTTLETON and WEST)
Past crimes to expiate be my present aim,
To raise new trophies to the SCOTTISH name,
To make (what can the proudest Muse do more)
Even faction's sons her brighter worth adore,
To make her glories, stamped with honest rhimes,
In fullest tide roll down to latest times.
Presumptuous wretch! and shall a Muse like thine,
An English Muse, the meanest of the nine,
Attempt a theme like this? Can her weak strain
Expect indulgence from the mighty THANE?
Should he from toils of government retire,
And for a moment fan the poet's fire,
Should he, of sciences the moral friend,
Each curious, each important search suspend,
Leave unassisted HILL of herbs to tell,
And all the wonders of a Cockle-shell,
Having the Lord's good grace before his eyes,
Would not the HOME step forth, and gain the prize?
Or if this wreath of honor might adorn
The humble brows of one in England born,
Presumptuous still thy daring must appear;
Vain all thy towering hopes, whilst I am here.
Thus spoke a form, by silken smile, and tone
Dull and unvaried, for the LAUREAT known,
FOLLY's chief friend, DECORUM's eldest son,
In every party found, and yet of none.
This airy substance, this substantial shade
Abashed I heard, and with respect obeyed.
From themes too lofty for a bard so mean
Discretion beckons to an humbler scene.
The restless fever of ambition laid,
Calm I retire, and seek the sylvan shade.
Now be the Muse disrobed of all her pride,
Be all the glare of verse by Truth supplied,
And if plain nature pours a simple strain,
Which BUTE may praise, and OSSIAN not disdain,
OSSIAN, sublimest, simplest Bard of all,
Whom English Infidels, MACPHERSON call,
Then round my head shall honor's ensigns wave,
And pensions mark me for a willing slave.
Two boys, whose birth beyond all question springs
From great and glorious, though forgotten, kings,
Shepherds of Scottish lineage, born and bred
On the same bleak and barren mountain's head,
By niggard nature doomed on the same rocks
To spin out life, and starve themselves and flocks,
Fresh as the morning, which, enrob'd in mist,
The mountain top with usual dullness kissed,
JOCKEY and SAWNEY to their labors rose;
Soon clad I ween, where nature needs no clothes,
Where, from their youth enured to winter skies,
Dress and her vain refinements they despise.
JOCKEY, whose manly high-bon'd cheeks to crown
With freckles spotted flamed the golden down,
With mickle art, could on the bagpipes play,
Even from the rising to the setting day;
SAWNEY as long without remorse could bawl
HOME's madrigals, and ditties from FINGAL.
Often at his strains, all natural though rude,
The Highland Lass forgot her want of food,
And, whilst she scratched her lover into rest,
Sunk pleased, though hungry, on her SAWNEY's breast.
Far as the eye could reach, no tree was seen,
Earth, clad in russet, scorned the lively green.
The plague of Locusts they secure defy,
For in three hours a grasshopper must die.
No living thing, whatever its food, feasts there,
But the Camaelion, who can feast on air.
No birds, except as birds of passage flew,
No be was known to hum, no dove to coo*
No streams as amber smooth, as amber clear,
Were seen to glide, or heard to warble here,
Rebellion's spring, which through the country ran,
Furnished, with bitter draughts, the steady clan.
No flowers embalmed the air, but one white rose,
Which, on the tenth of June, by instinct blows,
By instinct blows at morn, and, when the shades
Of drizly eve prevail, by instinct fades.
One, and but one poor solitary cave,
Too sparing of her favors, nature gave;
That one alone (hard tax on Scottish pride)
Shelter at once for man and beast supplied.
Their snares without entangling briers spread,
And thistles, armed against the invader's head,
Stood in close ranks all entrance to oppose,
Thistles now held more precious than the rose.
All Creatures, which, on nature's earliest plan,
Were formed to loath, and to be loathed by man,
Which owed their birth to nastiness and spite,
Deadly to touch, and hateful to the sight,
Creatures, which, when admitted in the ark,
Their Savior shunned, and rankled in the dark,
Found place within; marking her noisome road
With poison's trail, here crawled the bloated Toad;
There webs were spread of more than common size,
And half-starv'd spiders preyed on half-starv'd flies;
In quest of food, Efts strove in vain to crawl;
Slugs, pinched with hunger, smeared the slimy wall;
The cave around with hissing serpents rung;
On the damp roof unhealthy vapor hung,
And FAMINE, by her children always known,
As proud as poor, here fixed her native throne.
Here, for the sullen sky was overcast,
And summer shrunk beneath a wintry blast,
A native blast, which armed with hail and rain
Beat unrelenting on the naked swain,
The boys for shelter made; behind the sheep,
Of which those shepherds every day take keep,
Sickly crept on, and, with complainings rude,
On nature seemed to call, and bleat for food.
JOCKEY.
Since to this cave, by tempest, we are confined,
And within ken our flocks, under the wind,
Safe from the pelting of this perilous storm,
Are laid among yon thistles, dry and warm,
What, Sawney, if by shepherd's arts we try
To mock the rigor of this cruel sky?
What if we tune some merry roundelay?
Well do thou sing, nor ill does Jockey play.
SAWNEY.
Ah, Jockey, ill advisest thou, I wis,
To think of songs at such a time as this.
Sooner shall herbage crown these barren rocks,
Sooner shall fleeces cloth these ragged flocks,
Sooner shall want sieze shepherds of the south,
And we forget to live from hand to mouth,
Than Sawney, out of season, shall impart
The songs of gladness with an aching heart.
JOCKEY.
Still have I known thee for a silly swain;
Of things past help, what boots it to complain?
Nothing but mirth can conquer fortune's spite;
No sky is heavy, if the heart be light:
Patience is sorrow's salve; what cannot be cured,
So Donald right areeds, must be endured.
SAWNEY.
Full silly swain, I wot, is Jockey now;
How did thou bear thy MAGGY's falsehood? how,
When with a foreign loon she stole away,
Did thou forswear thy pipe, and shepherd's lay?
Where was thy boasted wisdom then, when I
Applied those proverbs, which you now apply?
JOCKEY.
O she was bonny! all the Highlands round
Was there a rival to my MAGGY found!
More precious (though that precious is to all)
Than the rare medicine, which we Brimstone call,
Or that choice plant, so grateful to the nose,
Which in, I know not what, far country grows,
Was MAGGY unto me; dear do I rue,
A lass so fair should ever prove untrue.
SAWNEY.
Whether with pipe or song to charm the ear,
Through all the land did JAMIE find a peer?
Cursed be that year by every honest Scot,
And in the shepherd's calendar forgot,
That fatal year, when JAMIE, hapless swain,
In evil hour forsook the peaceful plain,
JAMIE, when our young Lord discreetly fled,
Was seized, and hanged till he was dead, dead, dead.
JOCKEY.
Full sorely may we all lament that day:
For all were losers in the deadly fray.
Five brothers had I, on the Scottish plains,
Well do thou know, were none more hopeful swains;
Five brothers there I lost, in manhood's pride,
Two in the field, and three on gibbets died;
Ah! silly swains, to follow war's alarms,
Ah! what has shepherd's life to do with arms?
SAWNEY.
Mention it not -- there saw I strangers clad
In all the honors of our ravished Played,
Saw the FERRARA too, our nation's pride,
Unwilling grace the awkward victor's side.
There fell our choicest youth, and from that day
Mote never Sawney tune the merry lay:
Blessed those which fell! cursed those which still survive,
To mourn fifteen renewed in forty-five.
Thus plained the boys, when from her throne of turf,
With boils embossed, and overgrown with scurf,
Vile humors, which, in life's corrupted well
Mixed at the birth, not abstinence could quell,
Pale FAMINE reared the head; her eager eyes,
Where hunger even to madness seemed to rise,
Speaking aloud her throes and pangs of heart,
Strained to get loose, and from their orbs to start;
Her hollow cheeks were each a deep-sunk cell,
Where wretchedness and horror loved to dwell;
With double rows of useless teeth supplied,
Her mouth, from ear to ear, extended wide,
Which, when for want of food her entrails pined,
She opened, and cursing swallowed naught but wind;
All shrivelled was her skin; and here and there,
Making their way by force, her bones lay bare;
Such filthy sight to hide from human view,
Over her foul limbs a tattered Played she threw.
Cease, cried the Goddess, cease, despairing swains,
And from a parent hear what Jove ordains!
Pent in this barren corner of the isle,
Where partial fortune never deigned to smile;
Like nature's bastards, reaping for our share
What was rejected by the lawful heir;
Unknown amongst the nations of the earth,
Or only known to raise contempt and mirth;
Long free, because the race of Roman braves
Thought it not worth their while to make us slaves;
Then into bondage by that nation brought,
Whose ruin we for ages vainly sought,
Whom still with unslack'd hate we view, and still,
The power of mischief lost, retain the will;
Considered as the refuse of mankind,
A mass till the last moment left behind,
Which frugal nature doubted, as it lay,
Whether to stamp with life, or throw away;
Which, formed in haste, was planted in this nook,
But never entered in Creation's book;
Branded as traitors, who, for love of gold,
Would sell their God, as once their King they sold;
Long have we born this mighty weight of ill,
These vile injurious taunts, and bear them still,
But times of happier note are now at hand,
And the full promise of a better land:
There, like the Sons of Israel, having trod,
For the fixed term of years ordained by God,
A barren desert, we shall sieze rich plains
Where milk with honey flows, and plenty reigns.
With some few natives joined, some pliant few,
Who worship interest, and our track pursue,
There shall we, though the wretched people grieve,
Ravage at large, nor ask the owner's leave.
For us, the earth shall bring forth her increase;
For us, the flocks shall wear a golden fleece;
Fat Beeves shall yield us dainties not our own,
And the grape bleed a nectar yet unknown;
For our advantage shall their harvests grow,
And Scotsmen reap what they disdained to sow;
For us, the sun shall climb the eastern hill;
For us, the rain shall fall, the dew distill;
When to our wishes NATURE cannot rise,
ART shall be task'd to grant us fresh supplies.
His brawny arm shall drudging LABOR strain,
And for our pleasure suffer daily pain;
TRADE shall for us exert her utmost powers,
Here Is, all the toil; and all the profit, our's;
For us, the oak shall from his native steep
Descend, and fearless travel through the deep,
The sail of COMMERCE for our use unfurled,
Shall waft the treasures of each distant world;
For us, sublimer heights shall science reach,
For us, their Statesmen plot, their Churchmen preach;
Their noblest limbs of counsel we'll disjoint,
And, mocking, new ones of our own appoint;
Devouring WAR, imprisoned in the north,
Shall, at our call, in horrid pomp, break forth,
And, when, his chariot wheels with thunder hung,
Fell Discord braying with her brazen tongue,
Death in the van, with Anger, Hate, and Fear,
And Desolation stalking in the rear,
Revenge, by Justice guided, in his train,
He drives impetuous over the trembling plain,
Shall, at our bidding, quit his lawful prey,
And to meek, gentle, generous Peace give way.
Think not, my sons, that this so blessed estate
Stands at a distance on the roll of fate;
Already big with hopes of future sway,
Even from this cave I scent my destined prey.
Think not, that this dominion over a race
Whose former deeds shall time's last annals grace,
In the rough face of peril must be sought,
And with the lives of thousands dearly bought;
No -- fooled by cunning, by that happy art
Which laughs to scorn the blund'ring hero's heart,
Into the snare shall our kind neighbors fall
With open eyes, and fondly give us all.
When ROME, to prop her sinking empire, bore
Their choicest levies to a foreign shore,
What if we seized, like a destroying flood,
Their widowed plains, and filled the realm with blood,
Gave an unbounded loose to manly rage,
And, scorning mercy, spared nor sex nor age;
When, for our interest too mighty grown,
Monarchs of warlike bent possessed the throne,
What if we strove divisions to foment,
And spread the flames of civil discontent,
Assisted those who against their king made head,
And gave the traitors refuge when they fled;
When restless GLORY bad her sons advance,
And pitched her standard in the fields of France,
What if disdaining oaths, an empty sound,
By which our nation never shall be bound,
Bravely we taught unmuzzled war to roam
Through the weak land, and brought cheap laurels home;
When the bold traitors league for the defense
Of Law, Religion, Liberty, and Sense,
When they against their lawful Monarch rose,
And dared the Lord's Anointed to oppose,
What if we still revered the banished race,
And strove the Royal Vagrants to replace?
With fierce rebellions shook the unsettled state,
And greatly dared, though crossed by partial fate;
These facts, which might, where Wisdom held the sway,
Awake the very stones to bar our way,
There shall be nothing, nor one trace remain
In the dull region of an English brain,
Blessed with that Faith, which mountains can remove,
First they shall Dupes, next Saints, last Martyrs prove.
Already is this game of fate begun
Under the sanction of my Darling Son,
That Son, whose nature royal as his name,
Is destined to redeem our race from shame.
His boundless power, beyond example great,
Shall make the rough way smooth, the crooked straight,
Shall for our ease the raging floods restrain,
And sink the mountain level to the plain.
DISCORD, whom in a cavern under ground
With massy fetters our late Patriot bound,
Where her own flesh the furious Hag might tear,
And vent her curses to the vacant air,
Where, that she never might be heard of more,
He planted-LOYALTY to guard the door,
For better purpose shall Our Chief release,
Disguise her for a time, and call her PEACE.
Lured by that name, fine engine of deceit,
Shall the weak ENGLISH help themselves to cheat;
To win our love, with honors shall they grace
The old adherents of the STUART race,
For pointed out, no matter by what name,
TORIES or JACOBITES are still the same;
To sooth our rage, the temporising brood
Shall break the ties of truth and gratitude,
Against their Savior venomed falsehoods frame,
And brand with calumny their WILLIAM's name;
To win our grace, (rare argument of wit)
To our untainted faith shall they commit,
(Our says which, in extremest perils tried,
Disdained, and still disdains, to change her side,)
That Sacred Majesty they all approve,
Who most enjoys, and best deserves their Love.
FINIS.

