CHEAP REPOSITORY.

THE PLUM-CAKES; OR, THE FARMER and his THREE SONS.



Sold by J. MARSHALL, (Printer to the CHEAP REPOSITORY for Moral and Religious
Tracts) No. 17, Queen Street, Cheapside, and No. 4, Aldermary Church Yard;
LONDON.

By S. HAZARD, at Bath, and by all Booksellers, Newsmen, and Hawkers in Town
and Country. -- Great Allowance will be made to Shopkeepers and Hawkers.

Price ONE HALFPENNY, Or 2s. 3d. per 100. -- 1s. 3d. for 50. -- 9d. for 25. A
cheaper Edition for Hawkers.

[ Entered at Stationers Hall.]

THE PLUM-CAKES, etc.
A FARMER who some wealth possessed,
With three fine boys was also blessed;
The lads were healthy, stout, and young,
And neither wanted sense nor tongue.
Tom, Will, and Jack, like other boys,
Loved tops and marbles, sport and toys.
The father scouted that false plan,
That money only makes the man,
But, to the best of his discerning,
Was bent on giving them good learning:
He was a man of observation,
No scholar, yet had penetration;
So with due care, a school he sought,
Where his young sons might well be taught.
Quoth he, "I know not which rehearses
"Most properly his themes or verses,
"Yet I can do a father's part,
"And school the temper, mind, and heart;
"The natural bent of each I Will know,
"And trifles best that bent may show."
'Twas just before the closing year,
When Christmas holidays were near,
The farmer called to see his boys,
And asked how each his time employs.
Quoth Will, "there is father, boys without,
"He Is brought us something good no doubt."
The father sees their merry faces,
With joy beholds them, and embraces.
"Come boys, of home you will have your fill,"
"Yes, Christmas now is near," says Will,
"'It Is just twelve days -- these notches see,
"My notches with the days agree.
"Well," said the sire, "again I Will come,
"And gladly fetch my brave boys home.
"You two the dappled mare shall ride,
"Jack mount the poney by his side;
"Mean time, my lads, I Have brought you here,
"No small provision of good cheer."
Then from his pockets strait he takes,
A vast profusion of plum-cakes;
He counts them out, a plenteous store,
No boy shall have or less or more;
Twelve cakes he gives to each dear son,
When each expected only one;
And then, with many a kind expression,
He leaves them to their own discretion,
Resolved to mark the use each made
Of what he to their hands conveyed.
The twelve days past he comes once more,
And brings the horses to the door;
The boys with rapture see appear,
The poney and the dappled mare;
Each moment now an hour they count,
And slash their whips and long to mount.
As with the boys his ride he takes,
He asks the history of the cakes.
Says Will, "dear father, life is short,
"So I resolved to make quick sport;
"The cakes were all so nice and sweet,
"I thought I Would have one jolly treat,
"Why should I balk, said I, my taste?
"I Will make at once a hearty feast.
"So, snugly by myself I fed,
"When every boy was gone to-bed;
"I gorg' them all, both paste and plum,
"And did not waste a single crumb;
"Indeed they made me, to my sorrow,
"As sick as death upon the morrow;
"This made me mourn my rich repast,
"And wish I had not fed so fast."
Quoth Jack, "I was not such a dunce,
"To eat my quantum up at once;
"And though the boys all longed to clutch 'em,
"I would not let a creature touch 'em;
"Nor though the whole were in my power,
"Would I myself one cake devour;
"Thanks to the use of keys and locks,
"They Are all now snug within my box:
"The mischief is, by hoarding long,
"They Are grown so moldy and so strong,
"I find they will not be fit to eat,
"And I have lost my father's treat."
"Well Tom," the anxious parent cries,
"How did you manage?" Tom replies,
"I shunned each wide extreme to take,
"To glut my maw, or hoard my cake;
"I thought each day its wants would have,
"And appetite again might crave;
"Twelve school-days still my notches counted,
"To twelve my father's cakes amounted;
"So every day I took out one,
"But never ate my cake alone;
"With every needy boy I shared,
"And more than half I always spared.
"One every day 'twixt self and friend,
"Has brought my dozen to an end;
"My last remaining cake today,
"I would not touch but gave away;
"A boy was sick, and scarce could eat,
"To him it proved a welcome treat;
"Jack called me spendthrift, not to save,
"Will dubbed me fool because I gave;
"But when our last day came I smiled,
"For Will's were gone, and Jack's were spoiled;
"Not hoarding much nor eating fast,
"I served a needy friend at last."
These tales the father's thoughts employ;
"By these," said he, "I know each boy:
"Yet Jack, who hoarded what he had,
"The world will call a frugal lad;
"And selfish gormandising Will,
"Will meet with friends and favors still;
"While moderate Tom so wise and cool,
"The mad and vain will deem a fool;
"But I, his sober plan approve,
"And Tom has gained his father's love.
APPLICATION.
So when our day of life is past,
And all are fairly judged at last;
The miser and the sensual find,
How each misused the gifts assigned;
While he who wisely spends and gives,
To the true ends of living, lives,
It Is self denying moderation,
Gains the GREAT FATHER'S approbation.
Z.

THE END.

