Mr. ROWE's POEMS.

Price 1 s.

POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By N. ROW, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL at the Dial and Bible against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1714.

POEMS ON Several Occasions.
An EPISTLE to FLAVIA, On the Sight of two Pindarick Odes on the Spleen and
Vanity.
Written by a Lady her Friend.
FLAVIA, to you with Safety I commend,
This Verse, the secret Failing of your Friend.
To your Goodnature I securely trust,
Who know that to Conceal is to be just.
The Muse, like wretched Maids by Love undone,
From Friends, Acquaintance, and the Light would run;
Conscious of Folly, fears attending Shame,
Fears the censorious World, and Loss of Fame.
Some Confident by chance she finds (though few
Pity the Fools, whom Love or Verse undo)
Whose fond Compassion sooths her in the Sin,
And sets her on to venture once again*
SURE, in the better Ages of old Time,
Nor Poetry nor Love was thought a Crime;
From Heaven they both, the Gods best Gifts, were sent,
Divinely perfect both, and Innocent.
Then were bad Poets and loose Loves not known,
None felt a Warmth which they might blush to own.
Beneath cool Shades our happy Fathers lay,
And spent in pure untainted Joys the Day:
Artless their Loves, artless their Numbers were,
While Nature, simply did in both appear,
Nor could the Censor or the Critic fear.
Pleased to be pleased, they took what Heaven bestowed,
Nor were too curious of the given Good.
At length, like Indians, fond of fancied Toys,
We lost being happy, to be thought more wise.
In one cursed ^ge, to punish Verse and Sin,
Critics and Hang-men, both at once, came in;
Wit and the Laws had both the same ill Fate,
And partial Tyrants swayed in either State:
Then a lewd Tide of Verse, with vicious Rage,
Broke in upon the Morals of the Age.
The Stage (whose Art was once the Mind to move
To Noble Daring, and to Virtuous Love)
Precept, with Pleasure mixed, no more professed,
But dealt in double-meaning Bawdy Jest:
The shocking Sounds offend the blushing Fair,
And drive 'em from the guilty Theater.
Ye wretched Bards! from whom these Ills have sprung,
Whom the avenging Powers have spared too long,
Well may you fear the Blow will surely come,
Your Sodom has no Ten to avert its Doom;
Unless the Fair ARDELIA will alone
To Heaven for all the guilty Tribe atone;
Nor can Tou Saints do more than such a One.
Since she alone of the Poetic Crowd*
To the false Gods of Wit has never bowed;
The Empire, which she saves, shall own her Sway,
And all Parnassus her blessed Laws obey.
SAY, from what Sacred Fountain, Nymph Divine!
The Treasures flow, which in thy Verse do shine?
With what strange Inspiration art thou blessed,
What more than Delphic Ardor warms thy Breast?
Our sordid Earth never bred so bright a Flame,
But from the Skies, thy Kindred Skies it came.
To Numbers great like thine th'Angelick Quire
In Joyous Consort tune the Golden Lyre.
Viewing, with pitying Eyes, our Care's with thee,
They wisely own, that All is Vanity;
Even all the Joys which mortal Minds can know,
And find ARDELIA'S Verse the least vain thing below.
IF PINDAR'S Name to those blessed Mansions reach,
And Mortal Muses may Immortal teach;
In Verse like His, the Heavenly Nation raise
Their tuneful Voices to their Maker's Praise.
Nor shall Celestial Harmony disdain
For once to imitate an Earthly Strain,
Whose Fame, secure, no Rival e're can fear,
But those above, and fair ARDELIA here.
She, who undaunted, could his Raptures view,
And with bold Wings his Sacred Heights pursue.
Safe through the Dithyrambick Stream she steered,
Nor the rough Deep in all its Dangers feared:
Not so the rest, who with successless Pain
The unnavigable Torrent tried in vain.
So CLELIA leapt into the rapid Flood,
While the Etruscans struck with Wonder stood:
Amidst the Waves her rash Persuers died,
The matchless Dame could only stem the Tide,
And gain the Glory of the farther Side.
SEE with what Pomp the Antic Masque comes in!
The various Forms of the Fantastic Spleen.
Vain empty Laughter, howling Grief and Tears,
False Joy, bred by false Hope, and falser Fears;
Each Vice, each Passion which pale Nature wears,
In this odd monstrous Medley mixed appears.
Like Bays his Dance, confusedly round they run,
Statesman, Coquet, gay Fop, and pensive Nun,
Specter and Heroes, Husbands and their Wives,
With Moukish-Drones that dream away their Lives.
Long have I labored with the dire Disease,
Nor found, but from ARDELIA's Numbers, Ease:
The dancing Verse runs through my sluggish Veins,
Where Dull and Cold the frozen Blood remains.
Pale Cares and anxious Thoughts give Way in haste,
And to returning Joy resign my Breast.
Then free from every Pain I did endure,
I bless the Charming Author of my Cure.
So when to SAUL the great Musician played,
The sullen Fiend unwillingly obeyed,
And left the Monarch's Breast to seek some safer Shade.
HORACE Book II. Ode IV. Imitated. Ad XANTHIAM.
Ne sit Ancillae tibi amor pudori.

The Lord G -- to the E. of S --
I.
DO not, most fragrant Earl, disclaim
Thy bright, thy reputable Flame,
To Br -- g -- le the Brown,
But publicly espouse the Dame,
And say, G -- D -- the Town.
II.
Full many Heroes, fierce and keen,
With Drabs have deeply smitten been,
Although right good Commanders;
Some who with you have Hounslow seen,
And some who have been in Flanders.
III.
DID not base Greber's Seigniora Francesca Marguareta de l'Epine, an Italian
Songstress.
PEGG inflame
The sober Earl of N -- m?
Of sober Sire descended,
That careless of his Soul and Fame,
To Play Houses he nightly came,
And left Church undefended.
IV.
The Monarch who of France is Hight,
Who rules the Roast with matchless Might,
Since WILLIAM went to Heaven;
Loves MAINTENON, his Lady bright,
Who was but SCARRON'S Leaving.
V.
Though thy Dear's Father kept an Inn
At grisly Head of ^aracen,
For Carriers at Northampton,
Yet she might come of gentler Kin
Than ever that Father dreamt on.
VI.
Of Proffers large her Choice had she,
Of Jewels, Plate, and Land in Fee*
Which she with Scorn rejected;
And can a Nymph so virtuous be
Of base-born Blood suspected?
VII.
Her dimple Cheek, and roguish Eye,
Her slender Waste, and taper Thigh,
I always thought provoking;
But faith, though I talk waggishly,
I mean no more than Joking.
VIII.
Then be not Jealous, Friend, for why?
My Lady Marchioness is nigh,
To see I never shall hurt ye;
Besides, you know full well, that I
Am turned of f^^e and Forty.
HORACE, Book III. Ode IX. Imitated. Ad LYDIAM.
Donec gratus eram.

Tons. WHILE at my House in Fleetstreet once you lay,
How merrily, dear Sir, Time passed away?
While I partook your Wine, your Wit, and Mirth,
I was the happiest Creature on Tonson (sen.) his Dialect.
God's Earth.

Congreve, WHILE in your early Days of Reputation,
You for blue Garters had not such a Passion;
While yet you did not use (as now your Trade) is
To drink with noble Lords, and toast their Ladies;
Thou, JACOB TONSON, were, to my conceiving,
The chearfullest, best, honest Fellow living.

Tonson, I AM in with Captain VANBRUGH at the present,
A most sweet-natur'd Gentleman, and pleasant;
He writes your Comedies, draws Schemes and Models,
And builds Dukes Houses upon very odd-Hills:
For him, so much I dote on him, that I,
If I was sure to go to Heaven would die.

Congreve, TEMPLE and DALAVAL are now my Party,
Men that are tam Mercurio both quam Mart;
And though for them I shall scarce go to Heaven,
Yet I can drink with them six Nights in seven.

Tonson, WHAT if from VAN'S dear Arms I should retire,
And once more warm my Bunnians at your Fire;
If I to Bow-street should invite you home,
And set a Bed up in my Dining Room,
Tell me dear Mr. CONGREVE, Would you come?

Congreve, THOUGH the gay Sailor, and the gentle Knight,
Were Ten times more my Joy and Heart's Delight;
Though civil Persons they, you ruder were,
And had more Humors than a dancing Bear:
Yet for your sake I Would bid 'em ^oth adieu,
And live and die, dear COB, with only you.

HORACE, Book III. Ode XXI. Ad AMPHORAM.
O Nata mecum consule Manlio.

I.
HAIL, gentle Cask, whose venerable Head
With hoary Down, and ancient Dust o'er-spread,
Proclaim that since the Vine first brought Thee forth
Old Age has added to thy Worth.
Whether the sprightly Juice thou do contain,
Thy Vot'ries will to Wit and Love,
Or senseless Noise and Lewdness move,
Or Sleep, the Cure of these and every other Pain.
II.
Since to some Day propitious and great,
Justly at first thou wast designed by Fate;
This Day, the happiest of thy many Years,
With thee I will forget my Cares:
To my CORVINU'S Health thou shall go round,
(Since thou art ripened for to Day,
And longer Age would bring Decay)
Till every anxious Thought in the rich Stream be drowned.
III.
To thee, my Friend, his Roughness shall submit*
And SOCRATES himself a while forget.
Thus when old CATO would sometimes unbend
The rugged Stiffness of his Mind,
Stern and severe, the Stoic quaff'd his Bowl,
His frozen Virtue felt the Charm,
And soon grew pleased, and soon grew warm,
And blessed the sprightly Power that cheered his gloomy Soul.
IV.
With kind Constraint ill Nature thou do bend,
And mold the snarling Cynic to a Friend.
The Sage reserved, and famed for Gravity,
Finds all he knows summed up in thee,
And by thy Power unlocked, grows easy, gay, and free.
The Swain, who did some credulous Nymph persuade
To grant him all, inspired by thee,
Devotes her to his Vanity,
And to his fellow Fops toasts the abandoned Maid.
V.
The Wretch, who pressed beneath a Load of Cares,
And laboring with continual Woes, despairs,
If thy kind Warmth does his chilled Sense invade,
From Earth he rears his drooping Head,
Revived by thee, he ceases now to mourn;
His flying Cares give way to haste,
And to the God resign his Breast,
Where Hopes of better Days, and better Things return.
VI.
The laboring Hind, who with hard Toil and Pains,
Amidst his Wants a wretched Life maintains;
If thy rich Juice his homely Supper crown,
Hot with thy Fires, and bolder grown,
Of Kings, and of their Arbitrary Power*
And how by impious Arms they reign,
Fiercely he talks with rude Disdain,
And vows to be a Slave, to be a Wretch no more.
VII.
Fair Queen of Love, and thou great God of Wine,
Hear every Grace, and all ye Powers Divine,
All that to Mirth and Friendship do incline,
Crown this auspicious Cask, and happy Night,
With all things that can give Delight,
Be every Care and anxious Thought away;
Ye Tapers still be bright and clear,
Rival the Moon, and each pale Star,
Your Beams shall yield to none, but his who brings the Day.
HORACE, Book IV. Ode 1. Ad VENEREM.
Intermissa, Venus, diu
Rursus bella moves?

ONce more the Queen of Love invades my Breast,
Late, with long Ease, and peaceful Pleasures blessed;
Spare, spare the Wretch, that still has been thy Slave,
And let my former Service have
The Merit to protect me to the Grave.
Much am I changed from what I once have been,
When under CYNARA good and fair,
With Joy I did thy Fetters wear,
Blessed in the gentle Sway of an indulgent Queen.
II.
Stiff and unequal to the Labor now,
With Pain my Neck beneath thy Yoke I bow.
Why do thou urge me still to bear? Oh! why
Do thou not much rather fly
To youthful Breasts, to Mirth and Gaiety?
Go, bid thy Swans their glossy Wings expand,
And swiftly through the yielding Air
To SYLVIA Thee their Goddess bear,
Worthy to be Thy Slave, and fit for thy Command.
III.
Noble, and graceful, witty, gay, and young,
Joy in his Heart, Love on his charming Tongue.
Skilled in a thousand soft prevailing Arts,
With wondrous Force the Youth imparts
Thy Power to unexperienced Virgins Hearts.
Far shall he stretch the Bounds of thy Command,
And if thou shall his Wishes bless,
Beyond his Rivals with Success,
In Gold and Marble shall thy Statues stand.
IV.
Beneath the Sacred Shade of Odel's Wood,
Or on the Banks of Ouse's gentle Flood,
With odorous Beams a Temple he shall raise,
For ever sacred to thy Praise,
Till the fair Stream, and Wood, and Love it self decays.
There while rich Incense on Thy Altar burns,
Thy Votaries, the Nymphs and Swains,
In melting soft harmonious Strains,
Mixed with the softer Flutes, shall tell their Flames by turns.
V.
As Love and Beauty with the Light are born,
So with the Day thy Honors shall return;
Some lovely Youth, paired with a blushing Maid,
A Troop of either Sex shall lead,
And twice the Salian Measures round thy Altar tread.
Thus with an equal Empire over the Light,
The Queen of Love, and God of Wit,
Together rise, together sit,
But Goddess do thou stay, and bless alone the Night.
VI.
There may thou reign, while I forget to love:
No more false Beauty shall my Passion move;
Nor shall my fond, believing Heart be led,
By mutual Vows and Oaths betrayed,
To hope for Truth from the protesting Maid.
With Love the sprightly Joys of Wine are sled;
The Roses too shall wither now,
That used to shade and crown my Brow,
And round my cheerful Temples fragrant Odours shed.
VII.
But tell me, CYNTHIA, say, bewitching Fair,
What mean these Sighs? Why steals this falling Tear?
And when my struggling Thoughts for Passage strove,
Why did my Tongue refuse to move?
Tell me, can this be any thing but Love?
Still with the Night my Dreams my Griefs renew,
Still she is present to my Eyes,
And still in vain, I, as she flies,
Over Woods, and Plains, and Seas, the scornful Maid pursue.
HORACE Book I. Epist. IV. Ad ALBIUM TIBULLUM.
ALBI, nostrorum sermonum candide judex.

Inscribed to R. THORNHILL, Esquire
THORNHILL, whom doubly to my Heart commend
The Critick's Art, and Candor of a Friend,
Say what thou do in thy Retirement find
Worthy the Labors of thy active Mind?
Whether the Tragic Muse inspires thy Thought,
To emulate what moving OTWAY wrote;
Or whether to the Covert of some Grove
Thou and thy Thoughts do from the World remove,
Where to thy self thou all those Rules do show,
That Good Men ought to practice, or Wise know.
For sure thy Mass of Man, is no dull Clay,
But well informed with the Celestial Ray.
The bounteous Gods, to thee completely kind,
In a fair Frame enclosed thy fairer Mind:
And though they did profusely Wealth bestow,
They gave thee the true Use of Wealth to know.
Could even the Nurse wish for her darling Boy
A Happiness which thou do not enjoy,
What can her fond Ambition ask, beyond
A Soul by Wisdom's noblest Precepts crowned?
To this, fair Speech, and happy Utterance joined,
To unlock the secret Treasures of the Mind,
And make the Blessing common to Mankind.
On these let Health and Reputation wait,
The Favor of the Virtuous and the Great.
A Table cheerfully and cleanly spread,
Stranger alike to Riot and to Need.
Such an Estate as no Extremes may know,
A free and just Disdain for all things else below.
Amidst uncertain Hopes, and anxious Cares,
Tumultuous Strife, and miserable Fears,
Prepare for all Events thy constant Breast,
And let each Day be to Thee as thy last.
That Morning's Dawn will with new Pleasure rise,
Whose Light shall unexpected bless thy Eyes.
Me, when to Town in Winter you repair,
Batt'ning in Ease you will find, sleek, fresh and fair.
Me, who have learnt from EPICURUS Lore,
To snatch the Blessings of the flying Hour;
Whom every Friday at the Vine you will find,
His true Disciple, and your faithful Friend.
UNIO.
DUM Rosa purpureo suffunditur ora rubore,
Spina gravis nitidi floris amore calat.
Protinus armorum ponit pacatior iras,
Et jam blanda suae porrigit ora Rosae.
Ut videt alternis ambas concurrere votis,
Quae regit hortorum maxima FLORA, vices
Faelices jubet hinc coeant in foedera, utrisque
Unus, and ex Uno stemmate surgat honos.
Tu decus aeternum, dixit, mea, da, Rosa, Spinae,
Et tu perpetuam protege, Spina, Rosam.
Englished by the AUTHOR.
WHile rich in brightest Red, the blushing Rose
Her freshest opening Beauties did disclose;
Her, the rough Thistle, from a neighboring Field,
With fond Desires and Lovers Eyes beheld:
Straight the fierce Plant lays by his pointed Darts,
And woes the gentle Flower with softer Arts.
Kindly she heard, and did his Flame approve,
And owned the Warrior worthy of her Love.
FLORA, whose happy Laws the Seasons guide,
Who does in Fields and painted Meads preside,
And crowns the Gardens with their Flowery Pride,
With Pleasure saw the wishing Pair combine
To favor what their Goddess did design,
And bid 'em in Eternal UNION join.
Henceforth, she said, in each returning Year,
One Stem the Thistle and the Rose shall bear:
The Thistle's lasting Grace, Thou, O my Rose! shall be,
The warlike Thistle's Arms, a sure Defense to Thee.
EPIGRAM.
To the Two New Members for BRAMBER, 1708.
THOUGH in the Commons-House you did prevail,
Good Sir CLEEVE MOORE, and gentle Master HALE;
Yet on Good Luck be cautious of relying,
Burgess for Bramber is no Place to die in.
Your Predecessors have been odly fated;
ASGILL and SHIPPEN have been both Translated.
EPILOGUE Spoken by Mrs. BARRY, At the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, April the 7
th, 1709.
At her Playing in Love for Love with Mrs. BRACEGIRDLE, for the Benefit of Mr.
BETTERTON.
AS Some Brave Knight, who once with Spear and Shield
Had sought Renown in many a wellfought Field,
But now no more with Sacred Fame inspired,
Was to a peaceful Hermitage retired;
There, if by Chance disastrous Tales he hears,
Of Matrons Wrongs, and captive Virgins Tears,
He feels soft Pity urge his Generous Breast,
And vows once more, to succor the Distressed.
Buckl'd in Mail he sallies on the Plain,
And turns him to the Feats of Arms again.
SO We, to former Leagues of Friendship true,
Have bid once more our peaceful Homes Adieu,
To aid old THOMAS, and to pleasure you.
Like Errant Damsels boldly we Engage,
Armed, as you see, for the Defenseless Stage.
Time was, when this Good Man no Help did lack,
And scorned that any She, should hold his Back;
But now, so Age and Frailty have ordained,
By Mrs. Barry and Mrs. Bracegirdle, clasp him round the Waste.
two at once he is forced to be sustained.
You see, what failing Nature brings Man to;
And yet let none insult, for ought we know,
She may not wear so well with some of you.
Though old, you find his Strength is not clean past,
But true as Steel, he is Mettle to the last.
If better he performed in Days of Yore,
Yet now he gives you all that is in his Power;
What can the Youngest of you all do more?
WHAT he has been, though present Praise be dumb,
Shall happily be a Theme in Times to come,
As now we talk of ROSCIUS, and of Rome.
Had you withheld your Favors on this Night,
Old SHAKESPEARE'S Ghost had risen to do him Right.
With Indignation had you seen him frown
Upon a Worthless, Witless, Tastless Town;
Grieved and repining, you had heard him say,
Why are the Muses Labors cast away?
Why did I write what only he could Play?
But since, like Friends to Wit, thus thronged you meet,
Go on, and make the Generous Work complete;
Be true to Merit, and still own his Cause,
Find something for him more than bare Applause.
In just Remembrance of your Pleasures past,
Be kind, and give him a Discharge at last.
In Peace and Ease Life's Remnant let him wear,
And hang his consecrated Buskin Pointing to the Top of the Stage.
here.
On the Last Judgment, and Happiness of the Saints in Heaven.
IN that blessed Day, from every Part the Just,
Raised from the liquid Deep, or mouldering Dust,
The various Products of Time's fruitful Womb,
All of past Ages, present, and to come,
In full Assembly shall at once resort,
And meet within high Heaven's capacious Court:
There famous Names revered in Days of old,
Our great Forefathers there we shall behold,
From whom old Stocks and Ancestry began,
And worthily in long Succession ran;
The Reverend Sires with Pleasure shall we greet,
Attentive hear, while faithful they repeat
Full many a virtuous Deed, and many a noble Feat.
There, all those tender Ties, which here below,
Or Kindred, or more sacred Friendship know,
Firm, constant, and unchangeable shall grow.
Refined from Passion, and the Dregs of Sense,
A better, truer, dearer Love from thence,
Its everlasting Being shall commence;
There, like their Days, their Joys shall never be done,
No Night shall rise, to shade Heavens glorious Son,
But one Eternal Holy Day go on.
FINIS.
Just Published the following Books, printed with an Elzevir Letter in neat
Pocket Volumes, Adorned with Cuts.
I. MR. CREECH'S Translation of the Idylliums (or, Love Dialogues, etc.) of
that Ancient Greek Poet THEOCRITUS; viz. 1. The Lamentation for Thyrsis, who
died for Love. 2. The Enchantment, or the Forsaken Nymph. 3. The Coy Mistress.
4. Comatas and Laco: or, The Prize of Singing. 5. The Loves of Polyphemus and
Galatea. 6. The Praise of Love. 7. The Remedy of Love. 8. The tatling Gossips:
Or, the Feast of Adonis. 9. An Epithalamium at the Marriage of Helena and
Menelaus. 10. Advice to a Friend to be constant in his Love. 11. The Cruel Fair
One. 12. The Death of Pentheus King of Thebes, whom his Mother and Aunts tore
in pieces for disturbing the Solemnities of Bacchus. To which is prefixed Rapin
's Discourse upon Pastorals; also the Life of Theocritus, by Basil Kennet, M.
A. of C. C. C. Oxon. Price 2 s. 6 d.

II. The Works of ANACREON, SAPPHO, and BION, with their Lives Prefixed. Done
from the Greek by the late Earl of Winchelsea, Mr. Ambrose Phillips, Mr.
Sewell, etc. Containing, 1. Cupid, or the Cunning Beggar. 2. Love and Beauty.
3. The Dream. 4. The Vain Advice. 5. The Enjoyment. 6. The Praise of Bacchus.
7. The Jolly Drunkard. 8. The Careless Companions. 9. The Drunkard's Delight.
10. The Effects of Wine. To which is added, The Prize of Wisdom, a Dialogue
between Anacreon and Aristotle, from the French of M. Fontanelle. Price 2 s.

BOOKS lately Printed for E. CURLL.
I. THE Whole Works of M. BOILEAU. Made English by the most Eminent Hands: With
his Life written to JOSEPH ADDISON, Esquire and some Account of this Translation,
by N. ROW, Esquire Adorned with Cuts. 8 vo. 3 Vol. Price 15 s.

II. The Works of Mons. DE LA BRUYERE, containing, 1. The Moral Characters of
Theophrastus. 2. The Characters, or the Manners of the Present Age, with a
complete Key inserted. 3. M. Bruyere's Speech upon his Admission into the
French Academy. 4. An Account of the Life and Writings of M. Bruyere, by M.
COST. The 6 th Edition. Revised by the last Paris Edition. With an Original
Chapter, Of the Manner of living with Great Men. Written after M. Bruyere's
Method. By N. ROW, Esquire 2 Vol. 8 vo. Price 9 s.

III. CALLIPAEDIA (or, the Art of getting Beautiful Children.) A POEM, in Four
Books. Written in Latin by the Abbot Quillet. Made English by N. ROW, Esquire 8
vo. Price 4 s.

IV. MEMOIRS of K. EDWARD IV. and JANE SHORE; being an Impartial Account of
their Amors, and their Character fully drawn. Extracted from the best
Historians. Very necessary for the Readers of her Tragedy, written by N. ROW,
Esquire 4 to. Price 6 d.

V. A Collection of Original Poems, Translations, and Imitations. By Mr. PRIOR,
Mr. ROW, Dr. SWIFT, and other Eminent Hands. 8 vo. Price 5 s.

The Exceptionable PASSAGES left out in the Acting and Printing of the Tragedy
of JANE SHORE.
ACT III.
SCENE the Duke of Gloucester and Lord Hastings. Glost. -- Have you not heard
How, on a late Occasion, Dr. Shaw
Has moved the People much about the Lawfulness
Of Edward's Issue? by right grave Authority
Of Learning and Religion, plainly proving,
A Bastard Scyon never should be grafted
Upon a Royal Stock. --

L. Have. Ill befall
Such meddling Priests, who kindle up Confusion,
And vex the quiet World with their vain Scruples.
By Heaven it is done in perfect Spite to Peace,
As if they feared their Trade were at an End
If Laymen should agree. --

Glost. What if the same Estates, the Lords and Commons, should alter --

L. Have. What?

Glost. The Order of Succession.

L. Have. Curse on the innovating Hand attempts it!
Remember him, the Villain, righteous Heaven,
In thy great Day of Vengeance! blast the Traitor,
And his pernicious Counsels; who for Wealth,
For Power, the Pride of Greatness, or Revenge,
Would plunge his native Land in Civil Wars.

FINIS.
Just Published,
THE Gentleman's Accomptant; or, An Essay to unfold the Mystery of Accounts by
way of Debtor and Creditor, commonly called Merchants Accounts, and applying
the same to the Concerns of the Nobility and Gentry of England. Showing, I. The
great Advantage of Gentlemen's keeping their own Accounts, with Directions to
Persons of Quality and Fortune. II. The Ruin that attends Men of Estates, by
Neglect of Accounts. III. The Usefulness of the Knowledge of Accounts, to such
as are any way employed in the Public Affairs of the Nation. IV. Of Banks,
those of Venice and the Turkey Company. V. Of Stocks and Stock-Jobbing; the
Frauds therein detected. VI. A short and easy Vocabulary of certain Words, that
in the Language of Accompting take a particular Meaning. Done by a Person of
Honor. Printed for E. Curll, at the Dial and Bible against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1714. Price 4. s. Plain, or 5 s. neatly Bound and Gilt.


