POEMS ON Several Occasions.

Written by Dr. THOMAS PARNELL, Late Archdeacon of Clogher: AND Published by
Mr. POPE.

Dignum laud Virum Musa vetat mori. HOR. LONDON: Printed for B. LINTOT, at the
Cross-Keys, between the Temple Gates in Fleet Street, 1722.

TO THE Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of OXFORD AND Earl MORTIMER.
SUCH were the Notes, thy once-lov'd Poet sung,
'Till Death untimely stopped his tuneful Tongue.
Oh just beheld, and lost! admired, and mourned!
With softest Manners, gentlest Arts, adorned!
Blessed in each Science, blessed in every Strain!
Dear to the Muse, to HARLEY dear -- in vain!
For him, thou often have bid the World attend,
Fond to forget the Statesman in the Friend;
For Swift and him, despised the Farce of State,
The sober Follies of the Wise and Great;
Dextrous, the craving, fawning Crowd to quit,
And pleased to 'scape from Flattery to Wit.
Absent or dead, still let a Friend be dear,
(A Sigh the Absent claims, the Dead a Tear)
Recall those Nights that closed thy toilsom Days,
Still hear thy Parnell in his living Lays:
Who careless, now, of Interest, Fame, or Fate,
Perhaps forgets that OXFORD ever was Great;
Or deeming meanest what we greatest call,
Beholds thee glorious only in thy Fall.
And sure if ought below the Seats Divine
Can touch Immortals, it is a Soul like thine:
A Soul supreme, in each hard Instance tried,
Above all Pain, all Anger, and all Pride,
The Rage of Power, the Blast of public Breath,
The Lust of Lucre, and the Dread of Death.
In vain to Deserts thy Retreat is made;
The Muse attends thee to the silent Shade:
It Is hers, the brave Man's latest Steps to trace,
Re-judge his Acts, and dignify Disgrace.
When Interest calls off all her sneaking Train,
When all the Obliged desert, and all the Vain;
She waits, or to the Scaffold, or the Cell,
When the last lingering Friend has bid farewell.
Even now she shades thy Evening Walk with Bays,
(No Hireling she, no Prostitute to Praise)
Even now, observant of the parting Ray,
Eyes the calm Sunset of thy Various Day,
Through Fortune's Cloud One truly Great can see,
Nor fears to tell, that MORTIMER is He.
A. POPE.
Sept. 25. 1721.
HESIOD: OR, THE Rise of WOMAN.
HESIOD: OR, THE Rise of WOMAN.
WHAT ancient Times (those Times we fancy wise)
Have left on long Record of Woman's Rise,
What Morals teach it, and what Fables hide,
What Author wrote it, how that Author died,
All these I sing. In Greece they framed the Tale
(In Greece, 'twas thought, a Woman might be frail)
Ye modern Beauties! where the Poet drew
His softest Pencil, think he dreamt of you;
And warned by him, ye wanton Pens, beware
How Heaven's concerned to vindicate the Fair.
The Case was Hesiod's; he the Fable writ;
Some think with Meaning, some with idle Wit:
Perhaps it is either, as the Ladies please;
I wave the Contest, and commence the Lays.
In days of yore, (no matter where or when,
'Twas e're the low Creation swarmed with Men)
That one Prometheus, sprung of heavenly Birth,
(Our Author's Song can witness) lived on Earth.
He carved the Turf to mold a manly Frame,
And stole from Jove his animating Flame.
The sly Contrivance over Olympus ran,
When thus the Monarch of the Stars began.
Oh versed in Arts! whose daring Thoughts aspire
To kindle Clay with never-dying Fire!
Enjoy thy Glory past, That Gift was thine;
The next thy Creature meets, be fairly mine:
And such a Gift, a Vengeance so designed,
As suits the Counsel of a God to find;
A pleasing Bosom-cheat, a specious Ill,
Which felt they curse, yet covet still to feel.
He said, and Vulcan strait the Sire commands,
To temper Mortar with etherial Hands;
In such a Shape to mold a rising Fair,
As Virgin-goddesses are proud to wear;
To make her Eyes with Diamond-water shine,
And form her Organs for a Voice divine.
'Twas thus the Sire ordained; the Power obeyed;
And worked, and wondered at the Work he made;
The fairest, softest, sweetest Frame beneath,
Now made to seem, now more than seem, to breathe.
As Vulcan ends, the cheerful Queen of Charms
Clasped the new-panting Creature in her Arms;
From that Embrace a fine Complexion spread,
Where mingled Whiteness glowed with softer red.
Then in a Kiss she breathed her various Arts,
Of trifling prettily with wounded Hearts;
A Mind for Love, but still a changing Mind;
The Lisp affected, and the Glance designed;
The sweet confusing Blush, the secret Wink,
The gentle-swimming Walk, the courteous Sink,
The Stare for Strangeness fit, for Scorn the Frown,
For decent yielding Looks declining down,
The practiced Languish, where well-feign'd Desire
Would own its melting in a mutual Fire;
Gay Smiles to comfort; April Showers to move;
And all the Nature, all the Art, of Love.
Gold-scepter'd Juno next exalts the Fair;
Her Touch endows her with imperious Air,
Self-valuing Fancy, highly-crested Pride,
Strong sovereign Will, and some Desire to chide:
For which, an Eloquence, that aims to vex,
With native Tropes of Anger, arms the Sex.
Minerva (skillful Goddess) trained the Maid
To twirl the Spindle by the twisting Thread,
To fix the Loom, instruct the Reeds to part,
Cross the long Weft, and close the Web with Art,
An useful Gift; but what profuse Expense,
What world of Fashions, took its Rise from hence!
Young Hermes next, a close-contriving God,
Her Brows encircled with his Serpent Rod:
Then Plots and fair Excuses, filled her Brain,
The Views of breaking amorous Vows for Gain,
The Price of Favors; the designing Arts
That aim at Riches in Contempt of Hearts;
And for a Comfort in the Marriage Life,
The little, pilf'ring Temper of a Wife.
Full on the Fair his Beams Apollo flung,
And fond Persuasion tip'd her easy Tongue;
He gave her Words, where oily Flattery lays
The pleasing Colors of the Art of Praise;
And Wit, to Scandal exquisitely prone,
Which frets another's Spleen to cure its own.
Those sacred Virgins whom the Bards revere,
Tuned all her Voice, and shed a Sweetness there,
To make her Sense with double Charms abound,
Or make her lively Nonsense please by Sound.
To dress the Maid, the decent Graces brought
A Robe in all the Dies of Beauty wrought,
And placed their Boxes over a rich Brocade
Where pictured Loves on every cover played;
Then spread those Implements that Vulcan's Art
Had framed to merit Cytherea's Heart;
The Wire to curl, the close-indented Comb
To call the Locks that lightly wander, home;
And chief, the Mirror, where the ravished Maid
Beholds and loves her own reflected Shade.
Fair Flora lent her Stores, the purpled Hours
Confined her Tresses with a Wreath of Flowers;
Within the Wreath arose a radiant Crown;
A Veil pellucid hung depending down;
Back rolled her azure Veil with Serpent fold,
The purfled Border decked the Floor with Gold.
Her Robe (which closely by the Girdle brac't
Revealed the Beauties of a slender Waste)
Flowed to the Feet; to copy Venus Air,
When Venus's Statues have a Robe to wear.
The new sprung Creature finished thus for Harms,
Adjusts her Habit, practices her Charms;
With Blushes glows, or shines with lively Smiles,
Confirms her Will, or recollects her Wiles:
Then conscious of her Worth, with easy Pace
Glides by the Glass, and turning views her Face.
A finer Flax than what they wrought before,
Through Time's deep Cave the Sister Fates explore,
Then fix the Loom, their Fingers nimbly weave,
And thus their Toil prophetic Songs deceive.
Flow from the Rock my Flax! and swiftly flow,
Pursue thy Thread; the Spindle runs below.
A Creature fond and changing, fair and vain,
The Creature Woman, rises now to reign.
New Beauty blooms, a Beauty formed to fly;
New Love begins, a Love produced to dye;
New Parts distress the troubled Scenes of Life,
The fondling Mistress, and the ruling Wife.
Men, born to Labor, all with Pains provide;
Women have Time, to sacrifice to Pride:
They want the Care of Man, their Want they know,
And dress to please with heart-alluring Show,
The Show prevailing, for the Sway contend,
And make a Servant where they meet a Friend.
Thus in a thousand wax-erected Forts
A loytering Race the painful Be supports,
From Sun to Sun, from Bank to Bank he flies,
With Honey loads his Bag, with Wax his Thighs,
Fly where he will, at home the Race remain,
Prune the silk Dress, and murmuring eat the Gain.
Yet here and there we grant a gentle Bride,
Whose Temper betters by the Father's side;
Unlike the rest that double humane Care,
Fond to relieve, or resolute to share:
Happy the Man whom thus his Stars advance!
The Curse is general, but the Blessing Chance.
Thus sung the Sisters, while the Gods admire
Their beauteous Creature, made for Man in Ire;
The young Pandora she, whom all contend
To make too perfect not to gain her End:
Then bid the Winds that fly to breath the Spring,
Return to bear her on a gentle Wing;
With wafting Airs the Winds obsequious blow,
And land the shining Vengeance safe below.
A golden Coffer in her Hand she bore,
(The Present treacherous, but the Bearer more)
'Twas fraught with Pangs; for Jove ordained above,
That Gold should aid, and Pangs attend on Love.
Her gay Descent the Man perceived afar,
Wondering he run to catch the falling Star;
But so surpised, as none but he can tell,
Who loved so quickly, and who loved so well.
Over all his Veins the wandering Passion burns,
He calls her Nymph, and every Nymph by turns.
Her Form to lovely Venus he prefers,
Or swears that Venus must be such as hers.
She, proud to rule, yet strangely framed to teize,
Neglects his Offers while her Airs she plays,
Shoots scornful Glances from the bended Frown,
In brisk Disorder trips it up and down,
Then hums a careless Tune to lay the Storm,
And sits, and blushes, smiles, and yields, in Form.
"Now take what Jove designed (she softly cried)
"This box thy Portion, and my self thy Bride:"
Fired with the Prospect of the double Charms,
He snatched the Box, and Bride, with eager Arms.
Unhappy Man! to whom so bright she shone,
The fatal Gift, her tempting self, unknown!
The Winds were silent, all the Waves asleep,
And Heaven was traced upon the flattering Deep;
But whilst he looks unmindful of a Storm,
And thinks the Water wears a stable Form,
What dreadful Din around his Ears shall rise!
What Frowns confuse his Picture of the Skies!
At first the Creature Man was framed alone,
Lord of himself, and all the World his own.
For him the Nymphs in green forsook the Woods,
For him the Nymphs in blue forsook the Floods,
In vain the Satyrs rage, the Tritons rave,
They bore him Heroes in the secret Cave.
No Care destroyed, no sick Disorder preyed,
No bending Age his sprightly Form decayed,
No Wars were known, no Females heard to rage,
And Poets tell us, 'twas a golden Age.
When Woman came, those Ills the Box confined
Burst furious out, and poisoned all the Wind,
From Point to Point, from Pole to Pole they flew,
Spread as they went, and in the Progress grew:
The Nymphs regretting left the mortal Race,
And alt'ring Nature wore a sickly Face:
New Terms of Folly rose, new States of Care;
New Plagues, to suffer, and to please, the Fair!
The Days of whining, and of wild Intrigues,
Commenced, or finished, with the Breach of Leagues;
The mean Designs of well-dissembled Love;
The sordid Matches never joined above;
Abroad, the Labor, and at home the Noise,
(Man's double Sufferings for domestic Joys)
The Curse of Jealousy; Expense, and Strife;
Divorce, the public Brand of shameful Life;
The Rival's Sword; the Qualm that takes the Fair;
Disdain for Passion, Passion in Despair --
These, and a thousand, yet unnam'd, we find;
Ah fear the thousand, yet unnam'd behind!
THUS on Parnassus tuneful Hesiod sung,
The Mountain echoed, and the Valley rung,
The sacred Groves a fixed Attention show,
The crystal Helicon forbore to flow,
The Sky grew bright, and (if his Verse be true)
The Muses came to give the Laurel too.
But what availed the verdant Prize of Wit,
If Love swore Vengeance for the Tales he writ?
Ye fair offended, hear your Friend relate
What heavy Judgment proved the Writer's Fate,
Though when it happened, no Relation clears,
It Is thought in five, or five and twenty Years.
Where, dark and silent, with a twisted Shade
The neighboring Woods a native Arbor made,
There often a tender Pair for amorous Play
Retiring, toy'd the ravished Hours away;
A Locrian Youth, the gentle Troilus he,
A fair Milesian, kind Evanthe she:
But swelling Nature in a fatal Hour
Betrayed the Secrets of the conscious Bower;
The dire Disgrace her Brothers count their own,
And track her Steps, to make its Author known.
It chanced one Evening, ('it was the Lover's Day)
Concealed in Brakes the jealous Kindred lay;
When Hesiod wandering, mused along the Plain,
And fixed his Seat where Love had fixed the Scene:
A strong Suspicion strait possessed their Mind,
(For Poets ever were a gentle kind.)
But when Evanthe near the Passage stood,
Flung back a doubtful Look, and shot the Wood*
"Now take, (at once they cry) thy due Reward,"
And urged with erring Rage, assault the Bard.
His Corpse the Sea received. The Dolphins bore
('It Was all the Gods would do) the Corpse to Shore.
Methinks I view the Dead with pitying Eyes,
And see the Dreams of ancient Wisdom rise;
I see the Muses round the Body cry,
But hear a Cupid loudly laughing by;
He wheels his Arrow with insulting Hand,
And thus inscribes the Moral on the Sand.
"Here Hesiod lies: Ye future Bards, beware
"How far your Moral Tales incense the Fair:
"Unlov'd, unloving, 'twas his Fate to bleed;
"Without his Quiver Cupid caused the Deed:
"He judged this Turn of Malice justly due,
"And Hesiod died for Joys he never knew.
SONG.
WHEN thy Beauty appears
In its Graces and Airs,
All bright as an Angel new dropped from the Sky;
At distance I gaze, and am awed by my Fears,
So strangely you dazzle my Eye!
But when without Art,
Your kind Thoughts you impart,
When your Love runs in Blushes through every Vein;
When it darts from your Eyes, when it pants in your Heart,
Then I know you're a Woman again.
There Is a Passion and Pride
In our Sex, (she replied,)
And thus (might I gratify both) I would do:
Still an Angel appear to each Lover beside,
But still be a Woman to you.
A SONG.
THYRSIS, a young and amorous Swain,
Saw two, the Beauties of the Plain;
Who both his Heart subdue:
Gay Caelia's Eyes were dazzling fair,
Sabina's easy Shape and Air
With softer Magic drew.
He haunts the Stream, he haunts the Grove,
Lives in a fond Romance of Love,
And seems for each to dye;
'Till each a little spiteful grown,
Sabina Caelia's Shape ran down,
And she Sabina's Eye.
Their Envy made the Shepherd find
Those Eyes, which Love could only blind;
So set the Lover free:
No more he haunts the Grove or Stream,
Or with a True-love Knot and Name
Engraves a wounded Tree.
Ah Caelia! (sly Sabina cried)
Though neither love, we are both denied;
Now, to support the Sex's Pride,
Let either fix the Dart.
Poor Girl! (says Caelia) say no more;
For should the Swain but one adore,
That Spite which broke his Chains before,
Would break the other's Heart.
SONG.
MY days have been so wondrous free,
The little Birds that fly
With careless ease from Tree to Tree,
Were but as blessed as I.
Ask gliding Waters, if a Tear
Of mine increased their Stream?
Or ask the flying Gales, if ever
I lent one Sigh to them?
But now my former Days retire,
And I Am by Beauty caught,
The tender Chains of sweet Desire
Are fixed upon my Thought.
Ye Nightingales, ye twisting Pines!
Ye Swains that haunt the Grove!
Ye gentle Echoes, breezy Winds!
Ye close Retreats of Love!
With all of Nature, all of Art,
Assist the dear Design;
O teach a young, unpractic'd Heart,
To make my Nancy mine.
The very Thought of Change I hate,
As much as of Despair;
Nor ever covet to be great,
Unless it be for her.
It Is true, the Passion in my Mind
Is mixed with soft Distress;
Yet while the Fair I love is kind,
I cannot wish it Less.
ANACREONTICK.
WHEN Spring came on with fresh Delight,
To cheer the Soul, and charm the Sight,
While easy Breezes, softer Rain,
And warmer Suns salute the Plain;
'Twas then, in yonder Piny Grove,
That Nature went to meet with Love.
Green was her Robe, and green her Wreath,
Wherever she trod, 'twas green beneath;
Wherever she turned, the Pulses beat
With new recruits of Genial Heat;
And in her Train the Birds appear,
To match for all the coming Year.
Raised on a Bank, where Daizys grew,
And Vi'lets intermixed a Blew,
She finds the Boy she went to find;
A thousand Pleasures wait behind,
Aside, a thousand Arrows lie,
But all unfeather'd wait to fly.
When they met, the Dame and Boy,
Dancing Graces, idle Joy,
Wanton Smiles, and airy Play,
Conspired to make the Scene be gay;
Love paired the Birds through all the Grove,
And Nature bid them sing to Love,
Sitting, hopping, fluttering, sing,
And pay their Tribute from the Wing,
To fledge the Shafts that idly lie,
And yet unfeather'd wait to fly.
It Is thus, when Spring renews the Blood,
They meet in every trembling Wood,
And thrice they make the Plumes agree,
And every Dart they mount with three,
And every Dart can boast a Kind,
Which suits each proper turn of Mind.
From the towering Eagle's Plume
The Generous Hearts accept their Doom;
Shot by the Peacock's painted Eye
The vain and airy Lovers dye:
For careful Dames and frugal Men,
The Shafts are speckled by the Hen.
The Pyes and Parrots deck the Darts,
When Prattling wins the panting Hearts:
When from the Voice the Passions spring,
The warbling Finch affords a Wing:
Together, by the Sparrow stung,
Down fall the wanton and the young:
And fledged by Geese the Weapons fly,
When others love they know not why.
All this (as late I chanced to rove)
I learned in yonder waving Grove.
And see, says Love, (who called me near)
How much I deal with Nature here,
How both support a proper Part,
She gives the Feather, I the Dart:
Then cease for Souls averse to sigh,
If Nature cross ye, so do I;
My Weapon there unfeather'd flies,
And shakes and shuffles through the Skies.
But if the mutual Charms I find
By which she links you, Mind to Mind,
They wing my Shafts, I poize the Darts,
And strike from both, through both your Hearts.
ANACREONTICK.
GAY Bacchus liking Estcourt's Wine,
A noble Meal bespoke us;
And for the Guests that were to dine,
Brought Comus, Love, and Jocus.
The God near Cupid drew his Chair,
Near Comus, Jocus placed;
For Wine makes Love forget its Care,
And Mirth exalts a Feast.
The more to please the sprightly God,
Each sweet engaging Grace
Put on some Clothes to come abroad,
And took a Waiter's Place.
Then Cupid named at every Glass
A Lady of the Sky;
While Bacchus swore he would drink the Lass,
And had it Bumper-high.
Far Comus tossed his Brimmers o'cr,
And always got the most;
Jocus took care to fill him more,
When-e'er he mist the Toast.
They called, and drank at every touch;
He filled, and drank again;
And if the Gods can take too much,
It Is said, they did so then.
Gay Bacchus little Cupid stung,
By reckoning his Deceits;
And Cupid mocked his stamm'ring Tongue,
With all his stagg'ring Gaits:
And Jocus droll'd on Comus' Ways,
And Tales without a Jest;
While Comus called his witty Plays
But Waggeries at best.
Such Talk soon set 'em all at odds;
And, had I Homer's Pen,
I Would sing ye, how they drunk like Gods,
And how they fought, like Men.
To part the Fray, the Graces fly,
Who make 'em soon agree;
Nay, had the Furies selves been nigh,
They still were three to three.
Bacchus appeased, raised Cupid up,
And gave him back his Bow;
But kept some Darts to stir the Cup
Where Sack and Sugar flow.
Jocus took Comus' rosy Crown,
And gayly wore the Prize,
And thrice, in Mirth, he pushed him down,
As thrice he strove to rise.
Then Cupid sought the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus did recline,
And Venus close embracing Love,
They joined to rail at Wine.
And Comus loudly cursing Wit,
Rolled off to some Retreat,
Where boon Companions gravely sit
In fat unweildy State.
Bacchus and Jocus, still behind,
For one fresh Glass prepare;
They kiss, and are exceeding kind,
And vow to be sincere.
But part in Time, whoever hear
This our instructive Song;
For though such Friendships may be dear,
They cannot continue long.
FAIRY TALE IN THE Ancient ENGLISH Style.
IN Britain's Isle and Arthur's days,
When Midnight Faeries daunc'd the Maze,
Lived Edwin of the Green;
Edwin, I wis, a gentle Youth,
Endowed with Courage, Sense and Truth,
Though badly Shaped he been.
His Mountain Back mote well be said
To measure height against his Head,
And lift it self above:
Yet spite of all that Nature did
To make his uncouth Form forbid,
This Creature dared to love.
He felt the Charms of Edith's Eyes,
Nor wanted Hope to gain the Prize,
Could Ladies look within;
But one Sir Topaz dressed with Art,
And, if a Shape could win a Heart,
He had a Shape to win.
Edwin (if right I read my Song)
With slighted Passion paced along
All in the Moony Light:
'Twas near an old enchaunted Court,
Where sportive Faeries made Resort
To revel out the Night.
His Heart was drear, his Hope was crossed,
'Twas late, 'twas far, the Path was lost
That reached the Neighbor-town;
With weary Steps he quits the Shades,
Resolved the darkling Dome he treads,
And drops his Limbs adown.
But scant he lays him on the Floor,
When hollow Winds remove the Door,
A trembling rocks the Ground:
And (well I ween to count aright)
At once an hundred Tapers light
On all the Walls around.
Now sounding Tongues assail his Ear,
Now sounding Feet approachen near,
And now the Sounds increase:
And from the Corner where he lay
He sees a Train profusely gay
Come pranckling over the Place.
But (trust me Gentles!) never yet
Was dight a Masquing half so neat,
Or half so rich before;
The Country lent the sweet Perfumes,
The Sea the Pearl, the Sky the Plumes,
The Town its silken Store.
Now whilst he gazed, a Gallant dressed
In flaunting Robes above the rest,
With awful Accent cried;
What Mortal of a wretched Mind,
Whose Sighs infect the balmy Wind,
Has here presumed to hide?
At this the Swain whose venurous Soul
No Fears of Magic Art control,
Advanced in open sight;
'Nor have I Cause of Dreed, he said,
'Who view by no Presumption led
'Your Revels of the Night.
'Twas Grief, for Scorn of faithful Love,
'Which made my Steps unweeting, rove
'Amid the nightly Dew.
It Is well, the Gallant cries again,
We Faeries never injure Men
Who dare to tell us true.
Exalt thy Love-dejected Heart,
Be mine the Task, or ever we part,
To make thee Grief resign;
Now take the Pleasure of thy Chance;
Whilst I with Mab my part'ner dance,
Be little Mable thine.
He spoke, and all a sudden there
Light Music floats in wanton Air;
The Monarch leads the Queen:
The rest their Faerie Partners found,
And Mable trimly tript the Ground
With Edwin of the Green.
The Dancing past, the Board was laid,
And siker such a Feast was made
As Heart and Lip desire;
Withouten Hands the Dishes fly,
The Glasses with a Wish come nigh,
And with a Wish retire.
But now to please the Faerie King,
Full every deal they laugh and sing,
And antic Feats devise;
Some wind and tumble like an Ape,
And other-some transmute their Shape
In Edwin's wondering Eyes.
'Till one at last that Robin hight,
(Renowned for pinching Maids by Night)
Has hent him up aloof;
And full against the Beam he flung,
Where by the Back the Youth he hung
To spraul unneath the Roof.
From thence, "Reverse my Charm, he cries,
"And let it fairly now suffice
"The Gambol has been shown.
But Oberon answers with a Smile,
Content thee Edwin for a while,
The Vantage is thine own.
Here ended all the Phantome-play;
They smelt the fresh Approach of Day,
And heard a Cock to crow;
The whirling Wind that bore the Crowd
Has clapped the Door, and whistled loud,
To warn them all to go.
Then screaming all at once they fly,
And all at once the Tapers die;
Poor Edwin falls to Floor;
Forlorn his State, and dark the Place,
Was never Wight in sike a Case
Through all the Land before.
But soon as Dan Apollo rose,
Full Jolly Creature home he goes,
He feels his Back the less;
His honest Tongue and steady Mind
Han rid him of the Lump behind
Which made him want Success.
With lusty livelyhed he talks,
He seems a dancing as he walks,
His Story soon took wind;
And beauteous Edith sees the Youth,
Endowed with Courage, Sense and Truth,
Without a Bunch behind.
The Story told, Sir Topaz moved,
(The Youth of Edith erst approved)
To see the Revel Scene:
At close of Eve he leaves his home,
And wends to find the ruined Dome
All on the gloomy Plain.
As there he bides, it so befell,
The Wind came rustling down a Dell,
A shaking seized the Wall:
Up spring the Tapers as before,
The Faeries bragly foot the Floor,
And Music fills the Hall.
But certes sorely sunk with woe
Sir Topaz sees the Elphin show,
His Spirits in him die:
When Oberon cries, 'a Man is near,
'A mortal Passion, cleeped Fear,
'Hangs flagging in the Sky.
With that Sir Topaz (Hapless Youth!)
In Accents fault'ring ay for Ruth
Entreats them Pity grant;
For als he been a mister Wight
Betrayed by wandering in the Night
To tread the circled Haunt;
'Ah Losell Vile, at once they roar!
'And little skilled of Faerie lore,
'Thy Cause to come we know:
'Now has thy Kestrell Courage fell;
'And Faeries, since a Ly you tell,
'Are free to work thee Woe.
Then Will, who bears the wispy Fire
To trail the Swains among the Mire,
The Caitive upward flung;
There like a Tortoise in a Shop
He dangled from the Chamber-top,
Where whilome Edwin hung.
The Revel now proceeds apace,
Deffly they frisk it over the Place,
They sit, they drink, and eat;
The time with frolic Mirth beguile,
And poor Sir Topaz hangs the while
'Till all the Rout retreat.
By this the Stars began to wink,
They skriek, they fly, the Tapers sink,
And down ydrops the Knight.
For never Spell by Faerie laid
With strong Enchantment bound a Glade
Beyond the length of Night.
Chill, dark, alone, adreed, he lay,
Till up the Welkin rose the Day,
Then deemed the Dole was over:
But wot ye well his harder Lot?
His seely Back the Bunch has got
Which Edwin lost before.
This Tale a Sybil-Nurse ared;
She softly strok'd my youngling Head,
And when the Tale was done,
'Thus some are born, my Son (she cries)
'With base Impediments to rise,
'And some are born with none.
'But Virtue can it self advance
'To what the Favorite Fools of Chance
'By Fortune seemed designed;
'Virtue can gain the Odds of Fate,
'And from it self shake off the Weight
'Upon the unworthy Mind.
PERVIGILIUM VENERIS.
CRAS amet, qui numquam amavit; Quique amavit, cras amet.
Ver novum, ver jam canorum: vere natus orbis est,
Vere concordant amores, vere nubent alites,
Et nemus comam resolvit de maritis imbribus.
Cras amorem copulatrix inter umbras arborum
Implicat gazas virentes de flagello myrteo.
Cras Dione jura dicit, fulta sublimi throno.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Tune liquore de superno, spameo ponti e globo,
Caerulas inter catervas, inter and bipedes equos,
Fecit undantem Dionen de maritis imbribus.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Ipsa gemmas purpurantem pingit annum floribus,
Ipsa surgentis papillas de Favoni spiritu,
Urguet in toros tepentes; ipsa roris lucidi,
Noctis aura quem relinquit, spargit umentis aquas,
Et micant lacrymae trementes decidivo pondere.
Gutta praeceps orb parvo sustinet casus suos.
In pudorem florulentae prodiderunt purpurae.
Umor ille, quem serenis astra rorant noctibus.
Mane virgins papillas solvit umenti peplo.
Ipsa jussit muae ut udae virgins nubant rosae
Fusae prius de cruore deque amoris osculis,
Deque gemmis, deque flammis, deque Solis purpuris,
Cras ruborem qui latebat vest tectus ignea,
Unica marito nodo non pudebit solvere.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Ipsa Nimfas Diva luco jussit ire myrteo
Et Puer comes puellis. Nec tamen credi potest
Esse Amorem feriatum, si sagittas vexerit.
Ite Nimfae: posuit arma, feriatus est Amor.
Jussus est inermis ire, nudus ire jussus est:
Neu quid arcu, neu sagitta, neu quid igne laederet.
Sed tamen cavete Nimfae, quod Cupido pulcer est:
Torus est inermis idem, quando nudus est Amor.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Compari Venus pudore mittit ad te virgins.
Una res est quam rogamus, cede virgo Delia,
Ut nemus sit incruentum de ferinis stragibus.
Ipsa vellet ut venires, si deceret virginem:
Jam tribus choros videres feriatos noctibus:
Congreges inter catervas ire per saltus tuos,
Floreas inter coronas, myrteas inter casas.
Nec Ceres, nec Bacchus absunt, nec Poetarum Deus;
Detinent and tota nox est pervigila cantibus.
Regnet in silvis Dione: tu recede Delia.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Jussit Hiblaeis tribunal stare Diva floribus.
Praesens ipsa jura dicit, adsederunt Gratiae.
Hibla totos funde flores quidquid annus adtulit.
Hibla florum rumpe vestem, quantus Aennae campus est.
Ruris hic crunt puellae, vel puellae montium,
Quaeque silvas, quaeque lucos, quaeque montes incolunt.
Jussit omnis adsidere pueri Matter alitas,
Jussit and nudo puellas nil Amori credere.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Et recentibus virentes ducat umbras floribus.
Cras erit qui primus ether copulavit nuptias,
Ut pater roris crearet vernis annum nubibus
In sinum maritus imber fluxit almae conjugis,
Ut foetus immixtus omnis alcret magno corpore.
Ipsa venas atque mentem permeante spiritu
Intus occultis gubernat procreatrix viribus,
Perque coelum, perque terras, perque pontum subditum,
Pervium sui tenorem seminali tramite
Imbuit, jussitque mundum nosse nascendi vias.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Ipsa Trojanos nepotes in Latino transtulit;
Ipsa Laurentem puellam conjugem nato dedit;
Moxque Marti de sacello dat pudicam virginem.
Romuleas ipsa fecit cum Sabinis nuptias,
Unde Rames and Quirites, proque prole posterum
Romoli matrem crearet and nepotem Caesarem.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Rura foecundat voluptas: rura Venerem sentiunt
Ipse Amor puer Dionae rure natus dicitur.
Hunc ager cum parturiret, ipsa suscepit sinu,
Ipsa florum delicatis educavit osculis.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
Ecce, jam super genestas explicat aonii latus.
Quisque tuus quo tenetur conjugali foedere.
Subter umbras cum maritis ecce balantum gregem.
Et canoras non tacere Diva jussit alites.
Jam loquaces ore rauco stagna cygni perstrepunt,
Adsonant Terei puellae subter umbram populi,
Ut putas motus Amoris ore dici musico,
Et neges queri sororem de marito barbaro.
Illa cantat: nos tacemus: quando ver venit meum?
Quando faciam ut celidon, ut tacere desinam?
Perdidi Musam tacendo, nec me Phoebus respicit.
Sic Amyclas, cum tacerent, perdidit silentium.
Cras amet, qui numquam amavit; quique amavit, cras amet.
THE VIGIL of VENUS.
Written in the Time of JULIUS CAESAR, and by some ascribed to CATULLUS.

LET those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
The Spring, the new, the warb'ling Spring appears,
The youthful Season of reviving Years;
In Spring the Loves enkindle mutual Heats,
The feathered Nation choose their tuneful Mates,
The Trees grow fruitful with descending Rain
And dressed in differing Greens adorn the Plain.
She comes; to morrow Beauty's Empress roves
Through Walks that winding run within the Groves;
She twines the shooting Myrtle into Bowers,
And ties their meeting Tops with Wreaths of Flowers,
Then raised sublimely on her easy Throne
From Nature's powerful Dictates draws her own.
Let those love now; who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
'Twas on that Day which saw the teeming Flood
Swell round, impregnate with celestial Blood;
Wandering in Circles stood the finny Crew,
The midst was left a void Expanse of Blue,
There Parent Ocean worked with heaving Throes,
And dropping wet the fair Dione rose.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love them more.
She paints the purple Year with varied show,
Tips the green Gem, and makes the Blossom glow.
She makes the turgid Buds receive the Breeze,
Expand to Leaves, and shade the naked Trees.
When gathering damps the misty Nights diffuse,
She sprinkles all the Morn with balmy Dews;
Bright trembling Pearls depend at every spray,
And kept from falling, seem to fall away.
A glossy Freshness hence the Rose receives,
And blushes sweet through all her silken Leaves;
(The Drops descending through the silent Night,
While Stars serenely roll their golden Light,)
Close 'till the Morn, her humid Veil she holds;
Then decked with Virgin Pomp the Flower unsolds.
Soon will the Morning blush: Ye Maids! prepare,
In rosy Garlands bind your flowing Hair
It Is Venus' Plant: The Blood fair Venus shed,
Over the gay Beauty poured immortal Red;
From Love's soft Kiss a sweet Ambrosial Smell
Was taught for ever on the Leaves to dwell;
From Gemms, from Flames, from orient Rays of Light
The richest Luster makes her Purple bright;
And she to morrow weds; the sporting Gale
Unties her Zone, she bursts the verdant Veil;
Through all her Sweets the rifling Lover flies,
And as he breaths, her glowing Fires arise.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
Now fair Dione to the Myrtle Grove
Sends the gay Nymphs, and sends her tender Love.
And shall they venture? is it safe to go?
While Nymphs have Hearts, and Cupid wears a Bow?
Yes safely venture, it is his Mother's Will;
He walks unarmed and undesigning ill,
His Torch extinct, his Quiver useless hung,
His Arrows idle, and his Bow unstrung.
And yet, ye Nymphs, beware, his Eyes have Charms,
And Love that is naked, still is Love in Arms.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
From Venus Bower to Delia's Lodge repairs
A Virgin Train complete with modest Airs:
'Chast Delia! grant our Suit! or shun the Wood,
'Nor stain this sacred Lawn with savage Blood.
' Venus, O Delia! if she could persuade,
'Wou'd ask thy Presence, might she ask a Maid.
Here cheerful Quires for three auspicious Nights
With Songs prolong the pleasurable Rites:
Here Crowds in Measures lightly-decent rove;
Or seek by Pairs the Covert of the Grove,
Where meeting Greens for Arbours arch above,
And mingling Flowrets strew the Scenes of Love.
Here dancing Ceres shakes her golden Sheaves:
Here Bacchus revels, decked with viny Leaves:
Here Wit's enchanting God in Laurel crowned
Wakes all the ravished Hours with silver Sound.
Ye Fields, ye Forests, own Dione's Reign,
And Delia, Huntress Delia, shun the Plain.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
Gay with the Bloom of all her opening Year,
The Queen at Hybla bids her Throne appear;
And there presides; and there the favorite Band
(Her smiling Graces) share the great Command.
Now beauteous Hybla! dress thy flowery Beds
With all the Pride the lavish Season sheds,
Now all thy Colors, all thy Fragrance yield,
And rival Enna's Aromatic Field.
To fill the Presence of the gentle Court
From every Quarter rural Nymphs resort,
From Woods, from Mountains, from their humble Vales,
From Waters curling with the wanton Gales.
Pleased with the joyful Train, the laughing Queen
In Circles seats them round the Bank of green;
And 'lovely Girls, (she whispers) guard your Hearts;
'My Boy, though stripped of Arms, abounds in Arts.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
Let tender Grass in shaded Allys spread,
Let early Flowers erect their painted Head.
To morrow's Glory be to morrow seen,
That Day, old Either wedded Earth in green.
The Vernal Father bid the Spring appear,
In Clouds he coupled to produce the Year,
The Sap descending over her Bosom ran,
And all the various sorts of Soul began.
By Wheels unknown to Sight, by secret Veins
Distilling Life, the fruitful Goddess reigns,
Through all the lovely Realms of native Day,
Through all the circled Land, and circling Sea;
With fertile Seed she filled the pervious Earth,
And ever fixed the mystic Ways of Birth.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
'Twas she the Parent, to the Latian Shore
Through various Dangers Troy's Remainder bore.
She won Lavinia for her warlike Son,
And winning her, the Latian Empire won.
She gave to Mars the Maid, whose honored Womb
Swelled with the Founder of immortal Rome.
Decoyed by Shows the Sabin Dames she led,
And taught our vigorous Youth the Means to wed.
Hence sprung the Romans, hence the Race divine
Through which great Caesar draws his Julian Line.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
In rural Seats the Soul of Pleasure reigns;
The Life of Beauty fills the rural Scenes;
Even Love (if Fame the Truth of Love declare)
Drew first the breathings of a rural Air.
Some pleasing Meadow pregnant Beauty pressed,
She laid her Infant on its flowery Breast,
From Nature's Sweets he sipp'd the fragrant Dew,
He smiled, he kissed them, and by kissing grew.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
Now Bulls over Stalks of Broom extend their Sides,
Secure of Favors from their lowing Brides.
Now stately Rams their fleecy Consorts lead,
Who bleating follow through the wandering Shade.
And now the Goddess bids the Birds appear,
Raise all their Music, and salute the Year:
Then deep the Swan begins, and deep the Song
Runs over the Water where he sails along;
While Philomela tunes a treble Strain,
And from the Poplar charms the listening Plain.
We fancy Love expressed at every Note,
It melts, it warbles, in her liquid Throat.
Of barbarous Tereus she complains no more,
But sings for Pleasure as for Grief before.
And still her Graces rise, her Airs extend,
And all is Silence 'till the Siren end.
How long in coming is my lovely Spring?
And when shall I, and when the Swallow sing?
Sweet Philomela cease, -- Or here I sit,
And silent lose my rapturous Hour of Wit:
It Is gone, the Fit retires, the Flames decay,
My tuneful Phoebus flies averse away.
His own Amycle thus, as Stories run,
But once was silent, and that once undone.
Let those love now, who never loved before,
Let those who always loved, now love the more.
HOMER's BATRACHOMUOMACHIA: OR, THE BATTLE OF THE FROGS and MICE.
Names of the MICE.
PSYCARPAX, One who plunders Granaries. Troxartas, A Bread-eater. Lychomile, A
Licker of Meal. Pternotractas, A Bacon-eater. Lychopinax, A Licker of Dishes.
Embasichytros, A creeper into Pots. Lychenor, A Name from Licking. Troglodytes,
One who runs into Holes. Artophagus, Who feeds on Bread. Tyroglyphus, A Cheese
Scooper, Pternoglyphus, A Bacon Scooper. Pternophogus, A Bacon eater.
Cnissodioctes, One who follows the Steam of Kitchins. Sitophagus, An eater of
Wheat. Meridarpax, One who plunders his Share.
Names of the FROGS.
PHYSIGNATHUS, One who swells his Cheeks. Pelus A Name from Mud. Hydromeduse, A
Ruler in the Waters. Hypsiboas, A loud Bawler. Pelion, From Mud. Seutlaeus,
Called from the Beets. Polyphonus, A great Babbler. Lymnocharis, One who loves
the Lake. Crambophagus, Cabbage-eater. Lymnisius, Called from the Lake.
Calaminthius, From the Herb. Hydrocharis, Who loves the Water. Borborocates,
Who lies in the Mud. Prassophagus, An eater of Garlic. Pelusius, From Mud.
Pelobates, Who walks in the Dirt. Prassaeus, Called from Garlic. Craugasides,
From Croaking.
HOMER's BATTLE of the FROGS, etc.
BOOK I.
TO fill my rising Song with sacred Fire,
Ye tuneful Nine, ye sweet Celestial Quire!
From Helicon's imbow'ring Height repair,
Attend my Labors, and reward my Prayer.
The dreadful Toils of raging Mars I write,
The Springs of Contest, and the Fields of Fight;
How threatening Mice advanced with warlike Grace,
And waged dire Combats with the croaking Race.
Not louder Tumults shook Olympus' Towers,
When Earth-born Giants dared Immortal Powers.
These equal Acts an equal Glory claim,
And thus the Muse records the Tale of Fame.
Once on a Time, fatigued and out of Breath,
And just escaped the stretching Claws of Death,
A Gentle Mouse, whom Cats pursued in vain,
Fled swift-of-foot across the neighboring Plain,
Hung over a Brink, his eager Thirst to cool.
And dipped his Whiskers in the standing Pool;
When near a courteous Frog advanced his Head;
And from the Waters, hoarse-resounding said,
What art thou, Stranger? What the Line you boast?
What Chance has cast thee panting on our Coast?
With strictest Truth let all thy Words agree,
Nor let me find a faithless Mouse in thee.
If worthy Friendship, proffered Friendship take,
And entering view the pleasureable Lake:
Range over my Palace, in my Bounty share,
And glad return from hospitable Fare.
This silver Realm extends beneath my Sway,
And me, their Monarch, all its Frogs obey.
Great Physignathus I, from Peleus' Race,
Begot in fair Hydromede's Embrace,
Where by the nuptial Bank that paints his Side,
The swift Eridanus delights to glide.
Thee too, thy Form, thy Strength, and Port proclaim
A sceptered King; a Son of Martial Fame;
Then trace thy Line, and Aid my guessing Eyes.
Thus ceased the Frog, and thus the Mouse replies.
Known to the Gods, the Men, the Birds that fly
Through wild Expanses of the midway Sky,
My Name resounds; and if unknown to thee,
The Soul of Great Psycarpax lives in me.
Of brave Troxartas' Line, whose sleeky Down
In Love compressed Lychomile the brown.
My Mother she, and Princess of the Plains
Wherever her Father Pternotroctas reigns:
Born where a Cabin lifts its airy Shed,
With Figs, with Nuts, with varied Dainties fed.
But since our Natures naught in common know,
From what Foundation can a Friendship grow?
These curling Waters over thy Palace roll;
But Man's high Food supports my Princely Soul.
In vain the circled Loaves attempt to lie
Concealed in Flaskets from my curious Eye,
In vain the Tripe that boasts the whitest Hue,
In vain the gilded Bacon shuns my View,
In vain the Cheeses, Offspring of the Pale,
Or honey'd Cakes, which Gods themselves regale,
And as in Arts I shine, in Arms I fight,
Mixed with the bravest, and unknown to Flight.
Though large to mine the humane Form appear,
Not Man himself can smite my Soul with Fear.
Sly to the Bed with silent Steps I go,
Attempt his Finger, or attack his Toe,
And fix indented Wounds with dext'rous Skill,
Sleeping he feels, and only seems to feel.
Yet have we Foes which direful Dangers cause,
Grim Owls with Talons armed, and Cats with Claws,
And that false Trap, the Den of silent Fate,
Where Death his Ambush plants around the Bait:
All-dreaded these, and dreadful over the rest
The potent Warriors of the tabby Vest,
If to the dark we fly, the Dark they trace,
And rend our Heroes of the nibling Race.
But me, nor Stalks, nor watrish Herbs delight,
Nor can the crimson Radish charm my Sight,
The Lake-resounding Frogs selected Fare,
Which not a Mouse of any Taste can bear.
As thus the downy Prince his Mind expressed,
His Answer thus the croaking King addressed.
Thy Words luxuriant on thy Dainties rove,
And, Stranger, we can boast of bounteous Jove:
We sport in Water, or we dance on Land,
And born amphibious, Food from both command.
But trust thy self where Wonders ask thy View,
And safely tempt those Seas, I Will bear thee through:
Ascend my Shoulders, firmly keep thy Seat,
And reach my marshy Court, and feast in State.
He said, and bent his Back; with nimble Bound
Leaps the light Mouse, and clasps his Arms around,
Then wondering floats, and sees with glad Survey
The winding Banks resembling Ports at Sea.
But when aloft the curling Water rides,
And wets with azure Wave his downy Sides,
His Thoughts grow conscious of approaching Woe,
His idle Tears with vain Repentance flow,
His Locks he rends, his trembling Feet he rears,
Thick beats his Heart with unaccustomed Fears;
He sighs, and chilled with Danger, longs for Shore:
His Tail extended forms a fruitless Oar,
Half-drench'd in liquid Death his Prayers he spoke,
And thus bemoaned him from the dreadful Lake.
So passed Europa through the rapid Sea,
Trembling and fainting all the venurous Way;
With oary Feet the Bull triumphant road,
And safe in Crete deposed his lovely Load.
Ah safe at last! may thus the Frog support
My trembling Limbs to reach his ample Court.
As thus he sorrows, Death ambiguous grows,
Lo! from the deep a Water- Hydra rose;
He rolls his sanguin'd Eyes, his Bosom heaves,
And darts with active Rage along the Waves.
Confused, the Monarch sees his hissing Foe,
And dives to shun the sable Fates below.
Forgetful Frog! The Friend thy Shoulders bore,
Unskilled in Swimming, floats remote from Shore.
He grasps with fruitless Hands to find Relief,
Supinely falls, and grinds his Teeth with Grief,
Plunging he sinks, and struggling mounts again,
And sinks, and strives, but strives with Fate in vain.
The weighty Moisture clogs his hairy Vest,
And thus the Prince his dying Rage expressed.
Nor thou, that flings me flound'ring from thy Back,
As from hard Rocks rebounds the shatt'ring Wrack,
Nor thou shalt'scape thy Due, perfidious King!
Pursued by Vengeance on the swiftest Wing:
At Land thy Strength could never equal mine,
At Sea to conquer, and by Craft, was thine.
But Heaven has Gods, and Gods have searching Eyes:
Ye Mice, ye Mice, my great Avengers rise!
This said, he sighing gasp'd,' and gasping died.
His Death the young Lychopinax espied,
As on the flowery Brink he passed the Day,
Bask'd in the Beams, and loyter'd Life away.
Loud shrieks the Mouse, his Shrieks the Shores repeat;
The nibbling Nation learn their Hero's Fate:
Grief, dismal Grief ensues; deep Murmurs sound,
And shriller Fury fills the deafen'd Ground.
From Lodge to Lodge the sacred Heralds run,
To fix their Council with the rising Sun;
Where great Troxartas crowned in Glory reigns,
And winds his lengthening Court beneath the Plains;
Psycarpax Father, Father now no more!
For poor Psycarpax lies remote from Shore;
Supine he lies! the silent Waters stand,
And no kind Billow wafts the Dead to Land!
HOMER's BATTLE of the FROGS, etc.
BOOK II.
WHEN rosy-finger'd Morn had tinged the Clouds,
Around their Monarch-Mouse the Nation crowds,
Slow rose the Sovereign, heaved his anxious Breast,
And thus, the Council filled with Rage, addressed.
For lost Psycarpax much my Soul endures,
It Is mine the private Grief, the public, yours.
Three warlike Sons adorned my nuptial Bed,
Three Sons, alas, before their Father dead!
Our Eldest perished by the rav'ning Cat,
As near my Court the Prince unheedful sat.
Our next, an Engine fraught with Danger drew,
The Portal gaped, the Bait was hung in View,
Dire Arts assist the Trap, the Fates decoy,
And Men unpitying killed my gallant Boy!
The last, his Country's Hope, his Parent's Pride,
Plunged in the Lake by Physignathus, died.
Rouse all the War, my Friends! avenge the Deed,
And bleed that Monarch, and his Nation bleed.
His Words in every Breast inspired Alarms,
And careful Mars supplied their Host with Arms.
In verdant Hulls despoiled of all their Beans,
The buskined Warriors stalked along the Plains:
Quills aptly bound, their bracing Corselet made,
Faced with the Plunder of a Cat they flayed:
The Lamp's round Boss affords their ample Shield;
Large Shells of Nuts their covering Helmet yield;
And over the Region, with reflected Rays,
Tall Groves of Needles for their Lances blaze.
Dreadful in Arms the marching Mice appear;
The wondering Frogs perceive the Tumult near,
Forsake the Waters, thick'ning form a Ring,
And ask, and hearken, whence the Noises spring.
When near the Crowd, disclosed to public View,
The valiant Chief Embasichytros drew:
The sacred Herald's Scepter graced his Hand,
And thus his Words expressed his King's Command.
Ye Frogs! the Mic with Vengeance fired, advance,
And decked in Armor shake the shining Lance:
Their hapless Prince by Physignathus slain,
Extends incumbent on the watery Plain.
Then arm your Host, the doubtful Battle try;
Lead forth those Frogs that have the Soul to die.
The Chief retires, the Crowd the Challenge hear,
And proudly-swelling yet perplexed appear,
Much they resent, yet much their Monarch blame,
Who rising, spoke to clear his tainted Fame.
O Friends, I never forced the Mouse to Death,
Nor saw the Gaspings of his latest Breath.
He, vain of Youth, our Art of Swimming try'd'
And venurous, in the Lake the Wanton died.
To Vengeance now by false Appearance led,
They point their Anger at my guiltless Head.
But wage the rising War by deep Device,
And turn its Fury on the crafty Mice.
Your King directs the Way; my Thoughts elate
With Hopes of Conquest, form Designs of Fate.
Where high the Banks their verdant Surface heave,
And the steep Sides confine the sleeping Wave,
There, near the Margin, clad in Armor bright,
Sustain the first impetuous Shocks of Fight:
Then, where the dancing Feather joins the Crest,
Let each brave Frog his obvious Mouse arrest;
Each strongly grasping, headlong plunge a Foe,
'Till countless Circles whirl the Lake below;
Down sink the Mice in yielding Waters drowned;
Loud flash the Waters; and the Shores resound:
The Frogs triumphant tread the conquered Plain,
And raise their glorious Trophies of the slain.
He spoke no more, his prudent Scheme imparts
Redoubling Ardour to the boldest Hearts.
Green was the Suit his arming Heroes chose,
Around their Legs the Greaves of Mallows close,
Green were the Beets about their Shoulders laid,
And green the Colewort, which the Target made.
Formed of the varied Shells the Waters yield,
Their glossy Helmets glist'ned over the Field:
And tap'ring Sea-Reeds for the polished Spear,
With upright Order pierced the ambient Air.
Thus dressed for War, they take the appointed Height,
Poize the long Arms, and urge the promised Fight.
But now, where Jove's irradiate Spires arise,
With Stars surrounded in Ethereal Skies,
(A Solemn Council called) the brazen Gates
Unbar; the Gods assume their golden Seats:
The Sire superior leans, and points to show
What wondrous Combats Mortals wage below:
How strong, how large, the numerous Heroes stride!
What Length of Lance they shake with warlike Pride!
What eager Fire, their rapid March reveals!
So the fierce Centaurs ravaged over the Dales;
And so confirmed, the daring Titans rose,
Heaped Hills on Hills, and bid the Gods be Foes.
This seen, the Power his sacred Visage rears,
He casts a pitying Smile on worldly Cares,
And asks what heavenly Guardians take the List,
Or who the Mice, or who the Frogs assist?
Then thus to Pallas. If my Daughter's Mind
Have joined the Mice, why stays she still behind;
Drawn forth by sav'ry Steams they wind their Way,
And sure Attendance round thine Altar pay,
Where while the Victims gratify their Taste,
They sport to please the Goddess of the Feast.
Thus spoke the Ruler of the spacious Skies,
But thus, resolved, the blue-ey'd Maid replies.
In vain, my Father! all their Dangers plead,
To such, thy Pallas never grants her Aid.
My flowery Wreaths they petulantly spoil,
And rob my crystal Lamps of feeding Oil.
(Ills following Ills) but what afflicts me more,
My Veil, that idle Race profanely tore.
The Web was curious, wrought with Art divine;
Relentless Wretches! all the Work was mine!
Along the Loom the purple Warp I spread,
Cast the light Shoot, and crossed the silver Thread;
In this their Teeth a thousand Breaches tear,
The thousand Breaches skilful Hands repair,
For which vile earthly Dunns thy Daughter grieve,
(The Gods, that use no Coin, have none to give.
And Learning's Goddess never less can owe,
Neglected Learning gains no Wealth below.)
Nor let the Frogs to win my Succor sue,
Those clamorous Fools have lost my Favor too.
For late, when all the Conflict ceast at Night,
When mystretch'd Sinews worked with eager Fight,
When spent with glorious Toil, I left the Field,
And sunk for Slumber on my swelling Shield;
Lo from the Deep, repelling sweet Repose,
With noisy Croakings half the Nation rose:
Devoid of Rest, with aching Brows I lay,
'Till Cocks proclaimed the crimson Dawn of Day.
Let all, like me, from either Host forbear,
Nor tempt the flying Furies of the Spear.
Let heavenly Blood (or what for Blood may flow)
Adorn the Conquest of a meaner Foe,
Some daring Mouse may meet the wondrous Odds,
Though Gods oppose, and brave the wounded Gods.
Over gilded Clouds reclined, the Danger view,
And be the Wars of Mortals Scenes for you.
So moved the blue-ey'd Queen; her Words persuade,
Great Jove assented, and the rest obeyed.
HOMER's BATTLE of the: FROGS, etc.
BOOK III.
NOW Front to Front the marching Armies shine,
Halt ever they meet, and form the lengthening Line:
The Chiefs conspicuous seen and heard afar,
Give the loud Signal to the rushing War;
Their dreadful Trumpets deep mouthed Hornets sound,
The sounded Charge remurmurs over the Ground,
Even Jove proclaims a Field of Horror nigh,
And rolls low Thunder through the troubled Sky.
First to the Fighr the large Hypsiboas flew,
And brave Lychenor with a Javelin slew.
The luckless Warrior filled with generous Flame,
Stood foremost glittering in the Post of Fame;
When in his Liver struck, the Javelin hung;
The Mouse fell thundering, and the Target rung;
Prone to the Ground he sinks his closing Eye,
And soiled in Dust his lovely Tresses lie.
A Spear at Pelion Troglodytes cast,
The missive Spear within the Bosom past;
Death's sable Shades the fainting Frog surround,
And Life's red Tide runs ebbing from the Wound.
Embasichytros felt Seutlaeus' Dart
Transfix, and quiver in his panting Heart;
But great Artophagus avenged the slain,
And big Seutlaeus tumbling loads the Plain,
And Polyphonus dies, a Frog renowned,
For boastful Speech and Turbulence of Sound;
Deep through the Belly pierced, supine he lay,
And breathed his Soul against the Face of Day.
The strong Lymnocharis, who viewed with Ire,
A Victor triumph, and a Friend expire;
And fiercely flung where Troglodytes fought;
With heaving Arms a rocky Fragment caught,
(A Warrior versed in Arts, of sure Retreat,
But Arts in vain elude impending Fate;)
Full on his sinewy Neck the Fragment fell,
And over his Eyelids Clouds eternal dwell.
Lychenor (second of the glorious Name)
Striding advanced, and took no wandering Aim;
Through all the Frog the shining Javelin flies,
And near the vanquished Mouse the Victor dies;
The dreadful Stroke Crambophagus affrights,
Long bred to Banquets, less inured to Fights,
Heedless he runs, and stumbles over the Steep,
And wildly flound'ring flashes up the Deep;
Lychenor following with a downward Blow,
Reached in the Lake his unrecover'd Foe;
Gasping he rolls, a purple Stream of Blood
Distains the Surface of the Silver Flood;
Through the wide Wound the rushing Entrails throng,
And slow the breathless Carcass floats along.
Lymnisius good Tyroglyphus assails,
Prince of the Mice that haunt the flowery Vales,
Lost to the milky Fares and rural Seat,
He came to perish on the Bank of Fate.
The dread Pternoglyphus demands the Fight,
Which tender Calaminthius shuns by Flight,
Drops the green Target, springing quits the Foe,
Glides through the Lake, and safely dives below.
But dire Pternophagus divides his Way
Through breaking Ranks, and leads the dreadful Day.
No nibbling Prince excelled in Fierceness more,
His Parents fed him on the savage Boar;
But where his Lance the Field with Blood imbrued,
Swift as he moved, Hydrocharis pursued,
'Till fallen in Death he lies, a shatt'ring Stone
Sounds on the Neck, and crushes all the Bone,
His Blood pollutes the Verdure of the Pialn,
And from his Nostrils bursts the gushing Brain.
Lycopinax with Borbocaetes fights
A blameless Frog, whom humbler Life delights;
The fatal Javelin unrelenting flies,
And Darkness seals the gentle Croaker's Eyes.
Incensed Prassophagus with spritely Bound,
Bears Cnissiodortes off the rising Ground,
Thendragshim over the Lake deprived of Breath,
And downward plunging, sinks his Soul to Death.
But now the great Psycarpax shines afar,
(Scarce he so great whose Loss provoked the War)
Swift to Revenge his fatal Javelin fled,
And through the Liver struck Pelusius dead;
His freckled Corpse before the Victor fell,
His Soul indignant fought the Shades of Hell.
This saw Pelobates, and from the Flood
Heaved with both Hands a monst'rous Mass of Mud,
The Cloud obscene over all the Hero flies,
Dishonours his brown Face, and blots his Eyes.
Enraged, and wildly sputt'ring, from the Shore
A Stone immense of Size the Warrior bore,
A Load for laboring Earth, (whose Bulk to raise,
Asks ten degenerate Mice of modern Days.)
Full on the Leg arrives the crushing Wound;
The Frog supportless, wriths upon the Ground.
Thus flushed, the Victor wars with matchless Force,
'Till loud Craugasides arrests his Course,
Hoarse-croaking Threats precede! with fatal Speed
Deep through the Belly run the pointed Reed,
Then strongly tug'd, returned imbrued with Gore,
And on the Pile his reeking Entrails bore.
The lame Sitophagus oppressed with Pain,
Creeps from the desperate Dangers of the Plain;
And where the Ditches rising Weeds supply
To spread their lowly Shades beneath the Sky,
There lurks the silent Mouse relieved from Heat
And safe embowr'd, avoids the Chance of Fate.
But here Troxartes, Physignathus there,
Whirl the dire Furies of the pointed Spear:
But where the Foot around its Ankle plies,
Troxartes wounds, and Physignathus flies,
Halts to the Pool, a safe Retreat to find,
And trails a dangling Length of Leg behind.
The Mouse still urges, still the Frog retires,
And half in Anguish of the Flight expires:
Then pious Ardor young Prassaeus brings,
Betwixt the Fortunes of contending Kings:
Lank, harmless Frog! with Forces hardly grown,
He darts the Reed in Combats not his own,
Which faintly tinkling on Troxartes' Shield,
Hangs at the Point, and drops upon the Field.
Now nobly towering over the rest appears
A gallant Prince that far transcends his Years,
Pride of his Sire, and Glory of his House,
And more a Mars in Combat than a Mouse:
His Action bold, robust his ample Frame,
And Meridarpax his resounding Name.
The Warrior singled from the fighting Crowd,
Boasts the dire Honors of his Arms aloud;
Then strutting near the Lake, with Looks elate;
To all its Nations threats approaching Fate.
And such his Strength, the Silver Lakes around
Might roll their Waters over unpeopled Ground.
But powerful Jove, who shows no less his Grace
To Frogs that perish, than to human Race,
Felt soft Compassion rising in his Soul,
And shook his sacred Head, that shook the Pole.
Then thus to all the gazing Powers began
The Sire of Gods, and Frogs, and Mice, and Man,
What Seas of Blood I view! what Worlds of slain!
An Iliad rising from a Day's Campaign!
How fierce his Javelin over the trembling Lakes
The black-fur'd Hero Meridarpax shakes!
Unless some favoring Deity descend,
Soon will the Frogs loquacious Empire end.
Let dreadful Pallas winged with Pity fly,
And make her AEgis blaze before his Eye:
While Mars refulgent on his rattling Car,
Arrests his raging Rival of the War.
He ceased, reclining with attentive Head,
When thus the glorious God of Combats said.
Nor Pallas, Jove! though Pallas take the Field,
With all the Terrors of her hissing Shield,
Nor Mars himself, though Mars in Armor bright
Ascend his Car, and wheel amidst the Fight;
Not these can drive the des'prate Mouse afar,
Or change the Fortunes of the bleeding War.
Let all go forth, all Heaven in Arms arise,
Or launch thy own red Thunder from the Skies.]
Such ardent Bolts as flew that wondrous Day,
When Heaps of Titans mixed with Mountains lay,
When all the Giant-Race enormous fell,
And huge Enceladus was hurled to Hell.
'Twas thus the Armipotent advised the Gods,
When from his Throne the Cloud-Compeller nods,
Deep lengthening Thunders run from Pole to Pole,
Olympus trembles as the Thunders roll.
Then swift he whirls the brandished Bolt around,
And headlong darts it at the distant Ground,
The Bolt discharged inwrap'd with Lightning flies,
And rends its flaming Passage through the Skies,
Then Earth's Inhabitants, the Niblers, shake,
And Frogs, the Dwellers in the Waters, quake.
Yet still the Mice advance their dread Design,
And the last Danger threats the croaking Line,
'Till Jove that inly mourned the Loss they bore,
With strange Assistants filled the frighted Shore.
Poured from the neighboring Strand, deformed to View,
They march, a sudden unexpected Crew!
Strong Suits of Armor round their Bodies close,
Which, like thick Anvils, blunt the Force of Blows;
In wheeling Marches turned oblique they go;
With Harpy Claws their Limbs divide below;
Fell Sheers the Passage to their Mouth command;
From out the Flesh their Bones by Nature stand;
Broad spread their Backs, their shining Shoulders rise;
Unnumber'd Joints distort their lengthened Thighs;
With nervous Cords their Hands are firmly braced;
Their round black Eye Balls in their Bosom placed;
On eight long Feet the wondrous Warriors tread;
And either end alike supplies a Head.
These, mortal Wits to call the Crabs, agree,
The Gods have other Names for Things than we.
Now where the Jointures from their Loins depend,
The Heroes Tails with sev'ring Grasps they rend.
Here, short of Feet, deprived the Power to fly,
There, without Hands, upon the Field they lie.
Wrench'd from their Holds, and scattered all around,
The bended Lances heap the cumber'd Ground.
Helpless Amazement, Fear pursuing Fear,
And mad Confusion through their Host appear:
Over the wild Wast with headlong Flight they go,
Or creep concealed in vaulted Holes below.
But down Olympus to the Western Seas
Far-shooting Phoebus drove with fainter Rays;
And a whole War (so Jove ordained) begun,
Was fought, and ceased, in one revolving Sun.
To Mr. POPE.
TO praise, yet still with due Respect to praise,
A Bard triumphant in immortal Bays,
The Learned to show, the Sensible commend,
Yet still preserve the Province of the Friend,
What Life, what Vigor, must the Lines require?
What Music tune them? what Affection fire?
O might thy Genius in my Bosom shine!
Thou should not fail of Numbers worthy thine,
The brightest Ancients might at once agree
To sing within my Lays, and sing of thee.
Horace himself would own thou do excel
In candid Arts to play the Critic well.
Ovid himself might wish to sing the Dame
Whom Windsor Forest sees a gliding Stream,
On silver Feet, with annual Osier crowned,
She runs for ever through Poetic Ground.
How flame the Glories of Belinda's Hair,
Made by thy Muse the Envy of the Fair;
Less shone the Tresses Aegypt's Princess wore,
Which sweet Callimachus so sung before.
Here courtly Trifles set the World at odds,
Belles war with Beaus, and Whims descend for Gods,
The new Machines in Names of Ridicule,
Mock the grave Phrenzy of the Chimick Fool.
But know, ye Fair, a Point concealed with Art,
The Sylphs and Gnomes are but a Woman's Heart:
The Graces stand in sight; a Satyr Train
Peep over their Heads, and laugh behind the Scene.
In Fame's fair Temple, over the boldest Wits
Inshrin'd on high the sacred Virgil sits,
And sits in Measures, such as Virgil's Muse
To place thee near him might be fond to choose.
How might he tune the alternate Reed with thee,
Perhaps a Strephon thou, a Daphnis he,
While some old Damon over the Vulgar wise
Thinks he deserves, and thou deserv'sf the Prize.
Rapt with the Thought my Fancy seeks the Plains,
And turns me Shepherd while I hear the Strains.
Indulgent Nurse of every tender Gale,
Parent of Flowrets, old Arcadia hail!
Here in the cool my Limbs at ease I spread,
Here let thy Poplars whisper over my Head,
Still slide thy Waters soft among the Trees,
Thy Aspins quiver in a breathing Breeze,
Smile all thy Valleys in eternal Spring,
Be hushed, ye Winds! while Pope and Virgil sing.
In English Lays, and all sublimely great,
Thy Homer warms with all his ancient Heat,
He shines in Council, thunders in the Fight,
And flames with every Sense of great Delight.
Long has that Poet reigned, and long unknown,
Like Monarchs sparkling on a distant Throne;
In all the Majesty of Greek retired,
Himself unknown, his mighty Name admired,
His Language failing, wrapped him round with Night,
Thine raised by thee, recals the Work to light.
So wealthy Mines, that Ages long before
Fed the large Realms around with Golden Oar,
When choked by sinking Banks, no more appear,
And Shepherds only say, The Mines were here:
Should some rich Youth (if Nature warm his Heart,
And all his Projects stand informed with Art)
Here clear the Caves, there open the leading Vein;
The Mines detected flame with Gold again.
How vast, how copious are thy new Designs!
How every Music varies in thy Lines!
Still as I read, I feel my Bosom beat,
And rise in Raptures by another's Heat.
Thus in the Wood, when Summer dressed the Days,
When Windsor lent us tuneful Hours of Ease,
Our Ears the Lark, the Thrush, the Turtle blessed,
And Philomela sweetest over the rest:
The Shades resound with Song -- O softly tread!
While a whole Season warbles round my Head.
This to my Friend -- and when a Friend inspires
My silent Harp its Masters Hand requires,
Shakes off the Dust, and makes these Rocks resound,
For Fortune placed me in unfertile Ground;
Far from the Joys that with my Soul agree,
From Wit, from Learning, -- far, oh far from thee!
Here Moss-grown Trees expand the smallest Leaf,
Here half an Acre's Corn is half a Sheaf,
Here Hills with naked Heads the Tempest meet,
Rocks at their Side, and Torrents at their Feet,
Or lazy Lakes unconscious of a Flood,
Whose dull brown Naiads ever sleep in Mud.
Yet here Content can dwell, and Learned Ease,
A Friend delight me, and an Author please,
Even here I sing, while Pope supplies the Theme,
Show my own Love, though not increase his Fame.
Part of the first Canto of the Rape of the Lock.
AND now unveiled, the Toilet stands displayed,
Each Silver Vase in mystic order laid.
First, robbed in white, the Nymph intent adores
With Head uncovered, the Cosmetic Powers.
A heavenly Image in the Glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her Eyes she rears;
The inferior Priestess, at her Altar's side,
Trembling, begins the sacred Rites of Pride.
Unnumber'd Treasures open at once, and here
The various Offerings of the World appear;
From each she nicely culls with curious Toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glittering Spoil,
This Casket India's glowing Gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder Box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to Combs, the speckled, and the white.
Here files of Pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, Powders, Patches, Bibles, Billet-doux.
Now awful Beauty puts on all its Arms,
The Fair each Moment rises in her Charms,
Repairs her Smiles, awakens every Grace,
And calls forth all the Wonders of her Face;
Sees by degrees a purer Blush arise,
And keener Lightnings quicken in her Eyes.
The busy Sylphs surround their darling Care;
These set the Head, and those divide the Hair,
Some fold the Sleeve, while others plait the Gown,
And Betty's praised for Labors not her own.
A TRANSLATION of part of the first Canto of the Rape of the Lock, into Leonine
Verse, after the manner of the ancient Monks.
ET nunc dilectum speculum, pro more retectum,
Emicat in mensa, quae splendet pyxide densa:
Tum primum lympha, se purgat candida Nympha;
Jamque sine menda, coelestis imago videnda,
Nuda caput, bellos retinet, regit, implet, ocellos.
Hac stupet explorans, seu cultus numen adorans.
Inferior claram Pythonissa apparet ad aram,
Fertque tibi caute, dicatque Superbia! laute,
Dona venusta; oris, quae cunctis, plena laboris,
Excerpta explorat, dominamque deamque decorat.
Pyxide devota, se pandit hic India tota,
Et tota exista transpirat Arabia cista;
Testudo hic flectit, dum se mea Lesbia pectit;
Atque elephas lent, te pectit Lesbia dente;
Hunc maculis noris, nivei jacet ille coloris.
Hic jacet and munde, mundus muliebris abunde;
Spinula resplendens aeris longo ordine pendens,
Pulvis suavis odore, and epistola suavis amore.
Induit arma ergo, Veneris pulcherrima virgo;
Pulchrior in praesens tempus de tempore crescens;
Jam reparat risus, jam surgit gratia visus,
Jam promit cultu, mirac'la latentia vultu.
Pigmina jam miscet, quo plus sua Purpura gliscet,
Et geminans bellis splendet mage fulgor ocellis.
Stant Lemures muti, Nymphae intentique saluti,
Hic figit Zonam, capiti locat ille Coronam,
Haec manicis formam, plicis dat and altera normam;
Et tibi vel Betty, tibi vel nitidissima Letty!
Gloria factorum temere conceditur horum,
HEALTH, an ECLOGUE.
NOW early Shepherds over the Meadow pass,
And print long Footsteps in the glittering Grass;
The Cows neglectful of their Pasture stand,
By turns obsequious to the Milker's Hand.
When Damon softly trod the shaven Lawn,
Damon a Youth from City Cares withdrawn;
Long was the pleasing Walk he wandered through,
A covered Arbor closed the distant view;
There rests the Youth, and while the feathered Throng
Raise their wild Music, thus contrives a Song.
Here wafted over by mild Etesian Air,
Thou Country Goddess, beauteous Health! repair;
Here let my Breast through quivering Trees inhale
Thy rosy Blessings with the Morning Gale.
What are the Fields, or Flowers, or all I see?
Ah! tastless all, if not enjoyed with thee.
Joy to my Soul! I feel the Goddess nigh,
The Face of Nature cheers as well as I;
Over the flat Green refreshing Breezes run,
The smiling Dazies blow beneath the Sun,
The Brooks run purling down with silver Waves,
The planted Lanes rejoice with dancing Leaves,
The chirping Birds from all the Compass rove
To tempt the tuneful Echoes of the Grove:
High sunny Summits, deeply shaded Dales,
Thick Mossy Banks, and flowery winding Vales,
With various Prospect gratify the Sight,
And scatter fixed Attention in Delight.
Come, Country Goddess, come, nor thou suffice,
But bring thy Mountain-Sister, Exercise.
Called by thy lively Voice, she turns her Pace,
Her winding Horn proclaims the finished Chase;
She mounts the Rocks, she skims the level Plain,
Dogs, Hawks, and Horses, crow'd her early Train;
Her hardy Face repels the tanning Wind,
And Lines and Meshes loosely float behind.
All these as Means of Toil the Feeble see,
But these are helps to Pleasure joined with thee.
Let Sloth lie softning'till high Noon in Down,
Or lolling fan her in the sult'ry Town,
Unnerv'd with Rest; and turn her own Disease,
Or foster others in luxurious Ease:
I mount the Courser, call the deep mouthed Hounds,
The Fox unkennell'd flies to covert Grounds;
I lead where Stags through tangled Thickets tread,
And shake the Saplings with their branching Head;
I make the Faulcons wing their airy Way,
And soar to seize, or stooping strike their Prey;
To snare the Fish I fix the luring Bait;
To wound the Fowl I load the Gun with Fate.
It Is thus through change of Exercise I range,
And Strength and Pleasure rise from every Change.
Here beauteous Health for all the Year remain,
When the next comes, I Will charm thee thus again.
Oh come, thou Goddess of my rural Song,
And bring thy Daughter, calm Content, along,
Dame of the ruddy Cheek and laughing Eye,
From whose bright Presence Clouds of Sorrow fly:
For her I mow my Walks, I platt my Bowers,
Clip my low Hedges, and support my Flowers;
To welcome her, this Summer Seat I dressed,
And here I court her when she comes to Rest;
When she from Exercise to learned Ease
Shall change again, and teach the Change to please.
Now Friends conversing my soft Hours refine,
And Tully's Tusculum revives in mine:
Now to grave Books I bid the Mind retreat,
And such as make me rather Good than Great.
Or over the Works of easy Fancy rove,
Where Flutes and Innocence amuse the Grove:
The native Bard that on Sicilian Plains
First sung the lowly Manners of the Swains;
Or Maro's Muse, that in the fairest Light
Paints rural Prospects and the Charms of Sight;
These soft Amusements bring Content along,
And Fancy, void of Sorrow, turns to Song.
Here beauteous Health for all the Year remain,
When the next comes, I Will charm thee thus again.
The FLIES. An ECLOGUE.
WHEN in the River Cows for Coolness stand,
And Sheep for Breezes seek the lofty Land,
A Youth whom Aesop taught that every Tree
Each Bird and Insect spoke as well as he:
Walked calmly musing in a shaded Way
Where flow'ring Hawthorn broke the sunny Ray,
And thus instructs his Moral Pen to draw
A Scene that obvious in the Field he saw.
Near a low Ditch, where shallow Waters meet,
Which never learnt to glide with liquid Feet,
Whose Naiads never prattle as they play,
But screen'd with Hedges slumber out the Day,
There stands a slender Fern's aspiring Shade,
Whose answ'ring Branches regularly laid
Put forth their answ'ring Boughs, and proudly rise
Three Stories upward, in the nether Skies.
For Shelter here, to shun the Noonday Heat,
An airy Nation of the Flies retreat;
Some in soft Air their silken Pinions ply,
And some from Bough to Bough delighted fly,
Some rise, and circling light to perch again;
A pleasing Murmur hums along the Plain.
So, when a Stage invites to pageant Shows,
(If great and small are like) appear the Beaus,
In Boxes some with spruce Pretension sit,
Some change from Seat to Seat within the Pit,
Some roam the Scenes, or turning cease to roam;
Preluding Music fills the lofty Dome.
When thus a Fly (if what a Fly can say
Deserves attention) raised the rural Lay.
Where late Aminter made a Nymph a Bride,
Joyful I flew by young Favonia's side,
Who, mindless of the Feasting, went to sip
The balmy Pleasure of the Shepherd's Lip.
I saw the Wanton, where I stooped to sup,
And half resolved to drown me in the Cup;
'Till brushed by careless Hands, she soared above:
Cease, Beauty, cease to vex a tender Love.
Thus ends the Youth, the buzzing Meadow rung,
And thus the Rival of his Music sung.
When Suns by thousands shone in Orbs of Dew,
I wafted soft with Zephyretta flew;
Saw the clean Pail, and sought the milky Cheer,
While little Daphne seized my roving Dear.
Wretch that I was! I might have warned the Dame,
Yet sat indulging as the Danger came,
But the kind Huntress left her free to soar:
Ah! guard, ye Lovers, guard a Mistress more.
Thus from the Fern, whose high-projecting Arms,
The fleeting Nation bent with dusky Swarms,
The Swains their Love in easy Music breathe,
When Tongues and Tumult stun the Field beneath.
Black Ants in Teams come darkning all the Road,
Some call to march, and some to lift the Load;
They strain, they labor with incessant Pains
Pressed by the cumbrous weight of single Grains.
The Flies struck silent gaze with Wonder down:
The busy Burghers reach their earthy Town;
Where lay the Burdens of a wint'ry Store,
And thence unwearied part in search more.
Yet one grave Sage a Moment's space attends,
And the small City's loftiest Point ascends,
Wipes the salt Dew that trickles down his Face,
And thus harangues them with the gravest Grace.
Ye foolish Nurslings of the Summer Air,
These gentle Tunes and whining Songs forbear;
Your Trees and whispering Breeze, your Grove and Love.
Your Cupids Quiver, and his Mother's Dove,
Let Bards to Business bend their vigorous Wing,
And sing but seldom, if they love to sing:
Else, when the Flourets of the Season fail,
And this your Ferny Shade forsakes the Vale,
Though one would save ye, not one Grain of Wheat
Should pay such Songsters idling at my Gate.
He ceased: The Flies, incorrigibly vain,
Heard the May'r's Speech, and fell to sing again.
AN ELEGY, To an Old BEAUTY.
IN vain, poor Nymph, to please our youthful sight
You sleep in Cream and Frontlets all the Night,
Your Face with Patches soil, with Paint repair,
Dress with gay Gowns, and shade with foreign Hair.
If Truth in spite of Manners must be told,
Why really Fifty Five is something old.
Once you were young; or one, whose Life's so long
She might have born my Mother, tells me wrong.
And once (since Envy's dead before you dye,)
The Women own, you played a sparkling Eye,
Taught the light Foot a modish little Trip,
And pouted with the prettiest purple Lip --
To some new Charmer are the Roses fled,
Which blew, to damask all thy Cheek with red;
Youth calls the Graces there to fix their Reign,
And Airs by thousands fill their easy Train.
So parting Summer bids her flowery Prime
Attend the Sun to dress some foreign Clime,
While withering Seasons in Succession, here,
Strip the gay Gardens, and deform the Year.
But thou (since Nature bids) the World resign,
It Is now thy Daughter's Daughter's time to shine.
With more Address, (or such as pleases more)
She runs her Female Exercises over,
Unfurls or closes, raps or turns the Fan,
And smiles, or blushes at the Creature Man.
With quicker Life, as gilded Coaches pass,
In sideling Courtesy the drops the Glass.
With better Strength, on Visit-days she bears
To mount her fifty Flights of ample Stairs.
Her Mein, her Shape, her Temper, Eyes and Tongue
Are sure to conquer. -- for the Rogue is young;
And all that is madly wild, or oddly gay,
We call it only pretty Fanny's way.
Let Time that makes you homely, make you sage,
The Sphere of Wisdom is the Sphere of Age.
It Is true, when Beauty dawns with early Fire,
And hears the flattering Tongues of soft Desire,
If not from Virtue, from its gravest Ways
The Soul with pleasing Avocation strays.
But Beauty gone, it is easier to be wise;
As Harpers better, by the loss of Eyes.
Henceforth retire, reduce your roving Airs,
Haunt less the Plays, and more the public Prayers,
Reject the Mechlin Head, and gold Brocade,
Go pray, in sober Norwich Crape arrayed.
Thy pendent Diamonds let thy Fanny take,
(Their trembling Luster shows how much you shake;)
Or bid her wear thy Necklace rowed with Pearl,
You Will find your Fanny an obedient Girl.
So for the rest, with less Encumbrance hung,
You walk through Life, unmingled with the young;
And view the Shade and Substance as you pa^s
With joint Endeavor trifling at the Glass,
Or Folly dressed, and rambling all her Days,
To meet her Counterpart, and grow by Praise:
Yet still sedate your self, and gravely plain,
You neither fret, nor envy at the Vain.
'Twas thus (if Man with Woman we compare)
The wise Athenian crossed a glittering Fair,
Unmoved by Tongues and Sights, hewalk'd the place,
Through Tape, Toys, Tinsel, Gimp, Perfume, and Lace;
Then bends from Mars's Hill his awful Eyes,
And What a World I never want? he cries;
But cries unheard: For Folly will be free.
So parts the buzzing gaudy Crowd, and He:
As careless he for them, as they for him;
He wrapped in Wisdom, and they whirled by Whim.
The BOOK-WORM.
COME hither, Boy, we'll hunt to Day
The Book-Worm, ravening Beast of Prey,
Produced by Parent Earth, at odds
(As Fame reports it) with the Gods.
Him frantic Hunger wildly drives
Against a thousand Authors Lives:
Through all the Fields of Wit he flies;
Dreadful his Head with clust'ring Eyes,
With Horns without, and Tusks within,
And Scales to serve him for a Skin.
Observe him nearly, lest he climb
To wound the Bards of ancient Time,
Or down the Vale of Fancy go
To tear some modern Wretch below:
On every Corner fix thine Eye,
Or ten to one he slips thee by.
See where his Teeth a Passage eat:
We'll rouse him from the deep Retreat.
But who the Shelter's forced to give?
It Is Sacred Virgil as I live!
From Leaf to Leaf, from Song to Song,
He draws the tadpole Form along,
He mounts the gilded Edge before,
He Is up, he scuds the Cover over,
He turns, he doubles, there he past,
And here we have him, caught at last.
Insatiate Brute, whose Teeth abuse
The sweetest Servants of the Muse.
(Nay never offer to deny,
I took thee in the Fact to fly.)
His Roses nipt in every Page,
My poor Anacreon mourns thy Rage.
By thee my Ovid wounded lies;
By thee my Lesbia's Sparrow dies:
Thy rabid Teeth have half destroyed
The Work of Love in Biddy Floyd,
They rent Belinda's Locks away,
And spoiled the Blouzelind of Gay.
For all, for every single Deed,
Relentless Justice bids thee bleed.
Then fall a Victim to the Nine,
My self the Priest, my Desk the Shrine.
Bring Homer, Virgil, Tasso near,
To pile a sacred Altar here;
Hold, Boy, thy Hand outrun thy Wit,
You reached the Plays that D -- s writ;
You reached me Ph -- s rustic Strain;
Pray take your mortal Bards again.
Come bind the Victim, -- there he lies,
And here between his numerous Eyes
This venerable Dust I lay,
From Manuscripts just swept away.
The Goblet in my Hand I take,
(For the Libation's yet to make)
A Health to Poets! all their Days
May they have Bread, as well as Praise;
Sense may they seek, and less engage
In Papers filled with Party-Rage.
But if their Riches spoil their Vein
Ye Muses, make them poor again.
Now bring the Weapon, yonder Blade,
With which my tuneful Pens are made.
I strike the Scales that arm thee round,
And twice and thrice I print the Wound;
The sacred Altar floats with red,
And now he dies, and now he is dead.
How like the Son of Jove I stand,
This Hydra stretched beneath my Hand!
Lay bare the Monster's Entrails here,
To see what Dangers threat the Year:
Ye Gods! what Sonnets on a Wench?
What lean Translations out of French?
It Is plain, this Lobe is so unsound,
S -- prints, before the Months go round.
But hold, before I close the Scene,
The sacred Altar should be clean.
Oh had I Sh -- ll's Second Bays,
Or T --! thy pert and humble Lays!
(Ye Pair, forgive me, when I vow
I never missed your Works till now)
I Would tear the Leaves to wipe the Shrine,
(That only way you please the Nine)
But since I chance to want these two,
I Will make the Songs of D -- y do.
Rent from the Corpse, on yonder Pin,
I hang the Scales that brac't it in;
I hang my studious Morning Gown,
And write my own Inscription down.
'This Trophy from the Python won,
'This Robe, in which the Deed was done,
'These, Parnell glorying in the Feat,
'Hung on these Shelves, the Muses Seat.
'Here Ignorance and Hunger found
'Large Realms of Wit to ravage round;
'Here Ignorance and Hunger fell;
'Two Foes in one I sent to Hell.
'Ye Poets, who my Labors see,
'Come share the Triumph all with me!
'Ye Critics! born to vex the Muse,
'Go mourn the grand Ally you lose.
An ALLEGORY on MAN.
A Thoughtful Being, long and spare,
Our Race of Mortals call him Care:
(Were Homer living, well he knew
What Name the Gods have called him too)
With fine Mechanic Genius wrought,
And loved to work, though no one bought.
This Being, by a Model bred
In Jove's eternal sable Head,
Contrived a Shape impow'rd to breathe,
And be the Worldling here beneath.
The Man rose staring, like a Stake;
Wondering to see himself awake!
Then looked so wise, before he knew
The Business he was made to do;
That pleased to see with what a Grace
He gravely showed his forward Face,
Jove talked of breeding him on high,
An Under-something of the Sky.
But ever he gave the mighty Nod,
Which ever binds a Poet's God:
(For which his Curls Ambrosial shake,
And Mother Earth's obliged to quake:)
He saw old Mother Earth arise,
She stood confessed before his Eyes;
But not with what we read she wore,
A Castle for a Crown before,
Nor with long Streets and longer Roads
Dangling behind her, like Commodes:
As yet with Wreaths alone she dressed,
And trail'd a Landskip-painted Vest.
Then thrice she raised, (as Ovid said)
And thrice she bowed, her weighty Head.
Her Honors made, Great Jove, she cried,
This Thing was fashioned from my Side;
His Hands, his Heart, his Head are mine;
Then what have thou to call him thine?
Nay rather ask, the Monarch said,
What boots his Hand, his Heart, his Head,
Were what I gave removed away?
Thy Part's an idle Shape of Clay.
Halves, more than Halves! cried honest Care,
Your Pleas would make your Titles fair,
You claim the Body, you the Soul,
But I who joined them, claim the whole.
Thus with the Gods Debate began,
On such a trivial Cause, as Man.
And can Celestial Tempers rage?
(Quoth Virgil in a later Age.)
As thus they wrangled, Time came by;
(There Is none that paint him such as I,
For what the Fabling Ancients sung
Makes Saturn old, when Time was young.)
As yet his Winters had not shed
Their silver Honors on his Head;
He just had got his Pinions free
From his old Sire Eternity.
A Serpent girdled round he wore,
The Tail within the Mouth before;
By which our Almanacks are clear
That learned Egypt meant the Year.
A Staff he carried, where on high
A Glass was fixed to measure by,
As Amber Boxes made a Show
For Heads of Canes an Age ago.
His Vest, for Day, and Night, was py'd;
A bending Sickle armed his Side;
And Spring's new Months his Train adorn;
The other Seasons were unborn.
Known by the Gods, as near he draws,
They make him Umpire of the Cause.
Over a low Trunk his Arm he laid,
(Where since his Hours a Dial made;)
Then leaning heard the nice Debate,
And thus pronounced the Words of Fate.
Since Body from the Parent Earth,
And Soul from Jove received a Birth,
Return they where they first began;
But since their Union makes the Man,
'Till Jove and Earth shall part these two,
To Care who joined them, Man is due.
He said, and sprung with swift Career
To trace a Circle for the Year;
Where ever since the Seasons wheel,
And tread on one another's Heel.
It Is well, said Jove, and for consent,
Thundering he shook the Firmament.
Our Umpire Time shall have his Way,
With Care I let the Creature stay:
Let Business vex him, Avarice blind,
Let Doubt and knowledge rack his Mind,
Let Error act, Opinion speak,
And Want afflict, and Sickness break,
And Anger burn, Dejection chill,
And Joy distract, and Sorrow kill.
'Till armed by Care and taught to Mow,
Time draws the long destructive Blow;
And wasted Man, whose quick decay
Comes hurrying on before his Day,
Shall only find, by this Decree,
The Soul flies sooner back to Me.
An Imitation of some FRENCH Verses.
RElentless Time! destroying Power
Whom Stone and Brass obey,
Who giv'st to every flying Hour
To work some new Decay;
Unheard, unheeded, and unseen,
Thy secret Saps prevail,
And ruin Man, a nice Machine
By Nature formed to fail.
My Change arrives; the Change I meet,
Before I thought it nigh.
My Spring, my Years of Pleasure fleet,
And all their Beauties dye.
In Age I search, and only find
A poor unfruitful Gain,
Grave Wisdom stalking slow behind,
Oppressed with loads of Pain.
My Ignorance could once beguile,
And fancied Joys inspire;
My Errors cherished Hope to smile
On newly-born Desire.
But now Experience shows, the Bliss
For which I fondly sought,
Not worth the long impatient Wish,
And Ardour of the Thought.
My Youth met Fortune fair arrayed,
(In all her Pomp she shone)
And might, perhaps, have well essayed
To make her Gifts my own:
But when I saw the Blessings shower
On some unworthy Mind,
I left the Chase, and owned he Power
Was justly painted blind.
I passed the Glories which adorn
The splendid Courts of Kings,
And while the Persons moved my Scorn,
I rose to scorn the Things.
My Manhood felt a vigorous Fire
By Love increased the more;
But Years with coming Years conspire
To break the Chains I wore.
In Weakness safe, the Sex I see
With idle Luster shine;
For what are all their Joys to me,
Which cannot now be mine?
But hold -- I feel my Gout decrease,
My Troubles laid to rest,
And Truths which would disturb my Peace
Are painful Truths at best.
Vainly the Time I have to roll
In sad Reflection flies;
Ye fondling Passions of my Soul!
Ye sweet Deceits! arise.
I wisely change the Scene within;
To Things that used to please;
In Pain, Philosophy is Spleen,
In Health, it is only Ease.
A NIGHT-PIECE on DEATH.
BY the blue Tapers trembling Light,
No more I waste the wakeful Night,
Intent with endless view to pore
The Schoolmen and the Sages over:
Their Books from Wisdom widely stray,
Or point at best the longest Way.
I Will seek a readier Path, and go
Where Wisdom's surely taught below.
How deep yon Azure dies the Sky!
Where Orbs of Gold unnumber'd lie,
While through their Ranks in silver pride
The nether Crescent seems to glide.
The slumbering Breeze forgets to breathe,
The Lake is smooth and clear beneath,
Where once again the spangled Show
Descends to meet our Eyes below.
The Grounds which on the right aspire,
In dimness from the View retire:
The Left presents a Place of Graves,
Whose Wall the silent Water laves.
That Steeple guides thy doubtful sight
Among the livid gleams of Night.
There pass with melancholy State,
By all the solemn Heaps of Fate,
And think, as softly-sad you tread
Above the venerable Dead,
Time was, like thee they Life possessed,
And Time shall be, that thou shall Rest.
Those Graves, with bending Osier bound,
That nameless heave the crumbled Ground,
Quick to the glancing Thought disclose
Where Toil and Poverty repose.
The flat smooth Stones that bear a Name,
The Chissels slender help to Fame,
(Which ever our Set of Friends decay
Their frequent Steps may wear away.)
A middle Race of Mortals own,
Men, half ambitious, all unknown.
The Marble Tombs that rise on high,
Whose Dead in vaulted Arches lie,
Whose Pillars swell with sculptured Stones,
Arms, Angels, Epitaphs and Bones,
These (all the poor Remains of State)
Adorn the Rich, or praise the Great;
Who while on Earth in Fame they live,
Are senseless of the Fame they give.
Ha! while I gaze, pale Cynthia fades,
The bursting Earth unveils the Shades!
All slow, and wan, and wrapped with Shrouds,
They rise in visionary Crowds,
And all with sober Accent cry,
Think, Mortal, what it is to dye,
Now from yon black and funeral Yew,
That bathes the Charnel House with Dew,
Methinks I hear a Voice begin;
(Ye Ravens, cease your croaking Din,
Ye tolling Clocks, no Time resound
Over the long Lake and midnight Ground)
It sends a Peal of hollow Groans,
Thus speaking from among the Bones.
When Men my Scythe and Darts supply,
How great a King of Fears am I!
They view me like the last of Things:
They make, and then they dread, my Stings.
Fools! if you less provoked your Fears,
No more my Spectre-Form appears.
Death's but a Path that must be trod,
If Man would ever pass to God:
A Port of Calms, a State of Ease
From the rough Rage of swelling Seas.
Why then thy flowing sable Stoles,
Deep pendent Cypress, mourning Poles,
Loose Scarfs to fall athwart thy Weeds,
Long Palls, drawn Herses, covered Steeds,
And Plumes of black, that as they tread,
Nod over the 'Scutcheons of the Dead?
Nor can the parted Body know,
Nor wants the Soul, these Forms of Woe:
As Men who long in Prison dwell,
With Lamps that glimmer round the Cell,
When c'er their suffering Years are run,
Spring forth to greet the glittering Sun:
Such Joy, though far transcending Sense,
Have pious Souls at parting hence.
On Earth, and in the Body placed,
A few, and evil Years, they wast:
But when their Chains are cast aside,
See the glad Scene unfolding wide,
Clap the glad Wing and tower away,
And mingle with the Blaze of Day.
A HYMN TO CONTENTMENT.
LOvely, lasting Peace of Mind!
Sweet Delight of human kind!
Heavenly born, and bred on high,
To crown the Favorites of the Sky
With more of Happiness below,
Than Victors in a Triumph know!
Whither, O whither art thou fled,
To lay thy meek, contented Head?
What happy Region do thou please
To make the Seat of Calms and Ease?
Ambition searches all its Sphere
Of Pomp and State, to meet thee there.
Increasing Avarice would find
Thy Presence in its Gold enshrined.
The bold Advent'rer ploughs his way,
Through Rocks amidst the foaming Sea,
To gain thy Love; and then perceives
Thou were not in the Rocks and Waves.
The silent Heart which Grief assails,
Treads soft and lonesome over the Vales,
Sees Daisies open, Rivers run,
And seeks (as I have vainly done)
Amusing Thought; but learns to know
That Solitude's the Nurse of Woe.
No real Happiness is found
In trailing Purple over the Ground:
Or in a Soul exalted high,
To range the Circuit of the Sky,
Converse with Stars above, and know
All Nature in its Forms below;
The Rest it seeks, in seeking dies,
And Doubts at last for Knowledge rise.
Lovely, lasting Peace appear!
This World it self, if thou art here,
Is once again with Eden blessed,
And Man contains it in his Breast.
'Twas thus, as under Shade I stood,
I sung my Wishes to the Wood,
And lost in Thought, no more perceived
The Branches whisper as they waved:
It seemed, as all the quiet Place
Confessed the Presence of the Grace.
When thus she spoke -- Go rule thy Will,
Bid thy wild Passions all be still,
Know God -- and bring thy Heart to know,
The Joys which from Religion flow:
Then every Grace shall prove its Guest,
And I Will be there to crown the rest.
Oh! by yonder Mossy Seat,
In my Hours of sweet Retreat;
Might I thus my Soul employ,
With sense of Gratitude and Joy:
Raised as ancient Prophets were,
In heavenly Vision, Praise, and Prayer;
Pleasing all Men, hurting none,
Pleased and blessed with God alone:
Then while the Gardens take my Sight,
With all the Colors of Delight;
While silver Waters glide along,
To please my Ear, and court my Song:
I Will lift my Voice, and tune my String,
And thee, great Source of Nature, sing.
The Sun that walks his airy Way,
To light the World, and give the Day;
The Moon that shines with borrowed Light;
The Stars that gild the gloomy Night;
The Seas that roll unnumber'd Waves;
The Wood that spreads its shady Leaves;
The Field whose Ears conceal the Grain,
The yellow Treasure of the Plain;
All of these, and all I see,
Should be sung, and sung by me:
They speak their Maker as they can,
But want and ask the Tongue of Man.
Go search among your idle Dreams,
Your busy, or your vain Extremes;
And find a Life of equal Bliss,
Or own the next begun in This.
The HERMIT.
FAR in a Wild, unknown to public View,
From Youth to Age a reverend Hermit grew;
The Moss his Bed, the Cave his humble Cell,
His Food the Fruits, his Drink the crystal Well:
Remote from Man, with God he passed the Days,
Prayer all his Business, all his Pleasure Praise.
A Life so sacred, such serene Repose,
Seemed Heaven it self, 'till one Suggestion rose;
That Vice should triumph, Virtue Vice obey,
This sprung some Doubt of Providence's Sway:
His Hopes no more a certain Prospect boast,
And all the Tenor of his Soul is lost:
So when a smooth Expanse receives impressed
Calm Nature's Image on its watery Breast,
Down bend the Banks, the Trees depending grow,
And Skies beneath with answ'ring Colors glow:
But if a Stone the gentle Scene divide,
Swift ruffling Circles curl on every side,
And glimmering Fragments of a broken Sun,
Banks, Trees, and Skies, in thick Disorder run.
To clear this Doubt, to know the World by Sight,
To find if Books, or Swains, report it right;
(For yet by Swains alone the World he knew,
Whose Feet came wandering over the nightly Dew)
He quits his Cell; the Pilgrim-Staff he bore,
And fixed the Scallop in his Hat before;
Then with the Sun a rising Journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each Event.
The Morn was wasted in the pathless Grass,
And long and lonesome was the Wild to pass;
But when the Southern Sun had warmed the Day,
A Youth came posting over a crossing Way;
His Raiment decent, his Complexion fair,
And soft in graceful Ringlets waved his Hair.
Then near approaching, Father Hail! he cried,
And Hail, my Son, the reverend Sire replied;
Words followed Words, from Question Answer flowed
And Talk of various kind deceived the Road;
'Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their Age they differ; join in Heart:
Thus stands an aged Elm in Ivy bound,
Thus youthful Ivy clasps an Elm around.
Now sunk the Sun; the closing Hour of Day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray;
Nature in silence bid the World repose:
When near the Road a stately Palace rose:
There by the Moon through Ranks of Trees they pass,
Whose Verdure crowned their sloping sides of Grass.
It chanced the noble Master of the Dome,
Still made his House the wandering Stranger's home:
Yet still the Kindness, from a Thirst of Praise,
Proved the vain Flourish of expensive Ease.
The Pair arrive: the Liv'ry'd Servants wait;
Their Lord receives them at the pompous Gate.
The Table groans with costly Piles of Food,
And all is more than Hospitably good.
Then led to rest, the Day's long Toil they drown,
Deep sunk in Sleep, and Silk, and Heaps of Down.
At length it is Morn, and at the Dawn of Day,
Along the wide Canals the Zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay Parterres the Breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring Wood to banish Sleep.
Up rise the Guests, obedient to the Call,
'An early Banquet decked the splendid Hall;
Rich luscious Wine a golden Goblet graced,
Which the kind Master forced the Guests to taste.
Then pleased and thankful, from the Porch they go,
And, but the Landlord, none had cause of Woe;
His Cup was vanished; for in secret Guise
The younger Guest purloin'd the glittering Prize.
As one who 'spys a Serpent in his Way,
Glistning and basking in the Summer Ray,
Disordered stops to shun the Danger near,
Then walks with Faintness on, and looks with Fear:
So seemed the Sire; when far upon the Road,
The shining Spoil his wiley Partner showed.
He stopped with Silence, walked with trembling Heart,
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part:
Murmuring he lifts his Eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous Actions meet a base Reward.
While thus they pass, the Sun his Glory shrouds,
The changing Skies hang out their sable Clouds;
A Sound in Air presaged approaching Rain,
And Beasts to covert scud a cross the Plain.
Warned by the Signs, the wandering Pair retreat,
To seek for Shelter at a neighboring Seat.
'Twas built with Turrets, on a rising Ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its Owner's Temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a Desert there.
As near the Miser's heavy Doors they drew,
Fierce rising Gusts with sudden Fury blew;
The nimble Lightning mixed with Showers began,
And over their Heads loud-rolling Thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the Wind, and battered by the Rain.
At length some Pity warmed the Master's Breast,
('It Was then, his Threshold first received a Guest)
Slow creaking turns the Door with jealous Care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering Pair;
One frugal Faggot lights the naked Walls,
And Nature's Fervor through their Limbs recals:
Bread of the coursest sort, with eager Wine,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to dine;
And when the Tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready Warning bid them part in Peace.
With still Remark the pond'ring Hermit viewed
In one so rich, a Life so poor and rude;
And why should such, (within himself he cried,)
Lock the lost Wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new Marks of Wonder soon took place,
In every settling Feature of his Face!
When from his Vest the young Companion bore
That Cup, the generous Landlord owned before,
And paid profusely with the precious Bowl
The stinted Kindness of this churlish Soul.
But now the Clouds in airy Tumult fly,
The Sun emerging opes an azure Sky;
A fresher green the smelling Leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the Day:
The Weather courts them from the poor Retreat,
And the glad Master bolts the wary Gate.
While hence they walk, the Pilgrim's Bosom wrought,
With all the Travel of uncertain Thought;
His Partner's Acts without their Cause appear,
'Twas there a Vice, and seemed a Madness here:
Detesting that, and pitying this he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various Shows.
Now Night's dim Shades again involve the Sky;
Again the Wand'rers want a Place to lie,
Again they search, and find a Lodging nigh.
The Soil improved around, the Mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its Master's turn of Mind,
Content, and not for Praise, but Virtue kind.
Hither the Walkers turn with weary Feet
Then bless the Mansion, and the Master greet:
Their greeting fair bestowed, with modest Guise,
The courteous Master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging Heart,
To Him who gives us all, I yield a part;
From Him you come, for Him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly Cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome Table spread,
Then talked of Virtue till the time of Bed,
When the grave Household round his Hall repair,
Warned by a Bell, and close the Hours with Prayer.
At length the World renewed by calm Repose
Was strong for Toil, the dappled Morn arose;
Before the Pilgrims part, the Younger crept,
Near the closed Cradle where an Infant slept,
And writhed his Neck: the Landlord's little Pride,
Ostrange Return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of Horrors! what! his only Son!
How looked our Hermit when the Fact was done?
Not Hell, though Hell's black Jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue Fire, could more assault his Heart.
Confused, and struck with Silence at the Deed,
He flies, but trembling fails to fly with Speed.
His Steps the Youth pursues; the Country lay
Perplexed with Roads, a Servant showed the Way:
A River crossed the Path; the Passage over
Was nice to find; the Servant trod before;
Long arms of Oaks an open Bridge supplied,
And deep the Waves beneath the bending glide.
The Youth, who seemed to watch a Time to sin,
Approached the careless Guide, and thrust him in;
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his Head,
Then flashing turns, and sinks among the Dead.
Wild, sparkling Rage inflames the Father's Eyes,
He bursts the Bands of Fear, and madly cries,
Detested Wretch -- But scarce his Speech began,
When the strange Partner seemed no longer Man:
His youthful Face grew more serenely sweet;
His Robe turned white, and flowed upon his Feet;
Fair rounds of radiant Points invest his Hair;
Celestial Odours breathe through purpled Air;
And Wings, whose Colors glittered on the Day,
Wide at his Back their gradual Plumes display.
The Form Etherial bursts upon his Sight,
And moves in all the Majesty of Light.
Though loud at first the Pilgrim's Passion grew,
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do;
Surprise in secret Chains his words suspends,
And in a Calm his settling Temper ends.
But Silence here the beauteous Angel broke,
(The Voice of Music ravished as he spoke)
Thy Prayer, thy Praise, thy Life to Vice unknown,
In sweet Memorial rise before the Throne:
These Charms, Success in our bright Region find,
And force an Angel down, to calm thy Mind;
For this commissioned, I forsook the Sky,
Nay, cease to kneel -- Thy fellow Servant I.
Then know the Truth of Government Divine,
And let these Scruples be no longer thine.
The Maker justly claims that World he made,
In this the Right of Providence is laid;
Its sacred Majesty through all depends
On using second Means to work his Ends:
It Is thus, withdrawn in State from human Eye,
The Power exerts his Attributes on high,
Your Actions uses, not controuls your Will,
And bids the doubting Sons of Men be still.
What strange Events can strike with more Surprise,
Than those which latelystrook thy wondering Eyes?
Yet taught by these, confess the Almighty Just,
And where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust!
The Great, Vain Man, who fared on costly Food,
Whose Life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his Ivory Stands with Goblets shine,
And forced his Guests to morning Draughts of Wine,
Has, with the Cup, the graceless Custom lost,
And still he welcomes, but with less of Cost.
The mean, suspicious Wretch, whose bolted Door,
Never moved in Duty to the wandering Poor;
With him I left the Cup, to teach his Mind
That Heaven can bless, if Mortals will be kind.
Conscious of wanting Worth, he views the Bowl,
And feels Compassion touch his grateful Soul.
Thus Artists melt the sullen Oar of Lead,
With heaping Coals of Fire upon its Head;
In the kind Warmth the Metal learns to glow,
And loose from Dross, the Silver runs below.
Long had our pious Friend in Virtue trod,
But now the Child half-wean'd his Heart from God;
(Child of his Age) for him he lived in Pain,
And measured back his Steps to Earth again.
To what Excesses had his Dotage run?
But God, to save the Father, took the Son.
To all but thee, in Fits he seemed to go,
(And 'twas my Ministry to deal the Blow)
The poor fond Parent humbled in the Dust,
Now owns in Tears the Punishment was just.
But how had all his Fortune felt a Wrack,
Had that false Servant sped in Safety back?
This Night his treasured Heaps he meant to steal,
And what a Fund of Charity would fail!
Thus Heaven instructs thy Mind: This Trial over,
Depart in Peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding Pinnions here the Youth withdrew,
The Sage stood wondering as the Seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha, when to mount on high,
His Master took the Chariot of the Sky;
The fiery Pomp ascending left the View;
The Prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending Hermit here a Prayer begun,
Lord! as in Heaven, on Earth thy Will be done.
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And passed a Life of Piety and Peace.
FINIS.
VISIONS, Published in the SPECTATORS, etc.
By the same Hand.
VISION I.
SPECTATOR. No. 460.
Decipimur Specie Recti -- Hor.
OUR Defects and Follies are too often unknown to us; nay, they are so far from
being known to us, that they pass for Demonstrations of our Worth. This makes
us easy in the midst of them, fond to show them, fond to improve in them, and
to be esteemed for them. Then it is that a thousand unaccountable Conceits, gay
Inventions, and extravagant Actions must afford us Pleasures, and display us to
others in the Colors which we our selves take a Fancy to glory in: And indeed
there is something so amusing for the Time in this State of Vanity and
ill-grounded Satisfaction, that even the wiser World has chosen an exalted Word
to describe its Enchantments, and called it the Paradise of Fools.

Perhaps the latter Part of this Reflection may seem a false Thought to some,
and bear another Turn than what I have given; but it is at present none of my
Business to look after it, who am going to confess that I have been lately
amongst them in a Vision.

Methought I was transported to a Hill, green, flowery, and of an easy Ascent.
Upon the broad Top of it resided squint-eyed Error, and popular Opinion with
many Heads; two that dealt in Sorcery, and were famous for bewitching People
with the Love of themselves. To these repaired a Multitude from every Side, by
two different Paths which lead toward each of them. Some who had the most
assuming Air went directly of themselves to Error, without expecting a
Conductor; others of a softer Nature went first to popular Opinion, from whence
as she influenced and engaged them with their own Praises, she delivered them
over to his Government.

When we had ascended to an open Part of the Summit where Opinion abode, we
found her entertaining several who had arrived before us. Her Voice was
pleasing; she breathed Odours as she spoke: She seemed to have a Tongue for
every one; every one thought he heard of something that was valuable in
himself, and expected a Paradise which she promised as the Reward of his Merit.
Thus were we drawn to follow her, till she should bring us where it was to be
bestowed: And it was observable, that all the Way we went, the Company was
either praising themselves in their Qualifications, or one another for those
Qualifications which they took to be conspicuous in their own Characters, or
dispraising others for wanting theirs, or vying in the Degrees of them.

At last we approached a Bower, at the Entrance of which Error was seated. The
Trees were thick-woven, and the Place where he sat artfully contrived to darken
him a little. He was disguised in a whitish Robe, which he had put on, that he
might appear to us with a nearer Resemblance to Truth: And as she has a Light
whereby she manifests the Beauties of Nature to the Eyes of her Adorers, so he
had provided himself with a magical Wand, that he might do something in
Imitation of it, and please with Delusions. This he lifted solemnly, and
muttering to himself, bid the Glories which he kept under Enchantment to appear
before us. Immediately we cast our Eyes on that part of the Sky to which he
pointed, and observed a thin blue Prospect, which cleared as Mountains in a
Summer Morning when the Mists go off, and the Palace of Vanity appeared to
Sight.

The Foundation hardly seemed a Foundation, but a Set of curling Clouds, which
it stood upon by magical Contrivance. The Way by which we ascended was painted
like a Rainbow; and as we went the Breeze that played about us bewitched the
Senses. The Walls were gilded all for Show; the lowest Set of Pillars were of
the slight Fine Corinthian Order, and the Top of the Building being rounded,
bore so far the Resemblance of a Bubble.

At the Gate the Travelers neither met with a Porter, nor waited till one
should appear; every one thought his Merits a sufficient Passport, and pressed
forward. In the Hall we met with several Phantoms, that roved amongst us, and
ranged the Company according to their Sentiments. There was decreasing Honor,
that had nothing to show in but an old Coat of his Ancestors Achievements:
There was Ostentation, that made himself his own constant Subject, and
Gallantry strutting upon his Tip-toes. At the upper end of the Hall stood a
Throne, whose Canopy glittered with all the Riches that Gayety could contrive
to lavish on it; and between the gilded Arms sat Vanity decked in the Peacock's
Feathers, and acknowledged for another Venus by her Votaries. The Boy who stood
beside her for a Cupid, and who made the World to bow before her, was called
Self-Conceit. His Eyes had every now and then a Cast in wards, to the Neglect
of all Objects about him; and the Arms which he made use of for Conquest, were
borrowed from those against whom he had a Design. The Arrow which he shot at
the Soldier, was fledged from his own Plume of Feathers; the Dart he directed
against the Man of Wit, was winged from the Quills he writ with; and that which
he sent against those who presumed upon their Riches, was headed with Gold out
of their Treasuries: He made Nets for Statesmen from their own Contrivances; he
took Fire from the Eyes of Ladies, with which he melted their Hearts; and
Lightning from the Tongues of the Eloquent, to inflame them with their own
Glories. At the Foot of the Throne sat three false Graces. Flattery with a
Shell of Paint, Affectation with a Mirror to practice at, and Fashion ever
changing the Posture of her Clothes. These applied themselves to secure the
Conquests which Self-Conceit had gotten, and had each of them their particular
Polities. Flattery gave new Colors and Complexions to all Things, Affectation
new Airs and Appearances, which, as she said, were not vulgar, and Fashion both
concealed some home Defects, and added some foreign external Beauties.

As I was reflecting upon what I saw, I heard a Voice in the Crowd, bemoaning
the Condition of Mankind, which is thus managed by the Breath of Opinion,
deluded by Error, fired by Self-Conceit, and given up to be trained in all the
Courses of Vanity, till Scorn or Poverty come upon us. These Expressions were
no sooner handed about, but I immediately saw a general Disorder, till at last
there was a Parting in one Place, and a grave old Man decent and resolute, was
led forward to be punished for the Words he had uttered. He appeared inclined
to have spoken in his own Defense, but I could not observe that any one was
willing to hear him. Vanity cast a scornful Smile at him; Self Conceit was
angry; Flattery, who knew him for Plain-dealing, put on a Vizard, and turned
away; Affectation tossed her Fan, made Mouths, and called him Envy or Slander;
and Fashion would have it, that at least he must be Ill-Manners. Thus slighted
and despised by all, he was driven out for abusing People of Merit and Figure;
and I heard it firmly resolved, that he should be used no better wherever
they met with him hereafter.

I had already seen the meaning of most part of that Warning which he had
given, and was considering how the latter Words should be fulfilled, when a
mighty Noise was heard without, and the Door was blackned by a numerous Train
of Harpies crowding in upon us. Folly and Broken Credit were seen in the House
before they entered. Trouble, Shame, Infamy, Scorn and Poverty brought up the
Rear. Vanity, with her Cupid and Graces, disappeared; her Subjects ran into
Holes and Corners; but many of them were found and carried off (as I was told
by one who stood near me) either to Prisons or Cellars, Solitude, or little
Company, the mean Arts or the viler Crafts, of Life. But these, added he with a
disdainful Air, are such who would fondly live here, when their Merits neither
matched the Luster of the Place, nor their Riches its Expenses. We have seen
such Scenes as these before now; the Glory you saw will all return when the
Hurry is over. I thanked him for his Information, and believing him so
incorrigible as that he would stay till it was his Turn to be taken, I made off
to the Door, and overtook some few, who, though they would not hearken to
Plain-dealing, were now terrified to good purpose by the Example of others: But
when they had touched the Threshold, it was a strange shock to them to find
that the Delusion of Error was gone, and they plainly discerned the Building
to hang a little up in the Air without any real Foundation. At first we saw
nothing but a desperate Leap remained for us, and I a thousand times blamed my
unmeaning Curiosity that had brought me into so much Danger. But as they began
to sink lower in their own Minds, methought the Palace sunk along with us, till
they were arrived at the due Point of Esteem which they ought to have for
themselves; then the Part of the Building in which they stood touched the
Earth, and we departing out, it retired from our Eyes. Now, whether they who
stayed in the Palace were sensible of this Descent, I cannot tell; it was then
my Opinion that they were not. However it be, my Dream broke up at it, and has
given me Occasion all my Life to reflect upon the fatal Consequences of
following the Suggestions of Vanity.

VISION II.
SPECTATOR. No. 501.
HOW are we tortured with the Absence of what we covet to possess, when it
appears to be lost to us! What Excursions does the Soul make in Imagination
after it! and how does it turn into it self again, more foolishly fond and
dejected, at the Disappointment! Our Grief, instead of having Recourse to
Reason, which might restrain it, searches to find a further Nourishment. It
calls upon Memory to relate the several Passages and Circumstances of
Satisfactions which we formerly enjoyed; the Pleasures we purchased by those
Riches that are taken from us; or the Power and Splendor of our departed
Honors; or the Voice, the Words, the Looks, the Temper, and Affections of our
Friends that are deceased. It needs must happen from hence, that the Passion
should often swell to such a Size as to burst the Heart which contains it, if
Time did not make these Circumstances less strong and lively, so that Reason
should become a more equal Match for the Passion, or if another Desire which
becomes more present did not overpower them with a livelier Representation.
These are Thoughts which I had, when I fell into a kind of Vision upon this
Subject, and may therefore stand for a proper Introduction to a Relation of it.

I found my self upon a naked Shore, with Company whose afflicted Countenances
witnessed their Conditions. Before us flowed a Water deep, silent, and called
the River of Tears, which issuing from two Fountains on an upper Ground,
encompassed an Island that lay before us. The Boat which plied in it was old
and shattered, having been sometimes overset by the Impatience and Haste of
single Passengers to arrive at the other side. This immediately was brought to
us by Misfortune who steers it, and we were all preparing to take our Places,
when there appeared a Woman of a mild and composed Behavior, who began to
deter us from it, by representing the Dangers which would attend our Voyage.
Hereupon some who knew her for Patience, and some of those too who till then
cried the loudest, were persuaded by her, and returned back. The rest of us
went in, and she (whose Goodnature would not suffer her to forsake Persons in
Trouble) desired Leave to accompany us, that she might at least administer some
small Comfort or Advice while we sailed. We were no sooner embarked but the
Boat, was pushed off, the Sheet was spread; and being filled with Sighs, which
are the Winds of that Country, we made a Passage to the farther Bank through
several Difficulties of which the most of us seemed utterly regardless.

When we landed, we perceived the Island to be strangely over-cast with Fogs,
which no Brightness could pierce, so that a kind of gloomy Horror sat always
brooding over it. This had something in it very shocking to easy Tempers,
insomuch that some others, whom Patience had by this time gained over, left us
here, and privily conveyed themselves round the Verge of the Island to find a
Ford by which she told them they might escape.

For my part, I still went along with those who were for piercing into the
Center of the Place; and joining our selves to others whom we found upon the
same Journey, we marched solemnly as at a Funeral, through bordering Hedges of
Rosemary, and through a Grove of Yew-Trees, which love to over-shadow Tombs and
flourish in Churchyards. Here we heard on every side the Wailings and
Complaints of several of the Inhabitants, who had cast themselves
disconsolately at the Feet of Trees; and as we chanced to approach any of
these, we might perceive them wringing their Hands, beating their Breasts,
tearing their Hair, or after some other manner visibly agitated with Vexation.
Our Sorrows were heightened by the Influence of what we heard and saw, and one
of our Number was wrought up to such a Pitch of Wildness, as to talk of hanging
himself upon a Bough which shot temptingly across the Path we traveled in; but
he was restrained from it by the kind Endeavors of our abovementioned
Companion.

We had now gotten into the most dusky silent Part of the Island, and by the
redoubled Sounds of Sighs, which made a doleful whistling in the Branches, the
Thickness of Air which occasioned faintish Respiration, and the violent
Throbbings of Heart which more and more affected us, we found that we
approached the Grotto of Grief. It was a wide, hollow, and melancholy Cave,
sunk deep in a Dale, and watered by Rivulets that had a Color between Red and
Black. These crept slow, and half congealed amongst its Windings, and mixed
their heavy Murmur with the Echo of Groans that rolled through all the Passages.
In the most retired part of it sat the doleful Being her self; the Path to her
was strewed with Goads, Stings, and Thorns; and the Throne on which she sat was
broken into a Rock with ragged Pieces pointing upwards for her to lean upon. A
heavy Mist hung above her, her Head oppressed with it reclined upon her Arm:
Thus did she reign over her disconsolate Subjects, full of her self to
Stupidity, in eternal Pensiveness, and the profoundest Silence. On one side of
her stood Dejection just dropping into a Swoon, and Paleness wasting to a
Skeleton; on the other side were Care inwardly tormented with Imaginations, and
Anguish suffering outward Troubles to suck the Blood from her Heart in the
Shape of Vultures. The whole Vault had a genuine Dismalness in it, which a few
scattered Lamps, whose blueish Flames arose and sunk in their Urns, discovered
to our Eyes with Increase. Some of us fell down, overcome and spent with what
they suffered in the way, and were given over to those Tormentors that stood on
either Hand of the Presence; others, galled and mortified with Pain, recovered
the Entrance, where Patience, whom we had left behind, was still waiting to
receive us.

With her (whose Company was now become more grateful to us by the want we had
found of her) we winded round the Grotto, and ascended at the Back of it, out
of the mournful Dale in whose Bottom it lay. On this Eminence we halted, by her
Advice, to pant for Breath; and lifting our Eyes, which till then were fixed
downwards, felt a sullen sort of Satisfaction, in observing through the Shades
what Numbers had entered the Island. This Satisfaction, which appears to have
Ill Nature in it, was excusable, because it happened at a time when we were too
much taken up with our own Concern, to have Respect to that of others; and
therefore we did not consider them as suffering, but our selves as not
suffering in the most forlorn Estate. It had also the Groundwork of Humanity
and Compassion in it, though the Mind was then too deeply engaged to perceive
it; but as we proceeded onwards it began to discover it self, and from
observing that others were unhappy, we came to question one another, when it
was that we met, and what were the sad Occasions that brought us together. Then
we heard our Stories, we compared them, we mutually gave and received Pity, and
so by degrees became tolerable Company.

A considerable Part of the troublesome Road was thus deceived; at length the
Openings among the Trees grew larger, the Air seemed thinner, it lay with less
Oppression upon us, and we could now and then discern Tracts in it of a lighter
Greyness, like the Breakings of Day, short in Duration, much enlivening, and
called in that Country Gleams of Amusement. Within a short while these Gleams
began to appear more frequent, and then brighter and of a longer Continuance;
the Sighs that hitherto filled the Air with so much Dolefulness, altered to the
Sound of common Breezes, and in general the Horrors of the Island were abated.

When we had arrived at last at the Ford by which we were to pass out, we met
with those fashionable Mourners who had been ferried over along with us, and
who being unwilling to go as far as we, had coasted by the Shore to find the
Place, where they waited our coming; that by showing themselves to the World
only at that time when we did, they might seem also to have been among the
troubles of the Grotto. Here the Waters, that rolled on the other side so deep
and silent, were much dried up, and it was an easier Matter for us to wade over.

The River being crossed, we were received upon the further Bank by our Friends
and Acquaintance, whom Comfort had brought out to congratulate our Appearance
in the World again. Some of these blamed us for staying so long away from them,
others advised us against all Temptations of going back again; every one was
cautious not to renew our Trouble, by asking any Particulars of the Journey;
and all concluded, that in a Case of so much Affliction, we could not have made
choice of a fitter Companion than Patience. Here Patience, appearing serene at
her Praises, delivered us over to Comfort. Comfort smiled at his receiving the
Charge; immediately the Sky purpled on that side to which he turned, and double
Day at once broke in upon me.

VISION III.
GUARDIAN. No. 56.
Quid mentem traxisse polo, quid profuit altum
Erexisse caput? pecudum simore pererrant.
Claud.
I Was considering last Night, when I could not sleep, how noble a Part of the
Creation Man was designed to be, and how distinguished in all his Actions above
other Earthly Creatures. From whence I fell to take a view of the Change and
Corruption which he has introduced into his own Condition, the grovelling
Appetites, the mean Characters of Sense, and wild Courses of Passions, that
cast him from the Degree in which Providence had placed him, the debasing
himself with Qualifications not his own, and his degenerating into a lower
Sphere of Action. This inspired me with a mixture of Contempt and Anger; which
however, was not so violent as to hinder the Return of Sleep, but grew confused
as that came upon me, and made me end my Reflections with giving Mankind the
opprobrious Names of Inconsiderate, Mad and Foolish.

Here methought, where my waking Reason left the Subject, my Fancy pursued it
in a Dream; and I imagined my self in a loud Soliloquy of Passion, railing at
my Species, and walking hard to get rid of the Company I despised; when two Men
who had overheard me made up on either hand. These I observed had many
Features in common, which might occasion the Mistake of the one for the other
in those to whom they appear single, but I, who saw them together, could easily
perceive, that though there was an Air of Severity in each, it was tempered with
a natural Sweetness in the one, and by turns constrained or ruffled by the
Designs of Malice in the other.

I was at a loss to know the Reason of their joining me so briskly, when he
whose Appearance displeased me most, thus addressed his Companion. Pray,
Brother, let him alone, and we shall immediately see him transformed into a
Tiger. This struck me with Horror, which the other perceived, and pitying my
Disorder, bid me be of good Courage, for though I had been Savage in my Treatment
of Mankind, (whom I should rather reform than rail against) he would, however,
endeavor to rescue me from my Danger. At this I looked a little more cheerful,
and while I testified my Resignation to him, we saw the angry Brother fling
away from us in a Passion for his Disappointment. Being now left to my Friend,
I went back with him at his Desire, that I might know the Meaning of those
Words which so affrighted me.

As we went along, To inform you, says he, with whom you have this Adventure,
my Name is Reproof and his Reproach, both born of the same Mother, but of
different Fathers. Truth is our common Parent. Friendship, who saw her, fell in
Love with her, and she being pleased with him, he begat me upon her; but a
while after Enmity lying in Ambush for her, became the Father of him whom you
saw along with me. The Temper of our Mother enclines us to the same sort of
Business, the informing Mankind of their Faults; but the differing Complexions
of our Fathers make us differ in our Designs and Company. I have a natural
Benevolence in my Mind which engages me with Friends, and he a natural
Impetuosity in his, which casts him among Enemies.

As he thus discoursed we came to a Place where there were three Entrances into
as many several Walks, which lay beside one another. We passed into the
middlemost, a plain, strait, regular Walk, set with Trees, which added to the
Beauty of the Place, but did not so close their Boughs over head as to exclude
the Light from it. Here as we walked I was made to observe, how the Road on one
hand was full of Rocks and Precipices, over which Reproach (who had already
gotten thither) was furiously driving unhappy Wretches; the other side was all
laid out in Gardens of gaudy Tulips, amongst whose Leaves the Serpents
wreathed, and at the end of every grassy Walk the Enchantress Flattery was
weaving Bowers to lull Souls asleep in. We continued still walking on the
middle way, 'till we arrived in a Building in which it terminated. This was
formerly erected by Truth for a Watch Tower, from whence she took a View of the
Earth, and, as she saw occasion, sent out Reproof, or even Reproach, for our
Reformation. Over the Door I took notice that a Face was carved with a Heart
upon the Lips of it, and presently called to Mind that this was the Ancients
Emblem of Sincerity. In the Entrance I met with Freedom of Speech and
Complaisance, who had for a long time looked upon one another as Enemies; but
Reproof has so happily brought them together, that they now act as Friends and
Fellow-Agents in the same Family. Before I ascended up the Stairs, I had my
Eyes purified by a Water which made me see extremely clear, and I think they
said it sprung in a Pit, from whence (as Democritus had reported) they formerly
brought up Truth, who had hid her self in it. I was then admitted to the upper
Chamber of Prospect, which was called the Knowledge of Mankind; here the Window
was no sooner opened but I perceived the Clouds to roll off and part before me,
and a Scene of all the Variety of the World presented it self.

But how different was Mankind in this View, from what it used to appear!
Methought the very Shape of most of them was lost; some had the Heads of Dogs,
others of Apes or Parrots, and in short, wherever any one took upon him the
inferior and unworthy Qualities of other Creatures, the Change of his Soul
became visible in his Countenance. The strutting Pride of him who is endued
with Brutality instead of Courage, made his Face shoot out in the Form of a
Horse's; his Eyes became prominent, his Nostrils widened, and his Wig untying
flowed down on one side of his Neck in a waving Mane. The Talkativeness of
those who love the ill Nature of Conversation made them turn into Assemblies of
Geese, their Lips hardened into Bills by eternal using, they gabbled for
Diversion, they hissed in Scandal, and their Ruffles falling back on their
Arms, a Succession of little Feathers appeared, which formed Wings for them to
flutter with from one Visit to another. The Envious and Malicious lay on the
Ground with the Heads of different sorts of Serpents, and not endeavoring to
erect themselves, but meditating Mischief to others, they sucked the Poison of
the Earth, sharpened their Tongues to Stings upon the Stones, and rolled their
Trains unperceivably beneath their Habits. The Hypocritical Oppressors wore the
Faces of Crocodiles, their Mouths were Instruments of Cruelty, their Eyes of
Deceit; they committed Wickedness, and bemoaned that there should be so much of
it in the World; they devoured the Unwary, and wept over the Remains of them.
The Covetous had so hooked and worn their Fingers by counting Interest upon
Interest, that they converted to the Claws of Harpies, and these they still
were stretching out for more, yet seemed unsatisfied with their Acquisitions.
The Sharpers had the Looks of Camelions; they every Minute changed their
Appearance, and fed on Swarms of Flies which fell as so many Cullies amongst
them. The Bully seemed a Dunghill Cock, he crested well, and bore his Comb
aloft; he was beaten by almost every one, yet still sung for Triumph; and only
the mean Coward pricked up the Ears of a Hare to fly before him. Critics were
turned into Cats, whose Pleasure and Grumbling go together. Fops were Apes in
embroidered Jackets. Flatterers were curled Spaniels, fawning and crouching.
The Crafty had the Face of a Fox, the Slothful of an Ass, the Cruel of a Wolf,
the Ill-bred of a Bear, the Leachers were Goats, and the Gluttons Swine.
Drunkenness was the only Vice that did not change the Face of its Professors
into that of another Creature; but this I took to be far from a Privilege, for
these two Reasons; because it sufficiently deforms them of it self, and because
none of the lower Ranks of Beings is guilty of so foolish an Intemperance.

As I was taking a View of these Representations of Things, without any more
Order than is usual in a Dream, or in the Confusion of the World it self, I
perceived a Concern within me for what I saw; my Eyes began to moisten, and as
if the Virtue of that Water with which they were purified was lost for a time,
by their being touched with that which arose from a Passion, the Clouds
immediately began to gather again, and close from either hand upon the
Prospect. I then turned toward my Guide, who addressed himself to me after
this manner. You have seen the Condition of Mankind when it descends from its
Dignity; now therefore guard your self from that Degeneracy by a modest
Greatness of Spirit on one side, and a conscious Shame on the other. Endeavor
also with a Generosity of Goodness to make your Friends aware of it; let them
know what Defects you perceive are growing upon them; handle the Matter as you
see Reason, either with the Airs of severe or humorous Affection; sometimes
plainly describing the Degeneracy in its full proper Colors, or at other times
letting them know that if they proceed as they have begun, you give them to
such a Day or so many Months to turn Bears, Wolves, or Foxes, etc. Neither
neglect your more remote Acquaintance, where you see any worthy and susceptible
of Admonition; expose the Beasts whose Qualities you see them putting on, where
you have no mind to engage with their Persons. The Possibility of their
applying this is very obvious: The Egyptians saw it so clearly, that they made
the Pictures of Animals explain their Minds to one another instead of Writing;
and indeed it is hardly to be missed, since Aesop took them out of their Mute
Condition, and taught them to speak for themselves with relation to the Actions
of Mankind.

VISION IV.
GUARDIAN. No. 66.
THERE is a Set of Mankind, who are wholly employed in the Ill-natured Office
of gathering up a Collection of Stories that lessen the Reputation of others,
and spreading them Abroad with a certain Air of Satisfaction. Perhaps, indeed,
an innocent and unmeaning Curiosity, a Desire of being informed concerning
those we live with, or a Willingness to profit by Reflection upon the Actions
of others, may sometimes afford an Excuse, or sometimes a Defense, for
Inquisitiveness; but certainly it is beyond all Excuse, a Transgression against
Humanity, to carry the Matter further, to tear off the Dressings, as I may say,
from the Wounds of a Friend, and expose them to the Air in cruel Fits of
Diversion; and yet we have something more to bemoan, an Outrage of an higher
Nature, which mankind is guilty of when they are not content to spread the
Stories of Folly, Frailty and Vice, but even enlarge them, or invent new ones,
and blacken Characters that we may appear ridiculous or hateful to one another.
From such Practices as these it happens, that some feel a Sorrow, and others
are agitated with a Spirit of Revenge; that Scandals or Lies are told, because
another has told such before; that Resentments and Quarrels arise, and Injuries
are given, received, and multiplied, in a Scene of Vengeance.

All this I have often observed with abundance of Concern; and having a perfect
Desire to further the Happiness of Mankind; I lately set my self to consider
the Causes from whence such Evils arise, and the Remedies which may be applied.
Whereupon I shut my Eyes to prevent Distraction from outward Objects, and a
while after shot away, upon an Impulse of Thought, into the World of Ideas,
where abstracted Qualities became visible in such Appearances as were agreeable
to each of their Natures.

That part of the Country, where I happened to light, was the most noisy that I
had ever known. The Winds whistled, the Leaves rustled, the Brooks rumbled, the
Birds chatter'd, the Tongues of Men were heard, and the Echo mingled something
of every Sound in its Repetition, so that there was a strange Confusion and
Uproar of Sounds about me. At length, as the Noise still increased, I could
discern a Man habited like a Herald (and as I afterward understood) called
Novelty, that came forward proclaiming a Solemn Day to be kept at the House of
Common Fame. Immediately behind him advanced three Nymphs, who had monstrous
Appearances. The first of these was Curiosity, habited like a Virgin, and
having an hundred Ears upon her Head to serve in her Enquiries. The Second of
these was Talkativeness, a little better grown, she seemed to be like a young
Wife, and had an hundred Tongues to spread her Stories. The Third was
Censoriousness, habited like a Widow, and surrounded with an hundred Squinting
Eyes of a malignant Influence, which so obliquely darted on all around, that it
was impossible to say which of them had brought in the Informations she boasted
of. These, as I was informed, had been very instrumental in preserving and
rearing Common Fame, when upon her Birthday she was shuffled into a Crowd, to
escape the search which Truth might have made after her and her Parents.
Curiosity found her there, Talkativeness conveyed her away, and Censoriousness
so nursed her up, that in a short time she grew to a prodigious Size, and
obtained an Empire over the Universe; wherefore the Power, in Gratitude for
these Services, has since advanced them to her highest Employments. The next
who came forward in this Procession was a light Damsel, called Credulity, who
carried behind them the Lamp, the Silver Vessel with a Spout, and other
Instruments proper for this Solemn Occasion. She had formerly seen these three
together, and conjecturing from the number of their Ears, Tongues and Eyes,
that they might be the proper Genii of Attention, Familiar Converse, and Ocular
Demonstration, she from that time gave her self up to attend them. The last who
followed were some who had closely muffled themselves in upper Garments, so
that I could not discern who they were; but just as the foremost of them was
come up, I am glad, says she, calling me by my Name, to meet you at this time,
stay close by me, and take a strict Observation of all that passes. Her Voice
was sweet and commanding, I thought I had somewhere heard it; and from her, as
I went along, I learned the Meaning of every thing which offered.

We now marched forward through the Rookery of Rumors, which flew thick and with
a terrible din all around us. At length we arrived at the House of Common Fame,
where a Hecatomb of Reputations was that Day to fall for her Pleasure. The
House stood upon an Eminence, having a thousand Passages to it, and a thousand
whispering Holes for the Conveyance of Sound. The Hall we entered was formed
with the Art of a Musick-Chamber for the Improvement of Noises. Rest and
Silence are banished the Place. Stories of different Natures wander in light
Flocks all about, sometimes Truths and Lies, or sometimes Lies themselves
clashing against one another. In the middle stood a Table painted after the
manner of the remotest Asiatick Countries, upon which the Lamp, the Silver
Vessel, and Cups of a white Earth, were planted in order. Then dried Herbs were
brought, collected for the Solemnity in Moonshine, and Water being put to them,
there was a greenish Liquor made, to which they added the Flower of Milk, and
an Extraction from the Canes of America, for performing a Libation to the
infernal Powers of Mischief. After this, Curiosity, retiring to a
withdrawing-Room, brought forth the Victims, being to Appearance a Set of
small waxen Images, which she laid upon the Table one after another.
Immediately Talkativeness gave each of them the Name of some one, whom for the
Time they were to represent; and Censoriousness stuck them all about with black
Pins, still pronouncing at every one she stuck, something to the Prejudice of
the Persons represented. No sooner were these Rites performed, and Incantations
uttered, but the Sound of a Speaking Trumpet was heard in the Air, by which
they knew the Deity of the Place was propitiated and assisting. Upon this the
Sky grew darker, a Storm arose, and Murmurs, Sighs, Groans, Cries, and the
Words of Grief or Resentment were heard within it. Thus the three Sorceresses
discovered, that they, whose Names they had given to the Images, were already
affected with what was done to them in Effigy. The Knowledge of this was
received with loudest the Laughter, and in many Congratulatory Words they
applauded one another's Wit and Power.

As Matters were at this high Point of Disorder, the muffled Lady, whom I
attended on, being no longer able to endure such barbarous Proceedings, threw
off her upper Garment of Reserve, and appeared to be Truth. As soon as she had
confessed her self present, the Speaking-Trumpet ceased to Sound, the Sky
cleared up, the Storm abated, the Noises which were heard in it ended, the
Laughter of the Company was over, and a serene Light, till then unknown to the
Place, was diffused around it. At this the detected Sorceresses endeavored to
escape in a Cloud which I saw began to thicken about them, but it was soon
dispersed, their Charms being controled and prevailed over by the superior
Divinity. For my Part I was exceedingly glad to see it so, and began to
consider what Punishments she would inflict upon them. I fancied it would be
proper to cut off Curiosity's Ears, and fix them to the Eaves of Houses, to
nail the Tongue of Talkativeness to Indian Tables, and to put out the Eyes of
Censoriousness with a Flash of her Light. In respect of Credulity I had indeed
some little Pity, and had I been Judge she might, perhaps, have escaped with a
hearty Reproof.

But I soon found that the discerning Judge had other Designs, she knew them
for such as will not be destroyed entirely while Mankind is in Being, and yet
ought to have a Brand and Punishment affixed to them that they may be avoided.
Wherefore she took a Seat for Judgment, and had the Criminals brought forward
by Shame ever blushing, and Trouble with a Whip of many Lashes, two Phantoms
who had dogged the Procession in Disguise, and waited 'till they had an
Authority from Truth to lay Hands upon them. Immediately then she ordered
Curiosity and Talkativeness to be fettered together, that the one should never
suffer the other to rest, nor the other ever let her remain undiscovered. Light
Credulity she linkt to Shame at the Tormenter's own Request, who was pleased to
be thus secure that her Prisoner could not escape; and this was done partly for
her Punishment, and partly for her Amendment. Censoriousness was also in like
manner begged by Trouble, and had her assigned for an eternal Companion. After
they were thus chained with one another, by the Judge's Order, she drove them
from the Presence to wander for ever through the World, with Novelty stalking
before them.

The Cause being now over, she retreated from sight within the Splendour of her
own Glory, which leaving the House it had brightned, the Sounds that were
proper to the Place began to be as loud and confused as when we entered, and
there being no longer a clear distinguished Appearance of any Objects
represented to me, I returned from the Excursion I had made in Fancy.

VISION V.
WHatever Industry and Eagerness the modern Discoverers have shown for the
Knowledge of new Countries, there yet remains an ample Field in the Creation to
which they are utter Strangers, and which all the Methods of Traveling
hitherto invented, will never bring them acquainted with. Of this I can give a
very particular Instance in an Accident which lately happened to me.

As I was on the 6th of this Instant, being Febr. 1715, walking with my Eyes
cast upward, I fell into a Reflection on the vast Tracts of Air which appeared
before me as uninhabited. And wherefore, said I to my self, should all this
Space be created? Can it only be for an odd Bird to fly through, as now and
then a Man may pass a Desert? Or are there also Kingdoms with their particular
Polities, and People of a Species which we know nothing of, ordained to live in
it.

It was in this Manner I continued my Thought, when my Feet forsook the Level,
and I was insensibly mounted in the Air, till I arrived at a footing as firm
and level as what I had left. But with what Surprise did I find my self among
Creatures distinct from us in Shape and Customs?

The Inhabitants are of a small Stature, below those which History describes
for Pigmies. The tallest of them exceed not fourteen or fifteen Inches, and the
least are hardly three. This difference proceeds only from their Growth before
they are brought to Light; for after we never observe them to grow, unless it
please their Parents, who have this uncommon Method of enabling them: They
recall them to the Womb, where having been for some Time, they receive an
Addition to their Bulk, then go back to their Houses, and continue at a Stand
as they did before. The Experiment has been often tried with Success, but some
have suffered extremely by undergoing it.

Their Skins are like the ancient Britains, all drawn over with a Variety of
Figures. The Color made use of for this end, is generally Black. I have indeed
observed in some of the Religious, and Lawyers of the Country, Red here and
there intermingl'd, though not so commonly of late. They tell me too, they often
used to paint with all Colors; and I visited two or three of the old
Inhabitants, who were adorned in that Fashion: But this is now disused, since
the new Inventions, by which the use of a black Fountain that belongs to that
Country, is rendered more useful and serviceable.

The Clothes in which they go clad, are the Skins of Beasts, worn by some
Plain, by others with Figures wrought upon them. Gold is also made use of by
some, to beautify their Apparel; but very seldom Silver, unless, as Buckles are
by us, for fastening the Garment before. I have seen some of them go like
Seamen in thin blue Shirts, others like Indians in a party-colored loose kind
of Apparel, and others who they told me were the Politicians of the Country, go
about stark naked.

The Manner of dressing them is this: At first when they come into the World,
they have a Suit given them, which if it do not fit exactly, is not, as with
us, fitted up again, but the Children are in a cruel Manner cut and squeezed to
bring them to its Proportion. Yet this they seem not much to regard, provided
their principal Parts are not affected. When the Dress is thus settled on them,
they are clad for Life, it being seldom their Custom to alter it, or put it
off: In short, they live in it Night and Day, and wear it to Rags rather than
part with it, being sure of the same Torture, and a greater Danger if they
should be dressed a second Time. I have further taken Notice, that they delight
to go open Breasted, most of them showing their Bosoms speckled. Some Lawyers
indeed wear them quite White, perhaps for Distinction sake, or to be known at a
Distance. But the finest Show, is among the Beaux and Ladies, who mightily
affect something of Gold, both before and behind them.

Food I never saw them eat; they being a People, who, as I observed, live in
Air: Their Houses are all single and high, having no back Rooms, but frequently
seven or eight Stories, which are all separate Houses above one another. They
have one Gate to their City, and generally no Doors to their Houses; though I
have sometimes seen them have particular Doors, and even made of Glass, where
the Inhabitants have been observed to stand many Days, that their fine Apparel
may be seen through them. If at any time they lie down, which they do when they
come from their Habitations (as if coming Abroad were their greatest Fatigue)
they will lie together in Heaps without receiving Hurt: Though the soundest
Sleep they get, is when they can have Dust enough to cover them over.

The Females amongst them are but few, nothing being there produced by a
Marriage of Sexes. The Males are of a different Strength or Endowment of Parts,
some having Knowledge in an extreme Degree, and others none at all; yet at the
same Time, they are mighty Pretenders to instruct others. Their Names, (for as
many as would discover them to me) I observed to be the very same as ours are
upon Earth; I met a few who made theirs a Mystery, but why, I am yet to learn.
They are so communicative, that they will tell all the Knowledge they boast, if
a Stranger apply himself to their Conversation: And this may be worth his
while, if he considers that all Languages, Arts, and Sciences, are professed
amongst them. I think I may say it without Vanity, that I knew a certain
Talisman, with proper Figures and Characters inscribed, whereby their greatest
People may be charmed, brought to reside with a Man, and serve him like a
Familiar in the Conduct of Life.

There is no such thing as fighting amongst them, but their Controversies are
determined by Words, wherein they seldom own themselves conquered, yet proceed
no further than two or three Replies: Perhaps indeed two others take up their
Neighbor's Quarrel, but then they desist too after the same Manner; sometimes
however, Blows have ensued upon their Account, though not amongst them: In such
a Case they have descended to inspire Mankind with their Sentiments, and chosen
Champions from among us, in order to decide it.

The Time of their Life is very different, some dye as soon as born, and others
in their Youth; some get a new Lease of Life by their entering into the Womb
again, and if any weather it out to a hundred Years, they generally live on to
an extreme Age. After which it is remarkable, that instead of growing weaker as
we do, by Time, they increase in Strength, and become at last so confirmed in
Health, that it is the Opinion of their Country, they never can perish while
the World remains.

The Sicknesses which may take them off, besides what happens from their
natural Weakness of Body, are of different Sorts. One is over-moisture, which
affecting their Mansions, makes them lose their Complexions, become deformed,
and rot away insensibly: This is often obviated by their not keeping too much
within Doors. Another is the Worms, which prey upon their Bowels: If they be
maimed by Accidents, they become, like us, so far useless; and that Maim will
some time or other be the Occasion of their Ruin. However, they perish by these
Means only in Appearance, and like Spirits, who vanish in one Place, to be seen
in another. But as Men dye of Passions, so Disesteem is what the most nearly
touches them; then they withdraw into, Holes and Corners, and consume away in
Darkness. Or if they are kept alive a few Days by the force of Spices, it is
but a short Reprieve from their perishing to Eternity; without any Honor, but
that instead of a Burial, a small Pyre of Past should be erected over them,
while they, like the ancient Romans, are reduced to Ashes.

N. B. This Vision is to be understood of a Library of Books.

FINIS.
ERRATA, In Pervigilio Veneris.
Page 48. verse. 2. pro spameo, lege spumeo. p. 50. v. 10. muae, lege mane. p.
56. v. 3. Detinent, and tota nox, lege Decinent -- p. 64.v. 4. Explicat acnii
latus, lege Explicant tauri latus. p. 64. v. 9. Adsonant Terei puella, lege
Adsonat Terei puella.

INDEX.
HESIOD, or the Rise of Woman. Page 1 Song. Page 18, 19, 21 Anacreontick. Page
23, 28 A Fairy Tale, in the ancient English Style. Page 32 Pervigilium Veneris.
Page 47 The Vigil of Venus. Page 47 Battle of the Frogs and Mice. Page 71 To
Mr. Pope. Page 105 Part of the first Canto of the Rape of the Lock Translated.
Page 112 Health; an Eclogue. Page 116 The Flies; an Eclogue. Page 122 An Elegy.
To an old Beauty. Page 128 The Book-Worm. Page 134 An Allegory on Man. Page 141
In Imitation of some French Verses. Page 148 A Night-piece on Death. Page 152 A
Hymn to Contentment. Page 158 The Hermit. Page 164
VISIONS.
VISIONS I. Page 183 Vision II. Page 191 Vision III. Page 199 Vision IV. Page
207 Vision V. Page 215
BOOKS printed for BERNARD LINTOT.
MR. Pope's Homer in 6 Vol. 4to Royal, fol. and 12mo. -- His Miscellaneous
Poems. -- Miscellany Poems, by his Grace of Buckingham, etc. Oxford and
Cambridge Miscellany Poems. Mr. Fenton's Miscellaneous Poems. Dr. King's
Miscellanies, 2 Vol. -- His Art of Cookery, in Imitation of Horace's Art of
Poetry. -- His Art of Love, in Imitation of Ovid. Dryden's Art of Painting,
Corrected by Mr. Pope, and Mr. Jervas. Wiqueforts complete Ambassador. Dr.
Fiddes's Body of Divinity, 2 Vol. Dr. Keill's Astronomy, Corrected by Dr.
Halley. The Works of Chaucer, in large and small Paper fol. with Cutts. Coke's
Comment on Littleton The 11th Edition. Laurence of Gardening, with Cuts. James
of Gardening, with Cuts.

