OF STAGE TYRANTS.

AN EPISTLE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP Earl of Chesterfield. Occasioned by
the Honest Yorkshire-Man being rejected at Drury Lane PLAYHOUSE, and since
Acted at other Theaters with Universal Applause.

By Mr. CAREY.

-- Magnum hoc ego duco,
Quod placui Tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum,
Non patre praeclaro, sed vita, et pectore puro.
Hor. Sermon. 1.6. LONDON: Printed for J. Shuckburgh, and L. Gilliver in
Fleet Street, J. Jackson in Pall Mall, and J. Leake at Bath. And sold by A.
Dodd without Temple Bar, E. Nutt, and E. Cook, at the Royal Exchange, 1735.

AN EPISTLE To the Right Honorable PHILIP, Earl of Chesterfield, etc.
O CHESTERFIELD! My Patron and my Pride,
In whom does all that is Great and Good reside;
Noble by Birth, by Liberal Arts refined;
Delight of Heaven, and Darling of Mankind!
The public Patriot, and the private Friend;
To hated Indolence no more impute
The Muse's Silence, if, hereafter mute,
She quits her former Toils for future Ease;
And checks that Genius which (perhaps) might please.
It Is Time my fruitless Labors to decline,
When all Men's Works can climb the Stage, but mine:
When, in my stead, behold! a motley Herd
Of upstart Witlings to my self preferred.
Not so when Booth, Wilks, Cibber, ruled the Stage,
Dramatick Ornaments of this our Age:
My small Attempts to please were then approved,
And not for every trifling Farce removed.
Booth ever showed me Friendship and Respect,
And Wilks would rather forward than reject.
Even Cibber, Terror to the Scribbling Crew!
Would often Solicit me for something New.
Now, Younger Rulers Younger Authors take,
These handy Hirelings can, in half a Day,
Steal a new Ballad FARCE from some old PLAY;
To mangled Scraps of many an Ancient Tune
Tagg Feetless Jingle, Jarring and Jejune;
The jaded Play'rs with equal haste rehearse,
'Till Sing Song limps, to Horrid! Hobbling Verse.
Though Blunder follows Blunder, Line by Line,
The 'Squire is taught to think it is wondrous Fine!
It suits his Taste, he gives his plaudit Voice,
And shows his Understanding in his Choice.
Framing Conceptions both of Men and Things,
Just as Sir Figg directs his Leading-Strings:
Sir Figg, grand Master of the double Sneer,
Who, when He most deceives, seems most Sincere;
Dissembler Born, but much improved by Art,
A Friendly Aspect, an Infernal Heart:
The Mischievous, the Busy Go between
Easy 'Squire Amb's-Ace, and sly Harlequin;
Who, like two wrangling Counselors at Bar,
But yet, in Private, like dear Friends caress,
And form Designs, poor Players to distress.
Woe to the Stage! if once their Schemes Succeed;
Actors will then be Abject Slaves indeed:
Poets had better lay their Pens aside,
Than tamely truckle to Stage Tyrant's Pride;
Who, Vain and Partial, keep Old Authors down,
To force their own Low Trump'ry on the Town.
Why to such Wretches should I yield my Cause,
So lately honored with so much Applause?
My little Ballads still on every Tongue,
Are in politest Conversation Sung:
Nor can severest Censure trace one Line.
That tends to Vice, in any Verse of mine.
To please and yet instruct is all my Aim,
Let Venal Poetasters boast the same;
Whose utmost Views are to corrupt the Taste,
To sooth the Vicious, and to shock the Chaste;
And, quite estranged to any Sense of Shame,
Make Women speak what Rakes would blush to name;
Then, in Excuse, plead Nothing else goes down;
A wretched Compliment upon the Town!
Wretched as false -- The Town's not so depraved,
Were Authors and were Actors less enslaved:
Could one good Piece be suffered to appear,
The Town would gladly lend a candid Ear;
Prefer pure Nature and the simple SCENE,
To all the Monkey Tricks of Harlequin:
The Man of Taste proves this Assertion true,
We want what is rational as well as New.
But, this Declension of the British Stage,
BOOTH, Britain's Roscius, justly did presage;
That Rules Dramatic, Humor, Taste and Wit,
Must to that Monster Pantomime submit:
Yet Pantomime, in all its Grandeur dressed,
Is but a pompous Puppet-Shew at best.
Then, farewell Stage! be Business now my Boast,
With what was Irksome once Delighted most;
Pleased and contented with my little Store,
I scorn to prostitute my Muse for more.
Alas! What Fame, what Gain can I propose,
When others Father fast as I compose?
To such a pitch is pert Presumption grown,
It Is well if this Poor Piece be thought my own.
So when, long since, in simple Sonnet Lays,
I made the 'Prentice Sing his Sally's Praise,
Though rude the Numbers, yet the Subject moved;
Immortal ADDISON the Song approved;
Then Prejudice with Envy did combine,
Because 'twas Good, 'twas thought too Good for mine.
So common Fame did various Authors choose
To Namby Pamby, Offspring of my Muse;
Till POPE, who ever proved to Truth a Friend,
With Generous Ardour did my Cause defend;
Traced me obscure and in Detraction's Spite
Displayed me in a more conspicuous Light.
To mention more would prove a needless Task,
Why should they not be mine? That Is all I ask:
Because I Am Cheerful, Unreserv'd and Free,
Can nothing Good or New proceed from me?
What have I done, injurious to Mankind,
My Works must be to other Men assigned?
Well! let 'em go, I all my Right resign,
Entirely Easy, had they never been mine:
Yet, this Reflection consolates my Fate,
I see my Error ever it proves too late.
No more half Mazed I hurry through the Town,
With Magazines of Projects in my Crown:
While Pyrate Printers rob me of my Gain,
And reap the labored Harvest of my Brain.
Like other Men, I walk a common Pace,
Nor run through London one continued Race;
But know When, Where and What I am to do,
You Will think it is strange, My Lord! but yet it is true.
Thrice welcome, Sweet Tranquillity of Mind!
I now a Treasure in Contentment find;
Can labor or relax when ever I please,
And boast I Have once enjoyed a moment's Ease;
Of all a Moderate Man can wish possessed,
But most in such a Godlike Patron blessed.
Beneath the Sacred Sanction of whose Name,
I build my present Peace, my future Fame.
FINIS.

