Fronti Fides

(...) to the Publisher

MARTINI SCRIBLERI VERA EFFIGIES.
(...) Herman Van Kruus sculp



POPE ALEXANDER's Supremacy and Infallibility examined; And the ERRORS of
Scriblerus and his Man William Detected.

WITH THE EFFIGIES OF His HOLINESS and his PRIME MINISTER, Curiously engraved
on Copper.

Obscene with Filth the Miscreant lies bewrayed,
Fallen in the Plash, his Wickedness had laid.
Dunciad, Lib. II. ver. 71, and 72. LONDON: Sold by J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane.
M.DCC.XXIX. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Pieces contained in this Book.
THE INSCRIPTIONS on the PEDESTAL of the BUSTO from which the Effigies here
prefixed, is taken. A Letter to the Writer of a Letter to a Noble Lord, etc. A
Letter to a Noble Lord, occasioned by the late Publication of the Dunciad
Variorum. The MARTINIAD: A Poem: In One Book. Curious NOTES thereon, with some
Excerptions from Scriblerus. APPENDIX, containing, The ART of Writing Poetry,
without a Genius, taken from the Works of Martinus Scriblerus. A PARODY on the
Verses written by an ingenious Divine, on Mrs. Biddy L^ A DIALOGUE between
Hurlothrumbo and Death. A LIST of Books that will speedily be published by the
Author of the Martiniad. No INDEX of Persons celebrated in this Publication;
none being celebrated therein, but Scriblerus and his Man William.

INSCRIPTIONS graven on the four Sides of the PEDESTAL, whereon is erected the
BUSTO of MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS, from which Original the EFFIGIES prefixed to this
Work was taken.
The GREEK INSCRIPTION.
(...) Homer. The LATIN INSCRIPTION.
Hanc Imaginem
Poeseos Jocularis Specimen
Verum Authoris Dunciados Vultum
Ingenue Spectator contemplere.
Ut Animae Respondeat Forma,
Ut Veneno Ingenii Turpitudo Corporis
Infamis and Informis consentit,
Lubens and Demiratus videas.
Ne Cauda Cynocephali desit distortae
Suppeditavit and Posteritati dicavit
Gulielmus Flagellator.
The SPANISH INSCRIPTION.
Licito es al Poeta escribir cotra la Embidia,
E dizer mal delos Embidiosos, e assi de otros
Vicios, con que no Senale Persona Alguna
Pero ay Poetas, que a trueco de dizer una
Malicia, se pondran en Peligro, que los destierren
A las Islas de Ponto.
Miguel de Cervantes. The ENGLISH INSCRIPTION.
Artist, no longer let thy Skill be shown,
In forming Monsters from the Parian Stone;
Choose for this Work a Stump of crooked Thorn.
Or Log of Poison Tree, from India born:
There carve a Pert, but yet a Rueful Face,
Half Man, half Monkey, owned by neither Race.
Be his Crown Picked, to One Side reclined,
Be to his Neck his Buttocks closely joined;
With Breast protuberant, and Belly thin,
Bones all distorted, and a shrivelled Skin.
This his Misshapen Form: But say, what Art
Can frame the monst'rous Image of his Heart.
Composed of Malice, Envy, Discontent,
Like his Limbs crooked, like them impotent.
But, Sculptor, since by thee this cannot be done,
Nor will these Passions live in Wood or Stone;
Thine be the Task to carve his Carcass foul,
The Dunciad only can describe his Soul.
A LETTER TO THE Writer of a Letter to my Lord (...) Occasioned by a Letter to
the Publisher of the present Edition of the Dunciad Variorum.
SIR,
THE Author of the Dunciad has now obliged himself, and is perfectly happy in
beholding his illustrious Brat, the just Semblance of his sweet tempered
Parent, make his Appearance: He had long promised, or rather threatened the
Public with this Edition; but Nobody would believe, that any Creature could be
hardy, or vain, or wicked enough, to undertake to utter a virulent Lampoon,
with the Names of many worthy Persons at full Length; but it seems, the Raneour
of his Mind has got the better of his Fears, and the Itch of Scribbling is much
superior to the Dread of Chastisement.

Well then, having (like Caesar) written his own Commentaries, and given
himself various Readings upon himself, having guarded himself on all Sides, and
surrounded his Text with Prolegomena, Testimonia, Arguments, Indexes, Appendix,
etc. and adorned himself with all the Pomp and Trappings that usually attend
the Dignity of an established Writer of Antiquity: Behold him strutting into
the World, and expecting to receive the Reverence due to his Quality, Optat
Ephippia Mus, and however awkardly they become him, he rejoices in them. Behold
him now proclaiming himself a Classick; behold a Personage whom he styles
William Cleland, walking gravely before our Poetical Dictator, bare Headed,
with the Fasces on his Shoulder; and a little behind him, an ugly Northern
Thing, formerly his Colleague in Scandal and Criticism, an odd Mixture of
Doctor, Poet, Buffoon, Punster, Politician, Antiquary, and Cook; methinks I see
them now marching in solemn Parade, round the new created Classick's Garden at
Twickenham; I hear them repeating the Dunciad, and the neighboring Shores
resound his Verses.

Yet has not the Author of the Dunciad's Vanity outrun his Judgment so many
Lengths, to persuade him to set his own Name to this modest Performance;
therefore has he borrowed, and very properly, the Name of Martinus Scriblerus;
and not content with this, or apprehensive this was not a sufficient Protection
for him, he has published a Letter to his Publisher, and signed it William
Cleland.

I have many Reasons which induce me to believe, that this Friend of
Scriblerus's, whom he calls William Cleland, is a counterfeit Friend only, and
the Words stand like Richard Roe, and John Do, for Form Sake only, in a
Recovery, and to give the Modest Author of the Dunciad an Opportunity of saying
something pretty in his own Favor. Mr. Congreve, in his Way of the World,
shows us a Coxcomb, who used to enquire for himself at a Chocolate-house, and
not finding himself there, would leave Letters for himself: But our little
merry Author goes farther; he prints Letters to himself, writes Libels,
threatens, forgives, punishes, and is really the Drawcansir of the Age.

In the Publisher's Preface, (for our Classick gives us a Publisher's Preface,
as well as a Preface to the Publisher) he takes upon him to answer for
Posterity, and very modestly assures us, that this insipid Poem will be read by
Posterity: These are his Words, In this Monument they must expect to survive (
And here survive they shall, (Oh dreadful!) as long as the English Tongue shall
remain such as it was in the Reigns of Queen Anne and King George.) If this
Pigmy Animal's Wit could come up to his Malice, what Work would he make with
those who should be so unhappy to fall under his Displeasure! But as it is, if
this Monument, as he calls it, should last; let the present Age inform him, and
hereby it does inform him, that it will stand only as a Monument of his Infamy;
and those that come after us will and must believe, the Persons who stood the
Marks of his petulant Malice, to be Worthy and Good Men; and the Enemies of the
Author of the Dunciad, will be always looked upon as the Friends of Virtue;
they will see a little invidious narrow Mind in every Line he has written; they
will blush at his indecent Idaeas, and be shocked at his Scurrility. Therefore
I applaud your Design, Sir, of printing your Letter in Quarto, exactly on the
same Size with that of the Dunciad Variorum; let it be bound up with it; let
them cling together through every Age; there the Author of the Dunciad shall
survive, and survive he shall -- As long as the English Tongue shall remain
such as it was in the Reigns of Queen Anne, and King George. If this should be
the Case, What Courage, what Allies, what Stature must future Ages conceive
this Giant Warrior to be aided with? They will imagine him at least to be
Seven Foot high, beyond the Growth of his Cotemporaries, both in Stature and
Understanding. Will they not be surprised, when I assure them, and I do hereby
assure them, (for I, Sir, put in my Claim to Immortality too, by being annexed
to you) that this same Giant, was but about four Foot and an Half high, of a
Structure a little irregular, and his Genius Low and indecent as his Form.

But I lose my Purpose, which was to show the Improbability that any Man should
be so weak or unadvised, or hungry after any Sort of Fame to so mean a Degree,
to place, or suffer his Name to be placed before a lewd and infamous Libel;
therefore I say, This same Author has written a Letter to himself in the Name
of one William Cleland, and made him to commend and applaud the Author, for
what every one knows he is liable by the Laws of the Land to be punished when
he shall be discovered; and for this Cause, at the same Time that he has placed
every Gentleman's Name whom he has abused at full Length, he has not dared to
subscribe his own.

It is usual for the Merry Andrew after he has played over his arch Tricks for
some Time, to put on a grave Face, to rectify his Muscles, and to harangue his
Audience in a more sober Wise, to prepare them to receive the Doctor with
Respect; and this is always done in a prefatory Way, before the Doctor produces
his Medals, or his Pacquets, or proceeds to poison himself or the Company. Our
Doctor of the Dunciad has thought it proper, it seems, that somebody should for
Form sake take upon him this Character; and if he has not made his supposed
Friend to rise to the Dignity of his Zany, he may at least be allowed to be the
Vinegar of the Ring, and be qualified to whip the People into a Circle before
the Sports begin. As the Character of this W. C. thus drawn by the Libeller, is
of a very uncommon Kind, I will give it you in some Observations upon this
merry Letter of the Author of the Dunciad, in the Name of this W. C. to the
Publisher of the Dunciad; that is, to Nobody, it having been never publicly
sold when he wrote his Letter: So that here is one W. C. whom Nobody ever heard
of, writing to a certain Publisher, whom Nobody knew.

This same Author says, in the Name of W. C. that it was a Mark of his Humanity
to stay so long before he executed his Vengeance upon those who had offended
him: Now, as Nobody knows better than he, the Strength and Bitterness of his
own Gall, Nobody can assure us so well as he, how long Malice will keep alive,
fifteen or twenty Years at least it seems; but now as this Humanity of his (as
he is pleased to call it) would be a very dangerous Plea at the Old Baily in an
Indictment for the destroying a Man's Person, I think it should weigh as little
with the Candid, in justifying the Destruction of a Man's Reputation.

But he makes his William Cleland a Party to his Crime likewise, and declares
he assisted in composing the Libel: He makes him affirm, he was obliged to it
in Humanity, for, says he, very gravely, It was an Orphan; an Orphan Libel.
Libels are all Orphans, dear William Cleland, a Sort of Children whom their
Fathers never care to own, and though your Humanity may be very great, I think
in this Case your Prudence will hardly weight against it; there are very good
Reasons why this same Author does not own his Child; and if you knew or
considered them, sure you would not thrust your Ears into the Dispute; but I
forget that this W. C. is only an Ens Rationis, a Man of Straw, set up by the
candid Author of the Dunciad, to combat for him.

Immediately after this, our Libeller forgot what he just before affirmed, and
makes this very W. C. to say, He has found out the Father of the Bastard; he
makes him most impudently to declare Mr. Pope to be the Author: If he means, as
I hope he does not, the Poet of that Name, who has been so much obliged by the
Public, who is, or ought to be by his Education, a Gentleman, whom Books ought
to have taught Humanity, and polite Conversation and Letters, Decency and good
Manners; what does this infamous Author deserve for making his W. C. abuse him
in this Manner. But the Reasons he gives why he conceives Mr. Pope to be the
Author, are equally scurrilous and ridiculous. Every one was curious (says he)
to read what could be said to prove Mr. Pope a Dunce, and was ready to pay
something for such a Discovery. How came he to imagine every one (...) curious
to find this Gentleman a Dunce; if he knows him to be the Author of the
Dunciad, every Man of common Sense may easily judge what he is; but as the
Person who has written that low and infamous Satyr, has not yet dared to set
his own Name before it, I think it did not become this same W. C. whoever he
is, to do it for him. If W. C. was a real and not a feigned Person, I do not
doubt but Mr. Pope would do himself Justice for this Abuse, and recur to the
Laws for Satisfaction upon him.

But this Author of the Dunciad, whoever he is must be a pleasant Fellow, for
he goes on, and makes his Man of Straw, W. C. declare, that when he saw Mr.
Pope attacked or written against, or answered by those who were abused (for he
will have him to be his Author still) that he thought it was become a common
Cause; the Danger was common to all, and his Concern ought to be so too; and he
causes him very seriously to deliver it as his Opinion, That those who attacked
Mr. Pope, must be Traitors to Church and State, and Women, (strange Stuff) a
little venomous Wretch, not Mr. Pope, is lashed for his Ribaldry and his ill
Nature; and this Author makes one W. C. without any other Proof but his bare
Word, to declare, That they have insulted the Fallen, the Friendless, the
Exiled, and the Dead. It is plain, he would in this Place put his W. C. upon us
for one not well affected to our present Establishment. It is very well there
is no such Person as this W. C. If there should be such a one, and he should
have a Place under the Government, what Chastisement would not this low Author
merit, for putting these Words into his Mouth. We do very well know some People
have fallen in the unhappy Divisions of our Country (as he gently terms the
late unnatural Rebellion) some are Friendless, some Exiled, and others Dead,
and therefore, those who have written against these People, must bear the Lash
of our Author's Satyr; if it be true that they have insulted these People, let
our Author remember, that they first insulted their Country and its Laws.

This same Friend of his goes on, and does now discover some Fears that hang
about him, least he should be taken for a Fool or a Knave, by keeping Mr. P^
Company; though it luckily happens, that his writing this Letter has determined
his Character; yet he very judiciously conceives, it was his Duty to vindicate
him in Print from all Calumny, or to be deemed either the One or the Other; so
that according to this Notion, all the Acquaintance of Mr. P^ are obliged to
Print in his Vindication, or to be esteemed Fools or Knaves: Here the Author
puts forth his whole Head.

This can only be the overweening Conceit of a Self-sufficient Writer; an
assuming spurious Classick, asserting his Supremacy, and demanding Obedience,
as you will see; for immediately after this, he affects the Regal Style; he
causes his W. C. to proclaim his Royalty, and accordingly he issues his Edicts,
That all Offenders against him shall be chastised: He likens them to Assassins;
he says, Poverty shall not be any Excuse, nor to be pleaded before him, no more
than at the Old Baily, neither shall they, says he, receive the Benefit of the
Clergy. But some Time after this, his Majesty cools, he is graciously pleased
to show Mercy, and he makes his Herald W. C. to grant his Dunces a little
Bread, and a little Fame. How ridiculous is it, to see a diminutive strutting
Thing, erecting himself into a Mock-Sovereign: A modest Homuncio, who at the
same Time that he privately assassinates, calls those whom he wounds,
Assassins? But let us consider this Author of the Dunciad, as he really is, a
Person Poetically mad, jealous of Fame, and envious of every Rival, grasping at
the smallest Shadow of Reputation, all his Attention fixed to one Point, raving
after imaginary Honors, and seeking Infamy in Fame, and we shall incline to
Pity rather than Censure. This throws into ones Mind the Situation of the Mad
Tailor in Bedlam, who called himself Alexander the Great, was gracious, and
bountiful, and just, and cruel, and victorious, and good, and bad, as those
Ideas struck his sick Brain.

By this Time, Sir, you may imagine, I am not a little weary of raking into
this Heap of Nonsense and Vanity now before me; but as I now cast my Eye
forward, I cannot help observing upon this imaginary Letter Writer, where he
tells us, The Author of the Dunciad has a Contempt for the Writings of those he
has written against: This is not at all unlikely; One very seldom has a good
Opinion of those whom one has an ill Opinion of; but they are Dunces, and
should be abused for pretending to Wit: If this be the Case, neither the Great
Scriblerus, nor W. C. nor Mr. P^ himself, are exempt from the Lash of Satyr;
for Great, Dignified, Lettered, as they are, somebody may Print and declare
them Dunces, and attempt to displace this Stupendous Magistrate and all his mad
Ministry, who usurp the Throne of Wit. What a very Scanderberg of an Author is
this!

W. C. I mean the Author of the Dunciad, in his Name, goes on and compares
Boileau to himself: What has the Great Boileau done, to deserve to be compared
with an insignificant Ribald? But as he is now concluding his elegant Epistle,
he makes W. C. as is usual in the Beginning of a new Reign, to publish an Act
of Grace, and Mercy is offered to those who shall repent and merit it: These
are his Royal Words by W. C. If ever He (the Author of the Dunciad) shall give
us an Edition of this Poem himself, I may see some of them treated as gently (
on their Repentance and better Mind) as Perault and Quinault were at last by
Boileau.

This little bouncing mock Emperor concludes in the Name of W. C. with this
singular Observation on Mr. P^'s Modesty, that he never wrote a Line, that he
was ever ashamed or unwilling to own. Now, I think it is impossible any Person
but Mr. P. himself can be assured of this, at least, nobody but Mr. P. can know
that Mr. P. has no manner of Grace, or Modesty, or Morals; and he must be a
very Blunderer of a Letter-Writer, who could venture to assure the Public so,
and in the Name of one, who pretends to be ambitious of being called his Friend.

If now, Sir, after all the Reasons I have given to the contrary, this W. C.
should happen to be an Existence separate from Scriblerus it appears however,
very plainly, from his Manner of Thinking, that he is very like him, and
therefore might easily be mistaken for him. In this Case, we can only say, that
the Passion of Friendship has misled him, and we must forgive the Weakness of
his Head, for the Warmth of his Heart. This Praiseworthy Zeal, for maintaining
a Cause, the Goodness or Badness of which, the Advocate is absolutely ignorant
of, reminds me of a Story, told me by a very merry old Fellow, who was in his
Youth enrolled as a private Gentleman in the Life-Guards of King William: He
was in Esteem with the rest of the Troop, as a Soldier of Letters, and was
called by the Gentlemen of the Belt, by Way of Distinction, The Scholar. This
Character he bore unrivaled for some Time, 'till a Brother of the Sword, grew
jealous of his Reputation, and set up against him. His Rival, who had been
Book-keeper to a Carrier, (and from thence derived his Title to Letters) took
every Opportunity of opposing him, when any Subject, a little out of the Reach
of the rest of the Company, was started. One Evening, my Friend, in the Height
of his Argument, threw out a Sentence of Tully, and was immediately taken up by
his Antagonist for false Latin; the Debate ran high, the Troop divided upon the
Point, and yet were unwilling to determine positively in a Cause, into the
Merits of which, they could not see; 'till one, who was the Book-keeper's
Comrade, a very brave, though not a learned Man, pulled him by the Sleeve, and
leading him into a private Room, directed him to lay his Hand upon his Heart,
and inform him, upon his Honor, Whether the Words spoken, were true or false
Latin? And being answered, upon his Honor they were false Latin; he returned
immediately into the Circle of the Warriors they had left, and placing his Hand
on his Sword, declared with great Intrepidity, That the Latin the Gentleman had
spoken, was false Latin, and he would maintain it.

I am, SIR, etc. RICHARD SMITH.


WHEREAS a certain untowardly down-looking Fellow, who would be deemed of
Quality, and is indeed, Filius Populi, has taken upon him the Office of P^'s
Nuncio, and published in Coffee-Houses several scurrilous and scandalous Bulls
or Lampoons of his Holiness, his Master: This is to let him know, that he is
found out, and if he goes on, he will be punished as the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm shall require.

A LETTER TO A Noble LORD: Occasioned by the late Publication of the Dunciad
Variorum.
Turpitudo Personae ejus, in quam liberius invehimur, nos Vindicabit: Ignosces
etiam Iracundiae nostrae que justa est in ejusmodi and Homines and Cives.
Cicero.
My LORD, April the 5th, 1729.
TOGETHER, with the Dunciad, I am to return your Lordship many Thanks for the
Loan of so uncommon a Piece, which cannot but be highly welcome to all the true
Lovers of Scandal, since it leaves them no Room to doubt, as to most of the
Persons libelled in it. You were pleased to assure me, my Lord, that it was
left at your House by an unknown Hand, and that you were an utter Stranger both
to the Author and to the Nature of his Performance. It is but reasonable
therefore, that I should satisfy your Lordship, as to these two Particulars, in
Return for your Goodness in lending me this Book, when I had sought for it in
vain, by the Means of all the Booksellers and Publishers in Town. It may not be
improper at the same Time to acquaint you, that Copies have been left at many
Peers Houses, in the same Manner as your Lordship's was, whilst the Favorites
of the Author have had whole Cargoes sent them to dispose of. Thus has a little
insignificant Lampooner, with unparalleled Impudence, made People of the first
Quality, privy to, and some of them innocently Publishers of his Scandal; for
which, doubtless he will be chastised as he deserves.

I find at the Head of this Libel, a long stupid Letter, which though subscribed
by another Name, must doubtless by Scriblerus's, or, which is the same Thing,
the Author of the Dunciad's Encomium upon himself. He has, I know not with what
Intent, brought in the Praises too of one Mr. Pope, maliciously insinuating,
that this Poem was of his composing, which one would fancy it impossible it
should be; for that Writer, after having acquired the Dignity of a Poet, would
surely never condescend to accept of the Office of Scavenger, and rake into all
the Filth of the Town. I confess, I at first conceived the Name subscribed to
this Letter, to be such an one as Scriblerus, but I have been since assured,
that it is no fictitious Name, but the real one of a Person now living, who is
deeply read in the Indexes of Books and the Secret Histories of Families.
Whether this be the Letter-writer's established Character or not, the World
must judge; but this I will venture to affirm, that as the Real Author of the
Dunciad can add no Reputation to this William Cleland, so this William Cleland
can add no Reputation to the Author of the Dunciad. Should there be any Thing
here like the Association between the Lion and the Jackcall, I believe in this
Case, the Jackcall would prove the greater Beast of the Two: Not that I would
be hereby thought to exclude this Person from any Title he may have to the
other of these Appellations. I remember to have been present at a Trial for a
Rape, wherein, the Girl, to prove her former Chastity, brought in an old Bawd
for her Evidence: Doubtless this Story will admit of no Application in the
present Case; but to use a Scrap of this Man's own Scrap of Latin, FASTIDITIS
GRATIAM.

Being then obliged to presume, that Mr. Pope's known Veracity and good Nature
would not admit him to be suspected of having wrote such an Heap of Lies and
Abuse as is contained in the Dunciad; I have used my utmost Endeavors to
discover the true Author of that Poem, and having succeeded in my Research, I
have prefixed to this Tract his Effigies, as it has been exactly transcribed
from a Busto, which was returned upon a certain ingenious Sculptor's Hand, for
resembling, in a most unflattering Manner, the Original. By the rueful Features
of it, I am confident your Lordship will immediately discover who is the
renowned Father of the Dunciad.

You will not, I am sure, expect that I should enter into an Examination of the
Poetical Merit of that Piece; that would subject me to a Task, for which I am
wholly unfit; I mean, the reading it a second Time. But I am well informed,
that the Reception which the first Edition met with from the Town, showed that
the Performance was thought as mean as the Design. In my cursory View of it,
though I met with some Lines here and there Poetical enough, yet I thought the
Generality of them very Prosaick, the whole Tale loose and unconnected, the
Transitions unnatural, the Parodies on the most admired Passages of the
Ancients, were not only too frequent, but likewise too faintly and poorly
wrought up, either to strike or delight the Reader; and besides, the Nastiness
of the Games, and of all the Imagery in the Poem, the very Language often sunk
into downright Ribaldry, as when a Gentlewomans Breasts are styled her
Fore-Buttocks or her Cow-like Udders. Upon the whole, I judged this Dunciad to
be below all Criticism, both as to its Style and Versification.

Indeed, the Morality of it, as well as of the Notes of Scriblerus and
Variorum, may deserve a much stricter Scrutiny. Felons in the Condemned Hold at
Newgate, who have no Characters to forfeit, and but little Enjoyment of Life to
lose, may venture to attack the Reputations of other Men, without Fear or
Shame; but, unless under those Circumstances, none but a Madman could be
tempted to do it. How shall I astonish your Lordship then, when I assure you,
that no desperate Raver, but a poor Reptile; who, as he is the most helpless,
is likewise the most timid Creature living, has acted this Part. He is become a
voluntary Prisoner to his own House, rather than not enjoy the pitiful Pleasure
of aspersing with Impunity, Persons, all of them better Members of the
Community than himself, and many of them of a much higher Rank in Life than he
must ever pretend to; who can only derive a Mock Title, not from his Ancestors,
but his Shoulders. In his first Edition he had traduced certain Characters, for
which every one has always had the utmost Veneration, and thinks now, by
leaving out the Names of some, and falsely filling up the Blanks of others, as
well as by absconding for a Time, to escape the Stripes that ought to be the
just Reward of such Writings. How monstrous therefore has it been, to
insinuate, that they have reached a Presence, where Good Nature, Truth, and
Humanity only can be graciously received or encouraged; the Reverse whereof are
the Characteristicks of the Dunciad?

I am sensible that the Retailers in Scandal have always endeavored to pass
upon the World by the laudable Appellation of Satyrists, and would take Shelter
under the great Names of Horace, Juvenal, and Boileau. Not considering, that
these Precedents will never be to their Purpose; those generous Correctors of
Vice, never attacked Persons, but Errors, nor ever exposed the private
Character, but the public Appearance of Men, at the same Time taking especial
Care to pay the strictest Regard to Truth, even while the Scourge was in their
Hands; and therefore, Boileau, in his own Vindication, speaking of Chapelain,
who was a bad Poet, says, En blamant ses ecrits, ai je d'un Style Affreux
Distille sur sa Vie un Venin Dangereux.
I must likewise inform this half-learned Tribe, that the Codrus of Juvenal,
which these abusive Writers so often quote for their Justification, was no real
Person, but a Name designed in general to signify any bad Poet.

True and just Satyr will always have its Weight; Scandal will always be
condemned: The one is beneficial to Society, the other is detrimental to it.
Whenever a Man has taken upon himself the Profession of any Art or Science,
by Writing, or otherwise, he has certainly submitted his Talents therein to the
Judgment of the World. A Writer therefore, who in that Art or Science,
consistent with good Manners, exposes the Defects of his Fellow Writer, be it
by Ridicule or Argument, is guilty of nothing that is blameable, but rather
does a Praiseworthy Action, by endeavoring to rectify the Judgments of Men,
and prevent Pretenders to Science from imposing on the Public. The censuring
an Author then, only as such, is what every Man has a Right to do, from the
Moment he appears in Print, Hanc Veniam petimusque Damusque vicissim. But under
this Pretext to attack his private Reputation, as a Member of Society, must be
the Result of the same villainous Principles, as would lead a Man to be guilty
of Robbery or Murder, had he Courage enough for the Road. The Civil Magistrate
alone has a Right to enquire into Men's Personal Characters, and if they deserve
it, to expose and punish them: And it seems but just, that this Authority
should be vested solely in him, since no one else can, with any Certainty, be
informed of what passes in private Life.

The Predecessors of the Writer of the Dunciad, the elaborate Authors of
Grubstreet, have frequently transgressed this equitable Rule, and finding too
general a Propensity toward enquiring into the Blemishes of (otherwise) Great
Characters, have sometimes been pretty liberal of their Personal Reflections,
in order to render their several Dunciads the more Saleable: Yet these Men had
at least so much Decency, as to do this under feigned Names, or by pointing at
Persons only by their initial Letters, which were liable to various Readings.
Thus, whilst the Obscurity of their Scandal screen'd them from Punishment,
their very Proceeding was a tacit Confession of the Guilt of such Invectives.
But it was doubtless reserved for the Modest Author of the Dunciad to invent
the Ne plus ultra of Scandal, by calling Men, every Way his Superiors, Rogues,
Blockheads, Drunkards, and Liars, in Print, with their Names at length, whilst
he suppresses his own, that he may be exempt from the Fear of a very low
Punishment, but to which his Ears seem to be legally entitled.

As this is my first Appearance in Print, I have hitherto escaped the Malice of
this Scandalmonger's Pen, and do not now write out of any Hatred to him, but
real Love for Mankind. A Regard to Humanity, and the Rules of Society, have
raised in me an Indignation against a Writer, who has the Insolence to appear
in Public, in Defiance of them all. I am resolved, therefore (though such a
Procedure, with Relation to any honest Man would be detestable) to mark him to
the World; let us examine a little into the Character of this diminutive
Creature, who makes so free with those of other Men.

I find, that upon his first coming to Town, out of pure Compassion for his
exotic Figure, narrow Circumstances, and humble Appearance, the late Mr.
Wycherley admitted him into his Society, and suffered him, notwithstanding his
Make, to be his humble admirer at Will's; and afterward finding in him a
glimmering of Genius, recommended him to some People of Rank, and introduced
him to the most eminent Men of Letters; which Courtesy he soon after repaid
with a satirical Copy of Verses on his Benefactor: This put an End to their
Correspondence some Time before Mr. Wycherley died. His Acquaintance by this
Means being made with Sir Richard Steel, and Mr. Addison, they likewise, in
Compassion to his unhappy Form, and destitute Condition, endeavored to procure
him a Support under both, by setting on Foot a Subscription in his Behalf; it
was, indeed, for a Work, which (as has since appeared) they must have known he
was not equal to; but they hoped, with their friendly Assistance, to have
supplied his Defects. However, his Subscriptions were no sooner full, when the
little mischievous Urchin, no longer able to contain his Malice, wrote a Satyr
upon both these Gentlemen, (as he did afterward an abusive Libel on one of
them;) and as many Things which had passed in private Conversation at Button's
Coffee-house, came to be known by the Lord O^, of which Infidelity Scriblerus
was suspected, he was obliged to absent himself for some Years from thence.
After this, he listed openly in the Tory Service, and every Week published
scandalous Invectives on those very Whigs, who had been his amplest
Subscribers. He was in this honorable Occupation, when the late Queen died;
and our Poet soon changing his Note, found Means to be introduced to some of
the young Ladies of the Court. Four of these, who were his best Friends and
Patronesses, (as they are to any Thing that carries the Face of Wit or
Learning) he abused in a Scurvy Ballad, for which any other Man would have
received Correction; but in his Case, these generous Ladies contented
themselves with showing a Contempt of his Malice, and banishing him their
Company. This did not hinder him from writing a second Lampoon, wherein he
spared not the most exalted Characters, though under feigned Names; and adding
Treachery to Ill Nature, he threw the scandalous Imputation of having wrote
this Libel, on a Lady of Quality, whose Wit is equal to her Beauty, and whose
Character might have suffered by this impudent Forgery of his. But I begin to
be tired, as I believe your Lordship is too, with raking into the dirty Parts
of this foul Character. I shall therefore pass over the many other low Scenes
of his Life, to come to his Masterpiece of Scandal, the DUNCIAD. This misshapen
Lump of Malice and Ill Nature, at the earnest Request of all his Friends, who
feared his Abuse more than his Enemies, had for some Years forborne writing
Lampoons, except it were on a Curl or a Lintot; when at last, grown weary of
this Restraint, and unable to live in Peace with Society, he collected a List
of Names, yet unabused by him, and resolved to throw them together into one
Satyr. To furnish himself, therefore, with Matter, he went round all his Cully
Booksellers, enquiring for Scandal of any Kind; and an abusive Story being told
him, of a Parson in Drink, which the Relater thought could not come within his
Scheme of Satyr, as reflecting upon one that had never appeared in Print; he
told him that he was resolved to put it down to Laurus; for as to the Truth of
it, the Town would never be at the Trouble to enquire into that.

Thus compiled, and thus composed, the DUNCIAD made its Appearance last Summer,
and was so universally exploded for its witless Ill Nature and Falsehood, that
the Gentlemen traduced in it, being only pointed at by their Initial Letters,
did not think it worth their Care to correct the Author, in the Manner he
deserved. Yet I have been credibly informed, that some of them resorted to no
Place where Scriblerus might possibly be met with, without the Provision of a
Rod, to whip this Old Boy, for his untoward Malice. But he absconding for above
a Month, and the Scandal having hurt no Creature, but the Author himself, their
Resentment cooled; and the little Lampooner might have been at Peace, had he
not wantonly revived the Memory of his former Malice, by reprinting this
pitiful Poem on Royal Paper, giving at full Length the Names of most of those
mentioned in It; together with a Comment more abusive than the Text; which he
published under an Appellation very proper to himself, I mean that of
Scriblerus. This was such a consummate Piece of Insolence, as one would think
could admit of no Aggravation; yet he found Means to add one Degree of
Impudence more to it, by presuming at first to make Men of Rank and Quality, in
a Manner, his Publishers.

Your Lordship may wonder, that one, who has conducted himself after this
Manner, should not have suffered under the due Correction of some of those,
whom he has thus wantonly abused. It is most certain, that nothing in the
Figure of a Man, could have escaped Punishment, for such repeated Insults, many
of them on Persons of Distinction. But this Poetaster having unhappily a
Resemblance in his Size and Make, to the Animal much inferior to Man; it seems
he has been universally looked upon, as beneath the Dignity of Resentment. Upon
this Occasion, I cannot but call to Mind a Story (which I have somewhere read)
of an honest Highlander, who was walking along Holborn, when he heard a Voice
cry, Rogue Scot, Rogue Scot, his Northern Blood fired at the Insult, and he
drew his broad Sword, looking round him on every Side, to discover the Object
of his Indignation, when at last he found that the Voice came from a Parrot,
perched on a Balcony within his Reach; But the Generous Scot, disdaining to
stain his Trusty Blade with such ignoble Blood, put up his Sword again, with a
sour Smile, saying, Gin ye were a Mon, as you are a Green Geuse, I would split
your Weem.

A Sword, indeed, has never been deemed a Weapon fit for the Correction of
Libellers. Thersites, who, in Mr. Pope's Homer, resembles our Author, both in
Shape and Malice, was cudgelled by Ulysses, for his faucy Language to his
Betters. Aretin, the only Author, besides that of the Dunciad, within these
Three Hundred Years, that acquired a famous Infamy by his Pen, bragged of
keeping many Kings and Princes tributary to him, in order to purchase an
Exemption from his Satyrs. Yet it seems, some of the Princes of his own Country
found out a better Method of dealing with him; for having been abused by him,
they ordered the insolent Creature such a Bastinado, as at once put an End to
his Satirical Vein. And being by this Treatment brought to himself, he had such
a true Sense of his vile Character, that he turned his Mind wholly toward
Devotion: In which Strain he wrote many Books with such Success, as to obtain
at length, the Name of the Divine Aretin. Should the like Treatment of the
Father of the Dunciad produce the like Effect, what Service might he not be of
to Religion, by composing Pious Hymns, for the great Festivals of the Year, and
perhaps by a Translation of all the Psalms, the first of which, it seems, he
has already imitated in a most edifying Manner? Were Scriblerus to undertake
the whole Psalms, and perform that Work with the Justness and Accuracy of his
other Translations, it might not only eclipse Sternhold and Hopkins, but even
vie with that of Tate and Brady: And then, what would not the Public owe to
those, who, by the Human Means of a Stick, should have wrought so useful, as
well as praeter natural a Conversion.

But Aretin had the Shape of a Man, and might bear a Beating; whereas, our Poet
must of Necessity expire under the very first Blow; and he can, by the
Structure of his Person, only be liable to one Sort of Correction, that of the
Rod; which some Years ago Mr. Ambrose Philips, being abused by him, bought for
his Use, and stuck up at the Bar of Button's Coffee-house; and which he avoided
by his usual Practice after every Lampoon, of remaining a close Prisoner at
Home. The same Discipline was prepared for him last Summer, which he escaped in
the Manner abovementioned; and I am informed, that the Rods are now ready for
his Chastisement, as soon as he shall be found in a proper Place for whipping.

In the mean Time, as all Criminals who fly from Justice are executed in
Effigy, his Figure is exposed, and four Inscriptions under it, on the several
Sides of the Pedestal, in Greek, Latin, Spanish, and English. In the Greek and
Latin, for having offended those Languages, by presuming to translate or
imitate what he did not understand: And in his native Tongue, for having made
his British Muse, which ought to be chaste and delicate, to speak the Language
of the Stews, and of Billingsgate. The Spanish Inscription carries in it an
Instruction which might have been of use to him had he read it, before he
became a Libeller instead of a Satyrist. This curious Image having been
communicated to me, by one of those who are abused in the Dunciad, in whose
Possession it now is, I thought it proper to take a Cut from it, which I have
prefixed to this Publication.

Whenever it happens, that a worthy Mind is lodged in a deformed Body, I am
persuaded that all virtuous Men commiserate the Case, and far from indulging
any Reflections on the Figure, would use their utmost Endeavors to make both
the Owner and the rest of the World forget it: But when, as is the sad Fate of
the Author of the Dunciad, a crooked Carcass is become the Habitation of a much
more crooked Mind; and when this Creature, far from being humbled by the
irregularity of the Form assigned him by Providence, makes the very
Despicableness of it a Protection to him, for venting such Malice, as he would
not dare to utter, were he a possible Mark for Indignation to lay hold of. I
think, in such a Case, Mind and Body, which seem so well adapted to each other,
should go together, and be jointly exhibited and exposed to the Contempt of
that Society, which can have no other Reparations made them, for the Injuries
of such an untoward Animal.

A virtuous Man has strongly implanted in him a Philanthropy or innate
Humanity, which restrains him from reflecting too severely on the Frailties of
his Fellow Creatures, as remembering, that they are all of them of one Species.
But Scriblerus distinguished indeed, in a most remarkable Manner, by Nature,
from the rest of Mankind; has no Tenderness or Regard for them, but looks upon
himself as one of a quite different Race of Beings; nor shall I ever look upon
him in another Light.

Where, indeed, is the Definition of Man, to which he can be said to answer? If
(...) be the Term, can he have the Assurance to pretend to that
Characteristick, who looks with Envy on every Thing that contributes to the
Peace or Benefit of Society, and is never happy, but when he is creating Feuds
and Animosities even amongst the most intimate of his Acquintance? If Man be
styled a Rational Creature, will Scriblerus come within that Description, who
knowing how little able he is to defend either his own Character or Person,
wantonly begins the Attack on others? Man is often defined to be a Risible
Animal; were this meant to denote a Creature that we laugh at, the Author of
the Dunciad would bid fair to be comprehended; but all the Grammarians agree,
that it signifies an Animal susceptible of Laughter, which, Scriblerus was
never in good Humor enough, with himself, or others, to be, nor has he been
observed, since the Hour of his Birth, to have risen above a broad Grin, common
to him with the Quadrupede, most resembling Human Nature. Thus, whatsoever is
the Definition, He still appears excluded from the Human Species, which may in
some Measure account for, as well as excuse his universal ill Will to our Race.

As I find that this last pompous Edition of the Dunciad is in Quarto, I have
conformed myself to that Size in this Publication, that your Lordship may be
enabled to bind up this true Account of the Author and his Effigies with the
Work it self, since all of them seem calculated for one and the same Purpose,
to make his Infamy immortal, and his Malice contemptible.

I have the Pleasure to give your Lordship in Public, this Testimony of my
Obedience, and of the Respect with which

I am, My LORD, Your LORDSHIP' s Most Obedient Humble Servant, WILL. FLOGG.


THE MARTINIAD.
With NOTES.
In One BOOK.
AT Twickenham, Chronicles remark,
There dwelt a little Parish Clerk,
A peevish Wight, full fond of Fame,
And Martin Scribler was his Name:
Meagre and wan, and Steeple-crown'd,
His Visage long, and Shoulders round.
His crippled Corpse, two Spindle Pegs
Support, instead of Human Legs;
His shrivel'd Skin, of dusky Grain,
A Cricket's Voice, and Monkey's Brain.
This Martin had the Knack of Rhyme,
And spent at Crambo all his Time;
Lampoons and Songs devised so plenty,
While He made Ten, You scarce told Twenty.
Whoever durst in Verse indite,
He had him strait in Black and White.
Was any Neighbor caught in Liquor,
Martin compared him to the Vicar.
No Features could with him find Grace,
The long he called a Rueful Face,
The Man who 'rose to the Rotund,
He sunk him down in dull Profund.
No Sex, no Age, no State forbore,
The Dead, the Living, Rich, or Poor,
Wise, Fool, Young, Old, Fat, Lean, or neither,
Martin lampoon'd 'em all together.
The Parish, thus abused, determine
To crush the rhyming biting Vermin;
They Cudgels, Rods, and Whips prepare;
Of this, Clerk Martin was aware,
And skulk'd behind a Northern Lout,
Of Shoulders broad, and Visage Stout.
This Loon he caught, and much caressed him,
And thus in guileful Wise addressed him:
"You are, I ween, a Beuk-learn'd Scot,
"Unlike our Dunces here, I wot.
"I write, alas! but what I write,
"These dull ones only gibe and slight.
"Now, would you be so good to own
"My Work, 'twould hugely please the Town;
"Instead of mine, then set your Name,
"And you shall win immortal Fame.
The Scot, thus wheedled by the Clerk,
Set to his Name, (Some say his Mark.)
This done, the Loon, stead of his Pack,
Had the whole Parish on his Back.
REMARKS.

The Martiniad, for so all the Manuscripts reclaim, although some Critics have
asserted, not without Appearance of Reason, that it ought to have been called,
The Martinee, in Imitation of the Odyssee. This Poem, like That, being
Historical, and loosely told, and in no Means rising to the Epic Force of the
Iliad. But as our last Modern Classic Scriblerus, has surmounted this
Difficulty, and called his the Dunciad; we fear not to follow the Guidance of
so established an Author, especially as he is the Hero of our Poem, and so
style this the Martiniad.

At Twickenham; read Twick'nam, or Twitt'nam. This Village is at present
honored with the Residence of a small modern Classic, and of some of his
Poetical Underlings and Commentators. It is most pleasantly situated, on the
Banks of the Great River Thames, and has been celebrated in Lyric Poetry, by
the late Mr. Thomas D'Urfey, who, in his Richmond Balls, speaking of the
Inhabitants thereof, styles them Twick'nam Loobies.

A little Parish Clerk. That Office requiring a Talent in Vociferation, the
same is most elegantly insinuated under the Epithet Little, it being a received
British Adage, Little and Loud.

And Martin Scribler was his Name. He was not like the Generality of Clerks,
content with reading or singing the Works of other Men, but likewise composed
many of his own. And perhaps too audaciously as well as too ludicrously invaded
the Sacred Province of King David, by vying with him in Psalmody. Though I am
told, that our Martin went no farther than the First Psalm, not having met with
any Sort of Encouragement in that Undertaking.

Steeple Crowned. A most adequate Expression for the Crown of a Parish-Clerk,
whose Head in this Respect, bears a (...) Resemblance to a Steeple, inasmuch as
both are intended for the Omament of the Church. What Church Scribler's
Steeple-Crown now adorneth, is as much a Question, as it was anciently what
City might claim the Birth of Homer. However, it should seem by the Crown being
its self a Steeple, that Martin's Typical Head belonged to some Church that
claimed to itself the Supremacy.

Cricket's Voice. This is an Animal famous for the Smallness of his Voice and
Legs. He is observed to creep into the Chimneys of old Houses, where there is
much Filth and Nastiness, and where the Walls are full of Holes. Hence, Men,
who get into Families only to pick up Scandal, and find out their Flaws, are
often assimilated to Crickets.

Monkey's Brain. This is not to be understood in a literal Sense, but
metaphorically. And as Monkeys are commonly mischievous Mimicks, we are to
understand those Dispositions to have been in our Parish-Clerk.

While He made Ten, you scarce told Twenty. This is a very quaint Parody on the
(...) of (...) Whoever durst in Verse indite,
He had him strait in Black and White.


There is a very wide Difference between the Manuscripts of the best Authority,
as to the Reading of this Distick. That of the Vatican has it, Did any one but
go to She
He had him down in Black and White.


And this Reading they support from Authorities out of Scribler's own Dunciad,
where Expressions tantamount are very frequent.

The Alexandrine Copy, to which we shall pay all due Veneration, runs thus: Did
any drop their Evening Cates,
Whip, a Lampoon was at their Gates.


This Lection is not likewise unsupported with Authorities, but we adhere to
the Text, as conveying the most cleanly Ideas.

The Vicar. A very inoffensive Divine, who had never given (...) Clerk any
Provocation; but he could not bear any one of a Rank superior to his in the
Church, and was offended at the Vicar's pretending to sing in another Key than
He had set the Psalm, and therefore trump'd up a Story of his being found drunk
in a Kennel.

Rueful Face. How blind, alas! are all Mortals in their own Case; you see our
Martin can sneer at the Countenances of others; when in the whole Parish of
Twickenham, there was not a more Rueful Face than his own. Vid. Essigies
Scribleri, at the Head of this Publication.

Rotund. An Expression in Scriblerus for Plump, denoting, as He says, Obesity,
and He is of Opinion, that a Fat Man cannot be a Man of Wit; For although he
seems to admit Guts in a Man's Brain, He will not allow of Brains in his Guts.

Dull Profund. The Manuscripts read DEEP, but corrige meo periculo DULL, as in
the Text, our Clerk's Prosund being very Shallow, ut omnibus constat

Lampoon'd them all together. The Churchwardens of Twickenham affirm, that
there was a Gathering made for Martin, for his Christmas Hymn, he being at that
Time so poor, that he was a perfect Burden on the Parish; and they say, he no
sooner got the Money, than he lampoon'd the whole Village; but chiefly the
Churchwardens, and those who had been the chief Contributors toward his
Collection.

To crush the rhiming biting Vermin. The Scholiast will have it crack, as an
Expression more apposite to an Insect that bites. For, says this learned
Annotator, whoever heard of crushing a Louse or a Flea.

Cudgels, Rods, and Whips. These are the Instruments commonly made use of for
the Chastisement of Seurvy Lampooners. Vid. Dunciad, Lib. II. V. 140. and
sequent.

Northern Lout, alias (...) MINSHEW drives the same from Lutum, Mud or Dirt;
but SKINNER from Loeyes Saxon for a Layman, or Leos one of the Vulgar. It
signifies one of the Scum or Dregs of the People.

And Visage stout. This Hemistich be of no farther Use than to fill up the
Verse, which without it would have remained imperfect. These neutral
Expressions are in the Crast of Poetry called REPLENISHERS. I could give you
many Instances out of our Classick Scriblerus, but shall content myself with
one in the Dunciad Variorum, Lib. III. V. 299, and 300.

It stood in the first Edition thus. Thy Dragons (...) and (...) shall taste,
And from each Show rise duller than the last.


And I take it, the true Reason why our Poet left those Gaps, was because he
could not fill them up. But one Mr. (...) having called upon him, in a very
earnest Manner to do him that Favor; he discovered two Replenishers, or in the
Political Language, Stop-Gaps, and the Verse ran thus. Thy Dragons Magistrates
and Peers (...),And it might as well have been, Thy Dragons Shrieves and
Swordbearer shall taste,
Or else to rise higher, Thy Dragons, May^ and Aldermen shall taste,
Or it might have done to the full as well thus, Thy Dragons Fa fe fi fo fum
shall taste,


From this one Instance, the curious Reader may discover, that a Replenisher is
a Word which adds to the Measure without affecting the Sense of the Verse, not
unlike the false Calves worn by the Spindleshank'd, which help the outward
Appearance of the Leg, without contributing any Thing to its Strength.

This Loon. Loon in Minshew, is said to signify the same as Lout, but in Bailey
it is made to denote a dull heavy headed Fellow, lazy, and good for Nothing.

Beauk learned Scot. Here our Author in speaking of a Scotchman, very
humorously and elegantly falls into the very Dialect of that Country; doubtless
in Imitation of the Classic Author of the Dunciad, where he speaks of Wormius a
great Antiquary, and makes use of the old English Style, calling him the
Myster Wight.

As to the Term Beuk-learn'd, I find our Scholiast observes, that this
Scotchman was apt to examine Books as expert Jockeys do Horses, only by their
Head and Tail, and was therefore deeply read in the Title Pages and Indexes
only.

Immortal Fame. Corrige meo periculo, and read Immoral Fame. For although all the
Manuscripts agree with the Text, yet is it very manifest, that the spurious t
must have crept into the first Manuscript by the Inaccuracy of the Transcriber,
who, being doubtless one of little Genius, did not perceive how (...) it was,
to attribute the Word Immortal to the Fame of any of Scriblers Works. And this
Error being once crept in, the servile Transcribers have all followed one
another in it. From this one Example, I think the Reader may infer,
notwithstanding the vulgar Opinion to the contrary, That Good Sense is required
to constitute a True Critic.

Pack. Denotes a Bundle of Clothes or Linen, the Form of which is peculiar to
those of North Britain, many of the Inhabitants whereof, come up to London with
one of these at their Back, and as soon as they can get into a more genteel
Method of Traveling, are apt to forget the Pack they came up with. We may
affirm, that our Highland Loon's Pack is fuller of Scandal than of Linen.

Had the whole Parish. This must be understood figuratively: For although Milo
arrived to the Strength of carrying an Ox, yet had he ennur'd himself thereto,
by bearing him daily on his Shoulders from a Calf. So had our Highlander first
bore one, then two, then three Men, peradventure he might have attained to the
Force of carrying a great Number; but to think that he could step from a Pack,
at once, to bear a whole Parish, is unnatural and absurd. Wherefore, by Parish,
are here understood, the Cudgels, Rods, and Whips of the said Parish, and for
these, his Back seems to have been broad enough.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
A Curious Receipt, wherein is disclosed, the Art of writing Poetry with a
small Genius, taken from MARTINUS SCRIBLERUS's Writings.
READER, be thou Gentle, or be thou otherwise, I have always thy Profit and
Pleasure before mine Eyes, from the which I shall not readily swerve, else
may Thou, in all Probability, cast me off, as is usually practiced with
unprofitable Servants. As I have by my Sagacity discovered certain mechanical
Rules, by the Help whereof Scriblerus has obtained unto himself the Name of a
mighty Poet: I question not, but the imparting the same unto Thee, will be of
Contentment and Delight. It may furthermore be a Work conducive toward the
Strength and Glory of this my native Island, by multiplying the Number of Poets
therein. These have hitherto been but few, from a mistaken Opinion, that a
Genius, Learning, and a good Ear, were requisite to constitute a Poet; whereas,
from the following plain and easy Rules, it will most evidently appear, that
Application and Practice only are necessary. By the Help of these, I will
undertake, that any industrious Englishman, may, in the Space of one Month,
become as great a Versificator, as even the Great Scriblerus himself.

Let the Man then, whose sublime Passion it is to shine in Poesy, accustom
himself to Tautophonys, or Ingeminations of Sounds. This is most effectually
performed, by selecting Words, that begin with the same Consonant, and these
placed at due Distances, Two, Three, or more, in one and the same Verse, create
a Music in Poetry, insomuch, as that the Lines so composed, may be
indifferently, either sung or said. Of a Truth, this is an Art, which seems
to have escaped the Knowledge of all the Ancients, whether of Greece or of
Rome, and was hidden from the most celebrated even of our British Poets, being,
like many other inestimable Secrets, wrapped in the dark Womb of Time, to be
brought to Light only by the skillful Midwifery of the Renowned Scriblerus.
Some Traces, indeed, there are of this Art, amongst some of the Monkish
Writers, from whence our Poet may have taken the Hint. But the Monks never
reduced the same to any regular Practice (as our modern Classick has done) nor
did they make use thereof in any but Latin Verses, and those chiefly Technical
ones, for the Help of Memory: So that the Invention, or at least the Perfection
of this Nostrum, is owing to Martinus.

Conformable to his Rules, were I to mention an Author, whose Pride could bear
no Fame but his own, and that of his servile Flatterers, I would make the
Verses run thus, Poets support, like Pampered Priests, their Pride;
Such Stigmatize as Stick not to their Side.
Where the well chosen P's of the first Line, and the soft hissing S's of the
Second, compose a most excellent Harmony. But past all Peradventure, Courteous
Reader, for such doubtless by this Time thou art become, thou may deem it
more for thy Instruction to learn this Poetical Jingle in the Words of
Scriblerus himself.

Dunciad, Lib. 1. v. 65.
She sees a Mob of Metaphors advance,
Pleased with the Madness of the Mazy Dance.
Ibid. v. 125.
A Gothic Vatican! of Greece and Rome
Well-purg'd, and Worthy Withers, Quarles and Blome.
Ibid. v. 171.
So Spins the Silkworm, Small its Slender Store,
Labors the Vid. Mss.
Clue, that Clouds it self all over.
Ibid. v. 225.
Raptured, He gazes Round the dear Retreat,
And in Sweet Numbers celebrates the Seat.
Dunciad, Lib. 2. v. 57.
Swift as a Bard the Bailiffs leaves Behind,
He Left huge Lintot, and out-stript the Wind.
Dunciad, Lib. 2. v. 119.
Curl stretches after Gay, but Gay is Gone,
He grasps an empty Joseph for a John.
Ibid. v. 205.
While thus each Hand Promotes the Pleasing Pain,
And quick Sensations Skip from Vein to Vein.
Ibid. v. 253.
Long Chanc'ry Lane Retentive Rolls the Sound,
And Courts to Courts Return it Round and Round.
Dunciad, Lib. 3. v. 5.
Then raptures high the Seat of Sense overflow,
Which only heads, Refined from Reason know.
Ibid. v. 107.
Peeled, Patched and Pyebald, Linsey-woolsey Brothers,
Grave Mummers! Sleevless Some, and Shirtless others.
Ibid. v. 155.
Some free from Rhyme or Reason, Rule or Check,
Break Priscian' s head and Pegasus' s Neck.
Ibid. v. 335.
Signs following Signs Mark out the Mighty Year,
See the dull Stars Roll Round and Re-appear.
I might give a thousand more Instances of the same Nature, for indeed there
are not any two Lines together, in the whole Dunciad, or in any other of the
Writings of this Author, wherein the same mechanical Trick is not practiced:
And it is from thence that He has acquired the Name of Melodious Martin, and
not, as has been falsely insinuated from his having sung his own Psalm in a
certain Lutheran Congregation, the which we esteem of, only as a fictitious
Tale devised for Mirth, it being well known, that our Poet belongs to a much
more ancient Church. But to return to our Subject. Whosoever, by an unwearied
Exercise in Vocabularies and Dictionaries of Rhyme, shall have replenished the
Tubes of his Memory with Similar Sounds, will, in Proportion to his Application
and Labor therein, rival, or even surpass, if possible, the Merit of our Great
Martinus.

Any Person, moderately versed in Poetical Works, must have remarked, that
Adjectives are most commonly foisted in, not to add to the Sense, but in order
to fill up the Measure of a Verse. In all such Emergencies, it behooves our
Apprentice in Poesy, to make a most fervent Search for an Adjective, that
begins with the same Letter as his Substantive, even although the Context
should seem to suffer thereby. Thus must Comfort always be cold, the Day at
Noon Dawning, the Fury even of Scriblerus Fatal, Garments Gorgeous though all
tattered, Head Heavy, Limbs Lazy, Mind Muddy, Night Noisy, Plight Pleasing be
it never so sad, Quail Quivering, Rake Reeling though sober, Sot Social, and
Treat or Theobald Tasteless. True it is, that this ingenious Gentleman has
manifested as good a Taste as any of our Writers whatsoever; but what has
Truth to do with Scriblerick Poetry? His Name, and Tasteless, both commence
with the same Letter; and therefore, until He shall present us with a more
convenient Adjective, beginning with a T, He must be contented with this
abusive and unjust one, Euphoniae Gratia.

These Adjectives, or others in their Stead, having been choicely collected, as
has been premised, out of the Dictionary, constant Regard being had to the
initial Consonant, they must at sometimes immediately precede or follow their
Respective Substantives, and at others may be severed at a due Distance from
the same, from whence will result a most delectable Variety of Harmony. For the
first Sort, take this Example, Formed was his Figure Foul, in Limbs, in Face,
A Perfect Parody on human race.
But, Reader, Thou will be much more edified with the Words of Martinus, the
Father and undisputed Inventor of this Poesy. Hear then, the Soft
Sweet-warbling Twick'nam Swan.

Dunciad, Lib. 1. v. 21.
Or praise the Court, or Magnify Mankind,
Or thy grieved Country's Copper Chains unbind.
Ibid. v. 39.
Hence hymning Tyburn's Elegiac Lay,
And the Soft Sing Song of Cecilia's Day.
Ibid. v. 91.
While Pensive Poets Painful Vigils keep,
Sleepless themselves Secure the Readers Sleep.
Dunciad, Lib. 2. v. 13.
To grace this honored day, the Queen proclaims,
By Herald Hawkers, High Heroic Games.
Ibid. v. 143.
The Goddess then -- who best can send on high,
The Sallient Spout, far Streaming to the Sky.
Ibid. v. 395.
How Laurus Lay inspired beside a Sink,
And to Mere Mortals seemed a Priest in Drink.
Dunciad, Lib. 3. v. 57.
Then Stretch thy Sight over all her Rising Reign,
And let the Past and Future Fire thy Brain.
Ibid. v. 135.
A Second See, by Meeker Manners known,
And Modest as the Maid that sips alone.
Ibid. v. 205.
But Fate with Butchers placed thy Sacred Stall,
Meek Modern Faith to Murder, hack, and Mawl.
Although we have as yet only mentioned Adjectives, yet may the observing
Reader have seen, from the Instances given, that Verbs also come under the same
Rule: And neither of them are to be deemed inseparable from the Substantive to
which they are wedded. Of this Poetic License, let me furnish unto thee a
Scriblerick Instance.

Scurvy Shall Sound thy Scandal to Mankind,
And as thy Make, so Monstrous is thy Mind.
But without all Doubt, the Reader coveteth Examples from the Mouth of
Martinus, as being far more authentic, than any faint Resemblances of his Art.
I shall therefore subjoin a few.

Dunciad, Lib. 1. v. 89.
Here May'rs and Shrieves all hushed and Satiate lay,
Devour in Dreams the Custard of the Day.
Ibid. v. 117.
Volumes, whose Size the Space exactly filled,
Or which fond Authors were so Good to Gild.
Dunciad, Lib. 2. v. 61.
So laboring on, with Shoulders, Hands, and Head,
Wide as a Windmill all his Figure spread.
Ibid. v. 223.
Such happy Arts Attention Can Command,
When Fancy Flags and Sense is at a Stand.
Ibid. v. 265.
Dire is the Conflict, Dismal is the Din,
Here shouts all Drury, There all Lincoln's Inn.
Thus have I, worthy Reader, explained unto Thee the first Secret in
Scriblerus's Poesy, namely, That Divine one of Ingemination; and as I have set
before Thee a great Diversity of Examples, These must suffice to give Thee full
Light into this Mystery; the Rest must be the Result of thine own Diligence in
putting this Precept Properly in Practice.

Proceed we then to certain other mechanical Rules, whereby great and eminent
Poets may be produced, without the Help of Genius. In the second Place
therefore the -- Hiatus in M. S. valde Deflendus

Although in this Place there be a Gap in our Manuscript, which can never
enough be lamented by the Learned, yet are there preserved to us many Fragments
of the same, containing most curious Secrets; but as they are replete with
Quotations from Scriblerus, I must defer exhibiting them 'till a more
convenient Season. I think in the long Winter Nights, in which all well
regulated Families assemble round the Chimney, a Present of this Nature may not
be uncomfortable. At such a Season, should any one, endued with an even steady
Voice, read the many Excerptions out of Scriblerus, contained in the remaining
Parts of this Manuscript, what with the genial Warmth of the Fire, the Lullaby
whistling of the Wind, and the Monotony, or Sameness of Sound in the Verses,
That Slumber might effectually be procured, which is so soporiferously
described in the second Book of the Dunciad. Perhaps that good Effect might be
produced at this very Hour, without any concurring Helps, were it possible to
find People, whose Blood in Spring ran sluggish enough to sit still and hear
such a Work read to them.

Notwithstanding the great Veneration I have for the Author of the preceding
Manuscript, yet must I beg leave to animadvert on one Assertion therein, which
I take to be erroneous; viz. That the Divine Art of Ingemination of Sounds in
Poesy, was the sole Invention of Martinus Scriblerus; whereas, in Justice to
the Memory of his Predecessor Mr. John Grub, the Great Founder of the Street
and Sect, which still bear his Name, I shall venture to affirm, that he was no
Stranger to this Mystery. This will most evidently appear by a most curious
Fragment of his, which I shall here subjoin; and which, perhaps, may be a
Present as welcome to the Public, as those many Books of Tacitus, said to have
been lately retrieved by the Fidelity of the Constantinopolitan Library Keeper,
who may well be styled the Bentley of the East. Such is the Beauty of the
Allegory, couched in the few Lines of our Fragment, and such the Harmony of its
Versification, as may justly entitle it to a Place in the next Edition of the
Dunciad. The Verses of Mr. Grub are as follow.

Thus Trojan Boots tinged with Tartarean Glue,
Near which the Greasy Great Gambadoes Grew,
While Coaches rumbled round my Roman Nose,
And green Iniquity grew gray in Prose.
I intended here to have taken Leave of my Patient Reader, (for such doubtless
he is, who has been so good as to accompany me thus far) but reflecting with my
self, That our Martinus has not had the Leisure or Occasion of celebrating the
due Praises of his Panegyrical Letter Writer; I have determined for the present
to supply this Defect, by a Distick written in the Spirit and Style of our
Poet. See Clumsy Cleland lay a Claim to Wit,
From Puzzled Prose, in Poets Praises writ.


A PARODY on the Verses written on Mrs. Biddy L^, by an ingenious Divine.
THE Snarling Tribe did Momus late entreat,
A Satyrist to form by new Receipt:
He sent, and found on Africk's Monkey Shore,
Tricks, Impudence, Ill Nature, Looks forelore;
To these Ingredients, soon the sneering God
Joined the Malicious, Petulant, and Odd.
He did the Faults of Courtiers next provide,
Scandal, and Smut, and Lies, and servile Pride:
These Momus mixed with every lighter Grain
Of trifling, wild, presuming, pert, and vain.
This Image answered the Projector's Scope,
He laughed, and called the Composition (...)
A Dialogue between Hurlothrumbo and Death. Inscribed to Martin and his Man
William.
Tu es Hurlo, ego Thrumbo. Plautus.
Hurlothrumbo. THOU long lived Mortal, whither bound?
That I may shun the fatal Ground.

Death. To Twick'nam I direct my Way,
A Pigmy Poet is my Prey.

Hurlo. Thy promised Prey is not, I hope,
The Great (though little) Scribler, P^
For He Is Immortal, and thy Dart
Cannot reach his Fame, his better Part.
He too a Weapon wields, I wist,
Which, like thy Lance, none may resist.
Homer and Shakespeare thou, in vain,
Through many Ages would have slain;
Our Alexander, at one Blow,
Has laid The Immortal Bards full low.
Then boast no more thy Power to kill,
Thy Lance must yield to Scribler's Quill.
And since thy Murders claim the Scourge,
Go: His unquell'd Resentment urge;
He with despotick Pen, at once,
Will write thee down a deathless Dunce.

Death. I fear to battle this dread Imp,
But, 'stead of him, I Will slay HIS PIMP.

Hurlo. Alas! how can thou, Death, contrive
To kill what never was alive.

BOOKS that will speedily be published by the Author of the MARTINIAD.
THE BATTLE of the TOMBSTONES at TWICKENHAM. A Heroi-Comical Poem; with Notes;
wherein is contained the Art of procuring Pictures for Nothing; a Work very
useful to those who have more Curiosity than Money. To which is added an
Observation on the Proceedings of Spiritual Courts, by a CIVILIAN. The SCOTCH
SPY, in Two Parts. The First containing all Intelligence, True or False, fit
for Foreign Ministers. The Second containing only the False Intelligence,
proper for Certain Persons at Home. By Major Sputter. Major Sputter's Travels
into Spain and Italy; containing a full Account of the Pleasure of the Dog Days
in Spain, and a curious Instance of British Ingratitude in Italy. The whole
interspersed with seasonable Reflections on the Method of Educating young
Gentlemen. To which is added, by way of Appendix, Mercurius in Vehiculo; or The
notable Adventures of a Cart: By a Spanish Surgeon.
But when the Ass forgot his Duty,
With Scorn he cried, Et tu quoque Brute.
Prior's Fable of the Lion.

