RICHARD PLANTAGENET a ^^^^ndary Tale Now first Published.

(By Mr. HULL.)



-- (...)
^
^
^
Ho^^^^^^ DEDICATION.
THE following Legend having been read to a small Circle of select Friends, one
Lady, with great Eagerness of Manner, asked the Editor, to whom he intended to
dedicate it? He replied, with Truth, that he had not yet determined. "To whom,"
added she, can you so properly address it, as to Him, whose Image cleaves to us
during the Recital; Him, to whom we owe a livelier Idea of RICHARD the Third,
than either Historian or Painter ever gave; Him, whose Judge meant and Powers of
Execution keep Pace with the fine Imagination of that Poet, whom He delights
to Honor? These were nearly her exact Words, and the Editor pleads them in
Excuse for the Liberty he now takes of dedicating this Poem, With great Respect
and Esteem, TO DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.

PREFATORY ADDRESS.
THE following Poem fell into the Editor's Hands by a peculiar Means, which he
is not at present permitted to reveal. He hopes the Singularity of the Story,
and the moral Tendency, which so obviously and strongly inculcates THE DUTY OF
A PATIENT SUBMISSION TO THE DESTINATIONS OF PROVIDENCE, IN ALL VICISSITUDES AND
AFFLICTIONS OF LIFE, will justify his giving it to the World. He judged it too
curious to be utterly lost; and his Desire to preserve it, induced him to
collect, and scatter in Notes throughout the Work, such curious Particulars as
(in his Judgment) prove the actual Existence of such a Person as RICHARD
PLANTAGENET, and the chief Event of his Life to have been incontestibly certain.

RICHARD PLANTAGENET; A LEGENDARY TALE.
I.
"THE Work is done, the Structure is complete --
"Long may this Produce of my humble Toil
"Un-injur'd stand, and Echo long repeat,
"Round the dear Walls, Benevolence and MOYLE!" Sir THOMAS MOYLE, Possessor of
Eastwell-Place, in the County of Kent, in the Year 1546, gave RICHARD
PLANTAGENET (who for many Years had been his chief Bricklayer) a Piece of
Ground, and Permission to build himself a House thereon. The Poem opens, just
when RICHARD is supposed to have finished this Task. Eastwell-Place has since
been in the Possession of the Earls of Winchelsea.

II.
So RICHARD spoke, as he surveyed
The Dwelling he had raised;
And, in the Fullness of his Heart,
His generous Patron praised.
III.
Him MOYLE o'erheard, whose wandering Step
Chance guided had that Way;
The Workman's Mien he eyed intent,
Then earnest thus did say:
IV.
"My Mind, I see, misgave me not,
"My Doubtings now are clear,
"Thou ought not, in poor Attire,
"Have dwelt a Menial here.
V.
"To Drudgery, and servile Toil,
"Thou could not be decreed
"By Birth and Blood, but thereto wrought
"By hard o'er-ruling Need.
VI.
"Is it not so? That crimson Glow,
"That flushes over thy Cheek,
"And down-cast Eye, true Answer give,
"And thy Tongue need not speak.
VII.
"Often have I marked thee, when unseen
"Thou thought thyself by all,
"What Time the Workman from his Task
"The Evening Bell did call;
VIII.
"Have thou not shunned thy untaught Mates,
"And to some secret Nook,
"With drooping Gait, and musing Eye,
"Thy lonely Step betook?
IX.
"There has not thy Attention dwelt
"Upon the lettered Page,
"Lost, as it seemed to all beside,
"Like some sequestered Sage?
X.
"And would thou not, with eager Haste,
"The precious Volume hide,
"If sudden some Intruder's Eye
"Thy Musings has descried?
XI.
"Often have I deemed thou could explore
"The Greek and Roman Page,
"And often have yearn'd to view the Theme,
"That did thy Hours engage.
XII.
"But Sorrow, greedy, grudging, coy,
"Esteems of mighty Price
"It Is treasured Cares, and to the World
"The scantiest Share denies;
XIII.
"All as the Miser's heaped Hoards,
"To him alone confined,
"They serve, at once, to soothe and pain
"The wretched Owner's Mind.
XIV.
"Me had capricious Fortune doomed
"Thine equal in Degree,
"Long, long e're now, I had desired
"To know thine History;
XV.
"But who their worldly Honors wear
"With Meekness chaste and due,
"Decline to ask, lest the Request
"Should bear Commandment's Hue.
XVI.
"Yet now thy Tongue has spoke aloud
"Thy grateful Piety,
"No longer be thy Story kept
"In painful Secrecy.
XVII.
"Give me to know thy Dawn of Life;
"Unfold, with simple Truth,
"Not to thy Master, but thy Friend,
"The Promise of thy Youth.
XVIII.
"Now, late in Life, it is Time, I ween,
"To give thy Labors over;
"Thy well-worn Implements lay by,
"And drudge and toil no more.
XIX.
"Here shall thou find a quiet Rest,
"For all thy Days to come,
"And every Comfort, that may serve
"T'endear thy humble Home.
XX.
"Have thou a Wish, a Hope to frame,
"Beyond this neat Abode?
"Is there a Good, a higher Bliss,
"By me may be bestowed?
XXI.
"Is there within thine aged Breast
" "The smallest aching Void?
Give me to know thy Longings all,
"And see them all supplied.
XXII.
"All I entreat, in Lieu, is this,
"Unfold, with simple Truth,
"Not to thy Master, but thy Friend,
"The Promise of thy Youth."
XXIII.
So generous MOYLE intent bespake
The long-enduring Man, The Time of RICHARD's Service, at Eastwell-Place, was
near Sixty Years.

Who raised, at length, his drooping Head,
And, sighing, thus began.
RICHARD PLANTAGENET recites his TALE.
I.
HARD Task to any, but thyself, to tell
The Story of my Birth and treacherous Fate,
Or paint the Tumults in my Breast that swell,
At Recollection of my infant State!
II.
Often have I labored to forget my Birth,
And checked Remembrance, when, in cruel Wise,
From Time's Abyss she would the Tale draw forth,
And place my former self before my Eyes.
III.
Yet I complain not, though I feel anew,
All as I speak, fell Fortune's bitter Spite,
Who once set Affluence, Grandeur, in my View,
Then churlish snatched them from my cheated Sight,
IV.
And yet it may be -- is -- nay, must be best,
Whatever Heaven's righteous Laws for Man ordain;
Weak Man! who lets one Sigh invade his Breast,
For earthly Grandeur, fugitive as vain!
V.
Perchance Contentment had not been my Mate,
If in exalted Life my Feet had trod,
Or my Hands borne, in transitory State,
The Victor's Truncheon, or the Ruler's Rod.
VI.
My Course, perchance, had been one dazzling Glare
Of splendid Pride, and I in vain had sought
The quiet Comforts of this humble Sphere,
Rest undisturbed, and Reason's tranquil Thought.
VII.
But whither roam I? O! forgive, my kind,
My honored Lord, this undesign'd Delay,
Forgive, while in my new-awaken'd Mind
A Thousand vague Ideas fondly play.
VIII.
Enough! -- they are flown -- and now my Tongue prepares,
Thou Source of every Good by me possessed,
To pour a Tale into thy wondering Ears,
Full At the Time of this Relation, RICHARD is supposed to be nigh Fourscore
Years of Age; but he did not become acquainted with his own Story, till he was
near Twenty: probably, in his sixteenth or seventeenth Year.
threescore Years close-lock'd within my Breast.
IX.
Of those Care-woven, long-protracted Years,
Some sixteen Summers passed obscurely on,
A Stranger to the World, its Hopes, and Fears,
My Name, Birth, Fortunes, to myself unknown.
X.
Placed in a rural, soft, serene Retreat,
With a deep-learn'd Divine I held Abode,
Who sought, by pious Laws and Conduct meet,
The Way to Immortality and God.
XI.
By him instructed, I attained the sweet,
The precious Blessings that from Learning flow,
He fanned in my young Breast the genial Heat,
That bids the expanding Mind with Ardor glow.
XII.
He taught me with delighted Eye to trace
The comely Beauties of the Mantuan Page,
Enraptured mix with Tully's polished Grace,
Or catch the Flame of Homer's martial Rage.
XIII.
Nor stopped he there, Preceptor excellent,
Nor deemed that Wisdom lay in Books alone,
But would explain what moral Virtue meant,
And bid us make our Neighbor's Woes our own.
XIV.
Heaven's genuine Pity glist'ning in his Eyes,
The Sweets of Charity he would instill,
And teach what Blessedness of Comfort lies
In universal Mercy and Good Will.
XV.
So taught this pious Man, so thought, so did,
Squaring his Actions to his Tenets true;
His Counsel or Relief to none denied,
A general Good, like Heaven's all-chearing Dew!
XVI.
Thus guided, thus informed, thus Practice-drawn,
In guileless Peace my Spring of Life was spent,
My Leisure-hours I sported over the Lawn,
Nor knew what restless Care or Sorrow meant.
XVII.
A courteous Stranger, ever and anon,
My kind Instructor's due Reward supplied;
But still my Name, my Birth, alike unknown,
Wrapped in the Gloom of Secrecy lay hid.
XVIII.
One Autumn-Morn (the Time I well recall)
That Stranger drew me from my soft Retreat,
And led my Footsteps to a lofty Hall,
Where State and Splendour seemed to hold their Seat.
XIX.
Through a long Range of spacious gilded Rooms
Dubious I passed, admiring as I went,
On the rich-woven Labors of the Looms,
The sculptured Arch, or painted Roof intent.
XX.
My Guide, at length, withdrew; wrapped in Suspense
And Fear I stood, yet knew not what I feared;
When straight to my appalled, astounded Sense
A Man of noble Port and Mien appeared.
XXI.
His Form commanded, and his Visage awed,
My Spirit sunk as he advanced nigh,
With stately Step along the Floor he trod,
Fixed on my Face his penetrating Eye.
XXII.
The dancing Plumage over his Front waved high,
Thick-studded Ribs of Gold adorned his Vest,
In splendid Folds his purple Robe did ply,
And royal Emblems glittered on his Breast.
XXIII.
I sought to bend me, but my Limbs refused
Their wonted Office, motionless and chill;
Yet somewhat, as the Figure I perused,
A dubious Joy did in my Mind instill.
XXIV.
While thus I cow'r'd beneath his piercing Eye,
He saw, and strove to mitigate my Fear,
Softening the Frown of harsh Austerity
In his bold Brow, which Nature grafted there.
XXV.
With Speeches kind he cheered my sinking Heart,
Questioned me much, and stroak'd my drooping Head;
Yet his whole Mind he seemed not to impart,
His Looks implied more than his Speeches said.
XXVI.
A broider'd Purse, which weighty seemed with Gold,
He gave me then, and kindly pressed my Hand;
And thus awhile did stay me in his Hold,
And on my Face did meditating stand.
XXVII.
His Soul worked hugely, and his Bosom swelled,
As though some mighty Thing he yearn'd to say,
But (with indignant Pride the Thought repelled)
He started, frowned, and snatched himself away.
XXVIII.
My Guide returned, and re-conducted me
Towered the Abode of my Preceptor kind;
A Man he seemed of Carriage mild and free,
To whom I thought I might unload my Mind.
XXIX.
Without Reserve I told him all that passed,
Striving, by mine, his Confidence to gain;
Then my Enquiries frank before him cast,
Hoping some Knowledge of myself t'attain.
XXX.
I asked what wondrous Cause, yet undiscry'd,
Urged him his Time and Zeal for me t'employ;
And why that Man of Dignity and Pride
Had deigned his Notice to a Stranger-Boy.
XXXI.
Confused, yet undispleas'd, my Guide appeared,
Naught he divulged (though much he seemed to know)
Save this, which he with earnest Look aver'd,
"No Obligation, Youth, to me you owe;
XXXII.
"I do but what my Place and Duty bid,
"With me no Kindred-Drops of Blood you share,
"Yet (hard to tell!) your Birth must still be hid;
"Enquire no farther -- Honor bids, forbear."
XXXIII.
Thus he reproved, yet did it with a Look,
As though he pitied my Sensations keen;
Patient I bowed me to his mild Rebuke,
And pledged Obedience, with submissive Mien.
XXXIV.
He left me at my Tutor's soft Abode,
And parting blessed me by the holy Cross;
My Heart waxed sad, as he re-trac'd the Road,
And seemed to have sustained some mighty Loss.
XXXV.
But soon tumultuous Thoughts began give Way,
Lulled by the Voice of my Preceptor sage;
Unquiet Bosoms he could well allay,
His Looks could soften, and his Words assuage.
XXXVI.
Unruly Care from him was far removed,
Grief's wildest Murmurs at his Breath would cease;
O! in his blameless Life how well he proved
The House of Goodness is the House of Peace!
XXXVII.
Here I again enjoyed my sweet Repose,
And taught my Heart, with pious Wisdom filled,
No more with anxious Throb to seek disclose
What stubborn Fate had doomed to lie concealed.
XXXVIII.
But long these fond Delusions did not last,
Some sterner Power my rising Life controlled,
My visionary Hopes too swiftly past,
And left my Prospects dreary, dark, and cold.
XXXIX.
When rugged March o'er-rules the growing Year,
Have we not seen the Morn, with treacherous Ray
Shine out awhile, then instant disappear,
And leave to Damp and Gloom the future Day?
XL.
So dawned my Fate, and so deceived my Heart,
Nor weaned me from my Hopes, but cruel tore;
In one unlook'd-for Moment, bade me part
From all my Comforts, to return no more.
XLI.
My Guide once more arrived, though, as of late,
Of soft Deportment he appeared not now,
But wild Impatience fluttered in his Gait,
And Care and Thought seemed busy on his Brow.
XLII.
"Rise, Youth," he said, "and mount this rapid Steed" --
I argued not; his Bidding strait was done;
Proud-crested was the Beast, of warlike Breed,
Armed, at all Points, with rich Caparison.
XLIII.
We commun'd not -- such Heat was in our Speed,
Scantly would it allow me Power of Thought,
Till Eve, deep-painted with a burning Red,
To Bosworth, in Leicestershire.
Bosworth Field our panting Coursers brought.
XLIV.
Who has not heard of Bosworth's fatal Plain,
Where base Advent'rers did in Compact join
Against Chiefs of Prowess high, and noble Strain,
And low'r'd the Crest of YORK's imperial Line?
XLV.
Now verging on that memorable Ground,
Our Course we stayed -- yet we alighted not;
Filled with Astonishment I gazed around,
While in my glowing Breast my Heart grew hot.
XLVI.
Thick-station'd Tents, extended wide and far,
To the utmost Stretch of Sight could I behold,
And Banners fluttering in the whistling Air,
And Archers trimly dight, and Prancers bold.
XLVII.
The sinking Sun, with richly-burnish'd Glow,
Now to his western Chamber made Retire,
While pointed Spears, quick-shifting to and fro,
Seemed all as spiral Flames of hottest Fire.
XLVIII.
Promiscuous Voices filled the floating Gale,
The Welkin echoed with the Steed's proud Neigh:
The Bands often turned, and eyed the Western Vale,
Watching the Closure of departing Day.
XLIX.
Light vanished now apace, and Twilight gray
With Speed unusual mantled all the Ground,
The Chieftains to their Tents had taken their Way,
And Sentinels thick-posted watched around.
L.
As sable Night advanced more and more,
The mingled Voices lessened by Degrees,
Sounding at length, as, round some craggy Shore,
Decreasing Murmurs of the ebbing Seas.
LI.
Now towered the Tents awhile we journey'd on
With wary Pace, then lighted on the Ground,
Be-friended by the Stars, that shimm'ring shone,
And Fires, that cast a trembling Gleam around.
LII.
With hasty Foot we pressed the dewy Sod,
Fit Answer making to each station'd Guard;
When full before us, as we onward trod,
A martial Form our further Progress barred.
LIII.
He seemed as though he there did listening stand,
His Face deep-muffled in his folded Cloak;
Now threw it wide, snatched quick my dubious Hand,
And to a neighboring Tent his Speed betook.
LIVE.
With glowing Crimson the Pavilion shone,
Reflected by the lofty Taper's Ray,
The polished Armor, bright and deft to don,
Beside the royal Couch in order lay.
LV.
The Crown imperial glittered in mine Eye,
With various Gems magnificently graced,
Nigh which, as meant to guard its dignity,
A weighty Curtelax unsheathed was placed.
LVI.
The Chief unbonnetted, and drew me nigh,
Wrapped in a deepen'd Gloom his Face appeared,
Like the dark Low'rings of the clouded Sky,
Ere the big-bursting Tempest's Voice is heard.
LVII.
Revenge, Impatience, all that mads the Soul,
All that Despair and Frenzy's Flame inspires,
Shown by the Tapers, in his Eyes did roll,
Hot Meteors they amid the lesser Fires.
LVIII.
Though each dark Line I could not truly scan,
Yet through the Veil of his distempered Mien
Broke forth a Likeness of that lofty Man,
Whom, whilom, at the Palace I had seen.
LIX.
To quell his Feelings huge he sternly tried,
Strong Combat holding with his fighting Soul,
Cresting himself with more than earthly Pride,
As though from Power supreme he scorned Control.
LX.
At length (in Part subdued his troubled Breast)
On my impatient Ear these Accents broke,
(I pale and trembling as the attentive Priest,
Who waits the Inspirings of his mystic Oak!)
LXI.
Wonder no more why thou art hither brought,
The Secret of thy Birth shall now be shown;
With glorious Ardour be thy Bosom fraught,
For know, thou art imperial RICHARD's RICHARD the Third.
Son.
LXII.
Thy Father I, who fold thee in my Arms,
Thou royal Issue of PLANTAGENET! It may not, perhaps, be unacceptable to some
of our Readers, if we subjoin the Etymology of this Name, which has been borne
by several of our English Kings. GEORGE BUCK, Esquire. Compiler of the Life of
RICHARD the Third, in KENNET's History of England, says, it rather should be
called, PLANTAGENEST, being derived from the two Words, Planta Genesta or
Genista, that is, the Plant, Broom. It was first given to FULKE, Earl of Anjou,
who lived an hundred Years before the Norman Conquest. He, having been guilty
of some enormous Crimes, was enjoined, by Way of Penance, to go to the Holy
Land, and submit to a severe Castigation. He readily acquiesced, dressed
himself in lowly Attire, and, as a Mark of Humility, wore a Piece of Broom in
his Cap, of which Virtue this Plant is a Symbol, in the Hyeroglypick Language;
and VIRGIL seems to confirm it, by calling it humilis Genista, the humble
Broom. This Expiation finished, FULKE, in Remembrance of it, adopted the Title
of Plantagenest, and lived many Years in Honor and Happiness. His Descendants
accordingly inherited the Name, and many successive Nobles of the Line of Anjou
not only did the same, but even distinguished themselves by wearing a Sprig of
Broom in their Bonnets.

Soon as my Power has quelled these loud Alarms,
Thou shall be known, be honored, and be great.
LXIII.
Rise from the Ground, and dry thy flowing Tears,
To Nature's Dues be other Hours assigned!
Beset with Foes, Solicitude, and Cares,
Far other Thoughts must now possess the Mind.
LXIV.
Tomorrow, This decisive Battle, which terminated the Contentions between the
Houses of Lancaster and York, was fought on Monday, August 22d, 1485. This
Interview, consequently, was on the preceding Sabbath-Night.
Boy, I combat for my Crown,
To shield from Soil my Dignity and Fame:
Presumptuous RICHMOND HENRY, Earl of Richmond, afterward King HENRY VII.
seeks to win Renown,
And on my Ruin raise his upstart Name:
LXV.
He leads yon shallow renegado Band,
Strangers to War and hazardous Emprize,
And against the mighty Chieftains of the Land,
Vain and unskilled, a desperate Conflict tries.
LXVI.
Yet since Assurance is not given to Man,
Nor can even Kings command the Event of War,
Since peevish Chance can foil the subtlest Plan
Of human Skill, and hurl our Schemes in Air,
LXVII.
Tomorrow's Sun beholds me Conqueror,
Or sees me low among the Slaughtered lie;
RICHARD shall never grace a Victor's Car,
But glorious win the Field, or glorious die.
LXVIII.
But thou, my Son, heed and obey my Word;
Seek not to mingle in the wild Affray:
Far from the winged Shaft and gleaming Sword,
Patient await the Issue of the Day.
LXIX.
North The Encampment and Action were three Miles distant from the Town of
Bosworth, and the Place obtained the Name of Bosworth Field, from that
memorable Battle. CAMDEN, in his Account of Leicestershire, says, The exact
Place is frequently more and more discovered by Pieces of Armor, Weapons, and
other warlike Accoutrements, dug up; and especially a great many Arrow-Heads
were found there, of a long, large, and big Proportion, far greater than any
now in Use.
of our Camp there stands a rising Mound,
(Thy Guide awaits to lead thee on the Way,)
Thence shall thou rule the Prospect wide around,
And view each Chance, each Movement of the Fray.
LXX.
If righteous Fate to me the Conquest yield,
Then shall thy noble Birth to all be known;
Then boldly seek the Center of the Field,
And 'midst my laurell'd Bands my Son I Will own:
LXXI.
But if blind Chance, that seld' determines right,
Rob me at once of Empire and Renown,
Be sure thy Father's Eyes are closed in Night,
Life were Disgrace when Chance had reft my Crown.
LXXII.
No Means are left thee then, but instant Flight,
In dark Concealment must thou veil thy Head;
On RICHARD's Friends their fellest Rage and Spite
His Foes will wreak, and fear even RICHARD dead.
LXXIII.
Begone, my Son! This one Embrace! Away!
Some short Reflections claims this awful Night:
Ere from the East peep forth the glimmering Day,
My Knights attend to arm me for the Fight.
LXXIV.
Once more I knelt, he clasped my lifted Hands,
Blessed me, and seemed to check a struggling Tear;
Then led me forth to follow his Commands,
Overwhelmed with tenderest Grief, Suspense, and Fear.
LXXV.
What Need of more? Who knows not the Event
Of that dread Day, that The whole Continuance of this Action is said to have
been but two Hours, during which, the King's personal Bravery was astonishingly
great.
desp'rate-foughten Field,
Where, with his wondrous Deeds and Prowess spent,
By Numbers over-pow'r'd, my Sire was killed?
LXXVI.
A Son no more, what Course was left to tread,
To whom apply, or whither should I wend?
Back to my Tutor's Roof, by Instinct led,
My Orphan-Footsteps did I pensive bend.
LXXVII.
O'er-ruling Fate against my Wishes wrought;
That pious Man, snatched from this frail Abode,
Had found the Blessing he so long had sought,
The Way to Immortality and God.
LXXVIII.
With flowing Eyes I left the sacred Door,
And with relying Heart to Heaven did bend;
To God my Supplication did I pour,
To God, the Mourner's best and surest Friend,
LXXIX.
That He would guide me to some safe Retreat,
Where daily Toil my daily Bread might earn,
Where pious Peace might soothe Ambition's Heat,
And my taught Heart sublimer Ardor learn.
LXXX.
He heard me -- All I asked in thee was lent,
Thou liberal Proxy of my gracious God!
Thou paid'st my Industry with rich Content,
And giv'st my weary Age this soft Abode. RICHARD PLANTAGENET died in December,
1550 (the fourth Year of EDWARD the Sixth's Reign) aged, 81. Consequently he
enjoyed his little comfortable Retreat barely four Years.

The following is still to be found in the old Register of the Parish of
Eastwell.

"RICHARD PLANTAGENET was buried the 22d Day of December, 1550."

This last Piece of Intelligence was transmitted to the Editor by a very
sensible and worthy Clergyman now living, who kindly went from Wye to Eastwell,
to collect as many Circumstances as he could, to confirm the Authenticity of
this singular Story. To the Transcript of the Register he subjoined as follows:

It is observable that in the old Register there is prefixed to the Name of
every Person of noble Blood such a Mark as this,. At the Name of RICHARD
PLANTAGENET there is the same Mark, (and it is the First that is so
distinguished) only with this Difference, that there is a Line run across it,
thus.

There is still remaining in Eastwell-Park the Ruin of a Building, which, they
say, was his House; and a Well near it, which, to this Day, is called
PLANTAGENET's Well.

There is also a Tomb in the Wall of Eastwell-Church, under which he is said to
be buried, but it appears to me of much older Date.

The Editor of this Poem holds it incumbent on him to return his most grateful
Thanks to the Gentleman who sent him these curious Particulars, for the Trouble
he took, and the Politeness of his Letter; the whole of which he should be
proud to make public, together with the Name, could he presume such a Liberty
to be warrantable.

The Editor conjectures the Line, which is mentioned to run across the Mark of
Nobility, to be what is styled in Heraldry, the Bar of Bastardy.



LXXXI.
The Work is done, the Structure is complete --
Long may the Produce of my humble Toil
Un-injur'd stand! and Echo long repeat,
Round the dear Walls, Benevolence and MOYLE!
FINIS.

