THE RIVALS, A COMEDY.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

THE RIVALS, A COMEDY. As it is ACTED at the Theater Royal in Covent Garden.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN WILKIE, No. 71, St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLXXV.

PREFACE.
A Preface to a Play seems generally to be considered as a kind of
Closet-prologue, in which -- if his Piece has been successful -- the Author
solicits that indulgence from the Reader which he had before experienced from
the Audience: But as the scope and immediate object of a Play is to please a
mixed assembly in Representation (whose judgment in the Theater at least is
decisive) its degree of reputation is usually as determined as public, before
it can be prepared for the cooler tribunal of the Study. Thus any farther
solicitude on the part of the Writer becomes unnecessary at least, if not an
intrusion: and if the Piece has been condemned in the Performance, I fear an
Address to the Closet, like an Appeal to Posterity, is constantly regarded as
the procrastination of a suit, from a consciousness of the weakness of the
cause. From these considerations, the following Comedy would certainly have
been submitted to the Reader, without any further introduction than what it had
in the Representation, but that its success has probably been founded on a
circumstance which the Author is informed has not before attended a theatrical
trial, and which consequently ought not to pass unnoticed.

I need scarcely add, that the circumstance alluded to, was the withdrawing of
the Piece, to remove those imperfections in the first Representation which were
too obvious to escape reprehension, and too numerous to admit of a hasty
correction. There are few writers, I believe, who, even in the fullest
consciousness of error, do not wish to palliate the faults which they
acknowledge; and, however trifling the performance, to second their confession
of its deficiencies, by whatever plea seems least disgraceful to their ability.
In the present instance, it cannot be said to amount either to candor or
modesty in me, to acknowledge an extreme inexperience and want of judgment on
matters, in which, without guidance from practice, or spur from success, a
young man should scarcely boast of being an adept. If it be said, that under
such disadvantages no one should attempt to write a play -- I must beg leave to
dissent from the position, while the first point of experience that I have
gained on the subject is, a knowledge of the candor and judgment with which an
impartial Public distinguishes between the errors of inexperience and
incapacity, and the indulgence which it shows even to a disposition to remedy
the defects of either.

It were unnecessary to enter into any farther extenuation of what was thought
exceptionable in this Play, but that it has been said, that the Managers should
have prevented some of the defects before its appearance to the Public -- and
in particular the uncommon length of the piece as represented the first night.
-- It were an ill return for the most liberal and gentlemanly conduct on their
side, to suffer any censure to rest where none was deserved. Hurry in writing
has long been exploded as an excuse for an Author; -- however, in the dramatic
line, it may happen, that both an Author and a Manager may wish to fill a chasm
in the entertainment of the Public with a hastiness not altogether culpable.
The season was advanced when I first put the play into Mr. Harris's hands: --
it was at that time at least double the length of any acting comedy. -- I
profited by his judgment and experience in the curtailing of it -- 'till, I
believe, his feeling for the vanity of a young Author got the better of his
desire for correctness, and he left many excrescences remaining, because he had
assisted in pruning so many more. Hence, though I was not uninformed that the
Acts were still too long, I flattered myself that, after the first trial, I
might with safer judgment proceed to remove what should appear to have been
most dissatisfactory. -- Many other errors there were, which might in part have
arisen from my being by no means conversant with plays in general, either in
reading or at the theater. -- Yet I own that, in one respect, I did not regret
my ignorance: for as my first wish in attempting a Play, was to avoid every
appearance of plagiary, I thought I should stand a better chance of effecting
this from being in a walk which I had not frequented, and where consequently
the progress of invention was less likely to be interrupted by starts of
recollection: for on subjects on which the mind has been much informed,
invention is slow of exerting itself. -- Faded ideas float in the fancy like
half-forgotten dreams; and the imagination in its fullest enjoyments becomes
suspicious of its offspring, and doubts whether it has created or adopted.

With regard to some particular passages which on the First Night's
Representation seemed generally disliked, I confess, that if I felt any emotion
of surprise at the disapprobation, it was not that they were disapproved of,
but that I had not before perceived that they deserved it. As some part of the
attack on the Piece was begun too early to pass for the sentence of Judgment,
which is ever tardy in condemning, it has been suggested to me, that much of
the disapprobation must have arisen from virulence of Malice, rather than
severity of Criticism: But as I was more apprehensive of there being just
grounds to excite the latter, than conscious of having deserved the former, I
continue not to believe that probable, which I am sure must have been
unprovoked. However, if it was so, and I could even mark the quarter from
whence it came, it would be ungenerous to retort; for no passion suffers more
than malice from disappointment. For my own part, I see no reason why the
Author of a Play should not regard a First Night's Audience, as a candid and
judicious friend attending, in behalf of the Public, at his last Rehearsal. If
he can dispense with flattery, he is sure at least of sincerity, and even
though the annotation be rude, he may rely upon the justness of the comment.
Considered in this light, that Audience, whose fiat is essential to the Poet's
claim, whether his object be Fame or Profit, has surely a right to expect some
deference to its opinion, from principles of Politeness at least, if not from
Gratitude.

As for the little puny Critics, who scatter their peevish strictures in
private circles, and scribble at every Author who has the eminence of being
unconnected with them, as they are usually spleen-swoln from a vain idea of
increasing their consequence, there will always be found a petulance and
illiberality in their remarks, which should place them as far beneath the
notice of a Gentleman, as their original dullness had sunk them from the level
of the most unsuccessful Author.

It is not without pleasure that I catch at an opportunity of justifying myself
from the charge of intending any national reflection in the character of Sir
Lucius O'Trigger. If any Gentlemen opposed the Piece from that idea, I thank
them sincerely for their opposition; and if the condemnation of this Comedy
(however misconceived the provocation,) could have added one spark to the
decaying flame of national attachment to the country supposed to be reflected
on, I should have been happy in its fate; and might with truth have boasted,
that it had done more real service in its failure, than the successful morality
of a thousand stage-novels will ever effect.

It is usual, I believe, to thank the Performers in a new Play, for the
exertion of their several abilities. But where (as in this instance) their
merit has been so striking and uncontroverted, as to call for the warmest and
truest applause from a number of judicious Audiences, the Poet's after-praise
comes like the feeble acclamation of a child to close the shouts of a
multitude. The conduct, however, of the Principals in a Theater cannot be so
apparent to the Public. -- I think it therefore but justice to declare, that
from this Theater (the only one I can speak of from experience,) those Writers
who wish to try the Dramatic Line, will meet with that candor and liberal
attention, which are generally allowed to be better calculated to lead genius
into excellence, than either the precepts of judgment, or the guidance of
experience.

THE AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE.
BY THE AUTHOR.
Spoken by Mr. WOODWARD and Mr. QUICK. Enter Sergeant at Law, and Attorney.
Serj. What Is here! -- a vile cramp hand! I cannot see
Without my spectacles. At. He means his fee.
Nay, Mr. Sergeant, good Sir, try again.

[Gives money. Serj. The scrawl improves [ more] O come, it is pretty plain.
How Is this! The Poet's Brief again! O ho!
Cast, I suppose? At. O pardon me -- No -- No --
We found the Court, o'erlooking stricter laws,
Indulgent to the merits of the Cause;
By Judges mild, unused to harsh denial,
A Rule was granted for another trial.

Serj. Then heark'ee, Dibble, did you mend your Pleadings,
Errors, no few, we have found in our Proceedings.

At. Come, courage, Sir, we did amend our Plea,
Hence your new Brief, and this refreshing Fee.
Some Sons of Phoebus -- in the Courts we meet,

Serj. And fifty Sons of Phoebus in the Fleet!

At. Nor pleads he worse, who with a decent sprig
Of Bays -- adorns his legal waste of wig.

Serj. Full-bottom'd Heroes thus, on signs, unsurl
A leaf of laurel -- in a grove of curl!
Yet tell your Client, that, in adverse days,
This Wig is warmer than a bush of Bays.

At. Do you then, Sir, my Client's place supply,
Profuse of robe, and prodigal of tie --
Do you, with all those blushing powers of face,
And wonted bashful hesitating grace,
Rise in the Court, and flourish on the Case.

[Exit. Serj. For practice then suppose -- this Brief will show it, --
Me, Sergeant Woodward, -- Council for the Poet.
Used to the ground -- I know it is hard to deal
With this dread Court, from whence there is no appeal;
No Tricking here, to blunt the edge of Law,
Or, damned in Equity -- escape by Flaw:
But Judgment given -- your Sentence must remain;
-- No Writ of Error lies -- to Drury Lane!
Yet when so kind you seem -- it is past dispute
We gain some favor, if not Costs of Suit.
No spleen is here! I see no hoarded fury;
-- I think I never faced a milder Jury!
Sad else our plight! -- where frowns are transportation,
A hiss the gallows, -- and a groan, damnation!
But such the public candor, without fear
My Client waves all right of challenge here.
No Newsman from our Session is dismissed,
Nor Wit nor Critic we scratch off the list;
His faults can never hurt another's ease,
His crime at worst -- a bad attempt to please:
Thus, all respecting, he appeals to all,
And by the general voice will stand or fall.

EPILOGUE.
BY THE AUTHOR.
Spoken by Mrs. BULKLEY. LADIES for You -- I heard our Poet say --
He Would try to coax some Moral from his Play:
' One moral's plain -- cried I -- without more fuss;
' Man's social happiness all rests on Us --
' Through all the Drama -- whether d -- n'd or not --
' Love gilds the Scene, and Women guide the plot.
' From every rank -- obedience is our due --
' Do You doubt? -- The world's great stage shall prove it true.
The Cit -- well skilled to shun domestic strife --
Will sup abroad; -- but first -- he will ask his wife:
John Trot, his friend -- for once, will do the same,
But then -- he will just step home to tell my dame. --
The surly 'Squire -- at noon resolves to rule,
And half the day -- zounds! Madam is a fool!
Convinced at night -- the vanquished Victor says,
Ah! Kate! you women have such coaxing ways! --
The jolly Toper chides each tardy blade, --
Till reeling Bacchus calls on Love for aid:
Then with each Toast, he sees fair bumpers swim,
And kisses Chloe on the sparkling Brim!
Nay, I have heard that Statesmen -- great and wise --
Will sometimes counsel with a Lady's eyes;
The servile suitors -- watch her various face,
She smiles perferment -- or she frowns disgrace,
Curtsies a pension here -- there nods a place.
Nor with less awe, in scenes of humbler life,
Is viewed the mistress, or is heard the wife.
The poorest Peasant of the poorest soil,
The child of Poverty, and heir to Toil --
Early from radiant Love's impartial light,
Steals one small spark, to cheer his world of night:
Dear spark! -- that often through winter's chilling woes,
Is all the warmth his little cottage knows!
The wandering Tar -- who, not for years, has pressed
The widowed Partner of his day of rest --
On the cold deck -- far from her arms removed --
Still hums the ditty which his Susan loved:
And while around the cadence rude is blown,
The Boatswain whistles in a softer tone.
The Soldier, fairly proud of wounds and toil,
Pants for the triumph of his Nancy's smile;
But ere the battle should he list' her cries,
The Lover trembles -- and the Hero dies!
That heart, by war and honor steeled to fear,
Droops on a sigh, and sickens at a tear!
But Ye more cautious -- ye nice judging few,
Who give to Beauty only Beauty's due,
Though friends to Love -- Ye view with deep regret
Our conquests marred -- our triumphs incomplete,
'Till polished Wit more lasting charms disclose,
And Judgment fix the darts which Beauty throws!
-- In female breasts did Sense and Merit rule,
The Lover's mind would ask no other school;
Shamed into sense -- the Scholars of our eyes,
Our Beaux from Gallantry would soon be wise;
Would gladly light, their homage to improve,
The Lamp of Knowledge at the Torch of Love!
ERRATA.
Page 40. l. 21. For regiment read regimentals.

-- -- 25. For Anguish read Languish.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Anthony Absolute, Mr. SHUTER. Capt. Absolute, Mr. WOODWARD. Faulkland, Mr.
JEWS. Acres, Mr. QUICK. Sir Lucius O'Trigger, Mr. CLINCH. Fag, Mr. LEE-LEWIS.
David, Mr. DUNSTAL. Coachman, Mr. FEARON.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Malaprop, Mrs. GREEN. Lydia Languish, Miss BARSANTI. Julia, Mrs. BULKLEY.
Lucy. Mrs. LESSINGHAM.
Maid, Boy, Servants, etc.

SCENE, Bath.

TIME of ACTION, Five Hours.

THE RIVALS.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A STREEET in Bath. Coachman crosses the stage. -- Enter Fag, looking after
him. Fag. WHAT! -- Thomas! -- Sure it is he? -- What! -- Thomas! -- Thomas!


Coach. Hay! -- Odd's life! -- Mr. Fag! -- give us your hand, my old
fellow servants.


Fag. Excuse my glove, Thomas: -- I Am devilish glad to see you, my lad: why, my
prince of charioteers, you look as hearty! -- but who the deuce thought of
seeing you in Bath!


Coach. Sure, Master, Madam Julia, Harry, Mrs. Kate, and the postillion be all
come!


Fag. Indeed!


Coach. Aye! Master thought another fit of the gout was coming to make him a
visit: -- so he would a mind to gi't the slip, and whip we were all off at an
hour's warning.


Fag. Aye, aye! hasty in every thing, or it would not be Sir Anthony Absolute!


Coach. But tell us, Mr. Fag, how does young Master? Odd! Sir Anthony will
stare to see the Captain here!


Fag. I do not serve Capt. Absolute now. --


Coach. Why sure!


Fag. At present I am employed by Ensign Beverley.


Coach. I doubt, Mr. Fag, you have not changed for the better.


Fag. I have not changed, Thomas.


Coach. No! why didn't you say you had left young Master?


Fag. No -- Well, honest Thomas, I must puzzle you no farther: -- briefly then
-- Capt. Absolute and Ensign Beverley are one and the same person.


Coach. The devil they are!


Fag. So it is indeed, Thomas; and the Ensign half of my master being on guard
at present -- the Captain has nothing to do with me.


Coach. So, so! -- what, this is some freak, I warrant! -- Do, tell us, Mr.
Fag, the meaning o't -- you know I have trusted you.


Fag. You Will be secret, Thomas.


Coach. As a coach-horse.


Fag. Why then the cause of all this is -- LOVE, -- Love, Thomas, who (as you
may get read to you) has been a masquerader ever since the days of Jupiter.


Coach. Aye, aye; -- I guessed there was a lady in the case: -- but pray, why
does your Master pass only for Ensign? -- now if he had shamm'd General indeed
--


Fag. Ah! Thomas, there lies the mystery of the matter. -- Hark'ee, Thomas, my
Master is in love with a lady of a very singular taste: a lady who likes him
better as a half-pay Ensign than if she knew he was son and heir to Sir Anthony
Absolute, a baronet with three thousand a year!


Coach. That is an odd taste indeed! -- but has she got the stuff, Mr. Fag; is
she rich, hey?


Fag. Rich! -- why, I believe she owns half the stocks! -- Z -- ds! Thomas, she
could pay the national debt as easy as I could my washerwoman! -- She has a
lap-dog that eats out of gold, -- she feeds her parrot with small pearls, --
and all her thread-papers are made of bank-notes!


Coach. Bravo! -- faith! -- Odd! I warrant she has a set of thousands at least:
-- but does she draw kindly with the Captain?


Fag. As fond as pigeons.


Coach. May one hear her name?


Fag. Miss Lydia Languish -- But there is an old tough aunt in the way; --
though by the bye -- she has never seen my Master -- for he got acquainted with
Miss while on a visit in Gloucestershire.


Coach. Well -- I wish they were once harnessed together in matrimony. -- But
pray, Mr. Fag, what kind of a place is this Bath? -- I have heard a deal of it
-- here is a mort of merry-making -- hey?


Fag. Pretty well, Thomas, pretty well -- it is a good lounge. Though at present
we are, like other great assemblies, divided into parties -- Highroomians and
Low-roomians; however, for my part, I have resolved to stand neuter; and so I
told Bob Brush at our last committee.


Coach. But what do the folks do here?


Fag. Oh! there are little amusements enough -- in the morning we go to the
pump-room (though neither my Master nor I drink the waters); after breakfast we
saunter on the parades or play a game at billiards; at night we dance: but d --
n the place, I Am tired of it: their regular hours stupify me -- not a fiddle
nor a card after eleven! -- however Mr. Faulkland's gentleman and I keep it up
a little in private parties; -- I Will introduce you there, Thomas -- you will like
him much.


Coach. Sure I know Mr. Du-Peigne -- you know his Master is to marry Madam
Julia.


Fag. I had forgot. -- But Thomas you must polish a little -- indeed you must:
-- here now -- this wig! -- what the devil do you do with a wig, Thomas? --
none of the London whips of any degree of Ton wear wigs now.


Coach. More's the pity! more's the pity, I say. -- Odd's life! when I heard
how the lawyers and doctors had took to their own hair, I thought how 'twould
go next: -- Odd rabbit it! when the fashion had got foot on the Bar, I guessed
'twould mount to the Box! -- but it is all out of character, believe me, Mr.
Fag: and look'ee, I Will never gi' up mine -- the lawyers and doctors may do as
they will.


Fag. Well, Thomas, we'll not quarrel about that.


Coach. Why, bless you, the gentlemen of they professions ben't all of a mind
-- for in our village now tho'ff Jack Gauge the exciseman, has taken to his
carrots, there is little Dick the farrier swears he will never forsake his bob,
though all the college should appear with their own heads!


Fag. Indeed! well said Dick! but hold -- mark! mark! Thomas.


Coach. Zooks! it is the Captain -- Is that the lady with him?


Fag. No! no! that is Madam Lucy -- my Master's mistress's maid. -- They lodge
at that house -- but I must after him to tell him the news.


Coach. Odd! he is giving her money! -- well, Mr. Fag --


Fag. Good bye, Thomas. -- I have an appointment in Gydes' Porch this evening
at eight; meet me there, and we'll make a little party.


[Exeunt severally. SCENE II.
A Dressing Room in Mrs. Malaprop's lodgings. Lydia sitting on a sopha with a
book in her hand. -- Lucy, as just returned from a message. Luc. Indeed, Ma'am,
I transferred half the town in search of it: -- I don't believe there is a
circulating library in Bath I have not been at.


Lyd. And could not you get ' The Reward of Constancy?'


Lucy. No, indeed, Ma'am.


Lyd. Nor 'The Fatal Connection?'


Lucy. No, indeed, Ma'am.


Lyd. Nor 'The Mistakes of the Heart?'


Lucy. Ma'am, as ill-luck would have it, Mr. Bull said Miss Sukey Saunter had
just fetched it away.


Lyd. Heigh-ho! -- Did you inquire for ' The Delicate Distress?'


Lucy. -- Or ' The Memoirs of Lady Woodford?' Yes indeed, Ma'am. -- I asked
every where for it; and I might have brought it from Mr. Frederick's, but Lady
Slattern Lounger, who had just sent it home, had so soiled and dog's-ear'd it,
it wa'n't fit for a christian to read.


Lyd. Heigh-ho! -- Yes, I always know when Lady Slattern has been before me. --
She has a most observing thumb; and I believe cherishes her nails for the
convenience of making marginal notes. -- Well, child, what have you brought me?


Lucy. On! here Ma'am.

[Taking books from under her cloak, and from her pockets.] This is 'The
Gordian Knot,' -- and this 'Peregrine Pickle.' Here are 'The Tears of
Sensibility' and 'Humphry Clinker.' This is 'The Memoirs of a Lady of Quality,
written by herself,' -- and here the second volume of 'The Sentimental Journey.'


Lyd. Heigh-ho! -- What are those books by the glass?


Lucy. The great one is only ' The whole Duty of Man' -- where I press a few
blonds, Ma'am.


Lyd. Very well -- give me the sal volatile.


Lucy. Is it in a blue cover, Ma'am?


Lyd. My smelling bottle, you simpleton!


Lucy. O, the drops! -- here Ma'am.


Lyd. No note, Lucy?


Lucy. No indeed, Ma'am -- but I have seen a certain person --


Lyd. What, my Beverley! -- well Lucy?


Lucy. O Ma'am! he looks so desponding and melancholic!


Lyd. Hold Lucy! -- here is some one coming -- quick, see who it is. --

[ Exit Lucy.] Surely I heard my cousin Julia's voice!


[Re-enter Lucy. Lucy. Lud! Ma'am, here is Miss Melville.


Lyd. Is it possible! --


Enter Julia. Lyd. My dearest Julia, how delighted am I! -- ( Embrace) How
unexpected was this happiness!


Jul. True, Lydia -- and our pleasure is the greater; -- but what has been the
matter? -- you were denied to me at first!


Lyd. Ah! Julia, I have a thousand things to tell you! -- but first inform me,
what has conjured you to Bath? -- Is Sir Anthony here?


Jul. He is -- we are arrived within this hour -- and I suppose he will be here
to wait on Mrs. Malaprop as soon as he is dressed.


Lyd. Then before we are interrupted, let me impart to you some of my distress!
-- I know your gentle nature will sympathize with me, though your prudence may
condemn me! -- My letters have informed you of my whole connection with
Beverley; -- but I have lost him, Julia! -- my aunt has discovered our
intercourse by a note she intercepted, and has confined me ever since! -- Yet,
would you believe it? she has fallen absolutely in love with a tall Irish
baronet she met one night since we have been here, at Lady Macshuffle's rout.


Jul. You jest, Lydia!


Lyd. No, upon my word. -- She absolutely carries on a kind of correspondence
with him, under a feigned name though, till she chooses to be known to him; --
but it is a Delia or a Celia, I assure you.


Jul. Then, surely, she is now more indulgent to her niece.


Lyd. Quite the contrary. Since she has discovered her own frailty, she is
become more suspicious of mine. Then I must inform you of another plague! --
That odious Acres is to be in Bath today; so that I protest I shall be teased
out of all spirits!


Jul. Come, come, Lydia, hope the best. -- Sir Anthony shall use his interest
with Mrs. Malaprop.


Lyd. But you have not heard the worst. Unfortunately I had quarreled with my
poor Beverley, just before my aunt made the discovery, and I have not seen him
since, to make it up.


Jul. What was his offense?


Lyd. Nothing at all! -- But, I don't know how it was, as often as we had been
together, we had never had a quarrel! -- And, somehow I was afraid he would
never give me an opportunity. -- So, last Thursday, I wrote a letter to myself,
to inform myself that Beverley was at that time paying his addresses to another
woman. -- I signed it your Friend unknown, showed it to Beverley, charged him
with his falsehood, put myself in a violent passion, and vowed I Would never see
him more.


Jul. And you let him depart so, and have not seen him since?


Lyd. 'Twas the next day my aunt found the matter out. I intended only to have
teased him three days and a half, and now I Have lost him for ever.


Jul. If he is as deserving and sincere as you have represent^d him to me, he
will never give you up so. Yet consider, Lydia, you tell me he is but an
ensign, and you have thirty thousand pounds!


Lyd. But you know I lose most of my fortune, if I marry without my aunt's
consent, till of age; and that is what I have determined to do, ever since I
knew the penalty. -- Nor could I love the man, who would wish to wait a day for
the alternative.


Jul. Nay, this is caprice!


Lyd. What, does Julia tax me with caprice? -- I thought her lover Faulkland
had enured her to it.


Jul. I do not love even his faults.


Lyd. But a-propos -- you have sent to him, I suppose?


Jul. Not yet, upon my word -- nor has he the least idea of my being in Bath.
-- Sir Anthony's resolution was so sudden, I could not inform him of it.


Lyd. Well, Julia, you are your own mistress, (though under the protection of
Sir Anthony) yet have you, for this long year, been the slave to the caprice,
the whim, the jealousy of this ungrateful Faulkland, who will ever delay
assuming the right of a husband, while you suffer him to be equally imperious
as a lover.


Jul. Nay, you are wrong entirely. -- We were contracted before my father's
death. -- That, and some consequent embarrassments, have delayed what I know to
be my Faulkland's most ardent wish. -- He is too generous to trifle on such a
point. -- And for his character, you wrong him there too. -- No, Lydia, he is
too proud, too noble to be jealous; if he is captious, it is without
dissembling; if fretful, without rudeness. -- Unused to the soppery of love, he
is negligent of the little duties expected from a lover -- but being
unhackney'd in the passion, his love is ardent and sincere; and as it engrosses
his whole soul, he expects every thought and emotion of his mistress to move in
unison with his. -- Yet, though his pride calls for this full return -- his
humility makes him undervalue those qualities in him, which should entitle him
to it; and not feeling why he should be loved to the degree he wishes, he still
suspects that he is not loved enough: -- This temper, I must own, has cost me
many unhappy hours; but I have learned to think myself his debtor, for those
imperfections which arise from the ardour of his love.


Lyd. Well, I cannot blame you for defending him. -- But tell me heartily,
Julia, had he never saved your life, do you think you should have been attached
to him as you are? -- Believe me, the rude blast that overset your boat was a
prosperous gale of love to him.


Jul. Gratitude may have strengthened my attachment to Mr. Faulkland, but I
loved him before he had preserved me; yet surely that alone were an obligation
sufficient.


Lyd. Obligation! -- Why a water-spaniel would have done as much. -- Well, I
should never think of giving my heart to a man because he could swim!


Jul. Come, Lydia, you are too inconsiderate.


Lyd. Nay, I do but jest. -- What Is here?


Enter Lucy in a hurry. Lucy. O Ma'am, here is Sir Anthony Absolute just come
home with your aunt.


Lyd. They Will not come here. -- Lucy do you watch.


[ Exit Lucy. Jul. Yet I must go. -- Sir Anthony does not know I am here, and
if we meet, he will detain me, to show me the town. -- I Will take another
opportunity of paying my respects to Mrs. Malaprop, when she shall treat me, as
long as she chooses, with her select words so ingeniously misapplied, without
being mispronounced.


Re-enter Lucy. Lucy. O Lud! Ma'am, they are both coming up stairs.


Lyd. Well, I Will not detain you Coz. -- Adieu, my dear Julia, I Am sure you are
in haste to send to Faulkland. -- There -- through my room you will find another
staircase.


Jul. Adieu. -- ( Embrace.)


[ Exit Julia. Lyd. Here, my dear Lucy, hide these books. -- Quick, quick. --
Fling Peregrine Pickle under the toilet -- throw Roderick Random in to the
closet -- put the Innocent Adultery into The Whole Duty of Man -- thrust Lord
Aimworth under the sopha -- cram Ovid behind the bolster -- there -- put the
Man of Feeling into your pocket -- so, so, now lay Mrs. Chapone in sight, and
leave Fordyce's Sermons open on the table.


Lucy. O burn it, Ma'am, the hair-dresser has torn away as far as Proper Pride.


Lyd. Never mind -- open at Sobriety. -- Fling me Lord Chesterfield's Letters.
-- Now for 'em.


Enter Mrs. Malaprop and Sir Anthony Absolute. Mrs. Mal. There, Sir Anthony,
there sits the deliberate Simpleton, who wants to disgrace her family, and
lavish herself on a fellow not worth a shilling!


Lyd. Madam, I thought you once --


Mrs. Mal. You thought, Miss! -- I don't know any business you have to think at
all -- thought does not become a young woman; the point we would request of you
is, that you will promise to forget this fellow -- to illiterate him, I say,
quite from your memory.


Lyd. Ah! Madam! our memories are independent of our wills. -- It is not so
easy to forget.


Mrs. Mal. But I say it is, Miss; there is nothing on earth so easy as to
forget, if a person chooses to set about it. -- I Am sure I have as much forgot
your poor dear uncle as if he had never existed -- and I thought it my duty so
to do; and let me tell you, Lydia, these violent memories don't become a young
woman.


Sir Anth. Why sure she will not pretend to remember what she is ordered not! --
aye, this comes of her reading!


Lyd. What crime, Madam, have I committed to be treated thus?


Mrs. Mal. Now don't attempt to extirpate yourself from the matter; you know I
have proof controvertible of it. -- But tell me, will you promise to do as
you're bid? -- Will you take a husband of your friends choosing?


Lyd. Madam, I must tell you plainly, that had I no preference for any one
else, the choice you have made would be my aversion.


Mrs. Mal. What business have you, Miss, with preference and aversion? They
don't become a young woman; and you ought to know, that as both always wear
off, it is safest in matrimony to begin with a little aversion. I am sure I
hated your poor dear uncle before marriage as if he would been a black-a-moor --
and yet, Miss, you are sensible what a wife I made! -- and when it pleased
Heaven to release me from him, it is unknown what tears I shed! -- But suppose
we were going to give you another choice, will you promise us to give up this
Beverley?


Lyd. Could I belie my thoughts so far, as to give that promise, my actions
would certainly as far belie my words.


Mrs. Mal. Take yourself to your room. -- You are fit company for nothing but
your own ill-humours.


Lyd. Willingly, Ma'am -- I cannot change for the worse.


[ Exit Lydia. Mrs. Mal. There Is a little intricate hussy for you!


Sir Anth. It is not to be wondered at, Ma'am -- all this is the natural
consequence of teaching girls to read. -- Had I a thousand daughters, by
Heavens! I Would as soon have them taught the black-art as their alphabet!


Mrs. Mal. Nay, nay, Sir Anthony, you are an absolute misanthropy.


Sir Anth. In my way hither, Mrs. Malaprop, I observed your niece's maid coming
forth from a circulating library! -- She had a book in each hand -- they were
half-bound volumes, with marbled covers! -- From that moment I guessed how full
of duty I should see her mistress!


Mrs. Mal. Those are vile places, indeed!


Sir Anth. Madam, a circulating library in a town is, as an ever-green tree, of
diabolical knowledge! -- It blossoms through the year! -- And depend on it,
Mrs. Malaprop, that they who are so fond of handling the leaves, will long for
the fruit at last.


Mrs. Mal. Well, but Sir Anthony, your wife, Lady Absolute, was fond of books.


Sir Anth. Aye -- and injury sufficient they were to her, Madam. -- But were I
to choose another helpmate, the extent of her erudition should consist in her
knowing her simple letters, without their mischievous combinations; -- and the
summit of her science be -- her ability to count as far as twenty. -- The
first, Mrs. Malaprop, would enable her to work A. A. upon my linen; -- and the
latter would be quite sufficient to prevent her giving me a shirt, No. 1. and a
stock, No. 2.


Mrs. Mal. Fie, fie, Sir Anthony, you surely speak laconically!


Sir Anth. Why, Mrs. Malaprop, in moderation, now, what would you have a woman
know?


Mrs. Mal. Observe me, Sir Anthony. -- I would by no means wish a daughter of
mine to be a progeny of learning; I don't think so much learning becomes a
young woman; for instance -- I would never let her meddle with Greek, or
Hebrew, or Algebra, or Simony, or Fluxions, or Paradoxes, or such inflammatory
branches of learning -- neither would it be necessary for her to handle any of
your mathematical, astronomical, diabolical instruments; -- But, Sir Anthony, I
would send her, at nine years old, to a boarding-school, in order to learn a
little ingenuity and artifice. -- Then, Sir, she should have a supercilious
knowledge in accounts; -- and as she grew up, I would have her instructed in
geometry, that she might know something of the contagious countries; -- but
above all, Sir Anthony, she should be mistress of orthodoxy, that she might not
mis-spell, and mis-pronounce words so shamefully as girls usually do; and
likewise that she might reprehend the true meaning of what she is saying. --
This, Sir Anthony, is what I would have a woman know; -- and I don't think
there is a superstitious article in it.


Sir Anth. Well, well, Mrs. Malaprop, I will dispute the point no further with
you; though I must confess, that you are a truly moderate and polite arguer,
for almost every third word you say is on my side of the question. -- But, Mrs.
Malaprop, to the more important point in debate, -- you say, you have no
objection to my proposal.


Mrs. Mal. None, I assure you. -- I am under no positive engagement with Mr.
Acres, and as Lydia is so obstinate against him, perhaps your son may have
better success.


Sir Anth. Well, Madam, I will write for the boy directly. -- He knows not a
syllable of this yet, though I have for some time had the proposal in my head.
He is at present with his regiment.


Mrs. Mal. We have never seen your son, Sir Anthony; but I hope no objection on
his side.


Sir Anth. Objection! -- let him object if he dare! -- No, no, Mrs. Malaprop,
Jack knows that the least demur puts me in a frenzy directly. -- My process was
always very simple -- in their younger days, 'twas 'Jack, do this;' -- if he
demur'd -- I knocked him down -- and if he grumbled at that -- I always sent
him out of the room.


Mrs. Mal. Aye, and the properest way, of my conscience! -- nothing is so
conciliating to young people as severity. -- Well, Sir Anthony, I shall give
Mr. Acres his discharge, and prepare Lydia to receive your son's invocations;
-- and I hope you will represent her to the Captain as an object not altogether
illegible.


Sir Anth. Madam, I will handle the subject prudently. -- Well, I must leave
you -- and let me beg you, Mrs. Malaprop, to enforce this matter roundly to the
girl; -- take my advice -- keep a tight hand -- if she rejects this proposal --
clap her under lock and key: -- and if you were just to let the servants forget
to bring her dinner for three or four days, you cannot conceive how she would come
about!


[Exit Sir Anth. Mrs. Mal. Well, at any rate I shall be glad to get her from
under my intuition. -- She has somehow discovered my partiality for Sir Lucius
O'Trigger -- sure, Lucy cannot have betrayed me! -- No, the girl is such a
simpleton, I should have made her confess it. -- Lucy! -- Lucy! -- ( calls) Had
she been one of your artificial ones, I should never have trusted her.


Enter Lucy. Lucy. Did you call, Ma'am?


Mrs. Mal. Yes, girl. -- Did you see Sir Lucius while you was out?


Lucy. No, indeed, Ma'am, not a glimpse of him.


Mrs. Mal. You are sure, Lucy, that you never mentioned --


Lucy. O Gemini! I Would sooner cut my tongue out.


Mrs. Mal. Well, don't let your simplicity be imposed on.


Lucy. No, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. So, come to me presently, and I Will give you another letter to Sir
Lucius; -- but mind Lucy -- if ever you betray what you are entrusted with --
(unless it be other people's secrets to me) you forfeit my malevolence for
ever: -- and your being a simpleton shall be no excuse for your locality.


[ Exit Mrs. Malaprop. Lucy. Ha! ha! ha! -- So, my dear simplicity, let me give
you a little respite -- ( altering her manner) -- let girls in my station be as
fond as they please of appearing expert, and knowing in their trusts; --
commend me to a mask of silliness, and a pair of sharp eyes for my own interest
under it! -- Let me see to what account I have turned my simplicity lately --

(looks at a paper) For abetting Miss Lydia Languish in a design of running
away with an Ensign! -- in money -- sundry times -- twelve pound twelve --
gowns, five -- hats, ruffles, caps, etc. etc. -- numberless! -- From the said
Ensign, within this last month, six guineas and a half. -- About a quarter's
pay! -- Item, from Mrs. Malaprop, for betraying the young people to her -- when
I found matters were likely to be discovered -- two guineas, and a black
paduasoy. -- Item, from Mr. Acres, for carrying diverse letters -- which I never
delivered -- two guineas, and a pair of buckles. -- Item, from Sir Lucius
O'Trigger -- three crowns -- two gold pocket-pieces -- and a silver snuffbox!
-- Well done, simplicity! -- yet I was forced to make my Hibernian believe,
that he was corresponding, not with the Aunt, but with the Niece: for, though
not over rich, I found he had too much pride and delicacy to sacrifice the
feelings of a gentleman to the necessities of his fortune.


[Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Captain Absolute's Lodgings. Captain Absolute and Fag. Fag. SIR, while I was
there, Sir Anthony came in: I told him, you had sent me to inquire after his
health, and to know if he was at leisure to see you.


Abs. And what did he say, on hearing I was at Bath?


Fag. Sir, in my life I never saw an elderly gentleman more astonished! He
started back two or three paces, rapt out a dozen interjectoral oaths, and
asked, what the devil had brought you here!


Abs. Well, Sir, and what did you say?


Fag. O, I lied, Sir -- I forgot the precise lie, but you may depend on it; he
got no truth from me. Yet, with submission, for fear of blunders in future, I
should be glad to fix what has brought us to Bath: in order that we may lie a
little consistently. -- Sir Anthony's servants were curious, Sir, very curious
indeed.


Abs. You have said nothing to them --?


Fag. O, not a word, Sir -- not a word. -- Mr. Thomas, indeed, the coachman
(whom I take to be the discreetest of whips) --


Abs. God's Death! -- you rascal! you have not trusted him!


Fag. O, no, Sir -- no -- no -- not a syllable, upon my veracity! -- He was,
indeed, a little inquisitive; but I was fly, Sir -- devilish fly! -- My Master
(said I) honest Thomas (you know, Sir, one says honest to one's inferiors) is
come to Bath to recruit -- Yes, Sir -- I said, to recruit -- and whether for
men, money, or constitution, you know, Sir, is nothing to him, nor any one else.


Abs. Well -- recruit will do -- let it be so --


Fag. O, Sir, recruit will do surprisingly -- indeed, to give the thing an air,
I told Thomas, that your Honor had already inlisted, five disbanded chairmen,
seven minority waiters, and thirteen billiard markers.


Abs. You blockhead, never say more than is necessary.


Fag. I beg pardon, Sir -- I beg pardon -- But with submission, a lie is
nothing unless one supports it. -- Sir, whenever I draw on my invention for a
good current lie, I always forge indorsements, as well as the bill.


Abs. Well, take care you don't hurt your credit, by offering too much
security. -- Is Mr. Faulkland returned?


Fag. He is above, Sir, changing his dress.


Abs. Can you tell whether he has been informed of Sir Anthony's and Miss
Melville's arrival?


Fag. I fancy not, Sir; he has seen no one since he came in, but his gentleman,
who was with him at Bristol. -- I think, Sir, I hear Mr. Faulkland coming down
--


Abs. Go, tell him, I am here.


Fag. Yes, Sir -- ( going) I beg pardon, Sir, but should Sir Anthony call, you
will do me the favor to remember, that we are recruiting, if you please.


Abs. Well, well.


Fag. And in tenderness to my character, if your Honor could bring in the
chairman and waiters, I shall esteem it as an obligation; -- for though I never
scruple a lie to serve my Master, yet it hurts one's conscience, to be found
out.


[Exit. Abs. Now for my whimsical friend -- if he does not know that his
mistress is here, I Will tease him a little before I tell him --


Enter Faulkland. Faulkland, you're welcome to Bath again; you are punctual in
your return.

Faulk. Yes; I had nothing to detain me, when I had finished the business I
went on. Well, what news since I left you? How stand matters between you and
Lydia?


Abs. Faith, much as they were; I have not seen her since our quarrel, however
I expect to be recalled every hour.


Faulk. Why don't you persuade her to go off with you at once?


Abs. What, and lose two thirds of her fortune? You forget that my friend. --
No, no, I could have brought her to that long ago.


Faulk. Nay then, you trifle too long -- if you are sure of her, propose to the
aunt in your own character, and write to Sir Anthony for his consent.


Abs. Softly, softly, for though I am convinced my little Lydia would elope
with me as Ensign Beverley, yet am I by no means certain that she would take me
with the impediment of our friend's consent, a regular humdrum wedding, and the
reversion of a good fortune on my side; no, no, I must prepare her gradually
for the discovery, and make myself necessary to her, before I risk it. -- Well,
but Faulkland, you will dine with us today at the Hotel?


Faulk. Indeed I cannot: I am not in spirits to be of such a party.


Abs. By Heavens! I shall forswear your company. You are the most teasing,
captious, incorrigible lover! -- Do love like a man.


Faulk. I own I am unfit for company.


Abs. Am not I a lover; aye, and a romantic one too? Yet do I carry every where
with me such a confounded farago of doubts, fears, hopes, wishes, and all the
flimsy furniture of a country Miss's brain!


Faulk. Ah! Jack, your heart and soul are not, like mine, fixed immutably on
one only object. -- You throw for a large stake, but losing -- you could stake,
and throw again: -- but I have set my sum of happiness on this cast, and not to
succeed, were to be stripped of all.


Abs. But for Heaven's sake! what grounds for apprehension can your whimsical
brain conjure up at present? Has Julia missed writing this last post? or was
her last too tender, or too cool; or too grave, or too gay; or --


Faulk. Nay, nay, Jack.


Abs. Why, her love -- her honor -- her prudence, you cannot doubt.


Faulk. O! upon my soul, I never have; -- but what grounds for apprehension did
you say? Heavens! are there not a thousand! I fear for her spirits -- her
health -- her life. -- My absence may fret her; her anxiety for my return, her
fears for me, may oppress her gentle temper. And for her health -- does not
every hour bring me cause to be alarmed? If it rains, some shower may even then
have chilled her delicate frame! -- If the wind be keen, some rude blast may
have affected her! The heat of noon, the dews of the evening, may endanger the
life of her, for whom only I value mine. O! Jack, when delicate and feeling
souls are separated, there is not a feature in the sky, not a movement of the
elements; not an aspiration of the breeze, but hints some cause for a lover's
apprehension!


Abs. Aye, but we may choose whether we will take the hint or no. -- Well then,
Faulkland, if you were convinced that Julia was well and in spirits, you would
be entirely content.


Faulk. I should be happy beyond measure -- I Am anxious only for that.


Abs. Then to cure your anxiety at once -- Miss Melville is in perfect health,
and is at this moment in Bath.


Faulk. Nay Jack -- don't trifle with me.


Abs. She is arrived here with my father within this hour.


Faulk. Can you be serious?


Abs. I thought you knew Sir Anthony better than to be surprised at a sudden
whim of this kind. -- Seriously then, it is as I tell you -- upon my honor.


Falk. My dear friend! -- Hollo, Du-Peigne! my hat -- my dear Jack -- now
nothing on earth can give me a moment's uneasiness.


Enter Fag. Fag. Sir, Mr. Acres just arrived is below.


Abs. Stay, Faulkland, this Acres lives within a mile of Sir Anthony, and he
shall tell you how your mistress has been ever since you left her. -- Fag, show
the gentleman up.


[ Exit Fag. Faulk. What, is he much acquainted in the family?


Abs. O, very intimate: I insist on your not going: besides, his character will
divert you.


Faulk. Well, I should like to ask him a few questions.


Abs. He is likewise a rival of mine -- that is of my other self's, for he does
not think his friend Capt. Absolute ever saw the lady in question; -- and it is
ridiculous enough to hear him complain to me of one Beverley a concealed
sculking rival, who --


Faulk. Hush! -- He Is here.


Enter Acres. Acres. Hah! my dear friend, noble captain, and honest Jack, how
do thou? just arrived faith, as you see. -- Sir, your humble servant. Warm
work on the roads Jack -- Odds, whips and wheels, I Have traveled like a Comet,
with a tail of dust all the way as long as the Mall.


Abs. Ah! Bob, you are indeed an excentric Planet, but we know your attraction
hither -- give me leave to introduce Mr. Faulkland to you; Mr. Faulkland, Mr.
Acres.


Acres. Sir, I am most heartily glad to see you: Sir, I solicit your
connections. -- Hey Jack -- what this is Mr. Faulkland, who --


Abs. Aye, Bob, Miss Melville's Mr. Faulkland.


Acres. Od'so! she and your father can be but just arrived before me -- I
suppose you have seen them. -- Ah! Mr. Faulkland, you are indeed a happy man.


Faulk. I have not seen Miss Melville yet, Sir -- I hope she enjoyed full
health and spirits in Devonshire.


Acres. Never knew her better in my life, Sir, -- never better. -- Odd's
Blushes and Blooms! she has been as healthy as the German Spa.


Faulk. Indeed! -- I did hear that she had been a little indisposed.


Acres. False, false, Sir -- only said to vex you: quite the reverse I assure
you.


Faulk. There, Jack, you see she has the advantage of me; I had almost fretted
myself ill.


Abs. Now are you angry with your mistress for not having been sick.


Faulk. No, no, you misunderstand me: -- yet surely a little trifling
indisposition is not an unnatural consequence of absence from those we love. --
Now confess -- is not there something unkind in this violent, robust, unfeeling
health?


Abs. O, it was very unkind of her to be well in your absence to be sure!


Acres. Good apartments, Jack.


Faulk. Well Sir, but you were saying that Miss Melville has been so
exceedingly well -- what then she has been merry and gay I suppose? -- Always
in spirits -- hey?


Acres. Merry, Odds Crickets! she has been the bell and spirit of the company
wherever she has been -- so lively and entertaining! so full of wit and humor!


Faulk. There, Jack, there. -- O, by my soul! there is an innate levity in
woman, that nothing can overcome. -- What! happy and I away!


Abs. Have done: how foolish this is! just now you were only apprehensive for
your mistress's spirits.


Faulk. Why Jack, have I been the joy and spirit of the company?


Abs. No indeed, you have not.


Faulk. Have I been lively and entertaining?


Abs. O, upon my word, I acquit you.


Faulk. Have I been full of wit and humor?


Abs. No, faith, to do you justice, you have been confounded stupid indeed.


Acres. What Is the matter with the gentleman?


Abs. He is only expressing his great satisfaction at hearing that Julia has
been so well and happy -- that is all -- hey, Faulkland?


Faulk. Oh! I am rejoiced to hear it -- yes, yes, she has a happy disposition!


Acres. That she has indeed -- then she is so accomplished -- so sweet a voice
-- so expert at her Harpsichord -- such a mistress of flat and sharp,
squallante, rumblante, and quiverante! -- there was this time month -- Odds
Minnums and Crotchets! how she did chirup at Mrs. Piano's Concert.


Faulk. There again, what say you to this? you see she has been all mirth and
song -- not a thought of me!


Abs. Pho! man, is not music the food of love?


Faulk. Well, well, it may be so. -- Pray Mr. -- what is his d -- d name? -- Do
you remember what Songs Miss Melville sung?


Acres. Not I, indeed.


Abs. Stay now, they were some pretty, melancholy, purling stream airs, I
warrant; perhaps you may recollect: -- did she sing -- ' When absent from my
soul's delight?'


Acres. No, that wa'n't it.


Abs. Or -- ' Go, gentle Gales!' -- ' Go, gentle Gales!' (sings.)


Acres. O no! nothing like it. -- Odds slips? now I recollect one of them -- '
My heart's my own, my will is free.' (sings)


Faulk. Fool! fool that I am! to fix all my happiness on such a trifler!
God's Death! to make herself the pipe and ballad-monger of a circle! to sooth her
light heart with catches and glees! -- What can you say to this, Sir?


Abs. Why, that I should be glad to hear my mistress had been so merry, Sir.


Faulk. Nay, nay, nay -- I am not sorry that she has been happy -- no, no, I am
glad of that -- I would not have had her sad or sick -- yet surely a
sympathetic heart would have shown itself even in the choice of a song -- she
might have been temperately healthy, and somehow, plaintively gay; -- but she
has been dancing too, I doubt not!


Acres. What does the gentleman say about dancing?


Abs. He says the lady we speak of dances as well as she sings.


Acres. Aye truly, does she -- there was at our last race-ball --


Faulk. Hell and the devil! There! there! -- I told you so! I told you so! Oh!
she thrives in my absence! -- Dancing! -- but her whole feelings have been in
opposition with mine! -- I have been anxious, silent, pensive, sedentary -- my
days have been hours of care, my nights of watchfulness. -- She has been all
Health! Spirit! Laugh! Song! Dance! -- Oh! d -- n'd, d -- n'd levity!


Abs. For Heaven's sake! Faulkland, don't expose yourself so. -- Suppose she
has danced, what then? -- does not the ceremony of society often oblige --


Faulk. Well, well, I Will contain myself -- perhaps, as you say -- for form
sake. -- What, Mr. Acres, you were praising Miss Melville's manner of dancing a
minuet -- hey?


Acres. O I dare insure her for that -- but what I was going to speak of was
her country dancing: -- Odds swimmings! she has such an air with her! --


Faulk. Now disappointment on her! -- defend this, Absolute, why don't you
defend this? -- Country-dances! jiggs, and reels! am I to blame now? A Minuet I
could have forgiven -- I should not have minded that -- I say I should not have
regarded a Minuet -- but Country-dances! Z -- ds! had she made one in a
Cotillon -- I believe I could have forgiven even that -- but to be monkey-led
for a night! -- to run the gauntlet through a string of amorous palming puppies!
-- to show paces like a managed filly! -- O Jack, there never can be but one
man in the world, whom a truly modest and delicate woman ought to pair with in
a Country-dance; and even then, the rest of the couples should be her great
uncles and aunts!


Abs. Aye, to be sure! -- grandfathers and grand-mothers!


Faulk. If there be but one vicious mind in the Set, 'twill spread like a
contagion -- the action of their pulse bears to the lascivious movement of the
jigg -- their quivering, warm-breath'd sighs impregnate the very air -- the
atmosphere becomes electrical to love, and each amorous spark darts through every
link of the chain! -- I must leave you -- I own I am somewhat flurried -- and
that confounded looby has perceived it.


[Going. Abs. Aye, aye, you are in a hurry to throw yourself at Julia's feet.


Faulk. I Am not in a humor to be trifled with -- I shall see her only to
upbraid her.


[Going. Abs. Nay, but stay Faulkland, and thank Mr. Acres for his good news.


Faulk. D -- n his news!


[ Exit Faulkland. Abs. Ha! ha! ha! poor Faulkland five minutes since --
'nothing on earth could give him a moment's uneasiness!'


Acres. The gentleman wa'n't angry at my praising his mistress, was he?


Abs. A little jealous, I believe, Bob.


Acres. You don't say so? Ha! ha! jealous of me -- that is a good joke.


Abs. There Is nothing strange in that, Bob: let me tell you, that sprightly
grace and insinuating manner of yours will do some mischief among the girls
here.


Abs. Ah! you joke -- ha! ha! mischief -- ha! ha! but you know I am not my own
property, my dear Lydia, has forestalled me. -- She could never abide me in the
country, because I used to dress so badly -- but odds frogs and tambours! I
shall not take matters so here -- now ancient Madam has no voice in it -- I Will
make my old clothes know who is master -- I shall straitway cashier the
hunting-frock -- and render my leather breeches incapable -- My hair has been
in training some time.


Abs. Indeed!


Acres. Aye -- and tho'ff the side-curls are a little restive, my hind-part
takes to it very kindly.


Abs. O, you will polish, I doubt not.


Acres. Absolutely I propose so -- then if I can find out this Ensign Beverley,
odds triggers and flints! I Will make him know the difference o't.


Abs. Spoke like a man -- but pray, Bob, I observe you have got an odd kind of
a new method of swearing --


Acres. Ha! ha! you have taken notice of it -- it is genteel, is not? -- I didn't
invent it myself though; but a commander in our militia -- a great scholar, I
assure you -- says that there is no meaning in the common oaths, and that
nothing but their antiquity makes them respectable; -- because, he says, the
ancients would never stick to an oath or two, but would say By Jove! or by
Bacchus! or by Mars! or by Venus! or by Pallas! according to the sentiment --
so that to swear with propriety, says my little Major, the 'oath should be an
echo to the sense;' and this we call the oath referential, or sentimental
swearing -- ha! ha! ha! it is genteel, is not it?


Abs. Very genteel, and very new indeed -- and I dare say will supplant all
other figures of imprecation.


Acres. Aye, aye, the best terms will grow obsolete -- D -- ns have had their
day.


Enter Fag. Fag. Sir, there is a gentleman below, desires to see you -- shall I
show him into the parlour?


Abs. Aye -- you may.


Acres. Well, I must be gone --


Abs. Stay; who is it, Fag?


Fag. Your father, Sir.


Abs. You puppy, why didn't you show him up directly?


[ Exit Fag. Acres. You have business with Sir Anthony. -- I expect a message
from Mrs. Malaprop at my lodgings -- I have sent also to my dear friend Sir
Lucius O'Trigger. -- Adieu, Jack, we must meet at night -- Odds bottles and
glasses! you shall give me a dozen bumpers to little Lydia.


Abs. That I will with all my heart.


[ Exit Acres. Abs. Now for a parental lecture -- I hope he has heard nothing
of the business that has brought me here. -- I wish the gout had held him fast
in Devonshire, with all my soul!


Enter Sir Anthony. Abs. Sir, I am delighted to see you here; and looking so
well! -- your sudden arrival at Bath made me apprehensive for your health.


Sir Anth. Very apprehensive, I dare say, Jack. -- What, you are recruiting
here, hey?


Abs. Yes, Sir, I am on duty.


Sir Anth. Well, Jack, I am glad to see you, though I did not expect it, for I
was going to write to you on a little matter of business. -- Jack, I have been
considering that I grow old and infirm, and shall probably not trouble you long.


Abs. Pardon me, Sir, I never saw you look more strong and hearty; and I pray
frequently that you may continue so.


Sir Anth. I hope your prayers may be heard with all my heart. Well then, Jack,
I have been considering that I am so strong and hearty, I may continue to
plague you a long time. -- Now, Jack, I am sensible that the income of your
commission, and what I have hitherto allowed you, is but a small pittance for a
lad of your spirit.


Abs. Sir, you are very good.


Sir Anth. And it is my wish, while yet I live, to have my Boy make some figure
in the world. -- I have resolved, therefore, to fix you at once in a noble
independence.


Abs. Sir, your kindness overpowers me -- such generosity makes the gratitude
of reason more lively than the sensations even of filial affection.


Sir Anth. I am glad you are so sensible of my attention -- and you shall be
master of a large estate in a few weeks.


Abs. Let my future life, Sir, speak my gratitude: I cannot express the sense I
have of your munificence. -- Yet, Sir, I presume you would not wish me to quit
the army?


Sir Anth. O, that shall be as your wife chooses.


Abs. My wife, Sir!


Sir Anth. Aye, aye, settle that between you -- settle that between you.


Abs. A wife, Sir, did you say?


Sir Anth. Aye, a wife -- why; did not I mention her before?


Abs. Not a word of it, Sir.


Sir Anth. Odd so! -- I mustn't forget her though. -- Yes, Jack, the independence
I was talking of is by a marriage -- the fortune is saddled with a wife -- but
I suppose that makes no difference.


Abs. Sir! Sir! -- you amaze me!


Sir Anth. Why, what the d -- l's the matter with the fool? Just now you were
all gratitude and duty.


Abs. I was, Sir, -- you talked to me of independence and a fortune, but not a
word of a wife.


Sir Anth. Why -- what difference does that make? Odd's life, Sir! if you have
the estate, you must take it with the live stock on it, as it stands.


Abs. If my happiness is to be the price, I must beg leave to decline the
purchase. -- Pray, Sir, who is the lady?


Sir Anth. What Is that to you, Sir? -- Come, give me your promise to love, and
to marry her directly.


Abs. Sure, Sir, this is not very reasonable, to summon my affections for a
lady I know nothing of!


Sir Anth. I am sure, Sir, it is more unreasonable in you to object to a lady
you know nothing of.


Abs. Then, Sir, I must tell you plainly, that my inclinations are fixed on
another.


Sir Anth. They are, are they? well, that is lucky -- because you will have more
merit in your obedience to me.


Abs. Sir, my heart is engaged to an Angel.


Sir Anth. Then pray let it send an excuse. -- It is very sorry -- but business
prevents it is waiting on her.


Abs. But my vows are pledged to her.


Sir Anth. Let her foreclose, Jack; let her foreclose; they are not worth
redeeming; besides, you have the Angel's vows in exchange, I suppose; so there
can be no loss there.


Abs. You must excuse me, Sir, if I tell you, once for all, that in this point
I cannot obey you.


Sir Anth. Hark'ee Jack; -- I have heard you for some time with patience -- I
have been cool, -- quite cool; -- but take care -- you know I am compliance
itself -- when I am not thwarted; -- no one more easily led -- when I have my
own way; -- but don't put me in a phrenzy.


Abs. Sir, I must repeat it -- in this I cannot obey you.


Sir Anth. Now, d -- n me! if ever I call you Jack again while I live!


Abs. Nay, Sir, but hear me.


Sir Anth. Sir, I will not hear a word -- not a word! not one word! so give me
your promise by a nod -- and I Will tell you what, Jack -- I mean, you Dog -- if
you don't, by --


Abs. What, Sir, promise to link myself to some mass of ugliness! to --


Sir Anth. Z -- ds! sirrah! the lady shall be as ugly as I choose: she shall
have a hump on each shoulder; she shall be as crooked as the Crescent; her one
eye shall roll like the Bull's in Coxe's musaeum -- she shall have a skin like
a mummy, and the beard of a Jew -- she shall be all this, sirrah! -- yet I Will
make you ogle her all day, and sit up all night to write sonnets on her beauty.


Abs. This is reason and moderation indeed!


Sir Anth. None of your sneering, puppy! no grinning, jackanapes!


Abs. Indeed, Sir, I never was in a worse humor for mirth in my life.


Sir Anth. It Is false, Sir! I know you are laughing in your sleeve: I know
you will grin when I am gone, sirrah!


Abs. Sir, I hope I know my duty better.


Sir Anth. None of your passion, Sir! none of your violence! if you please. --
It will not do with me, I promise you.


Abs. Indeed, Sir, I never was cooler in my life.


Sir Anth. It Is a confounded lie! -- I know you are in a passion in your heart;
I know you are, you hypocritical young dog! but it will not do.


Abs. Nay, Sir, upon my word.


Sir Anth. So you will fly out! cannot you be cool, like me? What the devil good
can Passion do! -- Passion is of no service, you impudent, insolent,
overbearing Reprobate! -- There you sneer again! -- don't provoke me! -- but
you rely upon the mildness of my temper -- you do, you Dog! you play upon the
weakness of my disposition! Yet take care -- the patience of a saint may be
overcome at last! -- but mark! I give you six hours and a half to consider of
this: if you then agree, without any condition, to do every thing on earth that
I choose, why -- confound you! I may in time forgive you -- If not, z -- ds!
don't enter the same hemisphere with me! don't dare to breath the same air, or
use the same light with me; but get an atmosphere and sun of your own! I Will
strip you of your commission; I Will lodge a five-and-threepence in the hands of
trustees, and you shall live on the interest. -- I Will disown you, I Will
disinherit you, I Will unget you! and -- d -- n me, if ever I call you Jack again!


[ Exit Sir Anthony. Absolute, solus. Abs. Mild, gentle, considerate father --
I kiss your hands. -- What a tender method of giving his opinion in these
matters Sir Anthony has! I dare not trust him with the truth. -- I wonder what
old, wealthy Hag it is that he wants to bestow on me! -- yet he married himself
for love! and was in his youth a bold Intriguer, and a gay Companion!


Enter Fag. Fag. Assuredly, Sir, our Father is wrath to a degree; he comes down
stairs eight or ten steps at a time -- muttering, growling, and thumping the
bannisters all the way: I, and the Cook's dog, stand bowing at the door -- rap!
he gives me a stroke on the head with his cane; bids me carry that to my
master, then kicking the poor Turnspit into the area, d -- ns us all, for a
puppy triumvirate! -- Upon my credit, Sir, were I in your place, and found my
father such very bad company, I should certainly drop his acquaintance.


Abs. Cease your impertinence, Sir, at present. -- Did you come in for nothing
more? -- Stand out of the way!


[Pushes him aside, and Exit. Fag, solus. Fag. Soh! Sir Anthony trims my
Master; He is afraid to reply to his Father -- then vents his spleen on poor
Fag! -- When one is vexed by one person, to revenge one's self on another, who
happens to come in the way -- is the vilest injustice! Ah! it shows the worst
temper -- the basest --


Enter Errand-Boy. Boy. Mr. Fag! Mr. Fag! your Master calls you.


Fag. Well, you little, dirty puppy, you need not baul so! -- The meanest
disposition! the --


Boy. Quick, quick, Mr. Fag.


Fag. Quick, quick, you impudent Jackanapes! am I to be commanded by you too?
you little, impertinent, insolent, kitchen-bred --


[Exit, kicking and beating him. SCENE II.
The North Parade. Enter Lucy. Lucy. So -- I shall have another Rival to add to
my mistress's list -- Captain Absolute. -- However, I shall not enter his name
till my purse has received notice in form. Poor Acres is dismissed! -- Well, I
have done him a last friendly office, in letting him know that Beverley was
here before him. -- Sir Lucius is generally more punctual, when he expects to
hear from his dear Dalia, as he calls her: -- I wonder he is not here! -- I have
a little scruple of conscience from this deceit; though I should not be paid so
well, if my hero knew that Delia was near fifty, and her own mistress. -- I
could not have thought he would have been so nice, when there is a golden egg in
the case, as to care whether he has it from a pullet or an old hen!


Enter Sir Lucius O'Trigger. Sir Luc. Hah! my little embassadress -- upon my
conscience I have been looking for you; I have been on the South Parade this
half-hour.


Lucy. ( Speaking simply) O gemini! and I have been waiting for your worship
here on the North.


Sir Luc. Faith! -- may be, that was the reason we did not meet; and it is very
comical too, how you could go out and I not see you -- for I was only taking a
nap at the Parade-Coffee-house, and I chose the window on purpose that I might
not miss you.


Lucy. My stars! Now I Would wager a sixpence I went by while you were asleep.


Sir Luc. Sure enough it must have been so -- and I never dreamt it was so
late, till I waked. Well, but my little girl, have you got nothing for me?


Lucy. Yes, but I have: -- I Have got a letter for you in my pocket.


Sir Luc. O faith! I guessed you weren't come empty-handed -- well -- let me
see what the dear creature says.


Lucy. There, Sir Lucius. ( Gives him a letter.)


Sir Luc. ( Reads) Sir -- there is often a sudden incentive impulse in love,
that has a greater induction than years of domestic combination: such was the
commotion I felt at the first superfluous view of Sir Lucius O'Trigger.


Very pretty, upon my word.

As my motive is interested, you may be assured my love shall never be
miscellaneous.


Very well.

Female punctuation forbids me to say more; yet let me add, that it will give
me joy infallible to find Sir Lucius worthy the last criterion of my
affections. --

Yours, while meretricious. -- DELIA.


Upon my conscience! Lucy, your lady is a great mistress of language. -- Faith,
she is quite the queen of the dictionary! -- for the devil a word dare refuse
coming at her call -- though one would think it was quite out of hearing.


Lucy. Aye, Sir, a lady of her experience.


Sir Luc. Experience! what, at seventeen?


Lucy. O true, Sir -- but then she reads so -- my stars! how she will read
off-hand!


Sir Luc. Faith, she must be very deep read to write this way -- though she is
rather an arbitrary writer too -- for here are a great many poor words pressed
into the service of this note, that would get their habeas corpus from any
court in Christendom. -- However, when affection guides the pen, Lucy, he must
be a brute who finds fault with the style.


Lucy. Ah! Sir Lucius, if you were to hear how she talks of you!


Sir Luc. O tell her, I Will make her the best husband in the world, and Lady
O'Trigger into the bargain! -- But we must get the old gentlewoman's consent --
and do every thing fairly.


Lucy. Nay, Sir Lucius, I thought you wa'n't rich enough to be so nice!


Sir Luc. Upon my word, young woman, you have hit it: -- I am so poor that I
cannot afford to do a dirty action. -- If I did not want money I Would steal your
mistress and her fortune with a great deal of pleasure. -- However, my pretty
girl, ( gives her money) here is a little something to buy you a ribband; and
meet me in the evening, and I Will give you an answer to this. So, hussy, take a
kiss beforehand, to put you in mind. (Kisses her.)


Lucy. O lud! Sir Lucius -- I never seed such a gemman! My lady will not like you
if you're so impudent.


Sir Luc. Faith she will, Lucy -- that same -- pho! what is the name of it? --
Modesty! -- is a quality in a lover more praised by the women than liked; so,
if your mistress asks you whether Sir Lucius ever gave you a kiss, tell her
fifty -- my dear.


Lucy. What, would you have me tell her a lie?


Sir Luc. Ah then, you baggage! I Will make it a truth presently.


Lucy. For shame now; here is some one coming.


Sir Luc. O faith, I Will quiet your conscience!


[Sees Fag. -- Exit, humming a Tune. Enter Fag. Fag. So, so, Ma'am. I humbly
beg pardon.


Lucy. O lud! -- now, Mr. Fag -- you flurry one so.


Fag. Come, come, Lucy, here is no one bye -- so a little less simplicity, with
a grain or two more sincerity, if you please. -- You play false with us, Madam.
-- I saw you give the Baronet a letter. -- My Master shall know this -- and if
he don't call him out -- I will.


Lucy. Ha! ha! ha! you gentlemen's gentlemen are so hasty. -- That letter was
from Mrs. Malaprop, simpleton. -- She is taken with Sir Lucius's address.


Fag. What tastes some people have! -- Why I suppose I have walked by her
window an hundred times. -- But what says our young lady? Any message to my
master?


Lucy. Sad news! Mr. Fag. -- A worse Rival than Acres! -- Sir Anthony Absolute
has proposed his son.


Fag. What, Captain Absolute?


Lucy. Even so. -- I overheard it all.


Fag. Ha! ha! ha! -- very good, faith. -- Goodbye, Lucy, I must away with this
news.


Lucy. Well -- you may laugh -- but it is true, I assure you.

(Going.) But -- Mr. Fag -- tell your master not to be cast down by this.


Fag. O he will be so disconsolate!


Luc. And charge him not to think of quarrelling with young Absolute.


Fag. Never fear! -- never fear!


Lucy. Be sure -- bid him keep up his spirits.


Fag. We will -- we will.


[Exeunt severally. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The North Parade. Enter Absolute. IT IS just as Fag told me, indeed. --
Whimsical enough, faith! My Father wants to force me to marry the very girl I
am plotting to run away with! -- He must not know of my connection with her yet
awhile. -- He has too summary a method of proceeding in these matters -- and
Lydia shall not yet lose her hopes of an elopement. -- However, I Will read my
recantation instantly. -- My conversion is something sudden, indeed -- but I
can assure him it is very sincere. -- So, so -- here he comes. -- He looks
plaguey gruff.


[Steps aside. Enter Sir Anthony. No -- I Will die sooner than forgive him. --
Die, did I say? I Will live these fifty years to plague him. -- At our last
meeting, his impudence had almost put me out of temper. -- An obstinate,
passionate, selfwilled boy! -- Who can he take after? This is my return for
getting him before all his brothers and sisters! -- for putting him, at twelve
years old, into a marching regiment, and allowing him fifty pounds a year,
beside his pay ever since! -- But I have done with him; -- he is any body's son
for me. -- I never will see him more, -- never -- never -- never -- never.


Abs. Now for a penitential face.


Sir Anth. Fellow, get out of my way.


Abs. Sir, you see a penitent before you.


Sir Anth. I see an impudent scoundrel before me.


Abs. A sincere penitent. -- I am come, Sir, to acknowledge my error, and to
submit entirely to your will.


Sir Anth. What Is that?


Abs. I have been revolving, and reflecting, and considering on your past
goodness, and kindness, and condescension to me.


Sir Anth. Well, Sir?


Abs. I have been likewise weighing and balancing what you were pleased to
mention concerning duty, and obedience, and authority.


Sir Anth. Well, Puppy?


Abs. Why then, Sir, the result of my reflections is -- a resolution to
sacrifice every inclination of my own to your satisfaction.


Sir Anth. Why now, you talk sense -- absolute sense -- I never heard any thing
more sensible in my life. -- Confound you; you shall be Jack again.


Abs. I am happy in the appellation.


Sir Anth. Why, then, Jack, my dear Jack, I will now inform you -- who the lady
really is. -- Nothing but your passion and violence, you silly fellow,
prevented my telling you at first. Prepare, Jack, for wonder and rapture --
prepare. -- What think you of Miss Lydia Languish?


Abs. Languish! What, the Languishes of Worcestershire?


Sir Anth. Worcestershire! No. Did you never meet Mrs. Malaprop and her Niece,
Miss Languish, who came into our country just before you were last ordered to
your regiment?


Abs. Malaprop! Languish! I don't remember ever to have heard the names before.
Yet, stay -- I think I do recollect something. -- Languish! Languish! She
squints, don't she? -- A little, red-haired girl?


Sir Anth. Squints? -- A red-haired girl! -- Z -- ds, no.


Abs. Then I must have forgot; it cannot be the same person.


Sir Anth. Jack! Jack! what think you of blooming, love-breathing seventeen?


Abs. As to that, Sir, I am quite indifferent. -- If I can please you in the
matter, it is all I desire.


Sir Anth. Nay, but Jack, such eyes! such eyes! so innocently wild! so
bashfully irresolute! Not a glance but speaks and kindles some thought of love!
Then, Jack, her cheeks! her cheeks, Jack! so deeply blushing at the
insinuations of her telltale eyes! Then, Jack, her lips! -- O Jack, lips
smiling at their own discretion; and if not smiling, more sweetly pouting; more
lovely in sullenness!


Abs. That Is she indeed. -- Well done, old gentleman!


Sir Anth. Then, Jack, her neck. -- O Jack! Jack!


Abs. And which is to be mine, Sir, the Niece or the Aunt?


Sir Anth. Why, you unfeeling, insensible Puppy, I despise you. When I was of
your age, such a description would have made me fly like a rocket! The Aunt,
indeed! -- Odds life! when I ran away with your mother, I would not have
touched any thing old or ugly to gain an empire.


Abs. Not to please your father, Sir?


Sir Anth. To please my father! -- Z -- ds! not to please -- O my father! --
Oddso! -- yes -- yes! if my father indeed had desired -- that is quite another
matter. -- Though he wa'n't the indulgent father that I am, Jack.


Abs. I dare say not, Sir.


Sir Anth. But, Jack, you are not sorry to find your mistress is so beautiful.


Sir Anth. Sir, I repeat it; if I please you in this affair, it is all I desire.
Not that I think a woman the worse for being handsome; but, Sir, if you please
to recollect, you before hinted something about a hump or two, one eye, and a
few more graces of that kind -- now, without being very nice, I own I should
rather choose a wife of mine to have the usual number of limbs, and a limited
quantity of back: and though one eye may be very agreeable, yet as the prejudice
has always run in favor of two, I would not wish to affect a singularity in
that article.


Sir Anth. What a phlegmatic sot it is! Why, sirrah, you're an anchorite! -- a
vile insensible stock. -- You a soldier! -- you're a walking block, fit only to
dust the company's regiment on! -- Odds life! I Have a great mind to marry the
girl myself!


Abs. I am entirely at your disposal, Sir; if you should think of addressing
Miss Anguish yourself, I suppose you would have me marry the Aunt; or if you
should change you're mind, and take the old lady -- it is the same to me -- I Will
marry the Niece.


Sir Anth. Upon my word, Jack, you are either a very great hypocritie, or --
but, come, I know your indifference on such a subject must be all a lie -- I Am
sure it must -- come, now -- d -- n your demure face! -- come, confess, Jack --
you have been lying -- have not you? You have been lying, hey? I Will never forgive
you, if you have not: -- so now, own, my dear Jack, you have been playing the
hypocrite, hey! -- I Will never forgive you, if you have not been lying and playing
the hypocrite.


Abs. I Am sorry, Sir, that the respect and duty which I bear to you should be
so mistaken.


Sir Anth. Hang your respect and duty! But, come along with me, I Will write a
note to Mrs. Malaprop, and you shall visit the lady directly.


Abs. Where does she lodge, Sir?


Sir Anth. What a dull question! -- only on the Grove here.


Abs. O! then I can call on her in my way to the coffee-house.


Sir Anth. In your way to the coffee-house! You Will set your heart down in your
way to the coffee-house, hey? Ah! you leaden-nerv'd, wooden-hearted dolt! But
come along, you shall see her directly; her eyes shall be the Promethian torch
to you -- come along, I Will never forgive you, if you don't come back, stark
made with rapture and impatience -- if you don't, egad, I Will marry the girl
myself!


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Julia's Dressing Room. Faulkland, solus. Faulk. They told me Julia would
return directly; wonder she is not yet come! -- How mean does this captious,
unsatisfied temper of mine appear to my cooler judgment! Yet I know not that I
indulge it in any other point: -- but on this one subject, and to this one
object, whom I think I love beyond my life, I am ever ungenerously fretful, and
madly capricious! -- I am conscious of it -- yet I cannot correct myself! What
tender, honest joy sparkled in her eyes when we met! -- How delicate was the
warmth of her expressions! -- I was ashamed to appear less happy -- though I
had come resolved to wear a face of coolness and upbraiding. Sir Anthony's
presence prevented my proposed expostulations: -- yet I must be satisfied that
she has not been so very happy in my absence. -- She is coming! -- Yes! -- I
know the nimbleness of her tread, when she thinks her impatient Faulkland
counts the moments of her stay.


Enter Julia. Jul. I had not hoped to see you again so soon.


Faulk. Could I, Julia, be contented with my first welcome -- restrained as we
were by the presence of a third person?


Jul. O Faulkland, when your kindness can make me thus happy, let me not think
that I discovered more coolness in your first salutation than my long-hoarded
joy could have presaged.


Faulk. 'Twas but your fancy, Julia. -- I was rejoiced to see you -- to see you
in such health -- Sure I had no cause for coldness?


Jul. Nay then, I see you have taken something ill. -- You must not conceal
from me what it is.


Faulk. Well then -- shall I own to you -- but you will despise me, Julia --
nay, I despise myself for it. -- Yet I will own, that my joy at hearing of your
health and arrival here, by your neighbor Acres, was something damped, by his
dwelling much on the high spirits you had enjoyed in Devonshire -- on your
mirth -- your singing -- dancing, and I know not what! -- For such is my
temper, Julia, that I should regard every mirthful moment in your absence as a
treason to constancy: -- The mutual tear that steals down the cheek of parting
lovers is a compact, that no smile shall live there till they meet again.


Jul. Must I never cease to tax my Faulkland with this teasing minute caprice?
-- Can the idle reports of a silly boor weigh in your breast against my tried
affection?


Faulk. They have no weight with me, Julia: no, no -- I am happy if you have
been so -- yet only say, that you did not sing with mirth -- say that you
thought of Faulkland in the dance.


Jul. I never can be happy, in your absence. -- If I wear a countenance of
content, it is to show that my mind holds no doubt of my Faulkland's truth. --
If I seemed sad -- it were to make malice triumph; and say, that I had fixed my
heart on one, who left me to lament his roving, and my own credulity. --
Believe me, Faulkland, I mean not to upbraid you, when I say, that I have often
dressed sorrow in smiles, lest my friends should guess whose unkindness had
caused my tears.


Faulk. You were ever all goodness to me. -- O, I am a brute, when I but admit
a doubt of your true constancy!


Jul. If ever, without such cause from you, as I will not suppose possible, you
find my affections veering but a point, may I become a proverbial scoff for
levity, and base ingratitude.


Faulk. Ah! Julia, that last word is grating to me. I would I had no title to
your gratitude! Search your heart, Julia; perhaps what you have mistaken for
Love, is but the warm effusion of a too thankful heart!


Jul. For what quality must I love you?


Faulk. For no quality! To regard me for any quality of mind or understanding,
were only to esteem me. And for person -- I have often wished myself deformed,
to be convinced that I owed no obligation there for any part of your affection.


Jul. Where Nature has bestowed a show of nice attention in the features of a
man, he should laugh at it, as misplaced. I have seen men, who in this vain
article perhaps might rank above you; but my heart has never asked my eyes if
it were so or not.


Faulk. Now this is not well from you, Julia -- I despise person in a man --
Yet if you loved me as I wish, though I were an Aethiop, you would think none so
fair.


Jul. I see you are determined to be unkind. -- The contract which my poor
father bound us in gives you more than a lover's privilege.


Faulk. Again, Julia, you raise ideas that feed and justify my doubts. -- I
would not have been more free -- no -- I am proud of my restraint. -- Yet --
yet -- perhaps your high respect alone for this solemn compact has fettered
your inclinations, which else had made worthier choice. -- How shall I be sure,
had you remained unbound in thought and promise, that I should still have been
the object of your persevering love?


Jul. Then try me now. -- Let us be free as strangers as to what is past: -- my
heart will not feel more liberty!


Faulk. There now! so hasty, Julia! so anxious to be free! -- If your love for
me were fixed and ardent, you would not loose your hold, even though I wished it!


Jul. O, you torture me to the heart! -- I cannot bear it.


Faulk. I do not mean to distress you. -- If I loved you less, I should never
give you an uneasy moment. -- But hear me. -- All my fretful doubts arise from
this -- Women are not used to weigh, and separate the motives of their
affections: -- the cold dictates of prudence, gratitude, or filial duty, may
sometimes be mistaken for the pleadings of the heart. -- I would not boast --
yet let me say, that I have neither age, person, or character, to found dislike
on; -- my fortune such as few ladies could be charged with indiscretion in the
match. -- O Julia! when Love receives such countenance from Prudence, nice
minds will be suspicious of its birth.


Jul. I know not whither your insinuations would tend: -- as they seem pressing
to insult me -- I will spare you the regret of having done so. -- I have given
you no cause for this!


[Exit in Tears. Faulk. In Tears! stay, Julia: stay but for a moment. -- The
door is fastened! -- Julia! -- my soul -- but for one moment: -- I hear her
sobbing! -- 'Sdeath! what a brute am I to use her thus! Yet stay. -- Aye -- she
is coming now: -- how little resolution there is in woman! -- how a few soft
words can turn them! -- No, faith! -- she is not coming either. -- Why, Julia
-- my love -- say but that you forgive me -- come but to tell me that -- now,
this is being too resentful: -- stay! she is coming too -- I thought she would
-- no steadiness in any thing! her going away must have been a mere trick then
-- she sha'n't see that I was hurt by it. -- I Will affect indifference -- ( hums
a tune: then listens) -- No -- Z -- ds! she is not coming! -- nor don't intend
it, I suppose. -- This is not steadiness, but obstinacy! Yet I deserve it. --
What, after so long an absence, to quarrel with her tenderness! -- 'twas
barbarous and unmanly! -- I should be ashamed to see her now. -- I Will wait till
her just resentment is abated -- and when I distress her so again, may I lose
her for ever! and be linked instead to some antique virago, whose knawing
passions, and long-hoarded spleen, shall make me curse my folly half the day,
and all the night!


[Exit. SCENE III.
Mrs. Malaprop's Lodgings. Mrs. Malaprop, and Captain Absolute. Mrs. Mal. Your
being Sir Anthony's son, Captain, would itself be a sufficient accommodation;
-- but from the ingenuity of your appearance, I am convinced you deserve the
character here given of you.


Abs. Permit me to say, Madam, that as I never yet have had the pleasure of
seeing Miss Languish, my principal inducement in this affair at present, is the
honor of being allied to Mrs. Malaprop; of whose intellectual accomplishments,
elegant manners, and unaffected learning, no tongue is silent.


Mrs. Mal. Sir, you do me infinite honor! -- I beg, Captain, you will be seated.
-- ( Sit) -- Ah! few gentlemen, now a days, know how to value the ineffectual
qualities in a woman! few think how a little knowledge become a gentlewoman!
Men have no sense now but for the worthless flower, beauty!


Abs. It is but too true indeed, Ma'am; -- yet I fear our ladies should share
the blame -- they think our admiration of beauty so great, that knowledge in
them would be superfluous. Thus, like gardentrees, they seldom show fruits,
till time has robbed them of the more specious blossom. -- Few, like Mrs.
Malaprop and the Orange-tree, are rich in both at once!


Mrs. Mal. Sir -- you overpower me with goodbreeding. -- He is the very
Pineapple of politeness! You are not ignorant, Captain, that this giddy girl
has somehow contrived to fix her affections on a beggarly, strolling,
eve's-dropping Ensign, whom none of us have seen, and nobody knows any thing of.


Abs. O, I have heard the silly affair before. -- I Am not at all prejudiced
against her on that account.


Mrs. Mal. You are very good, and very considerate, Captain. -- I am sure I
have done every thing in my power since I exploded the affair! long ago I laid
my positive conjunction on her never to think on the fellow again; -- I have
since laid Sir Anthony's preposition before her; -- but I Am sorry to say she
seems resolved to decline every particle that I enjoin her.


Abs. It must be very distressing indeed, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. It gives me the hydrostatics to such a degree! -- I thought she had
persisted from corresponding with him; but behold this very day, I have
interceded another letter from the fellow! I believe I have it in my pocket.


Abs. O the devil! my last note.


[Aside. Mrs. Mal. Aye, here it is.


Abs. Aye, my note indeed! O the little traitress Lucy.


[Aside. Mrs. Mal. There, perhaps you may know the writing.


[Gives him the letter. Abs. I think I have seen the hand before -- yes, I
certainly must have seen this hand before: --


Mrs. Mal. Nay, but read it, Captain.


Abs. (Reads) My soul's idol, my adored Lydia! -- Very tender indeed!


Mrs. Mal. Tender! aye, and profane too, of my conscience!


Abs. I am excessively alarmed at the intelligence you send me, the more so as
my new rival --


Mrs. Mal. That Is you, Sir.

has universally the character of being an accomplished gentleman, and a man of
honor. -- Well, that is handsome enough.


Mrs. Mal. O, the fellow had some design in writing so --


Abs. That he had, I Will answer for him, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. But go on, Sir -- you will see presently.


Abs. As for the old weather-beaten she-dragon who guards you, -- Who can he
mean by that?


Mrs. Mal. Me, Sir -- me -- he means me there -- what do you think now? -- but
go on a little further.


Abs. Impudent scoundrel! -- it shall go hard but I will elude her vigilance,
as I am told that the same ridiculous vanity, which makes her dress up her
coarse features, and deck her dull chat with hard words which she don't
understand --


Mrs. Mal. There, Sir! an attack upon my language! what do you think of that?
-- an aspersion upon my parts of speech! was ever such a brute! save if I
reprehend any thing in this world, it is the use of my oracular tongue, and a
nice derangement of epitaphs!


Abs. He deserves to be hanged and quartered! let me see -- same ridiculous
vanity --


Mrs. Mal. You need not read it again, Sir.


Abs. I beg pardon, Ma'am does also lay her open to the grossest deceptions
from flattery and pretended admiration -- an impudent coxcomb! so that I have a
scheme to see you shortly with the old Harridan's consent, and even to make her
a go between in our interviews. -- Was ever such assurance.


Mrs. Mal. Did you ever hear any thing like it? -- he will elude my vigilance,
will he? -- yes, yes! ha! ha! he is very likely to enter these floors! -- we'll
try who can plot best!


Abs. Ha! ha! had a conceited puppy, ha! ha! ha! -- Well, but Mrs. Malaprop, as
the girl seems so infatuated by this fellow, suppose you were to wink at her
corresponding with him for a little time -- let her even plot an elopement with
him -- then do you connive at her escape -- while I, just in the nick, will
have the fellow laid by the heels, and fairly contrive to carry her off in his
stead.


Mrs. Mal. I am delighted with the scheme, never was any thing better
perpetrated!


Abs. But, pray, could not I see the lady for a few minutes now? -- I should
like to try her temper a little.


Mrs. Mal. Why, I don't know -- I doubt she is not prepared for a first visit
of this kind. -- There is a decorum in these matters.


Abs. O Lord! she will not mind me -- only tell her Beverley --


Mrs. Mal. Sir! --


Abs. Gently, good tongue.


[Aside. Mrs. Mal. What did you say of Beverley?


Abs. O, I was going to propose that you should tell her, by way of jest, that
it was Beverley who was below -- she would come down fast enough then -- ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Mal. 'Twould be a trick she well-deserves -- besides you know the fellow
tells her he will get my consent to see her -- ha! ha! -- Let him if he can, I
say again. -- Lydia, come down here!

[Calling. -- He Will make me a go-between in their interviews! -- ha! ha! ha!
Come down, I say, Lydia! -- I don't wonder at your laughing, ha! ha! ha! his
impudence is truly ridiculous.


Abs. It Is very ridiculous, upon my soul, Ma'am, ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Mal. The little hussy will not hear. -- Well, I Will go and tell her at once
who it is -- she shall know that Capt. Absolute is come to wait on her. -- And
I Will make her behave as becomes a young woman.


Abs. As you please, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. For the present, Captain, your servant -- Ah! you have not done
laughing yet, I see -- elude my vigilance! yes, yes, ha! ha! ha!


[Exit. Abs. Ha! ha! ha! one would think now that I might throw off all
disguise at once, and seize my prize with security -- but such is Lydia's
caprice, that to undeceive were probably to lose her. -- I Will see whether she
knows me.


[Walks aside, and seems engaged in looking at the pictures. Enter Lydia. Lyd.
What a scene am I now to go through! surely nothing can be more dreadful than to
be obliged to listen to the loathsome addresses of a stranger to one's heart.
-- I have heard of girls persecuted as I am, who have appealed in behalf of
their favored lover to the generosity of his rival: suppose I were to try it
-- there stands the hated rival -- an officer too! -- but O how unlike my
Beverley! -- I wonder he don't begin -- truly he seems a very negligent wooer!
-- quite at his ease, upon my word! I Will speak first -- Mr. Absolute.


Abs. Madam.


[Turns round. Lyd. O Heavens! Beverley!


Abs. Hush! -- hush, my life! -- softly! be not surprised!


Lyd. I am so astonished! and so terrified! and so overjoyed! -- for Heaven's
sake! how came you here?


Abs. Briefly -- I have deceived your Aunt -- I was informed that my new rival
was to visit here this evening, and contriving to have him kept away, have
passed myself on her for Capt. Absolute.


Lyd. O, charming! -- And she really takes you for young Absolute?


Abs. O, she is convinced of it.


Lyd. Ha! ha! ha! I cannot forbear laughing to think how her sagacity is
overreached!


Abs. But we trifle with our precious moments -- such another opportunity may
not occur -- then let me now conjure my kind, my condescending angel, to fix
the time when I may rescue her from undeserved persecution, and with a licensed
warmth plead for my reward.


Lyd. Will you then, Beverley, consent to forfeit that portion of my paltry
wealth? -- that burden on the wings of love?


Abs. O come to me -- rich only thus -- in loveliness -- Bring no portion to me
but thy love -- 'twill be generous in you, Lydia -- for well you know, it is
the only dower your poor Beverley can repay.


Lyd. How persuasive are his words! -- how charming will poverty be with him!


Abs. Ah! my soul, what a life will we then live? Love shall be our idol and
support! we will worship him with a monastic strictness; abjuring all worldly
toys, to center every thought and action there. -- Proud of calamity, we will
enjoy the wreck of wealth; while the surrounding gloom of adversity shall make
the flame of our pure love show doubly bright. -- By Heavens! I would fling all
goods of fortune from me with a prodigal hand to enjoy the scene where I might
clasp my Lydia to my bosom, and say, the world affords no smile to me -- but
here --

[Embracing her. If she holds out now the devil is in it!


[Aside. Lyd. Now could I fly with him to the Antipodes! but my persecution is
not yet come to a crisis.


Enter Mrs. Malaprop, listening. Mrs. Mal. I Am impatient to know how the little
huzzy deports herself.

[Aside.
Abs. So pensive, Lydia! -- is then your warmth abated?


Mrs. Mal. Warmth abated! -- so! -- she has been in a passion, I suppose.


Lyd. No -- nor ever can while I have life.


Mrs. Mal. An ill-temper'd little devil! -- She Will be in a passion all her life
-- will she?


Lyd. Think not the idle threats of my ridiculous aunt can ever have any weight
with me.


Mrs. Mal. Very dutiful, upon my word!


Lyd. Let her choice be Capt. Absolute, but Beverley is mine.


Mrs. Mal. I am astonished at her assurance! -- to his face -- this to his face!


Abs. Thus then let me enforce my suit.


[Kneeling. Mrs. Mal. Aye -- poor young man! -- down on his knees entreating
for pity! -- I can contain no longer. -- Why, huzzy! huzzy! -- I have overheard
you.


Abs. O confound her vigilance!


[Aside. Mrs. Mal. Capt. Absolute -- I know not how to apologize for her
shocking rudeness.


Abs. So -- all is safe, I find.

[Aside. I have hopes, Madam, that time will bring the young lady --


Mrs. Mal. O, there is nothing to be hoped for from her! she is as headstrong as
an allegory on the banks of Nile.


Lyd. Nay, Madam, what do you charge me with now?


Mrs. Mal. Why, thou unblushing rebel -- didn't you tell this gentleman to his
face that you loved another better? -- didn't you say you never would be his?


Lyd. No, Madam -- I did not.


Mrs. Mal. Good Heavens! what assurance! -- Lydia, Lydia, you ought to know
that lying don't become a young woman! -- Didn't you boast that Beverley --
that stroller Beverley, possessed your heart? -- Tell me that, I say.


Lyd. It Is true, Ma'am, and none but Beverley --


Mrs. Mal. Hold; -- hold Assurance! -- you shall not be so rude.


Abs. Nay, pray Mrs. Malaprop, don't stop the young lady's speech: -- she is
very welcome to talk thus -- it does not hurt me in the least, I assure you.


Mrs. Mal. You are too good, Captain -- too amiably patient -- but come with
me, Miss -- let us see you again soon, Captain -- remember what we have fixed.


Abs. I shall, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. Come, take a graceful leave of the gentleman.


Lyd. May every blessing wait on my Beverley, my loved Bev --


Mrs. Mal. Huzzy! I Will choke the word in your throat! -- come along -- come
along.


[Exeunt severally. [ Beverley kissing his hand to Lydia -- Mrs. Malaprop
stopping her from speaking. SCENE V. Acres's lodgings.
Acres and David. Acres as just dressed. Acres. Indeed, David -- do you think I
become it so?


Dav. You are quite another creature, believe me Master, by the Mass! an' we have
any luck we shall see the Devon monkeyrony in all the printshops in Bath!


Acres. Dress does make a difference, David.


Dav. It Is all in all, I think -- difference! why, an' you were to go now to
Clod-Hall, I am certain the old lady wouldn't know you: Master Butler wouldn't
believe his own eyes, and Mrs. Pickle would cry, "Lard presarve me!" our
dairy-maid would come giggling to the door, and I warrant Dolly Tester, your
Honor's favorite, would blush like my waistcoat. -- Oons! I Will hold a gallon,
there an't a dog in the house but would bark, and I question whether Phillis
would wag a hair of her tail!


Acres. Aye, David, there is nothing like polishing.


Dav. So I says of your Honor's boots; but the boy never heeds me!


Acres. But, David, has Mr. De-la-Grace been here? I must rub up my balancing,
and chasing, and boring.


Dav. I Will call again, Sir.


Acres. Do -- and see if there are any letters for me at the post office.


Dav. I will. -- By the Mass, I cannot help looking at your head! -- if I had not
been by at the cooking, I wish I may die if I should have known the dish again
myself!


[Exit. [ Acres comes forward, practicing a dancing step. Acres. Sink, slide --
coupee -- Confound the first inventors of cotillons! say I -- they are as bad
as algebra to us country gentlemen -- I can walk a Minuet easy enough when I Am
forced! -- and I have been accounted a good stick in a Country-dance. -- Odd's
jigs and tabors! -- I never valued your crossover two couple -- figure in --
right and left -- and I Would foot it with ever a captain in the county! -- but
these outlandish heathen Allemandes and Cotillons are quite beyond me! -- I
shall never prosper at 'em, that is sure -- mine are true-born English legs --
they don't understand their cursed French lingo! -- their Pas this, and Pas
that, and Pas the other! -- d -- n me, my feet don't like to be called Paws! no,
it is certain I have most Antigallican Toes!


Enter Servant. Serve. Here is Sir Lucius O'Trigger to wait on you, Sir.


Acres. Show him in.


Enter Sir Lucius. Sir Luc. Mr. Acres, I am delighted to embrace you.


Acres. My dear Sir Lucius, I kiss your hands.


Sir Luc. Pray, my friend, what has brought you so suddenly to Bath?


Acres. Faith! I have followed Cupid's Jack-a-Lantern, and find myself in a
quagmire at last. -- In short, I have been very ill-used, Sir Lucius. -- I
don't choose to mention names, but look on me as on a very ill-used gentleman.


Sir Luc. Pray, what is the case? -- I ask no names.


Acres. Mark me, Sir Lucius, I falls as deep as need be in love with a young
lady -- her friends take my part -- I follow her to Bath -- send word of my
arrival; and receive answer, that the lady is to be otherwise disposed of. --
This, Sir Lucius, I call being ill-used.


Sir Luc. Very ill, upon my conscience -- Pray, can you divine the cause of it?


Acres. Why, there is the matter: she has another lover, one Beverley, who, I am
told, is now in Bath. -- Odds slanders and lies! he must be at the bottom of it.


Sir Luc. A rival in the case, is there? -- and you think he has supplanted you
unfairly.


Acres. Unfairly! -- to be sure he has. -- He never could have done it fairly.


Sir Luc. Then sure you know what is to be done!


Acres. Not I, upon my soul!


Sir Luc. We wear no swords here, but you understand me.


Acres. What! fight him!


Sir Luc. Aye, to be sure: what can I mean else?


Acres. But he has given me no provocation.


Sir Luc. Now, I think he has given you the greatest provocation in the world.
-- Can a man commit a more heinous offense against another than to fall in love
with the same woman? O, by my soul, it is the most unpardonable breach of
friendship!


Acres. Breach of friendship! Aye, aye; but I have no acquaintance with this
man. I never saw him in my life.


Sir Luc. That Is no argument at all -- he has the less right then to take such
a liberty.


Acres. 'Gad that is true -- I grow full of anger, Sir Lucius! -- I fire apace!
Odds hilts and blades! I find a man may have a deal of valor in him, and not
know it! But couldn't I contrive to have a little right of my side?


Sir Luc. What the d -- l signifies right, when your honor is concerned? Do
you think Achilles, or my little Alexander the Great ever inquired where the
right lay? No, by my soul, they drew their broad-swords, and left the lazy sons
of peace to settle the justice of it.


Acres. Your words are a grenadier's march to my heart! I believe courage must
be catching! -- I certainly do feel a kind of valor rising as it were -- a
kind of courage, as I may say -- Odds flints, pans, and triggers! I Will
challenge him directly.


Sir Luc. Ah, my little friend! if we had Blunderbuss-Hall here -- I could show
you a range of ancestry, in the O'Trigger line, that would furnish the new
room; every one of whom had killed his man! -- For though the mansion house and
dirty acres have slipped through my fingers, I thank God our honor, and the
family-pictures, are as fresh as ever.


Acres. O Sir Lucius! I have had ancestors too! every man of 'em colonel or
captain in the militia? -- Odds balls and barrels! say no more -- I Am braced
for it -- my nerves are become catgut! my sinews wire! and my heart Pinchbeck!
The thunder of your words has soured the milk of human kindness in my breast!
-- Z -- ds! as the man in the play says, "I could do such deeds!"


Sir Luc. Come, come, there must be no passion at all in the case -- these
things should always be done civilly.


Acres. I must be in a passion, Sir Lucius -- I must be in a rage -- Dear Sir
Lucius let me be in a rage, if you love me. -- Come, here is pen and paper.

(Sits down to write) I would the ink were red! -- Indite, I say, indite! --
How shall I begin? Odds bullets and blades! I Will write a good bold hand,
however.


Sir Luc. Pray compose yourself.


Acres. Come -- now shall I begin with an oath? Do, Sir Lucius, let me begin
with a damme.


Sir Luc. Pho! pho! do the thing decently and like a Christian. Begin now, -- "
Sir --


Acres. That Is too civil by half.


Sir Luc. "To prevent the confusion that might arise."


Acres. Well --


Sir Luc. "From our both addressing the same lady."


Acres. Aye -- there is the reason -- "same lady" -- Well --


Sir Luc. "I shall expect the honor of your company" --


Acres. Z -- ds! I Am not asking him to dinner.


Sir Luc. Pray be easy.


Acres. Well then, "honor of your company"


Sir Luc. To settle our pretensions."


Acres. Well.


Sir Luc. Let me see, aye, King's Mead-fields will do. -- " In King's Mead
fields."


Acres. So that is done. -- Well, I Will fold it up presently; my own crest -- a
hand and dagger shall be the seal.


Sir Luc. You see now this little explanation will put a stop at once to all
confusion or misunderstanding that might arise between you.


Acres. Aye, we fight to prevent any misunderstanding.


Sir Luc. Now, I Will leave you to fix your own time. -- take my advice, and
you will decide it this evening if you can; then let the worst come of it, 'twill
be off your mind tomorrow.


Acres. Very true.


Sir Luc. So I shall see nothing more of you, unless it be by letter, till the
evening. -- I would do myself the honor to carry your message; but, to tell
you a secret, I believe I shall have just such another affair on my own hands.
There is a gay captain here, who put a jest on me lately, at the expense of my
country, and I only want to fall in with the gentleman, to call him out.


Acres. By my valor, I should like to see you fight first! Odds life! I should
like to see you kill him, if it was only to get a little lesson.


Sir Luc. I shall be very proud of instructing you. -- Well for the present --
but remember now, when you meet your antagonist, do every thing in a mild and
agreeable manner. -- Let your courage be as keen, but at the same time as
polished as your sword.


[Exeunt severally. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Acres's Lodgings. Acres and David. David. THEN, by the Mass, Sir! I would do
no such thing -- never a Sir Lucius O'Trigger in the kingdom should make me
fight, when I wa'n't so minded. Oons! what will the old lady say, when she
hears o't!


Acres. Ah! David, if you had heard Sir Lucius! -- Odds sparks and flames! he
would have roused your valor.


David. Not he, indeed. I hates such bloodthirsty cormorants. Look'ee, Master,
if you would wanted a bout at boxing, quarter-staff, or shortstaff, I should never
be the man to bid you cry off: But for your cursed sharps and snaps, I never
knew any good come of 'em.


Acres. But my honor, David, my honor! I must be very careful of my honor.


David. Aye, by the Mass! and I would be very careful of it; and I think in
return my honor couldn't do less than to be very careful of me.


Acres. Odds blades! David, no gentleman will ever risk the loss of his honor!


David. I say then, it would be but civil in honor never to risk the loss of
the gentleman. -- Lookee, Master, this honor seems to me to be a mavelous
false friend; aye, truly, a very courtier-like servant. -- Put the case, I was
a gentleman (which, thank God, no one can say of me); well -- my honor makes
me quarrel with another gentleman of my acquaintance. -- So -- we fight.
(Pleasant enough that) Boh! -- I kill him -- (the more's my luck.) Now, pray
who gets the profit of it? -- Why, my honor. -- But put the case that he kills
me! -- by the Mass! I go to the worms, and my honor whips over to my enemy!


Acres. No, David -- in that case! -- Odds crowns and laurels! your honor
follows you to the grave.


David. Now, that is just the place where I could make a shift to do without it.


Acres. Z -- ds, David! you're a coward! -- It does not become my valor to
listen to you. -- What, shall I disgrace my ancestors? -- Think of that, David
-- think what it would be to disgrace my ancestors!


David. Under favor, the surest way of not disgracing them, is to keep as long
as you can out of their company. Look'ee now, Master, to go to them in such
haste -- with an ounce of lead in your brains -- I should think might as well
be let alone. Our ancestors are very good kind of folks; but they are the last
people I should choose to have a visiting acquaintance with.


Acres. But David, now, you don't think there is such very, very, very great
danger, hey? -- Odds life! people often fight without any mischief done!


David. By the Mass, I think it is ten to one against you! -- Oons! here to meet
some lionheaded fellow, I warrant, with his d -- n'd doublebarrell'd swords,
and cut and thrust pistols! Lord bless us! it makes me tremble to think o't! --
Those be such desperate bloody-minded weapons! Well, I never could abide 'em!
-- from a child I never could fancy 'em! -- I suppose there a'n't so merciless
a beast in the world as your loaded pistol!


Acres. Z -- ds! I will not be afraid -- Odds fire and fury! you shall not make me
afraid. -- Here is the challenge, and I have sent for my dear friend Jack
Absolute to carry it for me.


David. Aye, In The name of mischief, let him be the messenger. -- For my part,
I wouldn't lend a hand to it for the best horse in your stable. By the Mass! it
don't look like another letter! -- It is, as I may say, a designing and
malicious-looking letter! -- and I warrant smells of gunpowder like a soldier's
pouch! -- Oons! I wouldn't swear it may not go off!


Acres. Out, you poltroon! -- you have not the valor of a grass-hopper.


David. Well, I say no more -- 'twill be sad news, to be sure, at Clod-Hall! --
but I have done. -- How Phyllis will howl when she hears of it! -- Aye, poor
bitch, she little thinks what shooting her Master's going after! -- And I
warrant old Crop, who has carried your honor, field and road, these ten years,
will curse the hour he was born.

(Whimpering.)
Acres. It will not do, David -- I am determined to fight -- so get along, you
Coward, while I Am in the mind.


Enter Servant. Serve. Captain Absolute, Sir.


Acres. O! show him up.


[ Exit Servant. David. Well, Heaven send we be all alive this time tomorrow.


Acres. What Is that! -- Don't provoke me, David!


David. Good bye, Master.

(Whimpering.)
Acres. Getalong, you cowardly, dastardly, croaking raven.


[ Exit David. Enter Absolute. Abs. What Is the matter, Bob?


Acres. A vile, sheep-hearted blockhead! -- If I had not the valor of St.
George and the dragon to boot --


Abs. But what did you want with me, Bob?


Acres. O! -- There -- ( Gives him the challenge.)


Abs. " To Ensign Beverley." So -- what is going on now!

[Aside. Well, what is this?


Acres. A challenge!


Abs. Indeed! -- Why, you will not fight him; will you, Bob?


Acres. 'Egad but I will, Jack. -- Sir Lucius has wrought me to it. He has left
me full of rage -- and I Will fight this evening, that so much good passion
may not be wasted.


Abs. But what have I to do with this?


Acres. Why, as I think you know something of this fellow, I want you to find
him out for me, and give him this mortal defiance.


Abs. Well, give it to me, and trust me he gets it.


Acres. Thank you, my dear friend, my dear Jack; but it is giving you a great
deal of trouble.


Abs. Not in the least -- I beg you will not mention it. -- No trouble in the
world, I assure you.


Acres. You are very kind. -- What it is to have a friend! -- You couldn't be
my second -- could you, Jack?


Abs. Why no, Bob -- not in this affair -- it would not be quite so proper.


Acres. Well then I must fix on my friend Sir Lucius. I shall have your good
wishes, however, Jack.


Abs. Whenever he meets you, believe me.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Anthony Absolute is below, inquiring for the Captain.


Abs. I Will come instantly. -- Well, my little hero, success attend you.

(Going.)
Acres. Stay -- stay, Jack. -- If Beverley should ask you what kind of a man
your friend Acres is, do, tell him I am a devil of a fellow -- will you, Jack?


Abs. To be sure I shall. -- I Will say you are a determined dog -- hey, Bob!


Acres. Aye, do, do -- and if that frightens him, 'egad perhaps he may not come.
So tell him I generally kill a man a week; will you, Jack!


Abs. I will, I will; I Will say you are called in the country " Fighting Bob!"


Acres. Right, right -- it is all to prevent mischief; for I don't want to take
his life if I clear my honor.


Abs. No! -- that is very kind of you.


Acres. Why, you don't wish me to kill him -- do you, Jack?


Abs. No, upon my soul, I do not. -- But a devil of a fellow, hey?

(Going.)
Acres. True, true -- but stay -- stay, Jack -- you may add that you never saw
me in such a rage before -- a most devouring rage!


Abs. I will, I will.


Acres. Remember, Jack -- a determined dog!


Abs. Aye, aye, " Fighting Bob!"


[Exeunt severally. SCENE II.
Mrs. Malaprop's Lodgings. Mrs. Malaprop and Lydia. Mrs. Mal. Why, thou
perverse one! -- tell me what you can object to him? -- Is Not he a handsome
man? -- tell me that. -- A genteel man? a pretty figure of a man?


Lyd. She little thinks whom she is praising! ( aside) -- So is Beverley, Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. No caparisons, Miss, if you please! -- Caparisons don't become a
young woman. -- No! Captain Absolute is indeed a fine gentleman!


Lyd. Aye, the Captain Absolute you have seen.


[Aside. Mrs. Mal. Then he is so well bred; -- so full of alacrity, and
adulation! -- and has so much to say for himself: -- in such good language too!
-- His physiognomy so grammatical! -- Then his presence is so noble! -- I
protest, when I saw him, I thought of what Hamlet says in the Play: --
Hesperian curls! -- the front of Job himself! -- an eye, like March, to
threaten at command! -- a Station, like Harry Mercury, new -- Something about
kissing -- on a hill -- however, the similitude struck me directly.


Lyd. How enraged she will be presently when she discovers her mistake!


[Aside. Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Anthony, and Captain Absolute are below Ma'am.


Mrs. Mal. Show them up here. [ Exit Serve. Now, Lydia, I insist on your
behaving as becomes a young woman. -- Show your good breeding at least, though
you have forgot your duty.


Lyd. Madam, I have told you my resolution; -- I shall not only give him no
encouragement, but I will not even speak to, or look at him.


[Flings herself into a chair, with her face from the door. Enter Sir Anthony
and Absolute. Sir Anth. Here we are, Mrs. Malaprop; come to mitigate the frowns
of unrelenting beauty -- and difficulty enough I had to bring this fellow. -- I
don't know what is the matter; but if I had not held him by force, he would have
given me the slip.


Mrs. Mal. You have infinite trouble, Sir Anthony, in the affair. -- I am
ashamed for the cause! Lydia, Lydia, rise I beseech you! -- pay your respects!


[Aside to her. Sir Anth. I hope, Madam, that Miss Languish has reflected on
the worth of this gentleman, and the regard due to her Aunt's choice, and my
alliance. -- Now, Jack, speak to her!


[Aside to him. Abs. What the d -- I shall I do! -- ( Aside) -- You see, Sir,
she will not even look at me, whilst you are here. -- I knew she wouldn't! -- I
told you so -- Let me entreat you, Sir, to leave us together!


[ Absolute seems to expostulate with his Father. Lyd. ( aside.) I wonder I
have not heard my Aunt exclaim yet! sure she cannot have looked at him! -- perhaps
their regimentals are alike, and she is something blind.


Sir Anth. I say, Sir, I will not stir a foot yet.


Mrs. Mal. I am sorry to say, Sir Anthony, that my affluence over my Niece is
very small. -- Turn round Lydia, I blush for you!


[Aside to her. Sir Anth. May I not flatter myself that Miss Languish will
assign what cause of dislike she can have to my son! -- Why don't you begin,
Jack? -- Speak, you puppy -- speak!


[Aside to him. Mrs. Mal. It is impossible, Sir Anthony, she can have any. --
She will not say she has. -- Answer, hussy! why don't you answer?


[Aside to her. Sir Anth. Then, Madam, I trust that a childish and hasty
predilection will be no bar to Jack's happiness. -- Z -- ds! sirrah! why don't
you speak?


[Aside to him. Lyd. ( aside) I think my lover seems as little inclined to
conversation as myself. -- How strangely blind my Aunt is!


Abs. Hem! hem! -- Madam -- hem! (Absolute attempts to speak, then returns to
Sir Anthony) -- Faith! Sir, I am so confounded! -- and so -- so -- confused! --
I told you I should be so, Sir, -- I knew it -- The-the-tremor of my passion,
entirely takes away my presence of mind.


Sir Anth. But it don't take away your voice, fool, does it? -- Go up, and
speak to her directly! [Abs. makes signs to Mrs. Mal. to leave them together.]


Mrs. Mal. Sir Anthony, shall we leave them together? -- Ah! you stubborn,
little vixen!


[Aside to her. Sir Anth. Not yet, Ma'am, not yet! -- what the d -- l are you
at? unlock your jaws, sirrah, or --


[Aside to him. [Absolute draws near Lydia.] Abs. Now Heaven send she may be
too sullen to look round! -- I must disguise my voice -- ( Aside) --

[Speaks in a low hoarse tone. -- Will not Miss Languish lend an ear to the
mild accents of true love? -- Will not --


Sir Anth. What the d -- l ails the fellow? -- Why don't you speak out? -- not
stand croaking like a frog in a quinsey!


Abs. The -- the -- excess of my awe, and my -- my -- my modesty, quite choke
me!


Sir Anth. Ah! your modesty again! -- I Will tell you what, Jack; if you don't
speak out directly, and glibly too, I shall be in such a rage! -- Mrs.
Malaprop, I wish the lady would favor us with something more than a side-front!


[Mrs. Malaprop seems to chide Lydia. Abs. So! -- all will out I see!

[Goes up to Lydia, speaks softly. Be not surprised, my Lydia, suppress all
surprise at present.


Lyd. ( aside) Heavens! it is Beverley's voice! -- Sure he cannot have imposed on
Sir Anthony too! --

[Looks round by degrees, then starts up. Is this possible! -- my Beverley! --
how can this be? -- my Beverley?


Abs. Ah! it is all over.


[Aside. Sir Anth. Beverley! -- the devil -- Beverley! -- What can the girl
mean? -- This is my son, Jack Absolute!


Mrs. Mal. For shame, hussy! for shame! -- your head runs so on that fellow,
that you have him always in your eyes! -- beg Captain Absolute's pardon
directly.


Lyd. I see no Captain Absolute, but my loved Beverley!


Sir Anth. Z -- ds! the girl's mad! -- her brain's turned by reading!


Mrs. Mal. OF my conscience, I believe so! -- what do you mean by Beverley,
hussy? -- You saw Captain Absolute before today; there he is -- your husband
that shall be.


Lyd. With all my soul, Ma'am -- when I refuse my Beverley --


Sir Anth. O! she is as mad as Bedlam! -- or has this fellow been playing us a
rogue's trick! -- Come here, sirrah! who the d -- l are you?


Abs. Faith, Sir, I am not quite clear myself; but I Will endeavor to recollect.


Sir Anth. Are you my son, or not? -- answer for your mother, you dog, if you
will not for me.


Mrs. Mal. Aye, Sir, who are you? O mercy! I begin to suspect! --


Abs. Ye Powers of Impudence befriend me! ( aside) Sir Anthony, most assuredly
I am your wife's son; and that I sincerely believe myself to be yours also, I
hope my duty has always shown. -- Mrs. Malaprop, I am your most respectful
admirer -- and shall be proud to add affectionate nephew. -- I need not tell my
Lydia, that she sees her faithful Beverley, who, knowing the singular
generosity of her temper, assumed that name, and a station, which has proved a
test of the most disinterested love, which he now hopes to enjoy in a a more
elevated character.


Lyd. So! -- there will be no elopement after all!


(sullenly. Sir Anth. Upon my soul, Jack, thou art a very impudent fellow! to
do you justice, I think I never saw a piece of more consummate assurance!


Abs. O, you flatter me, Sir -- you compliment -- it is my modesty you know, Sir
-- my modesty that has stood in my way.


Sir Anth. Well, I am glad you are not the dull, insensible varlet you
pretended to be, however! -- I Am glad you have made a fool of your father, you
dog -- I am. -- So this was your penitence, your duty, and obedience! -- I
thought it was d -- n'd sudden! -- You never heard their names before, not you!
-- What, Languishes of Worcestershire, hey? -- if you could please me in the
affair, 'twas all you desired! -- Ah! you dissembling villain! -- What! (
pointing to Lydia) she squints, don't she? -- a little red-hair'd girl! -- hey?
-- Why, you hypocritical young rascal -- I wonder you a'n't ashamed to hold up
your head!


Abs. It Is with difficulty, Sir -- I am confused -- very much confused, as you
must perceive.


Mrs. Mal. O Lud! Sir Anthony! -- a new light breaks in upon me! -- hey! how!
what! Captain, did you write the letters then? -- What! -- I am to thank you
for the elegant compilation of ' an old weather-beaten she-dragon' -- hey? -- O
mercy! -- was it you that reflected on my parts of speech?


Abs. Dear Sir! my modesty will be overpowered at last, if you don't assist me.
-- I shall certainly not be able to stand it!


Sir Anth. Come, come, Mrs. Malaprop, we must forget and forgive; -- odds'life!
matters have taken so clever a turn all of a sudden, that I could find in my
heart, to be so good-humored! and so gallant! -- hey! Mrs. Malaprop!


Mrs. Mal. Well, Sir Anthony, since you desire it, we will not anticipate the
past; -- so mind young people -- our retrospection will now be all to the
future.


Sir Anth. Come, we must leave them together; Mrs. Malaprop, they long to fly
into each other's arms, I warrant! -- Jack -- is'n't the cheek as I said, hey?
-- and the eye, you dog! -- and the lip -- hey? Come, Mrs. Malaprop, we'll not
disturb their tenderness -- their's is the time of life for happiness! -- "
Youth's the season made for joy" -- (sings) -- hey! -- Odds'life! I Am in such
spirits, -- I don't know what I couldn't do! -- Permit me, Ma'am -- ( gives his
hand to Mrs. Mal.) ( sings) Tol-de-rol -- 'gad I should like a little fooling
myself -- Tol-derol! de-rol!


[Exit singing, and handing Mrs. Mal. ( Lydia sits sullenly in her chair.) Abs.
So much thought bodes me no good ( aside) -- So grave, Lydia!


Lyd. Sir!


Abs. So! -- egad! I thought as much! -- that d -- n'd monosyllable has froze
me! ( aside) -- What, Lydia, now that we are as happy in our friends consent,
as in our mutual vows --


Lyd. Friends consent, indeed! (peevishly)


Abs. Come, come, we must lay aside some of our romance -- a little wealth and
comfort may be endured after all. And for your fortune, the lawyers shall make
such settlements as --


Lyd. Lawyers! I hate lawyers!


Abs. Nay then, we will not wait for their lingering forms, but instantly
procure the license, and --


Lyd. The license! -- I hate license!


Abs. O my Love! be not so unkind! -- thus let me entreat --


[Kneeling. Lyd. Pshaw! -- what signifies kneeling, when you know I must have
you?


Abs. ( rising) Nay, Madam, there shall be no constraint upon your
inclinations, I promise you. -- If I have lost your heart, -- I resign the
rest. -- 'Gad, I must try what a little spirit will do.


[Aside. Lyd. ( rising) Then, Sir, let me tell you, the interest you had there
was acquired by a mean, unmanly imposition, and deserves the punishment of
fraud. -- What, you have been treating me like a child! -- humouring my
romance! and laughing, I suppose, at your success!


Abs. You wrong me, Lydia, you wrong me -- only hear --


Lyd. So, while I fondly imagined we were deceiving my relations, and flattered
myself that I should outwit and incense them all -- behold! my hopes are to be
crushed at once, by my Aunt's consent and approbation! -- and I am myself, the
only dupe at last!


[Walking about in heat. Abs. Nay, but hear me --


Lyd. No, Sir, you could not think that such paltry artifices could please me,
when the mask was thrown off! -- But I suppose since your tricks have made you
secure of my fortune, you are little solicitous about my affections. -- But
here, Sir, here is the picture -- Beverley's picture! ( taking a miniature from
her bosom) which I have worn, night and day, in spite of threats and
entreaties! -- There, Sir, ( flings it to him) and be assured I throw the
original from my heart as easily!


Abs. Nay, nay, Ma'am, we will not differ as to that. -- Here, ( taking out a
picture) here is Miss Lydia Languish. -- What a difference! -- aye, there is
the heavenly assenting smile, that first gave soul and spirit to my hopes! --
those are the lips which sealed a vow, as yet scarce dry in Cupid's calendar!
-- and there the half resentful blush, that would have checked the ardour of my
thanks -- Well, all that is past! -- all over indeed! -- There, Madam -- in
beauty, that copy is not equal to you, but in my mind it is merit over the
original, in being still the same, is such -- that -- I cannot find in my heart
to part with it.


[Puts it up again. Lyd. ( Softening) It Is your own doing, Sir -- I, I, I
suppose you are perfectly satisfied.


Abs. O, most certainly -- sure now this is much better than being in love! --
ha! ha! ha! -- there is some spirit in this! -- What signifies breaking some
scores of solemn promises, half an hundred vows, under one's hand, with the
marks of a dozen or two angels to witness -- all that is of no consequence you
know. -- To be sure people will say, that Miss didn't know her own mind -- but
never mind that: -- or perhaps they may be ill-natured enough to hint, that the
gentleman grew tired of the lady and forsook her -- but don't let that fret you.


Lyd. There Is no bearing his insolence.


[Bursts into tears. Enter Mrs. Malaprop and Sir Anthony. Mrs. Mal. ( Entering)
Come, we must interrupt your billing and cooing a while.


Lyd. This is worse than your treachery and deceit, you base ingrate!


[Sobbing. Sir Anth. What the devil's the matter now! -- Z -- ds! Mrs.
Malaprop, this is the oddest billing and cooing I ever heard! -- but what the
deuce is the meaning of it? -- I Am quite astonished!


Abs. Ask the lady, Sir.


Mrs. Mal. O mercy! -- I Am quite analys'd for my part! -- why, Lydia, what is
the reason of this?


Lyd. Ask the gentleman, Ma'am.


Sir Anth. Z -- ds! I shall be in a phrenzy! -- why Jack, you scoundrel, you
are not come out to be any one else, are you?


Mrs. Mal. Aye, Sir, there is no more trick, is there? -- you are not like
Cerberus, three Gentlemen at once, are you?


Abs. You Will not let me speak -- I say the lady can account for this much
better than I can.


Lyd. Ma'am, you once commanded me never to think of Beverley again -- there is
the man -- I now obey you: -- for, from this moment, I renounce him for ever.


[ Exit Lydia. Mrs. Mal. O mercy! and miracles! what a turn here is -- why
sure, Captain, you haven't behaved disrespectfully to my Niece.


Sir Anth. Ha! ha! ha! -- ha! ha! ha! -- now I see it -- Ha! ha! ha! -- now I
see it -- you have been too lively, Jack.


Abs. Nay, Sir, upon my word --


Sir Anth. Come, no lying, Jack -- I Am sure ' it was so.


Mrs. Mal. O Lud! Sir Anthony! -- O fie, Captain!


Abs. Upon my soul, Ma'am --


Sir Anth. Come, no excuses, Jack; -- why, your father, you rogue, was so
before you: -- the blood of the Absolutes was always impatient. -- Ha! ha! ha!
poor little Lydia! -- why, you have frightened her, you Dog, you have.


Abs. By all that is good, Sir --


Sir Anth. Z -- ds! say no more, I tell you. -- Mrs. Malaprop shall make your
peace. -- You must make his peace, Mrs. Malaprop; -- you must tell her it is
Jack's way -- tell her it is all our ways -- it runs in the blood of our family!
-- Come, get on, Jack, -- ha! ha! ha! Mrs. Malaprop -- a young villain!


[Pushing him out. Mrs. Mal. O! Sir Anthony! -- O fie, Captain!


[Exeunt severally. SCENE IV.
The North-Parade. Enter Sir Lucius O'Trigger. Sir Luc. I wonder where this
Capt. Absolute hides himself. -- Upon my conscience! -- these officers are
always in one's way in love-affairs: -- I remember I might have married Lady
Dorothy Carmine, if it had not been for a little rogue of a Major, who ran away
with her before she could get a sight of me! -- And I wonder too what it is the
ladies can see in them to be so fond of them -- unless it be a touch of the old
serpent in 'em, that makes the little creatures be caught, like vipers with a
bit of red cloth. -- Hah! -- is not this the Captain coming? -- faith it is! --
There is a probability of succeeding about that fellow, that is mighty
provoking! -- Who the devil is he talking to?


[Steps aside. Enter Capt. Absolute. Abs. To what fine purpose I have been
plotting! a noble reward for all my schemes, upon my soul! -- a little gypsey!
-- I did not think her romance could have made her so d -- n'd absurd either --
God's Death, I never was in a worse humor in my life! -- I could cut my own
throat, or any other person's, with the greatest pleasure in the world!


Sir Luc. O, faith! I Am in the luck of it -- I never could have found him in a
sweeter temper for my purpose -- to be sure I Am just come in the nick! now to
enter into conversation with him, and so quarrel genteelly. [Sir Lucius goes up
to Absolute. -- With regard to that matter, Captain, I must beg leave to differ
in opinion with you.


Abs Upon my word then, you must be a very subtle disputant: -- because, Sir, I
happened just then to be giving no opinion at all.


Sir Luc. That Is no reason. -- For give me leave to tell you, a man may think
an untruth as well as speak one.


Abs. Very true, Sir, but if the man never utters his thoughts, I should think
they might stand a chance of escaping controversy.


Sir Luc. Then, Sir, you differ in opinion with me, which amounts to the same
thing.


Abs. Hark'ee, Sir Lucius, -- if I had not before known you to be a gentleman,
upon my soul, I should not have discovered it at this interview: -- for what
you can drive at, unless you mean to quarrel with me, I cannot conceive!


Sir Luc. I humbly thank you, Sir, for the quickness of your apprehension,
[Bowing. -- you have named the very thing I would be at.


Abs. Very well, Sir -- I shall certainly not baulk your inclinations: -- but I
should be glad you would please to explain your motives.


Sir Luc. Pray, Sir, be easy -- the quarrel is a very pretty quarrel as it
stands -- we should only spoil it, by trying to explain it. -- However, your
memory is very short -- or you could not have forgot an affront you passed on
me within this week. -- So no more, but name your time and place.


Abs. Well, Sir, since you are so bent on it, the sooner the better; -- let it
be this evening -- here, by the Spring-Gardens. -- We shall scarcely be
interrupted.


Sir Luc. Faith! that same interruption in affairs of this nature, shows very
great ill-breeding. -- I don't know what is the reason, but in England, if a
thing of this kind gets wind, people make such a pother, that a gentleman can
never fight in peace and quietness. -- However, if it is the same to you,
Captain, I should take it as a particular kindness, if you would let us meet in
King's-Mead-Fields, as a little business will call me there about six o'clock,
and I may dispatch both matters at once.


Abs. It Is the same to me exactly. -- A little after six, then we will discuss
this matter more seriously.


Sir Luc. If you please, Sir, there will be very pretty small-sword light, though
it will not do for a long shot. -- So that matter's settled! and my mind's at ease.


[ Exit Sir Lucius. Enter Faulkland, meeting Absolute. Abs. Well met. -- I was
going to look for you. -- O, Faulkand! all the Demons of spite and
disappointment have conspired against me! I Am so vexed, that if I had not the
prospect of a resource in being knocked of the head by and bye, I should scarce
have spirits to tell you the cause.


Faulk. What can you mean? -- Has Lydia changed her mind? -- I should have
thought her duty and inclination would now have pointed to the same object.


Abs. Aye, just as the eyes do of a person who squints: -- when her love-eye
was fixed on me -- the other -- her eye of duty, was finely obliqued: -- but when
duty bid her point that the same way -- off the other turned on a swivel, and
secured its retreat with a frown!


Faulk. But what is the resource you --


Abs. O, to wind up the whole, a good natured Irishman here has ( mimicking Sir
Lucius) begged leave to have the pleasure of cutting my throat -- and I mean to
indulge him -- that is all.


Faulk. Prithee, be serious.


Abs. It Is fact, upon my soul. -- Sir Lucius O'Trigger -- you know him by sight
-- for some affront, which I am sure I never intended, has obliged me to meet
him this evening at six o'clock: -- it is on that account I wished to see you --
you must go with me.


Faulk. Nay, there must be some mistake, sure. -- Sir Lucius shall explain
himself -- and I dare say matters may be accommodated: -- but this evening, did
you say? -- I wish it had been any other time.


Abs. Why? -- there will be light enough: -- there will (as Sir Lucius says)
"be very pretty small-sword light, though it will not do for a long shot." --
Confound his long shots!


Faulk. But I am myself a good deal ruffled, by a difference I have had with
Julia -- my vile tormenting temper has made me treat her so cruelly, that I
shall not be myself till we are reconciled.


Abs. By Heavens, Faulkland, you don't deserve her.


Enter Servant, gives Faulkland a letter. Faulk. O Jack! this is from Julia --
I dread to open it -- I fear it may be to take a last leave -- perhaps to bid
me return her letters -- and restore -- O! how I suffer for my folly!


Abs. Here -- let me see.

[Takes the letter and opens it. Aye, a final sentence indeed! -- it is all over
with you, faith!


Faulk. Nay, Jack -- don't keep me in suspense.


Abs. Hear then. -- As

I am convinced that my dear Faulkland's own reflections have already upbraided
braided him for his last unkindness to me, I will not add a word on the
subject. -- I wish to speak with you as soon as possible.

-- Yours ever and truly, Julia.


-- There Is stubbornness and resentment for you!

[Gives him the letter. Why, man, you don't seem one whit the happier at this.


Faulk. O, yes, I am -- but -- but --


Abs. Confound your buts. -- You never hear any thing that would make another
man bless himself, but you immediately d -- n it with a but.


Faulk. Now, Jack, as you are my friend, own honestly -- don't you think there
is something forward -- something indelicate in this haste to forgive? -- Women
should never sue for reconciliation: -- that should always come from us. --
They should retain their coldness till wooed to kindness -- and their pardon,
like their love, should not unsought be won.


Abs. I have not patience to listen to you: -- you are incorrigible! -- so say
no more on the subject. -- I must go to settle a few matters -- let me see you
before six -- remember -- at my lodgings. -- A poor industrious devil like me,
who have toiled, and drudg'd, and plotted to gain my ends, and am at last
disappointed by other people's folly -- may in pity be allowed to swear and
grumble a little; -- but a captious skeptic in love, -- a slave to fretfulness
and whim -- who has no difficulties but of his own creating -- is a subject
more fit for ridicule than compassion!


[ Exit Absolute. Faulk. I feel his reproaches! -- yet I would not change this
too exquisite nicety, for the gross content with which he tramples on the
thorns of love. -- His engaging me in this duel, has started an idea in my
head, which I will instantly pursue. -- I Will use it as the touchstone of
Julia's sincerity and disinterestedness -- if her love prove pure and sterling
ore -- my name will rest on it with honor! -- and once I Have stamped it there,
I lay aside my doubts for ever: -- but if the dross of selfishness, the allay
of pride predominate -- 'twill be best to leave her as a toy for some less
cautious Fool to sigh for.


[ Exit Faulkland. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Julia's Dressing Room. Julia, sola. How this message has alarmed me! what
dreadful accident can he mean! why such charge to be alone? -- O Faulkland! --
how many unhappy moments! -- how many tears have you cost me!


Enter Faulkland, muffled up in a Riding-coat. Jul. What means this? -- why
this caution, Faulkland?


Faulk. Alas! Julia, I am come to take a long farewell.


Jul. Heavens! what do you mean?


Faulk. You see before you a wretch, whose life is forfeited. -- Nay, start
not! -- the infirmity of my temper has drawn all this misery on me. -- I left
you fretful and passionate -- an untoward accident drew me into a quarrel --
the event is, that I must fly this kingdom instantly. -- O Julia, had I been so
fortunate as to have called you mine entirely, before this mischance had fallen
on me, I should not so deeply dread my banishment! -- But no more of that --
your heart and promise were given to one happy in friends, character, and
station! they are not bound to wait upon a solitary, guilty exile.


Jul. My soul is oppressed with sorrow at the nature of your misfortune: had
these adverse circumstances arisen from a less fatal cause, I should have felt
strong comfort in the thought that I could now chase from your bosom every
doubt of the warm sincerity of my love. -- My heart has long known no other
guardian -- I now entrust my person to your honor -- we will fly together. --
When safe from pursuit, my Father's will may be fulfilled -- and I receive a
legal claim to be the partner of your sorrows, and tenderest comforter. Then on
the bosom of your wedded Julia, you may lull your keen regret to slumbering;
while virtuous love, with a Cherub's hand, shall smooth the brow of upbraiding
thought, and pluck the thorn from compunction.


Faulk. O Julia! I am bankrupt in gratitude! but the time is so pressing, it
calls on you for so hasty a resolution. -- Would you not wish some hours to
weigh the advantages you forego, and what little compensation poor Faulkland
can make you beside his solitary love?


Jul. I ask not a moment. -- No, Faulkland, I have loved you for yourself: and
if I now, more than ever, prize the solemn engagement which so long has pledged
us to each other, it is because it leaves no room for hard aspersions on my
fame, and puts the seal of duty to an act of love. -- But let us not linger. --
Perhaps this delay --


Faulk. 'Twill be better I should not venture out again till dark. -- Yet am I
grieved to think what numberless distresses will press heavy on your gentle
disposition!


Jul. Perhaps your fortune may be forfeited by this unhappy act. -- I know not
whether it is so -- but sure that alone can never make us unhappy. -- The little
I have will be sufficient to support us; and exile never should be splendid.


Faulk. Aye, but in such an abject state of life, my wounded pride perhaps may
increase the natural fretfulness of my temper, till I become a rude, morose
companion, beyond your patience to endure. Perhaps the recollection of a deed,
my conscience cannot justify, may haunt me in such gloomy and unsocial fits,
that I shall hate the tenderness that would relieve me, break from your arms,
and quarrel with your fondness!


Jul. If your thoughts should assume so unhappy a bent, you will the more want
some mild and affectionate spirit to watch over and console you: -- One who, by
bearing your infirmities with gentleness and resignation, may teach you so to
bear the evils of your fortune.


Faulk. O Julia, I have proved you to the quick! and with this useless device I
throw away all my doubts. How shall I plead to be forgiven this last unworthy
effect of my restless, unsatisfied disposition?


Jul. Has no such disaster happened as you related?


Faulk. I am ashamed to own that it was all pretended; yet in pity, Julia, do
not kill me with resenting a fault which never can be repeated: But sealing,
this once, my pardon, let me tomorrow, in the face of Heaven, receive my
future guide and monitress, and expiate my past folly, by years of tender
adoration.


Jul. Hold, Faulkland! -- that you are free from a crime, which I before feared
to name, Heaven knows how sincerely I rejoice! -- These are tears of
thankfulness for that! But that your cruel doubts should have urged you to an
imposition that has wrung my heart, gives me now a pang, more keen than I can
express!


Faulk. By Heavens! Julia --


Jul. Yet hear me. -- My Father loved you, Faulkland! and you preserved the
life that tender parent gave me; in his presence I pledged my hand -- joyfully
pledged it -- where before I had given my heart. When, soon after, I lost that
parent, it seemed to me that Providence had, in Faulkland, shown me whither to
transfer, without a pause, my grateful duty, as well as my affection: Hence I
have been content to bear from you what pride and delicacy would have forbid me
from another. -- I will not upbraid you, by repeating how you have trifled with
my sincerity. --


Faulk. I confess it all! yet hear --


Jul. After such a year of trial -- I might have flattered myself that I should
not have been insulted with a new probation of my sincerity, as cruel as
unnecessary! A trick of such a nature, as to show me plainly, that when I
thought you loved me best, you even then regarded me as a mean dissembler; an
artful, prudent hypocrite.


Faulk. Never! never!


Jul. I now see it is not in your nature to be content, or confident in love.
With this conviction -- I never will be yours. While I had hopes that my
persevering attention, and unreproaching kindness might in time reform your
temper, I should have been happy to have gained a dearer influence over you;
but I will not furnish you with a licensed power to keep alive an incorrigible
fault, at the expense of one who never would contend with you.


Faulk. Nay, but Julia, by my soul and honor, if after this --


Jul. But one word more. -- As my faith has once been given to you, I never
will barter it with another. -- I shall pray for your happiness with the truest
sincerity; and the dearest blessing I can ask of Heaven to send you, will be to
charm you from that unhappy temper, which alone has prevented the performance
of our solemn engagement. -- All I request of you is, that you will yourself
reflect upon this infirmity, and when you number up the many true delights it
has deprived you of -- let it not be your least regret, that it lost you the
love of one -- who would have followed you in beggary through the world!


[Exit. Faulk. She Is gone! -- for ever! -- There was an awful resolution in her
manner, that rivetted me to my place. -- O Fool! -- Dolt! -- Barbarian! --
Cursed as I am, with more imperfections than my fellow-wretches, kind Fortune
sent a heaven-gifted cherub to my aid, and, like a ruffian, I have driven her
from my side! -- I must now haste to my appointment. -- Well my mind is tuned
for such a scene. -- I shall wish only to become a principal in it, and reverse
the tale my cursed folly put me upon forging here. -- O Love! -- Tormentor! --
Fiend! -- whose influence, like the Moon's, acting on men of dull souls, makes
idiots of them, but meeting subtler spirits, betrays their course, and urges
sensibility to madness!


[Exit. Enter Maid and Lydia. Maid. My Mistress, Ma'am, I know, was here just
now -- perhaps she is only in the next room.


[ Exit Maid. Lyd. Heigh ho! -- Though he has used me so, this fellow runs
strangely in my head. I believe one lecture from my grave Cousin will make me
recall him.


Enter Julia. Lyd. O Julia, I am come to you with such an appetite for
consolation. -- Lud! Child, what is the matter with you? -- You have been
crying! -- I Will be hanged, if that Faulkland has not been tormenting you!


Jul. You mistake the cause of my uneasiness. -- Something has flurried me a
little. -- Nothing that you can guess at. -- I would not accuse Faulkland to a
Sister!


(Aside.) Lyd. Ah! whatever vexations you may have, I can assure you mine
surpass them. -- You know who Beverley proves to be?


Jul. I will now own to you, Lydia, that Mr. Faulkland had before informed me
of the whole affair. Had young Absolute been the person you took him for, I
should not have accepted your confidence on the subject, without a serious
endeavor to counteract your caprice.


Lyd. So, then, I see I have been deceived by every one! -- but I don't care --
I Will never have him.


Jul. Nay, Lydia --


Lyd. Why, is it not provoking; when I thought we were coming to the prettiest
distress imaginable, to find myself made a mere Smithfield bargain of at last
-- There had I projected one of the most sentimental elopements! -- so becoming
a disguise! -- so amiable a ladder of Ropes! -- Conscious Moon -- four horses
-- Scotch parson -- with such surprise to Mrs. Malaprop -- and such paragraphs
in the Newspapers! -- O, I shall die with disappointment.


Jul. I don't wonder at it!


Lyd. Now -- sad reverse! -- what have I to expect, but, after a deal of flimsy
preparation with a bishop's license, and my Aunt's blessing, to go simpering up
to the Altar; or perhaps be cried three times in a country-church, and have an
unmannerly fat clerk ask the consent of every butcher in the parish to join
John Absolute and Lydia Languish, Spinster! O, that I should live to hear
myself called Spinster!


Jul. Melancholy, indeed!


Lyd. How mortifying, to remember the dear delicious shifts I used to be put
to, to gain half a minute's conversation with this fellow! -- How often have I
stole forth, in the coldest night in January, and found him in the garden,
stuck like a dripping statue! -- There would he kneel to me in the snow, and
sneeze and cough so pathetically! he shivering with cold, and I with
apprehension! and while the freezing blast numbed our joints, how warmly would
he press me to pity his flame, and glow with mutual ardour! -- Ah, Julia! that
was something like being in love.


Jul. If I were in spirits, Lydia, I should chide you only by laughing heartily
at you: but it suits more the situation of my mind, at present, earnestly to
entreat you, not to let a man, who loves you with sincerity, suffer that
unhappiness from your caprice, which I know too well caprice can inflict.


Lyd. O Lud! what has brought my Aunt here!


Enter Mrs. Malaprop, Fag, and David. Mrs. Mal. So! so! here is fine work! --
here is fine suicide, paracide, and salivation going on in the fields! and Sir
Anthony not to be found to prevent the antistrophe!


Jul. For Heaven's sake, Madam, what is the meaning of this?


Mrs. Mal. That gentleman can tell you -- 'twas he enveloped the affair to me.


Lyd. Do, Sir, will you inform us.


( To Fag.) Fag. Ma'am, I should hold myself very deficient in every requisite
that forms the man of breeding, if I delayed a moment to give all the
information in my power to a lady so deeply interested in the affair as you are.


Lyd. But quick! quick, Sir!


Fag. True, Ma'am, as you say, one should be quick in divulging matters of this
nature; for should we be tedious, perhaps while we are flourishing on the
subject, two or three lives may be lost!


Lyd. O patience! -- Do, Ma'am, for Heaven's sake! tell us what is the matter?


Mrs. Mal. Why, murder's the matter! slaughter's the matter! killing's the
matter! -- but he can tell you the perpendiculars.


Lyd. Then, prithee, Sir, be brief.


(...) Why then, Ma'am -- as to murder -- I can^^^ ^ake upon me to say -- and
as to slaughter, or manslaughter, that will be as the jury finds it.


Lyd. But who, Sir -- who are engaged in this?


Fag. Faith, Ma'am, one is a young gentleman whom I should be very sorry any
thing was to happen to -- a very pretty behaved gentleman! -- We have lived
much together, and always on terms.


Lyd. But who is this? who! who! who!


Fag. My Master, Ma'am -- my Master -- I speak of my Master.


Lyd. Heavens! What, Captain Absolute!


Mrs. Mal. O, to be sure, you are frightened now!


Jul. But who are with him, Sir?


Fag. As to the rest, Ma'am, his gentleman can inform you better than I.


Jul. Do speak, friend.


( To David.) David. Look'ee, my Lady -- by the Mass! there is mischief going
on. -- Folks don't use to meet for amusement with firearms, firelocks,
fire-engines, fire-screens, fire-office, and the devil knows what other
crackers besides! -- This, my Lady, I say, has an angry favor.


Jul. But who is there beside Captain Absolute, friend?


David. My poor Master -- under favor, for mentioning him first. -- You know
me, my Lady -- I am David -- and my Master of course is, or was Squire Acres.
-- Then comes Squire Faulkland.


Jul. Do, Ma'am, let us instantly endeavor to prevent mischief.


Mrs. Mal. O fie -- it would be very inelegant in us: -- we should only
participate things.


Dav. Ah! do, Mrs. Aunt, save a few lives -- they are desperately given,
believe me. -- Above all, there is that blood-thirsty Philistine, Sir Lucius
O'Trigger.


Mrs. Mal. Sir Lucius O'Trigger! -- O mercy! have they drawn poor little dear
Sir Lucius into the scrape? -- why, how you stand, girl! you have no more e
eling than one of the Derbyshire Putrefactions!


Lyd. What are we to do, Madam?


Mrs. Mal. Why, fly with the utmost felicity to be sure, to prevent mischief:
-- here, friend -- you can show us the place?


Fag. If you please, Ma'am, I will conduct you. -- David, do you look for Sir
Anthony.


[ Exit David. Mrs. Mal. Come, girls! -- this gentleman will exhort us. --
Come, Sir, you're our envoy -- lead the way, and we'll precede.


Fag. Not a step before the ladies for the world!


Mrs. Mal. You're sure you know the spot.


Fag. I think I can find it, Ma'am; and one good thing is, we shall hear the
report of the pistols as we draw near, so we cannot well miss them; never fear,
Ma'am, never fear.


[Exeunt, he talking. SCENE II.
South-Parade. Enter Absolute, putting his sword under his greatcoat. Abs. A
sword seen in the streets of Bath would raise as great an alarm as a mad-dog.
-- How provoking this is in Faulkland! -- never punctual! I shall be obliged to
go without him at last. -- O, the devil! here is Sir Anthony! -- how shall I
escape him?


[Muffles up his face, and takes a circle to go off. Enter Sir Anthony. Sir
Anth. How one may be deceived at a little distance! only that I see he don't
know me, I could have sworn that was Jack! -- Hey! -- 'Gad's life; it is. --
Why, Jack, you Dog! -- what are you afraid of? -- hey! sure I Am right. -- Why,
Jack -- Jack Absolute!


[Goes up to him. Abs. Really, Sir, you have the advantage of me: -- I don't
remember ever to have had the honor -- my name is Saunderson, at your service.


Sir Anth. Sir, I beg your pardon -- I took you -- hey! -- why, z -- ds! it is
-- Stay --

[Looks up to his face. So, so -- your humble servant, Mr. Saunderson! -- Why,
you scoundrel, what tricks are you after now?


Abs. O! a joke, Sir, a joke! -- I came here on purpose to look for you, Sir.


Sir Anth. You did! well, I am glad you were so lucky: -- but what are you
muffled up so for? -- what is this for? -- hey?


Abs. It Is cool, Sir; is not it? -- rather chilly somehow -- but I shall be late
-- I have a particular engagement.


Sir Anth. Stay. -- why, I thought you were looking for me? -- Pray, Jack,
where is it you are going?


Abs. Going, Sir!


Sir Anth. Aye -- where are you going?


Abs. Where am I going?


Sir Anth. You unmannerly puppy!


Abs. I was going, Sir, to -- to -- to -- to Lydia -- Sir to Lydia -- to make
matters up if I could; -- and I was looking for you, Sir, to -- to --


Sir Anth. To go with you, I suppose -- Well, come along.


Abs. O! z -- ds! no, Sir, not for the world! -- I wished to meet with you,
Sir, to -- to -- to -- You find it cool, I Am sure, Sir -- you would better not stay
out.


Sir Anth. Cool! -- not at all -- Well, Jack -- and what will you say to Lydia?


Abs. O, Sir, beg her pardon, humor her -- promise and vow: -- but I detain
you, Sir -- consider the cold air on your gout.


Sir Anth. O, not at all! -- not at all! -- I Am in no hurry. -- Ah! Jack, you
youngsters when once you are wounded here.

[Putting his hand to Absolute's breast. Hey! what the deuce have you got here?


Abs. Nothing, Sir -- nothing.


Sir Anth. What Is this? -- here is something d -- d hard!


Abs. O, trinkets, Sir! trinkets -- a bauble for Lydia!


Sir Anth. Nay, let me see your taste.

[Pulls his coat open, the sword falls. Trinkets! -- a bauble for Lydia! -- z
-- ds! sirrah, you are not going to cut her throat, are you?


Abs. Ha! ha! ha! -- I thought it would divert you, Sir, though I didn't mean to
tell you till afterward.


Sir Anth. You didn't? -- Yes, this is a very diverting trinket, truly.


Abs. Sir, I Will explain to you. -- You know, Sir, Lydia is romantic -- devilish
romantic, and very absurd of course: -- now, Sir, I intend, if she refuses to
forgive me -- to unsheath this sword -- and swear -- I Will fall upon its point,
and expire at her feet!


Sir Anth. Fall upon fiddle-sticks end! -- why, I suppose it is the very thing
that would please her -- Get along, you Fool. --


Abs. Well, Sir, you shall hear of my success -- you shall hear. -- "O, Lydia!
-- forgive me, or this pointed steel" -- says I.


Sir Anth. "O, Booby! stab away, and welcome" -- says she -- Get along! -- and
d -- n your trinkets!


[ Exit Absolute. Enter David, running. Dav. Stop him! stop him! Murder! Thief!
Fire! -- Stop fire! Stop fire! -- O! Sir Anthony -- call! call! bid 'em stop!
Murder! Fire!


Sir Anth. Fire! Murder! where?


Dav. Oons! he is out of sight! and I Am out of breath, for my part! O, Sir
Anthony, why didn't you stop him? why didn't you stop him?


Sir Anth. Z -- ds! the fellow's mad! -- Stop whom? stop Jack?


Dav. Aye, the Captain, Sir! -- there is murder and slaughter --


Sir Ant. Murder!


Dav. Aye, please you, Sir Anthony, there is all kinds of murder, all sorts of
slaughter to be seen in the fields: there is fighting going on, Sir -- bloody
sword-and-gun fighting!


Sir Anth. Who are going to fight, Dunce?


Dav. Every body that I know of, Sir Anthony: -- every body is going to fight,
my poor Master, Sir Lucius O'Trigger, your son, the Captain --


Sir Anth. O, the Dog! -- I see his tricks: -- do you know the place?


Dav. King's-Mead-Fields.


Sir Anth. You know the way?


Dav. Not an inch; -- but I Will call the Mayor -- Aldermen -- Constables --
Churchwardens -- and Beadles -- we cannot be too many to part them.


Sir Anth. Come along -- give me your shoulder! we'll get assistance as we go
-- the lying villain! -- Well, I shall be in such a phrenzy -- So -- this was
the history of his d -- d trinkets! I Will bauble him!


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
King's-Mead-Fields. Sir Lucius and Acres, with pistols. Acres. By my valor!
then, Sir Lucius, forty yards is a good distance -- Odds levels and aims! -- I
say it is a good distance.


Sir Luc. Is it for muskets or small fieldpieces? upon my conscience, Mr.
Acres, you must leave those things to me. -- Stay now -- I Will show you.
[Measures paces along the stage. there now, that is a very pretty distance -- a
pretty gentleman's distance.


Acres. Z -- ds! we might as well fight in a sentrybox! -- I tell you, Sir
Lucius, the farther he is off, the cooler I shall take my aim.


Sir Luc. Faith! then I suppose you would aim at him best of all if he was out
of sight!


Acres. No, Sir Lucius -- but I should think forty or eight and thirty yards --


Sir Luc. Pho! pho! nonsense! three or four feet between the mouths of your
pistols is as good as a mile.


Acres. Odds bullets, no! -- by my valor! there is no merit in killing him so
near: -- do, my dear Sir Lucius, let me bring him down at a long shot: -- a
long shot, Sir Lucius, if you love me!


Sir Luc. Well -- the gentleman's friend and I must settle that. -- But tell me
now, Mr. Acres, in case of an accident, is there any little will or commission
I could execute for you?


Acres. I am much obliged to you, Sir Lucius -- but I don't understand --


Sir Luc. Why, you may think there is no being shot at without a little risk --
and if an unlucky bullet should carry a Quietus with it -- I say it will be no
time then to be bothering you about family matters.


Acres. A Quietus!


Sir Luc. For instance now -- if that should be the case -- would you choose to
be pickled and sent home? -- or would it be the same to you to lie here in the
Abbey? -- I Am told there is very snug lying in the Abbey.


Acres. Pickled! -- Snug lying in the Abbey! -- Odds tremors! Sir Lucius, don't
talk so!


Sir Luc. I suppose, Mr. Acres, you never were engaged in an affair of this
kind before?


Acres. No, Sir Lucius, never before.


Sir Luc. Ah! that is a pity! -- there is nothing like being used to a thing. --
Pray now, how would you receive the gentleman's shot?


Acres. Odds files! -- I Have practiced that -- there, Sir Lucius -- there [Puts
himself in an attitude. -- a side-front, hey? -- Odd! I Will make myself small
enough: -- I Will stand edge-ways.


Sir Luc. Now -- you're quite out -- for if you stand so when I take my aim --


[Levelling at him. Acres. Z -- ds! Sir Lucius -- are you sure it is not cocked?


Sir Luc. Never fear.


Acres. But -- but -- you don't know -- it may go off of its own head!


Sir Luc. Pho! be easy -- Well, now if I hit you in the body, my bullet has a
double chance -- for if it misses a vital part on your right side -- 'twill be
very hard if it don't succeed on the left!


Acres. A vital part! O, my poor vitals!


Sir Luc. But, there -- fix yourself so -- [Placing him. let him see the broad
side of your full front -- there -- now a ball or two may pass clear through your
body, and never do any harm at all.


Acres. Clean through me! -- a ball or two clean through me!


Sir Luc. Aye -- may they -- and it is much the genteelest attitude into the
bargain.


Acres. Look'ee! Sir Lucius -- I Would just as leive be shot in an awkward posture
as a genteel one -- so, by my valor! I will stand edge-ways


Sir Luc. ( Looking at his watch.) Sure they don't mean to disappoint us. --
Hah? -- no faith -- I think I see them coming.


Acres. Hey! -- what! -- coming! --


Sir Luc. Aye -- Who are those yonder getting over the style?


Acres. There are two of them, indeed! -- well -- let them come -- hey, Sir
Lucius! -- we -- we -- we -- we -- will not run. --


Sir Luc. Run!


Acres. No -- I say -- we will not run, by my valor!


Sir Luc. What the devil's the matter with you?


Acres. Nothing -- nothing -- my dear friend -- my dear Sir Lucius -- but --
I-I-I don't feel quite so bold, somehow -- as I did.


Sir Luc. O fie! -- consider your honor.


Acres. Aye -- true -- my honor -- Do, Sir Lucius, hedge in a word or two
every now and then about my honor.


Sir Luc. Well, here they are coming.

[Looking.
Acres. Sir Lucius -- if I wa'n't with you, I should almost think I was afraid
-- if my valor should leave me! -- Valor will come and go.


Sir Luc. Then, pray keep it fast, while you have it.


Acres. Sir Lucius -- I doubt it is going -- yes -- my valor is certainly
going! -- it is sneaking off! -- I feel it oozing out as it were at the palms
of my hands!


Sir Luc. Your honor -- your honor -- Here they are.


Acres. O mercy! -- now -- that I were safe at Clod-Hall! or could be shot
before I was aware!


Enter Faulkland and Absolute. Sir Luc. Gentlemen, your most obedient -- hah!
-- what Captain Absolute! -- So, I suppose, Sir, you are come here, just like
myself -- to do a kind office, first for your friend -- then to proceed to
business on your own account.


Acres. What, Jack! -- my dear Jack! -- my dear friend!


Abs. Heark'ee, Bob, Beverley's at hand.


Sir Luc. Well, Mr. Acres -- I don't blame your saluting the gentleman civilly.
-- So, Mr. Beverley, ( to Faulkland) if you will choose your weapons, the Captain
and I will measure the ground.


Faulk. My weapons, Sir.


Acres. Odds life! Sir Lucius, I Am not going to fight Mr. Faulkland; these are
my particular friends.


Sir Luc. What, Sir, did not you come here to fight Mr. Acres?


Faulk. Not I, upon my word, Sir.


Sir Luc. Well, now, that is mighty provoking! But I hope, Mr. Faulkland, as
there are three of us come on purpose for the game -- you will not be so
cantanckerous as to spoil the party by sitting out.


Abs. O pray, Faulkland, fight to oblige Sir Lucius.


Faulk. Nay, if Mr. Acres is so bent on the matter.


Acres. No, no, Mr. Faulkland -- I Will bear my disappointment like a Christian
-- Look'ee, Sir Lucius, there is no occasion at all for me to fight; and if it
is the same to you, I Would as lieve let it alone.


Sir Luc. Observe me, Mr. Acres -- I must not be trifled with. You have
certainly challenged somebody -- and you came here to fight him -- Now, if that
gentleman is willing to represent him -- I cannot see, for my soul, why it is not
just the same thing.


Acres. Z -- ds, Sir Lucius -- I tell you, it is one Beverley I Have challenged --
a fellow, you see, that dare not show his face! If he were here, I Would make him
give up his pretensions directly! --


Abs. Hold, Bob -- let me set you right -- there is no such man as Beverley in
the case. -- The person who assumed that name is before you; and as his
pretensions are the same in both characters, he is ready to support them in
whatever way you please.


Sir Luc. Well, this is lucky -- Now you have an opportunity --


Acres. What, quarrel with my dear friend Jack Absolute -- not if he were fifty
Beverleys! Z -- ds! Sir Lucius, you would not have me be so unnatural.


Sir Luc. Upon my conscience, Mr. Acres, your valor has oozed away with a
vengeance!


Acres. Not in the least! Odds Backs and Abettors! I Will be your second with all
my heart -- and if you should get a Quietus, you may command me entirely. I Will
get you a snug lying in the Abbey here; or pickle you, and send you over to
Blunderbuss-hall, or any of the kind with the greatest pleasure.


Sir Luc. Pho! pho! you are little better than a coward.


Acres. Mind, gentlemen, he calls me a Coward; Coward was the word, by my
valor!


Sir Luc. Well, Sir?


Acres. Look'ee, Sir Lucius, 'tisn't that I mind the word Coward -- Coward may
be said in joke. -- But if you had called me a Poltroon, Odds Daggers and Balls!


Sir Luc. Well, Sir?


Acres. -- I should have thought you a very ill-bred man.


Sir Luc. Pho! you are beneath my notice.


Abs. Nay, Sir Lucius, you cannot have a better second than my friend, Acres --
He is a most determined dog -- called in the country, Fighting Bob. -- He
generally kills a man a week; don't you, Bob?


Acres. Aye -- at home!


Sir Luc. Well then, Captain, it is we must begin -- so come out, my little
counselor, [draws his sword. and ask the gentleman, whether he will resign the
lady, without forcing you to proceed against him?


Abs. Come on then, Sir; ( draws) since you will not let it be an amicable suit,
here is my reply.


[ Enter Sir Anthony, David, and the Women. David. Knock 'em all down, sweet
Sir Anthony, knock down my Master in particular -- and bind his hands over to
their good behavior!


Sir Anth. Put up, Jack, put up, or I shall be in a frenzy -- how came you in a
duel, Sir?


Abs. Faith, Sir, that gentleman can tell you better than I; 'twas he called on
me, and you know, Sir, I serve his Majesty.


Sir Anth. Here Is a pretty fellow; I catch him going to cut a man's throat, and
he tells me, he serves his Majesty! -- Zounds! sirrah, then how durst you draw
the King's sword against one of his subjects?


Abs. Sir, I tell you! That gentleman called me out, without explaining his
reasons.


Sir Anth. Gad! Sir, how came you to call my son out, without explaining your
reasons?


Sir Luc, Your son, Sir, insulted me in a manner which my honor could not
brook.


Sir Anth. Zounds! Jack, how durst you insult the gentleman in a manner which
his honor could not brook?


Mrs. Mal. Come, come, let us have no Honor before ladies -- Captain Absolute,
come here -- How could you intimidate us so? -- Here Is Lydia has been terrified
to death for you.


Abs. For fear I should be killed, or escape, Ma'am?


Mrs. Mal. Nay, no delusions to the past -- Lydia is convinced; speak child.


Sir Luc. With your leave, Ma'am, I must put in a word here -- I believe I
could interpret the young lady's silence -- Now mark --


Lyd. What is it you mean, Sir?


Sir Luc. Come, come, Delia, we must be serious now -- this is no time for
trifling.


Lyd. It Is true, Sir; and your reproof bids me offer this gentleman my hand,
and solicit the return of his affections.


Abs. O! my little angel, say you so? -- Sir Lucius -- I perceive there must be
some mistake here -- with regard to the affront which you affirm I have given
you -- I can only say, that it could not have been intentional. -- And as you
must be convinced, that I should not fear to support a real injury -- you shall
now see that I am not ashamed to atone for an inadvertency -- I ask your
pardon. -- But for this lady, while honored with her approbation, I will
support my claim against any man whatever.


Sir Anth. Well said, Jack, and I Will stand by you, my Boy.


Acres. Mind, I give up all my claim -- I make no pretensions to any thing in
the world -- and if I cannot get a wife, without fighting for her, by my Valor!
I Will live a bachelor.


Sir Luc. Captain, give me your hand -- an affront handsomely acknowledged
becomes an obligation -- and as for the Lady -- if she chooses to deny her own
hand writing here --

(Taking out letters.)
Mrs. Mal. O, he will desolve my mystery! -- Sir Lucius, perhaps there is some
mistake -- perhaps, I can illuminate --


Sir Luc. Pray, old gentlewoman, don't interfere, where you have no business.
-- Miss Languish, are you my Delia, or not?


Lyd. Indeed, Sir Lucius, I am not.


( Lydia and Absolute walk aside.) Mrs. Mal. Sir Lucius O'Trigger -- ungrateful
as you are -- I own the soft impeachment -- pardon my blushes, I am Delia.


Sir Luc. You Delia -- pho! pho! be easy.


Mrs. Mal. Why, thou barbarous Vandyke -- those letters are mine -- When you
are more sensible of my benignity -- perhaps I may be brought to encourage your
addresses.


Sir Luc. Mrs. Malaprop, I am extremely sensible of your condescension; and
whether you or Lucy have put this trick upon me, I am equally beholden to you.
-- And to show you I Am not ungrateful, Captain Absolute! since you have taken
that lady from me, I Will give you my Delia into the bargain.


Abs. I am much obliged to you, Sir Lucius; but here is our friend, fighting
Bob, unprovided for.


Sir Luc. Hah! little Valor -- here, will you make your fortune?


Acres. Odds Wrinkles! No. -- But give us your hand, Sir Lucius, forget and
forgive; but if ever I give you a chance of pickling me again, say Bob Acres is
a Dunce, that is all.


Sir Anth. Come, Mrs. Malaprop, don't be cast down -- you are in your bloom yet.


Mrs. Mal. O Sir Anthony! -- men are all barbarians --


(All retire but Julia and Faulkland.) Jul. He seems dejected and unhappy --
not sullen -- there was some foundation, however, for the tale he told me -- O
woman! how true should be your judgment, when your resolution is so weak!


Faulk. Julia! -- how can I sue for what I so little deserve? I dare not
presume -- yet Hope is the child of Penitence.


Jul. Oh! Faulkland, you have not been more faulty in your unkind treatment of
me, than I am now in wanting inclination to resent it. As my heart honestly
bids me place my weakness to the account of love, I should be ungenerous not to
admit the same plea for yours.


Faulk. Now I shall be blessed indeed!


(Sir Anthony comes forward.) Sir Anth. What Is going on here? -- So you have
been quarrelling too, I warrant. -- Come, Julia, I never interfered before; but
let me have a hand in the matter at last. -- All the faults I have ever seen in
my friend Faulkland, seemed to proceed from what he calls the delicacy and
warmth of his affection for you -- There, marry him directly, Julia, you will
find he will mend surprisingly!


(The rest come forward.) Sir Luc. Come now, I hope there is no dissatisfied
person, but what is content; for as I have been disappointed myself, it will be
very hard if I have not the satisfaction of seeing other people succeed better
--


Acres. You are right, Sir Lucius. -- So, Jack, I wish you joy -- Mr. Faulkland
the same. -- Ladies, -- come now, to show you I Am neither vexed nor angry, Odds
Tabors and Pipes! I Will order the fiddles in half an hour, to the New Rooms --
and I insist on you all meeting me there.


Sir Anth. Gad! Sir, I like your spirit; and at night we single lads will drink
a health to the young couples, and a husband to Mrs. Malaprop.


Faulk. Our partners are stolen from us, Jack -- I hope to be congratulated by
each other -- yours for having checked in time, the errors of an illdirected
Imagination, which might have betrayed an innocent heart; and mine, for having,
by her gentleness and candor, reformed the unhappy temper of one, who by it
made wretched whom he loved most, and tortured the heart he ought to have
adored.


Abs. Well, Jack, we have both tasted the Bitters, as well as the Sweets, of
Love -- with this difference only, that you always prepared the bitter cup for
yourself, while I --


Lyd. Was always obliged to me for it, hey! Mr. Modesty? -- But come, no more
of that -- our happiness is now as unallay'd as general.


Jul. Then let us study to preserve it so: and while Hope pictures to us a
flattering scene of future Bliss, let us deny its pencil those colors which
are too bright to be lasting. -- When Hearts deserving Happiness would unite
their fortune, Virtue would crown them with an unfading garland of modest,
hurtless flowers; but ill-judging Passion will force the gaudier Rose into the
wreath, whose thorn offends them, when its Leaves are dropped!



