THE TRAVELERS IN SWITZERLAND. A COMIC OPERA, IN THREE ACTS: AS PERFORMED AT
THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

By Mr. BATE DUDLEY.

The curious Wanderer left afar to roam,
Sighs for that comfort which he left at home.
LONDON. Printed for J. DEBRETT, opposite Burlington-House, Piccadilly. 1794.

DEDICATION.
TO THOMAS HARRIS, Esquire. PATENTEE, etc etc. OF THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.
MY DEAR SIR,
THE TRAVELERS in their Dramatic Tour through SWITZERLAND, have derived so
considerable a share of their celebrity from your judicious guidance -- and
their Author owes so much to your zealous friendship on all occasions, that it
were impossible to inscribe this OPERA to any other person than yourself,
without violating those feelings, which have so invariably represented you, as
the object of his regard, and esteem.

I am, dear Sir, Very faithfully yours, H. B. DUDLEY.
Bradwell Lodge, March 20, 1794.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE STORY on which the following DRAMA is founded, however defective, is not
borrowed -- Various curtailments, and transpositions of Scenes, have
unavoidably deranged the unities of the Piece, for the convenience of Stage
representation. Several of the AIRS, and all the CHORUSES having been written
to compiled Music, the critical reader will make a suitable indulgence for some
irregular, and uncouth numbers, which he will necessarily meet with.

The AUTHOR has too high a sense of the zealous exertions of his whole DRAMATIS
PERSONAE, to make any distinction in that general tribute of thanks, which he
gratefully pays to their united merit. To Mr. SHIELD, he is indebted on this
occasion, for every thing that friendship, and professional talent, could
contribute. --

The Passages omitted on the Stage, are marked with inverted Commas.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Mr. Sidney, Mr. MUNDEN. Dorimond, Mr. JOHNSTONE. Dalton, Mr. INCLEDON. Count
Friponi, Mr. FAWCETT. Sir Leinster M'Loghlin, Mr. ROCK. Daniel, Mr. QUICK.
Robin, Mr. BLANCHARD. Swiss Burgher, Mr. THOMPSON. Landlord, Mr. LINTON.
Sergeant, Mr. RICHARDSON. Fisherman, Mr. TOWNSHEND, Freebooters, Mr. ABBOTT.
Mr. REES.
Miss Somerville's Servant, Mr. BLURTON.
Lady Philippa Sidney, Mrs MATTOCKS. Miss Somerville, Miss POOLE. Julia, Mrs.
CLENDINING. Nerinda, Mrs. MARTYR. Margery, Mrs. HENLEY. Shepherdess, Miss
HOPKINS: Lady's Maid, Mrs. BLURTON.
Swiss Soldiery, Shepherds, etc. etc.

THE TRAVELERS IN SWITZERLAND. A COMIC OPERA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- An AUBERGE on the side of a mountain at Sunrise, Daniel leading
his mule toward it. -- After his calling loudly, the Landlord and Landlady
appear.
SEPTETTO -- I.
Daniel. HOUSE! Landlord! Landlady! I say.

Landlord. Qui va la?

Landlady. My Lor Anglois!

Daniel. So I am, and yet you will find
Greater folks than me behind.

Enter Lady PHILIPPA, Mr. SIDNEY, Sir LEINSTER, JULIA, and DORIMOND, disguised
as Cazelle, a Swiss Valet. Landlord and Landlady. Je suis charm!

Lady Phillippa. You alarm me,
No good company to meet?

Mr. Sidney and Sir Leinster. Nothing in the house to eat?

Landlady. Jean!

All. Landlord! Tapster! Drawer! Waiter!

Sir Leinster. Oh, leave the matter to myself --
Best an Irishman can cater,
Where there is nothing on the shelf.

Mr. Sidney. Is there nothing on the shelf.

Mr. Sidney and Sir Leinster. Bring at least a slice of ham in!

Daniel. It Is in vain to think of cramming,

All. Nothing in the house to eat,
This is misery complete!

DUO --
CAZELLE and JULIA. Such distresses never move
Minds, that purely live on love.

Sir Lein. Having nothing to eat, I perceive, is one of the luxuries we get by
traveling into foreign parts!


Lady Phil. Take care of the baggage, Cazelle, and see that the trunk with my
family arms upon it, is particularly secured.


Cazelle. Oui Madame.


Mr. Sidney. The honest fellow, (clapping Dorimond on the shoulder) that so
gallantly preserved your daughter's life at the hazard of his own, will not be
found deficient in the common offices of fidelity, depend on it.

[Exeunt within the Auberge.
SCENE II.
Enter Lady PHILIPPA and DANIEL. Lady Phil. What, news have you picked up,
Daniel? are there any people of rank, or old families beside myself, on the
road?


Daniel. Not that I know of, my Lady; I Have only heard of two surprising things;
one is, that young 'Squire Dalton, passed this way a few weeks ago, on his
travels.


Lady Phil. That is strange, indeed!


Daniel. But the other is much more wonderful.


Lady Phil. What can that be?


Daniel. Why, my Lady, a fine bewitched Castle, only two leagues off! now, that
in my notion, is a sight, worth going all the world over to see!


Lady Phil. Poh! this nonsense of witches and enchanted castles, will one day
or other turn your brain, Daniel.


Daniel. Oh, what a noble sight an enchanted castle must be!

[Exit Daniel.
Lady Phil. Such a pair of ridiculous lovers, as Dalton and Miss Somerville,
romance itself has never recorded -- both quarrelling with each other on a
punctilio of false pride, when neither of their families have so much as a
pedigre to be proud of -- though, I think, we heard enough of her ancient
Chateau, which she went abroad to take possession of.


Enter Mr. SIDNEY. Mr. Sidney. Julia and Sir Leinster seem inclined to
breakfast on a prospect; they have discovered a distant country through the
telescope, which she contends, is the cliffs of Dover; while Sir Leinster, to
be a match for her in geography, declares it to be the Mangerton mountains,
near the lake of Killarney.


Lady Phil. Now I must conjure you, Mr. Sidney, to lay aside your coarse jokes,
and to deport yourself for the remainder of the tour, as may become the dignity
of my family in a foreign clime.


Mr. Sidney. You know, my Lady Philippa, that the ruling object of my life, is
to make you happy.


Lady Phil. For shame, Mr. Sidney! pray let me ask, in what single instance
have you shown it? name one!


Mr. Sidney. Compose yourself, my dear, and I will -- Did I not forbid our
neighbor, young Dorimond, my house, because the poor fellow could not prove
his descent from one of the twelve Caesar's?


Lady Phil. Don't name the upstart in my presence -- a creature without a coat
of arms to his family.


Mr. Sidney. But having honor and private worth, I should have given him up
with reluctance, though he had been without a coat to his back.


Lady Phil. I think, Mr. Sidney, you might pay a little more respect to the
memory of my ancestors.


Mr. Sidney. Come, come, my Lady Philippa, ^et us drop this subject, or you will
worry yourself about the antiquity of your ancestors, till you grow as old as
the best of 'em!


Lady Phil. Very well, Sir, -- vastly well!


Mr. Sidney. Have I ever uttered a single emonstrance on our carriage being
overloaded with your quarterings, and scutcheons, like a country hearse?


Lady Phil. I see through your cruel design, Sir, -- you intend to break my
heart in a foreign country.


Mr. Sidney. And did not I take the advertisement for your Swiss valet to the
newspaper with my own hands, and procure you one to attend upon my person, with
whiskers as long as a pole cat?


Lady Phil. Go on, Sir! go on! dishonor me through life, and when I am no
more, persevere in your barbarity, and let no family trophies follow me to my
tomb!


Mr. Sidney. Oh, my dear Lady Philippa!

AIR II. -- Mr. SIDNEY.
WHEN convinced by the deep sounding boum,
That in earnest you seek your long home,
For trifles I then will not cavil;
But resigned to my fate,
I Will direct that in state,
On this journey you proudly may travel.
With a bim! boum! bell!
At your death, since you wish it, my dear,
All your honors of birth may appear,
For Heralds your arms shall reveal O!
Hang your a'chment up high,
To tell all who pass by,
That my duck has got -- quies in Caelo.
With a bim! boum! bell!

Lady Phil. Oh, you monster of a man! you would bury me alive! get me a glass
of Eau de Cologne, or I shall faint! (sits down.)


Enter DANIEL. Daniel. Here Is a letter, I fancy for your Ladyship, with a coat
of arms on it, as big as a waterman's badge.


Lady Phil. (Rising in extacy and receives it.) Coat of arms!


Sidney. So then, go which way I will, I am crossed at every turn, by some new
fangled notions of false grandeur! (aside.)


Lady Phil. (Looking minutely at the seal) Field sable, three panthers passant,
gorged with ducal collars chained, armed, crested, tufted, and hoofed.


Mr. Sidney. And horned too, I suppose, to complete the impression of modern
heraldry.


Lady Phil. From some illustrious personage, my life on it!


Daniel Yes, my Lady; I Am sure by what his servant says, he is a foreign Lord at
the least.


Lady Phil. And yet its rather singular, that he should not know my name!
(reads) "A Mesdames -- Mesdames Angloises." (opens it) yes, he must be a man of
fashion, for he writes, I perceive, in all the languages (reads indistinctly)
"Comte Friponi -- les belles Angloises -- his devoirs in person -- and chaperon
them through Geneva and its environs" Delightful! Friponi? That Is surely a very
old name.


Mr. Sidney. Yes, my Lady, one of the ancient families, no doubt which the
deluge had not time to sweep away. This must be the fellow that I saw in close
conference with our Swiss. (aside)


Lady Phil. Notwithstanding your sneers, Mr. Sydney, I shall not, you perceive
be entirely deserted in your absence, if you should pursue your commercial
scheme to Strasburg -- who is there? does the Courier wait?


Enter DORIMOND (as Swiss Valet.) Cazelle. Yes, my Lady.


Lady Phil. Give me the port feiulle, that I may write an answer immediately.

[Exit with Swiss.
Mr. Sidney. Travel, so far from correcting, seems but to increase her romantic
malady! This artificial weakness bears down all the amiable qualities of her
nature; and the infatuation, if not checked, will descend, I fear even to the
unaffected Julia! serious remonstrance has been of no avail; the force of
ridicule is my last resource, and the object is too valuable, to leave the most
painful experiment untried for its recovery.

Enter SIR LEINSTER M'LOGHLIN.
Sir Lein. What the devil, Mr. Sidney, have you done to my Lady Philippa this
morning? yesterday, she graciously told me, she could find no blot in my
'scutcheon -- now, this minute, she whisked as spitefully by me, as a bullet
from a cross bow!

Come come, stand my friend with Miss Julia, and tell her once for all how
clever, a husband I Will make her!


Mr. Sidney. Look ye, Sir Leinster, as old friends, don't let you and I talk
seriously when we can avoid it.

Julia has declared never to favor the addresses of any one, without my
approbation; in no case therefore but that of extreme necessity, shall a
father's authority control her inclination.

The future happiness of her life will probably depend on her own choice -- let
the man of her heart, then win her, and wear her, say I.


Sir Lein. My dear fellow, give me your hand, and is that what you say? Win her
and wear her! Oh! say no more, only leave me alone for that.

AIR III. -- Sir LEINSTER M'LOGHLIN.
TO win, and to wear a sweet creature,
Is always Sir Leinster's delight;
The first thing he dreams in the morning,
The last that awakes him at night.
He Is tight when he slips from his pillow,
As a ship that is just out of dock;
Though at dusk with a skinful of Claret,
He Is apt to run foul of a rock,
Sing smaghler oo smack smhilat smothar;
How funny this taste is of mine,
Oh! I learnt it from father and mother,
To love pretty women and wine!

Enter LADY PHILIPPA. Lady Phil. Well, Mr. Sidney, we can part with you now as
soon as you please, for Count Friponi in his note, has recommended to me an
English guide, who lives just at the foot of the mountain -- though he knows but
little of the man himself, he is reckoned the cleverest creature in the world,
who can tell us every body, and every thing.


Mr. Sidney. An English guide recommended to you by a foreign Count? -- there
must be some mischief on foot! (aside.)


Lady Phil. Yes; and don't you think this an act of great courtesy, and
condescension in a man of high family?


Mr. Sidney. Without doubt my everlasting love. (ruminating) If such a device
were practicable! (aside.)


Lady Phil. What are you prosing about?


Mr. Sidney. I Am thinking, my Lady Philippa, that in my absence, is it not
possible that you may thus subject yourself to some imposition?


Lady Phil. Imposition! I know you deem me a weak creature! show me the man,
Mr. Sidney, that can impose upon me.


Mr. Sidney. Its worth the experiment at all events. (aside) But don't you
perceive that this will be an unnecessary increase of your expenses?


Lady Phil. Poh! what signifies expense when the honor of a family is
concerned! the larger the suite, you know, the more dignified! besides, he will
be a better interpreter than Cazelle, the Swiss, who is far too reserved.


Mr. Sidney. I should be sorry to withhold my consent, even in --


Lady Phil. Your consent? now, Mr. Sidney, you have made it an object of too
much importance for me to dispense with -- so have him I will, and there is an
end of it.


Mr. Sidney. Then all I have to do, is, I suppose, as usual, to acquiesce?


Lady Phil. To be sure.

[Exit.
Mr. Sidney. Well said, my Lady Philippa! (musing) There can be no great
difficulty in defeating the probable rascalities of the Count, who, from what I
can learn of our landlord, is little better than a desperado after all -- This
same Guide, intended no doubt for some secret service of that fashionable
impostor, may, with a little dexterity, be managed, so as to answer a better
purpose of mine

-- I shall satisfy myself at least, whether the regard she pays to other
opinions in preference to mine, be a turn toward natural depravity, or merely
the coquettish folly of family pride. If only the affection of vice, she may
yet be shamed out of it -- should it prove worse, the painful alternative my
own honor must suggest.

Who knows but I may be received as her guide by stratagem, though refused it
through life on the score of long tried affection

-- I remember to have enacted Davus before the grave dons of Westminster, with
tolerable success.

-- How shall I manage my voice? but there can be no great difficulty in that;
for Lady Philippa has paid too little regard to its natural key, to be struck
with it under any disguise it may now assume.

[Exit.
SCENE III. -- Castle Gardens.
Enter Miss SOMERVILLE. AIR IV.
EVER let me shun the danger
Absence is ordained to prove;
Where the mind to pride a stranger,
Blends Indifference with love!
Oh, ye hoary mountains, say,
That surround me night and day,
How elate have I, 'ere now,
Sought with hope your proudest brow
Aloft in air!
Then -- sad reverse of scene!
How soon alas have been
Low at your feet with pale despair!

Enter NERINDA. Ner. Dear ma'am, why should we despair? I hope we are not
doomed to live alone for ever! (Miss Somerville musing) I wonder who that could
be, I saw just now through the glass from the turret? perhaps he is near enough
by this time to be observed with the naked eye.

[Exit unperceived by Miss Somerville.
Miss Some. This completes the first year of my self-banishment from an object
which I find is still dearer to me even than my country! How devoted is that
affection, which neither time can alter, nor distance remove! In vain have I
endeavored to reproach my own heart, for permitting me to fly from all it
values! Oh, Dalton! if I still beheld thee at the feet of another, my pride
would take the same alarm, and again inform thee, that I must dispense with
those addresses, which I owed more to my fortune than my person. Had I wronged
him by a groundless suspicion, he could not have withdrawn himself with that
cold respect, without attempting the smallest explanation of his conduct.
Though my mind approves the sacrifice it has made, it cannot recollect it with
indifference.

(perusing a letter she had written) That enquiry after Dalton will betray a
womanly weakness to others, and a want of resolution to myself -- It must not
be (draws her pen through a passage, folds up and addresses the letter.) Yet
how vain to erase him here, when he is imprinted on my heart for ever.


Enter NERINDA hastily. DUETT V.
Ner. DEAR ma'am, I Have such a sight for you
One fit for any queen!
Oh! run the sweetest man to view
Your eyes have ever seen!

Miss Some. Oh fie! no, no, no, no

Ner. Now I pray don't say no, no, no, no

Ner. Along the lake I saw him stray,
Where tempests often begin;
Poor soul he may have lost his way.
Oh! let us ask him in!

Miss Some. Oh fie! no, no, no, no!

Ner. Now I pray, don't say no, no, no, no!

Ner. Why not? he seems a countryman of our own, and may tell us all the news
of dear England!


Miss Some. Prithee, Nerinda, do not trifle with me -- I have addressed a
packet to my agent -- you must see it safely delivered to the mulateer when he
next passes the mountains.


Ner. He looked a charming man from the turret! and as I happen to have the key
of the abbey gate, I Will take a nearer peep at him presently, if I die for it!
Heigho! (sighs)


Miss Some. Heyday, Nerinda, why that deep sigh?


Ner. In pity, ma'am, that two such creatures as you and I, should be so
unhandsomely concealed from the world.


Miss Some. Oh, I know the world a little better than you, and believe me, that
unprotected woman is never so happy as in seclusion.


Ner. Well now, I don't think, that ever I should have found that out.


Miss Some. Bred a recluse, Nerinda, don't you prefer the peaceful freedom of
this mansion, to the dull austerities of a convent?


Ner. Oh, dear ma'am, the nunnery was certainly the most sprightly thing of the
two! for there, one had the privilege of peeping at a man through the grate, on
a red-letter day; but as to this dreary castle of your great grandfather's,
nothing human will approach it! the shepherds run away from us, for fear of
being bewitched; and the last time Margery went to market, they were about to
swim her, poor soul, for a wizard!


Miss Some. Come, a truce to raillery.

You know that I have imposed upon myself this penance, and the prejudices of
the world shall not move me from my resolve.

If you, Nerinda, feel it a restraint any longer to remain with me, I will
gladly endeavor to provide you a situation more suitable to the natural gaiety
of your temper!


Ner. O dear, ma'am, indeed I did but joke -- I would not quit you for the
whole world -- I was more anxious to shorten your serious moments, I assure
you, than my own.


Miss Some. Amiable girl!


Ner. However, ma'am, its necessary that something should be done with the
other part of your household, for I left it in a state little short of mutiny:
but here comes a pair of them to speak for themselves.


Enter ROBIN, and MARGERY. Miss Some. Well, pray what are your complaints?


Robin. Not for want of good living, my Lady, for no one roasts, or boils every
day better than our Margery!


Margery. Nor for more wages -- for and please your Ladyship, I am sure we are
as well paid, as fed!


Miss Some. What is it then you want?


Robin. Why, if I may be zo bold as to speak my mind, Madge and I here, have
laid our heads together for sometime in this dismal country, and begin to
think, we should like to taste what true liberty is in our own!


Miss Some. And is this really the case, Margery?


Margery. And please you my Lady, Robin has promised to make me his lawful
spouse, as soon as we set foot in old England again!


Miss Some. Poor creature! and that is the way she would secure her liberty?


Ner. Well; but Margery, cannot you contrive to be married here?


Robin. Yes, ma'am, in a botching kind of a way -- but if the knot was to come
azunder, and let her down in her old days, I should never forgive myself!


AIR VII. -- QUARTETTO. -- MARGERY, ROBIN, NERINDA, and Miss SOMERVILLE.
Marg. THUS on my bended knees I pray!

All. Ah, well-a-day!

Robin. Madge is in a melting mood!

Marg. Let him cheer my latter days;

Robin. Hear her, ma'am, she never prays
But for zomething very good!

Nerinda. Now for some most doleful ditty,

Marg. He Is the only man I prize!

Miss Some. How the creature moves my pity!

Robin. Drown me not, those sloe-black eyes.

Miss Some. and Nerinda. Cease your sorrow, and arise.

Robin. Stop your flood gates, wipe your eyes.

Miss Some, As your affections seem mutual, at the end of three months, your
further services shall be dispensed with, and a passport procured for your
conveyance to England.


Margery. Heaven bless you, and send your Ladyship a good husband in your turn,
and that speedily!


Ner. How happy you have made 'em!


Robin. Drop another curtsy, do'e, Madge, and now live in hopes, a little
longer like a reasonable woman.

[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
LADY PHILIPPA and JULIA. Lady Phil. Heaven be praised, your father has taken
his departure for Strasburgh.


Julia. You must excuse me, my Lady, if I cannot rejoice at the loss of his
society.


Lady Phil. No great loss, child; for now I can see good company, without the
fear of being checked by the coarseness of his English jokes

-- Let me expect, Julia, that before the men you are properly reserved; and if
you see me condescend occasionally to be a little more gracious to them, you
should consider who I am, and that you child, in the line of precedence, are
only the daughter of Mr. Sidney.


Julia. A distinction, my Lady, sufficiently honorable in my mind, I can
assure you.


Lady Phil. In a word, no more love fits!

You must know I expect an immediate visit from a Count Friponi, who is said to
be rather a polished creature.


Julia. Probably he may.


Lady Phil. With a something so easy in his address, and familiar at first
sight, that I thought it necessary to put you on your guard -- besides, should
you think to find a wealthy admirer on the Continent, which was probably your
father's object in coming abroad, you will both be much disappointed, believe me!


AIR VIII --
JULIA. JOY sparkles in the roving eye,
That seeks for treasure over the deep,
No billow then can beat too high,
No restless gale too boldly sweep.
But what lorn maid, alas! will boast,
The spreading sail, or willing wind.
That wafts her from her native coast.
To leave her fondest hope behind.

Enter DANIEL. Daniel. The mules are put to the carriages, my Lady, and it is
only four leagues to Geneva -- oh, I Would like to have forgot; here is an odd kind
of man with only one eye, who says he came by your Ladyship's order.


Lady Phil. By my order? oh then, it must be the English guide that the Count
recommended -- show him in: he is just in time to go along with us.

[Exit. Daniel. Enter Mr. SIDNEY, (disguised as LOPEZ.) You are the person
recommended to be our guide?


Lopez. (Speaking quick throughout his scenes, in disguise) The same at your
Ladyship's eternal command! now I Am launched, my fears begin to vanish! (aside.)


Lady Phil. How had you the misfortune to lose an eye?


Lopez. Merely by intense study, illustrious Lady.


Lady Phil. What might that study be?


Lopez. The Heraldry of ancient Greece.


Lady Phil. How fortunate to meet with so illumined a creature! why you must
have seen better days!


Lopez. I have indeed, my Lady; and am lineally descended from the first race
of Picts, who made, you know, no small figure in the world, before clothes came
into fashion!


Enter DANIEL, who stares at Mr. Sidney. Lady Phil. Take care of this person,
Daniel, he is a clever creature, and has known better days.


Daniel. Take care of my little stock of linen! (aside.)


Lady Phil. Now I look at him again, I can plainly perceive the man of
consequence in him. (aside) What is your name?


Lopez. Lopez is my traveling name, my Lady.


Lady Phil. Well, then, Lopez, you may now recite the curiosities that are most
worthy our seeing.


Lopez. It Is well I picked up a slice or two of the mavelous, along with my
new jacket. (aside,) First of all, most noble Lady, you have no doubt, paid a
visit to the immense Glacieres!


Lady Phil. No, we have not.


Lopez. No? why, one of them wears his snowy nightcap two thousand toises above
the common clouds.


Daniel. Phew! (whistles.)


Lady Phil. That must be nobly tremendous!


Lopez. On our right about a league and a half, stands -- the enchanted castle
of the mountains.


Daniel. (impatiently.) Aye, that is the very same castle, my Lady, I told you
of; and a sight worth traveling to see indeed! Oh, he is a much cleverer fellow
than I took him for. (aside.)


Lady Phil. Who is the possessor?


Lopez. (pausing.) A lucky thought -- I Will give it to the Comte -- It Is one of
the ancient possessions of the Comte Friponi.


Lady Phil. Indeed!


Lopez. Yes my Lady -- But I must request you to be on your guard, as he is
unwilling to acknowledge this part of his domain, from the awful family
circumstance which led to his present celebrity.


Lady Phil. What family circumstance? proceed!


Daniel (anxiously.) Ay, pray, Sir, do tell us all about it!


Lopex. About a century and a half ago, a Knight of Charlemagne, one of the
Comte's illustrious progenitors, was slain there, within the ancient Hall of
Arms, in a tilting match, gallantly defending the honor of his fair mistress.
Immediately on hearing this, she threw herself headlong from the lofty
battlements, and falling upon the foot of the Drawbridge, heroicly dashed her
lovely self to atoms!


Dan. Poor soul!


Lady Phil. She acted, indeed, like an ancient woman of honor.


Lopez. At four periods in the year, about twilight, she has since been seen to
pass through the illumined Hall, sometimes in white, at others in blue and fire.


Daniel. Bless me -- blue and fire!


Lady Phil. But who inhabits it now?


Lopez. Two ladies, who had quarrelled with the world, are said to have got
there, but for what purpose is not known.


Lady Phil. I am all impatience to behold the Hall of Arms.


Lopez. I can show your Ladyship that, and the castle throughout, without the
Comte's delicacy being hurt by the knowledge of it.


Daniel. Oh, it will be well worth your seeing my Lady -- Suppose I was to go
forward myself, and enquire a little about it first?


Lady Phil. I don't think that would be amiss, Daniel; and bring me some
further account of it to Geneva. But be careful, for curiosity, you know, has
always been your particular failing; so take care Daniel, that it does not run
you into too much danger.

[Exi
Daniel. Oh, never fear me, my Lady, for spirits and wizzards you know, were
always my delight from a child. What a comical world it is that we odd folks
live in! nothing delights my curiosity so much as a touch of the mavelous!
now and then it fancies a bit of the doleful! though a little simple mirth after
all it finds the easiest of digestion.

AIR IX.
JOY and grief are too many for poor little Dan.
In his mind they kick up such a pother;
So the one I serve truly as well as I can,
And by some friendly proxy do suit to the other!
For light is my heart, and merry,
With a high up! not with your low down derry.
See these eyelids were made for no snivelling Elf;
But light feathered to twinkle with glee;
When I Am merry, I manage to laugh with myself,
And when sad, why this flask kindly weeps for poor me.
For light is my heart, and merry,
With a high up! not with your low down derry.

SCENE V. An extensive Lake; A Fisherman's Hut in a Rock, etc.
DALTON coming out of the Hut. Dalton. Let me turn from the distressing scenes
of memory, to those of nature, so beautifully ranged around me -- how unruffled
is this expanse of water!

AIR X.
ELEMENT of liquid beauty,
Mirror chaste as opening day,
How enchanting is your duty,
Graceful nature to display!
Like the face of that fair creature,
Born for man's supreme delight,
Thou art decked with every feature,
That can captivate the sight!
How contradictory are all the accounts I can collect! my retreat in this
trusty creature's hut, will at least enable me to avoid the Sidney family, who
would only trifle with my distress. And yet I would gladly learn the better
fate of Dorimond and his Julia, in whose cause I have so severely suffered. --
Though I have at length found out the solitary abode of my crew fugitive, how
can I approach it, while her last words weigh so heavily on my heart?

Her wealth the object of my address, while the person of another engaged my
affection! 'twas a charge, which my pride can never condescend to refute -- had
she been inferior to me in fortune, a single prejudice of her mind against me,
my whole life should have been devoted to remove.

-- But here comes my honest fisherman, whose busy scenes afford me some
amusement.


Enter Fisherman. -- Dalton shakes hands with him. AIR XI -- GLEE.
OH! say, ye happy mountaineers, who lead a life secure,
How little do you reckon on the hardships we endure;
While on the lake, poor fishermen for bread are doomed to go,
Dark or light,
Day or night,
Where tempestuous winds do blow,
And the billows break below!
Our element's the water, on which we work amain,
The stars our only pilots, to steer us home again;
But on the beach re-landed, we feel our spirits flow,
And on shore,
Heed no more
How tempestuous winds do blow,
Or the billows break below!

Fisherman. Come, lads, bustle, bustle, and I Will be with you by the time you have
shot the biggest trowl in the bay.

[Exeunt Fishermen.
Enter NERINDA peeping. Dalton. Torment us how she may -- woman, dear woman,
must still be the solace of our lives!


Ner. As the only lady in company, that compliment must belong to me -- (aside.
Dalton turns and sees her) I fear, Sir, as a stranger, you flatter me!


Dalton. I must first learn how to do justice to so charming a creature! but
say, my pretty one, who are you? and how came so lovely an English woman in
these rude mountains?


Ner. Well, how delightful it is, to hear our native tongue, now and then so
charmingly spoken!


Dalton. Where do you inhabit?


Ner. Hard by! I saw you from our battlements, straying, as I thought, in a
melancholy mood; so I ran to ask you, if you stood in need of any thing.


Dalton. Charitable soul! she certainly belongs to the castle! (aside.)


Ner. Pray, Sir, inform me, -- how left you our native country?


Dalton. Bearing herself still proudly, as becomes the first of nations; and
solicitous, like you, to succor those around her in distress! but you will allow
me to attend you back -- I Have a thousand things to say to you!


Ner. Oh no, that cannot be -- we keep a very strict house, I assure you! And
yet he seems a good creature, that might assist me in comforting my poor lady!
(aside) Do you see that dismal mansion? (pointing.)


Dalton. Not long since I passed near it!


Ner. Then, if you must know, two spinsters of us inhabit it.


Dalton. Indeed! the companion, no doubt, of my Louisa (aside).


Ner. One facinated by the spells of her own mind, from which I would fain
relieve her -- and the other escaped from a convent -- and as you see, not
exactly calculated for such solitary confinement.


Dalton. But your companion -- is she an Englishwoman, and as charming as
yourself?


Ner. Every way my superior, I assure you -- but you must not be too particular
at present -- a thought has just struck me, that you might perhaps assist me in
rallying her out of this self captivity.


Dalton. By all means! command me this instant!


Ner. Oh no! not quite so violently: for I can only gain you admittance by an
innocent stratagem -- but indeed, how dare I confide in a stranger?


Dalton. Why should you doubt me?


Ner. That Is true; for you are an Englishman, and the service I require of you,
is the kind relief of a woman!


Dalton. Then let me fly with you this moment.


Ner. I tell you, that is impossible; but should I happen to see you a little
before sunset where the view opens from the castle to the Glacieres, there, if
my courage fail me not, I may, perhaps haps, give you further instructions,
till then, adieu!


Dalton. I Will certainly attend you -- But surely you will not leave me thus
uninformed, to return to solitude?


AIR XII. --
NERINDA. SINCE you ask me, I Will honestly tell you the truth,
Flesh and blood cannot bear such restraint in their youth!
I should like this same solitude, better, I own,
Was it not that I hate to be sighing alone!
For then poor Heigho! is but labor in vain,
Because one cannot get a Heigho back again!
Two rivers when blended, we very well know,
At all times more sweetly in unison flow:
Then my word for it you will find that there is nothing amiss,
If two hearts should thus form but one current of bliss;
For then poor Heigho is not labor in vain,
Because one may get a Heigho back again!

SCENE VI. -- An Hotel at Geneva.
JULIA, and CAZELLE entering to her. Caz. The Comte come with my lady, and she
ask Mademoiselle for you -- I beg pardon -- but I hope you not forget, that de
foreign Comtes are never the most honorable lover.


Julia. You are determined, I find Cazelle, to make me every hour more your
debtor.


Caz. Oh, Miss, you honor too great my humble fidelite. (retiring.)


Julia. Come hither, Cazelle -- I owe you much more than this small tribute of
gratitude for my preservation. (offering a purse)


Caz. Oh, no, Miss (laying his hand on his breast.) I have been pay for it
here, over, and over again!


Julia. Noble minded creature!


Cazelle. My transport had nearly betrayed me. (aside.)

[Exit.
Julia. There is something in the mild manners of this faithful Cazelle, which
indicates, that fortune has been unmindful of his deserts -- his kind attention
to my safety, brings to my mind the painful recollection of the friend, if
nothing more, I lost, in Dorimond!

AIR XIII.
Oh love, declare! dear friendship, say,
Why, why should memory impart,
A bliss, or sorrow passed away,
To cheat, alas, the silly heart?
On plighted vows -- on transports dwell,
Such, memory, alone impart,
From thy record these fondly tell,
And kindly cheat the silly heart!

Enter COMTE, leading in LADY PHILIPPA. Comte. Ah, ma chere Dame; comme vous
aim! (Sings ad lib, and kneels.)


Lady Phil. Rise, Comte, I entreat you!


Enter LOPEZ, (unobserved.) Lopez. (Aside.) Surely this cannot be the old family
way.


Comte. How I you adore!


Lady Phil. I must not allow even of this traveling familiarity.


Lopez. Nor I, or we shall make the grand tour too soon.

[Aside.
Lady Phil. Rise, Comte, I conjure you!


Comte. How can I rise, without your fair hand?


Lopez. (Aside) I Will show you (going between them.) As you seem to have made a
slip, sir, suppose you make shift with mine? (presents his hand.)


Lady Phil. Mercy, how the man alarmed me!


Comte. Lopez, how can you be so dam a fool? (Aside.)

[Lopez whispers the Comte.
Comte. Mademoiselle come dis way? Oh, vous avez raison. (Aside to him.) My
lady, je vous demand pardon. [Talks apart with her.


Lopez. My doubts increase, if not my dangers -- but being undiscovered, I am
in a fair way of satisfying the one, though I may not prevent the other! at all
events I shall rescue my child from the contagion of such traveling examples.

[Exit.
Lady Phil. Oh, here she comes -- Julia, child, you have kept us waiting for
you.


Julia. I entreat your pardon Lady Philippa.


Lady Phil. Let me introduce you to the Comte Friponi, the head of one of the
most ancient houses in the circle -- she has a mauvaise honte, you will perceive,
Comte, which travel will in time correct.


Comte. Certainment (Singing and looking inquisitively at Julia.)

Ma foi! elle est assez jolie! Upon my word, how can I know which is Madame,
and which is Mademoiselle?


Lady Phil. You are right, Comte, for she is sometimes taken for my elder sister.


Comte. En verite! I Am not at all surprise!


Lady Phil. But you should know, Monsieur le Comte, that I was a very young and
silly girl indeed, when I condescended to give my hand to Julia's father.

I Will just step and finish my dispatches, and return to you immediately.

[Exit.
Comte. Bon! Now I make de littel love to Miss.


AIR XIV. DUET.
Comte. Ma belle! ma jolie Reine!

Julia. What is it, sir, you mean
Let me go!

Comte. Oh, no, no!

Julia. Release me, sauciest of men!

Comte. How shall I catch a you again?

Julia. Hence from me fly --

Comte. Crudela! you will make a me die!

Julia. What care I?

Comte. But ah! morblieu!
I Would rather live, ma chere, pour vous.

[Julia breaks away and Exit. Comte. Dat is ver drole! But she have de bonne
fortune -- so, de next time I run wid her away sans ceemonie! Till one of de
dear creature come back, what will I do pour passer le temps? (walks toward
the end of the room, and looks out of the glass-doors.

Re-enter Lady PHILIPPA, and JULIA.
Lady Phil. Ridiculous child! Now your affectation carries you as far the other
way!

He is a man of high birth; so that if he had been hurried into an
indiscretion, it would not have been with a subordinate branch of the family.


Comte. (walks up to them) Eh bien, Mademoiselle, how you fly comme de littel
bird upon de wing! (to Julia; then talks apart with Lady Philippa.)


Julia. To be driven from the man I love, and obliged to solicit protection of
another in the absence of my father, from the wretch I hate, is a destiny
severe indeed!

[Aside. [Savoyards heard without.
Lady Phil. What delightful music.


Comte. Une petite serenade, I command pour passer le temps!


Lady Phil. How extremely well bred.

[Savoyards enter, and play.
Enter CAZELLE. Cazelle. A packet my lady, from England.

[Delivers letters.
Lady Phil. What a charming bustle will travel afford!


Comte. Oh, de travaille! Oui! It is le plus jolie chose du monde.


Lady Phil. Come Julia, you promised to throw aside your English ennui.


Julia. True Madam! But how hard to feign a merriment to which the heart's a
stranger!

[Aside.
AIR XV. QUINTETTE.
The cross road of life, which all mortals pursue,
MERRY TRAVELERS only with comfort pass through;
They stoop but to gather its pleasantest flowers,
Then gaily trip on with the light-footed hours.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Cazella alone.
THERE goes the Comte's rascally spy -- our guide, plotting every possible
mischief against the peace of a worthy man! had Mr. Sidney's family no other
claims on my service, I am bound to protect it in his absence, even by the
common duties of humanity! Never yet have I alarmed her delicacy by an abrupt
avowal of my passion. Had I revealed myself when I snatched her from the waves,
I might have misinterpreted her emotions of gratitude, for those of love! Oh
no! my mind must first receive some better assurance that her absent Dorimond
still lives in her regard.

[Exit
SCENE II. -- The Glacieres.
DANIEL, discovered with a skin of wine. Daniel. I begin to think this
confounded curiosity of mine, will carry me a little too far! If I should be
surpised in these lonely mountains, what would become of me?

[Seeing a Savoyard. Hey day, what have we here? Troth, and so it is -- one of
the Shepherd's hurdy-gurdies, with which he charms his mountain lasses. I Will
see if it will say a soft thing or two to me (turns it) yes, yes, (laughing)
it is a common prattling fool, that we wise men can always play upon! (plays
again) well, that ever I should turn out such a master of music! Why, I do it
better than the famed thrummer of old; he only caper'd the stones out of rocks
-- now see how I tickle even flesh and blood from the mountains!

[Shepherds and Shepherdesses descend from the GLACIERES, dancing. Ecod, but
their fellows are along with them! I Have heard these long whisker'd sparks are
now and then given to jealousy! I Will hide up a little!

[Conceals himself in the rocks. -- Dancers pass off.
Shepherdess. I Am sure I heard him near this glen -- which way can he have
taken?


Dan. (Peeping.) I Am not sorry they are gone! two or three of them were furious
looking dogs -- Fh! that was civil enough though, to leave one of their nymphs
behind 'em.

[Plays a strain.
Shep. Davio! (running toward him) Ah! no! it is some stranger!

[Falls back.
Dan. Come, come, my pretty lass, you are rather supriz'd at my skill -- but
that is nothing to what I can do.


AIR XVI.
SHEPHERDESS. Came you near yon mountain glade,
By the track the mules have made?
Path to me for ever dear,
Trodden by my Muleteer!
Over the frozen waste of snow,
Light and fearless do I go,
If the cheerful voice I hear,
Of my faithful Muleteer.
Cold my bosom never knows,
For my heart with rapture glows,
When the cheerful voice I hear,
Of my faithful Muleteer!

Dan. No, I did not meet any such tramper; but you are in luck, my little
grass-hopper, in popping upon the cleverer fellow of the two! come, cannot I do
as well?


Shep. Ah! no!


Dan. Bless your little innocent heart, then if that is the case, I wont
distress you by tarrying -- I Will look for him as I go on, and if I find him, be
sure I Will send him to you.


Shep. La! where did you get that savoyard?


Dan. Found it on the green-sward here!


Shep. Lay it down again directly, for fear you should be seen with it.


Dan. Seen with it -- why?


Shep. It belongs to the shepherd who keeps the watch this day on the mountain
-- the tune to which it is set, calls them altogether, and if they caught you
laughing at them, they would punish you, by shutting you up in one of the caves.


Dan. Lord a' mercy! you don't say so? (throws it down) what a narrow escape
I Have had! I Will begone! But hark ye, little one; is this the way to the old
castle, that they say is enchanted?


Shep. Yes; you will see it on your left when you have passed this Mountain.


Dan. Well, that is lucky however -- but are you certain it is bewitched?


Shep. So my grandmother says -- but I Am sure I don't know: two or three of our
Shepherds have been there on a Sunday, and they never got any harm -- good b'ye!


Dan. Well then -- good bye! [Exit Sheperdess. Come now, little DAN, as we are
alone, answer me one question fairly; an't you a bit of a coward at the bottom
after all? No, that I am not! (blustering) and suppose I was, you don't believe
I should be such a fool to own it, even to myself: -- if I have a fault, it is
bearing a little too much to the desperate side of valor.

AIR XVII. DANIEL.
Does this look like the face DAN,
Betwixt me and you;
Would that Daniel disgrace man,
Antiquity knew,
Whom no sense of danger could ever subdue?
Little DAN will not flinch,
He Is a man every inch,
To his namesake of old he will ever prove true,
Whom a Den full of Lions could never subdue!
[Exit.
SCENE III.
LOPEZ and the COMTE meeting. Comte. Ah, ah! mon ami, Lopez, you must help me
to make de love to de dear ladies Angloises.


Lopez. What, both, your honor?


Comte. Oui, both to be sure. You make Madame in love wid the antiquite of mon
famille; and Mademoiselle in love aussi, wid my youth and bon esprit!


Lopez. (Aside) Here Is a complete scoundrel for you! But could not the Swiss
lend a hand, your honor upon a pinch?


Comte. To be sure -- he will do what I command.


Lopez. I thought so -- ingrate, thus to cancel the obligations I owed him.

[Aside.
Enter CAZELLE, (observing them unseen.) Caz. The confederates I see, are met
in knavish council.

[Aside.
Comte. Here, mon ami, take de l'argent comptant, and if you do my business
tres bien, by gar I will enriche vous for life.

[Gives him money. [Exit.
Caz. So -- the compact of villainy is fully ratified.

[Aside.
Lopez. Now am I in the high road to preferment, or the devil's in it! But it
was rather short sighted in me to enter on such a service with only one eye,
which required all the vigilance of him, who in wiser times, could hardly make
shift with a hundred. (Seeing Cazelle.) Oh, here comes his new associate, Mr.
Whiskers -- why not tax him with his knavery at once?


Caz. I cannot withold my indignation any longer.


AIR XVIII. CAZELLE, LOPEZ, and Sir LEINSTER.
Cazelle, and Lopez. Alternately. Come, Sir, you're a rank impostor;
Well I know what you're about,
And the villainies you foster.
Sirrah, have I found you out?
Sure he has not found me out!
How can you, since that is the case,
Dare to look me in the face?
Enter SIR LEINSTER.
Sir Leinster. What the devil's all this clatter?

Both. How can you, since that is the case,

Sir Leinster. Jontlemen, pray what is the matter?

Both. Dare to look me in the face?

Sir Leinster. Varlets, cannot you fight in peace?

Sir Lein. Why, now, as fellow servants should you take the trouble of going to
loggerheads, when I Have a little snug quarrel ready made to your hands? Here it
is (producing a letter) Win her, and wear her -- oh, to be sure and I will not do
that.


Caz. What can all this mean?


Lopez. Some new family mischief on foot, my life on it!


Sir Lein. Come, as neither of you can write, I Will read this to myself, that
you may both understand it, do you see together. (reads) Mr. Count


Both. The Count!


Sir Lein. Faith, and you have both made a good guess of it; -- Mr. Count, I
shall be ready to give you satisfaction for the insult you have offered a sweet
creature -- you will expect to see me near the Cypress Grove precisely at three
o'clock -- I mean to bring only one friend, and that is my ownself -- as a man
of honor, he may see fair play for both of us! -- Yours to command, LEINSTER
M'LAUGHLIN.




Now do you perceive that this same Count --


Caz. But who has he insulted, Sir? [anxiously.


Lopez, Ay, pray, Sir, only tell us that.


Sir Lein. Why, who should it be, to be sure, but the dear little Julia her own
sweet self?


Caz. Miss Julia?


Lopez. In what manner? my agitation, I fear will discover me.

[Aside.
Sir Lein. Only by his impertinent familiarities, and proposing to the sweet
soul to run off with him, and leave me, do you see Sir Leinster, disconsolate
behind.


Caz. Consummate scoundrel!

[Aside.
Lopez. Oh, if that be all, Sir, her own good sense and honor will protect her.


Sir Lein. To be sure and I will not "win her and wear her." Here -- which of you
two lacquies will take --

[Offering the letter.
Caz. I fly vid de letter, Sir!


Lopez. No, your honor, pray entrust it to me -- this is not the kind of
correspondence that the Swiss usually conveys to the Count.


Sir Lein. Well -- see that he has it speedily betwixt you, while I get my
little Wogdons ready. I hope this same Cypress Grove is a snug place -- that if
one of us should happen to be kilt, he may not bother the other, with a hue and
cry after the survivor.


Caz. But how you know de Comte, Sir, as you never see him?


Sir Lein. Oh, let me alone for that -- I think I have traveled far enough to
find out a rascal in any part of the world -- and how to punish him into the
bargain.

[Exit.
Caz. Monsieur guide -- tell me -- for vhat I see de Comte give you dat money
just now?


Lopez. To make your mouth water for a share of it -- look ye, Mr. Swiss, our
suspicions of each other, if ill founded, may now be removed -- by entrusting
you with this letter I prove at least that I have no desire to screen a
villain. (Gives the letter.)


Caz. This is more mysterious than all the rest.

[Aside.
Lopez. Convince me by the punctual delivery of it, that you are equally
faithful, and we shall soon come to a better understanding, my life on it.

[Exit.
Caz. Were it not for that purse of money, I should think it possible, that
this fellow might still be honest -- but I begin to suspect every thing around
me. -- Hitherto I have avoided discovery! To be banished the family as a
friend, and recalled into it as a domestic, are transitions which fortune in
the height of her caprice, does not often display. Yet the service is still
hazardous, for with my dialect, I must continue to disguise those feelings
also, which the presence of her I love so naturally inspires! -- Poor Dalton!
harder still is his fate, to loose his own mistress in the kind endeavor to
secure mine! When in compassion to my natural diffidence, he was prevailed upon
to convey my sentiments of affection to JULIA, I little thought it could afford
to Miss Somerville the slightest ground, for jealousy or suspicion. Had I seen
her before so abrupt a departure to shut herself in a family castle on the
Continent, I might have convinced her at least, that Dalton's interviews with
my Julia, were merely to promote the addresses of his friend.

AIR XIX. CAZELL.
His vows to Julia, lovely maid,
Where all from passion free;
Whatever he looked, whatever he said,
In friendship 'twas for me.
A sense of honor, would reprove
A thought that wrongly pressed,
And check the selfish sigh of love,
Ere it escaped his breast.

SCENE IV. -- Near the front of the Castle.
DANIEL alone. Dan. Yes, yes! this must be it! chuck full of wizards and
hobgoblins I Will warrant it -- and there is the drawbridge, upon which the poor
knight's mistress dashed her pretty self to pieces! -- I wish my lady had come
along with me, for my courage, like my wit, always appears to most advantage in
good company! I thought I heard one of the rusty casements grate on the hinges!
(Robin appears on the battlement) That Is no ghost however! -- hip!


Robin. Who Is there?


Dan. Only one come to ask how you are, cooped up in this dismal place?


Robin. Pack off! or I must unmuzzle the wolf-dog at you!


Dan. I Would rather hear your own sweet voice -- pray come down, good Sir, and
prattle here. (sits on the moat-wall and fills his flask from the skin) Lud --
lud -- how it does grieve a body!


Robin (softly) Hallo! what are you about? hip! -- I zay, is that the way you
grieve? what have you got there?


Dan. Nothing -- no -- it don't signify! these are hard times, when a poor
fellow like myself, cannot get a friend to lend him a hand with a stoop of old
wine. (drinks)


Robin. Old wine! -- I ha been tasting a little good stuff myself, in our
cellar -- but I don't like tippling alone -- zo ztop -- and I Will ztep softly
down to you.

[Exit.
Dan. I guessed this must fetch him, if any thing could.

[Robin lets down the drawbridge, unlocks the pallisadoe, and comes out with
his coat on his arm.
Dan. What a tremendous drawbridge!

[Robin locks the palisadoe, and puts the key in his pocket.
Robin. I thought you were zorely grieved about zomewhat!


Dan. So I am. (drinks)


Robin. Then dont'e take it to heart too much -- but leave a little for me to
grieve along with'e!


Dan. With all the pleasure in life -- (Gives him the flask. Robin drinks) --
Take a hearty pull at it -- it wont hurt you!


Robin. Ecod, it is a clever notion sure enough!


Dan. Come, now to business -- I Have a message of compliment to your castle.


Robin. Lord love'e, we never receive any messages, or compliments. -- Mum!
dont'e talk quite so loud.


Dan. Now shall I hear all about it! (aside) to be sure I have heard an odd
character of your family -- come, among friends -- who, and what are you? and
are you enchanted or not?


Robin. It Is more than my life's worth!


Dan. Indeed! now the more frightened I am, the more do I want to see the
inside of this castle. (aside) Only let me take a peep at the ancient Hall of
Arms!


Robin. I be zworn to zecrecy!


Dan. The devil you are! in a spell, I suppose, with a circle made round you
with charcoal? (mean time Robin drinks) he sucks it in kindly! I Will ply him
closer, and if an open hearted fellow like myself, the good creature will soon
soften him.

[Aside.
AIR XX. -- DUET. -- DANIEL and ROBIN.
Daniel. Fellow Servants, come, here is to you! (drinks)

Robin. Thank you -- and much good may't do you.
That Is bravely quaft!

Daniel. Come, mend your draught!

Both. It Is the stuff with which wise men from old Noah's flood
Have enlivened their hearts, by enriching their blood.

Robin. Is this sack, or not, I query?

Daniel. No -- it is generous Canary.

Duo. Come drain the skin, boy, fill the wicker,
Fill it nimbly -- drain it quicker!
What a pity that wine, with a bright sparkling face,
Should not smile on poor servants when turned out of place.

Robin. (sitting down, and repeating indistinctly) Should not smile! -- what a
pity! poor zervants! what a -- (falls asleep.)


Dan. Yes! now I have done it with a vengeance! for I have made him speechless,
by way of getting the secret out of him! if I go back without some account of
this place, I shall neither satisfy my lady's curiosity, nor my own. (looking
toward the bridge) The drawbridge indeed is down, and the key of the
pallisadoe he put into his left hand pocket. But no -- I cannot bear the petty
larceny of picking pockets -- so I Will even change garments with him at once --
mine will keep him warm in his nap -- and his may serve me both for a pass, and
protection. (changes coats.) My heart begins to misgive me sorely -- but what
have I to fear? I don't know that ever I wronged man, woman, or child -- so,
with a good conscience, I don't see what is to harm me. (Enters over drawbridge,
and locks the pallisadoe gate after him.)


Robin. (waking at the sound of the drawbridge) Lord! where be I? why, our
castle goes round like a whirligig! (looking about) where be the chap? I be
sorry he is gone -- he was a kind hearted vellow -- for he loved the good stuff
dearly (searches DANIEL's coat for the key) Why! how now? plague take'n, he has
been too knowing for me zure enough!

-- what a pity; what a pity

-- the devil take his pity! -- the cunning rogue must be one of the mountain
banditti! he is got my key of the drawbridge, and, as zure as I Am alive, let the
gang in while I was a little dizzey! mercy on us, what mun I do? Why the Swiss
guards be quartered not far off -- zo I Will run and vetch some of them, and
they will match'n for it, I warrant'e!

[Exit.
SCENE V. -- Cypress Grove.
Sir LEINSTER with a case of pistols, looking at his watch. Sir Lein. How
punctual I am -- only a quarter of an hour before my own appointment -- To be
sure, and it is not a mark of very ill breeding to keep a jontleman waiting in
an affair of honor! but, Sir Leinster, you may as well, my dear, be getting
things in readiness, and take out your little family. (takes his pistols out of
the case, measures six short paces, sets up his cane and his hat upon it, falls
back, and strips to his flannel waistcoat) I always take off my outer garment
on these occasions; for there is, I think, Rothing so beggarly, as for a
jontleman to wear a fine coat with a hole in it. (puts himself in a fighting
attitude, levelling at his hat)


Enter BURGOMASTER. Burgo. Let the guard be relieved regularly, that the peace
of the city may be duly preserved.


Sir Lein. The two dearest friends in the whole creation could not wish to
fight at a prettier distance!


Burgo. What man is this playing such anticks?


Sir Lein. Oh! and are you come at last? I thought you did not intend to let me
see your odd face again.


Burgo. I am mistaken, if ever I saw yours before.


Sir Lein. That Is all one -- the fewer words, you know, the better -- so you
may stick yourself up at once by my cane, if you please.


Burgo. This must be some man deranged in his mind!


Sir Lein. Oh, if you prefer it a pace or two nearer its all one to Sir
Leinster.


Burgo. Armed! this poor creature may endanger his own life, if not that of
others -- what ho!

Guards enter. Secure this unfortunate man, but treat him with lenity, till you
hear further from me.

[Exit. Guards seize Sir Leinster.
Sir Lein. Seize me! for what? oh, you prodigious coward! this is a new
fashioned way of giving a jontleman satisfaction indeed!


Serj. Peace!


Sir Leins. Only wait a moment, and see if I don't wing him at least.


AIR XXI. -- TRIO and CHORUS.
Soldiers. This traitor to the guard house take,
For he has lost his reason,
It Is thus their wits low knaves forsake,
To dabble in high treason.
We'll all his sly maneuvers mark!
Now march away, the precious spark,
For hark! the roll call! hark!
(drum heard without.
Sir Leins. Unhand me varlets, what do you mean?
I Am sure yourselves are crazy!
Och, let me but that coward cane,
'Twill make me mighty easy.

Soldiers. Soon you will be tried by laws of High Court Martial
And from their honors' sentence, so impartial,
Be cat-o-nine-tail'd out of breath,
Or else more nobly shot to death.
[Exeunt.
Enter COMTE, looking round fearfully. Comte. I have no grand inclination pour
le combat! (sings melancholy) but I save mon reputation if possible -- no body
here but moi meme! courage, mon ami. (sings bolder) Ma foi, he no come at all!
(sings) la, la, la! aw, aw! voila! de laquais vid one apologe!


SWISS Enters. Caz. Sir Leinster not here? this fellow's triumph will be
insupportable.


Comte. Eh Bien! vere be votre maitre?

[Blustering.
Caz. I come, Monsieur, from --


Comte. No Sir -- no apologe will do -- my honor will have de satisfaction
instament.

[Draws.
LOPEZ, looking in. Lopez. And that damned Swiss of ours to be his second after
all! (aside)


Caz. But Monsieur a little patience.


Comte. No Sir -- I will have no littel patience.


Lopez. What a furious dog this turns out! why, where the devil is Sir
Leinster? he has mistaken the place -- I Will run and see for him.


Comte. I will proclaim votre maitre un grand poltroon -- if he no come, vy he
not send some depute? -- I fight le diable himself, if he send to me! (Sings)
"Malbrook il va ton guerra!"


Caz. Den Sir accept de humble endeavor of de servant to appease you. (Draws
his sword and throws off his cloak.)


Comte. Quelle outrage! fight vid de Valet and de Swiss -- no Sir -- I no
condescend to kill a you en verite! --

[Puts up his sword.
Caz. Pitiful evasion! behold the man who is now opposed to you and see, if in
any lineament of his face, you can read dishonor!


Oh miserable -- un diable Anglois!


Caz. Come, Sir --


Enter LOPEZ, undiscovered. Lopez. Ay, ay! Why, here is a new turn to the game.


Caz. No wonder that the assailant of a woman's honor should want the spirit to
defend his own.


Lopez. Well done, our Swiss! he is an honest fellow after all!


Caz. You wear in that hat a military emblem, which you must no longer disgrace
-- give it to me.


Comte. Cette pettite ribbon la? Oh, wid all mon coeur!


Caz. One thing more -- depart this city immediately -- if you are found within
a league of it an hour hence, your disgrace shall be the more exemplary.


Lopez. Eh! surely that voice is familiar to my ear!

[Aside.
Comte. La capitulation -- let me considere! (aside) ma foi, as I intend to get
into de Cassel bewitch dis ver night, in search of de beauty, and beaucoup de
l'argent -- why not, I set off to reconnoitre dis ver moment?


Caz. Come, Sir --


Comte. Monsieur, to do you de obligation, I shall go a la campaign avec
beaucoup de plaisir! and so, bon jour, mon ami! you have got my little ribbon
-- you are von comical man upon my honor.

[Exit.
Lopez. My honest fellow, give me your hand. (Looking earnestly at him.


Caz. Why de man stare so amaze?


Lopez. (Aside) It Is he, as I live! -- why you must know I was rather surpised
to hear a Swiss discourse in such excellent English. The dog has taken us all
in, and I Am heartily glad of it!

[Aside.
Caz. My indignation, I own, has got the better of my prudence; but as I now
begin to think I have done you injustice, by suspecting you to be in league
with this contemptible count -- I Will atone for it by owning to you, that I am
not what I seem, but -- an unfortunate Englishman in disguise.


Lopez. Indeed? How my bosom labors to acknowledge him for one of my own!
(aside) you have followed this family then, I presume, Sir, in friendship for
its master?


Caz. Not so -- though no one can revere that worthy man more than myself -- I
have attended them in this disguise with fear and trembling.


Lopez. For what?


Caz. Lest I should lose all that makes life desirable, in his lovely daughter!


Lopez. I shrewdly suspect then, that you love her, good Sir!


Caz. Adore her! now have I imparted to you the dearest secret of my heart.
Should you attempt to betray me, you shall not survive it.


Lopez. That Is one way of making a man keep a secret sure enough! but depend on
me, Sir -- and accept of a little advice into the bargain. Lose no more time in
your distant adoration -- tell the young lady that you must, and will have her,
and she has too great a regard for truth, I am sure, to let so clever a
Gentleman as you break his word.

[Exeunt.
SCENE V. -- The Glacieres.
Enter DALTON. Dalton. No poor sinner ever suffered more in his pilgrimage of
conscience, than I in this penance of unrequited love.

AIR XXII.
Heavily drag the dull hours along,
Every hope disappearing;
Where, for a comfort, alas, shall I turn,
Or look for a ray that is cheering.
How unrelentling, how cruel of fate,
Hearts so entwined to sever;
Why have I traced out her distant abode,
When gone is her love for ever?
Oh, how enraptured I Have dwelt on her smiles,
Smiles which so often have relieved me!
And on her vows so tenderly made,
Vows, which alas! have deceived me!
How unrelenting, how cruel, etc.
But a truce to this fruitless complainng. -- Where, I wonder, is my Mountain
Nymph? The time of her appointment is near -- But what fantastical being have
we here?


Enter COMTE, (Hastily, with a Parasol, etc. singing.) Comte. Ah! ah! un bon
Garcon. Bon jour, mon ami!


Dalton. Pray, Sir, to what accident may I ascribe the honor of this visit?


Comte. For what I come here? Oh, I shall tell you dans un moment. -- I am de
Comte Friponi, who was just oblige to fly from Geneve pour un little affair
d'honeur.


Dalton. Something of the duel kind, I presume?


Comte. Oui; a littel rencontre! Une belle Angloise, she attract with ma
person, and mon canto bello (singing) show to me some little civilite d'amour.


Dalton. Very flattering, no doubt!


Comte. Ver flattere to be sure: But her Lover, bien impoli, resent it! call a
me out! and I was so malheureuse to run him through de body. (Sings) Ah mio core,
etc.


Dalton. Killed him?


Comte. Oui; dead at my feet! But dat is not all; de pauvre Lady herself die
for love of me at dis ver moment! (Singing.)


Dalton. Quick work, indeed, with both sexes. I suppose, Sir, you never fail?


Comte. Oh nevere! Jamais! nevere.

AIR XXIII. COMTE,
For de vomen, I Have de plan, Sir,
Oh to charm them -- I Am de man, Sir!
Den I do -- vid such an air,
Every ting beyond compare!
Be she Spanish,
Or Danish,
Or Russian,
Or Prussian,
Florentine,
Algerine,
American,
Belgican,
Corsican,
Mexican,
Holander,
Polander,
Venetian, Grecian, Portuguese,
Or pretty, prattling Piedmontese;
O, de sweet and lovely creature,
I adore her every feature!
Each soft word of love I utter,
Set her little heart to flutter:
Vid de kiss -- her lip so hush is.
Ven I ogle -- den she blushes:
If she hear my canto bello
Den she cry -- Oh charming fellow!
Mara, Banti, Pachierotti,
Billingtoni, sweet Manghotti,
Little David, great Marchesi,
Never give such note to please ye!
Giornovichi, or Giardini,
Bold Pasquali, or Nardini,
Corporalli or Viotti,
Paissiello or Mingotti.
Sarti, Bruni, Boccherini,
Heydn, Pleyel, San Martini,
Gret^ry, Ditters, fat Jomelli,
Bach, Clementi, or Corelli,
Crosdil wid de rapid bow,
Hautboy Park, or Florio,
Cannot make so pretty strain
To relieve de lover's pain!
But should rival come to fight me. (draws his sword.)
Sa! Sa! to pink him it delight me;
Angelo, D'Eon, La Piere,
Famed St. George, or Lindamere,
Flanconade I push so neat,
Dead I lay him at my feet. (returns his sword.)
Den return, like gallant fellow,
To de girl wid canto bello!
Viganoni, Morichelli,
Lovetini, Faranelli,
Alligranti, Gabrielli,
Cressentini, Rubenelli,
Never warble so complete!
Mara never sing wid voice fo sweet,
Cramer never play de bow so neat!

Enter NERRIDA. (peeping) Ner. Oh dear, as sure as I am alive there are two of
them; and that is more than I bargained for! But one seems a Frenchman.


(Comte walking and singing by himself.) Dalton How am I to get rid of this
fellow?


Ner. What can there be in an Englishman, that makes him so superior a creature
all the world over? When a countryman's by, there is no danger, so I Will even
venture. Good day, gentlemen.


Comte. Ah ma chere -- Vous etes belle comme. --

(Dalton talks apart to her.) By gar, une jolie dame of de Castle! Ah! ma foi I
make her let me in by love, which is so mcuh better than de force. (aside.)


Dalton. Hark ye, Sir, I have the vanity to think that this visit was not
intended for you; and therefore to avoid giving you the trouble, either of
killing another unhappy lady, or running me through the body, I must request
the favor of you to retire.


Ner. Well, how charming it is to be made so much of!


Comte. Retire? Sir, I must know what you mean by retire.


Dalton. (turning him round) This instant retire!


Comte. Well, Sir, to oblige you I will retire. I take my conge. But by gar, I
must know a little more of this petit rendezvous to oblige myself. (aside).

[Exit.
Dalton. Now, my pretty incognita, for the remainder of your history.


Ner. No, not a tittle of intelligence respecting the strength or weakness of
our garrison, till you are on actual service. In the mean time can you venture
to confide in me?


Dalton. Most fully.


Comte (peeping). Ah! ah! here come the denouement! (aside).


Ner. I may put it in your power then, to do an act with which your heart can
never reproach you.


Dalton. Command me in what way you please.


Comte. And me so too -- if it be de way I like. (aside)


Ner. Be near the Ivy Turret then, about Sunset, where I will endeavor to meet
you.


Dalton. I will certainly attend you.


Comte (aside). Ma foi, and I so too!


AIR XXIII. NERISSA, DALTON, and COMTE. TRIO.
Ner. As soon as Moon-beams bright,
Lead Faries, and Elves a gadding,
And dazzle lovers sight,
'Till all their wits are madding,
Will you appear,
Our roof to cheer,
And set our hearts a gladding?
Yes, yes! yes, yes, Oh, yes, and set, etc.

Dalton. Beneath the lamp of night,
While fairy tribes are playing,
And by its witching light
Love's whisperers are straying;
I will appear,
In hopes to cheer,
And set your hearts a gladding.
Yes, yes! yes, yes! Oh yes! and set, etc.

Ner. Be secret

Dalton. Be watchful I implore you.

Comte. Or I Will be dear before you. (aside)

All. This coming night
Shall give delight,
When all around is still!
Then I,
And I,
Will gladly fly,
My promise to fulfill.

Ner. Remember!

Dalton. Remember!

Comte. Remember!

Ner. and Dalton. Your promise to fulfill!

Comte. My promise to fulfill!

END OF ACT II.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter LOPEZ. Lopez (alone). It Is astonishing how much I Am made of in my new
character: but this is not the first time that the servant has been preferred
to his master! Where I shall find my friend, Sir Leinster, I know not; for no
sooner had I procured his liberty, than out he sallied after the Count, in
search of a fresh adventure. Now for this famed Castle, which Lady Philippa,
still thinking it the Count's, is so impatient to behold: no improper scene for
an appeal to her pride, from the detection of an impostor: there my day's
experiments will terminate; should they fail in the reformation of a wife, they
will enable me at least to secure, in honest Dorimond, the happiness of my
child.

[Exit.
Enter CAZELL, (with a Bouquet) Cazell. I have collected the few flowers this
country would afford; scanty as they are, I can trace among them, emblems of my
own misery with those of Julia's charms! yet I dare not present them in my own
person. To live in this perpetual anxiety, fearful of alarming her by my
discovery, yet dreading to lose her for ever, is that alternate wretchedness I
cannot endure! But she comes this way, and seemingly more pensive than before!


Enter JULIA. (not observing Cazell) Julia. This excursion to the Castle is no
doubt intended to expose me to some new mortification. (sits musing.)


Cazell. (anxiously approaching) Miss Julia --! you seem indispose.


Julia. Oh Cazell, is it you?


Cazell. I have bring de flowers, Miss, you ask for.


Julia. Lay them on the table, Cazell. I shall soon recover my spirits!


AIR XXIV. --
CAZELL. Twin roses you have archly contrived,
To display all your charms on your face,
For fragrance you knew was derived,
From the bosom you're destined to grace.
Here is " Love lies a bleeding" behind,
But of " Heart's ease," no bud did I view,
In my search, not a sprig could I find,
Or else I had culled it for you.
Rude clime; 'twas in vain to explore,
For a bouquet of nature in thee,
Where Flora, alas! is no more,
Than a poor humble stranger like me!

(By the emphatic expression of the last line she discovers him as he kneels.)
Julia. Oh! Dorimond! -- is it possible?


Enter Lady PHILIPPA and LOPEZ. Lady Phil. What is all this?


Cazell. We are undone! (aside.)


Lopez. Heyday, why here is another knee scene -- Mr. Whiskers is now at his
devotions!


Julia. One hope remains (aside) -- as you have the opportunity Cazell --
solicit her ladyship now self.


Lopez. No bad hit for a young one! (aside.)


Cazell. What can she possibly mean?


Lady Phil. But what is it he wishes?


Lopez. If I don't lend a hand, it is all over with them, I see. (aside.) Why,
my lady, the poor fellow, from what I can learn of the matter, thinks he is
likely to lose his place, on account of your having retained me: -- so on his
bended knee (beckons to Cazell) down! down! (aside) as you again behold, he
solicits the honor to remain in your ladyship's service. (Cazell kneels to
Lady Philippa.)


Lady Phil. Oh, now I understand him perfectly -- and do not disapprove the
creature's humility --


Julia. Admirable invention! (aside.)


Lady Phil. Well, then, you have no great reason to fear, young man, after
preferring your suit with so much decorum.


Julia. Nor are you lessened in my esteem, Cazell, for this mark of your
attachment to the family.


Cazell. My life is devote to your service! (looking from Lady Phillippa, to
Julia, who makes signals of affection to him and retires) how fortunate the
escape! (to Lopez.)

[Exit.
Lopex. And who young spark, may you thank for it?


Lady Phil. Have you no tidings of the Count, Lopez?


Lopez. None, my lady -- that you will like to hear at present. (aside)


Lady Phil. He has not withdrawn himself, I hope, in chagrin, at the coolness
of my reception? Hearing of my intended visit to the castle, who knows but he
may be gone thither, to prepare for our reception?


Lopez. Nothing more likely, my lady!


Lady Phil. You, Lopez, who understand the necessary appendages to a woman of
fashion, would not advise me to neglect so elegant a chaperon, would you?


Lopez. Oh, by no means!


Lady Phil. Take this letter then, and deliver it immediately to the Count, if
he remains in Geneva -- It only appoints an explanatory rendezvous at the
castle, to convince him, I meant not to treat him with disrespect: (gives the
letter) but return as soon possible, that we may fly to behold the ancient
beauties of the Hall of arms!


Lopez. I am at last, in the high road to family honors, or the devil's in it!
(aside.)


Lady Phil. The Parisians, you know, Lopez -- apropos, you speak french like a
native, no doubt?


Lopez. There, I fear, she will have me. (aside) As to modern French, my lady, it
has been some time on the decline, and is evidently growing more barbarous
every day -- so that I seldom use more than two words, which I find sufficient
passports wherever I go.

AIR XXV -- LOPEZ.
The soul of wit is brevity,
As all the ancients tell us;
So, men of fewest words must be
The wittiest of fellows.
Then why multiply words when a couple will do,
Like Manger,
And Changer,
So glibly to carry one all the world through!
Two words will any bargain strike,
'Twixt all inclined to barter;
Except with women, who dislike
To lose the prattling charter.
Then why multiply words, etc.

SCENE II. -- A room in the Castle.
DANIEL coming out of a closet. Dan. I have cooped myself up these three hours,
in this dismal wing of the castle, and now only venture out like a bat at dusk,
for a mouthful of fresh air! This cursed curiosity of mine, I fear, will bring
me to an untimely end! -- here may I be hanged like a scarecrow out of the
watch tower, or rolled down the battlements by a pair of witches in a butt full
of spiked nails! All my hope is, that some good christian will come this way
before it is quite dark to relieve me -- Where have I got my unfortunate self?
(runs against a toilette table) As sure as I Am alive, I have stumbled into some
lady's bedchamber! what have we here, I fancv a looking glass, though none of
the newest fashion -- I thought I heard a footstep! this has shown many a nob
in its time, perhaps now it may contrive to hide one. (conceals himself behind
the glass)


Enter NERINDA. Ner. Oh, that my scheme may succeed! assisted by this honest
Englishman -- who knows but I may prevail upon Miss Somerville to return to
England -- at any rate the attempt must beguile her of some sad moments, and
that will make me happy -- But what shall I call him? cousin? oh no, that will not
do -- for methinks one might have no great objection to be nearer related to
him! I would fain put on my best looks, so I Will even take a peep how my bonnet
sits (walking toward the glass) and yet, my old friend, you and I, are almost
tired of each other, an't we?

AIR XXVI. -- NERINDA.
Dull reflector of odd faces,
I Will no more converse with you,
Give me back, my smiles and graces,
Or, pray give me something new.
If by magic or skill, brittle shewman,
You would tickle the heart of a woman,
The secret to you I Will discover:
When she looks for a grace,
You must show her the face
Of a man -- to convert to a lover.
Would you win her to good nature,
And her frowns lay on the shelf;
Only give her back a creature,
More bewitching than herself.
If by magic, etc,

(Daniel in peeping, reverses the glass, and is discovered through the frame.)
Ner. (Shrieks) Oh lud! a man! whence came you, and how got you here?


Dan. Now, for pity's sake, miss, don't be so violent! I Am more frightened than
you, a thousand times over, and yet you don't hear me cry out!


Ner. Tell me, this instant, who, and what are you?


Dan. An out of the way kind of traveling gentleman -- whose curiosity, as you
may see, now and then gets him into a scrape.


Enter MARGERY, and other servants. All. Oh dear ma'am! what is the matter?


Ner. Secure this ruffian, who by some means has broke in with an intent to
murder us all, and plunder the castle!


Marg. My poor, dear Robin! look! see!


Servant. And so he has sure enough -- murdered poor Robin, and got on his very
clothes!


Ner. Convey him instantly to the dungeon, till I learn your lady's pleasure.

(They seize him.
Dan. Only hear me, fair lady -- as I hope for mercy! --


Enter ROBIN in Daniel's dress. Marg. My dearest Robin -- then they have not
killed thee quite!


Robin. Oh, you treacherous knave! only bear witness, he is got my jacket on at
this very moment.


Daniel. If I had known, I would not have been in your coat for a hundred
ducats.


Ner. Where have you been, Robin?


All. Ay, where?


Robin. I hardly knowz where I'a been -- or what I 'a been about! -- that
rogue, there, gave me zweet poizon in a skin of wine, and I 'a been azleep --
or out of my zenses ever zince.


Marg. Oh, the merciless villain!


Robin. He be one of the mountain banditti, and the rest of the gang will zoon
be after 'n! -- he stripped me of my coat, and the key of the drawbridge in a
whif -- and I could only get back to 'e Margery, by swimming over the moat like
a water-rat -- but there be they a coming, will teach'n better, I Will warrante.


Daniel. Indeed, and indeed, I Am as innocent as --


Ner. Away with him, and confine him closely till further orders.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE III -- A distant view of the Castle at sunset.
DALTON alone. Though the affections of Miss Somerville may have been estranged
from me, by the casual inheritance of these domains, I feel, as I approach yon
castle, that my heart must still pay a constant homage to its cruel possessor.
-- How dignified its turrets rise, graceful even in decay! -- Time was, a chief
no doubt it boasted, whose sun of glory smiled on ages past; -- whether his
virtues have descended with his name, the mouldering mansion seems to question.

This AIR has been transposed to the last scene of the OPERA in the stage
representation.
AIR XXVII.
Say, Fame,
What is there in a titled name!
Or what in birth
To give hereditary worth,
That fleeting shadow of a noble pile,
On which the beams of honor proudly smile!
Let not around
Thy clarion breathe its sacred sound,
Unless to fire,
Inspire
The son to emulate a glorious sire!

SCENE IV. -- A plantation walk near the battlements of the castle. --
Moonlight.
ROBIN alone. Robin. If do you zee I Would know'd there was but only he, I zhould not
have thought it worth while to vetch so many zoldiers for one rogue. Certain,
howzever, I Have placed the whole tribe of the Switz guards at the foot of the
mountain. -- But, mum, Robin, not a zyllable about the zoldier volk, for fear
my lady should be angry.


Enter Miss SOMERVILLE. Miss Some. And what does the ruffian say for himself,
Robin?


Robin. Why, an' please you, my lady, he zays but little -- but as I took a
peep at'n through the iron lattice, he zeem'd to pay it away wi' thinking!


Miss Some. I hope you let him want for nothing?


'Robin. 'Oh, no my lady; I took'n two ribs of roast beef, and a zlice of baked
pudding myzelf -- but the zulky toad would 'na feed.'


'Miss Some. 'Poor wretch -- perhaps he may be unwell.'


'Robin. 'Unwell? -- oh, he is a rum little chap! -- but he shall give me my dry
coat back again, howzever -- When I clapped the beef down on the ztool before
'n, what now, my lady, do you think the cunning rogue zaid? -- Iz thiz the way
you treat your ztate prizoners, zays he -- virzt and voremozt to take away
their ztomachs, and then to zet good cheer before 'n?'


Enter NERINDA. 'Miss Some. 'Well, Nerinda!'


Ner. 'He'll confess nothing, ma'am, but that curiosity compelled him to play
this device upon Robin.'


'Robin. 'Yez, gad rat 'n!'


'Miss Some. 'Of what country is he?'


'Ner. 'I believe he is an Englishman.'


'Miss Some. 'Some poor frantic wanderer -- enquire of him further, and anon
I Will see him myself.'


'Robin. 'Lord, my lady, hez as cunning a little villain, with a tongue -- '


'Ner. 'As nimble as your own. Come, follow me.'

[Exeunt Nerinda and Robin.
'Miss Some. 'Calm is this parting scene of nature -- how soft her whispers of
repose! Even the voice of sorrow now is still, save from that lovelorn bird,
whose strains I hear.'

AIR XXVIII -- Miss SOMERVILLE.
Still let thy plaintive numbers flow,
Sweet bird of solitude and night,
And I will join the song of woe,
Until the morn's returning light.
With thee I Will shun the world's relief,
Woo sorrow only to my breast,
And press, for luxury of grief,
The thorn, that will not let it rest!

Enter NERINDA hastily. Ner. Oh dear, ma'am, a body of armed men, no doubt the
whole gang, are halted toward the west tower.


Miss Some. Impossible! and in a country so famed for peace and freedom?


Ner. Indeed, and indeed its true!


Miss Some. Though few in number, let our domestics then instantly arm!


Ner. But what shall we do with our prisoner?


Miss Some. Order him in the front of the battlement, as a fit sacrifice to the
lawless rage of his confederates. Let us even forget the weakness of our sex,
and arm ourselves, Nerinda.


Ner. Oh dear, ma'am, you wont pretend to fight: what can such helpless
creatures as we do?


Miss Some. Wonders, in a just cause! at least, Nerinda, we can expose to
abhorrence that savage licentiousness, which even women are compelled to resist.

[Exit Miss Somerville.
'Ner. 'How unfortunate, as well as alarming -- for this is the very time I was
to admit my good natured mountain acquaintance: -- and why not even now, when
we stand more in need of a gallant man than ever!'

[Exit.
SCENE V. -- The Abbey Gate.
Enter Comte FRIPONI disguised, with FREEBOOTERS. 'Comte. 'De place of
rendezvous -- it was luck I meet la petite fille de chamber! -- Attendez -- ven
I go in -- keep close to my person, for fear of me surprise.'


'1st Freebooter. 'We'll follow your honor close, rely upon it.'


'Comte. 'For why she not appear? -- prenez guard -- voila, le diable Anglois!'

[Falls back, but appears listening.
Enter DALTON. AIR XXIX.
Love may lead my steps astray;
Where, ah where is ma jolie fille?
Come, and safely point the way,
Wont you? Yes, I Am sure you will!
Venez donc ma jolie fille!
Let me not in vain implore,
Hither fly, ma jolie fille,
Open then the garden door,
Wont you? -- yes I Am sure you will,
Venez donc ma jolie fille!
Dalton. This is strange! I must have mistaken the gate, for why should she
deceive me?

[Exit round the walls.
Enter LOPEZ, and CAZELL with drawn swords, and soon after a file of Swiss
Soldiery. AIR XXXI -- CHORUS.
Cazell, Lopez, Dalton, and Robin. Yield, cruel monsters! vengeance dread!
Which way can the rest be fled?

Miss Some. (within) Calmly I to fate resign!

Cazell, etc. Hear the wailing voice to woe.

Soldiers. Advance! it is a soldier's duty.
To save, not to plunder beauty,
Where ever he is doomed to go.

Miss Some. (within) Take this wretched life of mine!

Comte, and others. [on Staircase. Let us out before it is night.

Robin, (aside them) That I will not by this light.

All. When it is woman that inspires us,
Valor,
Honor,
Glory, fires us.

Cazell, and others. Hear the lovely sufferers cry?

Comte, etc. [within. Let us once more daylight spy?

Robin. [Aside to 'em. Hold your tongues and quiet lie.

Soldiers, etc. Knaves, if here we cannot view you,
Over the Mountains we'll pursue you.

Comte, etc. [within. Let us once more daylight spy?

Robin. [Aside to 'em. Hold your tongues once more say I.

Soldiers, etc. Since the ruffians wont appear,
March on!

Miss Somerville. Behold your victim here! [Throwing open the door, discovers
herself.

Dalton. Miss Somerville!


Miss Some. Impossible! and armed against my life? --


Dalton. Oh no! led hither by our better stars to defend the person of her, who
too unkindly fled from his protection!


Miss Some. Am I to believe those senses which have so cruelly deceived me?


Robin. Why, dear heart, my Lady, this is the strange Gentleman that would a
vit for dear life to defend you.


Miss Some. And do I find in Dalton my gallant defender? (Dalton talks apart
with her.)


Swiss Serj. Advance! (to his men.)


Robin. Now dont'e fight no more about my blunders; for I vancy they be all
vriends and neighbors, except a few rogues that I a' got snug in a corner.


Miss Some. Why, are not these our rude assailants whom I saw from the
Battlement?


Serj. We are guards of the Republic, Lady, marched here to preserve it is
peace, and the property of this Castle.


Dalton. All this is wondrous strange!


Miss Some. How came I thus deceived?


Robin. Why, my lady, it was all along of I! for when that comical chap stripped
me, and got the key of the drawbridge, I took'n for one of the Mountain robbers
that I dreamt on last Sunday, who like a rogue, meant to let in all his
comrades; zo what did I, but run and vetch these honest zoldier gentry to zave
you from murder, or mayhap zomewhat worse.


Miss Some. Your zeal rather outran your discretion.


Dalton. But it was faithfully intended.


Miss Some. Come, Charles, attend me now in search of a most amiable, and
affectionate companion.

[Exeunt.
Julia. What doings does he mean?


Cazell. I suppose, Miss, de rejoice, and firework we hear just now.


Lady Phil. Fireworks! I am sorry he informed them of my coming, I should like
to have been received incog; without any particular regard to my rank or
distinction! but come, which is the entree, Daniel?


Daniel. Stop a little, my lady, and in the midst of the bustle; I Will try to
step down, and let you all in, if I die for it!

[Exit.
Cazell. Surely the fellow's mad, Lopez.


Lopez. Oh, no, only bewitched, I suppose, like the rest of the castle.

[Exeunt over the drawbridge into the castle.
SCENE VII. -- Vestibule within the castle.
NERINDA alone. Ner. Oh! it was all my unfortunate doing! I found out my
mistake, just time, enough to fly and force my poor lady, out of their
barbarous reach for a moment! Beset by a host without, and assailed by ruffians
within, what hope I of protecting her further?


Enter two Freebooters. 1st. Freebooter. Softly, comrade! here she is, and
luckily all alone!


2nd. Freebooter. Why then, no ceremony.


(Draw their swords, Nerinda observing them shrieks) 1st Freebooter. No uproar,
madam, I charge you, to disturb the peace of the mansion.


Ner. What is it you would have? (they seize her.)


2nd Freebooter. The pleasure of conveying you, and all your valuables into our
mountain for protection, fair lady of the castle, that is all!


Ner. Lady of the castle! indeed, indeed! gentlemen, you are much mistaken -- I
am only an humble domestic, and therefore every way unworthy of the honor you
intend me!


1st Freebooter. This instant then, show us where she is, and all her treasure.


Ner. Something less than that, gentlemen, I hope will appease you?


2nd Freebooter. No -- dispatch!


Enter COMTE. Ner. (aside) The monster that so deceived me!


Comte. Eh bien, ma petite guide! vite! vite! my mules are at de gate to car
votre maitresse, yourself, and all your treasure to mon chatteau!


Ner. But, Sir, as I had the honor to introduce you, indulge me at least in
one small request!


Comte. Oh, certainment qu'est que ca?


Ner. Only, Sir, as they are of such considerable value, that you will have the
goodness to take charge of my poor lady's jewels yourself!


Comte. Assurement! and de lady aussi, if she be prett comme vous! (aside) Oh,
quelle grand coup! show me to de dear creature dis moment!


Ner. Up this staircase of the tower, is an antichamber to the right -- there,
alas! too soon you will find her!


Comte. Wid de jewels, and beaucoup de l'argent?


Ner. Alas! all!


Comte. Bon! come, you show de way allons!


Ner. Not a word, I entreat you, Sir, that you were directed by me.


Comte. (making signals of secrecy) Oh! jamais! jamais!

(Exit through the stair case door with Freebooters, Nerinda soon after hastily
returns, and bolts it.)
Ner. There, monster, I have out generall'd you for the present, however; where
now is my faithful countryman?


Enter ROBIN with a blunderbuss. Oh, Robin! I Am glad you're come!

Robin. Flesh and blood cannot hold out this way much longer!


Ner. Courage, man, I have secured three of the ring leaders within here!


Robin. But pray ye madam Nerinda, how did you contrive to nab them so nicely?


Ner. Why, as they stumbled up the old dark staircase, in search of my lady and
her jewels, I turned the bolt, and have them all safe together.


Robin. Ecod you nicked 'em there for once, howzever.


Ner. Now you must guard the door, without saying one word to any body about
it, till I return with succor.


Robin. But how mun I manage to keep three such desperate toads, only under two
bolts? I Will try my best howzever, till you get more help.


Ner. Ay, do, my honest Robin.

(Exit Ner.
Robin. Ecod, then it is lucky enough I Have just let in the Zwiss Guard; come now
what will, my Lady cannot blame me for vetching 'em, for there is a Banditti
zure enough, in the Castle now, or the devil's in it. (listens at the door) The
chaps do zeem pretty quiet though in their new lodgings, and they would best keep zo
(levelling the blunderbuss at the door) I be not over fond of your devilish
pop-guns, vor they lay many a vine fellow flat before he is on his guard. If I Would
had but my quarter-staff from the west, I Would a cracked most of their noddles
myself before this time, or know'd the reason why -- ecod here comes another on
'em!


Enter DALTON, with a drawn hanger. Dalton. Which way could the ruffians fly?


Robin. Now dont'e come no nigher, or I mun down wi ye!


Dalton. Why, how is all this?


Robin. (looking at him earnestly) Dear heart and zo you be! our true English
friend that passed me just now, and ax'd so kindly about the poor Ladies.


Dalton. Where are the suffering captives? (Robin points to the Tower door
behind him.) Confined within that Tower; let me instantly behold them!


Robin. Cannot -- I be zet, do you zee, as guard over 'en; zo neither vriend nor
voe shall let 'en out! besides you're but a youngster, and they would be too many
for you all to nothing. (noise without) The devils own-zelf be in them zurely!
vor here is two more! now mun we ztand ztout by one another.

[Dalton goes over to him.
Enter Comte, followed by Freebooters. Comte. Ah! ah! she no come to Monsieur
Anglois! now I try my canto bello!

COMTE sings the same Air. None as me do love you more,
Cara bella -- jolie fille!
Open den de abbey door,
Vont you? ah! by gar you vill,
Cara bella -- jolie fille!

(Nerinda opens the gate, and making signs, the Comte and Freebooters entering,
follow her.) SCENE VI. -- The Battlements of the Castle.
Miss Somerville appearing on one wing, Daniel and domestics on another. A file
of Swiss soldiery in Front. -- Platoon firing heard. AIR XXX. -- CHORUS.
Serj. The Castle quick surrender,
Ye horde of Mountaineers;
Or else our arms shall raze it
By storm around your ears.

Miss Some. Of pride you cannot disarm me;
So hence, ye ruffian crew!
No summons shall alarm me!
Nor tyrant force subdue. (EXIT.

Serj. Are you for war?

Dan. No -- peace my trade is.

Serj. Then will you yield?

Dan. Nay, ask the ladies.

Serj. Your walls we must batter down.

Dan. Not yet, Sir, I pray!

Domestic. You Will waste, thus your powder,

Dan. Your shot throw away!
Re-enter Miss SOMERVILLE.
Full Chorus. Honor bids us prove victorious.
Justice bids us prove victorious.
Courage bids us prove victorious.
To repel them, would be glorious!
To subdue them, would be glorious!

Sergeant. Gunners, now your mortars bring,
To assail the Eastern wing.

Daniel. Hark ye, Sir, -- in pity spare,

Serseant. Mercy none of you must share.

Daniel. She who fights, and looks so fair!

Full Chorus. Honor, justice, etc.

[Miss Somerville and domestics retire. Dan, I Am glad they are all marched off
to the other side of the castle! I Will stay here and take breath a little! I
only turned my back on the cowardly dogs for a minute, and spank they had me in
an awkward place.

(Musquetry heard on the other side. There -- she is at it again pell mell?
(looking out anxiously) Eh! yes, but it is -- my dear Lady coming! and my
deliverance I hope along with her!


Enter Lady PHILIPPA, JULIA, LOPEZ and CAZELL. Lopez. Yes, yes, we are right
enough -- for see your ladyship's trusty courier on the battlement.


Lady Phil. Looking out to announce our arrival! I hope we are not too late,
Daniel?


Daniel. Oh! no, my Lady, you're time enough to have a share of it. Here have
been warm doings, I promise you!


Robin. Now, Mr. Sergeant, only be you zo good as to mount guard a little at
this door -- and I Will vetch you a bottle or two of old English stingo to whet
your whiskers with! -- 'after that we'll rummage the staircase, when madam
Nerinda comes, and zee whether we a got vriends, or foes there; vor we have been
at such cross purposes of late, that I don't know which they may turn out after
all.' -- One thing now, however's zertain -- that my lady's old zweet heart be
come to vetch her home -- zo I Will go and let our Madge out of the cellar, and
bid her pack up her duds for Old England!


AIR XXXII.
Across the briny zeas I Will zteer,
And back to Taunton Dean,
To tell the little huzzies there,
The zights that I ha zeen!
Oh rare be the doings of Taunton Dean! O rare, etc.
When I zet out for voreign parts,
Poor zouls, how they did cry!
I thought they would have broke their hearts,
They were zo fond o'I!
O sad were the doings of Taunton Dean! O sad, etc.
If they could cry when I were gone
In grief for zuch a boy.
Why zure, when I goes back a mon
They Will cry again for joy!
Oh rare be the doings of Taunton Dean! Oh rare, etc.
My zunday zpouse poor Madge I Will make,
As vree as vlow'rs in May,
And from the little jades I Will take
A wife for every day!
O rare then the doings of Taunton Dean! Oh rare, etc.
SCENE VIII. -- The ancient Hall, illuminated and decorated with banners, and
armorial bearings.
Lady PHILIPPA, Miss SOMERVILLE, and DALTON Lady Phil. You have told me many
strange things to be sure, child; but respecting the feudal inheritance of this
castle, I fancy I know a little more than you. Indeed, how you became its
resident at all, is matter of great surprise to me.


Miss Some. To receive your ladyship within its walls on any terms, is an honor
I little expected.


'Lady Phil. 'I always said that you and Dalton would come together; and a very
decent alliance for two young families on both sides -- you could not deceive
me, child.'


'Miss Some. 'No, Lady Philippa; I fear that I have been too busily employed in
deceiving myself.'


Lady Phil. (Taking her glass, and looking round the Hall.) Let me contemplate
the ancient banners, and armorial bearings! near this spot, no doubt, the
gallant Knight of Charlemagne, true to his plighted vow, fell in the presence
of a beloved mistress

Enter DORIMOND, leading JULIA. and honorably died!


Dor. Fit scene for a more humble KNIGHT of Love, to claim the hand of her --
for whom he fondly lives!


Lady Phil. I Am all amazement! Dorimond!


Julia. Dear madam, allow me to declare, that though I knew not of Dorimond's
disguise, my heart, adopting his sentiments, naturally triumphs in its success!


'Dalton. 'Oh, your ladyship will excuse it all, when you observe, that the
rogue, Dorimond, has deceived even me, his best friend, by the metamorphosis.
-- Now Louisa, I trust you behold Miss Sidney in her real character.'


Miss Some. I do -- as a rival created only by own suspicions.

[Miss Some. Julia, Dalton and Dorimond, talk apart.
Lady Phil. Who waits? where is my guide, Lopez!


Cazell. I left him, my lady, in the courtyard, paying due respect to the Count
Friponi.


Lady Phil. The Comte? -- oh, I Am rejoiced that he is arrived!


'Dalton. 'What, my chaunting, woman-killing hero?'


'Cazell. 'Why, do you know this vaunting braggart, Charles?'


'Dalton. 'Perfectly!'


Lady Phil. But where is he? I Am impatient to welcome his arrival.


Cazell. He Is in his own apartments, my lady, but rather in a dishabille.


Julia. I Am sorry this wretch is returned to torment us.


Miss Some. What can all this mean? (aside to Cazell.)


Cazell. Why, ma'am, the plain matter of fact is, that like other great men,
some of the Count's enterprises have miscarried: his last design was to
dispossess you of this castle; but failing in this attempt, he has modesty
enough, as a freebooter, to put up with one of its dungeons!


All. The leader of the banditti!


Lady Phil. The Count disgraced, and in a dungeon? Oh, that Mr. Sidney were
returned! (aside.) Lopez shall instantly depart for Strasburgh!


Cazell. On what errand, my lady?


Lady Phil. In search of Mr. Sidney, the only person in whom I can safely
confide.


Enter SIDNEY in his own dress. Mr. Sidney. A single wish of yours restores
him back to happiness, as well as sight! -- (Lifts up his bandeau.)


Lady Phil. I am petrified, astonished, and every way deceived.


Mr. Sidney. Not so my Lady Philippa, if I have at last but the good fortune to
prove -- the man to your mind!


All. Mr. Sidney!


Julia. My dear father in faithful Lopez!


'Mr. Sidney. 'Where's the wonder, Lady Philippa, that I, an old friend, should
have procured you a more trusty guide than your new fashioned acquaintance?'


Dor. And can it be possible, Sir?


Mr. Sidney. Yes, your fellow servants in disguise. -- But once or twice, young
spark, we had nearly been too cunning for each other.


'Dalton. 'You have contrived Sir, to hit off an admirable character in this
traveling masquerade.'


'Lady Phil. 'The shaft of ridicule has reached me. I perceive but too late,
that to persist, even in a family prejudice, is unworthy of a great, or a good
mind.'


'Mr. Sidney. ' (Taking her by the hand) Oh, never too late to renounce an
error, which an amiable heart must have long disclaimed! This billet, which I
confess to have perused, has removed all my serious apprehensions. I return it,
therefore, as an harmless, though unguarded document of fashionable levity.'


Mr. Sidney. Twice has this gallant adventurer saved our only child: join with
me then, Lady Philippa, in bestowing her hand upon him, and thus secure the
faithful services of an honest fellow through life.


Lady Phil. Most cheerfully.


Dori. How shall I ever repay --


Mr. Sidney. Not by long speeches, Dorimond -- You have won her by no feats of
ancestry, but your own natural deserts; if she prove a blessing therefore, long
may you live to wear it.


Lady Phil. Oh! Mr. Sidney, you have taught me at length to feel, that to
contribute to the happiness of those around us, is far more honorable than all
the pomp that heraldry can boast.


'Mr. Sidney. 'Then have I neither toiled, nor traveled in vain!'


Enter SIR LEINSTER. Sir Leinster. I perceive you generally contrive that Sir
Leinster should be front rank, where there is a prison; and always in the rear,
when there is either love, or fair fighting! But I Am in luck that the Comte has
got his deserts, though I have lost mine! And what a mighty pretty siege you have
had, where you have manned all your works with women! (looking at Miss Some.)
'Palliluh! why, is the devil's self come to you all, that you ladies should
turn soldiers, and your lacquies become fine gentlemen? I dare say, now, it is
all very funny, if one could but find out the reason why?'


Dan. O yes, Sir, I Have heard of all your pranks, and find I am the only
sufferer, by keeping my own countenance.


Mr. Sidney. All shall be explained, Sir Leinster, to your satisfaction.


Dalton. But its time we muster our little garrison, to get a return of our
missing, and wounded.


Lady Phil. Where is poor Daniel?


Enter NERINDA, leading in DANIEL. Ner. Having properly disposed of the
ruffianly Comte, who basely surprised me, I thought in my duty to administer
the best comfort in my power to one, who has suffered a little too severely
from his own curiosity, and my mistake.


Daniel. You have an odd way here of rewarding merit, that is certain; for you
open your gates to a banditti, and throw your best friends, neck and heels into
a dungeon!


Miss Some. 'And is this your arch valet, that put us all in such a fright?'


Julia. 'The very same; and as inoffensive a creature as ever breathed.'


Dau. 'What a rare thing my curiosity has proved to all except myself! It was
rather hard, after escaping the canister-shot of these ladies tongues, to be
stuck upon the battlements, to be pelted with double-round, and grape!'


All. 'Poor creature!'


Lady P. Where are you wounded, Daniel?


Dan. Not where its likely to disfigure me much, my lady -- being as it were --
in a place a little out of sight!


Sidney. We'll find the means of a speedy cure; but you don't seem to recollect
your old friends, Dan?


Miss Some. But here, Dalton, I owe more than I can express. (points to Ner.)


Dalton. I am much her debtor also; for she was the guiding star, that led me,
a disconsolate wanderer, to this spot.


Miss Some. 'Is that so, Nerinda?'


Ner. 'Nearly, Ma'am, and one time or other, perhaps you may do me as good a
turn.'


Miss Some. 'The day seems to have been devoted to strange mysteries, and as the
night is too far advanced to allow of your departure, I trust the new possessor
of this castle will allow me to give you welcome.'


Dalton. Most welcome all! for thus our lovely hostess bids me say; and though
we have no feats of chivalry to boast, we may, at least, as goodnatured
travelers, amuse ourselves with recounting our various adventures.


Sir Lein. But when you do that, you will remember, if you please, to forget mine.


Lady P. First accept my open recantation! for here do I renounce the vain
parade, and follies of false grandeur, convinced, that the just distinctions of
honorable rank, are best supported by their own intrinsic merit!


Sidney. Then am I raised to the enviable dignity of a happy man. Come, you
young destined brides, ere you set out on your nuptial travels, will you deign
to accept of a hint from one, who has gone this crooked road before you?


Julia. Certainly, Sir.


Miss Some. Oh, with pleasure!


Sidney. Then build not too much on converting a man into a husband, unless you
can condescend at the same time -- to create that husband your GUIDE through life!


FINALE.
AIR XXXIII. --
CHORUS. -- Now let us seek our native coast,
Where friends we hope will meet us;
As Travelers we then may boast,
If they but kindly greet us.

QUARTETTO. -- DALTON, DORIMOND, MISS SOMERVILLE, and JULIA. Let others travel
worlds around
For pleasure if they choose it;
The road to happiness we have found,
And hope no more to lose it.

CHORUS. Now let us seek, etc.

NERINDA. To follow close your steps through life,
You know, dear Ma'am, I meant it;
So should I follow as a wise,
I Am sure I shall not repent it.

CHORUS. -- Now let us seek, etc.

DANIEL. Come, little Dan, 'twixt you and me,
Your trip may well content ye;
You Have lost your curiosity,
And that is gain in plenty.

CHORUS. Now let us seek, etc.

MR. SIDNEY. By travel I Have regained a wife,
Though I was forced to snare her;
So, for the remnant of my life,
I hope to win, and wear her.

FULL CHORUS, Now let us seek our native coast,
Where friends we hope will meet us;
As Travelers we then may boast,
If they but kindly greet us!


