REMARKS CONCERNING THE ENCROACHMENTS ON THE RIVER THAMES NEAR DURHAM-YARD.

ADDRESSED To the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, the Worshipful the ALDERMEN,
and the COMMON COUNCIL of the City of London.

IN TWO PARTS.

LONDON: PRINTED BY G. BIGG, IN THE YEAR MDCCLXXI.

TO THE Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, THE Worshipful the ALDERMEN, AND THE
COMMON COUNCIL of the City of London.
MY LORD, AND GENTLEMEN,
BEFORE the Legislature had entirely assented to the late Bill in favor of the
Encroachments near Durham-Yard, the two following little Tracts, were drawn up
with a view to prevent the Confirmation of that Injustice; but as they were not
finished time enough to be Communicated, with any hope of Success, to those
Persons for whose perusal they were at first intended, I think it my Duty, in
the next Place, to address them to you, as they particularly relate to the
Rights and Property of the City of London. -- When Property is taken away from
the Ancient and Legal Proprietors WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT, and vested in other
Persons, even private individuals, as their own Property, for their own private
advantage, by Parliamentary Authority, such a Precedent will render the
Property of all Men as precarious as their Party interest, and will enlarge the
dangerous System of Public Corruption, by increasing the means of its baneful
influence. -- But this is not merely, a Political evil; it is also immoral and
irreligious, in every point of view. To remove the Ancient Land Mark, or
Boundary, is an accursed Crime according to the Laws of God; (compare Deuteronomy.
xix. 14. xxvii. 17. Job xxiv. 2. Proverbs xxii. 28.) so that every kind of
wilful Encroachment upon the Property of others, is, in some degree, tainted
with this heinous Guilt.

Times are bad enough, when such invasions on Public or Private Property remain
unpunished; but the moral State of any Nation is even deplorable, and their
measure of iniquity may be said to be almost filled up, when such notorious
Acts of Injustice meet with Public Encouragement, instead of reprehension; and
when Trespassers are rewarded and gratified (to the Exclusion of the injured
Proprietor) with a Parliamentary Right even in the very Object, which tempted
them to break the Laws and wrong their Neighbors.

Many well meaning People do not seem to be aware of the bad tendency of this
example; and there is, therefore, the more necessity that it should be pointed
out and exposed.

The injustice appeared to me so notorious, after I had carefully considered
the case, that I should have been inclined, as a Citizen of the World, to
represent the monstrous immorality of rewarding, instead of Punishing,
Trespassers, (lest the evil example should become epidemical and contagious in
the World, which is already too corrupt) but as a Citizen of London it is even
my Duty to do so in the present case: for when I took the Oath of Allegiance to
the King, I was Sworn at the same time to maintain the Franchises and Customs,
of the City of London to the utmost of my power (see the Oath of every Freeman
You shall swear, that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
George, obeysant and obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this
City. The Franchises and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep
harmless in that that in you is, etc.
) and therefore, as I hope I shall ever be faithful to the City of London, as
well as true to our most gracious Sovereign, I esteem it my indispensible Duty
to both, for the sake of public Justice, to point out the illegality (as it
appears to me) and dangerous tendency of Publicly rewarding the Trespassers on
the Rights of this Great City with an exclusive Title to the very object of
their temptation to Trespass.

The manner of making these Encroachments (viz. by throwing Rubbish into the
Water without any Fence to retain it) has been as hurtful to the River as the
Encroachments themselves, without affording the least probability of any one
good effect, saving, or convenience whatsoever, to recommend it: a method
unfavourable to every purpose, except the clandestine Designs of Trespassers,
that the intended Projection of their Encroachments may not surprise and alarm
the Public before the Mischief is carried into Execution: as for instance; --
if the space, which has lately been, thus gradually, stolen from the River near
Durham Yard, had been previously marked off with Piles for the Boundaries of a
Wharf, or with a Bank of large Chalk-Stones, or other hard Materials, not
liable to be washed away, (as all Embankments on Navigable Rivers ought to be
made) the Trespass would have appeared much more enormous at first than by this
method, which rendered the Progress of the growing Encroachments less notorious
and alarming.

Since these late Trespasses began, the Bed of the River (as I have been
informed by several Watermen and others, who have been well acquainted with the
River for many Years) is considerably increased in Height, which is certainly
occasioned, in great measure, by the manner of Embanking above described.

But, I am sorry, my Lord and Gentlemen, to observe, that the City is as much
to blame on this Account as the Encroachers; for my fellow Citizens, or some of
them, have suffered themselves to be persuaded, that this is the most eligible
way of Embanking; and they have, therefore, adopted, or, at least, do allow the
practice of this pernicious and slovenly Method, in those Parts, where the
Embankment is authorized; so that the City seems to betray her own Cause, as if
she really intended, by setting this bad Example, to justify the like notorious
Abuse near Durham-Yard; and, thereby, render the Progress and Iniquity of that
growing Encroachment less conspicuous and remarkable. It behooves the City to
enquire how such an inconsistency began: for this rude, slovenly and
unmechanical Measure could not have been adopted for the sake of saving either
Time or Expense in the Work; because it, certainly, requires a much greater
Quantity of Rubbish than would have been really necessary to fill up the Space
intended to be embanked! And this to the manifest Detriment of the River! for
the lighter Particles of the Rubbish are constantly washed away from the Banks,
every Tide, both up and down the Stream; and must inevitably lodge at the
Bottom of the River; because the Current runs, alternately, both Ways. And, for
the same Reason, the boasted Scheme of contracting the Avenue of the River will
not (it is manifest) prevent the gradual filling up of the Bed, because the
Rubbish and Filth, that is washed away from the Banks at one Time of Tide, is
liable to be brought back again at another; and so to be shifted, backwards and
forwards, till the whole is gradually incorporated in a thick heavy Loam at the
Bottom of the River; which, at length, becomes too firm to be affected or
removed by the Current; and by this means the Bed will, probably, be so raised,
in process of time, as to render the River totally unfit for Navigation.

It is therefore, absolutely necessary (my Lord and Gentlemen) to put a Stop,
as soon as possible, to this scandalous Practice (viz. of throwing Rubbish into
the River without a Fence to retain it) whether the Embankments are allowed to
Proceed or not: but it is, certainly, more for the Interest of the City to cut
new Docks and Recesses from the River, and to clear and deepen the old ones,
than to Embank.

There are likewise some other Abuses to which the alarming Increase of the
River's Bed is, likewise, in some Degree, to be attributed: for besides many
other lesser Encroachments that are continually making on both Sides the River,
by enlarging the Banks with Rubbish, driving Piles, etc. I am informed, that
Rubbish from Buildings, Refuse from the Dye-houses, etc. have sometimes been
thrown out of Lighters into the River in the Night, in order to save the
trouble and expense of carrying the load farther away. -- I have been told this
by several persons who have accidentally seen the like Trespasses. -- It is
therefore become necessary, for the future Preservation of this Noble River,
that the City should offer a proper Reward to all Watermen and others, that
shall give the first Information at Guildhall, or the Mansion House, of any
such Encroachments or Misdemeanors in future. The Reward should be paid when
the Offender is convicted; and might, perhaps, be defrayed out of the Fine for
the Offense. And the Water-Bailiffs should, likewise, be rewarded in the same
manner, whenever they shall have been vigilant enough to give the first Notice
of any Misdemeanor. A proper Inquest of Citizens should be appointed out of
each Ward by Rotation, or, else, be impanneled by the Sheriffs as a Jury (from
time to time as there should be occasion) to examine the Complaints, as soon as
any Informations are received. And the Assent or Leave of such an Inquest to
any Encroachment, driving of Piles, etc. should not be allowed to authorize the
same, or put a stop to further Enquiry, lest they should be in any Degree
influenced by private Solicitation, or be otherwise tampered with; (which has
sometimes been the Case on public Inquiries when Nuisances have been presented)
but the final Determination should rest, as at present, with the Court of
Common Council; and no Water-Bailiff, or other City Officer whatever, should
have Power to excuse, or tolerate, the driving any Piles, or the least
Encroachment. For when such a Power is vested in any Officer, whose charge is
of this nature, it is apt to destroy the intended utility of his Office;
because the more Offenses and Encroachments are committed, the more Fees and
Christmas Compliments he will, probably, receive, and annually demand, as the
Price of Toleration and Forbearance. The Office of Water Bailiff (though it
affords an ample Proof of the ancient Jurisdiction and Right of the City of
London to the River Thames, yet) has been hitherto, in general, (I fear,)
rather a means of authorizing Encroachments, than of preventing them.

I do not mean to blame the Conduct of your Water Bailiff, or of any other
Officer in particular; for Custom has so reconciled the giving of pecuniary
Acknowledgments to the Water Bailiff for tolerating Encroachments (as I have
been informed), that the same are looked upon as the lawful and just Dues of
his Office: and he does not clandestinely demand them, but openly, and, as it
were, by the authority of the City; which receives of every such Officer, at
his appointment, a very large sum of Money, for the Purchase of his Office, in
Consideration of these Emoluments. -- I say -- in Consideration of these
Emoluments, because the same must necessarily be supposed to be known and
understood by the Sellers as well as the Buyers, at the Time of the Purchase,
if the proper Income and Value of the Office be compared with the enormous
Price that has, of late, been given for it. The Profits or Salary ought,
therefore, to be made adequate in some other way, otherwise the City and not
the Water-Bailiff must be blamed.

I ought not, however, to blame the City without endeavoring, at the same
time, to obviate the Objection which some Persons have lately urged against her
on the same Account, viz. that by neglecting to prevent Abuses and
Encroachments, she has forfeited her Right of Conservancy: but as I have
already shown, in the two little Tracts, sent herewith, that the City has a
natural, as well as Legal Right to her Jurisdiction on the River, I need only
add, further, that the like Plea of Forfeiture, if it were once admitted, would
be equally effectual to deprive any Lord or Gentleman of his Family Estate and
Patrimony; for there are but few Men, I fear who make so good a Use of their
Possessions as they might, and ought; though there are very many, that would
PRETEND to improve and dispose of the same more advantageously for the PUBLIC
GOOD, if such a Plea was sufficient to justify an Attempt to dispossess the
right Owner. But to return -- I do not mean to blame the City for selling the
Office of Water Bailiff; but, rather, for not publishing (before it is offered
to sale) proper Conditions, Instructions, and Injunctions, to point out the
Duties of the Office; and for not giving notice that the same is liable to the
Penalty of Forfeiture for Mal-administration; in order that the Purchaser may,
thereby, be enabled to regulate his Conduct agreeable to the real Duty of his
Office; and may know, that he forfeits his Place, if he, wilfully, tolerates
the least Encroachment. Were this Method observed, the selling of Places (I
mean Places merely of Trust, that don't require great Learning and Science)
would be, by far, the most eligible way of disposal; because Recommendations
and great Interest are far from being certain Proofs of the most deserving
Candidate; whereas the Purchase Money would be a certain and real Gain, as well
as an excellent Security for good Behavior. But without such Instructions and
Conditions the private Emolument of the Officer is too liable to interfere with
the public Utility of the Office: whereas, by the Method which I have already
submitted to your Consideration (viz. of offering Rewards for the first
Discovery of Offenses,) every Waterman would find it his Interest to take upon
himself the Office of a diligent and inexorable Water-Bailiff, because the
proposed Reward arises from the public Proof, instead of the Concealment and
Toleration of Offenses; and there would be too many of these voluntary Officers
to be bribed to secrecy.

I am, with great Respect, My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most obedient, And most
humble Servant, GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, 10 Aug. 1771.
REMARKS CONCERNING THE ENCROACHMENTS ON THE RIVER THAMES NEAR DURHAM-YARD.
PART I.
PART I. Some Remarks on the Case of the City of London with respect to the
Encroachments on the River Thames near Durham-Yard, and the Bill now depending
in Parliament to establish the said Trespasses.
IT cannot be denied, notwithstanding all the delusive Sophistry that has been
used upon this occasion, that the City of London has ever enjoyed and
exercised on the River Thames a Right of Conservancy, as well of the Width or
Avenue, (by occasionally inspecting and regulating the Boundaries) as of the
Fishery, with power and authority to remove all nuisances; so that this
Franchise, or Liberty, is absolutely vested in the City by Prescription and
Ancient Usage, besides many positive Grants and Confirmations; -- And what
Freeholder will be able to produce a more authentic Title to his Estate and
Property! For a long process of time, and a long Use, Possession, or Custom,
which exceeds the Memory of Man, is sufficient to constitute a Right, or just
Title. Longum Tempus et longus Usus, qui excedit memoriam hominum, sufficit pro
jure. Principia Legis et AEquitatis, p. 55. See also Co. Lit. 115. There is,
besides, an express Article in Magna Charta to secure to the City of London all
her Ancient Liberties and Customs ( Civitas Londini habeat omnes libertates
suas antiquas et consuetudines suas. (Cap. 9.) amongst which, undoubtedly, this
Right and Custom of Conservancy is to be reckoned as one of the most material
Franchises, because the very existence of this great Trading City depends upon
it; so that the City's Title to the Conservancy is founded on a natural as well
as legal Right.

The pretended consent of the Collegiate Church of Westminster cannot palliate
the Trespass, or lessen the injury to the City of London. The Grant of King
James, on which the Claim of that Church is said to be founded, could not
convey a power to embank and fill up the River, nor a Right to confirm such a
Trespass when committed, because the King himself had no such power, and
consequently had no right to Grant it; so that the Jurisdiction said to extend
infra finem aquoe to the middle of the Stream, must be construed in some other
sense, or it will, otherwise, render the whole Grant null and void; because the
River Thames is a Public Avenue or Passage to the City; so that, in this
respect, it is to be considered as the King's highway, and it is esteemed the
King's highway no otherwise than in Trust for the Public: so that the King has
no power to dispense with an Encroachment on the highway; for though he may
pardon Nusances that are transient and not continuing, -- Yet a Nuisance in the
highway, which still continues, and is not ended, until removed; cannot be
pardoned; (Judge Vaughan's Reports, 333.) because the same is to be esteemed
evil and iniquitous, in its very nature, a "Malum in se, Bad in itself," which
is further proved by the same Learned Author in P. 337. I may conclude (says
he) those things to be mala in se, which can never be made lawful. He then
cites the Year-Book of 11 Henry 7. viz. But Malum in se, the King nor any other
can dispense. And instanceth, Si come, Si le Roy, voyloit pardon de occider un
homme, ou de fair nuisance in le haut chemin, ceo est void, To wit, if the
King, should be willing to pardon the Killing of a Man, (or rather, as the next
sentence explains it) will GIVE POWER to kill a Man, or to make a Nuisance in
the High-Road, the same is void.
-- and upon the same reason (says he) a license to imprison a Man, to take his
Land, his Horse, or any thing that is his from him, is void. For in Life,
Liberty, and Estate, every Man, who has not forfeited them, has a Property
and Right which the Law allows him to defend; and if it is violated, it gives
an Action to redress the Wrong, and to Punish the Wrong-doer -- Therefore a
Dispensation, that is, to make lawful the taking from a Man any thing which he
may lawfully defend from being taken, or lawfully punish if it be, must be
void. For it is a contradiction to make it lawful, to take what may be lawfully
hindered from being taken, or lawfully Punished if it be. And that were to make
two Men have several Plenary Rights in the same thing at the same time, which
NO LAW CAN EFFECT: Therefore TO DO a thing which NO LAW can make LAWFUL, must
be -- MALUM IN SE.

This Argument clearly proves the Impropriety of pretending a Right or Power in
the Crown, or in the Church of Westminster, to give their consent for the
establishment of the Trespass in the River at Durham-Yard.

The Right of Conservancy has been invested in the City of London from the most
ancient Times, so that the King cannot resume that Power if he would; for it is
a maxim in Law, that a quiet and uninterrupted Possession for 60 Years creates
a just Title. Possessio pacifica pour Anns 60 facit Jus: (See Judge Jenkins to
the same effect Cent. 26.) and, the Kings Order, Command, or Letters Patent
have no legal Weight, or Effect against such a Right, for rescriptum principis
contra jus non valet. On the other hand, the Right of the Church of Westminster
to the River (even supposing that it had been lawful for King James the first
to grant such a Right) is nevertheless forfeited for want of being claimed and
put in use since that time; whereas the Right of the Citizens of London is
sufficiently established (according to the Maxims before cited) by the exercise
and enjoyment of a continual and undisputed Jurisdiction upon the River, as
being their undoubted Right and Property, surely for more than 60 Years last
past. -- And a Right or Property, thus acquired, is as valid, even against the
Pretensions of the Crown, as against those of the Church of Westminster, or,
even, as against those of a Private Man, -- for the Nullum Tempus Doctrine
cannot justify the King's Claim to the Soil of the Thames, because the Right of
the Crown in Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. is exactly upon the same footing
with respect TO TIME as Private Freeholds; For Bracton informs us that in all
such things -- currit tempus contra Regem, sicut contra quam libet privatam
personam. (Bracton de legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae, 2d B. c. 5. P. 14.) I
have thoroughly examined the Doctrine of Nullum Tempus occurrit regi, in a
little Tract expressly upon that Subject, and therefore need not enlarge upon
it here.

Now as the City of London has acquired so firm a Title to her Jurisdiction by
a quiet Possession for 60 Years, according to the Maxim before quoted, how
unjust is it, at this time, to call her Right in Question, when it is
notorious, that the same may as easily be traced back more than 10 See the
Charter of Richard 1st, C. 2d. cited in the Royal Charter of Confirmation by
Charles the 2d, to the City of London, p. 9. We have clearly quit claimed all
that which the Keepers of the Tower of London were wont Yearly to receive of
the said Wares. -- Speaking of Wares in the Thames to the Detriment of the
City; and this Charter is expressly said to have been given for the Soul's
Health of King Henry our Father, and all our Ancestors Souls, probably meaning
his Ancestors of the Norman Line, who had unjustly usurped those Rights. The
Jurisdiction of the City of London upon the River was soon after acknowledged
also by his Brother King John. See his Charter cited in the Posthumous Works of
Sir H. Spelman, p. 63. Et Civitas Londinensis habeat omnes ANTIQUAS libertates
et liberas consuetudines suas tam per Terras quam PER AQUAS. N. B. Even at that
time they were esteemed, "ANTIQUAS Libertates, etc.


times 60 Years! For ex diuturnitate temporis omnia praesumuntur Solenniter
esse acta.

We are taught also by the unquestionable Whosoever denies the force and weight
of the Maxims and Principles of the Common Law, is unworthy of Argument, and
deserves not to be treated as a reasonable Being; for Contra Negantem principia
non est disputandum. Co. Lit. 343.
Maxims of the Common Law that Men cannot be obliged to part with their Right
and Property without their own free consent: Iniquum est ingenuis hominibus non
esse Liberam rerum suarum alienationem; -- And Rerum suarum quilibet est
moderator et arbiter. -- And again, Regulariter non valet pactum de re mea non
alienanda (Co. Lit. 223.) For no Man may be compelled to sell what is his own,
even for the full value of it. Nemo cogitur rem suam vendere, etiam justo
pretio. 4 Inst. 275. -- And again, That which is my own, cannot be taken from
me without my consent; Quod meum est, a me, sine me, auferri non potest. Jenk.
Cent. 251.

There is, indeed, an Exception to these general Maxims, and that is, when the
Public Benefit requires such an Alienation, as for the making of Public Roads,
Canals, In all the Cases here mentioned it is necessary that the Alienated
Private Property should be vested in the Public, or in the Crown for the
Public, and not as the private Property of any Individuals whatsoever,
notwithstanding that the Public may seem to be benefited by their Private
Undertakings. Precedents of this kind have, indeed, been established by some
late Acts for Cutting Canals; but I flatter myself, that the Legislature was
not then aware of the impropriety of such examples. The Proposal of the City of
London, for Cutting a Canal from Isleworth upwards, was a proper pattern for
all other Undertakings of that nature; because the Property was to be vested in
the Public, and it was intended finally to be made a Free Navigation, so that,
of course, it would have been considered, in Law, as the King's Highway.
etc. or Building Fortifications for the Public safety: In all such cases,
Private Advantage must give way to the Public Good, "Privatum commodum Publico
cedit," and "Privatum incommodum Publico Bono pensatur. (Jenk. Cent. 223 and
85.) But when the Public Property, vested in a Body Corporate in Trust for the
Public Advantage, is clandestinely taken away BY ENCROACHMENT, and an attempt
is made to establish the Trespass, and vest that Public Property in Private
Hands, for Private Advantage, without the Consent of the Ancient and Legal
Trustees, it is to reverse the very fundamental Principles of Natural Equity,
and to turn the once firm Pyramid of the Law upon its Point, instead of its
Basis, so as to threaten ruin and destruction to all things within the reach of
its fall. -- The Pretense, that the Public will be benefited in proportion to
the advantage arising to the Trespassers, is frivolous, and ought not, by any
means, to be admitted. It savours of partiality, to view a Public Benefit,
through the medium of a private Advantage, because the public Utility, (usually
alleged in such cases) proves, 9 times in 10, a mere pretense; and nothing
illegal ought to be admitted, even though the pretense for it is Lawful;
Pretextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum. (10. Co. 88.) -- There are also
some other things alleged as reasons for showing favor to this Trespass, viz.
the Taste and Skill of the Architects, and the Public Ornament of their
Edifices, etc. But all such Pretenses are equally frivolous with the first,
when they interfere with Public Right and Franchise, for the Law does not
favor the Elegant and Sumptuous; Lex non favet delicatorum votis. (9 Co. 58.)

Yet the City paid a proper Attention (it is manifest) to the merit of the
Architects, and the Appearance of their Buildings, by discovering an
Inclination (which I have elsewhere mentioned more at large) to allow them
sufficient room to make a convenient Wharf, that the Purposes of their noble
Vaults might not be injured; but, as more than this would be superfluous, the
Citizens could not have been justified, had they not rejected the
unconscionable request of the Trespassers, especially as it was thought, that
the addition of a large Timber-Yard for the private Use and Advantage of the
Builders, would not, (according to the Taste of the Citizens at least)
contribute much to public Ornament and Elegance. The other pretense of public
Utility was as little apparent to the Citizens in general as this last; for it
is still doubtful, and remains to be proved; (as I have shown in another
Paper;) whereas there is NO DOUBT of the illegality of the Trespass; for the
same was notorious, as well with respect to the Encroachment itself, as the
manner of making it, by throwing so many Thousand Cart-loads of Rubbish into
the River, without a Fence to retain it, which must, certainly, prejudice the
River by lessening the Depth. -- This was an apparent injury, and, an Injury is
contrary to Law: Tort a le ley est contrary. (Co. Lit. 158.) No Man ought to be
enriched to the inconvenience or disadvantage of another. -- Nemo debet
locupletari ex alterius incommodo. Jenk. Cent. 4. No Man ought to be allowed to
receive benefit or take advantage from his own fraud or Trespass. Nemo ex dolo
suo proprio relevetur, aut auxilium capiat. (Jur. Civ.) And shall the
Parliament of England then endeavor to establish a Wrong, to the total
subversion of these indisputable Precepts? The Example is dangerous! The
Precedent threatens Ruin and Dissolution to all the legal ties of Security for
the quiet Possession of Lands and Inheritances in this Kingdom. -- For if we
depart from the Law, there can be no Security to any Man in any thing, but all
things will be rendered uncertain and precarious. Si a jure discedas vagus
eris, et erunt omnia omnibus incerta. Co. Lit. 227. The Public Good requires,
that bad Actions should not remain unpunished. Interest Reipublicae ne
maleficia remaneant impunita. Jenk. Cent. p. 31. for when a Judge (and much
more the whole Legislature) favors an unworthy Man, does it not encourage all
Men to fall away from their integrity? and does it not promote an universal
contagion (as it were) of a Licenciousness? Cum indulget Judex indigno, nonne
ad Prolapsionis contagium provocat universos. (Fleta. Cap. 17. S. 11,) Because
the Admission of one Absurdity, or Injustice, makes way for Ten Thousand more,
-- Uno absurdo dato infinita sequuntur, 1 Co. 102. and those Crimes and
Trespasses which are often excused and defended, will, surely, be often
committed. Videbis ea saepe committi, quae saepe vindicantur. 3 Inst. Epilogue.

If all these Points are carefully considered, the Bill must, manifestly,
appear inconsistent with the Spirit and Principles of the Common Law. Nay! it
is so notoriously unjust, that it affords us some comfort, even by the excess
of its Illegality!

For I have already shown it to be a "malum per se," and contrary to natural
Right, and therefore I trust that it will be null and void of itself, even if
it should gain the Assent of all the Three Branches of the Legislature; for no
Law can establish what Nature (or natural Right) prohibits: Quae rerum natura
prohibentur nulla lege confirmata sunt: (Finch 74.) and whatsoever is done
contrary to Law, may be esteemed as undone, a mere nullity: Quod contra legem
fit, pro infecto habetur. 4 Co. 31. -- But, above all, let it be remembered,
that the Old Liberties and Customs of the City of London (amongst which the
Conservancy of the River Thames, Medway, and Lee, is perhaps the most essential
to her Welfare and very Existence) are secured to her by an Express Article of
Magna Charta (Chap. 9.) which I have already remarked in the beginning of this
little Tract; and therefore it behooves the Learned in the Law to demonstrate,
that this Bill is not in any Point derogatory to the said 9th Chapter of Magna
Charta; but, if this cannot be done, the joint Authority of King, Lords, and
Commons, is not sufficient to pass it into a Law, ( I mean, a Valid and
Constitutional Law, such as can be maintained without Corruption and Arbitrary
Power) because it is "Assented, and accorded," by an Act of the 42d Year of
King Edward III. Chap. 1. (which is still in force, and must ever remain so,)
that the Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, be holden and kept in all
Points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, that shall be holden for
NONE.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, 6th May, 1771.
REMARKS CONCERNING THE ENCROACHMENTS ON THE RIVER THAMES NEAR DURHAM-YARD.
PART II.
PART II. Some further Remarks concerning the Injury done to the City of London
by the Encroachments on the River Thames near Durham-Yard.
THE extraordinary Favor shown in Parliament to the Trespasses lately
committed by several Persons, in the enormous Encroachment on the River Thames
near Durham-Yard, is liable to affect the Security of Property in general;
because an Encouragement to commit Trespasses, and a Precedent to establish and
confirm the same, when committed, do certainly tend to the Total Subversion of
Justice; for in every point of view the same are repugnant to the fundamental
Principles of Law and Equity.

Actions were commenced in the Court of King's Bench against the Encroachments,
before the Trespassers brought their Bill into Parliament; so that the
Concurrence of Parliament with the Authors of the Injury, is a gross insult
upon the Laws, by stopping the regular Course of Justice in a matter of Right,
which came properly before the King's Courts; for, as it is esteemed unjust to
punish a Man by the force of an ex post facto Law, it, certainly, is equally
unjust by an ex post facto Law to confirm, and establish a manifest Trespass,
which was previously referred to a proper Court for Redress; and the
Application to Parliament is of itself a sufficient Proof, that the Right and
Claim of the City of London are just; and such as must necessarily have found a
Remedy in Law, according to the usual Proceedings of the King's Courts,
otherwise the ex post facto Law had been needless.

It ought to be remembered, also, that the City of London, for the sake of
Peace, and to avoid a Contest in Parliament, was inclined to allow some of the
Trespassers, (who are eminent Builders) as much ground in the Front of their
Buildings, as would be sufficient to make a Wharf, wide enough for Carts to
come down, and to turn, and load, etc. as at other Quays in the City, so that
the use and intention of the noble underground Passages might not be lost, or
in the least injured; and a private intimation of this Lenity and Favor, to
which the City seemed disposed, was given to a Friend of the Builders, that
they might be advised to Petition the City for Room to make such a Wharf; and
they were told, that the same would probably be granted in consideration of
their great Expenses, and the Grandeur of their Buildings.

But instead of such a Petition, the Builders presented a Memorial (they did
not deign to call it a Petition) desiring more than 3 or 4 Times as much room
as was necessary for the said purpose; because, it seems, a Wharf alone would
not content them; but, as Builders, they must be indulged also with room
enough, out of the Width of the River, to make (likewise for a Public Ornament,
I suppose) even a Timber Yard besides! -- They did not, indeed, mention the
Timber Yard in their Memorial, but the design plainly appears by a Clause in
the Bill to regulate the Height of the Piles of Timber, etc.

They did not fail, however, to demand of the City, as much Space as they
thought necessary for their intended Timber Yard; and they were pleased at the
same time to desire the Concurrence of the City (as Conservators of the River)
to their Petition in Parliament! An Insult this to the Citizens of London, as
gross and enormous, as the Encroachment itself; -- for, in effect, it was to
desire the Citizens to join in a Petition to Parliament against themselves;
that is, in Favor of, and to establish and confirm a notorious Trespass
committed in Defiance of their own repeated Prohibitions and Presentiments.

The Memorial, however, was rejected with a proper Disdain. But this was no
hindrance to the Adventurers; they were already sufficiently aware, that they
might affront the City with Impunity. -- They knew their Party Interest in
Parliament, and the Partiality has, hitherto, been proved by the Success.

Two great Law Lords strenuously endeavored to palliate the Offense, and to
set forth the Public Utility of the Embankment: One of them admitted that, the
present Scheme was intended for the private Emolument of Mess. Adams, but then,
(said he) that Emolument could only increase in Proportion to the Convenience,
and Public Utility of the Embankment; if it was found inconvenient; the
intended use would be lost; consequently their Profit would go with it; it was,
therefore, in every point, a great Public Good arising from a Private
Advantage. However plausible this Argument may seem, yet I must observe, that
it ill becomes any Gentleman at the head of the Law, to view a Public Good
through the medium of a Private Advantage, especially as that private advantage
had been sought by a manifest Public Injury and Trespass; for when the
Encroachment first began, the Right of the City of London was so far from being
disputed, that the Trespassers themselves acknowledged it, by Petitioning for
Leave; and though they could not obtain Leave from those who had a Right to
give it, yet they continued to enlarge their enormous Trespass, as confidently
as if the whole River was indisputably their own. But even if the imaginary
Public Good, (supposed by the learned Chief Justice) be admitted, yet his
Lordship knows, that That which is otherwise Good and Just in itself, becomes
Wicked and Unjust, if it is sought or obtained by Force or Fraud. Quod alias
bonum and justum est, si per vim vel fraudem petatur, malum et injustum
efficitur. (3 C. 78.) and his Lordship will not (I apprehend) deny, that an
enormous Trespass has been committed; and therefore, those that are robbed and
injured ought, before all things, to be reinstated, and have their Rights
restored. Spoliatus debet ante omnia restitui. 2 Just. 714. Law, Justice, and
Equity, cannot show the least favor or consideration for the Delinquents in
such a Case, because "Iniquity Bars Equity," -- and, no Man can take advantage
from his own Trespass or Injury. Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua
propria. Co. Lit. 148.

The Public Good requires that bad Actions should not remain unpunished.
Interest Reipublicae ne maleficia remaneant impunita. Jenk. Cent. p. 31.

But if, on the contrary, the Legislature will favor and confirm an apparent
Trespass, no Man's Property can be safe from such Adventurers. If I had as much
Party Interest, and paid as little regard to the difference between MEUM and
TUUM as they have done in the present Case, or their Advocates, I would procure
an elegant Plan for raising such a Building, as should not only be a Public
Ornament in its structure, but a Public Convenience in its Accommodations
within and without; in short, I would build a noble Inn, open to all Men, (for
MY OWN and the public advantage) upon the Inheritance of Lord A, Lord B, or of
any other Noble Freeholder whatsoever, whose Property, in point of Situation,
might seem to promise the most advantage to my undertaking.

Or a good Plan for raising an Elegant and outwardly Ornamental Edifice,
inwardly adapted to the purposes of Grinding Corn, Slitting Iron, making
Gunpowder, or any other Articles necessary for the sustenance, convenience, or
protection of the Public, would equally answer my private Advantage: and a good
Mill would be a good Inheritance, let me tell you, if I could make it my own
Freehold wherever I pleased to Build one, with or without the Consent of the
Lord of the Manor, or the lawful Proprietor of the Ground.

The same Doctrine may be extended even to the Building of whole Towns upon
other Men's Ground, without Leave; because the Towns would be for the
accommodation of Gentlemen, of Tradesmen, of Manufacturers, Artificers, etc.
etc. etc. whereby the Public would manifestly be benefited as well as the
Builder, in proportion to the Success of each Undertaking in the Increase of
Inhabitants.

If the lawful Proprietor of the Ground, on which I trespassed, would be
pleased to give me his Consent, it would be well; and if he refused it, my
Pretensions would still be as good as the much favored Cause of the
Trespassers at Durham-Yord; for, even though I should be obliged to allow that
my present Scheme was intended for the Private Emolument of, myself -- yet I
could allege the Opinion of a Chief Justice, that this Emolument could only
increase in proportion to the Convenience and Public Utility of, my Inn, my
Mill, or my Town, If it was found inconvenient, the intended Use would be lost,
consequently," my Profit would go with it; it would therefore (according to
this Opinion of my Lord Chief Justice) be in every point a great PUBLIC GOOD,
arising from a PRIVATE ADVANTAGE.

I might allege, also, that this private Advantage of mine, ought to be much
more favored than that of the Encroachers on the River Thames, because, if I
should raise my Prices for Provisions, for Grinding, for Rent, etc. upon the
Public, there would still be Room sufficient in the Neighborhood, ( as the
Consent of Proprietors is at present esteemed unnecessary) for other People,
also, to Trespass and Build more Inns, more Mills, or more Towns for THEIR OWN
and the Public Advantage, as near to my advantageous Situation as they should
think proper; so that the Public, when imposed upon by me, might be enabled to
give the preserence to cheaper and less unconscionable Trespassers.

But in the other Case, the local Advantages are more limited and confined to a
particular Situation; and the Encroachments are already so great, that there is
scarcely Room for more within any advantageous Distance; because the Advantage
of Situation for Wharfs is confined within the extent of the Trading Part of
the Town, now fully occupied; and the Port or Basin of the River, within these
Bounds, is already too much contracted to admit of more Encroachments, without
encumbering or stopping up the Passage of the River with Craft and Vessels,
which even at present are greatly endangered for want of commodious and proper
Mooring-Places out of the Stream and Tide-way. -- During the Frosty Weather
this last Winter, 3 or 4 Ships were wrecked, and many others damaged, even in
the Port of London, for want of such proper Accommodations; and a very
considerable number of Barges, Lighters, etc. were forced away from their
Moorings by the Ice, and lost, both above and below London Bridge; so that it
is manifest, that Water-room is of much more consequence to the Port of London
than any Land gained from it can possibly be; and that there cannot, therefore,
be any Room to spare, for making more Wharfs out of the Bed of the River,
without an apparent Injury to the Harbor; so that if the new Wharfs should
become absolutely necessary by an Increase of Trade, the Public Utility must
submit to the Exactions of the Private Possessor, whose Tenure is founded in
Public Injury and Injustice; and the Trade of this great City, on which its
very Existence depends, must be Loaded and Clogged with the much favored
Private Advantage of each Trespasser; so that we may fairly measure, by the
Enormity of the present Encroachments, how conscientiously Trespassers in
general would deign to consider the Trade and Rights of the Public, when their
own Private Interest is in View.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, 7th May, 1771.
AN INDEX TO THE Maxims of the Common Law, and other Authorities quoted in this
Book.
CONTRA Negantem principia non est disputandum. (Co. Lit. 343. See also Doct.
Stud. Cap. 8. p. 27.) Page 13 Longum Tempus et longus usus, qui excedit
memoriam hominum, sufficit pro jure. (Principia Legis et Aequit. p. 55. Co.
Lit. 115. Bract. lib. 4. p. 230. Fleta. lib. 4. cap. 24. p. 264.) Page 4
Civitas Londini habeat omnes libertates suas antiquas et consuetudines suas.
(Magna Charta, cap. 9.) Page 4, 23 Judge Vaughan's Reports, 333, 337, Year-Book
11 Hen. 7. Page 6, 7, 8 Possessio pacifica pour anns 60 facit Jus. (Principia
Leg. and Aequit. p. 81.) A peaceable Possession for 60 Years makes a Right.
(Jenk. Cent. 26.) Page 9 Rescriptum Principis contra Jus non valet. (Principia
Leg. et Aequit. p. 97.) See also Bracton (Lib. 3. cap. ix. p. 107.) for the
true sense of the Maxim, that the King can do no wrong. -- Nihilenimaliud
potest Rex in terris, cum sit Dei Minister et Vicarius, nisi id solum quod de
jure potest. etc. Page 10 Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi." Page 11 Currit Tempus
contra Regem, sicut contra quamlibet privatam personam. Bracton de legibus. 2
B. c. 5. p. 14. Page 11 Ex Diuturnitate Temporis omnia praesumuntur solenniter
esse acta Judge Jenkins. p. 26. Page 12 Charter of King Richard I. c. 2.
Charter of King Charles II. p. 9. Charter of King John. (Posthumous Works of
Sir H. Spelman. p. 63.) Page 12 Iniquum est ingenuis hominibus non esse Liberam
rerum suarum alienationem, -- Rerum suarum quilibet est moderator et arbiter.
-- Regulariter non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda. (Co. Lit. 223.) Page
13 Nemo cogitur rem suam vendere, etiam justo pretio. (4 Inst. 275.) Page 14
Quod meum est, a me, sine me, auferri non potest. (Jenk. Cent. 251.) Page 14
Privatum Commodum Publico cedit. -- Privatum Incommodum Publico Bono pensatur.
(Jenk. Cent. 223 and 85.) Page 15 Pretextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.
(Principia Leg. and Aequit. p. 82.) Page 17 Lex non favet delicatorum votis. (9
Co. 58.) Page 17 Tort a la Ley est contrary. (Co. Lit. 158, quoted from
Britton.) Page 19 Nemo debet locupletari ex alterius incommodo. (Jenk. Cent.
4.) Page 19 Nemo ex dolo suo proprio relevetur, aut auxilium capiat. (Jur'.
Civ.) Principia Leg. and Aequit. p. 65.) Page 19 Si a jure discedas vagus eris,
et erunt omnia omnibus incerta. (Co. Lit. 227.) Page 20 Interest Reipublicae ne
maleficia remaneant impunita. (Jenk. Cent. p. 31.) Page 20, 35 Cum indulget
Judex indigno, nonne ad prolapsionis contagium provocat universos? Fleta. lib.
1. cap. 17. p. 18. Also Bracton lib. 3. cap. 9. p. 107. b. Page 21 Uno absurdo
dato infinita sequuntur. (1 Co. 102.) Page 21 Videbis ea saepe committi, quae
saepe vindicantur. (3 Inst. Epil.) Page 21 Quae rerum natura prohibentur nulla
lege confirmata sunt (Principia Leg. and Aequit. p. 88. Page 22 Quod contra
legem fit, pro infecto habetur. (4 Co. 31.) Page 22 Act of Parliament 42 Edw.
III. cap. 1. Page 23, 24
PART II.
Quod alias bonum and justum est, si per vim vel fraudem petatur, malum and
injustum efficitur. (3 Co. 78.) Page 34 Spoliatus debet ante omnia restitui. (2
Inst. 714.) Page 34 Iniquity bars Equity. (Prin. Leg. and Aequit. p. 48.) Page
35 Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria. No man shall take
advantage of his own wrong. (Co. Lit. p. 148. b.) Page 35
FINIS.

