THE QUERIST, CONTAINING Several QUERIES, Proposed to the CONSIDERATION OF THE
PUBLIC.

DUBLIN: Printed by R. REILLY, on Cork-Hill, For G. RISK, G. EWING, and W.
SMITH, Bookseller^ in Dames-Street, M,DCC,XXV.

THE QUERIST, etc.
Query I.
WHETHER there ever was, is, or will be an industrious Nation poor, or an idle,
rich?

2. Qu. Whether a People can be called poor, where the common Sort are well
fed, clothed, and lodged?

3. Qu. Whether the Drift and Aim of every wise State should not be, to
encourage Industry in its Members? and whether those, who employ neither Heads
nor Hands for the common Benefit, deserve not to be expelled like Drones out of
a well governed State?

4. Qu. Whether the four Elements, and Man's Labor therein, be not the true
Source of Wealth?

5. Qu. Whether Money be not only so far useful, as it stirs up Industry,
enabling Men mutually to participate the Fruits of each others Labor?

6. Qu. Whether any other Means, equally conducing to excite and circulate the
Industry of Mankind, may not be as useful as Money?

7. Qu. Whether the real End and Aim of Men be not Power? And whether he who
could have every Thing else at his Wish or Will, would value Money?

8. Qu. Whether the public Aim in every well governed State be not, that each
Member, according to his just Pretensions and Industry, should have Power?

9. Qu. Whether Power be not referred to Action; and whether Action does not
follow Appetite or Will?

10. Qu. Whether Fashion does not create Appetites, and whether the prevailing
Will of a Nation is not the Fashion?

11. Qu. Whether the Current of Industry and Commerce be not determined by this
prevailing Will?

12. Qu. Whether it be not owing to Custom that most Fashions are agreeable?

13. Qu. Whether it may not concern the Wisdom of the Legislature to interpose
in the making of Fashions; and not leave an Affair of so great influence, to
the management of Women and Fops and Tailors and Vintners?

14. Qu. Whether reasonable Fashions are a greater restraint on Freedom than
those which are unreasonable?

15. Qu. Whether a general good Taste in a People would not greatly conduce to
their thriving? And whether an uneducated Gentry be not the greatest of
national Evils?

16. Qu. Whether Customs and Fashions do not supply the Place of Reason, in the
Vulgar of all Ranks? Whether, therefore, it does not very much import that they
should be wisely framed?

17. Qu. Whether the imitating those Neighbors in our Fashions, to whom we
bear no likeness in our Circumstances, be not one cause of Distress to this
Nation?

18. Qu. Whether frugal Fashions in the upper Rank, and comfortable living in
the lower, be not the Means to multiply Inhabitants?

19. Qu. Whether the bulk of our Irish Natives are not kept from thriving, by
that cynical Content in Dirt and Beggary, which they possess to a Degree beyond
any other People in Christendom?

20. Qu. Whether the creating of Wants be not the likeliest way to produce
Industry in a People? And whether if our Peasants were accustomed to eat Beef
and wear Shoes they would not be more Industrious?

21. Qu. Whether other Things being given, as Climate, Soil, etc. the Wealth be
not proportioned to the Industry, and this to the Circulation of Credit, be the
Credit circulated or transferred by what Marks or Tokens so ever?

22. Qu. Whether therefore less Money swiftly circulating be not, in effect,
equivalent to more Money slowly circulating? Or whether if the Circulation be
reciprocally as the Quantity of Coin, the Nation can be a Loser?

23. Qu. Whether Money is to be considered as having an intrinsic Value, or as
being a Commodity, a Standard, a Measure, or a Pledge, as is variously
suggested by Writers? And whether the true Idea of Money, as such, be not
altogether that of a Ticket or Counter?

24. Qu. Whether the Value or Price of Things, be not a compounded Proportion,
directly as the Demand, and reciprocally as the Plenty?

25. Qu. Whether the Terms Crown, Livre, Pound Sterling, etc. are not to be
considered as Exponents or Denominations of such Proportion? and whether Gold,
Silver, and Paper, are not Tickets or Counters for Reckoning, Recording, and
Transferring thereof?

26. Qu. Whether the Denominations being retained, although the Bullion were
gone, Things might not nevertheless be rated, bought and sold, Industry
promoted, and a Circulation of Commerce maintained?

27. Qu. Whether an equal raising of all Sorts of Gold, Silver, and Copper Coin
can have any effect in bringing Money into the Kingdom? And whether altering
the Proportions between the several Sorts can have any other effect, but
multiplying one Kind and lessening another, without any increase of the Sum
total?

28. Qu. Whether arbitrary changing the Denomination of Coin, be not a public
Cheat?

29. Qu. Whether nevertheless the Damage would be very considerable, if by
Degrees our Money were brought back to the English Value, there to rest for
ever?

30. Qu. Whether the English Crown did not formerly pass with us for six
Shillings? And what Inconvenience ensued to the Public, upon its Reduction to
the present Value, and whether what has been may not be?

31. Qu. What makes a wealthy People? And whether Mines of Gold and Silver are
capable of doing this? Whether Negroes amidst the Gold Sands of Afric are not
poor and destitute?

32. Qu. Whether there be any Virtue in Gold or Silver, other than as they set
People at Work, or create Industry?

33. Qu. Whether it be not the Opinion or Will of the People, exciting them to
Industry, that truly enricheth a Nation? And whether this does not principally
depend on the Means for counting, transferring and preserving Power, that is,
property of all Kinds?

34. Qu. Whether if there was no Silver in the Kingdom, our Trade might not
nevertheless supply Bills of Exchange, sufficient to answer the Demands of
Absentees in England or elsewhere?

35. Qu. Whether current Bank Notes may not be deemed Money? And whether they
are not actually the greater part of the Money of this Kingdom?

36. Qu. Provided the Wheels move, whether it is not the same Thing, as to the
effect of the Machine, be this done by the Force of Wind or Water or Animals?

37. Qu. Whether Power to command the Industry of others be not real Wealth?
And whether Money be not in Truth, Tickets or Tokens for conveying and
recording such Power, and whether it be of great Consequence what Materials the
Tickets are made of?

38. Qu. Whether Trade, either foreign or domestic, be in Truth any more than
this Commerce of Industry?

39. Qu. Whether to promote, transfer, and secure this Commerce, and this
Property in human Labor, or, in other Words, this Power, be not the sole Means
of enriching a People, and how far this may be done independently of Gold and
Silver?

40. Qu. Whether it were not wrong to suppose Land it self to be Wealth? And
whether the Industry of the People is not first to be considered, as that which
constitutes Wealth, which makes even Land and Silver to be Wealth, neither of
which would have any Value, but as Means and Motives to Industry?

41. Qu. Whether in the Wastes of America a Man might not possess twenty Miles
square of Land, and yet want his Dinner or a Coat to his Back?

42. Qu. Whether a fertile Land, and the Industry of its Inhabitants, would not
prove inexhaustable Funds of real Wealth, be the Counters for conveying and
recording thereof what you will, Paper, Gold, or Silver?

43. Qu. Whether a single Hint be sufficient to overcome a Prejudice? And
whether even obvious Truths will not sometimes bear repeating?

44. Qu. Whether if human Labor be the true source of Wealth, it does not
follow that Idleness should of all things be discouraged in a wise State?

45. Qu. Whether even Gold or Silver, if they should lessen the Industry of its
Inhabitants, would not be ruinous to a Country? And whether Spain be not an
Instance of this?

46. Qu. Whether the Opinion of Men, and their Industry consequent thereupon,
be not the true Wealth of Holland, and not the Silver supposed to be deposited
in the Bank at Amsterdam?

47. Qu. Whether there is in Truth any such Treasure lying dead? And whether it
be of great consequence to the Public, that it should be real rather than
notional?

48. Qu. Whether in order to understand the true Nature of Wealth and Commerce,
it would not be right to consider a Ship's Crew cast upon a desert Island, and
by Degrees forming themselves to Business and civil Life; while Industry begot
Credit, and Credit moved to Industry?

49. Qu. Whether such Men would not all set themselves to Work? Whether they
would not subsist by the mutual Participation of each others Industry? Whether
when one Man had in his Way procured more than he could consume, he would not
exchange his Superfluities to supply his Wants? Whether this must not produce
Credit? Whether to facilitate these Conveyances, to record and circulate this
Credit, they would not soon agree on certain Tallies, Tokens, Tickets or
Counters?

50. Qu. Whether Reflection in the better Sort might not soon remedy our Evils?
And whether our real Defect be not a wrong Way of Thinking?

51. Qu. Whether it would not be an unhappy Turn in our Gentlemen, if they
should take more Thought to create an Interest to themselves in this or that
County or Borough, than to promote the real Interest of their Country?

52. Qu. Whether it be not a Bull to call that making an Interest, whereby a
Man spends much and gains nothing?

53. Qu. Whether if a Man builds a House he does not in the first Place provide
a Plan which governs his Work? and shall the Public act without an End, a View,
a Plan?

54. Qu. Whether by how much the less particular Folk think for themselves, the
Public be not so much the more obliged to think for them?

55. Qu. Whether Cunning be not one thing and good Sense another? And whether a
cunning Tradesman does not stand in his own Light?

56. Qu. Whether small Gains be not the way to great Profit? And if our
Tradesmen are Beggars, whether they may not thank themselves for it?

57. Qu. Whether some way might not be found for making Criminals useful in
Public Works, instead of sending them either to America, or to the other World?

58. Qu. Whether we may not, as well as other Nations, contrive Employment for
them? And whether Servitude, Chains and hard Labor, for a term of Years, would
not be a more discouraging, as well as a more adequate Punishment for Felons,
than even Death itself.

59. Qu. Whether there are not such Things in Holland as bettering Houses for
bringing young Gentlemen to Order? And whether such an Institution might be
useless among us?

60. Qu. Whether it be true, that the Poor in Holland have no Resource but
their own Labor, and yet there are no Beggars in their Streets?

61. Qu. Whether he whose Luxury consumes foreign Products, and whose Industry
produces nothing domestic to Exchange for them, is not so far forth injurious
to his Country?

62. Qu. Whether, consequently, the fine Gentlemen, whose Employment is only to
dress, drink, and play, be not a public Nuisance?

63. Qu. Whether Necessity is not to be hearkened to before Convenience, and
Convenience before Luxury?

64. Qu. Whether to provide plentifully for the Poor, be not feeding the Root,
the Substance whereof will shoot upwards into the Branches, and cause the Top
to flourish?

65. Qu. Whether there be any Instance of a State wherein the People, living
neatly and plentifully, did not aspire to Wealth?

66. Qu. Whether Nastiness and Beggary do not, on the contrary, extinguish all
such Ambition, making Men listless, helpless, and slothful?

67. Qu. Whether a Country inhabited by People well fed, clothed, and lodged,
would not become every Day more populous? And whether a numerous Stock of
People in such Circumstances would not constitute a flourishing Nation; and how
far the Product of our own Country may suffice for the compassing of this End?

68. Qu. Whether a People, who had provided themselves with the Necessaries of
Life in good Plenty, would not soon extend their Industry to new Arts and new
Branches of Commerce?

69. Qu. Whether those same Manufactures which England imports from other
Countries may not be admitted from Ireland? And if so whether Lace, Carpets,
and Tapestry, three considerable Articles of English Importation, might not
find Encouragment in Ireland? And whether an Academy for Design might not
greatly conduce to the perfecting those Manufactures among us?

70. Qu. Whether France and Flanders could have drawn so much Money from
England, for figured Silks, Lace, and Tapestry, if they had not had Academies
for Designing?

71. Qu. Whether when a Room was once prepared, and Models in Plaster of
Paris, the Annual Expense of such an Academy need stand the Public in above two
hundred Pounds a Year?

72. Qu. Whether our Linen Manufacture would not find the Benefit of this
Institution? And whether there be any Thing that makes us fall short of the
Dutch, in Damasks, Diapers, and printed Linen but our Ignorance in Design?

73. Qu. Whether those Specimens of our own Manufacture, hung up in a certain
public Place, do not sufficiently declare such our Ignorance? And whether for
the Honor of the Nation they ought not to be removed?

74. Qu. Whether those, who may slight this Affair as notional, have
sufficiently considered the extensive use of the Art of Design, and its
Influence in most Trades and Manufactures wherein the Forms of Things are often
more regarded than the Materials?

75. Qu. Whether there be any Art sooner learned than that of making Carpets?
And whether our Women with little Time and Pains may not make more beautiful
Carpets than those imported from Turkey? And whether this Branch of the Woollen
Manufacture be not open to us? See Qu. 69.

76. Qu. Whether human Industry can produce, from such cheap Materials, a
Manufacture of so great Value, by any other Art than by those of Sculpture and
Painting?

77. Qu. Whether Pictures and Statues are not in Fact so much Treasure? And
whether Rome and Florence would not be poor Towns without them?

78. Qu. Whether they do not bring ready Money as well as Jewels? Whether in
Italy Debts are not paid and Children portioned with them, as with Gold and
Silver?

79. Qu. Whether it would not be more prudent, to strike out and exert
ourselves in permitted Branches of Trade, than to fold our Hands and repine,
that we are not allowed the Woollen?

80. Qu. Whether it be true, that two Millions are yearly expended by England
in foreign Lace and Linen?

81. Qu. Whether immense Sums are not drawn yearly into the northern Countries,
for supplying the British Navy with Hempen Manufactures?

82. Qu. Whether there be any Thing more profitable than Hemp? And whether
there should not be great Premiums for encouraging our Hempen Trade; what
Advantages may not Great Britain make of a Country where Land and Labor are so
cheap?

83. Qu. Whether Ireland alone might not raise Hemp sufficient for the British
Navy? And whether it would not be vain to expect this from the British Colonies
in America, where Hands are so scarce and Labor so excessively dear?

84. Qu. Whether if our own People want Will or Capacity for such an Attempt,
it might not be worth while for some undertaking Spirits in England to make
Settlements, and raise Hemp in the Counties of Clare and Limeric, than which
perhaps there is not fitter Land in the World for that Purpose? And whether
both Nations would not find their Advantage therein?

85. Qu. Whether if all the idle Hands in this Kingdom were employed on Hemp
and Linen, we might not find sufficient Vent for these Manufactures?

86. Qu. How far it may be in our own Power to better our Affairs, without
interfering with our Neighbors?

87. Qu. Whether the Prohibition of our Woollen Trade ought not naturally to
put us on other Methods, which give no Jealousy?

88. Qu. Whether Paper be not a valuable Article of Commerce? And whether it be
not true that one single Bookseller in London, yearly expends above four
thousand Pounds, in that foreign Commodity?

89. Qu. How it comes to pass that the Venetians and Genoese, who wear so much
less Linen, and so much worse than we do, should yet make very good Paper, and
in great quantity, while we make very little and very bad?

90. Qu. How long it will be before my Countrymen find out, that it is worth
while to spend a penny in order to get a groat?

91. Qu. If all the Land were tilled that is fit for Tillage, and all that
sowed with Hemp, and Flax, that is fit for raising them, whether we should have
much Sheep-Walk beyond what was sufficient to supply the Necessities of the
Kingdom?

92. Qu. Whether other Countries have not flourished without the Woollen Trade?

93. Qu. Whether it be not a sure Sign or Effect of a Countries thriving, to
see it well cultivated, and full of Inhabitants? And, if so, whether a great
Quantity of Sheep-Walk, be not ruinous to a Country, rendering it Waste and
thinly Inhabited?

94. Qu. Whether the Employing so much of our Land under Sheep, be not in fact
an Irish Bull?

95. Qu. Whether our hankering after the Woollen Trade, be not the true and
only Reason, which has created a Jealousy in England, toward Ireland? And
whether any Thing can hurt us more than such a Jealousy?

96. Qu. Whether it be not the true Interest of both Nations, to become one
People? And whether either be sufficiently apprized of this?

97. Qu. Whether the upper Part of this People are not truly English, by Blood,
Language, Religion, Manners, Inclination, and Interest?

98. Qu. Whether we are not as much Englishmen, as the Children of old Romans
born in Britain, were still Romans?

99. Qu. Whether it be not our true Interest, not to interfere with them; and,
in every other Case, whether it be not their true Interest to befriend us?

100. Qu. Whether a Mint in Ireland, might not be of great Convenience to the
Kingdom, and whether it could be attended with any possible Inconvenience to
great Britain? And whether there were not Mints in Naples and in Sicily, when
those Kingdoms were Provinces to Spain or the House of Austria?

101. Qu. Whether any Thing can be more ridiculous, than for the North of
Ireland to be Jealous of a Linen Manufacture in the South?

102. Qu. Whether the County of Tiperary be not much better Land than the
County of Armagh; and yet whether the latter is not much better improved and
inhabited than the former?

103. Qu. Whether every Landlord in the Kingdom does not know the Cause of
this? And yet how few are the better for such their Knowledge?

104. Qu. Whether large Farms under few Hands, or small ones under many, are
likely to be made most of? And whether Flax and Tillage do not naturally
multiply Hands, and divide Land into small Holdings and well improved?

105. Qu. Whether, as our Exports are lessened, we ought not to lessen our
Imports? And whether these will not be lessened as our Demands, and these as
our Wants, and these as our Customs or Fashions? Of how great Consequence
therefore are Fashions to the Public? See Qu. 10, 11, 16.

106. Qu. Whether it would not be more reasonable to mend our State than to
complain of it; and how far this may be in our own Power?

107. Qu. What the Nation gains by those who live in Ireland upon the Produce
of foreign Countries?

108. Qu. How far the Vanity of our Ladies in dressing, and of our Gentlemen in
drinking, contributes to the general Misery of the People?

109. Qu. Whether Nations as wise and opulent as ours, have not made sumptuary
Laws; and what hinders us from doing the same?

110. Qu. Whether those, who drink foreign Liquors and deck Themselves and
their Families with foreign Ornaments, are not so far forth to be reckoned
Absentees?

111. Qu. Whether as our Trade is limited, we ought not to limit our Expenses;
and whether this be not the natural and obvious Remedy?

112. Qu. Whether the Dirt, and Famine, and Nakedness of the Bulk of our
People, might not be remedied even although we had no foreign Trade? And
whether this should not be our first Care, and whether, if this were once
provided for, the Conveniences of the Rich would not soon follow?

113. Qu. Whether comfortable living does not produce Wants, and Wants
Industry, and Industry Wealth? See Qu. 20, 65.

114. Qu. Whether there is not a great difference between Holland and Ireland?
And whether foreign Commerce without which the one could not subsist, be so
necessary for the other?

115. Qu. Might we not put a Hand to the Plough or the Spade, though we had no
foreign Commerce?

116. Qu. Whether the Exigencies of Nature are not to be answered by Industry
on our own Soil? And how far the Conveniences and Comforts of Life may be
procured, by a domestic Commerce between the several Parts of this Kingdom?

117. Qu. Whether the Women may not sew, spin, weave, embroider, sufficiently
for the embelishment of their Persons, and even enough to raise Envy in each
other, without being beholden to foreign Countries?

118. Qu. Suppose the Bulk of our Inhabitants had Shoes to their Feet, Clothes
to their Backs, and Beef in their Bellies? Might not such a State be eligible
for the Public, even though the Squires were condemned to drink Ale and Cider?

119. Qu. Whether if Drunkenness be a necessary Evil, Men may not as well get
Drunk with the growth of their own Country?

120. Qu. Whether a Nation within itself might not have real Wealth, sufficient
to give its Inhabitants Power and Distinction, without the help of Gold and
Silver?

121. Qu. Whether, if the Arts of Sculpture and Painting were encouraged among
us, we might not furnish our Houses in a much nobler Manner with our own
Manufacture? See Qu. 76.

122. Qu. Whether we have not, or may not have all the necessary Materials for
Building at Home?

123. Qu. Whether Tiles and Plaster may not supply the Place of Norway Fir,
for flooring and Wainscot?

124. Qu. Whether Plaster be not warmer, as well as more secure, than Deal?
And whether a modern fashionable House lined with Fir daubed over with Oil and
Paint, be not like a Fire-ship ready to be lighted up by all Accidents?

125. Qu. Whether larger Houses, better built and Furnished, a greater Train of
Servants, the difference with regard to Equipage and Table, between finer and
coarser, more and less Elegant and Impolite, may not be sufficient to feed a
reasonable Share of Vanity, or support all proper Distinctions? And whether all
these may not be procured, by domestic Industry out of the four Elements,
without ransacking the four Quarters of the Globe?

126. Qu. Whether any Thing is a nobler Ornament, in the Eye of the World, than
an Italian Palace, that is, Stone and Mortar skilfully put together, and
adorned with Sculpture and Painting, and whether this may not be compassed
without foreign Trade?

127. Qu. Whether an Expense in Gardens and Plantations would not be an elegant
Distinction for the Rich, a domestic Magnificence, employing many Hands within,
and drawing nothing from abroad?

128. Qu. Whether the Apology which is made for foreign Luxury in England, to
wit, that they could not carry on their Trade without Imports as well as
Exports, will hold in Ireland?

129. Qu. Whether one may not be allowed to conceive and suppose a Society, or
Nation of Human Creatures, clad in Woollen Clothes and Stuffs, eating good
Bread, Beef, and Mutton, Poultry and Fish in great Plenty, drinking Ale, Mead,
and Cider, inhabiting decent Houses built of Brick and Marble, taking their
Pleasure in fair Parks and Gardens, depending on no foreign Imports either for
Food or Raiment; and whether such People ought much to be pitied?

130. Qu. Whether Ireland be not as well qualified for such a State, as any
Nation under the Sun?

131. Qu. Whether in such a State the Inhabitants may not contrive to pass the
twenty four Hours, with tolerable Ease and Cheerfulness? And whether any People
upon Earth can do more?

132. Qu. Whether they might not eat, drink, play, dress, visit, sleep in good
Beds, sit by good Fires, build, plant, raise a Name, make Estates and spend
them?

133. Qu. Whether upon the whole, a domestic Trade may not suffice in such a
Country as Ireland, to nourish and cloth its Inhabitants, and provide them
with the reasonable Conveniences and even Comforts of Life?

134. Qu. Whether a general Habit of living well would not produce Numbers and
Industry; and whether, considering the Tendency of human Kind, the Consequence
thereof would not be foreign Trade and Riches, how unnecessary soever? See Qu.
68.

135. Qu. Whether nevertheless, it be a Crime to enquire how far we may do
without foreign Trade, and what would follow on such a Supposition?

136. Qu. Whether the Number and Welfare of the Subjects be not the true
Strength of the Crown?

137. Qu. Whether in all public Institutions there should not be an End
proposed, which is to be the Rule and Limit of the Means? Whether this End
should not be the Well-being of the Whole? And whether in order to this, the
first Step should not be to cloth and feed our People?

138. Qu. Whether there be upon Earth any Christian or civilized People so
beggarly, wretched, and destitute, as the common Irish?

139. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, there is any other People whose Wants may be
more easily supplied from Home?

140. Qu. Whether, if there was a Wall of Brass a thousand Cubits high, round
this Kingdom, our Natives might not nevertheless live cleanly and comfortably,
till the Land, and reap the Fruits of it?

141. Qu. What should hinder us from exerting ourselves, using our Hands and
Brains, doing something or other, Man, Woman, and Child, like the other
Inhabitants of God's Earth?

142. Qu. Be the restraining our Trade well or ill advised in our Neighbors,
with respect to their own Interest, yet whether it be not plainly ours to
accomodate ourselves to it?

143. Qu. Whether it be not vain to think of persuading other People to see
their Interest, while we continue blind to our own?

144. Qu. Whether there be any other Nation possessed of so much good Land, and
so many able Hands to Work it, which yet is beholden for Bread to foreign
Countries?

145. Qu. Whether it be true, that we import Corn to the yearly value of two
hundred thousand Pounds?

146. Qu. Whether we are not undone by Fashions made for other People? And
whether it be not Madness in a poor Nation to imitate a rich one?

147. Qu. Whether a Woman of Fashion ought not to be declared a public Enemy?

148. Qu. Whether it be not certain that from the single Town of Cork were
exported, last Year, no less than one hundred and seven thousand one hundred
sixty one Barrels of Beef, seven thousand three hundred and seventy nine
Barrels of Pork, thirteen thousand four hundred and sixty one Casks and eighty
five thousand seven hundred and twenty seven Firkins of Butter? And what Hands
were employed in this Manufacture?

149. Qu. Whether a Foreigner could imagine, that one half of the People were
starving, in a Country which sent out such Plenty of Provisions?

150. Qu. Whether an Irish Lady, set out with French Silks, and Flanders Lace,
may not be said to consume more Beef and Butter than fifty of our laboring
Peasants?

151. Qu. Whether nine Tenths of our foreign Trade be not singly to support the
Article of Vanity?

152. Qu. Whether it can be hoped private Persons will not indulge this Folly,
unless restrained by the Public?

153. Qu. How Vanity is maintained in other Countries, whether in Hungary, for
Instance, a proud Nobility are not subsisted with small Imports from abroad?

154. Qu. Whether there be a prouder People upon Earth than the noble
Venetians, though they all wear plain black Clothes?

155. Qu. Whether a People are to be pitied, that will not sacrifice their
little particular Vanities to the public Good? And yet whether each Part would
not except their own Foible from this public Sacrifice, the Squire his Bottle,
the Lady her Lace?

156. Qu. Whether Claret be not often drunk rather for Vanity than for Health
or Pleasure?

157. Qu. Whether it be true, that Men of nice Palates have been imposed on, by
Elder Wine for French Claret, and by Mead for Palm Sack?

158. Qu. Do not Englishmen abroad purchase Beer and Cider at ten Times the
price of Wine?

159. Qu. How many Gentlemen are there in England of a thousand Pounds per
Annum, who never drink Wine in their own Houses? Whether the same may be said
of any in Ireland who have even one hundred Pounds per Annum?

160. Qu. What reason have our Neighbors in England for discouraging French
Wines, which may not hold with Respect to us also?

161. Qu. How much of the necessary Sustenance of our People is yearly exported
for Brandy?

162. Qu. Whether, if People must poison themselves, they had not better do it
with their own Growth?

163. Qu. If we imported neither Claret from France nor Fir from Norway, what
the Nation would save by it?

164. Qu. When the Root yields insufficient Nourishment, whether Men do not
Top the Tree to make the lower Branches thrive?

165. Qu. Whether, if our Ladies drank Sage or Balm Tea out of Irish Ware, it
would be an insupportable national Calamity?

166. Qu. Whether it be really true that such Wine is best as most encourages
drinking, i. e. that must be given in the largest Dose to produce its effect?
And whether this holds with regard to any Medicine?

167. Qu. Whether that Trade should not be accounted most pernicious, wherein
the Balance is most against us? And whether this be not the Trade with France?

168. Qu. Whether it be not even Madness, to encourage Trade with a Nation that
takes nothing of our Manufacture?

169. Qu. Whether Ireland can hope to thrive, if the major Part of her Patriots
shall be found in the French Interest? See Qu. 155.

170. Qu. Why, if a Bribe by the Palate or the Purse be in effect the same
Thing, they should not be alike infamous?

171. Qu. Whether the Vanity and Luxury of a few ought to stand in Competition
with the Interest of a Nation?

172. Qu. Whether national Wants ought not to be the Rule of Trade? And whether
the most pressing Wants of the Majority ought not to be first considered?

173. Qu. Whether it is possible the Country should be well improved, while our
Beef is exported and our Laborers live upon Potatoes? See Qu. 148.

174. Qu. If it be resolved that we cannot do without foreign Trade, whether,
at least, it may not be worth while to consider what Branches thereof deserve
to be entertained, and how far we may be able to carry it on under our present
Limitations?

175. Qu. What foreign Imports may be necessary, for clothing and feeding the
Families of Persons not worth above one hundred Pounds a Year? And how many
wealthier there are in the Kingdom, and what Proportion they bear to the other
Inhabitants?

176. Qu. Whether Trade be not then on a right Foot, when foreign Commodities
are imported in Exchange only for domestic Superfluities?

177. Qu. Whether the Quantities of Beef, Butter, Wool, and Leather exported
from this Island can be reckoned the Superfluities of a Country, where there
are so many Natives naked and famished?

178. Qu. Whether it would not be wise so to order our Trade, as to export
Manufactures rather than Provisions, and of those such as employ most Hands?

179. Qu. Whether she would not be a very vile Matron, and justly thought
either mad or foolish, that should give away the Necessaries of Life, from her
naked and famished Children, in Exchange for Pearls to stick in her Hair, and
sweet Meats to please her own Palate?

180. Qu. Whether a Nation might not be considered as a Family?

181. Qu. Whether other Methods may not be found for supplying the Funds
besides the Custom on Things imported?

182. Qu. Whether any Art or Manufacture be so difficult as the making of good
Laws?

183. Qu. Whether our Peers and Gentlemen are born Legislators? Or whether that
Faculty be acquired by Study and Reflection?

184. Qu. Whether to comprehend the real Interest of a People, and the means to
procure it, does not imply some Fund of Knowledge historical, moral, and
political, with a Faculty of Reason improved by Learning?

185. Qu. Whether every Enemy to Learning be not a Goth? And whether every such
Goth among us be not an Enemy to the Country?

186. Qu. Whether therefore it would not be an Omen of ill presage, a dreadful
Phoenomenon in the Land, if our great Men should take it in their Heads to
deride Learning and Education?

187. Qu. Whether on the contrary, it should not seem worth while to erect a
Mart of Literature in this Kingdom, under wiser Regulations and better
Discipline than in any other Part of Europe? And whether this would not be an
infallible Means of drawing Men and Money into the Kingdom?

188. Qu. Whether the governed be not too numerous for the governing Part of
our College? And whether it might not be expedient to convert thirty Natives
Places into twenty Fellowships?

189. Qu. Whether if we had two Colleges, there might not spring an useful
Emulation between them? And whether it might not be contrived, so to divide the
Fellows Scholars and Revenues between both, as that no Member should be a Loser
thereby?

190. Qu. Whether ten thousand Pounds well laid out might not build a decent
College, fit to contain two hundred Persons; and whether the purchase-Money of
the Chambers would not go a good way toward defraying the Expense?

191. Qu. Where this College should be situated?

192. Qu. Whether it is possible a State should not thrive, whereof the lower
Part were industrious and the upper wise?

193. Qu. Whether the collected Wisdom of Ages and Nations be not found in
Books, improved and applied by Study?

194. Qu. Whether it was not an Irish Professor who first opened the public
Schools at Oxford? Whether this Island has not been anciently famous for
Learning? and whether at this Day it has any better Chance for being
considerable?

195. Qu. Whether we may not with better Grace sit down and complain, when we
have done all that lies in our Power to help ourselves?

196. Qu. Whether the Gentleman of Estate has a right to be idle; and whether
he ought not to be the great Promoter and Director of Industry, among his
Tenants and Neighbors?

197. Qu. Whether the real Foundation for Wealth must not be laid in the
Numbers, the Frugality, and the Industry of the People? And whether all
Attempts to enrich a Nation by other Means, as raising the Coin, Stock-jobbing,
and such Arts, are not vain?

198. Qu. Whether a Door ought not to be shut against all other Methods of
growing rich, save only by Industry and Merit; and whether Wealth got otherwise
would not be ruinous to the Public?

199. Qu. Whether the abuse of Banks and Paper-Money is a just Objection
against the use thereof? And whether such abuse might not easily be prevented?

200. Qu. Whether national Banks are not found useful in Venice, Holland, and
Hambourgh? And whether it is not possible to contrive one that may be useful
also in Ireland?

201. Qu. Whether any Nation ever was in greater want of such an Expedient than
Ireland?

202. Qu. Whether the Banks of Venice and Amsterdam, are not in the Hands of
the Public?

203. Qu. Whether it may not be worth while to inform ourselves in the Nature
of those Banks? And what Reason can be assigned, why Ireland should not reap
the Benefit of such public Banks, as well as other Countries?

204. Qu. Whether a Bank of national Credit, supported by public Funds, and
secured by Parliament, be a Chimera or impossible Thing; and if not, what would
follow from the Supposal of such Bank?

205. Qu. Whether the Currency of a Credit so well secured would not be of
great Advantage to our Trade and Manufactures?

206. Qu. Whether the Notes of such pub^^^ (...) would not have a more general
Cir^^^^ than those of private Banks, as being (...) subject to Frauds and
Hazards?

207. Qu. Whether it be not agreed that Paper has, in many respects, the
Advantage above Coin, as being of more Dispatch in Payments, more easily
transferred, preserved, and recovered when lost?

208. Qu. Whether, beside these Advantages, there be not an evident Necessity
for circulating Credit by Paper, from the Defect of Coin in this Kingdom?

209. Qu. Whether the Public may not as well save the Interest which it now
pays?

210. Qu. What would happen if two of our Banks should break at once? And
whether it be wise to neglect providing against an Event which Experience has
shown us not to be impossible?

211. Qu. Whether such an Accident would not particularly affect the Bankers?
And therefore whether a national Bank would not be a Security even to private
Bankers?

212. Qu. Whether we may not easily avoid the Inconveniences attending the
Paper-Money of New England, which were incurred by their issuing too great a
Quantity of Notes, by their having no Silver in Bank to exchange for Notes, by
their not insisting upon Repayment of the Loans at the Time prefixed, and
especially by their Want of Manufactures to answer their Imports from Europe?

213. Qu. Whether a Combination of Bankers might not do Wonders, and whether
Bankers know their own Strength?

214. Qu. Whether a Bank in private Hands might not even overturn a Government?
And whether this was not the Case of the Bank of St. George in Genoa? See the
Vindication and Advancement of our national Constitution and Credit. Printed in
London 1710.


215. Qu. Whether we may not easily prevent the ill Effects of such a Bank, as
Mr. Law proposed for Scotland, which was faulty in not limiting the Quantum of
Bills, and permitting all Persons to take out what Bills they pleased, upon the
Mortgage of Lands, whence, by a Glut of Paper, the Prices of Things must rise:
Whence also the Fortunes of Men must increase in Denomination, though not in
Value; whence Pride, Idleness, and Beggary?

216. Qu. Whether such Banks, as those of England and Scotland, might not be
attended with great Inconveniences, as lodging too much Power in the Hands of
private Men, and giving handle for Monopolies, Stock-jobbing, and destructive
Schemes?

217. Qu. Whether the national Bank, projected by an Anonymous Writer in the
latter End of Queen Anne's Reign, might not on the other Hand be attended with
as great Inconveniences, by lodging too much Power in the Government?

218. Qu. Whether the Bank projected by Murray, though it partake, in many
useful Particulars, with that of Amsterdam, yet, as it places too great Power
in the Hands of a private Society, might not be dangerous to the Public?

219. Qu. Whether it be rightly remarked by some, that, as Banking brings no
Treasure into the Kingdom like Trade, private Wealth must sink as the Bank
rises? And whether whatever causes Industry to flourish and circulate, may
not be said to increase our Treasure?

220. Qu. Whether the ruinous Effects of Mississippi, South Sea, and such
Schemes, were not owing to an abuse of Paper Money or Credit, in making it a
Means for Idleness and Gaming, instead of a Motive and Help to Industry?

221. Qu. Whether those Effects could have happened, had there been no
Stock-jobbing? And whether Stock-jobbing could at first have been set on Foot,
without an imaginary Foundation of some Improvement to the Stock by Trade?
Whether, therefore, when there are no such Projects, or Cheats, or private
Schemes proposed, the same Effects can be justly feared?

222. Qu. Whether by a national Bank, be not properly understood a Bank, not
only established by public Authority as the Bank of England, but a Bank in the
Hands of the Public, wherein there are no Shares: Whereof the Public alone is
Proprietor, and reaps all the Benefit?

223. Qu. Whether having considered the Conveniences of Banking and
Paper-Credit in some Countries, and the Inconveniences thereof in others, we
may not contrive to adopt the former, and avoid the latter?

224. Qu. Whether great Evils, to which other Schemes are liable, may not be
prevented, by excluding the Managers of the Bank from a share in the
Legislature?

225. Qu. Whether the rise of the Bank of Amsterdam was not purely casual, for
the Security and Dispatch of Payments? And whether the good Effects thereof, in
supplying the Place of Coin, and promoting a ready Circulation of Industry and
Commerce, may not be a Lesson to us, to do that by Design, which others fell
upon by chance?

226. Qu. Whether the Bank proposed to be established in Ireland, under the
Notion of a national Bank, by the voluntary Subscription of three hundred
thousand Pounds, to pay off the national Debt, the Interest of which Sum to be
paid the Subscribers, subject to certain Terms of Redemption, be not in reality
a private Bank, as those of England and Scotland, which are national only in
Name, being in the Hands of particular Persons, and making Dividends on the
Money paid in by Subscribers? See a Proposal for the Relief of Ireland, etc.
Printed in Dublin A. D. 1734.


227. Qu. Whether Plenty of small Cash be not absolutely necessary, for keeping
up a Circulation among the People, that is, whether Copper be not more
necessary than Gold?

228. Qu. Whether it is not worth while to reflect, on the Expedients made use
of by other Nations, Paper-Money, Bank-Notes, public Funds, and Credit in all
its Shapes, to examine what has been done and devised, to add our own
Animadversions, and upon the whole offer such Hints, as seem not unworthy the
Attention of the Public?

229. Qu. Whether that, which increases the Stock of a Nation, be not a Means
of increasing its Trade? And whether that, which increases the current Credit
of a Nation, may not be said to increase its Stock?

230. Qu. Whether it may not be expedient to appoint certain Funds or Stock for
a national Bank, under direction of certain Persons, one third whereof to be
named by the Government, and one third by each House of Parliament?

231. Qu. Whether the Directors should not be excluded from sitting in either
House; and whether they should not be subject to the Audit and Visitation of a
standing Committee of both Houses?

232. Qu. Whether such Committee of Inspectors should not be changed every two
Years, one half going out, and another coming in, by Ballot?

233. Qu. Whether the Notes ought not to be issued in Lots, to be lent at
Interest on mortgaged Lands, the whole Number of Lots to be divided among the
four Provinces, rateably to the Number of Hearths in each?

234. Qu. Whether it may not be expedient to appoint four counting Houses, one
in each Province, for converting Notes into Specie?

235. Qu. Whether a Limit should not be fixed, which no Person might exceed, in
taking out Notes?

236. Qu. Whether, the better to answer domestic Circulation, it may not be
right to issue Notes as low as twenty Shillings?

237. Qu. Whether all the Bills should be issued at once, or rather by Degrees,
that so Men may be gradually accustomed and reconciled to the Bank?

238. Qu. Whether the keeping of the Cash, and the direction of the Bank, ought
not to be in different Hands, and both under Public Control?

239. Qu. Whether the same Rule should not always be observed, of lending out
Money or Notes, only to half the Value of the Mortgaged Land? And whether this
Value should not always be rated, at the same Number of Years Purchase as at
first?

240. Qu. Whether Care should not be taken to prevent an undue Rise of the
Value of Land?

241. Qu. Whether the increase of Industry and People will not of Course raise
the Value of Land? And whether this Rise may not be sufficient?

242. Qu. Whether Land may not be apt to rise, on the issuing too great Plenty
of Notes?

243. Qu. Whether this may not be prevented by the gradual and slow issuing of
Notes, and by frequent Sales of Lands?

244. Qu. Whether Interest does not measure the true Value of Land; for
Instance, where Money is at five per Cent, whether Land is not worth twenty
Years Purchase?

245. Qu. Whether two small a Proportion of Money would not hurt the landed
Man, and too great a Proportion the monied Man? And whether the Quantum of
Notes ought not to bear Proportion to the public Demand? And whether Trial must
not show what this Demand will be?

246. Qu. Whether the exceeding this Measure might not produce diverse bad
Effects, one whereof would be the Loss of our Silver?

247. Qu. Whether Interest paid into the Bank, ought not to go on augmenting
its Stock?

248. Qu. Whether it would or would not be right, to appoint that the said
Interest be paid in Notes only? See Mr. John Laws on Money and Trade.


249. Qu. Whether the Notes of this national Bank should not be received in all
Payments into the Exchequer?

250. Qu. Whether on Supposition that the Specie should fail, the Credit would
not nevertheless still pass, being admitted in all Payments of the public
Revenue?

251. Qu. Whether the Public can become Bankrupt, so long as the Notes are
issued on good Security?

252. Qu. Whether Mismanagement, prodigal Living, Hazards by Trade, which often
affect private Banks, are equally to be apprehended in a Public one?

253. Qu. Whether as Credit became Current, and this raised the Value of Land,
the Security must not of Course rise? See Qu. 233.

254. Qu. Whether as our current domestic Credit grew, Industry would not grow
likewise, and if Industry, our Manufactures, and if these, our foreign Credit?

255. Qu. Whether by Degrees, as Business and People multiplied, more Bills may
not be issued, without augmenting the Capital Stock, provided still, that they
are issued on good Security; which further issuing of new Bills, not to be
without Consent of Parliament?

256. Qu. Whether such Bank would not be Secure? Whether the Profits accruing
to the Public would not be very considerable? And whether Industry in private
Persons would not be supplied, and a general Circulation encouraged?

257. Qu. Whether such Bank should, or should not, be allowed to issue Notes
for Money deposited therein? And, if not, whether the Bankers would have Cause
to complain?

258. Qu. Whether if the Public thrives, all particular Persons must not feel
the Benefit thereof, even the Bankers themselves?

259. Qu. Whether beside the Bank-Company, there are not in England many
private wealthy Bankers, and whether they were more before the erecting of that
Company?

260. Qu. Whether as Industry increased our Manufactures would not flourish;
and as these flourished, whether better Returns would not be made from Estates
to their Landlords, both within and without the Kingdom?

261. Qu. Whether we have not Paper-Money circulating among us already?
Whether, therefore, we might not as well have that which is secured by the
Public, and whereof the Public reaps the Benefit?

262. Qu. Whether there are not two general Ways of circulating Money, to wit,
Play and Traffic? And whether Stock-jobbing is not to be ranked under the
former?

263. Qu. Whether there are more than two Things, that might draw Silver out of
the Bank, when its Credit was once well established, to wit, foreign Demands
and small Payments at Home?

264 Qu. Whether if our Trade with France were checked, the former of these
Causes could be supposed to Operate at all? And whether the latter could
operate to any great Degree? See Qu. 34.

265. Qu. Whether the sure Way to supply People with Tools and Materials, and
to set them at Work, be not a free Circulation of Money, whether Silver or
Paper?

266. Qu. Whether in New England, all Trade and Business is not as much at a
Stand, upon a Scarcity of Paper-Money, as with us from the Want of Specie?

267. Qu. Whether Paper-Money or Notes may not be issued from the national
Bank, on the security of Hemp, of Linen, or other Manufactures whereby the Poor
might be supported in their Industry?

268. Qu. Whether it be certain, that the Quantity of Silver in the Bank of
Amsterdam be greater now than at first; but whether it be not certain that
there is a greater Circulation of Industry and Extent of Trade, more People,
Ships, Houses, and Commodities of all Sorts, more Power by Sea and Land?

269. Qu. Whether Money, lying Dead in the Bank of Amsterdam, would not be as
useless as in the Mine?

270. Qu. Whether our visible Security in Land could be doubted? And whether
there be any Thing like this in the Bank of Amsterdam?

271. Qu. Whether it be just to apprehend Danger from trusting a national Bank,
with Power to extend its Credit, to circulate Notes, which it shall be Felony
to counterfeit, to receive Goods on Loans, to purchase Lands, to fell also or
alienate them, and to deal in Bills of Exchange, when these Powers are no other
than have been trusted for many Years with the Bank of England, although in
Truth but a private Bank? See Qu. 222.

272. Qu. Whether the Objection from Monopolies and an over-growth of Power,
which are made against private Banks, can possibly hold against a national one?

273. Qu. Whether Banks raised by private Subscription, would be as
advantageous to the Public, as to the Subscribers? And whether Risques and
Frauds might not be more justly apprehended from them?

274. Qu. Whether the evil Effects, which, of late Years, have attended
Paper-Money and Credit in Europe, did not spring from Subscriptions, Shares,
Dividends, Stock-jobbing?

275 Qu. Whether great Evils attending Paper-Money in the British Plantations
of America have not sprung from the over-rating their Lands, and issuing Paper
without Discretion, and from the Legislators breaking their own Rules in Favor
of themselves, thus sacrificing the Public to their private Benefit? And
whether a little Sense and Honesty might not easily prevent all such
Inconveniences? See Qu. 212.

276. Qu. Whether an Argument from the Abuse of Things, against the use of them
be Conclusive?

277. Qu. Whether he who is bred to a Part, be fittest to judge of the Whole?

278. Qu. Whether Interest be not apt to bias Judgment? And whether Traders
only are to be consulted about Trade, or Bankers about Money?

279. Qu. Whether the Subject of Free-thinking in Religion be not exhausted?
And whether it be not high Time for our Free-thinkers, to turn their Thoughts
to the Improvement of their Country?

280. Qu. Whether any Man has a Right to judge, that will not be at the Pains
to distinguish?

281. Qu. Whether there be not a wide Difference, between the Profits going to
augment the national Stock, and being divided among private Sharers? And
whether, in the former Case, there can possibly be any Gaming or Stock-jobbing?

282. Qu. Whether it must not be ruinous for a Nation to sit down to game, be
it with Silver or with Paper?

283. Qu. Whether, therefore, the circulating Paper, in the late ruinous
Schemes of France and England, was the true Evil, and not rather the
circulating thereof without Industry; And whether the Bank of Amsterdam, where
Industry had been for so many Years subsisted, and circulated by Transfers on
Paper, does not clearly decide this Point?

284. Qu. Whether there are not to be seen in America fair Towns, wherein the
People are well lodged, fed, and clothed, without a Beggar in their Streets,
although there be not one Grain of Gold or Silver current among them?

285. Qu. Whether these People do not exercise all Arts and Trades, build
Ships, and navigate them to all Parts of the World, purchase Lands, till and
reap the Fruits of them, buy and sell, educate and provide for their Children?
Whether they do not even indulge themselves in foreign Vanities?

286. Qu. Whether, whatever Inconveniences those People may have incurred,
from not observing either Rules or Bounds in their Paper-Money, yet it be not
certain that they are in a more flourishing Condition, have larger and better
built Towns, more Plenty, more Industry, more Arts and Civility, and a more
extensive Commerce, than when they had Gold and Silver current among them?

287. Qu. Whether a View of the ruinous Effects of absurd Schemes, and Credit
mismanaged, so as to produce Gaming and Madness instead of Industry, can be any
just Objection against a national Bank, calculated purely to promote Industry?

288. Qu. Whether a Scheme for the Welfare of this Nation should not take in
the whole Inhabitants? And whether it be not a vain Attempt, to project the
flourishing of our Protestant Gentry, exclusive of the Bulk of the Natives?

289. Qu. Whether, therefore, it does not greatly concern the State, that our
Irish Natives should be converted, and the whole Nation united in the same
Religion, the same allegiance, and the same Interest? And how this may most
probably be effected?

290. Qu. Whether an Oath, testifying Allegiance to the King and disclaiming
the Pope's Authority in Temporals, may not be justly required of the Roman
Catholics? And whether, in common Prudence or Policy, any Priest should be
tolerated who refuses to take it?

291. Qu. Whether there have not been Popish Recusants? And, if so, whether it
would be right to object against the foregoing Oath, that all would take it,
and none think themselves bound by it?

292. Qu. Whether those of the Church of Rome, in converting the Moors of Spain
or the Protestants of France, have not set us an Example which might justify a
similar Treatment of themselves, if the Laws of Christianity allowed thereof?

293. Qu. Whether compelling Men to a Profession of Faith is not the worst
Thing in Popery, and, consequently, whether to copy after the Church of Rome
therein, were not to become Papists ourselves in the worst Sense?

294. Qu. Whether nevertheless we may not imitate the Church of Rome, in
certain Places, where Jews are tolerated, by obliging our Irish Papists, at
stated Times, to hear Protestant Sermons? And whether this would not make
Missionaries in the Irish Tongue useful?

295. Qu. Whether the mere Act of hearing, without making any Profession of
Faith, or joining in any Part of Worship, be a Religious Act? And,
consequently, whether their being obliged to hear, may not consist with the
Toleration of Roman Catholics?

296. Qu. Whether, if penal Laws should be thought Oppressive, we may not at
least be allowed to give Premiums? And, whether it would be wrong, if the
Public encouraged Popish Families to become Hearers, by paying their
Hearth-Money for them?

297. Qu. Whether in granting Toleration, we ought not to distinguish between
Doctrines purely Religious and such as affect the State?

298. Qu. Whether the Case be not very different, in regard to a Man who only
eats Fish on Fridays, says his Prayers in Latin, or believes
Transubstantiation, and one who professes in Temporals a Subjection to foreign
Powers, who holds himself absolved from all Obedience to his natural Prince
and the Laws of his Country? who is even persuaded, it may be Meritorious to
destroy the Powers that are?

299. Qu. Whether, therefore, a Distinction should not be made between mere
Papists and Recusants? And whether the latter can expect the same Protection
from the Government as the former?

300. Qu. Whether our Papists in this Kingdom can complain, if they are allowed
to be as much Papists, as the Subjects of France or of the Empire?

301. Qu. Whether there is any such Thing as a Body of Inhabitants, in any
Popish Country under the Sun, that profess an absolute Submission to the Pope's
Orders in Matters of an indifferent Nature, or that in such Points do not think
it their Duty, to obey the civil Government?

302. Qu. Whether since the Peace of Utrecht, Mass was not celebrated, and the
Sacraments administered in diverse Diocese's of Sicily, notwithstanding the
Pope's interdict?

303. Qu. Whether every Plea of Conscience is to be regarded? Whether, for
Instance, the German Anabaptists, Levellers, or fifth Monarchy Men would be
tolerated on that Pretense?

304. Qu. Whether Popish Children bred in Charity Schools, when bound out in
Apprentiship to Protestant Masters, do generally continue Protestants?

305. Qu. Whether a Sum, which would go but a little Way toward erecting
Hospitals for maintaining and educating the Children of the Native Irish, might
not go far in binding them out Apprentices to Protestant Masters, for
Husbandry, useful Trades, and the service of Families?

306. Qu. Whether if the Parents are overlooked, there can be any great Hopes
of Success in converting the Children?

307. Qu. Whether there be any Instance, of a People's being converted in a
Christian Sense, otherwise than by preaching to them and instructing them in
their own Language?

308. Qu. Whether Catechists in the Irish Tongue may not easily be procured and
subsisted? And whether this would not be the most practicable Means for
converting the Natives?

309. Qu. Whether it be not of great Advantage to the Church of Rome, that she
has Clergy suited to all Ranks of Men, in gradual Subordination from Cardinals
down to Mendicants?

310. Qu. Whether her numerous poor Clergy are not very useful in Missions, and
of much influence with the People?

311. Qu. Whether in defect of able Missionaries, Persons conversant in low
Life, and speaking the Irish Tongue, if well instructed in the first Principles
of Religion and in the Popish Controversy, though for the rest on a Level with
Parish Clerks, or the Schoolmasters of Charity Schools, may not be fit to mix
with and bring over our poor illiterate Natives, to the established Church?
Whether it is not to be wished that some Parts of our Liturgy and Homilies were
publicly read in the Irish Language? And whether, in these Views, it may not
be right to breed up some of the better sort of Children in the Charity Schools
and qualify them for Missionaries, Catechists and Readers?

312. Qu. Whether there be any Nation of Men governed by Reason? And yet, if
there was not, whether this would be a good Argument against the use of Reason
in public Affairs?

313. Qu. Whether, as others have supposed an Atlantis or Eutopia, we also may
not suppose an Hyperborean Island inhabited by reasonable Creatures?

314. Qu. Whether an indifferent Person, who looks into all Hands, may not be a
better Judge of the Play than a Party who sees only his own?

315. Qu. Whether one, whose End is to make his Countrymen think, may not gain
his End, even though they should not think as he does?

316. Qu. Whether he, who only asks, Asserts? And whether any Man can fairly
confute the Querist?

317. Qu. Whether the Interest of a Part will not always be preferred to that of
the Whole?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 10. Line 17. for inexhaustable r. inexhaustible. P. 14. L. 22. for
Helpless r. Hopeless. P. 16 L. ult. for than r. as.

PLAYS, Printed for, and sold by G. RISK, G. EWING, and W. SMITH, Booksellers
in Dame's-street.
TRAGEDIES.
MAcbeth Julius Caesar The Merry Wives of Windsor King Lear By Will.
Shakespeare. The Fair Penitent Jane Shore The Lady Jane Gray The Ambitious Step
Mother Tamerlane By Not. Row. Rival Queens, or the Death of Alexander the
Great Hannibals Overthrow Mithridates King of Pontus Oedipus By Not. Lee. The
Albion Queens, or, Mary Queen of Scots Virtue betrayed, or, Ann Bullen The
Unhappy Favorite, or, the Earl of Essex By John Banks. Sesostris, or, Royalty
in Disguise Fatal Extravagance Busiris King of Egypt The Revenge Euridice
Philotas Victim Periander Thomson's Sophonisba Timoleon Fall of Saguntum
Frederick Duke of Brunswick Merope Themistocles Philip of Macedon K. Henry the
5th of England K. Henry 4th of France The Heroic Daughter The Spartan Dame
Heroic Love Abra-Mule, or, Love and Empire Captives Sir Walter Raleigh
COMEDIES.
The Funeral, or Grief Alamode The Tender Husband The Lying Lovers The
Conscious Lovers By Sir Richard Steel. Love and a Bottle Constant Couple, or, a
Trip to the Jubilee Sir Harry Wildair Inconstant, or, the Way to Win him The
Twin Rivals The Recruiting Officer The Beaux Stratagem By George Farquhar.
Provoked Husband, or, a Journey to London Provoked Wife Relapse Aesop, two
Parts The Mistake By John Vanburg. Loves last Shift or the Fool in Fashion Love
makes a Man, or, the Fop's Fortune

