REMARKS ON THE COMPOSITION, USE, and EFFECTS OF THE EXTRACT of LEAD OF Mr.
GOULARD, AND OF HIS VEGETO-MINERAL WATER.

By G. ARNAUD, DOCTOR in PHYSIC and MASTER in SURGERY, The only Person
authorized to sell this EXTRACT, composed by Mr. GOULARD himself.

Plumbi cum corpore humano Sympathia.

BORELLI. LONDON: PRINTED for the AUTHOR in CHURCH-STREET. St. ANN'S SOHO, and
sold by P. ELMSLY, Successor to Mr. VAILLANT, Bookseller in the STRAND.

MDCCLXX.

ON THE EXTRACT OF LEAD.
IT is not my intention here to descant on the praises of Mr. Goulard's remedy.
See Mr. Goulard's work, sold by P. Elmsly successor to Mr. Vaillant, Bookseller
in the Strand.
That is already too well known throughout Europe, to want any assistance from
my pen. My views coincide entirely with those of the author, in endeavoring to
bring it to still greater perfection, by considering it with more preciseness
both as to it is composition and use. To be ignorant of these would be a fault,
willingly to conceal it is superior virtues, would be an injury to society, and
a man's of proceeding very different from the author's, who has published all
his knowledge on the subject without reserve.

This medicament, justly looked upon by those of the faculty, who are free from
prejudice, as the best and most universal topic in surgery, may very properly
be substituted in the place of all others generally prescribed: it will
frequently prove efficacious when the rest have failed, and will repair the
disorders they have brought upon the constitution.

I don't pretend to mention this medicine as a new discovered one, on the
contrary, we have received it from antiquity, known by the name of Acetum
Lit^argiri; but by its having been ill made, mal-a-propos applied, and
prescribed in improper quantities, it was for some time out of repute, and
without the assistance and the vigilance of Mr. Goulard's speculative turn, who
has had resolution enough to stem the torrent of opposition, this remedy, like
many others, by having been improperly made and as improperly administered,
would have fallen into the possession only of the quacks. For want of proper
vinegar the basis of this medicine it frequently deceived the practitioners,
who, from not knowing its properties and the real method of composing it,
entirely laid it aside. But it has of late been too minutely considered to be
any longer neglected, and is now looked upon, by the impartial part of mankind,
to be one of the greatest ornaments of the dispensatories, as well as the most
efficacious remedy in surgery. It is then to Mr. Goulard, a skilful surgeon of
Montpellier, we owe its revival; which could never have been effected, but by a
man of his eminence, and like him exempt from vulgar prejudice, which has
hitherto laid to the charge of this salutary remedy faults, from which the
experiments of many famous in their profession are now endeavoring to clear it
in favor of mankind.

When this extract is made with natural vinegar, and the strongest which can be
procured in the south of France, where nature in favorable years, and in
particular cantons, furnishes this vegetable liquor with more virtues, than any
art of the vinegarmakers can possibly endow it with, it possesses all the
dispersing, cooling, and resolving qualities proper for dividing the glutinous
stagnated matter in the obstructed vessels; it relaxes them when too much
contracted, and restores to the solids and fluids the proportion of circulation
necessary for preserving the animal economy in a state of health. The common
vinegars, owing their strength to sal ammoniac, to pepper, and the dung of the
feathered kind, which cannot fail of robbing this extract of the qualities
necessary for its perfection, as do likewise other factitious vegetable acids,
such for example, as are brewed in England, and in the northern countries,
under the appearance of vinegar. The latter, it is true, though not capable of
injuring the constitution, act as stimulators to the stomach; but this property
is not sufficient to perfectly dissolve the lead, or to impregnate these
metallic particles with the particular qualities they acquire by the addition
of tartar natural to those vinegars, which are made with the strongest wines.
Such as are well versed in the art of chemistry, know, that natural vinegar
contains an essential oil which entirely dissolves lead, while its acid only
divides it is parts. Mr. Goulard has discovered that it is the property of some
particular vinegars only of the province he lives in, to perfectly dissolve
this metal, as they contain more essential oil than the rest; consequently
natural vinegars, when adulterated, or factitious one, which receive their
power of action from the acrid ingredients only mixed with them, are not only
rendered incapable of perfectly dissolving the lead, but likewise communicate
an inflammatory quality to the extract, very different from the cooling and
calming one natural to it, when made with the best vinegar. The healing quality
of lead is evident, from its happy effects, when applied in its natural state
even to ulcerated cancers; how much more efficaciously must it then act, when
its saline particles are so far divided as to be capable of being introduced
into the smallest vessels, and there circulate with the juices? these they
attenuate and divide, so as to return into their proper channel; it is very
necessary then, that the vinegar; made use of for the dissolution of the lead,
should be natural, well chosen, and by no means factitious. A chemical analysis
will easily discover the defects of vinegar; but, as every one is not in a
situation of making these experiments, it is merits may be ascertained by the
taste only. Good vinegar, when touched with the tongue, has a pleasing acid
taste, and leaves a freshness in the mouth, but when factitious rather appears
to inflame the mouth, and throat, which sensation continues for some time.
I shall not here enter upon the bad qualities which may be conveyed to lead by
the ingredients made use of in the composition of factitious vinegars, which
are brewed according to every one's particular recipe. The best argument in
favor of the extract of Saturn, made in particular parts of the south of
France, and against any other extract made with common vinegars, is, that the
tartar of Languedoc has the preference in chemical processes, some of which are
in vain attempted without it. Another argument still more corroborative is
that, at Montpellier alone good verdigrease can be procured, on account of the
singular property of its vinegar, and for some other concurrent and unknown
reasons, which help to dissolve the copper the basis of the above drug. For the
same reason we may be induced to think that the tartarous particles of the wine
of that country, being refined by its change into vinegar, may contribute more
efficaciously to dissolve the lead, which experience daily proves. Common
vinegars help only to divide it in parts, some of Languedoc properly elected
dissolve it so thoroughly, that without any sediment it preserves its weight, a
certain proof that it incorporates itself more with this species of vinegar,
which no doubt must render it is effects more efficacious. It is certainly owing
to this, that the medicine we speak of possesses cooling, dispersing, resolving
qualities, and by no means a repelling one, as has been hinted by certain
people. This requires an explanation, which will be easily understood by the
meanest capacity, as I shall endeavor to express myself in the plainest terms.

When the lead is divided only, it is parts are too gross and ponderous to
remain suspended in the vegetable liquid its vehicle; this causes it to
subside: on shaking the bottle, they again incorporate with the liquid, without
suffering a diminution of their volume; this volume by preventing them from
penetrating to the vessels though the pores of the skin causes them to remain in
the tissue of those parts, and, by stopping up the passages of perspiration,
gives rise to what is generally termed repulsion. But, when the metal is so far
dissolved, as always to remain suspended in the vegetable liquid, its parts are
so fine and so far attenuated, as not to be discernable through the most perfect
microscope; they then easily penetrate the pores of the skin, follow the course
of the perspiratory vessels, and put in motion the inspissated and stagnated
fluids, which they again return to the road of circulation. When the metallic
particles act thus, the aquatic vehicles, with which they are combined, loosen
the skin, which was before in a state of too great tension, whilst the
spiritous ones restore to the vessels that elasticity of which they had been
deprived. Thus a resolution of the humors is effected by means of
transpiration and circulation: but a wise and cautious practitioner must always
attend to the progress of the complaint, when either putrefaction or a degree
of malignity is apprehended; and care should be always taken to mix this with
digestives, for critical discharges, as by abating their heat it will prevent
the neighboring parts from being affected, and secure the patient against a
too copious discharge which frequently attends these cases.

The comparison made between the extract of Saturn, and its salt, commonly
called the sugar of lead, will be found unjust, when we consider, that the
latter is made with vinegars of all sorts of wines, and that those of
Switzerland, which produce the greatest quantity of this sugar, are made of
wines very little impregnated with tartar, and that too of an inferior quality.
But after all, this very sugar of lead, which is quoted as a proof of the
repelling quality to be found in our medicine, is it not made use of by the
ablest practitioners, both as an internal and external medicine? if so, with
how much more confidence may we make use of Mr. Goulard's extract, properly
made, in the above circumstances? A practice of fifty years, has sufficiently
convinced me of its superiority over the sugar of lead, which I have known
fail, when the other has always answered my intentions.

Such, as are thus disposed to criticize the most approved remedies, will not give
themselves time to reflect, that an accidental failure of success might be
owing to this extract not having been properly made in its commencement, or
succeeding processes, to its having been given in too great a quantity, or
applied cold, as indeed the author sometimes recommends with a view only to the
temperate climate he writes in: thus have these people been induced, without
having any regard for themselves, to confirm the opinion of the vulgar, who
generally attribute the death of the patient to the last remedy, and thus
shamefully take advantage of this fallacious argument to cry down the good
effects of the extract of Saturn, and to extol remedies at best uncertain,
often fallacious, and which custom alone, the tyrant of the mind, authorizes
the use of both against reason and experience. Many examples might be brought
to refute what persons, otherwise respectable, have thought proper to advance
to the prejudice of this remedy; but I will refer the reader, to many
observations given by the author in his treatise Already mentioned in the note
p. 3.
, and to take into consideration here the first paragraph of the third Formula,
page 208, on the inefficacy of the poultices generally prescribed.

The proofs I have given of the necessity of procuring the best vinegar, and
the rules I shall lay down in the sequel, for the better making and using this
extract, having been approved of by men of knowledge and rank in this country,
ever intent on means to assist the poorer part of mankind, have induced me to
procure a quantity of it from the fountain head itself. I have applied to Mr.
Goulard for this purpose, to whom I have likewise communicated my thoughts on
the farther improvement and use of this remedy, which I have the satisfaction
to know entirely coincide with his. This concurrence of Ideas, which originally
sprung from a fifty years acquaintance, having been fellow-students together,
has induced me to imitate him on other occasions, See pages 8 and 201 of my
treatise of disorders of the urethra and bladder, sold by P. Elmsly, bookseller
in the Strand, in 12mo. the third edition.
and has been the means of his allowing me to be the sole vender in this
country of the extract he himself made See the end of these remarks.
.

This topic, which properly speaking is an universal chirurgical medicine and
easily procured, has this triple advantage over others. First, it costs but
little; secondly, it is prepared in an instant; and thirdly, it may easily be
conveyed from place to place.

Whoever is provided with it may prevent the bad consequences of bruises
occasioned either by a fall or blow; it prevents an echymosis, or extravasation
of blood, the general attendant of fractures and dislocations, till proper
assistance can be procured to dress the patient secundum artem; in these
circumstances it should be made use of in the beginning, as it is a known
remedy against inflammations and mortifications, the general attendants of
these complaints. I shall not enter into a detail of the other disorders it
will relieve, but shall refer the reader to Mr. Goulard's treatise; I shall
only lay down here some few rules for its use, drawn from experience, which
have met with Mr. Goulard's approbation, both as to that and its composition.

I. Every one is sufficiently acquainted with the powerful effects of vegetable
acids, and particularly those of vinegar in regard to brass, to deter him from
making this extract in vessels of that metal. No precaution is sufficient to
prevent the vinegar from imbibing some of the copper; it is therefore much more
advisable to make use of vessels made either of glass, earth, or pewter. I
should have been much more uneasy about a gentleman's servant, who had
swallowed by chance, the 8th of December last, a certain quantity of the
vegeto-mineral water, had not I been very sure that the extract had not been
made in a brass kettle. I assured the master in answer to his letter, that no
bad consequences would ensue, but that it would be advisable to order the
patient to drink some warm water.

Copy of Mr. **** Letter.
SIR,
One of my servants has swallowed, by accident, some of the vegeto-mineral
water; are there any bad consequences to be apprehended, and what is best to be
done? It happened about half an hour ago. I am, etc.

8th December 1769.

The day after I received the following.

SIR,
I have the pleasure to inform you, that my servant is perfectly well to day:
he felt last night some pains in his stomach, which the warm water removed, but
no stitches, no cholicks. I am etc.

9th December, 1769.

II. The external qualities, which characterize the true original extract of
Saturn, consist in its color, its smell, its weight, its consistence, and its
taste: its color is that of orange, its consistence a little sirupy, its smell
empyreumatical, or of burnt sugar, its weight a third part more than that of
the vinegar; so that a phial, which holds three ounces of vinegar, ought to
weigh at least four ounces when filled with the extract; the thickness of this
medicine may be as great a defect as its lightness: for, if it weighs more or
less than it ought, it cannot but deceive in regard to the proportions made use
of, and not answer to the directions given. See p. 8.

III. When bad vinegar has imbibed as much lead as it can possibly dissolve,
the superfluous metallic particles are observed to sink to the bottom of the
bottle, such extract, improperly called so, is but an imperfect division of the
lead, which must be rejected for the reasons mentioned in page 8.

IV. From this mixture of lead and vinegar is produced a water called by the
author vegeto-mineral; and this water is endowed with excellent virtues, when
made use of in lotions, fomentations, injections, and baths, and in the
different formulae described by Mr. Goulard, in his cerate, poultices,
pomatums, liniments, plasters, etc. but the water, of which the vegeto-mineral
is composed, ought to be particularly considered in its own natural state,
before it is made use of to form this medicated water. Every species of water
is not proper for this use. Rain water, when purged and filtered, and that of
rivers, whose bottoms consist of either sand or gravel free from mud, are to
have the preference, especially after having been purified either by standing
some time, or filtering through proper paper; spring and pump water being
impregnated with gypsous or selenitous particles, give rise to a new change of
the metallic ones of the lead; and thus a white precipitate is formed, which
will by no means incorporate with the water. "These effects, says a clebrated
chemist BEAUME'.
, are owing to a separation of the vitriolic acid of the selenites from the
earth, to which it was joined, which now mixes with the lead of the extract of
Saturn, and thus forms a vitriol of lead. In that instant the vinegar mixes
with the earth of the selenites, and they form together an acetose-calcarious
salt; so that at the same time a new dissolution and a new combination are
effected. Thus the medicine is by no means that of the vegeto-mineral water,
but a mixture of vitriol of lead, acetose salt, and brandy. On this occasion
the vitriol of lead seems to descend in form of a white powder, though it is in
reality a saline matter dissoluble in water; the reason is, that it cannot be
dissolved without difficulty, and that there is not a sufficiency of water to
dissolve the whole quantity collected: the remainder of the water contains in
dissolution a small quantity of this vitriol of lead. In fine, if you add to
the precipitate a large quantity of boiling water, the dissolution is perfect;
which proves, that this precipitate is a saline substance." From this argument,
founded on natural philosophy, and confirmed by the experiments of all who make
use of water not properly purified, may we not conclude that we have no reason
to be surprised that this remedy has sometimes baffled our endeavors? is it
not, on the contrary, a subject of astonishment, that notwithstanding this
accidental defect in its composition it has so frequently been crowned with the
greatest success? In fine, the water, which dissolves soap the most
effectually, is to be preferred, though it will be proper first to purify it
well. When the extract is thrown into improper water, it whitens it only for a
time, and then falls to the bottom, without being able to mix perfectly with it
afresh; this water becomes curdled, and like sour milk; and in this state it is
by no means to be made use of, as not at all likely to answer our expectations.
To this we may ascribe the want of success, which serves to prejudice many
against the remedy, and to please others, who are by no means its friends for
want of being better acquainted with it. When proper water cannot be procured,
care must be taken to distill others, if opportunity serves. This may be easily
done with the common alembic, taking care to throw away some pints of the first
distilled, as it is frequently liable to be foul, by the uncleaness of the head
of the still: you must likewise take care to leave about a quarter of it in the
still, before you have finished your process, to prevent the rising of any of
its heterogeneous particles. But in case of necessity, where proper water is
not to be had, any kind of water may be used, taking care to boil and filter it
through paper which is not stiffened, till some of the best water can be procured
It is advisable, that all those, who make use of water in common as their
drink, would carefully abstain from all that are hard, earthy, and selenitous,
which, are apt to disorder the stomach, and give rise to strong concretions in
the kidneys and other urinary passages, especially if they meet with any slimy
matter. The only means of preventing this is by distillation, which will
separate, even from the purest water, some heterogeneous substances; but this
must be effected in baln^o mariae, with alembics either of earth or glass,
taking care always to throw away the two or three first pints, that pass into
the receiver, to avoid certain heterogeneous and volatile substances, which
rise by distillation, with the first portions of water. You must likewise
finish your operation as soon as two thirds of your water is distilled, because
what remains in the still must be impregnated more or less with noxious
particles, which the water might imbibe, was you to continue your process any
longer. The water thus distilled must be put into bottles well washed and
rinsed with the above distilled water. These bottles must be stopped with a
glass stopple. If the water has been well distilled, it will preserve its
limpidity, after you have poured into it some drops of the solution of mercury
by spirit of nitre. This experiment must be made upon a small quantity of the
distilled water.
.

V. Nothing is of greater consequence in prescriptions, than the ascertaining
the just proportion remedies of this kind bear to each other: I think the
author has rather neglected in regard to his. Looking upon it himself as a
topical one only, he has been little anxious about the quantities used in
lotions, poultices, etc. for common cases; nor is it indeed very material, but
when particular cases occur; such as inflammations of the eyes, ears, throat,
and of other parts endued with no less a degree of sensibility. The author
seems to have mistaken the quantity of extract proper for the occasion, see
page 204. where he says, "For example, (speaking of the eyes) put at first ten
or twelve drops of it (extract of Saturn) to a common glass of water, and
increase them gradually, as the inflammation is seen to disperse -- and after,
against the defluxions of the tympanum of the ear and occasional deafness,
taking care in these cases, to add to the drops of the extract, double the
number of drops of camphorated brandy, though common brandy may be used, as for
opthalmies."

The indefinite measure of a glass of water gives here an equivocal sense. It
is always improper to prescribe a remedy by measure, when it is to be used with
circumspection. Nothing can be ascertained by a glass of water, a coffee
spoonful, or drops. These measures contain more or less according to the
different places they are used in, and drops may vary according to the
consistence of the extract. As all measures then vary, and ever ENGLISH and
FRENCH WEIGHTS compared.
PARIS WEIGHT.
Grain. 24 Scrupule. 72 3 Dragme. 576 24 8 Once. 4608 192 64 8 Marc. 9216 384
128 16 2 Livre.

TROY WEIGHT.
Pds. Ounc. Drachs. Scrup. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 0: 0 0: 0: 0: 0: 19 0: 0: 0: 2: 19 0:
0: 7: 2: 12 0: 7: 7: 0: 0 1: 3: 6: 0: 0

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
Pounds. Ounces. Drachms. 0: 0:.03 0: 0:.72 0: 0: 2.16 0: 1: 1.28 0: 8: 10.24
1: 1: 4.48

TROY WEIGHT.
Grain. 20 Scruple. 60 3 Dram. 480 24 8 Ounce. 5760 288 64 12 Pound.

N. B. The Troy Ounce is also frequently divided into twenty Penny-weights,
each consisting of twenty-four grains.

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
Ounces. Drachms. 0:.036 0:.731 0: 2.194 1: 1.554 13: 2.651

PARIS WEIGHT.
Marc. Once. Drs. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 0: 1^ 0: 0: 0: 1: 0: 0: 1: 0: 1 4/7 0: 1:
0: 0: 9 1/7 1: 4: 1: 1: 13

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.
Dram. 16 Ounce. 256 16 Pound.

TROY WEIGHT.
Pounds. Oun. Drach. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 1: 7 0: 0: 7: 0: 17 1: 2: 4: 2: 0

PARIS WEIGHT.
Marc. Onc. Drs. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 1: 9 0: 0: 7: 1: 5 1: 6: 6: 1: 13

N. B. In the Fractions of Grains I have taken the nearest that could be
expressed by single Figures, in those of Avoirdupois Drachms I have made Use of
Decimals.

in the same country, care must be taken, where it is possible, to make use of
weights, and to reduce foreign ones to those of the country we live in. The
author himself has followed the weights and measures of the country he does
inhabit; I will follow the English one, called Troy, Called in French poids de
marc, or silver smith's weight. The same is used in Paris.
as it has more affinity to the Montpellier weight, being divided like that
into ounces, drachms, scruples, and grains. The Troy pound indeed, contains
only twelve ounces, and the Montpellier sixteen, but in the ounce, there is
only a difference of seven grains and an half, the Troy ounce being so much
heavier than the Montpellier. In the dram, the difference is less than a
grain, in the scruple, not a third of one. The grain differs more in
proportion, as the Montpellier scruple is divided into twenty four grains, and
the Troy scruple into only twenty; but for the satisfaction of those, who may
be curious to know the exact difference between the English and Montpellier
weights, I have added a table, in which is expressed the value of the
Montpellier pound, half pound, ounce, dram, and grains, both in Troy and
Avoir-du-Pois weight, as likewise the several values of these sorts of weights,
compared with the Montpellier and with each other; and this I imagine will be
the more welcome, as most of the authors, who treat of the comparison of
English and French weights, are more likely to mislead than to inform their
readers. I cannot help remarking here, that the origin of different weights,
arose from the ancient custom of regulating them by that of a barley corn,
which served as a standard for all the rest, by multiplying them into carats,
scruples, drachms, ounces, pounds, etc; but, as it necessarily happened, that
the barley corns, made use of in different countries, weighed more or less on
account of their size, moisture, or dryness, it gave rise to the difference of
weights, and made it difficult to ascertain precisely those of different
countries. It is much to be wished that the different powers of Europe would
come to a general regulation of weights, it would be a change of much greater
importance to trade than that of the old style, which all nations have not
adopted, though there are none who would not find their account in having a
general or universal standard for measure and weight. This, which was always
looked on as an impossibility, would be the most easy to be executed, without
any expense to governments, and with the easiest one for every individual.

But let us now return to the method of prescribing the extract of Saturn, and
again resume our subject, from which this episode has somewhat hurried me. I
shall then make use of the weight, generally known by the name of Troy-weight.
The proper and generally prescribed quantity of extract to a bottle of pure
water, This ought to weigh 29 or 30 ounces.
is two drachms (five penny weight) if the extract is well made, which quantity
will make about a hundred and ten drops. Now, if we suppose the bottle ought to
weigh twenty-nine Troy ounces, and a glass of water to weigh about three
ounces, the quantity of extract, according to the proportion given by Mr.
Goulard, would exceed, or at least be equal to that of the vegeto-mineral water
prescribed by him for common uses, when, on the contrary, the quantity ought to
be diminished considerably. So that I would recommend, in inflammations of the
eyes, to put only two drops of the extract to every ounce of water, and the
same proportion to be observed in all cases, where the sensibility of the part
is equally delicate, especially since Mr. Goulard has brought his extract to so
great a degree of perfection.

The method of counting the drops is to have a cork bored from end to end,
through which pass a tube about the size of a small quill commonly called a
pinion; this quill must be cut off at both ends, like the obtuse end of a
tooth-pick; and of the two extremities of the tube thus cut, one enters into
the bottle, and the other remains on the outside of the cork. By inclining the
bottle downwards and putting the end of the forefinger upon the aperture of
the tube you may let the drops fall at pleasure, one after the other.

Mr. Goulard does not recommend his pomatum in opthalmies, and I think with
great reason; greasy and oleagenous substances are always dangerous in
inflammations of the eyes, and erisipelatous complaints, though they are
equally advisable for those of the ears: he ought to have recommended the
frequent washing the eyes, externally with the vegeto-mineral water, and
keeping a bolster constantly on them, well wetted with that water. This I have
constantly practiced with success, but you must be careful always to add some
brandy, and even that which is camphorated. This omission, on the part of the
author in his first prescription, gives an air of obscurity to the last part of
his second paragraph, by putting you in mind there of the necessity of making
use of brandy in the second prescription, as well as in the first; a
circumstance he has entirely omitted. Let it be remarked, that camphorated
brandy on all occasions is to be preferred to the noncamphorated, as I shall
endeavor to prove in the following article.

VI. It is my opinion, that in the cases, in which the author recommends the
use of camphire, one of the most antiphlogistic, and antispasmodic medicines in
physic or surgery, he does not prescribe it in large quantities enough.
Camphire is one of those medicines we use too sparingly, not being sufficiently
conversant in its effects, which are always wonderful, whether made use of
externally or internally. I would recommend a work of Mr. Pouteau, entitled,
Melanges de Chirurgie, which would convince any one of the good qualities of
this drug. I know an English gentleman, who not only preserves himself from,
but cures himself of many complaints by the use of camphire, of which he takes
inwardly a large quantity; and always carries about him a box of it. When I
make use of this with the extract of Saturn, it is in large quantities, and
with some precautions different from those of Mr. Goulard. If it is given in
small quantities, it has no effect; when mixed with pomatums, cerates,
liniments, it is obliged to undergo the heat of fire, by which means the
volatile parts of it are evaporated; what remains of them, insensibly passes
away, so that in a few days none is left. Whenever the vegeto-mineral water is
made use of, I would recommend the same quantity of camphorated brandy, as the
author prescribes of that which is not camphorated. This camphorated brandy
should be kept in a bottle well corked; you must be careful likewise to fill it
up now and then, and see that the camphire you make use of for this purpose is
not too airy, but that it is fresh, oily, and of a strong perfume.

VII. Mr. Goulard recommends the vegetomineral water to be warmed only during
the winter, and to make use of it in summer in its natural state. This
distinction may be a very just one at Montpellier, and in other warm climates;
but in England and other cold countries it is absolutely necessary always to
warm it, otherwise the metallic particles are not so thoroughly divided; and by
the water's being impregnated with the vegetable parts only the repelling
property, with which it is reproached, only remains; the same may be said of
all cold waters, they act as repellents, by causing too great a tension in the
fibers they ought to relax, and the colder they are the greater is their
repelling power; but when warmed, they are of a moistening, relaxing, softening
and resolving quality. But particular care must be taken not to exceed the dose
above prescribed in inflammatory cases; Mr. Cosmond a celebrated surgeon has
well observed that the leaden particles, when introduced into the vessels in
too large a quantity, irritate and force them so considerably, as frequently to
add to the complaint, instead of relieving it. This is a fault that many, who
are ignorant of the effects of this remedy, frequently fall into; and often
blame the medicine, when themselves are only in fault.

In cases, where the lymph only is affected, the same precaution is not
necessary, as a dram or two of extract more may be safely added to each
bottle of water.

VIII. Such, as are little versed in the knowledge of the medicinal virtues of
metals, are very apt to make cosmetic pomatums with the vegeto-mineral water.
These have followed the errors handed down to us by our ancestors, who have
made use of lead under various forms; others did use such as magisteries of
pewter and bismuth, etc. which have rather served to destroy the beauty of the
skin, than to preserve it; the reason is evident: these metals, by infinuating
themselves into the pores, there depose some of their particles the most
divided, and by first opening, and then filling up these pores spoil the finest
features.

These metallic particles become of a black dye, and plainly show a leaden
color, which can be concealed only from the eye, by the application of a white
wash composed of the same drug, which by plaistering over the surface of the
skin add to its deformity. The author of these remarks begs leave to caution
the fair sex from trusting to these pomatums, the composition of which is a
secret, the better to conceal the known poison they are fraught with, which for
a short time appears to answer their intentions, only to give the deeper wound
afterward. Time only can re-establish nature, and the use of the pomatums
described by the author in his Treatise on Ruptures, p. 138, by leaving out the
gold and the saffron, the first making the skin black, the other yellow. This
pomatum, without altering the skin, softens, and nourishes it, preserves its
transparency, destroys tetters and redness, fills up wrinkles, and repairs all
damages done to it, either by the use of other pomatums or paint. This pomatum
is infinitely superior to that of Saturn, or the cerate for removing the piles,
for the scalding of the skin, and to remove the spots, which remain after the
small pox, if applied to it some time after the eruption.

IX. I must here add, that the pure liquid extract of Saturn, It is the liquid
extract only, which is mentioned it this Treatise.
mixed with double the quantity of oil of turpentine is the most sovereign
remedy known against a sprain in a horse, by rubbing him with this liniment, as
soon as the accident happens, taking care to keep the part well covered, till
you have got him home to the stable; if he should still continue lame, or
appear in pain, you must rub him again, before he grows cold, and repeat this
every four hours, keep him well clothed, and allow him but half his usual
quantity of food, and give him warm water with some bran in it to promote
perspiration: it seldom happens, if these rules are attended to, but that the
cure is completed in four-and-twenty hours.

COPY Of the POWER granted to the AUTHOR of these REMARKS, to provide the
PUBLIC with the original EXTRACT of LEAD.
I The under writer, counselor to the KING, and perpetual MAYOR of the town of
ALET; lecturer and demonstrator royal in surgery; demonstrator royal of a^^^omy
in the college of physicians; fellow of the royal academies of sciences in
MONTPELLIER, TOULOUSE, LION, NANCY; pensioner of the KING and of the province
of LANGUEDOC for lithotomy, and late surgeon to the royal and military hospital
in MONTPELLIER, do hereby certify that, in consequence of the friendship which
has subsisted these fifty years past between Mr. GEORGE ARNAUD my fellow
student and myself, I do pass my word by this present, and engage myself to
supply the said Mr. G. ARNAUD, doctor in physic in the university of TUBINGUEN,
ancient member of the royal academy of surgery, lecturer and professor of
anatomy in the college of surgeons at PARIS, and in LONDON as one of the
corporation of surgeons of the city, to supply, I say, the said Mr. G. A^NAUD
and him only in ENGLAND with a su^ficient quantity of my extract of saturn mad^
by myself, in the best manner I am able, i^ order to be distributed by him, or
those commissioned by him, over all the dominions ^^ his BRITISH MAJESTY;
promising beside^ to supply with the same no other in ENGLAND as long as he
shall continue to sell that I have sent him, or shall continue to send him, to
confirm which I do put here my hand and seal, this day being the 2d of March,
1770.

GOULARD.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 23, line 21, after Left, read But whenever, etc.


