THE School for LOVERS, A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane.

By WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Esquire POET LAUREAT.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall; and Sold by J. HINXMAN, in
Paternoster Row.

MDCCLXII.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Comedy is formed on a plan of Monsieur de Fontenelle's, never
intended for the stage, and printed in the eighth volume of his works, under
the title of Le Testament.

The scene of that piece is laid in Greece, and the embarrassing circumstances
depend on some peculiarities in the customs of that country. Slaves likewise,
as is usual in the Grecian Comedy, act as confidantes to the principal
personages. The Author, therefore, hopes he may be excused for having made the
story English, and his own; for having introduced a new character, and
endeavored to heighten those he found already sketched out. The delicacy of
the sentiments in Philonoe and Eudamidas, he has inviolably adhered to,
wherever he could insert them properly, in his Caelia and Sir John Dorilant;
and would willingly flatter himself, that he has made great and not
contemptible additions to their characters, as well as to the others.

Those who will give themselves the trouble to read both pieces, will see where
the Author is, or is not indebted to that elegant French Writer.

TO THE MEMORY OF MONSIEUR DE FONTENELLE, THIS COMEDY IS INSCRIBED BY A LOVER
OF SIMPLICITY,

THE AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE. As it was intended to have been SPOKEN.
SUCCESS makes people vain. -- The maxim's true,
We all confess it -- and not over new.
The veriest clown who stumps along the streets,
And doffs his hat to each grave cit he meets,
Some twelvemonths hence, bedaub'd with livery lace,
Shall thrust his saucy flambeau in your face.
Not so our Bard: though twice your kind applause
Has, on this fickle spot, espoused his cause:
He owns, with gratitude, the obliging debt;
Has twice been favored, and is modest yet.
Plain Tragedy, his first adventurous care,
Spoke to your hearts, and found an echo there,
Plain Comedy tonight, with strokes refined,
Would catch the coyest features of the mind:
Would play politely with your hopes and fears,
And sometimes smiles provoke, and sometimes tears,
Your giant wits, like those of old, may climb
Olympus high, and step over space and time;
May stride with seven-leagu'd boots, from shore to shore,
And, nobly by transgressing, charm you more.
Alas! our Author dares not laugh at schools,
Plain sense confines his humbler Muse to rules.
Formed on the classic scale his structures rise,
He shifts no scenes to dazzle and surprise.
In one poor garden's solitary grove,
Like the primaeval pair, his lovers rove.
And in due time will each transaction pass,
-- Unless some hasty critic shakes the glass.
PROLOGUE. As it is spoken by Mr. GARRICK.
SUCCESS makes people vain. -- The maxim's true. --
We all confess it -- and not over new.
The veriest clown, who stumps along the streets,
And doffs his hat to each grave cit he meets,
Some twelvemonths hence, bedaub'd with livery lace,
Shall thrust his saucy flambeau in your face.
Not so our Bard -- though twice your kind applause
Has, on this fickle spot, espoused his cause:
He owns, with gratitude, the obliging debt;
Has twice been favored, and is modest yet.
Your giant wits, like those of old, may climb
Olympus high, and step over space and time;
May stride, with seven-leagu'd boots, from shore to shore,
And, nobly by transgressing, charm ye more.
Alas! our Author dares not laugh at schools --
Plain sense confines his humbler Muse to rules:
He shifts no scenes -- But here I stopped him short --
Not change your scenes? said I, -- I Am sorry for it:
My constant friends above, around, below,
Have English tastes, and love both change and show*
Without such aids, even Shakespeare would be flat --
Our crowded Pantomimes are proofs of that.
What eager transport stares from every eye,
When pullies rattle, and our Genii fly!
When tin cascades like falling waters gleam:
Or through the canvas -- bursts the real stream:
While thirsty Islington laments in vain
Half her New-River rolled to Drury Lane.
Lord, Sir, said I, for gallery, boxes, pit,
I Will back my Harlequin against your wit --
Yet still the Author, anxious for his play,
Shook his wise head -- What will the critics say?
As usual, Sir -- abuse you all they can! --
And what the ladies -- He Is a charming man!
A charming piece! -- One scarce knows what it means;
But that is no matter -- where there is such sweet scenes!
Still he persists -- and let him -- enter nous --
I know your tastes, and will indulge 'em too.
Change you shall have; so set your hearts at ease:
Write as he will, we'll act it as you please.
PERSONS Represented.
Sir JOHN DORILANT, a Man of nice Honor, Guardian to Caelia, Mr. GARRICK.
MODELY, Men of the Town, Mr. PALMER. BELMOUR, Men of the Town, Mr. OBRIEN. An
old Steward to Sir John Dorilant, Mr. CASTLE. Footman to Sir John Dorilant, Mr.
FOX.
Lady BEVERLEY, a Widow Lady, Mother to Caelia, Mrs. CLIVE. CAELIA, Daughter to
Lady Beverley, and Ward to Sir John, Mrs. CIBBER. ARAMINTA, Sister to Sir John
Dorilant, Mrs. YATES.
SCENE a Garden belonging to Sir John Dorilant's House in the Country, with an
Arbor, Garden Chairs, etc.

THE School for LOVERS.
ACT I.
SCENE the Garden. Enter ARAMINTA with an affected Carelessness, and knotting,
MODELY following. MODELY. BUT madam!


ARAMINTA. But Sir! what can possibly have alarmed you thus? You see me quite
unconcerned. I only tell you in a plain simple narrative manner -- (this plaguey
thread) -- and merely by way of conversation, that you are in love with Caelia;
and where is the mighty harm in all this?


MODELY. The harm in it, madam! have I not told you a thousand and a thousand
times that you were the only woman who could possibly make me happy?


ARAMINTA. Why aye, to be sure you have, and sworn a thousand and a thousand
oaths to confirm that assertion.


MODELY. And am not I here now expressly to marry you?


ARAMINTA. Why that too is true -- but -- you are in love with Caelia.


MODELY. Bless me, madam, what can I say to you? If it had not been for my
attendance upon you, I had never known Caelia or her mother either, though they
are both my relations. The mother has since indeed put some kind of confidence
in me; she is a widow you know --


ARAMINTA. And wants consolation! The poor orphan too her daughter! Well,
charity is an excellent virtue. I never considered it in that light before. You
are vastly charitable, Mr. Modely.


MODELY. It is impossible to talk with you. -- If you will not do me justice,
do it to yourself at least. Is there any comparison betwixt you and Caelia?
Could any man of sense hesitate a moment? She has yet no character. One does
not know what she is, or what she will be; a chit, a green girl of fourteen or
fifteen.


ARAMINTA. Seventeen at least. -- (I cannot undo this knot.) --


MODELY. Well, let her be seventeen. Would any man of judgment attach himself
to a girl of that age? OF my soul, if one was to make love to her, she would
hardly understand what one meant.


ARAMINTA. Girls are not quite so ignorant as you may imagine, Mr. Modely;
Caelia will understand you, take my word for it, and does understand you. As to
your men of judgment and sense, here is my brother now; I take him to be full
as reasonable as yourself, and somewhat older; and yet with all his philosophy,
he has brought himself to a determination at last, to fulfill the father's
will, and marry this green girl. I am sorry to tell you so, Mr. Modely, but he
will certainly marry her.


MODELY. Let him marry her. I should perhaps do it myself, if I was in his
place. He was an intimate friend of her father's. She is a great fortune, and
was given to him by will. But do you imagine, my dear Araminta, that if he was
left to his own choice, without any bias, he would not rather have a woman
nearer his own years? He might almost be her father.


ARAMINTA. That is true. But you will find it difficult to persuade me, that
youth in a woman is so insurmountable an objection. I fancy, Mr. Modely, it may
be got over. Suppose I leave you to think of it. -- (I cannot get this right.)
-- Going.


MODELY. Stay, dear Araminta, why will you plague me thus? Your own charms, my
earnestness, might prove to you --


ARAMINTA. I tell you I don't want proofs.


MODELY. Well, well, you shall have none then. But give me leave to hope, since
you have done me the honor to be a little uneasy on my account --


ARAMINTA. Uneasy! -- I uneasy! -- What does the man mean? I was a little
concerned indeed to give you uneasiness by informing you of my brother's
intended marriage with Caelia. But -- (this shuttle bends so abominably.)


MODELY. Thou perplexing tyrant! Nay, you shall not go. -- May I continue to
adore you! you must not forbid me that.


ARAMINTA. For my part I neither command nor forbid any thing. Only this I
would have you remember, I have quick eyes. Your servant. -- (I wish this
knotting had never come in fashion.)


Exit Araminta. MODELY. Quick eyes indeed! I thought my cunning here had been a
master piece. The girl cannot have told sure! and the mother is entirely on my
side. They certainly were those inquisitive eyes she speaks of, which have
found out this secret. Well, I must be more cautious for the future, and act
the lover to Araminta ten times stronger than ever. One would not give her up
till one was sure of succeeding in the other place.


Enter BELMOUR from behind with a Book in his Hand. BELMOUR. Ha! ha! ha! well
said Modely!


MODELY (starting.) Belmour! how the duce came you here?


BELMOUR. How came I here? -- How came you here -- if you come to that? A man
cannot retire from the noise and bustle of the world, to admire the beauties of
the spring, and read pastoral in an arbor, but impertinent lovers must disturb
his meditations. -- Thou art the errantest hypocrite, Modely --


Throwing away the book. MODELY. Hypocrite! -- My dear friend, we men of
gallantry must be so. -- But have a care, we may have other listeners for aught
I know, who may not be so proper for confidantes. Looking about.


BELMOUR. You may be easy on that head. We have the garden to ourselves. The
widow and her daughter are just gone in, and Sir John is busy with his steward.


MODELY. The widow, and her daughter! Why, were they in the garden?


BELMOUR. They just came into it, but upon seeing you and Araminta together,
they turned back again.


MODELY. On seeing me and Araminta? I hope I have no jealousies there too.
However I am glad Caelia knows I am in the garden, because it may probably
induce her to fall in my way, by chance you know, and give me an opportunity of
talking to her.


BELMOUR. Do you think she likes you?


MODELY. She does not know what she does.


BELMOUR. Do you like her?


MODELY. Why faith, I think I do.


BELMOUR. Why then do you pursue your affair with Araminta? and not find some
honorable means of breaking off with her?


MODELY. That might not be quite so expedient. I think Araminta the finest
woman, and Caelia the prettiest girl I know. Now they are both good fortunes,
and one of them I am resolved to have, but which --


BELMOUR. Your great wisdom has not yet determined. Thou art undoubtedly the
vainest fellow living. -- I thought you brought me down here now to your
wedding?


MODELY. 'Egad I thought so too, but this plaguey little rustic has disconcerted
all my schemes. Sir John, you know, by her father's will, may marry her if he
pleases, and she forfeits her estate if she marries any one else. Now I am
contriving to bring it about, that I may get her, and her fortune too.


BELMOUR. A very likely business, truly. So you modestly expect that Sir John
Dorilant should give up his mistress, and then throw her fortune into the
batgain, as an additional reward to the obliging man who has seduced her from
him.


MODELY. Hum! why I don't expect quite that. But you know, Belmour, he is a man
of honor, and would not force her inclinations though he loved her to
distraction. -- Come, come, he is quite a different creature from what you and
I are.


BELMOUR. Speak for yourself, good Sir; yet why should you imagine that her
inclinations are not as likely to fix upon him as you? He has a good person,
and is scarce older than yourself.


MODELY. That shows your ignorance; I am ten years younger than he is. My dress
and the company I keep, give a youth and vivacity to me, which he must always
want. An't I a man of the town? O that town, Belmour! Could I but have met
these ladies there, I had done the business.


BELMOUR. Were they never there?


MODELY. Never. -- Sir Harry Beverley, the father of this girl, lived always in
the country, and divided his time between his books and his hounds. His wife
and daughter seldom mixed with people of their own rank, but at a horse-race,
or a rural visit. And see the effects! The girl, though she is naturally genteel,
has an air of simplicity.


BELMOUR. But does not want sense.


MODELY. No, no! -- She has a devilish deal of that kind of sense, which is
acquired by early reading. I have heard her talk occasionally, like a queen in
a tragedy, or at least like a sentimental lady in a comedy, much above your
misses of thirty in town, I assure you. -- As to the mother -- But she is a
character, and explains herself.


BELMOUR. Yes, yes, I have read her. But pray how came it to pass, that the
father, who was of a different way of thinking in regard to party, should have
left Sir John guardian to his daughter, with the additional clause too, of her
being obliged to marry him.


MODELY. Why that is somewhat surprising. But the truth of the case was, they
were thoroughly acquainted, and each considered party as the foible of the
other. Sir Harry thought a good husband his daughter's best security for
happiness, and he knew it was impossible Sir John Dorilant should prove a bad
one.


BELMOUR. And yet this prospect of happiness would you destroy.


MODELY. No, no; I only see farther than Sir Harry did, and would increase that
happiness, by giving her a better husband.


BELMOUR. O! your humble servant, Sir.


MODELY. Besides, the mother is entirely in my interest, and by the by has a
hankering after Sir John herself. He is a sober man, and should have a woman of
discretion for his wife, not a hoydening girl. -- 'Egad, Belmour, suppose you
attacked the widow? The woman is young enough, and has an excellent jointure.


BELMOUR. And so became your father-in-law.


MODELY. You will have an admirable opportunity tonight; we are to have the
fiddles you know, and you may dance with her.

When music softens, and when dancing fires! Eh! Belmour!


BELMOUR. You are vastly kind to Sir John, and would ease him I find of both
his mistresses. But suppose this man of honor should be fool enough to resign
his mistress, may not another kind of honor oblige him to run you through the
body for deserting his sister?


MODELY. Why faith, it may. However, it is not the first duel I have fought on
such an occasion, so I am his man. Not that it is impossible but he may have
scruples there too.


BELMOUR. You don't think him a coward?


MODELY. I know he is not. But your reasoning men have strange distinctions.
They are quite different creatures, as I told you, from you and I.


BELMOUR. You are pleased to compliment. But suppose now, as irrational as you
think me, I should find out a means to make this whole affair easy to you?


MODELY. How do you mean?


BELMOUR. Not by attacking the widow, but by making my addresses in good
earnest to Araminta.


MODELY. I forbid that absolutely.


BELMOUR. What, do you think it possible I should succeed after the
accomplished Mr. Modely?


MODELY. Why faith between you and I, I think not, but I don't choose to hazard
it.


BELMOUR. Then you love her still?


MODELY. I confess it.


BELMOUR. And it is nothing upon earth but that insatiable vanity of yours,
with a little tincture of avarice, that leads you a gadding thus?


MODELY. I plead guilty. But be it as it will, I am determined to pursue my
point. And see where the little rogue comes most opportunely. I told you she
would be here. Go, go, Belmour, you must not listen to all my love scenes. Exit
Belmour. Now for a serious face, a little upon the tragic; young girls are
mighty fond of despairing lovers.


Enter CAELIA. CAELIA (with an affected surprise.) Mr. Modely! -- are you here?
-- I am come to meet my mama -- I did not think to find you here.


MODELY. Are you sorry to find me here, madam?


CAELIA. Why should I be sorry, Mr. Modely?


MODELY. May I hope you are pleased with it?


CAELIA. I have no dislike to company.


MODELY. But is all company alike? Surely one would choose one's companions.
Would it have been the same thing to you, if you had met Sir John Dorilant here?


CAELIA. I should be very ungrateful if I did not like Sir John Dorilant's
company. I am sure I have all the obligations in the world to him, and so had
my poor papa. Sighing.


MODELY. Whatever were your papa's obligations, his gratitude I am sure was
unbounded. -- O that I had been his friend!


CAELIA. Why should you wish that, Mr. Modely? -- You would have had a great
loss in him.


MODELY. I believe I should. But I might likewise have had a consolation for
that loss, which would have contained in it all earthly happiness.


CAELIA. I don't understand you.


MODELY. He might have left his Caelia to me.


CAELIA. Dear, how you talk!


MODELY. Talk, madam! -- O I could talk for ever, would you but listen to my
heart's soft language, nor cruelly affect to disbelieve when I declare I love
you.


CAELIA. Love me, Mr. Modely? -- Are not you in love with Araminta?


MODELY. I once thought I was.


CAELIA. And do lovers ever change?


MODELY. Not those who feel a real passion. But there are false alarms in love,
which the unpractised heart sometimes mistakes for true ones.


CAELIA. And were yours such for Araminta?


MODELY. Alas, I feel they were. (Looking earnestly at her.)


CAELIA. You don't intend to marry her then, I hope.


MODELY. Do you hope I should not marry her?


CAELIA. To be sure I do. I would not have the poor lady deceived, and I would
willingly have a better opinion of Mr. Modely than to believe him capable of
making false protestations.


MODELY. To you he never could.


CAELIA. To me? -- I am out of the question. -- But I am sorry for Araminta,
for I believe she loves you.


MODELY. If you can pity those who love in vain, why am not I an object of
compassion?


CAELIA. Dear Mr. Modely, why will you talk thus? My hand, you know, is
destined to Sir John Dorilant, and my duty there does not even permit me to
think of other lovers.


MODELY. Happy, happy man! Yet give me leave to ask one question, madam. -- I
dread to do it, though my last glimpse of happiness depends upon your answer.


CAELIA. What question? -- Nay, pray speak, I entreat it of you.


MODELY. Then tell me, lovely Caelia, sincerely tell me, were your choice left
free, and did it depend upon you only to determine who should be the master of
your affections, might I expect one favorable thought?


CAELIA (after some hesitation.) It -- it does not depend upon me.


MODELY. I know it does not, but if it did?


CAELIA. Come, come, Mr. Modely, I cannot talk upon this subject.
Impossibilities are impossibilities. -- But I hope you will acquaint Araminta
instantly with this change in your inclinations.


MODELY. I would do it, but I dare not.


CAELIA. You should break it first to Sir John.


MODELY. My difficulty does not lie in the breaking it; but if I confess my
passion at an end, I must no longer expect admittance into this family, and I
could still wish to talk to Caelia as a friend.


CAELIA. Indeed, Mr. Modely, I should be loath myself to lose your acquaintance;
but -- O here comes my mama, she may put you in a method.


Enter LADY BEVERLEY. LADY. In any method, my dear, which decency and reserve
will permit. Your servant, cousin Modely. What, you are talking strangely to
this girl now? -- O you men!


MODELY. Your ladyship knows the sincerity of my passion here.


CAELIA (with surprise.) Knows your sincerity?


LADY. Well, well, what signifies what I know? -- You was mentioning some
method I was to put you in.


CAELIA. Mr. Modely, madam, has been confessing to me that he no longer loves
Araminta.


LADY. Hum! -- why such things may happen, child. We are not all able to govern
our affections. But I hope if he breaks off with her, he will do it with
decency.


MODELY. That, madam, is the difficulty.


LADY. What! -- Is it a difficulty to be decent? Fie, fie, Mr. Modely.


MODELY. Far be it from me even to think so, madam, before a person of your
ladyship's reserved behavior. But considering how far I have gone in the
affair --


LADY. Well, well, if that be all, I may perhaps help you out, and break it to
Sir John myself. -- Not that I approve of roving affections I assure you.


MODELY. You bind me ever to you. -- But there is another cause which you alone
can promote, and on which my eternal happiness --


LADY. Leave us -- leave us, cousin Modely. I must not hear you talk in this
extravagant manner. -- [Pushing him toward the scene, and then aside to him.]
-- I shall bring it about better in your absence. Go, go, man, go. Exit Modely.
A pretty kind of a fellow really. -- Now Caelia, come nearer, child: I have
something of importance to say to you. -- What do you think of that gentleman?


CAELIA. Of Mr. Modely, madam?


LADY. Ay Mr. Modely, my cousin Modely.


CAELIA. Think of him, madam?


LADY. Ay, think of him, child; you are old enough to think sure after the
education I have given you. Well, what answer do you make?


CAELIA. I really don't understand your Ladyship's question.


LADY. Not understand me, child? Why I ask you how you like Mr. Modely? What
should you think of him as a husband.


CAELIA. Mr. Modely as a husband! Why surely madam, Sir John --


LADY. Fiddle faddle Sir John; Sir John knows better things than to plague
himself with a wife in leading strings.


CAELIA. Is your ladyship sure of that?


LADY. O ho! would you be glad to have me sure of it?


CAELIA. I don't know what I should be glad of. I would not give Sir John a
moment's pain to be mistress of the whole world.


LADY. But if it should be brought about without giving him pain. Hey! Caelia
-- Patting her cheek with her fan.


CAELIA. I should be sorry for it.


LADY. Hey day!


CAELIA. For then he must think lightly of me.


LADY. What does the girl mean? Come, come, I must enter roundly into this
affair. Here, here, sit down, and tell me plainly and honestly without
equivocation or reservation, is Modely indifferent to you? Nay, nay, -- look me
in the face; turn your eyes toward me. One judges greatly by the eyes,
especially in a woman. Your poor papa used to say that my eyes reasoned better
than my tongue. -- Well, and now tell me without blushing, is Modely
indifferent to you?


CAELIA. I fear he is not, madam, and it is that which perplexes me.


LADY. How do you feel when you meet him?


CAELIA. Fluttered.


LADY. Hum! -- While you are with him?


CAELIA. Fluttered.


LADY. Hum! -- When you leave him?


CAELIA. Fluttered still.


LADY. Strong symptoms truly!


CAELIA. When Sir John Dorilant talks to me, my heart is softened but not
perplexed. My esteem, my gratitude overflows toward him. I consider him as a
kinder father, with all the tenderness without the authority.


LADY. But when Mr. Modely talks?


CAELIA My tranquillity of mind is gone, I am pleased with hearing what I doubt
is flattery, and when he grasps my hand --


LADY. Well, well, I know all that. -- Be decent, child. -- You need say no
more, Mr. Modely is the man. Rising.


CAELIA. But, dear Madam, there are a thousand obstacles. -- I am afraid Sir
John loves me; I am sure he esteems me, and I would not forfeit his esteem for
the universe. I am certain I can make him an affectionate and an humble wife,
and I think I can forget Mr. Modely.


LADY. Forget a fiddle! Don't talk to me of forgetting. I order you on your
duty not to forget. Mr. Modely is, and shall be the man. You may trust my
prudence for bringing it about. I will talk with Sir John instantly. -- I know
what you are going to say, but I will not hear a word of it. Can you imagine,
Caelia, that I shall do any thing but with the utmost decency and decorum?


CAELIA. I know you will not, madam; but there are delicacies --


LADY. With which I am unacquainted to be sure, and my daughter must instruct
me in them. Pray, Caelia, where did you learn this nicety of sentiments? Who
was it that inspired them?


CAELIA. But the maxims of the world --


LADY. Are altered, I suppose, since I was of your age. Poor thing, what world
have thou seen? Notwithstanding your delicacies and your maxims, Sir John
perhaps may be wiser than you imagine, and choose a wife of somewhat more
experience.


CAELIA. May he be happy wherever he chooses. -- But dear madam --


LADY. Again? don't make me angry. I will positively not be instructed. Ay, you
may well blush. -- Nay, no tears -- Come, come, Caelia, I forgive you. I had
idle delicacies myself once. Lard! I remember when your poor papa -- he, he, he
-- but we have no time for old stories. What would you say now if Sir John
himself should propose it, and persuade the match, and yet continue as much
your friend as ever, nay become more so, a nearer friend.


CAELIA. In such a case, madam --


LADY. I understand you, and will about it instantly. B'ye Caelia; O how its
little heart flutters!


Exit Lady. CAELIA. It does indeed. A nearer friend? I hardly know whether I
should wish her success or not -- Sir John is so affectionate. Would I had
never seen Mr. Modely! -- Araminta too! what will she say? -- O I see a
thousand bad consequences. I must follow her, and prevent them.


END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE continues. LADY BEVERLEY and MODELY. LADY. PRITHEE don't teize me so; I
vow, cousin Modely, you are almost as peremptory as my daughter. She truly was
teaching me decorum just now, and plaguing me with her delicacies, and her
stuff. I tell you Sir John will be in the garden immediately, this is always
his hour of walking: and when he comes, I shall lay the whole affair before
him, with all its concatenation of circumstances, and I warrant you bring it
about.


MODELY. I have no doubt, madam, of the transcendency of your ladyship's
rhetoric; it is on that I entirely rely. But I must beg leave to hint, that
Araminta already suspects my passion, and should it be openly declared, would
undoubtedly prevail that instant with her brother to forbid me the house.


LADY. Why, that might be.


MODELY. And though I told your daughter I did not care how soon it came to an
eclaircisment, yet a woman of your ladyship's penetration and knowledge of the
world, must see the necessity of concealing it, at least for a time. I beg
pardon for offering what may have even the distant appearance of instruction.
But it is Sir John's delicacy which must be principally alarmed with
apprehensions of her disregard for him; and I am sure your ladyship's manner of
doing it, will show him where he might much better place his affections, and
with an undoubted prospect of happiness.


LADY. Ay, now you talk to the purpose. -- But stay, is not that Sir John
coming this way? -- It is I vow, and Araminta with him. We'll turn down this
walk, and reason the affair a little more, and then I will come round the
garden upon him.

Modely takes her hand to lead her out. You are very gallant, cousin Modely.
Exeunt.


Enter SIR JOHN DORILANT and ARAMINTA. ARAMINTA. What do you drag me into the
garden for? We were private enough where we were -- and I hate walking.


SIR JOHN. Forgive me, my dear sister; I am restless every where, my head and
heart are full of nothing but this lovely girl.


ARAMINTA. My dear, dear brother, you are enough to spoil any woman in the
universe. I tell you again and again, the girl is a good girl, an excellent
girl, and will make an admirable wife. You may trust one woman in her
commendations of another; we are not apt to be too favorable in our judgments,
especially when there is beauty in the case.


SIR JOHN. You charm me when you talk thus. If she is really all this, how
happy must the man be who can engage her affections. But alas! Araminta, in
every thing which regards me, it is duty, not love, which actuates her
behavior. She steals away my very soul by her attentions, but never once
expresses that heartfelt tenderness, those sympathetic feelings.


ARAMINTA. Ha -- ha -- ha! -- O my stars! -- Sympathetic feelings! -- Why,
would you have a girl of her age have those sympathetic feelings, as you call
them! If she had, take my word for it, she would coquet it with half the
fellows in town before she had been married a twelvemonth. Besides, Sir John,
you don't consider that you was her father's friend; she has been accustomed
from her infancy to respect you in that light; and our fathers friends, you
know, are always old people, gray beards, philosophers, enemies to youth, and
the destruction of gayety.


SIR JOHN. But I was never such.


ARAMINTA. You may imagine so; but you always had a grave turn. I hated you
once myself.


SIR JOHN. Dear Araminta!


ARAMINTA. I did as I hope to live; for many a time has your aversion to
dancing hindered me from having a fiddle. -- By the by, remember we are to have
the fiddles tonight. -- But let that pass: As the case now stands, if I was
not already so near akin to you, you have the temper in the world which I
should choose in a husband.


SIR JOHN That is obliging, however.


ARAMINTA. Not so very obliging perhaps neither. It would be merely for my own
sake, for then would I have the appearance of the most obedient sympathetic
wife in the universe, and yet be as despotic in my government as an eastern
monarch. And when I grew tired, as I probably should do, of a want of
contradiction, why, I should find an easy remedy for that too -- I could break
your heart in about a month.


SIR JOHN. Don't trifle with me, it is your serious advice I want; give it me
honestly as a friend, and tenderly as a sister.


ARAMINTA. Why I have done it, fifty times. What can I say more? If you will
have it again you must. This then it is in plain terms. -- But you are sure you
are heartily in love with her?


SIR JOHN. Pshaw!


ARAMINTA. Well then, that we will take for granted; and now you want to know
what is right and proper for you to do in the case. Why, was I in your place, I
should make but short work with it. She knows the circumstances of her father's
will, therefore, would I go immediately to her, tell her how my heart stood
inclined, and hope she had no objections to comply, with what it is not in her
power to refuse.


SIR JOHN. You would not have me talk thus abruptly to her?


ARAMINTA. Indeed I would. It will save a world of trouble. She will blush
perhaps at first, and look a little awkward, (and by the by so will you too);
but if she is the girl I take her for, after a little irresolute gesture, and
about five minutes conversation, she will drop you a curtesy with the demure
humility of a Vestal, and tell you it shall be as you and her mama pleases.


SIR JOHN. O that it were come to that!


ARAMINTA. And pray what hinders it? Nothing upon earth but your consummate
prudence and discretion.


SIR JOHN. I cannot think of marrying her, till I am sure she loves me.


ARAMINTA. Lud, Lud! -- why what does that signify? If she consents is not that
enough?


SIR JOHN. Her gratitude may induce her to consent, rather than make me unhappy.


ARAMINTA. You would absolutely make a woman mad.


SIR JOHN. Why, could you think of marrying a man who had no regard for you.


ARAMINTA. The case is widely different, my good casuistical brother; and
perhaps I could not -- unless I was very much in love with him.


SIR JOHN. And could you then?


ARAMINTA. Yes I could -- to tell you the truth I believe I shall.


SIR JOHN. What do you mean?


ARAMINTA. I shall not tell you. -- You have business enough of your own upon
your hands.


SIR JOHN. Have you any doubts of Modely?


ARAMINTA. I shall keep them to myself if I have. For you are a wretched
counselor in a love case.


SIR JOHN. But dear Araminta --


ARAMINTA. But dear Sir John Dorilant, you may make yourself perfectly easy,
for you shall positively know nothing of my affairs. As to your own, if you do
not instantly resolve to speak to Caelia, I will go and talk to her myself.


SIR JOHN. Stay, lady Beverley is coming toward us.


ARAMINTA. And has left my swain yonder by himself.


SIR JOHN. Suppose I break it to her?


ARAMINTA. It is not a method which I should advise; but do as you please. -- I
know that horrid woman's sentiments very exactly, and I shall be glad to have
her teized a little (Aside.) -- I Will give you an opportunity by leaving you;
and so adieu, my dear sentimental brother!

We'll change partners if you please, madam -- To lady Beverley as she enters.
-- And then exit to Modely.


LADY BEVERLEY. Poor mistaken creature! how fond the thing is! --

Aside, and looking after Araminta. Your servant, Sir John.


SIR JOHN. Your ladyship's most obedient. -- [After some irresolute gesture on
both sides -- lady Beverley speaks.]


LADY. I -- I -- have wanted an opportunity of speaking to you, Sir John, a
great while.


SIR JOHN. And I, madam, have long had an affair of consequence to propose to
your ladyship.


LADY. An affair of consequence to me! -- O Lud -- you will please to speak,
Sir.


SIR JOHN Not till I have heard your ladyship's commands.


LADY. What, must women speak first? Fie, Sir John -- (looking languishingly)
-- Well then, the matter in short is this, I have been long thinking how to
dispose of my girl properly. She is grown a woman you see, and though I who am
her mother say it, has her allurements.


SIR JOHN. Uncommon ones indeed.


LADY. Now I would willingly consult with you how to get her well married,
before she is tainted with the indecorums of the world.


SIR JOHN. It was the very subject which I proposed speaking to you upon. -- I
am sorry to put your ladyship in mind of a near and dear loss -- But you
remember Sir Harry's will.


LADY. Yes, yes, I remember it very well. Poor man! it was undoubtedly the only
weak thing he was ever guilty of.


SIR JOHN. Madam!


LADY. I say, Sir, John we must pardon the sailings of our deceased friends.
Indeed his affection for his child excuses it.


SIR JOHN. Excuses it!


LADY. Yes indeed does it. His fondness for her might naturally make him wish
to place her with a person of your known excellence of character; for my own
part, had I died, I should have wished it myself. -- I don't believe you have
your equal in the world. -- Nay, dear Sir John, it is no compliment. -- This I
say might make him not attend to the impropriety of the thing, and the
reluctance a gentleman of your good sense and judgment must undoubtedly have to
accede to so unsuitable a treaty. Especially as he could not but know there
were women of discretion in the world, who would be proud of an alliance where
the prospect of felicity, was so inviting and unquestionable.


SIR JOHN, who had appeared uneasy all the time she was speaking. What women,
madam? I know of none.


LADY. Sir John! -- That is not quite so complaisant methinks -- to our sex, I
mean.


SIR JOHN. I beg your pardon, madam; I hardly know what I say. Your ladyship
has disconcerted every thing I was going to propose to you.


LADY. Bless me, Sir John! -- I disconcerted every thing? How pray? I have been
only talking to you in an open friendly manner, with regard to my daughter, our
daughter indeed I might call her, for you have been a father to her. The girl
herself always speaks of you as such.


SIR JOHN. Speaks of me as a father?


LADY. Why, more unlikely things have happened, Sir John.


SIR JOHN. Than what, madam?


LADY. Dear Sir John! -- You put such peremptory questions, you might easily
understand what one meant methinks.


SIR JOHN. I find, madam, I must speak plain at once. -- Know then, my heart,
my soul, my every thought of happiness is fixed upon that lovely girl.


LADY. O astonishing! Well, miracles are not ceased, that is certain. But every
body, they say, must do a foolish thing once in their lives. -- And can you
really and seriously think of putting Sir Harry's will in execution?


SIR JOHN. Would I could!


LADY. To be sure the girl has a fine fortune.


SIR JOHN. Fortune! I despise it. I would give it with all my soul to any one
who could engage me her affections. -- Fortune! dirt.


LADY. I am thunderstruck! --


SIR JOHN. (Turning eagerly to her.) O madam, tell me, sincerely tell me, what
method can I possibly pursue to make her think favorably of me! You know her
inmost soul, you know the tender moments of address, the easy avenues to her
unpractised heart. Be kind, and point them out. Grasping her hand.


LADY. I vow, Sir John, I don't know what to say to you. -- Let go my hand. --
You talked of my disconcerting you just now, I am sure you disconcert me with a
witness. -- (Aside.) I did not think the man had so much rapture in him. He
squeezed my hand with such an emphasis! I may gain him perhaps at last.


SIR JOHN. Why will you not speak, madam? Can you see me on the brink of
desperation, and not lend a friendly hand to my assistance?


LADY. I have it. -- (Aside.) -- Alas, Sir John, what signifies what I can do!
Can I answer for the inclinations of a giddy girl?


SIR JOHN. You know she is not such; her innocent mind is yet untainted with
the follies of her sex. And if a life devoted to her service, without a wish
but what regards her happiness, can win her to be mine --


LADY. Why that might go a great way with an unprejudiced mind. But when a
first passion has taken place.


SIR JOHN. (With amazement.) What do you mean?


LADY. To tell you the truth, I am afraid the girl is not so untainted as you
imagine.


SIR JOHN. You distract me. -- How -- when -- whom can she have seen?


LADY. Undoubtedly there is a man.


SIR JOHN. Tell me who, that I may -- No, that I may give her to him, and make
her happy whatever becomes of me.


LADY. That is generous indeed. -- So -- so. Aside.


SIR JOHN. But it is impossible. I have observed all her motions, all her
attentions, with a lover's eye incapable of erring. -- Yet stay -- has any body
written to her?


LADY. There are no occasion for letters, when people are in the same house
together.


SIR JOHN. Confusion!


LADY. I was going to offer some proposals to you, but your strange declaration
stopped me short.


SIR JOHN. You proposals? -- You? -- Are you her a better in the affair? -- O
madam, what unpardonable crime have I committed against you, that you should
thus conspire my ruin? Have not I always behaved to you like a friend, a
brother? -- I will not call you ungrateful.


LADY. Mercy on us! -- The man raves. -- How could it possibly enter into my
head, or the girl's either, that you had any serious thoughts of marrying her?
But I see you are too much discomposed at present, to admit of calm reasoning.
So I shall take some other opportunity. -- Friend -- Brother -- Ungrateful! --
Marry come up! -- I hope, at least, you will not think of forcing the poor
girl's inclinations! Ungrateful indeed! Exit in a passion.


SIR JOHN. Not for the universe. -- Stay, madam. -- She is gone. -- But it is
no matter. I am but little disposed for altercation now. Heigh ho! -- Good
heaven! can so slight an intercourse have effected all this? -- I have scarce
ever seen them together. O that I had been born with Belmour's happy talents of
address. -- Address! -- it is absolute magic, it is fascination -- Alas! it is
the rapidity of real passion. -- Why did Modely bring him hither to his
wedding? Every thing has conspired against me. He brought him, and the delay of
the lawyers has kept him here. Had I taken Araminta's advice a poor fortnight
ago, it had not been in the power of fate to have undone me. -- And yet she
might have seen him afterward, which would at least have made her duty uneasy
to her. -- Heigh ho!


Enter ARAMINTA and MODELY. ARAMINTA. (Entering.) I tell you, I heard them very
loud! and I will see what is the matter. O! here is my brother alone.


SIR JOHN. (Taking her tenderly by the hand.) O Araminta! -- I am lost beyond
redemption.


ARAMINTA. Dear brother, what can have happened to you?


SIR JOHN. (Turning to Modely.) Mr. Modely, you could not intend it; but you
have ruined me.


MODELY. (Alarmed.) I, Sir John!


SIR JOHN. You have brought a friend with you, who has pierced me to the very
soul.


MODELY. Belmour!


SIR JOHN. He has stolen my Caelia's affections from me.


ARAMINTA. (Looking slyly at Modely.) Belmour!


MODELY. This must he a mistake, but I Will humor it. (Aside.) It cannot be, who
can have told you so?


SIR JOHN. Her mother has been this instant with me, to make proposals on the
subject.


MODELY. For Belmour!


SIR JOHN. She did not absolutely mention his name, but I could not mistake it.
For she told me the favored lover was under the same roof with us.


MODELY. (A little disconcerted.) I could not have believed it of him.


ARAMINTA. Nor do I yet. -- Looking slyly again at Modely.


MODELY. There must certainly be some mistake in it; at the worst, I am sure I
can prevail so far with Belmour, as to make him drop his pretensions.


SIR JOHN. You cannot make her cease to love him. Sighing.


MODELY. Time may easily get the better of so young a passion.


SIR JOHN. Never, never; she is too sincere, too delicately sensible.


MODELY. Come, come, you must not think so; it is not yet gone so far, but that
it may be totally forgotten. -- Now for a master-stroke to clench the whole --
(Aside.) In the mean time, Sir John, I have the satisfaction of acquainting
you, that my affair, with Araminta's leave, draws very near a conclusion. The
lawyers have finished their papers, and I only now wait for your perusal of
them.


ARAMINTA. (Aside.) Well said!


MODELY. I ordered the writings to be laid upon your table.


ARAMINTA. (Aside.) What does he mean?


SIR JOHN. Dear Mr. Modely, you shall not wait a moment for me. I will dispatch
them instantly. I feel the want of happiness too severely myself, to postpone
it in others. I leave you with my sister; when she names the day, you may
depend upon my concurrence. Exit Sir John.

(MODELY and ARAMINTA look at one another for some time, then he speaks.) I
hope, madam, you are now convinced of my sincerity.


ARAMINTA. I am absolutely struck dumb with your assurance.


MODELY. (With an affected surprise.) Madam!


ARAMINTA. You cannot mean all this.


MODELY. Why not, madam?


ARAMINTA. Why, don't you know that I know --


MODELY. I cannot help a lady's knowledge or imaginations. All I know is, that
it is in your power to make me either the happiest or most miserable man in the
whole creation.


ARAMINTA. Well, this is astonishing.


MODELY. I am sorry, madam, that any unguarded behavior of mine, any little
playful gallantries, should have occasioned surmises, which --


ARAMINTA. Serious, as I hope to live.


MODELY. Is it not enough to make one serious, when the woman one has pursued
for years, almost with adoration, is induced by mere appearances to doubt the
honourableness of one's intentions. Have you not heard me this moment apply to
your brother, even in the midst of his uneasiness. -- I little expected where
the difficulty would lie.


ARAMINTA. Well, well, poor thing, I will not teize it any longer; here, there,
take my hand.


MODELY. Duped by Jupiter. -- (Aside.) -- O my everlasting treasure! And when,
and when shall I be happy?


ARAMINTA. It shall depend upon yourself.


MODELY. Tomorrow, then, my angel, be the day. O Araminta, I cannot speak my
transport. -- And did you really think that I was in love with Caelia?


ARAMINTA. Why, as a proof of my future sincerity, I must confess I did.


MODELY. I wonder how you could.


ARAMINTA. Come, come, there were grounds enough for a woman in love to go upon.


MODELY. (taking her by the hand.) But you are now perfectly easy?


ARAMINTA. (pulling her hand from him.) Why, yes, I think I am. -- But what can
my brother mean about Belmour?


MODELY. It is some trick of the widow's.


ARAMINTA. I dare say she meant you.


MODELY. Possibly she might; you know her motives.


ARAMINTA. Yes, yes, her passion for my brother is pretty notorious. But the
wretch will be mistaken. -- Tomorrow, you say?


MODELY. Tomorrow, my adorable.


ARAMINTA. It shall be as you please. -- But my situation is so terribly
awkward, that I must break from you. Adieu! Exit Araminta.


MODELY. Upon my soul she is a fine woman; and loves me to distraction; and
what is still more, I most undoubtedly love her. -- I have a good mind to take
her. -- Yet not to have it in my power to succeed in the other place, would
call my parts in question. -- No, no; -- I must not disparage my parts neither.
-- In order to be a great character, one should go as near being a rogue as
possible. I have a philosopher's opinion on my side in that, and the practice
of half the heroes and politicians in Europe.


END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE continues. BELMOUR (alone.) CAELIA in love with me! Egad the thing is
not impossible; my friend Modely may have been a little mistaken. Sir John was
very serious when he told me of it; and though I protested to him that I had
never made the least advances, he still persisted in his opinion. -- The girl
must have have told him so herself. -- Let me recollect a little. -- She is
always extremely civil to me; but that indeed she is to every body. -- I do not
remember any thing particular in her looks; but I shall watch them more
narrowly the next time I see her. -- She is very handsome; and yet in my
opinion, notwithstanding Modely's infidelity, Araminta is much the finer woman.
-- Suppose -- No, that will not do.


Enter MODELY. MODELY. So, so, Mr. Belmour, I imagined I should find you here;
this is the lover's corner. We have all had our reveries in it. But why don't
you talk louder, man? You ought, at least, to give me my revenge in that. My
soliloquies, you know, are easily overheard.


BELMOUR. I never designedly overheard them, Mr. Modely; nor did I make any
improper use of the accident.


MODELY. Grave, very grave, and perfectly moral! And so this is all I am to
have for the loss of my mistress. -- Heigh ho!

Then I must be content to see her bless
Yon happier youth. --

BELMOUR. Your raillery is a little unseasonable, Mr. Modely; for to speak
plainly, I begin to suspect that this is some trick of yours, to dupe me as
well as Sir John Dorilant.


MODELY. Upon my honor, no, if we must be serious: it may be a mistake, but
not intended on my side, I can assure you. Come, come, if the girl really likes
you, take her. If I should prove the happy man, give me joy, and there is an end
of it.


BELMOUR. I fancy you are used to disappointments in love, they sit so easy
upon you. Or rather I should suppose, in this case, you are pretty sure of your
ground.


MODELY. Neither, upon my soul; but a certain Je ne scai quoy, a Gayete de
Coeur which carries me above misfortunes: some people call it vanity.


BELMOUR. And are not absolutely mistaken. But what becomes of Araminta all
this while?


MODELY. (yawning.) I shall marry her, I believe, tomorrow.


BELMOUR. Marry her?


MODELY. Yes, Sir John is at this very moment looking over the settlements.


BELMOUR. I don't understand you.


MODELY. And yet it is pretty plain, methinks. I tell you I am to be married
tomorrow. Was it not time to make sure of one mistress, when you was running
away with the other?


BELMOUR. You know I have no such intentions. -- But are you really serious?
Have you laid aside your designs upon Caelia?


MODELY. Not so, neither.


BELMOUR. What do you mean then by your marriage with Araminta? Why will not you
unriddle this affair to me?


MODELY. Because it is at present a riddle to myself, and I expect lady
Beverley here every moment to resolve the enigma.


BELMOUR. Was it a scheme of here is?


MODLEY. Certainly, and I partly guess it, but will not unbosom till I know it
fully. -- Come, come, with all that gravity of countenance and curiosity, you
must leave me instantly; the lady will be here, and the plot unravelled, and
then --


BELMOUR. I shall expect to be satisfied. Exit.


MODELY. Ha! ha! ha! or else you fight me, I suppose. Why, so you may; and so
may Sir John Dorilant too, and faith with some color of reason. But my comfort
is, that I have experience on my side, and if I survive the rencounter, I shall
be a greater hero than ever amongst the ladies, and be esteemed in all
companies as much a man of honor as the best of you.


Enter LADY BEVERLEY. LADY. Dear cousin Modely, I am all over in an agitation;
we shall certainly be discovered; that devil Araminta --


MODELY. What of her, madam?


LADY. Is now with her brother talking so eagerly -- Oh! I saw the villainous
changes in her countenance; I would have given the world to have overheard
their conversation. -- Come, come, you must advise me instantly.


MODELY. Your ladyship must first let me into the secret. I am absolutely in a
wood with regard to the whole affair. What is all this of Caelia and Belmour?


LADY. Nothing, nothing at all; an errant dilemma of the foolish man's own
making, which his impertinent sister will immediately clear up to him, and then
all must out.


MODELY. But how came Belmour ever to be mentioned in the case?


LADY. Dear, dear, he never was mentioned. I must confess that I was so
provoked with Sir John's unnatural behavior, that I could not help telling him
that Caelia had a lover, and in the house too. Your situation with regard to
Araminta made him never dream of you, and consequently all his suspicions
turned on Belmour.


MODELY. But you did not say that that lover had made his addresses to Caelia?


LADY. I don't know what I might say; for he used me like a Turk. But whatever
I said I can unsay it again.


MODELY. Why, if I might venture to advice a person of your lady's sagacity --


LADY. O ay, with all my heart, cousin Modely. For though I may say it without
vanity, that nobody has a more clear apprehension of things when the mental
faculty is totally undisturbed; yet, when I am in a trepidation, nobody upon
earth can be more glad of advice.


MODELY. Why, then, madam, to speak with reverence, I should hope your ladyship
would see the necessity of keeping me as concealed as possible. It is the young
lady's passion, not mine, which must have the principal influence. Sir John
Dorilant's peculiarity of temper is such --


LADY. Yes, yes, he has peculiarity enough, that is certain.


MODELY. And it is there, madam, as the weakest part, that our attack will be
the surest. If she confesses an inclination for me, not both the Indies, added
to her fortune, could induce him to marry her.


LADY. That is honorable, however, cousin Modely. But he is a horrid creature,
notwithstanding.


MODELY. I grant it, madam; but a failure in an improper pursuit may recall his
reason, and, as he does not want understanding, teach him to search for
happiness where only it is to be expected.


LADY. He! he! I am so angry with him at present, that I really believe I
should refuse him.


MODELY. Your ladyship must not be too cruel.


LADY. Why, I confess it is not in my nature; but -- bless me, here they come.
-- Let us run down this walk directly, for they must not see us together.
Exeunt.


Enter ARAMINTA and SIR JOHN DORILANT. ARAMINTA. Come along, I say, you dragged
me into the garden just now, and I will command in my turn. Talk to her you
must, and shall. The girl has sense and spirit when she is disengaged from that
horrid mother of here is; and I have told her you wanted her, and in this very
spot.


SIR JOHN. You cannot feel, Araminta, what you make me suffer. But sooner or
later it must come to this, and therefore I will assume a resolution, and be
rid of all my doubts at once.


ARAMINTA. I tell you, this nonsense about Belmour is merely a phantom of her
mother's raising, to sound your intentions, and promote her own.


SIR JOHN. Thus far is certain, that Belmour disclaims all knowledge of the
affair, and with an appearance of sincerity; but even that is doubtful.
Besides, they are not his, but her inclinations which give me any concern. It
is the heart I require. The lifeless form, beauteous as it is, would only elude
my grasp; the shadow of a joy, not the reality.


ARAMINTA. Dear, dear, that men had but a little common sense; or that one
could venture to tell them what one knows of one's own sex! I have a good mind
to be honest. -- As I live, the girl is coming. -- I Will speed her on the way.
Courage, brother, Voila! Exit.


SIR JOHN. How shall I begin with her? -- What idiots are men when they have a
real passion! ridiculous, beneath contempt. -- [Walks about the stage] --
Suppose -- I will not suppose; the honest heart shall speak its faithful
dictates, and if it fails, -- why, let it.


Enter CAELIA. CAELIA (with timidity.) Araminta tells me, Sir, that you had
something to say to me.


SIR JOHN. I have, madam. -- Come forward, Miss Beverley. -- Would you choose to
sit. -- [They sit down.] -- [After some irresolute gesture.] You are not afraid
of catching cold?


CAELIA. Not in the least, Sir.


SIR JOHN. I know sitting in the open air has that effect upon some people --
but your youth and constitution. -- Did my sister say any thing concerning the
subject I would speak to you upon?


CAELIA. She only told me, Sir, that it was of moment.


SIR JOHN. It is of moment, indeed, Caelia. -- But you must not think that I am
angry.


CAELIA. Angry, Sir!


SIR JOHN. I don't mean angry. -- I am a little confused; but I shall recover
myself presently. -- [Rises, and Caelia rises too.] -- Nay, pray sit, Miss
Beverley. -- Whatever I feel myself, I would not disturb you. -- [Returns to
his seat, then after a pause, goes on.] -- The affair I would speak to you upon
is this: -- You remember your father perfectly?


CAELIA. And ever shall.


SIR JOHN. Indeed he was a good man, Miss Beverley, a virtuous man, and felt
tenderly for your happiness. -- Those tears become you, and yet, methinks, I
would not provoke them. -- When he died, he left you to my care.


CAELIA. Which alone made his loss supportable.


SIR JOHN. Are you sincere in what you say?


CAELIA. I should be ungrateful indeed, if I was not.


SIR JOHN (turning toward her.) Nay, you are sincerity itself. -- O Caelia
[Taking her by the hand.] -- But I beg your pardon, I am assuming a liberty I
have no right to take, till you allow it.


CAELIA. Sir!


SIR JOHN. I see I have alarmed you. -- Retire Miss Beverley. -- I Will speak to
you some other time. -- [She is going.] -- Caelia, Miss Beverley, -- pray come
back, my dear. -- I am afraid my behavior is rather too abrupt. -- Perhaps,
too, it may displease you.


CAELIA. I can be displeased with nothing from you, Sir; and am ready to obey
you, be your commands what they will.


SIR JOHN. Command, Caelia! -- that is a hard word.


CAELIA. I am sorry it offends you.


SIR JOHN. You know best, Caelia, whether it ought to offend me -- would I
could read the sentiments of your heart! Mine are but too apparent. -- In
short, my dear, you know the purport of your father's will -- dare you fulfill
it?


CAELIA. To the minutest circumstance. -- It is my duty.


SIR JOHN. Ah, Caelia, that word duty destroys the obligation.


CAELIA. Sir! --


SIR JOHN. I don't know how it is, but I am afraid to ask you the only
question, which sincerely answered, could make me happy -- or miserable. Half
aside.


CAELIA. Let me beg of you, sir, to ask it freely.


SIR JOHN. Well then -- is your heart your own?

O Caelia, that hesitation confirms my fears. You cannot answer in the
affirmative, and have too much humanity for what I feel, to add to my torments.
-- Good God! -- and is it possible, that an acquaintance of a few days, should
entirely obliterate the attentive assiduity, the tender anxieties which I have
shown for years! -- But I understand it all too well. Mine were the aweful,
though heartfelt attentions of a parent; his, the sprightly address of a
presuming lover. His easy assurance has won upon your affections, and what I
thought my greatest merit, has undone me.


CAELIA. You were so good, sir, a little while ago, to pity my confusion; pity
it now, and whilst I lay my heart open before you, be again that kind, that
generous friend, which I have always found you.


SIR JOHN. Go on.


CAELIA. It is in vain for me to dissemble an ignorance of your meaning, nor
would I if I could. I own I have been too much pleased with Mr. Modely's
conversation.


SIR JOHN. Modely's?


CAELIA. Let me go on. -- His intended marriage with Araminta, gave him a
freedom in this family which it was not my business to restrain. His attentions
to my mother, and the friendly manner in which he executed some commissions of
consequence to her, gave him frequent opportunities of talking to me. I will
confess too, that his appearance and his manner struck me. But I was so
convinced of his real passion for Araminta, that I never dreamt of the least
attachment to me, till --


SIR JOHN. Till what, when -- Modely? -- Why, he is to be married to my sister
tomorrow or next day.


CAELIA. I know it was so intended, but his behavior this morning, and the
intercessions of my mother, had, I own, won upon me strangely, and induced me
to believe that I only was the object of his pursuits.


SIR JOHN. I am thunderstruck! --


CAELIA. My mother made me clearly perceive that the completion of his marriage
would be an injury to Araminta. She told me too, sir, that you yourself would
be my adviser in the affair, and even persuad me to accept it.


SIR JOHN. O the malicious woman!


CAELIA. In that indeed I perceive she greatly erred. And I only mean this as a
confession of what is past, and of what is now at an end for ever. -- For the
future, I give myself to your guidance alone, and am what you direct. -- Giving
her hand to him.


SIR JOHN. Thou amiable softness! -- No, Caelia, however miserable I may be
myself, I will not make you so; it was your heart, not your hand I aspired to.
As the former has been seduced from me, it would be an injustice to us both to
accept of the latter. As to Mr. Modely, and Lady Beverley, I have not deserved
this treachery from them, and they shall both feel my resentment.


CAELIA. Sir!


SIR JOHN. She told me indeed there was a favored lover, and my suspicions
fell very naturally upon Belmour. Nay, even now, nothing but that lovely
sincerity -- which undoes me -- could make me credit this villainy of Modely.
-- O Caelia! what a heart have I lost!


CAELIA. You cannot, shall not lose it; worthless as it is, it is yours, and
only yours, my father, guardian, lover, husband! Hangs upon him weeping.


Enter ARAMINTA. ARAMINTA. Hey day! what a scene is here! What is the matter
with ye both.


SIR JOHN. O sister! that angel goodness, that mirror of her sex, has ruined me.


ARAMINTA. Ruined you! how?


SIR JOHN. Nay, I am not the only sufferer, Modely is as false to you, as her
mother is to all of us.


ARAMINTA. I don't understand you.


SIR JOHN. You will too soon. My suspicions of Belmour were all a chimaera; it
is your impious Modely who has possession of her heart. -- To me she is lost
irrecoverably. -- Going.


ARAMINTA. Stay, brother.


SIR JOHN. I cannot, my soul's too full. Exit.


ARAMINTA. Pray, miss Beverley, what is the meaning of all this?


CAELIA. I cannot speak -- Throwing herself into a chair.


ARAMINTA. I Will be hanged if this fellow Modely has not talked you into an
opinion, that he is in love with you; indeed, my dear, your youth and
inexperience may lead you into strange scrapes; and that mother of yours is
enough to turn any girl's head in the universe. Come, come, unriddle this
affair to me.


CAELIA. Alas! madam* all I know is, that the only man I ever did, or ever can
esteem, despises me, and, I fear, hates me.


ARAMINTA. Hates you! he doats upon you to distraction. -- But pray, did Modely
ever make any serious addresses to you?


CAELIA. Alas! but too often.


ARAMINTA. The hypocrite! but I Will be even with him. -- And your mother, I
suppose, encouraged him? An infamous woman! But I know her drift well enough.
--


Enter LADY BEVERLEY. LADY. Where is my poor girl? I met Sir John Dorilant in
such a furious way, that he seems to have lost all common civility. What have
they done to you, child?


ARAMINTA. Done to her? What has your ladyship done to her? I knew your little
artifices long ago, but --


LADY. My artifices! Mrs. Araminta.


ARAMINTA. Your artifices, lady Beverley; but they are all to no purpose; the
girl has too good an understanding to be imposed upon any longer; and your
boasted machinations are as vain and empty in their effect, as in their
contrivance.


LADY. What does the woman mean? But the loss of a lover, I suppose, is an
excuse for ill-breeding! Poor creature! if the petulancy of thy temper would
let me, I could almost pity thee. The loss of a lover is no agreeable thing;
but women at our time of life, Mrs. Araminta, must not expect a lasting passion.


ARAMINTA. Scarce any at all I believe, if they go a wooing themselves. For my
part, I have had the satisfaction of being solicited however. And I am afraid
my rustic brother never gave your ladyship's solicitations even the slightest
encouragement. How was it? Did you find him quite hard-hearted? No bowels of
compassion for so accomplished a damsel?


CAELIA. (interposing.) Dear madam! dear Araminta!


LADY. Stand away, child. -- Desert, madam, is not always attended with
success, nor confidence neither. There are some women so assured of their
conquest, as even to disgust a lover on the very day of marriage.


ARAMINTA. Was my behavior ever such?


LADY. I really cannot say, Mrs. Araminta; but the world, you know, is
censorious enough, when a match is broken off so near its conclusion, as
generally to charge the inconstancy of the lover on some defect in his mistress.


ARAMINTA. I defy him to produce any.


LADY. And yet he has certainly left you; Never, ah never to return.


ARAMINTA. Insolent!


CAELIA. (interposing again.) Dear Araminta!


ARAMINTA. But your ladyship may be mistaken even in that too. I may find him
at his solicitations again; and if I do --


LADY. You Will take him.


ARAMINTA. Take him? -- Daggers and poison sooner.


LADY. Poor creature! -- Come, Caelia, words do but aggravate her misfortune.
We only disturb her. You see, my dear, what are the effects of too violent a
passion. It may be a lesson for your future conduct.


ARAMINTA. Look you, lady Beverley, don't provoke me.


LADY. Why, what will you do?


CAELIA. (interposing.) For heaven's sake, madam --


LADY. I fancy, Mrs. Araminta, instead of quarrelling, we had better join
forces. If we could but get this girl out of the way, we might both succeed.


ARAMINTA. You are a wicked woman. --


LADY. Poor creature! shall I say any thing to my cousin Modely for you? You
know I have weight with him.


ARAMINTA. Yes, madam; you may tell him that his connections with you, have
rendered him ridiculous; and that the revenge of an injured woman is never
contemptible. Exit Araminta.


LADY. (leading off Caelia on the other side.) Poor creature! -- Come along,
child.


END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE continues. SIR JOHN DORILANT, alone. THIS fatal spot, which draws me to
it almost involuntarily, must be the scene of another interview. -- Thank
heaven I have recovered myself. Nor shall any misery which I may suffer, much
less any prospect of a mean revenge, make me act unbecoming my character.


Enter ARAMINTA. ARAMINTA. Well, brother, I hope you are resolved to marry this
girl.


SIR JOHN. Marry her, my dear Araminta? Can you think it possible, that I
should have so preposterous a thought? No, my behavior shall deserve her, but
not overruled her inclinations. Were I to seize the tender opportunity of her
present disposition, the world would ascribe it to her fortune; and I am sure
my deceased and valuable friend, however kindly he meant to me in the affair,
never intended that I should make his daughter unhappy.


ARAMINTA. But I tell you she loves you; and you must and shall marry her.


SIR JOHN. Ah sister, you are willing to dispose of her any way. That worthless
lover of yours still hangs about your heart, and I have avoided seeing him on
your account, as well as Caelia's.


ARAMINTA. To show how mistaken you are in all this, I have given him up
totally. I despise, and hate him; nay I am upon the brink of a resolution to
give myself to another. Sir John shakes his head. I am, I assure you; his
friend Mr. Belmour is by no means indifferent on my subject.


SIR JOHN. And is this revenge on yourself, a proof of your want of passion for
him? -- Ah Araminta! -- Come, come, my dear, I own I think him unworthy of you,
and would resent his usage to the utmost, did not I clearly perceive that it
would appear mercenary in myself, and give real pain both to you and Caelia.


ARAMINTHA. I actually don't know what to say to you.


SIR JOHN. You had better say nothing. Your spirits at present are too much
alarmed. -- I have sent for Caelia hither, a short hour may determine the fates
of all of us. I know my honorable intentions will give her great uneasiness.
But it is my duty which exacts them from me. -- You had better take a turn or
two in some other part of the garden; -- I see my steward coming this way: -- I
may want your assistance but too soon. Exit Araminta. Enter STEWARD. Have you
brought those papers I bad you look out?


STEWARD. Yes, Sir. But there is the gentleman within to wait upon your honor,
concerning the estate you intended to purchase. It seems a mighty good bargain.


SIR JOHN. I cannot speak to him now.


STEWARD. Your honor always used to be punctual.


SIR JOHN. Alas! Jonathan, I may be punctual again tomorrow. -- Give me the
papers. Did Miss Beverley say she would come to me?


STEWARD. Immediately, Sir. But I wish your honor would consider, such
bargains as these do not offer every day.


SIR JOHN. Heigh ho!


STEWARD. It joins so conveniently too to your honor's own estate, within a
hedge as I may say.


SIR JOHN. Prithee don't plague me.


STEWARD. Nay, it is not my interest, but your honor's. Though that indeed I may
call my interest, for I am sure I love your honor.


SIR JOHN. I know thou do, Jonathan, and I am too hasty, -- but leave me now.
-- If the gentleman will do me the favor of staying all night, I may satisfy
him in the morning. My head and heart are too full now for any business which
concerns my fortune.


STEWARD. Something goes very wrong with my poor master. Some love nonsense or
other I suppose -- I wish all the women were in the bottom of the sea, for my
part. Exit Steward.


Enter LADY BEVERLEY and CAELIA. LADY. I thought it requisite, Sir John, as I
heard you had something of importance to transact with my daughter, to wait
upon you with her.


SIR JOHN. Was that necessary, madam? -- I begged the favor of Miss Beverley's
company only.


LADY. But a mother, you know, Sir John, who has a tender concern for her child
--


SIR JOHN. Should show it upon every occasion.


LADY. I find, Sir John, there is some misunderstanding at present, which a
woman of prudence and experience might be much better consulted upon, than a
poor young thing, whose --


SIR JOHN. Not at all, madam; Caelia has all the prudence I require, and our
present conversation will soon be over.


LADY. Nay, Sir John, to be sure I am not afraid of trusting my daughter alone
with you. A man of your discretion will undoubtedly be guilty of no
impropriety. But a third person sometimes, where the parties concerned are a
little too much influenced by their passions, has occasioned very substantial,
and very useful effects. I have known several instances of it, in the course of
my experience.


SIR JOHN. This, madam, will not be one of them. -- How teizing! Walking aside.


LADY. I find, Sir John, that you are determined to have your own way, and
therefore I shall show you by my behavior, that I know what good manners
require, though I do not always meet with the same treatment from other people.
Exit Lady.


SIR JOHN. Now, Caelia, we are alone, and I have many excuses to make to you
for the impassioned sallies of our late conversation; which I do most
sincerely. -- Can you pardon them?


CAELIA. Alas! Sir, it is I who ought to entreat for pardon.


SIR JOHN. Not in the least, madam, I have no blame to cast upon you for any
part of your conduct. Your youth and inexperience, joined to the goodness of
your heart, are sufficient apologies for any shadow of indiscretion which might
appear in your behavior. I am afraid mine was not so irreproachable. However,
Caelia, I shall endeavor to make you all the amends in my power; and to show
you that it is your happiness, not my own, which is the object of my anxiety.

Your father's will is but too clear in its intentions. But the purity of his
heart never meant to promote my felicity at the expense of yours. You are
therefore, madam, entirely at liberty from this moment, to make your choice
where you please. This paper will entitle you to that authority, and this will
enable you to bestow your fortune where you bestow your hand. -- Take them, my
dear! -- Why are you so disturbed? -- Alas, Caelia, I see too plainly the cause
of these emotions. You only wish the happy man to whom you have given your
heart, loved you as I do! --

But I beg pardon; and will only add one caution, which my duty demands of me,
as your guardian, your protector, and your father's friend. -- You have been a
witness of Modely's transactions with my sister. Have a care therefore, Caelia;
be sure of his firm attachment before you let your own hurry you into a
compliance. These papers give you up all power on my part; but as an adviser, I
shall be always ready to be consulted.


CAELIA. My tears and my confusion have hitherto hindered me from answering;
not the invidious suggestion which you have so cruelly charged me with. What
friend, what lover have I, to engross my attentions? I never had but one, and
he has cast me off for ever. -- O, Sir, give me the papers, and let me return
them where my soul longs to place them.


SIR JOHN. No, Caelia, to accept them again, would impeach the justice of my
whole proceeding. It would make it look like the mean artifice of a mercenary
villain, who attempted to gain by stratagem what his merits did not entitle him
to. -- I blush to think of it. -- I have performed my office. Be mistress of
yourself, and let me fly from a combat to which I find myself unequal. Exit Sir
John.


(CAELIA sits down, leaning her head upon her hand.) Enter MODELY and BELMOUR.
MODELY. Hist! hist! he has just left her, and in a fine situation for my
approaches. -- If you are not yet satisfied, I will make up all differences
with you another time. -- Get into the arbor, and be a witness of my triumph.
You shall see me, like another Caesar, Come, See -- and Overcome.

Belmour goes into the arbor. (MODELY comes forward, walks two or three turns
by her, bowing as he passes, without being taken notice of, then speaks.) If it
is not an interruption, madam, when I find you thus alone --


CAELIA (rising.) I would choose to be alone.


MODELY. Madam!


CAELIA (after a little pause.) In short, Mr. Modely, your behavior to me of
late is what I can by no means approve of. It is unbecoming your character as a
man of honor, and would be a stain to the ingenuous modesty of my sex for me
to suffer it.


MODELY. You surprise me, madam. Can the adoration of an humble love, the timid
advances of a man whom you beauty has undone, be such unpardonable offenses?


(CAELIA looks with indignation at him, and is going off.) MODELY (catching
hold of her, and falling upon his knees.) Nay, madam, you must not leave me!


CAELIA. Rise, Sir, or I am gone this moment. -- I thought of flying from you,
but my soul disdains it. -- Know then, Sir, that I am mistress of myself,
mistress of my fortune, and may bestow my hand wherever my heart directs it.


MODELY. My angel! -- Coming eagerly up to her.


CAELIA. What do you mean?


MODELY. That you make the most sincere of lovers, the happiest of mankind. The
addition of your fortune will add splendour to our felicity; and the frowns of
disappointed love, only heighten our enjoyments.


CAELIA. Oh thou vile one! -- How does that cruel generous man who has rejected
me, rise on the comparison!


MODELY. Rejected you? -- Sir John Dorilant?


CAELIA. Yes, Mr. Modely, that triumph at least is yours. I have offered
myself, and been refused. My hand and fortune equally disdained. But may
perpetual happiness attend him, wherever his honest, honest heart shall fix!


MODELY. O, madam, your inexperience deceives you. He knows the integrity of
your mind, and trusts to that for recompense. His seeming disinterestedness is
but the surer method of completing his utmost wishes.


CAELIA. Blasphemer, stop thy tongue. The purity of his intentions is as much
above thy malice, as thy imitation.


She walks to one side of the stage, and Modely stands disconcerted on the
other. Enter LADY BEVERLEY. LADY. Well, child, what has the man said to thee?
Cousin Modely, your servant; you find our plot would not take, they were too
quick upon us. -- Hey day! what has been doing here?


MODELY. O, madam, you are my only refuge; a wretch on the brink of despair
flies to you for protection. That amiable creature is in full possession of
herself and fortune, and yet rejects my tenderest solicitations.


LADY. Really! -- What is all this? Tell me, Caelia, has the man actually given
up all right and title to thee real and personal? Come, come, I must be a
principal actress, I find, in this affair. -- Decency and decorum require it.
-- Tell me, child, is it so?


CAELIA. Sir John Dorilant, madam, with a generosity peculiar to himself,
(cruel generosity!) has cancelled every obligation which could confine my
choice. These papers confirm the freedom he has given me -- and rob me of all
future comfort.


LADY. Indeed! I did not expect this of him; but I am heartily glad of it. Give
me the papers, child.


CAELIA. No, madam! -- Useless as they are, they are yet my own.


LADY. Useless? -- What do you mean? Has the base man laid any other embargo on
thee, child?


CAELIA. I cannot bear, madam, even from you, to hear Sir John Dorilant treated
with disrespect. -- Useless! -- Yes, they shall be useless. Thus, thus I tear
them into atoms, and disdain a liberty which but too justly reproaches my
conduct. Your advice, madam, has already made me miserable, but it shall not
make me ungrateful or unjust.


Exit Caelia. LADY. I am astonished, I never saw the girl in such a way before.
Why this is errant disobedience, cousin Modely. I must after her, and know the
bottom of it. -- Don't despair. Exit Lady.


BELMOUR (coming out of the arbor.) Come, See, Overcome! -- O poor Caesar!


MODELY (humming a tune.) You think I am disconcerted now?


BELMOUR Why really I should think something of that kind.


MODELY. You never were more mistaken in your life. -- Egad it is a spirited
girl. She and Sir John Dorilant were certainly born for one another. I have a
good mind to take compassion of them, and let them come together. They must and
shall be man and wife, and I will even go back to Araminta.


BELMOUR. Thou have a most astonishing assurance.


MODELY. Hush! -- she is coming this way -- get into your hole again and be
dumb. -- Now you shall see a scene of triumph indeed.


BELMOUR. Have a care, Caesar, you have the Britons to deal with. Retires.


Enter ARAMINTA. ARAMINTA. What, are they gone? and my wretch here by himself?
-- O that I could dissemble a little! -- I will, if my heart bursts for it. --
O, Mr. Modely, I am half ashamed to see you; -- but my brother has signed those
odious writings.


MODELY. Then thus I seize my charmer.


ARAMINTA. Agreeable rascal! -- Be quiet, cannot you, you think one so forward
now.


MODELY. I cannot, will not be restrained, when the dear object of my wishes
meets me with kind compliance in her eyes and voice! -- Tomorrow! -- It Is an
age, why should we wait for that? Tonight, my angel, tonight may make us one,
and the fair prospect of our halcyon days even from this hour begin.


ARAMINTA. Who would not think this fellow, with his blank verse now, was in
earnest? But I know him thoroughly. -- Indeed Mr. Modely, you are too pressing,
marriage is a serious thing. Besides, you know, this idle bustle betwixt my
brother and Caelia, which you seem to think me ignorant of, and which you, in
some measure, though undesignedly I dare say, have occasioned, may obstruct us a
little.


MODELY. Not at all, my dear; an amusement en passant; the mere raillery of
gallantry on my side, to oblige her impertinent mother (who, you know, has a
penchant for Sir John herself) was the whole insignificant business. Perhaps,
indeed, I was something blameable in it.


ARAMINTA. Why really I think so, in your situation. But are you sure it went
no farther? nothing else passed between you?


MODELY. Nothing in nature.


ARAMINTA. Dear me, how mistaken people are. I cannot say that I believed it;
but they told me, that you had actually proposed to marry her, that the girl
was near consenting, and that the mother was your friend in the affair.


MODELY. The mere malice, and invention of lady Beverley.


ARAMINTA. And there is not a word of truth in it then?


MODELY. Not a syllable. -- You know my soul is yours.


ARAMINTA. O thou villain! -- I thought to have kept my temper, and to have
treated you with the contempt you deserve; but this insolence is intolerable.
Can you imagine that I am a stranger to your proceedings? a deaf, blind idiot?
-- O I could tear this foolish heart, which, cheated by its passion, has
encouraged such an insult. -- How, how have I deserved this treatment? Bursting
into tears.


MODELY (greatly alarmed.) By holy faith! -- by every power above! you, and you
only are the passion of my soul. -- May every curse --


ARAMINTA. Away, deceiver -- these tears are the tears of resentment. My
resolution melts not in my eyes. It Is fixed, unalterable! You might imagine
from the gayety of my temper, that it had its levity too. But know, Sir, that a
woman who has once been duped, defies all future machinations.


MODELY. Hear me, madam -- nay, you shall hear me. --


ARAMINTA. Shall! -- insufferable insolence! -- Go, Sir; for any thing which
regards me, you are free as air, free as your licentious principles. Nor shall
a thought of what I once esteemed you, disturb my future quiet. There are men
who think me not contemptible, and under whose protection I may shelter my
disgrace. -- Unhand me -- this is the last time I shall probably ever see you;
and I may tell you in parting, that you have used me cruelly; and that Caelia
knows you as perfectly as I do.


Exit Araminta. MODELY (stands confounded.) Enter BELMOUR. BELMOUR. Caesar
ashamed! -- and well he may in faith. Why, man, what is the matter with you?
Quite dumb? quite confounded? Did not I always tell you that you loved her?


MODELY. I feel it sensibly.


BELMOUR. And I can tell you another secret.


MODELY. What Is that?


BELMOUR. That she loves you.


MODELY. O that she did!


BELMOUR. Did! -- Every word, every motion of passion through her whole
conversation betrayed it involuntarily. I wish it had been otherwise.


MODELY. Why?


BELMOUR. Because I had some thoughts of circumventing you. But I find it will
be in vain. Therefore pursue her properly, and she is yours.


MODELY. O never, Belmour, never. -- I have sinned beyond a possibility of
pardon. That she did love me, I have had a thousand proofs, which like a
brainless idiot I wantonly trifled with. What a pitiful rascal have I made
myself?


BELMOUR. Why in that I agree with you; but don't despair, man; you may still
be happier than you deserve.


MODELY. With what face can I approach her? Every circumstance of her former
affection, now rises in judgment against me. O Belmour! she has taught me to
blush.


BELMOUR. And I assure you it becomes you mightily.


MODELY. Where can I apply? -- How can I address her? All that I can possibly
do, will only look like a mean artificial method, of patching up my other
disappointment.


BELMOUR. More miracles still! She has not only taught you to blush, but has
absolutely made a man of honor of you!


MODELY. Raillery is out of season.


Enter a SERVANT. SERVANT. Mrs. Araminta, Sir, desires to speak with you.


MODELY (eagerly.) With me?


SERVANT. No, Sir, with Mr. Belmour.


BELMOUR. With me?


SERVANT. Yes, Sir.


BELMOUR. Where is she?


SERVANT. In the close walk by the house, Sir.


BELMOUR. And alone?


SERVANT. Entirely, Sir.


BELMOUR. I wait upon her this instant. Exit Servant.


MODELY. Belmour, you shall not stir.


BELMOUR. By my faith but I will, Sir.


MODELY. She said there were men to whom she could fly for protection. By my
soul she intends to propose herself to you.


BELMOUR. And if she does, I shall certainly accept her offer.


MODELY. I Will cut your thtoat if you do.


BELMOUR. And do you think to fright me by that? I fancy I can cut throats as
well as other people. Your servant. If I cannot succeed for myself, I Will speak
a good word for you. Exit Belmour.


MODELY. What can this mean? -- I am upon thorns till I know the event. I must
watch them. -- No, that is dishonest. -- Dishonest! How virtuous does a real
passion make one! -- Heigh ho!

Walks about in disorder. He seems in great haste to go to her. He has turned
into the walk already. -- That abominable old fashioned cradle work makes the
hedges so thick, there is no seeing through them. -- An open lawn has ten
thousand times the beauty, and is kept at by less expense by half. -- These
cursed unnatural chairs are always in the way too.

Stumbling against one of the garden chairs. What a miserable dog am I? -- I
would give an arm to know what they are talking about. -- We talk of female
coquettes! By my soul we beat them at their own weapons! -- Stay -- one
stratagem I may yet put in practice, and it is an honest one. -- The thought
was lucky. -- I will about it instantly. Poor Modely! -- How has thy vanity
reduced thee?


END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE continues. ARAMINTA and BELMOUR. ARAMINTA. YOU find, Mr. Belmour, that I
have seen your partialities, and like a woman of honor I have confessed my
own. Your behavior to your friend is generous beyond comparison, and I could
almost join in the little stratagem you propose, merely to see if he deserves
it.


BELMOUR. Indeed, madam, you mistake him utterly. Vanity is his ruling vice; an
idle affectation of success among the ladies, which makes fools admire, and
boys envy him, is the master passion of his giddy heart. The severe checks he
has met with today, have sufficiently opened his understanding; and the real
possession of one valuable woman, whom he dreads to lose, will soon convince
him how despicable his folly has made him.


ARAMINTA. I am afraid, Mr. Belmour, a man who has half his life been pursuing
bubbles, without perceiving their insignificance, will be easily tempted to
resume the chase. The possession of one reality will hardly convince him that
the rest were shadows. And a woman must be an idiot indeed, who thinks of
fixing a man to herself after marriage, whom she could not secure before it. To
begin with insensibility, O fie, Mr. Modely.


BELMOUR. You need not fear it, madam; his heart --


ARAMINTA. Is as idle as our conversation on the subject. I beg your pardon for
the comparison; as I do, for having sent for you in this manner. But I thought
it necessary that both you and Mr. Modely should know my real sentiments,
undisguised by passion.


BELMOUR. And may I hope you will concur in my proposal?


ARAMINTA. I don't know what to say to it, it is a piece of mummery which I am
ill suited for at present. But if an opportunity should offer, I must confess I
have enough of the woman in me, not to be insensible to the charms of an
innocent revenge. -- But this other intricate business, if you can assist me in
that, you will oblige me beyond measure. There are two hearts, Mr. Belmour,
worthy to be united! Had my brother a little less honor, and she a little less
sensibility -- But I know not what to think of it.


BELMOUR. In that, madam, I can certainly assist you.


ARAMINTA. How, dear Mr. Belmour?


BELMOUR. I have been a witness, unknown to Caelia, to such a conversation, as
will clear up every doubt Sir John can possibly have entertained.


ARAMINTA. You charm me when you say so. -- As I live, here comes my brother.
-- Stay; is not that wretch Modely with him? He is actually. What can his
assurance be plotting now? -- Come this way, Mr. Belmour; we will watch them at
a distance, that no harm may happen between them, and talk to the girl first!
The monster! -- Exeunt.


Enter SIR JOHN DORILANT and MODELY. MODELY. (Entering and looking after
Araminta and Belmour.) They are together still! --

But let me resume my nobler self.


SIR JOHN. Why will you follow me, Mr. Modely? I have purposely avoided you. --
My heart swells with indignation. -- I know not what may be the consequence.


MODELY. Upon my honor, Sir John --


SIR JOHN. Honor, Mr. Modely! it is a sacred word. You ought to shudder when
you pronounce it. Honor has no existence but in the breast of truth. It Is the
harmonious result of every virtue combined. -- You have sense, you have
knowledge; but I can assure you, Mr. Modely, though parts and knowledge, without
the dictates of justice, or the feelings of humanity, may make a bold and
mischievous member of society even courted by the world, they only, in my eye,
make him more contemptible.


MODELY. This I can bear, Sir John, -- because I have deserved it.


SIR JOHN. You may think, perhaps, it is only an idle affair with a lady, what
half mankind are guilty of, and what the conceited wits of your acquaintance
will treat with raillery. Faith with a woman! ridiculous! -- But let me tell
you, Mr. Modely, the man who even slightly deceives a believing and a trusting
woman, can never be a man of honor.


MODELY. I own the truth of your assertions. I feel the aweful superiority of
your real virtue. Nor should any thing have dragged me into your presence, so
much I dreaded it, but the sincerest hope of making you happy.


SIR JOHN. Making me happy, Mr. Modely! -- You have put it out of your own
power. -- [Walks from him, then turns to him again.] -- You mean, I suppose, by
a resignation of Caelia to me.


MODELY. Not of Caelia only, but her affections.


SIR JOHN. Vain, and impotent proposal!


MODELY. Sir John, it is not a time for altercation. -- By all my hopes of bliss
here and hereafter, you are the real passion of her soul. -- Look not so
unbelieving: by heaven it is true; and nothing but an artful insinuation of your
never intending to marry her, and even concurring in our affair, could ever
have made her listen one moment to me.


SIR JOHN. Why do I hear you? -- O Mr. Modely, you touch my weakest part.


MODELY. Cherish the tender feelings, and be happy.


SIR JOHN. Is it possible that amiable creature can think and talk tenderly of
me? I know her generosity; but generosity is not the point.


MODELY. Believe me, Sir, it is more; it is real unaffected passion. Her innocent
soul speaks through her eyes the honest dictates of her heart. In our last
conference, notwithstanding her mother's commands; notwithstanding, what I
blush to own, my utmost ardent solicitations to the contrary, she persisted in
her integrity, tore the papers which left her choice free, and treated us with
an indignation which added charms to virtue.


SIR JOHN. O these flattering sounds! -- Would I could believe them!


MODELY. Belmour, as well as myself, and lady Beverley, was a witness of the
truth of them. I thought it my duty to inform you, as I know your delicacy with
regard to her. And indeed I would in some measure endeavor to repair the
injuries I have offered to your family, before I leave it for ever. -- O Sir
John, let not an ill-judged nicety debar you from a happiness, which stands
with open arms to receive you. Think what my folly has lost in Araminta; and,
when your indignation at the affront is a little respited, be blessed yourself,
and pity me. -- [As he goes out, he still looks after Araminta and Belmour.] --
They are together still; but I will go round that way to the house.


Exit Modely. SIR JOHN. What can this mean? -- He cannot intend to deceive me;
he seems too sincerely affected. -- I must, I will believe him. The mind which
suspects injustice, is half guilty of it itself. -- Talks tenderly of me? Tore
the parpers? Treated them with indignation? Heavens! what a flow of tender joy
comes over me! -- Shall Caelia then be mine? How my heart dances! O! I could be
wondrous foolish! -- Well, Jonathan.


Enter STEWARD. STEWARD. The gentleman, Sir --


SIR JOHN. What of the gentleman? I am ready for any thing.


STEWARD. Will wait upon your honor tomorrow, as you are not at leisure.


SIR JOHN. With all my heart. Now or then, whenever he pleases.


STEWARD. I am glad to see your honor in spirits.


SIR JOHN. Spirits! Jonathan! I am light as air. -- Make a thousand excuses to
him; -- but let it be tomorrow, however, for I see lady Beverley coming this
way.


STEWARD. Heaven bless his good soul! I love to see him merry. Exit.


Enter LADY BEVERLEY. LADY. If I don't interrupt you, Sir John --


SIR JOHN. Interrupt me, madam? it is impossible.


LADY. For I would not be guilty of an indecorum, even to you.


SIR JOHN. Come, come, lady Beverley, these little bickerings must be laid
aside. Give me your hand, lady. Now we are friends [Kissing it.] -- How does
your lovely daughter?


LADY. You are in mighty good humor, Sir John; perhaps every body may not be
so.


SIR JOHN. Every body must be so, madam, where I come; I am joy itself.

"The jolly god that leads the jocund hours!"


LADY. What is come to the man? -- Whatever it is, I shall damp it presently.
-- [Aside.) -- Do you choose to hear what I have to say, Sir John?


SIR JOHN. You can say nothing, madam, but that you consent, and Caelia is my
own. -- Yes, you yourself have been a witness to her integrity. Come, indulge
me, lady Beverley. Declare it all, and let me listen to my happiness.


LADY. I shall declare nothing, Sir John, on that subject: what I have to say
is of a very different import. -- In short, without circumlocution, or any
unnecessary embarrassment to entangle the affair, I and my daughter are of an
opinion, that it is by no means proper for us to continue any longer in your
family.


SIR JOHN. Madam!


LADY. This is what I had to declare, Sir John.


SIR JOHN. Does Caelia, madam, desire to leave me?


LADY. It was a proposal of her own.


SIR JOHN. Confusion!


LADY. And a very sensible one too, in my opinion. For when people are not so
easy together, as might be expected, I know no better remedy than parting.


SIR JOHN. (Aside.) Sure, this is no trick of Modely's, to get her away from
me? -- He talked too himself, of leaving my family immediately. -- I shall
relapse again.


LADY. I find, Sir John, you are somewhat disconcerted: but, for my part --


SIR JOHN. O torture!


LADY. I say, for my part, Sir John, it might have been altogether as well,
perhaps, if we had never met.


SIR JOHN. I am sorry, madam, my behavior has offended you, but --


Enter ARAMINTA, CAELIA, and BELMOUR. ARAMINTA. (to Caelia as she enters.)
Leave the house indeed! Come, come, you shall speak to him. -- What is all this
disorder for? Pray, brother, has any thing new happened? -- That wretch has
been beforehand with us -- (Aside to Belmour.)


LADY. Nothing at all, Mrs. Araminta; I have only made a very reasonable
proposal to him, which he is pleased to treat with his and your usual
incivility.


SIR JOHN. You wrong us, madam, with the imputation. -- (After a pause, and
some irresolution, he goes up to Caelia.) -- I thought, Miss Beverley, I had
already given up my authority, and that you were perfectly at liberty to follow
your own inclinations. I could have wished, indeed, to have still assisted you
with my advice; and I flattered myself that my presence would have been no
restraint upon your conduct. But I find it is otherwise. My very roof is grown
irksome to you, and the innocent pleasure I received in observing your growing
virtues, is no longer to be indulged to me.


CAELIA. O Sir, put not so hard a construction upon what I thought a blameless
proceeding. Can it be wondered at, that I should fly from him, who has twice
rejected me with disdain?


SIR JOHN. With disdain, Caelia?


CAELIA. Who has withdrawn from me even his parental tenderness, and driven me
to the hard necessity of avoiding him, lest I should offend him farther.

I know how much my inexperience wants a faithful guide; I know what cruel
censures a malicious world will pass upon my conduct; but I must bear them all.
For he who might protect me from myself, protect me from the insults of
licentious tongues, abandons me to fortune.


SIR JOHN. O Caelia! -- have I, have I abandoned thee? -- Heaven knows my
inmost soul how it did rejoice but a few moments ago, when Modely told me that
your heart was mine!


ARAMINTA. Modely! -- Did Modely tell you so? -- Do you hear that, Mr. Belmour?


SIR JOHN. He did, my sister, with every circumstance which could increase his
own guilt, and her integrity.


ARAMINTA. That was honest, however.


SIR JOHN. I thought it so, and respected him accordingly. O he breathed
comfort to a despairing wretch! but now a thousand thousand doubts crowd in
upon me. He leaves my house this instant; nay, may be gone already. Caelia too
is flying from me, -- perhaps to join him, and with her happier lover, smile at
my undoing! -- (Leans on Araminta.)


CAELIA. I burst with indignation! -- Can I be suspected of such treachery? Can
you, Sir, who know my every thought, harbor such a suspicion? -- O madam, this
contempt have you brought upon me. A want of deceit was all the little negative
praise I had to boast of, and that is now denied me.


Leans on Lady Beverley. LADY. Come away, child.


CAELIA. No, madam. I have a harder task still to perform. Comes up to Sir John
To offer you my hand again under these circumstances, thus despicable as you
have made me, may seem an insult. But I mean it not as such. -- O Sir, if you
ever loved my father, in pity to my orphan state, let me not leave you. Shield
me from the world, shield me from the worst of misfortunes, your own unkind
suspicions.


ARAMINTA. What fooling is here? Help me, Mr. Belmour. -- There, take her hand.
-- And now let it go if you can.


SIR JOHN (grasping her hand.) O Caelia! may I believe Modely? Is your heart
mine?


CAELIA. It is, and ever shall be.


SIR JOHN. Transporting extacy! -- Turning to Caelia.


LADY. I should, think Sir John, a mother's consent -- though Mrs. Araminta, I
see, has been so very good to take that office upon herself.


SIR JOHN. I beg your pardon, madam; my thoughts were too much engaged. -- But
may I hope for your concurrence?


LADY. I don't know what to say to you; I think you have bewitched the girl
amongst you.


ARAMINTA. Indeed, lady Beverley, this is quite preposterous. -- Ha! -- He here
again! -- Protect me, Mr. Belmour.


Enter MODELY. MODELY. Madam, you need fly no where for protection: you have no
insolence to fear from me. I am humbled sufficiently, and the post-chaise is
now at the door to banish me for ever. -- My sole business here is, to unite
that virtuous man with the most worthy of her sex.


ARAMINTA (half aside.) Thank you for the compliment -- Now, Mr. Belmour.


LADY. You may spare yourself that trouble, cousin Modely; the girl is
irrecoverably gone already.


MODELY. May all the happiness they deserve attend them! Going, then looks back
at Araminta. I cannot leave her.


SIR JOHN. Mr. Modely, is there nobody here besides, whom you ought to take
leave of?


MODELY. I own my parting from that lady (to Araminta) should not be in
silence; but a conviction of my guilt stops my tongue from utterance.


ARAMINTA. I cannot say I quite believe that; but as our affair may make some
noise in the world, for the sake of my own character, I must beg of you to
declare before this company, whether any part of my conduct has given even a
shadow of excuse for the insult I have received. If it has, be honest, and
proclaim it.


MODELY. None by heaven; the crime was all my own, and I suffer for it justly
and severely -- with shame I speak it, notwithstanding the appearances to the
contrary, my heart was ever yours, and ever will be.


ARAMINTA. I am satisfied; and will honestly confess, the sole reason of my
present appeal was this, that where I had destined my hand, my conduct might
appear unblemished. Gives her hand to Belmour.


MODELY. Confusion! -- then my suspicions were just.


SIR JOHN. Sister!


CAELIA. Araminta!


ARAMINTA. What do ye mean? What are ye surprised at? -- The insinuating Mr.
Modely can never want mistresses any where. Can he, Mr. Belmour? You know him
perfectly.


MODELY. Distraction! -- Knows me? Yes, he does know me. The villain! though he
triumphs in my sufferings, knows what I feel! -- You, madam, are just in your
severity, from you I have deserved every thing; the anguish, the despair which
must attend my future life comes from you like heaven's avenging minister! --
But for him -- Sir John interposes. O for a sword! -- But I shall find a time,
and a severe one. -- Let me go, Sir John --


ARAMINTA. I Will carry on the farce no longer. -- Rash inconsiderate madman! The
sword which pierces Mr. Belmour's breast, would rob you of the best of friends.
-- This pretended marriage, for it is no more, was merely contrived by him, to
convince me of your sincerity. -- Embrace him as your guardian angel, and learn
from him to be virtuous.


BELMOUR. O madam, let me still plead for him. Surely when a vain man feels
himself in the wrong, you cannot desire him to suffer a greater punishment.


ARAMINTA. I have done with fooling. -- You told me today, lady Beverley, that
he would never return to me.


LADY. And I told you at the same time, madam, that if he did -- you would take
him.


ARAMINTA. In both you were mistaken. -- Mr. Modely, your last behavior to
Caelia and my brother, shows a generosity of temper I did not think you capable
of, and for that I thank you. But to be serious on our own affair, whatever
appearance your present change may carry with it, your transactions of today
have been such, that I can never hereafter have that respect for you, which a
wife ought to have for her husband.


SIR JOHN I am sorry to say it, Mr. Modely, her determination is, I fear, too
just. Trust to time however, at least let us part friends, and not abruptly. We
should conceal the failings of each other, and if it must come to that,
endeavor to find out specious reasons for breaking off the match, without
injuring either party.


ARAMINTA. To show how willing I am to conceal every thing, now I have had my
little female revenge, as my brother has promised us the fiddles this evening,
Mr. Modely, as usual, shall be my partner in the dance.


MODELY. I have deserved this ridicule, madam, and am humbled to what you
please.


ARAMINTA. Why then, brother, as we all seem in a strange dilemma, why may not
we have one dance in the garden? it will put us in good humor.


SIR JOHN. As you please, madam. -- Call the fiddles hither, -- Don't despair
Mr. Modely. Half aside to him.


LADY. I will not dance, positively.


BELMOUR. Indeed but you shall, madam; do you think I will be the only
disconsolate swain who wants a partner? Besides, you see there are are so few
of us, that we must call in the butler and the ladies maids even to help out
the figure.


SIR JOHN. Come, lady Beverley, you must lay aside all animosities. If I have
behaved improperly to you today, I most sincerely ask your pardon, and hope the
anxieties I have been under will sufficiently plead my excuse; my future
conduct shall be irreproachable. Turning to Caelia.

Here have I placed my happiness, and here expect it. O Caelia, if the
seriousness of my behavior should hereafter offend you, impute it to my
infirmity; it can never proceed from want of affection.

A heart like mine its own distress contrives,
And feels most sensibly the pain it gives;
Then even its frailties heartily approve,
For, if it errs, it errs from too much love.

A DANCE. EPILOGUE. Spoken before the DANCE, By Mrs. YATES and Mr. PALMER, in
the Characters of ARAMINTA and MODELY.
ARAMINTA. WELL, ladies, am I right, or am I not?
Should not this foolish passion be forgot;
This fluttering something, scarce to be expressed,
Which pleads for coxcombs in each female breast?
How mortified he looked! -- and looks so still.
Turning to Modely. He really may repent -- perhaps he will. --

MODELY. Will, Araminta? -- Ladies, be so good,
Man's made of frail materials, flesh and blood.
We all offend at some unhappy crisis,
Have whims, caprices, vanities, -- and vices.
Your happier sex by nature was designed,
Her last best work, to perfect humankind.
No spot, no blemish the fair frame deforms,
No avarice taints, no naughty passion warms
Your firmer hearts. No love of change in you
Ever taught desire to stray. --

ARAMINTA. All this is true.
Yet stay; the men, perchance, will call it sneer,
And some few ladies think you not sincere.
For your petition, whether wrong or right,
Whatever it be, withdraw it for tonight.
Another time, if I should want a spouse,
I may myself report it to the house:
At present, let us strive to mend the age;
Let justice reign, at least upon the stage.
Where the fair dames, who like to live by rule,
May learn two lessons from the LOVER'S SCHOOL.
While Caelia's choice instructs them how to choose,
And my refusal warns them to refuse.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 9. l. 20. for you and I, read you and me. 10. l. 4. for you and I, read
you and me 15. l. 9. for a fellow, read fellow l. the last but two, for should
you think, read you should think 31. l. 19. for marry come up! read very fine
truly! 40. l. 2. for you fight me, read you will fight me. 41. l. 15. for
advice, read advise l. 16. for lady's, read ladyship's 48. l. 4. for persuad,
read persuade 61. l. 14. for you make, read you may make 75. l. last but one,
for they are together still, read I don't see them now 76. l. 5. for parpers,
read papers 80. l. 11. for it did, read did it

