SETHONA. A TRAGEDY. AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand.
MDCCLXXIV. [Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. CUMBERLAND.
Spoken by Mr. REDDISH. IN classic times, as learned authors say,
When Greek or Roman wits produced a play,
The herald Prologue, 'ere the sports began,
Fairly stepped forward, and announc'd the plan:
In few plain words he ran the fable through,
And, without favor, published all he knew.
An honest custom: for the plan was clear,
The scene was simple, and the Muse sincere;
No tawdry fashions warped the public taste,
The times were candid, and the stage was chaste.
Can we expect, in these enlightened days,
A courtly age should hold such vulgar ways?
Or that a blabbing prologue should disclose
Scenes, which no Muse of fashion ever shows.
No, Sirs, -- Sethona is the lady's name --
She lives at Memphis -- of unsullied fame:
A Tyrant wooed her -- but she liked another,
And once 'twas feared her lover was her brother.
As for the rest, a little patience borrow,
The Chronicle will tell you all tomorrow.
Authors are now so over modest grown,
They publish all men's writings, but their own.
But let no living bard conceive offense,
Nor take the general in a partial sense.
Peace to all such! the laboring be must feed
From flower to flower; perchance from weed to weed;
And should the comb unwelcome flavor yield,
The fault's not in the fabric, but the field;
The critic wasp, mean while upon the wing,
(An insect fraught with nothing but a sting)
Disturbs the inaustrious hive, for malice sake,
Marring that honey, which he cannot make.
An absent bard, engaged in distant war,
This night appears by proxy at your bar:
As over Arabia's wilds he took his way,
From sultry Ormus and the realms of day,
His active mind, superior to its toil,
Struck out these scenes upon the burning soil.
No cooling grottoes, no umbrageous groves,
To win the Graces, and allure the Loves;
No Heliconian fount wherein to dip,
And slake the burning fever on his lip;
Before him all is desert, waste, and dry,
Above him flames the tyrant of the sky;
Around his temples gathering whirlwinds fight,
And drifts of scorching dust involve the light:
Oh, snatch your Poet from impending death,
And on his shrine we'll hang his votive wreath.
EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mrs. BARRY. AS it is proved, by scholars of great fame,
That Gypsies and Egyptians are the same;
I, from my throne of Memphis, shift the scene,
And of the Gypsies, now step forth the Queen!
Suppose, that with a blanket on my shoulder,
An old stripped jacket, petticoat still older,
With ebon locks, in wild disorder spread,
The diadem, a clout about my head;
My dingy Majesty here takes her stand,
Two children at my back, and one in hand;
With curtsey thus -- and arts my mother taught,
I Will tell your fortunes, as a Gipsey ought:
Too far to reach your palms -- I Will mark your traces,
Which fate has drawn upon your comely faces;
See what is written on the cutward skin,
And from the title page, know all within:
First, in your faces To the Upper Gallery.
I will mark each letter --
Had they been cleaner I had seen 'em better;
Yet through that cloud some rays of sunshine dart,
An unwash'd face often veils the cleanest heart.
That honest Tar, with Nancy by his side,
So loving, leering, whispers thus his bride,
" I love you Nancy, faith and troth I do,
" Sound as a biscuit is my heart, and true;
" Indeed, dear Johnny, so do I love you."
Love on, fond pair, indulge your inclination,
You never will know, for want of education,
Hate, infidelity, and separation --
Some Cits I see look dull, and some look gay,
As in Change-Alley they have passed the day,
City Barometers! -- for as stocks go,
What Mercury they have, is high or low.
What Is in the wind which makes that Patriot vere?
He smells a contract or lott'ry next year;
Some Courtiers too I see, whose features lower,
Just turning patriots, they begin to sour;
What in your faces can a Gipsey see?
Ye Youths of fashion, and of family!
What are we not to hope from taste, and rank?
All prizes in this lottery? -- Blank -- blank -- blank --
Now for the Ladies -- I no lines can spy
To tell their fortunes -- and I Will tell you why;
Those fine-drawn lines, which would their fate displey,
Are, by the hand of fashion, brushed away;
Pity it is, on beauty's fairest spot,
Where nature writes her best, they make a blot! --
I Would tell our Author's fortune, but his face,
As distant far as India from this place,
Requires a keener sight than mine to view;
His FORTUNE can be only told by YOU.
ADVERTISEMENT.
COLONEL DOW, when he sailed for India, left the following Tragedy in the
possession of Mr. GARRICK. The event has shown, that the reputation of an
absent author could not have been trusted in safer hands. He spared no expense
as a manager, no pains as a man of taste. The Scenery is strictly
characteristical, and highly picturesque. The Dresses are magnificent and
expensive, the Parts cast with great judgment; and the whole conducted with
that regularity and ease, which can only be attained by a thorough knowledge of
the Drama, and the business of the Stage. Mrs. BARRY, possessed of every power
to touch, to penetrate, to dissolve the heart, exerted them in a degree that
astonished while it pleased the audience. Mr. BARRY was judicious, chaste, and
pathetic in Seraphis. Mr. REDDISH, spirited, and full of fire, in Menes. In
their respective parts, the two AICKINS deserved and received great applause.
Ample justice was done by Mr. PACKER, and others, to the rest of the
characters. The public, and the author, are indebted to Mr. CUMBERLAND, for an
elegant and classical Prologue: And to Mr. GARRICK, for one of the best
Epilogues that ever was pronounced from the stage.

Dramatis Personae.
SERAPHIS, King of Egypt, Mr. BARRY, AMASIS, Usurper of the Throne of Egypt,
Mr. AICKIN, MENES, next Male-Heir to the Crown, Mr. REDDISH, ORUS, High Priest
of Osiris, Mr. J. AICKIN, OTANES, Governor of Sais, Mr. PACKER, MYRTAEUS,
General of the Forces, Mr. DAVIES, OFFICERS, Mr. WRIGHT, Mr. WHEELER, and Mr.
KEEN. SETHONA, Daughter of Seraphis, Mrs. BARRY,
GUARDS, etc. etc.

SETHONA. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE, the Temple of OSIRIS, at MEMPHIS. ORUS, the High Priest, sacrificing at
the altar. SETHONA kneeling before the statue of OSIRIS. SETHONA. THOU power
divine! whose awful presence shakes
This sacred fane; if ever thy pitying hand
Was stretched to helpless mortals in distress,
O now protect a weak defenseless maid,
From Amasis, whose hands are drenched in blood,
The blood of Menes, dear-lamented youth!
And Seraphis, my father, Egypt's king.

ORUS. (advancing from the altar.) Lo! the devoted victims are consumed,
And all due rites of sacrifice performed,
Upon the altar of the great Osiris!

SETHONA. Thou sacred prophet! whose enlightened mind
Pierces the shades of dark futurity,
What have the gods decreed? Am I condemned
To wed my father's murderer? The man
Who tore my destined husband from my arms,
Even at the altar ever the rites began,
And left me thus to sorrow, to despair.

ORUS. Daughter of grief! Sethona! every hour
Changes the state of things. To day the sea,
Roused by the Northern wind, assails the sky,
And wears the face of ruin. Ever the morn
Unveils her eyes, it smooths its ruffl'd brow,
And holds a mirror to the stars of heaven.

SETHONA. Orus, I owe this emblem of my fate
To thy humanity. What ray of joy,
Can pierce the deep, dark dwelling of my soul,
Where Menes lies entombed?

ORUS. Time will unfold
More than thy hopes could cherish. Know, this night,
This present hour, is pregnant with events,
To me in part revealed.

SETHONA. Ha! what events?
The dimest shade of hope, in grief like mine,
Fancy may work to comfort.

ORUS. As I stood
Before the altar of Ammonian Jove,
In fervent meditation, I beheld
The towers of Memphis tottering, and the Nile
Rushing through all her gates. I heard a sound,
As when the winds, contending in their caves,
Disturb the mountains; saw the shadowy lines
Of banner'd armies closing in the air.
Streaming with blood, a headless trunk appeared,
Grasping a scepter. Over him strode in steel
The warlike form of Menes. Last uprose,
Dim through the gleam of arms, a hoary head
Encircled with a gorgeous diadem:
It seemed thy father!

SETHONA. Seraphis! my father,
And Menes? hapless ghosts!

ORUS. Peace to their shades!
'Twas but a vision of the mental eye,
The unbodied semblances of future things,
And not departed spirits.

SETHONA. Hope begins
To dawn upon me. In thy words I feel
The force of inspiration. Yet my grief
Succeeds, like darkness to the transient gleam
Of some deluding meteor! Can the tomb
Give up its dead? Can Menes hear my voice,
And rescue me from the detested arms
Of Amasis? Can Seraphis restore
The long extinguished glories of his line?
Can I forget my sorrow? Idle dreams!

ORUS. And yet, such dreams may take substantial forms.
Three days have not elapsed since from this fane
Menes was torn by Amasis, as yet
No certain tidings of his fate are known:
Though fame reports his death. Today his friend,
Noble Otanes, by the king's command
From Sais came, where he has governed long,
Averse from courts, with dignity and fame;
Worthy his high desent from Egypt's kings.

SETHONA. Oh, might I see him, ever the Tyrant's rage
Destroys his sacred life.

ORUS. Fear not his rage.
The fate of Menes has already raised
A storm in Memphis, that may shake his throne.
Otanes, on his entrance, has received
The highest honors by a subject borne.

Enter MYRTAEUS. (Orus retires to the altar.) MYRTAEUS. Prepare the nuptial
rites. The king approaches.

SETHONA. Alas, Myrtaeus! whither shall I fly?
Who can protect me! innocence is weak,
And tears, like the cold crystal drops in caves,
Can only serve to petrify the heart
Of Amasis.

MYRTAEUS. His soul is fierce, but love --

SETHONA. Speak not of love, from Amasis, nor think
So meanly of my virtue, of my faith,
And firm affection for departed Menes.
Though dead, his image dwells within my soul,
And leaves no room for others, -- all my joys
Were grafted on him. Now the tree is fallen,
And I am left to wither on the ground.

MYRTAEUS. Recall not thus the memory of the dead,
Nor rend the veil which nature kindly draws
Between us and the tomb; and yet my soul,
When thou complain'st, seems covetous of grief.
I could sit down and listen to thy tale,
Devour each piteous circumstance of woe,
And mourn with thee for ever.

SETHONA. Oh! Myrtaeus!
He was a friend most worthy of thy tears:
Humane, susceptible of the distress
Of others, but unshaken by his own.
Gentle in peace, but terrible in war,
As the rude blast, that from our desert pours,
Dark with the fate of armies.

MYRTAEUS. Ah! forbear;
You pierce my very soul.

SETHONA. O, could I fly
To some brown desert, far removed from man,
And in the shade of some poor lonely tree,
Beside a lingering stream, in silence sit,
And muse from morn to eve, from eve to morn.
Or tell my sister of the sky, that wanes
With me apace, the story of my woe;
There undisturbed, I might devour my grief,
Like some sad ghost, that nightly sits alone,
Pale, bending over the slowly twinkling flame
Of a decaying meteor.
(flourish of trumpets,
MYRTAEUS. It Is the king!

SETHONA. Whither shall I resort? Amid my foes
I stand alone, unpitied and forlorn!
[Exit Sethona.
Enter AMASIS attended. AMASIS. Why flies Sethona? Now the voice of mirth
Resounds through Egypt, and propitious stars
Combine to bless this hour?

MYRTAEUS. At thy approach
She suddenly withdrew, tears in her eyes
Her looks expressing anguish and despair.

AMASIS. The mere caprice of women, still afraid,
Or seemingly afraid of what they wish,
They fly but to delude --

MYRTAEUS. She sighs and talks
Of love and Menes, in such mournful strain,
As fills each eye with sympathetic tears.
She will not hear of comfort. Time, perhaps,
And gentle means, may sooth her mind to peace,
But force might now be fatal.

AMASIS. Fear not that.
Inform the princess we attend her presence.

MYRTAEUS. Too well she knows it. --
[Exit Myrtaeus.
ORUS. (descending from the altar.) Sovereign of the Nile!
Let not my words offend -- The gods forbid
The solemn rites. Whilst, in my hand, I held
The victim's heart it burst, and on the ground
Dissolved away!

AMASIS. Then let another bleed!

ORUS. Dare I advise, the nuptials were delayed
Till some propitious idle hour of peace:
For whilst the Ethiopian in his wrath
Threatens invasion, fame and glory call
For deeds of arms: and do thou yield to love?

AMASIS. Presumptious priest! thy sanctity, thy age,
And all those mystic symbols of thy god,
Shall not protect thee: -- speak the omens fair!

ORUS. O King! it is not for mortals to belie
The sacred will of heaven. The earth itself
Teems with uncommon births. The tombs appear
Deserted by their dead. The air is filled
With sounds; the streets with unsubstantial forms.
Great Ammon's helmet nods upon his brow,
Whilst he declares ambiguous oracles,
And frowns on Egypt.

AMASIS. Let him shroud the sun
In tenfold darkness, shake the solid earth,
Subvert the broad-bas'd pyramids; disclose
The oozy bottom of the frighted Nile,
My purpose stands unmoved. Then hence, away:
Let my commands be oracles to thee;
And Ammon may be silent.
[Exit Orus.
Enter SETHONA and MYRTAEUS. AMASIS. How long, Sethona, will thou arm those eyes
With cold disdain against me? Thus how long,
At awful distance, must I breathe my vows
Of love and constancy? The hour is come,
The nuptial feast prepared, and yet thou shun'st
My longing arms, as if contagion sprung
From every touch.

SETHONA. My looks have not deceived!
My soul detests thy person and thy name.
Have thou not been the scourge of all my race?
The bane of all my joys? and can thou hope
Returns of love for unexampl'd wrongs?

AMASIS. Forgive the past. The gods themselves forgive --
I have been much to blame. But if sincere
Repentance -- If the pangs of keen remorse
Could e're atone for guilt, I stand absolved
And hope for thy forgiveness. -- Hope for more,
Thy love -- For which alone I risqu'd my life,
And dared perdition!

SETHONA. Ha! it is a crime
To listen to thy words. -- I Will hear no more. --
My love is not for thee. The guilty thought
Would shake this sacred temple, and profane
The presence of the gods. -- The shades of night,
The midnight hour of silence, the dark tomb
Of Seraphis my father, the long line
Of ancestry, that darkly rest in death
Within the sacred pyramids; on these
My melancholy soul delights to dwell:
There let me wander and indulge my woes.

AMASIS. Can unavailing sorrow sooth the dead?
Deep are their slumbers, deaf their ear to woe!
Or did their spirits hover round -- can joy
Arise from our distress? Can those they loved
Afford them pleasure by incessant tears?
Then weep no more! -- Mount thou thy father's throne!
Egypt shall yield her scepter to thy hand,
And Africk's nations bend beneath thy sway.

SETHONA. Could thou enthrone me, 'midst the stars of heaven,
And say, the world that rolls beneath thy feet,
And all these splendid orbs around, are thine,
I would reject them, as the price of guilt,
Though pressed with all the miseries of life.

AMASIS. Enough of argument! Know then this hour
Shall make thee mine; shall bend thee to my arms;
Shall change these haughty frowns, and vain complaints;
To gentle smiles and murmurings of love.

SETHONA. Then know my soul, amidst my ruined state,
Maintains the dignity of Egypt's kings;
Looks down upon thee. -- Threats to me are vain.
My soul contemns them all!

AMASIS. By Egypt's gods,
You Are sovereign of my heart! the full extent
Of all my wishes! -- High, in regal state,
Thou shall command the nations. Princes, kings,
The Nile, the ocean, to thy feet shall bring
Their yearly tribute. Still my soul shall dwell
On thy perfections. Love shall crown our days
With joy, with transport --
(seizing her.
SETHONA. Spare me, Amasis!
I beg not for my life. I wish to die:
But if my tears, my prayers can move thy heart,
O let my wearied soul forsake the world,
In all its native innocence.

AMASIS. Arise,
Arise, Sethona! Do thou think my love
A spark, to be extinguished by a tear?
A flame, to be blown out with sobs and sighs?
A soft impression, melted by the breath
Of pity? No -- And would thou not despise
Such cold affection? Soon, within my arms,
Thy strange aversion shall be changed to love,
And thou shall wonder at thy own perverseness.

SETHONA. No -- never! never!

AMASIS. To the altar!

SETHONA. Here --
Here let me perish --

AMASIS. Thus I bear thee hence!

SETHONA. Inhuman man! tomorrow --

AMASIS. No -- this hour --
This moment!

SETHONA. Tyrant -- I will not betray
My faith to Menes!

AMASIS. Menes is no more!

SETHONA. Then grant this hour to grief --

AMASIS. Thou plead'st in vain;
In vain thou striv'st -- away --

SETHONA. (fainting.) O Menes, Menes!

AMASIS. Ha! whence this paleness? This is no deceit:
The blood retires. A transitory death
O'erwhelms her senses. -- Bear her to our halls!
[Amasis and Attendants lead her out.]
Enter MENES suddenly, ORUS following. ORUS. Menes, forbear!

MENES. It was Sethona's voice!

ORUS. Rash youth! thy frenzy ruins all our hopes.

MENES. As well thou might oppose the bolt of Jove,
Winged with his wrath. Away -- lest in my rage
Thou too should perish.

ORUS. Tread on my gray hairs,
I will not quit thee. Wherefore would thou rush
On certain death, and, in an evil hour,
Destroy the work of years, the fruit of all
Our expectations? Let not rage prevail --
A certain death, without revenge, attends
Thy rashness. Stay, this night, this very hour,
May crown thy hopes.

MENES. This moment fills my soul
With mortal anguish. In a state like mine
It were a crime to listen to the voice.
Of prudence. -- Wherefore thus obstruct my course?
Since full revenge is my determined aim,
Trust to my conduct.

ORUS. Whilst this storm of rage
Darkens thy reason, hence thou shall not stir.
Do thou despise my council? -- Have thou lost
All reverence for my friendship, for my age,
And sacred function? Is the life I saved
Unworthy of thy gratitude -- thy care? --
Young man, this frenzy suits not with thy fame.
A nobler passion now demands thy sword:
Egypt, amidst her tears, looks up to thee,
Her only hope! Not Amasis alone
Must perish, Tyranny itself must fall.

MENES. What noble purpose labors in thy mind?
I stand prepared. Orus, command my sword,
My life, my fame; but first let me behold
Sethona. In this moment of despair,
She may be lost for ever!

ORUS. Danger lies
Between thee and thy wishes: Yet to calm
This tempest of thy soul, a faithful slave,
At my request, shall quickly guide thy steps
Through the deserted passage, formed of old
By kings, who loved in secret to approach
The gods. But let not idle dreams of love
Ensnare thee by delay. With speed return
To hear, to execute a great design.

MENES. Whatever thy wisdom plans, is deemed by me
The will of heaven.

ORUS. Too long thou tarry'st here.
This is no place of safety. Moeris soon
Shall lead thee to Sethona. In thy cell
A moment wait. By my command, the slave
Shall there attend thee.

MENES. Nearest to the gods!
To thee I trust to save a dearer life
Than this which now I owe thee. To direct
My steps to glory, to revenge; to rouse
The warlike genius of our native land;
Armed with the wrath of heaven to crush the power
Of Amasis, and level in the dust
Those massy fabrics, which his pride has raised.
[ Exit Menes.
ORUS, alone. O that this night were past! and Seraphis
Again established on his ancient throne!
'Till then, I must not tell this gallant youth,
His high descent; that he, as Sethos' son,
Is nephew to the king, and Egypt's heir.
His headlong fury breaks through my designs.
I must invent some scheme to check his rage,
And stop the progress of his ill-timed love,
'Till from his throne usurped the tyrant falls.
Why stays Otanes thus? Conspiracies,
Like thunder clouds, should, in a moment, form
And strike, like lightning, 'ere the sound is heard.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, SETHONA 's Apartment. SETHONA. Entering in terror. SETHONA. HE finds no
rest in death! It bore the form
Of Menes! Dimly he arose through night!
He stood in silence! He pursues my steps!
Here I am left alone! My voice of grief,
Invades his dark repose! Again -- he comes!
Enter MENES. Thou awful shade, retire!

MENES. Away with fear!

SETHONA. It Is he! -- It Is he himself!

MENES. My soul's delight!
Once more I clasp thee to my panting breast.
This, this is more than joy!

SETHONA. Where have thou been?

MENES. Compose thy mind a while --

SETHONA. Since thou art safe,
Why should I question farther?

MENES. Thou shall hear,
But let not grief affect thy tender mind,
Or throw a damp upon this hour of joy.

SETHONA. Of joy, indeed! That gives me back my love!
Where have thou been? Oh, Menes, tell me where?
I will be calm -- but let me hear it all.

MENES. That day, on which we stood before the gods,
With willing vows, to consecrate our loves,
The tyrant's guards assaulted me unarmed,
And tore me from Osiris and from thee.
Through paths unknown, they led me to a cell,
Cast me in chains; then raising from the floor
A ponderous marble, to my view disclosed
A dark deep pit, a dreary sepulcher!
Headlong they threw me down, to dwell with night,
Famine and horror, solitude and death!

SETHONA. O dreadful state!

MENES. Cold, bruised, disconsolate,
With fetters galled, with mortal anguish torn,
I say, resigned to destiny.

SETHONA. Ye gods!

MENES. Then rising up, I crept along the walls,
From place to place, and often in my arms,
Embraced the embalmed dead! Through many a cell
I wandered cheerless. When a hollow sound
Rolled murmuring through the tombs. I wished again
For silence -- by degrees the noise approached --

SETHONA. Approached!

MENES. And soon a ray of livid light
Shot through the darkness. Then a form appeared,
That seemed not mortal, clad in vestments pure
As heaven's meridian beam. His beard was white,
And pale his aged visage, faintly seen
By the blue taper, in his trembling hand.
Towered me he moved; then claspt me in his arms,
And welcomed me to liberty and life. --
I knew him then for Orus.

SETHONA. Happy sight!
What brought him thither?

MENES. Often, at dead of night,
He visits his great ancestors. Released
From all my chains. I trod his cautious path.
Through winding ways, he led me to the fane
Of great Osiris. Where I scarce had stood
An hour concealed, when by thy voice alarmed
I rushed to save thee!

SETHONA. Still my fears intrude
Upon my joys. Is Amasis informed
Of thy escape from death?

MENES. He knows it not.

SETHONA. How came thou hither? Did thou pass unseen, Unknown by all?

MENES. My steps to thee were led
By faithful Maeris.

SETHONA. We Are betrayed and lost!
He, with the times, has changed. Our sorrows all
Proceed from Maeris. When before the gods
We pledged our vows of love, to Amasis
He bore the grateful secret, and received
The price of perfidy. While yet I speak,
Thy late escape is to his ear conveyed.
This fatal hour the tyrant's vengeance falls
Again upon thee, Menes! Thou must fly,
And leave me to my fate.

MENES. Thou do not mean
To wound my honor in the tenderest part,
By the proposal of a deed so base?
It must not be -- Our fate has made us one,
And what but death can part us?

SETHONA. Blame me not,
If my affection and my fears advised
The only means of safety.

MENES. Trust the gods,
Nor think of danger.

SETHONA. Think not that I fear,
The utmost rage of stern adversity,
Whilst thou art left. With thee I could be blessed,
Wrecked on a pointed solitary rock,
Though loud through night the spirits of the storm
Howled on the hoary deep.

MENES. That smile alone
Would calm the tempests rage. Wherever thou art,
There dwells my joy. A ray divine is poured
From heaven around thee, Sympathy of soul,
And finer feelings than the plant that shrinks,
From the light contact of an insect's wing,
Distinguish thee --

Enter an OFFICER, with a Guard. OFFICER. The king commands that Menes may be
seized,
For crimes of treason.

SETHONA. Ruin! Death ensues!

MENES. For treason? Hence! or this my sword --

SETHONA. Alas!

OFFICER. Put up thy sword. Thy rashness naught avails.

MENES. It Is better now to die in arms, than fall
Defenseless, unrevenged, by bloody slaves,
That murder in the dark. I will not yield.
Retreat, or perish.

OFFICER. Rush upon him --

MENES. Death
Awaits the man who dares advance --

SETHONA. O heaven!
O Menes, yield!

OFFICER. Why grasp ye thus your swords,
Yet look so pale? the orders of the king
Are death, should he resist.

MENES. Then welcome death!
When dire necessity presents the choice,
Of death, or of dishonor.

Enter OTANES and interposes. OTANES. Sheath your swords!

OFFICER. Then must Otanes answer to the king
For Menes.

OTANES. Soldier, hence!

OFFICER. Thy power must stand
Between us and his rage.

OTANES. It shall -- away --
[Exit Officer.
MENES. Otanes!

OTANES. Prop of my declining years!
Restored to bless my arms!

MENES. Restored to prove
New cause of sorrow.

OTANES. Fear it not, the gods
Are our protectors: Why in tears, Sethona?

SETHONA. Did thou not see these ministers of death?

OTANES. Give wing to hope. She cannot soar too high,
In this decisive moment of thy fate.
But Amasis may come. A while retire,
I must confer with Menes. Banish fear;
Our last resolves shall be conveyed to thee.

SETHONA. Thy words restore me from the wild abyss
Of horror and despair. May all the gods
Confirm thy hopes and prosper thy designs.
[Exit Sethona.
OTANES. Menes, thou know that with paternal care
I reared thy infancy and trained thy youth
To arms; with joy, from year to year, beheld
Thy ardent spirit kindling, as it flew,
To deeds of glory. Often in the field
I proved thy courage. Now the time is come
To prove thy fortitude. Thou must resign
Sethona to the king; or instant death
Awaits thy disobedience.

MENES. Ha! what means
Otanes? Yield Sethona! prove, at once,
False to my vows, a traitor to my love,
Detested, lost, dishonored! He that once
Falls, in his own opinion, falls indeed!
But he, that is conscious of his virtue, stands
Unmoved, the pressure of an adverse world.

OTANES. Menes, in any other cause but this,
Such noble sentiments I would approve;
But love awhile, must give a place to deeds
Of death or fame. This night I mean to raise
A King in Egypt, and subvert the throne
Of the usurper.

MENES. Shall it be to night?

OTANES. To night. The enterprise is planned and ripe
For execution.

MENES. When the tyrant falls,
Say, who shall reign in Egypt?

OTANES. Seraphis?
The loved, the lawful sovereign of the land;
Whose virtues equal his descent divine;
And, through the cloud of his misfortune, dart
A ray of glory round him.

MENES. Seraphis!
What do I hear? he perished in the Nile!

OTANES. So Fame reports. But still the monarch lives.
Today from Ethiopia, in disguise,
He is returned. There long he lay concealed,
A hermit in the desert. Stand prepared.
Our friends already fit their armor on,
And grasp their swords, with elevated hopes
Of glory and revenge! At my request,
Ciphrenus, who commands the eastern gate,
Fronting the royal palace, will admit
A powerful squadron, that, out flying Fame,
Advance from Sais. Orus, too, convenes
Some bold conspirators, within the walls.

MENES. Where do they meet in arms?

OTANES. At Ceops' tomb! --

Enter AMASIS, (suddenly.) AMASIS. Is Menes not in chains?

OTANES. O King, forgive
A crime that sprung from error, not design.

AMASIS. From error -- no! his crude ambition points
At Egypt's throne in fair Sethona's right.

OTANES. He never could cherish such ambitious hopes,
A youth of humble name.

AMASIS. Whence is he sprung?

OTANES. His sire in Seraphis's court was trained,
A man of virtue, though to fame unknown.
The gods bear witness, how my soul abhors
This fatal union. When, at Sais, first
His private purpose reached mine ear, to thee
With speed the fatal secret I conveyed.

AMASIS. Thou did, Otanes, and by that confirmed
Thy prudence and unshaken faith to me!
Yet such a crime, in Menes, merits death.

OTANES. May I not plead! --

AMASIS. Away, it is all in vain.
With fraudful arts, he won Sethona's soul:
Sethona, whom we loved and long designed
To grace our royal bed, to reconcile
The minds of factious subjects to our throne.

MENES. I loved Sethona! she returned my love;
Now she is mine, by all the holiest vows,
And would not violate, her plighted faith,
To share thy throne!

OTANES. Menes, what rage! --

AMASIS. Is thine!
Thy insolence! -- thy folly!

MENES. Art not thou
The guardian of the laws? And not the rod
Of vile oppression. -- It Is not meet that kings
Should break the chain, by which they bind mankind
And show the world examples of injustice.

AMASIS. Presumptuous man! -- this instant let him die!

MENES. (putting his hand to his sword.) Away! ye slaves or death --

OTANES. (aside.) All, -- all is lost!
O Menes, Menes! thou have ruined all.
Remember, ah! remember. Yield thy sword
(aloud) Dare thou oppose thy sovereign? Dare thou raise
Thy sword against Otanes?

MENES. I submit.
My life is in thy hands

AMASIS. Let him be led
To public execution. Let mankind
Learn from his fate, their duty to the throne.
(Menes is carried off.
OTANES. (kneeling.) My king! my sovereign, hear me!

AMASIS. Cease old man!
Would thou avoid our rage, forbear to plead
The cause of treason. Hence! I Will hear no more!
[Exit.
OTANES. Confusion! ruin! his unbridled rage
Has drawn the tyrant's vengeance on his head,
'Ere all our friends are armed. What now remains?

Enter SETHONA. SETHONA. Gone, gone for ever! They have torn him from me!
Hark! was not that his voice?

OTANES. I heard it not.

SETHONA. It is! it is!

OTANES. No whisper stirs the air;
Thy grief perverts thy senses. Still the power
Is thine to save him.

SETHONA. Ha! what power is mine?

OTANES. Consent to wed the king.

SETHONA. To wed the king! --

OTANES. His death shall free thee, 'ere the nuptial rites
Can be performed: A bold conspiracy
Is pointed at his life. This hour he falls!

SETHONA. This very hour! ye gods!

OTANES. Confide in me.
Feign full submission; on thy knees implore
His clemency. Thy honor shall remain
Safe and inviolate.

SETHONA. Thy plot may fail!

OTANES. It rests with thee.

SETHONA. With me it shall not rest.

Enter AMASIS. AMASIS. What do thou here, Sethona? why in tears?
Why art thou thus the constant prey of grief,
When joy prevails around?

SETHONA. Why do thou ask?
Oh, pardon Menes! spare him, Amasis!
Or give me instant death.

AMASIS. They death to me
Were more supportable than thy disdain.

SETHONA. Then it is decreed: The hour that Menes falls,
Shall be my last.

AMASIS. This tempest of my soul,
Which you, like some malicious goddess, raised
To wreck my peace, shall overwhelm you both,
Since you must sink together.
(going.)
OTANES, (aside.) Sooth his rage;
Menes must perish, all our schemes must fail,
Should thou not flatter him with hopes of love.

SETHONA. Still hear me, Amasis!

AMASIS. Of this no more.

SETHONA. Alas! what happiness can thou propose
By hastening my compliance: Time might work
A change in my affections. Generous minds
Disdain a cold return; and still derive
Their greatest joys, from those which they confer.

AMASIS. Persuasive woman! Know my pride, that brooks
Not opposition, fires my bosom more
Than all thy boasted charms; nor can the flame
Be quenched but with his blood. Haste, let him die!

SETHONA, (kneeling.) Stop, cruel man! O, Amasis, revoke
The fatal sentence! let thy heart relent,
I will be grateful.

AMASIS. It is now too late:
The power is mine.

SETHONA. Then use it like the gods,
In mercy.

AMASIS. In the punishment of crimes!

SETHONA. Is there no hope?

AMASIS. No -- none!

SETHONA. What would thou have?

AMASIS. I ask thee nothing.

SETHONA. Am I then so poor,
So abject in thine eyes?

AMASIS. No more! -- arise.
Leave me, Sethona!

SETHONA. Do thou mean to stain
Thy nuptial hour with murder?

AMASIS. Urge me not,
It Is weakness thus to hear thee.

SETHONA. On that hour
Do thou refuse one poor request!

AMASIS. Command
The wealth, the power of Egypt.

SETHONA. Wealth and power
Will now avail me nothing. Are thy fears
So great? Does Menes --

AMASIS. Fears! We know no fears;
Protected by our valor, by our power,
Our mind remains unshaken as our throne.
Once more to gratify thy will, to show
Our just contempt of Menes, set him free.
(to his guards) Nay, let him join the foe, dispute the field.
Then shall thou see, that Amasis excels
(to Sethona.) Alike in arms, in honor and in fame.
Call Menes hither.
(to his guards)
OTANES. Wherefore should the king
Thus condescend! His madness, his despair
May still insult thy clemency --

AMASIS. Away!
Let him approach.

OTANES. Sethona, leave this place.
Yield to the pressure of the present hour.
Bend to the tyrant's wrath. Seem to consent.
Obey my words. Depart.

SETHONA. How hard to feign
In love like mine! He comes --

Enter MENES. AMASIS. Bold youth, advance.
Sethona, yielding to our love, redeems
Thy life, but fly beyond our spacious realms,
Or we revoke our mercy.

MENES. Speak, Sethona!
She turns from me in silence. Bear me back
To death.
[Exit Sethona.
AMASIS. Thy doom is fixed. You Are banished from this hour.
Sethona wills it, and her will is fate.
Guards, bear him hence, without the palace gates
Strike off his chains -- and should he loiter here --
By all the gods, that guard our throne, he dies.
[Exit.
MENES. Am I awake? Undone. Forever lost!
O woman, born to change! are these her vows?
A desperate purpose labors in my breast;
I Will blast their rites, throw death amidst their joys,
And whelmed beneath the ruin, leave my woes.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SETHONA 's Apartment. Enter MENES. MENES. THIS secret path, which led me once
to joy,
Now ministers to vengeance. From the fane
Unseen, unheard, I have emerg'd to light,
Like some disastrous power on dark designs,
What doubt remains? O jealousy! I feel,
I feel thy serpent-tooth! Thou torturing fiend!
Thy rage some dreadful sacrifice demands.

Enter ORUS. ORUS. Menes, why tarry here? Our gallant friends,
Already met, now grasp their eager swords,
To free devoted Egypt. Thee they call
To lead them on.

MENES. Away, I claim no aid
To favor my revenge: No tedious forms
Of war, or slow conspiracy. My wrongs
Arise, like armies, round me. This my sword
Shall quickly dash the tyrant's hopes of joy.

ORUS. What frenzy fires thy mind, when thousands wait
To join their valor and their hopes with thine?

MENES. Whilst they prepare, my purpose must be lost,
The tyrant triumphs in Sethona's love.
My swelling soul some enterprise demands,
Great with uncommon danger, longs to rush,
And pour the tyrant's blood around his throne.

ORUS. Some demon, hostile to our cause, inspires
Thy frantic mind to ruin all our hopes;
To quit the certain prospect of revenge,
And give Sethona to the tyrant's arms.

MENES. Ha! name her not. To thee I owe my life.
Oh! show me now the noblest path to death.
Preserve my fame -- myself thou must not save.

ORUS. Then join thy friends. It is the noblest path
To fame, the surest to obtain revenge.
Lead on the war. Let conduct be combined
With valor. Amasis, though unprepared,
Has great resources in his active breast,
And fortitude approved.

MENES. The boldest course
To vengeance is the best. The glorious shock
Of arms, to which thy cooler counsel leads,
Is suited to my soul. I Will join our friends,
And lead the battle, 'till these lofty towers,
These palaces, these temples of the gods,
Shall mark the greatness of my rage with ruin.
[Exit Menes
ORUS. As yet an hour remains. The nuptial rites
Are not begun. I fear his headlong rage
Will drive him on, ever the appointed time,
Ever all our friends, like long imprisoned winds,
At once from different quarters, rushing forth
Begin destruction. Ha! what aged form
Moves slowly hither? Do my eyes deceive?
Or is it Seraphis? Defend him, gods!
Enter SERAPHIS. O king, beware! Alas, what weighty cause
Provokes this danger?

SERAPHIS. Shall my only hope
Be thus dishonored? Shall she meanly stoop
To wed the base usurper of my throne?
No: rather let destruction whelm our house,
And leave no monument of their disgrace
In Egypt.

ORUS. Seraphis, thy friends are armed.
The nuptials must proceed. The festive hour
Will favor our designs, and banish thought
From the pervading mind of Amasis.
Menes advances. On his sword depends
At once our fortune, and thy daughter's fate.
Retire to safety.

SERAPHIS. Yet this very hour,
Perhaps this moment, hurries her along
To foul dishonor. Shall I offer up
So fair a victim, for a doubtful point
Of policy? like some devoted prey,
Shall she be thus deserted, to allure
The savage to our toils? shall not my eyes
Behold her, ever the busy hand of death,
May close them up for ever?

ORUS. Yet my fears.
Should Amasis --

SERAPHIS. No danger shall withhold
My steps from where my honor, where my fame
Demand my presence. In this low disguise,
This sacred character, that finds access
Unquestioned to the privacy of kings,
I will approach Sethona, will preserve
My child from Amasis, and stand prepared
To join my friends, when their victorious arms
Approach.

ORUS. All ye gods, preserve,
Protect my sovereign! I will soon convey
Thy high commands to Menes.
[Exit Orus.
SERAPHIS. Guide my steps,
Thou great Osiris!

Enter SETHONA. SETHONA. Lost! I am betrayed,
Pressed to the verge of ruin, covered over
With guilt, with shame, with horror, with remorse,
Deserted, sunk, forlorn!

SERAPHIS. (aside.) It is my child!
My daughter!

SETHONA. Wherefore do I drag this life
Of misery, as if I feared to die;
Or that the deep dark mansions of the grave
Could not afford a refuge from my woes.
I will not tarry here. Ha! who art thou?

SERAPHIS. (aside.) This bosom tells me --

SETHONA. Venerable sage!
Intrude not on my sorrows. Now I hold
No converse, or with wisdom or the wise,
Despair and terror, solitude and grief,
Are my companions.
(going.)
SERAPHIS. Yet with patience hear --

SETHONA. Who talks of patience in the ear of grief?
But recommends the good we cannot find.
Ah! whither shall I fly? Who can protect
My innocence?

SERAPHIS. The gods.

SETHONA. The gods, alas!
Have left me to my woes.

SERAPHIS. Art thou not soon
To be a queen?

SETHONA. To be no more.

SERAPHIS. Alas!
I dare not blame thee.

SETHONA. Wherefore do thou weep?
The scourge of years, through this detested world,
Has not deprived thy tender heart of pity.

SERAPHIS. Too much I feel.

SETHONA. Does not thy age afford
A refuge from affliction?

SERAPHIS. None. These hairs
Have long been whitening in the winds of heaven,
Yet now I bend beneath a load of care,
That still augmenting sinks me to the grave.

SETHONA. O, could I give thee comfort. -- Thou art poor.
Fortune has left me nothing.

SERAPHIS. Yet on thee
My only hope depends.

SETHONA. Take, take my all,
My pity --

SERAPHIS. It Is too much -- give me thy hand
That I may bless thee. All ye gracious powers,
Look down! --

SETHONA. Thou good old man, why thus partake
In my affliction? Wherefore gaze upon me?

SERAPHIS. Such was thy mother's beauty in her prime.

SETHONA. My mother!

SERAPHIS. Yes -- thy mother!

SETHONA. Did thou know
The queen of Egypt?

SERAPHIS. Ah! this bosom still
Retains her image.

SETHONA. In thy poverty,
I might have read our fortune. Thou have served
My father to thy ruin!

SERAPHIS. Can thou fold
A secret in thy breast?

SETHONA. A secret!

SERAPHIS. Yes.
Call forth thy resolution.

SETHONA. Ha! What strong
Emotions swell thy breast?

SERAPHIS. My heart will burst.

SETHONA. Why do thou tremble?

SERAPHIS. All my strength has failed.

SETHONA. The weight of years is on thee. Small my strength,
Yet thou shall be supported, poor old man!

SERAPHIS. Come to my arms, thou dearest to my soul,
I am --

SETHONA. Who art thou? Speak! --

SERAPHIS. It is too late.
(Flourish)
SETOHNA. Unfold thyself. -- Thou shall not thus depart.

Enter AMASIS and OTANES. AMASIS. Sethona, still in tears? Why this delay?
With whom do thou so earnestly confer?
Who and from whence art thou?

OTANES. Distraction! ruin!
(aside) His name is Pheron.

AMASIS. Some divining priest,
Charged with false oracles.

SETHONA. Upbraid him not,
His only crime is poverty, which throws,
In such a venerable form, reproach
On thee and fortune. Pheron I would speak
With thee in secret.

AMASIS. When the god of love
Is hovering over the altar, and prepares
To crown our vows with joy? Lead on.

SETHONA. In vain
Thou striv'st to bear me hence. My soul is moved
By this unhappy stranger. He has served
My father. Pheron, tell me all thy tale.

OTANES. He may attend tomorrow --

SETHONA. No, Otanes!
A virtuous deed should never be delayed.
The impulse comes from heaven, and he who strives
A moment to repress it, disobeys
The god within the mind.

SERAPAIS. Now, bent with age,
And creeping to my grave, my wants are few,
But not the less my gratitude. -- To me,
My own reflections prove a full reward,
For all the good that threescore years and ten,
Have put within my power; nor do my crimes
Darken my eye of life.

AMASIS. From whence art thou?

SERAPHIS. That day on which inconstant fortune fled
The standard of the king, wedged in the flight
Of an inglorious squadron, I was borne
Unwillingly from death. -- The burning climes
Of Ethiopia have been since my home;
At length desirous of a quiet grave
Among my kindred, in my native land,
I ventured to return, and now resign
Myself with joys to the decrees of heaven.

AMASIS. His looks appear familiar to my eyes,
Nor seems his voice unknown.

SERAPHIS. In former times,
I was not here a stranger.

OTANES. (aside.) Now my fears
Press hard upon me -- Gods!

AMASIS. Art thou not sent
From the Ethiopian camp, to spy the state
Of Memphis?

SETHONA. Nothing wounds an honest mind,
Like undeserved suspicion.

AMASIS. He recals
The memory of thy father.

OTANES. All is lost!
(aside.
SETHONA. The memory of my father! let me trace,
Those venerable features that recall
The sad remembrance of the best of kings.

AMASIS. Thousands beheld him sinking in the Nile,
And yet I could suspect --

Enter MYRTAEUS. (hastily.) MYRTAEUS. O king, thy slave
Has an important secret for thine ear.

AMASIS. Thou shall be heard -- Otanes, lead him hence,
In secret question him, and search his soul.
[Exit.
SETHONA. (to Otanes.) Befriend the hapless. To the aged be kind.
Pity demands of thee, with double claim,
To save this guiltless stranger from his foes.
[Exit.
AMASIS. (advancing with Myrtaeus.) Speak, brave Myrtaeus!

MYRTAEUS. A conspiracy,
This hour is formed against thy crown and life.
While yet I speak they come.

AMASIS. Ha! who are these
Who league with Ethiopia? Dare the slaves
Whom favor raised, rebel against their Lord?

MYRTAEUS. The dark design, in partial whispers came
This instant to mine ear. -- Some daring chiefs
Are arming round the palace, and conspire
To place some other sovereign on the throne.

AMASIS. Haste, rouse the strength of Memphis. Let our guards
Be changed; the traitors seized; the gates secured;
A chosen squadron of our bravest troops
Reserved to guard us.

MYRTAEUS. It Is already done.

Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. To arms, to arms! the f^es already shake
The power of Memphis, bear our squadrons down.
And now advance, with Menes at their head.

AMASIS. What force remains?

OFFICER. Some troops are still in arms.

AMASIS. And so is Amasis. We lead them on.
[Exit.
Enter SETHONA. (Thunder and shouts at a distance.) SETHONA. O what a night of
horror! now the moon
Is darkn'd in eclipse. The air is filled
With streaming meteors. Murmuring thunder rolls.
The broad firm earth shakes with the tread of hosts,
That murder in the dark. The groans of death
Roll on the winds of heaven. Ye gods, look down,
Protect our cause! Let Menes' sword prevail
(shouts increase.) Again! It is the storm of war and death!
Who can survive the conflict?

Enter ORUS. (in terror.) ORUS. All is lost!

SETHONA. Speak; tell me all!

ORUS. Our friends retreat:

SETHONA. Alas!

ORUS. I fear, I fear, the aged king is slain!

SETHONA. What aged king?

ORUS. Thy father, Seraphis!

SETHONA. My father! Whether does thy frenzy lead,
To tell me now, what many years have told?

ORUS. This very instant he led on the war.

SETHONA. Thy fears distract thee!

ORUS. Yes, my fears are great,
But I possess my reason. Seraphis,
Thy father, lived amid the strife of arms,
This hour, in Memphis. Long he lay concealed
In Ethiopia, thence of late returned
In poverty's disguise, to fall, in age,
By the victorious arms of Amasis.

SETHONA. Is nature changed? Or do my senses stray
In the wild mazes of a troubled dream,
Where all is wonder? Woe succeds to woe!
The dead mix with the living, and the work
Of years is crowded in a single hour:
It cannot be! Alas, too sure I wake!
O that I now could sleep to wake no more!

ORUS. Ye gods of Egypt, soothe her mind to peace!

SETHONA. The aged hermit was the king himself!
My father Seraphis! O had I known
That, on my knees I might have kissed his feet,
And have received the blessings of a parent.
All -- all is silent -- Menes too has fallen!
My fate is dark around me. Farewell, Orus.
[Exit Orus. Forsaken, unprepared, weary of life,
Oppressed with woes, above my failing strength,
My limbs will not support me. Over my eyes
A cloud of darkness falls. The hated world
Fades on my sight. The clay-cold hand of death
Is heavy on my heart. Here let me rest,
(falls on a couch. And take my leave of sorrow. Sacred light!
Ah! whether do thou fly! Depart, ye shades,
Crowd not upon my soul!
(faints.
Enter MENES. MENES. My coward friends are fled. Dishonor, shame,
And ruin follow them. Ha! there she lies!
She seems to sleep. Despair, revenge, inspire
My soul with deadly rage. Do odours breathe
From such a poisonous plant? Does innocence
Pour divine radiance on the face of guilt?
She smiles! She dreams of joy! I Will turn aside
My eyes, least courage fail. I cannot err --
O that the deed were done! --
My hand shakes, my limbs totter, the warm blood
Already streams upon me. At my heart,
I feel the dagger's point. Horrid revenge!
Give, give me resolution.

SETHONA. (recovers.) Menes! Ha!
A dagger -- strike! --

MENES. Call -- call not back to light
These sinking furies.

SETHONA. In those deadly frowns,
Those looks of horror, I perceive my fate;
Thy adverse fortune. Amasis prevails.
Strike. Save my honor, and thy own.

MENES. Thy honor!

SETHONA. Now I am lost indeed! Let thy revenge,
Thy rage, have scope. I have deserved it all!

MENES. Do thou repent!

SETHONA. Alas! the gods themselves
Can grant me nothing, when condemned by thee;
Then give me death.

MENES. What! did thou not consent
To wed the tyrant?

SETHONA. Ha! to wed the tyrant?
Could thou suspect me of that base design?
Alas, I Have loved in vain! To save thy life,
I feigned submission to the tyrant's will;
My purpose gained, I meant to lose my own.

MENES. (throws away the dagger, and kneels.) O that my death could half
redress thy wrongs!
Throw, spurn me from thy feet! my guilt, my crimes,
Exceeds forgiveness! horror, rage, remorse,
Torment a wretch, unworthy to possess
Virtue, that seems to emulate the gods!

SETHONA. Menes, arise! I know thou were deceived!

MENES. Do thou embrace me?

SETHONA. Never more to part.

MENES. No, never more! Then let me lead thee hence,
Through the loud tumult of this fatal night,
To the dark caves of death; those dreary cells,
Where Egypt's monarchs lie. There all our friends
Retreat for safety.

SETHONA. I will follow thee,
As if the gods of Egypt led the way.
Protected by thy arm, I know no fear;
But where thou art not, terror whelms my soul.

END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, the CATACOMBS. SERAPHIS. THIS is the house of death! The dreary tomb
Of Egypt's ancient kings! What now remains
Of all their glory, but these mouldering piles,
And these imperfect, mutilated forms
Of what they were? The period of my fate
Will soon be closed. An undistinguished blank,
Perhaps succeeds. What then? To know it not,
Is not to be unhappy. Yet the soul
Looks through the gloomy portal of the grave,
To happier scenes of immortality.
O let not such a pleasing hope be vain!
Eternity, thou awful gulf of time,
This wide creation on thy surface floats.
Of life -- of death -- what is, or what shall be,
I nothing know. The world is all a dream,
The consciousness of something that exists,
Yet is not what it seems. Then what am I?
Death must unfold the mystery!

Enter OTANES. OTANES. My king!

SERAPHIS. My friend, Otanes.

OTANES. Still misfortune pours
Her storms upon us. What remains?

SERAPHIS. To die!

OTANES. Be that the last resource of our despair.
Some friends surrounds us.

SERAPHIS. Vain are all our hopes.
When, in full sail, conspiracy receives
An unexpected shock, it splits, it sinks,
To rise no more!

OTANES. Though death has thin'd our ranks,
Thousands remain.

SERAPHIS. Those lions, that had broke
Their chains to range at large, now trembling, hear
Their keeper's voice; and diffident of strength,
Crouch to the lash. My hopes are all cut off
In Menes. O had I beheld my son!

OTANES. (aside.) It Is well. He knows not that he has no son.
Orus has naught disclosed. His state requires
The secret should be kept. -- He still survives,
[To Seraphis. Like the immortal spirit of a storm,
Who stirs with joy the elements to war,
And strides amidst the ruin!

SERAPHIS. Still a ray
Of joy descends on my departing hour.
My son displays the spirit of his race,
Still braves his adverse fortune, and pursues
A glorious death, while we stand loitering here
To meet the most ignoble.
Otanes, let us hence, and meet the fate
That best becomes our dignity and fame.

OTANES. Dispose of me; and yet our post is strong;
Through Memphis, thousands will assert thy cause
And hasten to thy rescue.

SERAPHIS. Shall a king!
The race of heroes, honored as divine,
Be dragged in fetters, through a scoffing crowd;
Cast in some filthy dungeon, there to die
Of rage, or lengthened torture, or indulged
To fall by bafe assassins? Much I owe
To thee, Otanes; for thy loyalty;
Thy firm adherence to a failing cause;
Thy care of Menes, in his tender years;
Yet all has proved in vain. My wayward fate
Involves my friends in ruin.

OTANES. I have done
No more than duty and the state required,
And should I fall, I fall in the support
Of justice. It Is the noblest fate of man!
[Noise without.
SERAPHIS. Our foes advance. Let me have done with doubt.
I must not be the last to meet my death;
As if I feared to quench the lingering flame
Of an expiring life.

OTANES. I will explore
The cause of this alarm
[Exit Otanes.
SERAPHIS. (Noise continues.) My fame receives
A wound, at every stroke. The time has been,
When I could bear my armor with more ease.
Nor seemed this sword so heavy in my hand.
But though my body feels the frost of age,
When danger threatens, or when glory calls,
Some youthful vigor still inspires my soul.
[going.
Re-enter OTANES. OTANES. Our efforts all are vain; the foe has seized
The gate, and rushes on us! It Is too late!

SERAPHIS. Otanes, no! It Is never too late to die,
But when we live to shame. One last resource
Remains to man, when fortune frowns the most,
One general refuge from the ills of life.
My remedy I grasp. This faithful friend
Shall set me free.
(offers to stab himself.
OTANES. O stop thy frantic hand.
What means my lord, my king?

Enter MYRTAEUS with his party, who disarm him. MYRTAEUS. (To Seraphis.) So old
a traitor must not thus escape.
Another death awaits. -- Ha! who art thou?

SERAPHIS. The king of Egypt! Seraphis!

MYRTAEUS. so great,
So bold, and so unfortunate! My eyes
Belie my recollection, if to me
Thou art not known, by a much dearer name,
Though not so lofty. Pheron!

SERAPHIS. Thou art not
Deceived.

MYRTAEUS. Thus on my knees let me embrace
Those holy feet, that led me to thy cave,
And saved my life, from famine and the foe,
When banished to the desert.

SERAPHIS. Rise, Myrtaeus!
I well remember thee in thy distress,
Thou see me now in mine.

MYRTAEUS. And thus my heart
Speaks gratitude. -- The life thy bounty saved,
The light thy dictates poured upon my soul,
Are now at thy command. Forgive the past,
And trust my future conduct. Whilst I thought
That fate had numbered thee among the dead,
I yielded to the pressure of the times,
And bowed to Amasis. But now thou liv'st,
I mean to serve thee, with a zealous heart,
As my protector and my lawful king.

SERAPHIS. My noble friend! I fear thy valor now
Will naught avail. Our troops are all dispersed,
And Memphis pours her armies round the throne
Of the usurper. All our hope is flight.

MYRTAEUS. It must not be. Should thou desert our walls
Thy cause is ruined. Here thy name alone
Is more than armies. The command I bear
Is great. My late discovery of the plot,
Gives Amasis unbounded confidence
In my affections. Here thou may be safe,
Concealed within the cave? whilst I attempt,
By promises and arguments, to draw
The troops from their allegiance. Thou, Otanes,
Safe in my conduct may instruct thy friends
That range without a leader, where to meet
And wait my further orders, to renew
The daring enterprise.

SERAPHIS. Thou counsel'st well;
The bold succeed the best. It Is now no time
To play a game of caution. Fortune loves
Her ravisher. We must not fear her frowns,
But bind her to our purpose.

BOTH. We obey.
[Exeunt.
SERAPHIS, alone. My hope once more emerges from the cloud
Of my distress. The moment that appeared
Charged with the execution of my fate,
Brought safety. Ha! I hear the tread of feet
This way approach. Perhaps it is the foe.
Here in the dark recesses of the cave,
I will be safe.
(Goes into the tomb.
Enter SETHONA. SETHONA. Is this the appointed place? No friends are here,
But my departed ancestors, that feem
To becken me to their eternal rest!
O Menes, Menes! Wherefore would thou rush
Amidst the foe, nor suffer me to share
Thy danger and thy death. How dreadful seems
This moment of suspense? But hark! A groan!
I fear to listen. These dim lamps expire!
I shall be left in darkness! Something stirs,
Within the cave! Who 'ere thou art, appear --
It comes! Art thou the living or the dead?
Substantial form or mock'ry of the brain?
Why mov'st thou thus in silence?

Enter SERAPHIS, SERAPHIS. Let not fear --

SETHONA. Approach me not! -- Who art thou?

SERAPHIS. I am he!
That gave thee life.

SETHONA. My father, or my God?

SERAPHIS. Thy father!

SETHONA. Seraphis!

SERAPHIS. The same; the same;
Come to my aged arms, my lovely child!

SETHONA. My father! -- O my father!

SERAPHIS. Let not joy
Overwhelm thy tender soul. Why do thou weep?

SETHONA. Alas! I know not why; yet think my tears,
Are not the tears of sorrow. Let me lean
Upon thee. Never did my head before,
Recline upon a father's breast.

SERAPHIS. Perhaps,
It never may again.

SETHONA. Short was my dream
Of joy. I wake and see a shoreless sea,
Of trouble round me.

SERAPHIS. Still we grasp a reed
Of Egypt's broken strength. Does Menes live?

SETHONA. His fate's uncertain! Striving to escape,
We met the foe. Conjuring me to fly,
He stopped and fought; though many were the swords,
That gleam'd around him. -- If he lives some god
Must yield protection. But my fears --

SERAPHIS. I owe
Much to his valor; though he knows me not.
Should I succeed, I mean to make him king.
If not, the grave will prove the whole extent
Of our dominions.

SETHONA. Menes well deserves
The highest pitch of greatness, bears a soul,
That from its native ardour, still aspires
To that perfection, which enables man
To mix with the immortals. How my heart
Exults with joy, to hear my father thus
Approve my choice and sanctify my love.

SERAPHIS. Thy choice! thy love! explain thy words --

SETHONA. Alas!
Thy looks condemn me! yet, my heart declares
My innocence.

SERAPHIS. I hope it does!

SETHONA. My fears!
Again arise! -- yet why should I deny
What I esteem my greatest happiness,
By love, by fate impelled, I pledged my vows --

SERAPHIS. To whom? --

SETHONA. To Menes.

SERAPHIS. Horror! fly my sight.

SETHONA. What have I done to merit every woe,
The wrath of heaven can pour upon my head?
Is he not worthy?

SERAPHIS. Most unfit for thee.

SETHONA. If I have failed in duty take my life;
And, with my blood, blot out my crime; nor thus
With words, more sharp than daggers, pierce my soul.

SERAPHIS. I must unfold --

SETHONA. Ha! what would thou unfold?

SERAPHIS. A dreadful secret, which thou ought to know.

SETHONA. O tell me what it is --

SERAPHIS. That Menes --

SETHONA. What of Menes

SERAPHIS. Is thy brother.
(Sethona faints.) I Have been too rash,
The time was most improper. Hark! what sound
Comes ecchoing through the tombs! Against the wall
I see the shadow of an armed man.
Revive, Sethona! O my child, revive!
I must convey her to my dark retreat.
(leads off Sethona.
Enter MENES. MENES. I saw some ruffian bear Sethona hence,
As if he were her murderer. Tenfold night,
The deepest grave, the mansions of the dead,
Shall not conceal -- shall not defend -- he dies!
He dies if he is mortal.
(rushes into the tomb.) Who ever thou art, come forth --

SERAPHIS. Rash man, forbear!

SETHONA. (within.) O Menes! spare my father, spare the king --

MENES. (re-entering.) Forth to the light.

SERAPHIS. Remorse pursues the deed.

MENES. Who art thou? --

SERAPHIS. Seraphis, the king, thy father.

MENES. (throwing away his sword.) The king! ye gods -- thus prostrate at thy
feet,
Let me implore forgiveness.

SERAPHIS. Rise my son --
I do forgive thee. Come to my embrace.

Enter SETHONA. (from the cells.) MENES. (going to embrace her.) She lives --
she lives!

SETHONA. Away! avoid my arm.

MENES. What means Sethona? What has Menes done?
Thou dearest to my soul! --

SETHONA. Speak not of love --

MENES. Not speak of love!

SETHONA. Thy father will explain --
Thou art --

MENES. Thy husband. Seraphis approves;
And calls me son --

SERAPHIS. (embracing him.) My son indeed! my hope!

MENES. Thou art too kind, what merit can discharge
This gratitude I feel? what words excuse
My love, that dared presumptuously to rise
To thy fair daughter? I had cause to fear
Thy high displeasure, but thou giv'st me all,
Without her there is nothing. --
(Noise without.) Ha! behold,
The tyrant comes. My sword --

AMASIS and a party rush in. ATTENDANT. (taking up the sword of Menes.) It now
avails thee not.

AMASIS. The gods are still
The friends of valor, none deserves to wear
A crown who cannot defend it. In thy age
Attempts thou, what thy youth could not perform?
We have a cell for hermits.

MENES. Faithless man!
Do thou exult in villainy? -- It Is not
Thy valor, but thy fortune that prevails;
And if thou dare to doubt it, render back
My sword and try thy courage, with my youth;
Nor meanly thus, with vaunting tongue, insult
The venerable dignity of age.

AMASIS. Audacious traitor! Do thou hope to fall
By royal hands? It is the task of slaves
To punish such as thee.

MENES. Thy fears prevail.
Twice did thou shun me in the ranks, withdraw
Behind the shields of braver men, who paid
The price of life to save thee.

AMASIS. Bear him hence,
And let his burning frenzy cool in chains.
His tortures shall be equal to his crimes.
(guards seize Menes.
MENES. Yes, bear me hence! -- A coward ever finds
A subterfuge from danger. King of Egypt,
And thou fair mourner over a father's woes,
Farewell for ever!

SETHONA. Yet a moment stay --
Behold my death -- Relentless tyrant, here,
Here, plunge thy sword. -- It was the lightnings flash,
(looks distractedly.) The earth is rent, the wide abyss unfolds;
Deep, deep and raging. -- Roll me in the skirt
Of that descending cloud! I see thee not --
O Menes! Seraphis! ye will not leave
Your poor Sethona!

MENES. Tyrant! see -- behold!
The ruin thou have made. -- The furies sleep!
The bolt has fallen from the right hand of Jove. --
The voice of thunder is not heard in heaven.
Farewell for ever! -- Oh my king! -- my love!
Bear me to death. The rack itself appears
A place of slumber. In the last extreme,
One object of ambition still remains
With the exalted mind -- it is to die
With fortitude
(Menes is carried off.
AMASIS. Be Seraphis secured;
And bear Sethona to our royal halls.

SETHONA. Fear not the tyrant. Thou art Egypt's king.
They come! they come! Thy gray hairs will defend --
Thou see them not -- thy eyes are dim with age.
Raise not your bloody hands. Away, away!
Pity my father. He is weak and old --
They shall not kill thee, whilst I clasp thee thus --
(embracing Seraphis.
AMASIS. Tear them asunder --

SERAPHIS. Tyrant! though I meant
With just contempt, without a word or groan,
To bear thy utmost tortures, and support
With dignity, the rigor of my fate.
Yet thou have found a way to make my heart
Pour forth its anguish. Have thou no remorse,
Thus to oppress me with a father's grief?
Give me thy tortures, yet if justice dwells
Among the gods, the vengeance due to guilt,
Shall fall on thee.

AMASIS. (to his Guards.) Haste, force them from this place.

SERAPHIS, Tyrant! the power is thine. But still I scorn
Thy utmost efforts. Come to my embrace,
My poor unhappy daughter -- Now, farewell!

SETHONA. Hold, cruel men! ye shall not tear me hence.
Leave me! they pull too hard. He is my father!
Alas, we part for ever!

SERAPHIS. Child beloved!
We part to meet again. Thy tender soul,
Already on the wing, prepares for flight.
Soon shall thou join my spirit as it flies,
And leave behind thy anguish and thy woes.
[They are both carried off.]
AMASIS. These rigours dire necessity demands.
But still, though wild ambition steels my heart,
I feel some pangs of nature at their grief.
Fool that I am! -- Compassion to my foes
Is cruelty, perdition to myself!
This feeble fit is vanished with the scene,
And all the vigor of my soul returns.
[Exit.
END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, the court before a PRISON. AMASIS. O Royalty! What joys have thou to
boast,
To recompense thy cares? Ambition seems
The passion of a god. Yet, from my throne
Have I with envy seen the naked slave
Rejoicing in the music of his chains,
And singing toil away; and then, at eve,
Returning peaceful to his couch of rest.
Whilst I sat anxious and perplexed with cares;
Projecting, plotting, fearful of events:
Or like a wounded snake, lay down to writhe,
The sleepless night, upon a bed of state.
But I am plunged too far into the stream,
To gain the shore I left. -- They both shall die.

Enter ORUS guarded. GUARD. O king, we found this priest amidst the foe,
Bearing aloft the image of his god;
Invoking heaven, with prayers, to aid the cause
Of Seraphis. Encouraging his friends,
With prophecies and lying oracles,
And divinations fatal to his lord.

AMASIS. His prophecies and vain portents we scorn;
False are his arts. Say, do the gods approve
Of treason?

ORUS. Never; and for that the gods
Have disapproved of thee. A subject born,
A minister in trust; did thou not seize
Thy master's throne by perfidy? Pursue
His life with rancour? Trample on thy foes,
And scourge the world as w^^h the wrath of heaven.
Roused by a nation's woes, this great revolt
I meditated long. My duty done,
I leave the rest to heaven.

AMASIS. Do thou confess
Thy crime?

ORUS. My virtue. When the aged king,
On thy revolt, amidst his flying host,
Was headlong borne into the Nile, and, there,
Supposed to perish. Of the ancient race,
Two infant princes were by me concealed;
In hopes, one day, I might restore the line.
The heir of empire, and the only son
Of Sethos, younger brother to the king.
One died in youth. The other still remains.

AMASIS. Thou hoary traitor tell me where? Or death --

ORUS. My lips are sealed. Not prompted by my fear,
I spoke, but from the fullness of a heart,
Exulting in its enmity to thee.

AMASIS. Prepare to feel the torture.

ORUS. That I scorn.
The more I suffer in a virtuous cause
The more my glory. When we vanquish fear,
Tyrants may rage in vain! To me thy frowns
And menaces are triumphs.

AMASIS. (to his guards.) Bear him hence,
And prove his fortitude^

ORUS. When death awaits,
I would not seem to linger.
[Exit Orus guarded.
AMASIS. Well he bears
The weight of his misfortune. Seraphis
And Menes too must die. He still appeared
Of doubtful origin. Perhaps the son
Of Sethos. Doubts are vain. It Is folly now
To trust to fortune. In these cells they lie.
(To his guards, two of whom enters the cells.
[A Storm. Thunder.] Enter SETHONA, distractedly. SETHONA. Osiris thunders! yet
the tyrant lives,
Whilst Seraphis and Menes are no more!
O that my spirit, like that transient beam,
Would take its course upon the veering winds.

AMASIS. Why come thou thus, Sethona? Hence, retire!

SETHONA. (not observing him.) It is the melancholy bird of night,
Perched on that mouldering battlement, that screams
Her boding notes of woe. Ye hideous forms,
That dimly rise upon the night, and float
In the wild tempest of the troubled air!
Roll not your mournful voices on the storm.
Away! Your awful gestures are in vain,
All -- all my fears are vanquished by my woes.

AMASIS. She must not tarry here!

SETHONA. What groan was that?
In that dark cell I heard the sound of chains.
This is my way! that taper shall direct
My steps. Ye awful spirits of my race,
I come to join you in your dark repose!
(going.
AMASIS. Sethona, stop. Let me convey thee hence.
Why do thou gaze upon the vaulted roof,
As if some god descended; or the heavens
Were opened to thy view?

SETHONA. The cloud is broke!
Behold him mounted on the cherub's wing!
His white beard streams in air! The red drops fall
Upon me! He was old! Hard was the heart,
And ruthless was the hand!

AMASIS. She heeds me not!
Excess of grief has almost quenched the light
Of reason in her mind.

SETHONA. Was ever love
Like mine? Pale as the watery cloud his face!
Cold, cold his breast, and silent is his tongue!
His ruby lips! Sethona, like the be,
Sucked honey from the rose! I knew not then
He was my brother!

AMASIS. How her frenzy burns.
It runs on Menes.

SETHONA. When his bright eyes rolled,
I looked not at the sun; and when he spoke
My fingers dropped the lyre. This wound was death.
It bleeds! it bleeds! This breast was void of guilt.
Why do I weep? Tonight I am the bride,
The bride of Amasis. These wedding robes
Will prove my winding sheet.

AMASIS. Remorse begins
To fasten on my heart. I feel, I feel,
That guilt, like the envenomed scorpion, bears
Its own death's sting. Her frenzy seems to add
New luster to her beauty; and those eyes
Were not so piercing, when the milder beams
Of wisdom tempered their resistless power:
And yet the form alone remains. The light
Is gone, and, like the dim orb of the moon,
She labors in eclipse.

SETHONA. Hark? Who art thou?
Give me thy hand.

AMASIS. What would thou with my hand?

SETHONA. Away, away! wash out these purple stains!

AMASIS. It is too late.

SETHONA. Too late! who murdered them?

AMASIS. Ha! how she probes my heart, where most inflamed?

SETHONA. Why do I tarry here? Let me behold
Their bleeding wounds!
[going.
AMASIS. (stopping her.) It must not, shall not be!

SETHONA. Tyrant away! My sorrows cure themselves,
And vanquished nature finds repose in death.
The fountain of my tears is dry, my eyes
Burn with the raging fever of my brain.
It Is he! it is Menes! Oh, I follow thee!
Rolled in that shadowy mantle, thou shall bear
Sethona from her woes.
(rushes out.
Enter OFFICER hastily. AMASIS. What of him?

OFFICER. His squadron's rushing onward, loudly call
For Seraphis and Menes.

AMASIS. Thus I grasp
A sword that never failed of victory.
[Exeunt.
Enter SERAPHIS, and Guard from the prison. GUARD. No further order comes. I
wait in vain --
The hour is past. The king must be obeyed!

SERAPHIS. The king! behold thy king! -- thy ancient lord,
Whom thou would murder, soldier, well thou know!
The tyrant, Amisis, usurped my throne.
And yet thou serv'st him in a deed that draws
The dreadful vengeance of the gods upon thee.

GUARD. The gods have placed me in the rank of slaves,
And it is my duty to obey that lord
Whom fate has set above me.
(noise without.
SERAPHIS. Yet delay
A moment. Stop the hand of death. My hopes
Are not extinguished -- Many are my friends
In Memphis. -- Fortune suddenly may change
And thou shall be rewarded. --
(noise continues.)
GUARD. Certain death
Attends my disobedience. Haste, prepare
To die! --

SERAPHIS. I have a message to convey
To poor Sethona.

GUARD. It Is too late --

SERAPHIS. Ye gods receive my spirit!

MENES, rushing in between, in his chains, from another cell. MENES. Slay me
first --

MYRTAEUS and his party rush in and interpose. MYRTAEUS. Forbear, assassin!

SERAPHIS. Ha! my gallant friend!

MYRTAEUS. My royal master! my beloved prince! --
Strike off their chains.

MENES. Is Amasis alive?

MYRTAEUS. I saw him not in battle.

MENES. Still there is room
For me to share the glory --

Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. Amasis
Puts all to flight.

MENES. We soon shall stop his course.
Give me thy sword. The force of Memphis now
Shall not avail him. Whether does he turn
The tide of battle?

OFFICER. From the brazen gate
He bursts upon us.

MENES. We shall meet him there.
[Exit.
SERAPHIS. Let us support the prince. Though Amasis
Is great in arms, our fortune may prevail.
The worst event will change a shameful death,
To one of glory in the front of war.
[Exeunt.
Enter SETHONA, from the other side of the stage. SETHONA. These are the cells
of my departed race.
I find them not. In vain I search around,
What tomb conceals them? Whither are they borne?
O Menes! Menes! hear'st thou not my voice?
Sethona's voice, who comes, in her despair,
To mix the blood, that warms her heart, with thine.
Stretch forth thy pale hand, from that airy shroud,
And roll that cloud of sorrow from thy brow.
The blast of night is in my ears. The voice
Of dying winter does not thus complain.
Is there no rest for mortals in the tomb?
Think not I mean to tarry. He is gone --
He turns with horror from a sister's love!
A load of guilt lies heavy on my soul!

Enter AMASIS. suddenly. AMASIS. The gods descend in arms! --
Hurling their terrors, midst my flying host,
Blasting my glory! -- Ha! behold the cause
Of shame, of ruin! -- Wherefore should she live,
The joy, the triumph of my mortal foe? --
Prepare for death --

SETHONA. Art thou so much my friend?

AMASIS. Thy friend! -- thy murderer -- Ye gods! she smiles
Secure in her enchantments. What is man
When thus opposed? Disastrous star, that shed'st
Thy fatal influence over my life, thou fall'st! --
Thou fall'st! and darkness shall involve my soul.

SETHONA, kneeling. Look down, Osiris, let my spirit find
Repose in death. O Menes, to thy rest
Receive Sethona, with a brother's love --
Strike here! Thou murderer of my race -- behold.

AMASIS. A bosom armed with more than tempered steel.
Invulnerable beauty! --

SETHONA. Ha, thy wrath
Thy bloody purpose I embraced with joy.
But now I fear thy pity. Grant me death,
Nor look upon me, but with deadly rage.

AMASIS. Thy scorn demands it. -- Fury steels my heart,
And vengeance points the dagger; -- now thou dy'st,
A sacrifice to love, -- revenge -- despair! --

Enter MENES. MENES. Stop, murderer, stop --

AMASIS, quitting Sethona. Advance, thou trembling slave!

MENES. Perfidious man! In me behold a foe
That never turned from danger. -- Were the strength
Of thousands on thy sword, my joy would rise
To meet thee thus in arms.

SETHONA, retiring behind. Thou power supreme!
Protect our cause and thine.

AMASIS. Vain boy, approach!
Words will no more avail. --
(they fight, Amasis falls.
MENES. Thus perish traitors!

AMASIS. Thou have prevailed. Receive thy valor's prize.
The man that conquers Amasis, deserves
His throne, nay more, Sethona's love. -- My guilt --
My guilt o'erwhelms me. By no vulgar hand,
I die. -- The gods by thee avenge my crimes --
[dies.
MENES. The gods are just! Thou source of all my joys!
(advancing to Sethona.
SETHONA. Hence, shun me, fly me, tear me from thy heart.
Revoke thy vows, lest the offended gods
Should pour their fury on our guilty heads.
The bar of nature, and the wrath of heaven,
Are placed between us.

MENES. Ha! thy frenzy still!

SETHONA. Yes, Menes, yes; my frenzy well may burn.
Yet now, by reason, I Am too well informed
Thou art too near allied to me in blood!
Did not thy father tell thee? Scraphis!

MENES. Ha! what of Seraphis! My doubts arise.
Burst not my anxious heart. Reveal! reveal!

SETHONA. Thou art -- alas! how can I speak the name?
Thou art -- my brother!

MENES. Brother! All ye gods
Look down! What heavier curse remains in heaven
To crush my wretched head? What powerful charm
Works on these new creations of the night,
And sets our jarring senses every hour
At variance? I am lost!

Enter SERAPHIS, MYRTAEUS, OTANES, and ORUS. SERAPHIS. This way the prince
Pressed forward on the so. Advance with speed.
He leads to victory!

MENES. (showing his breast.) Here sheath your swords.

SERAPHIS. The tyrant! stretched beneath the hand of death.
Now all is safe. Thy fortune has prevailed.

MENES. Yes, to my ruin!

SERAPHIS. Ha! no wound appears!

MENES. Within this bosom is a mortal wound.
I am thy son. Sethona is my sister.

ORUS. Banish thy grief. No sister ever was thine.
Thy birth, though long concealed, at length is known.
Thou art the son of Sethos.

MENES. Sethos' son?

SERAPHIS. I know it all. My brother's only child!
Sethona now is thine.

MENES. Receive, ye gods!
The praise your goodness claims. Now joy returns,
And gladdens all my soul. Again, my love,
I may infold thee in these longing arms.

SETHONA. O, Menes! heaven, in this alone, repays
All, all our sorrows.

SERAPHIS. Join your hands. The gods
Their choicest blessings shower upon you both,
As the sun cherishes the subject world;
Or as the devious Nile dispenses joy
And plenty where it flows; so may your virtues
Diffuse bright happiness, over all the land.

MENES. My king! my father! such I call thee now.
My loved Sethona!

SETHONA. Now no tyrant lives
To bar our love. Osiris now assents.

SERAPHIS. Arise, my children. Still I have a son!
Sethona too is safe. My joy is full.
Since, now, my day of life declines apace,
My daughter and my scepter shall be thine.
Thy care, Otanes, shall direct his steps,
And make his kingdom flourish. Thou, Myrtaeus,
Versed in the business of the field, shall guide
His youthful valor. None of all our friends
Shall be ungratified. Nor shall our foes
Repine at our success. To conquer seems
Less worthy of our glory, than to spare.
[Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.
PRINTED FOR T. BECKET.
This Day is published, In two Volumes, Quarto, with a new and accurate Map,
Frontispieces to each Volume, and several other Engravings. The 2d Edition,
revised, altered, corrected and greatly enlarged. Price 1l. 10s. in boards. THE
HISTORY of HINDOSTAN, from the earliest Account of Time, to the Death of Akbar.
Translated from the Persian. With a Differtation concerning the Religion and
Philosophy of the Brahims. 2. The History of Hindostan, from the Death of
Akbar, to the complete Settlement of the Empire ader Aurungzebe. To which are
perfixed, 1. A Dissertation on the Origin and Nature of Despotism in Hindostan.
2. An Enquiry into the state of Bengal; with a Plan for restoring that Kingdom
to its former Prosperity and Splendour. In one Vol. 4to. Price 1l. 1s. in Boards.

3. TALES, Translated from the Persian. In two Vols. 5s. sewed. 4. ZINGIS; a
Tragedy, in Five Acts, 1s. 6d. The above are written by ALEX. DOW, Esquire.
Lieutenant Colonel in the East India Company's Service. 5. The POEMS of OSSIAN.
Translated by JAMES MACPHERSON, Esquire. in two Vols. New Edition, carefully
corrected, and greatly improved. 10s. 6d. in Boards. 6. The ILIAD of HOMER.
Translated by JAMES MACPHERSON, Esquire. The Second Edition, revised throughout,
and carefully corrected. 2 Vol. Royal 4to. 1l. 11s. 6d. in boards. 7. An
INTRODUCTION to the HISTORY of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND; or, An Inquiry into
the Origin, Religion, future State, Character, Manners, Morality, Amusements,
Persons, Manner of Life, Houses, Navigation, Commerce, Language, Government,
Kings, General Assemblies, Courts of Justice, and Juries, of the Britons,
Scots, Irish, and Anglo-Saxons. By JAMES MACKPHERSON, Esquire. The 3d Edit. revised
and greatly enlarged. In One Vol. 4to. 15s. in Boards. 8. MEMOIRS of RUSSIA,
from the Year 1727 to the Year 1744. Translated from the Original Manuscript of
the Baron de MANSTEIN. Illustrated with Maps and Plans. The 2d Edit. carefully
corrected throughout, and greatly improved. In One Vol. 4to. 18s. in Boards.

