A SCHOOL FOR GREYBEARDS; OR, THE MOURNING BRIDE: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS. AS
PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

BY MRS. COWLEY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

MDCCLXXXVI.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

AN ADDRESS.
I OFFER the following Comedy to the public, under a circumstance which has
given my mind the most exquisite uneasiness. On the morning after the first
representation, it was observed by the papers that there had been persons
present at the Theater the preceding evening, who went there determined to
disapprove at all events. From such a determination it is hard indeed to
escape! And the opposition intended, was justified it seems, by the indecency
of some of the expressions. -- From such a charge I feel it impossible to
defend myself; for against an imputation like this, even vindication becomes
disgraceful!

As I was not at the Theater, I should have had some difficulty in
understanding at what passages the objections were levelled, had not one of the
papers recorded them, with many cruel remarks. The particulars which were thus
pointed out, will, I trust, be a sufficient apology for themselves. In the
following pages they are all restored; that the public AT LARGE may have the
power to adjudge me, as well as that small part of it, confined within the
walls of a Theater.

These passages have not been restored from any pertinacious opinion of their
beauty -- for other expressions might have conveyed my intention as well; but
had I allowed one line to stand as altered for the stage, what might not that
reprobated line have been supposed to express? I shrink from the idea! And
therefore most solemnly aver, that the Comedy, as now printed, contains EVERY
WORD which was opposed the first night, from the suspicion of indelicacy;
hoping their obvious meaning only will be attended to, without the coarse
ingenuity of strained explanations; which have been made, by persons who seem
desirous to surround my task of dramatic writing, with as many difficulties as
possible.

A celebrated Critic, more attended to for the discrimination and learning
which appear in his strictures, than for their lenity; in his observations on
the Greybeards, has the following.

When Mrs. Cowley gets possession of the spirit and turn of a character, she
speaks the language of that character better than any of her dramatic
cotemporaries.

This, I confess, I hold to be very high praise; and it is to this very praise,
which my cotemporaries resolve I shall have no claim. They will allow me,
indeed, to draw strong character, but it must be without speaking its language.
I may give vulgar o^ low bred persons, but they must converse in a style of
elegance. I may design the coariest manners, or the most disgusting folly, but
its expressions must not deviate from the line of politeness. Surely it would
be as just to exact from the Artists who are painting the Gallery of
Shakespeare, that they should complete their designs without the use of light
and shade.

It cannot be the Poet's mind, which the public desire to trace, in dramatic
representation; but the mind of the characters, and the truth of their
coloring. Yet in my case it seems resolved that the point to be considered, is
not whether that dotard, or that pretender, or that coquet, would so have given
their feelings, but whether Mrs. Cowley ought so to have expressed herself.

This is a criterion which happily no author is subjected to, but those of the
drama. The Novelist may use the boldest tints; -- seizing Nature for her guide,
she may dart through every rank of society, drag forth not only the
accomplished, but the ignorant, the coarse, and the vulgar-rich; display them
in their strongest colors, and snatch immortality both for them, and for
herself! I, on the contrary, feel encompassed with chains when I write, which
check me in my happiest flights, and force me continually to reflect, not,
whether this is just? but, whether this is safe?

These are vain regrets, which I hope my readers will pardon me, for having a
moment indulged. I now hasten to that part of the Comedy which will be found in
the following sheets, as altered for the second representation.

The idea of the business which concerns Antonia, Henry, and Gasper was
presented to me in an obsolete Comedy; the work of a poet of the drama, once
highly celebrated. I say the idea, for when it is known that in the original
the scene lay amongst traders in the city of London -- and those traders of the
lowest and most detestable manners, it will be conceived at once, that in
removing it to Portugal, and fixing the characters amongst the nobility, it was
hardly possible to carry with me more than the idea. The circumstance which
most particularly interested me, and fixed itself in my mind, was that of
snatching a young woman from a hateful marriage, the moment before that marrige
became valid -- that is to say, after the ceremony. This very circumstance to
which the Comedy owes its existence, was that, which some of the audience found
discordant to their feelings. An event which had in the last century been
stamped with the highest applause, (though surrounded by many repulsive
circumstances) was found in this, to be illconceived. I did not, however,
dispute the decision of my Critics, -- and the marriage has been in course
dissolved.

The manner in which the Comedy has since been received, gives room to suppose
that the alteration is approved. It has struggled with many oppressive
circumstances: the chasm in the performance, occasioned by the repeated illness
of Mr. Parsons, was sufficient to have sunk it; -- but neither that, nor the
sterile month of December, always against the Theaters, has prevented its being
distinguished by many brilliant and crowded nights. I now resign it to the
closet, where without the aid of fine acting, or the fascinations of beauty,
and deriving all its little force from the pen which composed it, it hopes
still to amuse; -- the innocent flame of Seraphina's coquetry may still shed
rays of delight on her readers, and the affecting situation of Antonia interest
them.

H. COWLEY.

PROLOGUE.
BY MR. COBB.
SPOKEN BY MR. BANNISTER, JUN. PROLOGUES, like mirrors, which opticians place
In their shop windows, to reflect each face
That passes by -- still mark how fashion varies;
Reflecting Ton in all her wild vagaries:
Point out when hats and caps are large or small,
And register when collars rise or fall.
Caricature the fashionable hobby;
And tell if boots or shoe-strings grace the lobby:
Nay, bolder grown, have sought for your applause,
With many a naughty joke on cork and gauze.
Yet howsoe'er the saucy comic muse
Delights fantastic fashion to abuse,
From pert Thalia's wit let us try to save her,
And see what can be said in fashion's favor.
How many own immortal Handel's sway,
Since fashion to the Abbey led the way!
There taking long neglected nature's part,
She hailed him Shakespeare of the harmonic art.
In vain had warbled Galatea's woe,
If fashion had not bid the tear to flow.
"Hailstones and fire" had spent their rage in vain;
You might as well have heard a shower of rain.
But now, awakened to his magic song,
Folks wonder how the deuce they have slept so long.
His tortured airs, all voices made to suit,
His chorusses adapted for a flute.
Hand organ, hurdygurdy, tambourine;
In Handel's praise all join the general din.
When Miss is teiz'd to sing by every guest;
And fond Mamma, too, joining with the rest,
Cries, "Get the new guittar Papa has bought you;
Play the last lesson Mr. Tweedle taught you."
Miss hems and simpers -- feigns a cold of course;
After the usual "Dear Sir, I Am so hoarse,"
Instead of a cotillon from her book,
Where favored Handel triumphs over Malbrouk.
By way of prelude to the charming squall,
Thrums like a minuet the March in Saul.
Papa too, who a connoisseur now grows,
Accompanies divinely -- with his nose.
Since music is so universal grown,
Shall not our Mourning Bride its influence own?
Sure it is the wish of every female breast
That harmony may soothe her cares to rest.
Guided by harmony's enchanting laws,
Her sweetest music will be your applause,
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Don Alexis, Mr. KING. Don Gasper, Mr. PARSONS. Don Octavio Mr. PALMER. Don
Henry, Mr. KEMBLE. Don Sebastian, Mr. BANNISTER, Jun.
Donna Seraphina, Miss FARREN. Donna Antonia, Mrs. CROUCH. Donna Viola, Mrs.
BRERETON. Donna Clara, Mrs. CUYLER. Rachel, Mrs. WRIGHTEN. Cartola, Mrs.
WILSON.
Bride Maids, Ladies, Servants, etc.
SCENE, Portugal.

SCHOOL FOR GREYBEARDS; OR, THE MOURNING BRIDE.
ACT I.
SCENE, An Apartment at Don Sebastian's.
Enter two Servants, on opposite sides. Pedrillo. SO our Master is dressing, to
dine with Don Gasper today, previous to the wedding ceremony.


Jaquez. Yes -- Gad the bride will be well matched! there is hardly a richer man
in Lisbon.


Pedrillo. Well married you mean; -- as to the match, you might have made a
better, between a canary bird and a jack-a-lantern. Sixty-five and eighteen, is
a union full as vapoury and unnatural.


Jaquez. Now you have done it! Prithee who can that stranger be, so muffled up,
without?


Pedrillo. I know not -- he takes as much pains to hide his face, as though he
had stolen it.


Jaquez. Silly! -- stolen faces are always shown off the most boldly; witness
our Ladies, after they have been robbing the rouge pots. But as to this
stranger! he says he comes from our Master's friend, Don Henry.


Pedrillo. Hah! does he so? What that Don Henry who was obliged to fly, for
having fought a duel?


Jaquez. The same. Hang me if I Would be playing at hide-and-seek in foreign lands,
for drawing a little blood. I Would go boldly to court, and ask to speak to the
Queen's Majesty, and fall upon my knees, and say --


Pedrillo. Hist; here comes Don Sebastian.

( Enter Sebastian.) Here is a stranger waiting without Sir.


Sebas. Who is he?


Pedrillo. Truly, Sir, I cannot discover. I have questioned and cross questioned
him to no purpose -- he is as dexterous at shifting an answer, as though he was
foster-brother to a lawyer.


Jaquez. But he says, Sir, he came from Don Henry, -- he who was obliged to fly
his country for challenging the --


Sebas. Hah! Where is he? ( going to the wing) No, bring him hither -- bring
him instantly! The brave unfortunate Don Henry! This hour will be to him, the
heaviest of his life. ( he enters) Welcome, Sir! the friend of Don Henry cannot
find a house in Portugal, where he would be more joyfully received.


Henry. What, Sir! dare you thus receive the friend of a banished man? -- of a
man, who were he seen in Lisbon, would have his head claimed the next hour, by
the executioner? If thus you can receive his friend, how will you receive
himself? ( Throwing open his cloak.)


Sebas. In my arms, and in my heart! I re -- no, I do not rejoice. Oh Don
Henry, what imprudence! How dare you venture hither before your pardon has been
obtained?


Henry. Could you suppose the intelligence of Antonia's marriage, would suffer
me to rest in any other spot, that the proud sun visits? Had I been beneath the
zone from whence he pours his broadest rays, or in the dusky regions of
Cimmeria, such intelligence must have impelled me hither!


Sebas. And to what purpose? Surely this is a sort of Quixotism, that must end,
like the sublime Knight's contention with the windmills.


Henry. I care not how it ends. The displeasure of my sovereign, and my heart
torn by the ingratitude of the woman on whom it doats -- the sooner the end
approaches, the better!


Sebas. I am not now to learn, how hard it is, to stem the torrent of your
passions -- yet if you would be patient, all might be well. -- At least I trust
so; though my visit to England, at that period, prevented my knowing precisely
the ground of your quarrel.


Henry. Quarrel! ( with contempt) Do you then suspect it was a fray in which I
fought; or that my sword is drawn in tavern brawls; or to support the
insolence, or perfidy of an abandoned wanton? Duels of that sort, a soldier
stoops not to!


Sebas. Pray then inform --


Henry. I fought to punish the slanderer of him, who taught me how to fight --
the brave D'Almeida; that once conquering hero!


Sebas. I knew him well.


Henry. 'Twas he first placed a sword upon my youthful thigh; and drawing forth
the burnished blade, never my Henry, said the hoary general -- "never be its
luster stained, except to serve your king, or vindicate your friend! These are
the outlines of a soldier's duty; -- would you be a perfect soldier? Labor to
be an exemplary man!" with that sword -- I thank it! ( holding his sword, and
bending over it) I punished his traducer!


Sebas. Surely you cannot doubt of pardon.


Henry. But, whilst I wait for pardon in another kingdom, my Antonia's lost --
oh!


Sebas. Is she not already lost?


Henry. No, she is not -- and by heaven she shall not! She Is my contracted
wife; -- no power on earth can make her another's, whilst I live.


Sebas. All this, my friend, only proves the bitter excess of your
disappointment -- have you any settled scheme?


Henry. I have. -- At Madrid it chanced that Don Julio, nephew to old Gasper my
rival, conceived a warm attachment for me. -- From him I learnt the news of
this abhorred marriage -- the agonies it threw me in, he compassionated; and
formed a scheme, which wears a face of success.


Sebas. Alas! -- it is -- well, but pray go on.


Henry. Learning that my person was unknown to Don Gasper, whose retired life
throws him out of all public circles, Julio conceived the resolution to make me
pass for himself.


Sebas. You to pass for Don Gasper's nephew -- well!


Henry. With this view he pretended an ardent desire to visit Portugal. His
father has in course written to Don Gasper; we both arrived last night, and
Julio has given me the letter, which will fix me in the house of my rival; to
prevent, by whatever means that may offer themselves, the design upon my honor
-- the robbery of my wife!


Sebas. My dear unhappy Henry, summon your fortitude whilst I tell you, that
Don Julio's friendship, united with your own temerity, cannot save your honor
-- if your honor is to be wounded by -- ( shaking his head.)


Henry. What Is that? oh speak Sebastian -- my apprehensions choke me!


Sebas. I cannot give found to words so cruel -- but fly, and save that life,
which if you are discovered here, must be forfeited.


Henry. Hah -- I understand you -- she is married! she is married! Antonia is
another's! Oh, Sebastian -- let me breathe! ( throwing himself on Sebastian.)


Sebas. Courage man! if you would but swear a little now, and give all the sex,
black, brown, and yellow, to the devil, I should have some hopes of you.


Henry. Oh!


Sebas. There Is no bearing this! a fine young fellow yielding himself to
despair, at the very moment his perfidious mistress is giving herself to
another! This very day she weds Don Gasper.


Henry. This very day said thou? -- oh, speak it again Sebastian -- bless me
with the sound! is it this very day?


Sebas. Alas! he is mad.


Henry. Oh, no; if it be but this day, there yet are hopes. --


Sebas. She is now in the house of your rival. According to the custom of our
country, she this morning went there, attended by her bride-maids; and in the
evening old Gasper receives her vows.


Henry. They are mine! -- in the face of heaven, and before witnesses they are
mine; -- if she has given them to another they cannot be valid, but by my
assent. I Will fly instantly to the house --


( going.) Sebas. Nay, suffer me to attend you; for though I have dear and tender
cares of my own, I shall scarcely be awake to them, whilst my friend is in such
danger!


Don Henry. Oh, Sebastian! the bliss or misery of all my years to come, must be
determined before the approaching night has told out half its hours. The
enterprise is difficult -- is full of danger! but what danger can be formidable
to a wretch, who, precipitated on a gulf, must leap it, or be lost? Exeunt.


SCENE changes to Don Gasper's.
He enters, meeting Rachel. Don Gasper. Well Rachel, how is my little girl? how
is the bride? Are her spirits got up? What does she do? -- What does she say?


Rachel. Oh lord, Sir, she says but little; and as to doing, a half stifled
sigh pops out now and then, or else she is as still as an ivory statute.


Don Gasp. Statute! but why don't you talk to her then, Mrs. Statute; and tell
her how happy she is? You should say do you see ma'am what a fine house you are
mistress of? -- do you see ma'am how many servants are at your command? -- and
this rich casket of jewels ma'am, which my master presents to you -- how many
ladies will envy you these jewels! -- Did not her eyes sparkle when she found
them on her toilet?


Rachel. No, Sir; but they glittered -- for there was a tear in each.


Don Gasp. Tear! ay tears of joy, to be sure!


Rachel. The bride-maids and the rest of the ladies endeavored all they could
to divert her, but to no purpose -- so I up, and said -- says I, laws! ma'am,
you are the happiest lady in Portugal. My master is the most agreeablest man
for an old -- I mean a middle-aged gentleman -- that was the word indeed, Sir!
for a middle-aged gentleman in all the world. He Is never out of temper, nor
peevish, except when he has got the gout.


Don Gasp. Pshaw!


Rachel. Then says I, Ma'am, as to wrinkles -- Lord, what signifies minding a
few wrinkles? Why, in forty years, Ma'am, you will be as wrinkley as he is.


Don Gasp. What the devil did you talk to her of wrinkles for? Wrinkles! to be
sure I have the crow's feet about my eyes; but many men have them before they
are thirty.


Rachel. That Is true. Then says I, as to my Master's teeth, Ma'am, they are as
white, and even, and polished -- ay, as your Ladyship's! And so they are you
know, Sir -- they have been home but a fortnight.


Don Gasp. Zounds! Get into the kitchen, and go near your Lady no more. Was
there ever such a stupid chattering --


Rachel. It Is nuts to me to sting him, for I pity the poor young creature from
my soul. Exit.


Don. Gasp. I don't know whether it is stupidity or archness in the wench -- I
am afraid she means to laugh at me. Hang me if I would have married at all, if
my son would have married; but families must be kept up; and nothing can
persuade that young dog into the trammels -- he would rather turn monk than turn to
matrimony. ( Enter servant) Well, you saw your Lady, honest Peter?


Peter. Yes, Sir.


Don Gasp. Ah -- well -- well -- is not she a pretty tight thing? Look in the
garden -- there she trips -- there she trips.


Peter. With submission, Sir, I wish the trip may not have been yours. I am
afraid this marriage is one of the falsest steps your worship ever made. -- And
here is my young master -- I am out, if he does not think so too, for all he
looks so full of spirits.


Don Gasp. What care I for what your young master thinks, or you either, you
old --


Exit servant. ( Enter Octavio.) Octavio. Joy to you, Sir! joy on this festive
morn! but by the way it is very ill dressed for a bridal morn -- the same dusky
blue it has worn this fortnight; nor has the sun been at the expense of one ray
extraordinary! All nature should have been in gala, on such an event as your
nuptials. -- But where is my mother? I came eagerly to pay my duty.


Don Gasp. Mother! Gad it will look odd, to see such a strapper as you, call
her mother.


Octavio. Shall it be mamma, Sir?


Don Gasp. No. Madam -- that is grave and comely. Madam has a distant sound in
it -- you shall call her madam. But instead of coming dutifully to congratulate
me Sir, why did you not dutifully marry yourself?


Octavio. Faith, Sir, of all the duties fate has imposed upon a man, I think
that the hardest


Don Gasp. It Is an imposition that some hundred dozen of your great-grandsires,
as wise and as witty as your worship, have submitted to.


Octavio. It Is devilish strange, that it was necessary for so many great men to
play the fool, to bring me into existence!


Don Gasp. There Is Don Alexis d'Alva has been half mad to give you his daughter
-- ever since your return from Italy.


Octavio. Ay; had I had the grace to humor him, Sir, how happy for your fair
Antonia! She might have become at the same moment a virgin bride, and a
grandmamma. ( Drawling.)


Don Gasp. Pshaw -- nonsense!


Octavio. However, Sir, let her not despair -- she may hope for the honor of
being a grandmother yet. I refused the daughter of Don Alexis, without having
seen her; but now that I have seen her, I think I could venture to exchange my
dear prized liberty, for captivity with her.


Don. Gasp. Say you so my boy? Its the happiest news that I have heard. But
where could you see her? for Don Alexis is so nicely jealous, that if his stone
walls had eyes, he would never suffer either his wise or daughter to unveil before
them.


Octavio. I saw her at church with her father. The sermon was on Christian
charity, and to show how well she could illustrate the doctrine, she lifted her
veil on that side next me -- for she saw me hungering, and thirsting, for a
view.


Don Gasp. Memorandum -- My wife never goes to church.


Octavio. You shock me, Sir -- What is my dear mamma to turn heathen?


Don Gasp. No, Sir -- I Will read homilies to her, and she shall have prayers at
home.


Enter Servant. Serve. Don Alexis de Alva, Sir, is come to pay his compliments
to you on your wedding.


Octavio. It Is a happy presage! -- Pray recommend my suit Sir, and in the mean
time I Will go and ask blessing of the young lady in the garden.


Exit. Enter Don Alexis. Don Alexis. So my old friend, you're going to do a
wise deed to day; Soloman and the child was nothing to it! Give ye joy -- I
give ye joy!


Don Gasp. You have a happy knack in your civilities. You wish me joy, as though
you hoped it would be sorrow; and congratulate with an air of reproach.


Don Alexis. Air of a fiddle-stick's end! Why didn't ye ask my advice? Could
any body have given ye better? Have I not done the same thing -- have I not
made an old ass of myself, by marrying a girl?


Don Gasp. Never mind that, if your girl does not transform your ass-ship's
ears to horns.


Don Alexis. Ay, that is a blessed fear to be goaded with, in the last stage of
one's mortal journey! I wish the day I left my bed to marry, I had been
confined in it with a gout, an asthma, and a dropsy. Oons man, there is no end
of your plagues from this moment!


Don Gasp. Pray keep your temper now -- keep your temper. It Is a very bad one;
but pray keep it however!


Don. Alexis. Why, you would find it easier to spin cables out of cobwebs; or to
pierce through the earth, and swim out at the Antipodes, than to manage a young
rantipole wife, and so your servant -- I give ye joy -- much good may it do you.


going. Don Gasp. Stay, stay, a moment, man! and tell me which is the greatest
torment, a young wife, or daughter?


Don Alexis. Oh lord! why a daughter is a seventh day ague, and a wife is a
frenzy fever.


Don Gasp. Well, come, I Will recommend ye a physician for your ague.


Don Alexis. A physician -- What do you mean?


Don Gasp. Why a lover to take your daughter off your hands.


Don Alexis. Who Will be the bold man to do that?


Don Gasp. An impudent young rascal six feet and a half high; who upon such
authority as husbands are obliged to take, calls me father; if you like it, he
may call you so.


Don Alexis. What Octavio! Will he be my doctor! -- Octavio marry my daughter!
-- But perhaps this is a wedding day joke of yours, old Signor! Gad you will find
this day's work no joke believe me.


Don Gasp. If its a joke you have it but at second hand; the original inventor
is now in the house, and has just desired me to employ all my interest in his
favor.


Don Alexis. Interest -- let him use his own interest -- bid him come. Oh the
stout rogue! -- Your interest! you have no more than a corkcutter with an
archbishop. Bid him come, I say! I Will hurry home and prepare my daughter. Ay,
ay, let boys and girls marry, my old friend, but as for -- well I Will say no
more -- much good may it do ye! Exit.


Don Gasp. By Saint Jeffery the old fellow has made me feel chilly upon the
business! -- What brought him here to throw cold water upon all my ardors, and
all the pretty little loves that were springing up, and warming the Lapland
region about my heart. In one's wintry age those gleams require to be
cherished, and not -- Gad I Will go to little Tony -- the baggage has never yet
given me one kiss* the warm touch of her lips will be an antidote to his cold
poison, or I Am -- ( going.)


Enter Servants. Serve. Sir, here is one Don Julio from Spain.


Don Gasp. Hey!


Serve. Your worship's nephew, Sir, from Madrid. He has brought you a letter
from his father, Don Henriques; and desires you will admit him to pay his duty.


Don Gasp. Hah! my own sister's son -- my poor Olivia's boy, of whom she died
in childbed. Let him come in. ( Don Henry introduced.) My dear nephew, why I am
as glad to see thee as if -- how do do? Grown up a man! dear, dear, how time
slips! 'Twas but yesterday that your mother came out of the Convent to be
married. -- Like her too -- very like her indeed! Well, and how do do Julio?
how is thy father?


Don Henry. Don Henriques was well, Sir, when I left Madrid -- that letter will
inform you of his wishes. Scarcely can I contain my feelings! I am now under
the roof with the perfidious Antonia -- and this wretch will call her his wife!
Let him beware how he shows the slightest fondness! by heaven if he should --


Don Gasp. Ay, very well -- very well. Your father desires you may be received
as my guest; and adds, that you are of a remarkable sober serious turn. I am
glad of it Julio -- never be wild my boy! I suppose you can see a pretty woman
without wishing her husband at the devil; or endeavoring to persuade her, that
you are a finer fellow than he is.


Don Henry. Those are not my habits, Sir.


Don Gasp. I believe ye -- there is something in your look that confirms what
you say. Well you are come in happy time -- you are going to have a new aunt --
I Will present ye to her. But she is very rigid; -- Remember that! she will expect
ye to treat her with the most distant respect. She Is not so young as she looks;
no -- no -- a sedate person. Some women will look young in spite of years.


Don Henry. True, Sir; as some men will be fools in spite of wrinkles.


Don Gasp. Ay, you are right nephew -- it is a vile foolish age! -- Now I Will
carry ye to your aunt -- hah, here she comes; -- but not so pretty a woman I
assure you, when examined; as at the first glance -- some women strike at
first, you know --


Don Henry. ( Aside) Hypocritical slanderer! How shall I contain my emotions?
(Antonia enters with ladies) Hah! she does not look happy -- some consolation
to my racked heart!


Don Gasp. Come deary, cheer up, cheer up! What all these trinkets, and rich
laces, and finery, not brighten ye? Had you married a young fellow, he would have
made you no such presents -- his money would have been lavished on his
mistresses -- I Will keep no mistresses; no naughty women shall seduce thy nown
old man.


Antonia. ( Aside) Nauseous! Oh Clara, my fate seems to open on me at this
moment with a horror I never yet conceived!


Clara. It Is a moment too late sweet cousin! You have submitted to your fate,
think now how to make your fate submit to you.


Gasp. Out, out, no whispering till you grow old enough to turn backbiters! Now
call up your smiles ( patting Antonia's cheek), and your pretty roguish leers!
Come ladies your spirits, your wit! I thought every woman was happy on a
wedding day, whether 'twas her own or her neighbor's.


Lady. The bride's pensiveness infects us, Sir. Mirth seems to be impertinent.


Antonia. Oh pardon me! Were my spirits obedient to my wishes, your reproach
would have been undeserved; but though we can determine how to act, I find we
cannot determine how to feel.


Don Gasp. Feel, feel! When I was a youngster, women had no such word in their
vocabulary. Cannot you leave your feelings alone? Never mind 'em; and then like
neglected guests they will be in no hurry to repeat their visits. I have not
regarded my feelings many years; and now they have learnt manners, and don't
interrupt me.


Don Henry. ( Aside) Not one chance look this way! and yet I can forgive the
sweet averted eye, because it speaks disgust to all around her.


Antonia. You know the cause I have for sorrow, and have allowed it; yet my
pensiveness ought not to throw a weight upon the day; -- I will be better.


Don Gasp. Yes, yes, we shall be as happy, and as faithful as two turtle-doves
-- shall not we, Pet?


Antonia. I hope to prove my duty, Sir. He never asked my love! ( aside.)


Don. Gasp. Ud! I had forgot -- here, here is a nephew of mine -- a nephew of
yours now; pray receive him. Don Julio Cavallo.


( She curtsies without regarding him.) Don Henry. ( aside) Where then is the
secret sympathy of love, which should instruct her that her Henry's near? She
shall observe me. -- May this day be happy to you, lady; and to him, whom most
you wish to bless!


( She starts at his voice, looks, and shrieks.) Don Gasp. Heyday little Pet,
what ails ye? -- why do you start and shriek? -- he is my own flesh and blood.


Antonia. Surprise, Sir. Your nephew so much -- he so much resembles --


Don Gasp. Ay, like me, mayhap you think. I believe there is a family likeness,
but that need not have scared you so.


Antonia. No, Sir, it was not that -- his resemblance is to -- to a most
beloved relation, whom I have lost.


Don Gasp. Oh, what your cousin I suppose; that fine young man who went to
Mexico, and was drowned -- ay, poor fellow he was drowned!


Antonia. Were Don Henry living, I should believe the stranger him; but oh it is
impossible -- the grave will not give back its prey; no, not to agonizing love!


Don Gasp. Come, come, little Pudsey, what do you cry for? your cousin that was
drowned, went to Mexico to make his fortune, did not he?


Antonia. Yes, Sir.


Don Gasp. Well, he got his end there -- what would you have? Come, let us go
to the music-room. There you, who have husbands, will find them; and you who
have none, may make snares for them. Come, Pet! ( leading her) you are already
snared; and egad! he must look sharp who gets you out of my net.


( Exeunt all but Don Henry.) Don Henry. Yes I will look sharp, and get her out
of thy net, closely as thou have entangled her.


( Donna Clara returns, and twitches his arm.) Donna Clara. Turn, young man, I
pray! ( he starts) Good Don Julio, tell Don Henry we did not expect to find him
in masquerade to grace Antonia's nuptials.


Don Henry. I am discovered then -- Oh Donna Clara! your faithless cousin.


Donna Clara. Faithless, has she been?


Don Henry. Is she not this day to be married?


Donna Clara. Truly I think so, Signor, or I am not a bridemaid; but how far
faithless I know not -- for I returned from Arragon last night, after more than
a year's absence. We met but an hour since in the church, nor have we yet had
time for conversation.


Don Henry. Then I entreat you let this discovery rest with yourself. -- It is
of the last importance to me, that I should not be known to Don Gasper; and at
present, I would be equally concealed from Antonia.


Donna Clara. You must give me reasons for this request; for I am not certain
that I ought not instantly to betray you. It is true, you have been her lover,
but she is now to be the wife of Don Gasper; -- her duties to him will be of
the most sacred sort, and she must fulfill them scrupulously.


Don Henry. Think me not a seducer! I have loved Antonia for her purity and
virtue; and to destroy her honor, would be to trample on my own. Oh Clara! few
have loved as I do. My passion is mingled with the tender protecting affection
of a brother; and violation is impossible!


Donna Clara. Pray then tell me --


Don Henry. You shall know all; -- and should Antonia's marriage be voluntary,
I will take no revenge but to leave her; -- but if, as her melancholy allows me
to hope, she has been deceived into it, there is not a power on earth that can
divide us.


Donna Clara. If your design is not contrary to rectitude, be assured I shall
not oppose it. Follow me to a more distant room -- a new secret is almost as
delightful as a new lover. Exeunt.


END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II. An Apartment at Don Alexis's.
Enter Seraphina, pulling in Alexis. Seraphina. COME along, my charming
husband! Bless me, what eloquence and fire, considering you are fifty-nine! I
protest, a man thirty years younger could hardly have found such a variety of
things to have said on so trivial a subject. One might mistake you for an
English senator, instead of a Portugueze privy counselor, you can say so much
upon nothing.


Alex. Nothing! what is it nothing that whenever I go out of the door, your
head is directly out of the window -- like the sign of Queen Jezebel? It Is
known to all the impudent young face-hunters in Lisbon, who saunter about my
gates, like wolves before a sheepfold -- do you call that nothing?


Seraph. Oh no; Heaven forbid I should be so ungrateful toward the grand
pleasure of my life! Nothing! it is every thing -- my happiness! I wait for
sunset every day with impatience, because it is known that I then mount my
throne -- that is, I enter my balcony, and see new prostrate subjects adoring,
and deifying me.


Alex. Zounds! what a vile custom it was to build houses with windows! I Will
have them all blocked up. Sky-lights are the only things for a Christian
country. -- Windows and balconies! -- they are fit only for Turkish baths, and
public brothels.


Seraph. Listen, Deary! and I Will bless ye with a secret. Blind your windows,
and nail your doors, but if your honor ( curtseying) has no better security
than these, you will be soon in the herd, whose ideal ornaments ( touching his
forehead) are so terrific to you.


Alex. The devil's in it if stone walls will not keep ye! What stronger security
could my honor have?


Seraph. My honor! Rely on that, and I swear to you by every thing sacred,
that no vestal's life shall be more blameless. It is due to my own feelings to
be chaste -- I don't condescend to think of yours in the affair. The respect I
bear myself, makes me necessarily preserve my purity -- but if I am suspected,
watched, and haunted, I know not but such torment may weary me out of
principles, which I have hitherto cherished as my life.


Alex. If all this is true, what the devil makes ye so fond of admiration?


Seraph. I cannot tell what devil makes me so fond of admiration; but I know I
love admiration, and I will have it; till he, whom you represent, says no.


Alex. Whom I represent! who is that?


Seraph. Mercy! who can it be, but old, shrivelled, grey-pated Time? To his
negative I shall yield -- but with a very ill will, I assure you. If the
passion we have for admiration is wrong, let nature look to it -- 'twas she
impressed it on our hearts; and it is her law, that to tyrannize over the peace
of man, is to woman consummation of happiness!


Alex. And yet you every one of ye pretend to be tenderhearted, and
compassionate, and all that.


Seraph. Why to say truth, one is a sort of a paradox. At a tale of woe, I melt
like Niobe; and am agoniz'd at distress, if I cannot relieve it; -- yet a
lover's misery is delightful! I would not abate a man who adored me a single
sigh; and should have no rest at night, if I thought he was sleeping quietly.


Alex. Lord have mercy! ( muttering to himself.)


Seraph. Now I hope you feel yourself very much honored, that I take you so
far into my confidence. -- If you have a grain of sense, you will be charmed with
it.


Alex. I don't know what the devil to make of ye. Sometimes I think one thing,
and sometimes another.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Don Octavio, Sir. ( exit)


Alex. Better he, than Caesar! I Will wait upon him directly. -- Well, I am in the
way at last, to have one plague less however! Don Octavio is come to offer
himself to Viola -- Pray step, and send her here to receive him; for I am
obliged to go instantly to council. I shall but just speak to Octavio, and send
him up; -- charge her to receive him well -- she shall be married in less than
a week. ( exit)


Seraph. I shall give his daughter no such charge, poor girl! How can she
receive Octavio well, with her heart devoted to Sebastian? I wonder what sort
of a thing this Signor is -- some wr^^^ed privy counselor, like himself, I
suppose. (...) very odd now, that those ancients should take it into their
venerable noddles, that a youthful bride is a proper appendage to their
dignity; or to fancy that it requires no more talents to please a pretty wife,
than to govern a stupid nation. Lord! if my deary would but speak the truth
now, and warn his wise brethren -- Heyday! is this the Octavio? Handsome, I
vow! young! bold! He a privy counselor! Mercy, how could I slander him so? (
Enter Octav.) Welcome, Don Octavio! for I am informed that here you must have
welcome. The man I saw at church, I protest.


Octav. That cruel must, checks the transport your welcome gave me! May I not
hope that without a must, you would have given me welcome?


Seraph. Oh yes! pray hope it; for as I think the season of hoping, the most
delightful in our lives, I should be sorry to shorten yours.


Octav. If you mean to shorten my hope by disappointment, it is kind to protract
it; but there is a way of ending hope, enchanting Viola! without giving despair.


Seraph. Viola, did he call me?


Octav. Oh permit me to believe, that the honor your father allows me, of
telling you I adore you, is not displeasing to you.


Seraph. Mercy, he takes me for my husband's daughter -- delightful!


Octav. From the moment I beheld you at vespers, your image has never left me.


Seraph. I vow I will not undeceive him. I take it very ill of my image, to follow
a young man about, and keep such bad company without my leave.


Octav. Whilst your displeasure is thus playful, I can support it. -- Oh how
charming, to find the information of your face did not deceive me.


Seraph. Why what did it promise you?


Octav. Elegance, liveliness, frankness, and understanding!


Seraph. Oh dear! how our self-love operates on every occasion. Had I received
you with frowns, and given you room to believe the commands of Don Alexis
unpleasant to me, you would have thought me intolerably stupid, and wondered
why nature gave intelligent eyes to an idiot.


Octav. I will not defend myself; to be the object of your raillery is an
enviable distinction -- pray go on.


Seraph. Nay then I have done. An enemy who will not resist, is not worth
combating.


Octav. If you will not combat an unresisting enemy, I hope you will condescend
to rank him with your slaves. -- Consent to give me your chains.


Seraph. Oh, by all means -- I like to increase my captives. There! ( making as
though she flung something over his neck) there are my chains -- do you feel
them?


Octav. Yes, as rosy wreaths -- they delight me!


Seraph. That Is not what I intend. I would have you sigh under them -- aye, in
downright earnest too.


Octav. It is impossible for me to sigh in earnest, unless you tell me the
hopes Don Alexis has given me, make you sigh in earnest.


Seraph. What were those hopes, I pray?


Octav. That I should have the transporting joy of calling you mine.


Seraph. Indeed -- I can hardly think it.


Octav. By all the tempting witch'ries of your face, and the soft Cupids in
your graceful air, it is true!


Seraph. So pretty an oath deserves a civil reply, and I therefore protest to
you, the moment Don Alexis consents to my being yours, I Will yield you my hand
without reluctance. But after this frank engagement, Don Octavio, I expect you
to leave me for the present -- I have a peculiar reason to request this favor.
Some one will come in a moment, and spoil my roguery. ( aside)


Octav. Your commands shall ever govern me; but when may I again presume --


Seraph. I cannot tell you exactly now -- be at the gate in the evening. Adieu!
-- adieu!


( Running off.) Octav. At the gate in the evening! How sweetly that would
sound, if the little villain had not matrimony in her head. Well, if I must be
a slave at some time in my life, even let it be now -- a desperate action
should be done as soon as resolved on. Exit.


SCENE, Don Alexis 's Garden.
Sebastian and Viola seated on a garden chair in the front. He throws flowers
at her, then rises hastily. Sebas. No, I swear it Viola -- I Will love thee no
more. No more from this instant -- I am fixed!


Viola. ( Coming forward.) Will Not you indeed? Let me look in your face, whilst
you make that wicked oath.


Sebas. I could cuff you this instant for looking so pretty. Heavens! what a
horrible length of time is before you to do mischief! Sixteen! -- The fire of
those eyes cannot be quenched, nor that alabaster skin shrivelled, in less than
twenty years -- oh, it is dreadful!


Viola. You are mistaken. The small pox may fret it, the jaundice may tarnish
it -- you have many chances to behold me frightful yet.


Sebas. Would to heaven some of them would arrive! You to continue so lovely,
and your father so cruel!


Viola. But suppose the change should happen to my father, and he should favor
our wishes; -- will you then allow me to keep my charms?


Sebas. Ay, then indeed -- oh, how I would dote on them! Not one but should
have its separate share of passion divided and subdivided. -- I Would give to each
a twelvemonth, and then begin again.


Viola. Inventive love! ever the same, and yet for ever new!


Enter Carlota. Carl. Bless me, madam, Don Alexis is returned; -- the council
is put off -- he is asking for you, and will be in the garden directly.


Sebas. It Is impossible! scarcely have I had time to vent half the malice of my
tenderness -- I have been here but three minutes.


Carl. Three minutes! Oh dear -- how every woman the noon side of twenty would
rejoice, if time measured out his minutes as love does! You have been here one
hour and a quarter, by the great dial at the end of the walk.


Viola. Be it hours, or minutes, you must leave me my Sebastian -- Should my
father surprise us, I could expect nothing less than six months imprisonment in
a garret; with the lives of the saints for my study, and bread and water for my
banquet.


Sebas. Oh, I would embrace the punishment, if at the end of the period, he
would allow you to give me a new imprisonment.


Carl. Now you might as well have put off those two speeches and a half to the
next opportunity -- see the consequence! here comes the old gentleman. Well,
I Will not be in the mess I assure ye -- take it all to yourselves -- ( going.)


Viola. Oh stay -- stay, my dear Carlota! he cannot discern at this distance who
we are -- let me run away -- I Will go into the house through the close walk, and
Sebastian shall stay and pass for your lover; -- it must be so -- the danger
will be less to you than me. -- Exit.


Carl. Upon my word -- so I must be the scapegoat! But I will not be blamed I vow
-- I Will pretend I don't know you. -- It Is very extraordinary, Sir, ( raising
her voice) that the gardener could not leave the wicket open, whilst he threw
out his rubbish, but you must throw yourself in for more rubbish. -- If you
don't go this minute, I Will call him to bring his basket, and sling you out
again with the rest.


Sebas. I detest the subterfuge, but I must submit to it. -- Oh Carlota, I feel
that Viola must be mine! -- Exit.


Carl. She feels it too. -- Ay, pray get you gone; and don't mistake your
neighbor's gardens again. -- There -- there, -- that is your way. ( Going with
him through the wing.)


Enter Alexis. Alexis. Oh you traitress -- artful slut! this must be all a
feint. I clearly heard she feels it too! that she must concern my wife, or my
daughter -- oh my blood burns! -- "She feels it too!"


Carl. ( re-entering) I wonder people are not ashamed of themselves, I swear,
to pretend -- Oh, dear Sir, are you here?


Alex. Am I here -- cunning gentlewoman! who was that spark, hey? Speak thou
powder-puff -- thou snip of gauze -- thou black pin! Who was he? -- Tell me
truth, for I have a touchstone to try thee by, that thou can not evade.


Carl. I never thought of asking who he was. The careless gardener left the
door open -- he is some curious stranger walking about the streets of Lisbon.


Alex. Ay; seeking whom he may devour. But come -- what were the curious
stranger and you talking about -- What were his parting words?


Carl. ( Aside.) The devil is surely prompting him! Why, Sir, they are not
worth repeating, he was saying 'twas -- he asked if it was past twelve o'clock.


Alexis. ( Aside) Is it past twelve? ( going a little off) "She feels it too!"
that sits like custard and cucumber. Those were not the words mistress -- try
again! I mean his expression just before you said, pray get ye gone.


Carl. Oh that, Sir -- then he said -- what he said just then was -- that is a
fine poplar! ( pointing to a tree.)


Alexis. ( Aside) "A fine poplar," "she feels it too." That does not meet a bit
closer than the other. Come, once more comb-brush, recollect! or by St. Anthony
--


Carl. Now I have it, Sir; I have recollected now the very words -- what the
gentleman said at going away, was -- oh, you little black-ey'd rogue!


Alexis. ( Aside) "You little black-ey'd rogue" -- "she feels it too!" As wide
as Lisbon harbor, from the Irish channel. Now by our lady, if thou do
persist in giving me the trouble to question thee again, this cane and you
shall be better acquainted than your skin and your bones, hussy! ( shaking
her.)


Carl. Oh how you gripe my arm! devil take it, if you will have it, hear it
then! He said, "I feel that Viola must be mine." ( Bawling.) Now are you
satisfied?


Alexis. "I feel that Viola must be mine" -- "she feels it too!" H -- h -- h --
m! -- that fits like the two shells of an oyster. ( Aside.) Now minx, I feel
that I have the truth; and I feel a violent desire to make you feel this cane.
And so that curious stranger must have been Don Sebastian, whom I have ordered
her never to think of -- never -- never! --


Carl. Why, Sir, she has ordered herself never to think of him; but lord, her
thoughts mind her no more than a conclave of Cardinals would you -- they will
gallop toward him in spite of her. --


Alexis. Will they? but I Will cripple their speed -- they shall have a check
rein before she is aware. I Will go this moment, and -- oh here madam comes!


Enter Viola. Viola. Bless me Carlota, where have you been?


Alex. Oh dear, why she has been so kind to entertain one of your lovers
without doors, madam, whilst you were engaged with another within.


Viola. I do not understand you, Sir.


Alex. You don't! Come troop mistress ( to Carlota) you little black-ey'd rogue!


Viola. To be sure my father's bewitched. ( Aside.)


Alexis. I Will sit ye! you shall pack up your wardrobe in your pocket
handkerchief you little black eyed rogue! and beat your march before you are
three hours nearer your wrinkles. --


Carl. I hope I shall never overtake my wrinkles if they are to make me so
suspicious and tyrannical, as yours have made you. Exit.


Alexis. Well innocent ones, what sort of entertainment did you give Octavio?


Viola. Sir!


Alexis. How did you like him?


Viola. Bless me, what has he got in his head?


( Aside.) Alexis. Did you coquet, and give yourself only the allowed airs on
these occasions; or was your stubborn mind so full of Sebastian, that you gave
him no hopes?


Viola. My dear father, if you will be pleased to speak in a way that I can
understand --


Alexis. Don't provoke me! What encouragement, I say, have you given Don
Octavio? have you dared to throw cold water on his hopes? Why how you stand --
if you don't answer me --


Enter Seraphina, hastily. Seraph. Bless me, my dear, what is all this noise?


Alexis. Why I cannot get her to say a word about Octavio; -- I know no more
than my shoe-string whether she behaved decently to him or not.


Seraph. To be sure she did -- how can you question it? But you are really very
coarse; allow something to her delicacy!


Viola. I believe they are both beside themselves. ( Aside.)


Seraph. Leave her with me -- I Will get out all that past -- she will be
undisguis'd to me.


Alexis. Gad I Will go to Octavio himself -- that is the shortest way. I Will ask
him what past -- if he is content, I shall be so. I Will go to Octavio! Exit.


Seraph. Ha, ha, ha, my dear Viola, this is a web of my weaving -- how I shall
puzzle through it, I know not. And your poor father -- ha, ha, ha, how you stare!
be pleased to know then that I have just been receiving the most violent love
in the name of your ladyship -- actually personating you!


Viola. Personating me?


Seraph. Your father went out this morning, my dear, and either begged,
borrowed, or stole a lover for ye. -- The poor youth was introduced to my
apartment -- took it for granted that I was Viola; and begun (as I suppose he
promised your father he would) to adore, and die for me, in very good form.


Viola. Oh, now the mystery is cleared -- this is the Don Octavio --


Seraph. Yes, yes -- now you have the nut -- shall we crack it, or throw it
away?


Viola. Pray let us get at the kernel. If you can contrive to keep my father in
the dark some little time, it will allow me to concert measures with Don
Sebastian. You do him the honor to approve his addresses, I know.


Seraph. Oh, if you can make any thing of the incident, it is quite at your
service. I Will listen to Octavio's love-tales with all the condescension
imaginable; and let him adore me, for a month to come, if it will be of use to
you and Sebastian.


Viola. How very grateful he will be!


Seraph. Well, let us go then and settle matters. We must take Carlota into our
council, or the thing cannot go on.


Viola. My father has discharged her.


Seraph. Pho, I Will manage that. It would be hard, indeed, to marry an old man,
and not make him do as one likes. Young husbands we are content to submit to,
but when we marry GREYBEARDS, it is with the pious design to have our way in
every thing. Exeunt.


END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III. An Apartment at Don Gasper's.
Enter Don Henry, hastily, followed by Don Sebastian. Henry. OH it is too much!


Sebas. Too much! ay, so it is, that they should be all so blind to your
starts, your angry blushes, and your ill concealed confusion. I drew you from
the company the moment dinner ended, lest when they had done eating they should
begin to observe. Do you reflect that Don Philip has only to betray you to the
minister, to get rid of his rival for ever?


Henry. It is more than I can bear -- the old dotard's fondness, which I dare
not yet oppose, distracts me! Oh that I could speak to her alone! -- it is plain
amidst all the bridal gaiety her heart is not at ease.


Sebas. Your wish is half answered, for here comes her half -- the worst half
indeed by forty years.


Henry. Half! thou a lover, and able to speak thus to a lover? Speak of them as
one!


Sebas. Forgive me! for faith I am so much a lover at this moment, that I
scarcely know what I am saying. In a word, I am summoned by my mistress's maid,
who has some new information -- in an hour I am again at your service. Exit.


Enter Don Gasper. Don Gasp. Why how now Julio! What stole away? -- run from
the guests -- hide in corners -- how is this?


Henry. I am not in spirits for company, Sir; or to be sure this joyful
occasion --


Don Gasp. Not in spirits on your uncle's wedding day -- out upon it! -- But
tell me boy what do you think of the bride? -- Am I not a happy man -- hey?


Henry. If it turns out so, Sir.


Don Gasp. Oh, I fear no turns. She is virtuous and modest, and you know a
modest woman is above all price -- but perhaps you do not know that; for the
observation is made in a book not much read now a days. -- But what do you think
helped me to get her?


Henry. Ay, Sir, what did? -- I long to be informed. Wine perhaps will make him
communicative. ( Aside.) -- A splendid jointure probably.


Don Gasp. Jointure! she minds a jointure no more than a jointed doll -- guess
again!


Henry. I am not fortunate in guessing.


Don Gasp. Then I Will tell ye -- half a sheet of paper got her. Ay, you may well
stare. 'Twas but half a sheet of paper -- in which I procured it to be said,
that one Don Henry, whom she loved, was shrouded and buried -- that got her my
boy! ( slapping him on the shoulder) -- there is a contriving uncle for you!


Henry. Is it possible?


Don Gasp. Possible, why I did it -- I did it. And where is the harm? A banished
man is a dead man in the eye of the law, and a dead man can be no husband. He
fought a duel and was forced to fly.


Henry. And how, Sir, could you take advantage --


Don Gasp. Why those young rascals take every advantage over us, with nature to
back 'em; and we have a right to make reprisals when we can by the help of art.


Henry. And so the lady believed your intelligence?


Don Gasp. Yes, yes, she believed -- and swoon'd -- and raved -- and took to
her bed. Faith the doctor gave her up; but I still determined when it came to
the last gasp, to tell her the truth, rather than have her death to answer for
-- but it never came to that.


Henry. No, no! female grief, though sometimes obstinate, is seldom fatal. Why,
my dear uncle, you are a perfect Machiavel at a plot. I shall try if I cannot
out-plot you though. ( Aside.) It will be amusing to see Antonia's
astonishment, when she finds her Henry is still living -- ha, ha -- but then
she will be yours, ha, ha, ha.


Don Gasp. Yes, then she will be mine -- she will be mine! ha, ha, ha, You must
know the chit had no fortune, though of a noble family -- was pestered with
youthful profligate lovers, and at length to get rid of them, agreed to give
herself to me -- there is a stroke of prudence in a girl!


Henry. ( Aside.) Oh, 'twas more; -- I feel it was a stroke of love to me! But
what will Don Henry say to this pretty jest, which you and I find so laughable?


Don Gasp. What care I what a man says a thousand miles off.


Henry. But if he obtains his pardon, he will return, and then --


Don Gasp. Pardon! Oh, you don't know how deep I am. -- I leave no loop-holes
for my schemes to drop through. Hark in your ear -- but be secret -- I have
bought his pardon.


Henry. How, Sir -- bought his pardon!


Don Gasp. Hush! that is all under the rose -- you understand me -- it cost me a
good lump of moidores!


Henry. You astonish me! -- Strange kindness to a man whom you could rob of his
wife!


Don Gasp. Kindness -- tut! I got his pardon for myself, that nobody else
should have it; -- so that if he gets any one to ask for it, it will be
answered, "the pardon has been already granted" -- but for want of my
appearance, he is defunct depend on it; -- ay, as much out of the world, as though
the sexton had covered him with green-sod.


Henry. And are you actually in possession of his pardon?


Don Gasp. As good; -- the money is paid, and I shall receive it from the
broad-seal office tomorrow.


Henry. What a discovery is here! ( Aside.)


(Don Alexis enters, pulling in Octavio.) Alex. Come in here; come into this
room, my dear Octavio! So, here is the young bridegroom. Now prithee be so kind
to leave the apartment to me and Octavio.


Octav. Let us not disturb my father, Sir.


Alex. Disturb -- a feather! Will you leave us?


Gasp. Yes, yes, I Will leave ye -- but first let me present my nephew to you.
The son of my sister Victoria -- you knew her.


Alex. Knew her -- ay, as well as your nose does its spectacles. So, young
gentleman, what you are come to dance at young uncle's wedding? and 'twas worth
while to come post from Madrid on purpose; -- you will not cut capers at so wise a
wedding every day, I can tell you.


Gasp. Come, come, a truce to your sneers. Don't you think he resembles his
poor dear mother?


Alex. Not a bit.


Gasp. No! the eyes are the very same.


Alex. Eyes! -- why, here is were blue, and his are black.


Gasp. That Is nothing -- they have just the same look with 'em.


Alex. Yes. I grant ye as to the look, his look as much like eyes as here is did.
Then she was round favored.


Gasp. What signifies that -- a long face, and a short face, may have the same
air.


Alex. But his hair is dark, and here is was light.


Gasp. Oons! how you talk -- Why all hair must be light, or dark, or some
color. Come along, nephew -- When people get old, they grow so obstinate,
there is no convincing them of any thing. Come along -- come along. ( Exit with
Don Henry.)


Alex. Don't take him to your Antonia, lest she should have the odd notion,
that he is a fitter bridegroom for her, than you are. ( Bawling after him.)
Well, my dear boy, I am come on purpose to ask how you managed today with my
daughter. The young slut is so mealy-mouthed, I could get nothing out of her.
Was she kind -- did she show a proper sense of the favor?


Octav. Sense of the favor, Sir! She permitted me to implore the favor of
being allowed to hope.


Alex. Well, well, that is the point I would come to -- hang phrases! Was you
contented with your reception -- was she no more than decently coy?


Octav. She was all goodness, Sir. Why what an old fellow's this! ( aside)


Alex. All goodness -- well, that is in generals. Tell me -- come now tell me
honestly, did she let you kiss her?


Octav. Heavens! I dared not let such a thought exist. Had any man but her
father asked me --


Alex. You Would have said yes; -- you would, I know you would! Boasted of the
sweetness of her lip, and of the pressure of her white hand, but I -- I must
know nothing -- I am an old father.


Octav. ( aside) What can be the meaning of all this? Is it his suspicion, or
his folly?


Alex. Come, why will not you tell me now? -- Tell me at once.


Octav. What shall I tell you, Sir?


Alex. What! -- why that she treated ye kindly -- that you liked her pouting
lips; and that --


Octav. Believe me, Sir, I dared not attempt such a liberty.


Alex. No! why had you not my permission?


Octav. I did not so consider it, Sir; but if you will lay your commands on the
lady, when I have the honor to wait on her again --


Alex. Ay, that I will, never fear me. But pray where is the foundation of your
great content, if nothing kind past? I fear the slut has deceived him. ( aside)


Octav. Kind! she was all angelic sweetness, Sir!


Alex. Pho! don't tell me of angelic sweetness; a young fellow should be
content with nothing less than mortal sweetness, when with a blooming girl.


Octav. She had the condescension to promise --


Alex. What -- what?


Octav. That when you should order her to bestow her hand on me, she would obey
you without reluctance.


Alex. She promised that, did she?


Octav. She did; and my delighted soul has dwelt on the sound from that moment.


Alex. Well, well, come again this evening, and your soul shall have something
else besides sound to dwell upon, or I Will understand why.


Octav. Good Sir, you would be very convenient I perceive, but it unfortunately
happens, that I choose the sweet trouble of getting over my love difficulties
myself.


Alex. Oh to be sure -- above being obliged I see! but I tell you these young
baggages have all their arts to make a man half mad, and I know 'em -- I Will
manage her my little Octy, never fear! Sound indeed!


Octav. Allow me, Sir, with all humility, to request that you will give yourself
no trouble in the business. God's Death! If I don't take care I shall not have the
pleasure of running down my own game. If you wish to make a son-in-law of me,
Sir, you must permit me to travel the road of love in my own manner. -- No
bearing him! Exit.


Alex. Zounds! what a heat you're in! Why, so you may travel the road of love
in your own manner -- I only mean humbly to open the turnpike gates for ye. --
See what one gets by one's good nature! ( Exit.)


SCENE. Don Gasper's Garden.
Enter Henry. Don Henry. ( looking, as though uncertain.) Surely it is herself --
yes, it is Antonia! Like the soft lilly pressed by the dewy robe of night, she
bends her lovely head. Oh Clara! lead her -- lead her to her Henry! Hah --
accordant to my wish they come! But how may I be master of her thoughts?
Perhaps to her friend, she will unveil her inmost heart. I Will seem to sleep --
yes; but whilst I appear to slumber, my ear will hang on every sound she
utters, and my whole soul be suspended on her breath. ( He reclines on a bank.
Some shrubs prevent his being immediately seen.)


Enter Antonia and Clara. Cla. This is the strangest whim! seeking shades and
solitude, instead of company and mirth. What will Don Gasper say?


Ant. Oh name him not; the arrival of the young stranger his nephew, has
renewed all my miseries. But here my sorrows have a short cessation. Oh, how
those lonely shades will sooth my sadness! Each day I Will seek the soft recess,
and opening all the treasures of remembrance, live on my Henry's image.


Clara. Come, come, that is a sort of image worship we don't allow. It would be
more catholic to live in lonely shades with himself. " This soft recess" would
be at least more poetical my dear, with a handsome young man in it, even though
he should be uncivilly asleep. ( pointing to Henry.)


Ant. ( Not regarding her.) Oh, I Will call back each sacred hour which blessed our
wedded souls; trace each fond scene that chasten'd love made pure, and in the
dear review, forget that I Am a wretch.


Cla. Ay, do forget it pray, and look behind those shrubs -- there is a youth as
much like Don Henry, as ever one impudent rogue was like another.


Ant. Hah! it is Don Julio -- let us rotire before he wakes. And yet -- Oh
Clara! I could wish his sleep lengthened to eternity; and myself immortal, to
stand thus and gaze on him!


Clara. One might almost fancy it Don Henry himself; only unhappily it is not
the custom for people to leave their family mansions in the churchyard, to
repose on violets for their mistresses to gaze on them.


Ant. The resemblance is stronger now he sleeps. When awake, this stranger has
a scorn -- a severity in his eye -- something that made me fear; but Henry's
eye talked only love! Oh, I have seen a volume in a single glance; -- one look
has said, what eloquence and learning might try to imitate in vain.

[Sings.] Sweet rosy sleep! Oh do not fly,
Bind thy soft fillet on his eye,
That over each grace my own may rove,
And feast my hapless, joyless love!
For when he lifts those shading lids,
His chilling glance such bliss forbids --
Then rosy sleep oh do not fly,
But bind thy fillet on his eye!

Clara. I say on the contrary open your eyes! Who knows but they may by this
time have acquired a softer expression?


Ant. Fie, Clara! let us go this instant -- you will surely wake him. ( going
hastily.) Exit Clara.


Henry. ( Starting up.) Yes, he is awakened indeed! Oh my Antonia, turn! Turn
sweet traitress, and look upon the man you have injured!


Ant. ( Shrieking.) Oh, I shall sink! What art thou? Is Henry then alive in
Julio? Oh tell me whilst I yet can breathe -- Say, art thou both, or nothing?


Henry. Convince thyself. ( Embracing her.) Oh, my Antonia!


Ant. No! it is not air -- my arms return not empty to my bosom, but meet a
solid treasure!


Henry. A treasure you have lightly prized.


Ant. Alas, my Henry, I believed thee dead! Oh let me touch thee yet again! (
taking his hand) These veins are warm with life! health blushes on thy cheeks;
and this soft pressure darts through my nerves, and is new life to me. Oh my
Henry! it is -- it is thyself!


Henry. Can this joy be real? You thought me dead, Antonia, and chose in bridal
pomp to celebrate my obsequies! -- The Ephesian story will be always new.


Ant. Think not my heart perfidious. Had I chose a youthful husband, you might
have termed me fickle -- but from those I fled -- abhorred a second love, and
fixed where venerable age secured my heart from every tender impulse. A
guardian 'twas I asked, and not a husband.


Henry. Nature made women false, to see how well they would excuse their crimes.


Ant. It Is well you treat me thus, to check the transport of beholding thee,
which else might be too much! But think, reproachful man! consider my high
birth, and slender fortunes -- Behold me a lonely orphan, haunted by a train of
lovers -- some too high in rank to make them fear to act, whatever their wishes
prompted. 'Twas to escape all these --


Henry. Oh, was it that indeed, which forced thee to this marriage?


Ant. It cannot be a marriage since my Henry lives! My vows were given to thee
-- the solemn contract signed; and heaven, by its holy priest, invoked to bless
the engagement!


Henry. And in heaven it is recorded!


Ant. I do acknowledge it: and death alone could give Antonia right to make
herself another's. Base artifice deceived me, and virtuous art must free me
from the deceiver. -- But, oh, thy life's at stake! Where shall we fly? -- At
what blessed altar solemnize our vows?


Henry. Will thou then follow my sad fortunes?


Ant. Yes -- to the utmost boundaries of the earth!


Henry. Oh, my sick soul needed a cordial of this mighty strength to cheer it!
Know then, Antonia, we need not fly -- my pardon's promised -- I have important
secrets to communicate -- tomorrow thou wilt be mine.


Ant. Tomorrow!


Henry. Transporting hour! And will thou yet be Henry's? Oh bind the promise on
thy knee; -- invoke the sacred powers to witness it.


Ant. Thus then! ( kneeling) and hear me, heaven!


Henry. And thus I listen to thee. ( kneeling)


Enter Don Philip, followed by Alexis. Gasp. Tony! my little Tony, where art?
Hey!


( starting) Alex. 'Sblood! what is all this? -- Ah -- didn't I warn ye of the
bride's odd notions? -- didn't I warn ye?


Henry. We are undone!


Ant. Trust to me. ( apart) Thus then I invoke the sacred powers to witness my
resolve -- Never to know another love! never to hold myself bound by any vows,
but those made to the lord of my affections, the contracted husband of my heart!


Phil. Her contracted husband -- mark that now. ( to Alexis)


Henry. And thus do I invoke the same gracious powers, to bless you, as you're
true; and to preserve thee and that husband in a sweet eternity of love! ( Don
Philip runs to help them up.)


Phil. Thank ye, my dear children! There -- there, what do you say now to my
choice? Had ever man such a wife, and such a nephew?


Alex. No faith, I believe not; and may I be hanged if I believe it now, though
I have seen it.


Phil. Envy -- sheer envy! You see when I marry a girl, I know how to choose
one. Come along, my pigeons. ( going off with one under each arm.) Exit Philip
and Antonia.


Alex. Hark ye, Don Julio -- give me a minute. ( twitching him back) Come, I
know there is some jest in this. You must trust me, and egad if you will, I Will
-- do trust me, I know it is some jest.


Henry. I admire your penetration.


Alex. I love a jest to my soul, and gad if you will trust me -- here -- here is a
seal ring ( taking it off) 'twas worn by my great grandfather fifteen
generations back. I value it beyond the great ruby in the throne at Delhi. --
Egad I have a great mind to give it ye. ( Putting it on again, and throwing his
hand behind him.)


Henry. An idea darts upon me! -- yes, by heaven it shall be done! this is the
critical instant of Antonia's fate. ( Aside.) A ring valued by you so highly,
Don Alexis, ought to grace no finger but your own -- I refuse to accept it; but
if you will entrust it to me, I swear when you next see it you shall know the
jest.


Alexis. Shall I indeed?


Henry. Yes -- and I Will venture to promise that you shall enjoy it too!


Alexis. There Is my ring. I pant for the hour of its being restored, as much as
a girl does to unburthen her first love secret.


Henry. I too pant for the hour; for if I mistake not, I shall mean time make
such a use of your great grandfather's seal ring, as must make that and every
future hour blissful to me! Exit.


Alexis. What can he mean to do with it? that seal ring make all his future
hours blissful! May be there is some concealed witchcraft in it, and he has had
wit enough to find it out; or if rightly turned it may make a man invisible, or
something of that sort -- there have been such things formerly. -- Gad I Will
follow him though -- if my ring has any properties of that kind, how snugly I
shall be able to watch my wife!


END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Seraphina 's Apartment.
Enter Seraphina, followed by Octavio. Seraphina. IT is in vain, and so --


Octav. Charming Viola, why are ye so barbarous? Is it not by your own
permission I attend you?


Seraph. Yes, I know it is; but what of that? When the sun shone I liked you,
and now by candle light I hate you -- do go, I will not be teazed.


Octav. This is so singular!


Seraph. What, that a woman should change her mind since morning? You, I
suppose, are so wonderfully constant, that you change yours only with the moon.


Octav. Do not suspect me of fickleness -- permit me to prove my constancy.


Seraph. Impossible -- impossible.


Octav. How so?


Seraph. I see I must tell you, to avoid altercation. Be pleased to know then,
Sir, that there is nothing on earth I detest like this sober, quiet, prudent
method of loving. Your vows have a father's approbation; -- you are expected;
-- you enter the house without difficulty; -- you yawn through an hour of
commonplace; -- the wedding day is fixed, and we go to church to be married,
in the same hum-drum stupid way, that millions of dull couples have done before
us. No, no, this I cannot submit to, believe me!


Octav. Ah, it is plain we were born for each other, we think so exactly alike!
( aside.) These I confess are misfortunes; but how in our case are they to be
avoided?


Seraph. If you are really in earnest in your love, you must contrive to make
Don Alexis hate you. Let him throw a thousand difficulties in the way, and then
I Will throw myself -- into your arms!


Octav. Oh, that extatic promise! But your father is unhappily attached to our
marriage -- What the devil can I do to make him set his face against it? I fear
it is impossible.


Seraph. Poor Don Octavio! then you have no hopes -- for I do swear by every
thing that can bind me, whilst Don Alexis approves of our nuptials, I never
will be yours.


Octav. I Will bribe fellows to slander me! was ever so unhappy a dilemma? I
thought his approbation till this moment a blessing; but now I would willingly
make him shut his doors against me, and confine you to a grated room, with a
dozen smoak-dried Duennas to guard you.


Seraph. Ay, then indeed things would go on gloriously! You would be sighing
and groaning without, and I should be weeping and wailing within. Then for
plots and contrivances -- then for bribes and scaling ladders -- then for
escapes and pursuits -- Oh, what would I not do for a man who should bring me
into such blissful difficulties!


Octav. I swear you shall be obeyed, whatever I hazard. Who knows but an
elopement may finish the affair short of marriage! ( Aside.) ( A hustle without
-- the door opens a little, and discovers Carlota struggling to keep out
Alexis.)


Alexis. I tell you, Mrs. Brazen, I will be amongst 'em.


Carl. Bless me, Sir, how can you be so barbarous to disturb the young people?


Seraph. There Is Don Alexis! now begin your task directly -- prevent his coming
in; if he enters, I never will be yours.


Alexis. Let me in I say.


Octav. Pardon me, Sir, you must not come in. ( Going to the door.)


Alexis. Must not come in -- why you young dog! Well, well, tell me then, is
she kind -- hey my little Octy! is she kind?


Octav. Not quite so kind as I wish her to be.


Alexis. Oh, a jade! You slut you -- you perverse baggage! I will have you kind
to Octavio.


Octav. Devil take him, why does he not bid her dismiss me? then she would fly to
my bosom. ( Aside.)


Alexis. Octy! Octy! ( struggling with Carlota) have you kissed her yet?


Octav. No! ( loud -- in passion.)


Alex. Then you shall -- I will see you kiss her, by Jove!


Carl. Lord Sir! How can you be so rumbusterous?


Alex. Come in, I will.


Seraph. ( aside) Then go out I must. Exit.


Alex. So! what is she off! ( bursting in.)


Octav. Off! yes, and now I Will be off. What woman of delicacy could bear to be
thus treated? Or what father but you -- ( going.)


Alex. Now dear Octy do not be angry -- do not be angry! You have the character
of one of the civilest, politest, discreetest --


Octav. The character lies, Sir -- I am none of these. I am rude, ill-natured,
unjust, fickle, and full of extravagance!


Alex. Hey day! Why I believe you are full of wine too.


Octav. I am every thing you ought to dread. You could not in all Lisbon have
picked out so hopeless a husband for your daughter.


Alex. Oh Lord! no -- you are a very hopeful young gentleman -- The character
you have given of yourself, would suit ye all I doubt; -- but you seem so
intimate with your faults, that like a stale acquaintance, they will soon disgust
ye -- therefore fickle, drunk, or mad, my daughter shall be your wife.


Octav. Are you so obstinate Sir!


Alex. Ay -- and if she dares demur --


Octav. Oh I am ruined -- if you persist I am ruined. Dear Don Alexis pardon
me! I see my scheme was ridiculous -- a better strikes me. In one word -- stay,
let us take care we are not heard -- in one word, you and I must both be in a
plot, against your lovelely capricious daughter.


Alex. How now!


Octav. Her vivacity renders a stupid, formal, allowed courtship, intolerable
to her. If you persist in countenancing my addresses she will hate me; but if
you order her to see me no more, and allow me to steal her out of a window, or
over the garden wall, she will be the happiest bride in Portugal.


Alex. Do You say so? Oh a perverse baggage -- but I Will fit her! Will Not love ye,
merely because I order her to do it! that she had from her mother!


Octav. You must conceal your knowledge of that.


Alex. Pho! do you imagine I don't see your whole drift now? If you was to
continue talking a Lapland winter, you could not make the hint clearer. Gad
she is coming, and my wife with her! So do you hear you Signor Don Octavio, (
speaking loud) you are -- I say you are -- you shall know what you are another
time; for the present that is your way, Sir, that your way out; and I Will be
sworn you shall never know the way in. ( Pushing him out.)


Enter Seraphina and Viola. Seraph. Why my dear husband is so mere a gudgeon,
there is no credit in deceiving him. Now remember your lesson. ( to Viola)


Alex. So mistress -- I have dispatched your lover.


Viola. Have you, Sir?


Alex. A young rakeshame! your not liking him proves you have your father's
penetration. Notwithstanding his modest front, there is not such a desperate
fellow this side the Ganges; no nor 'tother side the Black Sea.


Seraph. My sweet love, are you speaking of Don Octavio?


Alex. Yes, I am. Take care you give him no encouragement, do you hear girl? No
whisperings from your balcony; no private correspondences; no billets dropped by
your officious maid, on pretense they are meant for some carotty-pated country
cousin!


Viola. Dear Sir!


Alex. No pencil'd assignations on the back of your fan; or cards in lemon
juice -- to be called on detection secret orders to your perfumer, for pearl
powder, and bloom of Circassia.


Seraph. How can you put such things in the girl's head, deary?


Alex. ( aside) That her fingers may put them in practice, to be sure; but you
are not up to me there, deary! ( aside.)


Viola. But a few minutes since, you were fearful, Sir, that he was not
received with sufficient favor.


Alex. That was -- that -- well, no matter. That was, perhaps, to try how far
things had gone.


Seraph. Oh I beg your pardon! the curtain rises, and we see the sun! Now I
understand your policy -- how admirable! You middle-aged gentlemen are so deep,
that it is difficult to sift ye.


Alex. Ay, and when we are sifted --


Seraph. You are found to be chaff. Poor dear Don Octavio! Send him a garland
of willows, Viola.


Viola. Rather of myrtles -- he is too handsome for willows.


Alex. Handsome is he, that handsome does -- remember that.


Viola. Why Sir, he does handsomely. He has traveled handsomely, has a
handsome estate, has brought home a handsome character, and now wishes for a
handsome wife.


Alex, Ay, but he must go further a field to catch her though. He Will find
neither wives nor widgeons in my orchard.


Seraph. No, our widgeons are all within doors.


Viola. Unfortunate that I am! just made up my mind to dismiss Sebastian, nay
absolutely to dislike him, and now --


Alex. And now! why now you must make up your mind the other way. Perhaps in my
present humor, of the two fools, I like Sebastian best.


Viola. But that humor must change, for I can never think of those two young
men as you do, my dear father.


Alex. Thoughts are free, daughter! Gad I could hug her. ( aside.)


Seraph. You see your father generously leaves your thoughts unshackled, my
dear; he only desires to control your actions -- pray oblige him, and take
Sebastian.


Alex. ( aside) Zounds! she knows nothing of our plot, and gives that advice
seriously.


Seraph. He is a most accomplished young man.


Alex. Wise!


Seraph. Engaging in his manners, and resistless in his form.


Alex. My dear, I say. ( spitefully.)


Seraph. His eyes are expressive, and his tongue is eloquent.


Alex. The devil's in your tongue! ( aside.) You don't know what you are
talking of.


Seraph. I do indeed -- perfectly. In short, Viola, he is so amiable, so
captivating, and loves you with such unbounded fondness, that if you marry any
other, your misery ought to equal your ingratitude.


Alex. Gad she speaks with an air of too much conviction -- this must be
managed more nicely. To your chamber, hussy, and try to forget Octavio.


( pushing off Viola.) Seraph. And remember your Sebastian. Let him be present
to you waking, and sleeping; let him --


Alex. Zounds let him alone! ( driving her off on the other side) you may be
doing mischief all this while. I dare not let her into my plot, lest her
perverseness, or her folly should mar it. And yet, I think -- no hang it I
will not -- I will not. The only plot that ever had a woman in it came to nothing.
I Will conduct this solely by my own sagacity, and have a hearty laugh at the
poor fools, when all is over.


Exit laughing. SCENE, An elegant Apartment at Don Gasper's, illuminated.
Rachel enters first; followed by Gasper, Antonia, Clara, and a number of
Ladies. Rach. ( looking back) Bless us! the approach of the ceremony has made
my master half out of his senses. The poor bride too seems half out of here is --
but not with joy -- if I may guess.


Don Gasp. ( capering in, and singing.) Tired of dance, of song, and play,
Now we end our wedding day.
Yes, yes, now for the ceremony! Come my pretty Pet, the Priest is waiting in
the next room to make thee the happiest girl in Portugal. In ten minutes thou will be the wife of Don. Gasper de Frontado! ( strutting.)


Ant. ( Aside) Oh heaven! where is Henry? Rachel, my soul sinks within me.


Rach. Truly, mine is not very high.


Gasp. Heyday! what is all this about? What! she must be coax'd now I warrant --
they all love coaxing. Come now, my pretty Tony, my nown little Tony. ( Taking
her under his arm.)


Ant. ( breaking from him) Henry! Henry! Where art thou? Oh, he mocks me!


Gasp. Come, let us to the priest, and tie the knot, which even Alexander who
cut the gordion will never be able to destroy.


Henry. ( without.) Where is he -- the bridegroom! the happy bridegroom!


Ant. Oh my heart -- he is come!


Gasp. Here he is -- here is the happy bridegroom. (Henry enters) Come, you are
just in time to witness the ceremony. -- The priest waits to join us in his
rosy bands. Look at her! h-u-m! Oh, you sweet little -- There are smiles and
blushes for ye! Look at her!


Henry. They are like those of Aurora, when she slies before the jolly god of
day!


Gasp. And I the jolly god of day pursue her.


Henry. But charming Antonia, the blissful fate which awaits you must be
postponed a few hours. Oh, Sir, I am sent --


Gasp. Sent -- about what! from whom? -- who has sent you to postpone Antonia's
bliss?


Henry. It is happy I have a token to convince you. Here, Sir, -- do you know
this great scal ring? the impression is -- stay, can you see it? ( taking a
candle) the impression is a satyr; look at his horns.


Gasp. The devil's in such luck! A man on the wrong side of fifty or so, cannot
marry but at every turn he has horns in his teeth. If he is invited to a tavern,
the dinner is sure to be at the horns: They Will wake me with horns tomorrow
morning -- nay, I am even kept from the ceremony tonight, to be regaled with
the sight of horns.


Ant. ( to Clara.) What can be the purport of the ring? I can hardly breathe
through terror!


Henry. Do you know them, Sir?


Gasp. Know them! Yes -- they are Don Alexis's horns, not mine -- it is his
ring; -- but what have I to do with it, any more than with the ring of Saturn,
or the belt of Jupiter? If you are for rings, you shall see one presently (
taking Antonia's hand) on this waxen finger, that --


Henry. You will not hear me, Sir. This is a token from Don Alexis -- observe
me, Sir, a token; by which you are required, as a counselor of the realm, to
meet Don Alexis immediately at his own house, on affairs of imminent importance.


Gasp. Meet Don Alexis! What is he mad? or are you mad? or does he think me
mad? Go, prithee -- I Will meet him tomorrow. ( seizing Antonia's hand) My
service to his night cap! ( going.)


Henry. Tomorrow! Why, all our throats may be cut by tomorrow.


Gasp. Hey! throats cut!


Hen. Why Sir, there is a plot -- a plot.


Gasp. A plot!


Clara. ( to Ant.) Now I have his design. My dear Don Gasper, at a juncture so
important, every selfish consideration must be annihilated. Should our
discontented citizens take arms --


Hen. Nay, for aught I know they are in arms already.


Gasp. Arms! well what can I do? Fight dog fight bear -- I Will be married. (
going.)


Rachel. ( dropping on her knee) Oh dear Sir, there'll be nothing but rapes and
murder! Oh take pity on us poor virgins, Sir, and go.


Gasp. Don't be a fool! ( striving to get free.)


Clara. Consider, Sir, the good of the nation.


Rach. Ay, Sir, the good of the nation; -- what wouldn't a body do for the good
of the nation?


Gasp. Good of the nation! -- 'twould be a shame! Go -- go Julio, and vote for
me; I Will make you my proxy.


Hen. Your proxy there, Sir! No, no, excuse me. But hasten; -- whilst you
dally, all Lisbon may be fired.


Gasp. If there is such danger, I am safest here -- an't I, duck? ( to Ant.)


Ant. Oh Sir, if you can resist the calls of honor, do not resist me. To marry
in the midst of such horrible apprehensions, is impossible -- and my fears are
so great, they will destroy me. Sweet Don Gasper, go!


Gasp. Nay then -- come, my dear Nephew, let us go together; not a step will I
move without you.


Hen. ( aside) Oh miserable, to be thus circumvented. Had I not better stay
here to guard the --


Gasp. Stay here! -- Oh you are a dutiful Nephew. No, Sir, you shall guard me,
if I stir -- but I will not stir by all --


Ant. Fie, Don Julio! surely you will not desert your uncle. Leave him in the
street, and return instantly! ( apart) Adieu, sweet bridegroom, ( helping to
get him out) speed quickly back, ( looking after them) but find Antonia gone!
Dear liberty, I hail thee! Oh Rachel, now I claim thy promise; -- assist my
flight, and make thy terms and fortune. Follow -- follow me! Exit.


Rachel. I will -- but let me consider first what I have engaged to do, to make
my fortune. Why I am to assist a pretty girl to run away from an old husband to
a young one; from age, gout, and petulance, to youth, health, and glowing love.
Ay, that I will, or may I never arrive at higher honor than to attend misses
in their bibs, and ancient maidens in their spectacles!


END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V. An Apartment at Don Alexis's.
A Table with Candles and Chairs. He enters, followed by a Servant. Alexis. HEY
dey! why what is the meaning of all this? The family are all up, though it is
past twelve o'clock, and my wife's apartments in a blaze -- illuminated! as
though it was some grand anniversary. What Is the meaning of all this, I say?


Serve. Donna Seraphina has ladies with her, Sir -- they have been playing.


Alex. Playing! go, get along and let me know when they break up. ( Exit
Servant.) There Is no having any rest in this world. -- No, or at least not for
the husbands of this world. -- This custom of letting one's wives receive
female company, is like shutting your gates upon the enemy, and then helping
them over the wall. Not a woman but has her head full of projects, and her
pockets of billets-doux. Well, if at last Don Octavio should really marry my
daughter, I shall then hope --


Enter Servant. Serve. Don Gasper de Frontado is without, Sir.


Alex. Don Gasper -- Don Gasper! it cannot be.


Serve. He is indeed, Sir, attended by most of his servants, with drawn swords
and torches.


Alex. Swords and torches -- why he is mad! the near approach of matrimony has
turned his brain. Well, no great wonder. It is Gasper sure enough! ( looking
through the wing) What a figure! --


Gasp. ( Speaking as he enters) Bless me, why all is quiet -- all is quiet, my
dear nephew! ah ( looking back) what is he gone? Not a voice in the street, but
two old women quarrelling about a string of sausages.


Alex. ( Aside.) Ay it is so -- he is certainly crazy. I am very sorry Don
Gasper ( gravely taking off his hat) that any thing should have happened to
call you from your house, at this time.


Gasp. My house -- that is nothing! From my bride -- from my little Tony -- from
the very altar, my friend. But that is nothing -- the good of the nation must
be minded. Come let us sit and to business.


Alex. As soon as you please. Zounds, what a time for him to think on the good
of the nation! ( aside.)


( They both draw chairs, and sit looking at one another, waiting for each to
begin.) Gasp. Be brief -- my good friend, be brief!


Alex. Brief -- why we hav'nt begun yet.


Gasp. Then why the devil don't we? How long am I to wait, before the mighty
matter is brought upon the carpet? Do you consider that I am on the point of
being married, Sir?


Alex. Pray, Sir, what would you be at?


Gasp. I be at -- I want to know what you would be at.


Alex. Ha, ha, ha, -- why this is the strangest thing! to see an old fellow,
high in the state, the night he should be married, forsake his bride, and come
with a train armed cap-a-pie, to disturb another old fellow, and ask him what
he would be at! What Is your business once more?


Gasp. My business, with whom?


Alex. With me, Sir -- with me! What the devil do you do here?


Gasp. That Is what I want to know, Sir, and you would best be quick in the
relation! You seem to think time of no more value to me than straw.


Alex. ( rising) Ay, straw -- there it is! I thought he was mad; they never
think of any thing but straw. I am sorry you are thus disturbed, Don Gasper.


Gasp. ( Pursuing him) The disturbance is nothing, if you would but come to the
point -- What is the plot -- Where are the conspirators, and what do they aim
at?


Alex. Poor soul -- poor soul! My dear friend you really shock me very much --
though I knew your marriage was a mad action, I did not think it would have taken
effect so soon.


Gasp. Oons! this is beyond all bearing! ( making a motion as though to his
sword, and seems disappointed) no sword -- meet me tomorrow, Sir -- meet me
tomorrow!


Alex. With all my heart. By that time you will be in a strait waistcoat, and I
shall be safe. ( Aside.)


Gasp. I am cooler. Such old men as we are can afford to waste no blood -- but
there is your ring, Sir; and let that be the last token of good, or ill will,
you ever send me. ( Flinging the ring from him.)


Alex. My ring! ( taking it from the floor) why, how came you -- who gave you
this ring? who gave it you?


Gasp. Why did not, -- did not -- oh, my mind misgives me!


Alex. You had it from your nephew -- eh?


Gasp. Ye -- y-e-s. ( Trembling.)


Alex. Ha, ha, ha, -- oh, a young rogue -- oh, a plotting young villain! ha,
ha, ha --


Gasp. What then I have -- oh, shame to my years -- I have been made a jest of.


Alex. A jest -- Heaven grant you may be made nothing worse of! Hurry home my
dear friend; you know what I said today about your bride's odd fancies. Hurry
home, and be thankful if it is a jest!


Gasp. What do you imagine -- do you conceive -- oh, my dear, dear friend! But
hold, you are in the plot -- the ring is yours -- you are in the plot! (
Ragefully.)


Alex. Believe me Don Gasper --


Gasp. Oh, what a beetle, what a bat, I have been! but I Will repay your jest
with interest. In the first place -- and that is only for a beginning mind me,
only for a beginning -- my Octavio shall never marry your daughter. How do you
like that jest? Oh what a blind -- blind -- oh! ( Going off stamping.)


Alex. ( going after him) My dear Don Gasper, my friend, my worthy friend, I
entreat -- Zounds! he is gone! If it had not been for his choak-pear about
Octavio, how I could laugh. Why, what the plague did that impertinent Don Julio
take such a liberty with my ring for? how dared he haul me head and ears into
his scheme, to laugh at his worthy uncle? But zooks it is a good laugh after
all -- ha, ha, ha -- but if Gasper now, through spite, should prevent Octavio's
marriage! What Is to be done? hang me if I go to bed to night -- I Will find out
Octavio wherever he is, make him steal my daughter, conclude the marriage, and
then I Will laugh with Julio, 'till my old sides crack. Exit.


SCENE changes to the Street, before Don Gasper's.
Enter Don Henry. He knocks gently at the door. Hen. I dare not be louder; but
sure the ear of love can catch the gentlest sound!


Rach. ( from the balcony) Oh, are you come, Sir -- I Will call my lady down.


Hen. Oh haste! the minutes fly; I have secured a safe retreat -- leave all
behind, and bring Antonia only to my arms. ( A noise of people advancing) Hah!
what noise is that? and lights too! they come this way -- surely it is Don
Gasper's voice -- I am breathless with my fears.


Gasp. ( without) Put out your lights -- extinguish your torches, and be silent.


Hen. Ay, it is he -- shall I plunge this sword into his bosom, or my own? oh,
either way I Am lost! ( Don Gasper enters, and knocks loudly.)


Gasp. Yes, yes, I Will be a match for his great grandsires, ring, trust me! (
Knocks again.)


Rachel. ( from the balcony) We are just ready, Sir -- have a moment's patience.


Gasp. Just ready for what? Oh I am arrived in the very nick of some cursed
scheme! Keep your swords drawn. ( to his servants) Come, I Will not give way to
suspicions -- she shall have fair play -- appearances may deceive.


The door opens. Antonia enters. Henry. Hah! by Heaven, Antonia -- we are
ruined!


Ant. Where are you, my best wishes? lord of my vows, and charmer of my soul,
where are you?


Henry. Oh heavens! ( half drawing his sword.)


Gasp. Well, well, that may be all meant for me.


Ant. Give me your hand, my love, my life, and guide me to your bosom -- the
home for which I pant!


Gasp. Hum -- that is rather too much, too! I Am afraid that is too sweet a
morsel to be meant for my chops.


Ant. ( groping about) Oh, are you here indeed? you frightened me with your
silence. Here take these jewels, and let us haste away.


Gasp. H-a-h, are you thereabouts, madam? ( between his teeth) then I Am cozened.


Henry. ( aside) To attempt to force her off would be in vain.


Ant. Will you not speak? do you repent already? before possession are you
cold, and false?


Gasp. Before -- ah, ah! -- well that is great comfort. Whatever is designed, I
am beforehand with the mischief, however.


Ant. Am I not to be your wife? -- this very day did we not invoke Heaven to
bless our vows?


Gasp. Now then it is clearly me, and I Will be mute no longer.


Ant. Oh Henry! Henry! ( mournfully.)


Gasp. ( starting) Who do thou take me for -- Henry? Oh thou perfidious
wretch!


Ant. Don Gasper -- what will become of me? Why -- why are you so angry, Sir,
at my naming one who in the cold grave cannot rival you? I was only going to
say, that Henry would not have been so unkindly silent.


Gasp. Was that all indeed, my little Tony? but 'twas wrong to think upon a
young man. Never let your thoughts run upon a young man, whether in a grave, or
a garret.


Ant. Never, Sir, be assured. Neither in one place, or the other, will my
thoughts ever seek a lover. But why did you not speak?


Gasp. Faith, you prattled love so prettily, I could have heard your little
tongue run for ever. But how came you out so late, and with these jewels, and
parcels?


Ant. Sir! -- I was -- why Sir --


Rachel. Alas, Sir, we thought the city was in arms, and packed up our things
to secure 'em. Lord, Sir, we were so scared! about plots, and robberies, and --


Ant. Yes, Sir, terrified to death.


Gasp. Oh it is all quelled now -- it is all over, my pretty chuck. As soon as I
appeared amongst 'em, and threatened 'em, and harangued 'em on their duty, they
were as silent as the soft tread of a thief on a dark staircase. I am resolved
she shall not know what a gull I was. ( aside) Come now let us in, and join our
tender hearts in one.


Ant. Pardon me, Sir. Day is on the point of breaking -- dear welcome day! and
I am resolved to pass it unbound by any vows, but those of love.


Gasp. How!


Ant. In this one point, Sir, I must govern, or here I vow most solemnly, never
to be yours.


Gasp. Oh its a rash vow -- a most unjustifiable vow!


Rach. Not so rash a vow as that you want her to make.


Gasp. What Is that, minx?


Rach. Why Sir, with submission, I say its most rash and unjustifiable, for
eighteen to rise out of bed, and go to church, to vow to love sixty-five -- and
I Will maintain it.


Gasp. But the vow was made, hussy, and all vows must be kept -- religiously
kept! and therefore, though it goes against me, even this last shall be kept.
So come in, my little Tony, and learn of your nown Hubby, never to break a vow.


( all go in.) Henry. That secures me! Her delicacy is safe from insult, and
when I see her next, it shall be with powers to suppress his audacious, fancied
rights, and close the necessity for these degrading acts for ever. Exit.


SCENE changes to Don Alexis 's Garden.
He enters, leading in Octavio. Alex. Gad I am glad I found ye -- 'twas
devilish lucky! Viola is certainly somewhere in the garden -- both my wife and
Carlota assured me that she was.


Octav. And the ladder of ropes is suspended from the place you pointed out.


Alex. Exactly there -- I helped to fix it myself -- it is very secure.


Octav. The dear little madcap must have her way; but it is strange she prefers
scaling a wall at midnight, to walking quietly through the gate in the sunshine.
Hist! -- I hear the tread of gentle feet.


Alex. Then I Am off. If she should find us together, the perverse baggage would
suspect our intelligence, and that would spoil all -- so I Am off! ( lowering
his voice.) Exit.


Octav. In a few hours, expect us at your feet asking pardon and blessing. ( A
pause.) Charming Viola, appear! I hear you not; yet by the soft influence about
me, I am sure you are near. What delightful faculty is this, which allows us to
be conscious of the presence of the object we adore, without the vulgar
intervention of the senses? -- It must be the privilege of purest love!


Seraph. ( entering.) The privilege of fancy -- all mere fancy; though you would
exalt it into a faculty!


Octav. Hah, my charmer! ( catching her in his arms) faculties, and fancies,
are now equally nothing; -- all lost in transport, at finding thee in my arms.


Seraph. I protest I begin to believe you very dangerous. I insist on your
quitting me this instant. ( breaking from him) Heavens what a situation! in the
arms of a man -- alone -- in a garden, at two o'clock in the morning? ( Aside.)


Octav. What do think of, sweet angel?


Seraph. That the sooner we are out of this place the better.


Octav. ( Aside.) Suppose I secure her mine! I almost fear some new caprice --
and if I mistake not, her little heart flutters at this moment, in unison with
my own. Dear bewitching woman, let me once more taste --


Seraph. Hold, Sir! or by all that is good -- ( breaking from him) I never knew
till now what resistance meant. ( Aside.)


Octav. By heavens I will not lose this charming moment!


Seraph. Then you lose me for ever -- make your election!


Octav. This moment is presented to us by love -- let us prove ourselves worthy
of the boon!


Seraph. How? by disgracing love?


Octav. We'll argue that point hereafter; but now --


Seraph. Hold, Sir -- I am neither blind to your intention, nor to my own
danger -- but know you are meditating an irremediable crime!


Octav. How irremediable? Love itself shall remedy the crimes it makes.


Seraph. Hah! you know not what you speak of, nor can I explain myself -- but
let us fly!


Octav. Then we will fly my little trembler, and Hymen shall --


Seraph. Yet stay -- I cannot go with you alone -- you must consent that a lady
accompanies us.


Octav. Who?


Seraph. No matter. You must promise me, without asking questions, to conduct
her safely to Don Sebastian; and then to conduct me in safety to your father's.


Octav. To my ghostly father you mean -- to a priest?


Seraph. No, to Don Gasper -- on those terms I scale the wall with you, and on
no other.


Octav. It is odd, and mysterious; but I Will scale walls with you on any terms.
Where is the lady?


Seraph. We shall find her in the next walk -- oh, no, she is hastening hither.
( Enter Viola, veiled.) Come fair damsel, this is the valourous knight who is
to conduct us through all the intervening dragons, and giants, to the quiet and
sober pale of matrimony -- where we shall grow good, and stupid: ( drawling)
and recollect the kind action of this night, with matronly thankfulness and
decency.


Octav. ( Aside.) It Is a vile thought, and sticks most indigestibly! Why must
love be thus shackled? I feel I shall repent, and leap the pale; -- but I am
fairly caught now, and must submit. Come my little fawns! take each an arm. --
Egad, let us make haste, or some unlucky ideas, which are growing rather
ponderous, will prevent my flight over the wall!


Seraph. I Will be hanged if it is not the idea of matrimony you find so heavy!
-- but be of good comfort, Signor, and make speed -- your fate has prepared a
consolation you little expect. Exeunt.


SCENE, Don Gasper's.
He enters. Gasp. Well, day at last is broad awake; and the vile night, which
cloaks so many schemes, and villainous plots, against the peace of wary
husbands, is passed away -- and all has gone well! yes, all has gone well,
except with my poor aching bones, and sleepless eyes. Spent all these hours
upon a mat at Antonia's chamber door -- dared not leave it. Truly she is a
treasure, but if to secure it I must fag out the remnant of my life in these
alarms, and fears, and misgivings. -- Well, well, it is too late now to think
about that; my hour is come! ( Dolefully.)


Enter a Servant. Serve. Don Octavio, and a lady, Sir. Exit.


Octavio enters, leading Seraphina, veiled. Octav. Permit me, Sir, to ask your
protection for this lady for a few hours; -- if you knew her, you would think
she had a right to claim it.


Gasp. To claim it -- why, who is she?


Octav. That I am forbid to tell -- do you release me from my promise, madam?


Seraph. No, certainly; -- and yet if I did, it were much the same thing, for
you do not know me.


Gasp. Not know the lady!


Seraph. Believe me he does not; and yet if you ask him, he will swear he does.


Octav. Surely, though you are veiled, I can swear you are the same sweet melting
creature, who in a certain garden --


Seraph. Found herself in your arms; and afterward leapt the wall with you --
that you may safely swear.


Octav. Yet I know you not -- ha, ha, ha, permit me ( apart) -- Perhaps you will
deny being her, whom I am to marry to day?


Seraph. Oh, no -- I swear I will marry you to day, if Don Alexis gives consent.


Octav. We have more than his consent -- his ardent wishes.


Seraph. Yet I shall not be yours.


Octav. Why, what a sweet enigmatical charmer you are!


Seraph. ( to Don Gasper) If I mistake not, Sir, this house has a mistress --
may I be permitted to wait on Donna Antonia?


Gasp. Madam -- ma -- Octavio! ( Whispers.)


Octav. Oh yes, of rank and reputation -- but a little capricious.


Gasp. Pardon me, madam! I will wait on you to Antonia's apartment. -- I shall not
care to leave them together though! ( Aside.)


Exit, leading Seraphina. Octav. What can she mean with her riddle-merees? I am
perplexed ( Sebastian enters with Viola.) Hah Don Sebastian! What the weighty
ceremony so lightly over? Madam, I wish you all the joys which belong to your
new state. Dear Sebastian ( taking him aside) tell me -- how do feel?


Sebas. Feel!


Octav. Ay; -- in a few hours I shall be in the same class, and I want to guess
how it is.


Sebas. If you love as I do, you will feel as I do -- blessed!


Octav. I fear all you married rogues are so many decoy ducks; you look up with
envy, and cry quake, quake, to your fellows at large; and when you have coax'd
us into the snare, clap your wings, and exult.


Viola. ( running to Sebastian.) Oh, I hear my father's voice -- I would not
have him see you at this instant. ( Apart.) Pardon my freedom Don Octavio, but
it will be infinitely kind if you will both leave me.


Sebas. Those fears are idle my charmer -- the moment must arrive.


Viola. Nay, do not stay to argue, but oblige me!


Octav. What, Sir, so much of a husband in half an hour, as to dispute a
command? I Will take him to task, madam, and give him a lesson on obedience.
Exeunt.


Alexis. ( without) Octavio, and a lady veiled? ( entering) then all is right!
Hah Viola! well, tell me, is it all over -- are you married?


Viola. Yes, Sir.


Alex. Yes, Sir -- enough said! ha, ha, ha, -- now I can laugh at Gasper, and
enjoy Don Julio's joke -- ha, ha, ha -- and you too -- you have been finely
nicked -- I have been obliged to cheat you into marrying the man you liked --
ha, ha, ha --


Viola. Oh, Sir, forgive what I have done!


Alex. Forgive thee, my girl! ay that I will -- here is my hand upon it. -- Hah
Don Gasper! ( he enters) your most obedient very humble servant! How do you
find yourself after your last night's whim, Sir? -- My seal-ring is at your
service, at any time, Don Gasper -- ha, ha, ha, -- two jokes at once -- I shall
laugh now, 'till I am a grandfather.


Gasp. If you laugh till my Octavio makes you a grandfather, it will be a very
long fit I promise ye.


Alex. Dye think so? I Will trust him!


Gasp. He is now in the next room, at the feet of a young lady, whose charms
are sufficient, I trust, to blot those of your daughter from his heart.


Alex. What Is that? Octavio at the feet of a lady! do you hear that, Viola?


Gasp. Your daughter -- Pardon me, fair lady!


Alex. Ay, Sir, and your daughter too -- your daughter! Let me see your
encourage her husband to kneel to other women in your house.


Gasp. Her husband -- ha, ha, ha.


Alex. Zounds, Sir, this is no laughing matter -- how dare you, Sir -- Why,
Viola, why don't you rave and storm, as women do on these occasions?


Viola. Alas, Sir! I have no right.


Alex. No right! I shall see that. Here Don Octavio, I say! The very day of his
marriage -- nay within the hour! ( Enter Octavio.)


Octav. Don Alexis -- your pleasure?


Alex. My pleasure, Sir, is, that -- Zounds! -- that your pleasure shall be
with my daughter.


Octav. It Is very kind -- nothing can make me so happy.


Alex. Then what the devil do you mean by -- by -- your father says you were at
the feet of a lady.


Octav. I was.


Alex. You was!


Octav. Why should that offend you? Do you not wish me to love your daughter?


Alex. Love my daughter, and kneel to another!


Octav. All mistake, Sir -- another! I Will convince you that Viola alone ( going
to the wing) here she comes! the dear lively girl! who leapt a garden wall, to
give a sober marriage the air of a romance.


Alex. Oons! where am I? are not you my daughter? ( twitching off Viola's veil)
yes. Did you not leap the wall with him?


Viola. Yes, Sir.


Alex. And are you not married?


Viola. I am indeed! ( curtseying.)


Alex. And did you, Madam, leap a wall?


Seraph. Yes, Sir.


Alex. And are you married too?


Seraph. I am, indeed! ( throws up her veil, and curtseys.)


Alex. My wife -- Oons -- my wife!


Octav. Amazement! his wife!


Gasp. His wife leap the wall with my Octavio -- ha, ha, ha. I Will add another
five hundred moidores to your yearly allowance, for that my boy! Prithee, dear
Don, indulge your laugh; you were in a very fine vein a minute ago -- ha, ha,
ha -- now laugh till you're a grandfather!


Seraph. Don Octavio, I have used you ill; but I trust your generosity will
pardon my taking advantage of your partiality for me, to serve two amiable and
faithful lovers.


Octav. You have used me ill, indeed! yet hang it, come, I am not married -- I
am not married however! ( aside) Yes, Madam, I can forgive you; but how shall I
forgive myself? I had you -- oh, distraction! I had you alone -- amidst the
conscious shades of night -- and in my power!


Seraph. Pardon me, Sir! no woman can be alone, nor in the power of any man,
whilst she respects herself, and is guarded by a sense of her duty. You see,
Don Alexis, what benefits arise from plotting without a woman. Ha, ha, ha.


Alex. Oh, I shall be mad! so it was my wife, then, to whom you were kneeling?
and it was you whom I pressed yesterday to grant him some small favors?


Seraph. Just so, my sweet Hubby!


Alex. Oh!


Gasp. Come, be merry, old Gentleman. -- A companion for your seal ring -- two
jokes at once, ha, ha, ha.


Alex. Ay, you have it all to nothing now. And you have the impudence to love
my wife? ( to Octavio.)


Octav. More than ever, now there is no danger of matrimony.


Alex. And you are now considering when you shall make me a -- a satyr, eh?
come, be frank -- when is it to be?


Octav. Faith, I wish I could tell.


Seraph. I will answer for him! -- it shall be never; whilst you repose a
generous confidence in me, and allow me to be the guardian of my own honor. (
Don Gasp. goes out.)


Octav. Now I entreat you, my dear Don Alexis, be a very tyrant! suspect her,
watch her, and confine her -- will you be so much my friend?


Alex. I don't know what I shall be yet; -- both as husband and father, I have
ingeniously contrived to bite myself most d -- n -- bly! As for you, Madam, (
to Viola) bread and water, and a dark chamber, shall be your lot --


Sebas. ( entering) No, Sir, -- I am the arbiter of her lot; -- however, I
confirm half your punishment; and a dark chamber she shall certainly have This
is the expression, I am told, which had nearly proved fatal to the Comedy. I
should not have printed it, but from the resolution I have religiously kept, of
restoring every thing that was objected to.
.


Alex. What then, thou art really married -- and married to Sebastian!


Viola. Dear, Sir, you assured me, that of the two fools you preferred him.


Alex. Yes, but I depended on your perverseness, hussy?


Gasp. ( Leading in Antonia) Come, you, who have not seen my little pet, behold
her -- Nay, I present her to ye all, as the pattern of meekness and perfect
love -- Oh its a sweet pudsey.


Ant. Meekness, alas! you should not answer for; you know I am a woman. My
perfect love, indeed you may -- the world has not a heart so truly wedded as
Antonia's -- behold its master -- its lawful lord, my husband! ( Pointing to
the opposite door.)


Don Henry. ( entering) Come, my Antonia, to his arms! Yes, I am thy husband --
now I stand boldly forward, and proclaim my title -- I am thy husband! that
dear distinction which heaven has blessed me with, heaven only shall reclaim!


Octav. What! am I to lose my mother as well as my wife?


Alex. ( To Gasp.) Your nephew! why is this full moon? We are all going to run
out of our wits.


Seraph. Don't be disheartened -- though it should be so -- You Will not have far
to run!


Gasp. Why Julio, what in the name of --


Henry. No, Sir -- not Julio, but Don Henry. That Don Henry whom you so basely
reported to be dead; that you might dishonor him in security.


Gasp. How! -- why -- why you are dead -- as good as dead; you are dead in law
-- you are outlawed, banished --


Henry. No, Sir, neither -- restored to my country! Behold my pardon! ( Shows a
paper.)


Gasp. Your pardon! -- hum! Now, then I see the whole; -- I must be telling my
secrets, with a devil to it! Well you got it through me you know -- you may
thank the music of my moidores for that dance!


Henry. No, Sir! ( throwing down a purse) there is the gold you basely bartered
for the pardon you solicited. My pardon I obtained from the hands of majesty
itself -- from our gracious queen! Oh, when her kingdom's foes provoke
correction from her subjects arms, then shall my sword again be drawn, nor ask
forgiveness for its ardent duty!


Gasp. Well, very well -- but what has your pardon to do with my wife? (
putting her behind him) What have you to do with Tony?


Henry. She is my wife; made mine by contract, before you destined her the
bliss of being yours. Pardon me then, my sweet Antonia! ( taking her from
Gasper) if I deprive you of his venerable charmer, and give you in his place a
husband!


Alex. Hum! hum! ( Sings.)

Once I was a merry old man,
But now the case is changed!
Who could have thought that my old seal ring would ever have been a talisman
to make lovers happy, and save a Greybeard from folly?


Seraph. Come Don Gasper, let me advise you to think your loss a gain -- you
see in your humble servant, what mischievous creatures young wives are; --
she would plague your heart out, as I do my old husband's.


Alex. Faith she says true. A minute ago I thought the laugh on my side; but
it is still on your own. You have lost a young wife, and I have found one.


Gasp. Why, to say truth, if it were not that at present I feel a little
awkward, and don't know very well which way to look. -- As to your contract I
might perhaps dispute its powers, but as here is a stroke or two of mine, which
may be, I shall not be sorry to have dropped, even go to church i'gad's name; and
when ye come home beware of plots and scal rings!


Ant. This is generous! The sentiments you professed for me I see will be
converted to a more decent regard, and we shall all be united in the bands of
charming friendship.


Alex. Gad this looks like a sort of general amnesty -- so let the frolic go
round! But dare my faults hope forgiveness here? ( to the house) Yes; -- I am
on this spot an old offender; and have so often gratefully experienced the
candor of my judges, that I trust now to meet their pardon -- and invoke the
gracious sign!


FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
BY MR. COBB.
SPOKEN BY MISS FARREN. A Mourning Bride! -- that would be something new --
(That I Am a Mourning Husband is too true,
Cries old Sir Testy in his gouty chair,)
"Ah could I wedlock's fatal slip repair!
"But young wives are a sort of flying gout,
"Torments for which no cure was ever found out;
"Both old men's plagues, to punish youthful tricks,
"Equally difficult, I fear, to fix.
"Of wife and gout alike I stand in dread,
"For both, alas! sometimes affect the head."
Thus rail old cynics, striving to disparage
The charming silken ties of modern marriage.
In former times, when folks agreed to wed,
The silent bride by silent bridegroom led,
Up to the altar marched in solemn state,
All was demure, and stupidly sedate.
Impressed with awe, while neither dared to speak,
A wedding was a mere Ballet Tragique.
Thank Heaven we are past the ages of romance;
Wedlock is now a kind of country dance,
Where man and wife with smiles each other greet,
Take hands, change sides, and part as soon as meet;
Pleasure's soft accents every care dispel,
While Hymen fiddles Vive la Bagatelle.
Blessed age! when ceremony's chains are worn,
Like bracelets, not to setter, but adorn.
When we assume deep mourning's fable show,
It Is etiquette prescribes the form of woe:
Whatever our loss, we must have fashion's leave,
Ere we can venture decently to grieve.
Blameless the heir over the dear parchment chuckles,
If he is unpowder'd, and puts on black buckles,
Till the gray frock speaks his first anguish over,
And he is but half as wretched as before.
Ere the gay widow first abroad is seen,
Decked in exhilarating bombazeen,
While the dear Col'nel visits unsuspected,
And she is as well as could have been expected;
Custom's indulgence wisely does she borrow,
In cards of compliments exhausts her sorrow;
Of tears her black-edg'd paper fills the place,
Mourns as her proxy, and preserves her face.
Our Mourning Bride, who with no sorrow labors,
And mourns but in appearance, like her neighbors,
Though forced by etiquette, good humor loves, as well as any here,
Blessed in the fate which these kind smiles decree her,
She hopes her friends will often come to see her.
The following NEW PIECES, written by Mrs. COWLEY, may be had of M^ssrs.
ROBINSON, Paternoster Row.
1. The RUNAWAY, a Comedy, Price 1s. 6d. 2. ALBINA, a Tragedy, 1s. 6d. 3. Who Is
THE DUPE? a Farce, 1s. 4. BELLE's STRATAGEM, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 5. WHICH IS THE
MAN? a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 6. BOLD STROKE FOR A HUSBAND, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 7. MORE
WAYS THAN ONE, a Comedy, 1s. 6d. 8. First Part of THE MAID OF ARRAGON, a Poem,
4to. 2s. 6d. 9. The SCOTTISH VILLAGE, a Poem, 4to. 2s.

