THE School for Wives.

A COMEDY.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. BECKET, IN THE STRAND. 1774.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.]

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following performance cannot commit it to the press, without
acknowledging the deepest sense of gratitude, for the uncommon marks of
approbation with which he has been honored by the Public.

Though he has chosen a title used by MOLIERE, he has neither borrowed a single
circumstance from that great poet, nor to the best of his recollection from any
other writer. -- His chief study has been to steer between the extremes of
sentimental gloom, and the excesses of uninteresting levity; he has some laugh,
yet he hopes he has also some lesson; and fashionable as it has been lately for
the wits, even with his friend Mr. Garrick at their head, to ridicule the Comic
Muse, when a little grave, he must think that she degenerates into farce, where
the grand business of instruction is neglected, and consider it as a heresy in
criticism, to say that one of the most arduous tasks within the reach of
literature, should, when executed; be wholly without utility.

The Author having been presumptuous enough to assert, that he has not
purloin'd a single sprig of bays from the brow of any other writer, he may,
perhaps, be asked, if there are not several plays in the English language,
which, before his, produced Generals, Lawyers, Irishmen, Duels, Masquerades,
and Mistakes? He answers, yes; and confesses moreover, that all the Comedies
before his, were composed not only of men and women, but that before his, the
great business of comedy consisted in making difficulties for the purpose of
removing them; in distressing poor young lovers; and in rendering a happy
marriage the object of every catastrophe.

Yet though the Author of the School for Wives, pleads guilty to all these
charges, still, in extenuation of his offense, he begs leave to observe, that
having only men and women to introduce upon the stage, he was obliged to
compose his Dramatis Personae of mere flesh and blood; if, however, he has
thrown this flesh and this blood, into new situations; if he has given a new
fable, and placed his characters in a point of light hitherto unexhibited: --
he flat.ters himself that he may call his play, a new play, and though it did not
exist before the creation of the world, like the famous Welsh pedigree, that he
may have some small pretensions to originality.

Two things besides the general moral inculcated through his piece, the Author
has attempted; the first, to rescue the law, as a profession, from ridicule or
obliquy; and the second, to remove the imputation of a barbarous ferocity,
which dramatic writers, even meaning to compliment the Irish nation, have
connected with their Idea of that gallant people: -- The law, like every other
profession, may have members who occasionally disgrace it; but to the glory of
the British name, it is well know that in the worst of times, it has produced
numbers whose virtues reflected honor upon human nature; many of the noblest
privileges the constitution has to boast of, were derived from the integrity,
or the wisdom of lawyers: Yet the stage has hitherto cast an indiscriminate
stigma upon the whole body, and labored to make that profession either odious
or contemptible in the theater, which, if the laws are indeed dear to good
Englishmen, can never be too much respected in this kingdom. There is scarcely
a play in which a lawyer is introduced, that is not a libel upon the long robe;
and so ignorant have many dramatic writers been, that they have made no
distinction whatever, between the characters of the first Barristers in
Westminster Hall, and the meanest solicitors at the Old Bailey.

With respect to the gentlemen of Ireland, where even an absolve attempt is
manifested, to place them in a favorable point of view, they are drawn with a
brutal promptitude to quarrel, which is a disgrace to the well known humanity
of their country. -- The gentlemen of Ireland have doubtless a quick sense of
honor, and, like the gentlemen of England, as well as like the gentlemen of
every other high-spirited nation, are perhaps unhappily too ready to draw the
sword, where they conceive themselves injured -- But to make them proud of a
barbarous propensity to Duelling; to make them actually delight in the effusion
of blood, is to fasten a very unjust reproach upon their general character, and
to render them universally obnoxious to society. The author of the School for
Wives therefore, has given a different picture of Irish manners, though in
humble life, and flatters himself that those who are really acquainted with the
original, will acknowledge it to be at least a tolerable resemblance.

It would be ungrateful in the highest degree to close this preface, without
acknowleging the very great obligations which the author has to Mr. Garrick.
Every attention, which either as a manager, or as a man, he could give to the
interest of the following play, he has bestowed with the most generous
alacrity; but universally admired as he is at present, his intrinsic value will
not be known, till his loss is deplored; and the public have great reason to
wish, that this may be a very distant event in the annals of the theater. The
Epilogue sufficiently marks the masterly hand from which it originated; so does
the comic commencement of the Prologue, and the elegant writer of the graver
part, is a character of distinguished eminence in the literary republic.

It has been remarked with great justice, that few new pieces were ever better
performed than The School for Wives. Mr. King, that highly-deserving favorite
of the town, was every thing the author could possibly wish in General Savage.
Mr. Reddish acquired a very considerable share of merited reputation in
Belville. Mr. Moody is unequalled in his Irishmen. Mr. Palmer, from his manner
of supporting Leeson, was entitled to a much better part: And Mr. Weston in
Torington was admirable. Miss Young, in Mrs. Belville, extorted applause from
the coldest auditor. Her tenderness -- her force -- her pathos, were the true
effusions of genius, and proved that she has no superior where the feelings are
to be interested. With respect to Mrs. Abington, enough can never be said. The
elegance, the vivacity, the critical nicety with which she went through Miss
Walsingham, is only to be guessed at, by those who are familiar with the
performance of that exquisite actress. Her Epilogue was delivered with an
animation not to be conceived, and manifested the strict propriety, with which
she is called the first priestess of the Comic Muse in this country.

Jan. 1, 1774.
THE SCHOOL FOR WIVES, BEING A COMEDY IN WHICH THE LADIES ARE PARTICULARLY
INTERESTED, IT SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO THE FIRST ORNAMENT OF THE SEX; AND IS
THEREFORE INSCRIBED WITH THE HIGHEST ADMIRATION AND THE MOST PROFOUND
REVERENCE, TO HER MAJESTY; NOT BECAUSE SHE IS THE GREATEST OF QUEENS, BUT
BECAUSE IN THE MILDER, AND MORE ENDEARING RELATIONS OF LIFE, SHE IS THE
BRIGHTEST PATTERN OF ALL THE FEMALE VIRTUES.

January 1, 1774.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. KING
NO coward he, who in this critic age,
Dares set his foot upon the dangerous stage;
These boards, like Ice, your footing will betray,
Who can tread sure upon a slippery way?
Yet some through five acts, slide with wondrous skill,
Skim swift along, turn, stop, or wind at will!
Some tumble, and get up; some rise no more;
While cruel critics watch them on the shore,
And at each stumble make a hellish roar!
A wise Philosopher, has truly noted,
(His name I have forgot, though often quoted,)
That fine-spun spirits from the slightest cause,
Draw to themselves affliction, or applause:
So fares it with our Bard. -- Last week he meets
Some hawkers, roaring up and down the streets,
Lives, characters, behavior, parentage,
Of some who lately left the mortal stage!
His ears so caught the sound, and worked his mind,
He thought his own name floated in the wind;
As thus -- "Here is a faithful, true relation,
"Of the birth, parentage, and education,
"Last dying speech, confession, character,
"Of the unhappy malefacterer,
"And comic poet, Thomas Addle Brain!
"Who suffered Monday last at Drury Lane;
"All for the price of halfpenny a piece;"
Still in his ears these horrid sounds increase!
Tried and condemned, half executed too;
There stands the culprit; 'till reprieved by you.

Enter Miss YOUNG. Miss YOUNG. Pray give me leave -- I Have something now to
say.

Mr. KING. Is It at the School for Wives, you're taught this way?
The School for Husbands teaches to obey.

Exit. Miss YOUNG. It is a shame, good Sirs, that brother King,
To joke and laughter, should turn every thing.
Our frighted poet would have no denial,
But, begs me to say something on his trial:
The School for Wives, as it to us belongs,
Should for our use be guarded with our tongues.
Ladies, prepare, arm well your brows and eyes,
From those your thunder, these your lightning flies.
Should storms be rising in the Pit -- look down,
And still the waves thus, fair ones, with a frown:
Or should the Galleries for war declare;
Look up -- your eyes will carry twice as far.
The conclusion of the Prologue from this line is by another hand.
Our Bard, to noble triumphs points your way,
Bids you in moral principles be gay;
Something he would alter in your education,
Something which hurting you, would hurt a nation:
Ingenuous natures wish you to reclaim?
By smiling virtue you will insure your aim:
That gilds with bliss the matrimonial hours,
And blends her laurels with the sweetest flowers.
Ye married fair! deign to attend our school,
And without usurpation learn to rule:
Soon will he cease mean objects to pursue,
In conscience wretched till he lives to you;
Your charms will reformation's pain beguile,
And vice receive a stab from every smile.

EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. ABINGTON.
CAN it be thought, ye wives! this scribbling fool,
Will draw you here, by calling you to School?
Does not he know, poor soul! to be directed,
Is what you hate, and more to be corrected!
Long have these walls to public fame been known,
An ancient College to instruct the town!
We Have Schools for Rakes, for Fathers, Lovers, Wives,
For naughty girls and boys, to mend their lives:
Where some to yawn, some round about to look,
Some to be seen, few come to mind their book:
Some with high wit and humor hither run,
To sweat the masters -- and they call it fun.
Some modish sparks, true stoics, and high bred,
Come, but never know what is done, or sung, or said;
Should the whole herd of critics round them roar,
And with one voice cry out, encore! encore!
Or louder yet, off, off; no more! no more!
Should Pit, Box, Gall'ry with convulsions shake,
Still are they half asleep, nor the other half awake;
O, ladies fair! are these fit men to wed?
Such husbands, half, had better be quite dead.
But, to return, -- vain men, throughout the nation,
Boast, they alone, have College education:
Are not we qualified to take degrees?
We Have caps, and gowns, nay bands too, if you please,
Cornelly's, and Almack's, our Universities!
Young female students rise, if girls of parts,
From under graduates, -- mistresses of arts!
The bashful spinsters, turn important spouses,
Strive to be masters, and the heads of houses!
Will any of you here, blessed with a wife,
Dispute the fact, -- you dare not for your life.
Pray tell me truly, critics, and be free,
Do you this night prefer the Wife to me?
Shall Mrs. Belville give the Play a name?
What are her merits? a cold, smiling dame,
While I, a salamander, lived in flame!
Pressed by three lovers! -- 'twas indeed provoking!
Ladies, upon my word, it was no joking.
Can you from mortal woman more require,
Than save her fingers, and yet play with fire?
The risks I run, the partial hard upbraids;
Wives will not be taught, -- be it the School for Maids.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
General SAVAGE, Mr. KING, BELVILLE, Mr. REDDISH, TORRINGTON, Mr. WESTON,
LEESON, Mr. PALMER, Captain SAVAGE, Mr. BRERETON, CONNOLLY, Mr. MOODY, SPRUCE,
Mr. BADDELEY, GHASTLY, Mr. W. PALMER.
WOMEN.
Miss WALSINGHAM, Mrs. ABINGTON, Mrs. BELVILLE, Miss YOUNG, Lady RACHEL
MILDEW, Mrs. HOPKINS, Mrs. TEMPEST, Mrs. GREVILLE, Miss LEESON, Miss JARRATT,
MAID, Mrs. MILLIDGE.
THE School for Wives.
ACT I.
SCENE, an Apartment at BELVILLE's. Enter Captain SAVAGE, and Miss WALSINGHAM.
CAPT. HA! ha! ha! Well, Miss Walsingham, this fury is going; what a noble peal
she has rung in Belville's ears!


Miss WALL. Did she see you, Captain Savage?


CAPT. No, I took care of that; for though she is'n't married to my father, she
has ten times the influence of a wife, and might injure me not a little with
him, if I didn't support her side of the question.


Miss WALL. It was a pleasant conceit of Mr. Belville, to insinuate the poor
woman was disordered in her senses! --


CAPT. And did you observe how the termagant's violence of temper, supported
the probability of the charge?


Miss WALL. Yes, she became almost frantic in reality, when she found herself
treated like a madwoman.


CAPT. Belville's affected surprise too, was admirable!


Miss WALL. Yes, the hypocritical composure of his countenance, and his
counterfeit pity for the poor woman, were intolerable!


CAPT. While that amiable creature, his wife, implicitly believed every
syllable he said --


Miss WALL. And felt nothing but pity for the accuser, instead of paying the
least regard to the accusation. But pray, is it really under a pretense of
getting the girl upon the stage, that Belville has taken away Mrs. Tempest's
neice from the people she boarded with?


CAPT. It is: Belville, ever on the look out for fresh objects, met her in
those primitive regions of purity, the Green-Boxes; where, discovering that she
was passionately desirous of becoming an actress, he improved his acquaintance
with her, in the fictitious character of an Irish manager, and she eloped last
night, to be, as she imagines, the heroine of a Dublin theater.


Miss WALL. So, then, as he has kept his real name artfully concealed, Mrs.
Tempest can at most but suspect him of Miss Leeson's seduction.


CAPT. Of no more; and this, only, from the description of the people who saw
him in company with her at the play; but, I wish the affair may not have a
serious conclusion; for she has a brother, a very spirited young fellow, who is
a council in the Temple, and who will certainly call Belville to an account,
the moment he hears of it.


Miss WALL. And what will become of the poor creature after he has deserted her?


CAPT. You know that Belville is generous to profusion, and has a thousand good
qualities to counter-balance this single fault of gallantry, which contaminates
his character.


Miss WALL. You men! you men! -- You are such wretches that there is no having a
moment's satisfaction with you! and what is still more provoking, there is no
having a moment's satisfaction without you!


CAPT. Nay, don't think us all alike.


Miss WALL. I Will endeavor to deceive myself; for it is but a poor argument of
your sincerity, to be the confidant of another's falsehood.


CAPT. Nay, no more of this, my love; no people live happier than Belville and
his wife; nor is there a man in England, notwithstanding all his levity, who
considers his wife with a warmer degree of affection: if you have a friendship
therefore, for her, let her continue in an error, so necessary to her repose,
and give no hint, whatever, of his gallantries to any body.


Miss WALL. If I had no pleasure in obliging you, I have too much regard for
Mrs. Belville, not to follow your advice; but you need not enjoin me so
strongly on the subject, when you know I can keep a secret.


CAPT. You are all goodness; and the prudence with which you have concealed our
private engagements, has eternally obliged me; had you trusted the secret even
to Mrs. Belville, it would not have been safe; she would have told her husband,
and he is such a rattleskul, that, notwithstanding all his regard for me, he
would have mentioned it in some moment of levity, and sent it in a course of
circulation to my father.


Miss WALL. The peculiarity of your father's temper, joined to my want of
fortune, made it necessary for me to keep our engagements inviolably secret;
there is no merit, therefore, either in my prudence, or in my laboring
assiduously to cultivate the good opinion of the General; since both were so
^ecessary to my own happiness; don't despise me for this acknowledgement now.


CAPT. Bewitching softness! -- But your goodness, I flatter myself, will be
speedily rewarded; you are now such a favorite with him, that he is eternally
talking of you; and I really fancy he means to propose you to me himself: for,
last night, in a few minutes after he had declared you would make the best wife
in the world, he seriously asked me if I had any aversion to matrimony?


Miss WALL. Why, that was a very great concession indeed, as he seldom stoops to
consult any body's inclinations.


CAPT. So it was, I assure you; for, in the army, being used to nothing but
command and obedience, he removes the discipline of the parade into his family,
and no more expects his orders should be disputed, in matters of a domestic
nature, than if they were delivered at the head of his regiment.


Miss WALL. And yet, Mrs. Tempest, who you say is as much a storm in her nature
as her name, is disputing them eternally.


Enter Mr. and Mrs. BELVILLE. BELL. Well, Miss Walsingham, hav'n't we had a
pretty morning's visitor?


Miss WALL. Really, I think so; and I have been asking Capt. Savage, how long
the lady has been disordered in her senses?


BELL. Why will they let the poor woman abroad, without some body to take care
of her?


CAPT. O, she has her lucid intervals.


Miss WALL. I declare I shall be as angry with you as I am with Belville. (aside
to the Captain.)


Mrs. BELL. You cannot think how sensibly she spoke at first.


BELL. I should have had no conception of her madness, if she had not brought so
preposterous a charge against me.


Enter a Servant. SER. Lady Rachel Mildew, Madam, sends her compliments, and if
you are not particularly engaged, will do herself the pleasure of waiting upon
you.


Mrs. BELL. Our compliments, and we shall be glad to see her Ladyship. Ex.
Servant.


BELL. I wonder if Lady Rachel knows that Torrington came to town last night
from Bath!


Mrs. BELL. I hope he has found benefit by the waters, for he is one of the best
creatures existing; he is a downright parson Adams, in good nature and
simplicity.


Miss WALL. Lady Rachel will be quite happy at his return, and it would be a
laughable affair, if a match could be brought about between the old maid and
the old bachelor.


CAPT. Mr. Torrington is too much taken up at Westminster Hall, to think of
paying his devoirs to the ladies; and too plain a speaker, I fancy, to be
agreeable to Lady Rachel.


BELL. You mistake the matter widely; she is deeply smitten with him; but honest
Torrington is utterly unconscious of his conquest, and modestly thinks that he
has not a single attraction for any woman in the universe.


Mrs. BELL. Yet my poor aunt speaks sufficiently plain, in all conscience, to
give him a different opinion of himself.


Miss WALL. Yes, and puts her charms into such repair, whenever she expects to
meet him, that her cheeks look for all the world like a rasberry ice upon a
ground of custard.


CAPT. I thought Apollo was the only god of Lady Rachel's idolatary, and that
in her passion for poetry she had taken leave of all the less elevated
affections.


BELL. O, you mistake again; the poets are eternally in love, and can by no
means be calculated to describe the imaginary passions, without being very
susceptible of the real ones.


Enter Servant. SER. The man, Madam, from Tavistock-street, has brought home
the dresses for the masquerade, and desires to know if there are any commands
for him.


Mrs. BELL. O, bid him stay till we see the dresses.


Ex. Servant. Miss WALL. They are only Dominos.


BELL. I am glad of that; for characters are as difficult to be supported at the
masquerade, as they are in real life. The last time I was at the Pantheon, a
vestal virgin invited me to sup with her, and swore that her pocket had been
picked by a Justice of peace.


Miss WALL. Nay, that was not so bad, as the Hamlet's Ghost that box'd with
Henry the Eighth, and afterward danced a hornpipe to the tune of Nancy Dawson.
Ha! ha! ha! -- We follow you, Mrs. Belville. Exeunt.


Scene changes to LEESON 's Chambers in the Temple: Enter LEESON. LEES. Where
is this clerk of mine? Connolly!


CON. (behind) Here, Sir!


LEES. Have you copied the marriage settlement, as I corrected it?


CON. (Enters with pistols) Ay, honey, an hour ago.


LEES. What, you have been trying those pistols?


CON. By my soul, I have been firing them this half hour, without once being
able to make them go off.


LEES. They are plaguey dirty.


CON. In troth, so they are: I strove to brighten them up a little, but some
misfortune attends every thing I do, for the more I clane them, the dirtier
they are, honey.


LEES. You have had some of our usual daily visitors for money, I suppose?


CON. You may say that; and three or four of them are now hanging about the
door, that I wish handsomely hanged any where else, for bodering us.


LEES. No joking, Connolly! my present situation is a very disagreeable one.


CON. Faith, and so it is; but who makes it disareeable? your Aunt Tempest
would let you have as much money as you please, but you will not condescend to be
acquainted with her, though people in this country can be very intimate
friends, without seeing one another faces for seven years.


LEES. Do you think me base enough to receive a favor from a woman, who has
disgraced her family, and stoops to be a kept mistress? you see, my sister is
already ruined by a connection with her.


CON. Ah, Sir, a good guinea is not the worse for coming through a bad hand; if
it was, what would become of us lawyers? and by my soul, many a high head in
London would, at this minute, be very low, if they had not recieved favors even
from much worse people than kept mistresses.


LEES. Others, Connolly, may prostitute their honor, as they please; mine is
my chief possession, and I must take particular care of it.


CON. Honor, to be sure, is a very fine thing, Sir; but I don't see how it is
to be taken care of, without a little money; your honor, to my knowledge,
has'n't been in your own possession these two years, and the devil a crum can
you honestly swear by, till you get it out of the hands of your creditors.


LEES. I have given you a license to talk, Connolly, because I know you
faithful; but I hav'n't given you a liberty to sport with my misfortunes.


CON. You know I Would die to serve you, Sir; but of what use is your giving me
leave to spoke, if you oblige me to hold my tongue? it is out of pure love and
affection that I put you in mind of your misfortunes.


LEES. Well, Connolly, a few days will, in all probability, enable me to redeem
my honor, and to reward your fidelity; the lovely Emily, you know, has half
consented to embrace the first opportunity of flying with me to Scotland, and
the paltry trifles I owe, will not be missed in her Fortune.


CON. But, dear Sir, consider you are going to fight a duel this very evening,
and if you should be kilt, I fancy you will find it a little difficult, to run
away afterward with the lovely Emily.


LEES. If I fall, there will be an end to my misfortunes.


CON. But surely it will not be quite genteel, to go out of the world without
paying your debts.


LEES. But how shall I stay in the world, Connolly, without punishing Belville
for ruining my sister?


CON. O, the devil fly away with this honor; an ounce of common sense, is
worth a whole ship load of it, if we must prefer a bullet or a halter, to a
fine young lady and a great fortune.


LEES. We'll talk no more on the subject at present. Take this letter to Mr.
Belville; deliver it into his own hand, be sure; and bring me an answer: make
haste; for I shall not stir out till you come back.


CON. By my soul, I wish you may be able to stir out then, honey. -- O, but
that is true!


LEES. What Is the matter?


CON. Why, Sir, the gentleman I last lived clerk with, died lately and left me
a legacy of twenty guineas --


LEES. What! is Mr. Stanley dead?


CON. Faith, his friends have behaved very unkindly if he is not, for they have
buried him these six weeks.


LEES. And what then?


CON. Why, Sir, I received my little legacy this morning, and if you would be so
good as to keep it for me, I Would be much obliged to you.


LEES. Connolly, I understand you, but I am already shamefully in your debt:
you have had no money from me this age. --


CON. O Sir, that does not signify; if you are not kilt in this damned duel,
you will be able enough to pay me: if you are, I shall not want it.


LEES. Why so, my poor fellow?


CON. Because, though I am but your clerk, and though I think fighting the most
foolish thing upon earth, I Am as much a gintleman as yourself, and have as much
right to commit a murder in the way of duelling.


LEES. And what then? You have no quarrel with Mr. Belville?


CON. I shall have a damned quarrel with him though if you are kilt: your death
shall be revenged, depend upon it, so let that content you.


LEES. My dear Connolly, I hope I shall not want such a proof of your affection.
-- How he distresses me!


CON. You will want a second, I suppose, in this affair: I stood second to my
own brother, in the Fifteen Acres, and though that has made me detest the very
thought of duelling ever since; yet if you want a friend, I Will attend you to
the field of death with a great deal of satisfaction.


LEES. I thank you, Connolly, but I think it extremely wrong in any man who has
a quarrel, to expose his friend to difficulties; we shou'dn't seek for redress,
if we are not equal to the task of fighting our own battles; and I choose you
particularly, to carry my letter because, you may be supposed ignorant of the
contents, and thought to be acting only in the ordinary course of your business.


CON. Say no more about it, honey; I will be back with you presently. (going,
returns.) I put the twenty guineas in your pocket, before you were up, Sir; and
I don't believe you would look for such a thing there, if I was not to tell you of
it. Exit.


LEES. This faithful, noble-hearted creature! -- but let me fly from thought;
the business I have to execute, will not bear the test of reflection. Exit.


Re-enter CONNOLLY. CON. As this is a challenge, I shou'dn't go without a
sword; come down, little tickle-pitcher. (Takes a sword.) Some people may think
me very conceited now; but as the dirtiest black legs in town can wear one
without being stared at, I don't think it can suffer any disgrace by the side
of an honest man.


Exit. SCENE changes to an Apartment at BELVILLE'S. Enter Mrs. BELVILLE. Mrs.
BELL. How strangely this affair of Mrs. Tempest hangs upon my spirits, though I
have every reason, from the tenderness, the politeness, and the generosity of
Mr. Belville, as well as from the woman's behavior, to believe the whole
charge the result of a disturbed imagination. -- Yet suppose it should be
actually true: -- heigho! -- well, suppose it should; -- I would endeavor -- I
think I would endeavor to keep my temper: -- a frowning face never recovered a
heart that was not to be fixed with a smiling one: -- but women, in general,
forget this grand article of the matrimonial creed entirely; the dignity of
insulted virtue obliges them to play the fool, whenever their Corydons play the
libertine; -- and poh! they must pull down the house about the traitor's ears,
though they are themselves to be crushed in pieces by the ruins.


Enter a Servant. SER. Lady Rachel Mildew, madam. Exit Ser.


Enter Lady RACHEL MILDEW. Lady RACH. My dear, how have you done since the
little eternity of my last seeing you. Mr. Torrington is come to town, I hear.


Mrs. BELL. He is, and must be greatly flattered to find that your Ladyship has
made him the hero of your new comedy.


Lady RACH. Yes, I have drawn him as he is, an honest practitioner of the law;
which is I fancy no very common character --


Mrs. BELL. And it must be a vast acquisition to the Theater.


Lady RACH. Yet the managers of both houses have refused my play; have refused
it peremptorily! though I offered to make them a present of it.


Mrs. BELL. That Is very surprising, when you offered to make them a present of
it.


Lady RACH. They allege that the audiences are tired of crying at comedies;
and insist that my Despairing Shepherdess is absolutely too dismal for
representation.


Mrs. BELL. What, though you have introduced a lawyer in a new light?


Lady RACH. Yes, and have a boarding-school romp, that sl^ps her mother's face,
and throws a basin of scalding water at her governess.


Mrs. BELL. Why, surely, these are capital jokes!


Lady RACH. But the managers cannot find them out. -- However, I am determined
to bring it out somewhere; and I have discovered such a treasure for my
boarding-school romp, as exceeds the most sanguine expectation of criticism.


Mrs. BELL. How fortunate!


Lady RACH. Goings to Mrs. Le Blond, my millener's, this morning, to see some
contraband silks, (for you know there is a foreign minister just arrived) I
heard a loud voice rehearsing Juliet, from the dining room; and upon enquiry
found that it was a country girl, just elop'd from her friends in town, to go
upon the stage with an Irish manager.


Mrs. BELL. Ten to one, the strange woman's neice, who has been here this
morning. aside.


Lady RACH. Mrs. Le Blond has some doubts about the manager it seems, though
she hasn't seen him yet, because the apartments are very expensive, and were
taken by a fine gentleman out of livery.


Mrs. BELL. What am I to think of this? -- Pray, Lady Rachel, as you have
conversed with this young actress, I suppose you could procure me a sight of
her.


Lady RACH. This moment if you will, I am very intimate with her already; but
pray keep the matter a secret from your husband, for he is so witty, you know,
upon my passion for the drama, that I shall be teized to death by him.


Mrs. BELL. O, you may be very sure that your secret is safe, for I have a most
particular reason to keep it from Mr. Belville; but he is coming this way with
Captain Savage, let us at present avoid him. Exeunt.


Enter BELVILLE, and Captain SAVAGE. CAPT. You are a very strange man,
Belville; you are for ever tremblingly solicitous about the happiness of your
wife, yet for ever endangering it by your passion for variety.


BELL. Why, there is certainly a contradiction between my principles and my
practice; but, if ever you marry, you will be able to reconcile it perfectly.
Possession, Savage! O, possession, is a miserable whetter of the appetite in
love! and I own myself so sad a fellow, that though I would not exchange Mrs.
Belville's mind for any woman's upon earth, there is scarcely a woman's person
upon earth, which is not to me a stronger object of attraction.


CAPT. Then perhaps in a little time you will be weary of Miss Leeson?


BELL. To be sure I shall; though to own the truth, I have not yet carried my
point conclusively with the little monkey.


CAPT. Why how the plague has she escaped a moment in your hands?


BELL. By a mere accident. -- She came to the lodgings, which my man Spruce
prepared for her, rather unexpectedly last night, so that I happened to be
engaged particularly in another quarter -- you understand me -- and the damned
aunt found me so much employment all the morning, that I could only send a
message by Spruce, promising to call upon her the first moment I had to spare
in the course of the day.


CAPT. And so your are previously satisfied that you shall be tired of her.


BELL. Tired of her? -- Why I am at this moment in pursuit of fresh game,
against the hour of satiety: -- Game that you know to be exquisite! and I fancy
I shall bring it down, though it is closely guarded by a deal of that pride,
which passes for virtue with the generallity of your mighty good people.


CAPT. Indeed! and may a body know this wonder?


BELL. You are to be trusted with any thing, for you are the closest fellow I
ever knew, and the rack itself would hardly make you discover one of your own
secrets to any body -- what do you think of Miss Walsingham?


CAPT. Miss Walsingham? -- Death and the devil!


aside. BELL. Miss Walsingham:


CAPT. Why surely she has not received your addresses with any degree of
approbation?


BELL. With every degree of approbation I could expect.


CAPT. She has?


BELL. Ay: Why this news surprises you?


CAPT. It does indeed!


BELL. Ha, ha, ha! I cannot help laughing to think what a happy dog Miss
Walsingham's husband is likely to be!


CAPT. A very happy dog, truly!


BELL. She Is a delicious girl, is'n't she, Savage? -- but she will require a
little more trouble; -- for a fine woman, like a fortified town, to speak in
your father's language, demands a regular siege; and we must even allow her the
honors of war, to magnify the greatness of our own victory.


CAPT. Well, it amazes me how you gay fellows ever have the presumption to
attack a woman of principle; Miss Walsingham has no apparent levity of any kind
about her.


BELL. No; but she continued in my house, after I had whispered my passion in
her ear, and gave me a second opportunity of addressing her improperly; what
greater encouragement could I desire?

Enter SPRUCE. Well, Spruce, what are your commands?


SPRUCE. My Lady is just gone out with Lady Rachel, Sir.


BELL. I understand you.


SPRUCE. I believe you do. ( Aside.) Exit.


CAPT. What is the English of these significant looks between Spruce and you?


BELL. Only that Miss Walsingham is left alone, and that I have now an
opportunity of entertaining her; you must excuse me, Savage; you must upon my
soul; but not a word of this affair to any body; because when I shake her off
my hands, there may be fools enough to think of her, upon terms of honorable
matrimony. Exit


CAPT. So, here is a discovery! a precious discovery! and while I have been
racking my imagination, and sacrificing my interest, to promote the happiness
of this woman, she has been listening to the addresses of another; to the
addresses of a married man! the husband of her friend, and the immediate friend
of her intended husband! -- By Belville's own account, however, she has not yet
proceeded to any criminal lengths -- But why did she keep the affair a secret
from me? or why did she continue in his house after a repeated declaration of
his unwarrantable attachment? -- What Is to be done? -- If I open my engagement
with her to Belville, I am sure he will instantly desist; -- but then her
honor is left in a state extremely questionable -- It shall be still concealed
-- While it remains unknown, Belville will himself tell me every thing; -- and
doubt, upon an occasion of this nature, is infinitely more insupportable than
the downright falsehood of the woman whom we love.


Exit. The END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, an Apartment in General SAVAGE's House. Enter General SAVAGE, and
TORRINGTON. GENESIS ZOUNDS! Torrington, give me quarter, when I surrender up my
sword: I own that for these twenty years, I have been suffering all the
inconveniences of marriage, without tasting any one of its comforts, and
rejoicing in an imaginary freedom, while I was really grovelling in chains.


TOR. In the dirtiest chains upon earth; -- yet you would not be convinced, but
laughed at all your married acquaintance as slaves, when not one of them put up
with half so much from the worst wife, as you were obliged to crouch under,
from a kept mistress.


GENESIS It Is too true. But, you know, she sacrificed much for me; -- you know
that she was the widow of a colonel, and refused two very advantageous matches
on my account. --


TOR. If she was the widow of a judge, and had refused a high chancellor, she
was still a devil incarnate, and you were of course a madman to live with her.


GENESIS You don't remember her care of me when I have been sick. --


TOR. I recollect, however, her usage of you in health, and you may easily find
a tenderer nurse, when you are bound over by the gout or the rheumatism.


GENESIS Well, well, I agree with you that she is a devil incarnate; but I am this
day determined to part with her for ever.


TOR. Not you indeed.


GENESIS What, don't I know my own mind?


TOR. Not you indeed, when she is in the question; with every body else, your
resolution is as unalterable as a determination in the house of peers; but Mrs.
Tempest is your fate, and she reverses your decrees with as little difficulty
as a fraudulent debtor nowadays procures his certificate under a commission
of bankruptcy.


GENESIS Well if, like the Roman Fabius, I conquer by delay, in the end, there
will be no great reason to find fault with my generalship. The proposal of
parting now comes from herself.


TOR. O, you darn't make it for the life of you.


GENESIS You must know that this morning we had a smart cannonnading on Belville's
account, and she threatens, as I told you before, to quit my house if I don't
challenge him for taking away her neice.


TOR. That fellow is the very devil among the women, and yet there is not a man
in England fonder of his wife.


GENESIS Poh, if the young minx had not surrendered to him, she would have
capitulated to somebody else, and I shall at this time be doubly obliged to
him, if he is any ways isntrumental in getting the aunt off my hands.


TOR. Why at this time?


GENESIS Because to show you how fixed my resolution is to be a keeper no longer,
I mean to marry immediately.


TOR. And cannot you avoid being pressed to death, like a felon who refuses to
plead, without incurring a sentence of perpetual imprisonment?


GENESIS I fancy you would yourself have no objection to a perpetual imprisonment
in the arms of Miss Walsingham.


TOR. But have you any reason to think that upon examination in a case of love,
she would give a favorable reply to your interrogatories?


GENESIS The greatest -- do you think I Would hazard such an engagement without being
perfectly sure of my ground? Notwithstanding my present connection will not suffer
me to see a modest woman at my own house -- She always treats me with
particular attention whenever I visit at Belville's, or meet her any where else
-- If fifty young fellows are present, she directs all her assiduities to the
old soldier, and my son has a thousand times told me that she professes the
highest opinion of my understanding.


TOR. And truly you give a notable proof of your understanding, in thinking of
a woman almost young enough to be your granddaughter.


GENESIS Nothing like an experienced chief to command in any garrison.


TOR. Recollect the state of your present citadel.


GENESIS Well, if I am blown up by my own mine, I shall be the only sufferer --
There Is another thing I want to talk of, I am going to marry my son to Miss
Moreland.


TOR. Miss Moreland! --


GENESIS Belville's sister.


TOR. O, ay, I remember that Moreland had got a good estate to assume the name
of Belville.


GENESIS I have'nt yet mentioned the matter to my son, but I settled the affair
with the girl's mother yesterday, and she only waits to communicate it to
Belville, who is her oracle, you know.


TOR. And are you sure the captain will like her?


GENESIS I am not so unreasonable as to insist upon his liking her, I shall only
insist upon his marrying her.


TOR. What, whether he likes her or not?


GENESIS When I issue my orders, I expect them to be obeyed; and don't look for an
examination into their propriety.


TOR. What a delightful thing it must be to live under a military government,
where a man is not to be troubled with the exercise of his understanding.


GENESIS Miss Moreland has thirty thousand pounds -- That Is a large sum of
ammunition money.


TOR. Ay, but a marriage merely on the score of fortune, is only gilding the
death-warrant sent down for the execution of a prisoner. However as I know your
obstinate attachment to what you once resolve, I shall not pretend to argue with
you; where are the papers which you want me to consider?


GENESIS They are in my library -- File off with me to the next room and they
shall be laid before you -- But first I Will order the chariot, for the moment I
have your opinion, I purpose to sit down regularly before Miss Walsingham --
who waits there?


Enter a servant. GENESIS Is Mrs. Tempest at home?


SERVE. Yes, Sir, just come in, and just going out again.


GENESIS Very well; order the chariot to be got ready.


SERVE. Sir, one of the pannels was broke last night at the Opera-house.


GENESIS Sir, I didn't call to have the pleasure of your conversation, but to have
obedience paid to my orders.


TOR. Go order the chariot, you blockhead.


SERVE. With the broken panel, Sir.


GENESIS Yes, you rascal, if both pannels were broke, and the back shattered to
pieces.


SERVE. The coachman thinks that one of the wheels is damaged, Sir.


GENESIS Don't attempt to reason, you dog, but execute your orders. -- Bring the
chariot without the wheels -- if you cannot bring it with them.


TOR. Ay bring it, if you reduce it to a sledge, and let your master look like
a malefactor for high treason, on his journey to Tyburn.


Enter Mrs. TEMPEST. Mrs. TEMP. General Savage, is the house to be for ever a
scene of noise with your domineering? -- The chariot shall not be brought -- it
will not be fit for use 'till it is repaired -- and John, shall drive it this very
minute to the coach-makers.


GENESIS Nay, my dear, if it is not fit for use that is another thing.


TOR. Here Is the experienced chief that is fit to command in any garr^^^n.
(aside.)


GENESIS Go order me the coach then. to the Ser.


Mrs. TEMP. You cannot have the coach.


GENESIS And why so, my love.


Mrs. TEMP. Because I want it for myself. -- Robert, get a hack for your master
-- though indeed I don't see what business he has ^ut of the house.


Exeunt Mrs. Tempest and Robert. TOR. When you issu^ your orders, you expect
them to be ^b^y'd, and don't look for an examination into their propriety.


GENESIS The fury! -- this has steeled me against her for ever, and nothing on
earth can now prevent me from drumming her out immediately.


Mrs. TEMP. (behind) An unreasonable old fool -- But I Will make him know who
governs this house!


GENESIS Zounds! here she comes again; she has been lying in ambuscade, I suppose,
and has over heard us.


TOR. What if she has? you are steeled against her for ever.


GENESIS No, she is not coming -- she is going down stairs; -- and now, dear
Torrington, you must be as silent as a sentinel on an out-post about this
affair. If that virago was to hear a syllable of it, she might perhaps attack
Miss Walsingham in her very camp, and defeat my whole plan of operations.


TOR. I thought you were determined to drum her out immediately. Exeunt.


The SCENE changes to BELVILLE's. Enter Miss WALSINGHAM, followed by BELVILLE.
Miss WALL. I beg, Sir, that you will insult me no longer with solicitations of
this nature -- Give me proofs of your sincerity indeed! What proofs of
sincerity can your situation admit of, if I could be even weak enough to think
of you with partiality at all?


BELL. If our affections, Madam, were under the government of our reason,
circumstanced as I am, this unhappy bosom wouldn't be torn by passion for Miss
Walsingham. -- Had I been blessed with your acquaintance, before I saw Mrs.
Belville, my hand as well as my heart, would have been humbly offered to your
acceptance -- fate, however, has ordered it otherwise, and it is cruel to
reproach me with that situation as a crime, which ought to be pitied as my
greatest misfortune.


Miss WALL. He Is actually forcing tears into his eyes. -- However, I Will mortify
him severely. ( aside.)


BELL. But such proofs of sincerity as my situation can admit of, you shall
yourself command, as my only business in existence is to adore you.


Miss WALL. His only business in existence to adore me. ( aside.)


BELL. Prostrate at your feet, my dearest Miss Walsingham (kneeling) behold a
heart eternally devoted to your service. -- You have too much good sense,
Madam, to be the slave of custom, and too much humanity not to pity the
wretchedness you have caused. -- Only, therefore, say that you commiserate my
sufferings -- I Will ask no more -- and surely that may be said, without any
injury to your purity, to snatch even an enemy from distraction -- where is my
handkerchief? aside.


Miss WALL. Now to answer in his own way, and to make him ridiculous to himself
-- (aside.) If I thought, if I could think ( affecting to weep) that these
protestations were real.


BELL. How can you, Madam, be so unjust to your own merit? how can you be so
cruelly doubtful of my solemn asseverations? -- Here I again kneel, and swear
eternal love!


Miss WALL. I don't know what to say -- but there is one proof -- (affecting to
weep.)


BELL. Name it, my angel, this moment, and make me the happiest of mankind!


Miss WALL. Swear to be mine for ever.


BELL. I have sworn it a thousand times, my charmer; and I will swear it to the
last moment of my life.


Miss WALL. Why then -- but don't look at me I beseech you -- I don't know how
to speak it --


BELL. The delicious emotion -- do not check the generous tide of tenderness
that fills me with such ecstasy.


Miss WALL. You Will despise me for this weakness.


BELL. This weakness -- this generosity which will demand my everlasting
gratitude.


Miss WALL. I am a fool -- but there is a kind of fatality in this affair -- and
I do consent to go off with you.


BELL. Eternal blessings on your condescension.


Miss WALL. You are irresistible, and I am ready to fly with you to any part of
the world.


BELL. Fly to any part of the world indeed -- you shall fly by yourself then; (
aside.) You are the most lovely, the most tender creature in the world, and
thus again let me thank you: O, Miss Walsingham, I cannot express how happy
you have made me! -- But where is the necessity of our leaving England? --


Miss WALL. I thought he wouldn't like to go abroad -- ( aside.) That I may
possess the pleasure of your company unrivaled.


BELL. I must cure her of this taste for traveling --


( aside.) Miss WALL. You don't answer, Mr. Belville?


BELL. Why I was turning the consequence of your proposal in my thoughts, as
going off -- going off -- you know. --


Miss WALL. Why going off, you know, is going off -- And what objections can you
have to going off?


BELL. Why going off, will subject you at a certainty, to the slander of the
world; whereas by staying at home, we may not only have numberless
opportunities of meeting, but at the same time prevent suspicion it self, from
ever breathing on your reputation.


Miss WALL. I didn't dream of your starting any difficulties, Sir. -- Just now I
was dearer to you than all the world.


BELL. And so you are, by heaven!


Miss WALL. Why will not you sacrifice the world then at once to obtain me?


BELL. Surely, my dearest life, you must know the necessity, which every man of
honor is under of keeping up his character?


Miss WALL. So, here is this fellow swearing to ten thousand lies, and yet
talking very gravely about his honor and his character. (aside.) Why, to be
sure in these days, Mr. Belville, the instances of conjugal infidelity are so
very scarce, and men of fashion are so remarkable for a tender attachment to
their wives, that I don't wonder at your circumspection -- But do you think I
can stoop to accept you by halves, or admit of any partnership in your heart?


BELL. O you must do more than that, if you have any thing to say to me.
(aside.) Surely, Madam, when you know my whole soul unalterably your own, you
will permit me to preserve those appearances with the world, which are
indispensibly requisite -- Mrs. Belville is a most excellent woman, however it
may be my fortune to be devoted to another -- Her happiness, besides,
constitutes a principal part of my felicity, and if I was publicly to forsake
her, I should be hunted as a monster from society.


Miss WALL. Then, I suppose, it is by way of promoting Mrs. Belville's repose,
Sir, that you make love to other women; and by way of showing the nicety of
your honor, that you attempt the purity of such as your own roof, peculiarly,
intitles to protection. For the honor intended to me -- thus low to the
ground, I thank you, Mr. Belville.


BELL. Laughed at, by all the stings of mortification*


Miss WALL. Good bye. -- Don't let this accident mortify your vanity too much;
-- but take care, the next time you vow everlasting love, that the object is
neither tender enough to sob -- sob -- at your distress; nor provoking enough
to make a proposal of leaving England. -- How greatly a little common sense can
lower these fellows of extraordinary impudence?


Exit. BELL. (alone.) So then, I am fairly taken in, and she has been only
diverting herself with me all this time: -- however, lady fair, I may chance to
have the laugh in a little time on my side; for if you can sport in this manner
about the flame, I think it must in the run lay hold of your wings: -- what
shall I do in this affair? -- she sees the matter in its true light, and
there is no good to be expected from thumping of bosoms, or squeezing white
handkerchiefs; -- no these will not do with women of sense, and in a short time,
they will be ridiculous to the very babies of a boarding-school.


Enter Captain SAVAGE. CAPT. Well, Belville, what news? You have had a fresh
opportunity with Miss Walsingham.


BELL. Why, faith, Savage, I Have had a most extraordinary scene with her, and yet
have but little reason to brag of my good fortune, though she offered in express
terms to run away with me.


CAPT. Prith'ee explain yourself, man; she could not surely be so shameless!


BELL. O, her offering to run away with me, was by no means the worst part of
the affair.


CAPT. No, then it must be damned bad indeed! but prith'ee, hurry to an
explanation.


BELL. Why then, the worst part of the affair is, that she was laughing at me
the whole time; and made this proposal of an elopement, with no other view,
than to show me in strong colors to myself, as a very dirty fellow to the best
wife in England.


CAPT. I am easy. aside.


Enter SPRUCE. SPRUCE. Sir, there is an Irish gentleman below with a letter for
you, who will deliver it to nobody but yourself.


BELL. Show him up then.


SPRUCE. Yes, Sir. Exit.


CAPT. It may be on business Belville, I Will take my leave of you.


BELL. O, by no means; I can have no business which I desire to keep from you,
though you are the arrant'st miser of your confidence upon earth, and would
rather trust your life in any body's hands, than even a paltry amor with the
apprentice of a millener.


Enter CONNOLLY. CON. Gintlemin, your most obedient; pray which of you is Mr.
Belville?


BELL. My name is Belville, at your service, Sir.


CON. I have a little bit of a letter for you, Sir.


BELL. ( Reads.) SIR,
The people where Miss Leeson lately lodged, asserting positively that you have
taken her away in a fictitious character, the brother of that unhappy girl,
thinks himself obliged to demand satisfaction, for the injury which you have
done his family; though a stranger to your person, he is sufficiently acquainted
with your reputation for spirit, and shall, therefore, make no doubt of seeing
you with a case of pistols, near the Ring in Hyde Park, at eight o'clock this
evening, to answer the claims of

George Leeson.

To Craggs Belville, Esquire.




CAPT. Eight o'clock in the evening! it is a strange time!


CON. Why so, honey? A fine evening is as good a time for a bad action as a
fine morning; and if a man of sense can be such a fool as to fight a duel, he
should never sleep upon the matter, for the more he thinks of it, the more he
must feel himself ashamed of his resolution.


BELL. A pretty letter!


CON. O yes, an invitation to a brace of bullets is a very pretty thing.


BELL. For a challenge, however, it is very civilly written!


CON. Faith, if it was written to me, I shou'dn't be very fond of such
civility; I wonder he does not sign himself, your most obedient servant.


CAPT. I told you Leeson's character, and what would become of this damned
business; but your affairs -- are they settled, Belville?


BELL. O they are always settled -- for as this is a country where people
occasionally die, I take constant care to be prepared for contingencies.


CON. Occasionally die! -- I Will be very much obliged to you; Sir, if you tell
me the country where people do not die? for I Will immediately go and end my days
there.


BELL. Ha! ha! ha!


CON, Faith, you may laugh gintlemin, but though I am a foolish Irishman, and
come about a foolish piece of business, I Would prefer a snug birth in this world,
bad as it is, to the finest coffin in all Christendom.


BELL. I am surprised, Sir, that thinking in this manner, you would be the
bearer of a challenge.


CON. And well you may, Sir. -- But we must often take a pleasure in serving
our friends, by doing things that are very disagreeable to us.


CAPT. Then you think Mr. Leeson much to blame, perhaps, for hazarding his life
where he can by no means repair the honor of his sister.


CON. Indeed and I do -- But I shall think this gintleman, begging his pardon,
much more to blame for meeting him:


BELL. And why so, Sir -- You woudn't have me disappoint your friend?


CON. Faith, and that I would -- He, poor lad, may have some reason at present
to be tired of the world, but you have a fine estate, a fine wife, a fine
parcel of children. -- In short, honey, you have every thing to make you fond
of living, and the devil burn me, was I in your case, if I Would stake my own
happiness against the misery of any man.


BELL. I am very much obliged to your advice, Sir, though on the present occasion
I cannot adopt it; be so good as to present my compliments to your friend, and
tell him I shall certainly do myself the honor of attending his appointment.


CON. Why then upon my soul I am very sorry for it.


CAPT. It Is not very customary, Sir, with gentlemen of Ireland to oppose an
affair of honor.


CON. They are like the gintlemin of England, Sir, they are brave to a fault;
yet I hope to see the day that it will be infamous to draw the swords of
either, against any body but the enemies of their country.


Exit. BELL. I am quite charmed with this honest Hibernian, and would almost
fight a duel for the pleasure of his acquaintance.


CAPT. Come, step with me a little, and let us consider, whether there may not
be some method of accommodating this cursed business.


BELL. Poh! don't be uneasy upon my account; my character, with regard to
affairs of this nature, is unhappily too well established, and you may be sure
that I shall not fight with Leeson.


CAPT. No -- you have injured him greatly?


BELL. The very reason of all others why I should not cut his throat. Exeunt.


Enter SPRUCE. SPRUCE. What, the devil, this master of mine has got a a duel
upon his hands! Zounds! I am sorry for that; he is a prince of a fellow! and a
good subject must always love his prince, though he may now and then be a
little out of humor with his actions.


Enter General SAVAGE. GENESIS Your hall-door standing open, Spruce, and none of
your sentinels being on guard, I have surprised your camp thus far without
resistance: Where is your master?


SPRUCE. Just gone out with Captain Savage, Sir.


GENESIS Is your lady at home?


SPRUCE. No, Sir, but Miss Walsingham is at home; shall I inform her of your
visit?


GENESIS There is no occasion to inform her of it, for here she is, Spruce. Exit
Spruce.


Enter Miss WALSINGHAM. Miss WALL. General Savage, your most humble servant.


GENESIS My dear Miss Walsingham, it is rather cruel that you should be left at
home by yourself, and yet I am greatly rejoiced to find you at present without
company.


Miss WALL. I cannot but think myself in the best company, when I have the honor
of your conversation, General.


GENESIS You flatter me too much, Madam; yet I am come to talk to you on a serious
affair, Miss Walsingham; an affair of importance to me and to yourself: Have
you leisure to favor me with a short audience, if I beat a parley?


Miss WALL. Any thing of importance to you, Sir, is always sufficient to command
my leisure. -- It Is as the Captain suspected. aside.


GENESIS You tremble, my lovely girl, but don't be alarmed; for though my business
is of an important nature, I hope it will not be of a disagreeable one.


Miss WALL. And yet I am greatly agitated. aside.


GENESIS Soldiers, Miss Walsingham, are said to be generally favored by the kind
partiality of the ladies.


Miss WALL. The ladies are not without gratitude, Sir, to those who devote their
lives peculiarly to the service of their country.


GENESIS Generously said, Madam: Then give me leave, without any masked battery,
to ask, if the heart of an honest soldier is a prize at all worth your
acceptance.


Miss WALL. Upon my word, Sir, there is no masked battery in this question.


GENESIS I am as fond of a coup de main, Madam, in love, as in war, and hate the
tedious method of sapping a town, when there is a possibility of entering sword
in hand.


Miss WALL. Why really, Sir, a woman may as well know her own mind, when she is
first summoned by the trumpet of a lover, as when she undergoes all the
tiresome formality of a siege. You see I have caught your own mode of
conversing, General.


GENESIS And a very great compliment I consider it, Madam: But now that you have
heartily confessed an acquaintance with your own mind, answer me with that
frankness for which every body admires you so much. Have you any objection to
change the name of Walsingham?


Miss WALL. Why then frankly, General Savage I say, no.


GENESIS Ten thousand thanks to you for this kind declaration.


Miss WALL. I hope you will not think it a forward one.


GENESIS I Would sooner see my son run away in the day of battle; -- I Would sooner think
Lord Russell was bribed by Lewis the XIVth, and sooner villify the memory of
Algernoon Sidney.


Miss WALL. How unjust it was ever to suppose the General a tyrannical father!
aside.


GENESIS You have told me condescendingly, Miss Walsingham, that you have no
objection to change your name, I have but one question more to ask.


Miss WALL. Pray propose it.


GENESIS Would the name of Savage be disagreeable to you? -- Speak frankly again,
my dear girl!


Miss WALL. Why then again I frankly say, no.


GENESIS You make me too happy; and though I shall readily own, that a proposal of
this nature would come with more propriety from my son --


Miss WALL. I am much better pleased that you make the proposal yourself, Sir.


GENESIS You are too good to me. -- Torrington thought that I should meet with a
repulse. aside.


Miss WALL. Have you communicated this business to the Captain, Sir?


GENESIS No, my dear Madam, I did not think that at all necessary. I have always
been attentive to the Captain's happiness, and I propose that he shall be
married in a few days.


Miss WALL. What, whether I will or no?


GENESIS O you can have no objection.


Miss WALL. I must be consulted, however, about the day, General: but nothing in
my power shall be wanting to make him happy.


GENESIS Obliging loveliness!


Miss WALL. You may imagine, that if I was not previously impressed in favor of
your proposal, it would not have met my concurrence so readily.


GENESIS Then you own that I had a previous friend in the garrison.


Miss WALL. I don't blush to acknowledge it, when I consider the accomplishments
of the object, Sir.


GENESIS O this is too much, Madam; the principle merit of the object is his
passion for Miss Walsingham.


Miss WALL. Don't say that, General, I beg of you, for I don't think there are
many women in the kingdom, who could behold him with indifference.


GENESIS Ah, you flattering, flattering angel! -- and yet, by the memory of
Marlborough, my lovely girl, it was the idea of a prepossession on your part,
which encouraged me to hope for a favorable reception.


Miss WALL. Then I must have been very indiscreet, for I labored to conceal
that prepossession as much as possible.


GENESIS You could not conceal it from me! you could not conceal it from me! -- The
female heart is a field which I am thoroughly acquainted with, and which has
more than once been a witness to my victories, Madam.


Miss WALL. I don't at all doubt your success with the ladies, General; but as
we now understand one another so perfectly, you will give me leave to retire.


GENESIS One word, my dear creature, and no more; I shall wait upon you sometime
to day, with Mr. Torrington, about the necessary settlements.


Miss WALL. You must do as you please, General, you are invincible in every
thing.


GENESIS And if you please, we'll keep every thing a profound secret, 'till the
articles are all settled, and the definitive treaty ready for execution.


Miss WALL. You may be sure, that delicacy will not suffer me to be communicate
on the subject, Sir.


GENESIS Then you leave every thing to my management.


Miss WALL. I cannot trust a more noble negociator.


Exit. GENESIS The day's my own. (sings.) Britons, strike home! strike home!
Revenge, etc. Exit singing.


END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Miss LEESON's Lodgings. Enter Lady RACHEL MILDEW, Mrs. BELVILLE, and
Miss LEESON. Lady RACH. WELL, Mrs. Belville, I am extremely glad you agree with
me, in opinion of this young lady's qualifications for the stage. Don't you
think she would play Miss Headstrong admirably in my comedy?


Mrs. BELL. Yes, indeed, I think she possesses a natural fund of spirit, very
much adapted to the character. -- It Is impossible, surely, that this hoyden can
have a moment's attraction for Mr. Belville?


aside. Miss LEES. You are very obliging, ladies; but I have no turn for
comedy; my fort is tragedy entirely.

Alphonso! -- O, Alphonso! to thee I call. etc.
Lady RACH. But, my dear, is there none of our comedies to your taste?


Miss LEES. O, yes; some of the sentimental ones are very pretty, there is such
little difference between them and tragedies.


Lady RACH. And pray, my dear, how long have you been engaged to Mr. Frankly?


Miss LEES. I only came away last night, and hav'n't seen Mr. Frankly since,
though I expect him every moment.


Mrs. BELL. Last night! just as Mrs. Tempest mentioned. aside.


Lady RACH. You had the concurrence of your friends?


Miss LEES. Not I, Madam. Mr. Frankly said, I had too much genius to mind my
friends, and as I should want nothing from them, there was no occasion to
consult them in the affair.


Lady RACH. Then Osbaldiston is not your real name, perhaps?


Miss LEES. O no, nor do I tell my real name: I chose Osbaldiston, because it
was a long one, and would make a striking appearance in the bills.


Mrs. BELL. I wish we could see Mr. Frankly.


Miss LEES. Perhaps you may, Madam, for he designs to give me a lesson every
day, 'till we are ready to set off for Ireland.


Lady RACH. Suppose then, my dear, you would oblige us with a scene in Juliet,
by way of showing your proficiency to Mrs. Belville.


Miss LEES. Will you stand up for Romeo?


Lady RACH. With all my heart, and I Will give you some instructions.


Miss LEES. I beg pardon, Ma'am; I Will learn to act under nobody but Mr.
Frankly. This room is without a carpet; if you will step into the next, ladies,
I Will endeavor to oblige you.

Shall I not be environed, distraught -- This way, Ladies.


Lady RACH. Pray, Madam, show us the way.


Exeunt Miss LEES. and Lady RACH. Mrs. BELL. I Will prolong this mummery as much
as possible, in hopes the manager may come. Lie still, poor fluttering heart!
it cannot be the lord of all your wishes! it cannot surely be your adored
Belville! Exit.


Re-enter Miss Leeson. Miss LEES. Hav'n't I left my Romeo and Juliet here? O
yes, there it is.


Enter Belville. BELL. -- O, were those eyes in heaven,
They Would through the starry regions stream so bright,
That birds would sing, and think it was the morn!

Miss LEES. Ah, my dear Mr. Frankly! I am so glad you are come! I was dying to
see you.


BELL. Kiss me, my dear; -- why didn't you send me word of your intention to
come away last night?


Miss LEES. I had not time: but as I knew where the lodgings were, I thought I
should be able to find you by a note to the coffee-house I always directed to.


BELL. Kiss me again, my little sparkler!


Miss LEES. Nay, I will not be kissed in this manner; for though I am going on the
stage, I intend to have some regard for my character. But, ha, ha, ha, I am
glad you are come now: I have company above stairs.


BELL. Company! that is unlucky at this time, for I wanted to make you entirely
easy about your character. (aside.) And pray, my dear, who is your company? You
know we must be very cautious for fear of your relations.


Miss LEES. O, they are only ladies. -- But one of them is the most beautiful
creature in the world!


BELL. The devil she is!


Miss LEES. An earth-treading star, that makes dim heavens light.


BELL. Zounds! I Will take a peep at the star, who knows but I may have an
opporturiity of making another actress. aside.


Miss LEES. Come, charmer! charmer!


BELL. -- Were thou as far
As that vast shore, washed by the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Now let us see what fortune has sent us above stairs.


Exeunt. SCENE changes to a Dining Room at Miss LEESON's. Mrs. BELVILLE and
Lady RACHEL discovered. Mrs. BELL. This is a most ignorant young creature, Lady
Rachel.


Lady RACH. Why I think she is -- did you observe how she slighted my offer of
instructing her?


Enter Miss LEESON. Miss LEES. Ladies! -- ladies! -- here he is! here is Mr.
Frankly!


Enter Belville, bowing very low, not seeing the Ladies. BELL. Ladies, your most
obedient.


Mrs. BELL. Let me, if possible, recollect myself -- Sir, your most obedient
humble servent.


BELL. Zounds! let me out of the house.


Lady RACH. What do I see!


Miss LEES. You seem, ladies, to know this gentleman?


Mrs. BELL. ( taking hold of him) You shall not go renegade -- You laughed at my
credulity this morning, and I must now laugh at your embarassment.


BELL. What a kind thing it would be in any body to blow out my stupid brains?


Lady RACH. I Will mark this down for an incident in my comedy.


Miss LEES. What do you hang your head for Mr. Frankley?


BELL. Be so good as to ask that lady, my dear. -- The Devil has been long in my
debt, and now he pays me home with a witness.


Mrs. BELL. What a cruel thing it is to let Mrs. Tempest out, my love, without
somebody to take care of her!


Miss LEES. What, do you know Mrs. Tempest, madam?


Mrs. BELL. Yes, my dear; -- and I am pretty well acquainted with this gentleman.


Miss LEES. What is not this gentleman the manager of a playhouse in Ireland?


BELL. The curtain is almost dropped my dear; the farce is nearly over, and you will
be speedily acquainted with the catastrophe.


Enter Mrs. Tempest. Mrs. TEMP. Yes, Sir, the curtain is almost dropped: I have
had spies to watch your haunts, and the catastrophe ends in your detection. --
Come, you abandoned slut, --


Miss LEES. And have I elop'd after all, without being brought upon the stage?


Mrs. TEMP. I don't know that you would be brought upon the stage; but I am
sure you were near being brought upon the town. I hope, madam, for the future,
you will set me down a mad-woman.


to Mrs. Belville. Mrs. BELL. Mr. Belvill, you will make my apologies to this
lady, and acknowledge that I think her perfectly in her senses.


BELL. I wish that I had entirely lost mine.


Lady RACH. (Writing) I wish that I had entirely lost mine. A very natural
wish, in such a situation.


Mrs. TEM. Come, you audacious minx, come away. You shall be sent into
Yorkshire this very evening; and see what your poor mother will say to you,
hussy.


Miss LEES. I will go on the stage, if I die for it; and it is some comfort
there is a playhouse at York.


Exit Mrs. Tempest and Miss Leeson. BELL. Nancy, I am so ashamed, so humbled,
and so penitent, that if you knew what passes here, I am sure you would forgive
me.


Mrs. BELL. My love, though I cannot say I rejoice in your infidelity, yet,
believe me, I pity your distress: let us therefore think no more of this.


Lady RACH. ( Writing.) And think no more of this. -- This conduct is new in a
wife, and very dramatic.


BELL. Where, my angel, have you acquired so many requisites to charm with?


Mrs. BELL. In your society, my dear; and believe me -- that a wife may be as
true a friend as any bottle companion upon earth, though she can neither get
merry with you over night, nor blow out your brains about some foolish quarrel
in the morning.


BELL. If wives knew the omnipotence of virtue, where she wears a smile upon her
face, they would all follow your bewitching example, and make a faithless husband
quite an incredible character.


Lady RACH. Quite an incredible character! -- Let me set down that. ( writing.)
Exeunt.


SCENE changes to General SAVAGE's. Enter General and Captain. GENESIS Yes,
Horace, I have been just visiting at Belvill's.


CAPT. You found nobody at home, but Miss Walsingham?


GENESIS No, but I Would a long conversation with her, and upon a very interesting
subject.


CAPT It Is as I guessed. aside.


GENESIS She is a most amiable creature, Horace.


CAPT. So she is, Sir, and will make any man happy that marries her.


GENESIS I am glad you think so.


CAPT. He Is glad I think so! -- it is plain, -- but I must leave every thing to
himself, and seem wholly passive in the affair. aside.


GENESIS A married life after all, Horace, I am now convinced is the most happy,
as well as the most reputable.


CAPT. It is indeed, Sir.


GENESIS Then perhaps you would have no objection to be married, if I offered you
as agreeable a young woman as Miss Walsingham.


CAPT. 'Twou'd be my first pride on every occasion, Sir, to pay an implicit
obedience to your commands.


GENESIS That Is sensibly said, Horace, and obligingly said; prepare yourself
therefore for an introduction to the lady in the morning.


CAPT. Is the lady prepared to receive me, Sir?


GENESIS O yes; and you cannot think how highly delighted Miss Walsingham appeared,
when I acquainted her with my resolution on the subject.


CAPT. She Is all goodness!


GENESIS The more I know her, the more I am charmed with her; I must not be
explicit with him yet, for fear my secret should get wind, and reach the ears
of the enemy. aside.


GENESIS I propose, Horace, that you should be married immediately.


CAPT. The sooner the better, Sir, I have no will but yours.


GENESIS (Shaking hands with him,) By the memory of Malbro', you are a most
excellent boy! -- But what do you think? Miss Walsingham insists upon naming
the day.


CAPT. And welcome, Sir; I am sure she will not make it a distant one.


GENESIS O she said, that nothing in her power should be wanting to make you happy.


CAPT. I am sure of that, Sir.


GENESIS [A loud knocking] Zounds, Horace! here is the disgrace and punishment of
my life: Let Us avoid her as we would a fever in the camp.


CAPT. Come to the library, and I Will tell you how whimsically she was treated
this morning at Belville's.


GENESIS Death and the devil! make haste. O I must laugh at marriage, and be cursed
to me! But I am providing, Horace, against your falling into my error.


CAPT. I am eternally indebted to you, Sir.


Exeunt. SCENE, BELVILLE's House. Enter Mrs. Belville and Lady Rachel. Lady
RACH. Nay; Mrs. Belville, I have no patience, you act quite unnaturally.


Mrs. BELL. What! because I am unwilling to be miserable?


Lady RACH. This new instance of Mr. Belville's infidelity -- This attempt to
seduce Miss Walsingham, which your woman overheard, is unpardonable!


Mrs. BELL. I don't say but that I am strongly wounded by his irregularities.
Yet if Mr. Belville is unhappily a rover, I would much rather that he should
have twenty mistresses than one.


Lady RACH. You astonish me!


Mrs. BELL. Why, don't you know, my dear madam, that while he is divided amidst
a variety of objects, it is impossible for him to have a serious attachment?


Lady RACH. Lord, Mrs. Belville! how can you speak with so much composure! a
virtuous woman should be always outrageous upon such an occasion as this.


Mrs. BELL. What, and weary the innocent sun and moon from the firmament, like a
despairing princess in a tragedy -- No -- no -- Lady Rachel, it is bad enough to
be indifferent to the man I love, without studying to excite his aversion.


Lady RACH. How glad I am that Miss Walsingham made him so heartily ashamed of
himself: Lord, these young men are so full of levity: Give me a husband of Mr.
Torrington's age, say I.


Mrs. BELL. And give me a husband of Mr. Belville's, say I, with all his
follies: However, Lady Rachel, I am pretty well satisfied that my conduct at
Miss Leeson's will have a proper effect upon Mr. Belville's generosity, and put
an entire end to his galantries for the future.


Lady RACH. Don't deceive yourself, my dear. -- The gods in the shilling
gallery would sooner give up Roast Beef, or go without an epilogue on the first
night of a new piece.


Mrs. BELL. Why should you, think so of such a man as Mr. Belville?


Lady RACH. Because Mr. Belville is a man: However, if you dare run the risque
-- we will try the sincerity of his reformation.


Mrs. BELL. If I dare run the risque! I would stake my soul upon his honor.


Lady RACH. Then your poor soul would be in a very terrible situation.


Mrs. BELL. By what test can we prove his sincerity?


Lady RACH. By a very simple one. You know I write so like Miss Walsingham,
that our hands are scarcely known asunder.


Mrs. BELL. Well --


Lady RACH. Why then let me write to him as from her --


Mrs. BELL. If I did not think it would look like a doubt of his honor --


Lady RACH. Poh! dare you proceed upon my plan? --


Mrs. BELL. Most confidently: Come to my dressing room, where you will find every
thing ready for writing, and then you may explain your scheme more particularly.


Lady RACH. I Will attend you, but I am really sorry, my dear, for the love of
propriety, to see you so calm under the perfidy of your husband; you should be
quite wretched -- indeed you should. Ex.


SCENE, the Temple. Enter Leeson. LEES. The hell hounds are after me.

Enter Connolly, at the opposite side. Fly, open the chambers this moment, the
bailiffs are in sight.


CON. Faith and that I will; but it will be of no use to fly a step, if I
hav'n't the key.


LEES. Zounds! did not you lock the door?


CON. Yes; but I believe I left the key on the inside: However, I see no more
than three people, and think we could beat them to their hearts content in
three minutes.


LEES. What! and fly in the face of the law?


CON. To be sure you have a great regard for the law, when you are going to
fight a duel!


LEES. God's Death! is this a time to talk? Stay here, and throw every possible
impediment in the way of these execrable rascals. (going.)


CON. Holloa! honey, come back: These execrable rascals are very worthy people,
I fancy, for they are quietly turning down the next court.


LEES. Their appearance alarmed me beyond measure.


CON. O you shou'dn't judge by outside show, my dear; for there is no being a
complete rogue, without the appearance of an honest man


LEES. Circumstanced as I am at present, every thing terrifies me; for should I
be arrested, the consequence would possibly be fatal, both to my honor and my
love. -- Belville would proclaim me publicly a coward; and Emily set me down as
a base, a mercenary adventurer, who was solely attracted by her fortune.


CON. Why faith, honey, like yourself, they might be apt to judge by
appearances.


LEES. O, Connolly, a man of spirit should learn prudence from his very pride,
and consider every unnecessary debt he contracts as a wanton diminution of his
character! the moment he makes another his creditor -- he makes himself a
slave! He runs the hazard of insults, which he never can resent, and of
disgraces which are seldom to be mitigated! He incurs the danger of being
dragged, like the vilest felon to the felon's prison! and, such is the
depravity of the world, that guilt is even more likely to meet with advocates,
than misfortune! Exit Leeson.


CON. Musha, long life to you, old Shillala! -- I wish I had any thing besides
my carcass to venture for you, for that is nothing; yet you are as welcome to it
as the flowers in May. Poor lad! I don't wonder that he is so much afraid of a
prison, for to be sure it is a blessed place to live in; and a blessed law it
must be, which coops a man up from every chance of getting money, by way of
making him pay his debts -- But now let my thick skull consider, if there is
any method of preventing this infernal duel. Suppose I have him bound over to
the pace! No, that will never do -- it would be a shameful thing for a
gintleman to keep the pace! Besides, I must appear in the business, and people
may think, from my connection with him, that he has not honor enough to throw
away his life: Suppose I go another way to work, and send an anonymous letter
about the affair to Mrs. Belville: They say, though she is a woman of fashion,
that no creter upon earth can be fonder of her husband. Surely the good genius
of Ireland put this scheme into my head -- I Will about it this minute; and if
there is only one of them kept from the field, I don't think that the other can
be much hurt, when there will be no body to fight with him. Exit.


SCENE, changes to Capt. SAVAGE's Lodgings. Enter Captain SAVAGE and BELVILLE.
CAPT. Why, faith, Belville, your detection, and so speedily too, after all the
pretended sanctity of the morning, must have thrown you into a most humiliating
situation.


BELL. Into the most distressing you can imagine: had my wife raved at my
falsehood, in the customary manner, I could have brazen'd it but pretty
tollerably; but the angel-like sweetness, with which she bore the mortifying
discovery, planted daggers in my bosom, and made me at that time wish her the
veriest vixen in the whole creation.


CAPT. Yet, the suffering forbearance of a wife, is a quality for which she is
seldom allowed her merit; we think it her duty to put up with our falsehood,
and imagine ourselves exceedingly generous in the main, if we practice no other
method of breaking her heart.


BELL. Monstrous! monstrous! from this moment I bid an everlasting adieu to my
vices: the generosity of my dear girl --


Enter a Servant to BELVILLE. SERVE. Here Is a letter, Sir, which Mr. Spruce has
brought you.


BELL. Give me leave, Savage. -- Zounds! what an industrious devil the father of
darkness is, when the moment a man determines upon a good action, he sends such
a thing as this, to stagger his resolution.


CAPT. What have you got there?


BELL. You shall know presently. Will you let Spruce come in.


CAPT. Where have you acquired all this ceremony?


BELL. Bid Spruce come in.


SERVE. Yes, Sir. Exit.


CAPT. Is that another challenge?


BELL. It Is upon my soul, but it came from a beautiful enemy, and dares me to
give a meeting to Miss Walsingham.


CAPT. How!


Enter SPRUCE. BELL. Pray, Spruce, who gave you this letter?


SPRUCE. Miss Walsingham's woman, Sir: she said it was about very particular
business, and therefore I would not trust it by any of the footmen.


CAPT. O, damn your diligence. aside.


BELL. You may go home, Spruce.


SPRUCE. (Looking significantly at his Master.) Is there no answer necessary,
Sir.


BELL. I shall call at home myself, and give the necessary answer.


SPRUCE. ( Aside.) What can be the matter with him all of a sudden, that he is
so cold upon the scent of wickedness? Exit.


CAPT. And what answer do you propose making to it, Belville?


BELL. Read the letter, and then tell me what I should do. -- You know Miss
Walsingham's hand.


CAPT. O, perfectly! -- This is not -- yes, it is her hand! -- I have too many
cursed occasions to know it.


aside. BELL. What are you a muttering about? -- Read the letter.


CAPT. If you are not entirely discouraged, by our last conversation, from
renewing the subject which then gave offense --


BELL. Which then gave offense. -- You see, Savage, that it is not offensive any
longer.


CAPT. Sdeath! you put me out. -- you may at the masquerade, this evening --


BELL. You remember how earnest she was for the masquerade party.


CAPT. Yes, yes, I remember it well: -- and I remember, also, how hurt she was
this morning, about the affair of Miss Leeson. ( aside.) -- have an opportunity
of entertaining me -- O the strumpet! aside.


BELL. But mind the cunning with which she signs the note, for fear it should by
any accident fall into improper hands.


CAPT. Ay, and you put it into very proper hands. ( aside.) I shall be in the
blue domino. -- The signature is -- YOU KNOW WHO.


BELL. Yes, you know who.


CAPT. May be, however, she has only written this to try you.


BELL. To try me, for what purpose? But if you read a certain postcript there, I
fancy you will be of a different opinion.


CAPT. If Mr. Belville has any house of character to retire to, it would be
most agreeable, as there could be no fear of interruption.


BELL. What do you say now? -- Can you recommend me to any house of character,
where we shall be free from interruption.


CAPT. O, curse her house of character! ( aside) But surely, Belville, after
your late determined resolution to reform --


BELL. Zounds! I forgot that.


CAPT. After the unexampled sweetness of your wife's behavior --


BELL. Don't go on, Savage: There is something here ( putting his hand upon his
bosom) which feels already not a little aukwardly.


CAPT. And can you still persist?


BELL. I am afraid to answer your question.


CAPT. Where the plague are you flying?


BELL. From the justice of your censure, Horace; my own is sufficiently severe;
yet I see that I shall be a rascal again, in spite of my teeth; and good advice
is only thrown away upon so incorrigible a libertine.


Exit. CAPT. ( alone) So then this diamond of mine proves a counterfeit after
all, and I am really the veriest wretch existing at the moment in which I
conceived myself the peculiar favorite of fortune. O the cursed, cursed sex!
I Will see her once more to upbraid her with her falsehood, then acquaint my
father with her perfidy, to justify my breaking off the marriage, and tear her
from my thoughts for ever.


Enter a Servant. SERVE. Sir! Sir! Sir! --


CAPT. Sir, Sir, Sir, -- What the devil's the matter with the booby?


SERVE. Miss Walsingham, Sir!


CAPT. Ah! what of her?


SERVE. Was this moment overturned at Mr. Belville's door, and John tells me
carried in a fit into the house.


CAPT. Ha! let me fly to her assistance. Exit.


SERVE. Ha let me fly to her assistance -- O, are you thereabouts. Exit.


SCENE changes to Mr. BELVILLE's. Enter Mrs. Belville, Miss Walsingham and Lady
Rachel Mildew. Mrs. BELL. But are you indeed recovered my dear?


Miss WALL. Perfectly my dear, -- I was not in the least hurt, though greatly
terrified, when the two fools of coachmen contended for the honor of being
first, and drove the carriages together with a violence incredible.


Lady RACH. I sincerely rejoice at your escape; and now Mrs. Belville, as you
promised to choose a dress for me if I went in your party to the masquerade
this evening, can you spare a quarter of an hour to Tavistock-Street?


Mrs. BELL. I am loath to leave Miss Walsingham alone, Lady Rachel, so soon after
her fright.


Miss WALL Nay, I insist that you don't stay at home upon my account; and Lady
Rachel's company to the masquerade is a pleasure I have such an interest in,
that I beg you will not delay a moment to oblige her.


Mrs. BELL. Well, then I attend your ladyship.


Lady RACH. You are very good; and so is Miss Walsingham. Exit.


Miss WALL. I wonder Captain Savage stays away so long! where can he be all this
time? -- I die with impatience to tell him of my happy interview with the
General.


Enter a Servant. SERVE. Captain Savage, madam.


Miss WALL. Show him in. [Exit Serve.] How he must rejoice to find his
conjectures so fortunately realiz'd.


Enter Captain Savage. CAPT. So, madam, you have just escaped a sad accident


Miss WALL. And by that agreeable tone and countenance, one would almost imagine
you were very sorry for my escape.


CAPT. People, madam, who doubt the kindness of others, are generally conscious
of some defect in themselves.


Miss WALL. Don't madam me, with this accent of indifference. What has put you
out of humor?


CAPT. Nothing.


Miss WALL. Are you indisposed?


CAPT. The Crocodile! the Crocodile! aside.


Miss WALL. Do you go to the masquerade to night?


CAPT. No, but you do.


Miss WALL. Why not? come, don't be ill-natured, I Am not your wife yet.


CAPT. Nor ever will be, I promise you.


Miss WALL. What is the meaning of this very whimsical behavior?


CAPT. The settled composure of her impudence is intolerable. ( aside.) Madam,
Madam, how have I deserved this usage?


Miss WALL. Nay, Sir, Sir, how have I deserved it, if you go to that?


CAPT. The letter, madam! -- the letter!


Miss WALL. What letter?


CAPT. Your letter, inviting a gallant from the masquerade to a house of
character, madam! -- What, you appear surpised?


Miss WALL. Well I may, at so shameless an aspersion.


CAPT. Madam, madam, I have seen your letter! Your new lover could not keep your
secret a moment. But I have nothing to do with you, -- and only come to declare
my reasons for renouncing you everlastingly!


Enter Servant. SERVE. General Savage, madam.


Miss WALL. Show him up. [Exit Serve.] I am glad he is come, Sir; inform him of
your resolution to break off the match, and let there be an end of every thing
between us.


Enter General Savage. GENESIS The news of your accident reached me but this
moment, madam, -- or I should have posted much sooner to reconnoitre your
situation. My aid de camp, however, has not been inattentive I see, and I dare
say his diligence will not be the least lessened, when he knows his obligations
to you.


CAPT. O, Sir, I am perfectly sensible of my obligations; and the consciousness
of them, was one motive of my coming here.


GENESIS Then you have made your acknowledgements to miss Wa^singham I hope.


Miss WALL. He has indeed, General, said a great deal more than was necessary.


GENESIS That opinion proceeds from the liberality of your temper; for it is
impossible he can ever say enough of your goodness.


CAPT. So it is; if you knew but all, Sir.


GENESIS Why who can know more of the matter than myself?


Miss WALL. This gentleman, it seems, has something, General Savage, very
necessary for your information.


GENESIS How Is this?


CAPT. Nay, Sir, I only say, that for some particular reasons, which I shall
communicate to you at a more proper time; I must beg leave to decline the lady
whose hand you kindly intended for me this morning.


GENESIS O you must! -- Why then I hope you decline at the same time, all
pretensions to every shilling of my fortune. It is not in my power to make you
fight, you paltroon, but I can punish you for cowardice.


Miss WALL. Nay, but General, let me interpose here. If he can maintain any
charge against the lady's repuation, 'twould be very hard that he should be
disinherited, for a necessary attention to his honor.


CAPT. And if I don't make the charge good, I submit to be disinherited without
murmurring.


GENESIS It Is false as hell! the lady is infinitely too good for you, in every
respect; and I undervalued her worth, when I thought of her for your wife.


Miss WALL. I am sure the lady is much obliged to your favorable opinion, Sir.


GENESIS Not in the least, Madam; I only do her common justice.


CAPT. I cannot bear that you should be displeased a moment, Sir; suffer me
therefore to render the conversation less equivocable, and a few words will
explain every thing.


GENESIS Sirrah, I Will hear no explanation; ar'n't my orders that you should marry?


Miss WALL. For my sake hear him, General Savage.


CAPT. Madam, I disdain every favor that is to be procured by your
interposition. Exit.


Miss WALL. This matter must not be suffered to proceed farther though,
provokingly, cruelly as the Captain has behaved. aside.


GENESIS What Is that you say, my bewitching girl?


Miss WALL. I say that you must make it up with the Captain, and the best way
will be to hear his charge patiently.


GENESIS I am shocked at the brutality of the dog; he has no more principle than a
suttler, and no more steadiness than a young recruit upon drill. But, you shall
have ample satisfaction: -- this very day I Will cut him off from a possibility
of succeeding to a shilling of my fortune. He shall be as miserable as --


Miss WALL. Dear General, do you think that this would give me any satisfaction?


GENESIS How he became acquainted with my design I know not, but I see plainly,
that his mutiny proceeds from his aversion to my marrying again.


Miss WALL. To your marrying again, Sir! why should he object to that?


GENESIS Why, for fear I should have other children, to be sure.


Miss WALL. Indeed, Sir, it was not from that motive; and, if I can overlook his
folly, you may be prevailed upon to forgive it.


GENESIS After what you have seen, justice should make you a little more attentive
to your own interest, my lovely girl.


Miss WALL. What at the expense of his?


GENESIS In the approaching change of your situation, there may be a family of
your own.


Miss WALL. Suppose there should, Sir; will not there be a family of his too?


GENESIS I care not what becomes of his family.


Miss WALL. But, pray let me think a little about it, General.


GENESIS It Is hard, indeed, when I was so desirous of promoting his happiness,
that he should throw any thing in the way of mine.


Miss WALL. Recollect, Sir, his offense was wholly confined to me.


GENESIS Well, my love, and is not it throwing an obstacle in the way of my
happiness, when he abuses you so grossly for your readiness to marry me?


Miss WALL. Sir! --


GENESIS I see, with all your good nature, that this is a question you cannot
rally against.


Miss WALL. It is indeed, Sir. -- What will become of me? aside.


GENESIS You seem suddenly disordered, my love?


Miss WALL. Why really, Sir, this affair affects me strongly.


GENESIS Well, it is possible, that for your sake, I may not punish him with as
much severity as I intended: In about an hour I shall beg leave to beat up your
quarters again, with Mr. Torrington; for it is necessary I should show you some
proof of my gratitude, since you have been so kindly pleased to honor me with
a proof of your affection.


Miss WALL. ( aside.) So, now indeed, we are in a hopeful situation. Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE, an Apartment at BELVILLE's. Enter Mrs. Belville, and Captain Savage.
Mrs. BELL. DON'T argue with me, Captain Savage; but consider that I am a wife,
and pity my distraction.


CAPT. Dear Madam, there is no occasion to be so much alarmed; Mr. Belville has
very properly determined not to fight; he told me so himself, and should have
been effectually prevented, if I had not known his resolution.


Mrs. BELL. There is no knowing to what extremities he may be provoked, if he
meets Mr. Leeson; I have sent for you, therefore, to beg that you will save him
from the possibility, either of exposing himself to any danger, or of doing an
injury to his adversary.


CAPT. What would you have me do, Madam?


Mrs. BELL. Fly to Hyde park, and prevent, if yet possible, his meeting with Mr.
Leeson: Do it, I conjure you, if you would save me from desperation.


CAPT. Though you have no reason whatever to be apprehensive for his safety,
Madam, yet, since you are so very much affected, I Will immediately execute your
commands. Exit.


Mrs. BELL. Merciful heaven! where is the generosity, where is the sense, where
is the shame of men, to find a pleasure in pursuits, which they cannot remember
without the deepest horror; which they cannot follow without the meanest fraud;
and which they cannot effect, without consequences the most dreadful? The
single word, Pleasure, in a masculine sense, comprehends every thing that is
cruel; every thing that is base; and every thing that is desperate: Yet men, in
other respects, the noblest of their species, make it the principal business of
their lives, and do not hesitate to break in upon the peace of the happiest
families, though their own must be necessarily exposed to destruction. -- O
Belville! Belville! -- my life! my love! -- The greatest triumph which a
libertine can ever experience, is too despicable to be envied; it is at best
nothing but a victory over his own humanity; and if he is a husband, he must be
dead indeed, if he is not doubly tortured upon the wheel of recollection.


Enter Miss WALSINGHAM and Lady RACHEL MILDEW. Miss WALL. My dear Mrs. Belville,
I am extremely unhappy to see you so distressed.


Lady RACH. Now, I am extremely glad to see her so, for if she was not greatly
distressed it would be monstrously unnatural.


Mrs. BELL. O, Matilda! -- my husband! my husband! my children! my children!


Miss WALL. Don't weep, my dear! don't weep! pray be comforted, all may end
happily. Lady Rachel, beg of her not to cry so.


Lady RACH. Why, you are crying yourself, Miss Walsingham; and though I think it
out of character to encourage her tears, I cannot help keeping you company.


Mrs. BELL. O, why is not some effectual method contrived, to prevent this
horrible practice of duelling?


Lady RACH. I Will expose it on the stage, since the law now adays, kindly
leaves the whole cognizance of it to the theater.


Miss WALL. And yet if the laws against it, were as well enforced as the laws
against destroying the game, perhaps it would be equally for the benefit of the
kingdom.


Mrs. BELL. No law will ever be effectual till the custom is rendered infamous.
-- Wives must shriek! -- mothers must agonize! -- orphans must multiply! unless
some blessed hand strips the fascinating glare from honorable murder, and
bravely exposes the idol who is worshipped thus in blood. While it is
disreputable to obey the laws, we cannot look for reformation: -- But if the
duellist is once banished from the presence of his sovereign; -- if he is for
life excluded the confidence of his country; -- if a mark of indelible disgrace
is stamped upon him, the sword of public justice will be the sole chastiser of
wrongs; trifles will not be punished with death, and offenses really meriting
such a punishment, will be reserved for the only proper avenger, the common
executioner.


Lady RACH. I could not have expressed myself better on the subject, my dear:
but till such a hand as you talk of is found, the best will fall into the error
of the times.


Miss WALL. Yes, and butcher each other like madmen, for fear their courage
should be suspected by fools.


Mrs. BELL. No news yet from Captain Savage?


Lady RACH. He cannot have reached Hyde-park yet, my dear.


Miss WALL. Let us lead you to you chamber, my dear; you will be better there.


Mrs. BELL. Matilda, I must be wretched any where; but I Will attend you.


Lady RACH. Thank heaven, I have no husband to plunge me into such a situation!


Miss WALL. And, if I thought I could keep my resolution, I Would determine this
moment on living single all the days of my life. Pray don't spare my arm, my
dear. Exeunt.


SCENE, Hyde Park. Enter BELVILLE. BELL. I fancy I am rather before the time of
appointment; engagements of this kind are the only ones, in which, nowadays,
people pretend, to any punctuality: -- a man is allowed half an hours law to
dinner, but a thrust through the body must be given within a second of the
clock.


Enter Leeson. LEES. Your servant, Sir. -- Your name I suppose is Belville?


BELL. Your supposition is very right, Sir; and I fancy I am not much in the
wrong, when I suppose your name to be Leeson.


LEES. It is, Sir; I am sorry I should keep you here a moment.


BELL. I am very sorry, Sir, you should bring me here at all.


LEES. I regret the occasion, be assured, Sir; but it is not now a time for
talking, we must proceed to action.


BELL. And yet talking is all the action I shall proceed to, depend upon it.


LEES. What do you mean, Sir? Where are your pistols?


BELL. Where I intend they shall remain till my next journey into the country,
very quietly over the chimney in my dressing room.


LEES. You treat this matter with too much levity, Mr. Belville; take your
choice of mine, Sir.


BELL. I Would rather take them both, if you please, for then no mischief shall be
done with either of them.


LEES. Sir, this trifling is adding insult to injury; and shall be resented
accordingly. Didn't you come here to give me satisfaction?


BELL. Yes, every satisfaction in my power.


LEES. Take one of these pistols then.


BELL. Come, Mr. Leeson, your bravery will not at all be lessened by the
exercise of a little understanding: If nothing less than my life can atone for
the injury I have unconsciously done you, fire at me instantly, but don't be
offended because I decline to do you an additional wrong.


LEES. God's Death, Sir, do you think I come here with an intention to murder?


BELL. You come to arm the guilty against the innocent, Sir; and that, in my
opinion, is the most atrocious intention of murder.


LEES. How Is this? --


BELL. Look'e, Mr. Leeson, there is your pistol (throws it on the ground) I have
already acted very wrongly with respect to your sister, but, Sir, I have some
character (though perhaps little enough) to maintain, and I will not do a still
worse action, in raising my hand against your life.


LEES. This hypocrital cant of cowardice, Sir, is too palpable to disarm my
resentment; though I held you to be a man of profligate principles, I
nevertheless considered you as a man of courage; but, if you hesitate a moment
longer, by heaven, I Will chastise you on the spot. (Draws.)


BELL. I must defend my life; though if it did not look like timidity, I would
inform you -- (they fight, Leeson is disarmed) -- Mr. Leeson, there is your
sword again.


LEES. Strike it through my bosom, Sir; -- I don't desire to outlive this
instant,


BELL. I hope, my dear Sir, that you will long live happy -- as your sister,
though to my shame I can claim no merit on that account, is recovered unpolluted,
by her family; but let me beg that you will now see the folly of decisions by
the sword, when success is not fortunately chained to the side of justice:
Before I leave you, receive my sincerest apologies for the injuries I have done
you; and, be assured, no occurrence will ever give me greater pleasure, than an
opportunity of serving you, if, after what is past, you shall at any time
condescend to use me as a friend. Ex.


LEES. Very well -- very well -- very well.


Enter Connolly. LEES. What, you have been within hearing, I suppose?


CON. You may say that.


LEES. And is not this very fine?


CON. Why I cannot say much as to the finery of it, Sir, but it is certainly
very foolish.


LEES. And so this is my satisfaction after all!


CON. Yes, and pretty satisfaction it is. When Mr. Belville did you but one
injury, he was the greatest villain in the world; but now that he has done you
two, in drawing his sword upon you, I suppose he is a very worthy gentleman


LEES. To be foiled, baffled, disappointed in my revenge! -- What though my
sister is by accident unstained, his intentions are as criminal, as if her ruin
was actually perpetrated; there is no possibility of enduring the reflection!
-- I wish not for the blood of my enemy, but I would at least have the credit
of giving him life.


CON. Arrah, my dear, if you had any regard for the life of your enemy, you
shou'dn't put him in the way of death.


LEES. No more of these reflections, my dear Connolly; my own feelings are
painful enough. Will you be so good as to take these damned pistols, and come
with me to the coach?


CON. Troth and that I will; but don't make yourself uneasy; consider that you
have done every thing which honor required at yous hands.


LEES. I hope so.


CON. Why you know so: You have broke the laws of heaven and earth, as nobly as
the first lord in the land, and you have convinced the world, that where any
body has done your family one injury, you have courage enough to do it another
yourself, by hazarding your life.


LEES. Those, Connolly, who would live reputably in any country, must regulate
their conduct in many cases by its very prejudices. -- Custom, with respect to
duelling, is a tyrant, whose despotism no body ventures to attack, though every
body detests its cruelty.


CON. I didn't imagine that a tyrant of any kind would be tolerated in England.
But where do you think of going now? For chambers, you know, are at present
most delightfully dangerous.


LEES. I shall go to Mrs. Crayon's.


CON. What the gentlewoman that paints all manner of colors in red chalk?


LEES. Yes, where I first became acquainted with Emily.


CON. And where the sweet creature has met you two or three times under
pretense of sitting for her picture.


LEES. Mrs. Crayons will, I dare say, oblige me in this exigency with an
apartment for a few days; but come, Connolly, we have no time to lose, though if
you had any prudence, you would abandon me in my present situation.


CON. Ah, Sir, is this your opinion of my friendship? Do you think that any
thing can ever give me half so much pleasure in serving you, as seeing you
surrounded by misfortunes. Exeunt.


The Scene changes to an Apartment at Belville's. Enter General Savage,
Torrington, and Spruce. SPRUCE. Miss Walsingham will wait on you
im-immediately, gentlemen.


GENESIS Very well.


SPRUCE. ( aside) What can old Holifernes want so continually with Miss
Walsingham? Exit


GENESIS When I bring this sweet mild creature home, I shall be able to break her
spirit to my own wishes -- I Will inure her to proper discipline from the first
moment, and make her tremble at the very thought of mutiny.


TOR. Ah, General, you are wonderfully brave, when you know the meekness of
your adversary.


GENESIS Envy, Torrington -- stark, staring envy: few fellows, on the borders of
fifty, have so much reason as myself, to boast of a blooming young woman's
partiality.


TOR. On the borders of fifty, man! -- beyond the confines of threescore.


GENESIS The more reason I have to boast of my victory then; but don't grumble at
my triumph, you shall have a kiss of the bride, let that content you,
Torrington.


Enter Miss Walsingham. Miss WALL. Gentlemen, your most obedient: General, I
intended writing to you about a trifling mistake; but poor Mrs. Belville has
been so very ill, that I could not find an opportunity.


GENESIS I am very sorry for Mrs. Belville's illness, but I am happy, Madam, to be
personally in the way of receiving your commands, and I wait upon you with Mr.
Torrington, to talk about a marriage settlement


Miss WALL. Heavens! how shall I undeceive him?


aside. TOR. It Is rather an awkward business, Miss Walsingham, to trouble you
upon; but as the General wishes that the affair may be as private as possible,
he thought it better to speak to yourself, than to treat with any other person.


GENESIS Yes, my lovely girl; and to convince you, that I intend to carry on an
honorable war, not to pillage like a free-booter, Mr. Torrington will be a
trustee.


Miss WALL. I am infinitely obliged to your intention, but there is no necessity
to talk about any settlement -- for --


GENESIS Pardon me, Madam, -- pardon me, there is -- besides, I have determined
that there shall be one, and what I once determine is absolute. -- A tolerable
hint for her own behavior, when I have married her, Torrington. aside to Tor.


Miss WALL. I must not shock him before Mr. Torrington ( aside). General Savage,
will you give me leave to speak a few words in private to you.


GENESIS There is no occasion for sounding a retreat, Madam; Mr. Torrington is
acquainted with the whole business, and I am determined, for your sake, that
nothing shall be done without him.


TOR. I can have no objection to your hearing the lady ex part, General.


Miss WALL. What I have to say, Sir, is of a very particular nature.


TOR. ( rising) I Will leave the room then.


GENESIS ( opposing him) You shall not leave the room, Torrington. Miss Walsingham
shall have a specimen of my command, even before marriage, and you shall see,
that every woman is not to bully me out of my determination. ( aside to Tor.)


Miss WALL. Well, General, you must have your own way.


GENESIS ( to Tor.) Don't you see that it is only fighting the battle stoutly at
first, with one of these gentle creatures?


TOR. ( significantly) Ah, General!


GENESIS I own, Madam, your situation is a distressing one; let us sit down -- let
us sit down --


Miss WALL. It is unspeakably distressing indeed, Sir.


TOR. Distressing however as it may be, we must proceed to issue, Madam; the
General proposes your jointure to be 1000 l. a year.


Miss WALL. General Savage!


GENESIS You think this too little, perhaps?


Miss WALL. I cannot think of any jointure, Sir.


TOR. Why to be sure, a jointure it at best but a melancholy possession, for
it must be purchased by the loss of the husband you love.


Miss WALL. Pray don't name it, Mr. Torrington.


GENESIS ( kissing her hand) A thousand thanks to you, my lovely girl.


Miss WALL. For heaven's sake, let go my hand.


GENESIS I shall be mad 'till it gives me legal possession of the town.


Miss WALL. Gentlemen -- General -- Mr. Torrington -- I beg you will hear me.


GENESIS By all means, my adorable creature; I can never have too many proofs of
your disinterested affection.


Miss WALL. There is a capital mistake in this whole affair -- I am sinking
under a load of distress.


GENESIS Your confusion makes you look charmingly though.


Miss WALL. There is no occasion to talk of jointures or marriages to me; I am
not going to be married.


TOR. What Is this?


Miss WALL. Nor have I an idea in nature, however enviable I think the honor,
of being your wife, Sir.


GENESIS Madam!


TOR. Why here is a demur!


Miss WALL. I am afraid, Sir, that in our conversation this morning, my
confusion arising from the particularity of the subject, has led you into a
material misconception.


GENESIS I am thunderstruck, madam! I could not mistake my ground.


TOR. As clear a n^l^ pros^ as ever was issued by an attorney general.


GENESIS Surely you cannot forget, that at the first word you hung out a flag of
truce, told me even that I had a previous friend in the fort, and didn't so
much as hint at a single article of capitulation?


TOR. Now for the rejoinder to this replication.


Miss WALL. All this is unquestionably true, General, and perhaps a good deal
more; but in reality my confusion before you on this subject to day, was such,
that I scarcely knew what I said; I was dying with distress, and at this moment
am very little better; -- permit me to retire, General Savage, and only suffer
me to add, that though I think myself highly flattered by your addresses, it is
impossible for me ever to receive them. Lord! Lord! I am glad its over in any
manner. Ex.


TOR. Why, we are a little out in this matter, General; the judge has decided
against us, when we imagined ourselves sure of the cause.


GENESIS The gates shut in my teeth, just as I expected the keys from the governor.


Tor. I am disappointed myself, man; I shall not have a kiss of the bride.


GENESIS At my time of life too!


TOR. I said from the first you were too old for her.


GENESIS Zounds to fancy myself sure of her, and to triumph upon a certainty of
victory.


TOR. Ay, and to kiss her hand in a rapturous return for her tenderness to you:
-- let me advise you never to kiss before folks, as long as you live again.


GENESIS Don't distract me, Torrington! a joke, where a friend has the misfortune
to lose the battle, is a downright inhumanity.


TOR. You told me that your son had accused her of something that you would not
hear; suppose we call at his lodgings, he perhaps, as an amicus-curiae, may be
able to give us a little information.


GENESIS Thank you for the thought; -- But keep your finger more than ever upon
you lips, dear Torrington. You know how I dread the danger of ridicule, and it
would be too much, not only to be thrash'd out of the field, but to be laughed
at into the bargain.


TOR. I thought when you made a presentment of your sweet person to Miss
Walsingham, that the bill would be returned ignoramus. Exeunt.


SCENE, BELVILLE's. Mrs. BELVILLE and Lady RACHEL MILDEW, discovered on a
Sopha. Lady RACH. You heard what Captain Savage said?


Mrs. BELL. I would flatter myself, but my heart will not suffer it; the Park
might be too full for the horrid purpose, and perhaps they are gone to decide
the quarrel in some other place.


Lady RACH. The Captain inquired of numbers in the Park without hearing a
syllable of them, and is therefore positive that they are parted without doing
any mischief.


Mrs. BELL. I am, nevertheless, torn by a thousand apprehensions, and my fancy,
with a gloomy kind of fondness, fastens on the most deadly, This very morning,
I exultingly numbered myself in the catalogue of the happiest wives. -- Perhaps
I am a wife no longer; -- perhaps, my little innocents, your unhappy father is
at this moment breathing his last sigh, and wishing, O, how vainly! that he had
not preferred a guilty pleasure to his own life, to my eternal peace of mind,
and your felicity!


Enter SPRUCE. SPRUCE. Madam! madam! my master! my master!


Mrs. BELL. Is he safe?


Enter BELVILLE. BELL. My love!


Mrs. BELL. O Mr. Belville! faints.


BELL. Assistance, quick!


Lady RACH. There she revives.


BELL. The angel-softness! how this rends my heart?


Mrs. BELL. O, Mr. Belville, if you could conceive the agonies I have endured,
you would avoid the possibility of another quarrel as long as you lived, out of
common humanity.


BELL. My dearest creature, spare these tender reproaches; you know not how
sufficiently I am punished to see you thus miserable.


Lady RACH. That Is pleasant indeed, when you have yourself deliberately loaded
her with affliction.


BELL. Pray, pray Lady Rachel, have a little mercy: Your poor humble servant has
been a very naughty boy, -- but if you only forgive him this single time, he
will never more deserve the rod of correction.


Mrs. BELL. Since you are returned safe, I am happy. Excuse these foolish tears,
they gush in spite of me.


BELL. How contemptible do they render me, my love!


Lady RACH. Come, my dear, you must turn your mind from this gloomy subject. --
Suppose we step up stairs and communicate our pleasure to Miss Walsingham?


Mrs. BELL. With all my heart. Adieu, recreant!


Exeunt Mrs. Bell. and Lady Rach. BELL. I don't deserve such a woman, I don't
deserve her. -- Yet, I believe I am the first husband, that ever found fault
with a wife, for having too much goodness.

Enter SPRUCE. What Is the matter?


SPRUCE. Your sister --


BELL. What of my sister?


SPRUCE. Sir, is elop'd.


BELL. My sister!


SPRUCE. There is a letter left, Sir, in which she says, that her motive was a
dislike to a match with Captain Savage, as she has placed her affections
unalterably on another gentleman.


BELL. Death and damnation!


SPRUCE. Mrs. Moreland, your mother, is in the greatest distress, Sir, and begs
you will immediately go with the servant that brought the message; for he
observing the young lady's maid carrying some bundles out, a little
suspiciously, thought there must be some scheme going on, and dogged a hackney
coach, in which Miss Morland went off, to the very house where it set her down.


BELL. Bring me to the servant, instantly; -- but don't let a syllable of this
matter reach my wife's ears, her spirits are already too much agitated. Exit.


SPRUCE. Zounds! we shall be paid home, for the tricks we have played in other
families. Exit.


Scene changes to Capt. SAVAGE's Lodgings. Enter Captain SAVAGE. CAPT. The
vehemence of my resentment against this abandoned woman has certainly led me
too far. I shou'dn't have acquainted her with my discovery of her b^seness; --
no, if I had acted properly, I should have concealed all knowledge of the
transaction 'till the very moment of her guilt, and then burst upon her when
she was solacing with her paramour, in all the fullness of security. Now, if she
should either alter her mind, with respect to going to the masquerade, or go in
a different habit to elude my observation, I not only (...) the opportunity of
exposing her, but give her time to plan some plausible excuse for her infamous
letter to Belville.


Enter a Servant. SER. General Savage, and Mr. Torrington, Sir.


CAPT. You blockhead, why did you let them wait a moment? What can be the
meaning of this visit?


Ex. Servant. Enter General SAVAGE, and TORRINGTON. GENESIS I come, Horace, to
talk to you about Miss Walsingham.


CAPT. She Is the most worthless woman existing, Sir: I can convince you of it.


GENESIS I have already changed my own opinion of her.


CAPT. What you have found her out yourself, Sir?


TOR. Yes, he has made a trifling discovery.


GENESIS God's Death, don't make me contemptible to my son. aside to TOR.


CAPT. But, Sir, what instance of her precious behavior has come to your
knowledge? For an hour has scarcely elapsed, since you thought her a miracle of
goodness


TOR. Ay, he has thought her a miracle of goodness, within this quarter of an
hour.


GENESIS Why she has a manner that would impose upon all the world.


CAPT. Yes, but she has a manner also to undeceive the world thoroughly.


TOR. That we have found pretty recently; however, in this land of liberty,
none are to be pronounced guilty, 'till they are positively convicted; I cannot
therefore find against Miss Walsingham, upon the bare strength of presumptive
evidence.


CAPT. Presumptive evidence! hav'n't I promised you ocular demonstration?


TOR. Ay, but 'till we receive this demonstration, my good friend, we cannot
give judgment.


CAPT. Then I Will tell you at once, who is the object of her honorable
affections.


GENESIS Who -- who --


CAPT. What would you think if they were placed on Belville?


GENESIS Upon Belville! has she deserted to him from the corpse of virtue?


CAPT. Yes, she wrote to him, desiring to be taken from the masquerade to some
convenient scene of privacy, and though I have seen the letter, she has the
impudence to deny her own hand.


GENESIS What a fiend is there then disguised under the (...) of an angel!


TOR. The delicate creature that was dying with confusion!


CAPT. Only come with me to the masquerade, and you shall see Belville carry
her off: 'Twas about the scandalous appointment with him, I was speaking, when
you conceived I treated her so rudely.


GENESIS And you were only anxious to show her in her real character to me, when I
was so exceedingly offended with you.


CAPT. Nothing else in the world, Sir; I knew you would despise and detest her,
the moment you were acquainted with her baseness.


GENESIS How she brazen'd it out before my face, and what a regard she affected
for your interest! I was a madman not to listen then to your explanation.


TOR. Though you both talk this point well, I still see nothing but strong
presumption against Miss Walsingham: Mistakes have already happened, mistakes
may happen again; and I will not give up a lady's honor, upon an evidence that
would not cast a common pickpocket at the Old Baily.


CAPT. Come to the masquerade then and be convinced.


GENESIS Let us detach a party for dresses immediately. Yet remember, Torrington,
that the punctuality of evidence which is necessary in a court of law, is by no
means requisite in a court of honor.


TOR. Perhaps it would be more to the honor of your honorable courts if it
was. Exeunt.


The Scene changes to an Apartment at Mrs. Crayon' s, BELL. ( behind.) My dear,
you must excuse me.


MAID. Indeed, Sir, you must not go up stairs.


BELL. Indeed but I will; the man is positive to the house, and I^ll search
every room in it, from the cellar to the garret, if I don't find the lady.
James, don't stir from the street door.


Enter Belville followed by a Maid. MAID Sir, you are the strangest gentleman I
ever met with in all my born days: -- I wish my mistress was at home.


BELL. I am a strange fellow, my dear -- But if your mistress was at home, I
should take the liberty of peeping into the apartments.


MAID. Sir, there is company in that room, you cannot go in there.


BELL. Now that is the very reason I will go in.


MAID. This must be some great man, or he would not behave so obstropolous.


BELL. Good manners by your leave a little. (forcing the door.) Whoever my
gentleman is, I Will call him to a severe reckoning: -- I have been just called
to one myself, for making free with another man's sister.


Enter Leeson followed by Connolly. LEES. Who is it that dares commit an
outrage upon this apartment?


CON. An Englishman's very lodging; ay, and an Irishman's too, I hope, is his
castle; -- an Irishman is an Englishman all the world over.


BELL. Mr. Leeson!


MAID. O we shall have murder. running off.


CON. Run into that room, my dear, and stay with the young lady, Exit Maid.


LEES. And Connolly let nobody else into that room.


CON. Let me alone for that, honey, if this gentleman has fifty people.


LEES. Whence is it, Mr. Belville, that you persecute me thus with injuries?


BELL. I am filled with astonishment!


CON. Faith, to speak the truth, you do look a little surpised.


LEES. Answer me, Sir; what is the foundation of this new violence?


BELL. I am come, Mr. Leeson, upon an affair, Sir --


CON. The devil burn me if he was half so much confounded a while ago, when
there was a naked sword at his breast.


BELL. I am come, Mr. Leeson, upon an affair, Sir, that -- How the devil shall I
open it to him, since the tables are so fairly turned upon me.


LEES. Dispatch, Sir, for I have company in the next room.


BELL. A lady, I suppose?


LEES. Suppose it is, Sir?


BELL. And the lady's name is Moreland, is not it, Sir?


LEES. I cannot see what business you have with her name, Sir, You took away my
sister, and I hope you have no designs upon the lady in the next room.


BELL. Indeed but I have.


LEES. The devil you have!


CON. Well, this is the most unaccountable man I ever heard of, he will have all
the women in the town, I believe.


LEES, And pray, Sir, what pretensions, have you to the lady in the next room,
even supposing her to be Miss Moreland?


BELL. No other pretensions than what a brother should have to the defense of
his sister's honor: You thought yourself authorized to cut my throat awhile
ago in a similar business.


LEES. And is Miss Moreland your sister?


BELL. Sir, there is insolence in that question; you know she is.


LEES. By heaven, I did not know it till this moment; but I rejoice at the
discovery: This is blow for blow!


CON. Devil burn me but they have fairly made a swop of it.


BELL. And you really didn't know that Miss Moreland was my sister?


LEES. I don't conceive myself under much necessity of apologizing to you, Sir;
but I am incapable of a dishonorable design upon any woman; and though Miss
Moreland in our short acquaintance, repeatedly mentioned her brother, she never
once told me that his name was Belville.


CON. And he has had such few opportunities of being in her company, unless by
letters, honey, that he knew nothing more of her connections, than her being a
sweet pretty creter, and having 30,000 l.


BELL. The fortune, I dare say, no way lessened the force of her attractions.


LEES. I am above dissimulation -- It really did not.


BELL. Well, Mr. Leeson, our families have shown such a very strong inclination
to come together, that it would really be a pity to disappoint them.


CON. Upon my soul and so it would; though the dread of being forced to have a
husband, the young lady tells us, quickened her resolution to marry this
gentleman.


BELL. O she had no violence of that kind to apprehend from her family;
therefore, Mr. Leeson, since you seem as necessary for the girl's happiness, as
she seems for yours, you shall marry her here in town, with the consent of all
her friends, and save yourself the trouble of an expedition to Scotland.


LEES. Can I believe you serious?


BELL. Zounds, Leeson, that air of surprise is a sad reproach! I didn't surprise
you when I did a bad action, but I raise your astonishment, when I do a good
one.


CON. And by my soul, Mr. Belville, if you knew how a good action becomes a
man, you would never do a bad one as long as you lived.


LEES. You have given me life and happiness in one day, Mr. Belville! however,
it is now time you should see your sister; I know you will be gentle with her,
though you have so much reason to condemn her choice, and generously remember
that her elopement proceeded from the great improbability there was of a
beggar's ever meeting with the approbation of her family.


BELL. Don't apologize for your circumstances, Leeson; a princess could do no
more than make you happy, and if you make her so, you meet her upon terms of
the most perfect equality.


LEES. This is a new way of thinking, Mr. Belville.


BELL. It Is only an honest way of thinking, and I consider my sister a gainer
upon the occasion; for a man of your merit is more difficult to be found, than
a woman of her fortune. Exeunt Leeson and Belville.


CON. What Is the reason now that I cannot skip, and laugh, and rejoice, at this
affair? Upon my soul my heart's as full as if I had met with some great
misfortune. Well, pleasure in the extreme is certainly a very painful thing: I
am really ashamed of these woman's drops, and yet I don't know but that I ought
to blush for being ashamed of them, for I am sure nobody's eye ever looks half
so well, as when it is disfigured by a tear of humanity. Exit.


ACT V.
SCENE a Drawing Room. Enter BELVILLE. BELL. WELL, happiness is once more mine,
and the women are all going in tip-top spirits to the masquerade. Now, Mr.
Belville, let me have a few words with you; Miss Walsingham, the ripe, the
luxurious Miss Walsingham, expects to find you there burning with impatience:
-- But, my dear friend, after the occurrences of the day, can you be weak
enough to plunge into fresh crimes? Can you be base enough to abuse the
goodness of that angel your wife; and wicked enough, not only to destroy the
innocence which is sheltered beneath your own roof, but to expose your family
perhaps again, to the danger of losing a son, a brother, a father, and a
husband? The possession of the three Graces is surely too poor a recompense for
the folly you must commit, for the shame you must feel, and the consequences
you must hazard. Upon my soul if I struggle a little longer, I shall rise in my
own opinion, and be less a rascal than I think myself: -- Ay, but the object is
bewitching; -- the matter will be an eternal secret -- and if it is known that
I sneak in this pitiful manner from a fine woman, when the whole elysium of her
person solicits me: -- well, and am I afraid the world should know that I have
shrunk from an infamous action? -- A thousand blessings on you dear conscience
for that one argument; -- I shall be an honest man after all -- Suppose,
however, that I give her the meeting; that is dangerous; -- that is dangerous: --
and I am so little accustomed to do what is right, that I shall certainly do
what is wrong, the moment I am in the way of temptation. Come, Belville, your
resolution is not so very slender a dependence, and you owe Miss Walsingham
reparation for the injury which you have done her principles. I Will give her the
meeting -- I Will take her to the house I intended -- I Will -- Zounds! what a fool
I have been all this time, to look for precarious satisfaction in vice, when
there is such exquisite pleasure to be found at a certainty in virtue! Exit


Enter Lady Rachel and Mrs Belville. Lady RACH. For mirth sake don't let him
see us: There has been a warm debate between his passion and his conscience.


Mrs. BELL And the latter is the conqueror, my life for it.


Lady RACH. Dear Mrs. Belville you are the best of women, and ought to have the
best of husbands.


Mrs. BELL. I have the best of husbands.


Lady RACH. I have not time to dispute the matter with you now; but I shall put
you into my comedy to teach wives, that the best receipt for matrimonial
happiness, is to be deaf, dumb, and blind.


Mrs. BELL. Poh! poh! you are a satirest, Lady Rachel -- But we are losing time;
shou'dn't we put on our dresses, and prepare for the grand scene?


Lady RACH. Don't you tremble at the trial?


Mrs. BELL. Not in the least, I am sure my heart has no occasion.


Lady RACH. Have you let Miss Walsingham into our little plot?


Mrs. BELL. You know she could not be insensible of Mr. Belville's design upon
herself, and it is no farther than that design, we have any thing to carry into
execution.


Lady RACH. Well, she may serve to facilitate the matter, and therefore I am
not sorry that you have trusted her.


Mrs. BELL. We shall be too late, and then what signifies all your fine plotting.


Lady RACH. Is it not a little pang of jealousy that would fain now quicken our
motions?


Mrs. BELL. No, Lady Rachel, it is a certainty of my husband's love and
generosity, that makes me wish to come to the trial. I would not exchange my
confidence in his affections for all the mines of Peru; so nothing you can say
will make me miserable.


Lady RACH. You are a most unaccountable woman; so away with you. Exeunt.


SCENE continued. Enter Spruce and Ghastly. SPRUCE. Why, Ghastly, the old
general your master is a greater fool than I ever thought he was: He want to
marry Miss Walsingham?


GHAST. Mrs. Tempest suspected that there was something going forward, by all
his hugger-mugger consulting with Mr. Torrington; and so set me on to listen.


SPRUCE. She Is a good friend of yours, and that thing she made the General
give you the other day in the hospital, is I suppose a snug hundred a year.


GHAST. Better than two; I wash for near four thousand people: there was a
major of horse who put in for it, and pleaded a large family --


SPRUCE. With long services, I suppose.


GHAST. Yes, but Mrs. Tempest insisted upon my long services; so the major was
set aside -- However to keep the thing from the damned Newspapers, I fancy he
will succeed the barber, who died last night, poor woman, of a lying-in fever,
after being brought to bed of three children, -- Places in public institutions.
--


SPRUCE. Are often sweetly disposed I think of asking Belville for something,
one of these days.


GHAST. He has great interest.


SPRUCE. I might be a justice of peace; if I pleased, and in a shabby
neighborhood, where the mere swearing would bring in something tolerable; but
there are so many strange people let into the commission nowadays, that I
shou'dn't like to have my name in the list.


GHAST. You are right.


SPRUCE. No, no, I leave that to paltry tradesmen, and shall think of some
little sinecure, or a small pension on the Irish establishment.


GHAST. Well, success attend you. I must hobble home as fast as I can, to know
if Mrs. Tempest has any orders. O, there is a rare storm brewing for our old
goat of a General.


SPRUCE. When shall we crack a bottle together?


GHAST. O, I shall not touch a glass of Claret these three weeks; for last night I
gave nature a little fillip with a drunken bout, according to the doctor's
directions; I have entirely left off bread, and I am in great hopes that I
shall get rid of my gout by these means, specially if I can learn to eat my
meat quite raw like a cannibal.


SPRUCE. Ha, ha, ha!


GHAST. Look at me, Spruce, I was once as likely a young fellow as any under
ground in the whole parish of St. James's: -- but waiting on the General so
many years.


SPRUCE. Ay, and following his example, Ghastly.


GHAST. It Is too true: has reduced me to what you see. These miserable spindles
would do very well for a lord or a duke, Spruce; but they are a sad disgrace to
a poor valet de chamber. Exit.


SPRUCE. Well, I don't believe there is a gentleman's gentleman within the
weekly bills, who joins a prudent solicitude for the main-chance, to a strict
care of his constitution, better than myself. I have a little girl who stands
me in about three guineas a week; I never bet more than a pound upon a rubber
of whist; I always sleep with my head very warm; and swallow a new laid egg
every morning with my chocolate. Exit.


The Scene changes to the Street, two Chairs cross the Stage, knock at a Door,
and set down BELVILLE and a Lady. BELL. This way, my dear creature! Exeunt.


Enter Genesis Savage, Capt. Savage, and Torrington. CAPT. There! there they go
in: -- You see the place is quite convenient, not twenty yards from the
masquerade.


GENESIS How closely the fellow sticks to her.


TOR. Like the great seal to the peerage patent of a chancellor. But,
gentlemen, we have still no more than proof presumptive: -- where is the ocular
demonstration which we were to have?


CAPT. I Will swear to the blue domino; it is a very remarkable one, and so is
Belville's.


TOR. You would have rare custom among the Newgate sollicitors, if you would
venture an oath upon the identity of the party under it.


GENESIS It Is the very size and shape of Miss Walsingham.


TOR. And yet I have a strange notion that there is a trifling alibi in this
case.


GENESIS It would be a damned affair if we should be countermin'd.


CAPT. O, follow me, here is the door left luckily open, and I Will soon clear up
the matter beyond a question. Enters the house.


TOR. Why your son is mad, General. This must produce a deadly breach with
Belville. For heaven's sake, let us go in and prevent any excesses of his
rashness.


GENESIS By all means, or the poor fellow's generous anxiety on my account may be
productive of very fatal consequences. Exeunt.


The Scene changes to an aparment, Belville unmasked, and a lady in a blue
domino masked. BELL. My dear Miss Walsingham, we are now perfectly safe, yet I
will by no means entreat you to unmask, because I am convinced, from the
propriety with which you repulsed my addresses this morning, that you intend
the present interview should make me still more deeply sensible of my
presumption. -- I never lied so aukwardly in all my life; if it was to make her
comply, I should be at no loss for language. (aside) The situation in which I
must appear before you, Madam, is certainly a very humiliating one; but I am
persuaded that your generosity will be gratified to hear, that I have bid an
everlasting adieu to my profligacy, and am now only alive to the virtues of
Mrs. Belville. -- She will not speak -- I don't wonder at it, for brazen as I am
myself, if I met so mortifying a rejection, I should be cursedly out of
countenance.

aside.
CAPT. (behind) I will go in.


GENESIS (behind.) I command you to desist.


TOR. (behind.) This will be an affair for the Old-Bailey.


The noise grows more violent, and continues. BELL. Why, what the devil is all
this? -- Don't be alarmed, Miss Walsingham, be assured I Will protect you at the
hazard of my life; -- step into this closet, -- you shall not be discovered depend
upon it; (she goes in): And now to find out the cause of this confusion.
unlocks the door.


Enter Genesis Savage, Capt. Savage, and Torrington. BELL. Savage! what is the
meaning of this strange behavior?


CAPT. Where is Miss Walsingham?


BELL. So then, Sir, this is a premeditated scheme, for which I am obliged to
your friendship.


CAPT. Where Is Miss Walsingham, Sir?


GENESIS Dear Belville, he is out of his senses; this storm was entirely against
my orders.


TOR. If he proceeds much longer in these vagaries, we must amuse him with a
commission of lunacy.


BELL. This is neither a time nor a place for argument, Mr. Torrington; but as
you and the General seem to be in the possession of your senses, I shall be
glad if you will take this very friendly gentleman away; and depend upon it, I
shall not die in his debt for the present obligation.


CAPT. And depend upon it, Sir, pay the obligation when you will, I shall not stir
'till I see Miss Walsingham. -- Look'ee, Belville, there are secret reasons for
my behaving in this manner; reasons, which you yourself will approve, when you
know them; -- my father here --


GENESIS Disavows your conduct in every particular, and would rejoice to see you
at the halberds.


TOR. And, for my part, I told him previously 'twas a downright burglary.


BELL. Well, gentlemen, let your different motives for breaking in upon me in
this agreeable manner, be what they may, I don't see that I am less annoyed by
my friends than my enemy. I must therefore again, request that you will all
walk down stairs.


CAPT. I Will first walk into this room.


BELL. Really, I think you will not.


GENESIS What phrenzy possesses the fellow to urge this matter farther?


CAPT. While there is a single doubt she triumphs over justice; ( drawing.) I
will go into that room.


BELL. Then you must make your way through me.


Enter Mrs. Belville. Mrs. BELL. Ah!


CAPT. There, I knew she was in the room: -- there is the blue domino.


GENESIS Put up your sword, if you don't desire to be cashiered from my favor for
ever.


BELL. Why, would you come out, madam? But, you have nothing to apprehend.


CAPT. Pray, madam, will you have the goodness to unmask?


BELL. She shall not unmask.


CAPT. I say she shall.


BELL. I say she shall not.


Mrs. BELL. Pray, let me oblige the gentleman?


CAPT. Death and destruction, here is a discovery!


GENESIS and TOR. Mrs. Belville!


Mrs. BELL. Yes, Mrs. Belville, gentlemen: Is consugal fidelity so very terrible
a thing now adays, that a man is to suffer death for being found in company
with his own wife?


BELL. My love, this is a surprise, indeed -- But it is a most agreeable one;
since you find me really ashamed of my former follies, and cannot now doubt the
sincerity of my reformation.


Mrs. BELL. I am too happy! this single moment would over pay a whole life of
anxiety.


BELL. Where shall I attend you? Will you return to the masquerade?


Mrs. BELL. O no! Lady Rachel and Miss Walsingham are by this time at our house,
with Mr. Leeson and the Irish gentleman whom you pressed into our party,
impatiently expecting the result of this adventure.


BELL. Give me leave to conduct you home then from this scene of confusion.
Tomorrow, Captain Savage, I shall beg the favor of your explanation; ( aside
to him as he goes out.) Kind gentlemen, your most humble servant.


Mrs. BELL. And when you next disturb a tete a tete, for pity to a poor wife,
don't let it be so very uncustomary a party, as the matrimonial one.


Exeunt Bell. and Mrs. Bell. GENESIS ( to the Capt.) So, Sir, you have led us upon a
blessed expedition here.


TOR. Now, don't you think that if your courts of honor, like our courts of
law, searched a little minutely into evidence, it would be equally to the
credit of their understandings?


CAPT. Though I am covered with confusion at my mistake (for you see, Belville
was mistaken as well as myself,) I am overjoyed at this discovery of Miss
Walsingham's innocence.


GENESIS I should exult in it too, with a feu de joy, if it didn't now show the
impossibility of her ever being Mrs. Savage.


CAPT. Dear Sir, why should you think that an impossibility? Though some mistake
^s have occurred consequence I suppose, of Mrs. Belville's little plot upon her
husband, I dare say Miss Walsingham may yet be prevailed upon to come into our
family.


TOR. Take care of a new error in your proceedings, young gentleman.


GENESIS Ay, another defeat would make us completely despicable.


CAPT. Sir, I Will forseit my life, if she does not consent to the marriage this
very night.


GENESIS Only bring this matter to bear, and I Will forgive you every thing.


TOR. The Captain should be informed, I think General, that she declined it
peremptorily this evening.


GENESIS Ay, do you hear that, Horace?


CAPT. I am not at all surpised at it, considering the general misconception
we labored under. But I Will immediately to Belville's, explain the whole
mystery, and conclude every thing to your satisfaction. Exit.


GENESIS So, Torrington, we shall be able to take the field again, you see.


TOR. But how in the name of wonder has your son found out your intention of
marrying Miss Walsingham? I looked upon myself as the only person acquainted
with the secret.


GENESIS That thought has marched itself two or three times to my own
recollection. For though I gave him some distant hints of the affair, I took
particular care to keep behind the works of a proper circumspection.


TOR. O, if you gave him any hints at all, I am not surpised at his
discovering every thing.


GENESIS I shall be all impatience 'till I hear of his interview with Miss
Walsingham: Suppose my dear friend we went to Belville's, it is but in the next
street, and we shall be there in the lighting of a match.


TOR. Really this is a pretty business for a man of my age and profession, trot
here, trot there. But, as I have been weak enough to make myself a kind of
party in the cause, I own that I have curiosity enough to be anxious about the
determination.


GENESIS Come along my old boy; and remember the song, " Servile spirits, etc."
Exeunt.


The Scene changes to Belville's. Enter Captain Savage and Miss Walsingham.
CAPT. Nay, but my dearest Miss Walsingham, the extenuation of my own conduct to
Belville made it absolutely necessary for me to discover my engagements with
you; and as happiness is now so fortunately in our reach, I flatter myself you
will be prevailed upon to forgive an error, which proceeded only from an
extravagance of love.


Miss WALL. To think me capable of such an action, Captain Savage! I am
terrified at the idea of a union with you, and it is better for a woman at any
time, to sacrifice an insolent lover, than to accept of a suspicious husband.


CAPT. In the happiest unions, my dearest creature, there must be always
something to overlook on both sides.


Miss WALL. Very civil, truly.


CAPT. Pardon me, my life, for this frankness; and recollect, that if the lover
has through misconception been unhappily guilty, he brings a husband altogether
reformed to your hands.


Miss WALL. Well, I see I must forgive you at last, so I may as well make a
merit of necessity, you provoking creature.


CAPT. And may I hope, indeed, for the blessing of this hand?


Miss WALL. Why, you wretch, would you have me force it upon you? I think, after
what I have said, a soldier might have ventured to take it without farther
ceremony.


CAPT. Angelic creature! thus I seize it as my lawful prize.


Miss WALL. Well, but now you have obtained this inestimable prize, Captain,
give me again leave to ask if you have had a certain explanation with the
General?


CAPT. How can you doubt it?


Miss WALL. And he is really impatient for our marriage?


CAPT. It Is incredible how earnest he is.


Miss WALL. What, did he tell you of his Interview with me this evening, when he
brought Mr. Torrington?


CAPT. He did.


Miss WALL. O, then, I can have do doubt.


CAPT. If a shadow of doubt remains, here he comes to remove it. Joy, my dear
Sir! joy a thousand times!


Enter General Savage, and Torrington. GENESIS What, my dear boy, have you carried
the day?


Miss WALL. I have been weak enough to indulge him with a victory, indeed,
General.


GENESIS None but the brave, none but the brave, etc.


singing. TOR. I congratulate you heartily on this decree, General.


GENESIS This had nearly proved a day of disappointment, but the stars have
fortunately turned it in my favor, and now I reap the rich reward of my
victory. ( Salutes her)


CAPT. And here I take her from you, as the greatest good which heaven can send
me.


Miss WALL. O, Captain!


GENESIS You take her as the greatest good which heaven can send you, sirrah; I
take her as the greatest good which heaven can send me: And now what have you
to say to her?


Miss WALL. General Savage!


TOR. Here will be a fresh injunction to stop proceedings.


Miss WALL. Are we never to have done with mistakes?


GENESIS What mistakes can have happened now my sweetest? you delivered up your
dear hand to me this moment?


Miss WALL. True, Sir; but I thought you were going to bestow my dear hand upon
this dear gentleman.


GENESIS How! that dear gentleman!


CAPT. I am thunderstruck!


TOR. General -- None but the brave, etc. sings.


GENESIS So the covert way is cleared at last; and you have imagined that I was
all along negociating for this fellow, when I was gravely soliciting for myself?


Miss WALL. No other idea, Sir, ever once entered my imagination.


TOR. General. -- Noble minds should never despair, etc. sings.


GENESIS Zounds! here is all the company pouring upon us in full gallop, and I
shall be the laughing stock of the whole town.


Enter Belville, Mrs. Belville, Lady Rachel, Leeson and Connolly. BELL. Well,
General, we have left you a long time together. Shall I give you joy?


GENESIS No; wish me demolished in the fortifications of Dunkirk.


Mrs. BELL. What Is the matter?


Lady RACH. The General appears disconcerted.


LEES. The gentleman looks as if he had fought a hard battle.


CON. Ay, and gained nothing but a defeat, my dear.


TOR. I Will show cause for his behavior.


GENESIS Death and damnation! not for the world. I am taken by surprise here; let
me consider a moment how to cut my way through the enemy.


Miss WALL. How could you be deceived in this manner. To Capt.


Lady RACH. O, Mr. Torrington, we are much obliged to you; you have been in
town ever since last night, and only see us now by accident.


TOR. I have been very busy, Madam; but you look sadly, very sadly indeed! your
old disorder the jaundice, I suppose, has been very troublesome to you?


Lady RACH. Sir, you have a very extraordinary mode of complimenting your
acquaintance.


CON. I don't believe for all that, that there is a word of a lie in the truth
he speaks. aside


Mrs. BELL. Miss Walsingham, Capt. Savage has been telling Mr. Belville and me
of a very extraordinary mistake.


Miss WALL. It Is very strange indeed, mistake on mistake.


BELL. It Is no way strange to find every body properly struck with the merit of
Miss Walsingham.


Miss WALL. A compliment from you now, Mr. Belville, is really worth accepting.


GENESIS If I thought the affair could be kept a secret, by making the town over
to my son, since I am utterly shut out myself --


CAPT. He seems exceedingly embarrassed.


GENESIS If I thought that; -- why mortified as I must be in giving it up, I think
I could resolve upon the maneuver, to save myself from universal ridicule: but
it cannot be; -- it cannot be; and I only double my own disappointment in
rewarding the disobedience of the rascal who has supplanted me. There! --
there! they are all talking of it, all laughing at me, and I shall run mad!


Mrs. TEMP. ( behind) I say, you feather-headed puppy, he is in this house; my
own servant saw him come in, and I will not stir 'till I find him.


GENESIS She here! -- then deliberation is over, and I am entirely blown up.


Lady RACH. I Will take notes of this affair.


Enter Mrs. Tempest. Mrs. TEMP. Mighty well, Sir. So you are in love it seems;
-- and you want to be married it seems?


LEES. My blessed aunt! -- O how proud I am of the relation.


GENESIS Dear Bab, give me quarter before all this company.


Mrs. TEMP. You are in love, you old fool, are you? and you want to marry Miss
Walsingham, indeed!


CON. I never heard a pleasanter spoken gentlewoman -- O hone, if I had the
taming of her, she should never be abusive, without keeping a civil tongue in
her head.


Mrs. TEM. Well, Sir, and when is the happy day to be fixed?


BELL. What the devil, is this true, General?


GENESIS True. -- Can you believe such an absurdity?


Mrs. TEMP. Why, will you deny, you miserable old mummy, that you made proposal
of marriage to her? --


GENESIS Yes I do -- no I don't -- proposals of marriage!


Miss WALL. In favor of your son. -- I Will help him out a little. aside


GENESIS Yes, in favor of my son -- what the devil shall I do?


Mrs. BELL. Shall I take a lesson from this lady, Mr. Belville? Perhaps if the
women of virtue were to pluck up a little spirit, they might be soon as well
treated as kept mistresses.


Mrs. TEMP. Harkee, General Savage, I believe you assert a falsehood; but if
you speak the truth, give your son this moment to Miss Walsingham, and let me
be fairly rid of my rival.


GENESIS My son! Miss Walsingham! -- Miss Walsingham, my son!


BELL. It will do, Horace; it will do.


Mrs. TEMP. No prevarications, General Savage; do what I bid you instantly, or
by all the wrongs of an enraged woman, I Will so expose you. --


CON. What a fine fellow this is, to have the command of an army!


GENESIS If Miss Walsingham can be prevailed upon.


TOR. O, she will oblige you readily -- But you must settle a good fortune upon
your son.


Mrs. TEMP. That he shall do.


Mrs. BELL. Miss Walsingham, my Dear --


Miss WALL. I can refuse nothing either to your request, or to the request of
the General.


GENESIS Oblige me with your hand then, Madam: come here you -- come here Captain.
There, there is Miss Walsingham's hand for you.


CON. And as pretty a little fist it is, as any in the three kingdoms.


GENESIS Torrington shall settle the fortune.


LEES. I give you joy most heartily, Madam.


BELL. We all give her joy.


CAPT. Mine is beyond the power of expression.


Miss WALL. ( aside to the company) And so is the General's, I believe.


CON. O faith, that may be easily seen by the sweetness of his countenance.


TOR. Well, the cause being now at last determined, I think we may all retire
from the court.


GENESIS And without any great credit, I fear, to the General.


CON. By my soul, you may say that. --


Mrs. TEMP. Do you murmur, Sir? -- Come this moment home with me.


GENESIS I Will go any where to hide this miserable head of mine: what a damned
campaign have I made of it!


Exeunt Genesis and Mrs. Temp. CON. Upon my soul, if I was in the General's place,
I Would divide the house with this devil; I Would keep within doors myself, and make
her take the outside.


BELL. The day has been a busy one, thanks to the communicative disposition of
the Captain.


Mrs. BELL. And the evening should be cheerful.


BELL. I shall not therefore part with one of you, 'till we have had a hearty laugh
at our general adventures.


Miss WALL. They have been very whimsical indeed; yet if represented on the
stage, I hope they would be found not only entertaining, but instructive.


Lady RACH. Instructive! why the modern Critics say that the only business of
Comedy is to make people laugh.


BELL. That is degrading the dignity of letters exceedingly, as well as
lessening the utility of the stage -- A good comedy is a capital effort of
genius, and should therefore be directed to the noblest purposes.


Miss WALL. Very true; and unless we learn something while we chuckle, the
carpenter who nails a Pantomime together, will be entitled to more applause,
than the best comic poet in the kingdom.


Exeunt omnes.
