THE STRATFORD JUBILEE. A NEW COMEDY OF TWO ACTS, AS IT HAS BEEN LATELY
EXHIBITED AT STRATFORD UPON AVON, WITH GREAT APPLAUSE. To which is prefixed
SCRUB'S TRIP TO THE JUBILEE.

LONDON. Printed for T. LOWNDES, No. 77. in Fleet Street, and J. BELL,
Successor to Mr. BATHOE, near Exeter Exchange in the Strand. M.DCC.LXIX. [PRICE
ONE SHILLING.]

TO SAMUEL FOOT, Esquire.
THE comic muse in consultation,
Where I should point my dedication;
Kindly vouchsafed to recommend
Her warmest patron; ablest friend:
Who with more skill than Warwick Lane
Pale spleen can cure in th'comic vein;
Then Sir! receive this hasty birth,
A slight attempt at harmless mirth;
Which dares not hope much critic praise,
Conceived and born within eight days;
Your smiles much credit must reflect,
On him who signs, with just respect,
The AUTHOR.

SCRUB'S TRIP TO THE JUBILEE. SPOKEN BY MR. WESTON.
FROM Stratford arrived -- piping hot -- gentle folks,
From the rarest fine shows and most wonderful jokes,
Your simple acquaintance, Scrub, comes to declare
'Twas fuller by far than our Litchfield great fair,
Such crowds of fine ladies, serenading and singing
Such firing of loud pateraroes and ringing,
To tell it in London must seem all a fable
And yet I will tell it as well as I Am able:
First something in linguo of schools called an ode;
All critics they told me allowed very good,
One said -- you may take it for truth I assure ye
'Twas made by the little great man of old Drury,
By my brother Martin -- for whose sake do you hear,
This night I Would a mind for a touch at Shakespeare This alludes to Mr. Weston's
intention of playing Richard.
.
But honestly speaking I take more delight in
A bit of good fun, than drums, trumpets and fighting.
The Procession, 'twas said, would have been a fine train;
But could not move forwards -- oh la, for the rain.
Such tragical, comical folks and so fine --
What pity it was that the sun did not shine,
Since ladies and baronets, aldermen, squires,
All went to this Jubilee full of desires,
In crowds as they go for to see a new play
And when it was done -- why they all came away.
Don't let me forget -- a main part of the show
Was long tailed fine comets by famed Angelo,
Some turtle I got which they called pashapee --
But honest roast beef's the best turtle for me.
I hate all ragouts, and, like a bold Briton,
Prefer good plumb pudding to ought I ever bit on.
I drank too -- and now I a poet may be --
From a charming fine cup of the mulberry tree.
To bed I must go -- for which like a ninny
I paid -- like my betters -- no less than a guinea.
For rolling -- not sleeping -- in linen so damp
As struck my great toe ever since with the cramp,
Thus fleeced -- in my pocket I felt a great smarting
Yet grieved not when I and the splinters were parting,
'Twas worth ten times more to hear sweet brother Martin.
He spoke till poor Scrub was just fit, with one eye
To laugh, while the other was ready to cry:
Which makes me now tell you without any brag
He Is second to none but the Warwickshire wag.
The Jubilee over, I come to this place
To tell you my story and sue for your grace.
You never refused it -- yet never before
With granting such kindness bound gratitude more.
I love but to own with a diligent spirit
Your favors have ever outrun my slight merit. The reader will easily
perceive that this Prologue is merely occasional

To the PUBLIC.
THE Author thinks it incumbent upon him to observe, that the following
Occasional Piece was imagined, and put into its present State within the Space
of a very few Days; and has some Reason to believe, that it would have been
presented at the Theater Royal in the Hay-Market, if the Thought had been
suggested in Time for Mr. FOOTE's Season. Some kind, and perhaps partial
Friends, having urged the Publication, it thus steps into Life with many
Imperfections on its Head; yet not, the Author flatters himself, without some
degree of Merit, to Apologize for submitting it to Public Perusal.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lord Spangle. Sir John Hearty. Sir Charles Planwell. Scrapeall. Captain
Blarney. Pasquin. Toby Dumplin. Sleekem. Longcork.
WOMEN.
Lady Shanker. Mrs. Dumplin. Emmeline. Jackonet.
SCENE, Stratford upon Avon. Time, the same as in Representation.

THE STRATFORD JUBILEE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir John Hearty and Scrapeall. Sir John. LET me see; half past five --
enough for this evening. -- Tomorrow by dinner time we shall beat up the
quarters of my old friend Jack Soakwell; rest with him two or three days, and
then for Yorkshire. -- What think you at present of a bottle of madeira and a
pipe or two of Oroonoko to entertain us till supper time?


Scrapeall. I would rather be excused from drinking any thing Sir John.


Sir John. From paying any thing you mean -- rot the money old boy, what was it
made for but circulation? why, you have more of it than you can count, and yet
take as little enjoyment of life as if you was not worth a single shilling.


Scrapeall. Economy -- economy is a very fine thing Sir John.


Sir John. Ay, ay, we have heard of that doctrine sufficiently of late -- but
for my own part, I would have every man live according to his station and
circumstances -- not disgrace and starve himself for the sake of hoarding
rascally pelf -- therefore now I have got you out of the smoke of London you
shall bleed a little. -- Here, house! -- Rings.


Scrapeall. I never loved bleeding in my life; neither from my veins nor
pockets.


Enter Longcork. Long. Coming, Sir! -- What would you please to have gentlemen?


Sir John. A bottle of madeira -- clean pipes, and a paper of mild.


Long. You shall have them in a moment, Sir! Exit.


Sir John. A smart well looking fellow that.


Scrap. Smart enough. I Will warrant him! -- how the coxcomb's hair is plaistered
with flour, which, I suppose, we must pay for! -- Ah! no wonder money is scarce
and provisions dear, when such a fellow as this wastes, on his empty noddle,
what would make a two-penny cake.


Sir John. At it again! -- the same dull theme over-again! -- Oons, so much of
it, is worse than a methodist sermon an hour long, or a scolding wife when a
man has got the headache. -- Take a glass of Lethe, to the forgetfulness of
care, old cent per cent, and live for this evening at least.


Scrap. Lethe! -- pray how much is that a bottle?


Sir John. A bottle! -- ha! ha! ha! -- step into the other world and you may
have hogshead's for nothing. -- But here comes my Lethe.


Enter Longcork. Sir John. An honest soldier's bottle, faith! -- Is it the
right sort friend?


Long. Good as ever was tipped. -- Neat as imported, Sir. -- Vintage sixty two,
five years in cask and two in bottles.


Sir John. It has the right smack. -- And how long have you lived here?


Long. Only two days, Sir. -- Mons. Fricassee, a celebrated French cook -- the
best hand at a turtle in Europe -- and myself, came down from London in a post
chaise and four last Saturday to assist at this here Jubilee.


Sir John. Jubilee! what is that?


Long. Good eating and drinking to the memory of Shakespeare, I believe.


Scrap. Shakespeare! what was he? the first woolcomber!


Long. Woolcomber! what do not you know Shakespeare, Sir?


Sir John. No! -- how the devil should we -- he never lived in our
neighborhood.


Long. Nor the sign of him in Covent Garden, where I have the honor to reside?


Scrap. No truly.


Long. What a couple of rum prigs! -- I shall laugh in their faces. -- Aside.
You must know, gentlemen, this Shakespeare was a writer of plays.


Scrap. I hate plays.


Sir John. Now I like them! -- There Is Whittington and his cat. -- Captain
Bateman. -- Punch in the suds, and two or three more make me laugh by the hour;
-- and so because this Shakespeare wrote such things, the corporation meet to
get drunk for joy. -- Jolly dogs, I warrant then!


Long. Corporation! -- what, Sir, do you think -- a dozen French cooks, and
fifty of the smartest waiters London can produce, would come to accommodate a
pitiful country corporation! -- No, no, gentlemen, all the world will be here!


Sir John. The Devil it will!


Long. True, upon my honor. -- I Will engage you might fire cannon from the
Royal Exchange to St. James's to morrow, without killing any thing but
hackney-coachmen or apple-women: -- London will be quite empty -- entirely
populated! --


Scrap. You lie -- you lie, escape grace; Change-Alley will not be empty; and
that is the best part of London! -- A very fine thing indeed, if East India
stock; South Sea; three per cents consols and lottery tickets, were left for
Jubilee, which, as I have heard, is a rank piece of popery, Sir John.


Sir John. Popery! adso if that is the case it is time for me to look about! --
I Will call a Bench upon it -- I Will -- but I am not of the peace for this county;
however, at our quarter sessions I can move for a petition against such things.


Long Lack-a-day, gentlemen, you need not be so angry! -- Do you think if there
was any religion in the matter, so many persons of fashion and quality would be
concerned with it?


Sir John. Well said, boy! I think there is no great danger!


Long. Quite innocent and polite, I assure you, Sir; if you want a description,
I can sing you a new song just made upon the occasion.


Sir John. With all my heart, honesty. -- Here wet the way first. Drinks.


SONG.
It Is Shakespeare invites -- to his Jubilee haste,
All you who profess either spirit or taste,
Young and old come away,
Be frolic be gay,
And let your old bard with due honor be graced.
Lo the call is obeyed -- see! see, they approach,
From nimble tim whisky, to the lumb'ring old coach.
Full bent one and all
On the Jubilee ball,
Which even Diogenes could not reproach.
Miss Tripsy expecting that Stratford will prove
A delicate region of pleasure and love;
Puts on her best face,
Adorned with each grace,
As ready to bill, and to coo as a dove.
To the market, old dowagers also repair,
With borrowed complexions, teeth, eyebrows, and hair;
Each wooes with her purse,
For better for worse,
The female that is wealthy must surely be fair.
Kept mistresses too, and galant modish wives,
Whom I join as devoted to similar lives;
Set out on the jaunt,
To ogle and flaunt,
Who, who can resist it when dear fashion drives?
Smart beaux, whom stern cynics call rational apes,
Haste hither to show their fine clothes and fine shapes,
They know Shakespeare's name,
And have heard of his fame,
Though his merit their shallow conception escapes.
Some authors, some critics, some actors advance,
Gay fiddlers of Rome, and trim barbers of France;
Lords, ladies, and squires
Confess strong desires,
To join the gay round of our Jubilee dance,
Would any one miss then, this great Jubilee,
Where so much you may hear and so much you may see,
Since in approbation
The wise corporation
Will give each a slip of the mulberry tree.

Scrapeall. A mighty hopeful description, I must confess.


Sir. John. Ay, ay, the song's well enough; but there is a blind fiddler that
plays at my house who sings three times as loud; he rattles away old Roger, the
hunting of the Fox, Bumper squire Jones, and Roast Beef, till he makes my great
hall ring again. -- Body of me it would do any body good to hear him.


Scrapeall. Ah, sir John, there is nothing better than old songs -- but old gold.


Sir John. Well friend you must order us a couple of beds with well aired
sheets and we'll think of somewhat for supper presently.


Longcork. Supper you may have gentlemen, from five shillings to five guineas,
but as to a bed in this house you could not have one for any sum.


Sir John. Not a bed! -- how so, fellow?


Long. Lord sir, they have been all bespoke these six-weeks; would you believe
it; lord Blazingstar has engaged the roost of one of our chambermaids four
story high, and lady Betty Soylainet is obliged to content herself with an
ostler's apartment over the stables.


Sir John. Very pretty accommodation truly! -- look ye, firrah, beds we must
and will have.


Scrape. Ay or we'll stop them out of the bill.


Long. Must and will have! -- So you may gentlemen if you can get them. -- Let
me see -- I would oblige you if I could -- there is an alderman of the town who
has one bed disengaged, and I believe you may have it three nights for five
guineas.


Scrape. Five guineas, coxcomb! -- I had rather pass three nights in purgatory;
what do you think we coin or find our money, Scapegrace? Jubilee, quotha! give
it the right name, the High Season at Bath, where the Extravagants eat silver


Sir John. Hold! they shall not rob us, old Truepenny -- we'll prime our noddles
and when they can hold up no longer even take a nap in our chairs; so there is
bite the biter. -- The devil's in it if Yorkshire and Change-alley cannot be a
match for Stratford upon Avon at any time.


Scrapeall. Why that is true, yet I wish we had gone the other road, and missed
this confounded Jubilee. -- Egad there is an excellent thought come into my
head, cousin; I Will go inquire if any body deals in Lottery Tickets, and if I
meet with a chap, it shall go hard if I do not tickle his soft side out of as
much as will pay our thievish expenses.


Sir. John. Well said old Two-and-go-three, in the mean time I will remove to
the garden for air, here Jack, Tom, Jonathan, what is your name? carry the
remains of that bottle, into an arbor, or summer house and I will follow you.


Long. This way, this way, Sir; -- what a couple of bears they are! Aside.


Sir John. Success, old Main-chance.


Scrap. Ah somebody had need mind the main chance; or else your Jubilee folks,
would soon turn the world topsy turvy. Exeunt.


Enter Lord Spangle and Toupee. L. Spang. So at length we have gained, this
occasional seat of mimic elegance. -- How long have we been coming the last
fifty miles?


Toupee. Exactly four hours, ten minutes and thirty-fire seconds by my stop
watch, my lord.


L. Spangle. Pretty tolerable driving -- though the minutes and seconds were
quite unnecessary. -- Don't you think I may lay the odds upon doing it under
three and a half?


Toupee. Most certainly, my lord, with relays of your nag tailed bays, the full
tailed blacks, and the switched roans.


L. Spangle. Mum then -- say no more -- now must I lay myself out for one of
Moore's flying Phaetons without horses, and then brother knowing ones have at
ye. -- Ring the bell Toupee; order my baggage to the lodgings and afterward
attend me here.


Exit Toupee. Enter Longcork. Long. Did you call, Sir! -- oh, my lord -- I beg
your lordship ten thousand pardons.


L. Spangle. Lord! prithee fellow have thou ever seen me before? or do thou
read nobility in my face?


Long. Ah my lord many a half crown have I touched of your money.


L. Spangle. Ay! my glass to recognize this old acquaintance. -- What Longcork
from the Piazzas?


Long. The very fame and entirely at your lordship's service.


L. Spangle. Thou have been serviceable in the affairs of love, and may be
so again. -- Any of the game expected here


Long. Great plenty my lord, of practiced ladies for country gentlemen; and I
make no doubt but there will be rare poaching for experienced sportsmen among
unflush'd game; we shipped off from Bow-street and the garden three wagon
loads last week: -- Forty-five, as we call Bet Tawdry, is to pass here for a
baronet's daughter -- Sall Bottlenose for a young clergyman's widow, Suky
Trapes for a country girl, and Peggy Nimwell, all your lordship's acquaintances
-- for an East India captain's lady.


L. Spangle. Excellent! -- the game hunted down by us gallants of fashion do
well enough for mistresses, or even wives, for fellows in this part of the
world, but have you fixed your eye on nothing fresh yet Longcork: no soft,
blooming, languishing fair, on whom a few soft words a few promises with a silk
gown or two could prevail; point out such a one, and ten gold-finches in one
cage shall chirp a most engaging piece of music to reward thee.


Long. I am bound to you, my lord, and shall have a sharp look out.


L. Spangle. But snug let it be; for the impertinent hungry news writers do so
search out and bastinado the modish failings of nobility; that a peer can not
debauch his neighbor's wife or daughter with any safety; and hypocrisy is
become almost as essential to us as to a Moorfields preacher.


Long. Insolent villains! their pens should be crammed down their throats: I
shall be as secret as a free-mason my lord -- not even a sign shall blab.


L. Spangle. Enough: nature designed thee for a successful minister of
intrigues and in due time I Will recommend thee to a snug place in the customs.
-- Men of merit should be rewarded.


Long. I thank your lordship; but I would not give up my present perquisites to
be any thing under a comptroller? besides I can only just scrawl my name.


L. Spangle. That Is hard! -- then thou art fit for nothing but a commissioner.
-- Hey day, either my glass deceives me, or that spirited fair-one, lady
Spanker, approaches; -- it is see faith.

Enter Lady Spanker. What no people of fashion yet! -- no real Jubilee! -- oh,
my lord Spangle, your presence has relieved me from the deplorable
apprehensions that I was the only person of condition arrived.


L. Spangle. Your ladyship's most obedient: Stratford has on Shakespeare's
account been always admitted the region of poetry; bur, enlightened by lady
Spanker's presence, it shines forth the hemisphere of beauty.


L. Spanker. Politely, flattering, I confess, my lord; bur perhaps at present I
am flushed with a little accidental beauty; for about half an hour since, as I
was driving my phaeton and four, at the rate of fourteen miles an hour; an
odious chimney sweeper's savage ass, set up his horrid bray, started my cream
colors, turned them out of the road, and tipped me head-foremost into a ditch.


L. Spang. Alarming chance! both the two legged and the four legged ass should
have been sacrificed to your hardship's perilous situation: I am determined to
bring in an act next sessions to prevent any such animals from appearing by
daylight.


L. Spank. Why indeed my lord it is a pity that creatures who have no adequate
idea of quality, should exist at all. -- I will request my uncle, sir Toby
Hubblebubble, to support your patriotic motion. -- Has your lordship any thing
at Newmarket for the next meeting.


L. Spang. Nothing, madam -- my roan by Regulus broke down in a trial sweat
last week and must forfeit two hundred -- my gray filly has put out a spavin
and my bay by Sampson has slipped a shoulder.


L. Spank. Quite unfortunate; I am matched against captain Clumsy a three mile
heat which I expect to win hollow; for you know he rides like a woolpack.


L. Spang. True madam -- ha! ha! ha!


L. Spank. I have a match depending also with lord Scapegrace for five hundred
a side on leaping five barred gates -- bets run pretty even.


L. Spang. I will back your ladyship in both -- six to four for any sum.


L. Spank. That is encouragement however -- and I have been in close training
these six weeks -- do not you think my lord the Sampsons have shown more bottom
than Foot of late? -- little Gimcrack he is the star of the turf, I would
freely give two thousand for him; then as a groom there is Singleton beats the
globe; I hope when he dies, for he must fall as well as Alexander, Marlborough,
and other great men; I hope there will be a Jubilee of commemoration appointed
for him at Newmarket. -- I am sure he deserves it much better than the old
musty scribbler Shakespeare; so fine a finger, so steady a hand, so firm a
seat; in short he rides so well that if the fellow had but genteel blood in his
veins I think no lady could refuse him for a husband.


L. Spang. Your ladyship's approbation does his merit singular honor and the
preference given against Shakespeare is most happily Judicious; no critic of
any delicacy, can bear the fellow's hum drum pieces now.


L. Spank. Quite intolerable. -- Though if some of them were turned into
singing affairs they might be endured well enough, the opera of Hamlet; the
opera of Othello; the opera of Richard; in short, the opera of ever thing, to
banish that antiquated barbarous word Tragedy. -- But my Lord, have you fixed
upon your character for the masquerade yet.


L. Spang. Not yet, madam; if your Ladyship, as in real life, will personate
Venus; I must consequently attempt the character of Adonis.


L. Spank. Infinitely polite! but my choice rather bends to the Queen of the
Amazons.


L. Spang. Then madam you will metamorphose me into Alexander, who was her
admirer.


L. Spank. Well, since I find there is no escape from your excessive gallantry
it shall be so -- that valuable creature Mr. Pasquin the habit-man, from
Tavistock-Street is to be here with at infinite variety; if it is agreeable to
your lordship we will have a view.


L. Spang. It is happiness to attend Lady Spanker any where.


L. Spank. Then we will step first to the stable; give some directions about my
cream colors and proceed immediately. Exeunt.


Enter Emmeline and Jackonet. Emmel. Well I vow, Jackonet, this flying from
place to place is pure. What would my old papa say now if he knew that I was
come to the Jubilee?


Jack. Say! why the same that all such old cuffs as he would say upon the same
occasion; that you was a wild mad-headed girl, that you was a flaunting
baggage, that you did not know the pains required to get money, nor the value
of it when got; that your head runs upon whirligigs and that you think of
nothing but plays, assemblies fine clothes and fine sweethearts.


Emmel. Ha! ha! ha! well I vow you take him off to a hair; if it was not for my
aunt Fiddle-de-dee, I should have known no circumstance of polite life I should
have been fit for nothing but mending stockings and making pies, if it was not
for her I should not have you to wait on me, Jackonet. -- He would have brought
me up just such an unfashionable creature as himself; but nature has given me
spirit, and my aunt has given me taste; so I am resolved not to be shut up in
the horrid smoke of Watling street any longer.


Jack. You are perfectly in the right of it, madam; get yourself tranlplanted
to Grosvenor, Berkley, or Cavendish Square as soon as possible; set up a
vis-a-vis bespeak an elegant sedan of four hundred guineas price; hire two of
the handsomest chairmen, and six of the genteelest footmen than can be found;
with every other article of a grand household, keep visiting days, routs, etc.
and shine forth an ornament of the gay world.


Emmel. Ravishing picture! -- What an unreasonable mortal is this Papa of mine
to think I would give up such a round of delights; for that hateful creature
Omnium, the change broker, and his country house at Islington. Did I ever sing
you a song I made upon being plagued to have him, Jackonet?


Jack. Not that I recollect, madam.


Emmel. Then you shall have it.

SONG.
How cruel, Papa, to insist upon that,
Which nature must always deny,
How can you resist a denial so flat?
Before you shall force me I Will die.
It Is base in the tongue, to proclaim a fair show:
When filled with abhorrence the heart cries out no.
Love only shall ever dispose of my hand,
Love only shall make me a wife;
No parent has justly a right to command.
To command away comfort, for life,
My Tongue then shall never proclaim a fair show
When filled with abhorrence, my heart cries out no.

Jack. A good resolution and well expressed, madam; I recollect a short ballad
much to the same, purpose; I Will endeavor to give it you as well as I can,


Emmel. I long to hear it of all things.


Jackonet. SONG,
The subject of marriage
So often meets miscarriage,
It Is ticklish for maidens to try;
Gallants in this matter
So often lie and flatter,
We scarce can tell how to comply.
Since seeking a blessing we often meet a curse,
When blushing, we answer, for better for worse.
Should parents presuming,
Like tyrants assuming,
Unkindly forbid a free choice:
The girl who has spirit
Will freedom inherit,
By listening to nature's kind voice.
If I am to be wretched I Will choose my own curse,
And the man of my heart take, for better for worse.

Emmel. Admirable! Jackonet, you shall be first lady of my bedchamber, and
shall have my wedding clothes. -- Sir Charles promised to meet me here this
evening, and, when the enchanting Jubilee is over, we shall fly for Scotland
immediately.


Jack. A charming convenient country that, for matrimonial affairs, madam, --
heigh ho! -- I wish I was taking a trip there with one I know, upon the same
occasion. -- The invitation which carried your father into Yorkshire at this
critical time was very fortunate.


Emmel. The luckiest thing in the world, the very name of a Jubilee would have
frightened him out of his senses! -- But, Jackonet -- what would you have me
get for the masquerade?


Jack. Lard, madam! there is such a variety, that it is almost impossible to
advise. When I lived with lady Bab. Rattle, she employed six hours a day for
three months, and could scarce fix upon any thing at last; -- one day she would
be a Turk; the next a Christian; the third a Chinese; the fourth a Dutch woman;
next a Heathen, Goddess; then a Savoyard; soon after a gipsy, a witch, and
twenty others: -- at last she thought of transforming herself into a moving
bee-hive, intimating that beauty is pregnant with the stings of love -- but,
alas! upon entering the ballroom, she saw two other bee-hives dancing a
cotilion with the sun, the moon, a bear, an ostrich, Hamlet's ghost, and an
animated butter-cask. -- This had such an effect upon her, that she retired
immediately, and almost fretted herself into a consumption.


Emmel. Poor lady! such terrible shocks must hurt any constitution; I have
cause enough myself; but a good heart and pleasing hopes bear me up. -- I would
have a dress odd and whimsical -- I Will make a bargain with you, Jackonet; you
shall choose for me and I Will choose for you.


Jack. As you please, madam! -- Bless me, yonder is one of Sir Charles's men
come post haste into the yard -- his master must be near at hand!


Emmel. Oh dear! I am so tumbled and tossed with the journey -- my head is in
such terrible disorder, -- I cannot see Sir Charles in this pickle, positively.


Jack. If you please, madam, I Will call the chambermaid to show a private room
and put you to rights: in a quarter of an hour you shall look so killingly,
that the baronet's impatience for Scotland shall make him think the Jubilee
seven years long.


Emmel. Come then, dear Jackonet -- do make me look very killingly, and every
silk sack and petticoat I have at present, shall be yours when we return from
Scotland. Exeunt.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE THE FIRST.
Sir JOHN HEART and SCRAPEALL. Sir JOHN. WHAT! no lottery gudgeons in this town?


SCRAPEALL. No no, Sir John; I could pick up nothing but a premium of ten
shillings for number forty-five -- they are all jubilee gudgeons here. -- When
I asked a bookselling fellow, who dabbles a little that way, whether he wanted
any tickets -- he answered -- Shakespeare is to be crowned tomorrow; and his
wife, before I could open my mouth again, said, there was to be a masquerade
tomorrow, which everybody would be at. -- For my part, I think they are all
Shakespeare-mad, and I wish we were fairly out of the town.


Sir JOHN. Body of me, why so? Cannot people be merry and wise? -- For my own
part, I should like to stay and see the fun -- ay and we will, old True-penny.
-- When it is over, I Will take you to such gardens, groves, and purling streams
in Yorkshire, as shall make you young again.


SCRAPEALL. With your leave, Sir John, I had rather go back to London. -- Pray
where can you find a garden of equal value to that of Covent Garden? -- Where
can you match the golden grove of Lombard street? -- Where meet more delightful
retreats than the arbours of the Alley? -- Where more comfortable walks than
those of the Exchange, or a stream equal to the Thames between Bridge and
Deptford? Besides, I am very uneasy about my girl, she is at the ticklish age of
nineteen, has twenty thousand pounds at her own disposal, when of age, besides
the inheritance of all my estate.


Sir JOHN. What, then, friend, touch and take, ten to one, do all you can,
she will please herself at last, and throw herself away upon some poverty-struck
lord, who, being out at the elbows, will marry her money to mend bad
circumstances; then keep a mistress to please his inclinations.


SCRAPEALL. I am no friend to popery, yet I wish we had nunneries amongst us to
lock up headstrong young hussies. -- Ah, why had not I a son? by this time he
might have been thoroughly educated in those schools of useful knowledge,
Lloyd's and Jonathan's -- I might have lived to see him double my fortune.


Sir JOHN. Why, then, old boy, since you cannot be sure who will get it, or how
it may go, take my advice and regale yourself with a little of it before you
are shipped off for the other world. -- Now I am here, I Am resolved to see what
sort of an affair this jubilee is -- though I suppose it will not be half so good
as a country feast or a fox chase.


SCRAPEALL. No, nor half so fine as my Lord Mayor's show, which may be seen for
nothing into the bargain.


Sir JOHN. Nothing! prithee don't grumble so in the gizzard -- it is my humor
to see what all this bustle's about; and if you will promise to throw off your
melancholy face, body of me, I Will bring you off scot free -- I Will pay for both;
I have three hundred pounds a quarter, and don't wish to save a shilling of it.


SCRAPEALL. As you please, Sir John. -- What a prodigal old fool it is. Aside.


Sir JOHN. Besides, man, I never saw a coronation in my life; and, for aught I
know, the crowning of king Shakespeare may be as pretty a piece of diversion as
the crowning of any other king -- so brush up your phiz, and we'll sally forth
to see what is stirring.


SCRAPEALL. I follow, Sir John -- I wish I knew how East India stock was done
today; and what news there is from the Nabobs. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A Masquerade Shop.
PASQUIN and SLEEKEM. PASQUIN. Well, if every freedom presented in a
mulberry-box was to produce a masquerade, I could wish all the authors, actors,
and critics in England were made burgesses of Stratford -- I shall love the
name of Shakespeare as long as I live. What a delightful bustle does this
jubilee make! so many country 'squires and their ladies, who know nothing of
the matter, apply for dresses, that we can fleece them genteelly -- but what of
that? they, in return, will rack their tenants; and the tenants consequently
raise provisions; so that, upon the whole, nobody is affected but the low
mechanical vulgar, whom nature has formed as mere necessary utensils for the
sport and profit of us in polite spheres of life.


SLEEKEM. Why, Sir, this promises fair to beat the royal masquerade.


PASQUIN. Most certainly -- we had too many of the knowing ones there -- here
we shall have well-fledged tame pigeons to pluck in plenty. -- Let me hear how
articles stand in the memorandum-book for to day.


SLEEKEM. Touchstone's dress for Alderman Numskull.


PASQUIN. Never were the cap and bells more happily adapted; though in choosing
the dress, his worship observed, that as the world thought him a wise man, he
was for once resolved to look and play the fool -- which in reality he does
every day of his life.


SLEEKEM. For Mr. Alderman --


PASQUIN. Pshaw, pshaw, skip all the corporation -- I furnish them and their
wives for nothing, which is a little hard; but as they have countenanced this
polite sheep shearing, I must make other people pay for them, and the
unconscionable long credit expected by most of my quality customers.


SLEEKEM. Lady Giggle the habit of a vestal.


PASQUIN. A vestal! ha! ha! ha! ha! -- most admirable, as Numskull's outside
will describe exactly what he is -- her ladyship's garment will show what she
absolutely is not. -- Go on.


SLEEKEM. The vest, drawers and axe of an execution for Mr. Whim -- the mask to
be truly dismal.


PASQUIN. How! what! an executioner and an axe! -- who the devil ever heard of
such a character in a masquerade? -- You might as well introduce a rope at St.
Giles's. -- Scratch it out immediately -- why, it would not only frighten all
the ladies, but half the noblemen present out of their senses. -- Out with it,
I Will lend no memento mori, unless it be Hamlet's ghost.


SLEEKEM. Nancy Pickup, from the Garden -- a nun's dress.


PASQUIN. Very good, the reverse of reality again -- a wolf in lamb's
clothing. -- This article goes on tick, but Nancy's a girl of honor, and will
pay well if the bait takes.


SLEEKEM. Mr. Eitherside, a Nabob's dress.


PASQUIN. What, Dick Eitherside, the Swiss news-paper scribbler -- the composer
of ghosts, bloody murders, and barbarous ballads, the fellow that dives for a
dinner four days a week, and fasts the other three -- that would kill or marry
anybody with his pen for sixpence -- he a Nabob!


SLEEKEM. Sir, he says he has written six letters, dated Avon, to the Public
Advertiser; six copies of verses, four epigrams, and twenty puff paragraphs to
raise public curiosity; so he claims it gratis as a right, and says, if you
don't comply, he will anatomize you; but if you do, he promises to recommend and
promote masquerades as much as possible.


PASQUIN. Well, let the poor rascal have his humor this once. -- What Is next?


SLEEKEM. Sir John Asiaticus, the apparatus of a blind fiddler.


PASQUIN. Hey-day! -- Hey-day! why this is masquerading with a witness. Nabob
turned beggar, and a beggar turned Nabob. -- Go on.


SLEEKEM. Mrs. Lapell, a sultana.


PASQUIN. Oh the advertising taylor's wife -- let her be charged double price,
because the scoundrel her husband works so low as fifteen per cent. profit; the
ne -- oh, I hear some customers -- mind, Sleekem, your best bow, a smooth
tongue and a right smirking Tavistock-street countenance.


Enter Mrs. DUMPLIN and TOBY. Mrs. DUMPLIN. Are you the person who furnishes
masquerade affairs?


PASQUIN. Yes, Madam; and though I say it, can produce the richest variety in
England: I have habits from one guinea to ten for the night, with Venetian and
caricatura masks in abundance. My shop, in the jocular style, Madam, may be
called a mill to grind old people young. -- Please to look over my book of
figures, Madam -- you will find them a most noble collection from Cleopatra to
Mother Shipton; from Pekin in China, to John a Groat's house in Scotland. You
have every thing remarkable in that volume -- look it over, Madam, and, in the
mean time, I Will consult the young gentleman's taste, that we may accomodate him
agreeably.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Very well, friend -- the boy may please himself, -- he has a
good taste -- and is as sharp as a needle?


TOBY. Ay, ay, moother, sharp enough for matter o'that -- Toby Dumplin knows
which side his bread's buttered on, tho'f he has never getten to London yet.


PASQUIN. That Is a pity indeed, young gentleman, though from your politeness
and fashionable appearance I should not have suspected so much.


TOBY. Ise very mickle obliged to your good-natures. To be seere all voaks in
our town say as how I be a pratty lad, and almost as woise as parson, potecary,
or exciseman.


PASQUIN. No doubt of it, Sir; but as time will rather press, let us to
business: What would you choose to appear in?


TOBY. Nay, I know not.


PASQUIN. Suppose then as a Turk?


TOBY. Then I mun have a turbut on my head and whiskers on my face.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. What did you say, a Turk? -- No, no, you shall not make an infidel
of my child neither -- any thing else he pleases.


TOBY. Do, moother, let me have wiskers; I shall look so pure and so comical.
-- He! he! he!


Mrs. DUMPLIN. It must not be. -- Any thing else, I say.


PASQUIN. What think you of a cardinal's dress then, to make him a very good
Christian?


Mrs. DUMPLIN. By no means; I hate the Pope as much as I do Mahomet. Any thing
else the boy likes.


PASQUIN. As you seem to like the comic strain, suppose you personate a
Dutchman, with a short pipe in your mouth?


TOBY. Whoy, well enough; but not so well as wiskers though.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. A Dutchman! Oh, frightful! spoil the boy's fine shape with
filthy great breeches! make him all bottom and no top! -- No, no; any thing
else.


TOBY. Why, moother, I thinks as how this any thing else, will come to nothing
at last.


PASQUIN. Well said, young gentleman; I think so too.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Well, to cut the matter short, I Will choose for him. Let me see,
as my dear Mr. Dumplin is not above two months dead, I would pay some respect
to his memory in my appearance. -- Can you make me represent Niobe, Sir?


PASQUIN. Exactly, Madam; I have the finest weeping mask in the world.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Tolerable features, I hope.


PASQUIN. Exquisitely delicate; a most attractive picture of beauty in distress.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Enough: though my heart is buried with my husband, one would not
appear deformed, you know.


TOBY. Moother! moother! here is a feace now for all the world like auld
Cicely's, our black-pooding wife: -- and here is one as like the vicar as two
pease; what a rare handle it has! For my part, I think they have getten half our
town here.

Enter Captain BLARNEY. Madam, your most obedient -- Sir, I Am yours also.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Upon my word, a handsome portly figure! Aside.


Captain BLARNEY. You must know, I come by long sea, over land.


PASQUIN. I hope you have had a pleasant journey.


Exeunt Toby and Sleekem. Captain BLARNEY. Well enough for that, only I was
like to be shipwrecked six miles off.


PASQUIN. Six miles off! Why, we have not the sea within many miles of this
place, Sir.


Captain BLARNEY. Sea! by my soul it was the turnpike-road. -- I Will tell you
about it, honeys. -- As my horse was trotting along, in a fine easy walk, a
spalpeen thief catches hold of the bridle, and says, Your money, or your life!
-- Ara, nabacklesh, says I, why would you depose upon a stranger? I am going to
the jubilee, and this is not so civil now. Oh, devil burn you, says he,
Terence, (it is my name sure enough) if you go to the jubilee, you will be robbed
there, so you may as well be robbed here; and if you don't, I Will shoot you
through the head.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Oh dear, what a terrible fellow! You was in great danger, Sir.


Captain BLARNEY. Ara, nothing at all when a body's used to it! -- And so, as I
was after telling you, cush la ma cree, when I would not give my splenters to
the Raparee, he fired his pistol strait at me of one side: though as luck would
have it, it did not go off neither; so I ups with little sweet lips, shillela,
that never missed fire in its life, and giving him a stouter on the noggin, I
laid him as flat as a flounder, agra.


PASQUIN. Bravely done, upon my word, Sir.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Upon my word, Sir, it is very happy he did not get up again and
murder you.


Captain BLARNEY. Oh, by my soul, he is safe enough for that; he is as dead as
Henry the Eighth. Why, he told me himself that he was dead; and so I said, if
he did not like it, he might carry himself to a surgeon, and get his head
heel-tapp'd.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Very witty and clever, I vow.


Captain BLARNEY. I am glad you like it -- Glogha too sneeshen -- Musha, upon
my soul, Madam, you're a very engageing person, and Captain Terence Blarney
(meaning myself) would be very glad of a better acquaintance with you.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Your are very polite, Sir; but the loss of a good husband so
lately, makes me indifferent to all the world.


Captain BLARNEY. Upon my soul now, if you have had one good husband, it is a
very good reason you should get another. My poor Sheela was buried at Monaghan
last Friday se'nnight was five weeks, so I came to this Jubilee to look out for
another; and, if your ladyship's not engaged, what is the reason but we may join
giblets without any balderdash pribble-prabble?


PASQUIN. Well said, Captain; a right widow's man.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Lard, Sir, you overpower me; -- so sudden, -- so short an
acquaintance.


Captain BLARNEY. Ara, what magnifies that; must not every acquaintance be
short before it is long? -- I Am a gentleman, every inch of me; I have a pretty
little estate, after the man that owns it is dead: and you see I Am as well
timbered about the legs and face, as one can meet in a long summer's day.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Your person is unexceptionable, Sir; and your manner very
agreeable; but I must not think of marriage; I must not, indeed, Sir.


Captain BLARNEY. By my soul, Gra ma cree, you may go further and fare worse.


Enter TOBY, dressed and masqued as a monkey, skipping about. Mrs. DUMPLIN. Oh,
dear, Sir, defend me from that ugly creature! Runs into Blaney's arms.


Captain BLARNEY. By my soul, and that I will, as long as there is a rag of
shilleta together.


TOBY squeaking. Do you know me?


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Bless us! the thing speaks!


TOBY. Do you know me, Captain?


Captain BLARNEY. Captain, ara; by what the devil relationship are we
acquainted?


TOBY. I knows you, but you don't know me.


Captain BLARNEY. Keep off your fore foots; or, devil burn me, but I Will crack
your noggin for you.


PASQUIN. Ha! ha! ha! -- Admirably performed, young gentleman! There Is a dress!
there is a mask! as natural as any East India jacko that ever came over.


TOBY. Nay, now you have spoiled the masquerading frolic; that young man told
me what to say. -- Is'n't it pure and comical, moother?


Mrs. DUMPLIN. What, my graceless turned into a monkey! Would you make me
mother of a baboon! -- I Will teach you, sirrah!


Captain BLARNEY. Och, never heed it, it is only a trick of youth; he will forget
it when he grows old.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. A trick of youth! Ill trick him: take this, sirrah! and this!
and this! Beats him.


TOBY. Fine masquerading this, Ise sure. Runs out.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. Oh dear, this mad-headed boy will run out of doors, and have all
the dogs in the street after his monkey's tail. Going off, returns. Oh, bless
me, I Am so flustered, that I forgot to tell you, Sir, I lodge at the White
Heart, where I shall be glad to see you at breakfast tomorrow morning.


Captain BLARNEY. Och, and that I will, my jewel; and put a clumsey piece of
toast under my girdle. But would not you let me touch your fair lips for good
fellowship? Och, 'pon my soul they are sweet as the honey of by-bla.


Mrs. DUMPLIN. You flatter me. -- I shall expect you, Sir. Exit.


Captain BLARNEY. Never fear, little Terence; don't you think, Mr. Mascarade,
the lady's in love with my parson?


PASQUIN. It looks very like it; but considering your country and address, it
is not at all surprising, Sir.


Captain BLARNEY. Why, as you say it is very natural for us Hibernians. A word
in your ear: if she has the mopus's, I Will have her as snug as a bug in a rug.
You could not take part of a bottle, could you?


PASQUIN. Business will not permit.


Captain BLARNEY. Musha, you should be as welcome as flowers in May; you must
get me some dress, either a cardinal, or a miller, or a sweep-chimney, or any
thing you like best yourself.


PASQUIN. Very well, Sir, I shall endeavor to please you.


Captain BLARNEY. Sir, your most obedient. Going backwards, jostles Lord
Spangle entering. I beg your pardon, young man; but if my ears had not seen you
before you was in sight, 'pon my soul I should have walked on top of you. Exit.


Lord SPANGLE. What an overgrown Irish bear! Sure the creature has not been to
hire a disguise, Mr. Pasquin! Nature has made his whole figure a mask of
humanity.


PASQUIN. Your Lordship's wit, like the sun, will break out. He has ordered me
to choose for him.


Lord SPANGLE. Then pray provide a bull's hide, horns and all, that the monster
may have characteristic clothing -- Ha! ha! ha!


PASQUIN. Brilliant to the last degree; quite the diamond cut -- Ha! ha! ha!


Enter Lady SPANKER. Lady SPANKER. My Lord, I beg ten thousand pardons, but I
have been quite flustered since you left me; for that eternal talker, lady Mary
Tattle, fast held me so long by the ears, that I lost all patience; then,
tripping one foot as I came up stairs, an officious Irishman laid hold of this
arm, and grasped it in such a manner with his monstrous paw, that I don't know
whether it will recover strength time enough to ride my October match at
Newmarket.


Lord SPANGLE. Provoking as well as painful.


Lady SPANKER. Mr. Pasquin, your servant; is this affair like to be tolerably
brilliant?


PASQUIN. Entirely to your Ladyship's taste, I believe.


Lady SPANKER. Well, positively we of the turf must establish a Newmarket
Jubilee: I Will mention it to the Duchess of Foxchase, at our next meeting.


PASQUIN. A design worthy such spirited ladies.


Lord SPANGLE. And I Will mention it in the Jockey-Club.


Lady SPANKER. Then, my Lord, I Will lay six to four, the thing takes; we shall
carry it quite hollow, and double distance Disappointment.


Enter a footman, delivers two letters. Lady SPANKER. Black! black! what
melancholy tales do these bring? -- Your Lordship's excuse -- Um -- um -- your
sister, lady Charlotte, died this afternoon. -- Poor Charlotte! she was a
good-natured girl, but wanted spirit: she fell in love with a young fellow of
inferior station, and being crossed, pined herself into a consumption, which
carried her off. Well, that is better than disgracing the family. Reads again
Your ladyship's bay hunter, Buck, was seized with the staggers, and died in
five minutes. -- Unfortunate chance! insupportable loss! -- so fine a creature!
-- besides, there will be two hundred and fifty forfeit on my play or pay
Bargate Match; I can never endure it. -- Miserable woman!


Lord SPANGLE. Madam, I allow the stroke to be very affecting; but, as some
alleviation, permit me to present you with my roan colt, Stag; as the phrase
is, he can snuff the moon, and will take the knowing-ones in deeply,


Lady SPANKER. Your Lordship is the very essence of consolation: I Will have Stag
to my leaping-bar, and throw him into training next week. -- Now, if you please
to divert my mind from poor Buck, we'll go into the inner warehouse-room, and
fix upon our masquerade habiliments. -- Come, Mr. Pasquin.


PASQUIN. I attend your Ladyship. Exeunt.


Enter Sir JOHN, and SCRAPEALL. Sir JOHN. So, after hard limping of your side,
cuz, we have reached the place at last; and now we'll see what they have got.


SCRAPEALL. Ay, ay, foolery enough, I warrant.


Sir JOHN Hey-day! Taking up a cap pray what is this young man?


SLEEKEM. A cuckold's cap, at your service.


Sir JOHN. My service! Will you wear it, square-toes? Nay, you need not start
so: "Caesar and Pompey," as the old song says -- What are all these?


SLEEKEM. Masks to cover the faces, and mark characters.


SCRAPEALL. Characters! I believe you deal in very suspicious characters. Why
these baubles can only be fit for such as are, or should be ashamed to show
their faces.


Sir JOHN. Body of me, here is one grins like a monkey; and there is so many, I
don't know how to choose.


SLEEKEM. If you please to walk that way, gentlemen, my master will help you to
a choice immediately.


Sir JOHN. Well said, lad. Come, old Multiplication.


SCRAPEALL. Ah, stocks must fall at this rate. Exeunt.


SLEEKEM. A rare trade this of ours; it takes in all from sixty to sixteen.


Sir CHARLES, EMMELINE, and JACKONET. Sir CHARLES. My dear Emmeline, the
cordial punctuality of this meeting has confirmed me yours for ever.


EMMELINE. I assure you, Sir Charles, Jackonet has been an active and steadfast
friend in your favor.


Sir CHARLES. I hope I have not been ungrateful; and if she has an inclination
to follow your example, Madam, I Will endeavor to procure her a good husband.


JACKONET. I thank you, Sir; but, according to the old proverb, I must please
my eyes, though I plague my heart.


Sir CHARLES. Then to our business. -- Here, show your book of dresses, young
man. Retire.


Enter Sir JOHN, and SCRAPEALL. SCRAPEALL. Positively, Sir John, I Will stay no
longer. What! six guineas for two dresses one night? Why it is absolute robbery.


EMMELINE. Now, I think, Sir Charles, this infinitely pretty.


SCRAPEALL. Bless me, what is this! my Emmy?


EMMILINE. Oh la, papa! what, what shall I do?


SCRAPEALL. Pretty! ay, it is pretty, hussy, to meet you here without my
consent, without my knowledge, without my -- Ad, I have lost all patience. And
who is this fellow? I Will make an example of him for running away with an
heiress.


JACKONET. Why don't you think she able and willing enough to run away with
herself, Sir?


SCRAPEALL. Is she so, Mrs. Prate-a-pace! Ay, you're a hopeful maid of her
aunt's providing: I know you well, sauce-box, and I Will turn over a new leaf.
But who are you, scape-grace?


Sir CHARLES. I am a gentleman, Sir, and not used to abusive language. To speak
of myself may not be so proper, but my father, Sir Robert Planwell, was
generally known and esteemed in the North of England.


Sir JOHN. What, are you Bob Planwell's son of Lincolnshire? As honest a
fellow, cousin Scrapeall, as ever tossed off a tankard!


SCRAPEALL. But did he know any thing of the Alley?


Sir CHARLES If he did not, I do, Sir; I have employed all my spare cash these
five years in the stocks. Why, Sir, I have wrote two letters, dated India, to
come over land, by Holland, one of which will raise that stock twenty per cent.
and the other fall it thirty. Now, Sir, if you will countenance my pretensions
to your daughter, I Will kill Heyder Ally, and make him conquer Madrass, as often
as you please to sell out or buy in.


SCRAPEALL. Nay, if that is the case, you may be a hopeful young fellow: but I
hate a title. Howevever, if you can make what you say appear --


Sir CHARLES. If not, Sir, I request no favor.


Sir JOHN. Why, that is honest; and since you have all met together, I Will take
care to bring you to a right understanding. I wear a title myself, and I Am no
rogue for all that. We'll see what is to be seen here, and then all for
Yorkshire, where we'll be as merry as grigs. But, do you hear, no more objections
to titles, for Titled or plain, still judge upon this plan,
That the heart only manifests the man.



FINIS.

