A SUPPLEMENT TO CHATTERTON'S MISCELLANIES. [PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.]

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE MISCELLANIES OF THOMAS CHATTERTON.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. BECKET, IN PALL MALL; BOOKSELLER TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE PRINCE OF WALES, AND THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE PRINCES. MDCCLXXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Editor begs leave to assure the Public, that the following Poems are
unquestionable Originals; the greater part of them having been immediately
transcribed from Chatterton's own Manuscript.

As the Character of their Author is now generally understood, it is thought
unnecessary to make any apology for his sentiments, or to say any thing of the
composition.

CONTENTS.
To a Friend -- March 6th, 1768 Page 1 To the Beauteous Miss H -- L -- D. 1768
3 Ode to Miss H -- L -- D. 1768 5 Acrostic on Miss H -- L -- D. 1768 8 Acrostic
on Miss Sally Clarke. 1768 9 To Miss H -- L -- D. 1768 10 To Miss H -- L -- D.
1768 12 To Miss H -- L -- D. 1768 14 To Miss H -- L -- D, with a Present. 1768
16 To Miss H -- L -- D. 1768 17 To Miss Clarke. 1768 18 Epistle to the Rev. Mr.
Catcott, Dec. 16th, 1769 19 Observations on the foregoing Epistle Dec. 20th,
1769 33 Sentiment. 1769 34 The Defense. Dec. 25th, 1769 35 Song to Mr. Catcott.
1769 39 Tournament. 1769 42 Our Ladies Chirch. 1769 50 Heccar and Gaira.
January 3d, 1770 53 Will. April 14th, 1770 60 The Methodist. May, 1770 72 Colin
Instructed. 1770 74 Burlesque Cantata. 1770 75 Song. Fanny of the Hill. 1770 77
Burletta: The Woman of Spirit. 1770 79
SUPPLEMENT TO CHATTERTON'S MISCELLANIES.
TO A FRIEND.
MARCH 6TH, 1768. DEAR FRIEND,
I HAVE received both your favors -- The Muse alone must tell my joy.

OVER WHELMED with pleasure at the joyful news,
I strung the chorded shell, and woke the Muse.
Begin, O Servant of the Sacred Nine!
And echo joy through every nervous line:
Bring down the etherial Choir to aid the Song;
Let boundless raptures smoothly glide along.
My Baker's well! -- Oh words of sweet delight!
Now! now! my Muse, soar up the Olympic height.
What wondrous numbers can the Goddess find,
To paint the extatic raptures of my mind?
I leave it to a Goddess more divine,
The beauteous H -- l -- d shall employ my line.
TO THE BEAUTEOUS MISS H -- L -- D.
FAR distant from Brittannia's lofty Isle,
What shall I find to make the Genius smile?
The bubbling fountains lose the power to please,
The rocky cataracts, the shady trees,
The juicy fruitage of enchanting hue,
Whose luscious virtues England never knew;
The variegated Daughters of the Land,
Whose numbers Flora strows with bounteous hand;
The verdant vesture of the smiling fields,
All the rich pleasures Nature's storehouse yields,
Have all their powers to wake the chorded string:
But still they are subjects that the Muse can sing.
H -- l -- d more beauteous than the God of Day,
Her name can quicken and awake the Lay;
Rouse the soft Muse, from indolence and ease;
To live, to love, and rouse her powers to please.
In vain would Phoebus, did not H -- l -- d rise:
It Is her bright eyes that gilds the Eastern skies;
It Is she alone deprives us of the light;
And when she slumbers, then indeed it is night.
To tell the separate beauties of her 'face
Would stretch Eternity's remotest space,
And want a more than man, to pen the line;
I rest; let this suffice, dear H -- l -- d's all divine.
ODE TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768.
AMIDST the wild and dreary dells,
The distant echo-giving bells,
The bending mountains head;
Whilst Evening, moving through the sky,
Over the object and the eye,
Her pitchy robes does spread.
There gently moving through the vale,
Bending before the blustering gale,
Fell apparitions glide;
Whilst roaring rivers echo round,
The drear reverberating sound
Runs through the mountain side:
Then steal I softly to the grove,
And singing of the Nymph I love,
Sigh out my sad complaint;
To paint the tortures of my mind,
Where can the Muses numbers find?
Ah! numbers are too faint!
Ah! H -- l -- d, Empress of my heart,
When will thy breast admit the dart,
And own a mutual flame?
When, wandering in the myrtle groves,
Shall mutual pleasures seal our loves;
Pleasures without a name?
Thou greatest beauty of the sex,
When will the little God perplex
The mansions of thy breast?
When will thou own a flame as pure,
As that seraphic souls endure,
And make thy Baker blessed?
O! haste to give my passion ease,
And bid the perturbation cease,
That harrows up my soul!
The joy such happiness to find,
Would make the functions of my mind
In peace and love to roll.
ACROSTIC ON MISS. 1768.
ENCHANTING is the mighty power of Love;
Life stripped of amorous joys would irksome prove;
Even Heaven's great Thund'rer woreth' easy chain,
And over all the world, Love keeps his reign;
No human heart can bear the piercing blade,
Or I than others, am more tender made.
Right through my heart a burning arrow drove,
Hoyland's bright eyes, were made the bows of Love.
Oh! torture, inexpressibly severe!
You are the pleasing Author of my care;
Look down, fair Angel, on a Swain distressed,
A gracious smile from you would make me blessed.
Nothing but that blessed favor stills my grief,
Death, that denied, will quickly give relief.
ACROSTIC ON MISS. 1768.
SERAPHIC Virgins of the tuneful Choir,
Assist me to prepare the sounding lyre!
Like her I sing, soft, sensible, and fair,
Let the smooth numbers warble in the air;
Ye Prudes, Coquets, and all the misled throng,
Can Beauty, Virtue, Sense, demand the Song;
Look then on Clarke, and see them all unite;
A beauteous pattern, to the always-right.
Rest here, my Muse, not soar above thy sphere,
Kings might pay adoration to the fair,
Enchanting, full of joy, peerless in face and air.
TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768.
ONCE more the Muse to beauteous H -- l -- d sings;
Her grateful tribute of harsh numbers brings
To H -- l -- d! Nature's richest, sweetest store,
She made an H -- l -- d, and can make no more.
Nor all the beauties of the world's vast round
United, will as sweet as her be found.
Description sickens to rehearfe her praise.
Her worth alone will deify my days.
Enchanting creature! Charms so great as thine
May all the beauties of the day outshine.
Thy eyes to every gazer send a dart,
Thy taking graces captivate the heart.
O for a Muse that shall ascend the skies,
And like the subject of the Epode rise;
To sing the sparkling eye, the portly grace,
The thousand beauties that adorn the face
Of my seraphic Maid; whose beauteous charms
Might court the world to rush at once to arms.
Whilst the fair Goddess, native of the skies,
Shall sit above, and be the Victor's prize.
O now, whilst yet I sound the tuneful lyre,
I feel the thrilling joy her hands inspire;
When the soft tender touch awakes my blood,
And rolls my passions with the purple flood.
My pulse beat high: my throbbing breast's on fire
In sad variety of wild desire.
O H -- l -- d! Heavenly Goddess! Angel, Saint,
Words are too weak thy mighty worth to paint;
Thou best, compleatest work that Nature made,
Thou art my substance, and I am thy shade.
Possessed of thee, I joyfully would go
Through the loud tempest, and the depth of woe.
From thee alone my being I derive,
One beauteous smile from thee, makes all my hopes alive.
TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768.
SINCE short the busy scene of life will prove,
Let us my H -- l -- d learn to live and love;
To love, with passions pure as morning light,
Whose saffron beams unsullied by the night
With rosy mantles do the Heavens streak,
Faint imitators of my H -- l -- d's cheek.
The joys of Nature in her ruined state
Have little pleasure, though the pains are great.
Virtue and Love, when sacred bands unite,
It Is then that Nature leads to true delight.
Often as I wander through the myrtle grove,
Bearing the beauteous burden of my love,
A secret terror, lest I should offend
The charming Maid on whom my joys depend,
Informs my soul, that virtuous minds alone
Can give a pleasure, to the vile unknown.
But when the body charming, and the mind,
To every virtuous christian act inclined,
Meet in one person, Maid and Angel join;
Who must it be, but H -- l -- d the divine?
What worth intrinsic will that man possess,
Whom the dear charmer condescends to bless?
Swift will the minutes roll, the flying hours,
And blessings overtake the pair by showers.
Each moment will improve upon the past,
And every day be better than the last.
Love, means an unadulterated flame,
Though lust too often usurps the sacred name;
Such passion as in H -- l -- d's breast can move,
It Is that alone deserves the name of Love.
Oh was my merit great enough to find
A favored station in my H -- l -- d's mind;
Then would my happiness be quite complete,
And all revolving joys as in a center meet.
TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768.
TELL me, God of soft desires,
Little Cupid, wanton Boy,
How thou kindlest up thy fires!
Giving pleasing pain and joy.
H -- l -- d's beauty is thy bow,
Striking glances are thy darts;
Making conquests never slow,
Ever gaining conquered hearts.
Heaven is seated in her smile,
Juno's in her portly air;
Not Britania's favorite Isle
Can produce a Nymph so fair.
In a desert vast and drear,
Where disorder springs around,
If the lovely Fair is there,
It Is a pleasure-giving ground.
Oh! my H -- l -- d! blessed with thee,
I Would the raging storm defy,
In thy smiles, I live, am free;
When thou frownest, I must die.
TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768. WITH A PRESENT.
ACCEPT, fair Nymph, this token of my love,
Nor look disdainful on the prostrate Swain;
By every sacred oath; I Will constant prove,
And act as worthy for to wear your chain.
Not with more constant ardour shall the sun
Chase the faint shadows of the night away;
Nor shall he on his course more constant run,
And cheer the universe with coming day,
Than I in pleasing chains of conquest bound,
Adore the charming Author of my smart; --
For ever will I thy sweet charms resound,
And paint the fair Possessor of my heart.
TO MISS H -- L -- D. 1768.
COUNT all the flowers that deck the meadow's side,
When Flora flourishes in newborn pride;
Count all the sparkling orbits in the sky;
Count all the birds that through the ether sly;
Count all the foliage of the lofty trees,
That fly before the bleak autumnal breeze;
Count all the dewy blades of verdant grass;
Count all the drops of rain that softly pass
Through the blue ether; or tempestuous roar;
Count all the sands upon the breaking shore;
Count all the minutes since the world began,
Count all the troubles of the life of man;
Count all the torments of the d -- n'd in Hell,
More are the beauteous charms that makes my Nymph excel.
TO MISS C -- KE. 1768.
TO sing of Clarke my Muse aspires,
A theme by charms made quite divine;
Ye tuneful Virgins sound your lyres,
Apollo aid the feeble line;
If Truth and Virtue, Wit, and Charms,
May for a fixed attention call:
The darts of Love and wounding arms
The beauteous Clarke shall hold over all.
It Is not the tincture of a skin,
The rosy lip, the charming eye.
No it is a greater Power within,
That bids the passion never die:
These Clarke possesses, and much more,
All beauty in her glances sport,
She is the Goddess all adore,
In Country, City, and at Court.
EPISTLE TO THE REVEREND MR. CATCOTT.
DECEMBER 16TH, 1769.
WHAT strange infatuations rule mankind!
How narrow are our prospects, how confined!
With universal vanity possessed,
We fondly think our own ideas best:
Our tottering arguments are ever strong;
We Are always self-sufficient in the wrong.
What philosophic Sage of pride austere
Can lend conviction an attentive ear?
What pattern of humility and truth
Can bear the jeering ridicule of youth?
What blushing Author ever ranked his Muse
With Fowler's Poet-Laureat of the Stews?
Dull Penny, nodding over his wooden lyre,
Conceits the vapors of Geneva fire.
All in the language of Apostles cry,
If Angels contradict me, Angels lie?
As all have intervals of ease and pain,
So all have intervals of being vain;
But some of folly never shift the scene,
Or let one lucid moment intervene;
Dull single acts of many-footed Prose
Their tragi-comedys of life compose;
Incessant madding for a system toy
The greatest of Creations blessings cloy;
Their senses dosing a continual dream,
They hang enraptured over the hideous scheme:
So virgins tottering into ripe three score,
Their greatest likeness in baboons adore.
When you advance new systems, first unfold
The various imperfections of the old;
Prove Nature hitherto a gloomy night,
You the first focus of primaeval light.
It Is not enough you think your system true,
The busy world would have you prove it too:
Then, rising on the ruins of the rest,
Plainly demonstrate your ideas best.
Many are best; one only can be right
Though all had inspiration to indite.
Some this unwelcome truth perhaps would tell,
Where Clogher stumbled, Catcott fairly fell.
Writers on Rolls of Science long renowned
In one fell page are tumbled to the ground.
We see their systems unconfuted still;
But Catcott can confute them -- if he will.
Would you the honor of a Priest mistrust
An excommunication proves him just.
Could Catcott from his better sense be drawn
To bow the knee to Baal's sacred lawn?
A mitred Rascal to his long-ear'd flocks
Gives ill example, to his wh -- s, the p-x
Yet we must reverence sacerdotal black,
And saddle all his faults on Nature's back.
But hold, there is solid reason to revere;
His Lordship has six thousand pounds a year;
In gaming solitude he spends the nights,
He fasts at Arthur's and he prays at White's;
Rolls over the pavement with his Swiss-tail'd six,
At White's the Athanasian Creed for Tricks.
Whilst the poor Curate in his rusty gown
Trudges unnotic'd through the dirty town.
If God made order, order never made
These nice distinctions in the preaching trade.
The servants of the Devil are revered,
And Bishops pull the Fathers by the beard.
Yet in these horrid forms Salvation lives,
These are Religions representatives;
Yet to these idols must we bow the knee --
Excuse me, Broughton, when I bow to thee.
But sure Religion can produce at least,
One Minister of God -- one honest Priest.
Search Nature over, procure me, if you can,
The fancied character, an honest Man
(A man of sense, not honest by constraint
For fools are canvass, living but in paint)
To Mammon, or to Superstition slaves,
All orders of mankind are fools, or knaves:
In the first attribute by none surpast,
Tailor endeavors to obtain the last.
Imagination may be too confined;
Few see too far; how many are half blind?
How are your feeble arguments perplexed
To find out meaning in a senseless text?
You rack each metaphor upon the wheel,
And words can philosophic truths conceal.
What Paracelsus humor'd as a jest,
You realize to prove your system best.
Might we not, Catcott, then infer from hence,
Your zeal for Scripture has devoured your sense?
Apply the glass of reason to your sight,
See Nature marshal oozy atoms right.
Think for yourself, for all mankind are free;
We need not Inspiration how to see.
If Scripture contradictory you find,
Be Orthodox, and own your senses blind.
How blinded are their optics, who aver,
What Inspiration dictates cannot err.
Whence is this boasted Inspiration sent,
Which makes us utter truths, we never meant?
Which couches systems in a single word,
At once depraved, abstruse, sublime, absurd.
What Moses tells us might perhaps be true,
As he was learned in all the Egyptians knew.
But to assert that Inspiration's given,
The Copy of Philosophy in Heaven,
Strikes at Religions root, and fairly fells
The awful terrors of ten thousand Hells.
Attentive search the Scriptures and you will find
What vulgar errors are with truths combined.
Your tortured truths, which Moses seemed to know,
He could not unto Inspiration owe;
For if from God one error you admit,
How dubious is the rest of Holy Writ?
What knotty difficultys fancy solves?
The Heavens irradiate, and the Earth revolves;
But here Imagination is allowed
To clear this voucher from its mantling cloud:
From the same word we different meanings quote,
As David wears a many colored coat.
O Inspiration, ever hid in night,
Reflecting various each adjacent light;
If Moses caught thee in the parted flood;
If David found thee in a sea of blood;
If Mahomet with slaughter drenched thy soil,
On loaded asses bearing off thy spoil;
If thou have favored Pagan, Turk, or Jew,
Say had not Broughton Inspiration too?
Such rank absurdities debase his line,
I almost could have sworn he copied thine.
Confute with candor, where you can confute,
Reason and arrogance but poorly suit.
Yourself may fall before some abler pen,
Infallibility is not for men.
With modest diffidence new schemes indite,
Be not too positive, though in the right.
What man of sense would value vulgar praise,
Or rise on Penny's prose, or duller lays?
Though pointed fingers mark the Man of Fame,
And literary Grocers chaunt your name;
Though in each Tailors book-case Catcott shines,
With ornamental flowers and gilded lines;
Though youthful Ladies who by instinct scan
The Natural Philosophy of Man,
Can every reason of your work repeat,
As sands in Africa retain the heat:
Yet check your flowing pride: Will all allow
To wreathe the labored laurel round your brow?
Some may with seeming arguments dispense,
Tickling your vanity to wound your sense:
But Clayfield censures, and demonstrates too,
Your theory is certainly untrue;
On Reason and Newtonian rules he proves,
How distant your machine from either moves.
But my objections may be reckoned weak,
As nothing but my mother tongue I speak;
Else would I ask; by what immortal Power
All Nature was dissolved as in an hour.
How, when the earth acquired a solid state,
And rising mountains saw the waves abate,
Each particle of matter sought its kind,
All in a strata regular combined?
When instantaneously the liquid heap
Hardened to rocks, the barriers of the deep,
Why did not earth unite a stony mass;
Since stony filaments through all must pass?
If on the wings of air the planets run,
Why are they not impelled into the sun?
Philosophy, nay common sense, will prove
All passives with their active agents move.
If the diurnal motion of the air,
Revolves the planets in their destined sphere;
How are the secondary orbs impelled?
How are the moons from falling headlong held?
'Twas the Eternal's fiat you reply;
And who will give Eternity the lie?
I own the awful truth, that God made all,
And by his fiat worlds and systems fall.
But study Nature; not an atom there
Will unassisted by her powers appear;
The fiat, without agents, is, at best,
For priestcraft or for ignorance a vest.
Some fancy God is what we Nature call,
Being itself material, all in all.
The fragments of the Deity we own,
Is vulgarly as various matter known.
No agents could assist Creations birth:
We trample on our God, for God is Earth.
It Is past the power of language to confute
This latitudinary attribute.
How lofty must Imagination soar,
To reach absurdities unknown before?
Thanks to thy pinions, Broughton, thou have brought
From the Moons orb a novelty of thought.
Restrain, O Muse, thy unaccomplish'd lines,
Fling not thy saucy satire at Divines;
This single truth thy brother Bards must tell;
Thou have one excellence, of railing well.
But disputations are befitting those
Who settle Hebrew points, and scold in prose.
O Learning, where are all thy fancied joys
Thy empty pleasures and thy solemn toys?
Proud of thy own importance; though we see
We Have little reason to be proud of thee:
Thou putrid foetus of a barren brain,
Thou offspring illegitimate of Pain.
Tell me, sententious Mortals, tell me whence
You claim the preference to men of sense?
-- wants learning; see the lettered throng
Banter his English in a Latin song.
Oxonian Sages hesitate to speak
Their native Language, but declaim in Greek.
If in his jests a discord should appear,
A dull lampoon is innocently clear.
Ye Classic Dunces, self-sufficient fools,
Is this the boasted justice of your schools?
-- has parts; parts which would set aside
The labored acquisitions of your pride;
Uncultivated now his Genius lies,
Instruction sees his latent beauties rise;
His gold is bullion, yours debased with brass,
Impressed with Folly's head to make it pass.
But -- swears so loud, so indiscreet,
His thunders rattle through the listening street:
Ye rigid Christians, formally severe,
Blind to his charities, his oaths you hear;
Observe his virtues: Calumny must own
A noble soul is in his actions shown;
Though dark this bright original you paint,
I Would rather be a -- than a Saint.
Excuse me, Catcott, if from you I stray,
The Muse will go where Merit leads the way;
The Owls of Learning may admire the night,
But -- shines with Reason's glowing light.
Still Admonition presses to my pen,
The infant Muse would give advice to Men.
But what avails it, since the man I blame
Owns no superior in the paths of fame?
In springs, in mountains, strata's, mines, and rocks,
Catcott is every notion Orthodox.
If to think otherwise you claim pretense,
Which is the true reading is uncertain, both being in his own handwriting,
and uncancelled.
Renounce detested heretic in sense.
Which is the true reading is uncertain, both being in his own handwriting,
and uncancelled.
You're a detested heretic in sense.
But oh! how lofty your ideas roar,
In showing wondering Cits the fossile store!
The Ladies are quite ravished, as he tells
The short adventures of the pretty shells;
Miss Biddy sickens to indulge her touch,
Madam more prudent thinks 'twould seem too much;
The doors fly open, instantly he draws
The sparry lood, and wonders of applause;
The full dressed Lady sees with envying eye
The sparkle of her di'mond pendants die;
Sage Natural Philosophers adore
The fossil whimsys of the numerous store.
But see! the purple stream begins to play,
To show how fountains climb the hilly way.
Hark what a murmur echoes through the throng.
Gods! that the pretty trifle should be wrong!
Experience in the voice of Reason tells
Above its surface water never swells.
Where is the priestly soul of Catcott now?
See what a triumph sits upon his brow:
And can the poor applause of things like these,
Whose souls and sentiments are all disease,
Raise little triumphs in a man like you,
Catcott, the foremost of the Judging few?
So at Llewellins your great Brother sits,
The laughter of his tributary wits;
Ruling the noisy multitude with ease,
Empties his pint and sputters his decrees.
DEC. 20TH, 1769.
MR. CATCOTT will be pleased to observe that I admire many things in his
learned Remarks. This Poem is an innocent effort of poetical Vengeance, as Mr.
Catcott has done me the honor to criticize my Trifles. I have taken great
poetical liberties and what I dislike in Verse possibly deserves my approbation
in the plain Prose of Truth -- The many Admirers of Mr. Catcott may on perusal
of this rank me as an Enemy: But I am indifferent in all things, I value
neither the praise or censure of the Multitude.

SENTIMENT. 1769.
SINCE we can die but once, what matters it,
If rope or garter, poison, pistol, sword,
Slow-wasting sickness or the sudden burst
Of valve arterial in the noble parts,
Curtail the miseries of human life?
Though varied is the Cause, the Effect's the same;
All to one common Dissolution tends.
THE DEFENSE,
DEC. 25TH, 1769.
NO more, dear Smith, the hackney'd Tale renew;
I own their censure, I approve it too.
For how can Idiots destitute of thought,
Conceive, or estimate, but as they are taught?
Say, can the satirizing Pen of Shears,
Exalt his name, or mutilate his ears?
None, but a Lawrence, can adore his Lays,
Who in a quart of Claret drinks his praise.
T -- l -- r repeats, what Catcott told before,
But lying T -- l -- r is believed no more.
If in myself I think my notions just,
The Church and all her arguments are dust.
Religion's but Opinion's bastard Son,
A perfect mystery, more than three in one.
It Is fancy all, distempers of the mind;
As Education taught us, we are inclined.
Happy the man, whose reason bids him see,
Mankind are by the state of Nature free;
Who, thinking for himself, despises those,
That would upon his better sense impose;
Is to himself the Minister of God,
Nor dreads the path, where Athanasius trod.
Happy (if Mortals can be) is the Man,
Who, not by Priest, but Reason rules his span;
Reason, to its Possessor a sure guide,
Reason, a thorn in Revelations side.
If Reason fails, incapable to tread
Through gloomy Revelations thick'ning bed,
On what authority the Church we own?
How shall we worship Deities unknown?
Can the Eternal Justice pleased receive
The prayers of those, who, ignorant believe?
Search the thick multitudes of every Sect,
The Church supreme, with Whitfield's new Elect;
No individual can their God define,
No, not great Penny in his nervous Line.
But why must Chatterton selected sit,
The butt of every Critic's little wit?
Am I alone for ever in a crime;
Nonsense in Prose, or blasphemy in Rhyme?
All monosyllables a line appears?
Is it not very often so in Shears?
See generous Eccas, lengthening out my praise
Inraptur'd with the music of my Lays;
In all the arts of panegyric graced,
The cream of modern Literary Taste.
Why, to be sure, the metaphoric line
Has something sentimental, tender, fine;
But then how hobbling are the other two;
There are some beauties, but they are very few.
Besides the Author, 'faith it is something odd,
Commends a reverential awe of God.
Read but another fancy of his brain;
He Is Atheistical in every strain.
Fallacious is the charge: It Is all a lie,
As to my reason I can testify.
I own a God, immortal, boundless, wise,
Who bid our glories of Creation rise;
Who formed his varied likeness in mankind,
Centring his many wonders in the mind;
Who saw Religion, a fantastic night
But gave us Reason to obtain the light.
Indulgent Whitfield scruples not to say,
He only can direct to Heavens highway.
While Bishops, with as much vehemence tell,
Both in the Author's handwriting, and uncancelled.
Sects heterodox are food for Hell.
Both in the Author's handwriting, and uncancelled.
All sorts heterodox are food for Hell.
Why then, dear Smith, since Doctors disagree,
Their notions are not oracles to me:
What I think right, I ever will pursue
And leave you liberty to do so too.
SONG TO MR. G. CATCOTT. 1769.
1.
AH blame me not, Catcott, if from the right way
My notions and actions run far.
How can my ideas do other but stray,
Deprived of the ruling North Star?
2.
Ah blame me not, Broderip, if mounted aloft,
I chatter and spoil the dull air;
How can I imagine thy foppery soft,
When discord's the voice of my fair?
3.
If Turner remitted my bluster and rhymes,
If Harding was girlish and cold,
If never an ogle was met from Miss Grimes,
If Flavia was blasted and old;
4.
I chose without liking, and left without pain,
Nor welcomed the frown with a sigh;
I scorned, like a monkey, to dangle my chain,
And paint them new charms with a lie.
5.
Once Cotton was handsome; I flamed, and I burned,
I died to obtain the bright Queen;
But when I beheld my Epistle returned,
By Jesu it altered the scene.
6.
She Is damnable ugly, my Vanity cried,
You lie, says my Conscience, you lie;
Resolving to follow the dictates of Pride,
I Would view her a hag to my eye.
7.
But should she regain her bright luster again,
And shine in her natural charms,
It Is but to accept of the works of my pen,
And permit me to use my own arms.
(...) O'Ro^e upon his courser fleet,
Who swift as lightning were his feet,
First gained the lists and gatte him fame;
From West Hybernee Isle he came,
His might depictur'd in his Probably alluding to the word Rock.
name.
All dreded such an one to meet;
Bold as a mountain wolf he stood,
Upon his sword sat grim death and blood.
But when he threw down his Asenglave,
Next came in Sir Botelier bold and brave,
The death of many a Saraceen;
Theie thought him a Devil from Hells black pen,
Ne thinking that any of mortalle men
Could send so many to the grave.
For his life to John Rumsee he rendered his thanks
Descended from Godred the King of the Manks.
Within his sure rest he settled his spear,
And ran at O'Rocke in full career;
Their lances with the furious stroke
Into a thousand shivers broke,
Even as the thunder tears the oak,
And scatters splinters here and there;
So great the shock, their senses did depart,
The blood all ran to strengthen up the heart.
Sir Botelier Rumsie first came from his trance,
And from the Marshall took the lance;
O'Rocke eke chose another speere,
And ran at Sir Botelier full career;
His prancynge stead the ground did tare;
In haste he made a false advance;
Sir Botelier seeing, with might amain
Fellde him down upon the plain.
Sir Pigotte Novlin at the Clarions sound,
On a milk-white stead with gold trappings around,
He couchde in his rest, his silver-poynt speere,
And ferslie ran up in full career;
But for his appearance he paid full dear,
In the first course laid on the ground;
Besmeer'd in the dust with his silver and gold,
No longer a glorious sight to behold.
Sir Botelier then having conquered his twain,
Rode Conqueror off the tourneying plain;
Receivying a garland from Alice's hand,
The sayrest Lady in the land.
Sir Pigotte this viewed, and furious did stand,
Tormented in mind and bodily pain,
Sir Botelier crowned, most galantlie stood,
As some tall oak within the thick wode.
Awhile the shrill Clarions sounded the word;
Next rode in Sir John, of Adderleigh Lord,
Who over his back his thick shield did bring,
In checkee of read and silver sheeninge,
With steed and gold trappings beseeming a King,
A gilded fine Adder twyned round his sword.
De Bretville advanced a man of great might
And couched his lance in his rest for the fight.
Ferse as the falling waters of the lough,
That tumble headlonge from the mountains browe,
Even so they met in drierie sound,
De Bretville fell upon the ground,
The blood from inward bruised wound,
Did out his stained helmet flow;
As some tall bark upon the foamie main,
So lay De Bretville on the plain.
Sir John of the Dale or Compton hight,
Advanced next in lists of fight,
He knew the tricks of tourneying full well,
In running race ne manne culd him excel,
Or how to wielde a sword better tell.
And eke he was a man of might;
On a black Stead with silver trappynges dyght
He darde the dangers of the tourneyd fight.
Within their rests their speeres they set,
So furiously each other met.
That Comptons well intended speere
Sir John his shield in pieces tare,
And wound his hand in furious geir;
Sir John's stele Assenglave was wette:
Sir John then toe the marshal turned
His breast with meekle fury burned.
The tenders of the feelde came in,
And bade the Champyons not begin;
Each tourney but one hour should last,
And then one hour was gone and past.
END OF THE FIRST CANTO.
IN IMITATION OF OUR OLD POETS. ON OUR LADIES CHIRCH. 1769.
IN ancient days, when Kenewalchyn King
Of all the borders of the sea did reign,
Whose cutting CELES, CELES, most probably from the ancient word Ceolis; which,
in the Saxon, is ships. From whence Ceolae, we find in Brompton, are used for
large ships.
as the Bardyes sing,
Cut strakyng furrows in the foamie main,
Sancte Warbur cast aside his Earls estate,
As great as good, and eke as good as great.
Tho blessed with what us men accounts as store,
Saw something further, and saw something more.
Where smokyng Wasker scours the claiey bank,
And gilded fishes wanton in the sun,
Emyttynge to the feelds a dewie dank,
As in the twyning path-waye he does run;
Here stood a house, that in the ryver smyle
Since valorous Ursa first won Bryttayn Isle;
The stones in one as firm as rock unite,
And it defyde the greatest Warriors might;
Around about the lofty elemens hie
Proud as their Planter reerde their greenie crest,
Bent out their heads, when ever the wynds came bie.
In amorous dalliaunce the flete clouds kest
Attendynge Squires dreste in trickynge brighte,
To each tenth Squier an attendynge Knight,
The hallie hung with pendaunts to the flore,
A coat of nobil arms upon the door;
Horses and dogs to hunt the fallowe dear,
Of pastures many, wide extent of wode,
Faulkonnes in Mewes, and little birds to teir,
The Sparrow Hawke, and many Hawkies good.
Just in the prime of life, when others court
Some swottie Nymph, to gain their tender hand,
Greet with the King and trerdie greet with the Court
And as aforesed mickle much of land.
FINIS.
HECCAR AND GAIRA AN AFRICAN ECLOGUE.
JAN. 3, 1770.
WHERE the rough Caigra rolls the surgy wave,
Urging his thunders through the echoing / distant Echoing and distant, copied
from the Boy's own hand; both uncancelled.
cave;
Where the sharp rocks, in distant horror seen,
Drive the white currents through the spreading green;
Where the loud Tiger, pawing in his rage,
Bids the black Archers of the wilds engage;
Stretched on the sand, two panting Warriors lay,
In all the burning torments of the day;
Their bloody jav'lins reek'd on living steem
Their bows were broken at the roaring stream:
Heccar the Chief of Jarra's fruitful Hill,
Where the dark vapors nightly dews distill,
Saw Gaira the companion of his soul,
Extended where loud Caigra's billows roll;
Gaira, the King of warring Archers found,
Where daily lightnings plow the sandy ground,
Where brooding tempests howl along the sky,
Where rising deserts whirled in circles fly.
HECCAR.
Gaira, it is useless to attempt the chase,
Swifter than hunted Wolves they urge the race;
Their lessening forms elude the straining eye,
Upon the plumage of Macaws they fly.
Let us return, and strip the reeking slain
Leaving the bodies on the burning plain.
GAIRA.
Heccar, my vengeance still exclaims for blood,
'Twould drink a wider stream than Caigra's flood.
This javelin, often in nobler quarrels tried,
Put the loud thunder of their arms aside.
Fast as the streaming rain, I poured the dart,
Hurling a whirlwind through the trembling heart:
But now my lingering feet revenge denies,
O could I throw my javlin from my eyes!
HECCAR.
When Gaira the united armies broke,
Death winged the arrow; Death impelled the stroke.
See, pil'd in mountains, on the sanguine sand
The blasted of the lightnings of thy hand.
Search the brown desert, and the glossy green;
There are the trophies of thy valor seen.
The scattered bones mantled in silver white,
Once animated, dared the force Query, whether not intended for foes?
in fight.
The Children of the Wave, whose palid race
Views the faint sun, display a languid face,
From the red fury of thy justice fled,
Swifter than torrents from their rocky bed.
Fear with a sicken'd silver tinged their hue:
The guilty fear, when vengeance is their due.
GAIRA.
Rouse not Remembrance from her shad'wy cell,
Nor of those bloody sons of mischief tell.
Cawna, O Cawna! decked in sable charms,
What distant region holds thee from my arms?
Cawna, the pride of Afric's sultry vales,
Soft as the cooling murmur of the gales,
Majestic as the many colored Snake,
Trailing his glories through the blossomed brake;
Black as the glossy rocks, where Eascal roars,
Foaming through sandy wastes to Jaghirs shores;
Swift as the arrow, hasting to the breast,
Was Cawna the companion of my rest.
The sun sat lowering in the Western sky,
The swelling tempest spread around the eye;
Upon my Cawna's bosom I reclind,
Catching the breathing whispers of the wind:
Swift from the wood a prowling Tiger came;
Dreadful his voice, his eyes a glowing flame;
I bent the bow, the never-erring dart
Pierced his rough armor, but escaped his heart;
He fled, though wounded, to a distant waste,
I urged the furious flight with fatal haste;
He fell, he died -- spent in the fiery toil,
I stripid his carcass of the furry spoil
And as the varied spangles met my eye,
On this, I cried, shall my loved Cawna lie.
The dusky midnight hung the skies in gray;
Impelled by Love, I winged the airy way;
In the deep valley and the mossy plain,
I sought my Cawna, but I sought in vain.
The pallid shadows of the azure waves
Had made my Cawna and my children slaves.
Reflection maddens, to recall the hour,
The Gods had given me to the Daemon's power.
The dusk slow vanished from the hated lawn,
I gained a mountain glaring with the dawn.
There the full sails, expanded to the wind,
Struck horror and distraction in my mind,
There Cawna mingled with a worthless train,
In common slavery drags the hated chain.
Now judge my Heccar, have I cause for rage?
Should aught the thunder of my arm assuage?
In ever-reeking blood this javelin died
With vengeance shall be never satisfied:
I Will strew the beaches with the mighty dead
And tinge the lily of their features red.
HECCAR.
When the loud shriekings of the hostile cry
Roughly salute my ear, enraged I Will fly;
Send the sharp arrow quivering through the heart
Chill the hot vitals with the venomed dart;
Nor heed the shining steel or noisy smoke,
Gaira and Vengeance shall inspire the stroke.
CHATTERTON'S WILL. 1770.
ALL this wrote between 11 and 2 o'clock Saturday in the utmost distress of
mind. April 14, 1770.

N. B. In a dispute concerning the character of David, Mr. -- argued that he
must be a holy man, from the strains of piety that breathe through his whole
works -- I being of a contrary opinion, and knowing that a great genius can
effect any thing, endeavoring in the foregoing What Poems Chatterton meant
here is uncertain.
Poems to represent an enthusiastic Methodist intended to send it to Roman,
and impose it upon the infatuated world as a reality; but thanks to Burgum's
generosity, I am now employed in matters of more importance.

Saturday April 20, 1770.

BURGUM I thank thee, thou have let me see,
That Bristol has impressed her stamp on thee,
Thy generous spirit emulates the May'rs,
Thy generous spirit with thy Bristols pairs.
Gods! what would Burgum give, to get a name
And snatch his blundering dialect from shame?
What would he give, to hand his memory down
To times remotest boundary? -- A Crown.
Would you ask more, his swelling face looks blue;
Futurity he rates at two pound two.
Well Burgum, take thy laurel to thy brow;
With a rich saddle decorate a sow,
Strut in Iambics, totter in an Ode,
Promise, and never pay, and be the mode.
Catcott, for thee, I know thy heart is good,
But ah! thy merit's seldom understood;
Too bigoted to whimsies, which thy youth
Received to venerate as Gospel truth,
Thy friendship never could be dear to me,
Since all I am is opposite to thee.
If ever obligated to thy purse
Rowley discharges all; my first chief curse
For had I never known the antique lore
I never had ventured from my peaceful shore,
To be the wreck of promises and hopes
A Boy of Learning, and a Bard of Tropes;
But happy in my humble sphere had moved
Untroubled, unsuspected, unbelov'd.
To Barrett next, he has my thanks sincere,
For all the little knowledge I had here.
But what was knowledge? Could it here succeed?
When scarcely twenty in the town can read.
Could knowledge bring in interest to maintain
The wild expenses of a Poets brain;
Disinterested Burgum never meant
To take my knowledge for his gain per cent.
When wildly squand'ring every thing I got,
On Books, and Learning, and the Lord knows what.
Could Burgum then, my Critic, Patron, Friend
Without security attempt to lend?
No, that would be imprudent in the man;
Accuse him of imprudence, if you can.
He promised, I confess, and seemed sincere;
Few keep an honorary promise here.
I thank thee, Barrett, thy advice was right,
But 'twas ordained by Fate that I should write.
Spite of the prudence of this prudent place,
I wrote my mind, nor hid the Authors face.
Harris ere long, when reeking from the Press
My numbers make his self-importance less,
Will wrinkle up his face, and damn the day
And drag my body to the triple way --
Poor superstitious Mortals! wreak your hate
Upon my cold remains --
THIS is the last Will and Testament of me Thomas Chatterton of the City of
Bristol; being sound in body, or it is the fault of my last Surgeon; the
soundness of my mind, the Coroner and Jury are to be judges of, desiring them
to take notice, that the most perfect Masters of Human Nature in Bristol
distinguish me by the title of the Mad Genius; therefore, if I do a mad action,
it is conformable to every action of my life, which savored of insanity.

Item. If after my death which will happen tomorrow night before eight
o'clock, being the Feast of the Resurrection, the Coroner and Jury bring it in
Lunacy, I will and direct, that Paul Far, Esquire and Mr. John Flower, at their
joint expense, cause my body to be interred in the Tomb of my Fathers, and
raise the Monument over my body to the height of four feet five inches, placing
the present flat stone on the top, and adding 6 Tablets.

On the first to be engraved in Old English Characters Vous qui par ici pasez
Whatever obsolete spelling or mistakes may be observed here, either in the
French or the Latin, the Reader is desired to consider as the Author's, not the
Editor's.
Pur l'ame Guateroine Chatterton priez
Le cors di oi ici gist
L'ame receyve Thu Crist. MCCX.


On the second Tablet in Old English Characters

Orate pro animabus Alanus Chatterton, et Alicia Whatever obsolete spelling or
mistakes may be observed here, either in the French or the Latin, the Reader is
desired to consider as the Author's, not the Editor's.
Uxeris ejus, qui quidem Alanus obict x die mensis November. M,CCCCXV, quorum
animabus propinetur Deus Amen. On the third Tablet in Roman Characters

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF THOMAS CHATTERTON, Subchaunter of the Cathedral of
this City, whose Ancestors were Residents of St. Mary Redcliffe since the year
1140. He died the 7th of August 1752. On the fourth Tablet in Roman Characters.

TO THE MEMORY OF THOMAS CHATTERTON; Reader judge not; if thou art a Christian
-- believe that he shall be judged by a Superior Power -- to that Power alone
is he now answerable. On the fifth and sixth Tablets which shall front each
other

Achievements viz. On the one, vest, a fess; or, crest, a mantle of estate,
gules, supported by a spear, sable, headed, or, on the other, or, a fess vest,
crest, a cross of Knights Templars. -- And I will and direct that if the
Coroners Inquest bring it in felo-de-se, the said monument shall be
notwithstanding erected. And if the said Paul Far and John Flower have souls
so Bristolish as to refuse this my request, they will transmit a copy of my
Will to the Society for supporting the Bill of Rights, whom I hereby empower to
build the said monument according to the aforesaid directions. And if they the
said Paul Far and John Flower should build the said monument; I will and
direct that the 2d Edition of my Kew Gardens, shall be dedicated to them in the
following Dedication. -- To Paul Far and John Flower, Esqrs this Book is most
humbly dedicated by the Author's Ghost.

Item. I give all my vigor and fire of youth to Mr. G -- C --,being sensible
he is most in want of it.

Item. From the same charitable motive, I give and bequeath unto the Reverend
Mr. C -- n senior all my humility. To Mr. B -- m all my Prosody and Grammar,
likewise one moiety of my modesty, the other moiety to any young Lady who can
prove without blushing that she wants that valuable commodity. To Bristol all
my spirit and difinterestedness, parcels of goods, unknown on her quay since
the days of Canning and Rowley! It Is true a charitable Gentleman, one Mr.
Colston, smuggled a considerable quantity of it, but it being proved that he
was a Papist, the Worshipful Society of Aldermen endeavor to throttle him with
the Oath of Allegiance. I leave also my Religion to Dr. C -- B --, D -- of B
--, hereby empowering the Sub-Spirit to strike him on the head when he goes to
sleep in Church -- My powers of utterance I give to the Reverend Mr. B -- n,
hoping he will employ them to a better purpose than reading Lectures on the
Immortality of the Soul: I leave the Reverend Mr. C -- some little of my free
thinking, that he may put on spectacles of reason and see how vilely he is
duped in believing the Scriptures literally. I wish he and his brother G --
would know how far I am their real Enemy, but, I have an unlucky way of
raillery, and when the strong fit of Satire is upon me I spare neither friend
nor foe. This is my excuse for what I have said of them elsewhere. I leave Mr.
Clayfield the sincerest thanks my gratitude can give, and I will and direct
that whatever any person may think the pleasure of reading my Works worth, they
immediately pay their own valuation to him, since it is then become a lawful
debt to me and to him as my Executor in this case. I leave my Moderation to the
Politicians on both sides the question. I leave my Generosity to our present
Right Worshipful Mayor, T -- H --, Esquire. I give my Abstinence to the Company at
the Sheriffs Annual Feast in general, more particularly the Aldermen.

Item. I give and bequeath to Mr. M -- M -- a mourning Ring with this Motto,
"Alas! poor Chatterton!" provided he pays for it himself. -- Item. I leave the
young Ladies all the Letters they have had from me, assuring them that they
need be under no apprehensions from the appearance of my Ghost, for I die for
none of them. -- Item. I leave all my debts the whole not Five Pounds to the
payment of the charitable and generous Chamber of Bristol, on penalty if
refused, to hinder every Member from a good dinner by appearing in the form of
a Bailiff. If in defiance of this terrible spectre, they obstinately persist in
refusing to discharge my debts, let my two Creditors apply to the Supporters of
the Bill of Rights. -- Item. I leave my Mother and Sister to the protection of
my Friends if I have any. Executed in the presence of Omniscience this 14th of
April 1770.

Those. CHATTERTON.

CODICIL.
It is my pleasure that Mr. Cocking and Miss Farley Print this my Will the
first Saturday after my death.

T. C.

THE METHODIST.
MAY 1770.
SAYS Tom to Jack, it is very odd,
These Representatives of God,
In Color, way of life and evil,
Sold be so very like the Devil.
Jack, understand, was one of those,
Who mould Religion in the Nose,
A red hot Methodist; his face
Was full of Puritanic Grace,
His loose lank hair, his slow gradation,
Declared a late Regeneration;
Among the daughters long renowned,
For standing upon holy ground;
Never in carnal battle beat,
Though sometimes forced to a retreat.
But C -- t, Hero as he is,
Knight of ^parable phiz,
When pliant Doxy seems to yield,
Courageously forsakes the field.
Jack, or to write more gravely, John
Through Hills of Wesley's Works had gone;
Could sing one hundred Hymns by rote;
Hymns which will sanctify the throat:
But some indeed composed so odly,
You Would swear 'twas bawdy Songs made Godly.
COLIN INSTRUCTED. 1770.
YOUNG Colin was as stout a boy
As ever gave a Maiden joy;
But long in vain he told his tale
To black-eyed Biddy of the Dale.
Ah why the whining Shepherd cried,
Am I alone your smiles denied,
I only tell in vain my tale
To black-eyed Biddy of the Dale.
True Colin, said the laughing Dame,
You only whimper out your flame,
Others do more than sigh their tale
To black-eyed Biddy of the Dale.
He took the hint etc.

A BURLESQUE CANTATA. 1770.
RECIT.
MOUNTED aloft in Bristols narrow Streets,
Where Pride and Luxury with meanness meets,
A sturdy Collier pressed the empty sack,
A troop of thousands swarming on his back;
When sudden to his rapt extatic view
Rose the brown beauties of his red-hair'd Sue.
Music spontaneously echoed from his tongue,
And thus the Lover rather bawled, than sung.
AIR.
Zaunds! Prithee pretty Zue is it thee,
Odzookers I mun have a kiss.
A Sweetheart should always be free,
I whope you wunt take it amiss.
Thy peepers are blacker than a caul,
Thy carcass is sound as a sack,
Thy visage is whiter than ball,
Odzookers I mun have smack.
RECIT.
The swain descending, in his raptured arms
Held fast the Goddess, and despoiled her charms.
Whilst locked in Cupid's amorous embrace,
His jetty skinnis met her red bronz'd face;
It seemed the sun when laboring in eclipse.
And on her nose he stamped his sable lips,
Pleased --.
SONG. FANNY OF THE HILL. Miss F. B --, on Radclif-Hill, Bristol.
1770.
IF gentle Love's immortal fire
Could animate the quill,
Soon should the rapture-speaking Lyre
Sing Fanny of the Hill. Betsy
My panting heart incessant moves,
No interval it is still;
And all my ravished nature loves
Sweet Fanny of the Hill. Betsy
Her dying soft expressive eye,
Her elegance must kill,
Ye Gods! how many thousands die
For Fanny of the Hill. Betsy
A love-taught tongue angelic air
A sentiment, a skill
In all the graces of the Fair,
Mark Fanny of the Hill. Betsy
Thou mighty Power, eternal Fate,
My happiness to fill,
O! bless a wretched Lover's state
With Fanny of the Hill. Betsy
The name of Fanny, which was first written, was afterward cancelled, and that
of Betsy substituted in its stead; but for what reason was best known to the
Author.

BURLETTA. THE WOMAN OF SPIRIT. 1770.
Distort Mr. Bannister Councellor Latitat Mr. Reinhold Endorse Master Cheney
Lady Tempest Mr. Thompson
THE WOMAN OF SPIRIT.
ACT I. SCENE I.
LADY TEMPEST AND LATITAT. LATITAT. I tell you Lady Tempest --


LADY TEMPEST. And I tell you Mr. Latitat in shall not be. -- I Will have no
Society of Antiquaries meet here: None but the honorable Members of the
Coterie shall assemble here -- you shall know.


LATITAT. Suspend your rage, Lady Tempest, and let me open my brief -- have you
not this day, moved by the instigation of the Devil, and not having the fear of
God before your eyes, wilfully and wittingly, and maliciously driven all my
friends out of my house. Was it done like a Woman of Quality?


LADY TEMPEST. It was done like a Woman of Spirit: A character, it shall ever
be my task to maintain.

AIR.
Away with your maxims, and dull formal rules
The shackles of pleasure, and trammels of fools;
For Wisdom and Prudence I care not a straw
I Will act, as I please, for my Will is my Law.

LATITAT. But upon my soul Madam I have one more consideration which should
especially move you to bridle your passion: for it spoils your face. When you
knocked down Lord Rust with the Bust of Marcus Aurelius, you looked the very
picture of the Alecto last taken out of the Herculaneum.

AIR.
Passion worse than age will plow
Furrows on the frowning brow:
Rage and passion will disgrace
Every beauty of the face:
Whilst good nature will supply
Beauties, which can never die.

LADY TEMPEST. Mr. Latitat I wont be abused -- Did I for this condescend to
forget my quality and marry such a Tautology of Nothing -- I will not be abused.


SCENE.
DISTORT, LATITAT, LADY TEMPEST. DISTORT. Pray Madam what has enraged you? May
I have the honor of knowing.


LATITAT. Mr. Distort shall be our Referee.


LADY TEMPEST. That is, if I please Sir.


LATITAT. Pray my Lady let me state the case, and you may afterward make a
reply -- you must know Sir. --


LADY TEMPEST. Yes, Sir, you must know, this morning, Mr. Latitat had invited
all his antiquated friends Lord Rust, Horatio Trefoil, Col. Tragedus, Professor
Vase and Countefeit the Jew to sit upon a brass halfpenny, which being a
little worn, they have agreed, Nem. Con. to be an Otho.


LATITAT. And it is further necessary to be known, that, while we were all warm
in debate upon the premises, my Lady made a forcible entry into the parlour,
and seizing an antique Bust of Marcus Aurelius, of malice propense, and before
thought, did with three blows of the said Bust, knock down Anthony Viscount
Rust, and --


LADY TEMPEST. And drove them all out of the house.


LATITAT. And furthermore --


LADY TEMPEST. Silence Mr. Latitat, I insist on the privilege of an English
Wife.


LATITAT. And moreover --


DISTORT. Nay Councellor, as I am your Referee, I command silence: Pray what do
you lay your damages at?


LATITAT. My Lady has in her cabinet a Jupiter Tonans, which in spite of all my
endeavors to open her eyes, she persists in calling an Indian Pagod, and upon
condition of my receiving that, I drop the prosecution.


DISTORT (aside to Lady.) It Is a trifle Madam let him have it, it may turn to
account.


LADY TEMPEST. A very toy: He shall have it instantly on condition I have the
use of my tongue.

AIR.
What are all your favorite joys So it stands in the Original, erased.

What are our pleasures.

FINIS.

