THE STATUES: OR, THE TRIAL of CONSTANCY. A TALE FOR THE LADIES.

LONDON: Printed for T. COOPER, at the Globe in Paternoster Row. M. DCC. XXXIX.

THE STATUES: OR, THE TRIAL of CONSTANCY*
IN a fair island, in the southern main,
Blessed with indulgent skys, and kindly rain,
A Princess lived, of origin divine,
Of bloom celestial, and imperial line.
IN that sweet season when the mounting Sun
Prepares, with joy, his radiant course to run,
Led by the Graces, and the dancing Hours,
And wakes to life the various race of flowers;
The lovely Queen forsook her shining court,
For rural scenes, and healthful Sylvan sport,
IT so befell, that, as in cheerful talk,
Her Nymphs and She purfu'd their evening walk,
On the green margin of the oozy deep,
They found a graceful Youth dissolved in sleep,
His charms the Queen surveyed with fond delight,
And hung enamored over the pleasing sight;
By her command the youth was strait conveyed,
And (sleeping) softly in her palace laid.
NOW ruddy morning purpled over the skies,
And beamy light unsealed the stranger's eyes,
Who cried aloud, Ye Gods unfold this Scene!
Where am I? what can all these wonders mean?
SCARCE had he spoke, when, with officious care,
Attendant nymphs a fragrant bath prepare;
He rose, he bathed, and on his lovely head,
Ambrosial sweets, and precious oil they shed;
To deck his polished limbs, a robe they brought,
In all the various dies of beauty wrought;
Then led him to the Queen, who, on a throne
Of burnished gold, and beamy diamonds shone:
But O what wonder selz'd her beauteous guest!
What love, what ecstasy his soul possessed!
Entranced he stood, and on his falt'ring tongue,
Imperfect words, and half formed accents hung*
Nor less the Queen the blooming youth admired,
Nor less delight, and love, her soul inspired.
O Stranger! said the Queen, if hither driven,
By adverse winds, or sent a guest from Heaven;
To me the wretched never sue in vain,
This fruitful isle with joy approves my reign;
Then speak thy wishes, and thy wants declare,
And no denial shall attend thy prayer:
She paused, and blushed; the youth his silence broke,
And kneeling, thus the charming Queen bespoke:
O GODDESS! for a form so bright as thine,
Speaks thee descended of celestial line*
Low at your feet a prostrate King behold,
Whose faithless subjects sold his life for gold;
I fly a cruel tyrant's lawless hand,
And storms have drove my vessel on your strand:
But why do I complain of Fortune's frowns?
Or what are titles! honors! sceptres! crowns!
To this sweet moment? whilst in fond amaze,
On such transporting excellence I gaze!
Such symetry of shape! so fair a face!
Such finished elegance! such perfect grace!
Hear then my only wish, and O approve
The ardent prayer, which supplicates thy love.
From Neptune, know, O Prince, my birth I claim,
Replies the Queen, and Lucida's my name;
This island, these attendant nymphs he gave
The fair-hair'd daughters of the azure wave:
But he whose fortune gains me for a bride,
Must have his constancy severely tried;
One day each moon am I compelled to go
To my Great Father's watery realms below,
Where coral groves celestial red display,
And blazing di'monds emulate the day;
In this short absence if your love endures,
My heart and empire are for ever yours;
And hoary Neptune, to reward your truth,
Shall crown you with immortal bloom and youth;
But instant death will on your falsehood wait,
Nor can my tenderness prevent your fate:
Twice twenty times in wedlock's sacred band,
My Royal Father joined my plighted hand;
Twice twenty noble youths, alas! are dead,
Who in my absence stained the nuptial bed;
Your virtues, Prince, may claim a nobler throne;
But mine is yielded on these terms alone.
Delightful terms! replied the raptured youth,
Accept my constancy, my endless truth:
Perfidious, faithless men, enraged he cried!
They merited the fate by which they died:
Accept a heart incapable of change;
Thy beauty shall forbid desire to range.
No other form shall to my eye seem fair;
No other voice attract my listening ear;
No charms but thine, shall ever my soul approve;
So aid thy vot'ry, potent God of love.
NOW loud applauses through the palace ring;
The duteous subjects hail their God-like King;
To feastful mirth they dedicate the day,
Whilst tuneful voices chant the nuptial lay:
Love-dittied-airs, hymn'd by the vocal quire,
Sweetly attemper'd to the warbling wire.
But when the Sun descending sought the main,
And low-brow'd night assumed her silent reign,
They to the marriage bed conveyed the Bride,
And laid the raptured Bridegroom by her side.
Now rose the morn, and with auspicious ray,
Dispelled the dewy mists, and gave the day;
When Lucida, with anxious cares oppressed,
Thus waked her sleeping lord from downy rest,
Soul of my soul, and monarch of my heart,
This day, she cried, this fatal day, we part;
Yet, if your love uninjur'd you retain,
We soon shall meet in happiness again,
To part no more, but rolling years employ,
In circling bliss, and never-fading joy:
Alas! my boding soul is lost in woe!
And from my eyes the tears unbidden flow.
JOY of my life, dismiss those needless fears,
Replied the King, and stay those precious tears;
Should lovely Venus leave her native sky,
And at my feet, imploring fondness, lie,
Even she, the radiant Queen of soft desires,
Should, disappointed, burn with hopeless fires.
THE heart of Man, the Queen's experience knew
Perjured, and false, yet wished to find him true:
She sighed, retiring; and, in regal state,
The King conducts her to the palace gate,
Where sacred Neptune's crystal chariot stands,
The wondrous work of his celestial hands;
Six harnessed swans the bright machine convey,
Swift through the air, or pathless watery way;
The birds with eagle-speed the air divide,
And plunge the goddess in the sounding tide.
SLOW to the court the pensive King returns,
And sighs in secret, and in silence mourns;
So in the grove sad Philomel complains,
In mournful accents, and melodious strains;
Her plaintive woes fill the resounding lawn,
From starry-vesper, to the rosy dawn.
THE King, to mitigate his tender pain,
Seeks the apartment of the virgin train,
With sportive mirth sad absence to beguile,
And bid the melancholy moments smile;
But there deserted, lonely rooms he found;
And solitary silence reigned around:
He called aloud, when, lo! a hag appears,
Bending beneath deformity and years;
Who said, My Liege, explain your sacred will,
With joy your sovereign purpose I fulfill.
My will! detested wretch! avoid my sight,
And hide that hideous shape in endless night.
What? does thy Queen, o'er-run with rude distrust,
Resolve by force to keep a husband just?
YOU wrong, replied the hag, your royal wife,
Whose care is love, and love to guard your life;
The race of mortals are by nature frail,
And strong temptations with the best prevail.
Be that my care, he said; be thine, to send
The virgin train, let them my will attend.
THE Beldam fled, the cheerful Nymphs advance,
And tread to measured airs, the mazy dance;
The raptured Prince, with greedy eye surveys
The bloomy maids, and covets still to gaze;
No more recals the image of his spouse,
(How false is Man!) nor recollects his vows;
With wild inconstancy for all he burns,
And every Nymph subdues his soul by turns.
At length a maid superior to the rest,
Arrayed in smiles, in virgin beauty dressed,
Received his passion, and returned his love,
And softly wooed him to the silent grove.
ENCLOSED in deepest shade of full-grown wood,
Within the grove a spacious grotto stood,
Where forty youths in marble seemed to mourn,
Each youth reclining on a funeral urn;
Thither the Nymph directs the Monarch's way;
He treads her footsteps, joyful to obey;
There, fired with passion, clasped her to his breast,
And thus the transport of his soul expressed:
DELIGHTFUL beauty! decked with every charm
High fancy paints, or glowing love can form,
I sigh, I gaze, I tremble, I adore,
Such lovely looks never blessed my eyes before!
Here, under covert of the embow'ring shade,
For Love's delights, and tender transports made,
No busy eye our raptures to detect,
No envious tongue to censure or direct,
Here yield to Love, and tenderly employ
The silent season in extatick joy.
WITH arms enclasp'd, his treasure to retain,
He sighed and strove, but strove and sighed in vain;
She rushed indignant from his fond embrace,
Whilst rage, with blushes, paints her virgin face;
Yet still he sues, with suppliant hands and eyes;
Whilst she to magic charms for vengeance flies.
A LIMPID fountain murmured through the cave;
She filled her palm with the translucent wave,
And, sprinkling, cried, Receive, false man, in time*
The just reward of thy detested crime.
THY changeful sex in perfidy delight,
Despise perfection, and fair virtue slight;
False, fickle, base, tyrannick, and unkind,
Whose hearts nor vows can chain, nor honor bind,
Mad to possess, by passion blindly led,
And then as mad, to stain the nuptial bed;
Whose roving souls no excellence, no age,
No form, no rank, no beauty, can engage:
Slaves to the bad, to the deserving worst,
Sick of your twentieth love, as of your first.
These STATUES, which this hallowed grot adorn,
Like thee were Lovers, and like thee forsworn;
Whose faithless hearts no kindness could secure,
Nor for a day preserve their passion pure;
Whom neither love, nor beauty, could restrain,
Nor fear of endless infamy and pain.
Now feel the force of heavens avenging hand,
And here inanimate for ever stand!
SHE spoke -- amazed the listening monarch stood;
And icy horror froze his ebbing blood!
Thick shades of death upon his eyelids creep,
And closed them fast in everlasting sleep;
No sense of life, no motion he retains,
But fixed, a dreadful monument remains!
A STATUE now! and if revived once more,
Would prove, no doubt, as CONSTANT as before*
FINIS.

