SUCH THINGS ARE; A PLAY, IN FIVE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL,
COVENT GARDEN. BY MRS. INCHBALD.

LONDON: Printed for G. G. J. and J. ROBINSON, Paternoster Row.

M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE travels of an Englishman throughout Europe, and even in some parts of
Asia, to soften the sorrows of the Prisoner, excited in the mind of the Author
the subject of the following pages, which, formed into a dramatic story, have
produced from the Theater a profit far exeeeding the usual pecuniary advantages
arising from a successful Comedy.

The uncertainty in what part of the East the hero of the present piece was (at
the time it was written) dispensing his benevolence, caused the Writer, after
many researches and objections, to fix the scene on the island of Sumatra,
where the English settlement, the system of government, and every description
of the manners of the people, reconcile the incidents of the Play to the
strictest degree of probability.

PROLOGUE,
Written by THOMAS VAUGHAN, Esquire.
Spoken by Mr. HOLMAN.
HOW say you, critic Gods Galleries.
and you below Pit.

Are you all friends? -- or here -- and there -- a foe?
Come to protect your literary trade,
Which Mrs. Scribble dares again invade --
But know you not -- in all the fair ones do,
It Is not to please themselves alone -- but you.
Then who so churlish, or so cynic grown,
Would wish to change a simper for a frown?
Or who so jealous of their own dear quill,
Would point the paragraph her fame to kill?
^et such there are, in this all-scribbling town,
And men of letters too -- of some renown,
Who sicken at all merit but their own.
But sure 'twere more for Wit's -- for Honor's sake,
To make the Drama's race -- the give and take.
[Looking round the house. My hint I see's approved -- so pray begin it,
And praise us -- roundly for the good things in it,
Nor let severity our faults expose,
When godlike Homer's self was known to doze.
But of the piece -- Methinks I hear you hint,
Some dozen lines or more should give the tint --
"Tell how Sir John with Lady Betty's maid
"Is caught intriguing at a masquerade;
"Which Lady Betty, in a jealous fit,
"Resents by flirting with Sir Ben -- the cit.
"Whose three-feet spouse, to modish follies bent,
"Mistakes a six-feet Valet -- for a Gent.
"Whilst Miss, repugnant to her Guardian's plan,
"Elopes in Breeches with her favorite man."
Such are the hints we read in Roscius' days,
By way of Prologue ushered in their plays.
But we, like Ministers and cautious spies,
In secret measures think -- the merit lies.
Yet shall the Muse thus far unveil the plot --
This play was tragi-comically got,
Those sympathetic sorrows to impart
Which harmonize the feelings of the heart;
And may at least this humble merit boast,
A structure founded on fair Fancy's coast.
With you it rests that judgment to proclaim,
Which in the world must raise or sink it is fame.
Yet ere her judges sign their last report,
It Is you [ to the boxes] must recommend her to the Court;
Whose smiles, like Cynthia, in a winter's night,
Will cheer our wanderer with a gleam of light.

CHARACTERS.
ACT I. SCENE, The Island of Sumatra, in the East Indies. MEN.
Sultan, Mr. Farren, Lord Flint, Mr. Davies, Sir Luke Tremor, Mr. Quick, Mr.
Twineall, Mr. Lewis, Mr. Haswell, Mr. Pope, Elvirus, Mr. Holman, Mr. Meanright,
Mr. Macready, Zedan, Mr. Fearon, First Keeper, Mr. Thompson, Second Keeper, Mr.
Cubitt, First Prisoner, Mr. Helm, Second Prisoner, Mr. Gardener. Guard, Mr.
Biurton, Messenger, Mr. Ledger.
WOMEN.
Lady Tremor, Mrs. Mattocks, Aurelia, Miss Wilkinson, Female Prisoner, Mrs.
Pope.
Time of Representation, Twelve Hours.

SUCH THINGS ARE. A PLAY. IN FIVE ACTS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Parlour at Sir Luke Tremor's.
Enter Sir Luke, followed by Lady Tremor. Sir Luke. I TELL you, Madam, you are
two and thirty.


Lady Tremor. I tell you, Sir, you are mistaken.


Sir Luke. Why, did not you come over from England exactly sixteen years ago?


Lady. Not so long.


Sir Luke. Have not we been married the tenth of next April sixteen years?


Lady. Not so long. --


Sir Luke. Did you not come over the year of the great Eclipse? answer me that.


Lady. I don't remember it.


Sir Luke. But I do -- and shall remember it as long as I live -- the first
time I saw you, was in the garden of the Dutch Envoy; you were looking through
a glass at the sun -- I immediately began to make love to you, and the whole
affair was settled while the eclipse lasted -- just one hour eleven minutes,
and three seconds.


Lady. But what is all this to my age?


Sir Luke. Because I know you were at that time near seventeen -- and without
one qualification except your youth -- and not being a Mullatto.


Lady. Sir Luke, Sir Luke, this is not to be borne --


Sir Luke. Oh! yes -- I forgot -- you had two letters of recommendation, from
two great families in England.


Lady. Letters of recommendation!


Sir Luke. Yes; your character -- that, you know, is all the fortune we poor
Englishmen, situated in India, expect with a wife who crosses the sea at the
hazard of her life, to make us happy.


Lady. And what but our characters would you have us bring? Do you suppose any
lady ever came to India, who brought along with her, friends, or fortune?


Sir Luke. No, my dear -- and what is worse -- she seldom leaves them behind,
either.


Lady. No matter, Sir Luke -- but if I delivered to you a good character --


Sir Luke. Yes, my dear you did -- and if you were to ask me for it again, I
cannot say I could give it you.


Lady. How uncivil! how unlike are your manners to the manners of my Lord Flint.


Sir Luke. Ay -- you are never so happy as when you have an opportunity of
expressing your admiration of him -- a disagreeable, nay, a very dangerous man
-- one is never sure of one's self in his presence -- he carries every thing he
hears to the ministers of our suspicious Sultan -- and I feel my head shake
whenever I am in his company.


Lady. How different does his Lordship appear to me -- to me he is all
politesse.


Sir Luke. Politesse! how should you underderstand what is real politesse? You
know your education was very much confined. --


Lady. And if it was confined -- -- I beg, Sir Luke, you will one time or other
cease these reflections -- you know they are what I cannot bear! [walks about in
a passion.] pray, does not his Lordship continually assure me, I might be taken
for a Countess, were it not for a certain little grovelling toss I have caught
with my head -- and a certain little confined hitch in my walk? both which I
learnt of you -- learnt by looking so much at you. --


Sir Luke. And now if you don't take care, by looking so much at his Lordship,
you may catch some of his defects.


Lady. I know of very few he has.


Sir Luke. I know of many -- besides those he assumes. --


Lady. Assumes!! -- --


Sir Luke. Yes; do you suppose he is as forgetful as he pretends to be? no, no
-- but because he is a favorite with the Sultan, and all our great men at
court, he thinks it genteel or convenient to have no memory -- and yet I Will
answer for it, he has one of the best in the universe.


Lady. I don't believe your charge.


Sir Luke. Why, though he forgets his appointments with his tradesmen, did you
ever hear of his forgetting to go to court when a place was to be disposed of?
Did he ever make a blunder, and send a bribe to a man out of power? Did he ever
forget to kneel before the Prince of this Island -- or to look in his
highness's presence like the statue of Patient-resignation in humble
expectation? --


Lady. Dear, Sir Luke -- --


Sir Luke. Sent from his own country in his very infancy, and brought up in the
different courts of petty, arbitrary Princes here in Asia; he is the slave of
every great man, and the tyrant of every poor one. --


Lady. "Petty Princes!" -- it is well his highness our Sultan does not hear you.


Sir Luke. It Is well he does not -- don't you repeat what I say -- but you know
how all this fine country is harrassed and laid waste by a set of Princes,
Sultans, as they style themselves, and I know not what -- who are for ever
calling out to each other "that is mine," and "that is mine;" -- and "you have no
business here" -- and "you have no business there" -- and " I have business
every where;" [Strutting] then "give me this," -- and "give me that;" and "take
this, and take that."


[makes signs of fighting.] Lady. A very elegant description truly.


Sir Luke. Why, you know it is all matter of fact -- and Lord Flint, brought up
from his youth amongst these people, has not one trait of an Englishman about
him -- he has imbibed all this country's cruelty, and I dare say would mind no
more seeing me hung up by my thumbs -- or made to dance upon a red-hot gridiron
-- --


Lady. That is one of the tortures I never heard of! -- O! I should like to see
that of all things!


Sir Luke. Yes -- by keeping this man's company, you will soon be as cruel as he
is -- he will teach you every vice -- a consequential -- grave -- dull -- and
yet with that degree of levity, that dares to pay his addresses to a woman,
even before her husband's face.


Lady. Did not you say, this minute, his Lordship had not a trait of his own
country about him? --


Sir Luke. Well, well -- as you say, that last is a trait of his own country.


Enter Servant and Lord Flint. Serve. Lord Flint. --


[ Exit Servant. Lady. My Lord, I am extremely glad to see you -- we were just
mentioning your name. --


Lord. Were you, indeed, Madam? You do me great honor.


Sir Luke. No, my Lord -- no great honor.


Lord. Pardon me, Sir Luke.


Sir Luke. But, I assure you, my Lord, what I said, did myself a great deal of
honor.


Lady. Yes, my Lord, and I Will acquaint your Lordship what it was.

[going up to him.
Sir Luke. [Pulling her aside] Why, you would not inform against me sure! Do
you know what would be the consequence? My head must answer it.

[frightened.]
Lord. Nay, Sir Luke, I insist upon knowing.


Sir Luke. [To ber] Hush -- hush -- -- no, my Lord, pray excuse me -- your
Lordship perhaps may think what I said did not come trom my heart; and I assure
you, upon my honor, it did.


Lady. O, yes -- that I am sure it did.


Lord. I am extremely obliged to you.

[bowing.
Sir Luke. O, no, my Lord, not at all -- not at all. -- [aside to her.] I Will be
extremely obliged to you, if you will hold your tongue -- Pray, my Lord, are
you engaged out to dinner today? for her Ladyship and I dine out.


Lady. Yes, my Lord, and we should be happy to find your Lordship of the party.


Lord. "Engaged out to dinner"? -- egad very likely -- very likely -- but if I
am -- I have positively forgotten where.


Lady. We are going to --


Lord. No -- I think (now you put me in mind of it) I think I have company to
dine with me -- I am either going out to dinner, or have company to dine with
me; but I really cannot tell which -- however, my people know -- -- but I cannot
call to mind. --


Sir Luke. Perhaps your Lordship has dined; can you recollect that?


Lord. No, no -- I have not dined -- -- what is o'clock?


Lady. Perhaps, my Lord, you have not breakfasted.


Lord. O, yes, I Have breakfasted -- I think so -- but upon my word these things
are very hard to remember.


Sir Luke. They are indeed, my Lord -- and I wish all my family would entirely
forget them.


Lord. What did your Ladyship say was o'clock?


Lady. Exactly twelve, my Lord.


Lord. Bless me! I ought to have been some where else then -- an absolute
engagement. -- I have broke my word -- a positive appointment.


Lady. Shall I send a servant?


Lord. No, no, no, no -- by no means -- it cannot be helped now -- and they know
my unfortunate failing -- besides, I Will beg their pardon, and I trust that will
be ample satistaction.


Lady. You are very good, my Lord, not to leave us.


Lord. I could not think of leaving you so soon, Madam -- the happiness I enjoy
here is such --


Sir Luke. And very likely were your Lordship to go away now, you might never
recollect to come again.


Enter Servant. Serve. A Gentleman, Sir, just come from on board an English
vessel, says, he has letters to present to you.


Sir Luke. Show him in -- [ Exit Servant.] He has brought his character too, I
suppose -- and left it behind, too, I suppose.


Enter Mr. Twineall, in a fashionable undress. Twi. Sir Luke, I have the honor
of presenting to you, [Gives letters] one from my Lord Cleland -- one from Sir
Thomas Shoestring -- one from Colonel Fril.


Sir Luke. [Aside] Who in the name of wonder have my friends recommended? -- [
reads while Lord Flint and the Lady talk apart] No -- as I live, he is a
gentleman, and the son of a Lord -- [ going to Lady Tremor.] My dear, that is a
gentleman, notwithstanding his appearance -- don't laugh -- but let me
introduce you to him.


Lady. A gentleman! certainly -- I did not look at him before -- but now I can
perceive it.


Sir Luke. Mr. Twineall, give me leave to introduce Lady Tremor to you, and my
Lord Flint -- this, my Lord, is the Honorable Mr. Twineall from England, who
will do me the favor to remain in my house, till he is settled to his mind in
some post here. [They bow.] I beg your pardon, Sir, for the somewhat cool
reception Lady Tremor and I gave you at first -- but I dare say her Ladyship
was under the same mistake as myself -- and I must own I took you at first
fight for something very different from the person you prove to be -- for
really no English ships have arrived in this harbor for these five years past,
and the dress of us English gentlemen is so much altered fince that time --


Twi. But, I hope, Sir Luke, if it is, the alteration meets with your
approbation.


Lady. O! to be sure -- it is extremely elegant and becoming.


Sir Luke. Yes, my dear, I don't doubt but you think so; for I remember you
used to make your favorite monkey wear just such a jacket, when he went out a
visiting.


Twin. Was he your favorite, Madam? -- Sir, you are very obliging.

[Bowing to Sir Luke.]
Sir Luke. My Lord, if it were possible for your Lordship to call to your
remembrance such a trifle --


Lady. Dear Sir Luke --

[Pulling him.
Lord. Egad, I believe I do call to my remembrance -- [Gravely considering.] --
Not, I assure you, Sir, that I perceive any great resemblance -- or, if it was
so -- I dare say it is merely in the dress -- -- which I must own strikes me as
most ridiculous -- very ridiculous indeed. -- --


Twi. My Lord!


Lord. I beg pardon, if I have said any thing that -- -- Lady Tremor, what did
I say? -- -- make my apology, if I have said any thing improper -- you know my
unhappy failing.


[Goes up the stage. Lady. [to Twineall.] Sir, his Lordship has made a mistake
in the word "ridiculous," which I am sure he did not mean to say -- but he is
apt to make use of one word for another -- his Lordship has been so long out of
England, that he may be said in some measure to have forgotten his native
language.


[His Lordship all this time appears consequentially absent. Twi. And you have
perfectly explained, Madam -- indeed I ought to have been convinced, without
your explanation, that if his Lordship made use of the word ridiculous (even
intentionally) that the word had now changed its former sense, and was become a
mode to express satisfaction -- or his Lordship would not have made use of it
in the very forcible manner he did, to a perfect stranger.


Sir Luke. What, Mr. Twineall, have you new modes, new fashions for words too
in England, as well as for dresses? -- and are you equally extravagant in their
adoption?


Lady. I never heard, Sir Luke, but that the fashion of words varied, as well
as the fashion of every thing else.


Twi. But what is most extraordinary -- we have now a fashion in England, of
speaking without any words at all.


Lady. Pray, Sir, how is that?


Sir Luke. Ay, do, Mr. Twineall, teach my wife, and I shall be very much
obliged to you -- it will be a great accomplishment. Even you, my Lord, ought
to be attentive to this fashion.


Twi. Why, Madam, for instance, when a gentleman is asked a question which is
either troublesome or improper to answer, you don't say you will not answer it,
even though you speak to an inferior -- -- but you say -- -- "really it appears
to me e-e-e-e-e -- [mutters and shrugs] -- that is -- mo-mo-mo-mo-mo --
[mutters] -- if you see the thing -- for my part -- -- te-te-te-te -- -- and
that is all I can tell about it at persent.


Sir Luke. And you have told nothing!


Twi. Nothing upon earth.


Lady. But may not one guess what you mean?


Twi. O, yes -- perfectly at liberty to guess.


Sir Luke. Well, I Will be shot if I could guess.


Twi. And again -- when an impertinent pedant asks you a question that you know
nothing about, and it may not be convenient to say so -- you answer boldly,
"why really, Sir, my opinion is, that the Greek poet -- he-he-he-he --
[mutters] -- we-we-we-we -- you see -- if his idea was -- and if the Latin
translator -- mis-mis-mis-mis -- [shrugs] -- -- that I should think -- in my
humble opinion -- but the Doctor may know better than I." -- --


Sir Luke. The Doctor must know very little else.


Twi. Or in case of a duel, where one does not care to say who was right, or
who was wrong -- you answer -- " This, Sir, is the state of the matter -- Mr. F
-- came first -- te-te-te-te -- on that -- be-be-be-be -- if the other -- in
short -- [whispers] -- whis-whis-whis-whis" --


Sir Luke. What?


Twi. There, now you have it -- there it is -- but don't say a word about it --
or, if you do -- don't say it come from me." --


Lady. Why, you have not told a word of the story!


Twi. But that your auditor must not say to you -- that is not the fashion -- he
never tells you that -- -- he may say -- "You have not made yourself perfectly
clear;" -- or he may say -- " He must have the matter more particularly pointed
out somewhere else;" -- but that is all the auditor can say with good breeding.


Lady. A very pretty method indeed to satisfy one's curiosity!


Enter Servant. Serve. Mr. Haswell.


Sir Luke. This is a countryman of ours, Mr. Twineall, and a very good man I
assure you.


Enter Mr. Haswell. Sir Luke. Mr. Haswell, how do you do?


[Warmly. Has. Sir Luke, I am glad to see you. -- -- Lady Tremor, how do you do?

[He bows to the rest.
Lady. O, Mr. Haswell, I am extremely glad you are come -- here is a young
adventurer just arrived from England, who has been giving us such a strange
account of all that is going on there.


[Introducing Twineall. Has. Sir, you are welcome to India. [Sir Luke whispers
Haswell. Indeed! -- his son.


Lady. Do, Mr. Haswell, talk to him -- he can give you great information.


Has. I am glad of it -- I shall then hear many things I am impatient to become
acquainted with. [Goes up to Twineall.] Mr. Twineall, I have the honor of
knowing his Lordship, your father, extremely well -- he holds his seat in
Parliament still, I presume?


Twi. He does, Sir.


Has. And your uncle, Sir Charles?


Twi. Both, Sir -- both in Parliament still.


Has. Pray, Sir, has any act in behalf of the poor clergy taken place yet?


Twi. In behalf of the poor clergy, Sir? -- I Will tell you -- l'll tell you,
Sir. -- -- As to that act -- concerning -- [shrugs and mutters] -- em-em-em-em
-- the Committee -- em-em -- ways and means -- hee-hee -- I assure you, Sir --
te-te-te -- [Sir Luke, Lady, and Lord Flint laugh. My father and my uncle both
think so, I assure you.


Has. Think how, Sir?


Sir Luke. Nay, that is not good breeding -- you must ask no more questions.


Has. Why not?


Sir Luke. Because -- we-we-we-we -- [mimicks] -- he knows nothing about it.


Has. What, Sir -- not know?


Twi Yes, Sir, perfectly acquainted with every thing that passes in the house
-- but I assure you, that when they come to be reported -- -- but, Sir Luke,
now permit me, in my turn, to make a few inquiries concerning the state of this
country.


[Sir Luke starts, and fixes his eyes suspiciously on Lord Flint. Sir Luke.
Why, one does not like to speak much about the country one lives in -- but, Mr.
Haswell, you have been visiting our encampments; you may tell us what is going
on there.


Lady. Pray, Mr. Haswell, is it true that the Sultan cut off the head of one of
his wives the other day because she said "I will not?"


Sir Luke. Do, my dear, be silent.


Lady. I will not.


Sir Luke. O, that the Sultan had you instead of me!


Lady. And with my head off, I suppose?


Sir Luke. No, my dear; in that state, I should have no objection to you myself.


Lady. [Aside to Sir Luke.] Now, I Will frighten you ten times more. -- But, Mr.
Haswell, I am told there are many persons suspected of disaffection to the
present Sultan, who have been lately, by his orders, arrested, and sold to
slavery, notwithstanding there was no proof against them produced.


Has. Proof! -- -- in a State such as this, the charge is quite sufficient.


Sir Luke. [In apparent agonies, wishing to turn the discourse.] Well, my Lord,
and how does your Lordship find yourself this afternoon? -- this morning, I
mean -- Bless my soul! why I begin to be as forgetful as your Lordship.


[Smiling and fawning. Lady. How I pity the poor creatures!


Sir Luke. [Aside to Lady.] Take care what you say before that tool of state --
look at him, and tremble for your head.


Lady. Look at him, and tremble for yours -- and so, Mr. Haswell, all this is
true? -- and some people, of consequence too, I am told, dragged from their
homes, and sent to slavery merely on suspicion?


Has. Yet, less do I pity those, than some, whom prisons and dungeons crammed
before, are yet prepared to receive.


Lord. Mr. Haswell, such is the Sultan's pleasure.


Sir Luke. Will your Lordship take a turn in the garden? it looks from this
door very pleasant; -- does not it?


Lady. But pray, Mr. Haswell, has not the Sultan sent for you to attend at his
palace this morning?


Has. He has, Madam.


Lady. There! I heard he had, but Sir Luke said not. -- I am told he thinks
himself under the greatest obligations to you.


Has. The report has flattered me -- but if his highness should think himself
under obligations, I can readily point a way, by which he may acquit himself of
them.


Lady. In the mean time, I am sure, you feel for those poor sufferers.


Has. [With stifled emotion.] Sir Luke, good morning to you -- I called upon
some trifling business, but I have out-staid my time, and therefore fore I Will
call again in a couple of hours -- Lady Tremor, good morning -- my Lord -- Mr.
Twine-all --

[Bows, and exit
Twi. Sir Luke, your garden does look so divinely beautiful --


Sir Luke. Come, my Lord, will you take a turn in it? Come Mr. Twineall -- come
my dear -- [taking ber hand.] I cannot think what business Mr. Haswell has to
speak to me upon -- for my part, I am quite a plain man -- and busy myself
about no one's affairs, except my own -- but I dare say your Lordship has
forgot all we have been talking about.


Lord. If you permit me, Sir Luke, I Will hand the Lady.


Sir Luke. Certainly, my Lord, if you please -- come, Mr. Twineall, and I Will
conduct you.


[Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Sir Luke Tremor's.
Enter Twineall and Meanright. Twi. MY dear friend, after so long a separation,
how gland I am to meet you! -- but how devilish unlucky that you should, on the
very day of my arrival, be going to set sail for another part of the world! yet
before you go, I must beg a favor of you -- you know Sir Luke and his family
perfectly well, I dare say?


Mean. I think so -- I have been in his house near six years.


Twi. The very person on earth I wanted! -- Sir Luke has power here, I suppose?
-- a word from him might do a man some service perhaps?

[significantly.
Mean. Why, yes; I don't know a man that has more influence at a certain place.


Twin. And her Ladyship seems a very clever gentlewoman?


Mean. Very.


Twi. And I have a notion they think me very clever.


Mean. I dare say they do.


Twi. Yes -- but I mean very clever.


Mean. No doubt!


Twi. But, my dear friend, you must help me to make them think better of me
still -- and when my fortune is made, I Will make yours -- for when I once become
acquainted with people's dispositions, their little weaknesses, foibles and
faults, I can wind, twist, twine, and get into the corner of every one's heart,
and lie so snug, they cannot know I Am there, till they want to pull me out, and
find it is impossible.


Mean. Excellent talent!


Twi. Is not it? and now, my dear friend, do you inform me of the secret
dispositions, and propensities of every one in this family, and of all their
connections. -- What Lady values herself upon one qualification, and what Lady
upon another? -- What Gentleman will like to be told of his accomplishments? or
his daughter's? -- or of his horses? or of his dogs? -- now, my dear Ned,
acquaint me with all this -- and within a fortnight I will become the most
necessary rascal -- -- not a creature shall know how to exist without me.


Mean. Why such a man as you ought to have made your fortune in England.


Twi. No -- my father, and my three uncles monopolized all the great men
themselves; and would never introduce me where I was likely to become their
rival -- This -- this is the very spot for me to display my genius -- But then
I must penetrate the people first -- and you will kindly save me that trouble.
-- Come, give me all their characters -- all short, all I am to praise -- and
all I am to avoid praising, -- in order to endear myself to them. [Takes out
tablets.] Come -- begin with Sir Luke.


Mean. Sir Luke -- values himself more upon personal bravery, than upon any
thing else.


Twi. Thank you, my dear friend -- thank you. [Writes] Was he ever in the army?


Mean. Oh yes -- besieged a capital fortress, a few years ago -- and now, the
very name of a battle or a great general tickles his vanity, and he takes all
the praises you can lavish upon the subject as compliments to himself.


Twi. Thank you -- thank you a thousand times -- [Writes.] I Will mention a
battle very soon.


Mean. Not directly.


Twi. O, no -- let me alone for time and place -- go on, my friend -- go on --
her Ladyship --


Mean. Descended from the ancient kings of Scotland.


Twi. You don't say so!


Mean. And though she is so nicely scrupulous as never to mention the word
genealogy, yet I have seen her agitation so great, when the advantages of high
birth have been extolled, she could scarcely withhold her sentiments of
triumph; which in order to disguise, she has assumed a disdain for all "vain
titles -- empty sounds -- and idle pomp."


Twi. Thank you -- thank you -- this is a most excellent trait of the Lady's --
[Writes.] "Pedigree of the kings of Scotland?" O, I have her at once.


Mean. Yet do it nicely -- oblique touches, rather than open explanations.


Twi. Let me alone for that.


Mean. She has, I know, in her possession -- but I dare say she would not show
it you, nay, on the contrary, would even affect to be highly offended, if you
were to mention it -- and yet it certainly would flatter her, to know you were
acquainted with her having it.


Twi. What -- what -- what is it?


Mean. A large old-fashioned wig -- which Malcolm the third or fourth, her
great ancestor, wore when he was crowned at Scone, in the year -- --


Twi. I Will mention it.


Mean. Take care.


Twi. O, let me alone for the manner


Mean. She Will pretend to be angry.


Twi. That I am prepared for. -- Pray who is my Lord Flint?


Mean. A deep man -- and a great favorite at court.


Twi. Indeed! -- how am I to please him?


Mean. By insinuations against the present Sultan.


Twi. How!


Mean. With all his pretended attachment, his heart -- --


Twi. Are you sure of it?


Mean. Sure: -- he blinds Sir Luke, (who by the bye is no great politician) but
I know his Lordship -- and if he thought he was sure of his ground -- (and he
thinks he shall be sure of it soon) -- then --


Twi. I Will insinuate myself and join his party -- but, in the mean time,
preserve good terms with Sir Luke, in case any thing should fall in my way
there. -- Who is Mr. Haswell?


Mean. He pretends to be a man of principle and sentiment -- flatter him on
that.


Twi. The easieft thing in the world -- no people like flattery better than
such as he. -- They will bear even to hear their vices praised. -- I will
myself undertake to praise the vices of a man of sentiment till he shall think
them so many virtues. -- You have mentioned no Ladies, but the Lady of the
house yet.


Mean. There is no other Lady, except a pretty girl who came over from England,
about two years ago, for a husband, and not succeeding in another part of the
country, is now recommended to this house -- and has been here three or four
months.


Twi. Let me alone, to please her.


Twi. Let me alone, to please her.


Mean. Yes -- I believe you are skilled.


Twi. For the art of flattery, no one more.


Mean. But damn it -- it is not a liberal art.


Twi. It is a great science, notwithstanding -- and studied, at present, by all
the connoisseurs. -- Zounds! I have staid a long time -- I cannot attend to any
more characters at present -- Sir Luke and his Lady will think me inattentive,
if I don't join them -- Shall I see you again? -- if not -- I wish you a
pleasant voyage -- I Will make the most of what you have told me -- you will hear
I Am a great man -- God bless you! -- good bye! -- you will hear I Am a great man.


[Exit. Mean. And, if I am not mistaken, I shall hear you are turned out of the
house before tomorrow morning. O, Twineall! exactly the reverse of every
character have you now before you -- the greatest misfortune in the ^ife of Sir
Luke has been, flying from his army in the midst of an engagement, and a most
humiliating degradation in consequence, which makes him so feelingly alive on
the subject of a battle, that nothing but his want of courage can secure my
friend Twineall's life for venturing to name the subject -- then Lord Flint,
firmly attached to the interest of the Sultan, will be all on fire, when he
hears of open disaffection -- but most of all her Ladyship! whose father was a
grocer, and uncle, a noted advertising "Periwig-maker on a new construction."
She will run mad to hear of births, titles, and long pedigrees. -- Poor
Twineall! little do thou think what is prepared for thee. -- There is Mr.
Haswell too -- but to him have I sent you to be reclaimed -- to him, -- who,
free from faults, or even foibles, of his own, has yet more potently the
blessing given, of tenderness for ours.


[Exit. SCENE II. The inside of a Prison.
Several Prisoners dispersed in different situations. Enter Keeper and Haswell
with lights. Keep. This way, Sir -- the prisons this way are more extensive
still -- you seem to feel for these unthinking men -- but they are a set of
unruly people, whom no severity can make such as they ought to be.


Has. And would not gentleness, or mercy, do you think, reclaim them?


Keep. That I cannot say -- we never try those means in this part of the world
-- that man yonder, suspected of disaffection, is sentenced to be here for
life, unless his friends can lay down a large sum by way of penalty, which he
finds they cannot do, and he is turned melancholy.


Has. [After a pause.] Who is that?

[To another.
Keep. He has been tried for heading an insurrection, and acquitted.


Has. What keeps him here?


Keep. Fees due to the Court -- a debt contracted while he proved his innocence.


Has. Lead on, my friend -- let us go to some other part.

[Putting his hand to his eyes.
Keep. In this ward, we are going to, are the prisoners, who by some small
reserve -- some little secreted stock when they arrived -- or by the bounty of
some friend who visit them -- -- or suchlike fortunate circumstance, are in a
less dismal place.


Has. Lead on.


Keep. But stop -- put on this cloak, for, before we arrive at the place I
mention, we must pass a damp vault, which to those who are not used to it --
[Haswell puts on the cloak] -- or will you postpone your visit?


Has. No -- go on.


Keep. Alas! who would suppose you had been used to see such places! -- you
look concerned -- vexed to see the people suffer -- I wonder you should come,
when you seem to think so much about them.


Has. Oh! that, that is the very reason.


[Exit, following the Keeper. [Zedan, a tawny Indian Prisoner, follows them,
stealing out, as if intent on something.] Two Prisoners walk slowly down the
Stage. 1st Pris. Who is this man?


2d Pris. From Britain -- I have seen him once before.


1st Pris. He looks pale -- he has no heart.


2d Pris. I believe, a pretty large one.


Re-enter Zedan. Zed. Brother, a word with you. [To the Is It Prisoner, the other
retires] as the stranger and our keeper passed by the passage, a noxious vapor
put out the light, and as they groped along I purloined this from the stranger
-- [Shews a pocket-book]see it contains two notes will pay our ransom.


[Shewing the notes. 1st Pris. A treasure -- our certain ransom!


Zed. Liberty! our wives, our children, and our friends, will these papers
purchase.


1st Pris. What a bribe! our keeper may rejoice too.


Zed. And then the pleasure it will be to hear the stranger fret, and complain
for his loss! -- O, how my heart loves to see forrow! -- Misery such as I have
known, on men who spurn me -- who treat me as if (in my own Island) I had no
friends that loved me -- no servants that paid me honor -- no children that
revered me -- who forget I am a husband -- a father -- nay, a man. --


1st Pris. Conceal your thoughts -- conceal your treature too -- or the
Briton's complaint --


Zed. Will be in vain -- our keeper will conclude the bribe must come to him,
at laft -- and therefore make no great search for it -- here, in the corner of
my belt [Puts up the pocket-book] twill be secure -- Come this way, and let us
indulge our pleasant prospect.


[They retire, and the scene closes. SCENE III. Another part of the Prison.
A kind of sopha with an old man sleeping upon it -- Elvirus sitting
attentively by him. Enter Keeper and Haswell. Keep. That young man, you see
there, watching his aged father as he sleeps, by the help of fees gains his
admission -- and he never quits the place, except to go and purchase cordials
for the old man, who, (though healthy and strong when he first became a
prisoner) is now become ill and languid.


Has. Are they from Europe?


Keep. No -- but descended from Europeans -- see how the youth holds his
father's hand! -- I have sometimes caught him bathing it with tears.


Has. I Will speak to the young man.

[Going to him.
Keep. He will speak as soon as he sees me -- he has sent a petition to the
Sultan about his father, and never fails to inquire if a reply is come.

[ They approach -- Elvirus starts, and comes forward]
Elv. [ To Haswell] Sir, do you come from the Court? has the Sultan received my
humble supplication? Can you tell? -- softly -- let not my father hear you
speak.


Has. I come but as a stranger, to see the prisoh.


Elv. No answer yet, keeper?


Keep. No -- I told you it was in vain to write -- they never read petitions
sent from prisons -- their hearts are hardened to such worn-out tales of sorrow.

[Elvirus turns toward his Father and weeps.
Has. Pardon me, Sir -- but what is the request you are thus denied?


Elv. Behold my father! but three months has he been confined here; and yet --
unless he breathes a purer air -- O, if you have influence at Court, Sir, pray
represent what passes in this dreary prison -- what passes in my heart. -- --
My supplication is to remain a prisoner here, while my father, released, shall
be permitted to retire to humble life; and never more take arms in a cause the
Sultan may suspect -- which engagement broken, my life shall be the forfeit. --
Or if the Sultan would allow me to serve him as a soldier. --


Has. You would fight against the party your father fought for?


Elv. [Starting.] No -- but in the forests -- or on the desert sands -- amongst
those slaves who are sent to battle with the wild Indians -- there I would go
-- and earn the boon I ask -- -- or in the mines --


Has. Give me your name -- I will, at least, present your suit -- and, perhaps
--


Elv. Sir! do you think it is likely? Joyful hearing!


Has. Nay, be not too hasty in your hopes -- I cannot answer for my success
[Repeats] Your father humbly implores to be released from prison -- and, in his
stead, you take his chains -- or, for the Sultan's service, fight as a slave,
or dig in his mines?


Elv. Exactly, Sir -- that is the petition -- I thank you, Sir.


Keep. You don't know, young man, what it is to dig in mines -- or fight
against foes, who make their prisoners die by unheard of tortures.


Elv. You do not know, Sir, what it is -- to see a parent suffer.


Has. [Writing] Your name, Sir?


Elv. Elvirus Casimir. --


Has. Your father's?


Elv. The same -- one who followed agriculture in the fields of Symria -- but,
induced by the call of freedom --


Has. How? have a care.


Elv. No -- his son, by the call of nature, supplicates his freedom.


Keep. The rebel, you find, breaks out.


Elv. [Aside to the Keeper.] Silence -- silence! he forgives it -- don't remind
him of it -- don't undo my hopes.


Has. I will serve you if I can.


Elv. And I will merit it -- indeed I will -- you shall not complain of me -- I
will be --


Has. Retire -- I trust you.

Elvirus bows lowly, and retires.]
Keep. Yonder cell contains a female prisoner.


Has. A female prisoner!


Keep. Without a friend or comforter, she has existed there these many years --
nearly fifteen.


Has. Is it possible!


Keep. Would you wish to see her?


Has. If it will not give her pain.


Keep. At least, she will not resent it -- for she seldom complains, except in
moans to herself -- [Goes to the cell.] Lady, here is one come to vist all the
prisoners -- please to appear before him.


Has. I thank you -- you speak with reverence and respect to her.


Keep. She has been of some note, though now so totally unfriended -- at least,
we think she has, from her gentle manners; and our governor is in the daily
expectation of some liberal ransom for her, which makes her imprisonment
without a hope of release, till that day arrives -- [Going to the cell] -- Lend
me your hand -- you are weak.

[ He leads her from the cell -- she appears faint -- and as if the light
affected her eyes -- Haswell pulls off his hat, and, after a pause --
Has. I fear you are not in health, Lady?


[She looks at him solemnly for some time. Keep. Speak -- Madam, speak.


Pris. No -- not very well.

[Faintingly.
Has. Where are your friends? When do you expect your ransom?


Pris. [Shaking her head.] Never.


Keep. She persists to say so; thinking by that declaration, we shall release
her without a ransom.


Has. Is that your motive?


Pris. I know no motive for a falsehood.


Has. I was to blame -- pardon me.


Keep. Your answers are somewhat prouder than usual.

[He retires up the stage.
Pris. They are. -- [ To Haswell] Forgive me -- I am mild with all of these --
but from a countenance like yours -- I could not bear reproach.


Has. You flatter me.


Pris. Alas! Sir, and what have I to hope from such a meaness? -- You do not
come to ransom me.


Has. Perhaps I do.


Pris. Oh! do not say so -- unless -- unless -- I am not to be deceived --
pardon in your turn this suspicion -- but when I have so much to hope for --
when the sun, the air, fields, woods, and all that wondrous world, wherein I
have been so happy, is in prospect; forgive me, if the vast hope makes me fear.


Has. Unless your ransom is fixed at something beyond my power to give, I will
release you.


Pris. Release me! Benevolent!


Has. How shall I mark you down in my petition? [Takes out his book.] what name?


Pris. It Is almost blotted from my memory.


[Weeping. Keep. It is of little note -- a female prisoner, taken with the
rebel party, and in these cells confined for fisteen years.


Pris. Daring which time I have demeaned myself with all humility to my
governors -- neither have I distracted my fellow prisoners with a complaint
that might recall to their memory their own unhappy fate -- I have been
obedient, patient; and cherished hope to cheer me with vain dreams, while
despair possessed my reason.


Has. Retire -- I will present the picture you have given.


Pris. Succeed too -- or, never let me see you more --

[She goes up the stage.
Has. You never shall.


Pris. [Returrs] Or, if you should miscarry in your views [for who forms plans
that do not sometimes sail?] I will not reproach you even to myself -- -- no --
nor will I suffer much from the disappointment -- merely that you may not have,
what I suffer, to account for.


[Exit to her cell. Has. Excellent mind!


Keep. In this cell --

[Going to another.
Has. No -- take me away -- I have enough to do -- I dare not see more at
present. --


[Exeunt. SCENE IV. The former Prison Scene.
Enter Zedan. Zed. They are coming -- I Will stand here in his sight, that,
should he miss what I have taken, he will not suspect me, but suppose it is one
who has hid himself.


Enter Keeper and Haswell. Keep. [ To Zedan] What makes you here? -- still
moping by yourself, and lamenting for your family? -- [ To Haswell] that man,
the most ferocious I ever met with -- laments, sometimes even with tears, the
separation from his wife and children.


Has. [Going to him] I am sorry for you, friend; [Zedan looks sullen and
morose.] I pity you.


Keep. Yes -- he had a pleasant hamlet on the neighboring island -- plenty of
fruits -- clear springs -- and wholesome roots -- and now complains bitterly of
his repasts -- sour rice, and muddy water.


[Exit Keeper. Has. Poor man! bear your sorrows nobly -- and as we are alone --
no miserable eye to grudge the favor -- [Looking round] take this trifle --
[Gives money] it will at least make your meals better for a few short weeks --
till Heaven may please to favor you with a less sharp remembrance of the
happiness you have lost -- Farewell.

[Going.]
[Zedan catches hold of him. and taking the pocketbook from his belt, puts it
into Haswell's hand.] Has. What Is this?


Zed. I meant to gain my liberty with it -- but I will not vex you.


Has. How came you by it?


Zed. Stole it -- and would have stabbed you too, had you been alone -- but I
am glad I did not -- Oh! I am glad I did not.


Has. You like me then?


Zed. [Shakes his head and holds his heart.] It Is something that I never felt
before -- it makes me like not only you, but all the world besides -- the love
of my family was confined to them alone; but this makes me feel I could love
even my enemies.


Has. Oh, nature! grateful! mild! gentle! and forgiving! -- worst of tyrants
they who, by hard usage, drive you to be cruel!


Enter Keeper. Keep. The lights are ready, Sir, through the dark passage -- [
To Zedan.] Go to your fellows.


Has. [ To Zedan.] Farewell -- we will meet again.


[Zedan exit on one side, Haswell and Keeper exeunt on the other. END OF THE
SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Sir Luke Tremor's.
Enter Sir Luke and Aurelia. Sir Luke. WHY, then Aurelia, (though I never
mentioned it to my Lady Tremor) my friend wrote me word, he had reason to
suppose your affections were improperly fixed upon a young gentleman in that
neighborhood; and this was his reason for wishing you to leave that place to
come hither -- and this continual dejection convinces me my friend was not
mistaken -- answer me -- can you say he was?


Aur. Why, then, Sir Luke, heartily to confess --


Sir Luke. Nay, no tears -- why in tears? for a husband? be comforted -- we'll
get you one ere long, I warrant.


Aur. Dear, Sir Luke, how can you imagine I am in tears because I have not a
husband, while you see Lady Tremor every day in tears for the very opposite
cause?


Sir Luke. No matter -- women like a husband through pride -- and I have known
a woman marry from that very motive, even a man she has been ashamed of.


Aur. Why, then I dare say, poor Lady Tremor married from pride.


Sir Luke. Yes; -- and I Will let her know pride is painful.


Aur. But, Sir, her Ladyship's philosophy --


Sir Luke. She has no philosophy.


Enter Lady Tremor and Twineall. Sir Luke. Where is his Lordship? What have you
done with him?


Lady. He Is speaking a word to Mr. Meanright about his passport to England. --
Did you mean me, Sir Luke, that had no philosophy? I protest, I have a great
deal.


Sir Luke. When? where did you show it?


Lady. Why, when the servant at my Lady Grissei's threw a whole urn of boiling
water upon your legs, did I give any proofs of female weakness? did I faint,
scream, or even shed a tear?


Sir Luke. No -- no -- very true -- and while I lay sprawling on the carnet, I
could see you fanning and holding the smelling bottle to the Lady of the house,
begging her not to make herself uneasy, for that the accident was of no manner
of consequence.


Aur. Dear Sir, don't be angry; -- I am sure her Ladyship spoke as she thought.


Sir Luke. I suppose she did, Miss.


Aur. I mean -- she thought the accident might be easily got the better of --
She thought you might be easily recovered.


Lady. No, indeed, I did not -- but I thought Sir Luke had frequently charged
me with the want of patience; and that moment, the very thing in the world I
could have wished, happened -- on purpose to give me an opportunity to prove
his accusation false.


Sir Luke. Very well, Madam -- but did not the whole company cry shame on your
behavior? did not they say, it was not the conduct of a wife?


Lady. Only our particular acquaintance could say so -- for the rest of the
company, I am sure, did not take me to be your wife -- thank Heaven, our
appearances never betray that secret -- do you think we look like the same
flesh and blood?


Sir Luke. That day, in particular, we did not -- for I remember you had been
no less than three hours at your toilet.


Aur. And, indeed, Sir Luke, if you were to use milk of roses, and several
other little things of that kind, you cannot think how much more like a fine
gentleman you would look. -- Such things as those make, almost, all the
difference there is between you and such a gentleman as Mr. Twineall.


Twi. No, pardon me, Madam -- a face like mine may use those things -- but in
Sir Luke's, they would entirely destroy that fine martial appearance -- [ Sir
Luke looks confounded.] which women as well as men admire -- for, as valor is
the first ornament of our sex --


Lady. What are you saying, Mr. Twineall? [Aside.] I Will keep him on this
subject if I can.


Twi. I was going to observe, Madam -- that the reputation of a General --
which puts me in mind, Sir Luke, of an account I read of a battle --

[ He crosses over to Sir Luke, who turns up the Stage in the utmost confusion,
and steals out of the room.]
Lady. Well, Sir -- go on -- go on -- you were going to introduce --


Twi. A battle, Madam -- but, Sir Luke is gone!


Lady. Never mind that, Sir -- he generally runs away on these occasions.


Sir Luke. [Coming back.] What were you saying, Aurelia, about a husband?


Lady. She did not speak.


Sir Luke. To be sure, Ladies in India do get husbands very quick.


Twi. Not always -- I am told, Sir Luke -- Women of family, [ fixing his eyes
steadfastly on Lady Tremor.] indeed, may soon enter into the matrimonial state
-- but the rich men in India, we are told in England, are grown lately very
particular with whom they marry, and there is not a man of any repute that will
now look upon a woman as a wife, unless she is descended from a good family.

[ Looking at Lady Tremor, who walks up the Stage and steals off, just as Sir
Luke had done before.
Sir Luke. I am very sorry -- very sorry to say, Mr. Twineall, that has not
been always the case.


Twi. Then I am very sorry too, Sir Luke; for it is as much impossible that a
woman, who is not born of a good family, can be --


[ Lady Tremor returns. Sir Luke. That is just what I say -- they cannot be --


Lady. Sir Luke, let me tell you --


Sir Luke. It does not signify telling, my dear, -- you have proved it.


Lady. [ To Twineall.] Sir, let me tell you --


Twi. O! O! my dear Madam, it is all in vain -- there is no such thing -- it
cannot be -- there is no pleading against conviction -- a person of low birth
must, in every particular, be a terrible creature.


Sir Luke. [Going to her.] A terrible creature! a terrible creature!


Lady. Here comes my Lord Flint -- I Will appeal to him.


Enter Lord Flint. Sir Luke. [Going to him.] My Lord, I was saying, as proof
that our great Sultan, who now fills this throne, is no impostor, (as the rebel
party would insinuate) no low born man, but of the Royal Stock; his conduct
palpably evinces -- for, had he not been nobly born, we should have beheld the
Plebeian bursting forth upon all occasions [ Looking at Lady Tremor] and then,
Heaven help all those who had had any dealings with him!


Lady. Provoking!

[Goes up the stage.
Lord. Sir Luke, is there a doubt of the Emperor's birth and title? he is the
real Sultan, depend upon it -- it surprises me to hear you talk with the
smallest uncertainty.


Twi. O, Sir Luke, I wonder at it too, [ Aside to Lord Flint.] and yet, damn
me, my Lord, if I have not my doubts.

[ Lord Flint starts.
Sir Luke. I, my Lord? far be it from me! I was only saying what other people
said; for my part I never harbored a doubt of the kind. -- [Aside.] My head
begins to nod, only for that word -- pray Heaven, I may die with it on! -- I
should not like to lose my head -- nor should I like to die by a bullet -- nor
by a small sword -- and a cannon ball would be as disagreeable, as any thing, I
know -- it is very odd -- but I never yet could make up my mind, in what manner
I should. like to go out of the world.

[ During this speech. Twineall is paying court to Lord Flint; they come
forward and Sir Luke retires.
Lord. Your temerity astonishes me!


Twi. I must own, my Lord, I feel somewhat awkward in saying it to your
Lordship -- but my own heart -- my own conscience -- my own sentiments -- they
are my own -- and they are dear to me. -- And so it is -- the Sultan does not
appear to be [With significance.] that great man some people think him.


Lord. Sir, you astonish me -- pray what is your name? I have forgotten it.


Twi. Twineall, my Lord -- the honorable Henry Twineall -- your Lordship does
me great honor to ask -- arrived this morning from England, as your Lordship
may remember -- in the ship Mercury, my Lord -- and all the officers on board
speaking with the highest admiration and warmest terms of your Lordship's
official character.


Lord. Why, then, Mr. Twineall, I am very sorry --


Twi. And so am I, my Lord, that your sentiments and mine should so far
disagree, as I know they do. -- I am not unacquainted with your firm adherence
to the Emperor -- but I am unused to disguise my thoughts -- I could not, if I
would -- I have no little views -- no sinister motives -- no plots -- no
intrigues -- no schemes of preferment, -- and I verily believe that if a large
scymitar was now directed at my head -- or a large pension directed to my
pocket -- (in the first case at least) I should speak my mind.


Lord. [Aside.] A dangerous young man this! and I may make something of the
discovery.


Twi. [Aside.] It tickles him to the soul, I find. -- My Lord, now I begin to
be warm on the subject, I feel myself quite agitated -- and, from the
intelligence which I have heard, even when I was in England, -- there is every
reason to suppose -- -- exm -- exm -- exm -- --

[Mutters.]
Lord. What, Sir? what?


Twi. You understand me.


Lord. No, Sir -- explain.


Twi. Why, then, there is every reason to suppose -- some people are not what
they should be -- pardon my thoughts, if they are wrong.


Lord. I do pardon your thoughts, with all my heart -- but your words, young
man, must be answered for [Aside.] Lady Tremor, good morning.


Twi. [Aside.] He is going to ruminate on my sentiments, I dare say.


Lady. Shall we have your Lordship's company toward the evening? Mr. Haswell
will be here; if your Lordship has no objection?


Sir Luke. How do you know Mr. Haswell will be here?


Lady. Because he has just called, in his way to the Palace, and said so -- and
he has been telling us some very interesting stories too.


Sir Luke. Of his moring visits, I suppose -- I heard Meanright say he saw him
very busy.


Lady. Sir Luke and I dine out, my Lord; but we shall return early in the
evening.


Lord. I will be here, without fail. -- Sir Luke, aword with you if you please
-- [They come forward.] Mr. Twineall has taken some very improper liberties
with the Sultan's name, and I must insist on making him answer for it.


Sir Luke. My Lord, you are extremely welcome [Trembling.] to do whatever your
Lordship pleases with any one belonging to me, or to my house -- but I hope
your Lordship will pay some regard to the master of it.


Lord. O! great regard to the master -- and to the mistress also. -- But for
that gentleman --


Sir Luke. Do what your Lordship pleases.


Lord. I will -- and I will make him --


Sir Luke. If your Lordship does not forget it.


Lord. I shall not forget it, Sir Luke -- I have a very good memory, when I please.


Sir Luke. I don't, in the least, doubt it, my Lord -- I never did doubt it.


Lord. And I can be very severe too, Sir Luke, when I please.


Sir Luke. I don't, in the least, doubt it, my Lord -- I never did doubt it.


Lord. You may depend upon seeing me here in the evening -- and then you shall
find I have not threatened more than I mean to perform -- good morning!


Sir Luke. Good morning, my Lord -- I don't in the least doubt it.


[ Exit Lord Flint. Lady. [Coming, forward with Twineall.] For Heaven's sake,
Mr. Twineall, what has birth to do with --


Twi. It has to do with every thing, Madam -- even with beauty -- and I wish I
may suffer death, if a woman, with all the mental and personal accomplishments
of the finest creature in Europe, would to me be of that value, [Snapping his
finger.] if lowly born.


Sir Luke. And I sincerely wish every man who visits me was of the same opinion.


Aur. For shame, Mr. Twineall! persons of mean birth ought not to be despised
for what it was not in their power to prevent -- and if it is a misfortune, you
should consider them only as objects of pity.


Twi. And so I do pity them -- and so I do -- most sincerely -- poor creatures.

[ Looking on Lady Tremor.
Sir Luke. Aye, now he has mended it finely.


Lady. Mr. Twineall, let me tell you --


Sir Luke. My dear -- Lady Tremor -- [Taking her aside.] let him alone -- let
him go on -- there is something preparing for him he little expects -- so let
the poor man say and do what he pleases, for the present -- it will not last long
-- for he has offended my Lord Flint, and, I dare say his Lordship will be
able, upon some account or another, to get him imprisoned for life.


Lady. Imprisoned! Why not take off his head at once?


Sir Luke. Well, my dear -- I am sure I have no objection -- and I dare say my
Lord will have it done, to oblige you. -- Egad, I must make friends with her to
keep mine safe.

[Aside.
Lady. Do you mean to take him out to dinner with us?


Sir Luke. Yes, my dear, if you approve of it -- not else.


Lady You are grown extremely polite.


Sir Luke. Yes, my dear, his Lordship has taught me how to be polite. -- Mr.
Twineall, Lady Tremor and I are going to prepare for our visit, and I will send
a servant to show you to your apartment, in order to dress, for you will favor
us with your company, I hope?


Twi. Certainly, Sir Luke, I shall do myself the honor.


Lady. Come this way, Aurelia, I cannot bear to look at him.

[ Exit with Aurelia.
Sir Luke. Nor I to think of him.


[Exit. Twi. If I have not settled my business in this family, I am mistaken --
they seem to have but one mind about me. -- Devilish clever fellow, egad! -- I
am the man to send into the world -- such a volatile, good-looking scoundrel
too! No one suspects me -- -- to be sure I am under some few obligations to my
friend for letting me into the different characters of the family -- and yet I
don't know whether I am obliged to him or not -- for if he had not made me
acquainted with them -- I should soon have had the skill to find them out
myshelf. -- No; I will not think myshelf under any obligation to him -- it is
devilish inconvenient for a gentleman to be under an obligation.


[Exit. SCENE II. The Place. The Sultan discovered with guards and officers
attending.
Haswell is conducted in by an officer. Sul. Sir you are summoned to receive
our thanks, for the troops restored to health by your kind prescriptions. --
Ask a reward adequate to your services.


Has. Sultan -- the reward I ask, is to preserve more of your people still.


Sul. How more? my subjects are in health -- no contagion reigns amongst them.


Has. The prisoner is your subject -- there misery -- more contagious than
disease, preys on the lives of hundreds -- sentenced but to confinement, their
doom is death. -- Immured in damp and dreary vaults, they daily perish -- and
who can tell but that amongst the many hapless sufferers, there may be hearts,
bent down with penitence to Heaven and you, for every slight offense -- there
may be some amongst the wretched multitude, even innocent victims. -- Let me
seek them out -- let me save them, and you.


Sul. Amazement! retract your application -- curb this weak pity; and receive
our thanks.


Has. Curb my pity? -- and what can I receive in recompense for that soft bond,
which links me to the wretched? -- and while it sooths their sorrow repays me
more, than all the gifts or homage of an empire. -- -- But if repugnant to your
plan of government -- not in the name of pity -- but of justtice.


Sil. Justice! -- --


Has. The justice which forbids all but the worst of criminals to be denied
that wholesome air the very brute creation freely takes; at least allow them
that.


Sul. Consider, Sir, for whom you plead -- for men, (if not base culprits) yet
so misled, so depraved, they are offensive to our state, and deserve none of
its blessings.


Has. If not upon the undeserving, -- if not upon the hapless wanderer from the
paths of rectitude, -- where shall the sun diffuse his light, or the clouds
distill their dew? Where shall spring breathe fragrance, or autumn pour its
plenty?


Sul. Sir, your sentiments, but much more your character, excite my curiosity.
They tell me, in our camps, you visited each sick man's bed, -- administered
yourself the healing draught, -- encouraged our savages with the hope of life,
or pointed out their better hope in death. -- The widow speaks your charities
-- the orphan lisps your bounties -- and the rough Indian melts in tears to
bless you. -- I wish to ask why you have done all this? -- What is it prompts
you thus to befriend the wretched and forlorn?


Has. In vain for me to explain -- the time it would take to tell you why I act
thus --


Sul. Send it in writing then.


Has. Nay, if you will read, I Will send a book, in which is already written why
I act thus.


Sul. What book? -- What is it called?


Has. "The Christian Doctrine." [Haswell bows here with the utmost reverence.]
There you will find all I have done was but my duty.


Sul. [To the Guards.] Retire, and leave me alone with the stranger.

[ All retire except Haswell and the Sultan. They come forward.]
Sul. Your words recall reflections that distract me; nor can I bear the
pressure on my mind without confessing -- I am a Christian.


Has. A Christian! -- What makes you thus assume the apostate?


Sul. Misery, and despair.


Has. What made you a Christian?


Sul. My Arabella, -- a lovely European, sent hither in her youth, by her
mercenary parents, to sell herself to the prince of all these territories. But
'twas my happy lot, in humble life, to win her love, snatch her from his
expecting arms, and bear her far away -- where, in peaceful solitude we lived,
till, in the heat of the rebellion against the late Sultan, I was forced from
my happy home to bear a part. -- I chose the imputed rebels side, and fought
for the young aspirer. -- An arrow, in the midst of the engagement, pierced his
heart; and his officers, alarmed at the terror this stroke of fate might cause
amongst their troops, urged me (as I bore his likeness) to counterfeit it
farther, and show myself to the soldiers as their king recovered. I yielded to
their suit, because it gave me ample power to avenge the loss of my Arabella,
who had been taken from her home by the merciless foe, and barbarously murdered.


Has. Murdered!


Sul. I learnt so -- and my fruitless search to find her since has consirmed
the intelligence. -- Frantic for her loss, I joyfully embraced a scheme which
promised vengeance on the enemy -- it prospered, -- and I revenged my wrongs
and here is, with such unsparing justice on the foe, that even the men who made
me what I was, trembled to reveal their imposition; and they find it still
their interest to continue it.


Has. Amazement!


Sul. Nay, they fill my prisons every day with wretches, that dare whisper I am
not the real Sultan, but a stranger. The secret, therefore, I myself safely
relate in private: the danger is to him who speaks it again; and, with this
caution, I trust, it is safe with you.


Has. It was, without that caution. -- Now hear me. -- Involved in deeds, in
cruelties, which your better thoughts revolt at, the meanest wretch your camps
or prisons hold, claims not half the compassion you have excited. Permit me,
then, to be your comforter, as I have been theirs.


Sul. Impossible!


Has. In the most fatal symptoms I have undertaken the body's cure. The mind's
disease, perhaps, I Am not less a stranger to -- Oh! trust the noble patient to
my care.


Sul. How will you begin?


Has. Lead you to behold the wretched in their misery, and then show you
yourself in their deliverer. -- I have your promise for a boon -- it is this. --
Give me the liberty of fix that I shall name, now in confinement, and be
yourself a witness of their enlargement. -- See joy lighted in the countenance
where sorrow still has left its rough remains. -- Behold the tear of rapture
chase away that of anguish -- hear the faultering voice, long used to
lamentation, in broken accents, utter thanks and blessings. -- Behold this
scene, and if you find the medicine ineffectual, dishonor your physician.


Sul. I will behold it.


Has. Come, then, to the governor's house this very night -- into that council
room so often perverted to the use of the torture; and there, unknown to them
as their king, you shall be witness me; nor can I bear the pressure on my mind
without confessing -- I am a Christian.


Has. A Christian! -- What makes you thus assume the apostate?


Sul. Misery, and despair.


Has. What made you a Christian?


Sul. My Arabella, -- a lovely European, sent hither in her youth, by her
mercenary parents, to sell herself to the prince of all these territories. But
'twas my happy lot, in humble life, to win her love, snatch her from his
expecting arms, and bear her far away -- where, in peaceful solitude we lived,
till, in the heat of the rebellion against the late Sultan, I was forced from
my happy home to bear a part. -- I chose the imputed rebels side, and fought
for the young aspirer. -- An arrow, in the midst of the engagement, pierced his
heart; and his officers, alarmed at the terror this stroke of fate might cause
amongst their troops, urged me (as I bore his likeness) to counterfeit it
farther, and show myself to the soldiers as their king recovered. I yielded to
their suit, because it gave me ample power to avenge the loss of my Arabella,
who had been taken from her home by the merciless foe, and barbarously murdered.


Has. Murdered!


Sul. I learnt so -- and my fruitless search to find her since has confirmed
the intelligence. -- Frantic for her loss, I joyfully embraced a scheme which
promised vengeance on the enemy -- it prospered, -- and I revenged my wrongs
and here is, with such unsparing justice on the foe, that even the men who made
me what I was, trembled to reveal their imposition; and they find it still
their interest to continue it.


Has. Amazement!


Sul. Nay, they fill my prisons every day with wretches, that dare whisper I am
not the real Sultan, but a stranger. The secret, therefore, I myself safely
relate in private: the danger is to him who speaks it again; and, with this
caution, I trust, it is safe with you.


Has. It was, without that caution. -- Now hear me. -- Involved in deeds, in
cruelties, which your better thoughts revolt at, the meanest wretch your camps
or prisons hold, claims not half the compassion you have excited. Permit me,
then, to be your comforter, as I have been theirs.


Sul. Impossible!


Has. In the most fatal symptoms I have undertaken the body's cure. The mind's
disease, perhaps, I Am not less a stranger to -- Oh! trust the noble patient to
my care.


Sul. How will you begin?


Has. Lead you to behold the wretched in their misery, and then show you
yourself in their deliverer. -- I have your promise for a boon -- it is this. --
Give me the liberty of six that I shall name, now in confinement, and be
yourself a witness of their enlargement. -- See joy lighted in the countenance
where sorrow still has left its rough remains. -- Behold the tear of rapture
chase away that of anguish -- hear the faultering voice, long used to
lamentation, in broken accents, utter thanks and blessings. -- Behold this
scene, and if you find the medicine ineffectual, dishonor your physician.


Sul. I will behold it.


Has. Come, then, to the governor's house this very night -- into that council
room so often perverted to the use of the torture; and there, unknown to them
as their king, you shall be witness to all the grateful heart can dictate, and
enjoy all that benevolence can taste.


Sul. I will meet you there.


Has. In the evening?


Sul. At ten precisely. -- Guards, conduct the stranger from the palace.


Exit Sultan. Has. Thus far advanced, what changes may not be hoped for?


[Exit. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. An Apartment at Sir Luke's:
Enter Elvirus and Aurelia. Elvirus. OH my Aurelia! since the time I first saw
you -- since you left the pleasant spot, where I first beheld you; what
distress, what anguish have we known?


Aur. Your family?


Elv. Yes -- and that caused the silence which I hope you have lamented. -- I
could not wound you with the recital of our misfortunes -- and now, only with
the sad idea that I shall never see you more, I am come to take my leave.


Aur. Is there a chance that we may never meet again?


Elv. There is -- and I hope it too -- sincerely hope and request it -- to see
you again, would be again to behold my father pining in misery.


Aur. Explain -- [A loud rapping at the door.] that is, Sir Luke, and Lady
Tremor -- what shall I say, should they come hither? they suspect I correspond
with some person in the country -- who shall I say you are? upon what business
can I say you are come?


Elv. To avoid all suspicion of my real situation, and to be sure to gain
admittance, I put on this habit, and told the servant, when I inquired for you,
I was just arrived from England -- [She starts.] nay, it was but necessary I
should conceal who I was in this suspicious place, or I might plunge a whose
family in the imputed guilt of mine.


Aur. Good Heaven!


Elv. I feared, besides, there was no other means; no likelihood to gain
admission -- and what, what would I not have sacrificed, rather than left you
for ever without a last farewell? think on these weighty causes, and pardon the
deception.


Aur. But if they should ask me --


Elv. Say, as I have done -- my stay must be so short, it is impossible they
should detect me -- for I must be back --


Aur. Where?


Elv. No matter where -- I must be back before the evening -- and would almost
wish never to see you more -- I love you, Aurelia -- O, how truly! and yet
there is a love more dear, more sacred still.


Aur. You torture me with suspense -- Sir Luke is coming this way -- what name
shall I say, if he asks me?


Elv. Glanmore -- I announced that name to the servant.


Aur. You tremble.


Elv. The imposition hurts me -- and I feel as if I dreaded a detection, though
it is scarce possible -- Sorrows have made a coward of me -- even the servant, I
thought, looked at me with suspicion -- and I was both confounded and enraged.


Aur. Go into this apartment; I Will follow you -- there we may be safe -- and do
not hide the smallest circumstance which I may have to apprehend.


[Elvirus exit at a door. Sir Lake. [Without.] Abominable! provokin^*
impertinent! not to be borne!


Aur. [Listening.] Thank Heaven, Sir Luke is so perplexed with some affairs of
his own, he may not think of mine. --


[ Exit to Elvirus. Enter Sir Luke, followed by Lady Tremor. Sir Luke. I am out
of all patience -- and all temper -- did you ever hear of such a complete
impertinent coxcomb? Talk, talk, talk, coutinually! and referring to me on all
occasions! Such a man was a brave General -- another a great Admiral, and then
he must tell a long story about a siege, and ask me if it did not make my bosom
glow!


Lady. It had not that effect upon your face, for you were as white as ashes.


Sir Luke Aye, you did not see yourself, while he was talking of grandfathers
and great grandfathers -- if you had --


Lady. I was not white, I protest.


Sir Luke. No -- but you were as red as scarlet.


Lady. And you ought to have resented the insult, if you saw me affected by it
-- Oh! some men would have given him such a dressing --


Sir Luke. Yes, my dear, if your uncle the frisseur had been alive, he would
have given him a dressing, I dare say.


Lady. Sir Luke, none of your impertinence; you know I cannot nor will not bear it
-- neither will I wait for Lord Flint's resentment on Mr. Twineall -- No, I
desire you will tell him to quit this roof immediately.


Sir Luke. No, my dear -- no, no -- you must excuse me -- I cannot think of
quarrelling with a gentleman in my own house.


Lady. Was it your own house to day at dinner when he insulted us? and would
quarrel then?


Sir Luke. No -- that was a friend's house -- and I make it a rule never to
quarrel in my own house -- a friend's house -- in a tavern -- or in the streets.


Lady. Well, then, I would quarrel in my own house -- a friend's house -- a
tavern -- or in the streets -- if any one offended me.


Sir Luke. O, my dear, I have no doubt of it -- no doubt, in the least.


Lady. But, at present, it shall be in my own house, -- and I will tell the
gentleman to quit it immediately.


Sir Luke. Very well, my dear -- pray do.


Lady. I suppose, however, I may tell him I have your authority to bid him go?


Sir Luke. Tell him I have no authority -- none in the world over you -- but
that you will do as you like.


Lady. I cannot tell him so -- he will not believe it.


Sir Luke. Why not? you often tell me so, and make me believe it too.


Lady. Here the gentleman comes -- go away for a moment.


Sir Luke. With all my heart, my dear.


[Going in a burry. Lady. I Will give him a few hints, that he must either change
his mode of behavior, or leave us.


Sir Luke. That Is right -- but don't be too warm -- or if he should be very
impertinent, or insolent -- (i hear Aurelia's voice in the next room) call her,
and I dare say she will come and take your part.


[ Exit Sir Luke. Enter Twineall. Twi. I positively could pass a whole day upon
that staircase -- those reverend faces! -- I presume they are the portraits of
some of your Ladyship's illustrious ancestors.


Lady. Sir! Mr. Twineall -- give me leave to tell you --

[In a violent passion.
Twi. The word illustrious, I find, displeases you -- pardon me -- I did not
mean to make use of so forcible an epithet -- I know the delicacy of sentiment,
which cannot bear the reflection that a few centuries only should reduce from
royalty, one, whose dignified deportment seems to have been formed for that
resplendent station.


Lady. The man is certainly mad! -- -- Mr. Twineall --


Twi Pardon me, Madam -- I own I am an enthusiast on these occasions -- the
dignity of blood --


Lady. You have too much, I am sure -- do, have a little taken from you.


Twi. Gladly would I lose every drop that fills these plebeian veins, to be
enobled by the smallest -- --


Lady. Pray, Sir, take up your abode in some other place.


Twi. Madam!

[Surprised.
Lady. Your behavior, Sir --


Twi. If my friend had not given me the hint, damn me if I should not think her
down right angry.

[Aside.
Lady. I can scarce contain my rage at being so laughed at.

[Aside.
Twi. Perhaps you may resent it, Madam -- but there is a favor --


Lady. A favor, Sir! is this a time to ask a favor?


Twi. To an admirer of antiquity, as I am.


Lady. Antiquity again!


Twi. I beg pardon -- -- but -- -- a wig, Ma'am --


Lady. A what?

[Petrified.
Twi. A wig.

[Bowing.
Lady. Oh! oh! oh! [Choaking.] this is not to be borne -- this is too much --
ah! ah! [ Sitting down, and going into fits.] a direct, plain, palpable, and
unequivocal attack upon my family -- without evasion or palliative. -- I cannot
bear it any longer. -- Oh! oh! --

[Shrieking.
Twi. Bless my soul, what shall I do? what is the matter?


Sir Luke. [Without.] Maids! maids! go to your mistress -- that
good-for-nothing fellow is doing her a mischief.


Enter Aurelia. Aur. Dear Madam, what is the matter?


Enter Sir Luke, and stands close to the scenes. Lady. Oh! oh!

[Crying.
Sir Luke. How do you do now, my dear?


Twi. Upon my word, Sir Luke --


Sir Luke. O, Sir, no apology -- it does not signify -- never mind it -- I beg
you will not put yourself to the trouble of an apology -- it is of no kind of
consequence.


Lady. What do you mean, Sir Luke?


[Recovered. Sir Luke. To show proper philosophy, my dear, under the affliction
I feel for your distress.


Lady, [ To Aurelia.] Take Twineall out of the room.


Aur. Mr. Twineall, her Ladyship begs you will leave the room, till she is a
little recovered.


Twi. Certainly

[ Bows respectfully to ber Ladyship, and exit with Aurelia.
Sir Luke. I thought what you would get by quarrelling -- fits -- and tears.


Lady. And you know, Sir Luke, if you had quarrelled, you would have been in
the same situation. [Rising from her seat.] But, Sir Luke, my dear, Sir Luke,
show yourself a man of courage but on this occasion. --


Sir Luke. My dear, I would do as much for you as I would for my own life --
but damn me if I think I could fight to save that.


Enter Lord Flint. Lord. Lady Tremor, did the servant say you were very well,
or very ill?


Lady. Oh, my Lord, that insolent coxcomb, the honorable Mr. Twineall --


Lord. Oh, I am very glad you put me in mind of it -- I dare say I should have
forgot it else, notwithstanding I came on purpose.


Lady. Forgot what?


Lord. A little piece of paper here, [Pulling out a parchment.] but it will do
a great deal -- has he offended you?


Lady. Beyond bearing.


Lord. I am glad of it, because it gives double pleasure to my vengeance -- he
is a disaffected person, Madam -- boldly told me he doubted the Sultan's right
to the throne -- I have informed against him, and his punishment is at my
option -- I may have him imprisoned; shot; sent to the galleys; or his head cut
off -- but which does your Ladyship choose? -- Which ever you please is at your
service.


[Bowing. Lady. [Rising and curtsying.] O, they are all alike to me; which ever
you please, my Lord.


Sir Luke. What a deal of ceremony! -- how cool they are about it.


Lord. And why not cool, Sir; why not cool?


Sir Luke. O, very true -- I am sure it has froze me.


Lord. I will go instantly, for fear it should slip my memory, and put this
paper into the hands of proper officers -- in the mean time, Sir Luke, if you
can talk with your visitor, Mr. Twineall, do -- inquire his opinion of the
Sultan's rights -- ask his thoughts, as if you were commissioned by me -- and,
while he is revealing them to you, the officers shall be in ambush, surprise
him in the midst of his sentiments, and bear him away to --


[Twineall looking in. Twi. May I presume to inquire how your Ladyship does?


Lady. O, yes -- and pray walk in -- I am quite recovered.


Lord. Lady Tremor, I bid you good day for the present.


Sir Luke. [Following him to the door.] Your Lordship will not forget?


Lord. No -- depend upon it, I shall remember.


Sir Luke. Yes -- and make some other people remember too.


[ Exit Lord Flint. Twi. Is his Lordship gone? I am very sorry.


Sir Luke. No -- don't be uneasy, he will soon be back.


Enter Haswell. Sir Luke. Mr. Haswell, I am glad to see you?


Has. I told her Ladyship I would call in the evening, Sir Luke; and so I have
kept my word -- I wanted too to speak with my Lord Flint, but he was in such a
hurry as he passed me, he would hardly let me ask him how he did. -- I hope
your Ladyship is well this afternoon.


[ Bows to Twineall -- Sir Luke exit at the door to Aurelia and Elvirus. Twi.
Pardon me, Mr. Haswell, but I almost suspect you heard of her Ladyship's
indisposition, and therefore paid this visit; for I am not to learn your care
and attention to all under affliction.


Has. [Bows gravely.] Has your Ladyship been indisposed then?


Lady. A little -- but I am much better.


Twi. Surely, of all virtues, charity is the first! it so protects our
neighbor!


Has. Do not you think, Sir, patience frequently protects him as much?


Twi. Dear Sir -- pity for the poor miserable --


Has. Is oftener excited than the poor and miserable are aware of.

[Looking significantly at him.
Sir Luke. [From the room where Aurelia and Elvirus are.] Nay, Sir, I beg you
will walk into this apartment -- Aurelia, introduce the gentleman to Lady
Tremor.


Lady. Who has she with her?


Has. Aurelia! -- O! I have not seen her I know not when -- and besides my
acquaintance with her relations in England, there is a frank simplicity about
her that --


Enter Sir Luke, Aurelia, and Elvirus. Sir Luke. You should have introduced the
gentleman before -- I assure you, Sir, [ To Elvirus.] I did not know, nor
should I have known, if I had not accidently come into the room.


Haswell starts, on seeing Elvirus. Sir Luke. [To Lady Tremor.] A relation of
Aurelia's -- a Mr. Glanmore, my dear, just arrived from England; who called to
pass a few minutes with us, before he sets off to the part of India he is to
reside in.

[Elvirus and Aurelia appear in the utmost embarrassment and confusion.
Lady. I hope, Sir, your stay with us will not be so short as Sir Luke has
mentioned?


Elv, Pardon me, Madam, it must -- the caravan, with which I travel, goes off
this evening, and I must accompany it.


Has. [Aside.] I doubted before; but the voice confirms me.

[ Looking on Elvirus.
Lady. Why, you only arrived this morning, did you, Mr. Glanmore? you came
passenger in the same ship, then, with Mr. Twineall?


Twi. No, Madam -- Sir, I am very sorry we had not the pleasure of your company
on board of us.

[ To Elvirus.
Sir Luke. You had: -- Mr. Glanmore came over in the Mercury -- did not you
tell me so, Sir?


[Elvirus bows. Twi. Bless my soul, Sir! I beg your pardon -- but surely that
cannot be -- I got acquainted with every soul on board of us -- every creature
-- all their connections -- and I can scarcely suppose you were of the number.


Sir Luke. [Aside.] How impertinent he is to this gentleman too! O! that I had
but courage to knock him down.


Elv. [To Twineall.] Perhaps, Sir --


Aur. Yes, I dare say, that was the case.


Twi. What was the case, Madam?


Sir Luke. Wha -- wha -- wha -- [Mimicks.] that is not good breeding.


Has. Why do you blush, Aurelia?


Aur. Because [Hesitating.] this gentleman -- -- came over in the same ship
with Mr. Twineall.


Sir Luke. And I cant't say I wonder at your biushing.


Twi. Why then positively, Sir, I thought I had known every passenger -- and
surely --


Lady. Mr. Twineall, your behavior puts me out of all patience -- did you not
hear the gentleman man say he came in the same vessel; and is not that
sufficient?


Twi. Perfectly, Madam -- perfectly -- but I thought there might be some
mistake.


Elv. And there is, Sir -- you find you are mistaken.


Lady. I thought so, -- --


Has.[To Elvirus.] And you did come in the same vessel?


Elv. Sir, do you doubt it?


Has. Doubt it?


Elv. Dare not doubt it. --

[Trembling and confused.
Has. Dare not?


Elv. No, Sir, dare not.

[Violently.
Aur. Oh, heavens!


Sir Luke.[To Aurelia.] Come, my dear, you and I will get out of the way.

[Retiring with her.
Lady. O, dear! -- for heaven's sake! -- Mr. Twineall, this is your doing.


Twi. Me, Madam! -- --


Has. I beg the company's pardon -- but [ To Elvirus.] a single word with you,
Sir, if you please.


Lady. Dear Mr. Haswell -- --


Has. Trust my prudence and forbearance, Madam -- I will but speak a word in
private to this gentleman. --

[Haswell takes Elvirus down to the bottom of the stage; the rest retire.
Has. Are you, or are you not, an impostor?


Elv. I am -- I am -- but do not you repeat my words -- Do not you say it.

[Threatening.
Has. What am I to fear?


Elv. Fear me -- I cannot lie with fortitude; but I can -- -- Beware of me.


Has. I will beware of you, and so shall all my friends.


Elv. Insolent, insulting man. --

[With the utmost contempt.
Lady Tremor and the rest come down. Lady. Come, come, gentlemen, I hope you
are now perfectly satisfied about this little nonsense. -- Let us change the
subject. -- Mr. Haswell, have you been successful before the Sultan for any of
those poor prisoners you visited this morning?


Sir Luke. Ave; Meanright told me he saw you coming from them with your long
cloak; and said he should not have known you, if somebody had not said it was
you.


[Elvirus looks with surprise, confusion, and repentance.] Lady. But what
success with the Sultan?


Has. He has granted me the pardon and freedom of any six I shall present as
objects of his mercy.


Lady. I sincerely rejoice. -- Then the youth and his father, whom you felt so
much for, I am sure, will be in the number of those who share your clemency.


[Haswell makes no reply, and after a pause] -- Elv. [With the most
supplicatory tone and manner.] Sir -- Mr. Haswell -- O, heavens!


Sir Luke. Come, Mr. Haswell, this young man seems sorry he has offended you --
forgive him.


Lady. Aye, do, Mr. Haswell -- are you sorry, Sir?


Elv. O! wounded to the heart -- and, without his pardon, see nothing but
despair.


Lady. Good heavens!


Has. Sir Luke, my Lord Flint told me he was coming back directly -- pray
inform him I had business elsewhere, and could wait no longer.


[Exit. Elv. O! I Am undone.


Lady. Follow him, if you have any thing to say?


Elv. I dare not -- I feel the terror of his just reproach.


Lady. Did you know him in England?


Aur. Dear Madam, will you suffer me to speak a few words -- --

[ Aside to Lady Tremor.
Sir Luke. Aye; leave her and her relation together, and let us take a turn in
the garden with Mr. Twineall. -- I Am afraid his Lordship will be back before we
have drawn him to say more on the subject, for which he will be arrested.


Lady. You are right.


Sir Luke. Mr. Twineall, will you walk this way? -- That young lady and
gentleman wish to have a little conversation.


Twi. O, certainly, Sir Luke, by all means. [ Exeunt Sir Luke and Lady. [ To
Elvirus.] I am extremely sorry, Sir, you kept your bed during the voyage: I
should else have been most prodigiously happy in such good company.


[Exit. Aur. Why are you thus agitated? It was wrong to be so impetuous -- but
such regret as this -- --


Elv. Hear the secret I refused before -- my father is a prisoner for life.


Aur. Oh, heavens! then Mr. Haswell was the only man -- --


Elv. And he had promised me -- promised me, with benevolence, his patronage --
but the disguise he wore when I first saw him, led me to mistake him now --
made me expose my falsehood, my infamy, and treat his honored person with
abuse.


Aur. Aye; let his virtues make you thus repent; but let them also make you
hope forgiveness.


Elv. Nay, he is just, as well as compassionate -- and for detected falsehood
--


Aur. You make me tremble.


Elv. Yet he shall hear my story -- I Will follow him, and obtain his pity, if
not his pardon.


Aur. Nay, supplicate for that too -- and you need not blush, or feel yourself
degraded, to kneel to HIM, for he would scorn the pride that triumphs over the
humbled.


[Exeunt. SCENE II. The Garden.
Enter Sir Luke, Twineall, and Lady Tremor. Twi. Why, really, Sir Luke, as my
Lord has given you charge to sound my prineiples, I must own they are just such
as I delivered to him.


Sir Luke. Well, Mr. Twineall, I only wish you to be a little more clear -- we
will suppose the present Sultan no impostor -- yet what pretensions do you
think the other family --


Twi. That I Will make clear to you at once -- or if my reasons are not very
clear, they are at least very positive, and that you know is the same thing. --
This family -- no -- that family -- the family that reigned before this -- this
came after that -- they came before. Now every one agrees that this family was
always -- so and so -- [whispering.] -- and that the other was always -- so and
so -- [whispering.] -- in short, every body knows that one of them had always a
very suspicious -- you know what -- --


Sir Luke. No, I don't.


Twi. Pshaw -- pshaw -- every body conjectures what -- and though it was never
said in so many words, yet it was always supposed -- and though there never has
been any proof, yet there have been things much more strong -- and for that
very reason, Sir William -- (Sir Luke, I mean -- I beg your pardon) -- for that
very reason -- (I cannot think what made me call you Sir William) -- for that
very reason -- (Oh, I was thinking of Sir William Tiffany) -- for that very
reason, say people what they will -- that, that must be their opinion -- but
then where is the man who will speak his thoughts freely as I have done?


Enter Guards, who had been listening at a distance during this speech. Sir
Luke. [Starting.] Bless my soul, gentlemen, you made my heart jump to my very
lips.


Guard. [To Twineall.] Sir, you are our prisoner, and must go with us.


Twi. Gentlemen, you are mistaken -- I had all my clothes made in England, and
it is impossible the bill can have followed me already.


Guard. Your charge, is something against the state.


Twi. Against the state? -- You are mistaken -- it cannot be me.


Guard. No -- there is no mistake. -- [Pulling out a paper.] -- You are here
called Henry Twineall.


Twi. But if they have left out honorable, it cannot be me -- -- I am the
Honorable Henry Twineall.


Sir Luke. Aye, that you are to prove before your judges.


Guard. Yes, Sir -- and we are witnesses of the long speech you have just now
been making.


Twi. And pray, gentlemen, did you know what I meant by it?


Guard. Certainly.


Twi. Why, then, upon my soul, it was more than I did -- I wish I may be
sacrificed -- --


Sir Luke. Well, well, you are going to be sacrificed -- Don't be impatient.


Twi. But, gentlemen -- Sir Luke!


[The Guards seize him. Lady. Dear Mr. Twineall, I am afraid you will have
occasion for the dignity of all my ancestors to support you under this trial.


Sir Luke. And have occasion for all my courage too.


Twi. But, Sir -- but, gentlemen -- --


Sir Luke. Oh! I would not be in your coat, fashionable as it is, for all the
Sultan's dominions.


[ Exit Sir Luke and Lady -- Twineall, and Guards -- separately. END OF THE
FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The Prison.
Haswell and the female Prisoner discovered. Haswell. RATHER remain in this
loathsome prison! -- refuse the blessing offered you! -- the blessing your
pleased fancy formed so precious you durst not even trust its reality!


Pris. No -- while my pleased fancy only saw the prospect, I own it was
delightful; but now reason beholds it within my reach, the view is changed --
and what, in the gay dream of fond delirium, seemed a blessing, in my waking
hours of sad reflection would prove the most severe of punishments.


Has. Explain -- what is the cause that makes you think thus?


Pris. A cause that has alone for fourteen years made me resigned to a fate
like this. -- When you first mentioned my release from this drear place, my
wild ideas included, with the light, all that had ever made the light a
blessing -- 'twas not the sun I saw in my mad transport, but a lost husband
filled my roving fancy -- 'twas his idea that gave the colors of the world
their beauty, and made me fondly hope to grasp its sweets.


Has. A husband!


Pris. But the world that I was wont to enjoy with him -- to see again without
him -- every wellknown object would wound my mind with dear remembrances for
ever lost, and make my freedom torture.


Has. But yet --


Pris. Oh! on my knees a thousand times I have thanked Heaven that he partook
not of this dire abode -- that he shared not with me my hard usage! -- a
greater blessing I possessed from that, than all his loved society could have
given -- but in a happy world, where smiling nature pours her boundless gifts!
-- oh! there his loss would be unsufferable.


Has. Do you lament him dead?


Pris. Yes -- or, like me, a prisoner -- else he would have sought me out --
have sought his Arabella! -- [Haswell starts.] -- Why do you start?


Has. Are you a Christian? -- an European?


Ara. I am.


Has. The name made me suppose it. -- I am shocked that -- the Christian's
sufferings -- [Trying to conceal his surprise.] -- but were you made a prisoner
in the present Sultan's reign?


Ara. Yes, or I had been set free on his ascent to the throne; for he gave
pardon to all the enemies of the slain monarch: but I was taken in a vessel,
where I was hurried in the heat of the battle with a party of the late
Emperor's friends -- and all the prisoners were by the officers of the present
Sultan sent to slavery, or confined, as I have been, in hopes of ransom from
their friends.


Has. And did never intelligence or inquiry reach you from your husband?


Ara. Never.


Has. Never?


Ara. I once was informed of a large reward for the discovery of a female
Christian, and, with boundless hopes, asked an interview with the messenger;
but found, on inquiry, I could not answer his description, as he secretly
informed me it was the Sultan who made the search for one he himself had known
and dearly loved.


Has. Good Heaven! -- [Aside.] -- You then conclude your husband dead?


Ara. I do; -- or, like me, by some mischance, taken with the other party, and
having no friend to plead his cause before the Emperor, whom he served --


Has. I Will plead it -- should I ever chance to find him -- but, ere we can hope
for other kindness, you must appear before the Sultan -- thank him for the
favor which you now decline, and tell the cause why you cannot accept it.


Ara. Alas! almost worn out with sorrow -- an object of affliction as I am --
in pity, excuse me -- present my thanks -- my humble gratitude -- but pardon my
attendance.


Has. Nay, you must go -- it is necessary -- I will accompany you to him. --
Retire a moment; but when I send, be ready.


Ara. I shall obey

[She bows obediently, and exit.
[ As Haswell comes down, Elvirus places himself in his path -- Haswell stops,
looks at him with an austere earnestness, which Elvirus observing, turns away
his face. Elv. Nay, reproach me -- I can bear your anger, but do not let me
meet your eye -- Oh! it is more awful, now I know who you are, than if you had
kingdoms to disperse, or could deal instant death. -- [Haswell looks on him
with a manly firmness, then walks on, Elvirus following him.] -- I do not plead
for my father now. -- Since what has passed, I only ask forgiveness.


Has. Do you forgive yourself?


Elv. I never will.


Enter Keeper. Keep. One of our prisoners, who, in his cell, makes the most
pitious moans, has sent to entreat that Mr. Haswell will not leave this place
till he has heard his complaints and supplications.


Has. Bring me to him.

[Going.
Elv. Nay, leave me not thus -- perhaps never to see you more! --


Has. You shall see me again -- in the mean time, reflect on what you merit.


[ Exit with Keeper. Elv. And what is that? -- Confusion! -- and yet, he says,
I am to see him again -- speak with him. -- Oh! there is a blessing to the most
abandoned, a divine propenfity (they know not why) to commune with the virtuous!


[Exit. SCENE II. The first Prison Scene.
Enter second Keeper, Haswell following. Has. Where is the poor unfortunate?


2d Keep. Here, Sir.


Has. Am I to behold greater misery still? -- a still greater object of
compassion?


[ Second Keeper opens a door, and Twineall enters a prisoner, in one of the
prison dresses. Has. What have we here?


Twi. Don't you know me, Mr. Haswell?


Has. I beg your pardon, Sir -- I beg your pardon -- but is it? -- is it? --


Twi. Why, Mr. Haswell -- if you don't know me, or will not know me, I shall
certainly lose my senses.


Has. O, I know you -- know you very well.


Twi. What, notwithstanding the alteration in my dress? -- there was a hard
thing!


Has. O, I Will procure you that again -- and, for all things else, I Am sure you
will have patience.


Twi. O, no, I cannot -- upon my soul I cannot. -- I want a little lavender water
-- My hair is in such a trim too! -- No powder -- no brushes --


Has. I will provide you with them all.


Twi. But who will you provide to look at me, when I am dressed?


Has. I Will bring all your acquaintance.


Twi. I had rather you would take me to see them.


Has. Pardon me.


Twi. Dear Mr. Haswell! -- Dear Sir! -- Dear friend! -- What shall I call you?
-- Only say what title you like best, and I Will call you by it directly -- I
always did love to please every body -- and I am sure at this time I stand more
in need of a friend than ever I did in my life.


Has. What has brought you here?


Twi. Typing to get a place.


Has. A place?


Twi. Yes; and you see I have got one -- and a poor place it is! -- in short,
Sir, my crime is said to be an offense against the state; and they tell me no
friend on earth but you can get that remitted.


Has. Upon my word, the pardons I have obtained are for so few persons -- and
those already promised --


Twi. O, I know I am no favorite of yours -- you think me an impertinent,
silly, troublesome fellow, and that my conduct in life will be neither of use
to my country nor of benefit to society.


Has. You mistake me, Sir -- I think such glaring imperfections as yours are,
will not be of so much disadvantage to society as those of a lessfaulty man. --
In beholding your conduct, thousands shall turn from the paths of folly, to
which fashion, custom, nature, (or call it what you will) impels them; --
therefore, Mr. Twineall, if not pity for your faults, yet a concern for the
good effect they may have upon the world (should you be admitted there again)
will urge me to solicit your return to it.


Twi. Sir, you have such powers of oratory -- what a prodigious capital
quality! -- and I doubt not but you are admired by the world equally for that
--


Enter Messenger to Haswell. Mess Sir, the Sultan is arrived in the council
chamber, and has sent me.

[Whispers.
Has. I come. -- Mr. Twineall, farewell for the present.


[ Exit with Messenger. Twi. Now, what was that whisper about? -- Oh, heavens!
perhaps my death in agitation. -- I have brought myself into a fine situation!
-- done it by wheedling too!


2d Keep. Come, your business with Mr. Haswell being ended, return to your cell.

[Roughly.
Twi. Certainly, Sir -- certainly! -- O, yes! -- How happy is this prison in
having such a keeper as you! -- so mild, so gentle -- there is something about
you, -- I said, and I thought the moment I had the happiness of meeting you
here, -- Dear me! -- what would one give for such a gentleman as him in
England! -- You would be of infinite service to some of our young bucks, Sir.


2d Keep. Go to your cell -- go to your cell.


[Roughly. Twi. This world would be nothing without elegant manners, and
elegant people in all stations of life. -- [ Enter Messenger, who whispers
second Keeper.] -- Another whisper!

[Terrified.
2d Keep. No; come this way. -- The judge is now stting in the hall, and you
must come before him.


Twi. Before the judge, Sir -- O, dear Sir! -- what, in this deshabille? -- in
this coat? -- Dear me! -- but to be sure one must conform to customs -- to the
custom of the country where one is. -- [He goes to the door, and then stops.]
-- I beg your pardon, Sir -- would not you chufe to go first?


2d Keep. No.


Twi. O!


[Exeunt. SCENE III. The Council Chamber.
Enter Sultan, Haswell, and Guards. Has. Sultan, I have outrun your bountry in
my promises; and one poor, unhappy female -- --


Sul. No -- you named yourself the number to release, and it is fixed -- I Will
not increase it.


Has. A poor, miserable female -- --


Sul. Am I less miserable than she is? -- And who shall release me from my
sorrows?


Has. Then let me tell you, Sultan, she is above your power to oblige, or to
punish. -- Ten years, nay more, confinement in a drear cell has been no greater
punishment to her, than had she lived in a pleasant world without the man she
loved.


Sul. Hah!


Has. And freedom offered she rejects with scorn, because he is not included in
the blessing.


Sul. You talk of prodigies! -- [He makes a sign for the Guards to retire, and
they exit.] -- and yet I once knew a heart equal to this description.


Has. Nay, will you see her? -- Witness yourself the fact?


Sul. Why do I tremble? -- My busy fancy presents an image -- --


Has. Yes, tremble, indeed!

[Threatening.
Sul. Hah! have a care -- what tortures are you preparing for me? -- My mind
shrinks at the idea.


Has. Your wife you will behold -- whom you have kept in want, in wretchedness,
in a damp dungeon, for these fourteen years, because you would not listen to
the voice of piry. -- -- Dread her look -- her frown -- not for herself alone,
but for hundreds of her fellow sufferers -- and while your selfish fancy was
searching, with wild anxiety, for her you loved, unpitying, you forgot others
might love like you.


Sul. O! do not bring me to a trial which I have not courage to support.


Has. She attends without -- I sent for her to thank you for the favor she
declines. -- Nay, be composed -- she knows you not -- cannot, thus disguised as
the Sultan.


[ Exit Haswell. Sul. Oh! my Arabella! could I have thought that your approach
would ever impress my mind with horror! -- or that, instead of flying to your
arms with all the love I bear you, terror and dread should fix me a statue of
remorse.


Enter Haswell, leading Arabella. Has. Here kneel, and return your thanks.


Sul. My Arabella! worn with grief and anguish!

[Aside.
Ara. [Kneeling to the Sultan.] Sultan, the favor you would bestow, I own, and
humbly thank you for.


Sul. Gracious Heaven!

[In much agitation.
Ara. But as I am now accustomed to confinement, and the idea of all the world
can give, cannot inspire a wish that warms my heart to the enjoyment -- I
supplicate permission to transfer the blessing you have offered, to one of
those who may have friends to welcome their return from bondage, and so make
freedom precious. -- I have none to rejoice at my release -- none to lament my
destiny while a prisoner. -- And were I free, in this vast world (forlorn and
friendless) it is but a prison still.


Sul. What have I done? --

[Throwing himself on a sopha with the greatest emotion.
Has. Speak to him again. -- He repents of the severity with which he has
caused his fellow creatures to be used. -- Tell him you forgive him.


Ara. [Going to him.] Believe me, Emperor, I forgive all who have ever wronged
me -- all who have ever caused my sufferings. -- Pardon you! -- Alas! I have
pardoned even those who tore me from my husband! -- Oh, Sultan! all the
tortures you have made me suffer, compared to such a pang as that -- did I say
I had forgiven it? -- Oh! I am afraid -- afraid I have not yet.


Sul. Forgive it now, then, for he is restored. -- [Taking off his turban.] --
Behold him in the Sultan, and once more seal his pardon. -- [ She faints on
Haswell.] -- Nay, pronounce it quickly, or my remorse for what you have
undergone, will make my present tortures greater than any my cruelties have
ever yet inflicted.


Ara. [Recovering] Is this the light you promised? -- [ To Haswell.] -- Dear
precious light! -- Is this my freedom? to which I bind myself a flave for ever.
-- [ Embracing the Sultan.] -- Was I your captive? -- Sweet captivity! -- more
precious than an age of liberty!


Sul. Oh, my Arabella! through the amazing changes of my fate, (which I will
soon disclose) think not but I have searched for thee with unceasing care; but
the blessing to behold you once again was left for my kind monitor alone to
bestow. -- -- Oh, Haswell! had I, like you, made others' miseries my concern,
like you sought out the wretched, how many days of sorrow had I spared myself
as well as others -- for I long since had found my Arabella.


Ara. Oh, Heaven! that weighest our sufferings with our joys, and as our lives
decline see in the balance thy blessings far more ponderous than thy
judgments -- be witness, I complain no more of what I have endured, but find
an ample recompense this moment.


Has. I told you, Sir, how you might be happy.


Sul. -- Take your reward -- (to a heart like yours, more valuable than
treasure from my coffers) -- this signet, with power to redress the wrongs of
all who suffer.


Has. Valuable indeed! -- --


Ara. [To Haswell.] Oh, virtuous man! -- to reward thee are we made happy -- to
give thy pitying bosom the joy to see us so, has Heaven remitted its intended
punishment of continued separation.


Sul. Come, my beloved wife! -- come to my palace -- there, equally, my dearest
blessing, as when the cottage gave its fewer joys -- and in him [ To Haswell.]
we not only find our present happiness, but dwell securely on our future hopes
-- for here, I vow, before he leaves our shores, I will adopt every measure he
shall point out -- and that period of my life whereon he shall lay his censure,
that will I fix apart for penitence. --

[ Exit Sultan and Arabella. -- Haswell bows to Heaven with thanks.
Enter Keeper. Keep. An English prisoner, just now condemned to lose his head,
one Henry Twineall, humbly begs permission to speak a few short sentences, his
last dying words, to Mr. Haswell.


Has. Condemned to lose his head? -- Lead me to him.


Keep. O, Sir, you need not hurry yourself -- it is off by this time, I dare
say.


Has. Off?


Keep. Yes, Sir -- we don't stand long about these things in this country -- I
dare say it is off.


Has. [Impatiently.] Lead me to him instantly.


Guard. O! it is of consequence, is it, Sir? -- if that is the case -- --


[Exit Keeper, followed by Haswell. SCENE IV. An arch-way at the top of the
stage, through which several Guards enter -- Twineall in the middle, dressed
for execution, with a large book in his hand.
Twi. One more verse, gentlemen, if you please.


Off. The time is expired.


Twi. One more, gentlemen, if you please.


Off. The time is expired.


Enter Haswell. Twi. Oh! my dear Mr. Haswell!

[Bursting into tears.
Has. What, in tears at parting with me? -- This is a compliment indeed!


Twi. I hope you take it as such -- I am sure I mean it as such. -- It kills me
to leave you -- it breaks my heart; -- and I once flattered myself such a
charitable, good, feeling, humane heart as you possess --


Has. Hold! Hold! -- This, Mr. Twineall, is the vice which has driven you to
the fatal precipice whereon you are -- and in death will you not relinquish it?


Twi. What vice, Sir, do you mean?


Has. Flattery! -- a vice that renders you not only despicable, but odious.


Twi. But how has flattery been the cause?


Has. Your English friend, before he left the island, told me what information
you had asked from him, and that he had given you the direct opposite of every
person's character, as a just punishment for your mean premeditation and
designs.


Twi. I never imagined that amiable friend had sense enough to impose upon any
body!


Has. Yet I presume, he could not suppose fate would have carried their
resentment to a length like this.


Twi. Oh! could fate be arrested in its course!


Has. You would reform your conduct?


Twi. I would -- I would never say another civil thing to any body -- never --
never make myself agreeable again.


Has. Release him -- here is the Sultan's signet.

[They release him.
Twi. Oh! my dear Mr. Haswell! never was compassion! -- never benevolence! --
never such a heart as yours! --


Has. Sieze him -- he bas broken his contract already.


Twi. No, Sir -- No, Sir -- I protest you are an illnatured, surly, crabbed
fellow. I always thought so, upon my word, whatever I have said.


Has. And, I Will forgive that meaning, sooner than the other -- utter any thing
but flattery -- Oh! never let the honest, plain, blunt English name, become a
proverb for so base a vice. --


Lady Ter. [Without.] Where is the poor creature?


Enter Lady Tremor. Lady. Oh! if his head is off, pray let me look at it? --


Twi. No, Madam, it is on -- and I am very happy to be able to tell you so. --


Lady. Dear Heaven! -- I expected to have seen it off! -- but no matter -- as
it is on -- I am come that it may be kept on -- and have brought my Lord Flint,
and Sir Luke, as witnesses.


Enter Lord, Aurelia, and Sir Luke. Has. Well, Madam, and what have they to say?


Sir Luke. Who are we to tell our story to? -- There does not seem to be any
one sitting in judgment. --


Has. Tell it to me, Sir -- I will report it.


Sir Luke. Why then, Mr. Haswell, as Ghosts sometimes walk -- and as one's
conscience is sometimes troublesome -- I think Mr. Twineall has done nothing to
merit death, and the charge which his Lordship sent in against him, we begin to
think too severe -- but, if there was any false statement --


Lord. It was the fault of my not charging my memory -- any error I have been
guilty of, must be laid to the fault of my total want of memory.


Has. And what do you hope from this confesfion?


Sir Luke. To remit the prisoner's punishment of death to something less, if
the Sultan will please to annul the sentence


Lord. Yes -- and grant ten or twelve years imprisonment -- or the Galleys for
fourteen years -- or --


Sir Luke. Ay, ay, something in that way.


Has. For shame -- for shame -- Gentlement! -- the extreme rigor you show in
punishing a dissension from your opinion, or a satire upon your folly, proves
to conviction, what reward you had bestowed upon the skilful flatterer.


Twi. Gentlemen and Ladies, pray why would you wish me requited with such
extreme severity, merely for my humble endeavors to make myself agreeable? --
Lady Tremor, upon my honor I was credibly informed, your ancestors were Kings
of Scotland.


Lady. Impossible! -- you might as well say that you heard Sir Luke had
distinguished himself at the battle of --


Twi. And, I did hear so


Lady. And he did distinguish himself; for he was the only one that ran away.


Twi. Could it happen?


Lady. Yes, Sir, it did happen.


Sir Luke. And go you, Mr. Twineall, into a field of battle, and I think it is
very likely to happen again.


Lord. If Mr. Haswell has obtained your pardon, Sir, it is all very well -- but
let me advise you to keep your sentiments on politics to yourself, for the
future -- as you value that pretty head of yours.


Twi. I thank you, Sir -- I do value it.


Enter Elvirus. Has. [Going to him.] Aurelia, in this letter to me, has
explained your story with so much compassion, that, for her sake, I must pity
it too. -- With freedom to your father, and youself, the Sultan restores his
forfeited lands -- and might I plead, Sir Luke, for your interest with
Aureila's friends, this young man's filial love, should be repaid by conjugal
affection.


Sir Luke. As for that, Mr. Haswell, you have so much interest at court, that
your taking the young man under you protection -- besides, as Aurelia was sent
hither merely to get a husband -- I don't see --


Aur. True, Sir Luke -- and I am afraid my father and mother will begin to be
uneasy that I have not got one yet -- and I should be very sorry to
disobligethem.


Elv. No -- say rather, sorry to make me wretched. --

[Taking her band.
Enter Zedan. Has. My Indian friend, have you received your freedom?


Zed. Yes -- and come to bid you farewell -- which I would never do, had I not
a family in wretchedness till my return -- for you should be my master, and I
would be your slave. --


Has. I thank you -- may you meet at home every comfort!


Zed. May you -- may you -- what shall I say? -- May you once in your life be a
prisoner -- then released -- to feel such joy, as I feel now! --


Has. I thank you for a wish, that tells me most emphatically, how much you
think I have served you.


Twi. And, my dear Lord, I sincerely wish you may once in your life, have your
head chopped off -- just to know what I should have felt, in that fituation. --


Zed. [Pointing to Haswell.] Are all his countrymen as good as he?


Sir Luke. No-no no-no -- not all -- but the worst of them are good enough to
admire him.


Twi. Pray Mr. Haswell, will you suffer all these encomiums?


Elv. He must suffer them -- there are virtues, which praise cannot taint --
such are Mr. Haswell's -- for they are the offspring of a mind, superior even
to the love of fame -- neither can they, through malice, suffer by applause,
since they are too sacred to incite envy, and must conciliate the respect, the
love, and the admiration of all.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Written by MILES-PETER ANDREWS, Esquire.
Spoken by Mrs. MATTOCKS.
SINCE all are sprung, they say, from Mother Earth,
Why stamp a merit or disgrace on birth?
Yet so it is, however we disguise it,
All boast their origin, or else despise it.
This pride or shame haunts every living soul
From Hyde-park Corner, down to Limehouse Hole:
Peers, tailors, poets, statesmen, undertakers,
Knights, squires, man-milliners, and peruke-makers.
Sir Hugh Glengluthglin, from the land of goats,
Though out at elbows, shows you all his coats;
And rightful heir to twenty pounds per annum,
Boasts the rich blood that warmed his great great grannam;
While wealthy Simon Soapsuds; just be-knighted,
Struck with the sword of state, is grown dim sighted,
Forgets the neighboring chins he used to lather,
And scarecely knows he ever had a father.
Our Author, then, correct in every line,
From nature's characters has pictured mine;
For many a lofty fair, who, friz'd and curled,
With crest of horse hair, towering through the world,
To powder, paste, and pins, ungrateful grown,
Thinks the full periwig is all her own;
Proud of her conquering ringlets, onward goes,
Nor thanks the barber, from whose hands she rose.
Thus does false pride fantastic minds mislead,
And make our weaker sex seem weak indeed:
Suppose, to prove this truth, in mirthful strain,
We bring the Dripping family again. --
Papa, a tallow chandler by descent,
Had read "how larning is most excellent:"
So Miss, returned from boarding school at Bow,
Waits to be finished by Mama and Co. --
" See, spouse, how spruce our Nan is grown, and tall;
" I Will lay, she cuts a dash at Lord Mayor's ball." --
In bolts the maid -- " Ma'am! Miss's master's come;" --
Away fly Ma' and Miss to dancing room --
" Walk in Mounseer; come, Nan, draw up like me." --
" Ma for! Madame, Miss like you as two pea." --
Mounseer takes out his kit; the scene begins;
Miss trusses up; my lady Mother grins; --
" Ma'amselle, me teach a you de step to tread;
" First turn you toe, den turn you littel bead;
" One, two, dree, sinka, risa, balance; bon,
" Now entrechat, and new de cotillon.
[Singing and dancing about, " Pardieu, Ma'amselle be one enchanting girl;
" Me no surprise to see her ved an Earl." --
" With all my heart, says Miss; Mounseer, I Am ready;
" I dreamed last night, Ma, I should be a Lady."
Thus do the Drippings, all important grown,
Expect to shine with luster not their own;
New airs are got, fresh graces, and fresh washes,
New caps, new gauze, new feathers, and new sashes;
Till just complete for conquest at Guildhall.
Down comes an order to suspend the ball.
Miss Shrieks, Ma' scolds, Pa' seems to have lost his tether;
Caps, custards, coronets -- all sink together --
Papa resumes his jacket, dips away,
And Miss lives single, till next Lord Mayor's day.
If such the sorrow, and if such the strife,
That break the comforts of domestic life,
Look to the hero, who this night appears,
Whose boundless excellence the World reveres;
Who, friend to nature, by no blood confined,
Is the glad relative of all mankind.


