The STRANGERS AT HOME; A Comic Opera, In Three Acts: As performed at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

tableau

LONDON: Printed for Harrison and Co. No.18. Paternoster Row. MDCCLXXXVI.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES.
SIR,
IT being peculiarly the business of a dramatic writer, to select those popular
topics upon which he is assured of having the public voice with him, it might
naturally be expected that, after receiving Your ROYAL HIGHNESS's gracious
permission to lay this Dramatic Essay at Your feet, I should eagerly have
availed myself of the opportunity thus given me, of expatiating on those
manners, talents, and virtues, which constitute so general a theme of
admiration. But minds truly conscious of meriting praise are ever reserved and
delicate in accepting it: and perhaps Your ROYAL HIGHNESS will not suffer a
sincere acknowledgment of merit, because the panegyric of Princes has been too
often stained with adulation.

Restrained by this consideration, I must content myself with offering my
humble acknowledgments for the honor conferred on me, in the countenance of my
feeble endeavors to cultivate an elegant art which so eminently boasts the
protection of Your ROYAL HIGHNESS.

I am, with the most profound respect, Your ROYAL HIGHNESS's Most obedient, And
most devoted servant, JAMES COBB.
LONDON, FEB. 22, 1786.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of the STRANGERS AT HOME would think himself guilty of great
injustice, if at a moment when the Piece is so highly honored by the public
approbation, he should forget how much of that approbation he owes to the
abilities of the Performers, all of whom so kindly interested themselves in its
success. To Mr. KING he has peculiar obligations, for the care and attention
with which he superintended the rehearsals of the Opera; and to that
Gentleman's judicious criticisms he is likewise highly indebted. Although it
might be superfluous for the Author to add his praises to those which the
public have so liberally and deservedly bestowed on Mr. LINLEY's Music, he
cannot but congratulate himself on having had the assistance of so able a
Master.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Aldobrand Mr. KING. Regnalto Mr. WILLIAMES. Octavio Mr. DIGNUM. Montano Mr.
BARRYMORE. Fabio Mr. PHILLIMORE. Firelock Mr. BANNISTER. Laurence Mr.
BANNISTER, Jun. Roberto Mr. JONES.
Viola Mrs. CROUCH. Laura Mrs. FORSTER. Alice Mrs. WRIGHTEN. Rosa Mrs. JORDAN.
SCENE, FLORENCE. The Passages marked with inverted Commas are omitted in the
Representation.

THE Strangers at Home. A COMIC OPERA.
ACT. I.
SCENE, a Street in FLORENCE.
VIOLA and ALICE in a Balcony belonging to REGNALTO's House. A Procession of
Captives redeemed from Slavery cross the Stage; among them are REGNALTO and
LAURENCE. CHORUS.
WELCOME once more our native land!
Where smiling Freedom's bounteous hand
Life's fading picture bids to glow
With tints she can alone bestow!
It Is Liberty inspires the lay,
To hail our second natal day:
Hail, Goddess bright! by all adored;
By thee to more than life restored.

ALICE. What a glorious procession, Ma'am!


VIOLA. Glorious indeed, Alice! to see so many of our countrymen redeemed from
foreign slavery, and all by the munificence of the young and noble Octavio!


ALICE. Ah, Madam! I fancy this same Signor Octavio has enslaved you at the
very moment when he was giving others their liberty.


VIOLA. Oh, that my long lost brother were but among these ransomed captives!


ALICE. And oh! that my long lost husband were among them too! Lord, Ma'am!
talk of a brother -- I Am sure, when I was of your age, I should have thought
one husband worth twenty brothers.


VIOLA. Hark! -- I hear the music again! -- Let us listen.


Some of the Crowd come forward with Flasks of Wine; they appear to
congratulate the Captives, who drink with them, and join in the following
Catch. CATCH.
Come, come, drink away, boys! let our glasses keep time
To the tune of the bells that so merrily chime!
Ding, dong; ding, dong, bell -- that so merrily chime!
From slavery freed, we'll forget all our pains;
At the tyrant we'll laugh while he rattles his chains!
We'll laugh at his chains!
Thus music and drinking all sorrow shall drown:
Then, my boys! let us take off our glasses;
Huzza! huzza! every bumper shall crown.

ALDOBRAND, (Without.) Viola!


ALICE. There is that croaking old raven, your guardian.


ALDOBRAND. Viola, my dear! where are you?


ALICE. Don't answer him, Ma'am.


VIOLA. Look, Alice! there are two men whose eyes seem rivetted upon us.


ALICE. Where? -- Eh! -- Why, sure -- Yes -- No -- Yes, it is my poor husband!
It is Laurence!


ALDOBRAND, (Without.) Alice! why, Alice!


ALICE. Coming, Sir, presently.


REGNALTO and LAURENCE come forward. LAURENCE. Yes, there is Alice, sure
enough! My rib, my spouse! and as plump as ever. She has not pined much after
me, I see.


REGNALTO. It is my sister! my Viola.


ALDOBRAND, (Without.) Viola! -- Alice! -- where are you?


ALICE. Coming, Sir! -- Plague take the old curmudgeon! You must go to him,
Ma'am.


REGNALTO. She looks on me, but does not know me.

[Exeunt VIOLA and ALICE from the Balcony. And see! they vanish like spirits at
the dawn of day.


LAURENCE. Spirits! I am sure, then, they are choice spirits. Heaven bless you,
Sir, they are flesh and blood, I Will warrant; at least, I can answer for Alice.
-- But I think I scent the supper! Oh, for a fat capon, and a bottle of good
wine! -- I Will knock at the door.


REGNALTO. By no means: you know my suspicions of Aldobrand, with whom I left
the charge of my sister, and my house. I am resolved to remain concealed till I
can satisfy those suspicions.


LAURENCE. But may not I satisfy my hunger, in the mean while, Sir?


REGNALTO. Have a little patience.


LAURENCE. Ah, Sir! patience is a bad physician; he has worn me to a skeleton
already. If I don't change my doctor, he will soon make a dreadful change in me!
But here comes the Algerine captain who brought us over.


Enter MONTANO. REGNALTO. Noble Ibrahim! I thank Heaven that I am at length
arrived where I may be enabled properly to acknowledge that benevolence whose
rays illumined our night of slavery. Nay, start not! are you surprised to find
gratitude among the Christian virtues?


MONTANO. No, my generous friend; wide as the sun darts his beams, he finds
that precious jewel, which decks alike the Turban and the Cross!


REGNALTO. Then let me express the grateful sentiments I feel --


MONTANO. It will be sufficient that you suffer me to remain unknown and
unnoticed in this city.

[Exit MONTANO.
REGNALTO. We must hasten to offer our respects to the generous Octavio.


LAURENCE. I had much rather offer my respects to a well-covered table: we
shall be in better spirits after supper; my gratitude will grow stronger as my
stomach gets fuller.


REGNALTO. Away! no trifling. We must pay our compliments where they are due.

[Exit.
LAURENCE. Well, Sir, if it must be so, I Will follow you presently: though mine,
I fear, will be but empty compliments. -- Ha! here comes our fellow-captive,
Firelock, the English soldier; that merry old fellow, whose jests and songs
made us so often forget our sorrows.

Enter FIRELOCK. Once more welcome to European ground, my old son of fun and
frolic!


FIRELOCK. Aye, my boy! and a son who has never dishonored his family. It Is
only your common dull metal that rusts with the breath of care and misfortune:
the high polish of mirth and good humor always cast off the envenomed damp.


LAURENCE. And did you really never meet with any misfortune which obliged you
to complain?


FIRELOCK. Faith, I never remember lamenting but two misfortunes in my whole
life: one, that I was not at the Prussian review; and the other, that I had not
the honor of being among the brave fellows besieged in Gibraltar. -- But
that is all over now! However, I hope I shall yet live to fight for my country.


LAURENCE. I am going to return thanks to Signor Octavio.


FIRELOCK. So shall I, as soon as I am dressed.


LAURENCE. Dressed!


FIRELOCK. Aye, I hardly dare call myself an Englishman while I wear the badges
of slavery. Our noble captain, Ibrahim, has kindly presented me with the very
clothes in which I was taken by the Algerines: so, within an hour, you shall
see me in that character which commands respect in every part of the world -- a
British soldier! -- and then I shall want nothing but a mistress to make me
completely happy.


LAURENCE. They, you know, are to be purchased every where.


FIRELOCK. Aye, but I would as soon think of buying a friend as a mistress.
Always barter love for love, and friendship for friendship: for, egad! when
either of the commodities are put up to sale, depend upon it they are not worth
buying. However, I don't despair of making myself pretty well understood by
some kind Florentine girl or other. Love, I take it, is an universal language;
much the same in most countries.


LAURENCE. But, you will remember, it is a language in which the oldest
scholars are not generally the greatest proficients!


FIRELOCK. I understand you, young man! But I fear nothing. I am a mixture of
spring and autumn: old Time and I have had so long a battle, that he has given
up the point at last, and left me master of the field. Besides, if even a
mistress should be coy, I have yet my bottle to comfort me.

AIR.
"In vain whining lovers their Cupid shall prize,
"And boast that his godship's derived from the skies;
"Though divine was the birth of the young god of Love,
"Our Bacchus, we know, was the son of great Jove:
"Let us number Love's vot'ries, I think we can prove,
"That though all the world drink, it is not all the world love."
When malicious young Cupid o'erwhelms us with grief,
In the comforts of Bacchus we find sure relief:
Though Chloe, disdainful, deny you her charms,
When glowing with rapture you rush to her arms;
Pay your court to a bumper, and there you will find
A gay smiling mistress eternally kind.
Nay, when chilling age, like bleak winter, comes on,
And the sunshine of beauty and love shall be gone;
Still constant your bumper will smile to the end,
And supply both the places of mistress and friend.
Let us number Love's vot'ries, I think we can prove,
That though all the world drink, it is not all the world love.

SCENE, a Room in REGNALTO's House.
Enter ALDOBRAND and VIOLA. ALDOBRAND. There are all the people in Florence out
at their windows, gaping at this scurvy procession of slaves. Tinkle but an old
brass shovel in the streets of this city, and the inhabitants will swarm like
bees at the sound! One would think there was a triumph for some victory, today.


VIOLA. And what can be a nobler triumph, than the triumph of humanity! what a
nobler victory, than that of freedom over slavery!


ALDOBRAND. Psha! don't tell me! Self-preservation is the first tie of nature.


VIOLA. But is it the only tie, Sir?


ALDOBRAND. Charity should begin at home.


VIOLA. And should charity end at home, too?


ALDOBRAND. Certainly! you would not have me turn Charity out of doors? She
keeps house with sober decent people, and only goes astray with such
spendthrifts as Octavio. -- By the bye, Viola, Octavio has invited us to his
house today.


VIOLA. To his house, Sir! [Aside -- How my heart beats!] And do you mean that
we should accept of his invitation?


ALDOBRAND. Why, yes! for once in a way. -- We are to meet Signor Lucilio and
his wife Laura there. [Aside. -- Laura is a charming creature!]


VIOLA. I am astonished, Sir!


ALDOBRAND. Don't be alarmed! I Will take care to watch Octavio: for I suppose
he will teaze you with a parcel of stuff, that he is dying for love of you, and
--


VIOLA. Do you really think he will?


ALDOBRAND. Oh, yes! these rakish young dogs begin to make love the moment they
see a woman, just as naturally as you would say 'Pretty Pol!' to a parrot: but
you must not answer him.


VIOLA. Perhaps, then, he will think that my silence gives consent.


ALDOBRAND. Frown at him, as you do at me when I make love to you, and I Will be
hanged if he mistakes your silence for consent then!

[Exit.
VIOLA. Well, Signor Aldobrand, since you teach me the lesson of dissimulation,
you must even take the consequences.

AIR.
Since you teach me, dear Sir, the art of deceiving,
You surely can never take it ill,
If, while with attention your lessons receiving,
On yourself I should practice my skill.
And when of your own wit the dupe I have made you,
All doubts of your art 'twill remove;
For you cannot but esteem it a compliment paid you,
To show you how much I improve.
So doting parents often have smiled
At mischief from a favorite child;
And viewed, with fond, exulting joy,
The growing genius of the boy;
Who gives poor Hodge's awkward bow,
And shows you how he goes to plough;
Hits off the Vicar's vacant stare,
Wry faces makes behind his chair;
"Then slily mocks the Parson's quaffing,
"While they almost expire with laughing.
"Soon panting for satiric fame,
"Our little master seeks new game;
"And, tired of laughing at the guest,
"On host and hostess breaks his jest:
"The father's gouty steps takes off,
"His purblind eyes, and winter's cough;
"Nor can Mamma's pert, smiling leer,
"Escape the wicked urchin's sneer;
"While giggling servants raptured sit,
"To see how well the little wit"
Now apes the simpers of Mamma,
Then coughs and hobbles like Papa.

Re-enter ALDOBRAND with FABIO. ALDOBRAND. Fabio! this prodigal fool, Octavio,
has ransomed another parcel of slaves from Algiers.


FABIO. Yes; the procession has disturbed the whole city.


ALDOBRAND. And this is called generosity! For my part, Fabio, I think such
doings should not be tolerated. When Fate has thought fit to send a man into
slavery, I think it is flying in the face of Fate to release him from his
situation.


FABIO. Your reasoning is very just, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. Fabio! I never hear of a released captive, but I think of Regnalto.
If by any ill luck he should find his way back to Florence --


FABIO. Impossible, Sir! You know, I have assured you --


ALDOBRAND. Why, yes, you have assured me: but you must know, friend Fabio I
don't think that telling truth is your forte! -- However, run and view this new
cargo of slaves. Bring me but a true account of Regnalto's not being among
them, and I Will compound with you for a month's lying afterward.

[Exit FABIO. Enter ALICE. Well, Alice, any news of the worthy Regnalto?


ALICE. Alas! no, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. Ah! -- Nor of your husband?


ALICE. No, Sir. I have heard nothing of poor Laurence. [Aside -- The old
wretch shall not discover that I have seen him.]


ALDOBRAND. My poor friend! I must give a tear to humanity.


ALICE. Certainly, Sir. [Aside. -- It costs you nothing, or else you would not
give that.]


ALDOBRAND. Now to our own concerns! -- Do you know, Alice, I have resolved to
take Viola with me to visit Octavio?


ALICE. To visit Laura, you mean! I find she is to be of the party.


ALDOBRAND. Ha! ha! -- Why I don't think Laura has been insensible to my
amorous glances! -- Only I have never yet had an opportunity of explaining
myself.


ALICE. [Aside. -- An old fool! -- I Will turn this to Viola's account.] Lord,
Sir, what a Turk you are among the women! Marrying a young girl of eighteen,
and seducing a married woman of twenty, at the same time! I declare, I should
not expect it from you!


ALDOBRAND. Psha! psha! the older a man grows, the better use he should make of
his time. -- But tell me, Alice, how can I contrive to get a private interview
with Laura? -- Suppose in some disguise? Let me tell you, disguise is very
useful to us men of gallantry.


ALICE. No bad thought, Sir! -- What say you to the dress of a Monk? It will
not be the first time that garb has covered designs as pious as yours.


ALDOBRAND. A Monk's habit! -- Zounds! a man might as well make love in his
shroud! It Is a monument erected to signify the decease of human frailty.


ALICE. Oh! no, Sir! It will only, like other monuments, point out where the
remains are deposited. -- But, Sir, you know, a little money will be necessary
for this business.


ALDOBRAND. Money!


ALICE. Certainly, Sir! Generosity is the only test of a lover's being in
earnest.

AIR.
A fig for all your whining stuff,
Fine speeches sweet as honey;
Of love you cannot give proof enough,
Except you give your money:
Were I your mistress, faith and troth,
Your avarice soon would lose me!
For compliments are but mere froth --
You must, good Sir, excuse me!
Of all the arrows Love can boast,
The golden ones are best, Sir;
And he who boldly bids the most
Can never be in jest, Sir.
It Is true that I make rather free;
But, faith! you shall not refuse me:
So draw your purse-strings now, do you see --
Or else you must excuse me.

ALDOBRAND, (Giving her Money.) But, egad! I run a great hazard here. --
Indeed, it is true, I have no other means to get at Laura, than by risquing
Viola in Octavio's house: but then I must depend on your watchful care over
her, Alice!


ALICE. Trust to me, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. If the young slut should dare to listen to him -- If she should
forget herself so far, as to --


ALICE. Follow her own inclinations, as you do, her crime would certainly be of
the blackest dye.


ALDOBRAND. Psha! But you know the weakness and inexperience of young girls.


ALICE. For which reason their faults are to be more severely punished! Well, I
admire the men! who, while they are continually boasting a superiority of
understanding, very modestly reserve to themselves the privilege of committing
acts of folly with impunity.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, An Apartment in OCTAVIO's House.
Enter REGNALTO and LAURENCE. LAURENCE. Lord, Sir! we have waited a great while
to see Signor Octavio. I dare say he will excuse our going now. Ceremony, I am
told, is quite out of fashion with great folks.


REGNALTO. What, would you quit his house without thanking him for your
liberty? Do you not feel the warmth of gratitude for so inestimable a gift?

AIR.
Grief, thy tyrant reign is over,
Now I tread my native shore!
Mirth, fair Freedom's sister guest,
Shall impart her choicest zest
To each flask of generous wine
Gaily offered at her shrine:
See the sparkling glass goes round;
Care, avaunt! it is hallowed ground!

LAURENCE. I think humility should teach us, that to wait among the servants is
the properest situation for us. -- I hear them now at supper, Sir; and, as we
are but slaves --


REGNALTO. Slaves! the noble Octavio will receive us as friends.


LAURENCE. Then, Sir, for that very reason we should go to supper! -- When a
generous man entertains his friends at his own house, he is always best pleased
to see them eat heartily.


REGNALTO. Peace! Here comes Octavio.

Enter OCTAVIO. Generous Octavio! we owe you thanks which language can never
express.


OCTAVIO. Silence, Sir, will be the most acceptable eloquence on that subject.
Your mien and deportment bespeak you of no vulgar rank.


LAURENCE, (Aside.) He says nothing of my mien and deportment.

[OCTAVIO and REGNALTO converse aside.
OCTAVIO. Do not mistake me; I have not the smallest wish to know any thing you
may desire to conceal. No one is under restraint here: as long as it suits your
convenience, make this your home; and accept, in the mean time, whatever my
house affords.


LAURENCE. Thank you, my lord! I wish we had known as much before; perhaps we
should have made free: I am sure I should. But to night we sup at Signor
Regnalto's; though, I think, a little snack before supper --

[REGNALTO frowns.
OCTAVIO, (To REGNALTO.) What! were you acquainted with Regnalto?


LAURENCE. Yes, my lord; and he had a very great regard for him, too, or I am
much mistaken.


OCTAVIO. Perhaps, then, you know his sister?


REGNALTO. Alas, Sir! I fear she has forgotten me. It is ten years ago since I
held the little prattler on my knee.


LAURENCE. And now, I suppose, Signor Octavio would be glad, in turn, to hold
the little prattler on his knee.


OCTAVIO. Alas! had Viola a parent living, there would be no longer any
obstacle to our happiness: but, to have my hopes blasted thus, by an avaricious
guardian! --

AIR.
When Prudence opposes the dictates of Love,
A parent may fairly our choice disapprove:
It Is kind, then, to save us,
From what would enslave us;
To tell us the tale of Experience with truth,
And check by advice the wild sallies of youth!
But when Prudence smiles on the soft nuptial band,
And Affection and Reason are joined hand in hand;
With Hymen's torch lighted,
Our mutual faith plighted;
Alas! how severe is Fate's partial decree,
That cruelly tears me, my charmer, from thee!
Sir, I will confer on you what, to the noble mind, is one of the most
acceptable favors -- an opportunity of showing your gratitude. I love Signora
Viola: here is a letter, in which I propose that she should fly with me this
evening, from the power of the wretch with whom her unsuspecting brother too
hastily entrusted her. This letter you shall do me the favor to deliver.


LAURENCE, (Aside.) A mighty pretty employ my master has got into!


OCTAVIO. I have invited Aldobrand to bring the charming Viola with him today:
but as I hardly expect any success from that scheme, this letter is my last
resource.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. The captain of the ship from Algiers, Sir, begs to
speak with you.

[Exit.
OCTAVIO. Adieu! I will not offend your zeal to serve me, by urging that
secresy on which my success depends.

[Exit.
REGNALTO. Laurence!


LAURENCE. Sir!


REGNALTO. This is rather a singular situation!


LAURENCE. Not at all, Sir! Nothing can be more regular. When a lover thinks of
marrying his mistress, her nearest relation should always be one of the first
persons consulted on the business. -- But here comes my dear Alice!


REGNALTO. Don't discover who I am, Laurence.


LAURENCE. I wont, Sir; I will not! -- How her eyes sparkle while she is looking
for me!


REGNALTO. Enquire after my sister.


LAURENCE. I will, Sir. -- Pretty rogue! -- Pretty rogue!


REGNALTO. I am very impatient --


LAURENCE. Yes, Sir; so am I!


Enter ALICE. ALICE. Ah! my poor Laurence! -- (Embracing him.)


LAURENCE. Poor indeed, Alice! -- I -- I -- Well! and how do you do? I had a
thousand things to say to you: but they are all jumbled together; and, like a
great crowd trying to get out of the playhouse, they press on one another till
they quite choke up the passage.


ALICE. You are wasted away prodigiously!


LAURENCE. Aye! I am not the man I was, Alice.


ALICE. I am very sorry for it, Laurence!


LAURENCE. When you and I parted, I was as plump as good living and laughing
could make me; but now I may, indeed, say -- my wife is my better half!

[REGNALTO pulls his Sleeve. And pray, how does your young lady do? -- Pretty
little soul! she --


ALICE. Why, I Will tell you! -- But I see we are not alone. Who is that?


LAURENCE. A brother captive of mine. He is both deaf and dumb, so you may say
what you will before him.


REGNALTO, (Aside.) The rogue has not lost his old knack at invention.


ALICE. La! what a pity it is, that such a well-looking man should have any
deficiencies!


LAURENCE. But tell me, how is your young lady?


ALICE. As well as any poor girl can be, when she is doomed to marry a miserly
old guardian; who tells her, forsooth, that she shall find a father in him.


REGNALTO, (Aside.) An old villain!


LAURENCE. Well, Alice, and do you think there so any thing so much amiss in a
husband's becoming a father!


ALICE. Signor Regnalto, he says, has certainly died in slavery. -- Now I think
of it, can you tell me any news of our old master?


LAURENCE. I cannot indeed, Alice; so don't ask me any thing about him.


ALICE. Poor man! Gone, I suppose! I am sorry for him.


LAURENCE. We shall never have such another master!


ALICE. No, never! He was the most good tempered creature! One of the best men
in the world for a servant to live with. So easily cheated!


LAURENCE. Easily cheated! No, no, Alice! That Is too much.


ALICE. Nay, Laurence, I am sure you know it as well as any body living. How
many bottles of his best wine did you drink, and made him believe the rats got
into the cellar and eat away the corks?


LAURENCE. Lord! Lord!


REGNALTO, (Aside.) I shall make some interesting discoveries.


LAURENCE. Not another word, Alice!


ALICE. Why, what the deuce are you afraid of? You may be sure a dumb man cannot
make any words about the matter.


REGNALTO, (Aside to LAURENCE.) It Is lucky for you, sirrah, that you have
deprived me of my speech!


ALICE. Hey-day! -- What, can he whisper?


LAURENCE. No; but he makes a queer comical kind of a noise; which I, who am
used to him, can understand as well as if he spoke ever so distinctly.


ALICE. And what does he mean?


LAURENCE. Why, to let me know he is hungry, as I am: and, in faith, it is no
wonder, considering how long it is since we tasted roast-meat! Let us take him
home with us, Alice. You will find him a mighty agreeable companion; he will
never contradict you!


ALICE. I declare, he seems as if he understood every word we say!


LAURENCE. Oh, he is very intelligent; I can teach him any thing. -- But come!
Never did soldier long more for conquest than I do to attack my supper. -- My
dear Alice, we'll be as merry as love and good wine can make us.

[Exeunt.
Enter OCTAVIO and MONTANO. OCTAVIO. Heavens! Montano, what a difference must
this Algerine habit make in you! when even I did not discover you, who but
three years ago was the most intimate friend you had in Florence.


MONTANO. But Laura! --


OCTAVIO. Inconsolable for your loss, she sequestered herself from the world
for some time.


MONTANO. That was kind!


OCTAVIO. At length, however, to the surprise of every one, after slighting the
first noblemen in Florence, she suddenly married a young stranger.


MONTANO. A stranger!


OCTAVIO. Named Lucilio. Gentle, yet lively in his manners; in his person, an
Adonis in miniature.


MONTANO. Do not oppress me with his praises; rather say that he is base!
unworthy! -- that my sword --


OCTAVIO. Hold, Montano! I conjure you, by our friendship! -- Lucilio and Laura
are here. Consider, this house is their sanctuary: retire but for a moment, you
shall see Laura presently; nay, you shall even speak to her. -- I beg only a
moment's delay.

[MONTANO and OCTAVIO retire.
Enter LAURA and ROSA. LAURA. Oh, Rosa! this uncertainty of my Montano's fate,
like the torturing arts of medicine, protracts my unhappy life but too long!


ROSA. Upon my word, Madam, you must think me a very complaisant husband, thus
to make me the confidante of your affection for another!


LAURA. You are a strange girl! However, I must own, it was a lucky thought for
me, which suggested this scheme of calling you my husband, to get rid of the
importunities of my lovers.


ROSA. Yes, really! and lucky for me, too; from your humble companion in
petticoats, to become your lord and master in breeches. -- I am sure I may
truly say, marriage has made a man of me!


LAURA. But hear me, Rosa!


ROSA. Rosa! -- you forget that I am your husband! Aye, and so kind! and so
indulgent, too! Am not I the best of husbands? [LAURA sighs.] Ah! you will
never know my value, till you have got your beloved Signor Montano; and then
you will soon find the difference between us!


LAURA. You trifler!


ROSA. However, though we may forget ourselves in private, let us at least take
care to behave like husband and wife in public; that is no more than many
married couples oblige themselves to do. But, seriously, my dear Madam, is it
possible you can doubt Montano's constancy? Duty and reason will secure --


LAURA. Duty and reason, when opposed to love! -- Oh, Rosa!

AIR.
In vain, when with the fatal dart,
(Unerring in his aim)
The little Archer wounds the heart,
Does Reason urge her claim:
The powerful sun of Beauty's eyes
Beams forth too bright a ray;
She thaws cold Duty with her sighs,
And Reason melts away!

OCTAVIO and MONTANO come forward. OCTAVIO, (To Laura.) My friend Ibrahim is
lately from Algiers, Madam.

[Introduces MONTANO, then walks apart with ROSA.
LAURA. I -- I -- had a friend carried to that part of the world, Sir, for whom
I am much interested.


MONTANO. [Aside -- How guilt flushes her cheeks!] I knew him well, Madam.


LAURA. You knew him -- a -- his name was --


MONTANO, (Aside.) Zounds! I forgot to wait for my name.


LAURA. Montano; a native of Florence.


MONTANO. Montano! -- He -- he -- was my friend, Madam.


LAURA. Then you can tell me news of him! [Aside -- Now for life or death!]


MONTANO. He is no longer considered as a Christian slave. He has taken the
turban. I myself saw him last in the Algerine habit.


LAURA. Heaven and earth!


MONTANO. I have heard him often repeat the name of Laura.


LAURA. Indeed! -- You distress me, Sir!


MONTANO. Montano loved her once; loved her, as the slave who now adores her!

[Seizing LAURA's Hand.
LAURA. You are bold, Sir!


MONTANO. And is that, Madam, a fault, in the estimation of a lady?


LAURA. I have a husband, Sir, who will answer whether it ought not to be so in
mine! -- Signor Octavio, a word with you.

[Walks aside with OCTAVIO.
ROSA comes forward. MONTANO. And do you, Sir, take upon you to chastise every
one who dares to love that lady?


ROSA. Not I, upon my soul, Sir! It would be a very troublesome office.
Besides, it is too flattering to my vanity, to have my wife universally beloved
--


MONTANO. She was beloved by Montano! Did you know him, Sir?


ROSA. Montano! Montano! -- Oh! the man who went one afternoon to fish in the
Mediterranean, and was himself caught by an Algerine rover!


MONTANO. Did you know Montano, young Sir?


ROSA. Oh! yes, Sir! I recollect he had the vanity to be my rival. Poor man! I
ought not to abuse him; for I owe him infinite obligations, for the merriment
Laura and I have so often had at his expense!


MONTANO. 'Sdeath! Sir, you dare not repeat what you say!


ROSA. Really, Sir, I don't desire it. Tautology in conversation is very
disagreeable.


MONTANO. If Montano were here --


ROSA. Why, if he were, Sir, I should certainly pity the poor devil! To be
laughed at by a successful rival would be intolerable; and, really, I could not
help it! -- Ha! ha! ha!

AIR.
When first I began, Sir, to ogle the ladies,
And prattle soft nothings, as a pretty fellow's trade is;
While with rapturous praises I dwelt on each feature,
If I stole a sly kiss, 'twas -- 'Fye, you wicked creature!'
But soon, in tones lower, and softer, and sweeter,
Half-pleas'd, they would whisper -- 'Fye, fie, you wicked 'creature!'
Indeed, my attractions no gallantry needed,
Each evening still conquests to conquests succeeded:
Perplexed how so many fond claims I should parry,
To settle all disputes, I resolved, faith, to marry!
Then pressed lovely Laura, in language still sweeter,
Till, blushing, she whispered -- 'I'm yours, you wicked creature!'

MONTANO. Hark'e, Signor Lucilio; I will not hear Montano insulted with
impunity! I shall walk by the riverside, two miles from the city, at six
tomorrow morning! You understand me, Sir?


ROSA. [Aside -- A pretty scrape I am got into!] -- Perfectly, Sir! You find
the air from the water beneficial to your health.


MONTANO. Insulting coward! draw instantly!


ROSA. [Looking round, and perceiving OCTAVIO approach to part them.] Zounds,
Sir! with all my heart. This is not to be borne! -- Signor Octavio, nothing but
the respect I bear you, prevents my punishing that boaster as he deserves! Your
presence protects him from my rage! [Aside to LAURA -- Let us be gone; I am
frightened out of my wits!]


OCTAVIO. Signor Lucilio, I am concerned for my friend's warmth!


ROSA. As to that, Sir, I am very happy you interfered. I declare, I tremble to
think what might have been the consequence!


LAURA. Signor Octavio, what has passed will, I am sure, plead my apology for
begging your permission to retire.


QUARTETTO.
LAURA. Good Signor, you will excuse me! --
Pray don't, my dear, refuse me!
Lucilio, let us go.
ROSA. Laura, you must excuse me! --
Satisfaction you shall not refuse me,
Before I go.
OCTAVIO. Good Signor, you will excuse me!
Pray don't, my friend, refuse me. --
Hold, Sir, you must excuse me! --
Pray, good Lucilio, go!
LAURA. Be by your reason aided!
Why will not you be persuaded?
Hear me!
Come, your passion smother!
For this you will thank me, some day or other.
Lucilio, let us go. --
Signor Octavio, with thanks to you, Sir,
Adieu, adieu, Sir! --
Lucilio, let us go.
ROSA. No, I Will not be persuaded! --
Hear me! --
Eh! well, then, my passion I Will try to smother.
Adieu, Signor! I go. --
But I shall find, Sir, some time or other,
For a private word, or so.
OCTAVIO. Why will not you be persuaded?
Hear me!
Hold! Before a lady,
Your anger smother^ --
Pray, good Lucilio, go:
You may, you know, find some time or other,
For a private word, or so.
MONTANO. No, Sir, I shall not excuse you!
Justice I will not refuse you,
Before you go! --
No, I Will not be persuaded! --
Hear me! --
My anger I cannot smother! --
Nay, Sir, you shall not go!
Well, I shall find, Sir, some time or other,
For a private word, or so.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, REGNALTO's House.
Enter ALICE, and LAURENCE with a Bottle of Wine in one Hand and Bread in the
other. LAURENCE. TELL the cook to make haste, Alice. I like my victuals rather
under done.


ALICE. You have been used to eat your meat rare, I suppose?


LAURENCE. Yes, the meat that came to my share in Algiers was very rare,
indeed! -- not above once a month.


ALICE. And how did they treat you, Laurence? Tell me all about it.


LAURENCE. They treated me with my board, to be sure -- to sleep on, I mean; a
scarcity of bread and water; and plenty of stripes and hard labor. For my
part, I had rather pay my own way in Florence, than be treated so by the best
Algerine of 'em all!


ALICE. Pray, Laurence, had your master many wives?


LAURENCE. Wives! aye, in every hole and corner of his house: they ran about
like rabbits in a warren!


ALICE. And did not you turn poacher now and then, and snap up a stray rabbit?
-- Eh! Laurence?


LAURENCE. Not I, indeed! I had a much keener appetite for a fat capon. --
Hunger is a bitter enemy to gallantry! -- Besides, the Infidels have ways of
keeping their wives to themselves, which we have not yet attained.


ALICE. By making slaves of them! -- Thank my stars, that odious fashion does
not prevail in Christendom!


LAURENCE. "No, the matter is just reversed with us: in all Christian
countries, the wives keep their husbands in subjection." -- But here comes
Madam Viola!


Enter VIOLA. VIOLA. Honest Laurence, I am rejoiced to see you once more at
home!


LAURENCE. Thank ye, Ma'am! -- I am much rejoiced to see myself here!


VIOLA. I imagine you have had a sufficient sample of traveling?


LAURENCE. Enough to last me my life, Ma'am!


VIOLA. And what think you of the men and manners where you have been?


LAURENCE. As for the men, the least said about them is the best; and, as for
their manners, egad! I never was treated with so much ill-manners, by any other
set of people, before or since!


VIOLA. Laurence, you are released from the chains of a tyrant, just time
enough to see me in fetters!

RONDEAU.
Woman's fate is still distressing,
Be her lot whatever it will;
Man perverts her every blessing
To a cause of future ill.
If with charms her form enduing,
Nature kindest care employs,
Man, the gaudy prize pursuing,
Conquers first, and then destroys.
Riches serve but to entoil her;
Like the be with honey stored,
Her wealth allures the cruel spoiler,
And dooms her -- victim of her hoard.
"Tomorrow is the day fixed by my inexorable guardian to make me his wretched
wife. -- Oh, for the presence of a brother, to save me from this living death!"

Enter REGNALTO. But Alice tells me you can give no tidings of the unfortunate
Regnalto?


LAURENCE. I know no more of him than this good man!

[Pointing to REGNALTO.
VIOLA. And who is he?


LAURENCE. He cannot tell you that himself; he is dumb.


ALICE. The poor fellow is just returned from slavery, Madam!


VIOLA. Perhaps he may have seen my brother: I Will question him. How
complacently he smiles upon me! I hope I shall be able to understand him.


LAURENCE. Well, Ma'am, my wine is out; so we'll leave you with our silent
friend, while we go and toast you in bumpers from a fresh bottle!

[Exeunt ALICE and LAURENCE.
VIOLA. Poor slave! perhaps he has a sister in some foreign land, who, like me,
mourns the absence of a brother! [Taking a Picture from her Pocket.] Here is
Regnalto's picture! -- Precious image of a beloved brother, let me press thee
to my heart!


REGNALTO, (Aside.) "How shall I support myself in this trying scene!"


VIOLA. If he has ever seen Regnalto, he will remember the likeness. [Shews it
to him; he looks at it attentively, and shakes his Head.] Alas! he knows not
the resemblance.


REGNALTO, (Aside.) I had almost forgot my errand!

[Pulls her by the Sleeve.
VIOLA. What would you with me, gentle slave? [REGNALTO offers her the Letter
from OCTAVIO, and makes Signs of Secresy.] A letter! [Opening it hastily.] And
from Octavio! [Reading.] 'Dearest Viola! our situation must plead my excuse for
the proposal I thus abruptly offer. Tomorrow is to make you the wife of
Aldobrand; suffer me to snatch you from the misery in which this detested
marriage would involve us. Do not doubt my honor: warm as my passion is for
the charming Viola, I can never forget the respect due to the sister of
Regnalto --


REGNALTO, (Aside.) Noble youth!


Viola, (Reading.) -- 'On a word depends your fate and mine. I shall be with
some chosen friends, at the balcony which looks into the garden, a little
before midnight. Let me hope that happy hour will consign you to the care of
the impatient Octavio!' -- What am I to do! [REGNALTO pleads for OCTAVIO in
dumb Show.] He endeavors to persuade me; he pleads for his benefactor. -- Will
you accompany me? -- [REGNALTO puts his Knee to the Ground, and kisses her
Hand.] Then I will meet Octavio! [She kisses the Letter, and intimates that she
agrees to the Proposal.

Enter ALDOBRAND. My guardian here!


ALDOBRAND. Hey-day! whom have we here? A lover in disguise! This is your
gallant-elect, I see, Madam; and he is kissing hands on his appointment! -- Who
the devil are you?


VIOLA. He is now my servant.


ALDOBRAND. That is to say, you are his mistress. So I suspected!


VIOLA. How you misunderstand things! He is --


ALDOBRAND. I ask him, and not you, what he is! -- I suppose he can speak for
himself?


VIOLA. Indeed he cannot, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. Not speak for himself! A pretty kind of a lover, then, he must be!


VIOLA. A lover! The poor creature is just come from Algiers; and I have
employed him as my servant, from motives of compassion. -- I tell you, he cannot
speak.


ALDOBRAND. But I suppose he can eat and drink; and that comes very expensive!


VIOLA. And is this the way you think to gain my regard, by thwarting me in
every thing I propose?


ALDOBRAND. Nay, nay! my dear wife, that is to be! I Am sure I Will do all I can
to make you happy. I agree, then, to take this speechless gentleman into our
service.


VIOLA. I thank you, Signor.


ALDOBRAND. Thanks! And is that all I am to receive from your lips, Viola? -- I
must! indeed, I must! -- [Offering to kiss her.] -- Well, I shall make you pay
for all tomorrow! Those rosy lips will be mine when we are married, Viola!


VIOLA. When we are married, they shall be yours; but, till then, good Signor,
they must remain my own!

[Exit.
Enter FABIO. ALDOBRAND. Well, Fabio, what news?


FABIO. Why, Sir, on this occasion, we may really say, no news is good news:
for I can hear nothing of Regnalto. You may depend upon it, he is not in
Florence.


ALDOBRAND. I am heartily glad of it, good Fabio! and will double the reward I
promised you.

[ALDOBRAND and FABIO sit down at a Table.
REGNALTO, (Aside.) Fortune has thrown an excellent opportunity in my way, to
discover the villainy of this false friend, in whose honor I have so unwarily
confided.


ALDOBRAND. Hey, Roberto! get wine and glass: and, do you hear! show Dummy the
way to the cellar. We must try to make something of him! -- [Exeunt ROBERTO and
REGNALTO.] -- Come, Fabio! let us sit down and enjoy ourselves! You have put me
in charming spirits; and we'll have a bottle of my best wine on the strength of
your good news!

Re-Enter ROBERTO with Glasses. Well, Roberto, does he appear to be a handy
fellow?


ROBERTO. O, yes, Sir! [REGNALTO enters.] he seems to know the ways about the
house as well as if he had been used to it!


ALDOBRAND. Aye, aye! we must converse with him by signs: I dare say he will soon
be able to find us out.


REGNALTO, (Aside.) I hope so!


ALDOBRAND. Roberto, you need not stay: let him wait on us.

[Exit ROBERTO. A dumb waiter is sometimes very convenient!


FABIO. Why, Sir, you retain not only your spirits, but your wit!


ALDOBRAND. My dear Fabio, the news you bring of Regnalto gives me new life!
Let him but keep out of my sight, and my bottle in it -- and then, Time and
Care, I defy you!

AIR.
The ills of life in vain assail,
I never yet would yield me;
Nor shall their malice ever prevail,
While frolic Mirth can shield me:
Like curs they snarl, but dare not bite;
I heed them not at all, Sir!
But laugh at all their harmless spite,
And still sing -- Tol de roll lol, Sir.
I ever scorned, with face of woe,
Proud dames to dangle after;
But bent with smiles young Cupid's bow,
And tipped his shafts with laughter:
Success still crowned each merry dart,
Black, fair, brown, short, or tall, Sir;
I vanquished every female heart,
With -- Tol de roll lol, de roll, Sir.
"Let first-rate singers stretch their throats,
"In fine falsetto squeaking;
"With new and strange unnatural notes,
"Applause from fashion seeking:
"The blockhead Connoisseurs among
"Even let them trill and squall, Sir;
"Give me, my boy! a jolly song,
"That ends with -- Tol de roll lol, Sir."
In spite of Dons so grave and wise,
Till over old Styx I ferry,
I always will most highly prize
Whatever's blithe and merry.
May Love and Laughter ever be
Attendant on my call, Sir!
Here Is what I Have always loved, do you see --
A glass to -- Tol de roll lol, Sir!
Where do you think Regnalto is now, Fabio?


FABIO. At a pretty good distance from us, I Will answer for it. You know I
bargained with a Turkish merchant to buy him at Algiers, and transport him from
thence to Constantinople!


ALDOBRAND. So you told me!


FABIO. After which, he was to be conveyed to Arabia, and sold to a chief of
the wild Arabs.


REGNALTO, (Aside.) A pretty journey these good people have marked out for me!


"FABIO. "And, I dare say, by this time, he is as expert at robbing a caravan
as the best freebooter among them.


"ALDOBRAND. "Then he has traveled to some end, Fabio.


"FABIO. "Yes, Sir! and I hope that will be the end of his travels.


"ALDOBRAND. "With all my heart! Give Dummy a bumper to that toast -- "May
Regnalto end his travels where he is now!

["They drink, and give REGNALTO a Glass of Wine.
"FABIO. "Well done, honest Dummy! Egad! he empties his glass to that toast!


"ALDOBRAND. "He little thinks that he is drinking to the captivity of his old
acquaintance; for I dare say Regnalto and he have had the bastinado together
many a time in Algiers."


Enter a SERVANT. SERVANT. Signor Lucilio, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. Lucilio! What the devil can he want with me? I hope he has not
discovered my designs on his wife! -- Show him up. -- Fabio, let Dummy retire
with you for the present.

[Exeunt REGNALTO and FABIO. Enter ROSA. Signor Lucilio, ten thousand thanks
for this honor! Believe me, I am heartily glad to see you!


ROSA. I am come, Signor Aldobrand, to request your advice and assistance in a
matter of great moment to me.


"ALDOBRAND. "I am sure I shall be particularly happy --


"ROSA. "I know you are a man of gallantry --


"ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) "Egad! I am sorry for that.


"ROSA. "And therefore I wish for your counsel. -- But, are we out of hearing?


"ALDOBRAND. "As snug as a conclave of cardinals!"


ROSA. Give me leave to ask you, what measures do you think I ought to pursue
with the man who has dared to make love to my wife?


ALDOBRAND. A -- a -- [Aside -- Oh! that I were but safe out of the room!] Why,
surely -- is it possible that --


ROSA. Possible! why not, Sir? Is not Laura handsome enough to be an object of
temptation?


ALDOBRAND. Upon my soul, I think so, Sir! Don't mistake me. [Aside -- What
shall I say to him?]


ROSA. When I consider the nature of the affront! --


ALDOBRAND. But consider, at the same time, good Signor, how liable we all are
to frailty! Temptation is an enemy who wrestles with us through life, growing
stronger as we grow weaker; and if youth cannot resist him, it is not to be
wondered at that he should easily trip up an old man's heels!


ROSA. I am resolved to punish him severely!


ALDOBRAND. [Aside -- I shall be exposed to all Florence!] Are there no
apologies which you could be prevailed on to receive?


ROSA. What apologies can he offer, after having had the assurance to threaten
my life! --


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) I threaten his life! -- What the devil does he mean now?


ROSA. The presumption to challenge me to single combat!


ALDOBRAND. Challenge you! -- Upon my veracity, I never dreamt of such a thing!


ROSA. Yes, the haughty Algerine dared me to measure swords with him!


ALDOBRAND. The haughty Algerine!


ROSA. Ibrahim, the commander of the vessel last from Algiers!


ALDOBRAND. [Aside -- I am restored to life!] Give me your hand, my dear Signor
Lucilio! We'll have the scoundrel hanged, drawn, quartered, flayed, and
carbonaded! -- A dog! a rascal! a villain! -- a -- such an abominable attempt!


ROSA. But how shall we manage, my dear friend? I have every thing to dread
from him while he is at liberty. You are a magistrate, and can assist me.


ALDOBRAND. He shall be thrown into prison in two hours time!


ROSA. Will that be strictly legal?


ALDOBRAND. Legal! aye, to be sure, if it can serve a friend. Laws were made
for the benefit of society; and are not our friends the very flower of society?


ROSA. But let us be careful not to infringe the strict letter of the law.


ALDOBRAND. Aye, that is a true oracle; always doubtful in it is meaning. We
lawyers are the priests, and who so proper to expound it as we who make it? The
letter of the law reminds me of a fanciful cloud in a summer sky; though no two
persons can agree in what it really represents, you may look at it till you
make what you will of it.


"ROSA. "And yet how beautiful are those clouds when gilded by the sun of
equity!


"ALDOBRAND. "Psha! psha! when the clouds gather fast, the sun of equity, as
you call it, sometimes finds it a devilish hard task to shine through them."
But come, let us to business; we have not a moment to lose. I Will dispatch the
officers of justice after this Ibrahim, and they will seize him the instant they
set eyes on him!


ROSA. Well, Signor Aldobrand, I perceive you improve on the poets, who
represent Justice as blind: you kindly remove the band from her eyes, that she
may distinguish objects clearly.


ALDOBRAND. Modern Justice is only blind to the faults of her friends.


ROSA. And what does she do with her sword?


ALDOBRAND. Reserves that for their enemies.


ROSA. Ha! ha! ha! -- Then her scales only remain to be disposed of!


ALDOBRAND. Which are too useful to be parted with. They are for the receipt of
fees; one scale for the plaintiff, and the other for the defendant: of course,
you know, that which is best filled makes the other kick the beam! -- And so
much for justice.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, the House of OCTAVIO.
Enter OCTAVIO and ALICE. OCTAVIO. Well, Alice, then the charming Viola is
permitted by her guardian to visit this house today? You may depend on my
gratitude!


"ALICE. "I will, Sir; though I own it is not a quality on which, generally
speaking, I place the greatest dependence.


"OCTAVIO. "Surely you do not doubt it is existence: you do not think it a mere
phantom."


ALICE. Why really, Sir, my experience has taught me, that gratitude is
something like a ghost; every body talks of it, but nobody sees it appear!


OCTAVIO. As to that, I can easily conjure up the apparition! -- [Giving her a
Purse.] How do you like it?


ALICE. Oh! I admire your spirit, I assure you, Sir! It could not appear in a
prettier shape.


OCTAVIO. But tell me, dear Alice! how am I to elude the vigilance of Aldobrand?


ALICE. Very easily, Sir. You must know the old fool expects to meet Laura her,
with whom he is most desperately in love! -- But I see him coming: I Will engage
him, while you slip down stairs, and entertain your mistress.

[Exit OCTAVIO.
Enter ALDOBRAND. ALDOBRAND. Here I am! so amorous -- but so frightened! My
heart is like a volcano in Iceland; fire and frost at the same time. If Laura
should not requite my passion -- if I should fail, Alice! --


ALICE. Fail, Sir! there is no such word in the lover's dictionary.


ALDOBRAND. Then I suppose mine is the old edition; for, egad! I think I see it
in the title page, in black letter. It frightens me so, that I cannot turn over
a new leaf!


ALICE. Come, Sir, I Will comfort you with an example, in a ballad which I learnt
of an English captain who used to visit my poor master, Signor Regnalto.

AIR.
Young Roger the ploughman, who wanted a mate,
Went along with his daddy a courting to Kate;
With nosegay so large, in his holiday clothes,
(His hands in his pockets) away Roger goes.
Now he was as bashful as bashful could be;
And Kitty, poor girl, was as bashful as he:
So he bowed, and he star'd, and he let his hat fall;
Then he grinn'd, scratched his head, and said -- nothing at all.
If awkward the swain, no less awkward the maid;
She simper'd and blushed, with her apron-string played:
Till the old folks, impatient to have the thing done,
Agreed that young Roger and Kate should be one.
In silence the young ones both nodded assent:
Their hands being joined, to be married they went;
Where they answered the parson with voices so small,
You Would have sworn that they both had said -- nothing at all.
But mark what a change! In the course of a week,
Kate quite left off blushing, Hodge boldly could speak;
Could joke with his deary, laugh loud at the jest:
She could coax, too, and fondle, as well as the best.
And, ashamed of past folly, they have often declared,
To encourage young folks, who at courtship are scared,
If at first to your aid some assurance you call,
When once you are used to it, it is -- nothing at all.
A lover is like a swimmer: fear will be sure to sink him.


ALDOBRAND. Then, egad! I shall certainly go to the bottom, Alice!


ALICE. Never fear that, Sir! -- Trust to the cork-jacket I have brought you.
-- [Shewing his Disguise] -- This will keep your head above water, I Will
warrant. -- Come, Sir, let me help you on with it.


ALDOBRAND, (Putting on the Friar's Dress.) Heigho! make haste, and lead me to
Laura, that I may face the enemy, while I have courage enough left for the
attack.


ALICE. I Will go and reconnoitre, Sir.


ALDOBRAND. And, do you hear? keep an eye on Viola! -- You know Octavio is a few
years younger than I am; and young girls have a devilish hankering after green
fruit!

[Exit ALICE.
Enter FIRELOCK. FIRELOCK. Who have we here? a Friar! I did not expect to meet
with so holy a man. I was in search of one Signor Aldobrand, a rich old lawyer
of this city. -- Do you know him, father?


ALDOBRAND. I know the man!


FIRELOCK. Perhaps you are his confessor? In Faith! if you are, you must have a
troublesome task of it, by all accounts: I am sure you deserve to be paid well
for keeping such a battered old conscience in repair!


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) How I long to break the rascal's head!


FIRELOCK. But I cannot think where the old fellow can be gone! He was seen to
enter this room not half an hour ago.


ALDOBRAND. Why, what the devil! are you set to watch him, you dog?


FIRELOCK. Hey-day! here is language for a man of mortification! You seem to
have forgot yourself, father.


ALDOBRAND. Rather so, indeed! -- But, if you knew me better, you would find me
a true son of the church.


FIRELOCK. Aye, I dare say! One of those dutiful children who are seldom better
pleased than when they are drinking their mother church in full bumpers; and,
lest her family should be extinct, like good sons, take all the care in their
power to provide her with grandsons.


ALDOBRAND. I forgive your scurrility, friend! -- You shall find, that Monkish
manners can cover liberality of sentiment.


FIRELOCK. As an extinguisher covers a candle! -- But here come Octavio and
Viola.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) A comfortable situation I shall be in, to be sure! for,
though I should be cuckolded before my face, I must, like a snail, draw my
horns within my shell!


Enter OCTAVIO and VIOLA. FIRELOCK. We are all safe, Sir! the enemy has
retreated, and left you master of the field.


OCTAVIO. Follow Aldobrand, my faithful friend, lest he should return
unexpectedly. -- But who is this?


FIRELOCK. Oh! as for this ghostly father, though he may hitherto have been a
neutral power, I dare say, he is a true politician; and, now victory has
declared for you, will have no objection to become your ally.

[Exit.
OCTAVIO. A lucky thought! This good priest shall join our hands. -- You
tremble, Viola?


VIOLA. Oh, Octavio! you will forgive that timidity which makes me start at the
precipitancy of a measure --


OCTAVIO. Which alone can release you from the power of an avaricious tyrant!
-- I Will submit the case to this worthy man; convinced that I could not have
fixed on any person better qualified to decide the matter.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) I wish to my soul the worthy man were safe at home! -- A
plague on this masquerading! If he finds me out, I shall have his sword through
me in a twinkling!


OCTAVIO. My good father, this lady is threatened with marriage by her
guardian; a wretch whom, if you knew, you must despise! -- She has blessed me
with the avowal of her affection!


VIOLA. That avowal, Octavio, I willingly repeat. Why should I blush to own my
acquaintance with Love, while he is the companion of Virtue?


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) The devil take her fine sentiments!


OCTAVIO. Thus, then, let me seize this charming hand! and our good friend,
here, I am persuaded, will cheerfully assist me in making it my own. [ALDOBRAND
shakes his Head.] "What, you say 'No!' Perhaps you are not aware what a sad old
fellow this guardian is: he reviles ecclesiastical government wherever he
goes; and declares he hates a priest so much, that he is ready to faint at the
sight of his habit. He says it resembles charity, for it is always sure to
cover a multitude of sins."


VIOLA. You seem to be mistaken in the person to whom you apply, Octavio?


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) Most cursedly mistaken, if he knew all!


OCTAVIO. As to his shaking his head, that is a disorder easily cured by a
proper application to the palm of the patient's hand!

[Giving Money to ALDOBRAND.
ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) Egad! if I refuse money, he will soon discover me to be no
churchman.

[Taking the Money.
OCTAVIO. Are you better, father? -- Not quite cured yet, eh! -- I must touch
the other hand, then. -- [Giving him more Money.] -- Now, I Will answer for it,
he will find himself perfectly well!


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) Then I Will even get off while I am well!

[Going.
OCTAVIO, (Stopping him.) Not so fast, my good friend!


Enter ALICE; who starts back with seeming Surprise, and then whispers VIOLA.
VIOLA, (Aside to ALICE.) My guardian, do you say?


ALICE, (Affecting Astonishment.] Bless me, what do I see -- To what a pass of
wickedness is this world arrived! -- Oh, my poor master! how he has been
imposed upon! And now, perhaps, he will think me an accomplice in the plot. I
shall run mad with vexation! -- As for you, Signora Viola, I shall take care
that you shall never speak another word to that vile seducer! [Aside to VIOLA
-- Tell him immediately how we are circumstanced.] -- [Aside to ALDOBRAND,
while VIOLA whispers OCTAVIO -- Ah! my dear Sir, how lucky it was for us all
that I came in just at the moment I did! -- What deceit there is in the world!


ALDOBRAND, (Aside to ALICE.) A d -- n'd deal, indeed! -- Alice, you must take
care they don't suspect me.


ALICE. [Aside to ALDOBRAND -- Leave that to me, Sir.] I blush for you, Signora
Viola, to behave so to your guardian! -- And as for you, Signor Octavio --


OCTAVIO. I should have been married by this time, had it not been for that
piece of mock sanctity, "who dared to receive money for what he never intended
to perform." But I Am resolved to take the most signal revenge!


ALICE. Dear Sir! what do you mean? [Aside to OCTAVIO -- Stick to that.] Bless
me, how your eyes roll! Don't be rash!


ALDOBRAND, (Aside to ALICE.) What is to become of me, Alice?


ALICE. Surely, Signor Octavio, you don't mean to attempt his life?


ALDOBRAND, (Aside to ALICE.) Hold your tongue! He will not think of killing me,
if you don't put him in mind of it!


ALICE. To be sure, the poor gentleman is entirely in your power. It would be
the easiest thing in the world to destroy him without it is being discovered.
You might hang him in the garden, or drown him in the river -- or shoot him --
-- or -- let me see! --


ALDOBRAND, (Aside to ALICE.) The devil's in the wench! -- You forget that you
are counsel for the defendant!


ALICE, (Aside to ALDOBRAND.) It may happen to the best advocate, who has no
retaining fee to remind him: that is the only anchor which can keep him steady
to you.


ALDOBRAND, (Giving her Money.) Why, I gave you one this morning! But you seem
soon blown from your anchor, as you call it.


ALICE. Consider, Sir, what a storm we are in! --


OCTAVIO. It is impossible, my dear Viola! Not even your entreaties can disarm
my resentment!


ALICE. What, Sir! not if he agrees to marry you?


OCTAVIO, (Aside.) Agrees to marry me! -- What the devil can she mean now? --
On that condition, indeed! --


ALICE. Leave me to calm the fears of the good man!


OCTAVIO. Well, father, I leave you to your female friend. Eloquence, you know,
is the gift of the sex: I dare say, Alice will persuade, you to listen to the
voice of reason, though I cannot.

[Exeunt OCTAVIO and VIOLA.
ALDOBRAND. Egad! if Reason speaks through your voice, I don't wonder that so
few people in the world listen to her; for the very tone of it is enough to
throw one into a quaking fit! -- A pretty sort of an engagement you have formed
for me, Alice! How the devil am I to fulfill it?


ALICE. Why, Sir, you must even run away: that is the most approved remedy, when
a man cannot fulfill his engagements!


Enter MONTANO; who, seeing ALDOBRAND and ALICE, retires to the Back of the
Scene. "MONTANO, (Aside.) "A confession scene, as I take it: I may chance to
profit by it."


ALDOBRAND. But then I leave Viola behind me!


ALICE. I Will take care she shall soon follow you. I can persuade Octavio to any
thing. You see I have gained his confidence!


ALDOBRAND. Egad! if you have gained his confidence, you have made a pretty
comfortable addition to your own stock; for I think he has as good a share as
any man I ever knew!


ALICE. I have news to tell you of your beloved Laura! --


MONTANO, (Aside.) His beloved Laura!


"ALICE. "But I fancy, in this jumble of passions, love has sunk to the bottom.


"ALDOBRAND. "Why, in faith, fear is the oil of the passions: attempt to mix it
with whatever you will, it is always sure to swim at top.


"ALICE. "Which proves that, with you, love is weighty, and fear light. But I
have to inform you, Sir, that Laura left this house on pretense of illness, and
that she is now at home, where she expects you."


MONTANO, (Aside.) I Am on the rack!


ALDOBRAND. Why, I -- I -- should like to visit her! -- But are you sure shall not
meet with another couple who want to be married?


ALICE. My dear Signor Aldobrand, consider what an opportunity! I have settled
every thing with Laura's maid: she will admit you as a friar sent to visit her
mistress by her confessor, who is indisposed.


MONTANO, (Aside.) Distraction!


ALDOBRAND. To personate a confessor! -- Excellent! -- I -- I will go, Alice!


ALICE. Then I will step into the garden, to secure Octavio and Viola in chat.
You follow me presently.

[Exit.
ALDOBRAND. Upon my soul, a father confessor, who has the keeping of a pretty
girl's conscience, leads a mighty agreeable life! The pleasure of giving
absolution must be so great, that, like a skilful physician who delights in
being constantly employed, one might be tempted now and then to make a flaw in
a patient's constitution, for the satisfaction of performing the cure!


MONTANO, (coming forward, and drawing his Sabre.) Stop, doctor!


ALDOBRAND. Ah, good Signor! what would you have? Do you wish to be married! --
Spare my life, and command my services!


MONTANO. Signor Aldobrand, I have overheard the whole of your pious
conversation; and am so much edified by it, that I am resolved to quit the
turban, and assume the religious habit which you wear! -- Yes, I am determined
to try the virtues of that magic garment, which can blind the eyes of a fine
woman to age and infirmity; for, surely, without such assistance, you could
never have presumed to think of gallantry!


ALDOBRAND. I don't know that!


"MONTANO. "Can that shrivelled countenance, and those tottering limbs, be
formed for seduction?


"ALDOBRAND." There is no fixed standard for beauty: and ladies often differ in
their tastes!


MONTANO. We'll settle that point another time. In the mean while, we must
exchange dresses; you shall have my vest and turban, in return for your
disguise of holiness!


ALDOBRAND. Turn Mohammedan!


MONTANO. Men of true piety, like you, never regard externals. Come, uncase, my
old Adonis! No more words to the bargain.


ALDOBRAND. Upon my soul, it is a devilish hard bargain!

[They exchange Dresses.
MONTANO. Now, then, Dissimulation assist me to avenge the cause of an injured
lover, and punish the lost and guilty Laura! -- Signor Aldobrand, one serious
word before we part!


ALDOBRAND. One serious word! -- Why then, perhaps, you have hitherto been in
jest?


MONTANO. Dare not, as you regard your life, to follow me; nor to discover
whither I am going! And so, adieu!

[Exit.
ALDOBRAND. Good bye to ye! -- Heigho! a pretty metamorphosis! [Looking at
himself.] I am made a mere peg, to hang cast-off clothes on! A child's doll,
dressed and undressed ten times in a day! I suppose I shall keep my Algerine
dress no longer than till somebody else takes a fancy to it! -- Oh, here comes
one of the footmen! I may as well begin to strip, for I dare say I must put on
his livery.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Signor Montano, my master begs you will conceal
yourself immediately. The officers of justice are in quest of you. He suspects
foul play, as they are sent hither by Aldobrand, who was seen here just now
disguised as a Friar.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) So! I have issued a warrant to apprehend myself!


SERVANT. Hark! the officers are forcing their way in; and my master and his
followers are defending the entrance with their swords!

[Exit.
ALDOBRAND. Ah! it is all over with me! Here am I, in my rival's house, with
another man's clothes on my back; having lost my character, my wife, my
mistress, and almost lost myself! I am an actual numeration-table of losses;
they rise upon me by tens, hundreds, and thousands. -- And here come more
plagues! How the devil shall I manage to conceal myself! Egad, I Will slip down
this staircase!

[Exit.
Enter OCTAVIO and VIOLA. OCTAVIO. Cast away your scruples, my love! and rely
upon me.

AIR.
By that eloquent language which speaks in the eyes;
By the ardour which breathes in the lover's sad sighs,
As in absence the nameless soft wishes arise;
I pr'ythee now hear me, my dearest!
By those fond, anxious doubts, which all lovers must feel,
Which, although some few moments of bliss they may steal,
Yet fan love's pure flame, and still wound but to heal;
I pr'ythee now hear me, my dearest!
By our hopes, when the moment of meeting is nigh;
When affection no longer can pardon deny;
Hopes which live in a look, in a word, in a sigh;
I pr'ythee now hear me, my dearest!
By my passion, for which words, alas! are too weak;
By that love-dawning blush which now glows on your cheek,
And so kindly avows what your tongue will not speak;
I pr'ythee now hear me, my dearest!
Make yourself perfectly easy, my dear Viola! Montano will protect you. I
thought he was here: but I know the agonies of his mind drive him from society,
to seek relief in solitude.

Enter ALICE. Alice! where is the Algerine captain?


ALICE. Algerine captain! -- Oh, you mean the man with the turban, whom I met
just now stealing down the dark private staircase which leads to the garden,
with his hands before his face, like a sulky child endeavoring to escape a
whipping! There is no fear of your losing him, Sir, except he can creep through
the keyhole; for I locked the door as I came up, and put the key in my pocket,
to prevent old Aldobrand's surprising us.


Enter ALDOBRAND, behind. ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) The door is fast, sure enough! --
I must try the other side, as soon as the coast is clear!


OCTAVIO. That gentleman whom you met in the Algerine dress is a native of this
city; "and unfortunately attached to Signora Laura.


"ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) "The devil! then I am discovered!"


OCTAVIO. His name is Montano.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside, and stifling a Laugh.) That Is very well, in faith!


OCTAVIO. I have the strongest reliance on his friendship.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) He little thinks that my appearance of friendship is like
some other friendships -- a mere disguise, which I shall throw off as soon as
convenient.


OCTAVIO. In a word, I will entrust Viola to his care, while I stay to face the
expected storm.


"ALICE. "Shall I run and fetch him, Sir?


"OCTAVIO. "It is by no means necessary: at this unfortunate moment, my
conversation would serve only to distress him.


"ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) "It would, indeed, most plaguily!


"OCTAVIO. "Only beg him to accompany Viola to my house by the riverside. Two
trusty servants will attend him.


"VIOLA. "Surely, Octavio, I should be safer under this roof?


"OCTAVIO. "No, my charmer! Montano will conduct you to a more agreeable
asylum; to a place which, I hope, my Viola will shortly call her home.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) "Yes, egad! I Will take care she shall soon find herself at
home!


"OCTAVIO. "Oh, Montano! I commit my existence into your hands!" -- Tell him,
my dear Alice, to watch over her as if she were the darling of his own soul. I
know he will with pleasure receive the precious pledge from me.


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) With great pleasure, indeed! "And, I fancy, when once I
get the precious pledge in my possession, you will find it no easy matter to
redeem it. -- But I must retreat to my hiding place."


OCTAVIO. We have no time to lose, my love! Give your hand to my friend, and
your guardian!


ALDOBRAND, (Aside.) Ha! ha! ha!

[Exit.
VIOLA. But consider, your friend is unknown to me. I never even saw him. --
Oh, Octavio! I have a thousand fears!


OCTAVIO. Dispel them all, my love! Our constancy will render us invulnerable
to the attacks of fortune.


TRIO.
Absence, all ills denouncing,
A fond adieu pronouncing,
We part -- all joy renouncing
Until we meet again.
Yet, while these ills enduring,
See Hope, with smiles alluring,
(Blessed smiles! all sorrow curing)
Still points to Hymen's chain.
CATCH.
How great is the pleasure, how sweet the delight,'
When Love's silken bands willing captives unite!
Well pleased in their bondage, his vot'ries remain,
And, proud of subjection, exult in his chain:
Oh, Love! how blissful's thy meed!
The prayer of thy vot'ries is -- never to be freed.
'How great is the pleasure, how sweet the delight,'
When Love's silken bands willing captives unite!

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, LAURA's House.
LAURA and ROSA. LAURA. INDEED, Rosa, my mind is too severely wounded by this
dreadful news of Montano.

AIR.
Thou art gone away from me, my love!
Long shall I rue that luckless day,
When thou were torn from me, my love.
Did but thy heart remain the same,
As when it left this shore, my love!
Alas! it owns another flame;
Of me thou think no more, my love.
With jealous pangs my bosom torn,
I wish that fair of thine, my love;
That fatal fair! may treat with scorn
Those vows which once were mine, my love!
But, ah! how sharp Love's venomed steel;
Inconstant though thou be, my love,
Ah! may thou never, never feel,
What Laura feels for thee, my love!
I cannot muster up spirits enough to execute your scheme.


"ROSA. "But consider, my dear Madam, it is the only means by which I can save
myself from the fury of this mad Algerine."


LAURA. How can you ask me at this time, when my heart is so sensibly touched?


ROSA. Well, Madam! and do not I run the risque of having my heart sensibly
touched by the point of a small-sword! Let me tell you, that is much the worst
touch of the two. I repeat to you, Madam, that old rogue Aldobrand has let
Ibrahim escape; and, while he is at liberty, I dare not venture abroad.


LAURA. And so you would really wish me to receive this odious visit from
Aldobrand --


ROSA. That I may surprise him with you, and work on the fears of the old
wretch, to make him secure Ibrahim.


LAURA. I don't like your scheme, Rosa. There is an indelicacy in subjecting my
ears to be offended with the mention of an illicit passion.


ROSA. There might be, I grant you, from the lips of a youthful gallant, like
Ibrahim; "in whose breast the passion glows hotenough to scorch the reputation
of every female who exposes herself to it is influence:" but, as for poor old
Aldobrand -- Lord, Ma'am! in him it is the mere Aurora Borealis of love; a few
straggling faint rays from the sun that is set, which vanish almost as soon as
they are seen, and have only the appearance of heat without the reality! -- To
give me a fair occasion for coming into the room, you must scream out; upon
which I rush in, and -- But who have we here?


Enter FIRELOCK. FIRELOCK. My abrupt visit will apologize for itself, Sir, when
I tell you that I come to offer you my services in assisting to punish
Aldobrand, who is now entering your house disguised as a friar.


LAURA, (Aside to ROSA.) Heavens, Rosa! how could he have discovered --


FIRELOCK. Do not be surprised: I was informed of the whole affair by a very
pretty girl at Signor Octavio's.


ROSA, (To LAURA.) He means Alice.


FIRELOCK. The same, Sir! She ordered me to engage in your service; and I would
no more disobey the commands of Beauty than the articles of war.


LAURA. Ha! ha! ha! -- Perhaps you have expectations of reward from your fair
employer?


FIRELOCK. Why, look ye, Madam! Love and Honor have ever been my commanding
officers; and I should not deserve the name of their soldier, if I wanted the
inducement of reward to do my duty.


LAURA. You have been bred a soldier, I presume?


FIRELOCK. No, Madam; I once had a pretty snug little estate, which my wife and
my friends obligingly helped me soon to get rid of: so, as I was too honest, or
too proud, to live by the same means as many of my neighbors, I paid my debts,
as far as I could, and took up a brown musket. The expectation of happier days
has supported me through all my misfortunes, and the anticipation of social
mirth has smiled on me even in the hour of battle.

AIR.
Fired with ardour to engage,
The soldier dares the battle's rage!
When groans, which shall be heard no more,
Echo to the cannon's roar;
When the flying ranks are broke,
And all is lost in clouds of smoke;
Death stalks triumphant over the field,
On every side the vanquished yield,
And fainting victors scarcely live
Their dear-bought laurels to receive!
Still he blesses the hours when, banishing care,
He shall triumph again in the smiles of the fair;
When wine, wit, and mirth, shall Love's pleasures increase,
And his laurels shall bloom with the olive of peace.

ROSA. Here comes Aldobrand, I vow! -- We must leave you.


LAURA. Let me accompany you; for I must have a few moments to prepare myself
for the meeting.

[Exeunt.
Enter MONTANO in the Friar's Habit, with a SERVANT. SERVANT. If you will sit
down a moment, my good father, I Will acquaint Signora Laura that you are here.

[Exit.
MONTANO. To what a dilemma have my ill stars reduced me. My errand here is to
tempt that virtue which I hope to find superior to temptation. "I must engage
in a conflict where I dread to obtain the victory. If she resists my
importunities as Ibrahim, it will at least afford me a satisfaction to find
that, though false to love, she is yet true to virtue." But she comes.


Enter LAURA. LAURA. Perhaps, Signor Aldobrand, you are not a little surpised
at my consenting to this interview? --


MONTANO, (Aside.) 'Sdeath! then she has really expected Aldobrand!


"LAURA. "I can venture to assure you, however, that my motives for it are very
different from what you may imagine. I hope you will not misinterpret my
conduct.


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "No, it seems to speak pretty plainly for itself!"


LAURA. I rely entirely on your discretion.


MONTANO, (Aside.) So it appears. -- Alas! she don't seem to have made any use
of her own, indeed!


LAURA. What can occasion his silence? I am in a most awkward situation! -- A
-- a -- Sir, I understood that you had something of a particular nature to
communicate. [Aside -- I hope Rosa will be at hand to relieve me!]


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "Perhaps she apprehends an interruption from her husband,
and means that I should fasten the door.

[Going to the Door.
"LAURA, (Stopping him.) "That is not at all necessary: you may -- you may
venture to declare your sentiments to me freely.


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "This is taking effectual care that I shall not misinterpret
her, indeed! I shall never be able to contain myself!"


ROSA, (Peeping.) I hear no screaming yet: I fancy Laura has no reason to
complain of the violence of the old gentleman's passions.

[Retires.
LAURA. You are still silent, Signor Aldobrand! [Aside -- What the deuce can be
the matter with the man?] -- [MONTANO kisses her Hand.] -- Hold, Sir! this
freedom is too much! Can this be the wise, prudent, and discreet Aldobrand?


MONTANO, (Throwing open his Friar's Habit.) No, Madam! it is the fond, the
faithful Ibrahim!


LAURA. Ah! I am betrayed; and am fallen a victim to my own imprudence!

[Breaks from him, and exit. At the Moment ROSA enters on the opposite Side,
MONTANO wraps himself up in his Disguise.
ROSA. Your servant, good Signor Aldobrand! I have caught you at last.
"Possibly you have assumed this disguise in order to give Laura some
intelligence of Ibrahim?


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "He little thinks that he is so near the truth.


"ROSA. "Or very likely you have resolved to make love in masquerade, as it
might not be quite convenient to appear in your own person?


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "Right again! The man has an admirable knack at guessing!


"ROSA. "You see I am not ignorant of the person whom that disguise conceals,
nor of the purpose for which it was assumed.


"MONTANO, (Aside.) "In Faith, I rather perceive you are ignorant of it, by your
bullying in so high a style."


ROSA. I find the Algerine is not yet taken: that rogue who was to be hanged,
drowned, flayed, and carbonaded! You have let him escape, after all your
promises to imprison him in spite of law or equity.


MONTANO, (Aside.) A pretty hair's-breadth escape I have had!


ROSA. But you have been bribed: I doubt not that you are interested in his
being at liberty?


MONTANO, (Aside.) Rather so, indeed!


ROSA. And I am to be assassinated by him! I dare say, I am betrayed! and that,
at this moment, he knows that you issued the order for apprehending him at my
request?


MONTANO, (Aside.) Not till this moment did he know it, good Signor Lucilio!


ROSA. Not that I fear the arm of the haughty Moor, could I but meet him face
to face. I only dread lest, lurking under some disguise, he may attack me at a
moment when I am not prepared; for I fancy my courage was never yet brought in
dispute.


MONTANO, (Aside.) I dare believe not: there can be but one opinion of it!


ROSA. But not even the abject silence which guilt imposes on your tongue shall
save you from my just revenge! -- I have a very curious piece of steel here!

[Drawing her Sword.
Enter FIRELOCK behind. MONTANO. And I believe I have just such another!

[Draws, and discovers himself.
FIRELOCK. And, here is a third, which I Will match with either of them!


ROSA. Ibrahim!


FIRELOCK. My friend, the Algerine captain, fighting in ambuscade!


MONTANO. The same. -- But perhaps, Signor Lucilio, this is one of your
unprepared moments?


ROSA. I -- I -- am not yet prepared for you, indeed, Sir! -- You -- you are
safe. -- [Putting up her Sword.] -- Aldobrand must be the first victim of my
vengeance!


MONTANO. Pitiful boy! draw instantly! Are these the evasions --


ROSA. I am not to be frightened, Sir! -- I -- I shall not fight at present!
True courage, Sir, like mine -- always calm -- always calm, I say -- and
intrepid, looks down, Sir, with contempt, on the impotent attacks of -- of --
of malice -- and -- and, in short, Sir -- I -- I shall find another time to see
you!

[Exit.
FIRELOCK. I am not sorry he has escaped you: such a conquest would have
disgraced your sword.


MONTANO. And this is the being for whom Laura has quitted me! But I Will think
no more of it! -- Ere I quit Florence for ever, the villainy of this Aldobrand,
in perverting the laws to his unworthy purposes, shall be punished. He is a
traitor to his country, who tamely beholds her laws and liberties invaded,
either by the assassin hand of knavery, or the bolder attacks of tyranny.

AIR.
Accursed the wretch, whose coward soul,
Awed by Oppression's guilty hand,
Dares not the lawless power control,
Which drives fair Freedom from the land;
Who, deaf to Honor's call sublime,
Tamely to tyranny submits,
Becomes the accomplice in the crime,
And shares the treason he permits!
[Exit.
SCENE, ALDOBRAND's House.
MONTANO's Algerine Habit and Turban lying on a Chair. Enter VIOLA. VIOLA.
Alas, how suddenly have I been awakened from my dream of bliss! How unexpected
the reverse! But a moment ago, I seemed to be treading the paths of happiness,
and whither have they led me! Yet does not Hope desert me: I will caress the
kind guest; and, like a drowning wretch, still continue to clasp him while I
seem to be irrecoverably sinking!

AIR.
Thus we view the treacherous morning
With false smiles the hills adorning;
Though of storms they give no warning,
Yet no sooner seen than gone:
Still, while clouds on clouds impelling,
The storm drives on, with ruin swelling,
Fancy, every cloud dispelling,
Paints tomorrow's happy dawn.

Enter ALDOBRAND and ALICE. ALDOBRAND. Once more I bid you welcome home, my
young Madam! -- Why, you made but a short visit to your lover! -- Egad! ne and
I have been playing the English game of cricket with you: I bowl you at him, he
bats you back again to me; you come plump into my hands, so he is caught out,
and there is an end of the game! -- Go to your chamber, and study the charms of
retirement.

[Exit VIOLA.
ALICE. Well, Sir, I am quite impatient to hear your success with Laura?


ALDOBRAND. [Aside -- Ah, the cockatrice! -- But I Will dissemble.] -- Don't
mention her, Alice: I have had enough of gallantry; the very name is poison to
my ears -- a pistol to my head -- a dagger to my breast! --


Enter FABIO. FABIO. Signora Laura is below.


ALDOBRAND. Indeed! -- Why -- why -- there is great condescension in her
visiting me. -- I Will wait on her!


ALICE. What, Sir! would you put the steel to your breast?


ALDOBRAND. Ah, Alice! if it be steel, it is certainly touched with a
loadstone; for I am irresistibly drawn to it, though I dread it is point.

[Exeunt ALDOBRAND and FABIO.
ALICE. Poor Viola! thus to be awakened in a fright from her dream of
happiness! -- But I Will assist her to fit the old dotard, yet! --

Enter MONTANO in the Friar's Habit. Bless me, Signor Aldobrand! can I believe
my eyes? Why, I parted with you but this moment, and now I see you in the very
dress --


MONTANO, (Discovering himself.) Which was intended as Aldobrand's passport to
Laura! -- I have done with it, my dear, and am come for my own clothes!

[Throws aside the Friar's Dress, and puts on the Turban, etc.
ALICE. Are not you the Algerine captain who behaved so kindly to the poor
slaves? -- I am sure you must be a good Christian in your heart!

[MONTANO retires while ALDOBRAND enters.
ALDOBRAND. Alice, give orders that my doors be instantly shut against that
ruffian Ibrahim! -- Here is poor Lucilio come to claim my protection: he and
Laura are afraid to trust themselves in their own house. -- That fellow is born
to be the plague of my life; wherever I go, I am sure to meet him!


MONTANO, (Coming forward.) I understand that you have issued an order to
apprehend me, good Signor?


ALICE, (Aside.) I hope the captain will give him a sound beating! -- I Will go
and keep the servants out of hearing.

[Exit.
MONTANO. I mean to surrender myself to Justice, if necessary; but I fear,
though you call yourself her representative, you do not speak the voice of your
constituent; but are like a bad inn, which promises good accommodation on its
sign, while there is nothing but extortion within!


ALDOBRAND. How dare you thus affront a magistrate?


MONTANO. Miscreant! do not rouse my anger! or, by all your villainies, I swear
--


ALDOBRAND. Help! help!


Enter ROSA. MONTANO. But I beg pardon! your life is that gentleman's property;
he has sworn to dispatch you before he fights me.


ALDOBRAND. I Will give up my turn, with all my soul!


ROSA. Signor Aldobrand, pay no attention to the idle dreams of a madman.


MONTANO. Well, if you will have them dreams, I dreamt that, under this
disguise -- [Taking up the Friar's Dress.] -- I believe we are all three
acquainted with it -- under this disguise, I say, the seducing, gallant
Aldobrand, meant to attempt the chastity of that gentleman's wife --


ROSA, (Angrily.) How, Signor Aldobrand!


MONTANO. And that the brave and noble Lucilio, conniving at the designs of
this youthful ravisher, lay in wait for him, to take advantage of his cowardice.


ALDOBRAND. How, Signor Lucilio! -- And who the devil told you all this?


MONTANO. There is my author; who, also, while I was disguised as a friar,
informed me of your kind intention, not only to imprison, but to hang, drown,
flay, and carbonade me! -- I think those were your words, Signor Aldobrand? --
I make no ceremony, gentlemen, in acquainting you with each other's rascality!
I am persuaded you are both too much of the poltroon, for me to apprehend any
bloodshed between you.


ALDOBRAND. Very pretty, upon my soul! -- They seem to be excellent company, so
I Will even leave them together.

[Exit:
ROSA. Yes, yes, I shall remember this! -- But I must keep down my passion.

AIR.
Good Sir, in vain you bend your brow,
And look so queer, I know not how,
And set your arms a-kimbo:
My laughter you provoke;
Ha! ha! ha! ha!
So pleasant is the joke.
If, Sir, I chose to try my skill,
Of fencing soon you would have your fill;
But, mighty Signor Whiskers,
With you I will not engage:
Ha! ha! ha! ha!
A fig for all your rage!
Nay, pr'ythee, friend, don't draw your sword;
I shall not draw mine, upon my word!
Nor could I fight for laughing,
Were I to look at you:
Ha! ha! ha! ha!
And so, sweet Sir, adieu!

MONTANO going, meets OCTAVIO. OCTAVIO. My friend, my Montano! how happy your
presence makes me! -- Then my Viola is safe! -- My visit here, at this time,
will prevent Aldobrand's suspecting the scheme by which he is deprived of his
prey --


MONTANO, (Aside.) He must mean my personating Aldobrand at Laura's! How could
it have reached his ears?


OCTAVIO. Tell me, Montano, how did she look? what did she say? Relate every
circumstance?


MONTANO. Why, when I first entered the house, she took me for Aldobrand.


OCTAVIO. Took you for Aldobrand! -- Ha! ha! ha! A ridiculous mistake! and no
great compliment to you, neither! -- Well, did she not often call upon Octavio?


MONTANO. No, she never mentioned your name.


OCTAVIO. That Is strange!


MONTANO. Her tongue faltering with conscious guilt --


OCTAVIO. Conscious guilt! What a strange phrase for the amiable timidity of
the sex! -- But proceed.


MONTANO. Just as I caught her in my arms --


OCTAVIO. What!


MONTANO. Her husband rushed into the room, and surpised us.


OCTAVIO. Her husband! -- What husband? -- I talk to you of my Viola; the
lovely charge whom I entrusted to you not two hours ago.


MONTANO. Viola entrusted to me! -- Why, my dear friend, either you or I must
have lost our wits, for I don't recollect that I ever saw the lady in my life.


OCTAVIO. I am in torment! -- Oh, Viola!


Enter REGNALTO, hastily. REGNALTO. She is now in the house: Alice, by your own
orders, gave her into the hands of Aldobrand; who, by some unaccountable
accident, was dressed like Ibrahim.


MONTANO. Rather whimsical in you to mistake Aldobrand for me; and no great
compliment to me neither, as you say! [To OCTAVIO.


REGNALTO. It is not too late to retrieve every thing. -- Signor Ibrahim, you
must not be seen here: wait near the garden-gate; your friend Octavio will need
your services.


MONTANO. Well, Octavio, take care you make no more mistakes.

[Exit.
REGNALTO. But we are interrupted: dissemble your chagrin at what is passed,
and fear nothing.


Enter ALDOBRAND and FABIO. OCTAVIO. Signor Aldobrand, my errand will apologize
for this unseasonable visit.


ALDOBRAND. Rather unseasonable, to be sure; and especially as Viola --


OCTAVIO. Sir, I speak to you of Regnalto -- I hear he is released from slavery.


ALDOBRAND. Released from slavery! -- Ha!


OCTAVIO. Why, you seem surpised: you --


ALDOBRAND. My joy overcomes me! -- that is all.


OCTAVIO. He is soon to make his appearance in Florence.


ALDOBRAND. I should be heartily glad to see him -- [Aside -- At the devil!]
But, pray, how did you hear this news?


OCTAVIO. My lacquey had it this moment from Regnalto's servant, Laurence, who
is his old acquaintance.


ALDOBRAND. [Aside -- I Am in a cold chill!] Regnalto's servant in Florence!


OCTAVIO. In your house at this moment!


ALDOBRAND. In my house! -- Run, Fabio, and bring him hither immediately! -- My
old friend's servant to be under my roof, and I not know it!

[Exit FABIO.
OCTAVIO. It rather seems as if he meant to conceal himself from you.


ALDOBRAND. Egad! that is very true, as you say! -- Perhaps the dog may have
robbed his master; and, when he finds himself discovered, he may make off. I
had better go and see after him myself. There are so many rogues in the world!

[Exit.
OCTAVIO, (To REGNALTO.) Tell me what means --


REGNALTO. Ask me no questions! They believe me dumb; still let them think so.


OCTAVIO. The charming Viola --


REGNALTO. Accepts the offer which your letter conveyed to her. I will assist
in her elopement; and have a ladder of ropes ready placed at the balcony in the
garden.


OCTAVIO. Transport! -- And this news of Regnalto --


REGNALTO. Is true! -- But here comes Aldobrand.


OCTAVIO. Then we must not be seen together. -- The garden, at twelve!


REGNALTO. Depend on me.

[Exit.
Enter ALDOBRAND. ALDOBRAND. Aye, there is that dog Laurence, sure enough! --
But there is no fear of his running away; he is so tipsy, he can hardly stand.


OCTAVIO. You must feel a singular satisfaction at the approaching return of
your old friend Regnalto?


ALDOBRAND. A very singular satisfaction, indeed! -- I never felt any thing
like it before!


Enter LAURENCE drunk, and FABIO. OCTAVIO. Is that Regnalto's servant?


ALDOBRAND. He himself, Sir.


LAURENCE. There you are mistaken; for I am not myself at present.


OCTAVIO. And your master --


LAURENCE. Like man, like master; he is not himself, neither. But we shall come
to ourselves, both of us, before tomorrow morning!


ALDOBRAND. Where is your master? [Aside -- I sit on pins and needles!]


LAURENCE. My master is at home.


ALDOBRAND. At home!


LAURENCE. And yet he is not at home -- because the people make a stranger of
him.


ALDOBRAND. Is he in Florence?


LAURENCE. How can I tell? I hardly know where I am myself: and if I did, I
would not tell you; for, to speak the truth, I have my suspicions of you, my
old boy!


ALDOBRAND. Old boy! -- Familiar rogue!


LAURENCE. Familiar! I am sure you and I have been very distant for these nine
years past.


ALDOBRAND. A blessed state you are in, sirrah!


LAURENCE. Yes, I am married; and that is a blessed state you will never be in.
-- Do you think, now, that Signora Viola will ever marry such an ugly,
decrepit, old -- --


ALDOBRAND. Why, you abusive rascal! -- Out of my sight!


LAURENCE. Signor Octavio, she is a fine girl, and walks in the garden
sometimes! -- Love lights her; she does not want the light of the moon.


ALDOBRAND. Eh! what?


OCTAVIO, (Aside.) That fellow's tongue will discover all!


"ALDOBRAND. "What Is that you said about the moon?


"LAURENCE. "That if you were married, you would be very much like the moon.


"ALDOBRAND. "How!"


"LAURENCE. "Why, in the course of a month, you would certainly have horns!"

[Exit.
ALDOBRAND. Signor Octavio, you will pardon my reminding you that it is very late?


OCTAVIO. I understand you, Signor: and, as it is near my hour, I Will take my
leave.


ALDOBRAND. Good night, sweet Signor! -- [Exit OCTAVIO.] -- Fabio, I don't know
whether I am upon my head or my heels! This Regnalto is certainly in Florence:
and then, I don't like what that drunken fellow said to Octavio about Viola's
walking in the garden; I fear there is some mischief stirring. Tell Guiseppe
and Roberto to get their carbines, and we'll take a walk round the garden;
Signor Lucilio, too, shall join our company -- I am always most valiant when I
am best supported!

[Exeunt.
SCENE, the Garden.
A Ladder of Ropes fixed to the Balcony. Enter MONTANO. MONTANO. This, I think,
is the spot where Octavio appointed me to stand guard. -- Alas! if my
endeavors for my friend's happiness are crowned with no better success than
those for my own -- But I hear voices!

[Retreating to the Back of the Scene.
Enter LAURA and ROSA. ROSA. I wish we could see some one appear at the window,
that we might apprize Viola of her danger.


LAURA. Happy Viola! to love, and be beloved! while I have lavished my
affection on an ingrate; who, perhaps, at this very moment amuses a happy
mistress with the fond tale of my weakness!

AIR.
Hope, on thee I call,
While through thy paths I stray;
Wherever my footsteps fall,
Oh! light me on my way.
Though lost in Error's maze,
Still kindly soothe my woe;
Nor let Truth's brighter blaze
Show what I fear to know.

ROSA. Think no more of your false lover, Madam. Take my advice; and, from
among the noble youths of Florence, who languish for your smiles, choose one to
whom I may resign you.


MONTANO, (Aside.) Pretty advice from a husband! -- 'Sdeath! I cannot suffer
this disgrace of manhood to exist.

[Drawing his Sword.
LAURA. Oh, my dear girl --


MONTANO, (Aside.) How, a girl!


LAURA. How continually has my tongue dwelt on it is dearest theme -- the
praises of my Montano!


MONTANO, (Aside.) Montano! -- Do I live!


LAURA. But it is all over, Rosa! -- I will retire from a world which has lost
it is only charm for me; a convent shall --


MONTANO. This excess of joy is too much!


LAURA. Hark!


ROSA. It is the voice of Ibrahim!


MONTANO. No, it is a voice with which the gentle Laura should be better
acquainted; a voice which, during four cruel years of slavery, has never ceased
to invoke Heaven for her happiness!


LAURA. Oh, Rosa! it is -- it is my Montano!

[Faints in his Arms.
ROSA. And so ends my first chapter of matrimony! -- A very excellent mode of
getting rid of a wife, without the trouble of a divorce, or the expense of a
separate maintenance! -- How many poor husbands would envy me! -- But, my dear
Madam -- and, Sir -- you forget that this is a moment as critical to Viola as
to yourselves; and I hear footsteps in the garden.


MONTANO. Let us retire then, my love. From this arbor I can watch whether any
one approaches the balcony.


Enter LAURENCE, still drunk, with a Bottle in his Hand. LAURENCE. It Is rather
a dark night; or else I don't see clear!

AIR.
Though I cannot walk quite straight,
And in figures of eight
Still circling my legs do their duty,
You Will always observe,
That a regular curve
Is reckoned the true line of beauty:
Of Orpheus they tell,
(He who fiddled so well)
That his notes made hills, rocks, and trees, caper;
So I can, in my way,
When a solo I play,
Make them dance full as well as that scraper.
Though at first, on a survey,
Things seem topsey-turvey,
When you're used to it, they don't look so frightful;
Still they move more or less,
And good judges confess
Moving prospects are always delightful:
The world's circular motion,
I Am sure's no false notion;
For, though sober I never could believe it,
Truth in wine, boys, is found,
Now I see it turns round,
He that is drunk can most plainly perceive it.
I wonder where my master is! As for old Aldobrand, I suppose he is in bed and
asleep --

Enter ALDOBRAND and FABIO at the Back of the Stage; they approach LAURENCE
softly. But I cannot think what is become of my good friend Dummy, as they call
him! -- Ah, Sir, are you there? I have been looking for you all over the
garden. -- What! not come to your speech yet? -- In Faith, I think you have
infected me; for I have not my speech half so well as I had a little while ago.
-- Where is Signor Octavio? -- You don't stand still! What makes you stagger
so? -- Why don't you answer me, Sir? Old Aldobrand cannot hear us now.

[ALDOBRAND seizes him on one Side, FABIO on the other.
ALDOBRAND. But he can hear, you hang-dog! -- So Dummy can speak, can he?


LAURENCE. Ah, Signor Aldobrand, is it you? -- Upon my soul, I did not know you!


ALDOBRAND I Will make you know me, you dog, before I have done with you!


FABIO. Hush, I hear somebody! -- Come this way, Sir! [Retiring behind.] To
LAURENCE -- Sit you down there.


LAURENCE. I will -- and take a nap!


Enter REGNALTO and FIRELOCK. VIOLA and ALICE appear at the Window. ALICE.
Signor Octavio, where are you?


VIOLA. I am frightened to death! Signor Octavio --


FIRELOCK, (Aside.) Bless their swee't tongues! There is more music in a pretty
woman's voice than in all the orchestras in Italy!


VIOLA. Say who you are?


REGNALTO. The friend of Octavio; in a word, the dumb slave. The ladder of
ropes is rendered useless, for I Have secured the key of the door. But somebody
approaches! -- Descend, and I Will be ready to receive you.

[VIOLA and ALICE retire.
Enter OCTAVIO. OCTAVIO. Well met, my trusty friends! True, I see, to your
appointment.


REGNALTO. Suppose, in case of a discovery, I were to personate Regnalto: his
clothes fit me exactly; and I might by that means further your designs.


OCTAVIO. Not at the expense of my honor; I will not owe my success to
artifice.


REGNALTO. Psha! a little artifice is often very useful: it is only retreating
from an enemy when he is too powerful for us; and a good pair of heels is
sometimes very serviceable -- Eh! friend Firelock?


FIRELOCK. A good pair of heels may be as useful to a coward as artifice is to
a knave: but honesty as much despises the aid of the one, as courage disdains
the assistance of the other!


REGNALTO. Viola approaches.


Enter VIOLA and ALICE, from a Door under the Balcony. OCTAVIO. My Viola!


VIOLA. What a transition from despair to happiness! -- Octavio, I commit
myself to your honor.


OCTAVIO. Charming Viola! my affection shall prove that your confidence is not
misplaced.


ALDOBRAND and FABIO come forward. ALDOBRAND. Lights there! -- Guiseppe! --
Roberto! -- where are you?

Enter SERVANTS with Lights. Your servant, Signor Octavio! -- [VIOLA shrieks,
and swoons in REGNALTO's Arms.] -- This scheme is no better than the other: and
you have not got your Algerine friend to back you now.


MONTANO comes forward, with LAURA and ROSA. MONTANO. Here I am, Signor
Aldobrand, at your service!


ROSA. And here am I! You are among friends, you see.


ALDOBRAND. Why then, as I am among friends, I shall make free!

[Attempting to seize VIOLA.
FIRELOCK. Stand off, if you regard your life!

[Draws.
ALDOBRAND. Thank you for tho hint: I Will take your advice! -- [Retreating.] But
as for you, my lads, [To the SERVANTS.] fall on! -- Seize the lady!


REGNALTO. Not while I have an arm to defend her!


ALDOBRAND. Well said, Dummy! -- Kill him, my boys, in the first place!


OCTAVIO. First you have to conquer me, slaves!

[Throwing himself before REGNALTO.
ALDOBRAND. Why, Signor Octavio! are you mad? -- What right has that fellow to
Viola? -- Am not I her guardian?


REGNALTO, (Throwing off his Slave's Dress.) And am not I her brother!


FABIO, (To ALDOBRAND.) It is a pity you sent for the lights, Sir!


REGNALTO, (To the SERVANTS.) Sheathe your swords; I am master here! -- Your
term is expired, Signor Aldobrand.


ALDOBRAND. Yes, and I am turned out at a moment's warning, I see!


VIOLA. Do I at length embrace my brother! -- Kind Heaven, I have no more to
ask!


REGNALTO. Except a husband, Viola! and him I give to you without asking --
[Giving her Hand to OCTAVIO.] -- A husband to whom your brother owes his
liberty and life!


LAURENCE, (Coming forward.) Hey-day! my old boy, why you are mistaken again!
-- You have made a cursed number of blunders this evening! -- Rot me, if I
believe you are quite sober!


REGNALTO. And now, my generous friend Ibrahim! --


MONTANO. No longer Ibrahim, but Montano! -- Fortune, who made us companions in
adversity, has compensated for all by giving you to me as a companion in
happier days.


LAURA. Signor Montano, I hope you will not forget my first husband!

[Pointing to ROSA.
ROSA. Believe me, I shall not forget your second as long as I live! I am sure
I found it so hard a task to personate the husband --


LAURENCE. That, I suppose, the next time you get married, you will personate the
wife! -- Depend upon it, you will act the part much more naturally.


ALICE. If she wants a good example, let her copy me, Laurence!


OCTAVIO, (To FIRELOCK.) As for you, my noble soldier! --


FIRELOCK. As for me, Signor, I have to thank you for two favors: first, for
restoring to me the greatest of blessings -- my liberty! and, secondly -- for
affording me the opportunity of showing my gratitude!


REGNALTO, (To ALDOBRAND.) Wretch! what have you to say in defense of yourself?


ALDOBRAND. Nothing, good Signor Regnalto! -- Least said is soonest mended.


REGNALTO. Repent, then, of your villainy, in silence: let us only hear the
voice of joy! -- We have now the highest blessing mortals can possess -- that
of sharing the happiness we create!


FINALE.
REGNALTO. Away with all care, till tomorrow,
No longer we are destined to roam;
Today bid adieu to all sorrow,
And welcome THE STRANGERS AT HOME.
CHORUS. Away with all care, etc.
DUETT. LAURA and MONTANO. No more of Fortune we'll complain,
Since she so kind has proved at last;
Our joys, contrasted with our pain,
Shall brighter shine for sorrows past.
LAURENCE. On the subject now before us,
I would fain my zeal display --
ALDOBRAND. And I, too, would join the Chorus,
If I knew but what to say.
VIOLA. My freedom I gladly resign,
Nor shall I for liberty ever repine.
OCTAVIO. And I from my purpose will never depart,
To bind faster those bonds in which Love holds your heart.
FIRELOCK. Though I Have no objection to fighting,
IN faith it is better by half,
With such happy lovers uniting,
To join in the song and the laugh!
ALICE. Believe me, I joy to behold you
All going to be married so soon --
You know, Ma'am, I often have told you,
A good husband is Fortune's best boon.
ROSA. When I marry, although I will not barter
My own little person for pelf,
In wedlock I Will keep up the charter,
And still wear the breeches myself.
CHORUS. Away with all care, till tomorrow,
No longer we are destined to roam;
O chase from our bosoms all sorrow, [To the Audience.
And welcome THE STRANGERS AT HOME!

FINIS.

