SILVIA; OR, THE COUNTRY BURIAL. AN OPERA. As it is Performed at the
THEATER ROYAL IN Lincoln's End FIELDS.

With the MUSIC prefixed to each SONG.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's Inn Fields. MDCCXXXI. [Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

A TABLE of the SONGS.
ACT I.
AIR 1. The Man, by Foes surrounded. page 2 2. The Servant that betrays his
Trust. p. 3 3. Sweet are the Joys of Love. p. 4 4. By our Weakness we help the
Deceit. p. 6 5. Wounded by the scornful Fair. p. 8 6. Strange Tales some lying
Travelers tell. p. 9 7. Neighbors all, behold with Sorrow. ibid. 8. Whom
cruel Death does sever; Hum, hum. p. 10 9. While you neglect the Living. p. 11
10. The Gentlefolks of London. p. 12 11. Hey ho! the Man is mad. p. 13 12.
Darkness and Death no Fear alarms. p. 14 13. The Fair and Young, who sigh
alone. p. 16 14. A feeble Life, with Pain began. p. 17 15. So unkind, and so
unwilling to receive me again. p. 18 16. The Bark in Tempests tossed. p. 19 17.
How happy is that Woman's Life. p. 20 18. My Master's Pimp and Favorite too.
p. 21 19. Charming, lovely Woman, I am in love with thee. p. 22 20. Young I am,
and sore afraid. p. 23 21. Faint denying. p. 24 22. O should wanton Fancies
move you. p. 25
ACT II.
AIR 23. Silent Night yields no Repose. p. 26 24. To love my Wife, to lose my
Wife. p. 28 25. The sweet and blushing Rose. p. 29 26. When tempting Beauty is
the Prize. p. 30 27. Ah me! unhappy Maid. p. 31 28. For our Poultry and Flocks
we often break our Repose. p. 32 AIR 29. As wretched and mean we despise. p. 33
30. Harmless Maids, of Men beware. p. 34 31. At Table thus my Master feeds. p.
35 32. Be gone, Sir, and fly me. p. 36 33. When youthful May adorns the Year.
p. 37 34. O fie! how could you serve me so. p. 38 35. The lovely blooming
Creature. p. 39 36. We Women appear. p. 40 37. Frail's the Bliss of Woman. p.
41 38. The powerful Law of Nature. p. 42 39. Free from Confinement, and Strife.
p. 44 40. Reign, Silvia, Reign. p. 46 41. Since you despise my Power. p. 47 42.
In vain you storm, and threaten high. p. 48 43. My Rage is past conceiving. p.
49 44. Where can gentle Pity meet. p. 50 45. She who, when she would please. ibid.
46. Still to sigh, to pine, and languish. p. 51
ACT III.
AIR 47. When flattering Love, and vain Despair. p. 52 48. On some Rock, by
Seas surrounded. p. 53 49. You happy Maids, who never knew. p. 54 50. A Maid,
though beautiful and chaste. p. 56 51. Thou can do Housewife's Work. p. 59 52.
O gracious Heaven, lend a friendly Ray. p. 60 53. In vain, in vain I rove. p.
62 54. He seized the Lass, trembling all over. p. 63 55. How kind was I used,
ever this Lettice came here. p. 64 56. Welcome endless Grief. p. 65 57. Could
you return her true and chaste. p. 66 58. So true, and so kind. p. 67 59.
Regard my Tears, dispel my Fears. p. 68 60. Your heaviest Resentment, ah! let
me, let me bear. p. 69 61. With Pity, gracious Heaven possessed. p. 70 62 Oh
how sweet. p. 74 63. Such Virtue possessing. p. 76
TO Mrs. Harriott Janssen.
MADAM,
TO be well Descended, happy in Your Fortune, nobly Allied, to be agreeable in
Your Person, to have an Understanding solid and extensive, and a Wit at once
the most poignant, and yet the most inoffensive and agreeable, may justly raise
Admiration and Esteem in others, as they distinguish You in so eminent a
manner, and constitute your personal Happiness.

But as it is that easy, graceful manner in which You enjoy them, that Freedom
from Vanity, Affectation or Pride, which form your real Character; so the Use
You make of Your Fortune, Interest, and good Sense, renders them a general
Blessing to all who have the Happiness of being within the Reach of their
Influence.

MADAM,

Your Generosity and Condescension in permitting this Address, is an Instance
of Both, so much to my Advantage, that I find it impossible, to suppress either
my Pride, or Gratitude, on this Occasion; especially when I consider that it is
an Honor, that many before have Solicited in vain.

That the Conversation and Friendship of a Lady of your Accomplishments, should
be highly Esteemed by Persons of the first Rank both for Dignity and Virtue
(not to mention the Noble Lord to whom you are so happily Allied) is no more a
Wonder, than that there should be among the Nobility, those who are as eminent
for their good Sense and fine Taste, as their high Stations.

That You may still continue the Ornament of your own Sex, and the Admiration
of ours, must be the sincere Wish of all who are any ways acquainted with your
Merit, but of none more than of,

MADAM, Your Grateful and Obliged Humble Servant.

November 10, 1730. On Thursday next will be Published, wherein are a great
Variety of New Tunes by the most Eminent Masters, (and compleats this
Collection)

The FIFTH and SIXTH VOLUMES of

* The MUSICAL MISCELLANY; Being a Collection of CHOICE SONGS and LYRICK POEMS:
With the BASSES to each TUNE, and Transposed for the FLUTE. Behold and listen,
while the Fair
Breaks in sweet Sounds the yielding Air;
And with her own Breath fans the Fire,
Which her bright Eyes did first inspire.
WALLER. Printed by and for J. Watts, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's End Fields, and Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country. Of
whom may be had the FIRST FOUR VOLUMES.

And on the same Day will be Published, with a Curious Frontispiece Designed by
Mr. John Vanderbank, The FIFTH EDITION of

* LETTERS of ABELARD and HELOISE. To which is prefixed a particular Account of
their Lives, Amors, and Misfortunes, extracted chiefly from Monsieur BAIL.
Translated from the French, by the late JOHN HUGHES, Esquire

N.B. Act. III, Page 61, for Scene IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, read as follows:
A Room in Sir John 's House. Sir John discovered at a Table, reading. It Is
hard a rooted Love to dispossess;
It Is hard, but you may do it ne'ertheless.
In this your Safety does consist alone:
If possible, or not, it must be done.
A Poem on a Dwarf! what strange stuff is here! Hey ho! -- This Welford's
Daughter has taken so strong hold of my Mind, that Books are useless to me.
[Lays aside the Book.] O Silvia, Silvia! thou have too strongly possessed my
Heart, ever to be dislodged. -- The Possession of other Beauties only fires my
Imagination with those Joys thou alone art capable to impart. -- I have made
thee an ungrateful Return to a disinterested Passion, and made thee suffer for
what I ought to adore thee. -- That Virtue which I endeavored to subdue, has
made me Captive; and I know not if the Grace of Beauty, or the most shining
Ornament of thy Sex, influences most. -- I have wronged thee, and am -- unjust.
But I Will acknowledge and repair my Fault.


Enter Jonathan. Jon. Sir, I have delivered your Letter.


Sir John. And what Answer?


Jon. Her Eyes delivered the Greater Part; but her Tongue said it required none.


Sir John. Ha! -- Whither am I going? -- whither, but to Silvia; the lovely,
mournful Silvia; to implore her Pardon, to expel her Griefs, to vow eternal
Love, eternal Truth.


AIR XL. Draw, Cupid, draw, etc.
Reign, Silvia, reign, etc. as in Page 46.


[Exit. This Opera appearing in Rehearsal too long for one Night's
Entertainment, some Scenes have been shortened, and Airs omitted.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir John Freeman, Mr. Walker. Welford, Mr. Hulett. Timothy Stitch, Mr.
Laguerre. Gaffer Gabble, Mr. Hall. Ploughshare, Mr. Salway. Jonathan, Mr.
Hippesley. Sexton, Mr. Ray.
WOMEN.
Silvia, Mrs. Cantrel. Dorothy Stitch, Mrs. Kilby. Lettice Stitch, Mrs.
Vincent. Goody Busy, Mrs. Martin. Goody Gabble, Mrs. Rice. Goody Costive, Mrs.
Forrester. Betty, Mrs. Egleton.
SILVIA; OR, THE COUNTRY BURIAL.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room in Welford 's House. WELFORD. NOW, now is the very Crisis of our Fate.
-- On this important Hour depends the Happiness, or Ruin, of my dear and only
Child, and all my future Peace. -- Why am I thus alarmed! The Event must sure
be happy! I have long, with Pleasure, beheld their mutual Love. -- The end of
all my Hopes and Fears is near -- This happy Marriage will restore my long-lost
Peace of Mind. -- After Marriage, should he prove false, or unkind -- what
Means are left -- what Power on Earth can do her Justice then! -- Now my Pains
return! thus Joy and Anguish alternately possess my Breast, as Hope or Fear
prevails.


AIR I. Since all the World's in Strife.
^ The Man, by Foes surrounded,
Whilst with himself at Peace,
Dauntless, and unconfounded,
Beholds their Rage increase.
But oh! the torturing Pain,
That racks his Heart and Brain,
Who, hourly with himself at War,
The Foe does in his Bosom bear! --
Shall this Tempest in my Breast
Ever cease, and I have Rest?
Ever cease, and I have Rest?



SCENE II.
Welford, and Jonathan. Jonathan, Sir John tarries long.


Jon. That is not to be wondered at, when he is in such good Company. I know my
Master never thinks himself so happy, as when he is with your fair Daughter.


Welf. Jonathan, I have observed, of all Sir John's Servants, that you, who,
indeed, seem best to deserve it, have the greatest share in his Confidence and
Favor: Now you are not ignorant of my Friendship for your Master, nor of his
Pretensions of Love to my Silvia; both which must interest me nearly in every
thing that relates to him. I have lately heard some Reflections on his Conduct,
that much alarm me. You, if you will, can satisfy my Doubts, without Prejudice
to your own Fidelity, or your Master's Honor.


Jon. Ay, dear Sir, I know that any Discoveries, which I might make to you,
would be as safe as in my own Bosom, and all the Use you would make of 'em,
would be to improve 'em, if possible, to my Master's Advantage, and not at all
to my Prejudice. What a wicked, censorious World do we live in! My Master is
certainly the most virtuous, sober, modest Gentleman in the Country; and, to
say Truth, we are a mighty regular Family. For my part, I am daily edified by
his good Example.


Welf. This Fellow mocks me. [Aside.] The Business of my Farm, and the Care of
my Flocks call me hence. Farewell. My best Respects and Service to Sir John.


SCENE III.
Jonathan. Ha, ha, ha! a pretty Jest truly! discover my Master's Secrets for
nothing! -- when I Am so well paid for keeping 'em.


AIR II. Gami'orum.
^ The Servant that betrays his Trust,
Who Is employed in search of Beauty,
To his Master and himself unjust,
Has neither Sense nor Duty.
Priests and Lawyers, by the Throng,
Are well paid for their Prattling;
What Fool then would use his Tongue,
Who loses by his Tatling. --
Gami -- 'orum, etc.
[Exit Singing.


SCENE IV.
Another Room in Welford 's House. Sir John Freeman, and Silvia. Sil. Urge me
no farther -- I have said too much. How have you drawn from me the fond
Confession?


Sir John. Merely to say you would obey your Father! is that too much to pay
whole Years spent in Adoration of your Charms!


Sil. What can you ask, or what can I say more?


Sir John. Can ardent Love be satisfied with Duty? You might have said as much
to any other Man, who should have gained your Father's Approbation. You have
not yet, my charming Fair, confessed you love.


Sil. Why will you press me to pass the Bounds of Modesty and Prudence? you
know my Father does not force my Will.


Sir John. Why then this needless Caution and Reserve? your cruel Coldness
chills me to the Heart. You never felt Love's animating Fire; some other
Motive, in which Love has no part, must influence you to admit of my Addresses.


Sil. Your Suspicions are as groundless as unkind. There may be Men false,
designing, cruel and unjust, who court and flatter only to deceive: would it be
therefore just to charge the Crimes of some on all? and, for your constant
Love, Truth and Sincerity, return you Doubts, Suspicions and unjust Reproaches?
There may be Women too, who, for Wealth or Power, would give their Hands where
they refuse their Hearts. If you think me such a one, for my sake, and your
own, desist at once: for Love, that is not founded on Esteem, can never yield
true Satisfaction, or continue long.


Sir John. Pardon, my dearest Silvia, a Fault, caused only by Excess of Love --
Thou art so great a Blessing, 'twere Presumption to be too secure. Long we
suspect, and hardly are convinced that the Treasure, on which our Happiness
depends, shall ever be attained. But now my Fears are hushed, and all my Doubts
are fled.


AIR III. Blithe Jockey young and gay.
^ Sweet are the Joys of Love,
When Doubts and Fears are past:

Sil. Virtue does Love improve;
Truth makes it ever last.

Sir John. All Virtues in thee shine,

Sil. Whatever I am is thine.

Both. Hearts, thus united, prove
Earth has no Joy like Love.



Sir John. When Love's sincere and constant, how does it bless and how improve
Mankind? yet, ambitious Statesmen, and foolish meddling Priests, would bind in
Fetters the noble freeborn Passion. Vain Attempt! -- Marriage never yet
kindled a mutual Flame, where it was not, but often has extinguished it where
it was; Love is its self its own Security, and needs no other Bonds.


Sil. This idle Talk, this commonplace Raillery on Marriage, I think, at any
Time is best omitted; but sure, Sir John, it is most improper now. You cannot
expect that a Maid, who is not weary of her Condition, will take upon her the
Defense of a Cause in which she is not concerned: yet, to pleasure you, who, I
presume, delight to hear me talk, though I thereby discover my own Simplicity,
this I will say, the World owes its Order, Kingdoms their peaceful regular
Succession, and private Families their Domestic Happiness to Marriage.


Sir John. The Prejudice of Education only makes you reason thus. I must
instruct you better.


Sil. Sir John, I understand you not --


Sir John. You shall join with me, by our Example to convince the World, that
Love can subsist without the Marriage Tie.


Sil. Sir John Freeman, I have known you long, bred up under one Roof from
Infancy together. I don't remember when I knew you not. The innocent
Friendship, contracted in our Childhood, in you improved to Love, or you have
been a thousand Times forsworn. If I have been deceived, when may a Virgin
safely believe a Man? I would not wrong your Honor by unjust Suspicions, --
but if you have abused me --


Sir John. If I love thee not, or if I ever cease to love thee, may I become
the most wretched and most accursed of Men. -- May I --


Sil. Imprecate no more. Wave this Discourse, and I am satisfied.


Sir John. It Is time, my Silvia, to complete our Joys. [Takes her by the Hand.]
You must now quit your Father's humble Roof, and shine with me. My Wealth,
great as it is, shall be exhausted to support thy Pleasures. Love, only Love,
shall be the Priest to join us. Enjoyment shall be our Marriage: [She
struggles.] Each Day I shall a happy Bridegroom be, and you a Bride. Mahomet's
Paradise shall be verified in us; and all our long Lives shall be but one
continued Transport.


Sil. Let go my Hand.


Sir John. And lest you should think I mean to deceive and to forsake you, no
proud Heiress, that brings a Province for her Portion, shall be joyntur'd as
you shall be. Half my Estate shall be settled on thee.


Sil. With brutal Force to compel me to hear thy hated Proposals, is such
Insolence. -- Thy Breath is blasting, and thy Touch infectious. Oh that my
Strength was equal to my Indignation! I Would give my Hand a Ransom for my Body.

[Breaks from him.
Sir John. Stay, my charming angry Fair, and hear me speak.


Sil. Would I had never heard you. Oh that 'twere possible to fly where I might
never hear the Voice of Mankind more! -- What, set a Price on my Immortal Soul
and spotless Fame? Know, thou ungenerous Man, I never was influenced by thy
Wealth to hearken to thy Vows; for notwithstanding my humble Birth, and
Fortune, I ever scorned Riches, when compared to Love, as now I do Love and
Thee, compared to Virtue. She, who capitulates on Terms like these, confesses
an Equivalent may be had for Innocence and Fame, and there by forfeits both.


AIR IV. Tweed Side.
^ By our Weakness we help the Deceit,
If our Virtue we balance with Gold.
When Dishonour's proposed, if we treat,
We Are to Ruin and Infamy sold.
The Bird, that beholds the Snares laid,
Yet presumptuously plays with the Bait,
By its Rashness and Folly betrayed,
Repents, and grows wiser too late.



SCENE V.
Sir John Freeman. Sir John. Jonathan.


SCENE VI.
Sir John Freeman, and Jonathan. Jon. Sir.


Sir John. Order the Groom to bring the Horses to the Gate.


SCENE VII.
Sir John Freeman. I have made a bold, but unsuccessful Attempt, and by it,
perhaps, have lost her for ever -- perhaps not. -- I would fain see her once
more, methinks. -- And yet there is but little likelihood of our coming to an
Agreement. I am resolved never to marry; and she seems as much resolved never
to comply without it. Whatever is the Meaning of it, I find my self more
ashamed than angry at the Disappointment. Though it is certain that I never did,
nor ever can, love any other Woman half so well. I feel a strange Palpitation
here! [Sighing.] I am not sure that I don't like her the better for refusing
me. -- I am sure of nothing -- but that I will not marry -- I must even have
recourse to the general Remedy in these Cases, a less scrupulous Female. For
though that will not remove the Cause, yet it is an admirable Opiate, and relieves
the Symptoms to a Miracle.


AIR V. Charming is your Face.
^ Wounded by the scornful Fair,
Since she dooms me to Despair,
Let me fly to seek for Rest
On some softer gentler Breast,
Whose free Soul no Forms enslave,
But kindly heals the Wounds she gave.



SCENE VIII.
A Country Village. The Funeral, attended by Timothy Stitch as chief Mourner,
Lettice, Ploughshare, Gaffer Gabble, Goody Busy, Goody Gabble, Goody Costive,
etc. crosses the Stage. The Sexton remains. Sex. A very pretty Fancy this of
being buried in her Clothes. If it were once a Fashion, a Sexton might get as
much as an Overseer of the Poor. Every Man is for making the most of his Place.
But then there is no Comparison between starving the Living and robbing the
Dead, for what should dead Folks do with Clothes? -- But the Truth of it is, in
these healthy Countries the Poor live so shamefully long, that Parish-Officers
get little now, beside good Eating and Drinking. -- But I have heard that
formerly such as were past their Labor, used to be provided for at the Expense
of the Sheriff, -- for then, if Persons were likely to become chargeable to the
Parish, the whole Neighborhood would swear that they were Witches or Wizards;
and so they were decently hanged up, to save Charges. -- But in London, and
other your great Towns, an industrious Man of my Business may make a good Penny
of it still, -- for there they steal Bodies and all, but here we are forced to
let them rot in their Graves, because we cannot tell what else to do with them.


AIR VI. There was a Jovial Beggar-Man.
^ Strange Tales some lying Travelers tell,
How Men on Men have fed;
Of public Shambles, where they sell
For Food their Friends when dead.
The Moral of the Fable thus
Men, that are wise, unfold;
No matter so you fill your Purse,
Though Living and Dead be sold.



SCENE IX.
A Churchyard. Dorothy Stitch in the Grave; Timothy Stitch, Ploughshare,
Gaffer Gabble, Lettice, Goody Busy, Goody Gabble, Goody Costive, Sexton, etc.
AIR VII. Bell Chimes.
^ Tim. Neighbors all, behold with Sorrow,
Whereunto we all must come;
As she today, so we tomorrow
May arrive at our long Home.



G. Busy. Ah, poor Dorothy Stitch! Rest her Soul! She was the handsomest Woman
in all our Parish. But Beauty is but Skin deep, as the Saying is; and you see,
Neighbors, what we must all come to.


Tim. Oh, my dear Wife! my dear Wife!


Let. Oh, my dear Mother! my dear Mother!


Plou. Don't cry so, Lettice; you will spoil your pretty Face.


Let. What Is that to you?


Plou. It Is very well, Mrs. Lettice Stitch!


Let. So it is, Mr. Ned Ploughshare. I ben't afraid of your telling my Mother
now.

[Goes from him.
G. Busy. Good Timothy Stitch, don't take on so. We did not all come together,
nor must we all go together; and our Loss is her Gain, as we all know,
Neighbors.


Omn. Ay, ay, to be sure.


G. Busy. Since we must live by the Living, and not by the Dead, you ought to
thank Heaven, and be contented.


AIR VIII. Oh, oh, I Have lost my Love.
^ Tim. Whom cruel Death does sever; Hum, hum.
Dreadful Thought! they part for ever. Hum, hum.

G. Busy. Yet herein still Fortune kind is, Fara-lall.
When one's gone, more left behind is, Tara-lall.



A poor Woman, who has lost one Husband, and is unprovided of another, has,
indeed, Cause enough of Grief. For though she be ever so much afraid to lie
alone, she cannot, for very Shame, ask a Man to be her Bedfellow.


G. Gab. Ay, ay, it is very true, Goody Busy; though it is, indeed, a very hard
Case. But Neighbor Stitch, here, need but ask and have.


G. Busy. She is in the Right of it. Timothy Stitch, we all know what a good
Husband you was to your last Wife. Here Is Goody Costive herself is a Widow. But
I say no more; spare to speak, and spare to speed, all the World over.


AIR IX. John of Bow.
^ Plou. While you neglect the Living,
For the Dead thus grieving,
Your Sorrows are increased.
Joy to slight for Anguish,
Fondly thus to languish,
Is fasting at a Feast.
You well deserve
To pine and starve,
Who eat not when you may:
Each Woman right,
Or dull, or bright,
Can give Delight;
For, in the Night,
Sure every Cat is Gray.



Tim. How could you name another Wife to me? Where shall I find another like my
First? Twenty Winters did we live in Love together, and never quarreled once
in all our Lives.


G. Busy. What he says is very true, Neighbors; but he may thank himself for
that. For let her say or do whatever she would, he would never quarrel with
her. Not but that the Woman was a very good Woman in the main.


Omn. Yes, yes; a very good Woman in the main.


G. Gab. Though I cannot but say she had an ugly way with her, of abusing every
Body.


G. Cost Ay, ay; we all know that she was the greatest Scold in the Parish.


G. Gab. And that she swore like a Trooper.


G. Cost. And then she would run in every Body's Debt, and pay no Body, by her
Good Will; -- as if she had been a Gentlewoman.


G. Busy. Yet, for all that, the Woman was a good Woman in the main.


Omn. O yes! a very good Woman in the main.


G. Busy. Though she was Proud.


G. Gab. And Lazy.


G. Cost. And Thievish.


1 Wom. And Impudent.


2 Wom. And Whorish.


3 Wom. But, above all, a sad Drunkard.


G. Gab. Ah, poor Creature! that was her Death; for we all know she died in her
Drink.


G. Cost. Ah, poor Soul! we all loved her, to be sure; and would not speak any
Harm of her for the World.


G. Busy. Oh, no! to be sure; for it would be a wicked thing of us to speak Ill
of the Dead, that cannot answer for themselves.


Gaff. Gab. O yes; a very wicked thing, to be sure. Though they do say it is all
the Fashion in London; the more Shame for 'em, I think.


AIR X. Hunt the Squirrel.
^ G. Busy. The Gentlefolks of London,
Infamy scattering,
Neighbors bespattering,
Care not who are undone,
But blast both Living and Dead.

Gaff. Gab. On high and low
They Scandal throw:
Would you the Reason find?
It Is, 'cause they fear
Themselves t'appear
The worst of Humankind.



The Moon is rising, it is time to be going home. Let the Sexton fill up the
Grave.


Tim. Let the Grave remain uncovered; I Will take care of that; for here I mean
to tarry 'till the Morning. Neighbors, I thank you all: Adieu. -- I wish you
well to your several Homes. -- Good Night.


Gaff. Gab. Stay here in the cold Churchyard all Night, with thy dead Wife! --
Why, you are distracted, surely.


G. Gab. If he been't, that were enough to make him so.


Tim. Nay, never go about to persuade me, for here I will stay, come Life, come
Death. Therefore, Neighbors, all go home, and leave me to my self.


AIR XI. Hey ho! who is above?
^ Gaff. Gab. Hey ho! the Man is mad!

G. Busy. Troth, if he is not, he is as bad.

Gaff. Gab. Thou Wilt dye, e're Morning, too I fear.

G. Busy. Leave off thy Fooling, and don't stay here.

Tim. No, no.

Gaff. Gab. G. Busy. Why, why?

Tim. I Would rather stay here with my Dolly, and dye.



G. Busy. This is the strangest Vagary, to pretend to stay here with his Wife,
when she is dead; when there are so few Men who care for their Wives Company,
while they are alive!


Tim. My Resolution may seem stranger than it is; I will therefore tell you the
Reason of it. Some time ago, my Wife was very sick (that cursed Geneva often
made her so) then I fell sick with Grief; but she soon recovering, I recovered
too. On this Occasion, she told me, if I died first, that she should break her
Heart. Yet, she is dead, and I, hard-hearted and ungrateful Wretch, am here
alive to speak it.


G. Busy. Poor Heart! he weeps like any rainy Day. But, good Timothy, go on
with your Tale.


Tim. Let me but dry my Eyes, and then I will. She said that she had heard of
People that had been buried alive, and being troubled with Fits, thought,
perhaps, that might be her Case.


G. Cost. Ay, ay; we all know what sort of Fits she was troubled withal -- But,
Mum for that. [Aside.


Tim. And desired me, if I outlived her, to let her be buried in her best
Clothes, and to watch the Grave the first Night all alone, nor to let the Body
be covered 'till the Morning. I promised to grant her Request, and now will
keep my Word. Nay, though the Ghosts of all those whose Bodies have been buried
here, should rise to drive me hence, I would not leave the Place 'till Morning.


G. Busy. O terrible! I shake like an old Barn in a windy Day, to hear him talk
of it.


AIR XII. Oh that I was, and I wish that I were.
^ Tim. Darkness and Death no Fear alarms,
In them who Light and Life despise.
Will Life restore her to my Arms,
Or Light reveal her to my Eyes?
Then Oh, that I were, and I wish that I were,
In the cold Grave where my true Love lies.



G. Gab. This is downright Madness.


Gaff. Gab. And we shall be as mad as he, to let him have his Will. Therefore,
since Persuasion will not do, Force must.


Omn. Ay, ay; let us carry him home by Force.


Gaff. Gab. Here, some of you help to hold him, while others fill up the Grave.


Tim. Hold, hold, Neighbors, and hear me speak: If you fill up the Grave, and
force me hence before I have performed my Promise, I will never eat, drink, or
sleep more.


Let. Oh dear! why that will be the Death of him.


G. Cost. To be sure.


Gaff. Gab. Nay, then I Will have no Hand in it.


G. Gab. Nor I.


G. Cost. Nor I.


G. Busy. Perhaps we may bring our selves into Trouble about it.


G. Gab. I think we are in a worse Quandary now than we were before.


G. Cost. What must we do in this Case?


G. Busy. Pray you now hear me speak.


Omn. Ay, ay, let us hear Goody Busy speak.


G. Cost. Ay, ay, she is a notable Woman, and a Midwife, and knows what is fit,
as well as any Woman in the Parish.


G. Busy. I say it is dangerous playing with edged Tools -- and we ought to do
as we would be done by -- and it is ill meddling between a Man and his Wife. --
And every honest Man is as good as his Word. -- And the Will of the Dead ought
to be performed. -- Therefore, let us leave him to keep his Promise to his Wife.


G. Cost. Ah, dear Heart! there are not many like him. More is the Pity.


Omn. Good Night, Timothy. Heaven preserve you! Good Night.


Let. O my dear Father! my dear Father! let me stay with you.


Tim. No body shall stay with me. Lettice, be a good Girl, and go home.

[Kisses her.
Plough. Come, you will let me lead you home, sure.


Let. No sure, but I will not. I Will have nothing to say to you, nor shall you have
any thing to do with me. My Father will not make me marry you, for he always used
to say that it was pity a good-natured Girl should be forced.


AIR XIII. The Bells shall ring.
^ Gaff. Gab. The Fair and Young, who sigh alone,
Yet are still denying,
Were Husbands all so constant grown,
Would be more complying.

G. Busy. Priss, Cis, Sue, Marg'ry and Nan,
In the Morning early,
With us shall come, to cheer the Man,
Who loved his Wife sincerely.

Cho. The Bells must ring,
And the Clerk must sing,
And the good old Wives must wind us.
You and I,
And all must dye,
And leave this World behind us.



SCENE X.
Timothy. Now from the Fields the Laborers homeward go; each one to kiss his
Wife, with sweet Content. A good warm Supper, and a loving Spouse, make his
House blessed as mine, while Dolly lived. My House is now like the forsaken Barn,
where the blind Howlet perches all the Day. -- The open Air, cold Ground, on
which I sit, with none to talk to but the speechless Dead, is all my Comfort
now. I hate my own warm Thatch, Flock-bed and Neighbor's Chat, since Dolly,
the Flower of all my Joys, is gone. -- Oh, how wretched is the State of Man


AIR XIV. The State of Man.
^ A feeble Life, with Pain began,
Exposed to great and numerous Woes:
Such is the Infant State of Man,
And with his Strength his Sorrow grows.
'Till his short yet tedious Glass be run;
Then he ends with Grief, who with Pain begun.



Dol. Oh!

[Groans in the Grave.
Tim. Mercy on me! -- what Noise was that! -- Sure I heard something. -- I
think I did -- perhaps I may hear it again -- No no -- nothing at all. -- All
is still -- It was only my Fancy. -- I Will return to my Post. -- [Dolly upright
in the Grave.] O dear, O dear! what can be the meaning of this! why do you
frighten a Body so? -- Was I not a good Husband to you while living, and am I
not performing my Promise to you now you are Dead? -- Why don't you lie still
in your Grave? -- What is it you would have?


Dol. Hickup -- Not a Drop more, -- if you love me.


Tim. It Moves -- and Talks! -- What will become of me?


Dol. I Am very cold. -- Where am I? -- Sure this is a Churchyard. -- This is a
Grave too. -- How came I here?


Tim. O dear, O dear!


Dol. Who Is that! -- Timothy! -- Come, help me out.


Tim. No, I thank you, you are Dead, and a Grave is the fittest Place for you.


Dol. I don't believe that. -- How came I dead!


Tim. Why you died with Drinking, and was buried tonight.


Dol. I don't know any thing of the Matter; but, if I was dead, I am alive
again.


Tim. I wish you were.


Dol. I tell you I am. Come hither and feel me. If you would but feel me once,
you would be sati^fy'd.


Tim. She was always given to lying -- I dare not trust her. -- Yet if she
should be alive again -- I have a good Mind to venture. [Aside, going toward
the Grave.] -- Oh, she has me, she has me!


Dol. The Devil have you for a Cowardly, Cabbaging Rogue* as you are. -- What,
are you afraid of your own Wife, Sirrah*


Tim. Nay, now I am sure it is my Dolly herself, and alive* My dear, dear Jewel,
don't be angry. 'Twas only my Fear*


Dol. Yes, yes, you would have had me Dead. You were only afraid I should be
alive again.


AIR XV. The 23d of April.
^ So unkind, and so unwilling to receive me again!

Tim. To my Heart the Blood's thrilling, to hear thee complain

Dol. Will you love me!

Tim. For ever.
Can you doubt me?

Dol. No never.

Amb. Oh the Pleasure and Pain!



Dol. I Have had a strange Escape! If you had not stayed here, where should I have
been by this Time! I cannot tell indeed; but I believe it is better as it is.


Tim. O my Dear, how can you suspect my Love? I had rather have thee again,
than be Lord of the Manor.


Dol. I would not forsake my Timothy, to be made a Lady.


Tim. Will you go Home with me, and love, and live in Peace; and drink no more
Drams, to fright me so?


Dol. Are you as glad as you seem to be! are you willing to take me again!


AIR XVI. I live in the Town of Lynn.
^ Tim. The Bark in Tempests tossed,
Will the despairing Crew
Land on some unexpected Coast?

Dol. Ay marry, and thank you too.
The Maid who dreamt by Night
Sh' had left her Love so true,
Will she awake to him and Light?

Tim. Ay marry, and thank you too.
O thou art my happy Coast;

Dol. And thou art my Love so true!

Tim. Return my Joy;

Dol. Take me, late lost;

Amb. Ay marry, and thank you too.



SCENE XI.
Lettice. Mercy on me! I Am frightened out of my Wits! I dropped the Company going
home, and came back again to see how my poor Father did, and, as sure as any
thing, I saw my Mother's Ghost go over the Style; and but that I know that my
Father's Alive and here, I could have sworn that I had seen his too. -- What
shall I do? My Father will be very angry if he should know that I am here; and
yet I must speak to him. Father, Father! -- Bless me, he is not here. I Am
frightened worse now than I was before. Sure he is not fallen into my Mother's
Grave. The Moon shines so directly into it, that I can see him if he be. [Looks
into the Grave, and shrieks.] Dear, dear! there is neither Father nor Mother! --
But let me think a little. -- If my Mother should be Alive, after all. -- Ay
marry, that would fright me worse than seeing twenty Ghosts, for she will force
me to marry Ned Ploughshare. I hate Work, Poverty and Confinement; and if I
marry him, I shall have all three.


AIR XVII. As I sat at my Spinning Wheel.
^ How happy is that Woman's Life,
Who, fair and free, has Wealth in store!
But oh, how wretched is the Wife,
That Is doomed to Work, and still be Poor:
To wash, to brew, to card or reel,
Or still to turn the Spinning Wheel?



SCENE XII.
Sir John, Jonathan, and Lettice. Jon. Sir, you may be as merry as you please
with my Cowardice, but I think still we had better have kept on our Horses
Backs, and have ventured our Necks through the Sloughs, than to have come through
this plaguey Churchyard at this time of the Night.


Sir John. Ha, ha, ha! -- what, you're afraid of the Dead?


Jon. I don't like their Company. -- Ah, Land, a Ghost, a Ghost!


Sir John. Get up, you Cowardly Rascal, or --


Jon. O dear Sir, I cannot, I cannot. I Am frightened to Death.


Sir John. Nay, if that be the Case -- you, and the Ghost, if there be one, may
be better acquainted presently. I Will not spoil good Company. Farewell.


Jon. O Lud, that is worse than the other. Pray don't leave me, and I will get up.


Sir John. Sure this Fellow's Folly has infected me too; for I think I see some
body yonder in White. -- Take your Hands from before your Eyes, you Dog, or
I Will cut 'em off.


Jon. I will, I will. -- O dear, dear Sir, there it is again.


Sir John. Cease your Impertinence, you Puppy, and let us observe it. It seems
to me to be a Woman; if so, she must be in Distress. I Will go and speak to her.


Jon. O dear Sir, don't offer it. It Is certainly the Devil, who knowing your
Constitution, has turned himself into this Shape, on purpose to draw you into
his Clutches.


Sir John. Away, Fool.

[Goes to her.
Jon. Poor Sir John! -- Poor Jonathan! -- When the Devil has run away with the
Whore-master, what will become of the Pimp! I have followed this Master of mine
to the Devil, and there will leave him, to go the rest of his Journey with his
new Acquaintance, and try to repent and save one.


AIR XVII. The Oxfordshire Tragedy.
^ My Master's Pimp and Favorite too,
In Liv'ry dressed of various Hue,
In wanton Pride my Days I Have spent,
But now, alas, I must repent.



Methinks I do it very scurvily. If I was sure I was out of the Devil's reach
now, I am afraid the Remembrance of my past Sins would give me more Pleasure
than Pain. And now I look again, it does not appear so frightful as it did.
They are very close. -- My Master has it by the Hand. If it should be a Woman
after all -- as it certainly is -- I have made a fine piece of Work on it truly.
Now will they strike up a Bargain without me, and I shall lose my Fee for
extraordinary Services, my Place as Pimp in ordinary, and my Reputation for
ever. Ay, ay, it is so -- thus it goes.


AIR XXI. You Love and I Love.
^ In a Man's Voice. Charming, lovely Woman, I am in love with thee;

In a Woman's. Nay Sir, pish Sir, fie Sir, sure that never can be.

In a Man's. You're so fair and charming,

In a Woman's. You're so kind and free,

Alternatively. You love, and I love, and you love,
And I am in love with thee.



They are at it still. He palms her, she suffers it; he swears, she lies; he
storms, she yields; Victoria, Victoria, huzzah!


Sir John. I see and pity your Distress; but, unless you consent to go along
with me, how can I relieve you?


Let. O dear Sir, you are the kindest Gentleman, I shall never have it in my
Power to make you amends.


Sir John. To serve any Person in distress, much more a Woman, rewards itself.
And if you are but half so kind as you are fair, you will always have it in your
Power to lay me under the greatest Obligations in the World.


Let. I don't know what you mean by that, but I shall be very willing to be
instructed, for I hate Ingratitude.


Sir John. I hope you are single, for it is a Principle with me, ^ever to ask
any Favor of a married Woman. For he who ^ays his Liberty for a Woman,
deserves to have her to himself.


Let. Nay, for that matter, I think, the Fools that are married are fit for no
body but one another. For my part, I do, and always did, hate the Thoughts of a
Husband.


Sir John. The most beautiful Woman, with the best natured Principles, that
ever I met with in the whole Course of my Life.


Let. How he squeezes my Hand! I understand him -- He is a fine Gentleman. --
But I must not seem too forward neither. [Aside.


AIR XX. Young I am, and yet unskilled.
^ Young I am, and sore afraid:
Will you hurt a harmless Maid?
In this Place I fear to stay,
Fear with you to go away.
Tell me, kind Sir, tell me true,
What you will, and I must do*
How shall I say, Yes or No?
Can I stay, can I stay, or dare I go?

AIR XXI. Flocks are sporting.
^ Sir John. Faint denying
's half complying;
Whist the Strife 'twixt Love and Shame
Fans the Fire
Of Desire,
Fans the Fire
Of Desire,
'Till it crowns the Lover's Flame.
'Till it crowns the Lover's Flame.



Jon. What should you be afraid of, Madam? If you and my Master should break a
Commandment together, there is no manner of harm done; for Sir John has a right
to sin scot-free himself, and make his Neighbors pay for it, as he is a Justice
of Peace.


Let. A Justice of Peace! O dear, I Am so afraid now that my Father should come
and spoil my Fortune. [Aside.


Jon. Bear up, Sir, and I warrant we carry her off betwixt us.


Sir John. But what shall we do with her? Let us get off as fast as we can, for
it is certainly the Devil, who, knowing my Constitution, assumes this Shape, as
the most likely way to draw me into his Clutches.


Jon. Pox on his Memory. [Aside.


Sir J. Give me leave to lead you to the Style at the end of the Churchyard,
where my Horses wait, and then --


Jon. Mount, Whip, Spur and away. Ha, Sir!


Let. O dear Sir! -- What am I doing? Whither am I going? Well, well, carry me
where you will, and do with me what you please, for sure you are a civil
Gentleman.


AIR XXII. Once I loved a Charming Creature.
^ O should wanton Fancies move you,
Should you prove a naughty Man,
I shall think you never loved me;
I shall hate you -- if I can.
But for my down, down, derry down,
But for my down, down, derry down.

Sir John. Should your Charming Beauty move me,
'Twou'd but prove that I Am a Man.
You should believe I better loved you:
Try, then hate me if you can.

Jon. Then for her down, down, derry down,
Hey for her down, down, derry down.



The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
SCENE a Grove. SILVIA. AIR XXIII. O the Charming Month of May.
^ SILENT Night yields no Repose,
Silent Night my Anguish knows:
And the gay Morning
Now returning,
Only lights me to new Woes.

Tim. within. Only lights me to new Woes.

Sil. Silent Night yields no Repose.

Tim. within. Silent Night yields no Repose.



Sil. Sure Echo's grown enamored with my Sorrows, that thus she dwells upon
the plaintive Sound.


Tim. within. Silent Night yields no Repose.


Sil. Ha, this is something more! Perhaps, some wretched Maid, like me by Love
undone, has chose you gloomy Thicket to complain in; and kindly joins her
sympathizing Notes with mine. I Will try again.


Long must I this Torture bear,
Long must I love and despair;
What Life denies us
Death supplies us;
Friendly Death, come end my Care.

Tim. within. Friendly Death, come end my Care.

Sil. Long must I this Torture bear.

Tim. Long must I, etc.



It seems, indeed, the Voice of one complaining; but one of that false,
deceitful Sex, which only seems unhappy, when it would make ours so indeed.
Perhaps some busy, prying Wretch, has stole, unheeded, on my Sorrows, and with
scornful Repetitions mocks my real Woes.


SCENE II.
Timothy, and Silvia. Tim. Forgive, fair Maid, an unhappy Man, who has wandered
all the long Night, not knowing where he went, nor where to go. Tired with my
Misery and fruitless Labor, unable to go farther, I laid me down in yonder
Thicket to complain. But, hearing your Voice, I have with much Difficulty crept
hither to enquire of you, after my lost Daughter; as I must of all I meet,
'till I have found her.


Sil. Is it a Child you have lost!


Tim. A dearly beloved and a loving Child.


Sil. That is a Loss indeed.


Tim. My Wife was buried last Night, and came to Life again, and while I went
home with her, my Daughter was carried away.


Sil. Your Story's very strange.


Tim. But very true.


Sil. I only said that it was strange, not that it was not true. I have heard
of People, who, seeming to be dead, have yet revived. That may have been her
Case.


Tim. I cannot tell -- It may be so -- My Daughter is about your Age, but not so
tall -- Have you heard of any such Person?


Sil. No, indeed.


Tim. She Is lost for ever, and I am the most miserable Man in the World.


AIR XXIV. Parson upon Dorothy.
^ To love my Wife, to lose my Wife,
To find my Wife again,
Was Peace and strife,
Was Death and Life,
Was Pleasure and was Pain.
In Hopes, and Fears,
In Smiles, and Tears,
Our Days inconstant flow;
But no End I see
Of my Misery,
Since Fortune proves my Foe.



Sil. You apprehend your Misery much greater than it is; for, if she be
Virtuous, and Prudent, she will find the Means to return.


Tim. She may be kept by Force. She Is very handsome -- What may she not be
forced to?


Sil. Fear it not. Innocence is the Care of Heaven. Virtue will give her
Resolution to resist Temptation, and Strength to oppose Violence should it be
offered; Duty will teach her such Artifices as will be sufficient to break
through all Difficulties and Dangers, that Fraud or Force can raise to obstruct
her in her Return. -- How fare you, Friend? Your Color changes, and you look
not well.


Tim. Indeed I Am very sick, and faint.


Sil. Alas, poor Man! lend me your Arm, and let me lead you to yonder Bank;
there you may repose your self a while: My Father, who lives at a Farm hard by,
will soon be here, who will, I Am sure, assist you with any thing, that his poor
House affords, or Power commands.


Tim. This Kindness to a Stranger, Heaven will reward.


Sil. Acts of Humanity reward themselves.


Tim. I give you too much Trouble.


Sil. They show themselves unworthy of their Kind, who seeing their
Fellow Creatures in Distress, take not a Pleasure in relieving them. Are not
All exposed to Time and Chance? there is often not the distance of an Hour betwixt
the height of Happiness and depth of Misery.


AIR XXV. Polwart on the Green.
^ Sil. The sweet and blushing Rose
Soon withers and decays.

Tim. Short are the Joys Life knows,
And few our happy Days.

Sil. The fairest Day must set in Night;

Tim. Summer in Winter ends;

Ambo. So Anguish still succeeds Delight,
And Grief on Joy attends.



SCENE III.
To them, Welford and Servant. Sil. Here is my Father. A good Morning to you,
Sir. -- Your Blessing.


Well. Heaven bless my Child.


Sil. Sir, here is an Object, that claims your Pity, and Assistance. An honest
Man distressed; so sick and weak he is, that it would be too much trouble to him
now to repeat the Tale of his Misfortunes.


Well. It Is enough that you, my Silvia, think he needs my Pity, to command all
that is in my Power. Come, Friend, accept of this Lad to guide and assist you --
I Will follow presently -- you shall find a hearty welcome, and all the
Assistance I, or my Family, can lend you.


Tim. With many Thanks I accept your Kindness.


SCENE IV.
Welford and Silvia. Well. Silvia, your Lover tarried late last Night -- I have
not seen you since till now. Nay, never blush, and turn away -- he proposed
Marriage, did he not?


Sil. O Father, why did you ever suffer him to talk of Love, or me to hear him?


Well. There is no Shame in virtuous Love. The most modest Virgin may hear, and
may return it too, without a Blush.


Sil. Oh!


Well. Why weeps my Child? What mean these Sighs, and all these Agonies of
Grief, as if thy Heart would burst?


Sil. O, I have cause to weep, despair, and die; for I have heard from the Man,
who swore a thousand times he loved me, the Man I loved, the Man you bid me
love, such vile Proposals. --


Well. O! I am all on Fire -- say, Silvia, what did he propose?


Sil. What is not fit for you to hear, nor me to speak.


Well. Then the Villain has dared to attempt thy Innocence and Virtue?


AIR XXVI. Now, now comes on the glorious Year.
^ When tempting Beauty is the Prize,
Intemperate Youth, rash and unwise,
Laws human and divine despise,
Not thinking what they are doing;
But did they make the Case their own,
A Child, or Sister thus undone,
With Horror struck, they sure would shun,
Nor tempt such dreadful Ruin.



Sil. Vain of his Wealth, and his superior Birth, with bold, ^^centious Freedom
he railed on Marriage; then talked to me of Love, Enjoyment, and eternal Truth;
endeavoring, by imposing on my Simplicity, to render me vile as his own Ends.
More he talked of Estates and Settlements, and I know not what; and more he
would have talked; but I, with just Indignation fired, flew from his hated
Presence.


AIR XXVII. One Evening as I lay.
^ Ah me! unhappy Maid,
How wretched is my Fate?
Deceived thus, and betrayed,
To love where I should hate.
When Hope has fled our Breast,
Why should Desire remain?
To rob us of our Rest,
And give incessant Pain.



Well. I will revenge thee, thou excellent Maid; I will revenge thee on him, my
self, and all that ever wronged thee.


Sil. Alas! Sir, I want no Revenge; or if I did, what could you do against a
Man so powerful? -- the Attempt would prove your Ruin. -- Let me not see him --
let him not insult me with his Presence -- by that means to be secured from new
Injuries, is all the Vengeance I desire.


Well. He never shall, unless he comes with deep Remorse and humble Penitence to
ask your Pardon, and make you Reparation.


Sil. Let him not come at all. The Man, who takes Advantage from a Maid's mean
Condition to attempt her Virtue, can never make her Reparation.


Well. I fear you hate him then.


Sil. Why should you fear it? You methinks should wish it rather. 'Twas long
before my Heart was taught to love him, and by the Pain his Cruelty gives me I
fear 'twill be much longer e're it will learn to hate him.


Well. I Will go and give Orders that Care be taken of the Stranger, and then I Will
see this mighty Man, who, by a vile Abuse of his Power, has dared to wrong me
thus. Thou'st Reason indeed for thy Anger; but grieve not, my Silvia. I can and
will defend thee.


AIR XXVIII. At Rome there is a terrible Rout.
^ For our Poultry and Flocks we often break our Repose,
To defend them from Foxes and Kites, their known Foes;
We our Children must guard from worse Vermin than those,
Which no Body can deny, etc.



SCENE V.
Silvia. My Fatherbad me not to grieve -- happy for me could I in that obey
him. In all the height of his Passion he never commanded me to hate the
injurious Author of my Woes. Indulgent Parent! He knows that it is not in my
Power, and would not impose on me a Task impossible. Answer his Kindness then
with equal Fortitude, and bear, without Reproach, those Ills thou can not
cure. To assert the Dignity of injured Virtue, though in an humble State, be then
my Care, and leave the rest to Heaven.


AIR XXIX. Fond Echo.
^ As wretched and mean, we despise
The Vicious, their Wealth, and high State;
The lowest, in Virtue, may rise,
It Is Virtue alone makes us great.
The hoarse Peacock, though gaudy and gay,
Sweeps the Earth with his Train, though so bright;
While the Lark, in his humble Array,
Soars warbling to Regions of Light.



SCENE VI.
A Room in Sir John 's House. Enter Betty. Betty. Sir John lies beyond his
usual Hour -- he likes his new Bedfellow. O the Impudence of some People! --
Here, in his own House -- under my Nose, as 'twere -- to bring his Trollops.
Nay, to oblige me to wait upon her too -- warm the Bed for 'em! -- What, make a
Bawd of me? -- O, I could fire the House, to be made a Bawd of at these Years.
The impudent Creature too -- to lie with a Man the first time he asked her. --
I wonder Sir John is not ashamed of himself! -- to take up with such a forward
Drab -- At first, I Am sure, he did not find me so easy. -- Well, I Have been a
Fool; -- but, if it was to do again --


AIR XXX. Young Philander wooed me long.
^ Harmless Maids, of Men beware,
When they are tempting you to Evil;
Though their Flatt'ries charm the Ear,
To be forsaken is the Devil.
Un-wed, never consent to do it;
Trust no false designing Fellow:
Virgins plucked, like other Fruit,
Lose their Relish, and grow mellow.



SCENE VII.
To her, Jonathan. Betty. O Jonathan! Sir John is a barbarous Man to me; but
you remember, I hope, before you know what passed, you bid me fear nothing, for
you were ready to marry me at any time.


Jon. Ay, ay, very likely, Child. But did Sir John promise nothing, before you
know what passed, but what he has since performed?


Betty. Yes, he did, to be sure. -- He promised to love me always. But, what
o'that? if he be a Gentleman, and above keeping his Word, I hope that it is no
Shame for poor People to be honest?


Jon. The greatest in the World, Child. Why, it would be downright Impudence
in us to pretend to be wiser than our Betters. Besides, you are mine of course,
and must not pretend to talk of Terms now. -- I have an equal Right to my
Master's cast Clothes and Mistresses. -- You are part of my Perquisites.


AIR XXXI. Great Lord Frog, and Lady Mouse.
^ At Table thus my Master feeds;
'Till he has done, I look on;
When the Second Course succeeds,
The first is left, like you.
As I in Love my Master serve,
Sure, I don't so ill deserve,
Though enough remains, to starve?
I seize you as my Due.



Betty. O Jonathan, sure you will not use me as my Master has done!


Jon. I cannot tell; I Will use you as well as I can; perhaps you may have no
reason to repent of the Exchange.


Betty. Because I Have been my Master's Fool, do you think I Will be yours?


Jon. Yes.


Betty. You're Impudent, and --


Jon. You like me the better for it.


Betty. Now I Am downright angry with you.


AIR XXXII. Dear Pickaninny.
^ Betty. Be gone, Sir, and fly me.

Jon. How can you deny me?
Be kind, and once try me.

Betty. Never talk of it more.

Jon. Come, grant my Desire.

Betty. I your Rudeness admire.

Jon. To your Chamber retire.

Betty. Sir, there is the Door.

[They sing the following Stanza together.] Jon. Come, grant my Desire.

Betty. I Will not grant your Desire.

Jon. I your Beauty admire.

Betty. I your Rudeness admire.

Jon. To your Chamber retire.

Betty. By your self, pray, retire.

Jon. Love, there is the Door.

Betty. Sir, there is the Door.

[Exit Betty, on one Side, shutting the Door upon Jonathan who goes off on the
other.]

SCENE VIII.
Lettice. AIR XXXIII. Mrs. Le Gard's Dance in Perseus and Andromeda.
^ Let. When youthful May adorns the Year,
The Earth is gay, the Heavens are clear,
And the long Days scarce yield to Night:
The Groves with Vernal Music ring,
Beneath our Feet fresh Odours spring,
All Nature revels in Delight:
In Life, Youth is the Bloom of May;
We laugh, we sing, we sport, we play;
And every rolling Hour supplies,
Some new, and some untasted Joys,
And all the various Scenes are bright.



Let. How fine I am? All over Lace, and Holland, and Silk, and Silver! -- How
pretty I look, too! Nay, I always thought my self too good for a Taylor's
Daughter. And since I find what my Favors are worth, I Will be cunning, and get
as much for 'em as I can, that I may never work, nor be poor again.


SCENE IX.
To her, Sir John. Sir John. Don't you wonder at your own Beauty? Dressed, or
Undressed, Night, or Day, you're always charming.


Let. Let me alone: Why do you stare upon a Body so? I cannot bear to see you, I
am so ashamed.


Sir John. Kind Innocent, yet charming Creature, that has the Art to please
beyond all her Sex, that I ever knew, yet seems to know nothing of it. Last
Night -- ye wanton Rogue --


Let. Oh! you're a sad Man.


AIR XXXIV. Alas! what mean I, foolish Maid?
^ O fie! how could you serve me so?
You naughty Man, pray, let me go,
That from you I may run;
But should I go, I fear 'twere vain,
For soon I should return again,
To be by you undone.



Sir John. Never were Tempers better suited. This Girl is as much a Libertine
in the Affairs of Love, as my self; only she don't seem so well acquainted with
her own Constitution, as to be able to give any Account of the Matter. -- It Is
pure Nature in her; like some lucky Quacks, who, though they know nothing of the
Theory, yet practice with surprising Success.


AIR XXXV. Musing, I late on Windsor Terras sat.
^ The lovely, blooming Creature,
Charming in every Feature;
Loving, moving,
Joys improving,
When she yields to Nature:
But O! the pleasing Smart,
That thrills through every Part,
When possessing,
Kissing, pressing,
Passion's improved by Art.



SCENE X.
To them, Jonathan. Jon. Sir, your Honor's Tenant, Farmer Welford, is come to
wait upon you.


Sir John. Ha! I might well expect him, indeed -- I am strangely shocked. --
Yet I must see him. -- Tell him, I am coming down.


SCENE XI.
Sir John and Lettice. Sir John. My Dear, my Affairs force me to leave you for
the present; in the mean time my Servants shall attend you -- Your Servants
they are now, and as such command them.


Let. But, will they obey me?


Sir John. Ay, or you shall change them for such as will.


Let. Then I shall be a Mistress indeed.


Sir John. Thou art the Mistress of my Life and Fortune; for a Moment, dear
Creature, farewell.


Let. Dear Sir, good by to ye.


SCENE XII.
Lettice. I Am now a Lady indeed. A fine House, fine Clothes, and Servants to
command. And this Sir John is the finest, handsomest Gentleman. -- Not that I
care for him, any more than I should for any Body else, that would but make a
Gentlewoman of me. But I must take care never to let him know that, for it is
for my Interest that he should love me. Besides, now I am a Gentlewoman, I
find, I should like mightily to be admired by every body, and care for no body.


AIR XXXVI. When Cloe we ply.
^ We Women appear
Now kind, now severe,
As Interest for either does call;
If we stay, and comply,
If we fly, and deny,
It is all Artifice, all; it is Artifice, Artifice all.



SCENE XIII.
Lettice and Betty. Betty. Madam, Breakfast is ready for you.


Let. Is it so, Mrs. Minks? but how do you know whether I am ready for that?


Betty. I suppose Sir John knows, Madam. He ordered me to get it ready as soon
as I could.


Let. Where is it? How did you know but that I would have had it here in my own
Chamber?


Betty. Nay, if that be all, Madam, I can soon fetch it, for that matter.


Let. Come back; where is the Wench going? You're mighty ready to obey without
Orders, and to run without being sent.


SCENE XIV.
Betty. My Chamber! -- and Minks! -- How the awkward Trapes takes upon her
already? Sir John acts like a Gentleman, truly. -- To suffer me to be huff'd,
and abused by this -- I don't know what to call her bad enough. I Will not bear
it, that is poz. I have let Farmer Welford know what a Life my Master leads. --
That'll make pure Mischief; for he loves the Daughter so well, that he dares
not disoblige the Father. Ay, there is a Girl, who, though but the Daughter of a
poor Farmer, by her Prudence in keeping the Fellows at a Distance, has as many
Admirers as there are Gentlemen in the County. Upon that single Point turns the
Happiness or Misery of a Woman's Life. But how few of us have the Wit to find
this out 'till it is too late!


AIR XXXVII. Room, Room for a Rover.
^ Frail's the Bliss of Woman,
Fleeting as a Shade;
While we pity no Man,
Goddesses we are made:
If our Favors wanting,
To their Wants we are kind;
Ruined by our granting,
We no Favor find.
Birds, for kind complying,
Love their Females more;
Were loved for denying,
Scorned when we implore.
While on every Tree,
Cherry, Cherry, sing the small Birds;
Terry, Terry, sing the black Birds;
Happier far than we.



SCENE XV.
Sir John and Welford. Well. Sir John, though from your late Behavior I Am
convinced that you look upon me as a Wretch, whom in the Wantonness of your
Wealth and Power you may injure without Danger, yet, I must tell you, that it is
base to wrong a poor Man, merely because he is so; and not always so safe as
you may imagine.


Sir John. I little expected such an Accusation from any Man, much less,
Welford, from you; whatever other Faults I may have, Pride and Cruelty, I thank
Heaven, are Strangers to my Nature. If you are uneasy that your Lease is
unrenew'd, the Fault is in your self, you might have had it done at any time,
upon your applying to me.


Well. It is not that which I complain of; though your refusing it be the Ruining
me and my whole Family, yet as it is a Matter of Courtesy, not Right, you are
at your Liberty. -- But that is not what I now come to speak of.


Sir John. My Love of Pleasure has not so far wasted my Estate, or debauched my
Principles, as to tempt me to wrong any Man, much less the Poor. The less they
have a Right to, the greater Necessity there is of preserving them in the quiet
Possession of that Right.


Well. Are not our Children the best and dearest Part of our Properties? Is
there a Monarch in the Universe that does not esteem an Heir to his Crown
dearer than the Crown he wears? Nature is alike in all. The meanest Wretch, who
daily labors for the Bread with which he feeds his poor Offspring, loves them
as much as the greatest King can his.


AIR XXXVIII. On yonder high Mountain.
^ The powerful Law of Nature
Does Savage Tigers bind;
What fierce or cruel Creature,
But to its Young is kind
By Hunger strong oppressed,
They forgo their needful Prey;
Love confessing,
Still caressing:
Shall Man do less than they?



Sir John, I have a Daughter.


Sir John. You have, a fair one.


Well. True, she is fair; but her Beauty is her least Perfection.


Sir John. In the Bloom of Youth she has Wisdom, Prudence, and Modesty, beyond
what I have observed in the most venerable Old Age.


Well. And to crown all, an inflexible Virtue, that sets her as much above
Temptation from Flattery, Wealth, or Power, as they are beneath her true Value.


Sir John. She is, indeed, the Phoenix of her Sex.


Well. It Is no Boasting, but modest Truth in a Father to say she is. Then where
is your Judgment, or Gratitude? Have I not preferred you to many Gentlemen of
superior Merit and Fortune, in your Addresses to my Silvia?


Sir John. I own the Obligation, and -- but that I am resolved never to marry.


Well. Not marry, Sir! Why it is a Debt due to your Ancestors -- you are the
Medium 'twixt them and Posterity, which in you must fail unless prevented by a
prudent and timely Choice; and an ample Estate, obtained by their Industry, be
possessed by Strangers to their Blood.


Sir John. As to my Ancestors, they have had their time, as I now have mine;
they lived to please themselves, and so will I. As to Posterity, I shall not
trouble my self about what I know nothing of, and which may or may not be,
notwithstanding all the Care we can take about it.


Well. Since I find, what I hoped had been only the Warmth of Youth, to be
Principles with you, you are justly accountable for their Consequences.


Sir John. Notwithstanding your present Circumstances, I look upon you as a
Gentleman. In your Youth, as a Soldier of Fortune, you had Opportunities of
knowing the World beyond most Men; which, joined to your good Sense and just
Observation, qualifies you to give Advice the best of any Man I know. And I
appeal to your own Experience, whether Marriage be not a state of Life,
attended with innumerable Cares, Disappointments, and Inquietudes?


Well. It Is true I have found it so; and you, by your living so many Years in my
House in your Youth, was frequently an Eyewitness witness of this sad Truth:
And I farther confess that my secret Troubles (which were the greater for being
so) far exceeded all that ever were visible; but those are not essential to a
married State, but might have been prevented by a more prudent Choice. But as
it was, one darling Child, not only made them easy, but far o'er-paid them all.
[Tho' Heaven knows that Child is now my greatest Trouble.] [Aside.


Sir John. It is not the Lot of every Man to be Father to a Silvia. The ill
Conveniences of Marriage are certain, the Advantages precarious, therefore I
determine to persevere in my Freedom.


AIR XXXIX. A Country Life is sweet.
^ Free from Confinement, and Strife,
I Will plow through the Ocean of Life,
To seek new Delights,
Where Beauty invites,
But never be confined to a Wife.
The Man that is free,
Like a Vessel at Sea,
After Conquest and Plunder may roam;
But when either's confined,
By Wife, or by Wind,
Though for Glory designed,
No Advantage they find,
But rot in the Harbor at home.



Well. How falsely do you reason? Lewdness is a Gulf which swallows up the
Lives and Fortunes of all who venture into it. And such will be your Fate, if
you pursue the Course you are now engaged in.


Sir John. I shall run the Hazard, spite of your wise Admonitions.


Well. At your own Peril be it then. Have I suppressed my just Resentment thus
long, to expostulate with thee for this? You would be thought a Man of Humanity
and Honor -- was not your late villainous Attempt upon my Daughter's Virtue a
notorious Instance of both? Nay, Sir, you may start, and frown, and bite your
Lips, if you please, -- I repeat it again, your villainous Attempt.


Sir John. Considering who I am, and what you are, supposing I had been to
blame, 'twou'd have become you to have clothed your Complaints in softer
Language.


Well. No Words are strong enough to express your Baseness and my Wrongs.


Sir John. Had the worst you seem to apprehend been accomplished --


Well. Confound thy profane Tongue for such a Supposition.


Sir John. Your Insolence and Outrage would tire the Patience of an Angel. Is
not your Daughter virtuous and chaste as ever?


Well. The Excellency of her Virtue, whom you would have ruined, but aggravates
thy Guilt.


Sir John. The mighty Ruin you talk of was but to have devoted my Life and
Fortune to her Pleasure, which sure was sufficient to have kept her from
Contempt, and her Beauty would still have been as much admired as ever.


Well. After the Loss of Virtue, Beauty and Fortune, like a fair and sumptuous
Monument erected upon a bad Man's Grave, serve only to perpetuate Infamy, and
make it more extensive.


Sir John. What is it that you would wish your Daughter?


Well. I wish her Innocence, Peace, Fortune with Fame on Earth, and Everlasting
Happiness hereafter; but you would make them all impossible to her.


Sir John. She may still be happy.


Well. And shall, in spite of thee. Fond Fool that I was! I thought to have made
you the happy Instrument to have advanced her to that Luster and Rank in Life
her Merit claims; but you have rendered your self unworthy of that Happiness
and Honor; and notwithstanding all my Dotage on thee, you now force me to
curse the Parent that begot thee, the Womb that bore thee, and the Hour that
gave thee to the Light; for thou have added to the Wrongs of Silvia, have
pierced her Heart with new unthought of Sorrows -- I have seen her flowing
Tears, heard her sad Sighs and soft Complaints for thy Ingratitude, unworthy as
thou art.


Sir John. O Welford! Father! did she weep and sigh for me? O let me fly to
throw me at her Feet! I cannot bear to hear her Sorrows told. But oh! to see
her -- surely I shall die with Tenderness before her! I could not have thought
I had been so happy, or so wretched.


AIR XL. Draw, Cupid, draw.
^ Reign, Silvia, Reign;
The Rebel quits his Arms:
Your Power's complete,
And I submit
To your Victorious Charms.
The pleasing Pain,
The gentle Chain,
That constant Hearts unite,
Such Joy bestows,
That Freedom knows
No such sincere Delight.
I shiver, and I burn,
I triumph, and I mourn,
I faint, I die,
Until I fly
Her Passion to return;
But O, I fear,
Too fierce to bear
The mighty Joy will be,
And Love's keen Dart,
Fixed in my Heart,
Prove that of Death to me.



Well. Whither would you go?


Sir John. Whither but to Silvia? to Silvia much wronged, but more beloved; to
the loving, mourning Silvia.


Well. To what end?


Sir John. To implore her Pardon, to expel her Griefs, to vow eternal Love,
eternal Truth.


Well. And if she consents to ratify those Vows by marrying -- Ha! he starts; a
crimson Blush o'erspreads his guilty Face. Would thou again abuse my fond
Credulity? I here renounce all Friendship with thee, and forbid all future
Converse with my Silvia. If by my Consent you ever see her Face again, may
Heaven renounce me; if to revenge her Wrongs and punish you, I spare my self,
may --


Sir John. O stop thy Imprecations, thou rash old Man; for know, I cannot, will
not live without my Silvia's Sight. Unsay what thou have sworn -- I never will
again abuse my Trust -- never again will I repeat my Offense,


Well. With me you have sinned past all Forgiveness.


Sir John. Though I ever loved thy charming Daughter, yet till this Hour I never
knew how much. Make me not desperate, for if you do, by all the Pains I feel,
there is no Revenge so cruel, but I Will pursue, to make thy Misery, if possible,
to equal mine; eject thee from thy Farm; expose thee to Want, and Wretchedness,
and --


Well. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir John. Fury and Madness! my Submission rejected! my Pains insulted! and my
just Resentment laughed at!


AIR XLI. Gillian of Croydon.
^ Since you despise my Power,
Though doubly pressed with Want and Age,
I Will make you curse the fatal Hour,
You scorned my Love, and urged my Rage.
Shall I to my Vassal bend?
When the weak with the strong contend,
On his own Head he plucks the Ruin;
So I my just Revenge pursuing,
Will crush you, before I end.

AIR XLII. Heigh Boys up go we.
^ Well. In vain you storm, and threaten high;
He Is weak, whose Cause is wrong:
When we your boastive Power shall try,
You Will find that Right is strong.
A virtuous Maid,
Wronged and betrayed,
Shall thy Destruction prove;
There Is no Defense,
Like Innocence,
Nor Curse like lawless Love.



SCENE XVI.
Welford 's House. Silvia, and Betty. Betty. Nay, for that matter, I Have told
your Father already, and he seemed so little concerned at it, that it put me
out of all Patience. So thought I, perhaps he will not tell Mrs. Silvia, and, just
as I thought, so it happened; so thought I, I Will even go and tell Mrs. Silvia
my self.


Sil. Oh! [Aside


Betty. Madam*


Sil. Alas!


Betty. What did you say?


Sil. Did I say any thing?


Betty. I thought you did.


Sil. Not that I know of. Oh! how shall I conceal my Tortures from this busy,
prying Creature? [Aside.


Betty. But Mrs. Silvia, don't you think this Sir John a horrible sort of Man?


Sil. All appear such to me, who fall from Virtue.


Betty. Virtue! Why he minds me no more than we do an old Sweetheart, when we
have got a new one.


Sil. The tiresome Impertinent! When shall I have Freedom to complain? [Aside


Betty. And then he is so fond of her -- Madam must have this, and Madam must
have that, and Madam must have the other; and this is not good enough, and that
is not fine enough, and the other is not rich enough for her. O it would make one
^istracted to see it! The impudent Strumpet -- I could tear ^er Eyes out.


AIR XLIII. Young Corydon and Phillis.
^ My Rage is past conceiving;
I storm and curse my Fate,
To think she is still receiving
Such Wealth and Pleasures great,
And something else, but what I dare not,
What I dare not, what I dare not name.



But our Jonathan, by the way, is as bad as his Master; -- O there is a precious
Couple of 'em! -- but as I was saying, our Jonathan, who is Sir John's
Cabinet-Counsellor, says my Master loves no body from his Heart but you; and
therefore the best of it is, her Reign is like to be but short.


Sil. When Women do those things, for which upon Reflection they ought to hate
themselves, they cannot expect that Men will love them long.


Betty. Why as you say, Mrs. Silvia, that Woman that a, a -- (I don't very well
understand her though, but I suppose that means that Sir John should love no body
but her self) [Aside.] -- But what were you saying, Mrs. Silvia?


Sil. That she who parts with her Virtue, parts with the only Charm, that makes
a Woman truly lovely; and she may well expect, for she deserves, to be despised.


Betty. She speaks plain enough now truly. [Aside.] -- Yes, as you say, one
cannot hate that impudent Creature too much.


Sil. If she be such, as you have described her, she is miserable, and,
whatever she may deserve, as such I sincerely pity her.


AIR XLIV. Strephon, when you see me fly.
^ Where can gentle Pity meet
So fit a Subject for her Grief?
Sure that Misery's complete,
When Time, and Death yields no Relief.
Death from lesser Ills may save;
Shame extends beyond the Grave.



Betty. Well, I Will stay no longer; she is enough to put one out of Conceit with
ones self. [Aside.] Mrs. Silvia, I hope you believe that what I have told you
is nothing but the Truth.


Sil. Would I could not. [Aside.


Betty. But I beg you to take no manner of Notice.


Sil. You may be assured I never will. May it ever remain unknown; if they are
guilty, they may yet repent; which if they do, Heaven innocent and gracious
will forgive; the equally guilty World, never will; if they are innocent, what
Injury shall I do, what Guilt contract, by propagating Falsehood?


Betty. Yes, yes, as you say -- besides I should be turned out of Doors; and
you know 'twould vex a body to lose ones Place for such a, a, a -- but I Have
told you what she is, and so Mrs. Silvia your Servant. -- What a way she has of
talking? She gives one such Rubs, and yet does not seem to know it neither. I
don't like her; but if she does but hold her Tongue I Am safe enough. I Have made
a pure deal of Mischief, I don't doubt, for I Am sure she is nettled, for all her
Gravity.


AIR XLV. A Wealthy Merchant's Son.
^ She who, when she would please,
Finds she is mistaken,
Others Pain gives her Ease,
Though she is forsaken.
Since he disdains my Love,
New Beauties courting,
His lasting Plague I Will prove,
I Will spoil his Sporting.



SCENE XVII.
Silvia. Sil. She Is gone, the busy Impertinent is gone, whose painful Presence
checked my struggling Griefs; and now my swollen Heart, and ready Eyes, may burst
with sighing, and overflow with Tears! O Freeman, Freeman! I thought thy former
Baseness, thy vile Attempt upon my injured Honor, had given me all the Pains
you could inflict, or I endure; but Jealousy, that burning Caustic to a Mind
wounded by Love and Injuries before, to Torture adding Torture, Pain to Pain,
gives Agonies never to be conceived till they are felt.


AIR XLVI. Whilst I gaze on Chloe.
^ Still to sigh, to pine, and languish,
Still to weep and wish in vain,
Still to hear increasing Anguish,
Ever hopeless to complain!
Thus to Sorrow never ceasing,
I a helpless Victim prove;
Ever full, and still increasing,
Are the Pains of jealous Love.



ACT III.
SCENE I. SCENE A Grove.
Silvia, Welford. AIR XLVII. Midsummer Wish.
^ Sil. WHEN flattering Love, and stern Despair,
At once invade the Virgin's Breast,
The meeting Tides raise Tempests there,
The rolling Storm destroys her Rest.
Bright Innocence, unerring Guide,
Lead me where Peace serenely reigns;
If gloomy Death her Mansions hide,
I Will seek her there, to lose my Pains.



Well. Still sighing! -- Still in Tears! -- In soft and gentle Murmurs still
complaining! Yet she, innocent even in Thought of any Guilt, that might deserve
a Punishment so severe, accuses not the Heavens, nor Me, nor Him, the cruel
Author of her Woes. No Storm of Rage ruffles her lovely Face; no Thought of
Vengeance swells her beating Breast; Virtue, Love, and Grief, so amply fill her
Mind, there is no Room for any ruder Guest. Never did Passion in a Female
Breast run with so deep, so strong, so smooth a Stream.


Sil. My Father here!


Well. Weeping, my Silvia! Could thou think how deep thy Sorrows wound me, I
know thou would endeavor to subdue them.


Sil. I did not know you was so nigh. -- I had not else indulged this Burst of
Grief: It adds to my Unhappiness, to afflict so tender, and so good a Father.


Well. Thy more than Child-like Duty and Affection, thy yielding Sweetness, and
determined Virtue, of which each Hour you give me fresh Examples, do so affect
me, that I am torn 'twixt Joy and Wonder, Sorrow and Remorse, when-e'er I look
upon thee. I, I, wretched as I am, have contributed to all the Wrongs you
suffer.


Sil. My dearest Father, do not thus aggravate our common Grief; let not your
Affection for me, cause you to wrong your self. If you have permitted me to
love, and I have been deceived, were not you deceived too?


Well. Indeed I was; but all shall yet be well; shortly you shall be convinced,
that he is so far unworthy of your Love, that gentle Peace and Joy shall fill
your Breast, and he be scorned at first, and soon forgot.


AIR XLVIII. How happy are young Lovers.
^ On some Rock, by Seas surrounded,
Distant far from Sight of Shore;
When the shipwrecked Wretch, confounded,
Hears the bellowing Tempests roar;
Hopes of Life do then forsake him,
When in this deplored Extreme,
Then his own loud Shrieks awake him,
And he finds it all a Dream.



Such are your Afflictions; and they, from their excessive Greatness, shall,
like some dreadful Vision, find their End.


Sil. Good Man! He knows not that all has been discovered to me already.
[Aside.] Shall I deceive the best of Fathers, and by Hypocrisy make that my
Crime, which is but my Misfortune? No. Whatever Discovery you make of his
Faults, forgive me, if I say, that I must love him still. True, Virtue forbids
all Converse with him, and I -- obey; his Crimes I hate; his Fall from Virtue I
lament; his Person, though I never see, nor wish to see again, it is still certain
I must ever, ever love.


AIR XLIX. One Night, when all the Village slept.
^ You happy Maids, who never knew
The Pains of constant Love,
Be warned by me, and never do
The lingering Torture prove.
Wisdom, here, brings no Relief,
And Resolution's vain;
Opposing, we increase our Grief,
And faster bind the Chain.



SCENE II.
Goody Busy, Goody Costive, etc. G. Busy. A good Day to you, Mr. Welford; I
have brought with me all my Neighbors, as you requested; and hearing you were
here, with your Daughter, I left them at your House, and chose with Goody
Costive and Goody Gabble, to come to you, that we might have the Pleasure of
seeing Mrs. Silvia.


Well. It Is kindly done of you; there is my Daughter; I Will leave you with her,
and go and bid your Friends welcome. -- You may follow at your Leisure.


SCENE III.
Silvia, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, etc. G. Busy. Do so, do so; I must have a
little Talk with her. It is some Years ago since I saw her, -- never since she
was Christened, as I remember. It is a great way, and I (Heaven help me) grow
old, I don't use to be so sparing of my Visits else. -- Do not know me,
pretty one?


Sil. I don't remember to have seen you before; but, as my Father's Friend, I
am pleased to have the Opportunity to know you now.


G. Busy. Pretty Sweetness! you are grown out of my Knowledge too, to be sure;
but we have been better acquainted; I was thy Mother's Midwife. -- Let me see
-- you will be Eighteen come the Time, and not married yet! Now out upon thy
Father, for a naughty Man! it must have been his Fault, for you are so pretty,
that you must have had Offers enough.


Sil. It is soon enough to know Care and Trouble.


G. Busy. Now out upon it! we have never had any good Times since People talked
so. -- Was not I young my self? and don't I know that the most troublesome and
careful Part of a Woman's Life, is from the time that she is fit for a Husband,
till she has got one? Our greatest Care and Trouble is over then, for the Men,
who seldom take any before, are bound to do it then.


AIR L. A Dame of Honor.
^ A Maid, though beautiful and chaste,
Like a Cipher stands alone;
Man, like a Figure, by her placed,
Makes her Worth and Value known.
The Tyrant, Man, fast bound for Life,
To rule she takes upon her;
Whenever a Maid is made a Wife,
She becomes a Dame of Honor.



G. Cost. Goody Busy, you are always talking to People in praise of Marriage;
now I suspect you, being a Midwife, do it for your own Ends. --


G. Busy. Suppose I did, Goody Costive, where is the Harm of that? I am sure,
Times are so bad, that what with one thing, and what with another, an honest
Woman, in my way of Business, can hardly get Bread; and I never expect to see
it otherwise, while Matrimony is so much despised as it is; why, the Men are
grown so horrible cunning, that few of them will marry at all; and the Women
are grown so forward, that they will not stay till they are married. -- But you
are melancholy, Mrs. Silvia.


Sil. A little thoughtful; I hope you will excuse me.


G. Gabble. Why truly, Neighbor Busy, these must needs be great Hardships upon
you; for no Marriages, no Lyings-Inn.


G. Busy. It is not that which I complain of; for, to say the Truth, I don't
find but that single People have as many Children as those that are married;
but then they are such Infidels, as to let their Children dye without
Christening, and what signifies, to the Midwife, a Lying-in, without a
Christening? -- I had once some Thoughts of going to London, but I am informed
that it is worse there than here; for there are, it seems, a Number of Women
who get their Livelihood by being naught with any Man that will pay them for
it, and yet never have any Children at all.


Sil. I cannot guess what my Father designs by sending for these People. [Aside.


G. Cost. Good lack-a-day! then they have no need of a Midwife, for certain.


G. Busy No, no; the Surgeons do all their Business.


SCENE IV.
Silvia, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, Goody Gabble, and Jonathan. Sil. Jonathan!
What comes he for?


Jon. Madam!


Sil. To me?


Jon. Yes, Madam; Sir John Freeman, by me, begs your Perusal of this Letter.


Sil. I am sorry Sir John has given himself the Trouble, since I am under the
Necessity of refusing it.


Jon. My Master commanded me to tell you, that it concerned the Happiness of
your Father.


Sil. Since such is the Case, I Will this Instant to my Father, and acquaint him
of this important Letter -- wait you here my Return.


SCENE V.
Jonathan, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, etc. Jon. Well, she is an agreeable Lady,
faith. I wonder what Sir John means, by employing me in this Affair? If his
Design be honorable, he knows I can be of no manner of use to him, it is quite
out of my way; and if he has any other Thoughts of her, he has less Sense than
I imagined he had -- But who have we here! my old Acquaintance, and former
Neighbor, Goody Busy!


G. Busy. Bless me; Mr. Jonathan! is it you! why you are strangely grown;
almost out of my Knowledge. But I am glad to see thee, with all my Heart.


Jon. I beg your Pardon, but I must salute you.


G. Busy. It Is what we are used to at Christenings. -- Pray let it go round.


Jon. With all my Heart.

[Kisses the rest.
G. Cost. A pretty civil young Man truly. I have known some squeamish ill-bred
Fellows, refuse to do their Duty by a Woman, because she was in Years.


G. Busy. But where have been all this while; and what Business do follow?


Jon. As you see, I serve a Gentleman.


G. Busy. Are you Married?


Jon. My Master is a single Man, and will not keep any Body that is married in his
Family.


G. Busy. Ay, Shame take these Gentlefolks; they would have every Body as bad
as themselves. That must be a sad House, that has never an honest Woman in it.


Jon. We live as they do in most Batchelors Families, very lovingly. While my
Master is entertaining the Housekeeper in his Chamber, I am as civil to the
Cook-maid in the Garret.


G. Busy. O sad, O sad! what pity it is that young Men should spend their Time
unfruitfully with naughty Women; when, were they honestly married, they might
in a lawful way do much good in their Generation. If you have any Thoughts of
Marriage, I have a Widow in my Eye, that would do very well for you. She has
something to bring you to, and is under Thirty I assure you. While her Husband
was in Health, she brought him a Child every Year; but I don't know how it fell
out, he grew weary of her, and, as it is supposed, thought to have killed her
with Kindness: but as it always happens in those Cases, he did his own Business
instead of hers, he fell into a Consumption -- and died about a Month ago.


Jon. No, Goody Busy, that will never do for me; a wanton young Widow for a
Wife, and a skittish Horse for a long Journey, are two the most troublesome
things a Man can meet withal.


G. Busy. Perhaps you would rather have a Maid. Truly they are ticklish things,
and I don't much care to meddle or make with 'em. But I do know of a Farmer's
Daughter, that will fit you to a Hair. Her Father is a sufficient Man, and will
stock a Farm for you. It Is true, indeed, she has had one Child; for I am a
Woman of Integrity, and would not deceive any Body in these matters for the
World. They did not marry her soon enough. But she will make an excellent
stirring Wife, I Will warrant her.


Jon. A Maid that has had a Child, is worse than a Widow that is past it. I
don't like any Body that you have proposed half so well as yourself.


G. Busy. Now out upon you, for an idle Pack. Why thou naughty, wanton, young
Knave, what would thou do with me? Heaven help me, I am old, and fit for
nothing.


Jon. Let me ask you a few Questions, and you will find you are fit for every
thing.


G. Busy. Well, come on then.


AIR LI. Can thou not weave Bonelace.
^ Jon. Thou can do Housewife's Work!

G. Busy. Yea, by'r Lady, that I can.

Jon. Whip and stitch with a Jerk?

G. Busy. Yea, as well as any one.

Jon. Can thou not bake and brew?

G. Busy. Yea, by'r Lady, that I can.

Jon. And do the other thing too?

G. Busy. Out, you're naughty: get you gone.

Jon. Thou can break Jests, and sing?

G. Busy. Yea, by'r Lady, that I can.

Jon. Caper and Dance with a Spring?

G. Busy. Yea, as well as any one.



SCENE VI.
Welford, Silvia, Jonathan, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, etc. G. Busy. Come
Neighbors, our Friends at Farmer Welford's expect us. -- There is something of
Consequence to be done; he would'n't send for us for nothing. -- A Wedding, I
hope; old Folks drop off apace, but if the young Ones would Marry, and be
industrious, the World might still be increasing.

By honest Love alone the World's upheld,
Death cannot destroy so fast, as Love can build.

SCENE VII.
Welford, Silvia, and Jonathan. Sil. I have obtained my Father's Leave to
receive the Letter you have brought. Whether the Contents may require or
deserve an Answer, I shall take Time to consider. I have no more to say.


SCENE VIII.
Welford, and Jonathan. [Silvia gives the Letter to Welford, who reads it.]
Well. See, my Silvia, the Picture of a Mind struggling between a Sense of
Virtue, and the Love of Vice. Yet he entreats to see thee in such Terms, as
might move weak Minds to pity him.

[Gives her the Letter.
Sil. If Pity be a Weakness, I am, sure, the weakest of my Sex; but yet I fear
to see him.


Well. His base Attempt on thee, his avowed Aversion to Marriage, and the Ruin
of the Daughter of that honest Stranger whom we entertained, all show the
Justice of thy Fear.


Sil. That Men should know Vice to be an Evil, by the Pain it gives, and yet
cherish the Monster that destroys their Peace!


Well. I have sworn never to expose thee to be again insulted by that licentious
Man. Yet I cannot but wish he had not rendered himself utterly unworthy of
thee. But I have given him up. You shall have ample Satisfaction for all the
Wrongs you have suffered.


Sil. If you can entertain a Thought of Vengeance, how are you changed, my
Father!


Well. Hereafter thou will know me better.


Sil. Whither have you sent the Stranger and his Wife? whither are you going
with the People that you sent for? O Sir, forgive my Fears. Urged by your Love
for me, you rush on to certain Ruin.


Well. Whatever becomes of me, you are the Care of Heaven.

[Exit.
Sil. I never knew him transported thus before. He Is going to Sir John, and
will certainly provoke him to his Undoing. Instruct me, Heaven, what I shall do
to save him.


AIR LII. When Flora she had decked.
^ O gracious Heaven, lend a friendly Ray,
To guide my Steps, in Darkness lost;
From Virtue's Precepts never let me stray,
But guide me safely through this dreary Coast.
My Love betrayed,
My Duty paid,
A spotless Maid,
Let me resign
My useless Breath, into the hands of Death;
For while I live there is no Grief like mine.



SCENE IX.
A Room in Sir John 's House. Sir John reading at a Table. It Is hard a rooted
Love to dispossess;
It Is hard, but you may do it ne'ertheless.
In this your Safety does consist alone:
If possible, or not, it must be done.
A Poem on a Dwarf! what strange stuff is here! Hey ho!


SCENE X.
Sir John, and Betty. Betty. There he sits, poring over a Book, which he no
more minds, than he does me. -- Sir, did you call?

[ Sir John throws the Book away.
Sir John. Who Is there; Betty? Come hither. Why you look very amiable today,
Betty.


Betty. O Laud, Sir, you make me blush.


Sir John. Betty, fill me some Wine. The large Glass, and fill it up.


Betty. Yes, Sir.


Sir John. My Love to you, Betty.


Betty. Thank you, Sir.


Sir John. Fill your self, and pledge me.


Betty. He Is coming about again, I see. -- Your Health, Sir. -- If he would but
drink a few more Bumpers; for when he had drank most he always took most notice
of me. [Aside.


Sir John. Leave me; and send the Lady that came home with me last Night.


Betty. Sir, could n't I -- I -- I --

Sir John. What is it you would say!


Betty. Why, Sir, that, that, -- I don't know where to find her.


Sir John. Must I be plagued with your Impertinence too! go, send her to me, or
leave the House your self.


Betty. O Fathers! I cannot bear it! I would I could send the Devil to fetch you
both. [Aside.


SCENE XI.
Sir John. AIR LIII. In Kent, so famed of old.
^ In vain, in vain I rove,
Wine, Wit, and Women prove,
My Anguish to remove,
I Am still a Lover.
And if, to ease my Pains,
I put on Marriage Chains,
Love, that Constraint disdains,
Will soon be over.



SCENE XII.
Sir John, and Jonathan. Jon. Sir, I delivered your Letter to Mrs. Silvia.


Sir John. It Is well.


SCENE XIII.
Sir John, Jonathan, and Betty. Sir John. You need give your self no farther
Trouble to look for the Lady. I Will go and find her my self.


SCENE XIV.
Jonathan, and Betty. Betty. How, Jonathan here! This Fool loves me however.
I Will divert my self, by teazing him. -- So Sir.


Jon. So Madam.


Betty. Captain, methinks you look very scurvily after your last Defeat.


Jon. Now I think you look like a Dealer in Second-hand Goods, who having
outstood your Market, repents, and would fain be turning the Penny at any rate.


Betty. Ha, ha, how vexed he is! but it would fret any Man, who going with
flying Colors to take Possession of a Fort, should find the Gates shut against
him.


Jon. Now you want to be attacked, only for an Excuse to surrender. But you may
keep your tottering Tenement 'till it tumbles about your Ears, for Jonathan.


Betty. Poor Fellow! I see he is horrible uneasy. But what Woman can deny
herself the Pleasure of tyrannizing, when she has it in her Power? To be sure,
Jonathan, you can never forget your last Disappointment.


AIR LIVE. There was a Knight was drunk with Wine.
^ He seized the Lass, trembling all over,
On storming bent, no Doubt, Sir;
But she slipped herself within the Door,
And the Fool was shut without, Sir.

Jon. But soon repents she ever said Nay,
And finds herself the Fool, Sir.
For she that would not when she may,
She shall not when she would, Sir. [Going.

Betty. But Jonathan, Jonathan.

Jon. But she that would not when she may,
She shall not when she would, Sir.

Betty. Sure you be'nt in Earnest.

Jon. But she that would not when she may,
She shall not when she would, Sir.



SCENE XV.
Betty. Betty. O the impudent, pert, conceited Puppy! to leave me before he has
had me! why he is worse than Sir John. I am like to have a fine time on it truly,
between 'em both!


AIR LV. The Sun was just setting.
^ How kind was I used, ever this Lettice came here!
But to be refused, sure no Woman can bear.
By the Master forsaken, I Am scorned by the Man;
How was I mistaken in trusting Sir John?
For he kissed me, I grumbl'd,
He pressed me, I stumbl'd,
He pushed me, I tumbled,
But still he pushed on.
But since that Slut's coming I Am left and undone.
But since, etc.
But if I don't plague him for serving me so,
May I be worse tumbled, worse pushed, and worse jambl'd,
Wherever, wherever I go.



SCENE XVI.
Another Room in Sir John 's House. Sir John, Timothy, Ploughshare, and
Dorothy. Sir John. Perhaps it may not be agreeable to the Lady, to be exposed to
gratify your Curiosity.


Tim. Sir, the Happiness of our Lives depends on finding our Child. And, as we
are informed, she is here.


SCENE XVII.
Sir John, Timothy, Ploughshare, Dorothy, and Lettice Singing. Let. My Father,
Mother, and Ploughshare here! What will become of me!


Sir John. Stay, Child; whither are you going?


Let. O dear, dear Sir; --


Tim. Ay, here she is; and no doubt but all the rest we have been told is as
true.


Plough. Ah Lettice, Lettice, what have you been doing? You Have spun a fine
Thread truly. We shall have the whole Parish ring of you shortly.


Tim. O Child, you will break my Heart.


Dor. Will she? but I Will break her Neck first.


Let. O dear Sir John, save me, save me, or I shall be torn to Pieces.


Plough. How fine the Slut is! and how familiar with the Justice!


Dor. Ay, ay, it is certainly so. Oh you impudent Carrion, I Will be the Death of
you.


Tim. To find my Girl ruined, is worse than never to have found her at all.


AIR LVI. Hear me weep and wail.
^ Welcome endless Grief,
Farewell my Goose and Sheers forever, ever.
Can I find Relief? No never, never.
For Grief, from Shame arising,
New Pains is still devising:
All Arts must fail,
Distraction prevail,
My Brain it is now surprising -- prizing.



Sir John. Friends, have Patience. What Is past cannot be recalled, but I Am ready
to make you any Satisfaction that is in my Power.


Dor. Look ye, Sir, you have utterly ruined the Wench. The Blame and Shame must
now fall all upon her own Head; whereas, had she been married, you know 'twou'd
have fallen upon her Husband's.


Plou. But who do you think will have her now?


AIR LVII. Send home my long-stray'd Eyes.
^ Could you return her true and chaste,
I Would meet her with a Bridegroom's Haste;
But since, from you, she is learned such Ill,
To hate her Spouse,
Or arm his Brows,
Keep her, for me, Sir, keep her still.



Let. O dear! what must I do? My Father will break his Heart; my Mother will
beat my Brains out; and that Monster, Ned Ploughshare, will make me the
May Game of the whole Parish.


Plou. Don't call me Monster: I Am none of your Husband: So keep your Tongue to
your Self.


Let. I will not; it is all along of you that this has happened. You always knew
that I hated you, and yet you would have had me, whether I would or no.


Dor. Yes, Hussy, he would have made an honest Woman of you; but you must be a
Gentlewoman, must you?


AIR LVIII. A Nymph of the Plain.
^ So true, and so kind,
To whatever you inclined,
To whatever you inclined,
He had never denied;
But with Joy had complied,
To have made you his Wife,
And obeyed all his Life;
In a manner so soft, so engaging, and sweet,
As well might persuade you his Passion to meet.



Tim. Wife, I never approved of your forcing the Girl's Inclinations, and now
you see what it is come to.


Sir John. Friend, you seem an honest inoffensive Man, which aggravates my
Remorse for having wronged you.


AIR LIX. Young Philoret and Celia met.
^ Let. Regard my Tears, dispel my Fears,
I Will never offend you more.

Tim. The simple Groom, the Steed being gone,
So shuts the Stable Door.

Let. Pity my Pain. Tim. My Pity's vain.

Let. My Folly I deplore.

Tim. Fame that is lost, and Time that is past,
What Power can restore?

Ambo. Fame that is lost, and Time that is past,
What Power can restore?



Sir John. What good-natured Man, that was but a Spectator in this Scene, but
must be moved? I thought, 'till now, the general Love of Women consistent with
Generosity, Honor, and Humanity. -- False and destructive Principle! By this
single Act of mine, how many innocent Persons have I injured? The Woman, too --
the Easiness with which she gave up her Honor, makes her, though pitied, yet
despised, even by me, the Author of her Ruin.


SCENE XVIII.
To them, Jonathan; whispers Sir John. Sir John. Ha! Silvia, said you? Sure you
mistake!


Jon. No, Sir; she is in the next Room, and desires to see you.


Sir John. Fly then, and conduct her in. -- Good People, an Affair of
Consequence obliges me to beg you would leave me for the present. If you please
to wait in the next Room, when that is dispatched, I Will send for you again.


SCENE XIX.
Sir John and Silvia. Sir John. She Is here, whom most I wish to see; and yet,
such is the Power of Guilt, I dare not look upon her. Could I have thought her
Sight would ever give me Pain? -- But, like a Wretch removed at once from
impenetrable Darkness, into the midday Blaze, I sicken at the cheerful Light,
and fain would shun a Brightness, that glads all Eyes but mine.


Sil. O Sir! pardon and pity an unhappy Maid: Had Heaven required me to have
died, to have shown my Duty to the best of Parents, the Pain had been far less;
but filial Piety commands me to live, and interpose between your Power, and the
Weakness of my good, but incensed Father.


AIR LX. I Am Ormond the Brave.
^ Your heaviest Resentment, ah! let me, let me bear.
In Pity to his Age, my reverend Father spare:
Toil, Want, and all you can inflict, I will not shun;
But when I think that he may be, for wretched me, undone,
Oh, oh!



SCENE XX.
Sir John, Silvia, amd Welford. Welf. O Silvia! Never, 'till now, had I Cause
to blush for any Act of thine. -- Rise, nor offer that Incense to an Idol,
which Heaven alone is worthy of, and which, were he not lost to Shame, as well
as Honor, he must blush to receive.


Sil. Condemn me not: Can any Submission be too low to save from Ruin such a
Parent? Still let me kneel.


Well. Heaven, and all that is just on Earth, forbid it.


Sir John. Confounded and amazed, I had not Power to raise her from the Earth.
-- O Silvia! -- Welford! -- could you see my Heart! how deep my Contrition! how
sincere my Sorrow! you would no longer fear, [ To Silvia.] nor you be angry, [
To Welford.] Vice, in all its genuine Deformities, I Have just beheld. Virtue, in
all its Charms, I see in you -- Receive a returning Prodigal to your Arms;
forgive, and make me happy. -- Let the Priest, by honorable, holy Marriage,
give me a just Possession of thy Charms, and join me to Virtue, and to thee,
for ever.


Sil. I came to beg your Favor for my Father, not a Husband for my self. You
once thought me mean enough to barter my Innocence and Virtue, for your Wealth;
should I now consent to marry you, might it not be justly suspected that my
former Resentment was not from the Love of Virtue, and Contempt of Riches, but
Artifice, to make the better Terms? Virtue is Heaven's best Gift: Nor have they
more than the Appearance of it, who submit to the least Imputation on their
Fame, for Wealth, or Power, or Love, more tempting to a generous Mind. Think it
not Pride in me, to refuse an Obligation to the Man who would have robbed me,
of all that distinguished me from the vilest of my Sex.


Sir John. To have my Love and Admiration increased, by what gives me Despair,
is a Punishment (though just) that is insupportable.


AIR LXI. Minuet.
^ With Pity, gracious Heaven possessed,
Taught Mortals how 'twould be addressed:
Celestial Fair,
O sooth my Care!
And, as my Heaven on Earth I view thee;
Lovely Creature,
Pride of Nature,
Teach me (like Heaven) how to woo thee.



Sil. I pardon, pity, and I love thee --


Sir John. O charming Sounds! -- So Heaven cheers a despairing Sinner, with the
sweet Voice of Mercy.


Sil. But Heaven, when it pardons, appears above Reward, by conferring
Obligations. That is not in my Power. -- To refuse them is, and in that I am
determined. -- Farewell, for ever. -- It Is hard -- but Virtue, Prudence, and my
Fame require it. Therefore, farewell for ever. -- If your Return to Virtue be
sincere, you have a Mistress who will never forsake you; but, ever blooming,
crown your Days and Nights with Joy, -- when I am Dust.


Sir John. [ Falling on Welford 's Neck.] O Welford, Welford! must I lose her?
You loved me once. Is there no Remains of Pity left? Can you behold me sinking,
and yet refuse a friendly Hand to save me?


Well. [Embracing him.] Heaven forbids me not to pity, love, and in the Anguish
of my Soul, weep over thee, my now dearer than ever, though too unhappy Son.


Sir John. Did not you call me Son? O that I were! To be your Son, is all the
Happiness my Soul aspires to.


Well. Too soon you will find that Name includes the worst of Miseries, certain
Despair. -- But, to the Business of my coming.


SCENE XXI.
Sir John, Silvia, Welford, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, Jonathan, Betty, etc.
Well. Goody Busy, and the rest of my Friends who came with me, pray, walk in.
Now let all here attend and witness to the Truths I am about to utter; and you,
unhappy Youth, prepare to bear the most surprising Change of Fortune, like a
Man. -- You are not whom you seem, and whom you think your self, Sir John
Freeman, Baronet, and rightful Possessor of a fair Estate, but an innocent
Impostor, and Usurper of another's Right, and my unhappy Son indeed.


Sil What can my Father mean!


G. Busy. This is the strangest Story that ever I heard of.


Sir John. Welford, to invent a Tale so vile, and so absurd, to make me despair
of Silvia, as being her Brother, is unworthy of your good Sense and former
Probity.


Well. I will not thank you for your Assent to the Truth of what I affirm. This
excellent Lady is not my Daughter, but the much wronged Angelica Freeman, the
sole surviving Child of the late Sir John Freeman, and Heiress to his large
Estate. -- I read Wonder and Surprise in every Face. -- You look for Proofs. --
Goody Busy, you served Sir John Freeman's Lady, and my Wife, as Midwife.


G. Busy. That I did to be sure.


Well. How many Children had each?


G. Busy. Two, a Son and a Daughter, I shall never forget it: they Lay-in both
times together, and your Wife nursed both Sir John's Children.


Well. All this is true; but was there any thing remarkable upon the Body of Sir
John's Son when born?


G. Busy. No, but yours was marked under the left Breast with a bunch of
Grapes, the Fruit, Leaves and Stalks all in their proper Shape and Color, as
if they had been growing on the Vine.


Sir John. [Opening his Breast.] Here is the indelible Mark, visible and fair,
as when the Seal of Heaven impressed it first, to distinguish the Impostor from
the rightful Heir.


Well. Too well I know it.


Sil. If this Gentleman be your Son, how could his Birth have been concealed so
long?


Well. That -- with my own Shame, I am now to discover. -- My Wife, while
unmarry'd, attended on the Mother of this Lady, then a Virgin, and so far was
she honored with her Confidence, that she lived with her rather as a Sister or
Companion than a Servant; after her Marriage to Sir John, and my Wife's to me,
the Honor of their Friendship was continued; for I was happy in Sir John's, as
my Wife was in his Lady's. -- That we had the same number of Children, and of
the same Age and Sex, and that my Wife was entrusted with the Care of theirs,
you have heard already. -- Soon after the Birth of this Lady, a War breaking
out, Sir John, who had an honorable Post in the Army, went for Flanders: I
attended him thither, and (as I had formerly done) served under him as a
Voluntier. -- In this our Absence, a Fever made dreadful Ravage in this part of
the Country. -- Of it died Sir John's Lady, and quickly after his Son, (who was
then at my House) and my Daughter. -- My Wife taking the Advantage of the
Lady's Death, and our Absence, reported, that the Son who died was ours; and
the surviving one (truly ours) was Sir John's. -- Our Daughter who died was
buried as his; and his, this Lady, was reputed and educated as our own -- The
Fraud was never so much as suspected by Sir John, nor any other Person, my self
excepted -- I indeed, by Observations, which none else had opportunity to make,
soon found it out, and charged my Wife with it; she confessed it, and to my
Shame prevailed upon me to conceal what I could never approve. -- She died
before Sir John, and never lived to see her Son possessed of the Honor and
Wealth, which she by such wicked Means had endeavored to procure for him. --
Through Heaven's Mercy I hope she rests in Peace. But what have been my Tortures
ever since I consented to conceal the guilty Secret! -- Stung hourly with
Remorse, I attempted to do her Justice and conceal my Shame, by effecting a
Marriage between her and my Son; but Heaven, that refused the imperfect
Satisfaction, and condemned the Fraud, has, you see, made vain the fond
Attempt, nor would suffer her to receive that as another's Gift, which is her
own proper Right.


Sir John. And long may she enjoy it. -- I have not so ill profited by her
bright Example, as to repine at a Change of Fortune, so just, and so much to
the Advantage of this wondrous Pattern of all that is excellent in Womankind.


Sil. Your Justice, and the Moderation of your Son, affects me more than these
unthought of, undesired Riches: can I ever forget your more than paternal
Kindness and Affection?


Well. Spare me the Confusion, that your Goodness gives me; look not so
tenderly, nor speak so kindly, but treat me as your Injuries and my Crimes
deserve.


Sil. The Crime was another's. -- Your former Tenderness and present Justice,
though to the Disadvantage of your Son, is all your own. -- If you forsake me
now, I am indeed an Orphan -- Riches have Snares, and Youth without a Guide is
exposed to many Dangers -- Be still my Father.


Well. Thy own worthy Father, were he living, could never love thee more. -- But
to be thy Father is impossible.


Sil. This is your Son. -- Let me be his, and you are still my Father.


Sir John. Do I indeed behold her heavenly Face, all clad in Smiles, and kindly
bent on me? Do I indeed hear her harmonious Voice pronounce me happy? -- Or
does my flattering Fancy, to sooth Despair, form Images that have no real
Existence?


Well. Bless her, bless her, Heaven! and as you have made her the best, make her
the happiest of her Sex. -- Never did I taste Joys sincere till now.


Sil. This surprising Discovery unmade, -- had I consented to have been yours,
-- the Disinterestedness of my Love and Virtue could never have been known. --
Heaven has made our Duty and our Interest one. I may now without Reproach give
my Hand, where before I had given my Heart.

[Betty Weeps.
Jon. What, in Tears, Betty!


Betty. What have I lost for want of reflecting sooner? I Would rather have that
Lady's Virtue, than her Beauty and Estate.


Jon. Poor Girl! -- Why this is to have it. -- I remember on a certain Occasion
I made you a Promise of Marriage, if you think it worth claiming, give me your
Hand.


Betty. There it is; if you can forget what is past, you shall have no Reason to
complain of my Conduct for the future.


AIR LXII. Ah how sweet's the cooling Breeze.
^ Sir John. Oh how sweet,
All over Charms,
To bless my Arms,
Thy generous Virtue all Vice defeating.

Sil. All complete and pure's my Joy,
Without Alloy;
With Transport unusual my Bosom is beating.

Sir John. Dearest Treasure!

Sil. O Joy beyond measure!

Sir John. This truly is Pleasure.
Ye Follies adieu.

Both. O Dearest!
All complete and pure's my Joy,
Without Alloy;
With Transport unusual my Bosom is beating.

Sil. Love gently firing,
And softly inspiring,

Sir John. Panting, desiring, I Will Virtue pursue.

Both. Oh Dearest!
All complete and pure's my Joy,
Without Alloy;
White Hours approach, and the black are retreating.



G. Busy. Ay, this is as it should be -- I could even cry for Joy, to see that
there is so much honest Love left in the World.


Sir John. Reclaimed by your Virtue, and restored to Fortune by your
Generosity, I hope you will take it as a Proof of my Sincerity, that I confess my
self concerned for the Distress brought upon an honest Man and his Family by my
Folly.


Sil. Your Concern is just and generous, like the Man I hope ever to find you
-- but have I given my self to you, and not my Fortune? All is yours; dispose
of it as you please.


Sir John. Jonathan, send Lettice and her Friends hither. -- O Madam, the
longest Life would be too short to pay my Obligation.


SCENE XXII.
Sir John, Silvia, Welford, Goody Busy, Goody Costive, etc. Timothy, Lettice,
Dorothy, etc. Sir John. Unhappy Girl, I wish it was in my Power to make you
ample Satisfaction for the Injury I Have done you; but since that is impossible,
I will settle something on your Father, in Trust for you, that, managed with
Prudence, may secure you from the Fears of Poverty, the Rock on which you split
before. -- You, Sir, I hope will continue with us. -- The Farm lately Tenanted
by my Father, with your Consent, Madam, I bestow on this honest Man, for the
Purposes beforementioned.


Sil. And may it answer your Intentions, which if it does, we may hereafter
give 'em farther Proofs of our regard for their Welfare.


Tim. Dor. Let. Heaven bless you both.


Sir John. Lettice, as I shall never see you more, take this Advice with you.
-- Keep this Lady's Example in view, and you may yet excel in Virtue many of
your Sex, who having never erred in the manner you have done, look on your
Fault as unpardonable. -- Nor shall you, Betty, or Jonathan, be forgot.


Jon. Sir, if you approve of it, Betty and I have resolved to take one another
for better for worse.


Sir John. That I do approve it, you shall find by the handsome Provision I Will
make for you.


Well. Son, not foreseeing this happy Event, I sent for the Tenants to attend,
that upon making the Discovery they might be ready to pay their Duties to this
Lady, upon her taking Possession of her Estate.


Sir John. Madam, what think you of inviting 'em in, to partake of the general
Joy?


Sil. By all means.


A DANCE. AIR LXIII. Dutch Skipper.
^ Gaff. Gabb. Such Virtue possessing,
Includes every Blessing,
Every Blessing,
Our mortal State can know.

Well. Such bright Examples firing,
Each generous Soul inspiring,
Inspiring,
We scorn the World below.

Plough. With Pleasure while we gaze,
Transformed, our Souls we raise,
For Virtue beheld the Mind renews.

Tim. So the Sun, for ever bright,
Communicates his Light,
And adorns every Object that he views.

CHORUS. Since Truth to the Mind her own Likeness reflects,
Makes known our Defects, makes known our Defects;
Since Truth to the Mind her own Likeness reflects,
Let none the just Mirror despise.
What Virtue so bright but Reflection improves,
Or Folly so stubborn, but what it removes?
Reflect, be happy, and wise.



FINIS.
Lately Published, Curiously Printed in Two Pocket Volumes,

* The MUSICAL MISCELLANY: being a COLLECTION of CHOICE SONGS, set to the
VIOLIN and FLUTE, by the most Eminent MASTERS. The Man that has no Music in
himself,
And is not moved with Concord of sweet Sounds;
Is fit for Treasons, Stratagems, and Spoils.
Shakespeare. Printed by and for J. Watts, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court
near Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, and Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country.

Nov. 12, 1729. This Day was published, The THIRD and FOURTH VOLUMES of

* The MUSICAL MISCELLANY; Being a Collection of CHOICE SONGS and LYRICK POEMS:
With the BASSES to each Tune, and Transposed for the FLUTE. By the most Eminent
Masters.

MUSICK'S the Cordial of a troubled Breast,
The softest Remedy that Grief can find;
The gentle Spell that Charms our Cares to Rest,
And calms the ruffling Passions of the Mind.
Printed by and for J. Watts, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's End Fields, and Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country.

The FIFTH and SIXTH Volumes, which are designed to conclude this COLLECTION,
will go to the Press very speedily; therefore all GENTLEMEN and LADIES who are
willing to Contribute any NEW SONGS to this Collection, are desired to send 'em
as soon as possible, directed for John Watts, and Care will be taken to have
'em set to Music by the best MASTERS.

N.B. Those PIECES which are come to Hand since the finishing the THIRD and
FOURTH Volumes, shall be inserted in the FIFTH and SIXTH.

Just Published, The Fourth Edition of

* The FAIR CIRCASSIAN, a Dramatick Performance, done from the Original by a
Gentleman Commoner of Oxford. To which are added several Occasional Poems, by
the same Author. -- sine Me, Liber, ibis in Urbem. Ovid.

October 28, 1729.

This Day was Published, with the Addition of Nine PIECES (marked thus * in
this Advertisement) and Adorned with curious CUTTS, Designed by Mr. John
Vanderbank and Mr. Highmore, and Ingrav'd by Mr. Gerrard Vandergucht, the
Second Edition of

* A SELECT COLLECTION of NOVELS and HISTORIES. In Six Volumes. Written by the
most Celebrated Authors in several Languages. Many of which never appeared in
English before. All New Translated and Compiled from the most Authentic
Originals.

VOL. I. Containing, An Extract of Monsieur Huet's Discourse concerning the
Original of Romances. ZAYDE. The Marriage of Belphegor. * The Adventures of
Melesicthon. The Jealous Estremaduran. * The History and Fall of the Lady Jane
Gray. * The Adventures on the Black Mountains.
VOL. II. Containing, The Princess of Cleves. The Fair Maid of the Inn. The
Force of Friendship. * Charon: or, the Ferry-Boat. The History of the Captive.
VOL. III. Containing, Don Carlos. The History of Count Belf^or and Leonora de
Cespedes. The Curious Impertinent. * The History of Jane Shore. The Prevalence
of Blood. The Liberal Lover. The Beautiful Turk.
VOL. IV. Containing, The Happy Slave. The Rival Ladies. * The Loves of King
Henry II, and Fair Rosamond. The Innocent Adultery. The History of the
Conspiracy of the Spaniards against the Republic of Venice.
VOL. V. Containing, The Little Gypsy. Ethelinda. The Amor of Count Palviano
and Eleonora. * The Unhappy Favorite: Or, the Fall of Robert Earl of Essex.
Scanderbeg the Great.
VOL. VI. Containing, The Life of Castruccio Castracani of Lucca. The Loves of
Osmin and Daraxa. The Spanish Lady of England. The Lady Cornelia. * The History
of Massaniello. The False Duchess. * Memoirs of the Imprisonment and Death of
Mary Queen of Scots.

Printed for J. Watts, at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near Lincoln's End
Fields; And Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country.

January 16, 1729.

This Day was Published the THIRD EDITION of

** Fifty One NEW FABLES in Verse, (Invented for the Amusement of His Highness
WILLIAM Duke of Cumberland) By Mr. GAY: With Fifty One Cutts, designed by Mr.
Kent and Mr Wotton, and Engraved by Mr. Baron, Mr. Vandergucht, and Mr.
Fourdrinier. Printed for J. Tonson, and J. Watts.

Just Published,

TIMOLEON. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Benjamin Martyn. The Second Edition. The VIRGIN QUEEN.
A Tragedy. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields. Written
by Mr. Richard Barford. The FATAL EXTRAVAGANCE. A Tragedy. As it is Acted at
the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields. Written by Mr. Joseph Mitchell. The
Fourth Edition Corrected. The FATE of VILLAINY. A Play. As it is Acted by the
Company of Comedians, at the Theater in Goodmans-Fields. DOUBLE FALSEHOOD; or,
The DISTRESSED LOVERS. A Play, as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.
Written Originally by W. Shakespeare; and now Revised and Adapted to the Stage
by Mr. Theobald, the Author of Shakespeare Restored. The HUMORS of OXFORD. A
Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants. Written
by a Gentleman of Wadham-College. The Second Edition. The PROVOKED HUSBAND; or,
a JOURNEY to LONDON. A Comedy, as it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His
Majesty's Servants. Written by the late Sir John Vanbrugh, and Mr. Cibber. The
Second Edition. LOVE in SEVERAL MASKS. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the
Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Fielding. The TEMPLE
BEAU. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theater in Goodmans-Fields. Written by
Mr. Fielding. The DISSEMBLED WANTON; or, My SON get MONEY. A Comedy. As it is
Acted at the Theater Royal in Lincoln's End Fields. Written by Mr. Welsted. The
BEGGAR's OPERA. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
Written by Mr. Gay. The Second Edition: To which is Added The Ouverture in
Score; With the Music prefixed to each Song. LOVE in a RIDDLE. A PASTORAL. As
it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr.
Cibber. With the Music to each Song. The VILLAGE OPERA. As it is Acted at the
Theatre-Roya^ by His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Johnson. With the
Music prefixed to each Song. MOMUS turned FABULIST: or VULCAN'a WEDDING. An
Opera: After the Manner of the Beggar's Opera. As it is performed at the
Theater Royal in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. With the Music prefixed to each Song.
The LOVER's OPERA. As it is performed at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants. By Mr. Chetwood. The Third Edition, with Alterations. With the Music
prefixed to each Song. The QUAKER's OPERA. As it is performed at Lee's and
Harper's Great Theatrical Booth in Bartholomew-Fair. With the Music prefixed
to each Song.
All Printed for J. WATTS at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country.


