VERSES TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE, ON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT
HONORABLE HENRY PELHAM.

By HENRY JONES, AUTHOR of the Earl of ESSEX.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall; And sold by M. COOPER, at
the Globe in Paternoster Row. 1754. (Price Sixpence.)

VERSES TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.
IF yet your throbbing bosom finds relief;
If Reason yet one moment steals from Grief;
Forgive, my Lord, the Muse that late appears,
To join with Britain's sighs, -- NEWCASTLE's tears;
The Muse, that joins her well intended strain,
With GEORGE's sacred sighs, but joins in vain.
Not regal sorrows can that life restore,
In vain the kingly fountains rich run over;
It Is hers, to join with all who truly mourn,
Who pour the plaintive note on PELHAM's urn.
Mistaken mortals in this vale below,
Sons of Adversity, and heirs of Woe,
The sad inheritance tenacious keep,
Too soon they triumph, or too late they weep.
The good possessed, with listless hearts they rate,
Nor prize the bliss enjoyed, till snatched by Fate;
Reflection then, and Gratitude conspire;
Then, every virtue kindles every fire;
The breast humane, with sudden fervor burns;
Then, all the soul alarmed, regrets and mourns;
This tribute Virtue from the heart demands,
And Nature pays it with obedient hands.
To vice high raised, no hallowed mark remains,
Her springs of pleasures, and her source of pains,
Ambition's frenzy, Lust, and Lucre fly
To black Obscurity; far off they lie
Sunk in the mass confused, Oblivion's lot,
By Time rejected, and by Fame forgot.
The all-revered pile, erect to Fame,
With Virtue's trophies charged, with Trajan's name,
Over vanquished Time shall stand, with story'd pride,
With each immortal witness at its side;
The world's applause, by classic power expressed,
Which thunder spared to strike; and Goths molest!
O sacred Avarice! O thirst divine!
The immortal springs of paradise are thine;
The treasures thine in Time's diminished store;
For thou shall claim, when he can give no more.
Illustrious PELHAM, to thy country dear,
For whom thy prince still sheds the social tear,
Thy honored worth, with lasting wreaths shall shine,
And every British trophy shall be thine;
Not Latian marble nobler praise can give,
In every patriot heart thy name shall live.
Nor yet, Britannia, let thy bosom cease,
Thy beating bosom, stranger yet to peace,
The fatal storm that tore thy bulwark wide,
With dread irruption, cannot yet subside;
Thy agitated heart yet feels the blow,
And Justice must approve the grateful woe.
It Is due to merit in the humblest sphere,
Where private virtue claims the private tear;
A secret transport mingles with such grief,
Such generous sorrow brings the soul relief;
Reason approves, what Passion then bestows,
And Nature pays the debt, that Friendship owes.
Ah! say, what sad memorial can express
A people's anguish, and a king's distress!
Alas! what monumental mark make known
The sighs of millions, grieved -- a monarch's moan!
What equal witness shall invention find,
Worthy the friend of truth, -- of human-kind!
Let Gratitude her sacred source explore,
Let Genius turn her treasured talents over,
Let Greece, let Rome bestow their reverend aid,
And rear the awful pile to PELHAM's shade.
Let Envy come, by factious Malice nursed,
With all her black seditious brood accursed,
Come forth at once, and witness if she can,
That ever thy shadow, Fraud, eclipsed the man.
She growls conviction, with reluctant tone,
And grinds the sacred truth, she is forced to own.
The vanquished pest retreats, that bane of men,
Drove back by Truth she seeks her horrid den.
A statesman die, and not one arrow move!
Has Faction lost her nerve! -- can Malice love
Science, Sincerity, or Truth? she can,
The blameless minister, the upright man:
Even in Britannia blessed, a length of years,
In whose clear conduct not one stain appears.
And will the jarring hydra this proclaim
From all her hostile mouths to PELHAM's fame?
Thrice happy PELHAM! blessed beyond compare,
Blessed in thy life, (and what few else could share,
In public station and exalted trust,)
Blessed in thy death, and honored in the dust.
With WALSINGHAM, with BURLEIGH blend thy rays,
Equal to each in merit, as in praise.
O if exalted to the realms of joy,
The immortal mind one moment may employ
On things terrestrial, on the affairs of men,
Bow down inraptur'd thy celestial ken;
Behold each rank, each faction, all agree,
(The patriot's rich reward reserved for thee,)
Alike the prince's and the peasant's tear,
In mingled current flowing over thy bier;
Extatic vision to the virtuous given,
Felt with increasing transport, though in heaven.
How wretched now from thy seraphic sphere,
Does Fraud, does Flattery, to thy sight appear!
Ambition's crest how abject does it show,
With Craft, with Avarice, thy scorn below!
How Pomp, how Pride, how Courts, to atoms shrink
From thy averted view! how sudden sink!
With gold, with grandeur, these misrated things,
These trappings of command, these toys of kings!
Whilst in some lowly cottage, Truth's retreat,
Neglected Virtue to thy eye looks great;
The unbody'd mind affection's force retains,
And friendship with the blessed, new fervor gains,
Exalted fervor, free from earth's cold dross,
And each alloy, that sensual hearts engross;
Still helpful to the good, the virtuous mind,
Still fond, they cast the friendly wish behind.
Fast by the stream of life, that joyful roves
Through labyrinths of bliss, immortal groves,
Thy ardent spirit feels a social care,
And Friendship still imprints its image there.
With each endearing tie through life enjoyed,
With each fond object, that the heart employed,
To Science wedded, in the abstracted bower,
To business sacred, in the important hour;
When deep Experience poised Europa's weal,
When Britain's genius watched the varying scale,
And O where heartfelt raptures often inspired
The throb reciprocal by Friendship fired,
By Sense, by Truth, by Love, by Honor taught,
By ripening Time to rich perfection brought.
Angels themselves might view a scene like this
With longing eyes, and envy human bliss.
Such soul-felt ecstasy, so deep impressed,
Retains thy Cath'rine's form among the blessed,
Takes off thy raptured thought, with tender care
Divides perhaps thy wishes even there.
What mortal anguish tore each filial breast,
When dreadful struck, in fixed amaze! -- expressed
By gushing tears, when Nature felt the blow;
And every voice was lost in whelming woe!
By silent agonizing looks alone,
With heart-expressive force, to words unknown,
Sent from the agitated soul to tell,
That Britain lost a friend, when PELHAM fell!
The parent dear, -- but sorrow stopped the rest,
And Nature sunk, beneath the load oppressed.
O Thou, to whom my numbers would ascend,
The tenderest brother, and the noblest friend,
NEWCASTLE, PELHAM, patriot, loyal, true,
From thy fraternal eye, still falls the dew
Of genuine sorrow, flowing from the heart
That melting feels -- but Britain claims her part
In thee; thy country now demands thy care,
Thy Prince to thee inclines the attentive ear,
By anxious thoughts and toils of state oppressed,
He leans for counsel on thy faithful breast;
To thee his bosom's inmost weight makes known,
Thou firm support, thou pillar to his throne!
O long support him, long his cause defend,
Thy Prince's favorite and thy country's friend,
Another PELHAM to the grave descend.
FINIS.

