THE TRAGEDY OF THE Lady JANE GRAY. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL in
Drury Lane.

By N. ROW Esquire

Sed frustra Leges and inania Jura tuenti
Scire mori Sors optima.
LONDON, Printed for BERNARD LINTOTT at the Cross-Keys between the Temple-Gates
in Fleetstreet. 1715.

TO Her Royal Highness THE PRINCESS of WALES.
MADAM,
A Princess of the same Royal Blood to which you are so closely and so happily
allied, presumes to throw her self at the Feet of YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS for
Protection. The Character of that Excellent Lady, as it is delivered down to us
in History, is very near the same with the Picture I have endeavored to draw
of her: And if, in the Poetical Coloring, I have aimed at heightning and
improving some of the Features, it was only to make her more worthy of those
Illustrious Hands to which I always intended to present her.

As the British Nation, in general, is infinitely indebted to YOUR ROYAL
HIGHNESS, so every particular Person amongst us ought to contribute, according
to their several Capacitys and Abilitys, toward the discharging that Public
Obligation.

We are your Debtors, MADAM, for the Preference You gave us, in choosing to wear
the British rather than the Imperial Crown; for giving the Best Daughter to our
KING, and the Best Wife to our PRINCE. It is to YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS we owe the
Security that shall be delivered down to our Childrens Children, by a most
Hopeful and Beautiful, as well as a Numerous Royal Issue. These are the Bonds
of our Civil Duty: ^ut YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS has said us under others yet more
Sacred and Engaging; I mean, those of Religion. You are not only the Brightest
Ornament, ^ut the Patroness and Defender of our Holy Faith.

Nor is it Britain alone, but the World, ^^t the present and all succeeding
Ages, ^ho shall bless Your Royal Name for the greatest Example that can be
given of a Disinterested Piety and Unshaken Con^ancy.

This is what we may certainly reckon amongst the Benefits YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS
has conferred upon us. Tho (...) the same time, how partial soever we ^ay be to
our selves, we ought not to believe You declined the First Crown of Europe in
regard to Britain only. No, MADAM, it is in Justice to YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS that
we must confess, you had more excellent Motives for so great an Action as that
was. Since You did it, in Obedience to the Dictates of Reason and Conscience,
for the Sake of True Religion, and for the Honor of God. All things that are
Great have been offered to You, and all things that are Good and Happy, as well
in this World as a Better, shall become the Reward of such Exalted Virtue and
Piety. The Blessings of our Nation, the Prayers of our Church, with the
faithful Service of all good Men, shall wait upon YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS as long
as You live. And whenever, for the Punishment of this Land, You shall be taken
from us, your Sacred Name shall be dear to Remembrance, and Almighty God, who
alone is able, shall bestow upon you the Fullness of Recompense.

Amongst the several Offerings of Duty which are made to You here, be
grasiously pleased to accept of this Unworthy Trifle, which is, with the
greatest Repect and lowest Submission, presented to YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS by,

MADAM, YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS's Most Obedient, Most Devoted, and Most Faithful
Humble Servant, N. ROW.

PREFACE.
THO I have very little Inclination to writ^ Preface before Works of this
nature, yet, upon this particular Occasion, I cannot but think my self obliged
to give some short Account of this Play, (...) justice to my self, as to a very
Learned and Ingenious (...) man, my Friend, who is dead. The Person (...) Mr.
Smith of Christ-Church, Oxon: one whose (...) I could with great pleasure enter
into, if it was (...) very well known to the World. As I had the Happiness to
be intimately acquainted with him, he often told me (...) signed writing a
Tragedy upon the Story of the Lady Jane Gray; and if he had lived, I should
never have ^^ought (...) meddling with it my self. But as he died without doing
(...) in the beginning of the last Summer I resolved to undertake (...) And
indeed the hopes I had of receiving some considerable Assistances from the
Papers he left behind him, were one of (...) principal Motives that induced me
to go about it. These Papers were in the hands of Mr. Ducket, to whom my Fri^^^
Mr. Tho. Burnett was so kind to write and procure 'em for me. The least Return
I can make to those Gentlemen is this public Acknowledgment of their great
Civility on the occasion. I must confess, before those Papers came to my ^and;
I had entirely formed the Design or Fable of my own Play: And when I came to
look 'em over, I found it was very different from that which Mr. Smith
intended; the Plan of his being drawn after that, which is in Print, of Mr.
Banks: at least I thought so, by what I could pick out of his Papers, To say
the truth, I was a good deal sur^iz'd and disappointed at the sight of 'em. I
hoped to have ^et with great part of the Play written to my hand, or at ^ast
the whole Design regularly drawn out. Instead of that, ^ found the quantity of
about two Quires of Paper written over (...) odd pieces, blotted, interlin'd
and confused. What was ^^ntain'd in 'em in general, was loose Hints of
Sentiments, (...) short obscure Sketches of Scenes. But how they were (...) be
applied, or in what order they were to be ranged, I ^^uld not by any Diligence
of mine (and I looked 'em very ^^refully over more than once) come to
understand. One ^cene there was, and one only, that seemed pretty near per^^ct;
in which Lord Guilford singly persuades the Lady ^^ne to take the Crown. From
that I borrowed all that I ^^uld, and inserted it in my own third Act. But
indeed the ^^^er and Turn of his Fable was so different from mine, (...) I
could not take above five and twenty or thirty Lines at (...) most; and even in
those I was obliged to make some Al^^ration. I should have been very glad to
have come into a ^^rtnership of Reputation with so fine a Writer as Mr. Smith
(...); but in truth his Hints were so short and dark (many 'em marked even in
Shorthand) that they were of little (...) service to me. They might have
served as Indexes (...) own Memory, and he might have formed a Play out of 'em;
but I dare say, no body else could. In one part of (...) Design he seemed to
differ from Mr. Banks, whose Tale (...) generally designed to follow; since I
observed in many of those short Sketches of Scenes he had introduced Queen
Mary. He seemed to intend her Character Pitiful and inclining to Mercy, but
urged on to Cruelty by the Rage and (...) Dispositions of Bonner and Gardener.
This Hint (...) wise taken from the late Bishop of Salisbury's (...) the
Reformation; who lays, and I believe very (...) horrible Cruelties that were
acted at that time, (...) charge of that Persecuting Spirit by which the (...)
then animated, than to the Queen's own natural Disp^^^^^

Many People believed, or at least said, that Mr Smi^^ left a Play very near
entire behind him. All that I am (...) for, is, that it was not so in fact. I
should have (...) scruple of taking three, four, or even the whole five (...)
from him; but then I hope I should have had the (...) to let the World know
they were his, and not take (...) Man's Reputation to my self.

This is what I thought necessary to say, as well (...) own account, as in
regard to the Memory of my Friend.

For the Play, such as it is, I leave it to prosper ^ can: I have resolved
never to trouble the World with (...) public Apologies for my Writings of this
kind, as much (...) have been provoked to it. I shall turn this my young Child
out into the World, with no other Provision tha^ Saying which I remember to
have seen before (...) Mrs. Behn's: Va! mon Enfant prend ta Fortune.

PROLOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. BOOTH. TO night the Noblest Subject swells our Scene,
A Heroine, a Martyr, and a Queen.
And tho the Poet dares not boast this Art,
The very Theme shall something Great impart,
To warm the generous Soul, and touch the tender Heart.
To you, Fair Judges, we the Cause submit;
Your Eyes shall tell us how the Tale is writ.
If your soft Pity waits upon our Woe,
If silent Tears for suffering Virtue flow;
Your Grief the Muse's Labor shall confess,
The lively Passions, and the just Distress.
Oh could our Author's Pencil justly paint,
Such as she was in Life, the Beauteous Saint;
Boldly your strict Attention might we claim,
And bid you mark, and copy out the Dame.
No wandering Glance one wanton Thought confessed,
No guilty Wish influm'd her spotless Breast:
The only Love that warmed her blooming Youth,
Was, Husband, England, Liberty, and T^^^^.
For these she fell; while, with too weak a Hand,
She strove to save a blind ungrateful Land.
But thus the secret Laws of Fate ordain;
WILLIAM's Great Hand was doomed to break that Chain,
And end the Hopes of Rome's Tyrannick Reign.
For ever, as the circling Years return,
Ye grateful Britons! crown the Hero's Vrn.
To his just Care you every Blessing owe,
Which, or his own, or following Reigns bestow.
Tho his hard Fate a Father's Name denied,
To you a Father, he that Loss supplied.
Then while you view the Royal Lines increase,
And count the Pledges of your future Peace;
From this great Stock while still new Glorys come,
Conquest abroad, and Liberty at home;
While you behold the Beautiful and Brave,
Bright Princesses to grace you, Kings to save,
Enjoy the Gift, but bless the Hand that gave.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Duke of Northumberland, Mr. Mills. Duke of Suffolk, Mr. Boman. Lord Guilford
Dudley, Mr. Booth. Earl of Pembroke, Mr. Elrington. Earl of Sussex, Mr. Ryan.
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Mr. Cibber. Sir John Gates, Mr. Shepherd.
Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Quin. Captain of the Guard, Mr. Maddocks.
WOMEN.
Duchess of Suffolk, Mrs. Porter. Lady Jane Gray, Mrs. Oldfield.
Lords of the Council, Gentlemen, Guards, Women, and Attendants.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Scene, The Court. Enter the Duke of NORTHUMBERLAND, Duke of SUFFOLK, and Sir
JOHN GATES. North. IT IS all in vain, Heaven has required its Pledge,
And he must die.

Suff. Is there an honest Heart,
That loves our England, does not mourn for Edward?
The Genius of our Isle is shook with Sorrow,
He bows his venerable Head with Pain,
And labors with the Sickness of his Lord.
Religion melts in every holy Eye,
All comfortless, afflicted and forlorn
She sits on Earth, and weeps upon her Cross:
Weary of Man, and hi^ detested Ways,
Even now she seems to meditate her Flight,
And waft her Angel to the Thrones above.

North. Ay, there, my Lord, you touch our heaviest Loss.
With him our holy Faith is doomed to suffer;
With him our Church shall vail her sacred Front,
That late from Heaps of Gothic Ruins rose,
In her first native simple Majesty;
The Toil of Saints, and Price of Martyr's Blood
Shall fail with Edward; and again Old Rome
Shall spread her Banners, and her Monkish Host;
Pride, Ignorance, and Rapine shall return;
Blind bloody Zeal, and cruel Priestly Power
Shall scourge the Land for ten dark Ages more.

Sir J. Gates. Is there no Help in all the healing Art,
No potent Juice or Drug to save a Life
So precious, and prevent a Nation's Fate?

North. What has been left untried that Art could do?
The hoary wrinkled Leach has watched and toiled,
Tried every Health-restoring Herb and Gum,
And wearied out his painful Skill in vain.
Close, like a Dragon folded in his Den,
Some secret Venom preys upon his Heart.
A stubborn and unconquerable Flame
Creeps in his Veins, and drinks the Streams of Life;
His youthful Sinews are unstrung, cold Sweats
And deadly Paleness sit upon his Visage,
And every Gasp we look shall be his last.

Sir J. Gates. Doubt not, your Graces, but the Popish Faction
Will at this Juncture urge their utmost Force.
All, on the Princess Mary, turn their Eyes,
Well hoping she shall build again their Altars,
And bring their Idol-Worship back in Triumph.

North. Good Heaven ordain some better Fate for England!

Suff. What better can we hope, if she should Reign?
I know her well, a blinded Zealot (...) she,
A gloomy Nature, sullen and severe,
Nurtured by proud presuming Romish Priests,
Taught to believe they only cannot err,
Because they cannot err; bred up in Scorn
Of Reason, and the whole Lay World; Instructed
To hate whoever dissent from what they teach,
To purge the World from Heresy by Blood,
To massacre a Nation, and believe it
An Act well pleasing to the Lord of Mercy.
These are thy Gods, Oh Rome! and this thy Faith.

North. And shall we tamely yield our selves to Bondage?
Bow down before these holy Purple Tyrants,
And bid 'em tread upon our slavish Necks?
No, let this faithful freeborn English Hand
First dig my Grave in Liberty and Honor.
And though I found but one more thus resolved,
That honest Man and I would die together.

Suff. Doubt not, there are ten Thousand, and ten Thousand,
To own a Cause so just.

Sir J. Gates. The List I gave
Into your Grace's Hand last Night, declares
My Power and Friends at full. [to Northumb.

North. Be it your Care,
Good Sir John Gates, to see your Friends appointed,
And ready for the Occasion. Have this Instant,
Loose not a Moment's time.

Sir J. Gates. I go, my Lord.
[Exit Sir J. Gates.
North. Your Grace's Princely Daughter, Lady JANE,
Is she yet come to Court?

Suff. Not yet arrived:
But with the soonest I expect her here.
I know her Duty to the dying King,
Joined with my strict Commands to hasten hither,
Will bring her on the Wing.

North. Beseech your Grace,
To speed another Messenger to press her;
For on her happy Presence all our Counsels
Depend, and take their Fate.

Suff. Upon the Instant
Your Grace shall be obeyed. I go to summon her.
[Exit Suff.
North. What trivial Influences hold Dominion
Over wise Men's Counsels, and the Fate of Empire?
The greatest Schemes that human Wit can forge,
Or bold Ambition dares to put in practice,
Depend upon our husbanding a Moment,
And the light lasting of a Woman's Will.
As if the Lord of Nature should delight
To hang this ponderous Globe upon a Hair,
And bid it dance before a Breath of Wind.
She must be here, and lodged in Guilford's Arms,
Ever Edward dies, or all we have done is marred.
Ha! Pembroke! that is a Bar which thwarts my Way,
His fiery Temper brooks not Opposition,
And must be met with soft and supple Arts;
With crouching Courtesy, and honey'd Words,
Such as assuage the Fierce, and bend the Strong.
Enter the Earl of Pembroke. Good morrow, Noble Pembroke, we have stayed
The Meeting of the Council for your Presence.

Pem. For mine, my Lord! you mock your Servant, sure,
To say that I am wanted, where your self,
The Great Alcides of our State is present.
Whatever Dangers menace Prince or People,
Our Great Northumberland is armed to meet 'em;
The ablest Head, and firmest Heart you bear,
Nor need a second in the glorious Task;
Equal your self to all the Toils of Empire.

North. No, as I honor Virtue: I have tried,
And know my Strength too well; nor can the Voice
Of friendly Flattery, like yours, deceive me.
I know my Temper liable to Passions,
And all the Frailties common to our Nature;
Blind to Events, too easy of Persuasion,
And often, too too often have I erred.
Much therefore have I need of some good Man,
Some wise and honest Heart, whose friendly Aid
Might guide my treading through our present Dangers.
and by the Honor of my Name I swear,
(...) know not one of all our English Peers,
Whom I would choose for that best Friend, like Pembroke.

Pem. What shall I answer to a Trust so noble,
This Prodigality of Praise and Honor?
Were not your Grace too Generous of Soul,
To speak a Language differing from your Heart,
^ow might think you could not mean this Goodness,
^o one whom his Ill-Fortune has ordained
^he Rival of your Son.

North. No more! I scorn a Thought
(...) much below the Dignity of Virtue.
It Is true I look on Guilford like a Father,
^ean to his Side and see but half his Failings:
^ut on a Point like this, when equal Merit
^ands forth to make its bold Appeal to Honor,
and calls to have the Balance held in Justice;
^way with all the Fondnesses of Nature!
(...) Judge of Pembroke and my Son alike.

Pem. I ask no more to bind me to your Service.

North. The Realm is now at Hazard: and bold Factions
^reaten Change, Tumult and disastrous Days.
^hese Fears drive out the gentler Thoughts of Joy,
(...) Courtship and of Love. Grant Heaven the State
(...) fix in Peace and Safety once again;
^hen speak your Passion to the Princely Maid,
and fair Success attend you. For my self,
^y Voice shall go as far for you, my Lord,
(...) for my Son, and Beauty be the Umpire.
(...) now a heavier Matter calls upon us,
^he King with Life just Laboring; and I fear,
^he Council grow impatient at our Stay.

Pem. One Moments Pause, and I attend your Grace.
[Exit North. Old Winchester cries to me often, beware
Of Proud Northumberland. The Testy Prelate,
Froward with Age, with disappointed Hopes,
And zealous for old Rome, rails on the Duke,
Suspecting him to favor the New Teachers.
Yet even in that, if I judge right, he errs.
But were it so, what are these Clergy Quarrels,
These wordy Wars of proud ill-manner'd Schoolmen
To us and our Lay-Interests? Let 'em rail
And worry one another at their Pleasure.
This Duke of late by many worthy Offices
Has sought my Friendship. And yet more, -- his Son,
The noblest Youth our England has to boast of,
The gentlest Nature and the bravest Spirit,
Has made me long the Partner of his Breast.
Nay when he found in Spite of the Resistance
My struggling Heart had made, to do him Justice,
That I was grown his Rival; he strove hard,
And would not turn me forth from out his Bosom,
But called me still his Friend. And see! he comes.
Enter Lord GUILFORD. Oh! Guilford just as thou were entering here,
My Thought was running all thy Virtues over,
And wondering how thy Soul could choose a Partner,
So much unlike it self.

Guil. How could my Tongue
Take Pleasure and be lavish in thy Praise!
How could I speak thy Nobleness of Nature,
Thy open manly Heart, thy Courage, Constancy,
And inborn Truth unknowing to dissemble!
Thou art the Man in whom my Soul delights,
In whom next Heaven I trust.

Pem. Oh! generous Youth!
What can a Heart stubborn and fierce like mine,
^urn to all thy Sweetness? -- Yet I would
^ould be grateful, -- Oh my Cruel Fortune!
^^'d I had never seen her! never cast
(...) Eyes on Suffolk's Daughter.

Guil. So would I;
(...) 'twas my Fate to see and love her first.

Pem. Oh why should she, that Universal Goodness,
(...) Light a common Blessing to the World,
(...) like a Comet fatal to our Friendship,
(...) threaten it with Ruin?

Guil. Heaven forbid!
(...) tell me Pembroke, Is it not in Virtue,
(...) arm against this proud imperious Passion?
(...) Holy Friendship dwell so near to Envy,
(...) could not bear to see another happy?
^^^ind mistaking Chance and partial Beauty
^^^ld join to favor Guilford. --

Pem. Name it not,
(...) fiery Spirits kindle at the Thought,
(...) hurry me to Rage.

Guil. And yet I think,
should not murmur were thy Lot to prosper,
(...) mine to be refused. Though sure the Loss
^^'d wound me to the Heart.

^em. Ha! coud'st thou bear it?
(...) yet perhaps thou might. Thy gentle Temper,
^^^m'd with Passions mixed in due Proportion,
^^ere no one overbears nor plays the Tyrant,
^^join in Nature's Business, and thy Happiness:
(...) mine disdaining Reason and her Laws,
(...) all thou can imagine wild and furious,
(...) drive me headlong on, now whirl me back,
(...) hurry my unstable flitting Soul
^^w'ry mad Extreme. Then Pity me,
(...) let my Weakness stand. --

Enter a Messenger. Mess. The Lords of Council
Wait with Impatience --

Pem. I attend their Pleasure.
[Exit M^ This only, and no more then. Whatsoever
Fortune decrees, still let us call to Mind
Our Friendship and our Honor. And since Love
Condemns us to be Rivals for one Prize,
Let us contend as Friends and brave Men ought;
With Openness and Justice to each other.
That he who wins the Fair one to his Arms,
May take her as the Crown of great Desert:
And if the wretched Loser does repine,
His own Heart and the World may all condemn him.
[Exit Pem
Guil. How cross the Ways of Life lie! while we think
We travel on direct in one high Road,
And have our Journey's End opposed in View,
A Thousand thwarting Paths break in upon us,
To puzzle and perplex our wandering Steps.
Love, Friendship, Hatred, in their Turns mislead us,
As every Passion has its separate Interest.
Where is that piercing Foresight can unfold,
Where all this mazy Error will have end,
And tell the Doom reserved for me and Pembroke?
There is but one End certain, that is -- Death.
Yet even that Certainty is still uncertain.
For of these several Tracks which lie before us,
We know that one leads certainly to Death,
But know not which that one is. It Is in vain
This blind divining, let me think no more on it,
And see the Mistress of our Fate appears!
Enter Lady JANE GRAY. Attendants. Hail Princely Maid! who with auspicious
Beauty,
Chear'st every drooping Heart in this sad Place;
Who, like the Silver Regent of the Night,
Lift'st up thy sacred Beams upon the Land,
To bid the Gloom look gay, dispell our Horrors,
And make us less lament the setting Sun.

L.J.G. Yes, Guilford, well do thou compare my Presence,
To the faint Comfort of the waining Moon;
Like her cold Orb, a chearless Gleam I bring,
Silence and Heaviness of Heart, with Dews
To dress the Face of Nature all in Tears.
But say how fares the King?

Guil. He lives as yet,
But every Moment cuts away a Hope,
Adds to our Fears, and gives the Infant Saint
A nearer Prospect of his opening Heaven.

L. J. Gray. Descend ye Quires of Angels to receive him,
Tune your melodious Harps to some high Strain,
And waft him upwards with a Song of Triumph;
A purer Soul and one more like your selves,
Never entered at the golden Gates of Bliss.
Oh Guilford! what remains for wretched England,
When he our Guardian Angel shall forsake us?
^or whose dear Sake Heaven spared a guilty Land,
and scattered not its Plagues while Edward reigned.

Guil. I own my Heart bleeds inward at the Thought,
and rising Horrors crowd the opening Scene.
and yet forgive me, thou my native Country,
^hou Land of Liberty, thou Nurse of Heroes,
^orgive me, if in Spite of all thy Dangers,
^ew Springs of Pleasure flow within my Bosom,
^hen thus it is given me to behold those Eyes,
^hus gaze and wonder, how excelling Nature
Can give each Day new Patterns of her Skill,
And yet at once surpass 'em.

L. J. Gray. Oh vain Flattery!
Harsh and ill sounding ever to my Ear,
But on a Day like this the Raven's Note,
Strikes on my Sense more sweetly. But no more,
I charge thee touch the ungrateful Theme no more.
Lead me to pay my Duty to the King,
To wet his pale cold Hand with these last Tears,
And share the Blessings of his parting Breath.

Guil. Were I like dying Edward, sure a Touch,
Of this dear Hand, would kindle Life anew.
But I obey, I dread that gathering Frown,
And oh! whenever my Bosom swells with Passion,
And my full Heart is pained with ardent Love,
Allow me but to look on you and sigh,
It Is all the humble Joy that Guilford asks.

L.J.G. Still will thou frame thy Speech to this vain Purpo^^
When the wan King of Terrors stalks before us,
When Universal Ruin gathers round,
And no Escape is left us? Are we not,
Like Wretches in a Storm, whom every Moment,
The greedy Deep is gaping to devour?
Around us see the pale despairing Crew,
Wring their sad Hands and give their Labor over;
The Hope of Life has every Heart forsook,
And Horror sits on each distracted Look,
One solemn Thought of Death does all employ,
And cancels like a Dream Delight and Joy,
One Sorrow streams from all their weeping Eyes,
And one consenting Voice for Mercy cries,
Trembling they dread just Heavens avenging Power,
Mourn their past Lives, and wait the fatal Hour.
[Exeu^
The End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE. I.
Scene continues. Enter the Duke of NORTHUMBERLAND, and the Duke of SUFFOLK.
Nor. YET then be cheered my Heartamidst thy Mourning,
Though Fate hang heavy over us, though pale Fear,
And wild Distraction sit on every Face,
Though never Day of Grief was known like this,
Let me rejoice, and bless the hallowed Light,
Whose Beams auspicious shine upon our Union,
And bid me call the Noble Suffolk Brother.

Suff. I know not what my secret Soul presages,
But something seems to whisper me within,
That we have been too hasty. For my self,
I wish this Matter had been yet delayed;
That we had waited some more blessed Time,
Some better Day with happier Omens hallowed,
For Love to kindle up his holy Flame.
But you, my noble Brother, would prevail,
And I have yielded to you.

North. Doubt not any Thing;
Nor hold the Hour unluckly. That good Heaven,
Who softens the Corrections of his Hand,
And mixes still a Comfort with Afflictions,
Has given to Day a Blessing in our Children,
To wipe away our Tears for dying Edward.

Suff. In that I trust. Good Angels be our Guard,
And make my Fears prove vain. But see! my Wife!
With her your Son the generous Guilford comes,
She has informed him of our present Purpose.

Enter the Duchess of Suffolk, and Lord Guilford. L. Guil. How shall I speak
the Fullness of my Heart?
What shall I say to bless you for this Goodness?
Oh! gracious Princess! but my Life is yours,
And all the Business of my Years to come,
Is to attend with humblest Duty on you,
And pay my vowed Obedience at your Feet.

Dutc. Suff. Yes, noble Youth, I share in all thy Joys,
In all the Joys which this sad Day can give.
The dear Delight I have to call thee Son,
Comes like a Cordial to my drooping Spirits;
It broods with gentle Warmth upon my Bosom,
And melts that Frost of Death which hung about me.
But have! inform my Daughter of our Pleasure,
Let thy Tongue put on all it is pleasing Eloquence,
Instruct thy Love to speak of Comfort to her,
To sooth her Griefs and cheer the mourning Maid.

North. All desolate and drowned in flowing Tears,
By Edward's Bed the pious Princess sits.
Fast from her lifted Eyes the Pearly Drops,
Fall trickling over her Cheek, while Holy Ardor,
And fervent Zeal pour forth her laboring Soul;
And every Sigh is winged with Prayers so potent,
As strive with Heaven to save her dying Lord.

Dutc. Suff. From the first early Days of Infant Life,
A gentle Band of Friendship grew betwixt 'em.
And while our royal Uncle Henry reigned,
As Brother and as Sister bred together,
^^neath one common Parent's Care they lived.

North. A wondrous Sympathy of Souls conspired,
To form the sacred Union. Lady JANE,
Of all his royal Blood was still the dearest:
(...) every innocent Delight they shared,
They sung and danced, and sat and walked together.
^ay, in the graver Business of his Youth,
^hen Books and Learning called him from his Sports,
^'n there the princely Maid was his Companion.
(...) left the shining Court to share his Toil,
(...) turn with him the grave Historians Page,
and taste the Rapture of the Poet's Song;
(...) search the Latin and the Grecian Stores,
and wonder at the mighty Minds of old.

Enter Lady JANE GRAY weeping. L. J. Gray. Wo't thou not break my Heart! --

Suff. Alas! what mean thou?

Guil. Oh speak!

Dt. Suff. How fares the King?

North. Say! Is he dead?

L. J. Gray. The Saints and Angels have him.

Dutc. Suff. When I left him
(...) seemed a little cheered, just as you entered. --

L. J. Gray. As I approached to kneel and pay my Duty,
(...) raised his feeble Eyes, and faintly smiling,
(...) you then come? he cried. I only lived,
(...) bid farewell to thee my gentle Cousin,
(...) speak a few short Words to thee and dye.
(...) that he pressed my Hand, and Oh; -- he said,
(...) I am gone do thou be good to England;
(...) to that Faith in which we both were bred,
(...) to the End be constant. More I would,
(...) cannot, -- there his falt'ring Spirits failed,
(...) turning every Thought from Earth at once,
To that blessed Place where all his Hopes were fixed,
Earnest he prayed, -- Mercyful, great Defender!
Preserve thy holy Altars undefiled,
Protect this Land from bloody Men and Idols,
Save my poor People from the Yoke of Rome,
And take thy painful Servant to thy Mercy.
Then sinking on his Pillow with a Sigh,
He breathed his innocent and faithful Soul,
Into his Hands who gave it.

Guil. Crowns of Glory,
Such as the brightest Angels wear, be on him;
Peace guard his Ashes here, and Paradise
With all its endless Bliss be open to him.

North. Our Grief be on his Grave. Our present D^^
Injoins to see his last Commands obeyed.
I hold it fit his Death be not made known,
To any but our Friends. To Morrow early
The Council shall assemble at the Tower.
Mean while, I beg your Grace would strait inform [to Duchess of Suf^
Your Princely Daughter of our Resolution.
Our common Interest in that happy Tie,
Demands our swiftest Care to see it finished.

D.S. My Lord, you have determined well. Lord Gui^
Be it your Task to speak at large our Purpose.
Daughter, receive this Lord as one whom I,
Your Father and his own, ordain your Husband.
What more concerns our Will and your Obedience,
We leave you to receive from him at leisure.
[Exeunt Duke and Duchess of Su^^ and Duke of Northumber^^
Guil. Wo't thou not spare a Moment from thy So^^
And bid these bubbling Streams forbear to flow?
Wo't thou not give one interval to Joy,
One little Pause while humbly I unfold
^he happiest Tale my Tongue was ever blessed with?

L. J. Gray. My Heart is cold within me, every Sense,
^^dead to Joy, but I will hear thee, Guilford,
^ay, I must hear thee, such is her Command,
whom early Duty taught me still to obey.
(...) oh! forgive me if to all thy Story,
^ho' Eloquence divine attend thy speaking,
^ho' every Muse and every Grace do crown thee,
^orgive me if I cannot better answer,
^han weeping -- thus -- and thus --.

Guil. If I offend thee,
(...) me be dumb for ever, let not Life,
^^form these breathing Organs of my Voice,
(...) any Sound from me disturb thy Quiet.
that is my Peace or Happiness to thine?
(...), though our noble Parents had decreed,
and urged high Reasons which import the State,
^his Night to give thee to my faithful Arms,
^y fairest Bride, my only earthly Bliss --

L. J. Gray. How Guilford? on this Night?

Guil. This happy Night.
(...) if thou art resolved to cross my Fate,
(...) this my utmost Wish shall give thee Pain,
(...) rather let the Stroke of Death fall on me,
and stretch me out a lifeless Coarse before thee,
(...) me be swept away with Things forgotten,
(...) huddl'd up in some obscure blind Grave,
(...) thou shoud'st say my Love has made thee wretched,
(...) drop one single Tear for Guilford's Sake.

L. J. Gray. Alas! I have too much of Death already,
and want not thine to furnish out new Horror.
(...) dreadful Thought! If thou were dead indeed,
(...) Hop^ were left me then! Yes I will own,
(...) of the Blush that burns my Maiden Cheek,
^y Heart has fondly leaned toward thee long:
Thy Sweetness, Virtue and unblemished Youth,
Have won a Place for thee within my Bosom:
And if my Eyes look coldly on thee now,
And shun thy Love on this disastrous Day,
It is because I would not deal so hardly,
To give thee Sighs for all thy faithful Vows,
And pay thy Tenderness with naught but Tears.
And yet it is all I have.

Guil. I ask no more,
Let me but call thee mine, confirm that Hope,
To charm the Doubts which vex my anxious Soul,
For all the rest, do thou allot it for me,
And at thy Pleasure portion out my Blessings.
My Eyes shall learn to smile or weep from thine,
Nor will I think of Joy while thou art sad.
Nay, coud'st thou be so cruel to command it,
I will forego a Bridegroom's sacred Right,
And sleep far from thee, on the unwholesom Earth,
Where Damps arise and whistling Winds blow loud.
Then when the Day returns come drooping to thee,
My Locks still drizzling with the Dews of Night,
And cheer my Heart with thee as with the Morning.

L.J.G. Say, wo't thou consecrate the Night to So^^
And give up every Sense to solemn Sadness?
Wo't thou in watching wast the tedious Hours,
Sit silently and careful by my Side,
List to the tolling Clocks, and Crickets Cry,
And every melancholy Midnight Noise?
Say, wo't thou banish Pleasure and Delight,
Wo't thou forget that ever we have loved,
And only now and then let fall a Tear,
To mourn for Edward's Loss and England's Fate?

Guil. Unwearied still I will attend thy Woes,
And be a very faithful Partner to thee.
Near thee I will complain in Sighs as numberless,
As Murmurs breathing in the leafy Grove:
My Eyes shall mix their falling Drops with thine,
Constant, as never-ceasing Waters roll,
That purl and gurgle over their Sands for ever.
The Sun shall see my Grief through all his Course;
And when Night comes. sad Philomel who plains,
From starry Vesper to the rosy Dawn,
Shall cease to tune her lamentable Song,
Ever I give over to weep and mourn with thee.

L. J. Gray. Here then I take thee to my Heart for ever, [Giving her Hand.
The dear Companion of my future Days:
Whatever Providence allots for each,
Be that the common Portion of us both.
Share all the Griefs of thy unhappy JANE;
But if good Heaven have any Joy in Store,
Let that be all thy own.

Guil. Thou wondrous Goodness!
Heaven gives too much at once in giving thee.
And by the common Course of Things below,
Where each Delight is tempered with Affliction,
Some Evil terrible and unforeseen,
Must sure ensue, to poize the Scale against
This vast Profusion of exceeding Pleasure;
But be it so, let it be Death and Ruin,
On any Terms I take thee.

L. J. Gray. Trust our Fate,
To Him whose gracious Wisdom guides our Ways,
And makes what we think Evil turn to Good.
Permit me now to leave thee and retire;
^'ll summon all my Reason and my Duty,
To scoth this Storm within, and frame my Heart,
To yield Obedience to my noble Parents.

Guil. Good Angels minister their Comforts to thee.
And Oh! If as my fond Belief would hope,
If any Word of mine be gracious to thee,
I beg thee, I conjure thee, drive a way
Those murderous Thoughts of Grief that kill thy Quiet,
Restore thy gentle Bosom's native Peace,
Lift up the Light of Gladness in thy Eyes,
And cheer my Heaviness with one dear Smile.

L. J. Gray. Yes Guilford, I will study to forget
All that the Royal Edward has been to me,
How we have loved, even from our very Cradles.
My private Loss no longer will I mourn,
But every tender Thought to thee shall turn.
With Patience I Will submit to Heavens Decree,
And what I lost in Edward, find in thee.
But oh! when I revolve, what Ruins wait
Our sinking Altars, and the falling State;
When I consider what my native Land,
Expected from her pious Sov'raign's Hand,
How formed he was to save her from Distress,
A King to govern, and a Saint to bless:
New Sorrow to my laboring Breast succeeds,
And my whole Heart for wretched England bleeds.
[Exit Lady JANE GRAY.
Guil. My Heart sinks in me at her soft complaining,
And every moving Accent that she breaths,
Resolves my Courage, slackens my tough Nerves,
And melts me down to Infancy and Tears.
My Fancy palls, and takes Distaste at Pleasure;
My Soul grows out of Tune, it loathes the World,
Sickens at all the Noise and Folly of it;
And I could sit me down in some dull Shade,
Where lonely Contemplation keeps her Cave,
And dwells with hoary Hermits; there forget my self,
There fix my stupid Eyes upon the Earth,
And muse a way an Age in deepest Melancholy.

Enter Pembroke. Pem. Edward is dead: so said the great Northumberland,
As now he shot along by me in Have.
He pressed my Hand, and in a Whisper begged me,
To guard the Secret carefully as Life,
Till some few Hours should pass; for much hung on it.
Much may indeed hang on it. See my Guilford!
My Friend! [Speaking to him.

Guil. Ha! Pembroke! [Starting.

Pem. Wherefore do thou start?
Why sits that wild Disorder on thy Visage,
Somewhat that looks like Passions strange to thee,
The Paleness of Surprise, and ghastly Fear?
Since I have known thee first, and called thee Friend,
I never saw thee so unlike thy self,
So changed upon the sudden.

Guil. How! so changed!

Pem. So to my Eye thou seem.

Guil. The King is dead.

Pem. I learned it from thy Father,
Just as I entered here. But say, could that,
A Fate which every Moment we expected,
Distract thy Thought, or shock thy Temper thus?

Guil. Oh! Pembroke, it is in vain to hide from thee;
For thou have looked into my artless Bosom,
And seen at once the Hurry of my Soul.
It Is true thy coming struck me with Surprise.
I have a Thought -- but wherefore said I one,
I have a thousand Thoughts all up in Arms,
Like populous Towns disturbed at dead of Night,
That mixed in Darkness bustle to and fro,
As if their Business were to make Confusion.

Pem. Then sure our better Angels called me hither.
For this is Friendship's Hour and Friendship's Office,
To come when Counsel and when Help is wanting,
To share the Pain of every gnawing Care,
To speak of Comfort in the Time of Trouble,
To reach a Hand and save thee from Adversity.

Guil. And wo't thou be a Friend to me indeed?
And while I lay my Bosom bare before thee,
Wo't thou deal tenderly, and let thy Hand
Pass gently over every painful Part?
Wo't thou with Patience hear, and judge with Temper?
And if perchance thou meet with somewhat harsh,
Somewhat to rouse thy Rage and grate thy Soul,
Wo't thou be Master of thy self and bear it?

Pem. Away with all this needless Preparation.
Thou know thou art so dear, so sacred to me,
That I can never think thee an Offender.
If it were so, that I indeed must judge thee,
I should take part with thee against my self,
And call thy Fault a Virtue.

Guil. But suppose,
The Thought were somewhat that concerned our Love.

Pem. No more, thou know we spoke of that to Day,
And on what Terms we left it. It Is a Subject,
Of which if possible, I would not think.
I beg that we may mention it no more.

Guil. Can we not speak of it with Temper?

Pem. No.
Thou know I cannot. Therefore prithee spare it.

Guil. Oh! could the Secret, I would tell thee, sleep,
And the World never know it, my fond Tongue,
Should cease from speaking, ever I would unfold it,
Or vex thy Peace with an officious Tale.
But since however ungrateful to thy Ear
It must be told thee once, hear it from me.

Pem. Speak then, and ease the Doubts that shock my Soul.

Guil. Suppose thy Guilford's better Stars prevail,
and crown his Love. --

Pem. Say not suppose, it is done.
^^ek not for vain Excuse nor softening Words,
^hou have prevaricated with thy Friend,
^y underhand Contrivances undone me;
and while my open Nature trusted in thee,
^hou have stepped in between me and my Hopes,
and ravished from me all my Soul held dear.
^hou have betrayed me, --

Guil. How! betrayed thee! Pembrook!

Pem. Yes, falsely, like a Traitor.

Guil. Have a Care.

Pem. But think not I will bear the foul Play from thee.
^here was but this which I could never forgive.
^y Soul is up in Arms, my injured Honor,
^patient of the Wrong, calls for Revenge;
and though I loved thee -- fondly --

Guil. Hear me yet,
(...) Pembrook shall acquit me to himself.
(...) while I tell how Fortune dealt between us,
(...) gave the yielding Beauty to my Arms. --

Pem. What hear it! stand and listen to thy Triumph!
^ou think me tame indeed. No, hold I charge thee,
^ast I forget that ever we were Friends,
^ast in the Rage of disappointed Love,
^^sh at once and tear thee for thy Falsehood.

Guil. Thou warn'st me well; and I were rash as thou art,
(...) trust the secret Sum of all my Happiness,
(...) one not Master of himself. Farewell. [Going.

Pem. Ha! art thou going? Think not thus to part,
(...) leave me on the Rack of this Incertainty.

Guil. What would thou further?

Pem. Tell it to me all.
Say thou art married, say thou have possessed her,
And rioted in vast Excess of Bliss;
That I may curse my self, and thee, and her.
Come, tell me how thou did supplant thy Friend?
How did thou look with that betraying Face,
And smiling plot my Ruin?

Guil. Give me Way.
When thou art better tempered I may tell thee,
And vindicate at full my Love and Friendship.

Pem. And do thou hope to shun me then, thou Traitor
No, I will have it now, this Moment, from thee;
Or drag the Secret out from thy false Heart.

Guil. Away thou Madman! I would talk to Winds,
And reason with the rude tempestuous Surge,
Sooner than hold Discourse with Rage like thine.

Pem. Tell it, or by my injured Love I swear, [laying his Hand upon his S^^^
I Will stab the lurking Treason in thy Heart.

Guil. Ha! Stay thee there; nor let thy frantic Hand, [stopping (...)
Unsheath thy Weapon; if the Sword be drawn,
If once we meet on Terms like those; Farewell
To every Thought of Friendship; one must fall.

Pem. Curse on thy Friendship, I would break the B^^^

Guil. That as you please -- beside this Place is sa^^ed,
And wo'not be profaned with Brawls and Outrage.
You know I dare be found on any Summons.

Pem. It Is well. My Vengeance shall not not loiter lo^^
Henceforward let the Thoughts of our past Lives
Be turned to deadly and remorseless Hate.
Here I give up the empty Name of Friend,
Renounce all Gentleness, all Commerce with thee,
To Death defy thee as my mortal Foe;
and when we meet again, may swift Destruction,
^id me of thee, or rid me of my self.
[Exit Pembrook.
Guil. The Fate I ever feared is fallen upon me;
and long ago my boding Heart divined
(...) Breach like this from his ungoverned Rage.
(...) Pembroke! thou have done me much Injustice,
(...) I have born thee true unfeigned Affection.
(...) past and thou art lost to me for ever.
(...) is or ought to be our greatest Bliss;
(...) every other Joy how dear soever,
(...) way to that, and we leave all for Love.
(...) the Imperious Tyrant's lordly Call,
(...) Spite of Reason and Restraint we come,
(...) Kindred, Parents, and our native Home.
(...) trembling Maid, with all her Fears, he charms,
(...) pulls her from her weeping Mother's Arms.
(...) laughs at all our Leagues, and in proud Scorn,
^^mmands the Bands of Friendship to be torn:
^^dains a Partner should partake his Throne,
(...) reigns unbounded, lawless, and alone.
[Exit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I
Scene, The Tower. Enter PEMBROKE and GARDENER. Gar. NAY, by the Rood, my Lord,
you were to bla^
To let a Hair-brained Passion be your Guide,
And hurry you into such mad Extremes.
Marry! you might have made much worthy Profit,
By patient hearing; the unthinking Lord,
Had brought forth every Secret of his Soul.
Then when you were the Master of his Bosom,
That were the Time to use him with Contempt,
And turn his Friendship back upon his Hands.

Pem. Thou talk as if a Madman could be wise.
Oh! Winchester, thy hoary frozen Age
Can never guess my Pain; can never know
The burning Transports of untamed Desire.
I tell thee, Reverend Lord, to that one Bliss,
To the Enjoyment of that lovely Maid,
As to their Center, I had drawn each Hope,
And every Wish my furious Soul could form;
Still with Regard to that my Brain forethought,
And fashioned every Action of my Life.
Then to be robbed at once, and unsuspecting,
Be dashed in all the Height of Expectation,
It was not to be born.

Gar. Have you not heard of what has happened since?

Pem. I have not had a Minutes Peace of Mind,
A Moments Pause, to rest from Rage, or think.

Gar. Learn it from me then: but or ever I speak,
I warn you to be Master of your self.
Though, as you know they have confined me long,
Gra'mercy to their Goodness, Prisoner here;
Yet as I am allowed to walk at large
Within the Tower, and hold free Speech with any;
I have not dreamed a way my thoughtless Hours,
Without good Heed to these our righteous Rulers.
To prove this true, this Morn a trusty Spy,
Has brought me Word that yester Evening late,
In Spice of all the Grief for Edward's Death,
Your Friends were married.

Pem. Married! Who? -- Damnation!

Gar Lord Guilford Dudley, and the Lady JANE.

Pem. Curse on my Stars!

Gar. Nay, in the Name of Grace,
Restrain this sinful Passion; all is not lost
In this (...) single Woman.

Pem. I have lost
More than the Female World can give me back.
I had beheld, even her whole Sex unmoved,
Looked over 'em like a Bed of gaudy Flowers,
That lift their painted Heads and live a Day,
Then she^ their trifling Glories unregarded.
My He^^^ disdained their Beauties, till she came,
With every Grace that Nature's Hand could give,
And with a Mind so great, it spoke its Essence
Immortal and Divine.

Gar She was a Wonder,
Detraction must allow that.

Pem. The Virtues came,
Sorted in gentle Fellowship to crown her,
As if they meant to mend each others Work.
Candor with Goodness, Fortitude with Sweetness,
Strict Piety and Love of Truth, with Learning,
More than the Schools of Athens ever knew,
Or her own Plato taught. A Wonder! Winchester!
Thou know not what she was, nor can I speak her,
More than to say, she was that only Blessing
My Soul was set upon, and I have lost her.

Gar. Your State is not so bad as you would make it;
Nor need you thus abandon every Hope.

Pem. Ha! wo't thou save me, snatch me from Despair,
And bid me live again?

Gar. She may be yours.
Suppose her Husband die.

Pem. O vain vain Hope!

Gar. Marry, I do not hold that Hope so vain
These Gospellers have had their golden Days,
And lorded it (...) Will, with proud Despite,
Have trodden down our Holy Roman Faith,
Ransacked her Shrines, and driven her Saints to Exile,
But if my Divination fail me not,
Their haughty Hearts shall be abas'd ever long,
And feel the Vengeance of our Mary's Reign.

Pem. And would thou have my fierce Impatience stay
Bid me lie bound upon a Rack, and wait
For distant Joys, whole Ages yet behind?
Can Love attend on Politicians Schemes,
Expect the slow Events of cautious Counsels,
Cold unresolving Heads and creeping Time?

Gar. To Day, or I am ill informed, Northumberland,
With easy Suffolk, Guilford, and the rest,
Meet here in Council on some deep Design,
Some (...) Contrivance, to protect
Their up^^^^ Faith from near approaching Ruin.
(...) there are Punishments -- Halters and Axes
(...) Traitors, and consuming Flames for Heretics.
The happy Bridegroom may be yet cut short,
^'n in his highest Hope -- but go not you,
^owe'er the fawning Sire, old Dudley, court you.
(...), by the Holy Rood I charge you mix not
^ith their pernicious Counsels. -- Mischief waits 'em,
^re, certain, unavoidable Destruction.

Pem. Ha! join with them! the cursed Dudley's Race!
(...), while they held me in their Arms, betrayed me,
^^^^n'd me for not suspecting they were Villains,
and made a Mock'ry of my easy Friendship.
(...), when I do, Dishonor be my Portion,
and swift Perdition catch me, -- join with them!

Gar. I would not have you -- hie you to the City,
(...) join with those who love our ancient Faith.
(...) your Friends about you, and be ready
(...) assert our zealous Mary's Royal Title.
(...) doubt not but her grateful Hand shall give you
(...) see your Soul's Desire upon your Enemies.
(...) Church shall pour her ample Treasures forth too,
(...) with ten thousand Years of Pardon.

Pem. No, keep your Blessings back, and give me Vengeance;
(...) to tell that soft Deceiver, Guilford,
(...) Traitor have thou done, thus have thou wronged me,
(...) thus thy Treason finds a just Reward.

Gar. But soft! no more! the Lords of the Council come.
(...)! by the Mass! the Bride and Bridegroom too!
^^tire with me, my Lord, we must not meet 'em.

Pem. It Is they themselves, the cursed happy Pair!
(...), Winchester, have! let us fly for even,
(...) drive her from my very Thoughts if possible.
Oh! Love what have I lost! -- Oh! Reverend Lord,
Pity this fond, this foolish Weakness in me.
Methinks, I go like our first wretched Father,
When from his blissful Garden he was driven.
Like me he went despairing, and like me,
Thus at the Gate stopped short for one last View.
Then with the chearless Partner of his Woe,
He turned him to the World that lay below.
There for (...) (...)'s happy Plains beheld,
A Barren, wild, uncomfortable Field.
Ho saw 'twas vain the Ruin to deplore,
He tried to give the sad Remembrance over,
The sad Remembrance still returned again,
And his lost Paradise renewed his Pain.
[Exeunt Pembrook and Gardine^
Enter Lord Guilford, and Lady JANE Guil. What shall I say to thee? What Power
Divine,
Will teach my Tongue to tell thee what I feel?
To pour the Transports of my Bosom forth,
And make thee Partner of the Joy dwells there?
For thou art comfortless, full of Affliction,
Heavy of Heart as the forsaken Widow,
And desolate as Orphans. Oh my fair one!
Thy Edward shines amongst the brightest Stars,
And yet thy Sorrows seek him in the Grave.

L.J. Alas, my dearest Lord! a thousand Griefs
Beset my anxious Heart, and yet as if
The Burden were too little, I have added
The Weight of all thy Cares. And like the Miser,
Increase of Wealth has made me but more wretched.
The Morning Light seems not to rise as usual;
It dawns not to me, like my Virgin Days,
But brings new Thoughts and other Fears upon me;
^ tremble, and my anxious Heart is pained,
^east ought but Good should happen to my Guilford.

Guil. Nothing but G^^d can happen to thy Guilford,
While thou art by his Side, his better Angel,
His Blessing and his Guard.

L.J. Why came we hither?
Thy was I drawn to this un^^^ky Place,
^his Tower, so often stained with Royal Blood?
^ere the fourth Edward's helpless Sons were murdered,
and pious Henry fell by Ruthless Gloucester.
(...) this the Place allotted for rejoicing,
The Bower adorned to keep our Nuptial Feast in?
Methinks Suspicion and Distrust dwell here,
^aring with meager Forms through grated Windows.
(...) within, and unrelenting Punishment.
(...) Danger, Fear, and fiercest Power,
(...) on the ^^de old Towers and Gothic Battlements;
^hile Horror overlooks the dreadful Wall,
and frowns on all around.

Guil. In Safety here,
(...) Lords of the Council have this Morn decreed,
(...) meet and with united Care support
(...) feeble tottering State. To thee, my Princess,
^^^se Royal Veins are rich in Henry's Blood,
(...) one Consent the noblest Heads are bowed;
(...) they ask a Sanction to their Counsels,
(...) thy healing Hand expect a Cure
(...) England's Loss in Edward.

L.J. How! from me!
(...) my Lord! -- but sure thou mean to mock me.

Guil. No, by the Love my faithful Heart is full of!
(...), thy Mother, gracious Suffolk comes,
(...) my Story. She shall tell thee,
(...) her Look I read the laboring Thought,
(...) Event thy Fate is now disclosing.

Enter the Duchess of Suffolk. Dutc. Suff. No more complain, indulge thy Tears
(...)
Thy pious Grief has given the Grave its Due:
Let thy Heart kindle with the highest Hopes,
Expand thy Bosom, let thy Soul enlarged,
Make Room to entertain the coming Glory,
For Majesty and Purple Greatness court thee,
Homage and low Subjection wait: A Crown,
That makes the Princes of the Earth like Gods.
A Crown, my Daughter, England's Crown attends,
To bind thy Brows with its Imperial Wreath.

L.J. Amazement chills my Veins! what says my Mothe

Dutc. Suff. It Is Heavens Decree; for our expiring Edwa^^
When now just struggling to his native Skies,
Even on the Verge of Heaven, in Sight of Ang^^^.
That hovered round to waft him to the Stars,
Even then declared my JANE his Successor.

L.J. Could Edward do this? could the dyi^^ Saint,
Bequeath his Crown to me? Oh fatal Bounty
To me! but it is impossible! we dream.
A thousand and a thousand Bars oppose me,
Rise in my Way and intercept my Passage.
Even you, my gracious Mother, what must you be,
Ever I can be a Queen?

Dutc. Suff. That and that only;
Thy Mother, fonder of that tender Name
Than all the proud Additions Power can give.
Yes, I will give up all my Share of Greatness,
And live in low Obscurity for ever,
To see thee raised thou Darling of my Heart,
And fixed upon a Throne. But see! thy Father.
Northumberland, with all the Council come,
To pay their vowed Allegiance at thy Feet,
(...) kneel and call thee Queen.

L.J. Support me Guilford,
(...) thy Aid, stay thou my fainting Soul,
(...) help (...) to repress this growing Danger.

(...) Suffolk, Northumberland, Lords and others of the Privy Council. North.
Hail! sacred Princess! sprung from ancient Kings;
(...) England's dearest Hope, undoubted Offspring
(...) York and Lancaster's united Line.
(...) whose bright Zeal, by whose victorious Faith,
^arded and fenced around our pure Religion,
(...) Lamp of Truth which shines upon our Altars,
(...) lift its golden Head and flourish long.
^eath whose awful Rule and righteous Scepter,
(...) plenteous Years shall roll in long Succession:
(...) shall prevail and ancient Right take Place,
(...) Liberty shall lift her cheerful Head,
^^rless of Tyranny and proud Oppression.
(...) sad complaining in our Streets shall cry,
(...) Justice shall be exercised in Mercy.
(...) Royal JANE! behold we band our Knees, [they kneel
(...) Pledge of Homage and thy Land's Obedience,
(...) humblest Duty th^^ we kneel, and own thee
(...) Liege, our Sovereign Lady, and our Queen.

L.J. Oh! rise!
(...) Father rise! [to Suff.
(...) you my Father too! [to North.
(...) me with this Confusion [they rise.
(...) means this Mock, this masquing Show of Greatness?
(...) do you hang these Pageant Glories on me.
(...)dress me upon Honors not my own?

(...) The Daughters of our late great Master Henry,
(...) both by ^aw excluded from Succession.
To make all firm,
And fix a Power unquestioned in your Hand,
Edward by Will bequeathed his Crown to you
And the concurring Lords in Council met,
Have ratified the Gift.

L.J. Are Crowns and Empire,
The Government and Safety of Mankind.
Trifles of such light Moment, to be left,
Like some rich Toy, a Ring or fancied Gem,
The Pledge of parting Friends? can Kings do thus,
And give away a People for a Legacy?

North. Forgive me, Princely Lady, if my Wonder,
Seizes each Sense, each Faculty of Mind.
To see the utmost Wish the Great can form,
A Crown thus coldly met: A Crown, which slighted,
And left in Scorn by you, shall soon be sought
And find a joyful Wearer; One perhaps,
Of Blood unkindred to your Royal House,
And fix its Glories in another Line.

L.J. Where art thou now, thou Partner of my Ca^ [turning to Gui^
Come to my Aid, and help to bear this Burden.
Oh! save me from this Sorrow, this Misfortune,
Which in the Shape of gorgeous Greatness comes,
To crown and make a Wretch of me for ever.

Guil. Thou weep'st, my Queen, and hang'st thy dr^
Like nodding Poppies heavy with the Rain,
That bow their weary Necks and bend to Earth.
See, by thy Side, thy faithful Guilford stands,
Prepared to keep Distress and Danger from thee,
To wear thy sacred Cause upon his Sword,
And war against the World in thy Defense.

North. Oh! stay this inauspicious Stream (...)
And cheer your People with one gracious (...)
Nor comes your Fate in such a dreadful Form
To bid you shun it. Turn those sacred Eyes
On the bright Prospect Empire spreads before you.
Methinks: see you seated on the Throne;
Beneath your Feet, the Kingdoms great Degrees
(...) brigh^ Confusion shine, Mitres and Coronets,
The various Ermin, and the glowing Purple:
Assemb^^^ Senates wait with awful Dread
To firm your high Commands, and make 'em Fate.

L. Jane. You turn to view the painted side of Royalty,
And cove^ all the Cares that lurk beneath.
(...) it to (...) Queen, to sit aloft
(...) solemn, dull, uncomfortable State,
The ^^^^^'d Idol of a Servile Court?
(...) it to draw ^ pompous Train along,
(...) Pageant, for the wondering Crowd to gaze at?
(...) it in Wantonness of Power, to Reign,
and make the World subservient to my Pleasure?
(...) it not rather to be Greatly Wretched,
To Watch, to Toil, to take a sacred Charge,
To bend each Day before high Heaven, and own,
(...) People have thou trusted to my Hand,
^^d at my Hand, I know, thou shall require 'em?
(...) Northumberland! -- my Father! -- Is it not
(...) live a Life of Care; and when I die,
(...) more to answer for before my Judge,
(...) any of my Subjects?

Suff. Every State
^lotted (...) the Race of Man below,
(...) in proportion, doomed to taste some Sorrow.
(...) is the golden Wreath on a King's Brow
^^^mpt from Care; and yet, Who would not bear it?
(...) the Monarchs of our Royal Race,
(...) lived not for Themselves: How many Blessings,
(...) many lifted Hands, shall pay thy Toil,
(...) thy Peoples Good thou happ'ly borrow
Some portion from the Hours of Rest, and Wake
To give the World Repose.

Suff. Behold, we stand upon the Brink of Ruin,
And only Thou can save us. Persecution,
That Fiend of Rome and Hell, prepares her Tortures;
See where she comes in Mary's Priestly Train.
Still wo't thou doubt? 'till thou behold her stalk
Red with the Blood of Martyrs, and Wide-wasting
Over England's Bosom? All the mourning Year
Our Towns shall glow with unextinguish'd Fires;
Our Youth on Racks shall stretch their Crackling Bones;
Our Babes shall sprawl on Consecrated Spears;
Matrons and Husbands, with their Newborn Infants,
Shall burn promiscuous; a continued Peal
Of Lamentations, Groans and Shrieks shall sound
Through all our purple Ways.

Guil. Amidst that Ruin,
Think thou behold'st thy Guilford's Head laid Low,
Bloody and Pale --

L. Jane. Oh! spare the Dreadful Image!

Guil. Oh! would the Misery be bounded there,
My Life were little; but the Rage of Rome
Demands whole Hecatombs, a Land of Victims.
With Superstition comes that other Fiend,
That Bane of Peace, of Arts and Virtue, Tyranny;
That Foe to Justice, Scorner of all Law;
That Beast, which thinks Mankind were born for One,
And made by Heaven to be a Monster's Prey;
That heaviest Curse of groaning Nations, Tyranny.
Mary shall, by her Kindred Spain, be taught
To bend our Necks beneath a Brazen Yoke,
And Rule over Wretches with an Iron Scepter.

L. Jane. Avert that Judgment, Heaven!
Whatever thy Providence allots for me,
In Mercy spare my Country.

Guil. Oh, my Queen!
Does not thy Great, thy Generous Heart Relent,
To think this Land, for Liberty so famed,
Shall have her Tow'ry Front at once laid low,
And robbed of all it is Glory? Oh! my Country!
Oh! Fairest Albion, Empress of the Deep.
How have thy Noblest Sons with stubborn Valor
Stood to the last, died many a Field in Blood,
In dear Defense of Birthright and their Laws!
And shall those Hands, which fought the Cause of Freedom,
Be manacl'd in base unworthy Bonds?
Be tamely yielded up? the Spoil, the Slaves
Of Hair-brained Zeal, and Cruel Coward Priests?

L. Jane. Yes, my loved Lord, my Soul is moved, like Thine.
At every Danger which Invades our England;
My cold Heart kindles at the great Occasion,
And could be more than Man, in her Defense.
But where is my Commission to Redress?
Or whence my Power to Save? Can Edward's Will,
Or Twenty met in Council, make a Queen?
Can you, my Lords, give me the Power to canvass
A doubtful Title with King Henry's Daughters?
Where are the Reverend Sages of the Law,
To guide me with their Wisdoms, and point out
The Paths which Right and Justice bid me tread?

North. The Judges all attend, and will at leisure
Resolve you every Scruple.

L. Jane. They expound,
But where are those, my Lord, who make the Law?
Where are the Ancient Honors of the Realm,
The Nobles, with the Miter'd Fathers joined?
The Wealthy Commons solemnly Assembled?
Where is that Voice of a Consenting People,
To pledge the Universal Faith with mine,
And call me justly Queen?

North. Nor shall that long
Be wanting to your Wish: The Lords and Commons
Shall, at your Royal Bidding, soon Assemble,
And with united Homage own your Title.
Delay not then to meet the General Wish,
But be our Queen; be England's better Angel.
Nor let mistaken Piety betray you
To join with Cruel Mary in our Ruin:
Her bloody Faith commands her to Destroy,
And yours forbids to Save.

Guil. Our Foes, already
High in their Hopes, devote us all to Death:
The Dronish Monks, the Scorn and Shame of Manhood
Rouse and prepare once more to take Possession,
To nestle in their ancient Hives again;
Again they furbish up their Holy Trumpery,
Relics, and Wooden Wonder-working Saints,
Whole Loads of Lumber and Religious Rubbish,
In high Procession mean to bring 'em back,
And place the Puppets in their Shrines again:
While those of keener Malice, Savage Bonner,
And Deep-designing Gardener, dream of Vengeance;
Devour the Blood of Innocents, in Hope,
Like Vultures, snuff the Slaughter in the Wind,
And speed their Flight to Havoc and the Prey,
Haste then and save us, while it is given to save
Your Country, your Religion.

North. Save your Friends!

Suff. Your Father!

D. Suff. Mother!

Guil. Husband!

L. Jane. Take me, Crown me;
Invest me with this Royal Wretchedness;
Let me not know one happy Minute more,
Let all my sleepless Nights be spent in Care,
My Days be vexed with Tumults and Alarms,
If only I can save you; if my Fate
Has marked me out to be the Public Victim,
I take the Lot with Joy. Yes, I will Die
For that Eternal Truth my Faith is fixed on,
And that dear Native Land which gave me Birth.

Guil. Wake every Tuneful Instrument to tell it,
And let the Trumpets sprightly Note proclaim
My Jane is England's Queen! Let the loud Cannon
In pe^^^ Thunder speak it to Augusta.
Imperial Thames, catch thou the sacred Sound,
And (...) it to the subject Ocean down:
Tell the old Deep, and all thy Brother-Floods,
My Jane is Empress of the Watery World!
Now (...) glad Fires our bloodless Streets shall shine;
With (...) of Joy our cheerful Ways shall ring;
Thy Name shall eecho through the rescued Isle,
And reach Applauding Heaven!

L. Jane. Oh, Guilford! What do we give up for Glory!
For Glory! That Is a Toy I would not purchase,
(...) empty Bubble. But for England!
What must we lose for That! Since then my Fate
(...) his hard Exchange upon my Will,
(...) gracious Heaven allow me one Request:
(...) that blessed Peace in which I once did dwell,
(...) Book^ Retirement, and my studious Cell,
(...) all th^se Joys my happier Days did prove,
(...) Plato and his Academick Grove;
(...) that (...), is, Though my Fortune frown,
(...) beneath this fatal Crown;
(...) that (...) Good be added to my Doom,
(...) save this Land from Tyranny and Rome
[Exeunt.
End of the Third ACT
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Scene Continues. Enter PEMBROKE and GARDENER. Gardener. IN an unlucky and
accursed Hour
Set forth that Traitor Duke, that Proud Northumberland,
To draw his Sword upon the side of Heresy,
And War against our Mary's Royal Right:
Ill Fortune fly before and pave his Way
With Disappointment, Mischief and Defeat:
And thou, O, holy Becket, the Protector,
The Champion, and the Martyr of our Church,
Appear, and once more own the Cause of Rome;
Beat down his Lance, break thou his Sword in Battle,
And cover foul Rebellion with Confusion.

Pem. I saw him marching at his Army's Head;
I marked him issuing through the City Gate
In Harness, all appointed as he passed;
And (for he wore his Beaver up) could read
Upon his Visage Horror and Dismay:
No Voice of friendly Salutation cheered him,
None wished his Arms might thrive, or bad God-speed him;
But through a staring Gastly-looking Crowd,
Unhail'd, unblessed, with heavy Heart he went:
As if (...) ^raytor Father's haggard Ghost,
And (...) fresh bleeding from the Ax,
On ^ther hand had ushered him to Ruin.

Gar. Nor shall the holy Vengeance loiter long.
At Framingham in Suffolk lies the Queen,
(...) Pious Mistress; where each Day
The Nobles of the Land, and swarming Populace
Gather, (...) List beneath her Royal Ensigns.
The Fleet Commanded by Sir Thomas Jerningham,
Set (...) Warlike manner to oppose her,
With one Consent have joined to own her Cause:
The ^^^ant Sussex, and Sir Edward Hastings,
With many more of Note, are up in Arms,
And all Declare for Her.

Pem. The Citizens,
Who held the Noble Somerset right dear,
Hate this aspiring Dudley and his Race,
And would, upon the Instant, join to oppose him;
Could we but draw some of the Lords of the Council
T'^^^ear among 'em, own the same Design,
And bring the Reverend Sanction of Authority
To lead 'em into Action. For that Purpose,
To thee, as to an Oracle, I come
To learn what fit Expedient may be found,
To (...) the wary Council to our side.
Say thou, whose Head is grown thus Silver White,
In A^^ of Government, and Turns of State,
How we may blast our Enemies with Ruin,
And (...) cursed Northumberland to Hell.

Gar. In happy Time be your whole Wish accomplished.
Since the Proud Duke set out, I have had Conference,
As in Occasion served, with diverse of 'em,
The Earl of Arundel, Mason, and Cheyney,
And find 'em all disposed as we could ask.
(...) Holy Mary, if I count aright,
To Day, the better Part shall leave this Place,
And meet at Baynard's-Castle in the City;
There own our Sovereign's Title, and defy
Jane, and her Gospel-Crew. But hye you hence?
This Place is still within our Foes Command,
Their Puppet-Queen reigns here.

Enter an Officer with a Guard. Off. Seize on 'em both.
[Guard seize Pembroke and Gardener. My Lord, you are a Prisoner to the State.

Pem. Ha! By whose Order?

Off. By the Queen's Command,
Signed and Delivered by Lord Guilford Dudley.

Pem. Curse on his Traytor's Heart!

Gar. Rest you Contented:
You have loiter'd here too long; but use your Patience,
These Bonds shall not be lasting.

Off. As for you, Sir, [To Gardener.
It Is the Queen's Pleasure, you be close Confined:
You Have used that fair Permission was allowed you,
To walk at large within the Tower, unworthily.
You're noted for an Over-busy Medler,
A Secret Practicer against the State;
For which, henceforth, your ^^^its shall be straiter.
Hence! to his Chamber.

Gar. Farewell, gentle Pembroke,
I trust, that we shall meet on blither Terms;
Till then, amongst my Beads, I will remember you,
And give you to the Keeping of the Saints.
[Exeunt part of the Guard with Gardener.
Pem. Now! whither must I go?

Off. This way, my Lord. [Going off.

Enter Guilford. Gui^. Hold, Captain! e're you go, I have a Word or two
For this your Noble Prisoner.

Off. At your Pleasure:
I know my Duty, and attend your Lordship.
[The Officer and Guard retire to the farther part of the Stage.
G^^^ (...) the Gentleness that was betwixt us
So (...) swept away from thy Remembrance,
Thou can not look upon me?

Pem. Ha! not look!
What Terrors are there in the Dudley's Race,
That Pembroke dares not look upon and scorn?
And yet,,it is true, I would not look upon thee:
Our Eyes avoid to look on what we hate,
As well as what we fear.

Guil. You hate me, then?

Pem. I do; and wish Perdition may overtake
Thy Father, thy false Self, and thy whole Name.

Guil. And yet, as sure as Rage disturbs thy Reason,
And masters all the noble Nature in thee;
As sure as thou have Wronged me, I am come
In tenderness of Friendship to Preserve thee;
To plant even all the Power I have before thee,
And fence thee from Destruction, with my Life.

Pem. Friendship from thee! But, my just Soul disdains thee:
Hence! take the prostituted Bawble back,
Hang it to grace some slavering Ideot's Neck,
For none but Fools will prize the Tinsel Toy:
But thou art come, perhaps, to vaunt thy Greatness,
And set thy Purple Pomp to view before me;
To let me know that Guilford is a King,
That he can speak the Word, and give me Freedom.
Oh! Short-lived Pageant! Had thou all the Power
Which thy vain Soul would grasp at, I would Die,
Rot in a Dungeon, e're receive a Grace,
The least, the meanest Courtesy from Thee.

Guil. Oh! Pembroke! But I have not time to Talk.
For Danger presses; Danger unforeseen,
And secret as the Shaft that flies by Night,
Is aiming at thy Life. Captain, a Word! [To the Officer.
I take your Prisoner to my proper Charge;
Draw of your Guard, and leave his Sword with me
[The Officer Delivers the Sword to Lord Guilford, and goes out with the
Guard.] [ L. Guil. offering the Sword to Pembroke.] Receive this Gift, even
from a Rival's Hand;
And if thy Rage will suffer thee to hear
The Counsel of a Man once called thy Friend,
Fly from this fatal Place, and seek thy Safety.

Pem. How now! What Show, What Mockery is this?
Is it in Sport you use me thus? What means
This swift fantastic changing of the Scene?

Guil. Oh! take thy Sword; and let thy va^^ant Hand
Be ready armed to Guard thy Noble Life:
The Time, the Danger, and thy wild Impatience,
Forbid me all to enter into Speech with thee,
Or I could tell thee --

Pem. No, it needs not, Traitor!
For all thy poor, thy little Arts are known.
Thou fear my Vengeance, and art come to Fawn,
To make a Merit of that proffered Freedom,
Which, in despite of thee, a Day shall give me:
Nor can my Fate depend on thee, false Guilford;
For know, to thy Confusion, e're the Sun
Twice gild the East, our Royal Mary comes
To End thy Pageant Reign, and set me Free.

Guil. Ungrateful and Unjust! Have thou then (...)
So little, to accuse my Heart of Fear?
Have thou forgotten Musselborough's Field?
(...) Fear, when by thy Side I fought,
And died my Maiden Sword in Scottish Blood?
But this is Madness all.

Pem. Give me my Sword. [Taking his Sword.
Perhaps indeed, I wrong thee. Thou have thought;
And, conscious of the Injury thou have done me,
Art come to proffer me a Soldier's Justice,
And meet my Arm in single Opposition:
Lead then, and let me Follow to the Field.

Guil. Yes, Pembroke, thou shall satisfy thy Vengeance.
And (...) thy bloody Purpose on my Bosom.
(...) Death wait to Day. By our past Friendship,
In Honor's Name, by every sacred Tie,
I beg thee ask no more, but haste from hence.

Pem. What mystic Meaning lurks beneath thy Words?
What Fear is this, which thou would awe my Soul with?
(...) Danger Pembroke dares not meet?

Guil. Oh! spare my Tongue a Tale of Guilt and Horror;
(...) this once; believe me, when I tell thee
(...) thy Life is all I seek.
Away!

Pem. By Heaven! I wo'not stir a Step.
(...) on this shuffling, dark, ambiguous Phrase.
If thou would have me think thou mean me fairly,
Speak with that plainness Honesty delights in,
And let thy Double-Tongue for once be True.

Guil. Forgive me, Filial Piety and Nature,
If, thus compelled, I break your sacred Laws,
Reveal my father's Crime, and blot with Infamy
The Hoary Head of him who gave me Being,
To save the Man whom my Soul loves, from Death.
[Giving a Paper.] Read there the fatal Purpose of thy Foe,
A Thought which Wounds my Soul with Shame and Horror,
Somewhat that Darkness should have hid for Ever,
But that thy Life -- Say, have thou seen that Character?

Pem. I know it well; the Hand of Proud Northumberland,
Directed to his Minions Gates and Palmer.
What Is this?
[Reads. Remember with your closest Care, to observe those whom (...) named to
you at parting; especially keep your Eye upon the Earl of Pembroke; as his
Power and Interest are most (...), so his Opposition will be most Fatal to us.
(...) Resolution was taken, if you should find him inclined to (...) Enemies.
The Forms of Justice are tedious, and (...) Dangerous. If he falters, lose not
the sight of him (...) Daggers have reached his Heart.


My Heart! Oh! Murderous Villain!

Guil. Since he parted,
Thy Ways have all been Watched, thy Steps been M^^'d;
Thy Secret Treaties with the Malcontents
That Harbor in the City; thy Conferring
With Gardener here in the Tower, all is known,
And, in pursuance of that Bloody Mandate,
A Set of Chosen Ruffians wait to End thee.
There was but one way left me to preserve thee:
I took it; and this Morning sent my Warrant
To seize upon thy Person -- But be gone!

Pem. It Is so -- it is Truth -- I see his Honest H^^^^

Guil. I have a Friend of well tried Faith and Courage,
Who with a fit Disguise, and Arms concealed,
Attends without, to guide thee hence in Safety.

Pem. What is Northumberland? and what art Thou?

Guil. Waste not the Time. Away!

Pem. Here let me fix
And gaze with Everlasting Wonder on thee.
What is there Good or Excellent in Man,
That is not found in thee? Thy Virtues flash,
They break at once on my astonished Soul;
(...) Curtains of the Dark were drawn,
To (...) Day at Midnight.

Guil. Think me True;
And though Ill-fortune crossed upon our Friendship --

Pem Curse on our Fortune! -- Think! -- I know thee honest.

Guil. For ever I could hear thee -- but thy Life --
Oh, Pembroke, linger not --

Pem. And can I leave thee
(...) I have clasped thee in my eager Arms,
And (...) thee back my sad repenting Heart?
Believe (...), Guilford, like the Patriarch's Dove, [Embracing.
It (...) forth, but found no Resting Place
Till (...) Home again to lodge with thee.

G^^^ What is there that my Soul can more desire,
(...) dear Marks of thy returning Friendship?
The Danger comes -- If you stay longer here,
(...) my Pembroke.

Pem. Let me stay and Die;
(...) if I go, I go to work thy Ruin.
(...) ^^ow'st not what a Foe thou (...) me forth,
(...) sworn Destruction to thy Queen,
And pledged my Faith to Mary and her Cause:
My Honor is at stake.

Guil. I know it is given:
But go -- the stronger thy Engagement's there,
The more's thy Danger here. There is a Power
Who sits above the Stars, in him I Trust;
All that I have, his bounteous Hand bestowed;
And he that gave it, can preserve it to me.
(...) ^^er-ruling Will ordains my Ruin,
(...) more, but to fall down before him,
And humbly yield Obedience! -- Fly! -- Be gone!

Pem. Yes, I will go -- For see! Behold who comes!
Oh, Guilford, hide me, shield me from her Sight;
Every mad Passion kindles up again,
Love, Rage, Despair -- and yet I will be Master --
I will Remember Thee -- Oh, my torn Heart!
I have a Thousand thousand Things to say,
But cannot, dare not stay to look on her.
Thus gloomy Ghosts, whenever the breaking Morn
Gives notice of the cheerful Sun's Return,
Fade at the Light, with Horror stand Oppressed,
And shrink before the Purple-dawning East;
Swift with the fleeting Shades they wing their way,
And dread the Brightness of the Rising Day.
[Exeunt Guil. and Pem.
Enter Lady Jane, Reading. L. Jane. It Is false! The thinking Soul is somewhat
(...)
Than Symmetry of Atoms well disposed,
The Harmony of Matter. Farewell else
The Hope of all hereafter, that New Life,
That separate Intellect, which must survive,
When this fine Frame is moulder'd into Dust.

Enter Guilford. Guil. What read'st thou there, my Queen?

L. Jane. It Is Plato's Phaedon,
Where Dying Socrates takes leave of Life,
With such an easy, careless, calm Indifference,
As if the Trifle were of no Account,
Mean in it self, and only to be worn
In honor of the Giver.

Guil. Shall thy Soul
Still scorn the World, still fly the Joys that court
Thy blooming Beauty, and thy tender Youth?
Still shall she soar on Contemplation's Wing,
And mix with nothing meaner than the Stars;
As Heaven and Immortality alone
Were Objects worthy to employ her Faculties.

L. Jane. Bate but thy Truth, what is there here below
Deserves the least Regard? Is it not time
To bid our Souls look out, explore hereafter,
And seek some better, sure-abiding Place;
When all around our gathering Foes come on,
To drive, to sweep us from this World at once?

Guil. Does any Danger new --

L. Jane. The faithless Counselors
Are fled from hence, to join the Princess Mary.
The servile Herd of Courtiers, who so late
In low Obeisance bent the Knee before me;
They, who with zealous Tongues, and Hands uplifted,
Besought me to Defend their Laws and Faith;
Vent their lewd Execrations on my Name,
Proclaim me Trait'ress now, and to the Scaffold
Doom my devoted Head.

Guil. The Changling Villains
That pray for Slavery, fight for their Bonds,
And shun the Blessing, Liberty, like Ruin.
What art thou, Human Nature, to do thus?
Does Fear or Folly make thee, like the Indian,
Fall down before this dreadful Devil, Tyranny,
And Worship the Destroyer?
But wherefore do I loiter tamely here?
Give me my Arms: I will Preserve my Country,
Even in her own despite: Some Friends I have
Who will or Die or Conquer in thy Cause,
Thine and Religion's, Thine and England's Cause.

L. Jane. Art thou not all my Treasure, all my Guard?
And wo'^ thou take from me the only Joy,
The last Defense is left me here below?
Think not thy Arm can stem the driving Torrent,
Or save a People who with blindfold Rage,
Urge their own Fate, and strive to be Undone.
Northumberland, thy Father, is in Arms;
And if it be in Valor to defend us,
His Sword, that long has known the way to Conquest.
Shall be our surest Safety.

Enter the Duke of Suffolk. Suff. Oh! my Children!

L. Jane. Alas! What means my Father?

Suff. Oh! my Son!
Thy Father, great Northumberland, on whom
Our dearest Hopes were built --

Guil. Ha! What of him?

Suff. Is Lost, Betrayed!
His Army, onward as he marched, shrunk from him,
Moulder'd away, and melted from his side,
Like falling Hail thick strown upon the Ground,
Which, e're we can essay to count, is vanished:
With some few Followers he arrived at Cambridge;
But there, even they forsook him; and himself
Was forced, with heavy Heart and watery Eye,
To cast his Cap up, with dissembled Cheer,
And cry, God save Queen Mary. But alas!
Little availed the semblance of that Loyalty:
For soon thereafter, by the Earl of Arundel,
With Treason was he charged, and there Arrested;
And now he brings him Prisoner up to London.

L. Jane. -- Then there is an end of Greatness the vain Dream
Of Empire and a Crown, that danced before me,
With all those unsubstantial, empty Forms,
Waiting in idle Mockery around us:
The gaudy Masque, tedious, and nothing meaning,
Is vanished all at once -- Why, fare it well.

Guil. And can thou bear this sudden Turn of Fate
With such unshaken Temper?

L. Jane. For my self,
If I could form a Wish for Heaven to grant,
It should have been to (...) of (...) Crown,
And thou o'er-ruling, great, all-knowing Power!
Th^^ who discern'st our Thoughts, who see 'em rising,
And ^^^ing in the Soul, Oh judge me, Thou!
If ever ambition's guilty Fires have warmed me,
If ever my Heart inclined to Pride, to Power,
Or joy'd in being a Queen. I took the Scepter
(...) this Land, thy People, and thy Altars:
And (...) behold I bend my grateful Knee, [Kneeling.
In humble Adoration of that Mercy,
Which quits me of the vast unequal Task.

Enter the Duchess of Suffolk. Dss Suff. Nay, keep that Posture still; and let
us join,
(...) all our Knees by thine, lift up our Hands,
And seek for Help and Pity from above,
For Earth and faithless Man will give us none.

L. Jane. What is the worst our cruel Fate ordains us?

Dss Suff. Cursed be my fatal Counsel, cursed my Tongue,
That pleaded for thy Ruin, and persuaded
Thy guiltless Feet to tread the Paths of Greatness!
My Child! -- I have undone thee! --

L. Jane. Oh my Mother!
Should I not bear a Portion in your Sorrows?

Dss Suff. Alas! thou have thy own, a double Portion.
Mary is come, and the revolting Londoners,
(...) the Heavens with thy applauded Name,
(...) to meet and hail her as their Queen.
Sussex is (...) here, commands the Tower,
(...) placed his Guards around: And this sad Place,
So late thy Palace, is become our Prison.
I saw him bend his Knee to cruel Gardener,
Who freed from his Confinement, ran to meet him,
Embraced and blessed him with a Hand of Blood.
Each hastening moment I expect 'em here,
To seize, and pass the Doom of Death upon us.

Guil. Ha! seized! shall thou be seized! and shall I stand,
And tamely see thee born away to Death?
Then blasted be my Coward Name for ever:
No, I will set my self to guard this Spot,
To which our narrow Empire now is shrunk;
Here will I grow the Bulwark of my Queen;
Nor shall the Hand of Violence profane thee,
Until my Breast have born a thousand Wounds;
Till this torn mangled Body sink at once
A Heap of Purple Ruin at thy Feet.

L. Jane. And could thy rash distracted Rage do thus?
Draw thy vain Sword against an armed Multitude,
Only to have my poor Heart split with Horror,
To see thee stabbed and butchered here before me.
Oh call thy better nobler Courage to thee,
And let us meet this adverse Fate with Patience!
Greet our insulting Foes with equal Tempers,
With even Brows, and Souls secure of Death.
Here stand unmoved, as once the Roman Senate
Received fierce Brennus and the conquering Gauls,
Till even the rude Barbarians stood amazed
At such superior Virtue. Be thy self,
For see the Trial comes!

Enter Sussex, Gardener, Officers and Soldiers. Suss Guards, execute your
Orders; seize the Traitors:
Here my Commission ends. To you, my Lord, [To Gardener.
So our great Mistress, Royal Mary, bids,
I leave the full Disposal of these Prisoners;
To your wise Care the pious Queen commends
Her Sacred Self, her Crown, and what is yet more
The Holy Roman Church; for whose dear Safety,
She wills your utmost Diligence be shown,
To bring Rebellion to the Bar of Justice.
(...), to proclaim ^^w much she trusts
In Winchester's deep Thought, and well-try'd Faith,
The Seal attends to grace those Reverend Hands;
And when I next salute you, I must call you
Chief Minister and Chancellor of England.

Gar. Unnumber'd Blessings fall upon her Head,
My Ever-gracious Lady ^ to remember
With such full Bounty her old humble Beadsman!
For these her Foes leave me to deal with them.

Suss. The Queen is on her Entrance, and expects me:
My Lord farewell.

Gar. Farewell, Right Noble Sussex.
Commend me to the Queen's Grace, say her Bidding
Shall be observed by her most lowly Creature. [Exit Sussex
Lieutenant of the Tower, take hence your Prisoners,
Be it your Care to see 'em kept apart,
That they may hold no Commerce with each other.

L. Jane. That Stroke was unexpected.

Guil. Wo't thou part us?

Gar. I hold no Speech with Heretics and Traitors.
Lieutenant, see my Orders be obeyed. [Exit Gardener.

Guil. Inhuman, monstrous, unexampled Cruelty!
Oh (...)! but the Task becomes thee well;
Thy ^^age Temper joys to do Death's Office;
To (...) the Sacred Bands of Love asunder,
And part those Hands which Heaven it self had joined.

Dss Suff. To let us waste the little Rest of Life
Together, had been merciful.

Suff. Then it had not
Been done like Winchester.

Guil Thou stand'st unmoved;
Calm Temper sits upon thy beauteous Brow;
Thy Eyes, that slow'd so fast for Edward's Loss,
Gaze unconcerned upon the Ruin round thee;
As if thou had resolved to brave thy Fate,
And triumph in the midst of Desolation.
Ha! see it swells, the liquid Crystal rises,
It starts in spite of thee, -- but I will catch it,
Nor let the Earth be wet with Dew so rich.

L. Jane. And do thou think, my Guilford, (...)
My Father, Mother, and even thee my Husband
Torn from my Side without a Pang of Sorrow?
How art thou thus unknowing in my Heart!
Words cannot tell thee what I feel. There is
An agonizing Softness busy here,
That rugs the Strings, that struggles to get loose,
And pour my Soul in Wailings out before thee.

Guil. Give way, and let the gushing Torrent come:
Behold the Tears we bring to swell the Deluge,
Till the Flood rise upon the guilty World,
And make the Ruin common.

L. Jane. Guilford, no:
The time for tender Thoughts and soft Endeaments
Is fled away and gone; Joy has forsaken us;
Our Hearts have now another Part to play;
They must be steeled with some uncommon Fortitude,
That fearless we may tread the Path of Horror;
And in despite of Fortune and our Foes,
Even in the Hour of Death be more than Conquerors.

Guil. Oh teach me! say, what Energy Divine
Inspires thy softer Sex and tender Years
With such unshaken Courage?

L. Jane Truth and Innocence;
A conscious Knowledge rooted in my Heart,
That to have saved my Country was my Duty.
Yes, England, yes, my Country, I would save thee;
But Heaven forbids, Heaven disallows my Weakness,
And to some dear selected Hero's Hand,
Reserves the Glory of thy great Deliverance.

Lieut. My Lords, my Orders --

Guil See! we must -- must part

L. Jane. Yet surely we shall meet again.

Guil. Oh! Where?

L. Jane. If not on Earth, among yon golden Stars.
Where other Suns arise on other Earths,
And happier Beings rest in happier Seats:
Where, with a Reach enlarged, the Soul shall view
The great Creator's never-ceasing Hand
^our forth new Worlds to all Eternity,
and people ^he Infinity of Space.

Guil (...) would I cheer my Heart with Hopes like these;
(...) Thought turns ever to the Grave,
(...) that last Dwelling, whither now we have,
(...) black Shade shall interpose betwixt us,
(...) from these longing Eyes for ever.

L. Jane. It Is true, by those dark Paths our Journey leads,
(...) through the Vale of Death we pass to Life:
(...) what is there in Death to blast our Hopes?
^^old the universal Works of Nature,
^^ere Life still springs from Death. To us the Sun
(...) every Night, and every Morn revives.
(...) Flowers, which Winter's icy Hand destroyed,
(...) their fair Heads, and live again in Spring.
(...) with what Hopes upon the furrowed Plain
(...) Plowman casts the pregnant Grain;
(...) a Grave awhile it lies,
(...) ^ing Season bids it rise,
Nature^^ Powers command a Birth,
(...) potent (...) it from the teeming Earth:
(...) large Increase the buried Treasures yield,
(...) with full Harvest crown the plenteous Field.
[Exeunt severally with the Guards.
End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Scene continues. Enter GARDENER, as Lord Chancellor, and the Lieuten^^^ of the
Tower. Servants with Lights before 'em. Lieut. GOOD Morning to your Lordship!
you (...)

Gar. Nay, by the Rood, there are too many Sleepers;
Some must stir early, or the State shall (...)
Did you, as yesterday our Mandate bad,
Inform your Prisoners, Lady Jane and Guilford,
They were to die this Day?

Lieut. My Lord, I did.

Gar. It Is well. But say, how did your Message like 'em

Lieut. My Lord, they met the Summons with a Temp^
That showed a solemn serious Sense of Death,
Mixed with a noble Scorn of all its Terrors.
In short, they heard me with the self-same Patience
With which they still have born them in their Prison.
In one Request they both concurred: Each begged
To die before the other.

Gar. That, dispose
As you think fitting.

Lieut. The Lord Guilford only
Implored another Boon, and urged it warmly;
That ever he suffered he might see his Wife,
And take a last Farewell.

Gar. That Is not much;
That Grace may be allowed him: See you to it.
How goes the Morning?

Lieut. Not yet Four, my Lord.

Gar. By Ten they meet their Fate. Yet one thing more,
You know 'twas ordered that the Lady Jane
Should suffer here within the Tower. Take care
No Crowds may be let in, no maudlin Gazers,
To wet their Handkerchiefs, and make Report
How like a Saint she ended. Some fit Number,
And those too of our Friends, were most convenient:
But above all, see that Good Guard be kept;
You know the Queen is lodged at present here,
Take care that no Disturbance reach her Highness.
And so good Morning, good Master Lieutenant. [Ex. Lieut.
How (...)! What Light comes here?

Serve. So please your Lordship,
If I mistake not it is the Earl of Pembroke.

Gar. Pembroke! -- It Is he, What calls him forth thus early?
^omewhat he seems to bring of high Import;
^ome Flame uncommon kindles up his Soul,
And flashes forth impetuous at his Eyes.
Enter Pembroke, a Page with a Light before him. Good morrow, Noble Pembroke!
What importunate
And strong Necessity breaks on your Slumbers,
And rears your youthful Head from off your Pillow
At this unwholesom Hour; while yet the Night
^ags in her latter Course, and with her raw
And rheumy Damps infects the dusky Air?

Pem. Oh Reverend Winchester! my beating Heart
^ults and labors with the Joy it bears.
The News I bring shall bless the breaking Morn;
This coming Day the Sun shall rise more glorious,
Than when his maiden Beams first gilded over
The rich immortal Greens, the flowery Plains,
And fragrant Bowers of Paradise newborn.

Gar. What Happiness is this?

Pem. It Is Mercy! Mercy,
The Mark of Heaven impressed on Human Kind,
Mercy that glads the World, deals Joy around;
Mercy that smooths the dreadful Brow of Power,
And makes Dominion light; Mercy that saves,
Binds up the broken Heart, and heals Despair.
Mary, our Royal Ever-gracious Mistress,
Has to my Services and humblest Prayers,
Granted the Lives of Guilford and his Wife;
Full, and free Pardon!

Gar. Ha* What said you? Pardon!
But sure you cannot mean it, could not urge
The Queen to such a rash and ill-timed Grace?
What! save the Lives of those who wore her
My Lord! it is most unweigh'd pernicious Cou^^
And must not be complied with.

Pem. Not complied with!
And who shall dare to bar her Sacred Pleasure,
And stop the Stream of Mercy?

Gar. That will I,
Who wo'not see her gracious Disposition
Drawn to destroy her self.

Pem. Thy narrow Soul
Knows not the godlike Glory of Forgiving;
Nor can thy cold, thy ruthless Heart conceive
How large the Power, how fixed that Empire is,
Which Benefits confer on generous Minds:
Goodness prevails upon the stubborn'st Foes,
And conquers more than ever Caesar's Sword did.

Gar. These are romantic, light, vainglorious Dreams
Have you considered well upon the Danger?
How dear to the fond Many, and how popular
These are whom you would spare? Have you forgot
When at the Bar, before the Seat of Judgment,
This Lady Jane, this beauteous Traitress stood,
W^^^ what Command she charmed the whole Assembly?
With silent Grief the mournful Audience sat,
Fixed on her Face, and listening to her Pleading.
Her very Judges wrung their Hands for Pity;
Their old Hearts melted in 'em as she spoke,
And Tears ran down upon their silver Beards.
Even I my self was moved, and for a moment
Felt Wrath suspended in my doubtful Breast,
And questioned if the Voice I heard was mortal.
But (...) her Tale was done, what loud Applause
Like Bursts of Thunder shook the spacious Hall!
At last, when, sore constrained, the unwilling Lords
Pronounced the fatal Sentence on her Life;
A Peal of Groans ran through the crowded Court,
As every Heart were broken, and the Doom,
Like that which waits the World, were universal.

Pem. And can that sacred Form, that Angel's Voice,
Which moved the Hearts of a rude ruthless Crowd,
Nay, moved even thine, now sue in vain for Pity?

Gar. Alas! you look on her with Lover, Eyes:
I hear and see through reasonable Organs,
Where Passion has no Part, Come, come, my Lord,
You have too little of the Statesman in you.

Pem. And you, my Lord, too little of the Churchman.
Is not the sacred Purpose of our Faith
Peace and Good Will to Man! The hallowed Hand,
Ordained to bless, should know no Stain of Blood.
It Is true, I am not practiced in your Politics.
'Twas your pernicious Counsel led the Queen
To break her Promise with the Men of Suffolk,
To violate what in a Prince should be
Sacred above the rest, her Royal Word.

Gar. Yes, and I dare avow it; I advised her
To break through all Engagements made with Heretics,
And keep no Faith with such a Miscreant Crew.

Pem. Where shall we seek for Truth, when even Religion,
The Priestly Robe and miter'd Head disclaim it?
But thus bad Men dishonor the best Cause.
I tell thee, Winchester, Doctrines like thine
Have stained our holy Church with greater Infamy
Than all your Eloquence can wipe away.
Hence it is, that those who differ from our Faith
Brand us with Breach of Oaths, with Persecution,
With Tyranny over Conscience, and proclaim
Our scarlet Prelates Men that thirst for Blood,
And Christian Rome more cruel than the Pagan.

Gar. Nay if you rail, farewell. The Queen (...) be
Better advised, than thus to cherish Vipers, [Aside.
Whose mortal Stings are armed against her Life.
But while I hold the Seal, no Pardon passes
For Heretics and Traitors.
[Exit Gardener.
Pem. 'Twas unlucky
To meet and cross upon this froward Priest:
But let me lose the Thought on it; let me haste,
Pour my glad Tidings forth in Guilford's Bosom,
And pay him back the Life his Friendship saved.
[Exit.
[The Scene draws, and discovers the Lady Jane kneeling, as at her Devotion; a
Light and a Book placed on a Table before her.] Enter Lieutenant of the Tower,
Lord Guilford, and one of Lady Jane's Women. Lieut. Let me not press upon your
Lordship further,
But wait your Leisure in the Antichamber.

Guil. I will not hold you long.
[Exit. Lieutenant.
Wom. Softly, my Lord!
For yet behold she kneels. Before the Night
Had reached her middle Space, she left her Bed,
And with a pleasing sober Cheerfulness,
As for her Funeral, arrayed her self
(...) thosesad solemn Weeds. Since then, her Knee
(...) known that Posture only, and her Eye,
(...) upon the sacred Page before her,
(...) with her rising Hopes to Heaven.

(...) See! with what Zeal those holy Hands are reared!
Mark her Vermilion Lip with Fervor trembling!
Her spotless Bosom swells with sacred Ardour,
And burns with Ecstasy and strong Devotion.
Her Supplication sweet, her faithful Vows
F^agrant and pure, and grateful to high Heaven,
Like incense from the golden Censor rise:
Or blessed Angels minister unseen,
Catch the soft Sounds, and with alternate Office
Spread their Ambrosial Wings, then mount with Joy,
And waft 'em upwards to the Throne of Grace.
But she has ended, and comes forward.

[Lady Jane rises, and comes toward the Front of the Stage. L. Jane. Ha!
Art thou my Guilford! Wherefore do thou come
To break the settled Quiet of my Soul?
I meant to part without another Pang,
And lay my weary Head down full of Peace.

Guil. Forgive the Fondness of my longing Soul,
That melts with Tenderness, and leans toward thee;
Tho the imperious dreadful Voice of Fate
Summon her hence, and warn her from the World.
But if to see thy Guilford, give thee Pain,
Would I had died, and never more beheld thee:
Tho my lamenting discontented Ghost
Had wandered forth unblest by those dear Eyes,
And wail'd thy Loss in Death's eternal Shades.

L. Jane. My Heart had ended every earthly Care,
(...) up its Prayers for thee and England,
And fixed its Hope upon a Rock unfailing;
While all the little Business that remained,
Was but to pass the Forms of Death with Constancy,
And leave a Life become indifferent to me:
But thou have wakened other Thoughts within me:
Thy Sight, my dearest Husband and my Lord,
Strikes on the tender Strings of Love and Nature;
My vanquished Passions rise again, and tell me
It Is more, far more than Death to part from thee.

Enter Pembroke. Pem. Oh let me fly! bear me, thou swift Impatience,
And lodge me in my faithful Guilford's Arms; [Embracing.
That I may snatch him from the greedy Grave,
That I may warm his gentle Heart with Joy,
And talk to him of Life, of Life and Pardon.

Guil. What means my dearest Pembroke?

Pem. Oh! my Speech
Is choked with Words that crowd to tell my Tidings:
But I have saved thee, and -- Oh Joy unutterable!
The Queen, my gracious, my forgiving Mistress,
Has given not only thee to my Request,
But she, she too in whom alone thou liv'st,
The Partner of thy Heart, thy Love is safe.

Guil. Millions of Blessings wait her! -- Has she -- tell me!
Oh has she spared my Wife?

Pem. Both, both are pardoned.
But haste, and do thou lead me to thy Saint,
That I may cast my self beneath her Feet,
And beg her to accept this poor Amends
For all I Have done against her -- Thou fair Excellence, [Kneeling.
Can thou forgive the hostile Hand that armed
Against thy Cause, and robbed thee of a Crown?

L. Jane. Oh rise, my Lord, and let me take your Posture!
Life and the World were hardly worth my Care;
But you have reconciled me to 'em both.
Then let me pay my Gratitude, and for
This free, this noble unexpected Mercy,
Thus low I bow to Heaven, the Queen, and You.

Pem. To me! Forbid it Goodness! If I live,
Somewhat I will do shall deserve your Thanks;
All Discord and Remembrance of Offense
Shall be clean blotted out, and for your Freedom
My self have underta'en to be your Caution.
Hear me, you Saints, and aid my pious Purpose;
These that deserve so much, this wondrous Pair,
Let these be happy, every Joy attend 'em;
A Fruitful Bed, a Chain of Love unbroken,
A good Old Age, to see their Childrens Children,
A holy Death, and everlasting Memory:
While I resign to them my Share of Happiness;
Contented still to want what they enjoy,
And singly to be wretched.

Enter Lieutenant of the Tower. Lieut. The Lord Chancellor
Is come with Orders from the Queen.

Enter Gardener, and Attendants. Pem. Ha! Winchester!

Gar. The Queen, whose Days be many,
By me confirms her first accorded Grace:
But as the pious Princess means her Mercy
Should reach even to the Soul as well as Body,
By me she signifies her Royal Pleasure,
That thou, Lord Guilford, and the Lady Jane,
Do instantly renounce, abjure your Heresy,
And yield Obedience to the Sea of Rome.

L. Jane. What, turn Apostate!

Guil. Ha! Forgo my Faith!

Gar. This one Condition only seals your Pardon.
But if through Pride of Heart and stubborn Obstina^
With wilful Hands you push the Blessing from you,
And shut your Eyes against such manifest Light
Know ye, your former Sentence stands confirmed.
And you must die today.

Pem. It Is ^alse as Hell:
The Mercy of the Queen was free and full.
Think thou that Princes merchandise their Graces,
As Roman Priests their Pardons? Do they barter,
Skrew up like you the Buyer to a Price,
And doubly sell what was designed a Gift?

Gar. My Lord, this Language ill beseems your Nobleness,
Nor come I here to bandy Words with Madmen
Behold the Royal Signet of the Queen,
Which amply speaks her Meaning. You, the Pri^'ners,
Have heard at large its Purport, and must instantly
Resolve upon the Choice of Life or Death.

Pem. Curse on -- But wherefore do I loiter here?
I Will to the Queen this moment, and there know
What it is this mischief-making Priest intends. [Exit.

Gar. Your Wisdom points you out a proper Course.
A Word with you, Lieutenant. [Talks with Lieut. (...)

Guil. Must we part then?
Where are those Hopes that flattered us but now?
Those Joys, that like the Spring with all its Flowers,
Poured out their Pleasures every where around us?
In one poor Minute gone, at once they withered.
And left their Place all desolate behind 'em.

L. Jane. Such is this foolish World, and such the Certa^^
Of all the boasted Blessings it bestows:
Then, Guilford, let as have no more to do with it:
Think only how to leave it as we ought,
But trust no more, and be deceived no more.

Guil. Yes, I will copy thy Divine Example,
And tread the Paths are pointed out by thee:
By thee instructed, to the fatal Block
I bend my Head with Joy, and think it Happiness
To give my Life a Ransom for my Faith.
From thee thou Angel of my Heart, I learn
That greatest, hardest Task, to part with thee.

L. Jane. Oh gloriously resolved! Heaven is my Witness,
My Heart rejoices in thee more even now,
(...) ^^lant as thou art in Death, thus Faithful,
(...) the holy Priest first joined our Hands,
And (...) the sacred Knot of Bridal Love.

Gar The Day wears fast; Lord Guilford, have you thought?
Will you lay hold on Life?

Guil ^^at are the Terms?

Gar. Death or the Mass attend you.

Guil It Is determined;
Lead to the Scaffold

Gar. (...) him to his Fate.

Guil. Oh let me fold thee once more in my Arms,
Thou ^est Treasure of my Heart, and print
A dying Husband's Kiss upon thy Lip!
Shall we not live again, even in these Forms?
Shall I not gaze upon thee with these Eyes?

L. Jane. O wherefore do thou sooth me with thy Softness?
Why do thou wind thy self about my Heart,
And make this Separation painful to us?
Here break we off at once; and let us now,
Forge (...) Ceremony, like two Friends
That (...) a little Business to be done,
Take a short Leave, and haste to meet again.

Guil. Rest on that Hope, my Soul -- my Wife --

L Jane. No more.

Guil. My Sight hangs on thee -- Oh support me, Heaven,
In this last Pang -- and let us meet in Bliss.
[ Guilford is led off by the Guards.
L. Jane. Can Nature bear this Stroke? --

Wom. Alas! she faints -- [Supporting

L. Jane. Wou't thou fail now! -- the killing Stroke is past,
And all the Bitterness of Death is over.

Gar. Here let the dreadful Hand of Vengeance stay:
Have pity on your Youth and blooming Beauty;
Cast not away the Good which Heaven bestows;
Time may have many Years in store for you,
All crowned with fair Prosperity: Your Husband
Has perished in Perverseness.

L. Jane. Cease, thou Raven;
Nor violate with thy profaner Malice
My bleeding Guilford's Ghost -- it is gone, it is flown;
But lingers on the wing, and waits for me.
[The Scene draws, and discovers a Scaffold hung with Bl^^, Executioner and
Guards.] And see my Journey's End!

1 Wom. My dearest Lady. [Weeping.

2 Wom. Oh Misery!

L. Jane. Forbear, my gentle Maids,
Nor wound my Peace with fruitless Lamentations:
The good and gracious Hand of Providence
Shall raise you better Friends than I have been.

1 Wom. Oh never! never! --

L. Jane. Help to disarray,
And fit me for the Block: Do this last Service,
And do it cheerfully. Now you will see
Your poor unhappy Mistress sleep in Peace,
And cease from all her Sorrows. These few T^^^les,
The Pledges of a dying Mistress' Love,
Receive and share among you. Thou, Maria, To 1 Wo^
Have been my old, my very faithful Servant;
In dear Remembrance of thy Love, I leave thee
This Book, the Law of Everlasting Truth:
Make it thy Treasure still, 'twas my Support
When all Help else forsook me.

Gar. Will you yet
Repent, be wise; and save your precious Life?

L. Jane. Oh Winchester! has Learning taught thee that,
To (...) Truth for Life?

Gar. Mistaken Folly!
You toil and travail for your own Perdition,
And die for damned Errors.

L. Jane. Who judge rightly,
And who persist in Error, will be known,
Then, when we meet again. Once more farewell; [To her Wom.
Goodne^ be ^ver with you. When I Am dead,
Entreat they do no rude dishonest Wrong
To my cold headless Corse; but see it shrouded,
And decent laid in Earth.

Gar. Will Not thou then die?
Thy Blood be on thy Head.

L. Jane. My Blood be where it falls, let the Earth hide it,
And may it never rise, or call for Vengeance:
(...) that it were the last shall fall a Victim
To Zeal's inhuman Wrath! Thou gracious Heaven,
Hear and defend at length thy suffering People.
Raise up a Monarch of the Royal Blood,
Grave, Pious, Equitable, Wise, and Good:
In thy due Season let the Hero come,
To save thy Altars from the Rage of Rome:
Long let him reign, to bless the rescued Land,
And deal out Justice with a righteous Hand.
And when he fails, Oh may he leave a Son,
With equal Virtues to adorn his Throne;
(...) Blessing to convey,
And guard (...) Faith for which I die today.

[Lady Jane goes up to the Scaffold, the Scene closes.] Enter Pembroke. Pem.
(...) Horror! blasted be the Hand
That struck my Guilford! Oh! his bleeding Trunk
Shall live in these distracted Eyes for ever.
Curse on thy fatal Arts, thy cruel Counsels! [To Gardener
The Queen is deaf and pitiless as thou art.

Gar. The just Reward of Heresy and Treason
Is fallen upon 'em both for their vain Obstinacy,
Untimely Death with Infamy on Earth,
And everlasting Punishment hereafter.

Pem. And can thou tell? Who gave thee to explore
The Secret Purposes of Heaven, or taught thee
To set a Bound to Mercy unconfined?
But know, thou proud perversly-judging Winchester,
However your hard imperious Censures doom,
And portion out our Lot in Worlds to come;
Those, who with honest Hearts pursue the Right,
And follow faithfully Truth's Sacred Light,
Tho suffering here, shall from their Sorrows cease,
Rest with the Saints, and dwell in endless Peace.
[Exeunt Om^
FINIS.
EPILOGUE:
Spoken by Mrs. PORTER. THE Palms of Virtue Heroes often have worn,
Those Wreaths, tonight, a Female Brow adorn.
The De^rin'd Salar, unfortunately Brave,
(...) those Altars which she strove to save.
(...) she dared to prop the Juster Side,
(...) greatly with her adverse Fate complied,
(...) that Heaven could ask, Resigned and Died.
(...) the Land for which she wished to Live,
And gained that Liberty she could not give.
Oh! Happy People! of this Favorite Isle,
On whom so many better Angels smile.
For you, kind Heaven new Blessings still supplies,
(...) other Saints and other Guardians rise.
For you the Fairest of her Sex is come,
Adopts our Britain, and forgets her Home.
For Truth and you, the Heroine declines
Austria's Proud Eagles and the Indian Mines.
What Sense of such a Bounty can be shown!
But Heaven must make the vast Reward its own,
And Stars shall join to form her future Crown.
Your Gratitude with ease may be expressed;
Strive but to be, what she would make you, Blessed.
Let no vile Faction vex the vulgar Ear
With fond Surmise, and false affected Fear:
Confirm but to your selves the given Good,
It Is all She asks, for all She has bestowed.
Such was our great Example shown today,
And (...) Thanks our Author's Pains repay.
If (...) Scenes, to guard your Faith you learn,
If for your Laws to show a just Concern,
If you are taught to dread a Popish Reign,
Our Beauteous Patriot has not died in vain.
A PROLOGUE to Lady JANE GRAY, sent by an Unknown Hand.
WHEN waking Terrors rouse the guilty Breast,
And satal Visions break the Murd'rer's Rest;
When Vengeance does Ambition's Fate decree,
And Tyrants bleed, to set whole Nations free;
Tho the Muse saddens each distressed Scene,
Unmoved is every Breast, and every Fate serene;
The mournful Lines no tender Heart subdue,
Compassion is to suffering Goodness due.
The Poet your Attention begs once more,
TO atone for Characters here drawn before:
No Royal Mistress sighs through every Page,
And breathes her dying Sorrows on the Stage:
No lovely Fair by soft Persuasion won,
Lays down the Load of Life, when Honor's gone.
Nobly to bear the Changes of our State,
To stand unmoved against the Storms of Fate,
A brave Contempt of Life, and Grandeur lost;
Such glorious Toils a Female Name can boast.
Our Author draws not Beauty's heavenly Smile,
TO invite our Wishes, and our Hearts beguile.
No soft Enchantments languish in her Eye,
No Blossoms sade, nor sickening Roses die:
A nobler Passion every Breast must move,
Than youthful Raptures, or the Joys of Love.
A Mind unchanged, superior to a Crown,
Bravely defies the angry Tyrant's Frown;
The same, if Fortune sinks, or mounts on high,
Or if the World's extended Ruins lie:
With generous Scorn she lays the Scepter down,
Great Souls shine brightest, by Misfortunes shown:
With patient Courage she sustains the Blow,
And triumphs over Variety of Woe.
Through every Scene the sad Distress is new;
How well feigned Life does represent the true!
Unhappy Age! who views the bloody Stain,
But must with Tears record Maria's Reign?
When Zeal, by Doctrine flattered lawless Will,
Instructed by Religion's Voice to kill.
Ye British Fair! lament in silent Woe,
Let every Eye with tender Pity flow:
The lovely Form through falling Drops will seem
Like flou'ry Shadows on the silver Stream.
Thus beauty, Heaven's sweet Ornament, shall prove
Enriched by Virtue, as adored by Love.
Forget your Charms, fond Woman's dear Delight,
The Fops will languish here another Night.
No Conquest from dissembline Smiles we fear,
She only kills, who wounds us with a Tear.

