THE TOWN.

A SATIRE.

Oh! that I Would had in those blessed Times my Birth,
Ever Coxcomb Pies, or Coxcombs were on Earth.
POPE. By W. KENRICK.

LONDON: Printed for R. GRIFFITHS, at the Dunciad, in Ludgate Street. 1748.

(Price, One Shilling.)

THE TOWN.
WISE was the Clown who, when he first descried
London, the Seat of Vanity and Pride,
And saw the Clouds that over it is Turrets spread,
Gravely stood still and shook his cautious Head:
What can this mean? the Portent is not good!
See, Heaven has marked it with a sulfurous Cloud!
Some Danger's near, this Warning is not vain!
Then turned him back, and traveled home again.
How happy they who never yet have known
The numerous Follies of the noisy Town,
Where Affectation joins to low Conceit,
And fills with Coxcombs every crowded Street;
All seek intent for what is new Today,
And Noise and Nonsense bear them all away.
At Paulin's, Long's behold the glorious Trade,
How the Fools swarm to get in Masquerade;
That Is done Tonight -- Tomorrow something new
Again with equal Appetite pursue.
To Broughton's see the tender Stripling goes
To hear the Battle and to see the Blows.
Some A Place of Resort among some Wits.
H -- 's calls, where snuffing Punsters meet,
And all the Company is plagued with Wit:
So great the Virtue of the strong Rappee,
That every Pinch creates a Repartee!
Strange Power in Dust! be H -- 's all the Gain,
Whose wondrous Art can thus affect the Brain;
Strait let his Shop commence a public School,
To teach the Blockhead and instruct the Fool.
'Twas here the Player took his first Degrees,
Who wrote a Farce, then helped his Farce to please;
Here, first established, was he called a Wit,
And since has charmed the World with what he writ.
In vain dull Songsters A barbarous and favorite Song on Woman, at Vaux Hall.
Woman's Praise rehearse,
His Peggy proves the mighty Power of Verse,
His Vocal Shell, what Shell soever it be,
Speaks a just Taste of senseless Poetry:
Pleased may the Mrs. W-f -- g -- n.
Fair review each charming Line,
By her inspired; and think herself divine:
Yet, Oh! how mortal on a sudden grown,
To be the sing-song Ballad of the Town.
Hail, mighty G -- k, Chief amidst the Throng,
Of leading Nonsense and of Apish Song;
To thee, with Joy, the Herd of Fools submit,
And Curse me Fellow's current Coin for Wit,
Thy keenest Satire bears the silliest Phrase,
And, Oh! how much unworthy of our Praise:
Pleasing the Character you set to View,
(For Fools are ever pleased with what is new)
The mean Infection catches through the Street,
And see a A Character too much known and practiced to need Explanation.
Fribble every Fop we meet:
So great the Miss in her Teens.
favorite Work, so learned, so wise;
One Fool is lashed, and thence lo! ten arise.
A Fool's a resolute and sturdy Beast,
And thy weak Hand but tickles him at best;
How much we owe to such a Pen as thine,
Where Blockheads with the Satyrist combine,
First taught by thee, they boast the strange Pretense,
To satire Coxcombs, while they murder Sense;
Fondly they write each other's Follies down,
And quite forget those Follies are their own.
As once a Fool beheld his antic Face,
And saw his Visage in the Magic Glass,
Surpised he saw, and this Construction made,
A Man is wondrous strange with such a Head:
Then laughed to view the Oddness of the Phiz,
But little thought the monstrous Picture his.
So when a Fop against Fops a Satire reads,
He smiles whenever he thinks the Victim bleeds,
Again the Tale insensibly pursues,
And struck afresh, afresh the Smile renews.
See amongst the Crowd new endless Follies rise;
Whilst all for Wit contend, a glorious Prize!
Each Blockhead boasts how just his own Pretense,
And proves how much he wants of common Sense.
The spruce young Templar, or th'affected Cit,
Maintains his Title as a first-rate Wit,
Prates of the Playhouse, -- "I was there Today,
"Saw the Rehearsal of a new writ Play,
"'Bout which the Manager's in Doubt perplexed,
"To bring it out this Season, or the next."
Of all the Coxcombs that infest the Age,
None like the Politicians of the Stage,
Those Dupes to Wit, who ever boldly say
They know as much as others, wise as they.
Eternal Bablers! yet they boast to know
More than the Managers or Actors do.
Name but a Play, they have seen it over and over,
And Speeches could rehearse, if need, a Score:
Beg but the Favor they would one repeat,
Puffed up with Vanity and loud Conceit,
With opening Lungs (for never they refuse
To tear the Product of a worthy Muse)
They plague your Ears, then fly the Place, or stay
To see a barbarous Murder on a Play:
As soon I Would go to Smithfield's dirty Fair,
And bear the Gabbling of a stroling Player:
As soon I Would be in James-street Hovel seen,
Where low-liv'd 'Prentices play Tamerlane:
Or at the Wells, where bawling Butchers wait,
And the fit Theme is wretched Barnwell's Fate:
As would I go where Fools like these resort,
The Curse of Company, the Public Sport.
Yet say what Place is free from Folly now,
Where do we lose the Fop's affected Bow,
Where does the Dunce attentive silent sit,
Or where the Blockhead fear to trust his Wit?
At W -- 's behold the Fools and Coxcombs there,
But Fools and Coxcombs in a higher Sphere,
There Lords and Knights fill up the crowded Room,
And Rakes polite that from the Bagnio come;
There Whisper, Nonsense, Apes, embroidered Clothes
Make up the sweet Society of Beaux:
Sense, scorned by all, the worthless House denies,
And W -- 's remains a Box of Butterflies.
Hold, cries a Friend, that at my Elbow sits,
What meddle with the Great, you have lost your Wits!
Perchance some Lord your Verses may receive.
And when they have Money, Lords, you know, can give.
Besides, there is some may boast a good Pretense,
However strange it seem, to Wit and Sense.
Well, Sir, suppose your just Assertion true,
That some Great Man is near as wise as you;
If amongst the Fools, St. James's Coffee-house.
St. James's constant Guest,
How shall we know to mark him from the rest?
But think not I would ever so meanly serve,
Show Verses to my Lord, then hope and starve:
Such be the Fate of every rhiming Fool
Who learned to pen his wretched Lines at School.
Like C -- 's self wrote Odes at Twelve to show,
Odes writ at Twelve are better Odes than now.
Dull Asses! void of Genius or of Thought,
And write (so Parrots prate) as once they are taught.
D -- s to those he had by Physic slain,
So sung to tell 'em how to rise again;
Finely describes how Vide, Dr. D -- s Poem on the Resurrection, printed in
Folio, 1747. Part 1st.
broken Members fly,
Odd Legs and Arms how bustle in the Sky:
(How vast the Genius that such Thoughts contains)
So then, if true be his prophetic Strains,
D -- s perhaps may find his scattered Brains.
To low Petitions can the Muses stoop!
See Invocations from a Baker's Shop.
To Stanhope's Name the A wretched Poem (published by Subscription by the
Author) on the Passions of Man. Dedicated to the Earl of Chesterfield.
mighty Work addressed,
But not by Stanhope's Name it is Worth confessed:
Man's dreadful Passion was the dreadful Verse,
But The Author of it.
R -- d's Passion was the greatest Curse.
He called the Muse, and begged her quick Relief,
In vain he called, for oh! the Muse was deaf.
Then down he sat and racked his brainless Head,
And swore to write, and writ without her Aid.
Oh! could I hope to catch the exalted Fires
(Which dropped from Heaven) the sacred Muse inspires,
Glad over the World, the noisy World I Would fly,
And taste the various Beauties of the Sky;
I Would seek the Groves and make the Dwelling mine
Where dwell the Graces and the tuneful Nine,
There wish to live in one continued Day,
Where bright Urania sings and heavenly Muses play.
How vain the Wish! the Prospect's vanished quite!
New Scenes of Folly rush upon my Sight.
What loads of Paper destined to the Press
To bear the dull Impressions of an Ass,
Who takes the Advantage of a senseless Age,
And cheats the Reader with a Title Page.
Of such the An Ode inscribed to Ralph Allen, Esquire of Bath, for which it is
conjectured the Author has robbed some poor Bell-man of his yearly Verses.
solitary, tuneless Ode,
With naught of Solitude nor ought of Good.
Cease, worthless Tribe, and give your Scribbling over,
If you would gain Applause then write no more;
That Maxim's taught in all our public Schools,
That Silence is the best Recourse of Fools:
Yet how perverse ye wander from the Right,
As if you would be Blockheads out of Spite,
Whilst all your Study and your utmost Care
Is to be viler Asses than ye are:
Yet each one thinks the more a Fool he grows,
The more he has of Wit, the more he knows,
Thus of all Follies that possess the Brain,
The Coxcomb's greatest Curse is to be vain.
Even sacred Temples are not sacred now,
For Fops and Fools intrude wherever you go,
Though Coxcombs ever are too vain to pray,
They go for Company, as to the Play.
See Clody enter in the Velvet Pew
(He comes Today, because his Clothes are new)
His Head he turns, his Body turns withal,
Or else the Buckle of his Hair might fall;
He coughs aloud, to tell the Ladies by
Who plagues the Church -- Hem! -- Ladies see -- it is I.
Now down he sits, still peeping at the Fair,
Pulls out a Mirror to adjust his Hair,
Lays out the Dresden, settles every Pleat,
Each Atom's set, his Lap-Dog's scarce so neat.
But on a sudden see the Mortal grieve,
For, oh! a dreadful Spot upon his Sleeve:
Pain insupportable! too much to bear;
But Thanks to Heaven, his Cordial Drops are near;
But see he goes, and leaves each sneering Fair,
Forsakes the Bishop, and the godly Prayer.
Even Priests themselves just Satire cannot pass,
Nor is the Bishop free if he is an Ass.
How often the Chaplain flies from serving God,
Strips off his Gown and turns a Man of Mode.
The low Prized Reader skips the Collects over
To get a Breakfast with a generous Whore.
In Brothels see the Priest a lech'rous Swine,
Dead drunk Tonight, Tomorrow's a Divine.
These, Britain, these your pious Teachers are;
If these not all, but others boast your Care;
How many such whom senseless Learning makes
As wretched Blockheads as the others Rakes.
Hold -- hold -- again thus interrupts, my Friend
Stop here, good Sir, and let your Satire end:
How vain, how needless! give the Purpose over,
Folly's a boundless Sea without a Shore;
As the light Bark is on the Waters tossed,
Thy Pen's amidst the floating Billows lost,
As soon you might the Sea's mad Wave contain,
As Folly's wide Prerogative restrain;
Nor Fops, nor Fools you ever can destroy,
For who will mind the Satire of a Boy.
Yet still in vain I curb the unruly Pen
Still it pursues and strikes at Fools again.
But what Misfortune has the Verse befell,
Conveyed, how sudden, to the crowded Mall.
Here Folly reigns, behold her numerous Tribe,
Which Fool, which Coxcomb shall I first describe:
Lost in the thronging Tumult of Conceit,
The Verse relents, and Satire would retreat;
But now too late, no Way is left to go,
Placed in between a Blockhead and a Beau:
Here doomed to bear the vast Impertinence
Of Wretches void of Learning as of Sense.
See now a Train of Ladies sailing by,
Strait whips the double Concave to the Eye;
The Laugh, the Sneer, the Look without the Glass
Denote the Blockhead and confirm the Ass:
There stalks a Creature some might call a Man,
Playing the Monkey with a Lady's Fan:
Lo! there a blustering Hector from the Wars,
Behind a Row of Smock-fac'd Sons of Mars.
Here Fools of every Kind -- Fops, Rakes, and Cits
Among the rest the worst of Fools, the Wits.
Say where shall those who Sense or Thought admire,
Free, undisturbed, amidst the Town retire.
No -- Here Is no Safety, here no Refuge found,
Where Nonsense rules and Vanities abound.
Behold the Stage, where Shakespeare once could charm,
And Row with sacred Fire each Bosom warm:
Even there low Folly finds a kind Retreat,
Whilst Shakespeare's trod beneath the Dancer's Feet.
To what low Ebb is Taste and Judgment grown,
That Sense must need a Dance, to please the Town.
Soft Otway's Lines sound tedious to the Pit,
And (...) expectant for A favorite Dancer.
Auretti sit.
Blush, senseless Audience, blush to see a Play'r,
(Whose Sounds of Sense should charm the attentive Ear)
Go silent off, or seldom more can boast
Than the poor Gall'ry's half-strain'd Praise at most:
Yet if Auretti.
Janeton shakes her slender Feet,
How the loud Thunder clatters through the Pit:
How often we see the Hero half divine,
In noble Worth and generous Passion shine
We see him fetch the last dear parting Breath,
And greatly bear the Agonies of Death.
Lo! the Scene shifts and see the Hero pass,
A mimick Sir and now is turned an Ass.
How ill proportioned! what a monstrous Thing!
Thus Abel Drugger, a low Character of Mr. G -- k's in Ben. Johnson's Alchymist.

It were to be wished that Persons of great Abilities for the Stage (instead of
being seen in the mean Characters they often are) would study and play those
more suitable to their Capacities, and to the Taste of Judges of Theatrical
Performances.


Nab Tomorrow swells into a King:
No Wonder Follies thus o'er-run the Stage,
Since naught but Folly takes the senseless Age;
What Shame to see, as I myself have seen,
When well-play'd An admirable Character in Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice,
then beautifully represented by Mr. Macklin. Jan. 1st.
Shylock graced the lively Scene;
A Stage-Box Beau, who sat a finished Ass,
And played at Peep-bo with a Spying-Glass,
Coxcomb! such Wretches would I more despise
Than Idiots Nature never intended wise:
Expelled the House was every Fool like these,
More Men of Sense would come, less Farces please.
F -- by himself had mimick'd over his Tea,
For F -- and At least in the Character of Punch.
Fool alike in Sound agree.
But B -- n calls, fly thither strait my Pen,
Again he calls, the Bull-Dog barks again --
The Kennel opens -- see the wretched Crew --
How base the Scene presented to the View,
Among the Boxers see my Lord and 'Squire,
All Hounds alike, for all the Pack admire.
But lo! the Curs for bloody Fight prepare,
And roaring Oaths loud bellow desperate War;
Whilst all the Gall'ry is in Praises lost
On him, the worthiest Cur that worries most.
So when two Mastiffs, better Dogs than they,
In James's Market mix the noisy Fray,
Before the snarly Fight is half begun
Lo! hooting Butchers from the Shambles run,
Redoubled Noise promotes the favorite Cause,
Whilst the poor Curs lose Blood and gain Applause.
But see the Kennel turned a public School,
Where 'Squires and Coachmen may be Brutes by Rule:
Mufflers for those the naked Fist may fright,
For here young Lords and Puppies learn to fight.
Did Britain boast no better Arts than these,
Let every worthless Art in Britain cease,
A Boxer be the Great Man's constant Guest,
And every Man of Fortune, turn a BEAST.
FINIS.

