To Her ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCESS of WALES, With the Tragedy of CATO. Nov.
1714.

TO Sir GODFREY KNELLER, ON HIS PICTURE of the KING.

LONDON: Printed for J. Tonson, at Shakespeare's- Head overagainst
Catherine-street in the Strand. 1716.

To Her ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCESS of WALES, With the Tragedy of CATO. Nov.
1714.
THE Muse that often, with sacred Raptures fired,
Has generous Thoughts of Liberty inspired,
And, boldly rising for Britannia's Laws,
Engaged great Cato in her Country's Cause,
On You submissive waits, with Hopes assured,
By whom the mighty Blessing stands secured,
And all the Glories, that our Age adorn,
Are promised to a People yet unborn.
No longer shall the widowed Land bemoan
A broken Lineage, and a doubtful Throne;
But boast her Royal Progeny's Increase,
And count the Pledges of her future Peace.
O Born to strengthen and to grace our Isle!
While You, fair PRINCESS, in your Offspring smile
Supplying Charms to the succeeding Age,
Each Heavenly Daughter's Triumphs we presage;
Already see the Illustrious Youths complain,
And pity Monarchs doomed to sigh in vain.
Thou too, the Darling of our fond Desires,
Whom Albion, opening wide her Arms, requires,
With manly Valor and attractive Air
Shall quell the Fierce, and captivate the Fair,
O England's younger Hope! in whom conspire
The Mother's Sweetness, and the Father's Fire!
For Thee perhaps, even Now, of Kingly Race
Some dawning Beauty bloom's in every Grace,
Some CAROLINA, to Heaven's Dictates true,
Who, while the Sceptered Rivals vainly sue,
Thy inborn Worth with conscious Eyes shall see,
And slight the Imperial Diadem for Thee.
Pleased with the Prospect of successive Reigns,
The tuneful Tribe no more in daring Strains
Shall vindicate, with pious Fears oppressed,
Endangered Rights, and Liberty Distressed:
To milder Sounds each Muse shall tune the Lyre,
And Gratitude, and Faith to Kings inspire,
And Filial Love; bid impious Discord cease,
And sooth the madding Factions into Peace;
Or rise Ambitious in more lofty Lays,
And teach the Nation their new Monarch's Praise,
Describe his awful Look, and Godlike Mind,
And Caesar's Power with Cato's Virtue joined.
Meanwhile, Bright PRINCESS, who, with graceful Ease
And native Majesty, are formed to please,
Behold those Arts with a propitious Eye,
That suppliant to their great Protectress fly!
Then shall they Triumph, and the British Stage
Improve her Manners, and refine her Rage,
More noble Characters expose to view,
And draw her finished Heroines from You.
Nor You the kind Indulgence will refuse,
Skilled in the Labors of the deathless Muse:
The deathless Muse with undiminisht Rays
Through distant Times the lovely Dame conveys.
To GLORIANA Waller's Harp was strung;
The Queen still shines, because the Poet sung.
Even all those Graces, in your Frame combined,
The common Fate of Mortal Charms may find;
(Content Our short-lived Praises to engage,
The Joy and Wonder of a Single Age,)
Unless some Poet in a lasting Song
To late Posterity their Fame prolong,
Instruct our Sons the radiant Form to prize,
And see Your Beauty with their Fathers' Eyes.
TO Sir GODFREY KNELLER, ON HIS PICTURE of the KING.
KNELLER, with silence and surprise
We see Britannia's Monarch rise,
A Godlike Form, by Thee displayed
In all the force of Light and Shade;
And, Awed by thy delusive Hand,
As in the Presence Chamber stand.
The Magic of thy Art calls forth
His Secret Soul and Hidden Worth,
His Probity and Mildness shows,
His Care of Friends, and Scorn of Foes:
In every Stroke, in every Line,
Does some exalted Virtue shine,
And Albion's Happiness we trace
Through all the Features of his Face.
O may I live to hail the Day,
When the glad Nation shall survey
Their Sovereign, through his wide Command,
Passing in Progress over the Land!
Each Heart shall bend, and every Voice
In loud applauding Shouts rejoice,
Whilst All his Gracious Aspect praise,
And Crowds grow Loyal as they Gaze.
This Image on the Medal place'd,
With its Bright Round of Titles grace'd,
And Stamped on British Coins shall Live;
To Richest Ores the Value give,
Or, wrought within the Curious Mould,
Shape and adorn the Running Gold.
To bear this Form, the Genial Sun
Has daily, since his Course begun,
Rejoice'd the Metal to Refine,
And Ripened the Peruvian Mine.
Thou, Kneller, long with noble Pride
(The Foremost of thy Art) have vied
With Nature in a generous Strife,
And touched the Canvas into Life.
Thy Pencil has, by Monarchs sought,
From Reign to Reign in Ermine wrought,
And, in their Robes of State arrayed,
The Kings of half an Age displayed.
Here swarthy Charles appears, and there
His Brother with Dejected Air;
Triumphant Nassau here we find,
And with him bright Maria joined;
There Anna, Great as when she sent
Her Armies through the Continent,
Ever yet her Hero was disgraced:
O may famed BRUNSWICK be the Last,
(Though Heaven should with my Wish agree,
And long preserve thy Art in Thee)
The Last, the Happiest British King,
Whom Thou shall paint, or I shall sing!
Wise Phidias, thus his Skill to prove,
Through many a God advanced to Jove,
And taught the polished Rocks to shine
With Airs and Lineaments divine;
Till Greece, amazed, and half-afraid,
The Assembled Deities surveyed.
Great Pan, who wont to chase the Fair,
And loved the spreading Oak, was there;
Old Saturn too with up-cast Eyes
Beheld his Abdicated Skies;
And mighty Mars, for War renowned,
In Adamantine Armor frowned;
By Him the childless Goddess rose,
Minerva, studious to compose
Her twisted Threads; the Webb she strung,
And over a Loom of Marble hung:
Thetis the troubled Ocean's Queen,
Matched with a Mortal, next was seen
(Reclining on a Funeral Urn)
Her short-lived Darling Son to Mourn.
The Last was He, whose Thunder slew
The Titan-race, a Rebel Crew,
That from a Hundred Hills, allie'd
In impious Leagues, their King defie'd.
This Wonder of the Sculptor's Hand
Produced, his Art was at a stand:
For who would hope New Fame to raise,
Or risque his well-establish'd Praise,
That, his high Genius to approve,
Had drawn a GEORGE, or carved a Jove!
FINIS.

