TIMON of ATHENS, Altered from SHAKESPEARE, A TRAGEDY. As it is ACTED at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Post hoc vehemens lupus. DUBLIN: Printed for J. EXSHAW, H. SAUNDERS, W.
SLEATER D. CHAMBERLANE, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, Jun. J. MITCHELL, J. WILLIAMS, W.
COLLES. J. MILIKEN, J. A. HUSBAND, T. WALKER, R. MONCRIEFFE, W. WILSON. and C.
JENKINS, M,DCC,LXXII.

I Wish I could have brought this Play upon the Stage with less Violence to its
Author, and not so much Responsibility on my own Part. New characters of
necessity require some display. Many original passages of the first merit are
still retained, and in the contemplation of them, my errors, I hope, will be
overlooked or forgiven; In examining the Brilliancy of a Diamond, few people
throw away any Remarks upon the dullness of the foil.

Richard Cumberland.

N. B. The Lines within Commas are additional.

Dramatis Personae.
Timon Mr. Barry Alcibiades Mr. Crofts Apemantus Mr. Banister. Flavius Mr.
Packer. Lucius Mr. Palmer. Lucullus Mr. Hurst. 1st Senator Mr, J. Aickin. 2d
Senator Mr. Inchbald. 3d Senator Mr. Keen Poet Mr. Jefferson. Painter Mr.
Davies. Jeweller Mr. Wright. Merchant Mr. Fawcett. Flaminius Mr. Brereton.
Caphis Mr. Ackman. Servilius Mr. Wrighton Hortensius Mr. Griffith. Varro Master
Cape. Titus Mr. J. Burton Lucius Mr. Wheeler. Philotas Mr. Jacobs. Soldier Mr.
Baddely Messenger Mr. Follet. Ditto Mr. Watkins Servant to Lucullus Mr. Lings
Evanthe Mrs. Barry.
Senators, Officers, Servants, Soldiers, etc. etc
TIMON of ATHENS,
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
A HALL in TIMON's House. Enter Poet and Painter. POET GOOD day, Sir.

Pain. I am glad y' are well.

Poet. I have not seen you long; how goes the world?

Pain. It wears Sir as it goes.

Poet. Ay, that is well known.
But what particular rariety? what so strange,
Which manifold record not matches? see!
Jeweller and Merchant enter; other Suitors pass over the Stage Magic of
bounty! all these spirits thy power
Has conjured to attend. I know the merchant.

Pain. I know them both; the other's a jeweller.

Mer. O it is a worthy Lord!

Jew. Nay, that is most fixed.

Mer. A most incomparable man, breathed as it were
To an untirable and continuate goodness.

Jew. I have a jewel here.

Mer. O, pray, let us see it:
For the Lord Timon, Sir?

Jew. If he will touch the estimate: but for that --
Exeunt Merchant and Jeweller.
Poet. [to himself.] When we for recompense have praised the vile,
It stains the glory in that happy verse
Which aptly sings the good.

Pain. You're rapt, Sir, in some work, some dedication
To the great Lord.

Poet. A thing slipped idly from me.
Our poesy is a gum, which issues
From whence it is nourished.
What have you there?

Pain. A picture, Sir -- and when comes your book forth?

Poet. Upon the heels of my presentment, Sir.
Let Us see your piece.

Pain. It Is a good piece.

Poet. So it is,
This comes off well and excellent.

Pain. Indiff'rent.

Poet. Admirable! how this grace
Speaks his own standing? what a mental power
This eye shoots forth? how big imagination
Moves in this lip? to the dumbness of the gesture
One might interpret.

Pain. It is a pretty mocking of the life:
Here is a touch -- is it good?

Poet. I Will say of it,
It tutors nature; artificial strife
Lives in those touches, livelier than life.

Enter certain Senators, and pass on. Pain. How this Lord is followed!

Poet. The Senators of Athens! happy man!

Pain. Look, more!

Poet. You see this confluence, this great flood of visiters.
I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base of the mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures,
That labor on the bosom of this sphere
To propagate their states: amongst them all,
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
One do I personate of Timon's frame,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Translates his rivals.

Pain. It Is conceived to the scope.
This throne, this fortune, and this hill, methinks,
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our condition.

Poet. Nay. but hear me on:
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants,
(Which labored after to the mountain's top,
Even on their knees and hands,) let him slip down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.

Pain. It Is common:
A thousand moral paintings I can show,
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of fortune
More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
To show Lord Timon, that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.

SCENE. II.
Flourish of Trumpets. Timon attended by several Suitors Senators, Jeweller,
Merchant, etc. etc. addressing himself courteously to every one. Tim.
Imprisoned is he, say you? [to a Messenger

Mes. Ay my good Lord; five talents is his debt,
His means most short, his creditors most straight:
Your honorable letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing to him
Periods his comfort.

Tim. Noble Ventidius! well --
I am not of that feather to shake off
My friend when he most needs me. I do know him.
A gentleman that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. I Will pay the debt, and free him.

Mes, Your Lordship ever binds him.

Tim. Commend me to him, I will send his ransom;
And, being enfranchiz'd bid him come to me;
It Is not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after. fare you well.

Mes. All happiness to your honor!
[Exit.
Poet. Vouchsafe my labor, and long live your Lordship.

Tim. I thank you, you shall hear from me anon:
Go not away. What have you there my friend?

Pain. A piece of painting, which I do beseech
Your Lordship to accept.

Tim. Painting is welcome.
The painted is the almost natural man:
For since dishonor trafficks with man's nature,
He is but outside: pencil'd figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work;
And you shall find I like it: wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.

Pain. The Gods preserve you!

Tim. Well fare you, Gentleman; give me your hand, [to the Merchant,
We must needs dine together -- Sir, your jewel
Has suffered under praise.

Jew. What, my Lord? dispraise?

Tim. A mere satiety of commendations.
If I should pay you for it, as it is extolled,
It would unclew me quite.

Jew. Believed, dear Lord,
You mend the jewel by the wearing it.

Tim. Well mocked.

Mer. No my good Lord, it is the common tongue,
Which all men speak with him.

Tim. Look who comes here.
Enter Apemantus. Will you be chid?

Jew. We'll bear it with your Lordship.

Mer. He Will spare none.

Tim. Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!

Apem. Till I be gentle, stay for thy good morrow;
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.

Tim. Why do thou call them knaves, thou know them not?

Apem. Are they not Athenians?


Tim. Yes


Apem. Then I repent not.


Jew. You know me Apemantus?


Apem. Thou know I do, I called thee by thy name.


Tim. Thou art proud, Apemantus.


Apem. Of nothing so much, as that I am not like Timon.


Tim. How like thou this picture, Apemantus?


Apem. The best for the innocence.


Tim. Wrought he not well that painted it?


Apem. He wrought better, that made the painter: And yet he is but a filthy
piece of work.


Tim. How do thou like this jewel, Apemantus?


Apem. Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost a man a doit.


Tim. What do thou think it is worth?


Apem. Not worth my thinking -- How now, poet?


Poet. How now philosopher?


Apem. Thou lie.


Poet. Art thou not one?


Apem. Yes.


Poet. Then I lie not.


Apem. Art not a poet?


Poet. Yes.


Apemr Then thou lie: look in thy last work, where thou have feigned him a
worthy fellow.


Poet. That Is not feigned, he is so.


Apem. Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labor. He that loves
to be flattered, is worthy of the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a Lord!


Tim. What would do then, Apemantus?


Apem. Even as Apemantus does now, hate a Lord with my heart.


Tim. What, thyself?


Apem. Ay.


Tim. Wherefore?


Apem. That I had so hungry a wit to be a Lord -- Art thou not a merchant?


Mer. Ay Apemantus.


Apem. Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not.


Mer. If traffic do it, the gods do it.


Apem. Traffick's thy god, and thy god confound thee!


Trumpets sound. Enter a Messenger. Tim. What trumpet's that?


Mes. It Is Alcibiades and some twenty horse,
All of companionship.

Tim. Pray entertain them, give them guide to us;
Exit. You must all dine with me -- Go not you hence,
Till I have thank't you and when dinner's done,
Show me this Piece. I Am joyful of your sights.
Enter Alcibiades with the rest. Most welcome, Sir! [Bowing and embracing


Apem. So, so! Aches contract, and starve your supple joints! that there should
be small love amongst these sweet knaves, and all this courtesy! the strain of
man's bred out into baboon and monkey.


Alc. You have even saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.

Tim. Right welcome, Sir.
Ever we do part, we'll share of bounteous time
In different pleasure. Pray you let us in.
[Exeunt
Manet Apemantus. Apem. O you gods! what a number of men eat
Timon and he sees 'em not? It grieves me to see
So many dip their meat in one man's blood,
And all the madness is he cheers them up too.
I wonder, men dare trust themselves with men!

SCENE. III.
Enter Lucius and Lucullus. Luc. What time of day is it Apemantus?


Apem. Time to be honest.


Luc. That time serves still.


Apem. The most accursed thou that still omitt'st it.


Lucul. Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast.


Apem. Ay to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools


Lucul. Fare thee well, fare thee well.


Apem. Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.


Lucul. Why, Apemantus?


Apem. Thou should have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give thee none.


Luc. Hang thyself.


Apem. No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thy requests to thy friend.


Lucul. Away, unpeaceable dog or -- I Will spurn thee hence.


Apem. I will fly, like a dog, the heels of the ass.

[Exit Apemantus.
Luc. He Is opposite to humanity.
Come, shall we in, and taste Lord Timon's bounty?
He, sure, outgoes the very heart of kindness.

Lucul. He pours it out. Plutus, the god of gold,
Is but his steward: no meed but he repays
Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him,
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
All use of quittance.

Luc. The noblest mind he carries,
That ever governed man.

Lucul. Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?


Luc. I Will keep you company.

[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
A magnificent assembly room, finely decorated and illuminated. Timon,
Alcibiades, Lucius, Lucullus, Senators and Suitors. Timon. " So, so! why this
is well. But where is my daughter?
" Where is Evanthe? she is the mistress spirit
" That conjures up these revels.

Lucius. " Lo! she comes. --

Evanthe advances from the back scene, attended by a train of Ladies. Timon. "
Give the flutes breath!
[flutes.
Luc. " Mark, how the general's rapt; I like not that

Alcib. " Hah! what new wonder; what enchantment holds me?
" All that I view is splendid, rare and noble:
" But she (great Gods!) oh, she -- Hence forward, Timon
" When I would tell the sum of thy possessions,
" I Will say though have a daughter: all things else
" I hold not worth the naming.

Evanthe. " Welcome, Sir!

Alcib. " Thanks, matchless Lady; not the rosy morn
" When she brings fame and victory on her wings,
" Ever blessed me with such beauties.

Tim. " Pray ye sit:
" And as, in honor of our warlike guest,
" The shrill-ton'd clarions in loud concert pour
" Their swelling peal, a band of Lydian dancers
" Shall all the while her airy measures tread
" Responsive to the strain."

Here a grand dance is introduced to martial music. The characters range on
every side, some sitting, Alcibiades next to Evanthe; he discourses with her
during the dance. Tim. You have done our pleasures much grace, gentle friends!
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
By adding worth unto't, and lively luster,
I am to thank you for it. Flavius?

Flav. My Lord.

Tim. The little casket bring me hither.

Flav. Yes, my Lord. More jewels yet? there is no crossing him in's humor,

Else I could tell him -- well --

Luc. Where be our men?


Serve. Here, my Lord, in readiness.


Tim. O my good friends!
I have one word to say to you; look, my Lord,
I must entreat you, honor me so much
As to advance this jewel, accept, and wear it,
Kind my Lord!

Luc. I am so far already in your gifts, --


All. So are we all.


Tim. You do yourselves much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits. Here,
my Lord, a trifle of our Love.


Luc. With more than common thanks, I do receive it.


Lucul. He has the very soul of bounty.


Tim. And now I remember, my Lord, you gave good words the other day of a bay
courser I rode on. It Is yours because you liked it.


Lucul. Oh, I beseech you, pardon me, my Lord, in that.


Tim. You may take my word, my Lord: I know no man can justly praise, but what
he does affect. I weigh my friend's affection with my own; I Will call on you.


All Lords. O, none to welcome.


Tim. I take all, and your several visitations
So kind to heart, it is not enough to give
My thanks; I could deal kingdoms to my friends,
And never be weary. Alcibiades.
Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich,
It comes in charity to thee; thy living
Is amongst the dead and all the lands thou have
Lie in a pitched field.

Alc. I defy land, my Lord.


Luc. We are so virtuously bound --


Tim. And so am I to you.


Lucul. So infinitely endeared --


Tim. All to you. Lights! more lights, more lights!
Come, Sirs, there is a trifling banquet waits you.

Luc. The best of happiness, honor and fortunes,
Keep you, Lord Timon --

Tim. Ready for his friends.
[Exeunt Lords
Manent Timon and Flavius. Flav. I beseech your honor, vouchsafe me a word; it
does concern you near.


Tim. Me near? Why then another time I Will hear thee. I pry'thee let us be
provided to show them entertainment.


Flav. I scarce know how.

[Exeunt.
End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A public place in the City. Enter a Senator. SENATOR. AND late, five
thousand: to Varro, and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum;
Which makes it five and twenty. -- Still in motion
Of raging waste. It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog,
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
If I would sell my horse, and buy ten more
Better than he; why give my horse to Timon,
Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me straight
Ten able horses. No porter at his gate;
But rather one that smiles, and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold; no reason
Can found his state in safety. Caphis, hoa!
Caphis, I say.

Enter Caphis. Cap. Here, Sir, what is your pleasure?

Sen. Get on your Cloak, and haste you to lord Timon
Importune him for moneys, be not ceast
With slight denial; nor then silenced with
' Commend me to your master' -- and the cap
Plays in the right hand, thus: -- but tell him, sirrah,
My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn
Out of mine own; his days and times are past.
And my reliance on his fracted dates
Has smit my credit. I love and honor him;
But must not break my back, to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone.
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand: for I do fear,
When every feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon wilt be left a naked gull,
Who flashes now a Phoenix -- get you gone.

Cap. I go, Sir.


Sen. I go, Sir? -- take the bonds along with you,
And have the dates in count.

Cap. I will, sir.


Sen. Go.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, II.
An apartment in Timon's house. Lucius and Evanthe, Luc. " Two tedious years
are past since I have sighed
" In secret and consumed away with love
" Of fair Evanthe: is it much to ask
" A moment's patience? -- On my knees I beg it.

Evan. " Rise, rise, my Lord, you wrong your state too much:
" Doubt not you have my love; all that are friends
" To Timon have my love; and you the most;
" For you are inmost with his heart and guide,
" Those springs that put his bounty into action.
" You are no flatterer, you, to hug him close
" And hood-wink him with kisses, till he strikes
" The rocks, and shallows, where his fortunes perish.

Luc. " Who doubts my friendship?

Evan. " Perish he that doubts it!
" You are not like the false ones of the world,
" Who, when the veering winds forsake their quarter,
" Turn from his worshipped side where late they hung,
" And like the ebbing and unsteady waves,
" Fall back and leave him bare.

Luc. " Enough of this;
" I pray you hear me now.

Evan. " Your pardon Sir.
" Do I not know your most uncommon virtue?
" And with what constancy you entertain
" The various gifts his bounty has shower'd on you,
" But as the untouched pledges of his love;
" Ready to deal them back with such addition,
" As grows in generous minds, when his necessities
" Shall challenge restitution, Would thou not
" Do all, give all for my dear father's sake?
[ Lucullus enters,] " Why here is Lucullus too; a worthy Lord:
" How can I choose but prize such equal friends?
" Of this be both assured, such love as each
" To Timon bears, bear I to him. Farewell.
[Exit Evanthe.]
SCENE. III.
Lucius and Lucullus. "Lucul. " How now, my Lord; in private?

"Luc. " Yes, I thought so,
" Till an unwelcome, intermedling Lord
" Stepped in and asked the question.

"Lucul. What, in anger?
" By Heavens I Will gall him; for he stands before me
" In the broad sunshine of Lord Timon's bounty,
" And throws my better merits into shade. [aside.

"Luc. " Now would I kill him, if I durst. [aside.

"Lucul. " Methinks.
" You look but coldly: What has crossed your suit?
" Alas, poor Lucius! but I read your fate
" In that unkind one's frown.

"Luc. " No doubt, my Lord,
" Yo that receive them ever, are well versed
" In that unkind one's frowns; as the clear stream
" Reflects your person, so may you espy
" In the sure mirror of her scornful brow
" The clouded picture of your own despair,

Lucul. " Come, you presume too far: talk not thus idly
" To me that know you.

Luc. " Know me?

Lucul. " Ay, that know you,
" For one that courses up and down on errands,
" A stale retainer at Lord Timon's table;
" A man grown great by making legs and cringes,
" By winding round a wanton spendthrift's heart,
" And gulling him at pleasure. Now, do I know you?

Luc. " Gods! must I bear this, bear it from Lucullus?
" I, who first brought thee from Lord Timon's stirrup,
" Set thee in sight, and breathed into thy ear
" The breath of hope? what had thou been, ungrateful
" But that I took up Jove's imperfect work,
" Gave thee a shape, and made thee into man?

SCENE IV.
Alcibiades to them. Alcib, " What, wrangling, Lords; like hungry curs "for
crusts?
" Away with this unmanly war of words!
" Pluck forth your shining rapiers from their shells,
" And level boldly at each other's heart!
" Hearts did I say? -- But they are gone from home,
" And hid in Timon's coffers -- Fie upon it!

Luc. " My Lord Lucullus, I shall find a time.

Alcib. " Hah! find a time? -- The brave make time and place:
" Gods, Gods! what things are men? You Will find a time?
" A time for what? To murder him in's sleep?
" The man, who wrongs me, at the altar's foot
" I Will seize, yea drag him from the sheltering aegis.
" Of stern Minerva.

Luc. " Ay, it is your profession.

Alc. " Down on your knees, and thank the gods for that;
" Or woe for Athens! was it left for such
" As you are to defend. Do ye not hate
" Each other heartily? yet neither dares
" To bare his trembling falchion to the sun:
" How tame they dangle on your coward thighs!

Lucul. " We are no soldiers, Sir,

Alc. " No, ye are Lords:
" A lazy, proud, unprofitable crew,
" The Vermin, gender'd from the rank corruption
" Of a luxurious state. -- No soldiers, say you?
" And wherefore are ye none? have you not life,
" Friends, honor, freedom, country to defend?
" He that has these by nature is a soldier,
" And, when he weilds his sword in their defense,
" Instinctively fulfills the end he lives for.
" What then are ye? Hence and avoid my sight.
[Exeunt Lucius and Lucullus. Alcibiades, " Gods! that such triflers should be
called Athenians:
" O Great Minerva, patroness of Athens,
" How is our fathers ancient spirit fled!
" By heavens I Will straight betake me to Lord Timon.
" And free him from these harpies -- Ha! Evanthe?

SCENE V.
Alcibiades and Evanthe. Alc. " Lady, your noble father's grossly wronged:
" His fortune breeds a swarm of summer flies,
" Whose filthy buzing fills his ears awhile,
" Till with the first cold blast that nips his blossoms,
" The fluttering insects take the wing, and leave him.

Evan. " It Is Lucius and Lucullus, whom you point at.

Alc. " Chiefly at them for they were last in sight;
" And it is but now I scared the drones away.

Evan. " For that I am to thank you; my tired ears
" Had else been tortured with their dreams of love?

Alc. " Their love? with Lucius with Lucullus love?
" How sleeps the thunder when men scale the heavens
" Yet who can see such beauty and not love?
" Our hearts must tell it, though our tongues keep silence.

Evan. " Nay, my, good Lord, no more of this, I pray you.
" She, who inspires thee with a private passion,
" Must be her country's foe.

Alc. " O say not that --
" Must then your soldier toil without reward?
" Beauty, that sun of bliss, that lights the world,
" And love, that lifts us equal to the gods,
" Say must those blessings be reserved alone
" To the soft sons of peace? Then war farewell!
" Take they who will, the chearless trade of arms,
" I envy not such honorable folly.

Evan. " Yes, you have words to make each cause your own,
" Lips, which your master Socrates has tuned
" To sounds, that soften, and persuade the soul:
" Oh, you're an apt disciple.

Alc. " You mistake me;
" I am no courtier; have no wit no cunning,
" To wrap your heart in flattery's silken snare
" And hook it gently in, as some can do,
" Home-keeping youths, the Idlers of the age,
" Smooth summer fops, that line your father's table
" With fashionable follies. -- I Have no art
" To pay your virtue reverence with my eyes,
" And wrong it with my heart; such as I am,
" Such nature formed me; philosophic aid
" Nor gives, nor takes away; of naught I boast
" Save of a faithful, pure, and ardent love

Evan. " O my caught heart; ah! whither would you lead me?
" But come, my Lord, the hall begins to fill;
" If you will commit yourself to such society
" As my poor thoughts can furnish, a short hour
" Frees you, and brings my father from the chase."
[Exeunt.
SCENE V continues.
Enter Flavius with many bills in his hand. Flav. No care, no stop -- so
senseless of expense;
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of riot? Takes no account
How things go from him, and resumes no care
Of what is to continue: never mind
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done? -- He will not hear, till feel:
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie fie.
[Exit.
Enter Caphis, Isidore, and Varro. Cap. Good evening! what, you come for money?


Var. It Is not your business too?


Cap. Il is; and yours too?


Isid. It is so.


Cap. Would we were all discharged.


Var. I fear it.


Cap. Here comes the Lord.


Enter Timon, and his train, with Flavius. Tim. So soon as dinner's done, we'll
forth again.
-- Well, what is your will?
[They present their bills.
Cap. My Lord, here is a note of certain dues.


Tim. Dues? whence are you?


Cap. Of Althens here my Lord.


Tim. Go to my steward.


Cap. Please it your Lordship, he has put me off
To the succession of new days, this month:
My master is awaked by great occasion,
To call upon his own; and humbly prays you,
That with your other noble parts you will suit,
In giving him his right.

Tim. My honest friend,
I pr'ythee but repair to me next morning.

Cap. Nay, good my Lord.

Tim. Contain thyself, good friend.

Var. One Varro's servant, my good Lord --

Isid. From Isidore, he prays your speedy payment --

Cap. If you did know, my Lord, my master's wants --

Var. 'Twas due on forfeiture, my Lord, six weeks, and past --

Isid. Your steward puts me off, my Lord and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.

Tim. Give me breath: --
I do beseech you, good my Lords, keep on,
[Ex. Lords. I Will wait upon you instantly. -- Come hither:
How goes the world, that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of broken bonds,
And the detention of long-since-due debts,
Against my honor?

Flav. Please you, gentlemen,
The time is unagreeable to this business:
Your importunity cease, till after dinner;
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.

Tim. Do so, my friends; see them well entertained.

Flav. Pray you, away!
[Exeunt creditors.
Tim. You make me marvel: wherefore, ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me?
That I might so have rated my expense,
As I had leave of means.

Flav. You would not hear me:
At many leisures I proposed.

Tim. Go to:
Perchance, some single vantages you took,
When my indisposition put you back:
And that unaptness made you minister
Thus to excuse yourself.

Flav. O my good Lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before; you you would throw them off,
And say, you found them in mine honesty;
When, for some trifling present, you have bid me
Return so much, I Have shook my head, and wept;
Yea, against the authority of manners, prayed you
To hold your hand more close. I did endure
Not seldom, nor no slight checks; when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate,
And your great flow of debts. My dear loved Lord,
Though you hear now too late, yet now is a time;
The greatest of your having lacks a half
To pay your present debts.

Tim. Let all my land be sold.

Flav. It Is all engaged, some forfeited and gone:
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues.

Tim. To Lacedaemon did my land extend.

Flav. O my good Lord, the world is but a world;
Were it all yours, to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone!

Tim. You tell me true.

Flav. If you suspect my husbandry,
Call me before the exactest auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the Gods bless me,
When all our offices have been oppressed
With riotous feeders; when our vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of wine; when every room
Has blazed with lights, and brayed with minstrelsie,
I have retired me to a lonely corner,
And set my eyes at flow.

Tim. Pr'ythee, no more.

Flav Heavens! have I said, the bounty of this Lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
This night englutted! who now is not Timon's?
Great Timon's, noble, worthy, royal Timon's?
Ah I when the means are gone, that buy this praise,
The breath is gone whereof this praise is maid:
Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,
These flies are coucht.

Tim Come, sermon me no further,
No villainous bounty yet has past my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why do thou weep? can thou the conscience lack,
To think I shall lack friends? secure thy heart;
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
And try the arguments of hearts by borrowing,
Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use,
As I can bid thee speak.

Flav. Assurance bless your thoughts!

Tim. And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned
That I account them blessings; for by these
Shall I try friends. You shall perceive how you
Mistake my fortunes: in my friends I Am wealthy.
Within there, Ho! Flaminius, Servilius!

Enter Flaminius, Servilius, and other servants. Serve. My Lord, my Lord.

Tim. I will dispatch you sev'rally.
You to Lord Lucius -- to Lord Lucullus you, -- you to Sempronius -- commend me
to their loves; and I am Proud, say, that my occasions have found time to use
'em toward a supply of money; let the request be fifty talents.


Flam. As you have said, my Lord.

Flav. Lord Lucius and Lucullus? humph!

Tim. Go, you. Sir, to the senators; [to Flavius.]
Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
Deserved this hearing; bid 'em send of the instant
A thousand talents to me.

Flav. I Have been bold,
(For that I knew it the most general way)
To them to use your signet and your name;
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.

Tim. Is It true? cannot be?

Flav. They answer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
Do what they would; are sorry -- You are honorable-
And so intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks, and these hard fractions,
With certain half-caps, and cold-moving nods,
They froze me into silence.

Tim. You Gods reward them!
I pr'ythee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:
Their blood is cak'd, it is cold, it seldom flows,
And nature, as it grows again towered earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventiaius -- pr'ythee, be not sad,
You Are true, and just; ingenuously I speak,
No blame belongs to thee: Ventidius lately
Buried his father, by whose death he is stepped
Into a great estate; when he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,
I cleared him with five talents. Greet him from me,
Bid him suppose, some good necessity
Touches his friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five talents. That had, give't these fellows,
To whom it is instant due. Never speak, or think
That Timon's fortunes among his friends can sink.

Stew. Would, I could not: that thought is bounty's foe;
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
[Exeunt.
End of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Lucullus's House in Athens. Flaminius waiting. Enter a servant to him.
SERVANT. I Have told my Lord of you; he is coming down to you.


Flam. I thank you, Sir.


Enter Lucullus. Serve. Here Is my Lord.


Lucul. One of Lord Timon's men; a gift, I warrant. Why, this hits right: I
dreamt of a silver basin and ewre tonight. Flaminius, honest Flaminius, you
are very respectively welcome, Sir; fill me some wine. And how does that
honorable, complete, free-hearted Gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good
lord and master?


Flam. His health is well, Sir.


Lucul. I am right glad that his health is well, Sir; and what have thou there
under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?


Flam. Faith, nothing but an empty box, Sir, which in my Lord's behalf I come
to entreat your Honor to supply; who having great and instant occasion to use
fifty talents, has sent to your Lordship to furnish him, nothing doubting your
present assistance therein.


Lucul. La, la, la, la, -- Nothing doubting, says he? alas, good Lord, a noble
Gentleman it is, if he would not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I
have dined with him, and told him on it; and came again to supper to him on
purpose to have him spend less. And yet he would embrace no counsel, take no
warning by my coming; every man has his fault, and honesty is his. I have told
him on it, but I could never get him from 't.


Enter a servant, with wine. Serve. Please your Lordship, here is the wine.


Lucul. Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here Is to thee,


Flam. Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.


Lucul. I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit, give thee thy
due: and one that knows what belongs to reason; and can use the time well, if
the time use thee well. Good parts in thee -- Get you gone, sirrah. [To the
servant, who goes out.] -- Draw nearer, honest Flaminius; thy Lord's a
bountiful Gentleman, but thou art wise, and thou know well enough (although
thou come to me) that this is no time to lend money, especially upon bare
friendship without security. Here Is three Solidares for thee: good boy, wink at
me, and say, thou saw me not. Fare thee well.


Flam. Is It possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? fly, damned baseness,
To him that worships thee. [Throwing, the money away

Lucul Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.

[Exit Lucullus.
Flam. May these add to the number that may scald thee:
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
It turns in less than two nights? O you gods!
I feel my master's passion. This slave
Unto this hour has my Lord's meat in him:
Why should it thrive, and turn to nutriment,
When he is turned to poison?
O! may diseases only work upon it:
And when he is sick to death, let not that part
Of nature, my Lord paid for, be of power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!
[Exit.]
SCENE II.
A Hall in Timon's House. Evanthe, Flavius. Evan. " Nay, they shall all away:
here, take the casket;
" Away with these unprofitable trinkets,
" They mock my wretchedness; get money, Flavius.
" Peace, man, reply not; these plain weeds will serve
" The daughter of so poor a man as Timon.
" Go, go; no more on it.
[Exit Flavius Servilius enters. " Now Servilius -- Well!
" What says Sempronius? Where are the five talents
" Due from Ventidius?

Servil. I have tried them both
" And they have both denied him?
" The Gods deny them, when they crave their blessing
" Why he has been to these men as a father,
And kept their credit with a bounteous purse,
Now they deny him. "Scarce three days are past,
" Since he redeemed Ventidius from a prison.
" Oh, the base soul of man -- Come hither, Sir;
" Hortensius the Senator late gave me
" Six young Numidian slaves, let them be sold.
" Go, see it done.
[Exit Servilius.] Flaminius enters. " Flaminius, you were sent
" To Lord Lucullus; come, tell out the talents.

Flam. " A fruitless errand have I made, dear Lady,
" To a most thankless man.

Evan. " Are you too empty?

Flam. " Empty as air, as the false hollow heart
" Of him who has denied me.

Evan. " Oh! the villain.
This was my Lord's best hope; now all are fled,
Save the Gods only. Who can call him friend,
That dips in the same dish? This man never drinks,
But Timon's silver treads upon his lip:
And yet, O see the monstrousness of man,
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!
He does deny him in respect of his,
What charitable men afford to beggars.

Flam. " Religion groans at it.

Evan. " I have a picture,
" Apelles might have owned it: it is my father:
" Lo, what a form he wears! A Cretan artist
" Traced out the living work. There was a time,
" Not all the treasures of the Ephesian fane,
" Had bribed me to dispose on it. Here, Flaminius,
" Take it; get gold. Now I have nothing left.
[Exit Flaminius.
SCENE III.
Evanthe and Lucius. Luc. " Alone; in tears too? Ill betide the cause,
" That wrings these pearly drops from such fair eyes!
" Look up, divine Evanthe; it is thy Lucius,
" Whose life, fame, fortune, whose extremest means,
" Lie all at thy devotion.

Evan. " Have a care;
" Art sure of that?

Luc. " What says my fair?

Evan. " I say,
" Art sure this is not flattery? Speak truly,
" You tell me all that you possess is mine;
" What, if I take you at your word you will shrink
" From these large promises.

Luc. " Lady I swear --

Evan. " Oh! swear it by all means.

Luc. " Then in the name
" Of all the Gods at once --

Evan. " Ay, this is something;
" Band 'em all in; leave not a god uncalled
" To witness to your oath; my faith has need on it.

Luc. " Then let each conscious power, that sees me kneel,
" Witness how gladly Lucius would give up
" Rank, honors, riches, all the world holds dear,
" So he might gain thy love.

Evan. " Rise; it is enough.
" Here is my hand -- For that vile trash called gold,
" Well none on it.

Luc. " Hah!

Evan. " O we'll be rich in love;
" Love is a pure, sublime, etherial passion:
" Timon wants gold; his state is shrunk to nothing.
" We need it not. Go, and restore him back
" All his too lavish bounty has show'r'd on you;
" Build up his fortune to its former splendour:
" Do this, and I am thine.

Luc. " Humph!

Evan. " Do you waver?
" Oh while you live beware of perjury,
" The Gods have registered your oath. Go Lucius.
" Cast off that glittering garb, as I have done,
" And take a noble poverty like mine:
" And fear not, Lucius, the consenting Heavens
" Shall bless your gratitude and my devotion;
" With honest hands we'll labor to supply
" Life's slender wants, and scorn the guilty great.

Luci. " How Is this? is Timon ruined, did you say?

Evan. " Go, ask his friends Sempronius and Lucullus
" They Will tell you he is ruined. Ask Ventidius,
" These abject souls will tell you he is ruined;
" And therefore these have turned their backs upon him
" But you, my Lucius, you --

Luc. " Have these denied him?

Evan. " All, all; their hearts are flint.

Luc. " Lucullus too?

Evan. " He too, the viper that his bosom warmed;
" None now remains untried, but you alone.

Luc. " Soft you, am I alone of all untried?
" Sempronius and Lucullus and Ventidius"
Have all denied? And does, he send to me?
It shows but little love or judgment in him.
Must I be his last refuge? I am angry.
He has disgraced me in it. I see no sense for it,
But his occasions might have wooed me first;
For, in my conscience, I was the first man,
That ever received gift from him. "For you Lady,
" Your beauty may do something, but not this.
" This were too much. The fairest of ye all
" May be too dearly bought.

Evan. " Away, Away,
" With these base shifts, these counterfeit complaints;
" Nor love nor friendship ever round thy heart.
" Thou spiritless dissembler: die abhorred.
" Gold be thy bane, thy God be thy perdition!
" Out of my sight, ungrateful! Hoa, Flaminius!
" Oh! art thou fled? Thy infamy light on thee,
" Unfeeling shameless villain.

SCENE IV.
Evanthe and Alcibiades. Alcib. " Who has wronged you?
" And why these tears? Speak, Lady I Am no flatterer:
" A plain Blunt man, who bears you more good will
" Than he will tell of; courts no wealthy friend.
" And dares to own a poor one. Why do you shake
" Your head thus? Where Is your father; is all well?
" O my prophetic soul!

Evan. " Where is my father?
" As low as misery and want can lay him.

Alcib. " Now the gods comfort him! Spare your sad story,
" I know it all. I am a man that carry
" My fortune by my side; this sword, though poor,
" Has made men rich: the senate are my debtors;
" Thus armed, I Will strait before them. When their fleet
" Perished at Aegos, and the city saw
" The Spartan standard on their frighted walls,
" What could have saved the state, and bought them peace,
" Had not Lysander's mercenary palm
" Been filled with Timon's gold? shall Timon then
" Want that base dirt, while their crammed coffers stand
" Up to the lips in coin? the Gods forbid it.

Evan. " Alas, the Senate have been tried already
Theyv'e all been touched, and all are found base metal,
For they have all denied him.

Alcib. " Gods, I thank you,
" Since it is your pleasure to allow such baseness,
" For that this hour shall bring me into trial.
" Adversity's dread fan shall now divide
" The base light chaff, and give it to the winds:
" Yet Timon shall confess he has a friend.
" Go then, dear maid, meet this ungrateful time
" With constant virtue and becoming scorn;
" Go to thy father, tell him I am gone
" To this vile Senate, who deny his wants;
" And say, when I have chained those wakeful dragons
" I Will shake their rich, and golden clusters down,
" Or tear up roots and all.

Evan. " The Gods, preserve thee,
" For in thy joint, and corporate perfections
" Each great Divinity has stamped his own;
" All Mars's valor, all Apollo's grace,
" The bloom of Bacchus, and the port of Jove.
[Exit Evanthe.
SCENE V.
Enter Varro, Titus, Hortensius, Lucius, and other servants of Timon's
creditors, who wait for his coming out Var. Well met, good morrow, Titus and
Hortensius.


Tim. The like to you, kind Varro.


Hor. Lucius, why do we meet together?


Luc. I think one business does command us all.
For mine is money.

Tit. So is theirs and ours.


Enter Philotas. Luc. And Sir Philotas's too.


Phi. Good day, at once.


Luc. Welcome, good brother. What do you think the hour?


Phi. Laboring for nine.


Luc. So much?


Phi. Is not my Lord seen yet?


Luc. Not yet.


Phi. I wonder: he was want to shine at seven.


Luc. Ay, but the days are waxed shorter with him.
You must consider that a prodigal's course
Is like the sun's, but not like his recoverable. I fear,
It Is deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse.

Hor. I Am weary of this charge, the Gods can witness:
I know my lord has spent of Timon's wealth,
Ingratitude now makes it worse than stealth.

Var. Yes, mine is three thousand crowns: what is yours?


Luc. Five thousand.


Enter Flaminius. Tit. One of Lord Timon's men.


Luc. Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my Lord ready to come forth?


Flam. No, Indeed, he is not.


Tit. We attend his Lordship; pray, signify so much.


Flam. I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.


Enter Flavius in a cloak, muffled. Luc. Ha! is not this his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud, call him, call him.

Tit. Do you hear, Sir --


Var. By your leave, Sir.


Fla. What do you ask of me my friend?


Tit. We wait for certain money here, Sir.


Fla. If money were certain as your waiting,
'Twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills,
When your false masters eat of my Lord's meat?
Then they would smile and fawn upon his debts,
And take down the interest in their glutt'nous maws;
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up,
Let me pass quietly: --
Believed, my Lord and I have made an end,
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

Luc. Ay, but this answer will not serve.


Flav. If 'twill not serve, it is not so base as you; For you serve knaves.

Exit.
Var. How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?


Tit. No matter what. -- He Is poor, and that is revenge enough. Who can speak
broader than he that has no house to put his head in? Such may rail against
great buildings.


Enter Servilius. Tit. O here is Servilius; now we shall have some answer.


Serve. If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some other hour I should
derive much from it. For take it of my soul,

My Lord leans wondrously to discontent:
His comfortable temper has forsook him,
He is much out of health, and keeps his chamber.

Luc. Many do keep their chambers, are not sick:
And if he be so far beyond his health,
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the Gods.

Tit. We cannot take this for an answer.


Flam. [within.] Servilius help -- my Lord! my Lord!


Enter Timon in a rage. Tim. What are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive enemy, my goal?
The place, which I have feasted, does it now,
Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?

Luc. Put in now, Titus.


Tit My Lord, here is my bill.


Luc. Here Is mine.


Var. And mine, my Lord.


Cap. And ours, my Lord.


Phi. And our bills.


Tim. Knock me down with 'em -- cleave me to the girdle.


Luc. Alas my Lord.


Tim. Cut out my heart in sums.


Tit. Mine, fifty talents.


Tim. Tell out my blood.


Luc. Five thousand crowns, my Lord.


Tim. Five thousand drops pay that.
What yours -- and yours?

Var. My Lord --


Cap. My Lord --


Tim. Here take me, tear me, and the Gods fall on you
[Exeunt creditors They have even put my breath from me, the slaves
Creditors! -- devils.

Fla. My dear Lord!


Tim. What if it should be so? --


Fla. My dear Lord!


Tim. I Will have it so -- My steward!


Fla. Here, my Lord.


Tim. So fitly! -- Go, bid all my friends again
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius, All. --
I Will once more feast the rascals.

Fla. O my Lord!
You only speak from your distracted soul;
There Is not so much left as to furnish out
A moderate table.

Tim. Be it not thy care:
Go, and invite them all, et iu the tide
Of knaves once more: my cook and I Will provide.

Street of Athens. Alcibiades and two Senators. 1 Sen. " Thus in few words you
have your answer (Sir.)
" The senate do refuse your suit for Timon,
" Holding themselves not bound to heal the waste,
" That every spendthrift makes -- And in return
" For that intemperate heat, with which you urged them,"
They banish you for ever.

Alcib. Banish me!

2 Sen. " Come, no more."
If after two days shine, Athens contain thee,
Expect their weightier Judgment.

Alcib. Hah! their judgment?
" Away, away, ye know not what ye do.
" Now, by the Gods! rash men, if ye but whisper
" That word again, and clench your griping palms
" Against the ripe wants of my noble friend,
" Look to yourselves, grave Sirs, look to your city:
" By heavens I Will slip my soldiers at your throats,
" And gall you, slaves, for this ingratitde."
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE returns to Timon's house..
Enter diverse Senators, at several doors. 1 Sen. The good time of the day to
you, Sir.


2 Sen. I also wish it to you: I think this honorable Lord did but try us this
other day.


1 Sen. Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we encountered. I hope, it is
not so low with him, as he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.


2 Sen. It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.


1 Sen. I should think so: he has sent me an earnest inviting, which many my
near occasions did urge me to put off: but he has conjured me beyond them, and
I must needs appear.


2 Sen. In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business; but he would
not hear my excuse. I am sorry when he sent to borrow of me, that my provision
was out.


1 Sen. I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how how all things go.


2 Sen. Every man here is so. What would he have borrowed of you?


1 Sen. A thousand pieces.


2 Sen. A thousand pieces!


1 Sen. What of you?


3 Sen. He sent to me, Sir -- here he comes.


Enter Timon and attendants Tim. With all my heart, gentlemen both, and how
fare you?


1 Sen. Ever at the best, hearing well of your Lordship.


2 Sen. The swallow follows not summer more willingly, than we your Lordship.


Tim. Nor more willingly leaves winter: such summer-birds are men. --
Gentlemen, our dinner will not recompense this long stay: feast your ears with
the music a while; if they will fare so harshly as on the trumpet's sound: we
shall to it presently.


1 Sen. I hope it remains not unkindly with your Lordship, that I returned you
an empty messenger.


Tim. O Sir, let it not trouble you.


2 Sen. My noble Lord


Tim. Ah, my good friend, what cheer?

[The banquet brought in.
2 Sen. Most honorable Lord, I Am even sick of shame that when your Lordship
the other day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a beggar.


Tim. Think not on it, Sir.


2 Sen. If you had but sent two hours before --


Tim. Let it not cumber your better remembrance. Come bring in all together.


2 Sen. All covered dishes!


1 Sen. Royal cheer, I warrant you.


3 Sen. Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it.


1 Sen. How do you? what is the news?


3 Sen. Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it? Both. Alcibiades banished!


3 Sen. It Is so, be sure of it.


1 Sen. How? how?


3 Sen. I pray you, upon what?


Tim. My worthy friends, will you draw near?


3 Sen. Here Is a noble feast toward.


2 Sen. This is the old man still.


3 Sen. Will It hold? will it hold?


Tim. Each man to his stool with that spur as he would to the lip of his
mistress; your diet shall be in all places alike. Make not a city-feast of it,
to let the meat cool e're we can agree upon the first place. Sit, sit.

The Gods require our thanks.

You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with thankfulness. For your own
gifts make yourselves praised: but reserve still to give lest your Deities be
despised. Lend to each man enough, that one need not lend to another. For were
your Godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the Gods. Make the meat
beloved, more than the man that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without
a score of villians. If there sit twelve women at the table, let a dozen of
them be as they are -- The rest of your foes O Gods, the Senators of Athens,
together with the common lag of people what is amiss in them, you Gods make
suitable for destruction. For these my friends -- as they are to me nothing, so
in nothing bless them, and to nothing are they welcome. Uncover, dogs, and lap.


Some speak. What does his lordship mean?


Some other. I know not.


Tim. May you a better feast never behold,
You knot of mouth'd-friends; ^moke and luke warm water
Is your perfection. This is Timon's last;
Who stuck and spangled with your flatteres,
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Your reaking villainy. Live loathed and long,
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Crust you quite over! -- What, do thou go?
Soft, take thy physic first: -- thou too -- and thou
[Throwing the dishes at them, and drives 'em out. Stay, I will lend thee
money, borrow none.
What! all in motion? henceforth be no feast,
Whereat a villian's not a welcome guest.
Burn house, sink Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon, man and all humanity!
Exit.
End of the THIRD ACT.
ACT. IV.
SCENE. I.
TIMON's House. Evanthe and Flavius. EVANTHE. " THE general banished, and my
father fled?

Flav. " True, Lady, Alcibiades is banished;
" But fear not thou; he leads a gallant troop,
" With hearts high beating in your father's cause;
" Soon shall you see the haughty Senate humbled,
" Crouching for pardon at Lord Timon's feet;
" And this base city, that now casts him forth,
" With one voice worshipping his glad return.

Evan. " Whence springs this hope in you? O! that I felt it!

Flav. " Why, Alcibiades is up in arms:
" Dreadful he comes, like an avenging god,
" To chasten this proud city; e're the sun
" Shall tinge yon western cliffs, Athens shall hear
" His trumpet at her gates. Pale staring forms
" Course up and down, and fill the streets with terror.
" But now as I crossed Mars's-hill, I met
" Two of the Senate, who with eager speech,
" And almost inarticulate with fear,
" Prayed me to give them conduct to my Lord,
" Courting my service in most abject terms.

Evan. " That Is well! Ah! what is well while wretched Timon
" Houseless and bare, a spectacle of pity,
" Wanders I know not where? come, let us carry,
" These last few relics of a scattered fortune
" To thy poor master.

Two Senators enter. 1 Sen. " Noble lady, stay!

Evan. " Off, let me pass.

2 Sen. No, we yet rule in Athens;
" And by the Senate's voice command your stay.

Evan. " Shame to your Senate; slavery be your portion,
" And sorrows deep as mine increase upon you!
" Oh, you have struck the noblest heart in Athens,
" The first, the clearest spirit of the time;
" Him on whose meanest stirrup ye have hung
" With spaniel-like observance; him, whose shrine
" Morning and evening ye have fed with incense,
" While the Gods went unworshipt; him at length
" Mad with his wrongs, ye've driven to range the wood
" And vacant wilds; hence then, and let me forth!

2 Sen. " Lady, it must not be.

Evan. " Have you no daughters?
" No sense of filial piety, no mercy?
" That thus relentless you heap crime on crime,
" Murder the father, and enslave the child!

1 Sen. " Murder the father? no; dear as yourself,
" We prize Lord Timon's life; every fond art
" Will be employed to sooth his troubled soul
" And bring him back to happiness and thee.

Evan. " Where is he then? let me behold his face,
" Let me embrace him, bathe him with my tears:
" And doubt not but I Am in your bosoms, Sirs;
" It Is not repentance for unkindness past;
" It Is not the hand of mercy turns your hearts
" To think of Timon thus; it is dread of vengeance,
" It Is Alcibiades that awes your souls,
" It Is that young warrior, thundering at your gates,
" That bids you keep a hostage in your hands
" To mollify his anger:

2 Sen. " We confess it;
" Our hopes rest all with thee; therefore no more;
" But, like another tutelar Minerva,
" Walk forth and save the city.

1 Sen. " Yield, dear Lady,
" And from necessity strike out a grace;
" So shall thy father's fortunes be restored
" To their first splendour, and thy Athens saved.
" From pitiless destruction.

2 Sen. " What we ask,
" We may command.

Evan " No menances, proud Lords;
" Mercy, not terror, governs in my heart,
" One such word more and you are lost for ever.

Flav. " Come, gentle mistress, let thy servant join
" His prayers to those of the repentant Senate:
" What profit can thy father's cause derive
" From vain resistance? Pray you be advised.

Evan. " Hark'ee, my Lords, the rulers as you say,
" And Senators of Athens; this good man
" Was Timon's steward, let him have free passage
" And instant to his master.

2 Sen. " It is granted.

Evan. " Let him bear all refreshments, viands, wines
" And costly vestments, such as Timon used
" In his full State.

1 Sen. It Is done.

Evan. " The thousand talents,
" Which you (O shame!) refused let them be sent
" To the last dram, and be you the bearers.

2 Sen. " Is there aught else?

Evan. " Upon these terms I yield
" To stay the general's coming: what your exile
" May else inflict, short of your city's ruin
" And slaughter of the guiltless herd within it,
" I know not, nor am studious to divert.

1 Sen. " Be with us only in this hour of peril,
" We are content.

Evan. " Then, Flavius, get thee hence;
" Bear my fond wishes to thy injured Lord,
" Comfort the sufferer with thy friendly care,
" And reconcile him to the world again.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, the WOODS.
Enter Timon. Tim. O blessed, breeding sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: Infect the air
Below thy sister's orb. All is oblique;
There Is nothing level in our cursed natures,
But direct villainy. Then be abhorred,
All feasts, societies, and throngs of men!
Destruction phang mankind! Earth, yield me roots! [Digging the Earth.
Who seeks better of thee, for sauce his palate
With thy most operant poison! -- What Is here?
Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold?
No, Gods, I am no idle votarist.
Roots, you clear Heavens! thus much of this will make
Black, white; foul, fair; wrong, right;
Base, noble; old young; coward, valiant.
You Gods! why, this
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides:
This yellow slave
Will knit and break religions; bless the accursed;
Make the hoar leprosy adored; place thieves.
And give them title, knee and approbation,
With Senators on the bench: this is it,
That makes the weeping widow wed again;
She, whom the spittle-house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To the April day again. Come damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that putt'st odds
Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
Do thy right nature. -- [March afar off.] Ha, a drum? -- you are quick,
But yet I Will bury thee -- thou wilt go, (strong thief)
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Nay, stay thou out for earnest. [Keeping some gold.

Enter Alcibiades with drum and fife in warlike manner. Alc. What art thou
there? speak.

Tim. A beast, as thou art. Cankers gnaw thy heart,
For showing me again the eyes of man!

Alc. What is thy name? is man so hateful to thee,
That art thyself a man?

Tim. I hate mankind.
For thy part, I do wish thou were a dog,
That I might love thee something.

Alc. " Gods, it is he!
" This wretched thing is Timon; sure his wits
Are drowned and lost in his calamities.
How came the noble Timon to this change?

Tim. As the moon does by wanting light to give.
But then renew I could not like the moon;
There were no suns to borrow of.

Alc. What friendship may I do thee, noble Timon?

Tim. None, but to maintain my opinion.

Alc. What is it, Timon?

Tim. Promise me friendship, but perform none.
I pr'ythee beat thy drum and get thee gone.

Alc. I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.

Tim. How do thou pity him, whom thou do trouble?
I Would rather be alone.

Alc. Why, fare thee well,
Here Is gold for thee.

Tim. Keep it, I cannot eat it.

Alc. When I have laid proud Athens in a heap --

Tim. War'st thou against Athens?

Alc. Ay, and in thy cause.

Tim. The Gods confound them all then in thy conquest,
And, after thee, go on, here is gold, go on;
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
Will over some high-vic'd city hang his poison
In the sick air: Let not thy sword skip one,
Pity not honored age for his white beard,
He is an usurer. Strike me the matron,
It is her habit only that is honest,
Herself's a bawd -- Let not the virgin's cheek
Make soft thy trenchant sword. Spare not the babe,
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;
Think it a bastard, whom the oracle
Has dou'tfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,
And mince itsans remorse. Swear against objects,
Put armor on thine ears, and on thine eyes;
Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Nor sight of Priest in holy vestments bleeding,
Shall Pierce a jot. I Have gold to pay thy soldiers.
Make large confusion; and thy fury spent,
Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.
Exit Timon.
Alc. " Phocion!

Pho. " My Lord.

Alc. " Be it your care to guard
" This place and Timon; you perceive his humor,
" And therefore cross him not, but spread your party,
" In secret round this thicket where he haunts.
" It seems he has found a treasure; what it is,
" Or how in's present mood he may dispose on it,
" I know not -- Therefore. Phocion, look you to it.
" Farewell. For Athens, hoa! Bid the line march.
[Exeunt.
Tim. That nature being sick of man's unkindness
Should yet be hungry! O thou common mother,
Yield him, who all thy human sons does hate.
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
Let it no more bring out ungrateful man.

Enter Flavius. Flav. Oh, you Gods!
Is yon despised and ruinous man my Lord?
Full of decay and failing? oh monument
And wonder of good deeds, evilly bestowed!
H'has caught me in his eye, I will present
My honest grief to him; and, as my Lord,
Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!

Timon comes forward from his cave. Tim. Away! what art thou?

Flav. Have you forgot me, Sir?

Tim. Why do thou ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then if thou grantest that thou art a man,
I have forgot thee.

Flav. An honest servant, --

Tim. Then I know thee not:
I never had honest men about me; all
I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.

Flav. The Gods are witness,
Never did poor steward wear a truer grief
For his undone Lord, than mine eyes for you.

Tim. What, do thou weep? come nearer, then I love thee,
Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st
Flinty mankind; whose eyes do never give
But or through lust, or laughter; "my dear daughter!
" (Oh! comfort her sweet heaven! wherever she is!)
" She is a woman too.

Flav. " Ay, and the gent'lest,
" Purest, and best that ever bore the name,
I beg of you to know me, good my Lord,
T'accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts,
" Which your dear daughter's piety has sent you,
To entertain me as your steward still.

Tim, Have I then friends,
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous nature mild?
Let me behold thy face:
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
Perpetual, sober Gods! I do proclaim
One honest man: mistake me not, but on:
No more, I pray; and he is a steward.
How fain would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee,
I fell with curses, Yet declare the truth,
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
A usuring kindness, as rich men deal gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?

Flav. No, my most worthy master, (in whose breast
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late,)
That which I show, Heaven knows, is merely love.

Tim. Thou singly honest man,
Here, take; the Gods out of my misery
Have sent thee treasure, go, live rich and happy:
But thus conditioned; Thou shall build from men:
Hate all, curse all, show charity to none;
But let the famisht flesh slide from the bone,
Ere thou relieve the beggar. Give to dogs
What thou deny'st to men. Let prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither 'em; be men like blasted woods,
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
And so farewell and thrive.

Flav. O, let me stay and comfort you, my master.

Tim. If thou hat'st curses,
Stay not, but fly, whilst thou art blessed and free;
Never see thou man, and let me never see thee,
[Exit Flavius. Enter Apemantus. More man? plague, plague!

Apem. I was directed hither. Men report,
Thou do affect my manners, and do use them.

Tim. It Is then, because thou do not keep a dog
Whom I would imitate; consumption catch thee!

Apem. This is in thee a nature but affected,
A poor unmanly melancholy, sprung
From change of fortune, Why this spade? this place?
This slave-like habit, and those looks of care?
Thy flatt'rers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not those weeds,
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatt'rer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee; hinge thy knee,
And let this very breath whom thou wilt observe
Blow off thy cap: do not assume my likeness.

Tim. Were I like thee' I Would throw away myself.

Apem. Thou'st cast away thyself, being like thyself,
So long a madman, now a fool. What think thou
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlane,
Will put thy shirt on warm? will these moist trees
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,
And skip when thou point'st out? will the cold brook,
Candied with ice, cawdle thy morning taste
To cure thy over- night's surfeit? Call the creatures.
Whose naked natures live in all the spite
Of wreckful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements exposed,
Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;
Oh! thou shall find --

Tim. A fool of thee; depart.

Apem. I love thee better now than ever I did.

Tim. I hate thee worse.

Apem. Why?

Tim. Thou ftatt'rest misery.

Apem. I flatter not; but say, thou art a caytist.
If thou did put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy Pride, 'twere well; but thou
Do it enforcedly: thou would courtier be,
Were thou not beggar.

Tim. Thou art a slave, whom fortunes tender arm
With favor never claspt; bred but a dog.
Had thou like us, from our first swath proceeded
Through sweet degrees, thou would have plunged thyself
In general riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of lust, and never learned
The icy precepts of respect, but followed
The sugared game before thee. But myself,
Who had the World as my confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, the hearts of men
At duty, more than I could frame employments;
That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves
Do on the oak; have with one winter's brush
Fallen from their boughs, and left me open, bare
For every storm that blows. I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden.
Thy nature did commence in suff'rance, time
Has made thee hard in it. Why should thou hate men?
They never flattered thee. What have thou given?
If thou will curse, thy father, that poor rag,
Must be thy subject; who in spite put stuff
To some she-beggar, and compounded thee
Poor rogue, hereditary. Hence! begone --
If thou had not been born the worst of men,
Thou had been flatterer.

Apem. You Are too bad to curse.
[Exit.
End of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT. V.
SCENE changes to the Walls of Athens.
Enter two other Senators, with a Messenger. 1 Sen. Thou have painfully
discovered: are his files
As full as they report?

Mes. I have spoke the least,
Besides his expedition promises
Present approach.

2 Sen. We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.

Enter the other Senators. 1 Sen. Here come our brothers

3 Sen. No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect --
The enemies drum is heard, and fearful scowring
Does choke the air with dust. In and prepare:
Our's is the fall, I fear, our foes the snare.
[Exeunt in the gate.
Trumpets sound. Enter Alcibiades with his powers. Alc. Sound to this coward
and lascivious town
Our terrible approach.
[sound a parley. [Senators appear upon the walls. " Oh! have I roused you?
" Your banished soldier is returned, my Lords,
" And vengeance now must work.

1 Sen. " Speak your desires.

Alc. " Bring forth Evanthe, noble Timon's daughter,
" Set her before me. By the Gods, rash men,
" If ye have dared to touch her sacred life,
" I Will tread your cursed city into dust
" And bury you in the ruins.

2 Sen. " Noble Sir,
" Here is the lady ready to come forth;
" (Give her safe conduct there!) and we do hope
" She Will prove a gentle advocate with thee
" To stir thy noble heart unto forgiveness:"
We sent to thee to give thy rages balm
To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
Above its quantity.

1 Sen. So did we woo
Transformed Timon to our city's love,
By humbling message and by promised meads;
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.

3 Sen. Set but thy foot,
Against our rampir'd gates and they shall open.
So thou will send thy gentle heart before
To say thou wilt enter friendly.

( Evanthe enters.) Alc. " Hah, she comes, --
" Hail, loveliest, dearest maid;
" Oh, grant thy soldier to repay his toil
" With this one fond embrace.

Evan. " Thus on my knees,
" I thank the gods and thee, and thus beseech thee,
" O spare thy Country, spare the reverend Senate,
" Spare this repentant city.". These our walls
Were not erected by their hands from whom
We have received our griefs; nor are they such,
That these great towers, trophies, and schools should fall
For private faults in them.

Alc. " Sweet pleader, rise!
" Hear ye this, Sirs?"

1 Sen. March on dear countryman,
Into our city with thy banners spread:
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage
Spare thy Athenian cradle; like a shepherd
Approach the fold, and cull the infected forth,
But kill not all together.

2 Sen. Throw thy glove,
Or any token of thine honor else,
That thou will use the wars as thy redress,
And not as our confusion; all thy powers
Shall make their harbor in our town, till we
Have sealed thy full desire.

Alc. Then there is my glove;
Descend and open your uncharged ports,
Those enemies of Timon, and mine own,
Whom ye yourselves shall set out for reproof,
Fall, and no more; and to atone your fears
With my more noble meaning; not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
But shall be remedied by public laws
At heaviest answer.

Both. It Is most nobly spoken.

Alc. Descend and keep your words.

Evan. " -- It Is done! my country can demand no more;
" Now, nature, I am thine.

Alc. " What means Evanthe?

Evan. " I Have saved a city; grant me now, kind Gods,
" To save a father. Give me instant convoy
" To the lone wilds where wretched Timon haunts,
" And with the howling savages consorts
" The exile of mankind.

Alc. " See where the senate
" Expect us at their gates: enter with me,
" And all due terms of reconcilement ended,
" Myself will be your guide.

Evan. " Forbid it, Heaven!
" Too much already have I given to Athens
" My heart is gone before to Timon's cave;
" And I must follow it.

Alc. " Yet e're we part.
" The hope, to which your looks, your words, gave life
" Bid it grow up and multiply within me:
" Oh, take from piety a moment's truce,
" And once again with soft consenting smiles
" Tell me Evanthe will be only mine.

Evan. " O covetous in love; possessing all
" Which my fond heart can give, do thou require
" That I should tell it to thee over and over,
" While with a miser's transport thou enjoy'st
" The contemplation of thy own success?
" Yield to the time; a father claims me now;
" Sacred to him let me preserve this hour,
" Nor take from nature what I give to thee.
[Exit.
Alc. " Pausanias, take thy guard; follow Evanthe,
" And spread with care thy troop around the wood
" Where Timon harbors; give the word for Athens.
[ Alcibiades enters the city with his army.
SCENE, changes to a street in Athens.
Lucullus enters. " Let the storm light upon improvident man!
" I saw it in the wind. Let Athens blaze;
" Let Alcibiades with brutal rage
" Extinguish, this fair scene, and these famed schools,
" Towers, temples, palaces, convert to dust;
" Lucullus built not on such sandy hopes
" But as the wary falcon hangs her nest
" Where danger cannot reach it, so did I,
" Prophetic of this hour, dispose my fortune
" Where the sun never looks, within the womb
" Of mother earth, deep hid, a mine of gold,
" A magazine to save or sack a city,
" The fruit of seven years bounty from this Timon.
" With all my thrift could add -- Good morrow Caphis.

Caphis enters. Caph. " Here Is a sad change; all is lost -- myself beheld
" Your Palace flaming.

Lucul. " Knowing this, good Caphis,
" I know the worst -- What bring you from Lord Timon?

Caph. Contempt and mockery; he is too proud to curse you.

Lucul. " Took he the gold I sent?

Caph. " He took your gold
" And scattered it like ashes; why 'twas nothing;
" Breast high in coin he stands, I think the Gods
" Have show'r'd it on him; never did I see
" So vast a treasure.

Lucul. " Hah! a treasure say thou?
" Did I hear right; has Timon found a treasure?

Caph. " He has, my Lord; and such an one it seems
" As betters his lost fortune.

Lucul. " You confound me;
" Where was this mine discovered? Tell me, Caphis.
" Can thou describe the spot?

Caph. " Know you the wood
" West of the City, where Lord Timon keep
" His wild and savage haunt?

Lucul. " Well, Caphis, well;
" Proceed, I know it well; each brake and bramble;
" Each little path that threads its winding way
" Through the fantastic maze, I can unravel
" Familiar as my garden.

Caph. " On the skirts
" Of this rude waste within a lonely dell,
" With poplars and with aspins planted round,
" Sacred to Faunus stands a Sylvan fane
" An antique structure.

Lucul. " Did he find it there?
" I am alive again.

Caph. " Observe me well:
" South of this fane, about an arrow's flight,
" A solitary beech, whose upmost boughs,
" Mouldering with age, in leafless ruin hang,
" The grandsire of the forest, stands --

Lucul. " Enough,
" It is my treasure; you have described the spot --
" It is my treasure; these providing hands
" Dug the unfaithful soil and at the root
" Of that old traitor buried all my hopes.

Caph. " Your treasure? -- Fortune how severe thou art!

Lucul. " These are your doings, ye vindictive Gods!
" I see you rise against ingratitude.
" And push us from the earth; I have deserved it.
" Timon, thou art revenged -- Death, be my refuge!
Lucius enters muffled. " Soft, who goes there? Lucullus, as I think;
" I have no heart to speak. Where shall I hide?
" What hill will cover, or what cave conceal
" A wretch like me? Would I were Timon's dog
" Rather than what I am -- Egregious dotard!
Various Soldiers of Alcibiades enter, carrying plate, treasure, etc. " How
now, what is here? O poison to my sight!
" These are my treasures -- Lost undone for ever.
" See, see another yet, and yet another --
" By heavens the very cup which I did worship
" More reverently than the Gods -- It was the work
" Of antique Melidorus, fit to bear
" Celestial Nectar from the ministering hand
" Of Hebe to the lips of Cretan Jove.
" Swallow me, earth -- Oh, the unholy villains,
" They pause for breath; they will kill me if I speak to 'em.
[They pass over. " But soft this man seems of a gentler sort:
" He is a stranger of the General's train,
" And knows me not. I may accost him safely.
" The good hour to you, Sir -- I pray you now
" Whence are these riches?

Sold. " Do you live in Athens,
" And ask that question? know you not one Lucius?

Luc. " I Have seen the man.

Sold. " Then you have seen a villain,
" A most dissembling, base, unmanly villain.
" Would I could meet him --

Luc. " Would you slay him then?

Sold. " No, but the sight of these his treasures would:
" We Have stripped the knave to the skin; he did deny
" Lord Timon certain vile and sorry drachms
" In his distress; now Timon's star prevails,
" And justice wrings these treasures from the gripe
" Of that perfidious, that ungrateful Lucius.

Luc. " Men in all ages have been found ungrateful.

Sold. " But none like him; society bleeds for it.

Luc. " Has Athens then a law to try the heart?

Sold. " The order of the General is our law.

Luc. " But is there nothing saved?

Sold. " All, all is swept
" To the last dram; pictures, statues, coins,
" Rich hangings, couches, vestments wrought with gold,
" And robes of Tyrian dye; plate, jewels, gems --
" Is It not a pleasant jest? Why laugh you not?
" You only seem of all men to be sad.

Luc. " I cry you mercy; I am wondrous merry --
[Feigns a laugh. " I Have heard he had a ring, a most rare jewel,
" Is that gone too?

Sold. " Behold! [Shewing the ring.

Luc. " Ay it is the same.

Sold. " Mark what a play! it is a most perfect stone.

Luc. " Would 'twere a basilisk? -- must this away
" To Timon's with the rest?

Sold. " Yes, and it is time
" That it were there -- Good morrow, gentle Sir.

Luc. Curse on your courtesy! [aside

Sold. I Am glad you like
" The ring so well: If you should meet the knave,
" Tell him the prize we have got, and gird him well,
" I know 'twill give you pleasure: All men loath him.
" Be sure you wring him to the quick -- remember.
[Exit.
Luc. " Remember! yes: no fear but I Will remember.
" You Have given me cause; the Gods, who deal in vengeance,
" Reward you for it! I could dash my brains,
" For that way only can I 'scape remembrance.
" O nature, what a luckless piece of work was man!
[Exit
SCENE.
The prospect of a rude wild country, to a considerable extent, with the ruins
of a temple to Faunus, Timon is discovered at the extremity of the stage led in
by Flavius: At the same time Evanthe enters at the front, surveys him some
time, and while he slowly advances, speaks. Evan. " O spectacle of sorrow!
Mighty Gods,
" Is that my father? -- is that mournful ruin,
" That bare and blasted trunk the spreading vine,
" Beneath whose shade late a whole nation sat
" And feasted from its branches? Hold, my heart:
" Sink not, my knees, beneath your weight of woe,
" But bear me to his feet -- My Lord, my father!
[She kneels.
Tim. " Rise, rise, my daughter -- do I once again
" Enfold thee in my arms? Alas, my child,
" I Am old and weak and smitten sore with grief.
" Gods, how ingratitude lays waste your works!
" Unkindness, like another deadly plague,
" Strikes all below the moon; creation groans;
" Nature with more than mother's pangs brings forth
" Her thankless offspring man

Evan. " All shall be well.

Tim. " All, all is well, for thou art in my sight.
" Mute as these scenes and calm as summer seas,
" Here will we sit and meditate a while,
" Then die and be at peace.

Evan. Oh! talk not thus.

Tim. " Give me your pardon; I have suffered much,
" And much I fear sorrow has shook my wits;
" But in the bitterest moments of affliction,
" I have remembered still to bless my child.

Evan. " O bless me not in part, complete my joy,
" Return to me, to Athens, to thyself,
" And these base emblems of thy discontent,
" Like the Nessean garment cast away,
" And be at peace with a repentant world.

Tim. " Can I, who from the depth of hell have called
" Malignant spirits to ensnare mankind,
" I, who each night upon the lonely strand
" By the sea brink, or in this silent waste
" Have stood and bandied curses to the moon,
" Till the gray dawn looked out; can I now teach
" That voice, which execration has made hoarse,
" The smooth soft notes of peace? will nature pardon,
" That common mother, in whose patient bosom
" I have stuck iron goads? -- It will not be.

Flav. " Move him no more, dear Lady it is in vain.

Tim. " Yet I had cause -- Speak Flavius, thou art honest,
" And wilt not flatter, had I not full cause?

Flav. " May the just Gods, who know thy wrongs, revenge 'em!

Tim. " Hush, hush! no more of that -- We must be calm;
" Shattered with storms, at length I see my port,
" And stretch for death's calm shore -- Rejoice my child,
" Thy father's sufferings hasten to an end,
" And life and care shall terminate together.

Eva. Alas, my father, talk not in this strain;
" Bright years of glory rise to crown thy hopes;
" Great Alcibiades defends thy cause,
" The suppliant Senate come to kiss thy feet,
" Loaded with treasure, while repentant Athens
" From all her gates pours forth unnumber'd crowds,
" To hail thy glad return.

Tim. " -- Why let them come!
" Should Alcibiades to please old Timon,
" Burn Athens to a heap, crush the proud Senate,
" And swallow that vile swarm of summer friends,
" That left him bare to shame; shall Timon say
" I thank thee, Sir, for this great courtesy?
" Shall man say this to man, who in pure love
" And singleness of heart never stirs his hand
" To aid his suffering fellow?

Evan. " Nay that is hard.

Tim. " Rather let Timon say, I have a daughter
" Beauteous and young, and fair as unsun'd lilies;
" Your eye has drank her charms, and strong desire
" Knocks at your heart, therefore let Athens burn;
" Spare not a man that ever spoke Timon's name
" But in the way of worship -- Oh, it is great,
" It Is glorious friendship in his daughter's arms.

Evan. " That daughter is no idle wanton, Sir,
" To dote on every form that courts the eye;
" Though nature fashioned him with every grace
" Which the joint bounty of the Gods could give him,
" Yet Alcibiades had passed unnoticed,
" With Lucius and Lucullus, and the herd
" Of common flatterers, were he that base thing,
" Which your description paints him.

Tim. " Soft you now;
" He is a man, and Flavius is no more;
" Yet he is honest, and you will say, another
" May be so too -- Two honest men, ye Gods! --
" Can there be two? I know you can do much,
" Ye great Divinities! therefore I say,
" It may be so; but mark me well, my child,
" I vouch it not! that were indeed too much.

Evan. " Does Heaven cloth falsehood in celestial robes?
" See where he comes. Who can survey that form,
" And doubt if honor dwells in such a shrine?
" Yes, in each glance, each gesture it appears,
" Lives in his tongue, and lightens in his eye,
" Pervades, inspires, and occupies his soul.

Alcibiades enters. Alcib. " Health to thee, noble Timon! health and fame,
" Peace and fair fortune! The Athenian Senate,
" Stung with remorse and shame, present themselves
" Entreating your return with them to Athens.

Tim. " Say to the Senate, you have seen me die;
" Timon is now no more; here lies their prey.
[He sinks down on the steps of the temple, being supported in his fall by
Evanthe and Flavius. " The stout old heart they have cours'd so long in view,
" Dead, dead you see, and fairly hunted down.

Alcid. " Much injured Timon., they have seen their faults,
" Their former thriftiness they have cast from them;
" And now their coffers, like their hearts, stand open
" To your free use.

Tim. " Alas, kind hearted men!
" Oh! they are cunning murderers; fine the wound,
" And hard to trace, where sharp unkindness strikes,
" Therefore they say I am not struck at all;
" But Heaven rejects their plea, and in my heart
" Sees the dire arrow rankle.

Alcib. " Live, oh live!
" Shake off despair and live, most worthy Timon
" See on all sides my Soldiers fence thee round.
" Athens I Have humbled to thy meanest use.
" And driven to shameful flight that loathsome crew,
" Whose black ingratitude corrodes thy heart.

Tim. " And what in recompense can Timon give
" To Alcibiades?

Alcib. " More than the Gods did,
" When they gave life; thou can bestow Evanthe.

Evan. " O Alcibiades, forbear to urge
" At this sad hour thy inauspicious suit:
" Hence must we date our nuptials? this a time
" To ask a blessing in? this awful moment,
" For mourning, for misfortune only fit,
" Can this be happy when a father dies?

Tim. " No more: give me your hands; come on each side:
" The overshadowing heavens shower down upon you
" Infinite blessings; make you one in heart,
" In mind, faith, truth, contentment! shun mankind:
" Live to yourselves and to the Gods alone.

Evan. " Break, break, my heart!

Tim. " Weep not for me, my child! death is my cure,
" Life my disease. Son, daughter, friend, farewell.
" Bring not my corpse within the walls of Athens,
" But lay me on the very hem of the sea,
" Where the vast Neptune may for ever weep
" On my low grave -- Remember -- Oh! it is past
[Dies.
Evan. " There fled his spirit: waft it, immortal gods
" Up to our heavenly mansions: yes, my father,
" We will entomb thee by the ocean's edge
" On the salt beech; and when the thronging waves
" Which every morn shall bow their curled heads
" To kiss thy tomb, shall, like the flattering friends
" Of this base world, fall off and leave thee bare;
" Then will I come down to the vacant strand,
" Washing thy grave with never ceasing tears,
" Till the sea flows again.

Alcib. " Ah turn Evanthe,
" Turn from that mournful sight and look upon me:
" Damp not the blessing which his dying breath
" Pronounced upon us, and lament not him,
" Who, freed from this bad world, rests from his cares.
" Now let us bear him to the neighboring beach.
" And with such rites as soldiers use inter him
" Under the vaulted cliff, (such was his will)
" Strong in extremes, from love to hatred tossed,
In the fierce conflict he was whelmed and lost."

FINIS.

