Two Strings to your Bow, A FARCE, IN TWO ACTS, AS NOW PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN, WITH DISTINGUISHED APPLAUSE.

BY ROBERT JEPHSON, ESQUIRE.

London: PRINTED FOR C. AND G. KEARSLEY, NO. 46, FLEET STREET. 1791.

PRICE ONE SHILLING.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Don Pedro, Father of Leonora, Mr. POWELL. Don Sancho, Father of Ferdinand, Mr.
THOMPSON. Octavio, Lover to Clara, Mr. DAVIES. Ferdinand, Lover to Leonora, Mr.
MACREADY. Borachio, Master of the Hotel, Mr. BERNARD. Lazarillo, Servant to
Octavio, and to Clara as Don Felix, Mr. MUNDEN.
Porters, Waiters, etc.

WOMEN.
Donna Clara, in Man's Clothes as Felix, Mrs. HARLOWE. Leonora, Mistress of
Ferdinand, Miss STEWART. A Maid Servant, Miss BRANGIN.
SCENE, GRENADA.

TWO STRINGS TO YOUR BOW.
ACT I. DON PEDRO's House.
Enter Don Sancho, Don Pedro, and Borachio. Don SANCHO. Here Is my hand. Is it a
bargain?


Don Ped. Certainly -- we'll have the wedding tonight. The young couple are so
much in love, they will be glad to dispense with ceremony -- it really looks as
if Heaven had a hand in this match, for if young Felix had not died so
commodiously at Salamanca, we could never have been brothers-in-law.


Bora. Bless me, your honor! is poor Don Felix dead then? He was a merry young
gentleman -- I Am sorry for it with all my soul.


Don Ped. Ay, he is as dead as King Philip the Second -- but did you know Don
Felix?


Bora. As well as any hogshead in my cellar -- I have kept a tavern three years
at Salamanca, and he was my constant customer. I knew his sister too, a brave
mettled damsel, that made no more of clapping on a pair of breeches, and
straddling a horseback, than if she had never been laced in stays, or
encumbered with a petticoat.


Don Ped. Well, now she may give a more free scope to her frolics, for she has
no brother left to restrain her. We sent for you, Borachio, to provide the
wedding-dinner. Let things be as they should be.


Bora. Never trouble your head about it. I Will set you out such a repast -- the
first course shall be as substantial as the bridegroom, and the second as
delicate as the bride -- then for wines and a desert. I don't care if you ask
all the Benedictines to sit in judgment upon their flavor and freshness.


Enter a Servant Maid. Maid. Sir, there is a servant of a strange gentleman, who
has a message for you.


Don Ped. What does he want with me?


Maid. He will not tell his business to any one but your worship. He has been
fooling with me till I am tired of him.


Don. Ped. Bid him come in. Exit Maid.


Don San. Can you guess what business a stranger can have with you?


Don Ped. Ay, I suppose the old business -- some needy spendthrift who has lost
his purse at the gaming-table, and wants to try if I am fool enough to take a
liking to him, and lend him as much more upon his no security.


Enter Lazarillo and Maid. Lazar. I have the honor to be, gentlemen, with the
most profound respect, your honor's most faithful, obsequious, and obedient
humble servant.


Don San. This fellow begins his speech like the conclusion of a letter.


Don Ped. Have you any business with me, friend?


Lazar. May I take the liberty to ask your honor a question?


Don Ped. Ay, what is it?


Lazar. Pray, who may that pretty, plump, cherry-cheeked, round-hipped, buxom,
genteel, light-pastern'd, black-eyed damsel be?


Don Ped. What business is it of yours? she is my daughter's maid.


Lazar. I wish your honor much joy of her.


Don Ped. What does the fellow mean? To your business, friend -- Who are you?
What do you want with me? Who do you belong to?


Lazar. Softly, softly, Sir: three questions in a breath are too much for a
poor man like me to answer all at once.


Don Ped. (To Don San.) I don't know what to make of this fellow -- I believe
he is none of the wisest.


Don San. I should rather suspect he was none of the honestest.


Lazar. Are you married, my pretty lass?


Don Ped. What would the fellow beat? What Is your business, I say?


Lazar. Sir, to answer your questions -- in the first place, I am my master's
servant. (To the Maid.) And my pretty one, as I was going to tell you, if the
Don had not interrupted me --


Don Ped. Who the devil is your master?


Lazar. He Is a strange gentleman, Sir, who has a strong inclination to pay your
Worship a visit. (To the Maid.) And now as to the little affair between us --


Don Ped. Who is this strange gentleman? What business has he with me?


Lazar. Sir, he is the noble Don Felix de Silva, of Salamanca, who waits below
to have the supreme felicity of kissing your honor's hand, and has sent me
before to make his compliments to you. (To the Maid.) Well, my dear, have you
thought of the proposal? Do you think me shocking?


Don Ped. Mind me, fellow -- what is this you say?


Lazar. Sir, if you are curious to know particulars about me, I am Lazarillo,
of Valencia, as honest a little fellow, though I say it, that should not say
it, as ever rode before a portmanteau. (To the Maid.) What I pride myself for,
more than any other good qualities, is, that I am the adorer, and faithful
slave of your divine and insurmountable beauty.


Don Fred. Turn this way, booby -- you are either drunk or mad -- Why, Don
Felix of Salamanca is dead. Exit Maid.


Lazar. Dead!


Don San. You may get another master, honest friend, for poor Don Felix has no
occasion for you.


Lazar. This is strange news. It must be a very sudden death -- perhaps it was
only his ghost that hired me, but I never saw any thing so like a living
creature; he gave me a rap over the shoulders just now, that I thought felt
very natural. If he is really a ghost, he will not dare to pretend he is alive, and
tell a lie before so much good company. Exit.


Don Ped. What do you think of this rascal? Is he a knave or a fool?


Bora. To my thinking, he is a brewing of both.


Don San. To my poor thinking, he is crazy.


Don Ped. Before Heaven, brother-in-law that is to be, if Don Felix should be
alive, we two should make but a silly figure.


Re-enter Lazarillo. Lazar. Truly, gentlemen, this is but indifferent treatment
for a stranger, to tell a poor servant like me that his master was dead.


Don Ped. So he is, I say.


Lazar. And I say that he is not only alive, but in good health, sound as a
biscuit, and sprightly as a bottle of champaigne -- and at this moment is ready
to come in, and give you proof positive by your own eyesight.


Don San. What, Don Felix?


Lazar. Ay, Don Felix.


Don Ped. De Silva?


Lazar. Ay, De Silva.


Don San. Of Salamanca?


Lazar. Ay, of Salamanca.


Don Ped. I would recommend to you, friend, to lose a little blood, and have
your head shaved -- you are mad.


Lazar. This is enough to make me so; I say he is below at this moment waiting
in the parlour.


Don Ped. I Will break your head, you rascal.


Don San. Keep your temper. Stay, let us see this impostor, who calls himself
Don Felix. Bid him walk up stairs.


Don Ped. Ay, ay, you're right -- let us see this resurrection.


Lazar. In a twinkling. Exit Lazar.


Don San. This is some sham, some cheat; but I think we shall not be easily
imposed upon.


Don Ped. Let me alone, let me alone, he must rise early, brother, who makes a
fool of Don Pedro.


Enter Donna Clara, in Man's Clothes. Clara. Signior Don Pedro, after the many
polite letters I have received from you, I could little expect such
extraordinary treatment, to be kept half an hour cooling my heels among
muleteers and lacquies.


Don Ped. Sir, I humbly ask your pardon. But may I take the liberty to crave
your name or title?


Clara. My name, Sir, is Don Felix de Silva.


Don Ped. Of Salamanca?


Clara. The same.


Bora. [Aside.] Ha, what is this; why this is Donna Clara, the sister of Felix:
let us see what will ^e the end of this.


Don Ped. I Am struck dumb with amazement; Sir, I rejoice to see you safe and
sound, which, indeed, is a little extraordinary, considering we had heard you
was dead and buried. ( Aside to Don San.) I wish, with all my heart, he was
under ground.


Clara. It was reported, I know, that I was dead; but in fact, I only received
a flesh wound in a quarrel; a fainting fit succeeded the loss of blood, and
gave occasion to the report of my death: but the moment I recovered strength
enough to travel, I mounted my horse, and set out to pay my respects, and keep
my engagement.


Don Ped. I really don't know what to say to it: you have the appearance of a
gentleman; but I have had such assurances that Don Felix was dead, that, unless
I have some strong proofs to the contrary -- you will pardon me, Sir, -- I mean
no harm -- but, truly, in a matter of this consequence, a little caution, you
know --


Clara. Sir, you're perfectly right; but here are proofs -- here are no less
than four letters. This is from the Governor of the Bank -- you know the hand
and seal, I suppose.


Bora. (To Clara.) Sir, will you permit me to congratulate you upon your
recovery, and your arrival in Granada?


Clara. [Aside.] Ha! confusion! my old host of Salamanca -- he will certainly
know and will discover me. I think I recollect you, friend.


Bora. I believe you may, your honor; my face is no stranger at Salamanca;
Joseph Borachio is as well known as the high road to Madrid.


Clara. True, true, I know I was acquainted with you -- hark! a word -- don't
betray me, and this purse has a twin brother as like it -- (Aside to Borachio).


Bora. Never fear, Madam: there is something so engaging in your countenance,
and so persuasive in your manner, that I would as soon pull down my sign as
discover you. (Aside to Clara.) Aloud. I am, for want of a better, the master
of the Eagle, hard by: and will be bold to say, that, for good treatment, soft
beds, wholesome food, and old wine, Joseph Borachio will not give the wall to
any publican in Granada.


Clara. Get your best apartments ready, and I Will order my baggage there.


Don Ped. Why, certainly these letters are addressed to Don Felix; but there
are ways you know of getting another man's letters -- at the same time, Sir --


Clara. Nay, Sir, if you still doubt, here is my old acquaintance Joseph
Borachio, he knows me; I suppose you will take his word, though you seem a little
suspicious of mine.


Bora. Lord, Sir, I Will give my oath to him. ( Aside.) I tell twenty lies every
bill I bring up for half a dollar, and the devil's in my conscience if I cannot
tell one for a purse full of doubloons. Exit.


Don Ped. Sir, I ask a thousand pardons: my doubts are vanished; you certainly
are Don Felix. ( To Don San.) What do you think of this brother-in-law that was
to be?


Don San. Why I think it is a little unlucky, that the dead should get out of
their graves to prevent our being relations.


Enter Ferdinand and Leonora. Leon. Did you send for me, father?


Don Ped. I did send for you, my dear; but matters are a little changed within
this half hour.


Clara. Is that young lady your daughter, Don Pedro?


Don Ped. Ay, Sir, that is my daughter.


Clara. This then is the young lady I must pay my addresses to -- I hope,
Madam, the consent of our families to my happiness, has made no unfavourable
impression against the person of your humble servant.


Leon. What can I say to him -- Yes, Sir -- No, Sir --


Clara. An odd reception! -- Yes, Sir -- No, Sir -- Pray, Sir, ( To Don Pedro)
how am I to understand the Lady?


Don Ped. She Is a little bashful at present -- she will be more intelligible by
and by -- she is not much acquainted with you yet -- she will come to presently.


Clara. I hope so -- this gentleman ( to Ferdinand) I suppose, is a friend of
the family -- a near relation.


Fer. A friend of the family certainly, but no other way a relation, than as I
am to call this Lady my wife.


Don San. Right! stick to that -- don't give up your pretensions -- my boy has
spirit -- that young coxcomb will not carry it so swimmingly. ( Aside.)


Clara. How Is this? I don't understand you, Sir -- your wife? -- What, does
that Lady intend to have two husbands?


Don Ped. Young gentleman, pray come with me; here has been a small mistake.
Your supposed death -- but I Will explain every thing to you within -- depend
upon it I shall fulfill my engagements.


Fred. But hark'ee, Sir, I suppose you are a cavalier of honor, and don't
imagine that the affections of a young Lady are thrown into the bargain when
the old folks are pleased to strike up a contract -- you will ask Donna Leonora's
consent, I hope.


Clara. I don't know that. People of fashion never embarrass themselves with
such vulgar ideas. Lawyers do all that is necessary on such occasions; if the
conveyances are right, affection and that old stuff, follow of course you know.


Don San. This fellow ought to have been a Sovereign Prince by his notions of
matrimony, he will take the wife, let who will choose the woman. As Kings are
obliged to wed for the good of their subjects, this libertine takes a helpmate
for the benefit of his creditors. I suppose he would marry a mermaid if there was a
good fishing bank entailed upon her.


Clara. Sir, I have not been so unsuccessful in gallantry, as to apprehend that
the Lady will object to me.


Fred. Sir, I perceive you have a very favorable opinion of yourself; but it
would be more to the purpose if you could persuade the Lady to have the same
partiality. But, Sir, a word in your ear. You and I must talk of this matter in
another place; you understand me.


Touches his sword, and exit. Don San. Bravo! well said -- he is a chip of the
old block -- Don Pedro, or brother-in-law that was to be, you and I must talk
of this matter in another place -- you understand me.


Touches his sword, and exit. Don Ped. Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Clara. But, charming Leonora, these gallants are so warm they have not allowed
you an opportunity to speak for yourself. What do you say to me, fair creature?


Leon. I say that I look at you with horror, and that my evil genius sent you
here to destroy my happiness. Exit.


Don Ped. What will become of me! I shall have a quarrel with that old ruffian
in spite of me. I Will after him, and try what can be done with my daughter by
coaxing: if that fails, I must even have recourse to the old fatherly
expedients of locking up, and a diet of bread and water.


Clara. Hold a moment -- for Heaven's sake, no harshness. Leave your daughter
to me, a little time, and my attention, may, perhaps, bring her to reason. But
in the interim, Sir, as I have occasion for some ready cash, and my letters of
credit are upon you, I must trouble you for 200 pistoles.


Don Ped. With pleasure, Sir, I have not so much cash about me, but if you will
take the trouble just to step into the next street --


Clara. I am much obliged to you, and will take the liberty to send my servant.
I can depend upon his honesty. Exeunt.


SCENE changes to the Hotel. Enter Borachio. Bora. Well, I know not how this
will end for other folks, but it has had a very promising beginning for me
already -- a hundred pistoles for keeping a secret, which I could not get a
Maravedi for discovering. Then there can be no fault found with my charges or
my entertainment, though I serve up crows for partridges, and a delicate
ram-cat for a fricasee of rabbits. But here comes my Adventurer.


Enter to him Clara. Clara. Borachio! a word with you! as you know who I am,
it is to no purpose to make a secret of any part of my history: My brother, you
know, is dead, died at Salamanca; but you don't yet understand why I have
assumed his sex and character.


Bora. I shall be glad to learn it, my sweet young Lady; especially if I can be
of any service to you.


Clara. My poor brother made too free with some choice wine at a vento near
Salamanca. Octavio, my lover, happened to be of the party; a quarrel ensued
between my brother's company and a set of strangers, who had just arrived at
the same place; in the fray my brother was run through the body, and left dead
on the spot; the officers of justice had orders to search for, and seize all
who were present as principals in the murder; to avoid the pursuit, Octavio, as
I was informed, fled hither; and with the wardrobe, credentials, and the name
of my brother, here I have followed him.


Bora. Ay, Madam, you was always a young Lady of spirit, and egad! I love
spirit: and though I was never to touch a pistole of the other purse you was
pleased to promise me, I would no more tell your secret than I would tell my
guests my own secret, how I turn Alicant into Burgundy, and sour cider into
champagne of the first growth of France.


Clara. I rely upon you -- But I wish to see my apartment; pray enquire for my
servant, and bid him come to me immediately. I ordered him to wait for me near
the Prado.


Bora. May I ask where you picked up that fellow.


Clara. I found him in my journey. He Is an odd mixture of simplicity and
cunning; but I have no reason to suspect his honesty, and that is the quality
for which at present I have most occasion.


Exeunt. SCENE, A Hall in the Hotel. Lazarillo, alone. Lazar. My master desired
me to wait for him in the street, but I see no sign of him -- it is twelve by
the clock, but by my guts at least four. There is no watch, clock, or pendulum
in the city, that points to the dining hour with more certainty than the
mechanism of my bowels: I feel a craving that must be satisfied. Odzooks! what
a delicate flavor of roast, boiled, and baked, issues from these purlieus! The
very smell is enough to create an appetite. Ay, that way lies the kitchen -- I
know it by the attraction of the odor. I Will down -- but hold, not a sous, by
Fortune; my purse is as empty as my belly.


Enter Octavio, a drunken Porter following with a Portmanteau. Octa. Come
along, you drunken rascal!


Porter. Not a step further without payment.


Octa. Why, scoundrel! would you have your hire before you earn it?


Porter. Ay, that I would -- as I Would like to make sure of my straw before I was
to sleep on it -- Pay me directly, or here I stick as fast as a mule up to the
girths in the mire.


Octa. Carry in the portmanteau -- there is the door, carry in the portmanteau
-- it is not three yards, you sot you.


Porter. Sot in your teeth -- pay me.


Throws down the portmanteau. Lazar. What Is this! egad, I may get something by
it -- it has an omen of dinner -- I smell beef in it. (Goes up to the Porter.)
Why, you drunken, staggering, sputtering beast of burden, with two legs and no
conscience, how dare you prate so saucily to a gentleman? Reel off, or I Will
teach you manners.


( Beats off the Porter, and then carries in the portmanteau.) Porter. So I
find I Am to have no payment. The Corregidor shall hear of it. Exit.


Octa. A good smart fellow -- that looks like a Servant; if he has no master
I Will hire him.

Re-enter Lazarillo. Come hither, friend -- do you know me?


Lazar. No, Sir. I only know that you are a gentleman -- that is, I don't know
you are a gentleman, but I have a strong suspicion of it. You look for all the
world as if you would not let a man who wanted his dinner, and had an excellent
stomach, go without it.


Octa. Are you acquainted with the tavern?


Lazar. I think I am very well acquainted with it. The cellars are full of old
wine, the larder full of butchers meat and poultry -- 'twould make a man's
mouth water but to look at them. Sir, does your honor smell nothing?


Octa. Smell! -- No.


Lazar. Lord bless me, Sir! why there are such steams from savoury pies, such a
fumette from plump partridges and roasting pigs, that I think I can distinguish
them as easily as I know a rose from a pink, or jonquil from a cauliflower.


Octa. Are you at present in service? have you any master?


Lazar. [Aside.] I Will tell a bouncing lie, and disown my master. No, Sir.


Octa. You seem to be a ready intelligent fellow -- Will you be my servant?


Lazar. Will I eat when I Am hungry? Will I sleep when I Am weary? Can your
honor doubt it? command me, Sir, from one extremity of the kingdom to the
other; give but me as much as will keep cold air out of my stomach, and I can
never tire in your service. Then, as for wages, to be sure my last master was a
very princely sort of a gentleman -- he gave me, Sir --


Octa. No matter what -- I shall not be more difficult to please, or less generous
to reward, than he was. What Is your name?


Lazar. Lazarillo, Sir.


Octa. I will employ you immediately. Go to the post house -- take this pistole
-- inquire if there are any letters for Don Octavio of Salamanca, and bring
them here to me.

Octavio goes in. Lazarillo, alone. Well done, Lazarillo; between two stools
they say a certain part of a man comes to the ground; but it is hard, indeed, if
I don't take care of myself between two masters.


Enter to him Clara and Borachio. Clara. So, my gentleman, is this your
attention to my commands? I ordered you to wait for me at the Prado: I might
have looked for you, it seems, till morning, if by mere accident I had not
found you here.


Lazar. By your honor's leave, I waited for you till my very bowels began to
yearn; such a craving came upon me, that had pikes, pistols, and petteraroes
opposed my passage, I could not avoid entering the house in hopes of --


Clara. No prating. Go directly, order my baggage to be brought hither, then
run to the post, and inquire if there are any letters for Don Felix, or Donna
Clara, of Salamanca, and bring them to me directly.


Lazar. Here, Sir!


Clara. Yes, here to this Hotel. Exit.


Lazar. [Aside.] Zounds! what shall I do with my other master?


Bora. The post office is but in the next street; if you should miss your way
returning, inquire for me.


Lazar. For you! and pray, who are you, Sir?


Bora. Joseph Borachio, the master of the Eagle: every body knows me.


Lazar. So, Sir, you are the master of this house?


Bora. I am.


Lazar. Then you are a happy man. I had a respect for the roundness of your
belly, and the illumination of your nose, the first glimpse I had of you; but
now my respect is increased to adoration. If you leave money for masses for
your soul, take my advice, get the Fathers, instead of praying you out of
Purgatory into Paradise, to pray you back into your own kitchen. In my opinion,
no Paradise can be superior to it. Exit.


Enter Octavio, at an opposite door, to Borachio. Octa. If this be true that
Felix is still alive, I need conceal myself no longer: you say you saw him?


Bora. Saw him! yes, Sir; saw him and conversed with him.


Octa. A very sudden recovery! but, since it is so, I have no business here;
I Will just send for my letters, and then back to Salamanca. Borachio!


Bora. Sir!


Octa. Let me have horses ready, I shall set out this evening.


Bora. This evening! why your honor has had no time to refresh yourself. Our
roads of late are none of the safest after sunset. Why, Sir, not above a week
ago, a calash of mine with a young cavalier and his new married bride, were
attacked on the road by six of the most desperate banditti that ever cried
stand to a traveller.


Octa. Indeed!


Bora. Too true, Sir. Two of my best mules were shot dead at the first
discharge of their carbines; they wounded the gentleman, stunned my drivers,
and rifled the poor young lady in a terrible manner. In truth, your honor had
better not think of venturing till morning, when you have the day fairly before
you.


Octa. No, hang it! such fellows seldom attack a single traveller; besides, if
your horses are good, I think I could out-gallop them.


Bora. I Will answer for the horses, better never came out of Andalusia: they
have straw up to their withers, and barley they may bury their ears in: poor
dumb beasts, I take as much care of them, and love them as well as if they were
my fellow Christians.


Octa. What noise is that? Away, landlord, and order the horses.


Exit. Enter Lazarillo, with Porters following him. Lazar. This way, this way,
my lads -- what the deuce, my last masters here still! (To the Porters) Fall
back, rascals, and wait for me in the passage. Exit Porters.


Octa. Lazarillo!


Lazar. Sir!


Octa. I shall set out for Salamanca presently.


Lazar. Before dinner, Sir?


Octa. Yes, directly.


Lazar. Mercy on me! no pity on my stomach. Truly, Sir, I am but a bad
traveller on an empty belly; I get such whims and vertigoes, the wind plays
such vagaries in the hollow crannies of my entrails, that you will have more
trouble with me than if I was a sick baboon, or a breeding lady of quality.


Octa. I sent you to the post; where are my letters? quick, quick -- what are
you fumbling about?


Lazar. Patience, Sir, a little patience. I thought I put them into this pocket
-- no, they are not there -- then they must be in the other pocket. [Aside.]
The letters are so unwilling to come out for fear they should be obliged to
bear witness against me; I have mixed the letters of both my masters, and curse
me if I know which I ought to give him.


Octa. You tedious booby! where are my letters?


Lazar. Here, Sir, here are three of them; but they are not all for your
honor. I Will tell you, Sir, how I came by them. As I was going to the post, I
met an old fellow servant who happened to be in a great hurry upon another
errand, and he desired me to ask for his master's letters, and keep them for
him; one of them belongs to him, but which I don't know, for to tell you the
truth, Sir, my parents found I had such fine natural parts, they would not
throw away money in having me taught any thing, so reading was left out among
some other little accomplishments in my education.


Octa. Let me see them. I Will take my own, and give you back what belongs to
your friend's master. ( Takes the letters.) What Is this? To Donna Clara -- in
Granada!


Lazar. Have you found the letter, Sir, that belongs to my comrade?


Octa. Who is your comrade?


Lazar. An old fellow servants of mine; a very honest fellow, I have known him
from a boy, when he was not this high, please your honor.


Octa. His name, puppy!


Lazar. His name, Sir -- his name -- Lopez, Sir --


Octa. Where does this Lopez live?


Lazar. Starve me if I can tell, Sir.


Octa. How then could you know where to carry him the letter?


Lazar. Oh, for that matter, Sir, I Will tell your honor that in a moment.


Octa. Well, out with it.


Lazar. ( Putting his hand to his cheek.) Deuce take it! I am stung to the bone
I believe.


Octa. What Is the matter?


Lazar. A muskito, Sir, a little peevish, whizzing, blood-sucking vermin!


Octa. Where, I say, were you to meet Lopez?


Lazar. I ask pardon, Sir -- in the Piazza.


Octa. What am I to think of this?


Lazar. Dear Fortune, get me out of this puzzle -- ( Aside) Will Not your honor
give me my comrade's letter?


Octa. No, I have occasion for it; I must open it.


Lazar. Open another gentleman's letter! Why Sir, it is reckoned one of the most
unmannerly pieces of friendship a gentleman can be guilty of.


Octa. Peace, I say -- I am too much interested to mind forms at present.
[Reads.]

Madam,
Your sudden departure from Salamanca has occasioned the greatest consternation
among your friends. They have made all possible enquiries, and have discovered
that you left this town in your brother's clothes, and the general opinion is,
that you are gone in pursuit of Octavio, who was known to pay his addresses to
you at Salamanca. I shall not fail to communicate any further intelligence of
your affairs which comes to my knowledge, and I remain with great respect,

MANUEL.



Lazar. He little cares what may happen to me from his curiosity. [Aside.]


Octa. Clara fled from Salamanca, and in pursuit of me! Find this Lopez
instantly, bring him here, and I Will reward him for his intelligence.


Lazar. Yes, Sir, give me the letter that belongs to him. But how am I to
account for its being opened? This may bring an imputation upon my honor,
about which I am amazingly punctilious.


Octa. Your honor, Mungrel! say the letter was opened by mistake, and
instantly find Lopez.

Exit.
Lazarillo, alone. Lazar. Find Lopez! 'gad if I do I shall be a lucky fellow,
for I know no such person. Lazarillo, thou have a headpiece never fails thee
at a pinch: if I could but read and write, I Would turn author, and invent tales
and story-books. But what the deuce shall I say about opening the letter? let
me see! is there no way to disguise it? I remember my mother used to make
wafers with bread and water. I have a few crumbs in my pocket, and with a
little mouth-moistening, I don't see why it should not answer; here goes for an
experiment. ( Takes bread out of his pocket, and chews it.) Gadzooks! it has
slipped down my throat -- it would not go against nature. My mouth's like the
hole of a till, whatever goes in falls to the bottom. I Will take more care this
time. There it is -- ( Seals the letter) I think it will do. After all, what
signifies how a letter's sealed, provided he likes the contents of it?


Enter Clara. Clara. Was you at the post? did you get my letter?


Lazar. Yes, Sir -- there it is -- ( gives the letter.)


Clara. Why this letter has been opened.


Lazar. Impossible.


Clara. I say it has, and here it has been patched up again with a piece of
bread.


Lazar. Egad, that is very extraordinary.


Clara. Confess, villain, what trick has been played with my letter -- the
truth instantly, or -- ( seizing him.)


Lazar. Hold, Sir, have a little patience, and I Will tell the truth: if you
frighten me, I shall never be able to tell it.


Clara. Quick then, this moment.


Lazar. Then, Sir, it was I opened it.


Clara. Impudent varlet! for what purpose?


Lazar. A mistake, nothing but a mistake as I am a Christian: I thought it was
directed to me, and I opened it.


Clara. And read it?


Lazar. No, Sir, no, upon my veracity, I read nothing but the first word, and
finding it was not for me, I clapped in a wafer directly just as your honor
sees it.


Clara. You are sure no other person saw it?


Lazar. Sure of it! I Will take my oath. As I am an honest man, as I hope to die
in my bed -- if your honor has a book about you, I Will swear by it. Any other
person! no, no -- Lord, Sir, I was never so much grieved in my life as when it
was opened, I gave myself a great knock in the head for vexation. I believe you
may see the mark of it here just over my left eye-brow.


Clara reads the letter. Lazar. There Is something in that letter does not
please him. I shall have enough to do to manage my two masters.


Clara. There are the keys of my baggage, get my things ready for dressing.

Exit.
Enter Don Pedro, at an opposite Door. Don Ped. Is your master at home?


Lazar. No, Sir.


Don Ped. Do you expect him back to dinner?


Lazar. O yes, by all means, Sir.


Don Ped. Give him this purse when he returns, with my compliments -- there are
two hundred pistoles in it. -- I shall wait upon him myself in the evening.


Gives a purse to Lazarillo, and exit. Lazar. Yes, Sir -- but curse me if I
know which of my masters it is intended for. I Will offer it to the first of them
I see, and if it does not belong to him I suppose he will not take it.


Enter Octavio. Octa. Have you found Lopez?


Lazar. No, Sir, not yet, but I have found a better thing for you.


Octa. A better thing! what is that?


Lazar. Only a purse -- full of money. I believe there are two hundred pistoles
in it.


Octa. I suppose it was left by my banker.


Lazar. You expected money, Sir?


Octa. Yes, I left a letter of credit with him.


Lazar. Oh, then there can be no doubt it was left for you, Sir. Give it to
your master, says he -- yes, Sir, says I; so there is the money.


Octa. Hold! lock up this money till I want it -- take care, put it up safely,
for I shall soon have occasion for it. But go find Lopez, and bring him to me
immediately. Exit.


Lazar. (Alone.) Go find Lopez, and bring him o me immediately -- but where
shall I find him, is another matter -- I Will go look for what I am sure of
finding, a good dinner. What a fortunate fellow was I not to make any mistake
about the money! -- If a man takes care in great matters, small things will
take care of themselves -- or if they should go wrong, if the gusts of ill-look
should make his vessel drive a little, honesty is a sheet-anchor, and always
brings him up to his birth again. Exit.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I. -- DON PEDRO's House.
Enter Clara and Leonora. CLARA. I HAVE told you my story; I rely upon your
honor, you will not discover me.


Leon. Don't fear me. You have relieved me from such anxiety by your friendly
confidence, that I would rather die than betray you; nay, what is still more, I
would rather lose my lover.


Clara. Of that there can be no danger: let matters proceed to the utmost, the
discovery of my sex puts an end, at once, to any impediment from my claim to
you.


Leon. But may I not tell Ferdinand?


Clara. No. Pray indulge me; a secret burns in a single breast; it is just
possible that two may keep it, but if it is known to a third, I might as well
tell it to the Crier, and have it proclaimed at the Great Door of every Church
in Granada.


Leon. Well, you shall be obeyed; depend upon it I will be faithful to you. Men
give themselves strange airs about our sex: we are so unaccustomed, they say,
to be trusted, that our vanity of a confidence shows we are unworthy of it.


Clara. No matter what they say; I think half of their superiority lies in
their beards and their doublets. Since I have worn man's apparel, I find many
strange inclinations coming upon me; I begin to strut, to swagger, to look big,
to run my head into quarrels, and the Lord knows what, though I am at the
bottom as errant a coward as a Turkey-cock -- he bristles and swells if you
retreat from him, but his crest falls, and his tail drops, if you advance one
step to meet him.


Don Ped. (Within.) Leonora!


Leon. My father calls me; farewell, dear Clara! should you want my assistance
you know you may command me. Exit.


Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. So, Sir, I have found you. Do you know me, Sir?


Clara. I have so many acquaintances whom I should wish not to know, that I
don't like to answer that question suddenly.


Ferd. Do you take me for a sharper, youngster?


Clara. Sharpers wear good clothes.


Ferd. And puppies wear long swords, What means that piece of steel dangling
there by thy effeminate side? Is thy soft hand too weak to touch it? Death! to
be rivall'd by a puppet, by a thing made of cream! Why, thou compound of
fringe, lace, and powder, dare thou pretend to win a Lady's affections?
Answer, stripling, can thou fight for a Lady?


Clara. [Aside.] He Is a terrible fellow! I quake every inch of me; but I must
put a good face upon it -- I Will try what speaking big will do -- (Advancing to
him). Why, yes, Captain Terrible! do you suppose I am to be daunted by your
blustering? Bless me! if a long stride, a fierce brow, and a loud voice, were
mortal, which of us should live to twenty? I Would have you to know, damn me --


Ferd. Draw your sword, draw your sword, thou amphibious thing! If you have the
spirit of a man, let me see how you will prove it -- (Draws).


Clara. Oh Lord! what will become of me! hold, hold, for Heaven's sake! What,
will nothing but fighting satisfy you? -- I Will do any thing in reason -- don't
be so hasty.


Ferd. Oh, thou egregious dastard! you will not fight, then?


Clara. [Aside.] No, by no means. I Will settle this matter in another way --
what will become of me?


Ferd. Thy hand shakes so thou will not be able to sign a paper, though it were
ready for thee; therefore, observe what I say to you.


Clara. Yes, Sir.


Ferd. And if thou dare to disobey, or murmur at the smallest article.


Clara. Yes, Sir.


Ferd. First then, own thou art coward.


Clara. Yes, Sir.


Ferd. Unworthy of Leonora.


Clara. Yes, Sir.


Ferd. Return instantly to Salamanca.


Clara. (Seeing Leonora.) Ha, Leonora! Not till I have chastised you for your
insolence.


(Draws). Enter Leonora, and runs between them. Leon. Heavens! what do I see!
fighting! for shame, Ferdinand! draw your sword on a -- stranger. She holds
Ferdinand.


Ferd. Don't hold me.


Clara. Hold him fast, Madam -- you cannot do him a greater kindness.


Ferd. (Struggling.) Dear Leonora!


Clara. Thou miserable coward! thou egregious dastard! thou poltron! by what
name shall I call thee?


Ferd. Do you hear him, Leonora?


Clara. Hold him fast, Madam -- I am quite in a fever with my rage at him.
Madam, that fellow never should pretend to you: he was just ready to sign a
paper I had prepared for him, renouncing all right and title to you.


Ferd. (To Leonora.) By Heaven, you injure me.


Clara. He had just consented to leave this city, and was actually upon his
knees to me for mercy.


Ferd. Can I bear this?


Leon. Patience, dear Ferdinand.


Clara. When seeing you coming, he plucked up a little spirit, because he knew
you would prevent us, and drawing out his unwilling sword, which hung dangling
like a dead weight by his side there, he began to flourish it about just as I
do now, Madam.


Ferd. Nothing shall restrain me -- loose me, or by my wrongs, I shall think
you are confederate with him.


Clara. Ay, ay, threaten the Lady: you know she cannot hurt you. Go, call me one
of the waiters, get a bottle or two of courage, and then see if you dare meet
me. Adieu, Ferdinand -- consider, you owe your life to that Lady; and, Madam,
in return for my mercy, once more remember your engagement. Exit.


Ferd. So, Madam, I see why you were so anxious to prevent me from chastising
that coxcomb. It was not your love of me, but your fears for him -- ungrateful
woman!


Leon. Dear Ferdinand, rely upon it you are mistaken -- don't trust appearances.


Ferd. No, don't trust my senses, don't believe my ears! --


Leon. No matter, nothing that can shake my faith to you, or injure your honor.


Ferd. Incomparable sex! we are their fools so often, they think nothing too
gross to pass upon us -- it is not above an hour since you first saw him, and
then it was with abhorrence -- 'Sdeath! Weathercocks, wind, and feathers, are
nothing. Woman, woman, is the true type of mutability -- and to be false to me
for such a thing as that -- I could cut such a man out of a sugared cake -- I
believe a confectioner made him.


Leon. Have you done yet?


Ferd. No, nor ever shall till you satisfy me.


Leon. Then you can never be satisfied -- not just now I mean, but you shall in
proper time.


Ferd. Very well.


Leon. So it is very well, if you will let it be so.


Ferd. Then you will not tell me?


Leon. No, I cannot.


Ferd. Then adieu -- you shall see me no more, but you shall hear of me. I Will
find your Narcissus, that precious flower-pot. I Will make him an example. All
the wrongs I have suffered from you shall be revenged on him. My name shall be
as terrible to all future coxcombs as broad daylight to a decayed beauty, or a
wet Sunday to a powdered citizen. Exit.


Leon. I never was in such perplexity; I like his anger as a proof of his
passion, though I tremble for the consequence. Clara will avoid him for her own
sake; and if she should find no other way to escape his fury, she has it always
in her power to make a discovery, from which honor must prevent me, without
her permission. Exit.


SCENE changes to the Hotel. Two Doors are placed obliquely at opposite Sides
of the Stage, as Entrances to different Chambers. Table and Chairs. Enter
Lazarillo. Lazar. I have often heard that gentlemen, that is, fine gentlemen,
had no conscience; but I believe the truth is, they have no stomachs: they seem
to think of every thing but eating, and, for my part, I think of nothing else.
But here comes one of my masters.


Enter Clara, with a Paper. Clara. Has Don Pedro been here to enquire for me?


Lazar. Truly, Sir, I cannot tell.


Clara. Was he here?


Lazar. Ay, that he was certainly.


Clara. Did he leave nothing with you for me?


Lazar. Not that I know of.


Clara. What, no money?


Lazar. Money!


Clara. Ay, money. -- I expected a purse with 200 pistoles.


Lazar. I believe I have made a small mistake. The purse belongs to this
master, and I gave it to the other. [Aside.] Are you certain you expected a
purse with 200 pistoles?


Clara. Certain -- yes -- what does the fellow stare at?


Lazar. You are sure they were not for another gentleman that shall be nameless?


Clara. Is the booby drunk?


Lazar. It must be with wind then. Why, Sir, I did receive a purse with the sum
you mention, and from Don Pedro, but whether it was intended for you is a point
that requires some consideration.


Clara. What did Don Pedro say to you?


Lazar. I Will tell you, Sir. Friend, says Don Pedro, there are 200 pistoles for
your master.


Clara. Well, dolt-head! and who is your master?


Lazar. There Is the point now -- there is the puzzle. Ah, Sir, there are many
things you would not find it easy to explain, though you was educated at
Salamanca, and are no doubt a great scholar.


Clara. Give me the money, fool; and no more of you impertinence.


Lazar. There it is, Sir. Heaven do you good with it; I think I know some
people who would be glad of just that sum, especially if they thought they had
a right to it.


Clara. No more -- I expect Don Pedro. Bid Borachio get a good dinner; and here
take this letter of credit, lock it up carefully, I shall have occasion for a
good deal of cash, and this way it is most portable: be careful of it, and make
no mistakes; I expect dinner to be ready as soon as I return. Exit.

Lazarillo, alone. You shall not wait a moment. This is the pleasantest order I
have yet received from either of my masters. Here comes Borachio -- I Will try if
my host understands any thing of a table.

Enter Borachio. Signor Borachio, or Master Borachio, or Don Joseph de
Borachio, you come most opportunely. We must have a dinner immediately.


Bora. Name your hour. I am always prepared; two hours hence, an hour, half an
hour; -- my cooks are the readiest fellows --


Lazar. Ay, but this must not be one of your every-day dinners, the first thing
comes to hand, tossed up and warmed over again, neither hot nor cold, like a
day in the beginning of April -- that is villainous.


Bora. Do you think I have kept the first tavern in the city so long, not to
know how to please a gentleman?


Lazar. Some gentlemen are easily pleased; other gentlemen are hard to be
pleased; now I Am of the latter order.


Bora. Gentleman, forsooth!


Lazar. A gentleman's gentleman; that is, my master's master in most things,
but in the business of his eating, absolute and uncontrollable: But come,
Master Borachio, let us have your idea of a dinner.


Bora. Two courses, to be sure.


Lazar. Two courses and a dessert.


Bora. Five in the first, and seven in the second.


Lazar. Good.


Bora. Why, in the middle I would have a rich savoury soup.


Lazar. Made with craw-fish -- Good!


Bora. At the top, two delicate while trout, just fresh from the river.


Lazar. Good! Excellent! go on, go on.


Bora. At the bottom a roast duck.


Lazar. A duck! a scavenger! an unclean bird! a waddling glutton; his bill is a
shovel, and his body but a dirt-cart: away with your duck -- let me have a
roast turkey, plump and full-breasted, his craw full with marrow.


Bora. You shall have it.


Lazar. Now for the side-dishes.


Bora. At one side stewed venison, at the other an English plum-pudding.


Lazar. An English plum-pudding! That Is a dish I am a stranger to. Now, Signor
Borachio, to your second course,


Bora. Roast lamb at the top, partridge at the bottom, jelly and omlette on one
side, pig and ham at the other, and Olla Podrida in the middle.


Lazar. All wrong, all wrong, -- what should be at the top you put at the
bottom, and two dishes of pork at the same side. It will not do -- it will never
do, I tell you.


Bora. How would you have it? I can order it no better.


Lazar. It will never do. Mind, I don't find fault with the things, the things
are good enough, very good, but half the merit of a service consists in the
manner in which you put it on the table. Pig and ham at the same side! Why you
might as well put a Hebrew Jew into the same stall at church with the Grand
Inquisitor. Mind me, do but mind me, see now, suppose this floor was the table.
(Goes upon one knee, and tears the paper left him by his master.) Here Is the
top, and there is the bottom -- put your partridge here (places a piece of the
paper), your lamb there (another piece of the paper), there is top and bottom.
Your jelly in the middle (another piece of the paper), Olla Podrida and pig at
this side together (two pieces of the paper), and the omlette and ham at this
-- (two pieces more of the paper.) There Is a table laid out for you as it
should be -- (Looking at it with great satisfaction.)


Enter Clara and Don Pedro. Clara. Hey-day! what are you about on your knees
there?


Lazar. Showing mine host how to lay out your honor's dinner; I Am no novice at
these matters -- I Will venture a wager -- there are the dishes.


Clara. Get up, puppy -- What Is this? as I live, the letter of credit I left
with him to put up for me, all torn to pieces!


Lazar. Oh the devil! I was so full of the dinner, every thing else slipped out
of my memory. [Aside.] Upon my soul, Sir, I quite forgot it. I was so taken up
about the main chance, I quite forgot the value of the paper.


Clara. Dolt! Idiot! A letter of credit for no less than four hundred pistoles
-- what amends can you make for such inconceivable stupidity?


Bora. ( To Lazarillo.) The merit of a dinner consists, you know, in the manner
in which you put the things on the table. This is a confounded dear dinner,
truly.


Lazar. Plague upon it, it was your fault, and not mine; it never would have
happened if you had served up the course properly -- pig and ham at the same
side. Such a blunder was never heard of. Exit Bor.


Clara. ( To Don Pedro) What can I do with this fellow?


Don Ped. The mischief is not without remedy. You must take up the pieces, join
them, and paste them on a sheet of paper. Your bankers will not refuse it.


Clara. Hear you -- do you understand, Don Pedro?


Lazar. Perfectly. But in truth Sir, Borachio's stupidity was enough to drive
every thing out of one's memory. He wanted, Sir --


Clara. Silence! take these fragments, and join them as Don Pedro directed you.
Make haste, and attend at dinner.


Lazar. Yes, Sir. They Will make twenty mistakes if I am not present to direct
them. Exit.


Don Ped. Really, young gentleman, nothing could be more a-propos than your
arrival. A day's delay longer had lost you your mistress, and a good portion
into the bargain. Have you seen any thing of Ferdinand, your rival, since?


Clara. Yes, and was upon the point of a most desperate combat; but your
daughter stepped in, and he ran to her for protection: but I frightened him
soundly.


Don Ped. Indeed!


Clara. It must be some very great, some extraordinary provocation makes me
draw, but when once my sword is out, I Am never tired of fighting: it is as
natural to me as the clothes on my back.


Don Ped. I don't doubt it, I don't doubt it. I was the same myself when I was
young; but what with a little gout and rheumatism in my arms, and better than
threescore years over my head, my appetite for the duello is somewhat abated;
so do you hear, Felix, when your hand's in, if you would frighten Sancho a
little for me it would not be amiss. He left me when I saw him last with a
menace, and ever since I think I have him before my eyes flourishing a long
toledo.


Clara. Leave him to me, I can manage him as easily as his son; I would as soon
fight two as one of them.


Don Ped. Don Sancho, besides, was bred a soldier. Commerce and money-dealing
have been my business. To take a man in his own trade is a great disadvantage.
-- I might as soon think of working miracles with St. Jago, or killing a man
secundum artem with Dr. Fillgrave, the first physician in Granada.


Clara. Right, Sir, right; leave it to me, and you shall never hear more of it.


Don Ped. It Is not that I am afraid, only, being out of practice, I am a little
unwilling.


Clara. I understand, I understand; I have felt just the same way, more than
once.


Don Ped. To think at my time of life of fighting myself out of the world with
cold iron, when fur and flannel can hardly keep me warm in it, would be a very
absurd piece of precipitation.


Clara. You are perfectly right.


Don Ped. Then do you consider how difficult it is to bring an old man up to my
years? As to your young people they die, and are born every hour; few of them
come to maturity, and no great matter -- but a hale, healthy, stout old man as
I am, is invaluable. Your young, puny, tender shrubs are not missed from a
plantation; but if the old tree falls, think what a length of time it requires
to replace him: my eyes run over when I reflect upon it.


Clara. No wonder; there is something very melancholy in the idea.


Don Ped. That all the care I took of myself should be thrown away -- never
exposing myself to the night air; never fatiguing myself beyond a gentle
perspiration, so careful of my diet, so regular in my hours, so chaste in my
amors; and after all this, in the evening of my days to have a long spado run
through my guts, and look like a blue-breech'd fly with a corking-pin sticking
in it!


Clara. Say no more, say no more, depend upon it you shall come to no mischief.


Don Ped. I am prodigiously obliged to you: I feel as if a great weight was
taken off me. I really am prodigiously obliged to you.


Enter Borachio. Bora. Gentlemen, your dinner will be ready in less than half
an hour.


Don Ped. Half an hour! cannot you get it sooner? to say the truth, I Am a little
hungry.


Bora. What was ordered for you cannot be ready sooner.


Clara. Let us have any thing that is ready. Appetite's the best sauce. What say
you, Don Pedro?


Don Ped. Ay, ay -- better than all the cooks in France. Let me have something
soft, that can be chewed easily, some spoon-meat; for to tell the truth, my
teeth are none of the stoutest.


Bora. Then be pleased to step into that room, and you shall have something
immediately.


Clara. ( To Don Pedro.) I follow you, pray no ceremony. Exeunt.


Enter Lazarillo, with a napkin under his arm. Lazar. Here, waiters! waiters!
what, are the fellows deaf? I knew nothing would be done till I got among them.


Enter first Waiter with a dish. 1 st Wait. Who calls! here --


Lazar. What have you got there? where are you going?


1 st Wait. To carry it to your master.


Lazar. What is it?


1 st Wait. I don't know, the cook made it, not I.


Lazar. Put it down, I Will carry it myself. Exit 1 st Wait. It smells well --
What is it? I Will try. ( Takes a spoon out of his pocket.) Like a good soldier,
or a good surgeon, I never go without my arms and my instruments. ( Tastes the
dish.) Excellent, faith -- I Will try it again -- better and better -- but here
it goes for master.


Octavio meets him as he is carrying in the dish. Lazar. Cursed ill luck,
here is my other master.


Octa. Where are you going?


Lazar. Going, Sir -- Sir, I was going -- I was going to carry this in for your
honor's dinner.


Octa. Carry in my dinner, before you knew I was come home!


Lazar. Lord, Sir, I knew you was coming home. I happened just now to pop my
head out of the window, and saw you walking down the street, so I thought you
would like to have your dinner on the table the moment you came in.


Octa. What have you got there?


Lazar. It Is a kind of a fricasee, very good I promise you.


Octa. Let me have soup -- what, do you bring meat before soup, you blockhead!


Lazar. Lord, Sir, nothing so common. In some parts of the world soup is the
very last thing brought to the table.


Octa. That Is not my custom -- carry that back, and order some soup immediately.


Lazar. Yes, Sir.


Octa. How unfortunate! to have searched so much, and to have heard nothing of
Clara.

Exit. Lazarillo, pretending to go down, returns. Now I may carry this to my
first master.

Goes into Clara's chamber.
Enter 2d Waiter with a dish. 2 d Wait. Where is this man? Lazarillo!


Lazar. ( Running out.) Who calls? here I am.


2 d Wait. Carry this to your master.

Exit Waiter.
Lazar. That I will -- give it to me. I Will carry it to the first. ( Going
toward Clara's Chamber is called to Octavio's.) What do you want? here I am.


Enter first Waiter with a dish. 1 st Wait. Here Is a dish for your master.


Lazar. You're an honest fellow. Come, stir, stir, get the soup as fast as
possible.

Exit Waiter. If I can have the good fortune to serve them both without being
discovered --


( Going toward Clara's chamber is called from Octavio's.) Octa. (Within.)
Lazarillo!


Lazar. Coming! Coming!


Enter 2 d Waiter with a dish. 2 d Wait. Where is this strange fellow,
Lazarillo?


Lazar. Who calls? here I am.


2 d Wait. Do you attend one table, and we'll take care of the other.


Lazar. Not at all, not at all, I Will take care of them both.


Exit 2 d Waiter. Clara. (From within.) Lazarillo!


Lazar. Here.


Octa. (Within.) Lazarillo!


Lazar. Patience, a little patience. Coming!


Enter 1 st Waiter with a dish. 1 st Wait. Master, what is your name, here is a
pudding.


Lazar. A pudding! What pudding?


1 st Wait. An English plum-pudding.


Lazar. Lay it down, lay it down.

Exit Waiter. This is a stranger, I must be civil to him. He looks like a
Mulatto in the smallpox. Let Us try how he tastes. (Takes out his spoon.)
Excellent! Admirable! rich as marrow, and strong as brandy. (Eats again.) This
is meat and drink, no trusting outsides. This Leopard-like pudding is most
divine, I cannot part with it. (Eats again, and sits down.)


Enter Clara, with a cane. Clara. I must get another servant. This fellow minds
nothing. Where are you, rascal? (Sees him.) There he is cramming himself
instead of attending me.


Octa. (Within.) Lazarillo!


Lazar. (Speaking with his mouth full.) In a moment, in a moment.


Clara. What are you about there? Don't you see me?


Lazar. I was just -- tasting this pudding for you -- I promise you, Sir --
you will like it.


Clara. Why, it is all gone.


Lazar. It slips down so fast, Sir, you cannot tell the taste of it till you eat
a good deal.


Clara. (Beats him.) Taste that, and that, and that --


Lazar. Hold, hold, Sir, for Heaven's sake! take care, Sir, you have no right
to more than one half of me, the other half belongs to another gentleman -- Oh!
oh! oh!


Enter Octavio. Octa. What Is this? beating my servant! loose your hold, Sir!
What right have you to strike my servant? A blow to the fellow who receives my
wages, is an affront to me. You must account with me for this.


Clara. (Seeing Octavio.) By all my hopes, Octavio!


Lazar. [Aside.] If this comes to a duel, and one of them falls, I am for the
survivor.


Octa. You look surprised, Sir! What, is this doctrine new to you?


Clara. I am not much accustomed to menaces from those lips; do you not know
me, Octavio?


Octa. Know you!


Clara. Is my voice a stranger to you? Must you have stronger proofs that I am
Clara -- if so, let this convince you.


Octa. O unexpected happiness! Art thou, indeed, my Clara? the same sincere,
faithful, generous Clara I knew and loved at Salamanca?


Clara. The same, the very same, except that as you loved me when my brother
lived, and I had little, I can now reward your disinterested passion with my
hand, my heart, and an estate large enough to gratify all our wishes, and to
relieve the necessities of all who may want our assistance.


Octa. Words are too weak, my life must thank you.


Clara. We shall find time enough for protestations hereafter; however, we are
both obliged to this fellow, though his blundering only brought us together.


Lazar. Very true, Madam; I served you both to the best of my power; but as you
were to be man and wife, it is not strange, you know, that I should not always
be able to obey one without offending the other.


Clara. O very well -- a sufficient apology; but Don Pedro's in the next room;
I Will step and explain what has happened, and send immediately for Leonora and
Ferdinand. Exit.


Lazar. May I take the liberty of offering my poor congratulations on this
joyful occasion? Will you believe it, Sir, I had a sort of an inkling, a
divining, that something of this kind would happen; for I dreamt all last night
of cats and dogs and a spread eagle.


Octa. Your dreams, I hope, go by contraries; and you shall be a witness of our
harmony, for I intend to keep you in my service.


Lazar. I will be bold to say, Sir, you never took a wiser resolution. Mercy on
me, Sir, you don't know half what I can do to serve you. I was Major Domo to
the first Grandee of Arragon, he was called Don Guzman Poderoso, y Chilos, y
Figureroz, y Palidos, y Fuscados, y Dumpos: he was a great man, Sir, and had a
great many names.


Octa. So I perceive.


Lazar. He lost his only daughter, a most beautiful young Lady, who broke her
heart for the death of her lover, and a favorite squirrel.


Octa. A very susceptible Lady, truly.


Lazar. O yes, Sir, very surreptible. A certain Duke, a particular friend of my
master's, came to condole with him (for poor Grandee, he was quite
uncomfortable) and spying me wiping my eyes in an outward room, with a
Barcelona handkerchief, as he was taking leave of my master, says he, Don
Dumpos, I am sorry for your misfortune; but be of good heart, pray be
comforted. If you had lost your wife as well as your daughter, I should hardly
know how to pity you, while you possess such a treasure in a servant as the
incomparable Lazarillo. (Meaning me, Sir.)


Octa. You have a ready invention.


Lazar. Invention! Sir; I have no more invention than an oyster; all memory and
strict truth, I protest to you.


Enter Clara, Pedro, Leonora, Sancho, and Ferdinand. Don Ped. Joy, joy, I give
you joy, this discovery has saved us all a great deal of perplexity. Our only
strife now shall be, who will fill the greatest quantity of bumpers to the
felicity of this double Gemini of Turtles.


Don San. Brother-in-law that is to be, give me your hand: we will presently
drown all animosities in a bottle of honest Borachio's Burgundy.


Ferd. (To Clara.) Madam, your ingenuity has had already such ample revenge for
the rude language I used to you, that I hardly know how to offer an apology for
the effects of my mistaken anger.


Clara. I am afraid, if any apology were necessary, I ought to make it, for I
was certainly the offender; but all unkindness must give way hereafter to
esteem and friendship.


Lazarillo steps forward. Lazar. To serve two masters long I strove in vain,
Hard words or blows were all my toils could gain;
But their displeasure now no more can move,
If you (to the Audience), my kinder masters, but approve.

FINIS.

