WHAT we must ALL come to* A COMEDY In TWO ACTS, As it was intended to be ACTED
at the THEATER ROYAL in COVENT GARDEN.

-- Otium et oppidi
Laudat rura sui --
HOR. -- Nugae seria ducent
In mala --
HOR. LONDON, Printed for P. VAILLANT, facing Southampton-street, in the
Strand. MDCCLXIV.

(Price One Shilling.)

Advertisement.
THE idea of the Character of DRUGGET, in the following piece, was taken from a
paper written by Mr. POPE, and published in the Guardian, No. 173. The reader
will perceive some strictures of true humor from thence inserted in this
little Comedy. The violent differences between Sir Charles and Lady Rackett
about a trifle, and the renewal of those differences by venturing, after they
had subsided, to resume the object in thorough good humor, are, it is
conceived, founded in Nature, because similar incidents often occur in real
life. To show the passions thus frivolously agitated, and to point out the
ridicule springing from their various turns and shiftings, was the main drift
of the ensuing scenes. But some people were determined not to hear, and the
Author could not be induced by any private motives to send the Performers a
second time into so painful a service as that of the Stage always is, when a
few are unwilling to be entertained.

Lincoln's Inn, January 10, 1764.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir CHARLES RACKETT, Mr. DYER. DRUGGET, Mr. SHUTER. LOVELACE, Mr. CUSHING.
WOODLEY, Mr. WHITE.
WOMEN.
Lady RACKETT, Miss ELLIOT. Mrs. DRUGGET, Mrs. PIT. NANCY, Miss HALLAM.
DIMITY, Mrs. GREEN.
A Servant, etc.

WHAT we must ALL come to.
ACT I.
Enter WOODLEY and DIMITY. Dimity. PO! Po! -- no such thing -- I tell you, Mr.
Woodley, you are a mere novice in these affairs.


Wood. Nay, but listen to reason. Mrs. Dimity -- has not your master, Mr.
Drugget, invited me down to his country house, in order to give me his daughter
Nancy in marriage; and with what pretense can he now break off?


Dim. What pretense! -- you put a body out of all patience -- but go on your
own way, Sir; my advice is all lost upon you.


Wood. Come now, do me justice -- have not I fixed an interest in the young
lady's heart?


Dim. An interest in a fiddlestick? -- You ought to have made love to the
father and mother -- what, do you think the way to get a wise, is by speaking
fine things to the lady you have a fancy for? -- That was the practice, indeed,
but things are altered now -- you must address the old people, Sir; and never
trouble your head about your mistress -- None of your letters, and verses, and
soft looks, and fine speeches, -- "Have compassion, thou angelic creature, on a
poor, dying" -- Pshaw! stuff! nonsense! all out of fashion. -- Go your ways to
the old Curmudgeon, humor his whims -- "I shall esteem it an honor, Sir, to
be allied to a gentleman of your rank and taste." "Upon my word, he is a pretty
young gentleman." -- Then wheel about to the mother: "Your daughter, Ma'am, is
the very model of you, and I shall adore her for your sake." "Here, come
hither, Nancy, take this gentleman for better for worse." "La, Mama, I can
never consent." -- "I should not have thought of your consent -- the consent of
your relations is enough: why how now, Hussy! -- So away you go to church, the
knot is tied, and you quarrel like contrary elements all the rest of your lives
-- that is the way of the world now."


Wood. But you know, my dear Dimity, the old couple have received every mark of
mention from me.


Dim. Attention! to be sure you did not fall asleep in their company; but what
then? -- You should have entered into their characters, played with their
humors, and sacrificed to their absurdities.


Wood. Bat if my temper is too frank --


Dim. Frank, indeed! I hate the word, except when I receive a letter. -- Have
not you to do with a rich old shopkeeper, retired from business with an hundred
thousand pounds in his pocket, to enjoy the dust of the London road, which he
calls living in the country -- and yet you must find fault with his situation!
-- What if he has made a ridiculous gimcrack of his house and gardens, you know
his heart is set upon it; and could not you have commended his taste? But you
must be too frank! -- "Those walks and alleys are too regular -- those
evergreens should not be cut into such fantastic shapes." -- And thus you
advise a poor old mechanic, who delights in every thing that is monstrous, to
follow nature -- Oh, you're likely to be a successful lover!


Wood. But why should not I save a father-in-law from being a laughing stock?


Dim. Make him your father-in-law first --


Wood. Why he cannot open his windows for the dust -- he stands all day looking
through a pane of glass; and he calls that living in the fresh air, and enjoying
his own thoughts.


Dim. Po! Po! -- you have ruined yourself by talking sense to him; and all your
nonsense to the daughter will not make amends for it. -- And then the mother; how
have you played your car^s in that quarter? -- She wants a tinsel man of
fashion for her second daughter -- "Don't you see (says she) how happy my
eldest girl is made by marrying Sir Charles Rackett -- Nancy shall have a man
of quality too."


Wood. And yet I know Sir Charles Rackett perfectly well.


Dim. Yes, so do I; and I know he will make his lady wretched at last -- But what
then? You should have humored the old folks, -- you should have been a talking
empty fop, to the good old lady; and to the old gentleman, an admirer of his
taste in gardening. But you have lost him -- he is grown fond of this beau
Lovelace, that is here in the house with him; the coxcomb ingratiates himself by
flattery, and you're undone by frankness.


Wood. And yet, Dimity, I will not despair.


Dim. And yet you have reason, a million of reasons -- Tomorrow is fixed for
the wedding day; Sir Charles and his lady are to be here this very night --
they are engaged, indeed, at a great rout in town, but they take a bed here,
not withstanding. -- The family is fitting up for them; Mr. Drugget will keep
ye all up, in the next room there till they arrive -- and tomorrow the
business is over -- and yet you don't, despair! -- Hush! --, hold your tongue;
here he comes, and Lovelace with him. -- Step this way with me, and, I Will
devise something, I warrant you. -- It Is enough to vex a body, to see an old
father and mother marrying their daughter as they please, in spite of all I can
do.

Exeunt.
Enter DRUGGET and LOVELACE. Drug. And so you like my house and gardens, Mr.
Lovelace.


Love. Oh! perfectly, Sir; they gratify my taste of all things. One sees villas
where nature reigns in a wild kind of simplicity; but then they have no
appearance of art, no art at all.


Drug. Very true, rightly distinguished: -- now mine is all art; no wild nature
here; I did it all myself.


Love. What, had you none of the great proficients in gardening to assist you?


Drug. Lackaday! no, -- ha! ha! I did it all myself -- I love my garden. The
front of my house, Mr. Lovelace, is not that very pretty?


Love. Elegant to a degree!


Drug. Don't you like the sun-dial, placed just by my dining room windows?


Love. A perfect beauty!


Drug. I knew you would like it -- and the motto is so well adapted -- Tempus edax,
and index rorum. And I know the meaning of it -- Time eats and discovers
all things -- ha! ha! -- pretty, Mr. Lovelace! -- I have seen people so stare
at it as they pass by -- ha! ha!


Love. Why now I don't believe there is a nobleman in the kingdom has such a
thing.


Drug. Oh no -- they have got into a false taste. -- I bought that bit of
ground, the either side of the road -- and it looks very pretty -- I made a
duck-pond there, for the lake of the prospect.


Love. Charmingly imagined!


Drug. My leaden images are well --


Love. They exceed ancient statuary. --


Drug. I love to be surpised at the turning of a walk with an inanimate
figure, that looks you full in the face, and can say nothing to you, while one
is enjoying one's own thoughts -- ha! ha! -- Mr. Lovelace, I Will point out a
beauty to you -- Just by the haw-haw, at the end of my ground, there is a fine
Dutch figure, with a scythe in his hand, and a pipe in his mouths -- that is a
jewel, Mr. Lovelace. --


Love. That escaped me: a thousand thanks for pointing it out -- I observe you
have two very fine yew-trees before the house.


Drug. Lackaday, Sir! they look uncouth -- I have a design about them -- I
intend -- ha! ha! it will, be very pretty, Mr. Lovelace -- I intendto have them
cut into the shape of the two giants at Guild Hall -- ha! ha!


Love. Exquisite! -- Why then they will not look like trees, --


Drug. Oh, no, no -- not at all -- I will not have any thing in my garden that
looks like what it is -- ha! ha!


Love. Nobody understands these things like you, Mr. Drugget.


Drug. Lackaday! it is all my delight now -- this is what I have been working
for. I have a great improvement to make still -- I propose to have my
evergreens cut into fortifications! and then I shall have the Moro castle, and
the Havanna; and then near it shall be ships of myrtle, failing upon seas of
box to attack the town: will not that make my place look very rural, Mr. Lovelace?


Love. Why you have the most fertile invention, Mr. Drugget.


Drug. Ha! ha! this is what I have been working for. I love my garden -- but I
must beg your pardon for a few moments -- I must step and speak with a famous
nursery-man, who is come to offer me some choice things -- Do go and join the
company, Mr. Lovelace -- my daughter Rackett and Sir Charles will be here
presently -- I shall not go to bed till I see 'em -- ha! ha! -- I did all this
myself, Mr. Lovelace -- this is what I have been working for -- I fined for
Sheriff to enjoy these things -- ha! ha!

Exit.
Love. Poor Mr. Drugget! Mynheer Van Thundertentrunck, in his little box at the
side of a dyke, has as much taste and elegance. -- However, if I can but carry
off his daughter, if I can rob his garden of that flower -- why then I shall
say, "This is what I have been working for."


Enter DIMITY. Dim. Do lend us your assistance, Mr. Lovelace -- you're a sweet
gentleman, and love a good-natured action.


Love. Why how now! what is the matter?


Dim. My master is going to cut the two yew-trees into the shape of two devils,
I believe; and my poor mistress is breaking her heart for it. -- Do, run and
advise him against it -- she is your friend, you know she is, Sir.


Love. Oh, if that is all -- I Will make that matter easy directly.


Dim. My mistress will be for ever obliged to you; and you will marry her
daughter in the morning.


Love. Oh, my rhetoric shall dissuade him.


Dim. And, Sir, put him against dealing with that nursery-man; Mrs. Drugget
hates him.


Love. Does she?


Dim. Mortally.


Love. Say no more, the business is done.

Exit.
Dim. If he says one word, old Drugget will never forgive him. -- My brain was
at it is last shift; but if this plot takes -- So, here comes our Nancy.


Enter NANCY. Nan. Well, Dimity, what is to become of me?


Dim. My stars! what makes you up, Miss? -- I thought you were gone to bed!


Nan. What should I go to bed for? only to tumble and toss, and fret, and be
uneasy -- they are going to marry me, and I am frighted out of my wits.


Dim. Why then you're the only young lady within fifty miles round, that would
be frightened at such a thing.


Nan. Ah! if they would let me choose for myself.


Dim. Don't you like Mr. Lovelace?


Nan. My mama does, but I don't; I don't mind his being a man of fashion, not I.


Dim. And, pray, can you do better than follow the fashion?


Nan. Ah! I know there is a fashion for dressing the hair, and a fashion for new
bonnets -- but I never heard of a fashion for the heart.


Dim. Why then, my dear, the heart mostly follows the fashion now.


Nan. Does it? -- Pray who sets the fashion of the heart?


Dim. All the fine ladies in London, of my conscience.


Nan. And what is the last new fashion, pray?


Dim. Why to marry any fop, that has a few deceitful agreeable appearances
about him; something of a pert phrase, a good operator for the teeth, and a
tolerable tailor.


Nan. And do they marry without loving?


Dim. Oh! marrying for love has been a great while out of fashion.


Nan. Why then I Will wait till that fashion comes up again.


Dim. And then, Mr. Lovelace, I reckon --


Nan. Pshaw! I don't like him: he talks to me as if he was the most miserable
man in the world, and the confident thing looks so pleased with himself all the
while. -- I want to marry for love, and not for card-playing -- I should not be
able to bear the life my sister leads with Sir Charles Rackett -- and I Will
forfeit my new cap, if they don't quarrel soon.


Dim. I Will be sworn they will -- but what say you then to Mr. Woodley?


Nan. Ah! -- I don't know what to say -- but I can sing something that will
explain, my mind.

SONG.
I.
WHEN first the dear youth passing by,
Disclosed his fair form to my sight,
I gazed, but I could not tell why;
My heart it went throb with delight.
2.
As nearer he drew, those sweet eyes
Were with their dear meaning so bright,
I trembled, and, lost in surprise,
My heart it went throb with delight.
3.
When his lips their dear accents did try
The return of my love to excite,
I feigned, yet began to guess why
My heart it went throb with delight.
4.
We changed the stolen glance, the fond smile,
Which lovers alone read aright;
We looked, and we sighed, yet the while
Our hearts they went throb with delight.
5.
Consent I soon blushed, with a sigh
My promise I ventured to plight;
Come, Hymen, we then shall know why
Our hearts they go throb with delight.

Enter WOODLEY. Wood. My sweetest angel! I have heard all, and my heart
overflows with love and gratitude.


Nan. Ah! but I did not know you was listening. You should not have betrayed me
so, Dimity: I shall be angry with you.


Dim. Well, I Will take my chance for that. -- Run both into my room, and say all
your pretty things to one another there, for here comes the old gentleman --
make haste away. --

Exeunt Woodley and Nancy.
Enter DRUGGET. Drug. A forward presuming coxcomb! Dimity, do you step to Mrs.
Drugget, and send her hither.


Dim. Yes, Sir; -- It works upon him I see. --

Exit.
Drug. The yew-trees ought not to be cut, because they will help to keep off the
dast, and I am too near the road already -- a sorry ignorant fop! -- When I am
in so fine a situation, and can see every carriage that goes by. -- And then to
abuse the nursery-man's rarities! -- A finer sucking pig in lavender, with sage
growing in his belly, was never seen! -- And yet he wants me not to have it --
But have it I will. -- There Is a fine tree of knowledge too, with Adam and Eve
in juniper; Eve's nose not quite grown, but it is thought in the spring will be
very forward -- I Will have that too, with the serpent in ground ivy -- two poets
in wormwood -- I Will have them both. Ay; and there is a Lord Mayor's feast in
honeysuckle; and the whole court of Aldermen in hornbeam: and three modern
beaux in jessamine, somewhat stunted: they all shall be in my garden, with the
Dragon of Wantley in box -- all -- all -- I Will have 'em all, let my wife and
Mr. Lovelace say what they will --


Enter Mrs. DRUGGET.
Mrs. D. Did you send for me, lovey?


Drug. The yew-trees shall be cut into the giants of Guild Hall, whether you
will or not.


Mrs. D. Sure my own dear will do as he pleases.


Drug. And the pond, tho'you praise the green banks, shall be walled round, and
I Will have a little fat boy in marble, spouting up water in the middle.


Mrs. D. My sweet, who hinders you?


Drug. Yes, and I Will buy the nursery-man's whole catalogue -- Do you think
after retiring to live all the way here, almost four miles from London, that I
will not do as I please in my own garden?


Mrs. D. My dear but why are you in such a passion?


Drug. I Will have the lavender pig, and the Adam and Eve, and the Dragon of
Wantley, and all of 'em -- and there shall not be a more romantic spot on the
London road then mine.


Mrs. D. I Am sure it is as pretty as hands can make it.


Drug. I did it all myself, and I Will do more -- And Mr. Lovelace shall not have my
daughter. --


Mrs. D. No! what is the matter now, Mr. Drugget?


Drug. He shall learn better manners than to abuse my house and gardens. -- You
put him in the head of it, but I Will disappoint ye both -- And so you may go and
tell Mr. Lovelace that the match is quite off.


Mrs. D. I cannot comprehend all this not I -- but I Will tell him so, if you
please, my dear -- I am willing to give myself pain, if it will give you
pleasure: must I give myself pain? -- don't ask me, pray don't.


Drug. I am resolved, and it shall be so.


Mrs. D. Let it be so then. (Cries) Oh! oh! cruel man! I shall break my heart
if the match is broke off -- if it is not concluded tomorrow, send for an
undertaker, and bury me the next day.


Drug. How! I don't want that neither --


Mrs. D. Oh! oh! --


Drug. I am your lord and matter, my dear, but not your executioner -- Before
George, it must never be said that my wife died of too much compliance -- Cheer
up, my love -- and this affair shall be settled as soon as Sir Charles and Lady
Rackett arrive.


Mrs. D. You bring me to life again -- you know, my sweet, what an happy couple
Sir Charles and his Lady are -- they have been married these six weeks, and
have never had the least difference -- Why should not we make our Nancy as
happy?


Enter DIMITY.
Dim. Sir Charles and his Lady, Ma'am.


Mrs. D. Oh! charming! I Am transported with joy! -- Where are they? I long to
see 'em.

Exit.
Dim. Well, Sir; the happy couple are arrived.


Drug. Yes, they do live happy, indeed.


Dim. But how long will it last?


Drug. How long! don't forbode any ill, you jade -- don't, I say -- It will
last during their lives, I hope.


Dim. Well, mark the end of it -- Sir Charles, I know, is gay. and
good-humored -- but he cannot bear the least contradiction, no, not in the
merest trisle.


Drug. Hold your tongue -- hold your tongue.


Dim. Yes, Sir; I have done; -- and yet there is in the composition of Sir
Charles a certain humor, which, like the flying gout, gives nodisturbance to
the family till it settles in the head -- When once it fixes there, mercy on
very body about him! but here he comes.

Exit,
Enter Sir CHARLES. Sir Cha. My dear Sir, I kiss your hand -- but why stand on
ceremony? to find you up thus late, mortifies me beyond expression.


Drug. It Is but once in a way, Sir Charles.


Sir Cha. My obligations to you are inexpressible; you have given me the most
amiable of girls; our tempers accord like unisons in music.


Drug. Ah! that is what makes me happy in my old days; my children and my garden
are all my care.


Sir Cha. And my friend Lovelace -- he is to have our sister Nancy, I find.


Drug. Why my wife is so minded.


Sir Cha. Oh, by all means, let her be made happy -- A very pretty fellow
Lovelace -- And as to that Mr. -- Woodley I think you call him -- he is but a
plain underbred, ill-fashion'd sort of a -- Nobody knows him, he is not one of
us -- Oh, by all means marry her to one of us.


Drug. I believe it must be so -- Would you take any refreshment?


Sir Cha. Nothing in nature -- it is time to retire.


Drug. Well, well! good night then, Sir Charles -- ha! here comes my daughter
-- good night, Sir Charles.


Sir Cha. Bon repos!


Drug. (Going out) My Lady Rackett, I Am glad to hear how happy you are,
(without) I will not detain you now -- there is your good man waiting for you --
good night, my girl.


Sir Cha. I must humor this old putt, in order to be remembered in his will.


Enter Lady RACKETT. Lady R. O la! -- I Am quite fatigued -- I can hardly move
-- why don't you help me, you barbarous man?


Sir Cha. There; take my arm -- "Was ever thing so pretty made to walk."


Lady R. But I will not be laughed at -- I don't love you.


Sir Cha. Don't you?


Lady R. No. Dear me! this glove! Why don't you help me off with my glove?
pshaw! -- You awkward thing, let it alone; you an't fit to be about me, I might
as well not be married for any use you are of -- reach me a chair -- You have
no compassion, for me -- I am so glad to sit down -- Why do you drag me to
routs -- You know I hate 'em?


Sir Cha. Oh! there is no existing, no breathing, unless one does as other
people of fashion do.


Lady R. But I Am out of humor, I lost all my money.


Sir Cha. How much?


Lady R. Three hundred.


Sir Cha. Never fret for that -- I don't value three hundred pounds to
contribute to your happiness.


Lady R. Don't you? -- not value three hundred pounds to please me?


Sir Cha. You know I don't.


Lady R. Ah! you fond fool! -- but I hate gaming -- It almost metamorphoses a
woman into a fury -- do you know that I was frighted at myself several times
tonight -- I had an huge oath at the very tip of my tongue.


Sir Cha. Had ye?


Lady R. I caught myself at it -- and so I bit my lips -- and then I was
crammed up in a corner of the room with such a strange party at a whist-table,
looking at black and red spots -- did you mind 'em?


Sir Cha. You know I was busy else where.


Lady R. There was that strange unaccountable woman, Mrs. Nightshade -- She
behaved so strangely to her husband, a poor; inoffensive, good-natured, good
sort of a good for nothing kind of man, -- but she so teiz'd him -- "How could
you play that card? Ah, you have a head, and so has a pin -- You're a numscull,
you know you are -- Ma'am, he has the poorest head in the world, he does not
know what he is about; you know you don't -- Ah sye! -- I Am ashamed of you!"


Sir Cha. She has served to divert you, I see.


Lady R. And then to crown all -- there was my Lady Clackit, who runs on with
an eternal volubility of nothing, out of all season, time, and place -- In the
very midst of the game she begins, "Lard, Ma'am, I was apprehensive I should
not be able to wait on your La'ship -- my poor little dog, Pompey -- the
sweetest thing in the world, -- a spade led! -- there is the knave -- I was
fetching a walk, Me'm, the other morning in the Park -- a fine frosty morning
it was -- I love frosty weather of all things -- Let me look at the last trick
-- and so Me'm, little Pompey -- And if your La'ship was to see the dear
creature pinched with the frost, and mincing his steps along the Mall -- with
his pretty little innocent face -- I vow I don't know what to play -- And so,
Me'm, while I was talking to Captain Flimsey -- Your La'ship knows Captain
Flimsey -- Nothing but rubbish in my hand -- I cannot help it -- And so, Me'm,
five odious frights of dogs beset my poor little Pompey -- the dear creature
has the heart of a lion, but who can resist five at once -- And so Pompey
barked for assistance -- the hurt he received was upon his chest -- the doctor
would not advise him to venture out till the wound is healed, for fear of an
inflammation -- Pray what is trumps?"


Sir Cha. My dear, you would make a most excellent actress.


Lady R. Well, now let us go to bed -- but Sir Charles, how shockingly you
played that last rubber, when I stood looking over you!


Sir Cha. My love, I played the truth of the same.


Lady R. No, indeed, my dear, you played it wrong.


Sir Cha. Po! nonsense! you don't understand it.


Lady R. I beg your pardon, I am allowed to play better then you.


Sir Cha. All conceit, my dear, I was perfectly right.


Lady R. No such thing, Sir Charles, the diamond was the play.


Sir Cha. Po! po! ridiculous! the club was the card against the world.


Lady R. Oh, no, no, no, I say it was the diamond.


Sir Cha. Zounds! Madam, I say it was the club.


Lady R. What do you fly into such a passion for?


Sir Cha. 'Sdeath and fury, do you think I don't know what I Am about? I tell
you once more the club was the judgment of it.


Lady R. May be so -- have it your own way (walks about, and sings.)


Sir. Cha. Vexation! you're the strangest woman that ever lived, there is no
conversing with you -- Look'ye here, my Lady Rackett -- it is the clearest case
in the world, I Will make it plain in a moment.


Lady R. Well, Sir! ha! ha! ha! (witha sneering laugh)


Sir Cha. I had four cards left -- a trump was led -- they were six -- no, no,
no, they were seven, and we nine -- then you know -- the beauty of the play was
to --


Lady R. Well, now it is amazing to me, that you cannot see it -- give me leave,
Sir Charles -- your left hand adversary had led his last trump -- and he had
before finess'd the club, and rough'd the diamond -- now if you had put on your
diamond --


Sir Cha. Zoons! Madam, but we played for the odd trick.


Lady R. And sure the play for the odd trick --


Sir Cha. Death and fury! cannot you hear me?


Lady R. Go on, Sir.


Sir Cha. Zoons, hear me I say -- will you hear me?


Lady R. I never heard the like in my life;

(Hums a tune, and walks about fretfully.)
Sir Cha. Why then you are enough to provoke the patience of a Stoic -- (Looks
at her, and she walks about, and laughs uneasily.) Very well, Madam; -- You
know no more of the game than a hobbyhorse -- no more than my coachman.


Lady R. Ha! ha! -- (takes cut a glass, and settles her hair.)


Sir Cha. You're a vile woman, and I Will not sleep another night under one roof
with you.


Lady R. As you please, Sir.


Sir Cha. Madam it shall be as I please -- I Will order my chariot this moment --
(going) I know how the cards should be played as well as any man in England,
that let me tell you -- (going) -- And when your family were standing behind
counters, measuring out tape, and bartering for Whitechapel needles, my
ancestors, my ancestors, Madam, were squandering away whole estates at cards;
whold estates, my Lady Rackett -- (She hums a tune and he looks at her) -- Why
then, by all that is dear to me, I Will never exchange another word with you,
good, bad, or indifferent -- Look'ye, my Lady Rackett -- thus it stood -- the
trump being led, it was then my business --


Lady R. To sinesse the club.


Sir Cha. Damn it, I have done with you for ever, and so you may tell your
father.

Exit.
Lady R. What a passion the gentleman's in! ha! ha! (laughs in a peevish
manner), I promise him, I Will not give up my judgment.


Enter Sir CHARLES. Sir Cha. My Lady Rackett, look'ye, Ma'am -- once more out
of pure goodnature --


Lady R. Sir, I am convinced of your goodnature.


Sir Cha. That, and that only prevails with me to tell you, the club was the
play.


Lady R. Well, be it so -- I have no objection.


Sir Cha. It Is the clearest point in the world -- we were niney and --


Lady R. And for that very reasoh: -- you know the club was the best in the
house.


Sir Cha. There is no such thing as talking to you -- You're a base woman --
I Will part from you for ever; you may live here with your father, and admire his
fantastical evergreens, till you grow as fantastical yourself -- I Will set out
for London this instant -- (Stops at the door) The club was not the best in the
house.


Lady R. How calm you are! Well! -- I Will go to bed; -- will you come? -- you
had better -- come then -- you shall come to bed -- not come to bed when I ask
you? -- Poor Sir Charles!

Looks and laughs, then Exit.
Sir Cha. That ease is provoking. (Cross;ses to the opposite door, where she
went out) -- I tell you the diamond was the play, and I here take my final
leave of you -- (walks back, as fast as be can) I am resolved upon it, and I
know the club was not the best in the house.

Exit.
ACT II.
Enter DIMITY. Dimity. HA! ha! ha! oh! heavens! I shall expire in a fit of
laughing -- This is the modish couple that were so happy -- such a quarrel as
they have had -- the whole house is in an uproar -- ha! ha! A rare proof of the
happiness they enjoy in high life. I shall never hear people of fashion
mentioned again, but I shall be ready to die in a fit of laughter -- ho! ho! ho!


Enter DRUGGET. Drug. Hey! how! what is the matter, Dimity -- What am I called
down stairs for?


Dim. Why there is two people of fashion -- (Stifles a laugh.)


Drug. Why you saucy minx! -- Explain this moment.


Dim. The fond couple have been together by the ears this half hour -- are you
satisfied now? --


Drug. Ay! -- what have they quarreled -- what was it about?


Dim. Something above my comprehension and yours too, I believe -- People in
high life understand their own forms best -- And here comes one that can
unriddle the whole affair.

Exit.
Enter Sir CHARLES. Sir Cha. (To the people within) I say, let the horses be
put-to this moment -- So, Mr. Drugget.


Drug. Sir Charles, here is a terrible bustle -- I did not expect this -- what
ean be the matter?


Sir Cha. I have been used by your daughter, in so base, so contemptuous a
manner, that I am determined not to stay in this house tonight.


Drug. This is a thunderbolt to me! after seeing how elegantly and fashionably
you lived together, to find new all sunshine vanished -- Do, Sir Charles, let
me heal this breach, if possible.


Sir Cha. Sir, it is impossible -- I Will not live with her a day longer.


Drug. Nay, nay, don't be over hasty, -- let me entreat you, go to bed and
sleep upon it -- in the morning when you're cool --


Sir Cha. Oh, Sir, I am very cool, I assure -- ha! ha! -- it is not in her
power, Sir, to -- to -- a -- a -- to disturb the serenity of my temper -- Don't
imagine that I Am in apassion -- I Am not so easily ruffled as you may imagine --
But quietly and deliberately. I can resent ill usage -- I can repay the
injuries done me by a false, ungrateful, deceitful wife, with the severity, and
at the same time with the composure of an old judge, hardened in his office --
That man, am, I, Sir.


Drug. The injuries done you by a treacherous wife! -- my daughter I hope --


Sir Cha. Her character is now fully known to me -- she is a vile woman! that is
all I have to say, Sir.


Drug. Hey! how! -- a vile woman -- what has she done -- I hope she is not
capable --


Sir Cha. I shall enter into no detail, Mr. Drugget, the time and circumstances
will not allow it at present -- But depend upon it I have done with her -- a low,
unpolished, uneducated, false, imposing -- See if the horses are put-to.


Drug. Mercy on me! in my old days to hear this.


Enter Mrs. DRUGGET. Mrs. D. Deliver me! I am all over in such a tremble -- Sir
Charles, I shall break my heart if there is any thing amiss.


Sir Cha. Madam, I am very sorry for your sake -- but there is no possibility
of living with her.


Mrs. D. My poor dear girl! What can she have done?


Sir Cha. What all her sex can do, the very spirit of them all.


Drug. Ay! ay! ay! -- She Is bringing soul disgrace upon us -- This comes of her
marrying a man of fashion.


Sir Cha. Faihion, Sir! -- That should have instructed her better -- She might
have been sensible of her happiness -- Whatever you may think of the fortune
you gave her, my rank in life, claims respect -- claims obedience, attention,
truth, and love, from one raised in the world as she has been by an alliance
with me.


Drug. And let me tell you, however you may estimate your quality, my daughter
is dear to me.


Sir Cha. And, Sir, my character is dear to me.


Drug. Yet you must give me leave to tell you --


Sir Cha. I will not hear a word.


Drug. Not in behalf of my own daughter?


Sir Cha. Nothing can excuse her -- it is to no purpose -- She has married above
her; and if that circumstance makes the Lady forget herself, she at least shall
see that I can and will support my own dignity.


Drug. But, Sir, I have a right to ask --


Mrs. D. Patience, my dear, be a little calm.


Drug. Mrs. Drugget, do you have patience, I must and will enquire.


Mrs. D. Don't be so hasty, my love; have some respect for Sir Charles's rank;
don't be violent with a man of his fashion.


Drug. Hold your tongue, woman, I say -- you're not a person of fashion at
least -- My daughter was ever a good girl.


Sir Cha. I have found her out.


Drug. Oh! then it is all over -- and it does not signify arguing about it.


Mrs. D. That ever I should live to see this hour!


Sir Cha. I know her thoroughly -- and there is no such thing as being
connected with her a moment longer.


Mrs. D. How the unfortunate girl could take such wickedness in her head, I
cannot imagine -- I Will go and speak to the unhappy creature this moment.

Exit.
Sir Cha. She stands detected now -- detected in her truest colors.


Drug. Well, grievous as it may be, let me hear the circumstances of this
unhappy business.


Sir Cha. Mr. Drugget, I have not leisure now -- but her behavior has been so
exasperating, that I shall make the best of my way to town -- My mind is fixed
-- She sees me no more, and so, your servant, Sir.

Exit.
Drug. What a calamity has here befallen us! as good a girl, and as well
disposed till the evil communication of high life, and fashionable vices,
turned her to folly.


Enter LOVELACE. Love. Joy! joy! Mr. Drugget, I give you joy.


Drug. Don't insult me, Sir -- I desire you will not.


Love. Insult you, Sir! -- is there any thing insulting, my dear Sir, if I take
the liberty to congratulate you on --


Drug. There! there! -- the manners of high life for you -- He thinks there is
nothing in all this -- the ill behavior of a wife he thinks an ornament to her
character -- Mr. Lovelace, you shall have no daughter of mine.


Love. My dear Sir, never bear malice -- I have reconsider'd the thing, and
curse catch me if I don't think your notion of the Gulid-hall giants, and the
court of Aldermen in hornbeam --


Drug. Well! well! well! there may be people of the court end of the town in
hornbeam too.


Love. Yes, faith, so there may -- and I believe I could recommend you a
tolerable collection -- however, with your daughter I am ready to venture.


Drug. But I am not ready -- I Will not venture my girl with you -- no more
daughters of mine shall have their minds depraved by polite vices.

Enter WOODLEY. Mr. Woodley -- you shall have Nancy to your wife, as I promised
you -- take her tomorrow morning.


Wood. Sir, I have not words to express --


Love. What the devil is the matter with the old haberdasher now?


Drug. And hark ye, Mr. Woodley -- I Will make you a present for your garden, of
a coronation dinner in greens, with the champion riding on horseback, and the
sword will be full grown before April next.


Wood. I shall receive it, Sir, as your favor.


Drug. Ay, ay! I see my error in wanting an alliance with great folks -- I had
rather have you, Mr.Woodley, for my son-in-law, than any courtly fop of 'em
all. Is this man gone! -- Is Sir Charles Rackett gone?


Wood. Not yet; -- he makes a bawling yonder for his horses -- I Will step and
call him to you.

Exit.
Drug. I am out of all patience -- I am out of my senses, -- I must see him
once more -- Mr. Lovelace, you nor no person of fashion, shall ruin another
daughter of mine.

Exit.
Love. Droll this! -- damned droll! And every syllable of it Arabic to me --
the queer old putt is as whimsical in his notions of life as of gardening. If
this be the case -- I Will brush, and leave him to his exotics.

Exit.
Enter Lady RACKETT, Mrs. DRUGGET, and DIMITY. Lady R. A cruel barbarous man!
to quarrel in this unaccountable manner; to alarm the whole house, and expose
me and himself too.


Mrs. D. Oh! child! I never thought it would have come to this -- your shame
will not end here; it will be all over St. James's parish by tomorrow morning.


Lady R. Well, if it must be so, there is one comfort, the story will tell more
to his disgrace than mine.


Dim. As I Am a sinner, and so it will, Madam. He deserves what he has met with,
I think.


Mrs. D. Dimity, don't you encourage her -- No, no, no, my dear child, the
disgrace will be all your own.


Lady R. Will it? -- I am sure I shall not blush for any thing that has past -- I
know a little more of the world than that comes to.


Mrs. D. You shock me to hear you speak so -- I did not think you had been so
hardened.


Lady R. Hardened do you call it? -- I have Iiv'd in the world to very little
purpose, if such trifles as these are to disturb my rest.


Mrs. D. You wicked girl! -- Do you call it a trifle to be guilty of falsehood
to your husband's bed?


Lady R. How! -- (Turns short, and slares at her.)


Dim. That! that is a mere trifle indeed -- I have been in as good places as any
body, and not a creature minds it now, I Am sure.


Mrs. D. My Lady Rackett, my Lady Rackett, I never could think to see you come
to this deplorable shame.


Lady R. Surely the base man has not been capable of laying any thing of that
sort to my charge -- (Aside.) All this is unaccountable to me -- hai ha! --
it is ridiculous beyond measure.


Dim. That Is right, Madam: -- Laugh at it -- you served him right.


Mrs. D. Charlotte! Charlotte! 'm astonished at your wickedness.


Lady R. Well, I protest and vow I don't comprehend all this -- has Sir Charles
accused me?


Mrs. D. Oh! too true he has -- he has found you out, and you have behaved
basely he says.


Lady R. Madam!


Mrs. D. You have fallen into frailty like many others of your sex, he says,
and he is resolved to come to a separation directly.


Lady R. Why then if he is so base a wretch as to dishonor me in that manner,
his heart shall ache before I live with him again.


Dim. Hold to that, Ma'am, and let his head ache into the bargain.


Mrs. D. Oh! what shall I do? it is all too true I find.


Lady R. True! -- it is false as scandal, and the vilest calumny that ever was
invented.


Dim. Po! never go to deny it -- own it Ma'am.


Lady R. Stand away; -- don't talk to me -- Sir Charles! Sir Charles! -- Pray,
Madam, let Mr. Woodley have my sister -- I am unfortunate ever to have seen so
vile a slanderer -- is it possible that he could have talked thus meanly of me?


Mrs. D. Your poor father heard it as well as me.


Lady R. Then let your doors be opened for him this very moment -- let him
return to London -- if he does not, I Will lock myself up, and the false one
shall not approach me, though he beg on his knees at my very door -- a base injurous
man!

Exit.
Mrs. D. Dimity, do let us follow, and hear what she has to say for herself.

Exit.
Dim. She has excuse enough I warrant her -- What a noise is here indeed! -- I
have lived in polite families, where there was no such bastie made about
nothing.

Exit.
Enter Sir CHARLES, and DRUGGET. Sir Cha. It Is in vain Sir, my resolution is
taken --


Drug. Well, but consider, I am her father, -- indulge me only till we hear
what the girl has to say in her defense.


Sir Cha. She can have nothing to say -- no excuse can palliate such behavior.


Drug. Don't be too positive -- there may be some mistake.


Sir Cha. No mistake -- did not I see her, hear her myself?


Drug. Lackaday! I am an unfortunate man!


Sir Cha. She will be unfortunate too -- with all my heart -- She may thank
herself -- She might have been happy had she been so disposed.


Drug. Why truly, I think she might.


Enter Mrs. DRUGGET. Mrs. D. I wish you would moderate your anger a little -- and
let us talk over this affair with temper -- my daughter denies every tittle of
your charge.


Sir Cha. Denies it! denies it!


Mrs. D. She does indeed.


Sir Cha. And that aggravates her fault.


Mrs. D. She vows you never found her out in any thing that was wrong.


Sir Cha. So! She does not allow it to be wrong then! -- Madam, I tell you
again, I know her thoroughly, I say I have found her out, and I am now
acquainted with her character.


Mrs D. Then ycu are in opposite stories -- She swears, my dear Mr. Drugget,
the poor girl swears she never was guilty of the smallest infidelity to her
husband's bed in her born days.


Sir Cha. And what then? -- What if she does say so!


Mrs. D. And if she says truly, it is hard her character should be blown upon
without just cause.


Sir Cha. And is she therefore to behave ill in other respects? I never charged
her with infidelity to me, Madam -- there I allow her innocent.


Drug. And did not you charge her then?


Sir Cha. No, Sir, 1 never dreamt of such a thing.


Drug. Why then, if she is innocent, let me tell you, you're a scandalous person.


Mrs. D. Prithee, my dear --


Drug. Be quiet -- though he is a man of quality, I will tell him of it -- did
not I fine for sheriff? -- yes, you are a scandalous person to defame an honest
man's daughter.


Sir Cha. What have you taken into your head now?


Drug. You charged her with falsehood to your bed.


Sir Cha. No -- never -- never.


Drug. But I say you did -- you called yourself a cuckold -- did not he, wife?


Mrs. D. Yes, Lovey, I Am witness.


Sir Cha. Po! po! po! no such thing --


Drug. But I aver you did --


Mrs D. You did indeed, Sir --


Sir Cha. But I tell you no -- positively, no.


Drug. and Mrs. D. And I say yes -- positively yes --


Sir Cha. 'Sdeath, this is all madness --


Drug. You said you had found her out in the very fact --


Sir Cha. Mr. Drugget -- give me leave, Sir --


Drug. That she followed the ways of most of her sex --


Sir Cha. I said so -- and what then?


Drug. There he owns it -- owns that he called himself a cuckold -- and without
rhyme or reason into the bargain --


Sir Cha. I never owned any such thing --


Drug. You owned it even now -- now -- now -- now --


Enter DIMITY, in a fit of laughing. Dim. What do you think it was all about --
ha! ha! -- the whole secret is come out, ha! ha! -- It was all about a game of
cards -- ha! ha! --


Drug. A game of cards! --


Dim. (Laughing) It was all about a club and a diamond (runs out laughing.)


Drug. And was that all, Sir Charles?


Sir Cha. And enough too, Sir --


Drug. And was that what you found her out in?


Sir Cha. I cannot bear to be contradicted, when I Am clear that I Am in the right.


Mrs. D. Oh! -- I understand the affair now -- this was only one of those
polite disputes, which people of quality, who have nothing else to differ
about, must always be liable to.


Drug. I never heard of such a heap of nonsense in all my life -- Woodley shall
marry Nancy.


Mrs. D. Don't be in a hurry, my love, this will be all made up.


Drug. Why does not he go and ask her pardon then?


Sir Cha. I beg her pardon! I will not debase myself to any of you -- I shall not
forgive her, you may rest assured --

Exit.
Drug. Now there -- there is a pretty fellow for you --


Mrs. D. I Will step and prevail on my Lady Rackett to speak to him -- then all
will be well.

Exit.
Drug. A ridiculous fop! I Am glad it is no worse however. Enter NANCY. So Nancy
-- you seem in confusion, my girl!


Nan. How can one help it? -- With all this noise in the house, and you're
going to marry me as ill as my sister -- I hate Mr. Lovelace.


Drug. Why so child?


Nan. I know these people of quality despise us all out of pride, and would be
glad to marry us out of avarice.


Drug. The girl's right.


Nan. They marry one woman, live with another, and love only themselves.


Drug. And then quarrel about a card.


Nan. I don't want to be a gay lady -- I want to be happy.


Drug. And so you shall -- don't fright yourself, child -- step to your sister,
bid her make herself easy -- go, and comfort her, go --


Nan. Yes, Sir.

Exit.
Drug. I Will step and settle the matter with Mr. Woodley this moment.

Exit.
Enter Sir CHARLES, with a pack' of cards in his hand. Sir Cha. Never was any
thing like her behavior -- I can pick out the very cards I had in my hand, and
then it is as plain as the sun -- there -- now -- there -- no -- damn it -- no
-- there it was -- now let us see -- They had four by honors -- and we played
for the odd trick -- damnation! honors were divided -- ay! -- honors were
divided -- and then a trump was led -- and the other side had the -- confusion!
-- this preposterous woman has put it all out of my head (puts the cards into
his pocket.) Mighty well, Madam; I have done with you.


Enter Mrs. DRUGGET. Mrs. D. Come, Sir Charles, let me prevail -- come with me
and speak to her.


Sir Cha. I don't desire to see her face.


Mrs. D. If you were to see her all bathed in tears, I am sure it would melt
your very heart.


Sir Cha. Madam, it shall be my fault if ever I Am so treated again -- I Will have
nothing to say to her (going, stops) does she give up the point?


Mrs. D. She does, she agrees to an thing.


Sir Cha. Does she allow that the club was the play?


Mrs. D. Just as you please -- She Is all submission.


Sir Cha. Then I Will step and speak to her -- I never was clearer in any thing
in my life.

Exit.
Mrs. D. Lord love 'em, they will make it up now -- and then they will be as happy
as ever.

Exit.
Enter NANCY. Nan. Well! they may talk what they will of taste, and genteel
life -- I don't think it is natural -- give me Mr. Woodley -- La! there is that
odious thing coming this way.


Enter LOVELACE. Love. My charming little innocent, I have not seen you these
three hours.


Nan. I have been very happy these three hours.


Love. My sweet angel, you seem disconcerted -- And you neglect your pretty
figure -- no matter for the present; in a little time I shall make you appear
as graceful and genteel as your sister.


Nan. That is not what employs my thoughts, Sir.


Love. Ay, but my pretty little dear, that, should engage your attention -- to
set off and adorn the charms that nature has given you, should be the business
of your life.


Nan. Ah! but I have learnt a new song that contradicts what you say, and though
I am not in a very good humor for singing, yet you shall hear it.


Love. By all means; -- don't check your fancy -- I am all attention.


Nan. It expresses my sentiments, and when you have heard them you will not teize
me any more.

SONG.
I.
TO dance, and to dress, and to flaunt it about,
To run to Park, play, to assembly and rout,
To wander for ever in whim's giddy maze,
And one poor hair torture a million of ways,
To put, at the glass, every feature to school,
And practice their art on each fop and each fool,
Of one thing to think, and another to tell,
These, these are the manners of each giddy belle.
2.
To smile, and to simper, white teeth to display;
The time in gay follies to trifle away;
Against every virtue the bosom to steel,
And only of dress the anxieties feel;
To be at Eve's ear, the insidious decoy,
The pleasure never taste yet the mischief enjoy,
To boast of soft raptures they never can know,
These, these are the manners of each giddy beau. Exit.

Love. I must have her notwithstanding this -- for though I am not in love, yet
I Am in debt.


Enter DRUGGET. Drug. So, Mr. Lovelace! any news from above-stairs? Is this
absurd quarrel at an end -- have they made it up?


Love. Oh! a mere bagatelle, Sir -- these little fracas among the better sort
of people never left long -- elegant trifles cause elegant disputes, and we
come together elegantly again -- as you see -- for here they come, in perfect
good humor.


Enter Sir CHARLES and Lady RACKETT, Mrs. DRUGGET. Sir Cha. Mr. Drugget, I
embrace you, Sir; you see me now in the most perfect harmony of spirits.


Drug. What, all reconciled again?


Lady R. All made up, Sir -- I knew how to bring the gentleman to -- this is
the first difference, I think we ever had, Sir Charles. --


Sir Cha. And I Will be sworn it shall be the last.


Drug. I am at ease again -- Sir Charles, I can spare you an image to put on
the top of your house in London.


Sir Cha. Infinitely obliged to you.


Mrs. D. My dear, they are as happy now as two intriguing ducks in our pond
yonder -- You Will give Nancy, to Mr. Lovelace?


Sir Cha. Oh, to be sure, my friend Lovelace must be the man.


Lady R. And then my sister and I shall be near neighbors, and we shall so
rival each other in the beau monde.


Drug. Well! well! I believe it must be so -- we'll talk of these matters in
the morning -- It Is time to retire now -- I am glad to see you happy again --
and now I Will wish you a good night, Sir Charles -- Mr. Lovelace, this is your
way -- fare ye well both -- I am glad your quarrels are at an end -- This way,
Mr. Lovelace -- come, come my dear -- come, we'll go and take care of one
another.

Exeunt Lovelace, Drugget, and Mrs. Drugrret.
Lady R. Ah! your a sad man, Sir Charles, to behave to me as you have done --


Sir Cha. My dear, I grant it -- and such an absurd quarrel too -- ha! ha!


Lady R. Yes -- ha! ha! -- about such a trifle --


Sir Cha. It Is pleasant how we could both fall into such an error -- ha! ha! --


Lady R. Ridiculous beyond expression, -- ha! ha!


Sir Cha. And then the mistake your father and mother fell into -- ha! ha!


Lady R. That too is a diverting part of the story -- ha! ha! but Sir Charier,
must I I stay and live with my father till I grow as fantastical as his own
evergreens?


Sir Cha. No, no, prithee -- don't remind me of my folly.


Lady R. Ah! my relations were all standing behind counters selling Whitechapel
needles, while your family were spending great estates.


Sir Cha. Nay, nay, spare my blushes.


Lady R. How could you say so low a thing? -- I don't love you.


Sir Cha. It was indelicate I grant it.


Lady R. Am I a vile woman?


Sir. Cha. How can you, my angel?


Lady R. I shall not forgive you! -- I Will have you on your knees for this. (Sings
and plays with him.) -- ("Go, naughty man") -- Ah! Sir Charles --


Sir Cha. The rest of my life shall aim at convincing you how sincerely I love
--


Lady R. (Sings) "Go, naughty man, I cannot abide you" -- Well! come let us go
to rest (Going.) Ah, Sir Charles! -- now it is all over, the diamond was the
play --


Sir Cha. Oh no, no, no, -- my dear! ha! ha! -- It was the club indeed --


Lady R. Indeed, my love, you're mistaken --


Sir Cha. Oh, no, no, no, --


Lady R. But I say, yes, yes, yes -- (Both laughing.)


Sir Cha. Pshaw, no such thing -- ha! ha! --


Lady R. It Is so, indeed -- ha! ha! --


Sir Cha. No -- no -- no -- you will make me die with laughing --


Lady R. Ay, and you make me laugh too -- ha! ha! (Toying with him.)


Enter FOOTMAN. Footm. Your honor's cap and slippers --


Sir Cha. Ay, give me my night cap -- and here, take thesc shoes off (He takes
'em off, and leaves 'em at a disiance) Indeed my Lady Rackett, you make me
ready to expire with laughing -- ba! ha! --


Lady R. You may laugh -- but I Am right notwithstanding --


Sir Cha. How can you say so?


Lady R. How can you say otherwise?


Sir Cha. Well now mind me, my Lady Rackett -- We can now talk of this matter
in good humor --


Lady R. So we can -- and it is for that reason I venture to speak to you -- are
these the ruffles I bought for you?


Sir Cha. They are, my dear.


Lady R. They are very pretty -- but indeed you played the card wrong --


Sir Cha. Po, there is nothing so clear -- if you will but hear me -- only hear
me --


Lady R. Ah! -- but do you hear me -- the thing was thus -- your club being the
best in the house --


Sir Cha. How can you talk so! -- (Somewhat peevish.)


Lady R. See there now --


Sir Cha. Now see -- this was the affair --


Lady R. Pshaw! fiddlestick! hear me first.


Sir Cha. Po -- no -- damn it -- let me speak --


Lady R. Well, to be sure you're a strange man --


Sir Cha. Plague and torture! -- there is no such thing as conversing with you
--


Lady R. Very well, Sir -- fly out again --


Sir Cha. Look here now -- here is a pack of cards -- now you shall be convinced
--


Lady R. You may talk till tomorrow, I know I Am right (walks about.)


Sir Cha. Why then by all that is perverse, you are the most headstrong -- Cannot
you look here now -- here are the very cards --


Lady R. Go on; you will find it out at last --


Sir Cha. Damn it! will you let a man show you! Po! it is all nonsense -- I Will
talk no more about it -- (Puts up the cards.) Come, we'll go to bed (Going.)
Now only stay a moment -- (Takes out the cards) -- Now, mind me -- see here --


Lady R. No, it does not signify -- your head will be clearer in the morning --
I Will go to bed --


Sir Cha. Stay a moment, cannot ye --


Lady R. No -- my head begins to ache -- (Affectedly.)


Sir Cha. Why then damn the cards -- there -- there -- (Throwing the cards
about.) and there, and there -- you may go to bed by yourself -- and confusion
seize me, If I live a moment longer with you -- (Putting on his shoes again.)


Enter DIMITY. Dim. Did you call, Sir?


Sir Cha. No -- never -- never -- Madam --


Dim. (In a fit of laughing) -- What, at it again!


Lady R. Take your own way, Sir --


Sir Cha. Now then I tell you once more you are a vile woman.


Dim. Law! Sir -- This is charming! -- I Will run and tell the old couple.

Exit.
Sir Cha. (Still putting on his shoes) -- You are the most perverse obstinate,
nonsensical --


Lady R. Ha! ha! don't make me laugh again, Sir Charles --


Sir Cha. Hell and the devil -- will you sit down quietly and let me convince
you --


Lady R. I don't choose to hear any more about it --


Sir Cha. Why then, I believe you are possessed -- it is in vain to talk sense
and reason to you --


Lady R. Thank you for your compliment, Sir -- such a man (With a sneering
laugh) I never knew the like -- (Sits down.)


Sir Cha. I promise you, you shall repent of this usage -- before you have a
moment of my company again -- it shall not be in a hurry you may depend, Madam --
Now see here -- I can prove it to a demonstration (Sits down by her, she gets
up.) Lookye there again now -- you have the most perverse and peevish temper --
I wish I had never seen your face -- I wish I was a thousand miles off from you
-- sit down but one moment --


Lady R. I Am disposed to walk about, Sir --


Sir Cha. Why then may I perish if ever -- a blockhead -- an idiot I was to
marry (Walks about) such a provoking -- impertinent -- (She sits down.) --
Damnation! -- I am so clear in the thing -- She is not worth my notice -- (Sits
down, turns his back, and looks uneasy.) I Will take no more pains about it --
(Pauses for some time, then looks at her.) Is not it very strange, that you
will not hear me?


Lady R. Sir I am very ready to hear you --


Sir Cha. Very well then -- very well -- you remember how the game stood --
I Will write it down and send it to Arthur's; and if the best judges there --


Lady R. I wish you would untie my necklace, it hurts me --


Sir Cha. Why cannot you listen? --


Lady R. I tell you it hurts me terribly --


Sir Cha. Death and confusion! -- there is no bearing this -- farewell --

Exit.
Enter Mr. and Mrs. DRUGGET, WOODLEY, LOVELACE, and NANCY. Drug. What Is here to
do now?


Lady R. Never was such a man born -- I did not say a word to the gentleman --
and yet he has been raving about the room like a madman.


Drug. And about a club again, I suppose, come hither, Nancy; Mr. Woodley, she
is yours for life --


Mrs. D. My dear, how can you he so --


Drug. It shall be so -- take her for life, Mr. Woodley.


Wood. My whole life shall be devoted to her happiness --


Love. The devil! and so I am to be left in the lurch in this manner, am I?


Lady R. Oh! my dear Sir, this is nothing -- I have a lure to bring the
gentleman back again --


Drug. Never tell me -- it is too late now -- Mr. Woodley, I recommend my girl
to your care -- I shall have nothing now to think of, but my greens, and my
images, and my shrubbery -- though, mercy on all married folks, say I! -- for
these wranglings are, I am afraid, What we must All come to.


Lady Rackett, coming forward. WHAT we must all come to? What? -- Come to what?
Must broils and quarrels be the marriage lot?
If that is the wise, deep meaning of our poet,
The man's a fool! a blockhead! and I Will show it.
What could induce him in an age so nice --
So famed for virtue, so refined from vice,
To form a plan so trivial, false, and low?
As if a belle could quarrel with a beau:
As if there were -- in these thrice happy days,
One who from nature, or from reason strays!
There Is no cross husband now; no wrangling wife, --
The man is downright ignorant of life.
It Is the millennium this -- devoid of guile,
Fair gentle Truth, and white-rob'd Candor smile.
From every breast the forbid love of gold
Is banished quite -- no boroughs now are sold!
Fray tell me, Sirs -- (for I don't know, I vow,)
Pray -- is there such a thing as Gaming now?
Do peers make laws against that giant Vice,
And then at Arthur's break them in a trice?
No -- no -- our lives are virtuous all, austere and hard; --
Pray, ladies, -- do you ever see a card?
Those empty boxes show you don't love plays;
The managers, poor souls! get nothing now a days.
If here you come -- by chance -- but once a week,
The pit can witness that you never speak:
Pensive Attention sits with decent mien;
No paint, no naked shoulders to be seen!
And yet this grave, this moral, pious age,
May learn one useful lesson from the stage.
Shun strife, ye fair, and once a contest over,
Wake to a blaze the dying flame no more --
From fierce debate sly all the tender Love,
And Venus cries, "Coachman, -- Put-to my doves."
The genial bed no blooming Grace prepares,
"And every day becomes a day of cares."

FINIS.

