THE TRIUMPH of ISIS, A POEM. OCCASIONED BY ISIS, an ELEGY.

Quid mihi nescio quam, proprio cum Tybride, Romani
Semper in ore geris? referunt si vera Parents,
Hanc Urbem insano Nullus qui Mart petivit
Laetatus violasse redit. Nec numina sedem
Destituunt. --
CLAUDIAN. LONDON, Printed for W. OWEN, at Homer's Head near Temple Bar.

THE TRIUMPH OF ISIS.
ON closing flowers when genial gales diffuse
The fragrant tribute of refreshing dews;
When chaunts the milk-maid at her balmy pail,
And weary reapers whistle over the vale;
Charmed by the murmurs of the quivering shade,
Over ISIS' willow-fringed banks I strayed;
And calmly musing, through the twilight way,
In pensive mood I framed the Doric lay.
When lo! from opening clouds a golden gleam
Poured sudden splendours over the shadowy stream;
And from the wave arose its guardian queen,
Known by her sweeping stole of glossy green:
While in the coral crown that bound her brow,
Was wove the Delphic laurel's verdant bough.
As the smooth surface of the dimply flood
The silver-slipper'd virgin lightly trod,
From her loose hair the dropping dew she pressed,
And thus mine ear in accents mild addressed.
"No more, my son, the rural reed employ,
Nor trill the trifling strain of empty joy;
No more thy love-resounding sonnets suit
To notes of past'ral pipe, or oaten flute.
For hark* high throned on you majestic walls,
To the dear Muse afflicted Freedom calls*
When Freedom calls, and OXFORD bids thee sing,
Why stays thy hand to strike the sounding string?
While thus, in Freedom's and in Phoebus' spite,
The venal sons of slavish CAME unite*
To shake you towers when malice rears her crest,
Shall all my sons in silence idly rest?
Still sing, O CAME, thy favorite Freedom's cause,
Still boast of Freedom -- while you break its laws;
To power your songs of gratulation pay,
To courts address soft flatt'ry's soothing lay.
What though your gentle M -- N's plaintive verse
Has hung with sweetest wreaths MUSAEUS' hearse;
What though your vaunted bard's ingenuous woe,
Soft as my stream in tuneful numbers flow;
Yet strove his Muse, by fame or envy led,
To tear the laurels from a Sister's head? --
Misguided youth! with rude unclassic rage,
To blast the beauties of thy whiter page;
A rage that sullies even thy guiltless lays,
And blasts the vernal bloom of half thy Bays.
Let GR -- boast the patrons of her name,
Each pompous fool of fortune and of fame;
Still of preferment let her shine the queen,
Prolific parent of each bowing Dean!
Be here is each Pr -- te of the pampered cheek,
Each courtly Chaplain sanctified and sleek:
Still let the Drones of her exhaustless hive
On fat pluralities supinely thrive.
Still let her senates titled slaves revere,
Nor dare to know the patriot from the peer;
For tinsel'd courts their laureled mount despise
In stars and strings superlatively wise:
No longer charmed by virtue's golden lyre,
Who sung of old amid the Aonian choir,
Where CAME, slow-winding through the breezy reeds,
With kindly wave his groves of laurel feeds.
It Is ours, my son, to deal the sacred bay,
Where honor calls, and justice points the way;
To wear the well-earn'd wreath which merit brings*
And snatch a gift beyond the reach of kings!
Scorning and scorned by courts, yon Muses bower
Still nor enjoys, nor asks the smile of power.
Though wakeful vengeance watch my crystal spring,
Though persecution wave her iron wing,
And over yon spiry temples as she flies,
"These destined feats be mine" exulting cries;
On ISIS* still each gift of fortune waits,
Still peace and plenty crown my beauteous gates.
See Science walks with freshest chaplets crowned,
With songs of joy my festal groves resound;
My Muse divine still keeps her wonted state,
The front erect, and high majestic gait.
Green: as of old, each oliv'd portal smiles,
And still the Graces build my Parian piles:
My Gothic spires in ancient grandeur rise,
And dare with wonted pride to rush into the ski^^
Ah should thou fall (forbid it heavenly pow'^^
Dashed into dust with all thy hundred towers;
Who but would mourn to British virtue dear,
What patriot could refuse the manly tear:
What British Vid. Vell. Paterc. Lib. ii. and Plutarch. in Vit. Marii:
MARIUS would refuse to weep
Over mighty CARTHAGE fallen, a prostrate heap!
Even late when RADCLIFFE'S delegated train
Auspicious shone in ISIS' happy plain;
When you proud The Radcliffe Library.
dome, fair Learning's amplest shrine,
Beneath its Attick roofs received the Nine;
Mute was the voice of joy and loud applause,
To RADCLIFFE due, and ISIS' honored cause?
What freeborn crowds adorned the festive day,
Nor blushed to wear my tributary bay?
How each brave breast with honest ardours heaved,
When SHELDON'S fane the patriot band received;
While, as we loudly hailed the chosen few,
Rome's awful senate rushed upon our view!
O may the day in latest annals shine,
That made a BEAUFORT and an HARLEY mine!
That bade them leave the loftier scene awhile,
The pomp of guiltless state, the patriot toil,
For bleeding Albion's aid the sage design,
To hold short dalliance with the tuneful Nine.
While music left her golden sphere on high,
And bore each strain of triumph from the sky;
Swelled the loud song, and to my chiefs around,
Poured the full Paeans of mellifluous sound;
My Naiads blythe the floating accents caught,
And listening danced beneath their pearly grot:
In gentle eddies played my wanton wave,
And all my reeds their softest whispers gave;
Each lay with brighter green adorned my bowers,
And breathed a fresher fragrance on my flowers.
But lo! at once the swelling concerts cease,
And crowded theaters are hushed in peace.
See on yon sage how all attentive stand,
To catch his darting eye, and waving hand.
Hark! he begins with all a TULLY's art
To pour the dictates of a CATO's heart.
Skilled to pronounce what noblest thoughts inspire,
He blends the Speaker's with the Patriot's fire;
Bold to conceive, nor timorous to conceal,
What Britons dare to think, he dares to tell:
It Is his alike the ear and eye to charm,
To win with action, and with sense to warm:
Untaught in flowery diction to dispense
The lulling sounds of sweet impertinence;
In frowns or smiles he gains an equal prize,
Nor meanly fears to fall, nor creeps to rise:
Bids happier days to ALBION be restored,
Bids ancient justice rear her radiant sword:
From me, as from my country wins applause,
And makes an OXFORD's a BRITANNIA's cause.
While arms like these my steadfast sages wield,
While mine is Truth's impenetrable shield;
Say, shall the PUNY CHAMPION fondly dare,
To wage with force like this scholastic war?
Still vainly scribble on with pert pretense,
With all the rage of pedant impotence?
Say, shall I foster this domestic pest,
This parricide that wounds a mother's breast?
Thus in some stately ship, that long has bore
Britain's victorious cross from shore to shore:
By chance beneath her close sequestered cells*
Some low-born worm, a lurking mischief dwells;
Eats his blind way, and saps with secret toil
The deep foundation of the watery pile.
In vain the forest lent its stateliest pride,
Reared her tall mast, and framed her knotty side.
In vain the thunder's martial rage she stood,
With each fierce conflict of the stormy flood;
More sure the reptile's little arts devour,
Than waves, or wars, or Eurus' wintry power.
Ye venerable bowers, ye seats sublime,
Clad in the mossy vest of fleeting time;
Ye stately Piles of old munificence,
At once the pride of Learning, and defense,
Where ancient Piety, a matron hoar,
Still seems to keep the hospitable door;
Ye cloisters pale that lengthening to the sight,
Still step by step to musings mild invite;
Ye high arched walls, where often the bard has caught
The glowing sentiment, the lofty thought:
Ye temples dim, where pious duty pays
Her holy hymns of ever-echoing praise;
Lo! your loved ISIS, from the bord'ring vale,
With all a mother's fondness bids you hail!
Hail, OXFORD, hail! of all that is good and great,
Of all that is fair, the guardian and the seat;
Nurse of each brave pursuit, each generous aim,
By truth exalted to the throne of fame!
Like Greece in science and in liberty,
As Athens learned, as Lacedaemon free!
Even now confessed to my adoring eyes,
In awful ranks thy sacred sons arise:
With every various flower thy temples wreathed,
That in thy gardens green its fragrance breathed.
Tuning to knightly tale his British reeds,
Thy crowding Bards immortal CHAUCER leads:
His hoary head o'erlooks the gazing choir,
And beams on all around caelestial fire.
With graceful step see ADDISON advance,
The sweetest child of Attic elegance
To all but his beloved embrace denied,
See LOCK leads Reason, his majestic bride:
See sacred HAMMOND, as he treads the field,
With goldlike arm uprears his heavenly shield.
All who beneath the shades of gentle peace,
Best plan'd the labors of domestic ease;
Who taught with truth, or with persuasion moved;
Who soothed with Numbers, or with sense improved;
Who told the powers of reason, or refined
All, all that strengthened or adorned the mind;
Each priest of health who mixed the balmy bowl,
To rear frail man, and stay the fleeting soul;
All crowd around, and echoing to the sky,
Hail, OXFORD, hail! with filial transport cry.
And see yon solemn band! with virtuous aim,
'Twas theirs in thought the glorious deed to frame:
With pious plans each musing feature glows,
And well-weigh'd counsels mark their meaning brows.
" Vid. the ELEGY. Page 4.
Lo these the leaders of thy patriot line,"
HAMDEN and HOOKER, HYDE and SIDNEY shine.
These from thy source the fires of Freedom caught:
How well thy sons by their example taught;
While in each breast the hereditary flame
Still blazes unextinguish'd and the same!
Nor all the toils of thoughtful peace engage,
It Is thine to form the hero as the sage.
I see the sable-suited prince advance
With lillies crowned, the spoils of bleeding France,
EDWARD -- the Muses in yon hallowed shade
Bound on his tender thigh the martial blade:
Bade him the steel for British freedom draw,
And OXFORD taught the deeds that CRESSY saw.
And see, great father of the laureat band,
The Alfred. Regis Romani. V. Virg. Aen. 6.
BRITISH KING before me seems to stand;
He by my plenty-crowned scenes beguiled,
And genial influence of my seasons mild,
Hither of yore (forlorn, forgotten maid)
The Muse in prattling infancy conveyed;
From Gothic rage the helpless virgin bore,
And fixed her cradle on my friendly shore:
Soon grew the maid beneath his fost'ring hand,
Soon poured her blessings over the enlightened land.
Though rude the dome, and humble the retreat,
Where first his pious care ordained her seat,
Lo! now on high she dwells in Attic bowers,
And proudly lifts to heaven her hundred towers.
He first fair Learning's and Britannia's cause
Adorned with manners, and advanced with laws;
He bade relent the Briton's savage heart,
And formed his soul to social scenes of art;
Wisest and best of Kings! -- with ravished gaze
Elate the long procession he surveys:
Joyful he smiles to find, that not in vain
He plan'd the rudiments of Learning's reign:
Himself he marks in each ingenuous breast,
With all the founder in the race expressed:
With rapture views, fair Freedom still survive
In yon bright domes (ill-fated fugitive.)
(Such scene, as when the Goddess poured the beam
Unsullied, on his ancient diadem) -- -- -- Ad capitolia ducit
Aurea nunc, olim Sylvestribus horrida dumis.
VIRG. Aen.



Well pleased that in his own Pierian seat
She plumes her wings, and rests her weary feet;
That here at last she takes her favorite stand,
"Here deigns to linger ever she leave the land."
FINIS.

