TABLES, Showing the Doses of purging and vomiting Medicines according to the
Solution of D.R COCKBURN'S Problem.
Medicines whose common Dose is i. Medicines Constitutions Ages. Doses Gr.
Cassia. Catholicon Diacarthamun. Elect. lenitivum. Succus radic Jrid. --
Fumarioe. Syrup de Rhamno. -- de Pomis magis. -- Rosarcum Helleb. Tamarind. Sal
cathartic. amar. -- Mirabile. Mann. ij. Emetica Vin. Emeticum. seu Bened. suc.
Asari. Senecionis. 16 2 3 1 13 3 8 0 0 4 14 0 13 9 2 2 2 0 3 6 0 0 4 10 2 0 6 2
1 2 6 3 4 0 0 4 7 0 6 3 2 0 2 13 3 2 0 0 4 3 1 13 Common Dose i^. Confectio
Hamech. Elect. Caryocostin. Diaphoenicon. and succo Roscco Rosarum. Emet.
Syrupus emeticus. 16 2 1 2 6 3 4 0 0 4 7 0 6 9 2 1 1 0 3 3 0 0 4 5 1 0 6 2 0 2
13 3 2 0 0 4 3 1 13 3 2 0 1 6 3 1 0 0 4 1 2 6 Common Dose i. Agaricus. Aloe.
Carthamus. Ebuli sem. -- Cortex. Harmodactylus. Mechoacanna. Pil. Aggre.
gattivoe. -- Coch. Major. -- Foetidoe -- sine Qui bus. Pulv. Diasennoe.
Rhabarbarum. Soldanel la. Senna. Turvith. 16 2 0 1 6 3 1 0 0 4 1 2 6 9 2 0 1 0
3 0 2 5 4 1 1 0 6 2 0 0 13 3 0 1 10 4 0 2 13 3 2 0 0 6 3 0 0 15 4 0 1 6 Common
Dose i^. Jalappa. Juli juglandis. Lap. Lazuli. -- Armenius. Opoponax. Pil.
Coch. minor. -- de Gut. Gamandra. -- Rudii. Pull. Warvicensis. Sagapenum Emet.
Rad Ipecacuana. 16 2 0 0 13 3 0 1 10 4 0 2 13 9 2 0 0 10 3 0 1 2 4 0 2 0 6 2 0
0 6 3 0 0 15 4 0 1 6 3 2 0 0 3 3 0 0 7 4 0 0 13 Common Dose i. Resina jalappoe.
Extr. rhabarbari. Pil. de Hermodactylis ij. Pulv. Cornach. ij. Emet. Gilla
vitrioli. 16 2 0 0 8 8/9 3 0 1 0 4 0 1 15 5/9 9 2 0 0 6 3 0 0 15 4 0 1 6 6 2 0
0 4 4/9 3 0 0 10 4 0 0 17 7/9 3 2 0 0 2 2/9 3 0 0 5 4 0 0 8 8/9 Common Dose Gr.
VI. Colocynthis. Ecephorbium Esuloe Cortex. Elaterium. Gum. Guttoe. Gran. Gnid.
Ricini sem. Scammon. Tr. Alhand. Emet. Croc. Rulandi. Turbith minerale. 16 2 0
0 2 3 0 0 6 4 0 0 10 9 2 0 0 2 3 0 0 4 4 0 0 8 6 2 0 0 1 3 0 0 3 4 0 0 5 3 2 0
0 3 0 0 1 4 0 0 2 Common Dose Gr. III. Emet. Hep. Antimonij. vitr. Ant. Merc.
Vitoe. Tart. Emet. Merc. proec. per se -- solar. -- ruber. Hercules Bovij. 16 2
0 0 1 3 0 0 3 4 0 0 5 9 2 0 0 1 3 0 0 2 1/4 4 0 0 4 6 2 0 0 3 0 0 1 4 0 0 2 3 2
0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 1

I. The Practice of Purging and Vomiting Medicines, according to Dr. Cockburn
's Solution of his Problem; with Tables showing their Doses in particular Ages
and Constitutions. Inscribed to the Learned Dr. Garth, F. R. S. by W. Cockburn,
M. D.
BY my Solution of the Problem for determining the due Doses of Purging and
Vomiting Medicines, Phil. Transact. No. 303.
in all their Cases, it is manifest in general, Postul.
that these Medicines operate either upon the account of their being mixed with
the Blood, Schol.
or by their stimulating the Stomach and Guts: 2. That this their Operation is
more or less according to the Quantity and Thickness of Blood, h.e. Cor. 1.
a greater Quantity, and the thickest Blood require the greatest Doses: And 3,
Prop. 1.
that when the Quantities of Blood are the same, the Doses of Purging and
Vomiting Medicines are in a duplicate proportion of the Bloods thickness. As
also, that in every case these Doses must be in a proportion compounded of the
Quantity of Blood and those Squares of its thickness. Prop. 2.


Now since the Operations of Purgative and Vomitive Medicines depend so much on
the Quantity and Viscidity of the Blood, Why the Doses of these Medicines so
hard to be found.
which have not been duly considered before; it is no wonder that the Practice
of Physic in these Evacuations has been so uncertain, and that the most expert
Physicians, from their most accurate Observations, could never determine the
true Doses of Medicines, which alter so much according to the various Subjects
they work upon; they not being acquainted with the true Method of determining
either the quantity of the Blood, or the degrees of its thickness.

Because Experience is equally the Foundation and Touchstone of all reasoning
in Physic, we will here submit our Solution to common Observations, and try
whether every thing proposed in it, does not exactly answer Matters of Fact,
and the visible Operations of Nature.

First then, The different effects of these Medicines upon the account of their
(...)
it plainly follows, that these Medicines always purge best and most constantly
in a liquid form; because they are more easily conveyed into the Blood, and can
stimulate more parts, and that upon the account of this their Fluidity;
whatever may be the way that Purges and Vomits work, or whatsoever their Nature
may be. This explains very easily a very common Observation, hitherto very
difficult to Physicians, about the different Operation of the same Medicine in
different forms: Why, viz. the Infusion of a due quantity of a Purging Medicine
produces its effects sooner and more constantly than a like quantity of the
same Medicine in a Powder, though still more constantly in a Powder than a Bolus,
though still sooner and more constantly in a dry Bolus, than if it be given in
Pills made into that form with Gums that do not purge; and this difference in
Purging shall even be notable, according to the dissolubility of the Gums.

From whence it follows, that the Evacuation made by such Medicines, is in
proportion to the quantity of those Medicines that happens to be dissolved, and
not to the quantity administered.

Secondly, Their effects different, because of the different thickness of Blood.
That purging by Draughts is the most excellent form, and will always have the
most constant effect.

The next Consideration is, that a certain quantity of any purging Medicine
affects us after a different manner, according to the different Quantity and
Constitution of the Blood, or its thickness, and it was shown in the Solution,
that if its thickness were the same, the Dose should always be as its Quantity,
but the Blood differing likewise in thickness, the Doses of Purging and
Vomiting Medicines must be augmented on account of its thickness. This is
perfectly well confirmed by daily experience; where we find, that People sick
with a manifest thickness of Blood, as in Dropsies, the Jaundice, etc. take far
greater Doses than they did at any other time when they were not sick, or in
that manner.

By a further Disquisition into this matter, we find that the Doses must not
only be greater where the thickness of Blood is greater; but that they must be
increased in a duplicate proportion of their Viscidity. This is evident by the
Tables in Cassia. viz. 9:83::4:3, 1, 13 gr. and therefore alternando 9:4::8:3,
1, 13 gr. Therefore the Doses are as the Squares of the Constitutions. So
likewise 9:8::16:14, 13 gr. and alternando 9:16::8:14, 13 gr. h. e. the Doses
are as the Squares of the Constitutions.

The same is true in any other Constitution besides the mean: For Example, in
the lowest and highest 4:16:: 213 gr: 853. So that by this means we are not
only led directly to a right use of these Medicines, and are able to find the
true cause why the ordinary Doses produce so very different effects in
different Constitutions; but likewise, A Problem.
The Quantity of Blood in any Person being given together with the ordinary and
extraordinary effect of a Dose of a Purging Medicine, the Change of that
Persons Constitution, and the Nature of that Change may be determined.

It cannot but be a great satisfaction to the mind to find a Doctrine founded
on a few simple Experiences leading us into the cause of many more that are
very complext, This Doctrine true because conform to Nature.
difficult, and obscure; which is sufficient to prove its conformity to Nature.
But my present endeavor being to rectify the common Practice of these
Medicines by this Doctrine, I shall frame, by this Method, Tables of the
Purging and Vomiting Medicines in present use; better adapted to Experience
than are hitherto to be found.

The Method of framing such Tables, How they are made.
is by setting off the practicable Constitutions in the different Ages that I
have observed to take notable Quantities of Purging and Vomiting Medicines; so
that by comparing these Constitutions with the Ages, we have the different
Doses in all those cases, which is all that is required for a better practice;
though a more proper occasion may produce a more nice and exact division of
Constitutions, very much to the advantage of the Practice of Physic in all
Diseases.

The Ages wherein these different Doses are taken, I find to be four; when a
Man is about 16 or 20 Years of Age, and weighs about 12 Stone, he then takes
the common Dose: One of nine Years takes three quarters of that; one of six the
half, and one of three Years a quarter. Moreover, (...) p. 51. Biblioth.
Anatom. p. 1124. T^^. 2.
it having already been shown, that the notable healthy Constitutions are but
three, as also the notable Pulses of each of these: Let then these
Constitutions be as 2, 3, 4. That of the most fluid Blood as the first number,
and so on; in that case, the Dose of any Person will be found by multiplying
the common Dose for his Age into the Square of his Constitution and dividing by
the Square of the middle Constitution. For instance, If j. Cassioe is the
common Dose, or the Dose of the middle Constitution, iij. j. and gr. 13 is the
Dose of the first Constitution, and xiv. gr. 13 that of the grossest or last
Constitution; and so proportionably for every Medicine in all the Ages, as
appears by the Tables.

This Method seems to answer so exactly, Only exception.
that there is not any thing necessary besides, except a Person is more Loose
or Costive than ordinary (which may be known from the Patient or otherways) it
is to be reputed the same, as if he had taken an equivalent quantity of a
Medicine proper to produce these effects. Any Physician, who has considered
this case in some People after Fluxing, will allow the justness of this
Exception.

As Vomiting Medicines have the same common Doses with those that Purge, The
Doses of Vomiting Medicines.
they admit also of the like divided Doses; which, therefore may be found by
the same Tables. Only, as People that are more Costive than ordinary require a
proportionable greater Dose of a Purging Medicine: So they require their Dose
of a Vomiting Medicine to be considerably less, as is very very well known in
hot Countries.

But it must be observed, that in the Tables, Note ^.
Age stands Instead of Quantity of Blood; because they increase pretty equally,
and it makes the practice more easy to such as are not accustomed to Weights
and Numbers.

The more Skilful are desired to observe, that the mean Ages, ^.
multiplied into the mean Constitutions, give Doses more nicely.

The TABLES. Some Instances showing the Defects of the present Practice, and
how mended by the foregoing Tables.
The Doses of the foregoing Tables, arising from Calculation, agree perfectly
well with the common Observation of the best Authors; though their Observation is
very general and ill made, if we except the very first Steps. For instance,
Authors of all Countries, English, Dutch, Authors Copy, but do not Observe.
German, Italian and French, reckon the Doses after the same manner; whereas,
if they had been observed, they must have been different as are the
Constitutions of Men in the different Countries.

II. The defect of their Observation is manifest by the disproportioned Doses
of some Medicines, their high Doses being sometimes double and sometimes
triple, and more of their low Doses, which is not conform to Nature; for, let
the low Dose be what it will, the high Dose of one Medicine must always bear
the same proportion to the high Dose of another, as did their low Doses, viz.
even in Manna, they reckon it from j: commonly to iij. and iv. If it is said
that the first Dose is the lowest Dose that is taken by a Man of a due Age, it
is neither true in fact nor conform to their own way of reckoning: For
instance, Rhubarb is said to be taken from j. to ij. No body will say that this
is the lowest Dose taken by a Man of a due Age as formerly; because it is not
in fact true, nor that the high natural Dose is ss; for, as I said before, if
j. of Manna and j, of Rhubarb are the respective low Doses, then iv and ij.
cannot be the respective high Doses. As to what concerns some extraordinary
Doses given by themselves, and far exceeding the ordinary Dose, is easily
accounted for by the Solution. There are many Examples of this Nature: Turbith,
viz. is commonly reckoned among them from j. to ij; yet Marggravius, and good
Authors, have given it to iv. So Colocynthis from gr. vi. to gr. xij. and
Fulgin. Fernel. Duncan. say they have given it to ss.

III. They have only given the Doses for Men at full Age.
Authors have been far from being exact; for they have only dos'd these
Medicines for People of full Age; but have left the Doses of the different Ages
in silence; nor have they told us at what time a Man takes his highest Dose, or
how that alters in the Growth and Decline of Age, which is still a very great
difficulty for the most experienced Physicians to manage.

IV. Their way of determining Doses false.
Their general Method is founded in a Mistake; their lowest Dose being really
the common Dose taken by the generality of Men, which produces a multitude of
Errors in the Practice. This is manifest in their dosing every Medicine.

V. This shown particularly.
The mentioned Case is more manifest by these Tables, and it is two to one but
that a Physician over Purges or under Purges any Person in Health; and if more
Cases in Sickness are supposed, the odds will increase proportionably.
Experience confirms this exactly: For if the middle Dose is given to one of the
lowest Constitution, and the middle Dose is to purge 7 or 8 times; in that
case, the Person of the lowest Constitution is purged near twice as much as he
ought to be; and if given to one of the highest Constitution, he is purged but
half of what he should be. But if the Dose of the highest Constitution is given
to one of the middle Constitution, he is purged twice as much as he ought to
be; and if given to one of the lowest, he is purged four times as much, or
about thirty times, as we find true by daily Experience. But if the Quantity of
Blood, the Age, or Sickness contribute to the Error, it may prove fatal. If
this Consideration were illustrated by a proper number of Examples, we should
find some hundreds of, otherways unavoidable, Mistakes now prevented by the
Practice of these Tables.

Lastly, We may easily account, by these Tables, These Tables show how the
Doses of Children may over purge People of full Age.
for the Doses of Children over purging some People of good Health, and of due
Age; a Phaenomenen so surprising, that the smallness of the Dose is commonly
thought a good Excuse for the Mistake.

FINIS.

