THE DEAD ALIVE: A COMIC OPERA.

IN TWO ACTS.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATERS IN LONDON AND DUBLIN.

By JOHN O'KEEFFE, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.

M,DCC,LXXXIII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
MEN.
Sir Walter Weathercock, MR. GEMEA. Edward, MR. JOHNSTON. Undertaker, MR.
FOTTERALL. Sheers, MR. O'REILLY. Motley, MR. CORNELYS. Dennis, MR. KANE.
Degagee, MR. WITHINGTON. Coachman, MR. LYNCH. Hannibal, MR. MURPHY. Grizley,
WOMEN.
Miss Hebe Wintertop, MRS. HEAPHY. Comfit, MRS. HITCHCOCK. Caroline, MRS.
JOHNSTON.
Servants, etc.

THE DEAD ALIVE.
ACT I.
Enter Dennis and Coachman. Dennis. IT is indeed a thousand pities so generous
a gentleman as our master, should be thus obliged to part with half his
servants, merely for want of the means to retain them.


Coach. Ay, Dennis, master's a free horse, but the world's a deep road, and
spirit will not bring wheels through without the hard meat -- so poor master's
knocked up at last.

(Degagee sings without.) What, and Monsieur struck off too?


Enter Degagee, singing, Den. Why Monsieur Degagee, by your mirth nobody could
suppose you had lost a good place this morning.


Degrees. Oui, Monsieur Denni, I am turn off a mon maitre this morning; when I did
get out of bed, I was in place, and tonight when I get into bed, I shall be
out of place. Ah, ha!


Den. I see when missortune comes --


Degrees. Oui, I am one pauvre, unfortunate miserable -- Monsieur Denni, maitre
Jean, attendezmi landlor did once set fire his own house, and burn me out out
of my logement -- five pound for de first engine! -- I was make my escape out
of de vinder in my shirt -- crack went de slame widin -- whiz went de water
widout -- the engine did play upon pauvre me, and de mob did laugh at me, as if
I vas une Comedy or Farce.


Den. Ay, the farce of fire and water.


Degrees. Fire and water, non! -- I vas roast and drown -- ver good -- I escape vid
the von shirt all wet, and was held to dry too near de fire, it was burn too;
all de shirt I had in de world -- but all one to Degagee.


Coach. Poor Monsieur!


Degrees. Oui Vraiment, pauvre moi, attendez -- after dat I was go to France in de
suite of a mi Lor Aagloise, den I was tink to come back to England, and set up
de grand shop in Pall Mall, and did lay out all my l'argent in de silk
stocking, de tambour wastecoat, and lace ruffles; perfume poudre, and paresols
for my shop -- I did put all in de Dutch bottom, but at sea, up did come de
little sailor Anglois -- vid de new copper breeches, and pauf shoot off our
masts and sail, and drag us into Portsmouth, and sing -- "Always are ready."


Den. You were towed in.


Degrees. I no understand dat toe.


Coach. Why Monsieur the little English sailor with the copper breeches, took
the Dutchman by the toe, and dragged his bottom into Portsmouth.


Degrees. Ban est vrai, but il tout perdue -- and den I vas san sit sous and sans
souci -- I lost all -- but den, par hazard I vas come live wid dat bon tete,
mon maitre, Monsieur Edward, vat you call Sandford, -- alas! he is all broke --
and ma foi -- I am all broke again -- aussi de debris of my wages, two, three
guineas, and my cofter vid some pomade, comb, curling iron, and three pound
mareschale.


Coach. Poor Monsieur.


Degrees. Oui, pauvre moi, maitre Jean, you loose your place too -- but you are
prepare for de fast, you carry your beef vid you -- here is de beef.

Touching the coachman's belly. And here is de shoulder of de beef, and de leg
of de beef, aussi, and de head of de beef aussi.


Coach. And Monsieur I have de fist of de beef.

(Oh, s;ee!)
Degrees. Very heavy morbleu, come make a de peace, begar my king make a de good
peace vid your king, so do you make de peace vid Degagee.


Coach. Our king, heaven bless him, holds the rein for his subjects, and he will
always hold a whip for the mounsieurs.


Degrees. Vat, he vil whip de Monsieurs!

Enter Grizley, with a little dog. Ah, my little dog, mosh oblige Monsieur
Grizley Voyez, Monsieur Denni Voyez, Maitre Jean, look at dis pretty dog, -- I
am turn often a mon Maitre, pauvre, miserable -- he is turn often aussi.


Den. I am sorry we lose you, Monsieur.


Degrees. And I am sorry, so full of sorry as all de vorld! -- Lol, lol, lol!
Santez -- Ah, jump up my little dog, mon petit Santez jedit, allons done --
Lol, lol, lol! Bon jour, Maitre Jean -- Adieu, Monsieur Denni.


Exit singing, and dancing the dog. Den. What a merry piece of distress!


Coach. Monsieur knows his swarthy phiz, and broken English, soon recommend him
to a lady of quality.


Enter a Black crying. Coach. What, and Blacky goes too?


Black. Oh, oh! me no live wid good massa no more; oh, oh! -- what me do for de
mush good eat and drink, oh, oh!


Coach. You shall soil with me you dog -- cry, you may well cry at quitting
your master; you're grown as sleek and as plump as a bishop's coach horse in
his service -- but courage, Hannibal, your sleece and complexion soon get you
into bread -- but when shall I mount a box again? Ah, I Am an Englishman! Well,
I hope to see the day when that will be a better recommendation to an English
nobleman than being a Monsieur or a Black-amoor.


Black. Oh, I must strip fine coat -- oh!


Coach. Yes, and that turbot off your head too.


Den. No, John, my master desires you and Hannibal may keep your liveries.


Coach. What, and may I take the harness I have on -- bless his handsome heart!
Well Dennis, you stay -- good bye, lad -- when you chance to drive toward
Leicester Fields, I shall be glad to take a watering tankard with you at the
Coach and Horses; but mayhap, like the great courtiers, you scorn to know an
old acquaintance out of place.


Den. No, John, I Am not so polite as that yet.


Coach. Come along, Hannibal -- gee up! off we go into the world again! but up
or down, wet or dry, through thick or thin, prosperity and better fortune to my
dear master. Gee up -- ay, ay.


Exeunt Coachman and Black. Den. Poor fellows! I cannot help feeling for them.


Enter Edward. Edw. Sad at parting with your companions, Dennis?


Den. Not more grieved than they were, Sir, at quitting so good a master as
your honor.


Edw. Poor fellows! ay, Dennis, integrity and fidelity like other obsolete
fashions, seem to be cast off by the great -- it is natural that they here and
there be picked up by their inferiors -- Any body here this morning?


Den. Mr. Wormwood, Sir, to let you know he would call no more for his money.


Edw. I am obliged to him.


Den. For he has put the affair into the attorney's hands.


Edw. And the rascal paid his own debts with half a crown in the pound -- now,
my sole dependence is upon my old friend Rushstaff.


Den. Mr. Rushstaff left his compliments, Sir, is sorry he cannot oblige you, as
he has not more than will just enable him to take the box at Brookes's tonight.

Exit.
Edw. Well, well -- a verbal answer to my letter; his good manners he levels to
his sincerity -- my friend too.

SONG.
If balmy friendship yet survives,
Ah, whither is she fled;
Believe the tongues of men, she lives,
Their actions speak her dead:
Perhaps responsive echo's shade,
She haunts this brittle mound,
Or flitting Sylph, or watery Naide,
In fancy only found.
The gilded cards to feast and ball,
The silken guest invite;
They fondly think it is friendship's call,
But pride and pomp indite:
For interest with delusive wiles,
Beneath fair friendship's form;
In sunshine on us sweetly smiles,
But leaves us in the storm.

Enter Caroline. Caro. My dear, dear, Edward!


Edw. My sweet Caroline.


Caro. Such a delicious scheme as I have devised for our relief -- Come, come,
I Will have no more melancholy.


Edw. For myself I should not care; if single, I could elbow my way through the
bustle of this busy world; but to involve you, my love, a partner in my poverty
--


Caro. Poor pretty bird! then it could soaring cleave the air and sweetly chirp
the song of freedom, if not impeded by its troublesome, yet affectionate male.

SONG.
While pert cock sparrows sport and play
By turns with every female gay,
The turtle faithful to his dove
Lives but for her, and lives to love,
Still closely nes;tling side by side
Sit the good bridegroom, and good bride,
And murmuring, gurgling on the spray
Both bill and coo their hours away.
But Edward, is the carriage gone?


Edw. Sold by auction.


Caro. You are so hasty -- but no matter -- if my plot don't lift us into
another, welcome a calash and pattens -- let us first methodically state out
case to fortune, and invoke her aid.


Edw. Begin then.


Caro. My wealthy uncle, Sir Walter Weathercock --


Edw. Would have married my rich aunt, Miss Hebe Wintertop.


Caro. A quarrel on the bridal morn, broke off the match.


Edw. Hate succeeds to love.


Caro. Or rather anger to dotage.


Edw. At this period, I possessing an ardent passion for Caroline --


Caro. And I, having no aversion for Edward --


Edw. Are forbid by the old ones to hold further intercourse with each other,
on pain of their immortal displeasure, but nobly sacrificing interest to love,
you ran away with me.


Caro. O fie, Edward! it was you ran away with me.


Edw. Married scarce a twelve month, our mutual partiality for good
housekeeping has brought our stock to the last guinea -- and no living without
money.


Caro. Then let us die.


Edw. Die!


Caro. Yes, -- my life to yours, it enables us to live comfortably hereafter.


Edw. Ha, ha, ha! pleasant enough this! but Caroline, I confess I cannot
comprehend how dying can conduce to a person's living comfortably -- Ha, ha, ha!


Caro. You laugh, but I am serious.


Edw. Death is indeed a serious subject -- but come, your scheme.


Caro. It lies thus -- you shall instantly go to your aunt, in all the supposed
grief of a disconsolate widower, tell her that I died this morning: I Will to my
uncle, and tell him the same story of you -- Now, each supposing the cause of
their displeasure for ever removed, will,(I make no doubt) restore us again
into favor, supply us with an ample sum for the present, and settle on each an
affluent appointment in future.


Edw. But the discovery of such a fraud --


Caro. How -- they never see each other, perhaps never may -- then their circle
is so remote from ours -- or, at worst, can we be poorer, or farther removed
from, their favor than at present.


Edw. Say no more, I am dead.


Caro. And I, gone with the doleful news to my uncle -- I fear nothing but a
laugh to prevent my success.


Edw. And that we do succeed, dear fortune grant.


DUETTO.
Edw. Let me but my Caroline guard,
My love from distress let me save;
And I ask for no other reward
Or blessing on this side the grave.

Caro. Let me but see Edward content,
His lot while his Caroline shares:
Though uncle should never relent,
Or aunt should be angry, who cares.

Both. Deign fortune to smile on a pair,
Who Have trusted so long to thy power;
Thy woes since they patiently bear,
O grant them some sweet with the sour.

Exeunt. A Room in Sir Walter Weathercock's House. Enter Motley, peeping about.
If Sir Walter should see me now -- what then -- I Will tell him, says I, -- if
wrinkled bachelors keep smooth cheek'd housekeepers, "as Squire Ranger says,"
we clever young fellows have a right -- I Would tell him -- if he had not a cane in
his hand -- cane or no cane, I Would -- Here he is -- I had as good hide myself.
(Retires.) Eh, no, its my sweet Comfit.

Enter Comfit. Com. Now who could imagine that a simple country girl as I was
five years ago, could turn out such a -- I Am very ugly to be sure.

Looking in a glass. SONG.
When I left Primrose Green, and first came up to town,
Just at blooming fifteen in my plain linen gown;
Though my thoughts were all gay and my head full of play,
Let me die, if -- Oh fie! was not all I could say.
But now improved in every grace,
With charms to captivate a King;
And seen in shape, or air of face,
My tout ensemble is the thing.
What can become of this wretch, Motley?


Mot. That Is I.

(Aside.)
Com. I know the fellow loves me.


Mot. Do I?

(Aside.)
Com. He Would leap at marrying me.


Mot. I Would look twice first.

(Aside.)
Com. I Am certainly a handsome girl.

Looking in the glass.
Mot. Yes, and you don't know it.

(Aside)
Com. But these men -- Motley's perhaps at this moment, listening to some
conceited hussy of other.


Mot. I am indeed.

(Aside.)
Com. I Am sorry Motley's so poor.


Mot. Upon my soul, so am I.

(Aside.)
Com. But my three hundred pound --


Mot. Say no more, I Will have it.


Com. Ah, Motley, you devil, how could you frighten a body so?


Mot. Take me! for as Jacques, the huntsman, says -- "Motley's your only man."


Com. Who says so?


Mot. Jacques, in the play of "How do you like it." -- There, where Harlequin
Touchstone is -- "Motley," says he, "is your only man," and he did not know me
from Adam, only it came so apropos.


Com. Motley, you improved during the year you lived with the actress.


Mot. Yes, I think I did a little.


Com. But how came she to part with you?


Mot. Because I was a Pagan.


Com. A Pagan!


Mot. Yes -- you must know she gave me a shilling one night to go to the
twelve-penny gallery, and ordered me, after she sung a song, to cry out
ongiorum.


Com. What Is ongiorum?


Mot. Ongiorum is Latin for, don't sing any more. Well, up I mounted -- but
unfortunately taking a glass too much with a friend I met in the gallery --
instead of my mistress, when one Mr.Damon, who played, the Devil that night,
had sung his, song, I roared out -- oncorum, oncorum, Red Stockings -- so my
mistress turned me off next morning; for, says she, (looking in the glass,
after your fashion just now) none but a Pagan, could mistake a Devil for an
Angel.


Com. Poor Motley! -- Pray, what sort of people are there players?


Mot. What sort! -- Lord, my dear Comfit, of all sorts.

SONG.
An actor's a comical dog,
Now frisky, now dull as a log;
So changeable all, now short and now tall,
Now plump, them slim as a frog.
Now Paddy the brogue he puts on,
Then struts with the pride of a Don;
Now a French oui Monsieur, then a Dutch ya^ Mynheer,
Or braw Donald the head of his clan.
How rarely they take in the town,
From one shilling up to a crown!
They pant, and they cry, fight, tumble and die,
But laugh when the curtain is down.

Com. That Is a good song -- but I wish you were down stairs, for my master
makes this his way to the study, and his aversion to your mistress is such -- I
think I hear him -- if he sees you I am ruined.


Mot. He cannot remember me.


Com. Hush, he is here -- don't speak, and I Will get you off.


Enter Sir Walter Weathercock. Sir Wall. Comfit, I wanted to ask -- who is that?


Com. The lad, Sir, belongs to Mr. Quack, the famous rheumatism man, ^^at
advertises to supply elderly gentlemen with calves.


Sir Wall. Calves! his master's a grazier, -- ha!


Com. No, Sir, a gouty doctor.


Sir Wall. Oh! the doctor has the gout?


Com. No, no, Sir, he cures the rheumatism, gout, and dropsy.


Sir Wall. Have you a dropsy? eh Comfit!


Com. No, Sir, but the doctor gives this young man leave to turn a penny for
himself in the fortune telling-way.


Sir Wall. A fortune tellers! -- I Will take a peep through his telescope of futurity
-- Pray friend --


Motley makes signs and faces. Sir Wall. Why does he make faces at me? cannot he
speak?


Com. He cannot speak, Sir, for many reasons -- first he is dumb -- secondly --


Sir Wall. Hold -- your first reason is sufficient for his not speaking -- shall
I ever marry?


Motley grimaces and makes signs. Sir Wall. What Is that?


Com. He means yes, Sir.


Sir Wall. He lies! -- if so, shall I be happy? -- Eh!


Motley points upwards with his finger. Com. He means Sir, that matrimony will
send you to Heaven.


Sir Wall. How?


Motley makes horns with his fingers. Sir Wall. Through Cuckold's-gate, Sir Walter
Weathercock called cuckold, by a mumming magician! a secondhand son of a
sorcerer! a hey-cockolorum conjuror! a wizard with a pig-tail! How long have
you been dumb, sirrah?


Mot. Sir, I was born dumb -- Zounds!

Aside.
Sir Wall. In my life I never heard a dumb man speak so plain.


Com. Such a blockhead!

Aside.
Sir Wall. Cures dropsies! raises dropsies I fancy, eh, Comfit! -- the doctor
provides rams as well as calves -- this is a ram of Jacob's breed --
parti-colour'd, streaked and pied.


Com. Own yourself. [Apart to Motley] The truth is, Sir, this is Miss
Wintertop's man, and he is come to -- tell my master what you are come about.


Mot. Yes, Sir, I come to -- what the devil did I come about; [Apart to Comfit]
I come, Sir -- I come, Sir -- I Am come, Sir.


Sir Wall. I see you are come Sir, but what brought you, Sir?


Com. With his lady's compliments for the honor of your company this evening --
I know he will not go.

Aside.
Sir Wall. And pray, hussy, have you no butt but your master for your hums and
haws.


Com. Sir, I beg your pardon, but I knew your spirit would reject with scorn an
offer from Miss Wintertop, and so, Sir, to save the poor lad from the dreadful
effects of your fury, I thought to have got him out of the house without your
knowledge.


Sir Wall. I believe I ought to be angry here [Aside] -- Yes, Comfit, I am in a
fury! go back to your Mistress, sirrah, and if I catch you here again, I Will
bamboo you so, that it shall puzzle Hunter, that able anatomist, to distinguish
one muscle from another! I will upon my honor, you rascal.


Mot. Oncorum, red stockings again, by gad -- I Will mollify him to some tune out
of the Beggar's Opera.

Aside. SONG.
Oh ponder well, be not severe,
Nor beat me like a drum;
A stick that makes that speak I fear,
Would make poor Motley dumb.

Exeunt Motley and Comfit. Enter Servant. Serve. Mrs. Sandford, is below Sir,
and insists on coming up.


Sir Wall. What, my niece! I will not see her -- I Will, never see her, tell her so.


Ser. She Is here, Sir.

Exit.
Enter Caroline. Sir Wall. So niece, I find you will add another twig to the rod
of disobedience, by thus intruding contrary to my express commands.


Caro. Ah, Sir! your rigor would dissolve to pity and forgiveness, did you
know my calamitous situation.


Sir Wall. Pity! your tears played off at rny heart, are are Spanish onions
against the rock of Gibraltar -- you would marry Miss Wintertop's nephew; though
you knew how injuriously I was used by that old coxcom his aunt. You have a
husband, and so -- make much of him.


Caro. Alas, Sir! I have no husband.


Sir Wall. I said he would run away from you, when you became poor.


Caro. Ah, Sir, wrong not the memory of the -- Oh, wretched Caroline! Alas,
Sir, my husband's dead.


Sir Wall. Edward dead! -- gad so niece, I ask your pardon -- I Am sorry -- I am
faith -- poor thing -- Eh! gad! -- now Edward is gone, I begin to think he was
a worthey lad -- now he is gone, I --


Caro. For ever -- ever gone!


Sir Wall. Well, we m'ust only take care of those that stay behind, -- we must
have a handsome funeral, -- but I Will go see the body.


Caro. Heaven forbid! [Aside.] Do, dear Sir, I left his sorrowful aunt weeping
over him.


Sir Wall. Oh, if she is there, I Will stay here -- Caroline, no money left I
soppose -- Ay, Edward a Bon Vivant! lived all the days of his life. [Gives her
a note.] Well, there is five hundred pounds -- have a decent funeral, Sand kiss
tne child -- come dry up your tears, and look upon ma again as your parent.


Caro. Sir, this goodness --


Sir Wall. Come, child, you are a young widow, don't let your tears impair your
beauty.


Caro. Oh, Sir, think on what I have lost.

SONG.
See the blossom of Spring that enriches the thorn,
Unfolding its sweetness to welcome the mam;
But if nipt, the fond birds in soft elegy mourn,
That fragrance and beauty that never shall return.
Can the sun beams of hope glance a ray of relief,
No, let tears overflow the dew drops of grief,
Soon the bold hand of Winter shall cover the head,
Soon alas! must I wither since Edward is dead.

Exit. Sir Wall. And Edward's dead! it must be for my kind condolence that his
aunt sent for me; I Am sorry I treated her message with such contempt -- Heigh
ho! I feel my love for her revive. I Will wait on her at her own house, 'tho' the
sight of Edward has made her so sad -- Ay, no making love when a dead man's in
company.

Exit.
A Chamber at Miss Wintertop's.

Enter Edward and a Servant. Edw. Only a gentleman would speak with Miss
Wintertop. Exit Servant. If my success with my aunt here equals Caroline's
expectations -- Oh, here she is.


Enter Miss Wintertop and Servant. Miss Win. Your most obedient -- my nephew!
how dare you Richard, call me to any person with previously bringing up their
name.

Exit Servant.
Edw. I feared a knowledge of mine, madam, might deprive me of the honor,
which I now enjoy; but did you know the fatal disaster that occasioned --


Miss Win. I don't love disasters, and I now tell, once for all, nephew, your
disasters shall never be the less for me; your disobedient marriage with Sir
Walter's niece, has --


Edw. Ah! Madam, that marriage is eternally dissolved.


Miss Win. Elop'd! I thought she would turn out as fashionable a wife as ever a
Duchess of 'em all! but indeed what can ^e expected when ladies wear uniforms,
and pay morning visits with phaetons and ponies -- gone off! fine doings.


Edw. My Caroline, Madam, was compelled to yield; the careful parent, and the
tender husband, daily, with tears behold the wife and maiden ravished from
their arms by that insatiate monster! that general Gallant.


Miss Win. He rude to maidens too! the filthy fellow -- what street does he
live in?


Edw. Who, Madam?


Miss Win. General Gallant.


Edw. My grief, too copious for common language swelled into a metaphor; the
gallant I mean, madam, was death.


Miss Win. Death! well I never knew you to bring a pleasant story.


Edw. Oh!


Miss Win. What does the man mean by his blubbering and bellowing?


Edw. Excuse my tears -- but my Caroline is no more.


Miss Win. Caroline dead -- Oh, that is another thing! well nephew, though your
match was repugnant to my will, I don't rejoice at your wife's death.


Edw. That Is very good of you, madam.


Miss Win. But how, and when, pray, did this affair happen?


Edw. This morning, suddenly! I hope the necessity of seeing you will excuse
the indecorum of my being seen abroad so soon.


Miss Win. Necessity! no money left I suppose -- well, I find this accident has
somewhat relaxed my severity. Pray, do you ever see that civil gentleman her
uncle? I fancy your extravagance has rendered you the object of his bounty, but
a nephew of mine, never shall be obliged to him -- I Will send you some money --
come, child, you must not give way to grief.


Edw. O madam! had I never known the amiable qualities of Caroline, I should
not have such cause to lament her loss.

Exit.
Miss Win. Sir Walter's attention to Edward and Caroline has given a gentle
puff to the dying embers of my love, and if --


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Walter Weathercock, madam.


Miss Win. Oh, he has surpised me at a most dismal criterion -- admit him --
Edward's tale has depressed my spirits in the abyss of a lethargic torpitude.
[Enter Sir Walter Weathercock.] Sir, this is an honor.


Sir Wall. Madam, -- I see she is in great grief for the death of her nephew.

Aside.
Miss Win. His niece's death affects him extremely.


Sir Wall. Oh, Hebe! Hebe! my lovely old darling!


Miss Win. Old darling! as rude as ever.


Sir Wall. You are sorrowful -- I don't wonder at it -- well -- accept my
sincere condolence.


Miss Win. Yes, you must feel for the death of so dear a relation -- has it
altered Caroline much? how does she look?


Sir Wall. Dismal enough.


Miss Win. Yes, death wears a dismal aspect.


Sir Wall. You Have seen Edward.


Miss Win. Just now.


Sir Wall. Lost his fine complexion I suppose.


Miss Win. No, I think he looks as well as ever.


Sir Wall. Ay, sudden death, I fancy, does not change the countenance much.


Miss Win. Your niece was very young.


Sir Wall. She Is rising twenty -- Edward, I fancy, was not above twenty-three.


Miss Win. He Will be twenty-four his next birthday.


Sir Wall. Birthday to a dead man. [Aside.] And poor Edward's gone!


Miss Win. Yes, he is gone home -- I wish you would follow him, Sir Walter.


Sir Wall. I am obliged to you, madam, but I hope I shall not go to his home these
thirty years.


Miss Win. Now that is unkind, the sight of a friend in the hour of trouble is
such a comfort.


Sir Wall. A great comfort indeed. [Aside.] I fancy you will have a visit from
Caroline when its dusk.


Miss Win. Heaven forbid -- no, when people quit this world, I beg to be
excused from any further intercourse.


Sir Wall. Why, madam, though my niece may be said to be out of this world now,
yet the funeral vow, and a few Lethean tears shed, I warrant her youth attracts
the butterflies.


Miss Win. Butterflies! the worms I think you mean, Sir Walter.


Sir Wall. Worms! why to be sure divested of their gaudy outside, the macaronies
are a species of grubs -- but come, my angelic Hebe! let us forget our silly
quarrels -- here let me take this vernal sprig, as earnest of the sole
possession of thee, thou aromatic shrub of winter savory.

Taking her hand.
Miss Win. Oh, you amorous Philander!


Sir Wall. Oh, ecstasy! Hebe, get your nephew buried, and then we'll be married
in --


Miss Win. Wait till my nephew is buried?


Sir Wall. Nay, I only speak for decency sake.


Miss Win, How, Sir? would you infer that I would deviate from the rules of
decency? I should imagine when your niece is buried; the wedding --


Sir Wall. My niece buried! why she is cracked. [Aside.] Bury your nephew, madam.


Miss Win. Bury my nephew?


Sir Wall. To be sure! would you hang him up between two loadstones like Mahomet
of Mecca.


Miss Win. Bury my nephew! why he is mad.


Sir Wall. You know your nephew is dead.


Miss Win. No, but you know your niece is dead.


Sir Wall. Not I.


Miss Win. Did not you say your niece had left this world?


Sir Wall. Did not you say your nephew was gone to his long home.


Miss Win. I tell you Edward left this room as you entered it.


Sir Wall. I tell you, I saw Caroline at my house just now.


Miss Win. Sir, I don't think it safe to stay in a place with you.


Sir Wall. Madam, I shou'dn't have troubled your place, if you had not sent for
me.


Miss Win. I send for you, Sir!


Sir Wall. Deny that too -- here comes the very fellow who brought the message.


Miss Win. Astonishing!


Enter Motley. Mot. Madam, the -- Ha, he here! damnation! this is the second
time to day he crossed the way.


Miss Win. Pray Motley did I send you to Sir Walter Weathercock's this morning?


Mot. Nothing but a lie can save me.

Aside.
Sir Wall. Speak, friend, did not I see you at my house today?


Mot. Me! Oh Lord, Sir! not me, indeed.


Sir Wall. Oh you infernal son of a -- do you forget you were dumb.


Mot. Dumb! Oh dear Sir, don't say that of me! my lady I warrant would not keep
me an hour, if she suspected I was dumb -- Lord, madam, am I dumb?


Miss Win. Ridiculous! it must be somebody else.


Mot. Oh Sir, ridiculous! it must be somebody else.


Sir Wall. Braved out of the belief of my ears and eyes! -- as for you, sirrah
--

Takes him by the collar.
Mot. Can eat a crocodile -- drink like a weazle.


Sir Wall. I Will weazle you, and weasand you too you dog.


Mot. Let Hercules himself do what he may, the dog will bark -- the cat will
have fair play.

Exit.
Sir Wall. Since you are so positive, to --


Miss Win. And you so obstinate, I Will send to Edward's house and learn the
truth.


DUET.
Miss Win. Away Sir! get out of my sight,
You are wrong, and I Am sure I am right.
A positive person who takes in his pate,
Such whimsies and fancies I ever shall hate.

Sir Wall. Sweet Hebe, nay, hear me, sweet Hebe,
With reason and love let me rule.

Miss Win. You infant, you grey-headed baby,
Mere dotage has made you a fool.

Sir Wall. I doting and stupid,
Oh Venus and Cupid,
What tyrannous usage is this?
But my rage I Will restrain,
I Will submit to my chain,
And each link of the chain be a kiss.

Miss Win. Since meek and obedient,
You think it expedient,
To receive like a law my command,
In the course of nine years,
I may melt with yaur tears,
And present you my heart and my hand.

Both. Yes meek and obedient, etc.

END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT II.
Enter Edward and Caroline. Caroline. HA, ha, ha! well my dear Edward, now
all is over, the success of ou^ little trick is even beyond my expectation.


Edw. Yes, my dear, but the benevolent effects of their credulity almost gives
our little trick the air of a crime, and the shame of a detection.


Caro. You're ever raising phantoms to scare yourself -- the dread of meeting
your aunt here will keep Sir Walter away.


Edw. True, and the fear of seeing him will secure us from her visits, but I
expect her messenger with the cash every moment.


Caro. Well, I Am prepared here within, should he be curious.


Enter Dennis. Den. A servant from your aunt, Sir.


Caro. I Will to my post of mortality.

Exit.
Edw. Admit him. [Exit Dennis.] Now for a woeful visage.


Enter Motley. Mot. "Even such a man so spiritless -- so woe begone, etc." --
Sir, I am sorry for your loss -- my lady, Sir, desires me to see the -- Oh!


Edw. There she lies.

[Pointing to the side scene.]
Mot. [Goes to the door and looks in!] As handsome a corpse as a man would wish
to look on, as Lord Romeo says -- "Death has not sucked the honey from her
cheeks, and his pale lieutenant -- no -- his ensign, is not quartered there."


Edw. Any commands from my aunt?


Mot. Yes, Sir, she commands you to prop up your spirits with old stout
Madeira. -- She commands you Sir, to take a bumper yourself, and to give three
bumpers to every body that comes to see you, gentle and simple.


Edw. Oh!


Mot. I suppose, Sir, you will have the funeral obsequiors; if so, Sir, I Would have
you, Sir, far the credit of, the thing, hire Solomon Durges to sing at it.


Edw. Oh, bitter separation!


Mot. Consider, Sir, your lady, is in heaven, where you can never come, and for
your sake, I hope your separation may long continue -- her death is the cause
of your grief -- therefore, Sir, I wish you joy.

Going.
Edw. 'Sdeath! she has sent no money. -- [Aside.] Pray have not you any message?


Mot. No, Sir, only a letter.


Edw. Right -- [Aside.] Lay it on the table.


Mot. [Lays it down.] She is indeed a comely corpse -- Oh, life's an Italian
shadow, a strolling player, that falls through a trap-door upon the stage, and
then is seen no more.

SONG.
The world is all nonsense and noise,
Fantoccini or Ombres Chinois,
Mere pantomime mummery,
Puppet-show flummery;
A magical lanthorn confounding the sight.
Like players or puppets we move,
On the wires of ambition and love,
The poets write wittily,
Maidens look prettily,
Till death drops the curtain -- all is over -- good night.

Exit. Enter Caroline. Edw. Thank ye, Mr. Solomon Durges! but what has our kind
aunt sent us? four hundred! -- very handsome indeed.


Enter Dennis. Den. Mrs. Cypress, Madam, the black Milliner.

Exit.
Edw. To take orders for your weeds -- Ha, ha, ha!


Caro. Ah, my frizeur shall supply me with craping for weeds -- Italian flowers
-- and for love, I wear it on my heart.

Exeunt
Another Chamber in Edward's House.

Enter Sheers and Grizley. Griz. Mr. Sheers, Sir, -- I Will tell him, Sir.


Sheers. Yes, Mr. Sheers, to take orders for his mourning. Exit Grizley A
bailiff shall carry them home, though -- yet no tailor in town so complaisantly
suits his own dress to the present humor of his employer -- to a brisk
bridegroom, I Am white as a swan, and here, to this woeful widower, I appear
black -- black as my own goose.


Enter Undertaker. Under. "Hearse -- mourning-coaches -- scarss -- pall." Um --
ay -- if the cash was plenty this might turn out a pretty, sprightly funeral.


Sheers. Servant, Sir.


Under. Scarfs -- a merry death -- coffin -- um -- ay --


Sheers. A sudden affair this, Sir!


Under. Sudden -- ah! I Am always prepared for death.


Sheers. Sign of a good liver.


Under. No tradesman within the bills of mortality lives better.


Sheers. You Have many customers then, Sir.


Under. Not one breathing.


Sheers. You disoblige them, perhaps.


Under. Why the truth is, Sir, though my friends would die to serve me, yet I
cannot keep one three days without turning up my nose at him -- Odso! I forgot
to take measure of the body.


Sheers. (Aside.) Oh, oh! -- A brother tailor -- you measure nobody here.


Under. Yes, I shall -- Mr. Sandford's body.


Sheers. For what, pray?


Under. For a wooden furtout lined with white satin.


Sheers. Odd sort of mourning. [Aside.] But, Sir, I have the business of this
family.


Under. You! I know I have had it, since St. James's churchyard was set on
fire by old Mattack the grave-digger, twenty years last influenza business. I
have nineteen bodies under lock and key this moment.


Sheers. You may have bodies, skirts, cuffs, and buttons -- My business! -- ask
my foreman -- I don't set a stitch -- I Am merely an undertaker.


Under. Undertaker! so am I -- and for work --


Sheers. Now I do no work -- I cut out indeed --


Under. Cut out! Oh you embowel 'em perhaps -- can you make a mummy in the
Egyptian fashion?


Sheers. I never made masquerade habits.


Under. What! could you stuff a person of rank, to send him sweet over sea.


Sheers. Stuff! persons of rank -- Irish tabinets are in style for people of
rank.


Under. Nothing like sage, thyme, pepper, and salt.


Sheers. Pepper and salt! thunder and lightning for a color.


Under. Thunder and lightning! why you are in the clouds, man -- in one word,
could you pickle a Duke?


Sheers. I pickle a Duke!


Under. Could you place a lozenge over a window, or make out a coat for a
hatchment without the help of a Herald?


Sheers. Mr. Hatchment! never made a coat for a gentleman of that name.


Under. Mr. Hatchment, you have a scull as thick as a tombstone.


Sheers. Mayhap so, but I Will let you know no crosslegg'd, and bandy
button-making, Bedford bury, shredseller, shall rip a customer from me.


Under. Friend, depart in peace -- or my cane shall make you a Memento Mori to
all impertinent rascals.


Sheers. Here Is a cowardly advantage! to attack a naked man -- lay by your
cane, and I Will talk to you.


[The undertaker throws down his cane which Sheers takes up, and beats him
with.] Under. Oh, death and treachery! help! murder!


Enter Dennis. Den. Hey! what is all this?


Under. A villain! -- Why here is another Undertaker insists that is he that is to
bury your master.


Sheers. O thread and needles! I bury a gentleman! but egad you're a
frolicksome tailor.


Under. Tailor! -- Oh you son of a Sexton! call you me tailor! a more capital
Undertaker than yourself.


Sheers. Zounds, man, I Am no Undertaker! I Am a tailor.


Under. And Zounds, man -- tailor, I mean -- I Am an Undertaker.


Den. I perceive this mistake. (Aside.) One word good gentlemen mechanics --
Mr. Tailor.


Sheers. Sir.


Den. My Lady is not dead.


Sheers. Your Lady not dead!


Den. No, nor my master neither.


Under. Your master not dead!


Den. No.


Under. Then perhaps he don't want to be buried.


Den. Not alive, I believe.


Under. The most good for nothing family in the parish.


Sheers. By these sheers, parchment of mine shall never cross a shoulder in it.

Exit.
Under. Zounds I Will go home, and bury myself for the good of my family.

Exit.
Exit Dennis. SCENE changes to an Apartment at Miss Wintertop's. Sir Walter and
Miss Wintertop discovered sitting -- Motley at a side-table attending. Miss
Win. Then you will be positive, Sir Walter.


Sir Wall. Yes, when I Am right. I never was wrong but once in my life; and that
was in preferring the wing to the leg of a rabbit.


Miss Win. Psha! I tell you it is your niece that is gone.


Sir Wall. And I tell you, it is your nephew that is gone.


Mot. Gone down the Burn from whence no traveller returns back again.


Sir Wall. Oh my dumb fortune tellers! is this fellow's word your authority? if
that rascal this moment swore I held my own nose, I Would have him cropp'd for
perjury -- consider I am a Privy Counselor.


Mot. Ha, ha, ha!


Miss Win. For shame, Motley, how dare you laugh!


Mot. I beg your pardon, madam; but it would make a Chancellor laugh to see a
fool take a, Privy Counselor by nose.


Sir Wall. Sirrah, I Will --


Miss Win. Sir Walter! have you no respect for my livery.


Mot. Ay, Sir, would you beat lady's livery?


Sir Wall. Well, I Will not dust the rascal's jacket this bout; here is your health
Hebe -- but I Am sure I Am right.


Miss Win. Then I suppose, Sir Walter, it is to this obstinacy of adherence to
your own opinion I am beholden for this honor.


Sir Wall. Don't say so! for that sherbet was nectar from the hand of my divine
Hebe, and inclines me to fancy myself a little Jove.


Mot. Jove in his chair of the sky Lord Mayor!

Singing.
Sir Wall. Are you there still? -- Withdraw you rascal.


Miss Win. Motley, retire.


Mot. It is not safe to leave you two alone, till Doctor Thump has made you too
in one.

Exit.
Miss Win. Mercy on me!


Sir Wall. What Is the matter?


Miss Win. We are alone indeed.


Sir Wall. Well.


Miss Win. This room has double doors.


Sir Wall. What then?


Miss Win. If I cry out nobody can hear me.


Sir Wall. Cry out! what ails you?


Miss Win. If you should be rude now.


Sir Wall. Me! I shall not touch you.


Miss Win. I Have heard that you gentlemen never slip a^ opportunity of kissing a
lady when you get her alone.


Sir Wall. Oh, oh!


DUET.
Sir Wall. In vain to smother love we strive.

Miss Win. I feel my tenderness revive,
Yes, Cupid, once again thy flame,
Burn fierce and bright, and still the same,
For when it has been truly lit,
No quarrel can extinguish it.

Sir Wall. Extinguish it -- Ah, no! I Will prove,
There Is no extinguisher for love;
For quarrels do but snuff the light,
A moment quenched to shine more bright.

Miss Win. In vain to smother love we strive,
I feel my tenderness revive.

Both. In vain to smother love we strive,
I feel my tenderness revive.
Sir Walter going to kiss her.
Enter Caroline. Com. Sir.


Sir Wall. Well, Comfit, who is shrouded?


Com. All Is over, Sir.


Sir Wall. I said so.


Miss Win. And so did I.


Com. But such a lovely corpse.


Miss Win. Motley's words -- be positive again, Sir Walter -- has he sent any
message?


Com. Who, Dennis, madam.


Miss Win. What Dennis? I mean my nephew.


Com. Lord ma'am, he is -- I Am sorry to say it, but your nephew's dead.


Sir Wall. Be positive again, Miss Hebe.


Miss Win. My nephew dead -- Motley!


Sir Wall. Dead! why not? Gad she fancies all her family to be Saturns, or
Pluto's, or some old immortal gods or other.


Enter Motley. Miss Win. Pray, Motley, who did you give my letter to?


Mot. To your nephew, madam.


Miss Win. Are you sure?


Mot. Sure -- by the same token he said -- Motley, says he, you're a fine
fellow, you're as honest as -- an iron chest; and if your lady knew how, to
reward a good servant, she would take half a guinea out of her own silk purse, with
her lily white hand, and say, there Motley, drink my health, my good friend.


Com. Mr. Edward say all this! Oh, you notorious, abominable -- the dear
gentleman I saw stretched -- and Mrs. Caroline told me.


Mot. She speak! Oh you notorious abominable -- The dear lady that at this
moment is as pretty a corpse as ever entered a churchyard heels foremost.


Com. You saucy, impudent -- so I Am not to be believed.


Mot. I would not believe my father, when I knew he was telling a lie.


Sir Wall. I know it is Edward.


Miss Win. I Am sure it is Caroline.


Sir Wall. Well, madam, since you are so positive --


Miss Win. And you so obstinate -- I Will go this moment to Edward's house, and
prove your folly to a shameful conviction.

Exit.
Sir Wall. And to prove you -- take an ass in your company, I Will go with you
myself.

Exit.
Mot. Comical fish in our pond -- Ha, ha, ha! you carried it on extremely well.


Com. Carried it on -- what does the man mean?


Mot. Why sure, you was not in earnest?


Com. Earnest -- certainly.


Mot. Eh! -- why that is good faith -- and you believe too that it is Mr. Edward
that is dead.


Com. I know it.


Mot. I say it is Mrs. Caroline.


Com. Say, but what do you think -- come I see a lie in that brazen face.


Mot. Then my brass is highly polished, and serves for looking glass. No, if
the lady had survived, I Would have it her myself -- "Before her shoes were broke,
with which she followed her husband to the grave, like Nobb^, all in tears."


Com. Upon my word.


Mot. Yes, and have her! for widows now take husbands, as the boys box -- one
down the other comes on -- she is jealous. -- Aside. Comfit, kiss me, my dear.


Com. Carry your kisses to King's Place, puppy.

Exit.
Mot. To King's Place! what, with this case of pockets.

SONG.
I.
See a nymph so brisk and witty,
As nimbly tripping through the Park,
Throwing round her eyes so pretty,
And ogling every powdered spark;
She Will leer, and gaze with fond delight,
Invite you home and kiss you too;
Sigh, kneel, and swear my angel bright,
Without your cash, your kissing will not do.
With a long purse, ever go to your love,
Chink it, chink it, there, oh there;
When you twinkum, twankum, tol de roll, lol de roll,
Ha, ha, ha! then she will love you dear.
II.
Who'd refuse a lad of my inches,
Sprightly, sightly, neat, complete;
But wagtails lured are by gold-finches,
Though eyes may roll, and pulses beat,
They Will leer and gaze with fond delight,
Tip 'em an ogle, they ogle too;
My dove, my duck, my angel bright,
Without the cash, your kissing will not do.
Without a long purse, etc.

Edward and Caroline discovered with wine and glasses. Dennis attending. Caro.
Are all the cards ready for Tuesday se'nnight, Dennis?


Den. Yes, madam.


Edw. The last bottle of Champagne, Dennis?


Den. Ay, Sir, it should be good, for it has not its fellow in the house.


Edw. Well, my cellar died like Seneca; you have sent to my merchant for the old
quantum of champagne, claret and burgundy?


Den. Yes, Sir, old Grizley's gone this half hour.


Edw. I wish he was here -- I thirst to pour out a crimson libation of
thanksgiving to fortune, our propitious deity -- Caroline, take one glass --
come, I Will give you a toast for its passport -- Here Is reconciliation with
America, and let Rodney transfer her flag, and give Thirteen Stripes to the
French and Spaniards.

A noise without.
Caro. I heard a noise!


Den. It Is old Grizley with the wine, madam; he sometimes since, the servants
went away, leaves the door at a jar.


Edw. Then come in old Grizley with the wine.


Enter Sir Walter and Miss Wintertop. Sir Wall. Edward!


Miss Win. Caroline!


Sir Wall. Why here is the Dead Alive! -- What news from the other world, Sir?


Miss Win. Was it you pray, Mr. Orphens, that brought back your Euridice?


Sir Wall. How is old Scratch, and all our black friends below -- this bottle
from Pluto's side-board, I suppose (Drinks.) Upon my honor his diabolical
majesty drinks celestial liquor; good wine -- but, I fancy, Pluto has a good
many persons of quality at his table?


Edw. Confusion!


Enter Comfit. Com. Sir here is -- Mr. Edward! -- A ghost! a ghost!


Enter Motley. Mot. The wench is cracked -- Mrs. Caroline! "Avaunt and quit my
fight! Thy blood is marrowless, thy bone is cold, and no spectacles upon those
eyes you glare with."


Sir Wall. How now, boy?


Mot. "Ay, and a bold boy too, to look on that -- that looks like Paul the
devil."


Miss Win. Such an audacious fraud! pretended to die.


Sir Wall. Ay, are not you ashamed to be alive.


Edw, The truth is, Sir, our money was departed, and our credit expired.


Caro. And we could no longer have lived in earnest, had we not died in jest.


Sir Wall. By gad and a good jest It was, and I am glad it was a jest -- Eh, --
shall I -- yes -- Ha, ha, ha! I will laugh -- Ha, ha, ha! Hebe -- you must
grant me two trifles, forgive them, and marry me.


Miss Win. Lord, Sir Walter!


Sir Wall. You must, you shall, and first your virgin hand -- as to the young
folks, the fault was partly ours, to suffer our whimsical caprices to abandon
them to poverty; I Would never let a child want money, for necessity often obliges
a person to do that, which otherwise he would blush to think of.


Miss Win. It was a knavish affair -- but I forgive you -- and Sir Walter, I am
yours for ever.


FINALE.
Sir Wall. Away with care, adieu to despair,
It Is the season to marry not bury,
In love let us join, I Am Hebe's, she is mine;
And all are alive and merry.

Miss Win. When a lover so brisk, gives the spirits a frisk,
Even maids must sing, hey down derry;
Then to church let us go for I cannot say no,
Where all are alive and merry.

Edw. Late, my Caroline dear, be thou laid on the bier,
May those lips long keep red as cherry;
May both uncle and aunt prove a flourishing plant,
And all keep alive and merry.

Caro. Now both uncle and aunt are like us grown gallant,
It Is too soon to pass Charon's ferry;
So my Edward and I, gladly join in the cry,
While all are alive and merry.

Mot. An adventure so gay, is as good as a play,
Or a cup of canary or sherry;
And if Comfit would join, and say Motley I Am thine.
We should all be alive and merry.

Com. When you offer your love, right and true let it prove,
For champagne do not fool me with perry,
Then if those who are here, contented appear,
We shall all be alive and merry.

FINIS.

