

The WOODMAN; A Comic Opera BY MR. BATE DUDLEY.

THE WOODMAN, A COMIC OPERA, IN THREE ACTS; AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL,
COVENT GARDEN, WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE.

BY MR. BATE DUDLEY.

London: PRINTED BY T. RICKABY, FOR T CADELL, IN THE STRAND. 1791.

DEDICATION.
TO BAMBER GASCOYNE, ESQUIRE. RECEIVER GENERAL OF HIS MAJESTY's CUSTOMS, etc.
DEAR SIR,
THE following OPERA is inscribed to you, from two motives -- Gratitude, and
Selfinterest. My best feelings are indulged by this acknowledgment of the many
obligations I owe to you -- and my vanity, I confess, will derive no
inconsiderable gratification, from the world being informed, that you have long
classed me in the respectable list of your private friends.

The scenes of dramatic fiction, are not perhaps the best calculated, to
display the sincerity of personal regard; -- but my attachment is not the
novelty of a day, and depends not therefore on the form of a public offering.

The WOODMAN indeed, has, on this occasion, some sylvan pretensions of his own:
doing, "Suit, and Service," in that ancient HAINAULT FOREST, in ESSEX.
FOREST, over which you exercise a joint jurisdiction, he may be allowed, at
least, a feudal claim to your protection: I should pay but an ill compliment to
your classical taste, which I admire, to suppose he will be the less welcome,
because he approaches you in the unaffected garb of Pastoral Simplicity.

I am, Dear Sir, With great Regard, Very faithfully yours, H. B. DUDLEY.
BRADWELL LODGE, April 30 th. 1791.
The following Statement, proceeded the Book of SONGS, in the first Night's
Representation; explanatory of the Writer's Views.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THAT the OPERA of THE WOODMAN has been hastily put together, its defects will
but too plainly point out. To excite the admired talents of a MUSICAL FRIEND,
superseded every other consideration in this undertaking. In an endeavor to
sketch his scenes from Nature, if the Writer has failed, the demerit must be
entirely his own. In this case, he can only lament, that the genius of a great
LYRIC COMPOSER should have been misguided by his inability -- but the pride of
having first introduced the modest merit of Mr. SHIELD to the Theatrical World,
he must still retain!

He was advised, to shelter himself under an assumed name, from some friendly
apprehensions on the score of party prejudice; but this he thought unnecessary.
-- The decision of an English Audience, is seldom regulated by unworthy
motives; and personal resentment is so invariably disclaimed by candid
Criticism, that to deprecate it on the present occasion, would degrade, even
the humility of a DRAMATIC AUTHOR!

To the friendly and liberal attention of Mr. HARRIS, and the zealous exertions
of all the PERFORMERS, the AUTHOR feels himself much indebted.

From a combination of the most effective powers of the Theater, the WOODMAN
derived, that correct, and animated Performance, which secured to the Piece so
flattering a reception.

* The words adapted to two or three old AIRS, unavoidably partake of a bro^,
irregular measure.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
SIR WALTER WARING Mr. QUICK. WILFORD Mr. INCLEDON. CAPT. O'DONNEL Mr.
JOHNSTONE. MEDLEY Mr. BLANCHARD. BOB, the Miller, Mr. WILLIAMSON. FAIRLOP, the
Woodman Mr. BANNISTER. FILGERT, the Gardener Mr. CROSS.
WOMEN.
EMILY Miss DALL. DOLLY Mrs. MARTYR. MISS DI CLACKIT Mrs. WEBB. POLLY Miss
HUNTLEY. BRIDGET Mrs. CROSS. KITTY MAPLE Miss STUART.
Female Archers -- Woodmen, etc. etc.

The Lines distinguished by inverted Commas, are omitted in the Representation.

THE WOODMAN, A COMIC OPERA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Perspective Garden. MEDLEY and FILBERT. MEDLEY. WHAT slaves are we
men in office! -- Don't you wonder, Filbert, how I get through all my business?


FILBERT. Oh! it is your larning does it, Mr. Medley, that is certain.


MEDLEY. Why, to be sure, Filbert, your men of parts are the fellows after all;
-- but come, did you deliver the dresses, bows and arrows, last night, to the
lasses who are to shoot for the heifer and ribbands, according to the forest
charter.


FILBERT. Yes.


MEDLEY. And did you tell 'em to meet me in good time, this afternoon, in the
gladeway, near the old Oak?


FILBERT. To be sure I did -- and gave 'em a kiss all round into the bargain,
that they might not forget it.


MEDLEY. That was done like a man, Filbert! -- Now take these to Goodman
Fairlop's, the Woodman, -- (giving him bows and arrows, etc.) -- and tell him I
shall be down with them before the girls have untied their night-caps.


FILBERT. I will. -- (Laughing.) -- Efecks, Master Medley, you think, mayhap, I
don't know who has a fancy to who, in that corner of the forest?


MEDLEY. Come, jog away -- jog away -- I Have no time now to crack jokes with
you, Master Filbert. -- [Exit Filbert. -- Like other great men -- I, Matt
Medley, am obliged, for the good of the state, to hold many offices. -- I am
Deputy Ranger of the Purlieu! -- Keeper of the waifs and strays! -- Fac-totum
to his Worship Sir Walter! -- and Mender of Morals in the absence of our Vicar!
-- I think I Have employment enough cut out for the present day. -- Let me see --
I Am to find out who this little stranger is at the Woodside, which I cannot
learn for my life from that hussy Dolly. -- I Am to make love to her for my
brother Bob, if she is good for any thing -- and if not, I must prevent Sir
Walter making himself the hamlet's talk about her. -- I Have to keep peace
through the day -- if I can -- between Sir Walter and his rantipole cousin
Dinah -- then to act as umpire at the archery -- and at night -- receive a
smile from Dolly as a recompense for all my toils.

AIR I.
In the World's crooked path where I Have been,
There to share of life's gloom my poor part,
The bright sunshine that softened the scene
Was -- a smile from the girl of my heart!
Not a swain, when the lark quits her nest,
But to labor with glee will depart,
If at eve he expects to be blessed
With -- a smile from the girl of his heart!
Come then crosses, and cares as they may,
Let my mind still this maxim impart,
That the comfort of man's fleeting day
Is -- a smile from the girl of his heart!

SIR WALTER. -- (Calling behind.) Medley! why, Matt Medley! where are you, I
say?


MEDLEY. Yes, yes, just as I thought, the old Buck's noddle cannot rest for
dreaming of this little fawn at the Woodside!


Enter SIR WALTER. SIR WALTER. Good morrow, Medley! -- how are you, Matt?
always chanting with the first cock -- eh, you rogue?


MEDLEY. I love to be cheerful, and stirring betimes -- but how comes your
Worship abroad so soon?


SIR WALTER. I could not sleep, Matt, for the rheumatism -- and so forth.


MEDLEY. And I doubt whether your disorder will let you rest, now you're up --
and so forth. [Aside.


SIR WALTER. But did you think of what I was saying to you last night, Matt?


MEDLEY. I Am going about it the first thing this morning! I have a good excuse
for the enquiry, as my brother's desperately in love with this pretty stranger.


SIR WALTER. What, Bob of the mill? -- A great fool! why it will be the ruin of
the poor fellow? -- But how do you know it? -- have you evidence of the fact?


MEDLEY. He told me himself -- so I Am going to look into it.


SIR WALTER. Ay do -- that is quite right: a silly numpskull! -- but you know,
Matt, there can be no harm just in my having a little sort of a curiosity about
her -- and so forth?


MEDLEY. Oh! none at all, sir. -- Nor of my satisfying that curiosity according
to my mind -- and so forth. [Aside.


SIR WALTER. Well then go -- that is a good lad.


MEDLEY. I will, your Worship.


SIR WALTER. That Is right -- now go about it directly Matt, while I finish my
morning's walk.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A Woodside, discovering FAIRLOP 's Cottage Farm soon after Sunrise: -- EMILY
and DOLLY, sitting at a breakfast Table near the Door. FAIRLOP and POLLY
entering to them from the Porch. AIR II. -- QUARTETTO.
FOR all thy boons below,
Oh, ruddy HEALTH! to thee
Thus ever, ever flow
The grateful strains of Industry!
CHORUS of Woodmen. FROM Labor's sons around
The woodlands catch the sound;
While songsters blithe on every spray,
Attune their voices to our roundelay!
[Exit Polly.
FAIRLOP. So much for the first portion of the day! -- and now, my girls, let
us partake of the homely meal that Providence sets before us.


DOLLY. No, father -- that Providence bestows, and I set before you!


FAIRLOP. You are a good girl, Doll -- but though his Worship's clerk, Mr.
Medley, does flatter your comeliness -- mind, child, and never think of setting
yourself before Providence.


EMILY. There, sir -- there is your breakfast ready for you -- I had the
pleasure of toasting your brown bread --


DOLLY. And I of rubbing the nutmeg over it.


FAIRLOP. Honest husbands to you both, for your kindness. -- But now, Miss
Emily, for the rest of your story, which you promised us a month ago. -- Your
aunt I remember well -- and a fine straight woman she was in my younger days.


DOLLY. Ay, father -- you will pity poor Emily indeed, when you hear it; -- she
told it me last night; and I did nothing but sob and cry till daylight.


EMILY. I believe I told you, that my widowed mother was a tenant to old Mr.
Wilford, in a small farm near the park --


FAIRLOP. Yes, child, you did.


EMILY. At her decease I was taken, when very young, to be a companion to their
noice, Miss Wilford, and shared with her, while she lived, an education -- far
beyond what my rank in life could entitle me to.


DOLLY. I don't know that.


FAIRLOP. Well -- and so. --


EMILY. Being the constant observer of her brother's increasing worth, my
esteem for him insensibly grew with it; till at length I listened, too fondly,
to his professions of regard -- which, probably, I ought to have discouraged!


FAIRLOP. I don't know how that should have been: but that is all over, child.


DOLLY. Lord! father, does not love always beget love, as I Have heard my poor
dear mother tell you a hundred, and a hundred times to that?


FAIRLOP. And so thou have, Dolly -- but go on my dear.


EMILY. In short, a mutual vow of inviolable affection was the consequence of
this attachment.


DOLLY. Well, and that was right.


EMILY. His Uncle, one moonlight evening -- surprised us walking together on
the terrace! -- The next morning -- to the astonishment of every one, he
hurried my Wilford off to the continent, without his being able to bid me a
last adieu! -- and, by the most cruel vow, declared, he would disinherit him if
ever he beheld me more!


DOLLY. Barbarous creature!


FAIRLOP. Hold your tongue a little -- pray, Dolly!


EMILY. He enclosed me, a bill of a hundred pounds, the legacy bequeathed me by
his Lady's will -- and informed me, that I had his permission to remain at
Wilford Lodge till I could otherwise accommodate myself -- which I did the same
day at my aunt's, in the adjoining parish.


FAIRLOP. I honor your spirit!


EMILY. After three years absence on his travels -- during which time he has
written to me in terms of unaltered affection, I learnt, that Wilford was on
his return to England. -- To prevent, therefore, the fatal effects to him of
even a supposed renewal of our attachment -- I resolved -- unknown to any one,
to retire in search of an asylum, which, from my aunt's description of you, I
flattered myself I might find -- and, Heaven knows, have sound under your
generous protection!


DOLLY. A'n't this very cruel, and heartbreaking, father?


FAIRLOP. It is a little against the grain, to be sure -- but let us make the
best we can of it.


DOLLY. And so the dear, constant-hearted man is soon expected back again?


EMILY. He is indeed, Dolly --

AIR III.
ZEPHYR, come, thou playful minion,
Greet with whispers soft mine ear!
Hence! each breeze of ruder pinion,
Tell me I have naught to fear!
Gently, ZEPHYR, wing him over,
Though I never behold him more;
With the breath of some young lover,
Waft him to his native shore!

FAIRLOP. Well, child -- the best way now, is to reconcile yourself to a more
humble lot: -- you will not fare so well, it is true -- but you may be as safe
under my lowly roof, as in the proudest dwelling!


EMILY. Oh, the feelings of my heart! --


FAIRLOP. I Am glad on it -- they will spare you the trouble of saying, what I
neither deserve, nor desire to hear. -- But come, girls, I Will now take a step
into the Hop-ground, while you finish dressing the garland pole; and in the
evening we'll all dance round it, and forget our sorrows.

AIR IV.
ON Freedom's happy land
My task of duty done,
With Mirth's light-hearted band
Why not the lowly Woodman one?
Though Fortune's smile our groves forsake,
Mirth may be left behind;
For wealth can neither give, nor take
This treasure of the mind!
On Freedom's happy land, etc.
Come, Cheerfulness, with blithsome gait,
Trip by the peasant's side;
While Care -- in cold, and sullen state,
Sits on the brow of pride.
On Freedom's happy land, etc.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
A Woodland View near FAIRLOP 's Cottage. EMILY and DOLLY, decorating a
Hop-Pole with Ribbands. AIR. -- DUET.
"The blushing pink -- the spotless white,
"Will always charm the purer sight,
"Disdaining gaudy pride:
"How can such colors fail to please,
"When, oh! with silken bands like these,
"True Lover's knots are tied?"

DOLLY. I Have another bit of pink upon my best cap, that will do for the top to
a T. -- I Will run and fetch it.

[Exit.
EMILY. Ah, my Wilford! -- had fate but fashioned thee for these humble scenes
of life, I might then perhaps have aspired to thy love without presumption.


Re-enter DOLLY. DOLLY. Here it is! -- but hold -- this was given me at our
last fair by Medley -- and I should not like to part with it, though he is an
audacious creature! -- But I Will pin it so high, that nobody can reach it. --
There! --


EMILY. Well, this must be the smartest Pole in the parish, to be sure!


DOLLY. And bless me, what kissing there'll be under it!

AIR V.
There Is a something in kissing -- I cannot tell why,
Makes my heart in a tumult jump more than breast high:
For nine times in ten,
So teazing,
And pleasing,
We find those rude creatures -- the dear kissing men,
That we wish it repeated again, and again!
Though a kiss stop my breath, oh! how little care I,
Since a woman at some time or other must die!
For nine times in ten,
So teazing,
And pleasing,
We find those rude creatures -- the dear kissing men,
That we wish it repeated again, and again!

POLLY peeps at the latter part of this Air, and entering archly, sings, " We
wish it repeated again, and again! DOLLY. Heighday, little Miss Nimble-tongue!
-- who asked for your piping?


POLLY. Dear sister! I thought I should always say, and do, every thing after
you.


DOLLY. Indeed! -- but come, Miss -- here, take your basket -- (giving her one)
-- and pack off to school. -- Marry come up -- I think we can find you
something else to mind, or I wonder!


EMILY. Oh! she will be a good girl, Dolly, I Will answer for her.


DOLLY. And so she ought -- mind and finish your task in your sampler before
you come home, Miss.


POLLY. Well -- so I will, if you don't s^ub a-body.

[Exit Emily and Dolly. [ Sings] -- " There Is a something in kissing -- I
cannot tell why!" [Exit Polly.
SCENE IV.
MEDLEY coming to the Woodman's. MEDLEY. So! -- so! -- why these girls are not
up yet! -- by their lying in bed thus -- they fancy themselves married already!


Enter BOB. BOB. Good morrow, brother Matt.


MEDLEY. Good morrow again, Bob -- if it is not too late -- well, do you
continue in the same mind?


BOB. Yes -- I love her dearly.


MEDLEY. Come, then, I Will try what is to be done for you.


BOB. Don't expect me to talk much at first -- for when I see her, I know I
shall be as dumb as my breast-wheel in a hard frost.


MEDLEY. Leave it to me, and never you mind it -- Halloo! halloo! -- why house!
are you all dead, or fast asleep?


Enter EMILY and DOLLY, from the Woodside-part. DOLLY. As I hope to live,
there is my spark, and his brother Bob the miller, your intended lover.


EMILY. How can you be so absurd, Dolly?


DOLLY. -- (Advancing.) Pray, Gentlemen -- or rather middling kind of men --
what may be your business here so early this morning?


BOB. "Now mind, brother -- for I cannot speak a word. [To Medley.


MEDLEY. "First of all, Dolly -- I came to enquire, whether you have received
the bows and arrows, and how you like your dresses?


DOLLY. "Why, so-so!


MEDLEY. "Then, Mrs. So-So -- the rest of my business happens not to be with
you -- but with your pretty companion there. [Turning to Emily.


EMILY. "With me, sir?


DOLLY. "Oh! I see he is in his airs this morning -- but I Will match him.
[Turning off with Emily.


MEDLEY. "Faith, Bob, she is a nice grist!


BOB. "A pure white sample, an't she brother?"


MEDLEY. Come, we'll to the point at once. -- May I crave your name, fair one?


EMILY. If it can be of any service to you to know it -- it is Emily.


MEDLEY. Emily! -- a pretty name enough for the top of a love letter -- an't
it, Bob?


DOLLY. I have no patience at his impudence, and neglect of me! [Aside.


MEDLEY. Why then, Miss Emily -- the long and short of the matter is this: --
my brother Bob here, as stirring a lad as any on the stream, has soused over
head and ears, for you, into the mill-pond of affection --


EMILY. Ridiculous! --


MEDLEY. And thinks he shall prefer the pretty clapper of a wife -- to the
clack of his mill --


DOLLY. Impudent fellow!


MEDLEY. And unless you take compassion on him, he is determined -- what are
you determined upon Bob? -- (aside) -- oh! he is resolved to knock down his
hopper, and let the stream of life run waste with him the remainder of his days!


EMILY. -- (Smiling.) Lamentable indeed!


DOLLY. -- (Tauntingly.) But that an't all?


MEDLEY. Why, what the deuce would a reasonable woman have more?


EMILY. I would save you and your brother the trouble of any further
explanation, by assuring you, that I can never listen to his addresses, though I
feel myself honored by his esteem!


MEDLEY. Lord, Miss! -- but his love --


DOLLY. And lord, sir! -- don't be so meddling -- it is enough for you to
explain your own love!


EMILY. Ah, Dolly! -- how sew are there able to reveal to others this mystery
of the mind!

AIR VI. -- GLEE.
What is LOVE? -- An odd compound of simples most sweet,
Culled in life's spring by fancy -- poor mortals to cheat;
A passion -- no eloquence yet could improve,
So a sigh best expresses the passion of Love!
[Exeunt Bob, and Emily severally.
DOLLY. -- (Laughing.) Ha! -- ha! -- ha! --


MEDLEY. What is it you giggle at so -- Ma'am Dolly?


DOLLY. At you, and your foolish brother!


MEDLEY. Oh! you do?


DOLLY. Yes, to be sure I do! -- I cannot help it for my life. [Still laughs.


MEDLEY. Then, since my brother is to be fobbed off by your companion in this
pretty manner -- I Will enquire a little into what is what? and who is who? --


DOLLY. Oh! pray do, Mr. Jack in office!


MEDLEY. Yes, Ma'am -- and know how Miss Proud-Airs came here? -- whether she
gets an honest livelihood? -- and where is the place of her last legal
settlement, Ma'am!


DOLLY. Pitiful spite! -- But I can save you all this trouble. She Is a
thirteenth cousin by the side of my mother's halfbrother: -- she came on a
visit to us from foreign parts -- has been better brought up than either you,
or I, sir -- and being, at this time, a little in adversity -- why -- my father
has taken compassion upon her. --


MEDLEY. Taken compassion upon her?


DOLLY. Yes, sir.


MEDLEY. And, like an old fool -- keeps her, I suppose?


DOLLY. Well -- and suppose he does.


MEDLEY. What? -- after the fashion of the great folks above!


DOLLY. For my part, I don't see that such an action is a disgrace to any one,
gentle, or simple.


MEDLEY. You don't, upon your little wicked soul?


DOLLY. No. -- And so, till you learn to behave yourself a little more like a
man, I don't wish to see your spiteful face again.

[Exit Dolly.
MEDLEY. Here Is a pretty skit for you! -- Have I been fifteen months at a Latin
school? -- two years hackney-writer to an attorney on Tower Hill -- more than
three years justice clerk to Sir Walter? -- and to be outwitted, after all, "by
this old stub-fox, and his young cubs? -- Surely, Master Solomon -- by your
leave, there is now and then something new under the sun! -- Old Fairlop, the
Woodman, to take a flashy young hussy into keeping! -- and his daughter, -- in
whom I placed every hope of future comfort -- to encourage and laugh at it? --
I Will go instantly to Sir Walter to prevent his falling into the trap that may
be laid for him, however -- and as to Dolly -- "

AIR VII.
Say -- what kind of revenge shall I take?
Shall I quit her -- and see her no more? --
It Is a pity at once to forsake
What we have learnt a long while to adore!
If I tell her, for life we must part,
Ten to one if it gives her much pain!
Should the feel it -- my own rebel heart
Will fly to her succor again!
[Exit.
SCENE V.
The Forest. WILFORD, and CAPT. O'DONNEL. CAPT. O'DONNEL. Upon my conscience --
but you true lovers are restless creatures! -- We will only have been landed
six days from the continent, and here are we again launched upon a more
slippery element, in chase of your runaway mistress.


WILFORD. Ah! my friend O'Donnel -- but what a treasure are we in pursuit of?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, but I wish you to be after giving me a more particular
description of this same treasure -- for which, I think, we will encounter a
small number of difficulties.


WILFORD. Oh! she will repay all my anxieties!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Yes, faith! and what is to become of mine into the bargain? --
but -- I see yours is a dashing kind of love -- which my friendship is eager
enough to follow; -- so order it upon any service you please, in search of your
goddess.


WILFORD. My dear O'Donnel -- I cannot thank you as you deserve. -- My
intelligence informs me, that Emily has, unaccountably, sought a retreat on the
confines of this extensive forest. -- We must, therefore, vigilantly explore
it, taking different directions. -- The guide told you where we should meet?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Not he indeed! -- but what occasion for a rendezvous, when we
are only going upon a foraging party!


WILFORD. He directed our servants to the Rein Deer, near the samed Oak: --
there, at least, we may have tidings of each other's success. -- Here let us
part!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And see who starts the first do on the forest. -- But hark
ye, Wilford! -- how shall I be sure of her, so as not, by one of my consounded
country mistakes, to take her for one of the little wild fawns of the chase?


WILFORD. If you have no eyes, -- hear her but speak, and the mild melody of
her accents will instantly convince you!

AIR VIII.
THE streamlet that flowed round her cot,
All the charms of my Emily knew;
How often has its course been forgot,
While it paused, her dear image to woo!
Believe me, the fond silver tide
Knew from whence it derived the fair prize,
For silently swelling with pride --
It reflected her back to the skies!
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE VI.
Garden. SIR WALTER, and MEDLEY. SIR WALTER. Did you ever hear such a
persecuting clapper as cousin Di's?


MEDLEY. A little out of tune now and then, to be sure, your worship: but how
did this storm break out?


SIR WALTER. Only, forsooth, because I good humour'dly laughed at her a little,
for sashing herself off like a young girl, and telling her, she would make a
better patroness of beefeaters, than female archers! -- However, I Will see none
of her prudish nonsense there -- I Will ride ten miles first another way.


MEDLEY. That Is a pity; for it will be a fine sight.


SIR WALTER. What signifies your finery, and foolery, Matt? -- if a man cannot
be comfortable, and take a quiet peep at a pretty girl -- and so forth. -- But
when am I to see this little stray wood-nymph, Matt?


MEDLEY. We cannot too soon enquire into the merits of the case; -- you will find
her no better than I told you. -- We may take out orders of removal for her
directly.


SIR WALTER. But not without positive evidence of the fact.


MEDLEY. Let me beg your worship to be a little upon your guard -- if Miss Di
gets hold of it -- she will prattle about it merrily, I warrant you.


SIR WALTER. Yes, let her alone for that: -- she is squeamish enough about other
people -- but as to her fantastical self -- you will find her always upon the
ogle -- and fancying every man she sees -- in love with her -- and so forth.


MEDLEY. Suppose, some time or other, we were to humor this fancy of here is: --
I don't think, your worship, it would be of any disservice to her!


SIR WALTER. My dear Matt, give me your hand! -- prithee don't forget it! --
Let me get her but once fairly on the hip, and then at all events I shall
secure a good peace, with the enemy I never can conquer!

AIR IX.
SURELY woman's a powerful creature
In every stage of her life,
So armed at all points, by dame Nature,
As Maiden -- Miss -- Widow -- or Wife!
In her bloom, every glance she shoots through you;
Ever after her la^um's well strung: --
And sure is that force to subdue you,
Which shifts from the eye -- to the tongue!
[Exeunt.
SCENE VII.
The Forest. CAPT. O'DONNEL alone. CAPT. O'DONNEL. Upon my conscience -- but
this is likely to turn out a very clever expedition of mine! -- A pretty
account I Will be able to give poor Wilford! I marched out in search of his
rivulet goddess -- and the devil a human creature have I clapped my eyes on --
except two huge bucks at a tilting-match under an oak! -- But hold -- what have
we here? something nimbly scudding along -- and this is her track! --


Enter POLLY. POLLY. Oh la! what fine gentleman can this be? [Aside.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. How are you, my little innocent?


POLLY. Very well, I thank you sir -- (curtesying) -- Pray, if I may be so
bold, do you belong to our forest?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. No, my little dear -- I Am a roving buck from foreign parts!
"what would you say to such a one for a husband?


POLLY. "Oh! dear sir -- you are very good -- but I must not think of one 'till
my eldest sister's married.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. "No -- who tells you that?


POLLY. "My father -- he says my waxen baby is a better play-thing than a
husband, after all!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. "But you don't believe him?


POLLY. "I don't know, sir."


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Where do you live? -- and what may be your little name?


POLLY. I live hard by, and my name is Polly Fairlop. I Am going to school --
but I think I Am too old for that, however!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Indeed! and so you are, my dear!

AIR X.
WHEN first I slipped my leading strings -- to please her little POLL,
My mother bought me at that fair, a pretty waxen Doll;
Such sloe-black eyes, and cherry cheeks, the smiling dear possessed,
How could I kiss it often enough -- or hug it to my breast?
No sooner I could prattle it, as forward Misses do,
Than how I longed, and sighed to hear -- my Dolly prattle too;
I curled her hair in ringlets neat, and dressed her very gay,
And yet the sulky hussy not a syllable would say.
"Provoked, that to my questions kind, no answer I could get,
"I shook the little hussy well -- and whipped her in a pet: --
"My mother cried, Oh fie upon it -- pray let your Doll alone,
"If ever you wish to have a pretty baby of your own!"
My head on this I bridled up, and threw the play-thing by,
Although my sister snubb'd me for it -- I know the reason why --
I fancy she would wish to keep the sweet-hearts all her own,
But that she shall not, depend upon it -- when I Am a woman grown!

CAPT. O'DONNEL. Bravo, my little warbler! -- Though you are not tall enough,
do you see -- for a husband -- I dare be bound you're cunning enough to tell me
-- whether you have amongst you, such a thing as a stray young lady, almost as
handsome as your own sweet self?


POLLY. As true as any thing this must be Miss Emily's sweetheart, that I Have
heard them talk, and cry so much about. -- (Aside.) -- A stray young lady? --
what sort of one, sir?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Faith, an odd sort enough! -- one that run away from her
lover, for fear of being married to the man of her heart!


POLLY. Oh, dear sir! -- we have no such girls in our parts, I can assure you.
-- But here comes Mr. Bob, the Miller; perhaps he can inform you better -- and
so good bye, sir -- for I ought to have been at school full half an hour ago!

[ Exit singing -- " But that she shall not, depend upon it, when I Am a woman
grown."
CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well done, little Whirligig! --


Enter BOB. CAPT. O'DONNEL. Good day to you, friend Bob.


BOB. -- (Surprised.) Why, how the dickens did he know my name to be Bob? --
(Aside) -- The fame to you, sir. [Bowing.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Faith, honest miller -- you will confer an obligation upon me,
by telling me whereabouts I am.


BOB. -- (Smiling.) By your question, sir, I should guess you a bit of a
stranger in this forest!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Indeed and you have hit it. -- What Is more, I came upon a
strange bit of business -- and, to tell you the honest truth, I need not walk
much further to be tired, as well as hungry.


BOB. Lord love you! say no more -- the traveller that has lost his way, shall
never want a welcome at my mill, so long as I am able to grind a grist in it.
--


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Upon my conscience, but this honest fellow would soon make a
man forget that he was out of his own country! What a fine thing is generosity!
but what is it good for without a little gratitude? --

AIR XI.
OH! a French foederation,
Or courtier's oration,
Is all botheration,
To you Bob, and me! --
But what is more inviting,
My own heart delighting,
Faith better than fighting,
I Will tell you -- do you see:
Why the snug little blessings, that most men desire,
The girl we can love -- and the friend we admire!
But the sight above all, would you feel, my lad, here below,
Make the warm flame of gratitude tenderly overflow!
Though drones heap with pleasure,
Wealth's mischievous measure,
Faith that is no treasure
-- To you Bob, and me! --
But what is more inviting, etc.

BOB. But what might bring you into these out-of-the-way parts, if I may be so
bold? -- and how did you know my name was Bob?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Because I take you to be the son of your father -- whose name
I guess was Robert!


BOB. Efecks! that is no bad guess for a stranger, however! -- But now, sir, for
your business --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Faith, I came only to enquire after a stray dappled fawn, the
owner of which would recover it at any pains, or price.


BOB. Oh! if that is all, set your heart at ease. -- When you have refreshed
yourself, I Will take you to my brother Matt, who is all in all with Sir Walter
-- and looks after the waifs and strays -- so if any body can give you
intelligence, he is the man. -- Besides, there is to be fine doings this
afternoon round here -- so you may as well tarry, and see the pastimes of the
place!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. With all my soul! -- Then, miller, I may peep at some of your
Woodland nymphs -- You have a few pretty ones skipping through these gladeways,
I suppose?


BOB. Oh, a mort! -- I Will show you one among 'em shall make your mouth water --
if you're ever so nice.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Why don't you pick out one amongst 'em for a wife, Bob?


BOB. Because I cannot choose the sample I like.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. A little shy -- ch! Bob -- of the antlers that flourish so
thick around you?


BOB. No -- no -- I understand your joke, sir -- but I Have no fears of that
kind, I promise you.

AIR XII.
MY heart is as honest, and brave as the best,
My body's as sound as a roach;
Though in gay fangled garments I never was dressed,
Nor stuck up my nob in a coach:
If Fortune refuses to slow with my stream,
My sacks with her riches to fill,
Why surely it is Fortune alone that is to blame --
And not honest Bob of the Mill!
My breast is as artless, and blithe as my lay,
From my cottage Content never flies,
She is sure to reward the fatigue of the day,
And I know how to value the prize:
Would the girl that I love, then, but give me her hand,
The world it may wag as it will;
I desy the first 'Squire, or Lord of the Land,
To dishonor plain Bob of the Mill!
[Exeunt.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE VIII. EMILY alone, ^ting near the Cottage. EMILY. WHY should the report
of a stranger's arrival on the forest, so much alarm me? -- But may he not, by
this time, have removed me as far from his memory, as his person? -- Oh, no! --
my Wilford is still the same -- and, ill-fated as we are -- my heart must dwell
upon his fidelity with emotions of delight! --

AIR XIII.
SWEET inmate -- SENSIBILITY!
How pure thy transports flow,
When even grief that springs from thee,
Is luxury in woe!
Without thee -- where is the sigh of love,
Or blush by grace refined?
Where Friendship's sacred tear, to prove
The triumph of the mind?
RONDEAU -- Sweet inmate, etc.
[Emily continues reading.
Enter SIR WALTER, and MEDLEY with his Clerk's Bag. MEDLEY. Yes, yes -- there
she is upon the layer, as I expected!


SIR WALTER. Why, she warbles as innocently as a little Robin, Matt!


MEDLEY. Oh! she can warble fast enough, if that is all -- why, I dare say
she will turn out, upon examination, to be one of the little hurdy-gurdy girls
that grind music about the streets of London!


SIR WALTER. But are you sure that my tenant, Fairlop -- like a sly old fox --
has picked up this pretty chicken for himself? -- have you evidence of the fact?


MEDLEY. To be sure, your Worship. -- I Have his daughter Dolly's own confession
of the whole.


SIR WALTER. Well -- I Will frighten her a little -- but I cannot find in my
conscience to hurt her -- for every moment I perceive in her fresh beauties --
and so forth.


MEDLEY. Justice you know, sir, should be blind on these occasions.


SIR WALTER. What signifies that, Matt -- when one can see such charms with
half an eye! -- But what can she be reading?


MEDLEY. No good, I Will answer sor't --


Enter DOLLY, who seeing them, goes up to Emily. DOLLY. As I live, here is Sir
Walter! -- We must make a curtesy to him.

[Emily rises, and modestly courtesies with Dolly.
SIR WALTER. They observe us -- what a pretty rogue! -- Hark ye -- young --
blooming damsel?


DOLLY. Which of us, and please your Worship?


MEDLEY. Not you, Ma'am Forward-step -- Here, Miss Scapegrace, walk this way.
[To Emily.


SIR WALTER. Don't, Matt. -- I will not suffer you to be so harsh with her. -- How
came you, child, into the limits of this forest?


EMILY. Good heaven, how shall I support my self! [Aside.


DOLLY. Why, pluck up a good spirit, and never mind it! [Aside.


MEDLEY. -- (Beckoning Sir Walter aside.) As this may turn out a nice point at
sessions, -- you should ask her, -- where she was born? -- and then, how she
got her bread from her youth up? -- that is the practice according to law!


SIR WALTER. But not exactly, Matt, according to my nature.


MEDLEY. Indeed, first of all she should be sworn!

[Takes out a book.
SIR WALTER. Well, you may swear her -- but I cannot be severe with her,
without positive evidence of the fact!


MEDLEY. Take off your glove --


EMILY. What can this mean? [To Dolly.


DOLLY. I Am sure I don't know -- but I Will run and fetch my father.

[Exit.
SIR WALTER. Come -- come, pretty one -- the law requires you should be sworn.


EMILY. Pray, sir, inform me -- against what rule of society have I offended,
that my humble character should be thus scrupulously enquired into?


MEDLEY. You hear his Worship's commands, and that is sufficient.


EMILY -- (To Sir Walter.) I fear, sir, I know not the extent of so solemn an
obligation!


SIR WALTER. No? -- not an oath? -- oh fie!


EMILY. No, indeed, sir! -- I entreat you would have the goodness to expound it
to me.


SIR WALTER. Why, child -- an oath -- is -- as one may say -- a sacred -- kind
of a -- taking of a --


MEDLEY. Lord, sir! I Would be above explaining it to her! besides, here comes the
old offender.


Enter FAIRLOP. SIR WALTER. Sirrah! how dare you! -- how durst you! -- You may
retire, child, for the present. [To Emily, who goes out.


FAIRLOP. Mercy on us! -- what? and please your Worship!


MEDLEY. We are come in the king's name, to demand, Master Fairlop -- who, and
what, that little coaxing Minx is?


SIR WALTER. Where she comes from? -- and how you came by her?


FAIRLOP. And please you -- all I know -- your Honor shall know --


MEDLEY. Now for it!


FAIRLOP. I ^ound this poor Emily, a friendless creature, that the world had
turned it back upon -- and so, your Honor -- I took her in --


MEDLEY. And keep her in the face of the whole forest?


SIR WALTER. Why, your betters could have done no more? -- an't you ashamed of
yourself, Master Fairlop?


FAIRLOP. No, indeed, your Worship.


SIR WALTER. No?


FAIRLOP. Why should a poor man be ashamed of an act that the great are so
proud of?


MEDLEY. There Is impudence for you!


SIR WALTER. Why, what will the world say of you?


FAIRLOP. So long, your Honor, as I can lie down with a quiet conscience, and
rise to work under a good landlord, I heed not the world, and all its malice!


SIR WALTER. What! have you no regard for your own precious soul -- and so
forth?


FAIRLOP. When my poor trunk is sell'd, and the knots hewn off, I hope that
some sound plank will be found here -- (laying his hand on his breast) -- as
well as in finer sticks, with a smoother bark!


MEDLEY. Why, don't you know whose tenant you are?


FAIRLOP. Dear heart! what a question?


SIR WALTER. Ay, answer him that --


FAIRLOP. To be sure, I am your Honor's tenant for the Hopground -- the six
acre croft -- and the little woodland plot, where I was born -- and I always
strove hard not to be behind hand with my rent.


SIR WALTER. Then mark me -- I Will let it all over your head tomorrow, if you
don't discard that bewitching little baggage directly!


FAIRLOP. That Is rather hard! -- I Have lived under your Worship three-and-fifty
years! -- but if it must be so -- I Will be content. -- I hope your Honor will
get a better tenant!


SIR WALTER. What! you will be obstinate?

AIR XIV.
Good lack a day!
I would not for the land I hold,
Nor sacks brim-full of British gold
My trust betray: --
I Will do such deed for no man!
My maxim is, to do my best
To make each creature round me blessed --
Much more -- a helpless woman!
[Exit Fairlop.
SIR WALTER. What a sturdy old pollard this is, Matt?


MEDLEY. Why, he will corrupt the morals of the whole hamlet, his poor daughter
Dolly and all!


SIR WALTER. But still, Medley -- as to the little warbler herself -- I do not
find, yet, that we have evidence of the fact.


MEDLEY. You know, your Worship, Burn says --


SIR WALTER. Pooh -- pooh -- what signifies what Burn says. I question if ever
he met with so ticklish a case in the whole course of his life.


Enter BOB, who whispers MEDLEY. MEDLEY. A strange gentleman! -- glad to speak
with me?


SIR WALTER. Here, Bob! -- your brother Matt wants me to play the very deuce
with the pretty little stranger at the woodside!


BOB. No sure, your Honor!


MEDLEY. Your Worship, to be sure, must act as you please.


SIR WALTER. If I should commit her -- you, as constable, Bob, must take the
poor rogue to the house of correction.


BOB. I could not do it, your Honor, for the world! -- Lord love her little
heart, what has she done?


SIR WALTER. True, Robert! -- that is what I want to know -- at all events, I Will
do nothing further in it, 'till I Have re-examined her closely -- and so forth!


MEDLEY. I don't see, indeed, that there can be any harm in reconsidering the
case.


SIR WALTER. No, none in the world -- besides we should hear all the
circumstances, pro and con -- and so forth.


BOB. Ay do -- your Honor -- why, brother Matt, you wa'n't used to be a
hard-hearted fellow -- particularly to the poor girls.


MEDLEY. No, God forbid I ever should be -- 'though this is a terrible example,
Bob, for poor Dolly.


AIR XV. -- TRIO.
ALL -- Hard is the task, in one decree,
To blend
Medley -- Law!
Bob -- Love!
Sir Walter -- and Clemency!
ALL -- But where they equally prevail,
Let soft Compassion turn the scale!
[Exeunt.
SCENE IX.
DOLLY entering the Garden. DOLLY. Where can this cruel monster of mine be? --
I did not intend to let him see that I loved him this half year -- but if I
don't -- he may still play poor Emily some ill-natured trick. -- Oh! here he
is! -- As her Ladyship, Miss Dina, kindly takes our part -- I Will be upon the
high ropes a little now, as well as he.


Enter MEDLEY. MEDLEY. Well, Ma'am Dolly -- what may your business be with me?
for I Am rather in haste --


DOLLY. Lud -- what a hurry some folks are in all of a sudden! -- if you must
know, sir -- I sent for you to tell you, that you, and Sir Walter, are going to
Old Nick as fast as you can gallop!


MEDLEY. Indeed? -- why then, perhaps, you would not dislike to take a canter
along with us!


DOLLY. You may joke and jeer, Mr. Matt -- but how can you find in your heart
to collogue and plot against so innocent a creature?


MEDLEY. I collogue? -- I scorn your words!


DOLLY. "I should not wonder to find, when I get home, that she had drowned
herself in the brook at the back of our orchard!


MEDLEY. "No -- no -- your young father is too tender hearted to suffer that.
--


DOLLY. "Pray what do you mean, sir?


MEDLEY. "Only that, instead of -- drowning -- you will have a little nursing at
home sooner than you looked for. [" Imitating the cry of a young child."


DOLLY. What, could you learn nothing better in London, Mr. Medley, than to
slander a poor innocent girl, because she refused your brother Bob! -- poor
spite!


MEDLEY. Why, if you come to that, didn't you tell me with your own mouth, that
--


DOLLY. That what? --


MEDLEY. That your father had taken -- a fancy to her! -- and did'n't he
acknowledge it before his Worship himself?


DOLLY. Mercy upon us! -- what is this wicked world come to -- I? --


MEDLEY. "Yes you did -- told me flat and plain, that your father was fool
enough to -- to keep her.


DOLLY. "Keep her? -- and so he does.


MEDLEY. "Well -- there now!


DOLLY. "Keeps her -- poor man, like another daughter."


MEDLEY. What? -- don't she -- now mind me, Dolly -- are you sure -- and
certain -- that --


DOLLY. What?


MEDLEY. That -- Emily does not -- now and then -- by chance -- tie your
father's -- nightcap under his chin?


DOLLY. I wonder you a'n't ashamed of yourself, to look me in the face, after
such a speech?


MEDLEY. Faith, there may be some confounded mistake in this affair, after all!
-- (Aside) -- why, Dolly, I only --


DOLLY. My father may be poor, sir -- but ask the whole hamlet whether they
ever found him dishonest!


MEDLEY. No, Dolly! -- but such a bewitching little rogue, you know -- might
have done you no good -- that was all my fear, I can assure you now Dolly!


DOLLY. I thought you more of a man -- she is as innocent --


MEDLEY. Are you in earnest?


DOLLY. Earnest!

AIR XVI.
WHEN next you view the lily blow,
Or on wild heath the driven snow,
Tossed rudely by the wind --
Tell me then, which you would compare
To her -- who with a form that is fair,
Adds still a fairer mind!

MEDLEY. Poor thing! -- if that is the case -- I have been sadly to blame -- But
I Am glad we stopped proceedings -- no -- the law must not take its course -- to
trample down innocence and humanity!


DOLLY. My dear Matt -- do you say so?


MEDLEY. To be sure I do --


DOLLY. Then heaven will bless -- and I will kiss you for it!

[Runs and kisses him.
MEDLEY. Methinks, Dolly, I like your blessing the best, at present! -- but did
you give it me for yourself, or your friend?


DOLLY. Oh! -- half one, and half the other.


MEDLEY. Then let me have a whole one on your own account -- (kisses her) --
and now, to make my happiness complete, give me your hand -- and say, you're
mine for ever!


DOLLY. Lord! you do tease a body so, Matt!


MEDLEY. Come -- come --


DOLLY. Well then, there -- (gives her hand) -- but you must get my father's
consent.


MEDLEY. To be sure -- and then all is settled and done. I Will go and set Sir
Walter right -- and come to you both before we meet at the archery. -- But who
the deuce is this pretty water-wagtail -- come, surely you may tell me now!


DOLLY. I cannot, indeed -- but you shall know all about it in good time.


AIR XVII. -- DUET.
Medley. HAVING brought my suit to issue,
I may venture close to kiss you,
Lovely Dolly! -- dearest Doll!
Ever singing toll-de-roll. [Ad lib.
Dolly. Aye! but when my charms are falling,
Shall I then still hear you calling
"Lovely Dolly! -- dearest Doll!
"Ever singing toll-de-roll? etc."
Medley. You're a woman, made for ever?
Dolly. You're a man, Sir, made for ever?
Both. Hold your head up now, my dear,
Such a match for you, how clever!
You Will be envied far and near,
Ever singing toll-de-roll, etc. [Ad lib.
[Exeunt.
SCENE X.
Garden. SIR WALTER. Matt Medley promised to be with me an hour ago! -- I want
to know how he has managed it -- that I may see her out of the reach of my
prying cousin! -- Hold -- hold -- suppose, after all -- she should prove an
honest, good girl! -- what is to be done then? -- Why, it will only be my care
-- as it is my duty, to protect her innocence. -- But if she turns out the
little wanton baggage Medley suspects -- it will be charity to take her out of
the way myself, and thus prevent old Fairlop's ruin! -- Gads me! here she is,
just at the nick. -- I must be cautious with her at first, 'till I learn how
her pulse beats -- and so forth.


Enter EMILY. EMILY. I hope you will pardon me, sir, this bold intrusion --


SIR WALTER. Make no apology, my little dear! I am happy to see you -- I Will do
all I can to serve you, depend on it.


EMILY. Regardless of my own fate -- I come not, sir, to ask indulgence for
myself -- but most humbly to solicit you in behalf of an amiable man!


SIR WALTER. Ay! who can that be, child?


EMILY. One, sir, who through life has enjoyed the cheering warmth of your
benevolence -- and is therefore less able, in old age, to bear up against the
severity of your displeasure!


SIR WALTER. What, old Fairlop the woodman, you mean?


EMILY. Yes, sir.


SIR WALTER. A pretty amiable fellow, to be sure, child! but come -- they say
you're very partial to him -- now confess the truth, and I don't know what may
be done.


EMILY. Oh, sir! I do indeed regard him -- beyond what even gratitude can
express!


SIR WALTER. That Is strange! -- but what could you see, child, in such an old
delving blockhead?


EMILY. Every thing that can render man worthy of esteem. I fear, sir, that I
have been the cause of his present distress: -- restore him but to your
protecting favor, and dispose of me, and my sufferings, in what manner you
please!


SIR WALTER. Gad! -- that is a significant hint I don't dislike, however. [Aside.


AIR XVIII.
ANDANTE. HEAR me! and comfort shall your steps attend;
Leave not the man of worth without a friend!
ALLEGRO. Oh! the rapture of possessing
Power to dispense a blessing,
Or to raise a prostrate foe;
God-like he! -- the deed concealing --
Who, with sympathetic feeling,
Softens but one sigh of woe!

SIR WALTER. Well, child -- I Will consider of it -- I will not detain you here any
longer now -- for fear of some inquisitive eye observing us; -- so if you will
fix a time with my clerk, Medley, where I may see you again presently, I Will
tell you a little more of my mind -- and so forth -- (Emily courtesies, and
retires.) -- "Dispose of me as you please?" -- pretty foul! -- how innocently
complying! -- Yes, yes -- the case now is clear enough! -- but what puzzles me
is, how that liquorish-tooth'd old woodman could come by her. -- Well, she is
fair game now, Matt -- or I wonder. -- Let me see -- how shall I dispose of
her? -- I Am too much enraptured to plan the scheme myself -- Matt shall find
out some sly corner, where the little rogue may live as happy as the day's
long! -- and then how snug shall I be with so pretty a companion, to read to me
through a cold winter's night -- and so forth!

AIR XIX.
WHAT mortal ever saw such a creature?
How prettily turned every feature!
A mouth chastely simple!
A chin decked with dimple,
A cheek that discloses
Full-blown damask-roses,
With a lip like a ruby that is brought from afar,
And an eye -- that out-twinkles the bright morning star!
[Exit.
SCENE XI.
The Forest. DOLLY, and MEDLEY. MEDLEY. But where is your innocent companion --
I long to atone for my offense --


DOLLY. She Is gone up to Sir Walter's -- for what purpose I know no more than
you: -- but here she returns.


Enter EMILY, dejectedly. MEDLEY. Cheer up your little heart! nobody will harm
you! -- I Am a whimsical fellow -- and take the wrong end of a matter now and
then, as well as other folks -- but I think I would go as many miles on foot to
serve one in distress, as any man upon the forest.


DOLLY. There! -- didn't I tell you that Matt was honest in grain?


EMILY. Oh, sir -- but I dread the effects of Sir Walter's resentment! --


MEDLEY. Never you sear -- leave him to me.


EMILY. He directed me to consult you about a further interview with him today.


DOLLY. What can his Worship want with her again?


MEDLEY. Some business, I fancy, that I only can settle properly between them!
-- but come, I Have news for you! -- Have you heard of the strange gentleman just
come on the forest?


DOLLY. We have, and wish mightily to see him; don't we, Emily?


EMILY. We do, indeed -- and mine is more than common curiosity.


MEDLEY. My brother Bob first scraped acquaintance with him; -- efaith! here
they come together in search of me -- you may now satisfy your curiosity, while
I examine him.


EMILY. Let us retire awhile -- (to Dolly) -- for I feel an agitation I cannot
describe!


Enter CAPT. O'DONNEL, and BOB. BOB. This is the strange gentleman I told you
of, brother!


MEDLEY. Good day to you, sir. --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Sir, I Am your servant.


MEDLEY. I am told you wanted to speak with me.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure and I do. -- The short and the long of the business
is, -- I have lost a little runaway damsel, and you, my dear, must be after
finding her for me.


MEDLEY. That Is coming to the point, indeed!


BOB. Who knows but it is Miss Emily he is hunting for? [Aside to Medley.


MEDLEY. That we shall soon see. -- (Aside to Bob.) -- We have choice of waifs
and strays on this forest. -- Now here -- (pointing to EMILY, and DOLLY, who
approach) -- here is a pair of pretty out-lying deer! -- will either of these
suit you?


DOLLY. -- (As Capt. O'Donnel turns.) There -- now you may see -- is that any
thing like him? [To Emily.


EMILY. Oh, no! --


BOB. "That Is her! -- that is the beauty I told you of! [To Captain O'Donnel.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. "Upon my conscience, but you have a pretty choice, miller! -- if
I was hunting only for myself, I should seek no prettier game, than that little
blue-eyed do to the left -- Oh, she is a sweet creature!"


MEDLEY. Here, lasses, you must help this honest gentleman to find his
sweetheart.


DOLLY. I hope, sir, she is worth looking for!


BOB. For my part, I hope it will not turn out a wild-goose chase!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. You all seem to think it a very good joke -- but, as a
stranger among you, let me hope for your good wishes at least --


EMILY. You have mine, sir -- from a sympathising heart.


DOLLY. And I wish that you may recover your wandering mistress, with all my
soul!

AIR XX. -- GLEE. The Author thought he might, with less presumption, slightly
alter these original words of SHAKESPEARE to make them incidental to the Scene,
than adapt others, which would probably have impaired the melody of this
charming GLEE.

OH, Mistress Coy! where art thou roving?
Oh! stay and hear thy true-love coming,
That can sing both high, and low.
Trip no farther, pretty sweeting,
Journeys end in lovers' meeting,
Every wise man's son does know.
Seek for love -- but not hereafter;
Present mirth has present laughter;
What Is to come is still unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty;
Flee not bliss, then, sweet, and twenty,
Youth's a season will not endure!
[Exit Emily, Dolly, and Bob.
MEDLEY. Well, but this is an odd kind of story, Captain! -- Come, as we are by
ourselves, what sort of a damsel have you lost?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Now, faith -- that is the very thing I came to learn of
yourself. -- But I Am sorry the dear blue-eyed girl has left us so soon, without
leave.


MEDLEY. What the devil! -- don't you know your own mistress?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Laughing.) Palliluh! -- but that is a good joke! Why, my
dear, she is no mistress of mine!


MEDLEY. Not yours?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Not at all -- I Will tell you, as a secret! -- it is my friend's!


MEDLEY. Oh! your friend's is it? --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure and it is!


MEDLEY. What an opportunity for treating Miss Di with a specimen of my cousin
Tipperary's courtship -- unless her shape should mar the joke. -- (Aside.) --
Well but, Captain, let us know a few of the marks and colors -- is she fair or
brown, fat or lean? --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Why, that, upon my conscience, I forgot to ask; but, as near
as I can guess, by my friend's taste, she must be a clever, plumpish kind of
creature -- just about neither one thing, nor the other, do you see!


MEDLEY. Come then, Captain, to keep you no longer in su^pense, your friend's
lass is lodged not far off.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. But are you in earnest?


MEDLEY. To be sure I am. Now, what will you say if I take you to her directly?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, but will you now, my dear fellow? Give me your hand -- and
after that, I Will give you an opportunity of doing myself a little favor, if
you please? --


MEDLEY. What Is that, Captain -- 'Twas lucky that I told Miss Di this morning,
she would be run away with -- [Aside.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Only to tell me where I may find that little blue-ey'd sawn --
as a recompense for my own pains!


MEDLEY. And why not hamper Sir Walter with him a little at the same time, and
so rescue poor Emily -- who may be the lass he is in search of, after all!
[Aside.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. But what are you proseing so much about to yourself, little
fellow?


MEDLEY. Why, I Am thinking, that this may be a service of some danger, as well
as honor.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. So much the better.


MEDLEY. You can talk big -- and fight a little, upon occasion?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Looking sternly at him.) Is it a laugh, sir, you are after
putting upon a soldier? --


MEDLEY. Who me? -- don't look so fierce, Captain! -- not I upon my word! --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. I Would have you learn, sir -- that, when necessary, I can fight a
great deal -- and say nothing at all about it! --


MEDLEY. Why, that is better still -- then give me your hand, my dear friend --
and now mind what I say to you.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, proceed --


MEDLEY. You see that great house. [Pointing to the Mansion.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Very well --


MEDLEY. That Is Sir Walter Waring's, where she is to be found.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. The devil she is now!


MEDLEY. Our forest air has not disagreed with her; you will find her as plump as
a partridge. -- How Sir Walter came by her -- that you must learn -- but he has
always been a devil of a fellow, from his youth, for fighting, and wenching!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, be easy! -- let me see whether he will not give her up to me?
-- and a fighting fellow too! --


MEDLEY. You Will be able to speak to her now, as he is riding in the Park. Ask
for the young lady -- you cannot mistake her -- as she is the only one in the
house. --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure, and I will not beat up the old buck's quarters! -- I
perceive you have a little intrigue and frolic in this desert forest, as well as
in Ireland's own self?


MEDLEY. And why not? --

AIR XXI.
OH! Life's a gay forest, like merry Sherwood.
Tantarra, my boys!
Abounding with fish, flesh, and fowl, that is good;
These are your joys!
When the soft mountain-roe
Is skipping -- soho!
Or tripping -- teigho!
It will happen so!
This -- this is the time, if it is well understood,
For the sport of that forest -- dear merry Sherwood!
In such forests where game will for ever arise,
Tantara, my boys!
We may chase every light-footed pleasure that flies;
These are your joys!
Slyly then mark the do,
That Is skipping -- soho!
Or tripping -- teigho!
It will happen so!
For the well-flavour'd ven'son, dear me! is so good,
That is shot by an arrow in merry Sherwood.

SCENE XII.
A Room in Sir WALTER WARING 's House MISS DI CLACKIT. MISS DI. I hope the
archery will go off well -- or my sweet cousin will never let me hear the last
of it -- never hear the last of it! -- He has been endeavoring to turn it into
ridicule all through the hamlet, this morning. -- What woman of spirit, but
myself, would endure the mortifying control that I do? -- But I Will match him
one day or other, when he least expects it. -- Where the deuce can this girl
be? -- (Rings the bell, and calls at the same time.) -- Bridget! -- Bridget!


Enter BRIDGET. BRIDGET. Did you call, your Ladyship?


MISS DI. Call? -- to be sure I did call! -- and have called for you this half
hour! -- Is my archery dress ready? -- quite ready? for let me tell you --


BRIDGET. Yes, your Ladyship; and I think your Ladyship will look more
handsomer in it, than ever I see you in all my born days --


MISS DI. There! -- there! -- now you are going to crack the drum of my ear
with your eternal talking.

AIR XXII.
YOUNG women should shun tittle-tattle;
Like sun-dials, never should prattle;
Just tell what they are asked, and be still!
But girls are so idle,
Their tongue they will not bridle,
So gallop it goes -- like the clack of a mill!
We gentry you never hear rattle,
Like furies engaged in a battle;
Of talking we soon have our fill:
But girls are so idle, etc.

MISS DI. You may go about your business -- may go about your business. --
(Exit Bridget.) -- what, the deuce, is there in talking -- that people are so
excessively fond of it -- excessively fond of it? for my part! -- (Bridget
reenters.) -- Well! -- what is the matter? -- what is the matter now? how often
have I told you --


BRIDGET. There Is a gentleman in the Hall -- wishes to speak with your
Ladyship: -- he says he came from Mr. Medley. --


MISS DI. Wants to speak with me, child? -- wants to speak with me? What kind
-- what sort of a gentleman? -- Is the girl dumb? -- why don't you answer? --
why don't you --


BRIDGET. Oh! a comely, genteel person as you could wish to see, my Lady -- but
he talks a little like a foreigner.


MISS DI. Come from Medley? -- Then I find there was something in his hint to
me this morning, about a new admirer. -- (Aside.) -- Show him in immediately;
-- how, like a stupid statue, the girl stands! -- (Exit Bridget.) -- I like
foreigners -- and every thing that is foreign! -- He must have heard of my
situation -- and, in the true spirit of foreign gallantry, wishes to release me
from this hideous captivity? -- there is no resisting one's fate! -- but I fear
he has caught me in a horrid dishabille -- horrid dishabille -- [Arranging her
dress in the glass.


Enter CAPT. O'DONNEL. CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Astonished.) Faith, and I believe,
Arthur -- you have blundered into a small mistake here! [Aside.


MISS DI. -- (Curtesying low.) Sir, you do me honor by this visit. -- But you
seem a little surprised -- you need not be alarmed, for Sir Walter --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, Madam! never fear me -- I Am not to be alarmed by all the
Sir sighting Walters on the forest. [Looking at her inquisitively.


MISS DI. Well, Bridget was quite right -- he is a fine, bold man, indeed --
and sure enough -- [Aside.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Looking round.) You Have some agreeable female, I presume --
as a companion about your person, Madam?


MISS DI. Not a soul, sir -- I Am confined here, as you see, by my solitary self
--


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Then there can be no mistake! -- This must be the little
fellow's Partridge; -- and a plump Partridge she is, sure enough! [Aside.


MISS DI. Pray what may be the commands, sir, with which you have to honor me?
-- You know, sir, that --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure, and are you not the dear creature, I have
traveled so many weary miles to look after? --


MISS DI. That Is a question -- you, sir, can best resolve -- it would ill
become me to -- [Affecting bashfulness.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. O! it is her own self I perceive -- though she is grown old
enough for the lad's mother-in-law, at least -- but that is his business, and
not mine. -- (Aside.) -- Oh, Miss! -- we were afraid we had lost you for ever!


MISS DI. Too long have I been lost indeed, sir! -- Oh! the tedious moments
that --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Three short years seem to have made a little alteration in
you, Miss -- for the better --


MISS DI. Better, sir? -- I thought, for the last twelve months, my poor heart
would have been broken! -- my grief of heart --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, then -- under all your sorrows, and concerns, Miss --
it is a pleasant thing to see you look so jolly!


MISS DI. Jolly, sir? -- my sighs and tears, at one time, had nearly worn me
into a consumption!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Now, a cousin-german of mine, in the county of Sligo -- by
bottleing up her tears too much in a hurry, -- fell, poor soul, into a devil of
a dropsy!


MISS DI. You Have heard -- you have heard, no doubt, sir, of my deplorable fate?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure -- and the old baronet's tricks into the bargain^
but how came you with him at all, my dear Miss?


MISS DI. It was my cruel destiny -- perhaps you have not heard how -- I Will tell
you the whole, sir -- I Will tell you --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, you may spare yourself all that trouble: little mittimus
the justice's clerk told me every syllable. -- If these are her "mild melody
accents!" what a comical car must poor Wilford have for music? -- [Aside.] --
But come, madam -- thank your stars that your faithful admirer is arrived --
that old square toes, our uncle, is gone to take a peep at the other world! --
and that you may now -- if you please -- be made a happy creature for your life
to come.


MISS DI. Dear sir -- you only flatter a woman's weak credulity -- weak
credulity! -- But to whom do I owe the honor of so agreeable a visit -- this
agreeable visit? -- for I blush to own --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. My name, Miss, is Arthur O'Donnel, Esquire. -- I have the honor
to command a company in Dillon's brigade -- would lay down my life for my
friend -- and am arrived, with your leave, to take your sweet self to liberty,
and the man you must love, and adore!


MISS DI. But, surely, sir, you are rather too impatient -- too impatient; --
besides, you know, sir, it requires time --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Time! -- oh, have as little to do with that old rap as you can
help.


Enter BRIDGET, hastily. BRIDGET. La! Ma'am, Sir Walter's getting off his horse
at the keeper's lodge, and will be within, in a ^ew minutes.

[Exit Bridget.
MISS DI. How unfortunate! -- but the wretch is always in the way -- always in
the way! -- Dear sir, I must beg the favor of you to retire! -- I am afraid
that --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, never fear me, madam! -- Let him come with his fighting
face, and we'll see who has the best pretensions to you.


MISS DI. But I Am alarmed beyond measure for the consequence. -- I entreat you
to leave me for the present -- leave me for the present! -- and hereafter, you
know --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, but if I file off -- and suffer the enemy to repossess
the garrison. -- will you guarantee me another speedy interview -- and hold
yourself in readiness for a quick march at a moment's notice?


MISS DI. That requires a little consideration -- but I Will talk with Medley on
the subject -- and from him expect to hear, when and where you may see me
again: but may I rely on your honorable protection? -- honorable protection
-- for a poor -- helpless virgin -- that --

[Exit. AIR XXIII.
OH, sear not my courage, proved over and over!
Your soldier will rout each impertinent lover;
With a row-dow! I Will guard you -- the foe shall your presence fly,
Who to fall in love here -- must have tumbled, faith, pretty high!
With wide-spreading charms, like the Lake of Killarney,
Dear creature, oh! listen to none of their blarney.
With a row-dow, etc.
Your true-hearted lad is come galloping to you:
Oh! the Salmon-leap's naught to his slight to pursue you.
With a row-dow, etc.
Your short date of beauty -- your glib tongue contrasting,
Like our own Giant's-Causeway, will prove everlasting!
With a row-dow, etc.

SCENE XV.
The Forest. MEDLEY. MEDLEY. So far, I fancy, this little noddle of mine has
succeeded pretty well! -- Miss Di, I should hope is by this time, smitten with
my cousin Tipperary -- for I mistake my man, if, in this first visit, he made
himself understood to be courting for any one -- but himself! -- Now must I
contrive a few whimsical appointments -- like so many cross bills in chancery
-- but with this difference -- that mine are not intended to create -- but to
prevent mischief.


Enter CAPT. O'DONNEL. MEDLEY. Well, my friend -- did you meet with her as I
informed you?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure, and I did -- for which I heartily thank you, my
dear fellow.


MEDLEY. You found her well, I hope?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Yes, hearty enough -- considering the poor creature has almost
fretted herself into a consumption!


MEDLEY. Altered a little, no doubt?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Indeed, and you may say that -- why, she is so plaguily
altered, that she does not look like the same creature. --


MEDLEY. But how should you know that captain? I thought you had never seen her
before.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. But haven't I seen her lover paint her to me a thousand times
over? -- though I now perceive, that he always took a very flattering likeness.


MEDLEY. "You did not stay long with her?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. "And you may thank the old buck of a baronet for that. -- Oh,
there had like to have been the devil of a kick up about his discovering me
with her! -- but I made a prudent retreat -- and Emily is to plan with
yourself, when, and where I am to see her this afternoon!


MEDLEY. "Very anxious, I suppose, to return with you?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. "No faith -- to tell you the truth, I thought that she put but
a cool remembrance upon the worth of poor Wilford!"


Enter BOB. BOB. His Worship wants you, brother, directly.


MEDLEY. And I his Worship -- and I fancy on the same business.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Robert! -- you're an honest fellow -- and I Am not a little
indebted to you, my dear. [Shaking him by the hand.


BOB. None in the least, sir.


MEDLEY. You wished, Captain, to learn something further about the little nymph
with the blue sparklers?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure and I did; -- and you will assist me; -- upon my
conscience, but it is a pleasant thing, to be able to do a good turn now and
then by one another -- an't it, Bob?


BOB. Ay, that it is, for certain.


MEDLEY. Well then, go with my brother down to the Ballfac'd Stag -- call for a
bottle of wine, and by the time you're sat down to it -- I Will be with you, and
give you the clue you want.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. My dear little fellow, how friendly will that be? -- Come
along, Bob; we'll soon draw the cork, boy, and drink to the lass we like best
on the forest!


AIR XXIV. -- TRIO.
SHOULD Mirth be observed by her sons to decline,
They recruit her bright lamp with a flask of good wine!
When the glass circles round, and our spirits improve,
How sweet slows the b^per -- to Friendship, and Love!

END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE. The Forest. WILFORD alone. WILFORD. WHICH way can I shape my further
course with any prospect of success? -- I have met with no one except a savage
train of hunters, and they made but a sport of my distress! -- Yon track seems
the most beaten, and may lead me to our appointed rendezvous: -- I Will explore
my way thither, in expectation of some tidings from my friend's pursuit; -- but
my heart at this moment misgives me, and tells me, that Emily is estranged from
it for ever!

AIR XXV.
IT IS in vain for succor calling,
Hope no more my bosom cheers!
Cruel fate that bliss appalling,
With her scroll of joyless years!
Come, Despair! and Distraction confound me!
Add still to my life's wretched load;
And while your mixed horrors surround me,
This desert of wildness shall be my abode!

CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Behind.) Hilliho! -- hilliho! -- ho!


WILFORD. That must be his welcome voice! halloa! boy; halloa! -- (Enter Capt.
O'Donnel.) -- my dear friend! how rejoiced am I to see you!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And you may thank the luck of it, Wilford, that I should make
a blunder upon you so soon!


WILFORD. Well -- what success?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Faith, as to the success -- do you see -- why -- I cannot very
well tell.


WILFORD. Have you seen, or heard any thing of my Emily?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. To be sure, I have seen her -- and for the matter of that,
have heard a little about her into the bargain!


WILFORD. Say, then -- where? and how is she?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, she is not far off -- and, let me tell you, one of the
plumpest, and sleekest does on the forest. --


WILFORD. Spoke she not of me with passionate anxiety?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Not a great deal of that -- though she talked pretty freely
too! -- but the poor creature, Wilford, has lost all the "mild melody accents"
that you told me so much about.


WILFORD. Pooh! -- is this a time for jesting?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. The devil a jest! -- however you will soon see her, and judge
for yourself: -- besides, you will have to learn something about her, and an old
fighting Sir Walter, where she is just gone on a comical kind of visit -- which
I can hardly make head, or tail of!


WILFORD. "Visit to an old fighting Sir Walter?" -- What can all this mean? --
oh! sly with me instantly to relieve my impatience.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And that I will, my friend -- but I Have a little impatience of
my own to fly with first. -- Had you ever the honor of a tete-a-tete, Wilford,
with a pretty blooming a hop-ground?


WILFORD. Indeed, I take this very unfriendly, O'Donnel!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. What! that I will not give up the chance of my own little wild
do, to go immediately after yours, which I Have got safe enough in the toils
for you?


WILFORD. Direct me but the way --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, then, if you are in such haste -- you see that little
crooked gladeway straight before you. -- It leads to the village near which she
lodges. -- Enquire for the sign of the Stag, with the bald -- white countenance
-- halt there -- and in half an hour I Will be with you, and conduct you, myself,
to your rivulet Emily.


WILFORD. But may I depend upon you?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh! as sure as fate! -- (Exit Wilford.) -- Poor fellow! --
what a devil of a job will it be, if, after all this trouble, he should find
his Emily so altered -- that his own eyes and ears cannot put a remembrance upon
her! Give Arthur O'Donnel the girl neither quite so plump, nor so fond of
changing. -- To be sure, and I Am not going to meet a little creature just after
my own heart! and, oh! will I not love her, as long as the frailty of my nature
will permit? -- Ay, that I will, by the -- but be easy, Arthur, -- let me swear
by something that will not disgrace her! --

AIR XXVI.
BY her own lovely self, that is my choice, and delight;
By that form I could gaze on from morning 'till night;
By that bosom, so prettily veiled from my sight,
I swear to adore the dear creature!
I swear to adore, etc.
By the smiles on that cheek, I could ever caress;
By the stars, which her forehead so brilliantly dress;
By those lips, which -- my own pair would willingly press,
I swear to adore the dear creature!
I swear to adore, etc.

SCENE XV.
A Hop Ground. Various Parties of Hop-pickers, working at the Cribs -- Men
taking down the Hop-Poles, etc. etc. AIR XXVII. -- FULL CHORUS.
HAIL to the vine of Britain's vale!
Whose stores refine her nut-brown ale,
Till that like nectar flows;
Whose virtues -- to this isle confined,
Are sent to cheer a Briton's mind,
Too generous for his foes!

Enter FAIRLOP. FAIRLOP. Come, strike -- strike, lads and lasses! -- you have
done a fair morning's work -- and now all hands to the kiln to dinner!

[Exeunt Hop-pickers, etc.
Enter MEDLEY. MEDLEY. I have luckily nicked the time, I find! -- but where is
my cousin Tipperary? -- Unless I trap this wild bird first, my whole plan will
be destroyed.


Enter CAPT. O'DONNEL. CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well, my dear! --


MEDLEY. Ecod, I sear it is not so well.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Why? what is the matter, little sellow?


MEDLEY. Only your friend's damsel about to be moved off -- that is all!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. What is it you mean? Is it game you're making?


MEDLEY. Sir Walter -- hearing, I suppose, of your search after her, has, some
how or other, prevailed upon her to be secretly conveyed to one of his tenants
on the other side of the forest -- and fix d this time and place, to meet her
for that purpose --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And after all her fine speeches and promises to me? -- But
where is my little grig? -- she will not slip through my fingers after this manner, I
hope.


MEDLEY. No -- no -- you're safe enough there -- I was obliged, you know, to
put off her coming for fear of a discovery: -- But see, yonder appears one of
the party -- and the other, no doubt, will soon follow.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And Arthur O'Donnel will soon make another amongst them.


MEDLEY. Suppose, then, we conceal ourselves hereabouts, and observe their
motions?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. With all my soul!


MEDLEY. But see! -- what a deuced black cloud there is coming up with the wind!

[The light gradually diminishes.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. Well -- and what of that?


MEDLEY. Why, an't you afraid, Captain, that it will pepper your fine jacket
for you?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh! not at all -- a soldier's jacket is not made for sunshine
-- and mine, I know, will not turn its back to a flying shower.


MEDLEY. If that is the case -- step you behind that pile of hoppoles, while I
get on the snug side of this tree.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Do so, little fellow, -- says and I have hid myself in many a
worse ambuscade before now. [Concealing himself.


MEDLEY. Here he comes! -- and the storm close at his skirts!

[Retires behind the tree.
Enter SIR WALTER. SIR WALTER. I don't much like the looks of the weather. --
But here am I, snugly arrived first!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. -- (Peeping.) To be sure, my old Cockatoo, and you are not!
[Aside.


SIR WALTER. The sun seems to put rather a black face upon it! -- but the
hop-pickers are all out of the way -- surely I can find a little shelter for
her! -- What a lucky opportunity to settle matters with the pretty rogue?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. And with me at the same time, if you please. [Aside.


SIR WALTER. Didn't I hear somebody? -- No! -- 'twas only a rustling among the
vines! -- Who knows, but the little bashful hussy may be half concealed
amongst them? I Will take a peep -- and so forth.

[Walks into the hop-ground.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. There Is an abominable old gander for you! [Aside.


MEDLEY. -- (Peeping.) Hush! -- hush! for the hen bird's now on wing!


Enter MISS DI CLACKIT, in her Archery Dress. MISS DI. How indiscreet to
consent to this interview!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Indeed, Miss, and you may say that. [Aside.


MISS DI. He Is a man of honor, no doubt -- But, bless me, how the sky lowers!
-- what shall I do, if I Am caught in a tempest?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Indeed, Miss, and you deserve a good sopping for your pains!
[Aside.


MISS DI. I thought I heard a footstep this way!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Your own, my dear -- for you tread none of the lightest!
[Aside.

[Miss Di Clackit goes into the hop-ground. -- A tempestuous shower comes on.
-- Capt. O'Donnel, and Medley laugh.
MEDLEY. Faith they have got a souser!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. So much the better. -- To be sure, and I will not wing the old
cock-bird, for crossing upon my own sport!

[Storm ceases.
AIR XXVIII. -- QUARTETTO.
Medley and Capt. O'Donnel. MARK! how the cooing pair draws near!
Miss Di. Why, Captain?
Sir Walter. -- Emily!
Both. -- I Am here!
Where are you? Here in half-drown'd state!
Medley and Capt. O'Donnel. Hark, the old ring-dove calls his mate!

MEDLEY. And now, Matt, must you avoid an untimely explanation.

[Exit. [Sir Walter, and Miss Di return, and first discover each other, with
astonishment, as Capt. O'Donnel advances between them unbuttoning his lapels,
and carelessly throwing the rain off his hat.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. What a mighty pretty joke is love in a shower! [Looking at
them alternately.


SIR WALTER. Upon my soul -- Madam! -- I -- cannot say -- that -- that I
expected the honor of this ducking -- to -- to meet you here! --


MISS DI. -- (Confused.) Nor I -- sir -- the pleasure of catching my death, for
the -- the -- felicity of seeing you here! -- Provoking wretch! -- (Aside.) --
You may think, sir --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, palliluh! -- I did not hope for the honor of expecting you
here -- nor I the pleasure of seeing you there -- (imitating them) -- when you
had both contrived the whole farce beforehand -- except the happiness of seeing
my own self -- any where!


MISS DI. This is very extraordinary behavior in you, sir! [To Capt. O'Donnel.


SIR WALTER. And have I caught you out, Cousin Prudery, at last? [Exultingly.


MISS DI. What is it you mean, sir? -- I came --


SIR WALTER. To learn to pick hops according to the articles of war! -- but
you have got a good sopping for it -- and so forth. [Aside to her.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. There Is an honest fellow in the world, Madam, who has reason
to expect better usage at your hands.


SIR WALTER. Excellent! -- What say you to that, Coz? -- Though she has flushed
my pretty game -- I can match her -- for now I shall be able to silence her
clapper -- by positive evidence of the fact! [Aside.


MISS DI. To you, sir, I hope I shall find time to explain myself; and as to my
cousin Wiseacre --

[Exit.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, Madam, the thing is bad enough without any further
explanation.


SIR WALTER. And pray, sir, who may you be -- that come in this impudent,
blustering manner, to poach after a part of my family?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Part of your family? -- That Is a good joke, my old boy! --
(laughing.) -- but I Will soon settle that. -- As you're such a devilish fighting
fellow -- do you see -- why, you may be pleased to give me a little account your
own self -- for daring to presume, to seduce the mistress of my friend.


SIR WALTER. -- (Amazed.) I seduce! -- I -- a fighting fellow!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Come, come -- make no more words about it: -- you will meet me,
my old buck, without further ceremony, on this very spot, tomorrow morning, at
sunset -- that I may not be compelled to post you -- upon every pole in your
own hop-ground.


SIR WALTER. -- (Looking inquisitively at him.) Damme, if I think this fellow's
any thing but a bully after all! -- I Will try him, however -- (Aside.) -- Look
ye, Captain Bounceabout! -- I have served three campaigns, in our county
militia, with some credit! -- and, let me tell you, sir -- I am no more afraid
than you, or any other man -- of sire! sword! -- and so forth!


CAPT. O'DONNEL. So much the better, my dear.


AIR XXIX. -- DUET.
THE dreadful weapons choose, sir!
No, that I must refuse, sir;
We'll bring enough,
Then sight in buff,
'Twill make important news, sir!
Sword! pike! and hand-grenade!
Will prove us not afraid,
O'Don. With these try well to hack me;
Sir Walt. With these you think to hack me;
But being brave,
I Will only have
Capt. O'Don. -- My honor's self to back me!
Sir Walt. -- Twelve constables
[Exeunt.
SCENE XVI.
MEDLEY alone, in an Archery Dress, with a Bugle Horn. MEDLEY. -- (Laughing.)
What would I give, to know how they have settled their matters? -- but we shall
have it piping hot when Miss Di comes on the forest, I Will warrant it! -- Now to
muster my female troop.

[Winds his bugle.
Enter BOB. BOB. Here they come, brother Matt -- and a pretty show they make,
sure enough! --

(Female Archers trip in, proceeded by forest colors -- and a pastoral band of
music.)
MEDLEY. Well, my sprightly lasses! -- now fall in -- and we'll soon march off
to the Oak -- and see who is to win the pretty prize heifer.


AIR XXX. -- SESTETTO.
Female Arch. Oh sweet Mr. Medley, I say!
But mind Mr. Medley, I say!
Come dear Mr. Medley, I say!
Medley. What the deuce is the matter?
Bob. How neatly they prattle!
Medley. If you keep such a clatter,
Bob. What sweet pretty prattle!
Medley. No game on the forest will stay,
F. Arch. and Bob. -- Oh sie!
Medley. But hence it will fly.
To Old Nick in a trice to get out of your way!
Female Arch. Oh sweet Mr. Medley, I say!
But mind Mr. Medley, I say!
Come dear Mr. Medley, I say!
Medley. Now don't stretch your lungs --
Female Arch. We mind not your sneers:
Medley. For to all your glib tongues
Little Husseys you know,
F. Arch. and Bob. Come, pray let us go!
Medley. I Have only but one pair of ears!
Med. and Bob. -- Pretty dears!

(Female Archers -- all talking together.) "But I say, Mr. Medley!" -- "Now,
dear Mr. Medley!" etc. etc. etc.


MEDLEY. Halloah! -- why, if you keep up this clatter, I tell you again, that
all the game will break the bbounds of the forest! --


(Female Archers talking together again.) "Ay, but Mr. Medley -- suppose I say,
Mr. Medley, etc. etc.


MEDLEY. "Now pray talk a little gently, sweet ones!

[" Bob, and Kitty Maple, looking at the colors, inscribed IN MEDIO PALMA."]
BOB. "An't they very gay, and pretty?


KITTY. "Yes, very smart indeed!


BOB. "They were done, spick and span new, at London!


KITTY. "Ay -- but what is the signification of the gold writing, Mr. Bob?


BOB. "Oh! that is our Vicar's doings -- it is Arabac, I believe -- but ask my
brother Matt -- he can tell you all about it. --


KITTY. "So I will. -- Mr. Medley, what does this here mean? [Pointing to the
Motto.


MEDLEY. "That there, my love?


KITTY. "Yes, that --


MEDLEY. "Why, as to Archery, it means -- that -- if -- but, perhaps, you would
like a free translation best?


KITTY. "Dear! I don't care!


MEDLEY. "Why then the plain meaning is that, -- the middle's your mark! -- Now
for it, girls! -- come, Kitty Maple, stand you to the right. -- (Places her.)
-- You ought to shoot well, hussy -- for your father was always a dead hand at
pulling the long bow --

[All laugh.
KITTY. "I wonder you an't ashamed of your wicked self!"


MEDLEY. Here, Betsy Blewit -- stand by the side of her -- very well. -- S^cky
Wheatsheaf, and Jenny Whitethorn, you are next -- now let the rest drop in --
two and two. -- But where the deuce are the little woodside nymphs?


BOB. I Will go and fetch 'em, brother.


MEDLEY. Do, Bob! -- tell 'em they will be too late, if they don't put their best
foot first.

[Exit Bob.
KITTY. Somebody, I see, thinks there'll be no sport, if some folks an't here!

[All laugh.
MEDLEY. Smartly said, Kitty! -- I don't know how they may shoot an arrow --
but you must take care, or some folks will hit as far with their sparklers, as
the best of you! -- Now strike up, pipers! --

AIR XXXI. --
COME lasses! Follow me,
With merry glee,
To sports of Woodland Archery!
CHORUS of Female ARCHERS. With merry glee,
We follow thee,
To sports of Woodland Archery!
[Medley puts himself at their head, and they march off to the repeat of the
Chorus.
SCENE XIX.
The Forest. DOLLY alone, with her Bow, etc. DOLLY. Dear, dear! -- what can I
do? -- We shall certainly be too late! -- and you will not go? -- (Speaking to
Emily behind) -- How can you be so unkind?


Enter BOB. BOB. Come! come! my pretty ones -- they are all marched to the
ground -- with music and streamers! -- and by this time her Ladyship, Miss
Dinah, is there! -- Matt sent me to look for you! -- But where is Miss Emily?


DOLLY. There she sits under that tree -- and will not budge an inch, for all I
can say to her!


EMILY, entering. EMILY. I beg you to excuse me, Dolly! -- let me go back --
say I am unwell! --


BOB. Now, pray you, Miss Emily, come along with us -- the sight will be worth
nothing without you!


EMILY. Well, since you will have it so -- proceed --

[Sound of a Bugle horn, within the Forest. AIR XXXII. -- GLEE.
HARK -- the Bugle's sylvan strain,
Calls us to the sportive plain,
Scene of artless love!
Shepherds -- faithful tales advancing,
Maidens hearts in transport dancing,
Happy may they prove!
How blissful then the Wood-nymphs green retreat,
Where Love, and Innocence enraptured meet!

SCENE XX.
View of the Oak. Tents -- Targets -- Forest Colors, etc. -- Female Archers,
etc. ranged on each Wing -- A Dance, in Character, commences on Miss Di
Clackit's entering, and taking her Seat at the Front of the Forest. -- At the
Close of the Dance, Medley winds his Bugle Horn, and the Female Archers take
their respective Posts. MISS DI. -- (Walking down through the ranks.) Are they
all here? -- are they all ready? -- "I Am so flurried, and confused! [To Medley
apart.


MEDLEY. "What Is the matter, Ma'am?


MISS DI. "Would you think it? -- My blundering Cousin has discovered me in the
hop-ground!


MEDLEY. "Why, that was a little awkward, to be sure -- but I can manage it,
Ma'am -- by swearing, that I sent you there on purpose to meet him!


MISS DI. "My dear Medley -- can you, indeed -- can you, indeed? -- but then if
he --


MEDLEY. "Oh! never trouble yourself about it -- to be sure I can -- and with a
pretty safe conscience, I fancy! [Aside.


MISS DI. "As to the Captain -- I can easily set him right myself -- but I
wonder he is not here. -- (Walks toward the Female Archers.) -- You Have picked a
tolerable set -- tolerable set! -- Hold up your head, girl -- hold up your
head!" [To one of the Female Archers.


MEDLEY. All ready -- quite ready, Madam. -- Where the deuce can my little
hussies be? [Aside.


MISS DI. As they are already -- you may sound the charge, and let the archery
commence; though I don't know --

[Medley winds his bugle.
EMILY, DOLLY, and BOB enter. DOLLY. -- (To Emily.) That Is her Ladyship, Sir
Walter's cousin, sitting alone!

[Medley observes them, as the two first Archers stand forth.]
MEDLEY. Oh, you're come at last! -- but you have lost your turns -- so stay
here, Dolly, till I call you -- for I must attend the targets. -- (The shooting
commences cross-ways at targets placed on each side of the Oak. -- Medley
holding in his hand a card, on which to mark the different shots.)


MEDLEY. -- (After the first shots.) Pretty well, Kitty -- but levelled a
little too high! -- Better, much better, Betsey Blewitt -- just within the
third circle! -- very well, indeed! -- (After two other shots.) -- Oh, bad,
very bad! -- (Two others.) -- Excellent! -- Well done, Jenny! -- within three
inches of the bull's eye! -- Let me see who will beat that?


MISS DI. Who Is nearest, Medley? -- who is nearest? -- who is nearest?


MEDLEY. Oh, Madam, Jenny Hawthorn! hollow! -- (Shows Miss Di the marked card:
-- while the Female Archers march to music for their arrows, and return to
different sides.)

[Medley takes Dolly out to shoot.
MEDLEY. Now for it, Dolly -- Now, Dolly!


MISS DI. Don't rattle and talk so fast, Medley -- you confuse 'em -- you
confuse 'em -- besides, if they --


MEDLEY. Oh, worst of all, Dolly! -- No heifer for you, Doll -- but you think a
good husband prize enough for one day, I suppose? [To her aside.


DOLLY. Of all conscience, Matt -- I Am content!


Enter WILFORD and CAPT. O'DONNEL, near the Oak. WILFORD. Where is the
perfidious Emily?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh, there she sits -- (Pointing to Miss Di) -- just as
unconcerned -- as if nothing had happened at all!


WILFORD. (Walking toward Miss Di, starts back! -- turning to O'Donnel) Why
add mockery to my distress?


MISS DI. Oh, the Captain's here! -- I Will pretend not to observe him. [Aside.


MEDLEY. -- (On Emily advancing to shoot.) Don't be alarmed, there is a dear.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. But here is a creature, Wilford -- here is one -- (beckoning to
Wilford) -- after my own choice. [At this instant Emily shoots -- and hits the
center of the target. -- Bugle sounds.


MEDLEY. She Is won it -- she is won it!


AIR XXXIII. -- CHORUS.
TO Beauty's shaft the prize decree,
In strains of ancient minstrelsy!
[Wilford and Emily at this instant behold each other -- she sinks on Dolly's
arm -- Capt. O'Donnel runs and supports her.
WILFORD. Can it be possible?


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Oh! very possible! keep a little back. -- (To Wilford.) --
It Is only a small flutteration at seeing me -- 'twill soon be over -- see how
she revives, at the sound of my own voice!

[Emily recovers.
WILFORD. Oh, my Emily!


EMILY. And do I live again to behold my faithful Wilford?


MEDLEY. Oh, oh! the pretty lost lamb's owned at last! -- the plot will unravel
fast -- I must to Sir Walter, and by a full consession, secure a free pardon.

[Exit.
MISS DI. -- (Drawing near.) What is the matter? -- what is the cause of this
confusion? -- Pray, sir -- how have I deserved this usage? am I so altered that
you don't recollect me -- don't recollect me? Surely, Captain --


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Faith and troth -- for the matter of that -- though you have
forgot yourself -- I know you well enough, Miss Emily, and all your pranks!


MISS DI. Miss Emily? -- all my pranks? What can he mean? what can he mean? --
You well know, sir, my name is Dinah; and that I am the nearest relation of Sir
Walter Waring -- though you are all conspiring against my honor? but justice, I
hope --

[Exit.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. Upon my conscience, I begin to fancy we are all as mad as wild
geese! Harkee, Wilford, is it you, or me, that this bewitching rogue has
beplundered out of our senses?


WILFORD. It is I, my friend, who have lost mine in love, and admiration!

AIR XXXIV.
OH tell me, Memory! no more,
What woe in banishment was mine --
What pain this laboring bosom bore,
Compelled its treasure to resign!
But tell me, Memory -- more kind,
The envied transports I regain;
Record them on my grateful mind,
That not a sorrow may remain!

WILFORD. But where is the rustic guardian of my Emily?


Enter FAIRLOP. EMILY. Here -- (Pointing to Fairlop.) -- My kind, disinterested
protector!


FAIRLOP. Lackaday! what is all this?


DOLLY. Oh, father! -- Miss Emily's sweetheart's found, and this is he!


WILFORD. I wish I could express the obligations I owe to you.


FAIRLOP. Pooh! pooh! why do you give the gentleman all this trouble? May I be
free enough to speak a word of my mind?


WILFORD. By all means!


FAIRLOP. Then, set you, sir, as much store by this treasure through life --
(takes her hand) -- as I have done but for three short months -- and, trust a
plain man, we shall all be sufficiently rewarded!


WILFORD. Generous woodman! Emily, you must prevail upon your adopted sister,
to attend you to Wilford Lodge.


EMILY. What say you, my dear friend, Dolly?


Enter MEDLEY. MEDLEY. Oh! that is impossible, Ma'am -- she may soon have a
house full of children of her own to take care of! [Conceitedly.


EMILY. How is all this?


DOLLY. The audacious wretch coax'd me into a kind of promise this morning; --
and I cannot find in my heart to be worse than my word.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Why then, give Dolly the little prize-cow, for a bride's
portion -- I think, Wilford, you will not be after making a bull of that now.


Enter SIR WALTER, followed by Female Archers, etc. SIR WALTER. Come along,
come along! and see how I administer justice among 'em. -- I arrest you all in
my own name! -- and so forth.


WILFORD. Pray, sir, what may be your charge against us? -- (Smiling.) -- It Is
a bailable offense, I trust?


SIR WALTER. Yes, if you put in your appearance at my house, where, with your
consent, we'll have a merry night on it -- and so forth. [Shaking Wilford by the
hand.


DOLLY. But perhaps, Miss Emily --


SIR WALTER. Will Not resist my authority, when she knows I Have a chaplain at hand,
who can soon bind her over to good behavior for life.


CAPT. O'DONNEL. Upon my conscience, Sir Walter, but you may command Arthur
O'Donnel, esquire. -- Give me your hand, my old buck -- it is a pleasanter thing
to draw a cork, than a sword, with an honest fellow, at any time. -- But hark
ye, little Mittimus, there'll be no need for that Snap-dragon -- Miss
Consumption there, to be one of the party!


WILFORD. -- (To Fairlop.) But, my best of friends, with your permission, --
we'll transplant you to a larger farm, where you may acquire the means of
extending your benevolence.


FAIRLOP. With thanks for your kindness, sir, -- as my Landlord's ill will is
blown over, I Will live, and die by my native woodside! But, before you rob me
and Dolly of our pretty companion, and depart -- stop at our cottage by the way
-- and, if you can break bread with a lowly man -- you shall have his blessing
into the bargain.


VAUDEVILLE.
CHORUS.
TUNE the pipe, and strike the tabor,
Quickly join their faithful hands;
This is not a time for labor,
While young Joy on tip-toe stands!
Sir Walter Waring, to Emily. JUSTICE bids me now befit you,
Blind to all your roguish charms;
So I Will certainly commit you --
To an honest husband's arms!
Tune the Pipe, etc.
DUET. -- Wilford, and Emily. Fearless now our vows are plighted,
Hence the clouds of sorrow fly!
Love, and constancy united,
Thus restore a tranquil sky.
Tune the Pipe, etc.
DUETT. -- Dolly, and Medley. Med. -- Dolly -- mind you love me dearly!
Doll. -- Never fear if you are true:
Med. -- Scolding, I shall take but queerly,
Doll. -- Chiding, I shall take but queerly,
Both. -- Sulky fits will never do!
Tune the pipe, etc.
CAPT. O'DONNEL. Marriage faith's a pretty notion,
If you could but change a wife;
But a soldier loves promotion --
Not a warm campaign for life!
Tune the pipe, etc.
FAIRLOP. 'Though my Woodland thus you plunder,
Of the sweetest plant that grew,
At the loss I cannot wonder --
May it better thrive with you.
FULL CHORUS. Tune the pipe, and strike the tabor,
Quickly join their faithful hands;
This is not a time for labor,
While young Joy on tip-toe stands!

FINIS.
ADDITIONAL SONG, By the AUTHOR, introduced on Saturday in the Comic Opera of
THE WOODMAN.
RONDEAU -- Mrs. BILLINGTON.
Court me not to scenes of pleasure,
This fond heart no more must know;
Can it beat to Mirth's gay measure,
All its strings attun'd to woe?
No! the mind by Hope forsaken,
But of Sorrow seeks relief:
Joy no transport can awaken,
Sighs must number out its grief.

