THE RIVAL CANDIDATES: A COMIC OPERA In Two ACTS; AS IT IS NOW PERFORMING AT
THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

By the Rev. HENRY BATE.

LONDON: Printed: Sold by T. BECKET, corner of the Adelphi-buildings, in the
Strand; and by W. GRIFFIN, No. 6, Catharine-street, M,DCC,LXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE RIVAL CANDIDATES is an attempt of the dramatic kind, undertaken by the
writer from no motive of literary vanity, but in order to introduce to the
world, a young musical composer, whose taste he conceived might do honor to
his profession.

The reformer of the English drama no sooner was informed of him, than he
kindly consented to an early trial of his abilities, and discovered a generous
anxiety for his success.

The author arrogates to himself but a moderate share of that universal
applause with which his piece has been received, particularly when he
recollects how much of it is derived from the kind attention of Mr. GARRICK, in
the double capacity, of friend, and manager; -- and what immense claims those
respectable persons have, who fill his little canvass with such credit to
themselves, and their profession. To single out any one of these celebrated
performers, when all so kindly combined to produce, what is deemed a striking
representation in the comic style, would be a task unpleasing as ungenerous.
And therefore, as they have been equally zealous in their endeavors, as happy
in the execution of their several characters, he wishes them, jointly to
accept, the returns of a grateful heart.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
BYRON, Mr. Vernon. Sir HARRY MUFF, Mr. Dodd. GENERAL WORRY, Mr. Parsons. SPY,
Mr. Weston. FIRST GARDENER, Mr. Bannister. UNDER GARDENERS, Mr. Kear, Mr.
Fawcett.

NARCISSA, Mrs. Baddely. JENNY, Mrs. Wrighten.
SCENE, A COUNTRY VILLA, etc. To Mrs. GARRICK.
MADAM!
PERHAPS you were not aware, when you were kind enough to show an early
countenance to the following petite OPERA, that so indulgent an overture,
entitled it in some measure to your future patronage; indeed, notwithstanding
this circumstance, you might probably have escaped the present mortifying
situation, had not the author conceived, that his piece owes no inconsiderable
share of its dramatic effect to your taste and judgment: -- hence arose an
appeal to his feelings, too powerful to be treated with silent indifference. --

I mean not, however, to alarm your delicacy, by a recital of those
accomplishments, which have long rendered you an ornament of the most
fashionable circles; -- nor by recounting those private virtues, which stamp
you one of the first patterns of domestic felicity; facts however agreeable or
instructive they might prove to society, I decline enumerating, in compliment
to female diffidence.

Having therefore made the acknowledgement I conceive due upon this occasion,
it is high time for me frankly to confess, that vanity had some influence over
me, when I presumed to think of Mrs. GARRICK for the patroness of this my FIRST
ESSAY.

I remain Madam, with great respect, Your most obedient, and devoted Servant,
HEN. BATE.
Hendon, Middlesex, Feb. 9, 1775.
THE RIVAL CANDIDATES.
ACT. I SCENE I.
A Hall in General WORRY'S house, adorned with military trophies; through the
folding doors of which, is seen a part of the garden. NARCISSA and JENNY.
Jenny. -- INDEED ma'm I don't like to go near him: -- besides, what the deuce
should he want with me?


Nar. Oh some fresh complaints, I Will warrant you: -- but I desire you would go.


Jenny. Lud ma'm! he is such an old suspicious mortal, that I can do no good
with him: -- and its a shame to throw away good reasoning, and fine sentiment,
upon so unfeeling a --


Nar. Prithee, don't be tristing now, girl, but go to him, and let us know the
worst.


Jenny. Well, to oblige you, ma'm, I Will venture any thing.

[ Exit Jenny.
Narcissa alone. Why was I doomed to envy the freeborn villager? -- or what do
I derive from fortune or education, but reflections, which render my
confinement insupportable. -- The family quarrel which separates me from the
man I love, and my father's unreasonable suspicions lie heavy on my spirits: --
denied even to breathe that pure air, which nature designed as a common
blessing to all her creatures! -- Surely the time will come when I shall regain
my liberty, and my Byron have an opportunity of resuming the tender subject of
his passion, so cruelly cut off in its infancy.

AIR I. Mrs. Baddely.
Soft FANCY thou truant to me,
My summons oh quickly obey!
Neglected by BYRON and thee,
How heavily passes the day!
Thy charms I Have mistaken for Love's,
So artfully do thou beguile,
Thy magic enlivens the groves,
When he has forgotten to smile!

Enter JENNY hastily. Jenny. Oh dear, ma'm! -- charming news, ma'm!


Nar. Thou art a mad girl: -- but what is the cause of this transport?


Jenny. Lud m'am! as I hope to live and breath, your papa is going down to the
borough to vote for his friend, Mr. Indigo, the Nabob, and his nephew, Sir
Harry Muff, the sweet spark that lines his clothes with fur in the dog days --
and your lover that is to be --


Nar. My love that is to be! -- but prithee go on --


Jen. And so, ma'm, he has given us leave to divert ourselves in the
plantations, till he returns: -- he sent Spy in search of you, to tell you of
it before he saw me.


Nar. Indeed!


Jen. Yes, indeed, and indeed, Ma'm! -- I wish I could let somebody know of it,
that -- he might pay us a visit.


Nar. That Is impossible, Jenny: -- but soft! -- here comes my father's cabinet
counselor.


Enter SPY. Nar. -- Well, Sir, what is your business?


Spy. Business, madam! -- no great matter of business truly; only his worship
ordered me to tell you, that he was going to the election at Tipplewell; and so
if you thought fit, you and Mrs. Jenny might recreate yourselves in the
pleasure grounds (as it is a fine day) till he returns.


Jen. There Is kindness for you, madam!


Spy. But he charged me to tell you, he would have no lolling out of the
summer house window that looks to the high-road; -- nor no singing, for fear
you should scare the wild-ducks that are hatching in the island; -- nor no --


Jen. -- Opening our eyes, I suppose, for fear we should see any thing in the
shape of a man! -- now your bolt's shot! -- Your master's very kind truly,
after depriving us of every enjoyment for three months past, he now sets a dish
before us, and generously tells us we must not taste of it.


Spy. Why you know, Mrs. Jenny, I would refuse you nothing; not even if you
were to take a liking to me myself.


Jen. That would be a fine dish indeed!


Nar. Come, come, no more of this; you may tell your master, I think myself
obliged to him, even for this limited indulgence: -- what does the fellow stand
so like a statue for?


Spy. I only waits to let you in, that is all.


Nar. You may save yourself that trouble, by giving the keys to my maid.


Jen. Come give them to me, Sir. --


Spy. -- But axing your pardon, Miss Narcissa, that is not the case neither; I
was ordered to lock the garden doors after you, and carry the keys back to your
papa.


Nar. Lock us in, for what?


Jen. Ay, for what, Sir?


Spy. For -- for -- oh! -- only for fear the turkies should get in, and eat up
all the strawberries, that is all.


Nar. I understand my father's cruel suspicions; but thou have more delicacy
than thy master; go open the gates.

[ Exit Spy.
Jen. Now, ma'm! -- if Mr. Byron be the gentleman I take him for, he will find it
out some how or other that the old gentleman has left his watch, and be here in
the twinkling of an eye. --


Nar. Ah Jenny! it is three long weeks --


Jen. So it is Ma'm, since he blew you the last kiss from the orchard-wall, by
moonlight: -- I Am sure it almost melted my heart, it was sent up with such a
deep sigh: -- poor young gentleman! -- I wish I was not of so tender a
constitution myself in these cases.


Nar. Heigh day! -- why I shall look upon thee as my rival presently: -- Well,
I must confess girl, that Byron finds in thee a powerful advocate, and I, a
faithful confidante: I hope we shall be enabled to reward thy fidelity.


Jen. I should be sufficiently repaid, Ma'm, in seeing you happy: -- dear me!
if he would but come now and offer himself a candidate here, we might have a
snug little election of our own: -- he should have my vote, and if I know any
thing of eyes, I don't think, but you would immediately return him.


Nar. Faith, I cannot swear that I would not, Jenny.


Jen. Lord, Ma'm! -- I can easily clamber over the pales if they do lock us in:
-- let me go then, and see if I can find him any where.


Nar. Heavens, girl, not for the world! -- after such an imprudent advance on
my part, I need not wonder if a cool indifference should succeed on his: for I
have been told, Jenny, that men always set a value upon a conquest, in
proportion to the ease, or difficulty with which it is obtained: -- and yet I
long to see him! -- but come, I am impatient to enjoy once more the beauties of
nature: I am going into the drawing room for my book; you will find me at one of
my favorite seats, where I really long to rest myself.

[Exit Nar.
JENNY, alone. Poor young lady! -- I wonder she holds it out so long: no sleep
o'nights, and her little heart hurry scurry, hurry scurry! all day: -- the
deuce take the men say I, for a pack of unfeeling numskulls; they are all alike
-- wonderfully loving, when locks and bars are between; but if you give 'em a
favorable opportunity, not one in ten of them has the brains to make use of it.

AIR II. Mrs. Wrighten.
Fie! fie! silly man,
Your soft nonsense forego,
No heart you will trepan
With your sighing -- heigho!
For that is not the way a fond damsel to woo;
A truce to your whining,
Your sobbing, and pining;
But press her!
Caress her!
The business is done, and she will soon buckle too.
[Exit Jenny.
SCENE II.
Enter GENERAL WORRY, discovering JENNY as she goes off. Genesis There Is a baggage
for you now! -- Zounds! if I had stole a march upon her a minute sooner, I
should have caught 'em out! -- Damme, if the life I now lead is not more
perilous, than when I was upon the coast of France, and expected a mine to be
sprung upon me every step I advanced. -- A sine bouncing girl, scribbling dying
songs, and love letters, from morning till night, and snivelling day after day
for Liberty, in order to run away with some scape-grace, who will cut my throat
to get in for my fortune; -- and an abigail, crafty enough to debauch the
morals of a Lapland virgin! -- It Is too much for an invalid of sixty-five! --
But, upon second thought, there can come no great harm on letting them out for
a little while: -- besides it will give Narcissa a bloom against I bring Sir
Harry home with me: --


[ Enter SPY, whistling, and leading a large mastiff. Spy. Here, Dragon! Dragon!


Genesis Well Spy! -- what have you let 'em out?


Spy. Yes, your honor's worship, I let 'em loose: -- it would have done your
heart good to see 'em: they jumped and frisk'd about, for all the world, like
rabbits in a warren.


Genesis But did you double-lock all the gates?


Spy. Yes, your honor: and I Have unmuzzled Dragon, and am going to let him loose
in the back yard.


Genesis Well, that is right; but suppose they should clamber over the pales and
elope? I Have heard of such things in my time!


Spy. So have I; but they must scramble deucedly if they do: -- indeed, for the
matter of that, Mrs. Jenny has a fine stride with her.


Genesis Are you sure now, Spy, that you have seen no suspicious kind of body
lurking about the grounds this week past?


Spy. Not a soul, indeed, your honor; nor can I track any thing but the foot of
farmer Brown's Tom cat, that comes caterwauling after Miss Narcissa's Tabby;
and, if I catch him, I fancy I shall stop his rambles.


Genesis Well then, all is well! -- but I Am wasteing time here -- I Will set out --
nothing should have tempted me from home, but the fear of affronting my old
friend Indigo: -- Sir Harry will have a fine estate, in a ring-fence, close to
mine, -- he is worth a little powder. -- Come Spy, you and Dragon to your posts:
-- you must have an hawk's eye upon 'em; -- and be sure you don't tipple upon
guard: -- behave like a soldier to day, and I Will give you leave to get drunk to
morrow by day break.


Spy. Thank your honor, I Will take you at your word: [going returns] your
worship [pointing to Dragon] we are a pair of staunch friends, or deadly
enemies.

[Exit with Dragon.]
Genesis -- Now I recollect, there is certainly a conspiracy against me, for I
traced a man's foot upon the-tulip-bed, a full inch longer than Spy's or any of
the gardeners. -- If I find her out, I don't know what I shall do in my
passion! -- perhaps take a second rib, and get a son and heir to disinherit her!

AIR III. Mr. Parsons.
What new curses spring up,
To replenish man's cup,
Though heaven in pity has borrowed his wife!
His daughter will grieve him,
With plots to deceive him:
But mine! -- oh, I Will match her
The first time I catch her,
Attempt, a young jade, to embitter my life!
[Exit.
SCENE III.
NARCISSA discovered on a garden seat reading: -- JENNY entering hastily to her
with a bird. Jen. Law, ma'm! -- I have caught the sweetest little linnet in the
green-house, that ever you saw in all your born days: -- how it is little heart
goes pit-a-pat! -- only look at it, ma'm: --


Nar. Deprived of liberty myself, I cannot behold the pretty captive without
emotion: -- prithee, let it go: --


Jen. But perhaps we may never catch it again, ma'm: -- and I want to hang it
up as a companion to my little bull-finch.


Nar. The generous find more true delight in restoring their prisoners to
freedom, than in all the advantages they derive from their captivity: -- Pretty
sportive creatures! -- though we envy them their liberty, never let it be said,
that we invade the smallest of their little privileges.

[While the symphony is playing, Jenny releases the bird.] AIR IV. RONDO. Mrs.
Baddely.
Love unfettered is a blessing
Nature's commoners enjoy;
Source of raptures past expressing,
Which no tyrant laws destroy.
Come ye songsters! wing around me,
Tell me all ye know of love:
Watchful of your young you have found me; --
-- Hark! they carol through the grove,
[Love unfettered, etc. D. CAPO.
Jen. Ay, ma'm! -- and I Would be as free as the lark myself, if I had the fortune
that you will have, and not be mewed up any longer.


Nar. But there is such a thing as reputation, Jenny; -- and my father never
fails to tell me, it is to be preserved but by prudence and philosophy.


Jen. Philosophy! what the deuce does he mean by that?


Nar. That I should subdue all my feelings I suppose, in compliment to his.


Jen. Is that his philosophy? -- oh never think of it, ma'm, 'till you can
think of nothing else. -- I dare swear your papa never thought any thing about
it, 'till he found himself a philosopher against his will.

AIR V. Mrs. Wrighten.
Since his worship forsooth,
Having lost his sweet tooth,
Forbids you Love's feast
Which no more he can taste,
Be advised, and he will find you a tartar!
Talk of lovers to vex him:
Intrigue to perplex him: --
What give nature the lie?
By my stars would not I!
'Though I died the next moment her martyr.

Nar. There Is something of reason in that girl; -- or rather, there is something
in it I believe that flatters my own inclinations: -- be that as it may; --
methinks if Byron were present, I should not hesitate to fly with him any where.


Jen. Lud ma'm! if you could but behold yourself this moment, you would see the
charming difference between a despairing damsel, and one who loves with spirit:
-- for my part, I always think it time enough for a woman to despair, when you
may count her age by her wrinkles.


Nar. Thy pleasantry, girl, generally carries consolation along with it: --
Well! though I cannot but sometimes lament his absence, yet I receive comfort
from thy council, which tells me, I shall one day or other see a reverse of
fortune: -- Oh! how transporting the idea, Jenny!

AIR VI. Mrs. Baddely.
Thus the midnight tempest raging
Strikes the sailor with dismay,
Furious winds, and waves engaging,
Banish every hope of day!
But at dawn, their wrath subsiding,
Ocean wears a tranquil face;
Joy, through every current gliding
Calms his bosom into peace.

Jen. Hush! hush! -- As I hope to be married, yonder is that arch-mongrel Spy
upon the watch behind the mulberry-tree there; -- and now he is coming this way:
-- what if I could prevail upon him to go down to the election, and make me
deputy turnkey.


Nar. That Is impossible; he gets too much by watching us, to give up his post
for nothing.


Jen. Do you call love nothing? -- Consider what you feel yourself, madam, and
then think of poor Spy's sufferings. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- he is dying for me; and
so if he will not betray every body else to obey me, he shall dangle upon that
willow before I give him a single grain of hope; -- however, take your book,
and go rest yourself in your favorite bower near the fountain, while I try the
power of my charms. -- He must give up his master or me: so don't fear our
success.


Nar. Prosper thee my faithful girl!

[ Exit Nar.
Enter SPY. Spy. Your servant, Madam Jenny: -- its a blessed fine day, and
you're all alone, I see. -- I am with you indeed, -- but then I Am nobody, Mrs.
Jenny, unless you would smile upon me.


Jen. Smile upon you, Mr. Spy? -- you are nobody indeed; -- can an
English-woman, and a friend to liberty and the rights of the constitution,
smile upon a creature --


Spy. Creature! -- am I a creature, Mrs. Jenny? -- why you make me as bad as
Dragon.


Jen. You are worse, Mr. Spy: he is a dumb creature, and knows no better; -- but
you can talk, and talk finely, Mr. Spy.


Spy. Thank you for that, Mrs. Jenny: -- to be sure I can talk a little when I
am half cocked.


Jen. Fie for shame! then, Mr. Spy! -- Fie for shame! -- Can a freeborn woman
like myself, who would give up my life, nay more -- perhaps my honor for my
country --


Spy. That is noble indeed!


Jenny. -- Shall I smile upon a creature, who, whilst his country's rights are
in danger at the election of Tipplewell, can meanly, and ingloriously stay at
home to watch the motions of two innocent young ladies, when he should be
huzzaing, drinking, and breaking windows, for liberty and property? --


Spy. Indeed, and so I should: -- how her fine speeches melt a body!


Jen. O fie for shame, Mr. Spy! -- never ask for my smiles. My smiles, my hand,
and my heart shall be given to a man only, and an Englishman.


Spy. I am both a man and an Englishman: -- but what signifies all that, when
I Have no money in my pocket: -- if I had but one piece of silver to prime me
with a little, no man should stand firmer by you and his country, than little
Spy would.


Jen. You shant want for that then, though its the only companion to my silver
thimble: -- here Mr. Spy. [gives him money.


Spy. Now one little roguish smile, that I Would give a thousand of these for, --
and the keys are your own.


Jen. Dearest Mr. Spy [courtesying and smiling] I thank you!


Spy. Had they been the keys of the strong beer cellar, you should have had
'em! -- thus I surrender up the garrison for the present, [giving her the keys]
and now to protect the laws, liberties, and property of Old England: [going,
returns.] -- Perhaps, Mrs. Jenny, I may return bold enough to entreat another
favor, -- may I hope?


Jen. A patriot may hope -- never to sigh in vain!


Spy. That Is noble again! -- I Will only step and mount my gaters, and return in
an instant; -- you shall let me out at the back gate, and I Will whisk down to
the borough as quick as a nine-pounder

That -- for my master! -- by your smiles I Am blessed,
Ale! love! and liberty, now fire my breast.
[ Exit Spy.
JENNY laughing. Ha! ha! ha! there is a pretty fool now! -- If the fate of a
kingdom had depended upon it, the gudgeon would have bit just the same. -- Let
short-sighted politicians say what they will about the power of money, a little
well-dissembled love will go farther, take my word for it.

[ Exit Jenny.
SCENE IV.
A perspective view to the General's park; on an oak tree near the paling of
which is the usual inscription of -- Men traps, and spring guns, etc. Enter
BYRON. By this time the old buck is lost in the general uproar of an election.
-- What a lucky dog was I to catch a glimpse of him as he passed along the
road! -- let him choose whom he pleases, -- I am happy that I refused the
solicitations of my friends, as my success would but have increased his
resentment. -- Give me, kind Fortune, but thy voice in Love's soft election,
and I care not who are the representatives of a tumultuous borough! -- but
here is the blessed retreat of my Narcissa.

AIR VII. Mr. Vernon.
How often through this responsive grove
Has softest echo told my tale!
When ever she caught my notes of love,
She gently bore them down the vale!
The scene renewed, my wakeful breast
Now joyful beats to love's alarms;
Ye powr's who pity the distressed,
Transport me to Narcissa's arms!
-- Heighday! -- [discovering the inscription] -- what new bugbear have we
here? -- "Men-traps and spring-guns set in these grounds DAY and NIGHT." --
Well done general! -- Indeed you planned things a little better last war, or we
should not have heard so much of your exploits: -- ha! ha! ha! -- such a device
might secure your ducks and geese, but not the game I Am in pursuit of, I assure
you: -- so with my cousin Ranger -- Up I go! -- up I go! -- [getting upon the
pales.] -- there -- now if the Cyprian deity, has not taken care to draw all
the charges of his spring-guns, and blunt the teeth of his steel-traps, I Am
mistaken in my goddess! -- So love and fortune go with me. [jumps over.


ACT II.
SCENE V.
JENNY alone. I Knew I could coax him to make a fool of himself, and give me
the keys: -- Hark! did not I hear something? No; I believe it was only the
noise of the cascade: but it put my heart into my mouth! -- Egad, if Miss
Narcissa was to be caught sleeping -- and the poor thing takes a very sound
nap -- there would be a fine spot of work; but I believe there is no great
danger, for the gardeners cannot be come back from the election yet: -- Well,
I Will even take a run across the green, and see if I can spy him for her. --
Pretty creatures I should like to bring them together! -- and for all she is so
sly, and looks so demure, my word for it she will have no objection. -- If all
women were like me, they would cut the matter very short, for my tongue and my
heart always go together.

AIR VIII. Mrs. Wrighten.
Fine ladies may tell us
They hate pretty fellows,
Despise little Cupid -- his quiver, and dart,
But when love's only by,
Not a prude will deny,
That man though a tyrant's the lord of her heart.
So bewitching a creature!
So noble each feature!
My bosom commands me to take his dear part;
Then how can I conceal
What my eyes will reveal? --
That he must, and he will be -- the lord of my heart.

SCENE VI.
BYRON discovered in an attitude of surprise, beholding NARCISSA asleep in a
Jessamin bower. Byr. -- Surely my eyes deceive me! -- or is it some sleeping
Naiad of the neighboring floods? -- No; it is her! it is my Narcissa's beavenly
form, harmonious formed by nature's matchless hand!

AIR IX. Mr. Vernon.
My bosom's on fire!
It throbs with desire,
Say whither ye gods shall I fly?
Love presses my stay;
But should I obey,
To my passions a victim I die.
[going, returns. -- But stay: -- thus will I obey the dictates of honor as
well as love. Thanks to love and the descriptive author of the Seasons. [Takes
a card from his pocket, and writes] -- there: -- in atonement for the innocent
trespass on thy soft repose, I will become thy watchful guardian, and protect
thee from the eye of any rude observer: -- but soft! my eager transport has
disturbed her: -- she wakes -- and see she shrinks even at nature's voice; --
alarmed, and blushing at the doubtful breeze! I must conceal myself. [He
retires behind a tree.


NARCISSA awaking. Nar. -- Methought I heard some human voice! These sleepless
eyes, wearied with perpetual watchings, betrayed me ito slumber: -- Sure no eye
profane peeped through yon close recess, and in my unguarded moments -- Ah!
what is here? [seeing the card] -- then I Am undone. [Comes forward and reads.]

-- " Sleep on my fair,
"Yet unbeheld, save by the sacred eye
"Of faithful love: I go to guard thy haunt,
"To keep from thy recess each vagrant foot,
"And each licentious eye!"
[After a pause of wonder] -- It is -- it is my Byron's well-known hand! --
then why these mixed emotions hard to be described? why heaves my laboring
breast, except to bid eternal welcome to its long-lov'd lord? -- No, my Byron,
no! thy virtuous merit shall go no longer unrewarded: -- but where is he? --
fled! -- assist me then love's favorite muse, that thus expressing my own
feelings, I may alleviate the severity of his. --

[She writes and sings AIR X. Mrs. Baddely.
Dear youth my fond heart you have won,
It Is a truth, that it cannot deny;
Love's fetters have made us but one,
Then tell me, -- ah! why did thou fly?
My hand shall thy honor repay,
As witness this amorous sigh!
So believe me when hither you stray,
You need not, --
[ Byron discovering himself sings -- I never will fly!
Nar. [dropping the card] Heavens defend me!


Byr. Forgive me, lovely maid, for thus breaking in upon those angelic strains:
-- if I have mistaken their sweet harmonious burden, I am sufficiently
punished for my presumption.


Nar. [beholding him affectionately] My faithful Byron! -- why should my tongue
deny, what my looks, sighs, and every action of my life proclaim? -- In the
infancy of affection, hypocrisy may be merit; but when love is assured of love,
concealment would be folly, and prudery a crime.


AIR XI. Mrs. Baddely and Mr. Vernon.
NAR. -- Here I plight a maiden's vow! --
BYR. -- By thy beauteous self I swear! --
NAR. Thou shall be my guardian now!
BYR. Thou shall be my only care!
DUET. Here we plight, etc. --

Enter JENNY hastily. Jen. Oh, stop your piping! -- who the deuce would have
thought of seeing you here -- [to Byron -- Your papa, m'am, is this moment
returned, and Sir Harry Muff along with him; they will be in at the gate in the
twinkling of an eye!


Nar. Oh we are undone then, what shall we do?


Byr. How for your sake shall I avoid them?


Jen. Oh dear m'am, I have it! -- run both of you with me into the temple, and
I Will bolt you in safe enough: -- I Have been forced to play at bo-peep with him
there a hundred and a hundred times before now myself -- in! in! in! --

[Exeunt to the temple.
SCENE VII.
Genesis WORRY, and Sir HARRY MUFF. Sir Harry. No Sir; -- these things never give
a moments uneasiness to a man of the world, Sur mon hone ur.


Genesis No? -- What the devil, be kicked out of your birthright by an impudent
young scoundrel, the second son of an obstinate fool of a baronet, and not take
fire at it? You Would make a damned fine soldier! --


Sir Harry. We take fire at nothing, Genesis Worry: You fine gentlemen of the last
century, wore yourselves out with your gunpowder passions before you were men:
-- for example, your fire has burnt you to the bone, General; so that you are
in reality, nothing but a collection of tinder and touchwood.


Genesis Damme, you have not a single spark of fire in your whole composition.


Sir Harry. Passion of any kind agitates the human frame most horribly; and
therefore we of the high ton have no passions at all; indeed our lives may be
properly styled, a kind of agreeable vegetation.


Genesis Agreeable vegetation! -- what a devil of a husband will this fellow make?
[aside.


Sir Harry. But I Am all agog for a sight of your delicious daughter -- they
tell me she is a fine cretur; is she any thing like Maria? -- [Taking off his
hat]


Genesis What the devil has he got there? -- A picture in his hat instead of a
button!


Sir Harry. -- Apropos, has Narcissa good teeth?


Genesis What the devil will he ask me next? [aside] I Will answer for it, she will do
your table no discredit, if that is all; -- but zounds --


Sir Harry. Table! why my dear General, we do not understand each other: -- Do
you seriously imagine, that teeth in this enlightened age, like your green
handled knives and forks, are mechanically constructed for eating?


Genesis Why, what the devil would you have 'em constructed for?


Sir Harry. Quel sauvage! (aside) why General, if you must know, the teeth
belonging to persons of fashion, are tortured into beauteous semi-circles, and
polished thrice a day for the admiration of the beholders.


Genesis And that is the reason, I suppose, why our fine Gentlemen are always upon
the broad grin; -- a set of slop dawdle puppies!


Sir Harry. Why, do you really think, General, that I should cut so capital a
figure in a fashionable grin, if I had delv'd all my days in tough, old English
roast beef?


Genesis I tell you, I neither know nor care: -- but one thing I fancy you will
find, that my daughter will not easily be prevailed upon to give up her notions
of substantials, in compliment to your delicate appetite.


Sir Harry. Oh leave that to me, General. -- I shall soon make a convert of
her; or why have I scaled the lofty Alps, and swept the aromatic vales of blessed
Italia: -- if Narcissa is fortunate enough to have a gusto for poetry and
music, I shall make a rapid conquest.


Genesis Damn your music and poetry! for both of you together, would turn
Worry-Hall into a mad-house. [aside.)


Sir Harry. You must know, General, that the Muses all Nine, smiled upon my
birth, and Apollo stood godfather to me by proxy.


Genesis Damme, but I believe he is touched! [aside.


Sir Harry. I have written a song, that has made a little noise in the polite
world; -- and tach'd the crotchets to it myself.


Genesis His crotchets! -- Oh he is past recovery. [aside.


Sir Harry. -- Nay, the Scavoire vivre, of which I Have the honor to be a
member, forced their annual prize upon me for the composition. -- You must
know, we were rallied a little upon a certain occasion by the female wits of
the Coterie: -- so you may guess who was fixed upon for our literary champion.
(affectedly) You shall have it, though it will lose much of its effect, from
the pressure of an English atmosphere, upon the delicate organs of my pipe.

General (walking about hastily,) mad as a March hare!

AIR XII. Mr. Dodd.
Ladies in vain,
Why entertain,
Hopes to bewitch us with loves artful wiles?
Cease to do so
Since you all know,
We have his patent for dimples and smiles.
Gentler beaux that power possessing
Yield no more to your alarms,
Each his scented self caressing,
Quite enamored with his charms!
Pretty playthings all adieu!
Now dissolve in amorous sighs,
We a softer clime pursue,
Froze too long beneath your eyes.
Da Capo.

Genesis -- Pshaw! damn your singing, it may be very fine, but I Am not in a humor
to relish it: -- I Am touched to the quick at being flung by the Byrons; -- and
yet you seem to mind it no more, than the loss of a match of billiards.


Sir Harry. My dear General, be composed as I am; -- and don't fret yourself in
this absurd manner: --


Genesis I will not be composed; -- damme, but I will fret myself! -- Indeed if I was
of your cucumber like disposition, you might expect to find me as fine a piece
of still life, agreeable vegitation as yourself; but -- no, no, no, Sir! --


Sir Harry. Now indeed, General, I mean to resent their treatment; and to show
you I Am in earnest, I Will lodge a petition against them by this light.


Genesis Ay; why there you are right, for your grounds are good enough: --


Sir Harry. 'Pon honor, General, you shall be commanding officer for the day.


Genesis If that is the case, I have a plan: -- but I Am so tired: -- walk with me
into the temple, and I Will tell it to you: -- I am sure we shall discover some
underhand dealings of this young rascal's at the bottom, and don't doubt of
bringing it home to him. (finding the doors fast) -- What the devil's the
meaning of this? -- why the door's fastened within. -- [listens at the
key-hole] -- Zounds! here are some villains concealed with a design to rob the
house; listen, Sir Harry, (Sir Harry puts his ear to the door) here Robbin!
Matthew! Jerry! -- why, where the devil are these scoundrels got to?


Sir Harry. Why really, General, I do hear a kind of confederate buz: --

[Enter Robbin.
Rob. What Is your honor's will?


Genesis Here, break open the door directly: -- some thieves have hid themselves
withi n side! --


Rob. Have they, your worship? -- then we'll soon have them out. -- Come along
my boys! (Enter Mat. and Jerry.) -- Thieves in our garden! we'll let 'em know
that nobody shall encroach upon our privileges, without a good ducking,
however: --

[They burst open the door with their spades, and discover Byron: -- the
gardeners laugh.]
Genesis -- Hell and the devil! what have we got here? -- your servant, Mr. Byron:
-- I give you joy of your election, Sir! -- (sneeringly) -- how composed the
rascal stands! -- what, I suppose, you are a stick of agreeable vegitation too?


Sir Harry. This is rather too much, damme! upon his return for one borough, to
be canvassing for another: -- Don't you smoke a pettycoat, General? [The
General looking inquisitively.]


Byr. Gentlemen, my present situation prevents me from returning your raillery:
--


Genesis Fire! and smoke! my daughter's maid Jenny! -- why hussy, how dare you be
locked up with such a rake as this.


Jen. Law Sir! the gentleman only asked to see the temple, and so I thought
there was no harm in showing it him.


Sir Harry. Comingly kind, by all that is plump, and lovely!


Genesis How the devil did he get in when the gates were all locked? -- but it is a
lie, hussy, he came caterwauling after you; but get about your business, you
jade! you shall not stay in my house another minute! --


Byr. Nay then, Sir, I hope it will not offend you, since it can no longer be
concealed, if I produce the most delicate testimony of our innocence. --

[ Stepping back discovers Narcissa.]
Sir Harry. Doublets by this light!


Genesis Narcissa! Traitor! deliver up my daughter, whom you have seduced, that I
may punish her as she deserves!


Byr. Retire Narcissa, into the citadel, I beseech you, and I Will defend you to
the last: --


Narc. I beg you will give me up, your danger overpowers me. [To Byron.]


Jen. Dear Ma'm, you are only to reward the conqueror; you have nothing to do
with the battle: -- besides, Mr. Muff will take care there shall not be much blood
spilt. --


Genesis Matchless impudence! -- what! laughed at into the bargain? -- Seize him,
Robin, and drag him to the canal: -- Rascals, why don't you obey my orders?


Rob. What! duck young Master Byron: -- not I, I love him too well? --


Other gardeners. And so do I: --


Genesis Villains, you are my slaves; and I Will make you do what I command you: --
lay hold on him, I say!


AIR XIII. TRIO. Mr. Bannister, Mr. Fawcet, and Mr. Kear.
He Is the pride of the borough, god bless him say I!
I Have poll'd for his honor, and will till I die;
In vain then you rave,
I Will not be your slave,
Though I Am a poor fellow of humble degeee:
Which of you then will bear it?
Will you?
-- MAT. No I swear it!
Or you? JERRY. No I swear it!
There is but one way then to set us all free:
We'll none of us bear it:
Will you? -- both -- No, I swear it:
Nor BOB, I declare it:
This, this is the way then, for now we are free.
[ Throw down their spades, etc.]
Byr. You must excuse me General, though I am under the necessity even in this
place, of defending your daughter, from any violence on her inclinations.


Genesis Scoundrels! I Will be revenged! Oh! here comes Spy! -- fetch my
double-barrel'd horse-pistols this instant; why the rascal's drunk! [Enter Spy.]


Spy. Byron for ever! shoot who, him? -- Lord love his heart -- Byron for ever!
-- I tell you that will not do: -- there is no flints: -- I would not hurt a hair
of his head. -- Byron for ever! -- (turning to Sir Harry) -- So I think we
wa'n't troubled to chair your fine gingerbread carcass: -- damme, you know'd a
trick worth too of that!


Sir Harry. Filthy brute!


Genesis The devil has bewitched 'em, all to conspire against me! Get out of my
sight, villain, or I shall be the death of you: --


Spy. Oh! if that is all -- I can punch it: -- Byron for ever! -- though he don't
want a second: -- he is spunk: -- he can manage 'em both -- No Muffs and Indigo
Nabobs -- Byron for ever! --

[Exit reeling.]
Genesis Powder and fury! I believe there is neither a brave, nor an honest man
left in the kingdom. -- Look you, Sir Harry, win her and wear her: -- What! I
suppose, I must fight this fellow myself (goes up to the door) but here he
comes, -- if he refuses to surrender her, put him to death!


Sir Harry. Well, if it must be so, it must; though 'pon my soul, I Have no
butchering ideas about me (half draws) -- come, good Sir, don't put me to the
fatigue of chastising you.


Byr. Sir Harry, you have more humanity: --


Sir Harry. No, split me if I have! -- She Is mine by deed of gift; if you
dispute that title, she must be mine by force of arms; -- (Draws, and puts
himself in an attitude.)


Byr. Say you so? -- come on then: -- (drawing a pistol, Sir Harry springs
back.)


Genesis Why, what the devil, are you afraid of the smell of powder? [To Sir Harry.


Sir Harry. No, not in the least, General, (confusedly) -- I am -- I am -- only
disconcerted a little for, -- for fear of the ladies; -- you saw they retired
disordered: besides, Sir, I Am not upon an equal footing with the assassin.


Byr. No more you were, when you valiantly drew upon a naked man.: -- however,
Sir, not to alarm you with the superiority of my weapon, thus I resign it into
your hands [Sir Harry receives the pistol, cocks it, and advances.


Sir Harry. Oh then the citadel's our own General!


Byr. When you have won it, Sir! (presents a second pistol.


Sir Harry. [Retiring assrighted.] Split me, but the ruffian has got another!


Genesis [looking earnestly at Byron] Damme, that is noble too! It Is almost a sin
to kill so fine a fellow: -- but the calls of honor must be obeyed: -- come,
you shall settle it like soldiers however: -- I little thought I should ever
see another shot fired, (measures ten paces with his cane,


Sir. Harry. My dear General, what are you about?


Genesis About? -- Why measuring the ground: -- you would not fight like a couple
of foot-pads, with the muzzle of the pistol in each others mouth, would you?
What the devil ails you now?


Sir. Harry. Dear General, your ear a moment (whispering, my conscience forbids
me.


Genesis Conscience! who the devil ever heard of a man's having conscience, who
had no heart? -- however, Sir Harry, I see how the land lies: -- You need give
yourself no further concern about me or my family: -- I am determined to have a
brave man for my son-in-law, though I cross the ocean for him.


Byr. You need not put yourself to that inconveniency, Sir, when you behold in
me, one, who is ready to lay down his life in defense of your daughter's
virtue, and your honor.


Genesis Why, though my enemy -- thou art a fine fellow I own: -- and if I could
forget the family grudge --


Byr. Believe me, Sir, I have lamented in secret the groundless animosity, that
has so long subsisted between you and my father, so fatal to the early
overtures I made the lovely Narcissa.


Genesis Zounds! but when I recollect, -- to be jockey'd by you out of the
borough, and by such underhand means! --


Byr. Why, Sir, you surprise me! -- they have chosen that Gentleman, have they
not? [pointing to Sir Harry.]


Genesis No, Sir, they have not. -- what, you don't know, I suppose, that they
have returned you?


Byr. Upon my honor, no, Sir: -- I have been employed ugon a much more
agreeable service: -- and to convince you of it, as they have chosen me,
contrary to my wishes, I am ready to resign my seat in favor of any one, you
shall appoint.


Genesis No, you young dog: -- you shall not do that neither: -- I am a little cooler
than I was: -- that piece of still life there, has brought me to my senses:
[pointing to Sir Harry] I begin now to think, that the unanimous choice of a
free body of people, is too sacred, to be superceded by the will of any
individual; besides your courage has charmed me: -- come, you young dog, you
may release your prisoners, they shall be upon their parole, 'till I pass
sentence. [Byron opens the door of the temple, and brings them a little
forward.] You look mighty cunning, Sir Harry, after loosing Tipplewell, and the
richest heiress in the county, through your delicate feelings. -- damn such
feelings, say I! you will cut a pretty figure in the modern history of
Maccaronyism!


Sir Har. Why, good General, you don't know me yet: -- I confess I have lost a
pair of pretty toys! -- but with respect (...) a real fine gentleman, is
infinitely beyond it is reach, I assure you: -- so I shall laugh at the
dinner-hunting tribe.


Genesis Why, where the devil did this fellow spring from! -- (Byron, Jenny, and
Narcissa, coming forward) -- I believe the young rogue deals in magic with both
of us -- (to Narcissa) -- come hither, girl, don't tremble so: -- I begin to
think, that I Have held out too long with Sir Walter -- and therefore I don't
know how I can show a heartier desire of reconciliation, than by rewarding his
son of merit, with my only daughter and fifty thousand pounds: -- What says
Narcissa? -- but I need not ask her! --


Nar. If I may discover my partiality for Mr. Byron, without offending you,
Sir, I should tell you, that I have every reason in the world to admire and
esteem him.


Genesis Come hither, then, both of you; as an earnest of my approbation, there --
I Have joined your hands before the parson; and may neither you, nor I live to
repent it.


Byr. This, Sir, is so generous, my life will be too short to repay the
obligation.


Sir Har. Demme, but I cut a pretty figure here truly! -- choused out of my own
borough, and a fine girl, by the son of a fox-hunting baronet; -- and laughed
at by the old Jew of a father, for endeavoring to accommodate him! -- Well! --
What Is to be done? -- Why, upon my arrival at Almack's, I must carry it off,
for the present, by dint of bronze; tell 'em the girl was damned ugly; and,
that the other borough had lost it is charter.


Genesis Come, come, Sir Harry; every man's not born to be a giant-killer; --
(ironically) if it be not beneath the dignity of a fine gentleman, to rejoice
at the success of a worthier man than himself, adjourn with us to Worry-hall.


Sir Har. Any thing for a frolic, General, for I Am in tip-top spirits.


Genesis All that now remains, is for me to endeavor to prevail upon Sir Walter
to meet us, and consent to make the little rogues happy: -- for my own part, I
am now fully convinced, that the tender affections were never implanted in the
human breast, to be called forth, or suppressed, by the caprice of an unfeeling
parent.


VAUDEVILLE.
NARCISSA. Rosy archer come away!
Give your train a holiday,
Lay your bow and quiver by,
Cease to wound, -- and hither hie!
CHORUS. Rosy archer, etc.
BYRON. Hither bring the smiling graces,
And the loves with cherub faces,
Bid the valleys laugh and say,
"Love has made a holiday!"
CHORUS. Hither bring, etc.
SIR HARRY. Lips of coral! eyes so pretty!
Out of luck foregad was I:
Though I Am choused, I Will join the ditty; --
Down thou little rising sigh.
May Love's tender prittle-prattle
Keep the day for ever bright,
And no jealous tittle-tattle,
Mar the raptures of the night!
CHORUS. May Love's tender, etc.
JENNY. Gentlefolks if you will permit me
I Have a word or two to say,
Though perhaps it may not befit me,
On my lady's wedding day:
Gravest Don with eye of ferrit
Though he practice all his art,
Cannot break a woman's spirit,
Till he is strength to break her heart.
CHORUS. Gravest Don, etc.
COLONEL WORRY. Brother grey-beards short's my story,
Read your features in this glass,
Here Is a convert now before ye
Metamorphos'd from an ass: --
When a swain of merit woos her,
Make your girl a happy wife;
Nature bids you not refufe her,
In the CRISIS of her life.
CHORUS. When a swain of merit woos her,
Make your girl a happy wife;
Nature bids you not refuse her,
In the CRISIS of her life!
THE END.
EPILOGUE.
Written by the AUTHOR,
AND SPOKEN BY MR. WESTON, Entering with a large Dog. OH! Lud! What authors
have we now adays!
A farmer this! -- Ecod or what you please:
He swears (though we have but just got through one sweat-o)
He Will make us speak an epilogue duetto. --
What say you Dragon? -- Why's your tail so low? --
Be not chop-fall'n -- they cannot damn you, you know: --
What dumb my comrade? -- terrible disaster;
So I must puff for you, and for your master.
Ye Gods be kind! -- No cat-call interference!
Believe, Tom Weston, it is his first appearance. --
You would not think it; but the rogue's so steady,
He Is in the privy council here, already;
The Prompter gives him merit universal,
Because -- [whistling] his whistle calls him to rehearsal;
Besides, he imitates no tragic brother, --
Who makes him pull down one bill -- post another;
Though he is not sleek; -- and has an hungry eye,
(A poet's dog is never fed too high)
Yet he is sound, Sirs, and in good condition;
He has no whimsies -- no indisposition:
When ever in letters large the bills he graces,
You're sure of seeing him -- if you have places;
He Will top the bills, if to this text he sticks;
A dog of parts -- and have no puppy tricks? --
Odzooks, I Have lost his business in his praise;
Oh! -- here he is sent to guard his master's bays.
A Dragon, once they say, kept watch and ward,
Some curious golden fruit from thieves to guard.
So to protect the poet's fruit from riot,
Secure some guineas, and a better diet,
He Is sent this Dragon critics! -- So be quiet:
Sharp then is the word, my slender waisted cousins,
He Will swallow macaronies by the dozens!
Growling, and snarling, -- don't let this dog catch ye,
At all your tearing-work he will over match ye;
If by ill humors, you our bard would puzzle,
I Have nothing else to do -- but slip the muzzle!
Though your so high (to the galleries) You too he soon would tame;
DRAGON has wings, if I but show him game.
But should his master's sing-song melt your soul,
He Will be as soft as -- Signor Rosignol:
Will with harmonious howlings swell each note,
And bark sweet music -- " only from his throat."
FINIS.

