THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.

A POEM.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.

A POEM. IN THREE BOOKS.

(...) EPICT. apud Arrian. II. 23. (...) sculp.



LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's- Head in Pall Mall. M.DCC.XLIV.

The DESIGN.
THERE are certain powers in human nature which seem to hold a middle place
between the organs of bodily sense and the faculties of moral perception: They
have been called by a very general name, THE POWERS OF IMAGINATION. Like the
external senses, they relate to matter and motion; and at the same time, give
the mind ideas analogous to those of moral approbation and dislike. As they are
the inlets of some of the most exquisite pleasures we are acquainted with, men
of warm and sensible tempers have sought means to recall the delightful
perceptions they afford, independent of the objects which originally produced
them. This gave rise to the imitative or designing arts; some of which, as
painting and sculpture, directly copy the external appearances which were
admired in nature; others, as music and poetry, bring them back to remembrance
by signs universally established and understood.

But these arts, as they grew more correct and deliberate, were naturally led
to extend their imitation beyond the peculiar objects of the imaginative
powers; especially poetry, which making use of language as the instrument by
which it imitates, is consequently become an unlimited representative of every
species and mode of being. Yet as their primary intention was only to express
the objects of imagination, and as they still abound chiefly in ideas of that
class, they of course retain their original character, and all the different
pleasures they excite, are termed, in general, PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.

The Design of the following poem is to give a view of these, in the largest
acceptance of the term; so that whatever our imagination feels from the
agreeable appearances of nature, and all the various entertainment we meet with
either in poetry, painting, music, or any of the elegant arts, might be
deducible from one or other of those principles in the constitution of the
human mind, which are here established and explained.

In executing this general plan it was necessary first of all to distinguish
the imagination from our other faculties, and then to characterize those
original forms or properties of being about which it is conversant, and which
are by nature adapted to it, as light is to the eyes, or truth to the
understanding. These properties Mr. Addison had reduced to the three general
classes of greatness, novelty, and beauty; and into these we may analyze every
object, however complex, which, properly speaking, is delightful to the
imagination. But such an object may also include many other sources of
pleasure, and its beauty, or novelty, or grandeur, will make a stronger
impression by reason of this concurrence. Besides this, the imitative arts,
especially poetry, owe much of their effect to a similar exhibition of
properties quite foreign to the imagination; insomuch that in every line of the
most applauded poems, we meet with either ideas drawn from the external senses,
or truths discovered to the understanding, or illustrations of contrivance and
final causes, or above all the rest, with circumstances proper to awaken and
engage the passions. It was therefore necessary to enumerate and exemplify
these different species of pleasure; especially that from the passions, which
as it is supreme in the noblest works of human genius, so being in some
particulars not a little surprising, gave an opportunity to inliven the
didactic turn of the poem, by introducing a piece of machinery to account for
the appearance.

After these parts of the subject which hold chiefly of admiration, or
naturally warm and interest the mind, a pleasure of a very different nature,
that which arises from ridicule, came next to be considered. As this is the
foundation of the comic manner in all the arts, and has been but very
imperfectly treated by moral writers, it was thought proper to give it a
particular illustration, and to distinguish the general sources from which the
ridicule of characters is derived. Here too a change of style became necessary;
such a one as might yet be consistent, if possible, with the general taste of
composition in the serious parts of the subject: nor is it an easy task to give
any tolerable force to images of this kind, without running either into the
gigantic expressions of the mock-heroic, or the familiar and pointed raillery
of professed satire; neither of which would have been proper here.

The materials of all imitation being thus laid open, nothing now remained but
to illustrate some particular pleasures which arise either from the relations
of different objects one to another, or from the nature of imitation itself. Of
the first kind is that various and complicated resemblance existing between
several parts of the material and immaterial worlds, which is the foundation of
metaphor and wit. As it seems in a great measure to depend on the early
associations of our ideas, and as this habit of associating is the source of
many pleasures and pains in life, and on that account bears a great share in
the influence of poetry and the other arts, it is therefore mentioned here and
its effects described. Then follows a general account of the production of
these elegant arts, and the secondary pleasure, as it is called, arising from
the resemblance of their imitations to the original appearances of nature.
After which, the design is closed with some reflections on the general conduct
of the powers of imagination, and on their natural and moral usefulness in life.

Concerning the manner or turn of composition which prevails in this piece,
little can be said with propriety by the author. He had two models; that
ancient and simple one of the first Grecian poets, as it is refined by Virgil
in the Georgics, and the familiar epistolary way of Horace. This latter has
several advantages. It admits of a greater variety of style; it more readily
ingages the generality of readers, as partaking more of the air of
conversation; and especially with the assistance of rhyme, leads to a closer
and more concise expression. Add to this the example of the most perfect of
modern poets, who has so happily applied this manner to the noblest parts of
philosophy, that the public taste is in a great measure formed to it alone.
Yet, after all, the subject before us tending almost constantly to admiration
and enthusiasm, seemed rather to demand a more open, pathetic and figured
style. This too appeared more natural, as the author's aim was not so much to
give formal precepts, or enter into the way of direct argumentation, as by
exhibiting the most engaging prospects of nature, to enlarge and harmonize the
imagination, and by that means insensibly dispose the minds of men to the same
dignity of taste in religion, morals, and civil life. It Is on this account that
he is so careful to point out the benevolent intention of the author of nature
in every principle of the human constitution here insisted on; and also to
unite the moral excellencies of life in the same point of view with the mere
external objects of good taste; thus recommending them in common to our natural
propenstiy for admiring what is beautiful and lovely. The same views have also
led him to introduce some sentiments which may perhaps be looked upon as not
quite direct to the subject; but since they bear an obvious relation to it, the
authority of Virgil, the faultless model of didactic poetry, will best support
him in this particular. For the sentiments themselves he makes no apology.

ARGUMENT of the FIRST BOOK.
THE subject proposed; verse 1, to 30. Difficulty of treating it poetically; v.
45. The ideas of the divine mind, the origin of every quality pleasing to the
imagination; v. 56, to 78. The natural variety of constitution in the minds of
men, with its final cause; to v. 96. The ideas of a fine imagination, and the
state of the mind in the enjoyment of those pleasures which it affords; v. 100,
to 132. All the primary pleasures of imagination result from the perception of
greatness, or wonderfulness, or beauty in objects; v. 145. The pleasure from
greatness, with its final cause; v. 151, to 221. Pleasures from novelty or
wonderfulness, with its final cause; v. 222. to 270. Pleasure from beauty, with
its final cause; v. 275, to 372. The connection of beauty with truth and good,
applied to the conduct of life; v. 384. Invitation to the study of moral
philosophy; to v. 428. The different degrees of beauty in different species of
objects; v. 448. Color; shape; natural concretes; vegetables; animals; the
mind; v. 445, to 475. The sublime, the fair, the wonderful of the mind; v. 497,
to 526. The connection of the imagination and the moral faculty; 557.
Conclusion.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK the FIRST.
WITH what attractive charms this goodly frame
Of nature touches the consenting hearts
Of mortal men; and what the pleasing stores
Which beauteous imitation thence derives
To deck the poet's, or the painter's toil;
My verse unfolds. Attend, ye gentle POWERS
OF MUSICAL DELIGHT! and while I sing
Your gifts, your honors, dance around my strain.
Thou, smiling queen of every tuneful breast,
Indulgent FANCY! from the fruitful banks
Of Avon, whence thy rosy fingers cull
Fresh flowers and dews to sprinkle on the turf
Where Shakespeare lies, be present: and with thee
Let FICTION come, upon her vagrant wings
Wafting ten thousand colors through the air,
And, by the glances of her magic eye,
Combining each in endless, fairy forms,
Her wild creation. Goddess of the lyre
Which rules the accents of the moving sphere,
Will thou, eternal HARMONY! descend,
And join this festive train? for with thee comes
The guide, the guardian of their lovely sports,
Majestic TRUTH; and where TRUTH deigns to come,
Her sister LIBERTY will not be far.
Be present all ye GENII who conduct
The wandering footsteps of the youthful bard,
New to your springs and shades: who touch his ear
With finer sounds: who heighten to his eye
The bloom of nature, and before him turn
The gayest, happiest attitudes of things.
Often have the laws of each poetic strain
The critic-verse employed; yet still unsung
Lay this prime subject, though importing most
A poet's name: for fruitless is the attempt
By dull obedience and the curb of rules,
For creeping toil to climb the hard ascent
Of high Parnassus. Nature's kindling breath
Must fire the chosen genius; nature's hand
Must point the path, and imp his eagle-wings
Exulting over the painful steep to soar
High as the summit: there to breathe at large
Ethereal air; with bards and sages old,
Immortal sons of praise. These flattering scenes
To this neglected labor court my song;
Yet not unconscious what a doubtful task Yet not unconscious.]
Lucret. l. 2. v. 921. Nec me animi fallit quam sint obscura, sed acri
Percussit thyrso laudis spes magna meum cor,
Et simul incussit suavem mi in pectus amorem
Musarum; quo nunc instinctus mente vigenti
Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante
Trita solo: juvat integros accedere fonteis,
Atque haurire: juvatque novos discerpere flores;
Insignem meo capiti petere inde coronam,
Unde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae.




To paint the finest features of the mind,
And to the most subtle and mysterious things
Give color, strength and motion. But the love
Of nature and the muses bids explore,
Through secret paths erewhile untrod by man,
The fair poetic region, to detect
Untasted springs, to drink inspiring draughts;
And shade my temples with unfading flowers
Culled from the laureate vale's profound recess,
Where never poet gained a wreath before.
From heaven my strains begin; from heaven descends
The flame of genius to the human breast,
And love and beauty, and poetic joy
And inspiration. Ere the radiant sun
Sprung from the east, or 'mid the vault of night
The moon suspended her serener lamp;
Ere mountains, woods, or streams adorned the globe;
Or wisdom taught the sons of men her lore;
Then lived the eternal ONE: then deep-retir'd
In his unfathomed essence, viewed at large
The uncreated images of things;
The radiant sun, the moon's nocturnal lamp,
The mountains, woods and streams, the rolling globe,
And wisdom's form celestial. From the first
Of days, on them his love divine he fixed,
His admiration: till in time complete,
What he admired and loved, his vital smile
Unfolded into being. Hence the breath
Of life informing each organic frame,
Hence the green earth, and wild resounding waves;
Hence light and shade alternate; warmth and cold;
And clear autumnal skies and vernal showers,
And all the fair variety of things.
But not alike to every mortal eye
Is this great scene unveiled. For since the claims
Of social life, to different labors urge
The active powers of man; with wise intent
The hand of nature on peculiar minds
Imprints a different bias, and to each
Decrees its province in the common toil.
To some she taught the fabric of the sphere,
The changeful moon, the circuit of the stars,
The golden zones of heaven: to some she gave
To weigh the moment of eternal things,
Of time, and space, and fate's unbroken chain,
And will's quick impulse: others by the hand
She led over vales and mountains, to explore
What healing virtue swells the tender veins
Of herbs and flowers; or what the beams of morn
Draw forth, distilling from the clifted rind
In balmy tears. But some, to higher hopes
Were destined; some within a finer mould
She wrought, and tempered with a purer flame.
To these the sire omnipotent unfolds
The world's harmonious volume, there to read
The transcript of himself. On every part
They trace the bright impressions of his hand:
In earth or air, the meadow's purple stores,
The moon's mild radiance, or the virgin's form
Blooming with rosy smiles, they see portray'd
That uncreated beauty, which delights
The mind supreme. They also feel her charms,
Enamored; they partake the eternal joy.
As Memnon's marble harp, renowned of old As Memnon's marble harp.]
The statue of Memnon, so famous in antiquity, stood in the temple of Serapis
at Thebes, one of the great cities of old Egypt. It was of a very hard,
iron-like stone, and, according to Juvenal, held in its hand a lyre, which
being touched by the sunbeams, emitted a distinct and agreeable sound. Tacitus
mentions it as one of the principal curiosities which Germanicus took notice of
in his journey through Egypt,; and Strabo affirms that he, with many others,
heard it.



By fabling Nilus, to the quivering touch
Of Titan's ray, with each repulsive string
Consenting, sounded through the warbling air
Unbidden strains; even so did nature's hand
To certain species of external things,
Attune the finer organs of the mind:
So the glad impulse of congenial powers,
Or of sweet sound, or fair-proportion'd form,
The grace of motion, or the bloom of light,
Thrills through imagination's tender frame,
From nerve to nerve: all naked and alive
They catch the spreading rays: till now the soul
At length discloses every tuneful spring,
To that harmonious movement from without,
Responsive. Then the inexpressive strain
Diffuses its enchantment: fancy dreams
Of sacred fountains and Elysian groves,
And vales of bliss: the intellectual power
Bends from his awful throne a wondering ear,
And smiles: the passions gently soothed away,
Sink to divine repose, and love and joy
Alone are waking; love and joy, serene
As airs that fan the summer. O! attend,
Whoever thou art whom these delights can touch,
Whose candid bosom the refining love
Of nature warms, O! listen to my song;
And I will guide thee to her favorite walks,
And teach thy solitude her voice to hear,
And point her loveliest features to thy view.
Know then, whatever of nature's pregnant stores,
Whatever of mimic art's reflected forms
With love and admiration thus inflame
The powers of fancy, her delighted sons
To three illustrious orders have referred;
Three sister-graces, whom the painter's hand,
The poet's tongue confesses; the sublime,
The wonderful, the fair. I see them dawn!
I see the radiant visions, where they rise,
More lovely than when Lucifer displays
His beaming forehead through the gates of morn,
To lead the train of Phoebus and the spring.
Say, why was man so eminently raised Say, why was man, etc.]
In apologizing for the frequent negligence of the sublimest authors of Greece,
Those god-like geniuses, says Longinus, were wellassured that nature had not
intended man for a low-spirited or ignoble being: but bringing us into life and
the midst of this wide universe, as before a multitude assembled at some heroic
solemnity that we might be spectators of all her magnificence, and candidates
high in emulation for the prize of glory; she has therefore implanted in our
souls an inextinguishable love of every thing great and exalted, of every thing
which appears divine beyond our comprehension. Whence it comes to pass, that
even the whole world is not an object sufficient for the depth and rapidity of
human imagination, which often sallies forth beyond the limits of all that
surrounds us. Let any man cast his eye through the whole circle of our
existence, and consider how especially it abounds in excellent and grand
objects, he will soon acknowledge for what enjoyments and pursuits we were
destined. Thus by the very propensity of nature we are led to admire, not
little springs or shallow rivulets, however clear and delicious, but the Nile,
the Rhine, the Danube, and much more than all, the ocean, etc. Dionys. Longin.
de Sublim.. xxxiv.



Amid the vast creation; why ordained
Through life and death to dart his piercing eye,
With thoughts beyond the limit of his frame;
But that the Omnipotent might send him forth
In sight of mortal and immortal powers,
As on a boundless theater, to run
The great career of justice; to exalt
His generous aim to all diviner deeds;
To shake each partial purpose from his breast;
And through the mists of passion and of sense,
And through the tossing tide of chance and pain
To hold his course unfalt'ring, while the voice
Of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
Of nature, calls him to his high reward,
The applauding smile of heaven? Else wherefore burns
In mortal bosoms, this unquenched hope
That breathes from day to day sublimer things,
And mocks possession? wherefore darts the mind,
With such resistless ardor to embrace
Majestic forms? impatient to be free,
Spurning the gross control of wilful might;
Proud of the strong contention of her toils;
Proud to be daring? Who but rather turns
To heaven's broad fire his unconstrained view,
Than to the glimmering of a waxen flame?
Who that, from Alpine heights, his laboring eye
Shoots round the wide horizon to survey
The Nile or Ganges roll his wasteful tide
Through mountains, plains, through empires black with shade,
And continents of sand; will turn his gaze
To mark the windings of a scanty rill
That murmurs at his feet? The highborn soul
Disdains to rest her heav'n-aspiring wing
Beneath its native quarry. Tired of earth
And this diurnal scene, she springs aloft
Through fields of air; pursues the flying storm;
Rides on the volley'd lightning through the heavens;
Or yoked with whirlwinds and the northern blast,
Sweeps the long tract of day. Then high she soars
The blue profound, and hovering over the sun,
Beholds him pouring the redundant stream
Of light; beholds his unrelenting sway
Bend the reluctant planets to absolve
The fated rounds of time. Thence far effus'd
She darts her swiftness up the long career
Of devious comets; through its burning signs
Exulting circles the perennial wheel
Of nature, and looks back on all the stars,
Whose blended light, as with a milky zone,
Invests the orient. Now amazed she views
The empyreal waste, where happy spirits hold, The empyreal waste.]
Ne se peut-il point qu'il y a un grand espace audela de la region des etoiles?
Que ce soit le ciel empyree, ou non, toujours cet espace immense qui environne
toute cette region, pourra etre rempli de bonheur and de gloire. Il pourre etre
concu comme l'ocean, ou se rendent les fleuves de toutes les creatures
bienheureuses, quand else seront venues a leur perfection dans le systeme des
etoiles. Leibnitz dans la Theodicee, part. i.. 19.



Beyond this concave heaven, their calm abode;
And fields of radiance, whose unfading light Whose unfading light, etc.]
It was a notion of the great M. Huygens, that there may be fixed stars at such
a distance from our solar system, as that their light shall not have had time
to reach us, even from the creation of the world to this day.



Has traveled the profound six thousand years,
Nor yet arrives in sight of mortal things.
Even on the barriers of the world untir'd
She meditates the eternal depth below;
Till, half recoiling, down the headlong steep
She plunges; soon overwhelmed and swallowed up
In that immense of being. There her hopes
Rest at the fated goal. For from the birth
Of mortal man, the sovereign Maker said,
That not in humble or in brief delight,
Not in the fading echoes of renown,
Powers purple robes, or pleasure's flowery lap,
The soul should find enjoyment: but from these
Turning disdainful to an equal good,
Through all the ascent of things enlarge her view,
Till every bound at length should disappear,
And infinite perfection close the scene.
Call now to mind what high, capacious powers
Lie folded up in man; how far beyond
The praise of mortals, may the eternal growth
Of nature to perfection half divine,
Expand the blooming soul? What pity then
Should sloth's unkindly fogs depress to earth
Her tender blossom; choke the streams of life,
And blast her spring! Far otherwise designed
Almighty wisdom; nature's happy cares
Th'obedient heart far otherwise incline.
Witness the sprightly joy when aught unknown
Strikes the quick sense, and wakes each active power
To brisker measures: witness the neglect
Of all familiar prospects, though beheld -- the neglect
Of all familiar prospects, etc.]
It is here said, that in consequence of the love of novelty, objects which at
first were highly delightful to the mind, lose that effect by repeated
attention to them. But the instance of habit is opposed to this observation;
for there, objects at first distasteful are in time rendered entirely agreeable
by repeated attention.

The difficulty in this case will be removed, if we consider, that when objects
at first agreeable, lose that influence by frequently recurring, the mind is
wholly passive and the perception involuntary; but habit, on the other hand.
generally supposes choice and activity accompanying it: so that the pleasure
arises here not from the object, but from the mind's conscious determination of
its own activity; and consequently increases in proportion to the frequency of
that determination.

It will still be urged perhaps, that a familiarity with disagreeable objects
renders them at length acceptable, even when there is no room for the mind to
resolve or act at all. In this case, the appearance must be accounted for, one
of these ways.

The pleasure from habit may be merely negative. The object at first gave
uneasiness: this uneasinest gradually wears off as the object grows familiar;
and the mind finding it at last entirely removed, reckons its situation really
pleasurable, compared with what it had experienced before.

The dislike conceived of the object at first, might be owing to prejudice or
want of attention. Consequently the mind being necessitated to review it often,
may at length perceive its own mistake, and be reconciled to what it had looked
on with aversion. In which case, a sort of instinctive justice naturally leads
it to make amends for the injury, by running toward th e other extreme of
fondness and attachment.

Or lastly, though the object itself should always continue disagreeable, yet
circumstances of pleasure or good fortune may occur along with it. Thus an
association may arise in the mind, and the object never be remembered without
those pleasing circumstances attending it; by which means the disagreeable
impression it at first occasioned will in time be quite obliterated.



With transport once; the fond, attentive gaze
Of young astonishment; the sober zeal
Of age, commenting on prodigious things.
For such the bounteous providence of heaven,
In every breast implanting this desire
Of objects new and strange, to urge us on -- this desire
Of objects new and strange -- ]
These two ideas are often confounded; though it is evident the mere novelty of an
object makes it agreeable, even where the mind is not affected with the least
degree of wonder: whereas wonder indeed always implies novelty, being never
excited by common or well-known appearances. But the pleasure in both cases is
explicable from the same final cause, the acquisition of knowledge and
enlargement of our views of nature: and on this account it is natural to treat
of them together.



With unremitted labor to pursue
Those sacred stores that wait the ripening soul,
In truth's exhaustless bosom. What need words
To paint its power? For this, the daring youth
Breaks from his weeping mother's anxious arms,
In foreign climes to rove: the pensive sage
Heedless of sleep, or midnight's harmful damp,
Hangs over the sickly taper; and untir'd
The virgin follows, with enchanted step,
The mazes of some wild and wondrous tale,
From morn to eve; unmindful of her form,
Unmindful of the happy dress that stole
The wishes of the youth, when every maid
With envy pined. Hence finally, by night
The village-matron, round the blazing hearth,
Suspends the infant-audience with her tales,
Breathing astonishment! of witching rhymes,
And evil spirits; of the deathbed call
To him who robbed the widow, and devoured
The orphan's portion; of unquiet souls
Risen from the grave to ease the heavy guilt
Of deeds in life concealed; of shapes that walk
At dead of night, and clank their chains, and wave
The torch of hell around the murd'rer's bed.
At every solemn pause the crowd recoil
Gazing each other speechless, and congealed
With shivering sighs: till eager for the event,
Around the beldame all arrect they hang,
Each trembling heart with grateful terrors quelled.
But lo! disclosed in all her smiling pomp,
Where BEAUTY onward moving claims the verse
Her charms inspire: the freely-flowing verse
In thy immortal praise, O form divine,
Smooths her mellifluent stream. Thee, BEAUTY, thee
The regal dome, and thy enlivening ray
The mossy roofs adore: thou, better sun!
For ever beamest on the enchanted heart
Love, and harmonious wonder, and delight
Poetic. Brightest progeny of heaven!
How shall I trace thy features? where select
The roseate hues to emulate thy bloom?
Haste then, my song, through nature's wide expanse,
Haste then, and gather all her comeliest wealth,
Whatever bright spoils the florid earth contains,
Whatever the waters, or the liquid air,
To deck thy lovely labor. Will thou fly
With laughing Autumn to th'Atlantic isles, Atlantic isles.]
By these islands, which were also called the Fortunate, the ancients are now
generally supposed to have meant the Canaries. They were celebrated by the
poets for the mildness and fertility of the climate; for the gardens of the
daughters of Hesperus, the brother of Atlas; and the dragon which constantly
watched their golden fruit, till it was slain by the Tyrian Hercules.



And range with him th'Hesperian field, and see,
Wherever his fingers touch the fruitful grove,
The branches shoot with gold; wherever his step
Marks the glad soil, the tender clusters glow
With purple ripeness, and invest each hill
As with the blushes of an evening sky?
Or will thou rather stoop thy vagrant plume,
Where, gliding through his daughter's honored shades, Where gliding through his
daughter's honored shades.]
Daphne, the daughter of Peneus, transformed into a laurel.



The smooth Peneus from his glassy flood
Reflects purpureal Tempe's pleasant scene?
Fair Tempe! haunt beloved of fylvan powers,
Of nymphs and fauns; where in the golden age
They played in secret on the shady brink
With ancient Pan: while round their choral steps
Young hours and genial gales with constant hand
Show'r'd blossoms, odours, show'r'd ambrosial dews,
And spring's Elysian bloom. Her flowery store
To thee nor Tempe shall refuse; nor watch
Of winged Hydra guard Hesperian fruits
From thy free spoil. O bear then, unreprov'd,
Thy smiling treasures to the green recess
Where young Dione stays. With sweetest airs
Entice her forth to lend her angel-form
For beauty's honored image. Hither turn
Thy graceful footsteps; hither, gentle maid,
Incline thy polished forehead: let thy eyes
Effuse the mildness of their azure dawn;
And may the fanning breezes waft aside
Thy radiant locks, disclosing as it bends
With airy softness from the marble neck
The cheek fair-blooming, and the rosy lip
Where winning smiles and pleasure sweet as love,
With sanctity and wisdom, temp'ring blend
Their soft allurement. Then the pleasing force
Of nature, and her kind parental care,
Worthier I Would sing: then all the enamored youth,
With each admiring virgin to my lyre
Should throng attentive, while I point on high
Where beauty's living image, like the morn
That wakes in Zephyr's arms the blushing May,
Moves onward; or as Venus, when she stood
Effulgent on the pearly car, and smiled,
Fresh from the deep, and conscious of her form,
To see the Tritons tune their vocal shells,
And each coerulean sister of the flood
With fond acclaim attend her over the waves,
To seek the Idalian bower. Ye smiling band
Of youths and virgins, who through all the maze
Of young desire with rival-steps pursue
This charm of beauty; if the pleasing toil
Can yield a moment's respite, hither turn
Your favorable ear, and trust my words.
I do not mean to wake the gloomy form
Of superstition dressed in wisdom's garb,
To damp your tender hopes; I do not mean
To bid the jealous thund'rer fire the heavens,
Or shapes infernal rend the groaning earth
To fright you from your joys: my cheerful song
With better omens calls you to the field,
Pleased with your generous ardour in the chase,
And warm as you. Then tell me, for you know,
Does beauty ever deign to dwell where health
And active use are strangers? Is her charm
Confessed in aught, whose most peculiar ends
Are lame and fruitless? Or did nature mean
This awful stamp the herald of a lie;
To hide the shame of discord and disease,
And catch with fair hypocrisy the heart
Of idle faith? O no! with better cares,
The indulgent mother, conscious how infirm
Her offspring tread the paths of good and ill,
By this illustrious image, in each kind
Still most illustrious where the object holds
Its native powers most perfect, she by this
Illumes the headlong impulse of desire,
And sanctifies his choice. The generous glebe
Whose bosom smiles with verdure, the clear tract
Of streams delicious to the thirsty soul,
The bloom of nectar'd fruitage ripe to sense,
And every charm of animated things,
Are only pledges of a state sincere,
The integrity and order of their frame,
When all is well within, and every end
Accomplished. Thus was beauty sent from heaven,
The lovely ministress of truth and good
In this dark world: for truth and good are one,
And beauty dwells in them, and they in her, -- Truth and good are one,
And beauty dwells in them, etc.]
Do you imagine, says Socrates to his libertine disciple, that what is good is
not also beautiful? Have you not observed that these appearances always
co-incide? Virtue, for instance, in the same respect as to which we call it
good, is ever acknowledged to be beautiful also. In the characters of men we
always This the Athenians did in a peculiar manner by the words (...).
join the two denominations together. The beauty of human bodies corresponds,
in like manner, with that economy of parts which constitutes them good; and in
all the circumstances which occurr in life, the same object is constantly
accounted both beautiful and good, inasmuch as it answers the purposes for
which it was designed. Xenophont. memorab. Socrat. 1. 3. c. 8.

This excellent observation has been illustrated and extended by the noble
restorer of ancient philosophy; see the Characteristicks, vol. 2. p. 399. and
422. and vol. 3. p. 181. And his most ingenious disciple has particularly
shown, that it holds in the general laws of nature, in the works of art, and
the conduct of the sciences. Inquiry into the original of our ideas of beauty
and virtue; Treat. 1.. 8. As to the connection between beauty and truth, there
are two opinions concerning it. Some philosophers assert an independent and
invariable law in nature, in consequence of which all rational beings must
alike perceive beauty in some certain proportions, and deformity in the
contrary. And this necessity being supposed the same with that which commands
the assent or dissent of the understanding, it follows of course that beauty is
founded on the universal and unchangeable law of truth.

But others there are who believe beauty to be merely a relative and arbitrary
thing; that indeed it was a benevolent design in nature to annex so delightful
a sensation to those objects which are best and most perfect in themselves,
that so we might be engaged to the choice of them at once and without staying
to infer their usefulness from their structure and effects; but that it is not
impossible, in a physical sense, that two beings, of equal capacities for
truth, should perceive, one of them beauty, and the other deformity, in the
same relations. And upon this supposition, by that truth which is always
connected with beauty, nothing more can be meant than the conformity of any
object to those proportions upon which, after careful examination, the beauty
of that species is found to depend. Polycletus for instance, the famous
sculptor of Sicyon, from an accurate mensuration of the several parts of the
most perfect human bodies, deduced a canon or system of proportions, which was
the rule of all succeeding artists. Suppose a statue modeled according to this
canon. A man of mere natural taste, upon looking at it, without entering into
its proportions, confesses and admires its beauty; whereas a professor of the
art applies his measures to the head, the neck, or the hand, and, without
attending to its beauty, pronounces the workmanship to be just and true.



With like participation. Wherefore then,
O sons of earth! would you dissolve the tie?
O wherefore, with a rash, imperfect aim,
Seek you those flowery joys with which the hand
Of lavish fancy paints each flattering scene
Where beauty seems to dwell, nor once inquire
Where is the sanction of eternal truth,
Or where the seal of undeceitful good,
To save your search from folly? Wanting these,
Lo! beauty withers in your void embrace,
And with the glittering of an idiot's toy
Did fancy mock your vows. Nor let the gleam
Of youthful hope that shines upon your hearts,
Be chilled or clouded at this awful task
To learn the lore of undeceitful good,
And truth eternal. Though the poisonous charms
Of baleful superstition, guide the feet
Of servile numbers, through a dreary way
To their abode, through deserts, thorns and mire;
And leave the wretched pilgrim all forlorn
To muse, at last, amid the ghostly gloom
Of graves, and hoary vaults, and cloistered cells;
To walk with specter through the midnight shade,
And to the screaming owl's accursed song
Attune the dreadful workings of his heart;
Yet be not you dismayed. A gentler star
Your lovely search illumines. From the grove
Where wisdom talked with her Athenian sons,
Could my ambitious hand intwine a wreath
Of PLATO'S olive with the Mantuan bay,
Then should my powerful voice at once dispel
These monkish horrors: then in light divine
Disclose the Elysian prospect, where the steps
Of those whom nature charms, through blooming walks,
Through fragrant mountains and poetic streams,
Amid the train of sages, heroes, bards,
Led by their winged Genius and the choir
Of laurell'd science and harmonious art,
Proceed exulting to the eternal shrine,
Where truth enthroned with her celestial twins,
The undivided part'ners of her sway,
With good and beauty reigns. O let not us,
Lulled by luxurious pleasure's languid strain,
Or crouching to the frowns of bigot-rage,
O let not us a moment pause to join
The god-like band. And if the gracious power
That first awakened my untutored song,
Will to my invocation breathe anew
The tuneful spirit; then through all our paths,
Never shall the sound of this devoted lyre
Be wanting; whether on the rosy mead,
When summer smiles, to warn the melting heart
Of luxury's allurement; whether firm
Against the torrent and the stubborn hill
To urge bold virtue's unremitted nerve,
And wake the strong divinity of soul
That conquers chance and fate; or whether struck
For sounds of triumph, to proclaim her toils
Upon the lofty summit, round her brow
To twine the wreathe of incorruptive praise;
To trace her hallowed light through future worlds,
And bless heaven's image in the heart of man.
Thus with a faithful aim have we presumed,
Adventurous, to delineate nature's form;
Whether in vast, majestic pomp arrayed,
Or dressed for pleasing wonder, or serene
In beauty's rosy smile. It now remains,
Through various being's fair-proportion'd scale,
To trace the rising luster of her charms,
From their first twilight, shining forth at length
To full meridian splendor. Of degree
The least and lowliest, in th'effusive warmth
Of colors mingling with a random blaze,
Does beauty dwell. Then higher in the line
And variation of determined shape,
Where truth's eternal measures mark the bound
Of circle, cube, or sphere. The third ascent
Unites this varied symmetry of parts
With colour's bland allurement; as the pearl
Shines in the concave of its azure bed,
And painted shells indent their speckled wreathe.
Then more attractive rise the blooming forms
Through which the breath of nature has infused
Her genial power to draw with pregnant veins
Nutritious moisture from the bounteous earth,
In fruit and seed prolific: thus the flowers
Their purple honors with the spring resume;
And such the stately tree which autumn bends
With blushing treasures. But more lovely still
Is nature's charm, where to the full consent
Of complicated members, to the bloom
Of color, and the vital change of growth,
Life's holy flame and piercing sense are given,
And active motion speaks the tempered soul:
So moves the bird of Juno; so the steed
With rival ardour beats the dusty plain,
And faithful dogs with eager airs of joy
Salute their fellows. Thus does beauty dwell
There most conspicuous, even in outward shape,
Where dawns the high expression of a mind:
By steps conducting our inraptur'd search
To that eternal origin, whose power,
Through all the unbounded symmetry of things,
Like rays effulging from the parent sun,
This endless mixture of her charms diffused.
MIND, MIND alone, bear witness, earth and heaven!
The living fountains in itself contains
Of beauteous and sublime: here hand in hand,
Sit paramount the Graces; here enthroned,
Celestial Venus, with divinest airs,
Invites the soul to never-fading joy.
Looks then abroad through nature, to the range
Of planets, suns, and adamantine spheres
Wheeling unshaken through the void immense;
And speak, O man! does this capacious scene
With half that kindling majesty dilate
Thy strong conception, as when Brutus rose As when Brutus rose, etc.]
Cicero himself describes this fact -- Caesare interfecto -- statim cruentum
alte extollens M. Brutus pugionem, Ciceronem nominatim exclamavit, atque ei
recuperatam libertatem est gratulatus. Cic. Philipp. 2. 12.



Refulgent from the stroke of Caesar's fate,
Amid the crowd of patriots; and his arm
Aloft extending, like eternal Jove
When guilt brings down the thunder, called aloud
On Tully's name, and shook his crimson steel,
And bade the father of his country, hail!
For lo! the tyrant prostrate on the dust,
And Rome again is free? -- Is aught so fair
In all the dewy landscapes of the spring,
In the bright eye of Hesper or the morn,
In nature's fairest forms, is aught so fair
As virtuous friendship? as the candid blush
Of him who strives with fortune to be just?
The graceful tear that streams for other's woes?
Or the mild majesty of private life,
Where peace with ever-blooming olive crowns,
The gate; where honor's liberal hands effuse
Unenvied treasures, and the snowy wings
Of innocence and love protect the scene?
Once more search, undismayed, the dark profound
Where nature works in secret; view the beds
Of min'ral treasure, and the eternal vault
That bounds the hoary ocean; trace the forms
Of atoms moving with incessant change
Their elemental round; behold the seeds
Of being, and the energy of life
Kindling the mass with ever-active flame:
Then to the secrets of the working mind
Attentive turn; from dim oblivion call
Her fleet, ideal band; and bid them, go!
Break through time's barrier, and overtake the hour
That saw the heavens created: then declare
If aught were found in those external scenes
To move thy wonder now. For what are all
The forms which brute, unconscious matter wears,
Greatness of bulk, or symmetry of parts?
Not reaching to the heart, soon feeble grows
The superficial impulse; dull their charms,
And satiate soon, and pall the languid eye.
Not so the moral species, or the powers
Of genius and design; the ambitious mind
There sees herself: by these congenial forms
Touched and awakened, with intenser act
She bends each nerve, and meditates well-pleased
Her features in the mirror. For of all
The inhabitants of earth, to man alone
Creative wisdom gave to lift his eye
To truth's eternal measures; thence to frame
The sacred laws of action and of will,
Discerning justice from unequal deeds,
And temperance from folly. But beyond
This energy of truth, whose dictates bind
Assenting reason, the benignant ^ire,
To deck the honored paths of just and good,
Has added bright imagination's rays:
Where virtue rising from the awful depth
Of truth's mysterious bosom, does forsake Where virtue rising from the awful
depth.
Of truth's mysterious bosom, etc.]
According to the opinion of those who assert moral obligation to be founded on
an immutable and universal law, and that pathetic feeling which is usually
called the moral sense, to be determined by the peculiar temper of the
imagination and the earliest associations of ideas.



The unadorned condition of her birth;
And dressed by fancy in ten thousand hues,
Assumes a various feature, to attract,
With charms responsive to each gazer's eye,
The hearts of men. Amid his rural walk,
The ingenuous youth whom solitude inspires
With purest wishes, from the pensive shade
Beholds her moving, like a virgin-muse
That wakes her lyre to some indulgent theme
Of harmony and wonder: while among
The herd of servile minds, her strenuous form
Indignant flashes on the patriot's eye,
And through the rolls of memory appeals
To ancient honor; or in act serene,
Yet watchful, raises the majestic sword
Of public power, from dark ambition's reach
To guard the sacred volume of the laws.
Genius of ancient Greece! whose faithful steps
Well-pleased I follow through the sacred paths
Of nature and of science; nurse divine
Of all heroic deeds and fair desires!
O! let the breath of thy extended praise
Inspire my kindling bosom to the height
Of this untemper'd theme. Nor be my thoughts
Presumptuous counted, if, amid the calm
That sooths this vernal evening into smiles,
I steal impatient from the sordid haunts
Of strife and low ambition, to attend
Thy sacred presence in the sylvan shade,
By their malignant footsteps never profaned.
Descend, propitious! to my favored eye;
Such in thy mien, thy warm, exalted air,
As when the Persian tyrant, foiled and stung
With shame and desperation, gnash'd his teeth
To see thee rend the pageants of his throne;
And at the lightning of thy lifted spear
Crouch'd like a slave. Bring all thy martial spoils,
Thy palms, thy laurels, thy triumphal songs,
Thy smiling band of arts, thy godlike sires
Of civil wisdom, thy heroic youth
Warm from the schools of glory. Guide my way
Through fair Lyceum's Lyceum.]
The school of Aristotle,


walk, the green retreats
Of Academus, Academus.]
The school of Plato.


and the thymy vale,
Where often enchanted with Socratic sounds,
Ilissus Ilissus.]
One of the rivers on which Athens was situated. Plato, in some of his finest
dialogues, lays the scene of the conversation with Socrates on its banks.


pure devolved his tuneful stream
In gentler murmurs. From the blooming store
Of these auspicious fields, may I unblam'd
Transplant some living blossoms to adorn
My native clime: while far above the flight
Of fancy's plume aspiring, I unlock
The springs of ancient wisdom; while I join
Thy name, thrice honored! with the immortal praise
Of nature; while to my compatriot youth
I point the high example of thy sons,
And tune to Attic themes the British lyre.
End of the FIRST BOOK.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK the SECOND.
ARGUMENT of the SECOND BOOK.
THE separation of the works of imagination from philosophy, the cause of their
abuse among the moderns; to verse 41. Prospect of their reunion under the
influence of public liberty; to v. 61. Enumeration of accidental pleasures,
which increase the effect of objects delightful to the imagination. The
pleasures of sense; v. 73. Particular circumstances of the mind; v. 84.
Discovery of truth; v. 97. Perception of contrivance and design; v. 121.
Emotions of the passions; v. 136. All the natural passions partake of a
pleasing sensation, with the final cause of this constitution illustrated by an
allegorical vision, and exemplified in sorrow, pity, terror and indignation;
from v. 155 to the end.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK the SECOND.
WHEN shall the laurel and the vocal string
Resume their honors? When shall we behold
The tuneful tongue, the Promethean hand
Aspire to ancient praise? Alas! how faint,
How slow the dawn of beauty and of truth
Breaks the reluctant shades of Gothic night
Which yet involve the nations! Long they groaned
Beneath the furies of rapacious force;
Often as the gloomy north, with iron-swarms
Tempestuous pouring from her frozen caves,
Blasted the Italian shore, and swept the works
Of liberty and wisdom down the gulf
Of all-devouring night. As long immured
In noontide darkness by the glimmering lamp,
Each muse and each fair science pined away
The sordid hours: while foul, barbarian hands
Their mysteries profaned, unstrung the lyre,
And chained the soaring pinion down to earth.
At last the Muses rose, and spurned their bonds, At last the Muses rose, etc.]
About the age of Hugh Capet, the founder of the third race of French kings,
the poets of Provence were in high reputation; a sort of stroling bards or
rhapsodists, who went about the courts of princes and noblemen, entertaining
them at festivals with music and poetry. They attempted both the epic ode and
satire, and abounded in a wild and fantastic vein of fable, partly allegorical,
and partly founded on traditionary legends of the Saracen wars. These were the
rudiments of the Italian poetry. But their taste and composition must have been
extremely barbarous, as we may judge by those who followed the turn of their
fable in much politer times; such as Boiardo, Bernardo Tasso, Ariosto, etc.



And wildly warbling scattered, as they flew,
Their blooming wreaths from fair Valclusa's Valclusa.]
The famous retreat of Francesco Petrarcha, the father of Italian poetry, and
his mistress Laura, a lady of Avignon.


bowers
To Arno's Arno.]
The river which runs by Florence, the birthplace of Dante and Boccacio.


myrtle border from the shore
Of soft Parthenope. Parthenope.]
Or Naples, the birthplace of Sannazaro. The great Torquato Tasso was born at
Sorrento in the kingdom of Naples.


But still the rage
Of dire ambition and gigantic power, -- the rage
Of dire ambition, etc.]
This relates to the cruel wars among the republics of Italy, and the
abominable politics of its little princes, about the the fifteenth century.
These at last, in conjunction with the papal power, entirely extinguished the
spirit of liberty in that country, and established that abuse of the fine arts
which has since been propagated over all Europe.



From public aims and from the busy walk
Of civil commerce, drove the bolder train
Of penetrating science to the cells,
Where studious ease consumes the silent hour
In shadowy searches and unfruitful care.
Thus from their guardians torn, the tender arts Thus from their guardians
torn, the tender arts, etc.]
Nor were they only losers by the separation. For philosophy itself, to use the
words of a noble philosopher, being thus severed from the sprightly arts and
sciences, must consequently grow dronish, insipid, pedantic, useless, and
directly opposite to the real knowledge and practice of the world. Insomuch,
that a gentleman, says another excellent writer, cannot easily bring himself to
like so austere and ungainly a form: so greatly is it changed from what was
once the delight of the finest gentlemen of antiquity, and their recreation
after the hurry of public affairs! From this condition it cannot be recovered
but by uniting it once more with the works of imagination; and we have had the
pleasure of observing a very great progress made toward their union in England
within these few years. It is hardly possible to conceive them at a greater
distance from each other than at the revolution, when Lock stood at the head
of one party, and Dryden of the other. But the general spirit of liberty, which
has ever since been growing, naturally invited our men of wit and genius to
improve that influence which the arts of persuasion give them with the people,
by applying them to subjects of importance to society. Thus poetry and
eloquence became considerable; and philosophy is now of course obliged to
borrow of their imbellishments, in order even to gain audience with the public.



Of mimic fancy and harmonious joy,
To priestly domination and the lust
Of lawless courts, their amiable toil
For three inglorious ages have resigned,
In vain reluctant: and Torquato's tongue
Was tuned for slavish paeans at the throne
Of tinsel pomp; and Raphael's magic hand
Effus'd its fair creation to inchant
The fond adoring herd in Latian fanes
To bind belief; while on their prostrate necks
The sable tyrant plants his heel secure.
But now behold! the radiant era dawns,
When freedom's ample fabric, fixed at length
For endless years on Albion's happy shore
In full proportion, once more shall extend
To all the kindred powers of social bliss
A common mansion, a parental roof.
There shall the Virtues, there shall Wisdom's train,
Their long-lost friends rejoining, as of old,
Embrace the smiling family of arts,
The Muses and the Graces. Then no more
Shall vice, distracting their delicious gifts
To aims abhorred, with high distaste and scorn
Turn from their charms the philosophic eye,
The patriot-bosom: then no more the paths
Of public care or intellectual toil,
Alone by footsteps haughty and severe
In gloomy state be trod: the harmonious Muse
And her persuasive sisters then shall plant
Their sheltring laurels over the bleak ascent,
And shed their flowers along the rugged way.
Armed with the lyre, already have we dared
To pierce divine philosophy's retreats,
And teach the Muse her lore; already strove
Their long-divided honors to unite,
While temp'ring this deep argument we sang
Of truth and beauty. Now the same task
Impends; now urging our ambitious toil,
We hasten to recount the various springs
Of adventitious pleasure, which adjoin
Their grateful influence to the prime effect
Of objects grand or beauteous, and enlarge
The complicated joy. The sweets of sense,
Do they not often with kind accession flow,
To raise harmonious fancy's native charm?
So while we taste the fragrance of the rose,
Glows not her blush the fairer? While we view
Amid the noontide walk a limpid rill
Gush through the trickling herbage, to the thirst
Of summer yielding the delicious draught
Of cool refreshment; over the mossy brink
Shines not the surface clearer, and the waves
With sweeter music murmur as they flow?
Nor this alone; the various lot of life
Often from external circumstance assumes
A moment's disposition to rejoice
In those delights which at a different hour
Would pass unheeded. Fair the face of spring,
When rural songs and odours wake the morn,
To every eye; but how much more to his
Round whom the bed of sickness long diffused
Its melancholy gloom! how doubly fair,
When first with fresh-born vigor he inhales
The balmy breeze, and feels the blessed sun
Warm at his bosom, from the springs of life
Chasing oppressive damps and languid pain!
Or shall I mention, where celestial truth
Her awful light discloses, to effuse
A more majestic pomp on beauty's frame?
For man loves knowledge, and the beams of truth
More welcome touch his understanding's eye,
Than all the blandishments of sound, his ear,
Than all of taste his tongue. Nor ever yet
The melting rainbow's vernal-tinctur'd hues
To me have shone so pleasing, as when first
The hand of science pointed out the path
In which the sunbeams gleaming from the west
Fall on the watery cloud, whose darksome veil
Involves the orient; and that trickling shower
Piercing through every crystalline unequal
Of clust'ring dew-drops to their flight opposed,
Recoil at length where concave all behind
The internal surface of each glassy orb
Repells their forward passage into air;
That thence direct they seek the radiant goal
From which their course began; and, as they strike
In different lines the gazer's obvious eye,
Assume a different luster, through the bread
Of colors changing from the splendid rose
To the pale violet's dejected hue.
Or shall we touch that kind access of joy,
That springs to each fair object, while we trace,
Through all its fabric, wisdom's artful aim
Disposing every part, and gaining still
By means proportioned her benignant end?
Speak, ye, the pure delight, whose favored steps
The lamp of science through the jealous maze
Of nature guides, when happily you reveal
Her secret honors: whether in the sky,
The beauteous laws of light, the central powers
That wheel the pensile planets round the year;
Whether in wonders of the rolling deep,
Or smiling fruits of pleasure-pregnant earth,
Or fine-adjusted springs of life and sense,
You scan the counsels of their author's hand.
What, when to raise the meditated scene,
The flame of passion, through the struggling soul
Deep-kindled, shows across that sudden blaze
The object of its rapture, vast of size,
With fiercer colors and a night of shade?
What? like a storm from their capacious bed
The sounding seas o'erwhelming, when the might
Of these eruptions, working from the depth
Of man's strong apprehension, shakes his frame
Even to the base; from every naked sense
Of pain or pleasure dissipating all
Opinion's feeble cov'rings, and the veil
Spun from the cobweb-fashion of the times
To hide the feeling heart? Then nature speaks
Her genuine language, and the words of men,
Big with the very motion of their souls,
Declare with what accumulated force,
The impetuous nerve of passion urges on
The native weight and energy of things.
Yet more; her honors where nor beauty claims,
Nor shows of good the thirsty sense allure,
From passion's power alone our nature holds From passion's power alone, etc.]
This very mysterious kind of pleasure which is often found in the exercise of
passions generally counted painful, has been taken taken notice of by several
authors. Lucretius resolves it into self-love, Suave mari magno, etc. lib. II.
1. As if a man was never pleased in being moved at the distress of a tragedy,
without a cool reflection that though these fictitious personages were so
unhappy, yet he himself was perfectly at ease and in safety. The ingenious and
candid author of the reflections critiques sur la poesy and sur la peinture,
accounts for it by the general delight which the mind takes in its own
activity, and the abhorrence it feels of an indolent and unattentive state: And
this, joined with the moral applause of its own temper, which attends these
emotions when natural and just, is certainly the true foundation of the
pleasure, which as it is the origin and basis of tragedy and epic, deserved a
very particular consideration in this poem.



Essential pleasure. Passion's fierce illapse
Rouzes the mind's whole fabric; with supplies
Of daily impulse keeps the elastic powers
Intensely poised, and polishes anew
By that collision all the fine machine:
Else rust would rise, and foulness, by degrees
Incumb'ring, choke at last what heaven designed
For ceaseless motion and a round of toil.
-- But say, does every passion men endure
Thus minister delight? That name indeed
Becomes the rosy breath of love; becomes
The radiant smiles of joy, the applauding hand
Of admiration: but the bitter shower
That sorrow sheds upon a brother's grave,
But the dumb palsy of nocturnal fear,
Or those consuming fires that gnaw the heart
Of panting indignation, find we there
To move delight? -- Then listen, while my tongue
The unaltered will of heaven with faithful awe
Reveals; what old Harmodious wont to teach
My early age; Harmodius, who had weighed
Within his learned mind whatever the schools
Of wisdom, or thy lonely-whisp'ring voice,
O faithful nature! dictate of the laws
Which govern and support this mighty frame
Of universal being. Often the hours
From morn to eve have stole unmarked away,
While mute attention hung upon his lips,
As thus the sage his awful tale began.
'Twas in the windings of an ancient wood,
When spotless youth with solitude resigns
To sweet philosophy the studious day,
What time pale autumn shades the silent eve,
Musing I roved. Of good and evil much,
And much of mortal man my thought revolved;
When starting full on fancy's gushing eye,
The mournful image of Parthenia's fate,
That hour, O long beloved and long deplored!
When blooming youth, nor gentlest wisdom's arts,
Nor Hymen's honors gathered for thy brow,
Nor all thy lover's, all thy father's tears
Availed to snatch thee from the cruel grave;
Thy agonizing looks, thy last farewell
Struck to the inmost feeling of my soul
As with the hand death. At once the shade
More horrid nodded over me, and the winds
With hoarser murmuring shook the branches. Dark
As midnight storms, the scene of human things
Appeared before me; deserts, burning sands,
Where the parched adder dies; the frozen south,
And desolation blasting all the west
With rapine and with murder: tyrant-pow'r
Here sits enthroned in blood; the baleful charms
Of superstition there infect the skies,
And turn the sun to horror. Gracious heaven!
What is the life of man? Or cannot these,
Not these portents thy awful will suffice?
That propagated thus beyond their scope,
They rise to act their cruelties anew
In my afflicted bosom, thus decreed
The universal sensitive of pain,
The wretched heir of evils not its own!
Thus I, impatient; when at once effus'd,
A flashing torrent of celestial day
Burst through the shadowy void. With slow descent
A purple cloud came floating through the sky,
And poised at length within the circling trees,
Hung obvious to my view: till opening wide
Its lucid orb, a more than human form
Emerging leaned majestic over my head,
And instant thunder shook the conscious grove.
Then melted into air the liquid cloud,
And all the shining vision stood revealed.
A wreath of palm his ample forehead bound,
And over his shoulder, mantling to his knee,
Flowed the transparent robe, around his waist
Collected with a radiant zone of gold
Ethereal: there in mystic signs ingrav'd,
I read his office high and sacred name,
Genius of human kind. Appalled I gazed
The godlike presence; for athwart his brow
Displeasure, tempered with a mild concern,
Looked down reluctant on me, and his words
Like distant thunders broke the murmuring air.
Vain are thy thoughts, O child of mortal birth,
And impotent thy tongue. Is thy short span
Capacious of this universal frame?
Thy wisdom all-sufficient? Thou, alas!
Do thou aspire to judge between the lord
Of nature and his works? to lift thy voice
Against the sovereign order he decreed
All good and lovely? to blaspheme the bands
Of tenderness innate and social love,
Holiest of things! by which the general orb
Of being, as with adamantine links,
Was drawn to perfect union and sustained
From everlasting? Have thou felt the pangs
Of softening sorrow, of indignant zeal
So grievous to the soul, as thence to wish
The ties of nature broken from thy frame;
That so thy selfish, unrelenting heart
May cease to mourn its lot, no longer then
The wretched heir of evils not its own?
O fair benevolence of generous minds!
O man by nature formed for all mankind!
He spoke; abashed and silent I remained,
As conscious of my lips' offense, and awed
Before his presence, though my secret soul
Disdained the imputation. On the ground
I fixed my eyes; till from his airy couch
He stooped sublime, and touching with his hand
My dazzled forehead, Raise thy sight, he cried,
And let thy sense convince thy erring tongue.
I looked, and lo! the former scene was changed;
For verdant alleys and surrounding trees,
A solitary prospect, wide and wild,
Rushed on my senses. 'Twas a horrid pile
Of hills with many a shaggy forest mixed,
With many a sable cliff and glittering stream.
Aloft recumbent over the hanging ridge,
The brown woods waved, while ever-trickling springs
Washed from the naked roots of oak and pine,
The crumbling soil; and still at every fall
Down the steep windings of the channel'd rock,
Remurm'ring rushed the congregated floods
With hoarser inundation; till at last
They reached a grassy plain, which from the skirts
Of that high desert spread her verdant lap,
And drank the gushing moisture, where confined
In one smooth current, over the lilied vale
Clearer than glass it flowed. Autumnal spoils
Luxuriant spreading to the rays of morn,
Blushed over the cliffs, whose half-incircling mound
As in a sylvan theater enclosed
That flowery level. On the river's brink
I spied a fair pavilion, which diffused
Its floating umbrage 'mid the silver shade
Of osiers. Now the western sun revealed
Between two parting cliffs his golden orb,
And poured across the shadow of the hills,
On rocks and floods, a yellow stream of light
That cheered the solemn scene. My listening powers
Were awed, and every thought in silence hung,
And wondering expectation. Then the voice
Of that celestial power, the mystic show
Declaring, thus my deep attention called.
Inhabitant of earth, to whom is given Inhabitant of earth, etc.]
The account of the economy of providence here introduced, as the most proper
to calm and satisfy the mind, when under the compunction of private evils,
seems to have come originally from the Pythagorean school: but of all the
ancient philosophers, Plato has most largely insisted upon it, has established
it with all the strength of his capacious understanding, and ennobled it with
all the magnificence of his divine imagination. He has one passage so full and
clear on the head, that I am persuaded the reader will be pleased to see it
here, though somewhat long. Addressing himself to such as are not satisfied
concerning divine providence, The being who presides over the whole, says he,
has disposed and complicated all things for the happiness and virtue of the
whole, every part of which, according to the extent of its influence, does and
suffers what is fit and proper. One of these parts is yours, O unhappy man!
which though in itself most inconsiderable and minute, yet being connected with
the universe, ever seeks to cooperate with that supreme order. You in the mean
time are ignorant of the very end for which all particular natures are brought
into existence, that the all-comprehending nature of the whole may be perfect
and happy; existing, as it does, not for your sake, but the cause and reason of
your existence, which, as in the symmetry of every artificial work, must of
necessity concur with the general design of the artist, and be subservient to
the whole of which it is a part. Your complaint therefore is ignorant and
groundless; since according to the various energy of creation, and the common
laws of nature, there is a constant provision of that which is best at the same
time for you and for the whole. -- For the governing intelligence clearly
beholding all the actions of animated and selfmoving creatures, and that
mixture of good and evil which diversifies them, considering first of all by
what disposition of things, and what situation of each individual in the
general system, vice might be depressed and subdued, and virtue made secure of
victory and happiness with the greatest facility and in the highest degree
possible. In this manner he ordered through the entire circle of being, the
internal constitution of every mind, where should be its station in the
universal fabric, and through what variety of circumstances it should proceed in
the whole tenor of its existence. He goes on in his sublime manner to assert a
future state of retribution, as well for those who, by the exercise of good
dispositions being harmonized and assimilated to the divine virtue, are
consequently removed to a place of unblemished sanctity and happiness; as of
those who by the most flagitious arts have arisen from contemptible beginnings
to the greatest affluence and power, and whom therefore you look upon as
unanswerable instances of negligence in the Gods, because you are ignorant of
the purposes to which they are subservient, and in what manner they contribute
to that supreme intention of good to the whole. Plato de Leg. x. 16.

This theory has been delivered of late, especially abroad, in a manner which
subverts the freedom of human actions; whereas Plato appears very careful to
preserve it, and has been in that respect imitated by the best of his followers.



The gracious ways of providence to learn,
Receive my sayings with a steadfast ear --
Know then, the sovereign spirit of the world,
Though self-collected from eternal time,
Within his own deep essence he beheld
The circling bounds of happiness unite;
Yet by immense benignity inclined
To spread around him that primaeval joy
Which filled himself, he raised his plastic arm,
And sounded through the hollow depth of space
The strong, creative mandate. Strait arose
These heavenly orbs, the glad abodes of life
Effusive kindled by his breath divine
Through endless forms of being. Each inhal'd
From him its portion of the vital flame,
In measure such, that from the wide complex
Of coexistent orders, one might rise,
One order, all-involving and entire. -- one might rise,
One order, etc.]
See the meditations of Antoninus, and the characteristics, passim.



He too beholding in the sacred light
Of his essential reason, all the shapes
Of swift contingence, all successives ties
Of action propagated through the sum
Of possible existence, he at once,
Down the long series of eventful time,
So fixed the dates of being, so disposed,
To every living soul of every kind,
The field of motion and the hour of rest,
That all conspired to his supreme design,
To universal good: with full accord
Answ'ring the mighty model he had chose,
The best and fairest of unnumber'd worlds The best and fairest, etc.]
This opinion is so old, that Timaeus Locrus calls the supreme being, (...),
the artificer of that which is best; and represents him as resolving in the
beginning to produce the most excellent work, and as copying the world most
exactly from his own intelligible and essential idea; so that it yet remains,
as it was at first, perfect in beauty, and will never stand in need of any
correction or improvement. There is no room for a cauiton here, to understand
these expressions not of any particular circumstances of human life separately
considered, but of the sum or universal system of life and being. See also the
vision at the end of the Theodicee of Leibnitz.



That lay from everlasting in the store
Of his divine conceptions. Nor content,
By one exertion of creating power
His goodness to reveal; through every age,
Through every moment up the tract of time,
His parent-hand with ever-new increase
Of happiness and virtue has adorned
The vast harmonious frame: his parent-hand,
From mute shellfish gasping on the shore,
To men, to angels, to celestial minds,
For ever leads the generations on
To higher scenes of being; while supplied
From day to day by his enlivening breath,
Inferior orders in succession rise
To fill the void below. As flame ascends, As flame ascends, etc.
] This opinion, though not held by Plato or any of the ancients, is yet a very
natural consequence of his principles. But the disquisition is too complex and
extensive to be entered upon here.



As bodies to their proper center move,
As the poised ocean to the attracting moon
Obedient swells, and every headlong stream
Devolves its winding waters to the main;
So all things which have life aspire to GOD,
The sun of being, boundless, unimpair'd,
Center of souls! Nor does the faithful voice
Of nature cease to prompt their eager steps
Aright; nor is the care of heaven witheld
From granting to the task proportioned aid;
That in their stations all may persevere
To climb the ascent of being, and approach
For ever nearer to the life divine.
That rocky pile thou see, that verdant lawn
Fresh-water'd from the mountains. Let the scene
Paint in thy fancy the primaeval seat
Of man, and where the will supreme ordained
His mansion, that pavilion fair-diffus'd
Along the shady brink, in this recess
To wear the appointed season of his youth;
Till riper hours should open to his toil
The high communion of superior minds,
Of consecrated heroes and of gods.
Nor did the sire omnipotent forget
His tender bloom to cherish; nor witheld
Celestial footsteps from his green abode.
Often from the radiant honors of his throne,
He sent whom most he loved, the sovereign fair,
The effluence of his glory, whom he placed
Before his eyes for ever to behold;
The goddess from whose inspiration flows
The toil of patriots, the delight of friends;
Without whose work divine, in heaven or earth,
Naught lovely, naught propitious comes to pass,
Nor hope, nor praise, nor honor. Her the sire
Gave it in charge to rear the blooming mind,
The folded powers to open, to direct
The growth luxuriant of his young desires,
And from the laws of this majestic world
To teach him what was good. As thus the nymph
Her daily care attended, by her side
With constant steps her gay companion stayed,
The fair Euphrosyne, the gentle queen
Of smiles, and graceful gladness, and delights
That cheer alike the hearts of mortal men
And powers immortal. See the shining pair!
Behold, where from his dwelling now disclosed,
They quit their youthful charge and seek the skies.
I looked, and on the flowery turf there stood,
Between two radiant forms, a smiling youth
Whose tender cheeks displayed the vernal flower
Of beauty; sweetest innocence illum'd
His bashful eyes, and on his polished brow
Sat young simplicity. With fond regard
He viewed the associates, as their steps they moved;
The younger chief his ardent eyes detained,
With mild regret invoking her return.
Bright as the star of evening she appeared
Amid the dusky scene. Eternal youth
Over all her form its glowing honors breathed;
And smiles eternal, from her candid eyes,
Flowed like the dewy luster of the morn
Effusive trembling on the placid waves.
The spring of heaven had shed its blushing spoils
To bind her sable tresses: full diffused
Her yellow mantle floated in the breeze;
And in her hand she waved a living branch
Rich with immortal fruits, of power to calm
The wrathful heart, and from the bright'ning eyes
To chase the cloud of sadness. More sublime
The heavenly part'ner moved. The prime of age
Composed her steps. The presence of a god,
High on the circle of her brow enthroned,
From each majestic motion darted awe,
Devoted awe! till, cherished by her looks
Benevolent and meek, confiding love
To filial rapture softened all the soul.
Free in her graceful hand she poised the sword
Of chaste dominion. An heroic crown
Displayed the old simplicity of pomp
Around her honored head. A matron's robe,
White as the sunshine streams through vernal clouds,
Her stately form invested. Hand in hand
The immortal pair forsook the enameled green,
Ascending slowly. Rays of limpid light
Gleam'd round their path; celestial sounds were heard,
And through the fragrant air ethereal dews
Distilled around them; till at once the clouds
Disparting wide in midway sky, withdrew
Their airy veil, and left a bright expanse
Of empyrean flame, where spent and drowned,
Afflicted vision plunged in vain to scan
What object it involved. My feeble eyes
Endured not. Bending down to earth I stood,
With dumb attention. Soon a female voice,
As watery murmurs sweet, or warbling shades,
With sacred invocation thus began.
Father of gods and mortals! whose right arm
With reins eternal guides the moving heavens,
Bend thy propitious ear. Behold well-pleased
I seek to finish thy divine decree.
With frequent steps I visit yonder seat
Of man, thy offspring; from the tender seeds
Of justice and of wisdom, to evolve
The latent honors of his generous frame;
Till thy conducting hand shall raise his lot
From earth's dim scene to these ethereal walks,
The temple of thy glory. But not me,
Not my directing voice he often requires,
Or hears delighted: this enchanting maid,
The associate thou have given me, her alone
He loves, O father! absent, her he craves;
And but for her glad presence ever joined,
Rejoices not in mine: that all my hopes
This thy benignant purpose to fulfill,
I deem uncertain; and my daily cares
Unfruitful all and vain, unless by thee
Still farther aided in the work divine.
She ceased; a voice more awful thus replied.
O thou! in whom for ever I delight,
Fairer than all the inhabitants of heaven,
Best image of thy author! far from thee
Be disappointment, or distaste, or blame;
Who soon or late shall every work fulfill,
And no resistance find. Is man refuse
To hearken to thy dictates; or allured
By meaner joys, to any other power
Transfer the honors due to thee alone;
That joy which he pursues he never shall taste,
That power in whom delights never behold.
Go then once more, and happy be thy toil;
Go then! but let not this thy smiling friend
Partake thy footsteps. In her stead, behold!
With thee the son of Nemesis I send;
The fiend abhorred! whose vengeance takes account
Of sacred order's violated laws.
See where he calls thee, burning to be gone,
Fierce to exhaust the tempest of his wrath
On yon devoted head. But thou, my child,
Control his cruel frenzy, and protect
Thy tender charge. That when despair shall grasp
His agonizing bosom, he may learn,
Then he may learn to love the gracious hand
Alone sufficient in that hour of ill,
To save his feeble spirit; then confess
Thy genuine honors, O excelling fair!
When all the plagues that wait the deadly will
Of this avenging demon, all the storms
Of night infernal, serve but to display
The energy of thy superior charms
With mildest awe triumphant over his rage,
And shining clearer in the horrid gloom.
Here ceased that awful voice, and soon I felt
The cloudy curtain of refreshing eve
Was closed once more, from that immortal fire
Sheltering my eyelids. Looking up, I viewed
A vast gigantic spectre striding on
Through murmuring thunders and a waste of clouds,
With dreadful action. Black as night his brow
Relentless frowns involved. His savage limbs
With sharp impatience violent he writhed,
As through convulsive anguish; and his hand
Armed with a scorpion-lash, full often he raised
In madness to his bosom; while his eyes
Rained bitter tears, and bellowing loud he shook
The void with horror. Silent by his side
The virgin came. No discomposure stirred
Her features. From the glooms which hung around,
No stain of darkness mingled with the beam
Of her divine effulgence. Now they stoop
Upon the river-bank; and now to hail
His wonted guests, with eager steps advanced
The unsuspecting inmate of the shade.
As when a famished wolf, that all night long
Had ranged the Alpine snows, by chance at morn
Sees from a cliff incumbent over the smoke
Of some lone village, a neglected kid
That strays along the wild for herb or spring;
Down from the winding ridge he sweeps amain,
And thinks he tears him: so with tenfold rage,
The monster sprung remorseless on his prey.
Amazed the stripling stood; with panting breast
Feebly he poured the lamentable wail
Of helpless consternation, struck at once,
And rooted to the ground. The queen beheld
His terror, and with looks of tenderest care
Advanced to save him. Soon the tyrant felt
Her awful power. His keen, tempestuous arm
Hung nerveless, nor descended where his rage
Had aimed the deadly blow: then dumb retired
With sullen rancour. Lo! the sovereign maid
Folds with a mother's arms the fainting boy,
Till life rekindles in his rosy cheek;
Then grasps his hand, and chears him with her tongue.
O wake thee, rouse thy spirit! Shall the spite
Of yon tormentor thus appall thy heart,
While I, thy friend and guardian, am at hand
To rescue and to heal? O let thy soul
Remember, what the will of heaven ordains
Is ever good for all; and if for all,
Then good for thee. Nor only by the warmth
And soothing sunshine of delightful things,
Do minds grow up and flourish. Often misled
By that blind light, the young unpracticed views
Of reason wander through a fatal road,
Far from their native aim: as if to lie
Inglorious in the fragrant shade, and wait
The soft access of ever-circling joys,
Were all the end of being. Ask thyself,
This pleasing error did it never lull
Thy wishes? Has thy constant heart refused
The silken fetters of delicious ease?
Or when divine Euphrosyne appeared
Within this dwelling, did not thy desires
Hang far below that measure of thy fate,
Which I revealed before thee? and thy eyes,
Impatient of my counsels, turn away
To drink the soft effusion of her smiles?
Know then, for this the everlasting ^ire
Deprives thee of her presence, and instead,
O wise and still benevolent! ordains
This horrid visage hither to pursue
My steps; that so thy nature may discern
Its real good, and what alone can save
Thy feeble spirit in this hour of ill
From folly and despair. O yet beloved!
Let not this headlong terror quite overwhelm
Thy scattered powers; nor fatal deem the rage
Of this tormentor, nor his proud assault,
While I am here to vindicate thy toil,
Above the generous question of thy arm.
Brave by thy fears, and in thy weakness strong,
This hour he triumphs; but confront his might,
And dare him to the combat, then with ease
Disarmed and quelled, his fierceness he resigns
To bondage and to scorn: while thus inured
By watchful danger, by unceasing toil,
The immortal mind, superior to his fate,
Amid the outrage of external things,
Firm as the solid base of this great world,
Rests on his own foundations. Blow, ye winds!
Ye waves! ye thunders! roll your tempest on;
Shake, ye old pillars of the marble sky!
Till all its orbs and all its worlds of fire
Be loosened from their seats; yet still serene,
The unconquered mind looks down upon the wreck,
And ever stronger as the storms advance,
Firm through the closing ruin holds his way,
Where nature calls him to the destined goal.
So spoke the goddess; while through all her frame
Celestial raptures flowed, in every word,
In every motion kindling wrath divine
To seize who listened. Vehement and swift
As lightning fires the aromatic shade
In Ethiopian fields, the stripling felt
Her inspiration catch his fervid soul,
And starting from his languor thus exclaimed.
Then let the trial come! and witness thou,
If terror be upon me; if I shrink
To meet the storm, or faulter in my strength
When hardest it besets me. Do not think
That I am fearful and infirm of soul,
As late thy eyes beheld: for thou have changed
My nature; thy commanding voice has waked
My languid powers to bear me boldly on,
Wherever the will divine my path ordains
Through toil or peril: only do not thou
Forsake me; O be thou for ever near,
That I may listen to thy sacred voice,
And guide by thy decrees my constant feet.
But say, for ever are my eyes bereft?
Say, shall the fair Euphrosyne not once
Appear again to charm me? Thou, in heaven!
O thou eternal arbiter of things!
Be thy great bidding done: for who am I
To question thy appointment? Let the frowns
Of this avenger every morn overcast
The cheerful dawn, and every evening damp
With double night my dwelling; I will learn
To hail them both, and unrepining bear
His hateful presence: but permit my tongue
One glad request, and if my deeds may find
Thy awful eye propitious, O restore
The rosy-featur'd maid; again to cheer
This lonely seat, and bless me with her smiles.
He spoke; when instant, through the sable glooms
With which that furious presence had involved
The ambient air, a flood of radiance came
Swift as the light'ning-flash; the melting clouds
Flew diverse, and amid the blue serene
Euphrosyne appeared. With sprightly step
The nymph alighted on the irriguous lawn,
And to her wondering audience thus begun.
Lo! I am here to answer to your vows,
And be the meeting fortunate! I come
With joyful tidings; we shall part no more --
Hark! how the gentle Echo from her cell
Talks through the cliffs, and murmuring over the stream
Repeats the accent; we shall part no more.
O my delightful friends! well-pleased on high
The father has beheld you, while the might
Of that stern foe with bitter trial proved
Your equal doings: then for ever spoke
The high decree: that thou, celestial maid!
However that griesly phantom on thy steps
May sometimes dare intrude, yet never more
Shall thou descending to the abode of man,
Alone endure the rancour of his arm,
Or leave thy loved Euphrosyne behind.
She ended; and the whole romantic scene
Immediate vanished: rocks, and woods, and rills,
The mantling tent, and each mysterious form
Flew like the pictures of a morning dream,
When sunshine fills the bed. A while I stood
Perplexed and giddy; till the radiant power
Who bade the visionary landscape rise,
As up to him I turned, with gentlest looks
Preventing my inquiry, thus began.
There let thy soul acknowledge its complaint
How blind, how impious! There behold the ways
Of heaven's eternal destiny to man,
For ever just, benevolent and wise:
That VIRTUE'S awful steps, however pursued
By vexing fortune and intrusive PAIN,
Should never be divided from her chaste,
Her fair attendant, PLEASURE. Need I urge
Thy tardy thought through all the various round
Of this existence, that thy softening soul
At length may learn what energy the hand
Of virtue mingles in the bitter tide
Of passion swelling with distress and pain,
To mitigate the sharp with gracious drops
Of cordial pleasure? Ask the faithful youth,
Why the cold urn of her whom long he loved
So often fills his arms; so often draws
His lonely footsteps at the silent hour,
To pay the mournful tribute of his tears?
O! he will tell thee, that the wealth of worlds
Should never seduce his bosom to forego
That sacred hour, when stealing from the noise
Of care and envy, sweet remembrance sooths
With virtue's kindest looks his aching breast,
And turns his tears to rapture -- Ask the crowd
Which flies impatient from the village-walk
To climb the neighboring cliffs, when far below
The cruel winds have hurled upon the coast
Some helpless bark; while sacred pity melts
The general eye, or terror's icy hand
Smites their distorted limbs and horrent hair;
While every mother closer to her breast
Catches her child, and pointing where the waves
Foam through the shattered vessel, shrieks aloud
As one poor wretch that spreads his piteous arms
For succor, swallowed by the roaring surge,
As now another, dashed against the rock,
Drops lifeless down: O deemest thou indeed
No kind indearment here by nature given
To mutual terror and compassion's tears?
No sweetly-melting softness which attracts,
Over all that edge of pain, the social powers
To this their proper action and their end?
-- Ask thy own heart; when at the midnight hour,
Slow through that studious gloom thy pausing eye
Led by the glimmering taper moves around
The sacred volumes of the dead: the songs
Of Grecian bards, and records wrote by fame
For Grecian heroes, where the present power
Of heaven and earth surveys the immortal page,
Even as a father blessing, while he reads,
The praises of his son. If then thy soul,
Spurning the yoke of these inglorious days,
Mix in their deeds and kindle with their flame;
Say, when the prospect blackens on thy view,
When rooted from the base, heroic states
Mourn in the dust and tremble at the frown
Of cursed ambition; when the pious band -- when the pious band, etc.]
The reader will here naturally recollect the fate of the sacred battalion of
Thebes, which at the battle of Chaeronea was utterly destroyed, every man being
found lying dead by his friend.



Of youths who fought for freedom and their sires,
Lie side by side in gore; when ruffian-pride
Usurps the throne of justice, turns the pomp
Of public power, the majesty of rule,
The sword, the laurel, and the purple robe,
To slavish empty pageants, to adorn
A tyrant's walk, and glitter in the eyes
Of such as bow the knee; when honored urns
Of patriots and of chiefs, the awful bust
And storied arch, to glut the coward-rage
Of regal envy, strew the public way
With hallowed ruins; when the muse's haunt,
The marble porch where wisdom wont to talk
With Socrates or Tully, hears no more,
Save the hoarse jargon of contentious monks,
Or female superstition's midnight prayer;
When ruthless rapine from the hand of time
Tears the destroying scythe, with surer blow
To sweep the works of glory from their base;
Till desolation over the grass-grown street
Expands his raven-wings, and up the wall,
Where senates once the price of monarchs doomed,
Hisses the gliding snake through hoary weeds
That clasp the mouldering column; thus defaced,
Thus widely mournful when the prospect thrills
Thy beating bosom, when the patriot's tear
Starts from thine eye, and thy extended arm
In fancy hurls the thunderbolt of Jove
To fire the impious wreath on Philip's Philip.]
The Macedonian.


brow,
Or dash Octavius from the trophied car;
Say, does thy secret soul repine to taste
The big distress? Or would thou then exchange
Those heart-ennobling sorrows for the lot
Of him who sits amid the gaudy herd
Of mute barbarians bending to his nod,
And bears aloft his gold-invested front,
And says within himself, "I am a king,
" And wherefore should the clamorous voice of woe
" Intrude upon mine ear? -- The baleful dreggs
Of these late ages, this inglorious draught
Of servitude and folly, have not yet,
Blessed be the eternal ruler of the world!
Defiled to such a depth of sordid shame
The native honors of the human soul,
Nor so effaced the image of its sire.
End of the SECOND BOOK.
THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK the THIRD.
ARGUMENT of the THIRD BOOK.
PLEASURE in observing the tempers and manners of men, even where vicious or
absurd; v. 1. to 14. The origin of vice, from false representations of the
fancy, producing false opinions concerning good and evil; v. 14. to 62. Inquiry
into ridicule; v. 73. The general sources of ridicule in the minds and
characters of men, enumerated; v. 14. to 240. Final cause of the sense of
ridicule; v. 263. The resemblance of certain aspects of inanimate things to the
sensations and properties of the mind; v. 282, to 311. The operations of the
mind in the production of the works of imagination, described; v. 358, to 414.
The secondary pleasure from imitation; to v. 436. The benevolent order of the
world illustrated in the arbitrary connection of these pleasures with the
objects which excite them; v. 458, to 514. The nature and conduct of taste; v.
515, to 567. Concluding with an account of the natural and moral advantages
resulting from a sensible and well-form'd imagination.

THE PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION.
BOOK the THIRD.
WHAT wonder therefore, since th'indearing ties
Of passion link the universal kind
Of man so close, what wonder if to search
This common nature through the various change
Of sex, and age, and fortune, and the frame
Of each peculiar, draw the busy mind
With unresisted charms? The spacious west,
And all the teeming regions of the south
Hold not a quarry, to the curious flight
Of knowledge, half so tempting or so fair,
As man to man. Nor only where the smiles
Of love invite; nor only where the applause
Of cordial honor turns the attentive eye
On virtue's graceful deeds. For since the course
Of things external acts in different ways
On human apprehensions, as the hand
Of nature tempered to a different frame
Peculiar minds; so happily where the powers
Of fancy neither lessen nor enlarge -- where the powers
Of fancy, etc.]
The influence of the imagination on the conduct of life is one of the most
important points in moral philosophy. It were easy by an induction of facts to
prove that the imagination directs almost all the passions, and mixes with
almost every circumstance of action or pleasure. Let any man, even of the
coldest head and soberest industry, analyze the idea of what he calls his
interest; he will find that it consists chiefly of certain images of decency,
beauty and order, variously combined into one system, the idol which he seeks
to enjoy by labor, hazard, and self-denial. It is on this account of the last
consequence to regulate these images by the standard of nature and the general
good; otherwise the imagination, by heightening some objects beyond their real
excellence and beauty, or by representing others in a more odious or terrible
shape than they deserve, may of course engage us in pursuits utterly
inconsistent with the laws of the moral order.

If it be objected, that this account of things supposes the passions to be
merely accidental, whereas there appears in some a natural and hereditary
disposition to certain passions prior to all circumstances of education or
fortune; it may be answered, that though no man is born ambitious or a miser, yet
he may inherit from his parents a peculiar temper or complexion of mind, which
shall render his imagination more liable to be struck with some particular
objects, consequently dispose him to form opinions of good and ill, and
entertain passions of a particular turn. Some men, for instance, by the
original frame of their minds, are more delighted with the vast and
magnificent, others on the contrary with the elegant and gentle aspects of
nature. And it is very remarkable, that the disposition of the moral powers is
always similar to this of the imagination; that those who are most inclined to
admire prodigious and sublime objects in the physical world, are also most
inclined to applaud examples of fortitude and heroic virtue in the moral. While
those who are charmed rather with the delicacy and sweetness of colors, and
forms, and sounds, never fail in like manner to yield the preference to the
softer scenes of virtue and the sympathies of a domestic life. And this is
sufficient to account for the objection.

Among the ancient philosophers, though we have several hints concerning this
influence of the imagination upon morals among the remains of the Socratic
school, yet the Stoics were the first who paid it a due attention. Zeno, their
founder, thought it impossible to preserve any tolerable regularity in life,
without frequently inspecting those pictures or appearances of things which the
imagination offers to the mind. ( Diog. Laert. l. vii.) The meditations of M.
Aurelius, and the discourses of Epictetus, are full of the same sentiments;
insomuch that this latter makes the (...), or right management of the fancys,
the only thing for which we are accountable to providence, and without which a
man is no other than stupid or frantic. Arrian. l. i. c. 12. and l. ii. c. 22.
See also the Characteristics, vol. 1. from p. 313, to p. 321. where this
Stoical doctrine is embellished with all the eloquence and graces of Plato.



The images of things, but paint in all
Their genuine hues, the features which they wore
In nature; there opinion will be true,
And action right. For action treads the path
In which opinion says he follows good,
Or flies from evil; and opinion gives
Report of good or evil, as the scene
Was drawn by fancy, lovely or deformed:
Thus her report can never there be true,
Where fancy cheats the intellectual eye,
With glaring colors and distorted lines.
Is there a man, who at the sound of death,
Sees ghastly shapes of terror conjured up,
And black before him; naught but deathbed groans,
And fearful prayers, and plunging from the brink
Of light and being, down the gloomy air,
An unknown depth? Alas! in such a mind,
If no bright forms of excellence attend
The image of his country; nor the pomp
Of sacred senates, nor the guardian voice
Of justice on her throne, nor aught that wakes
The conscious bosom with a patriot's flame;
Will not opinion tell him, that to die,
Or stand the hazard, is a greater ill
Than to betray his country? And in act
Will he not choose to be a wretch and live?
Here vice begins then. From the enchanting cup
Which fancy holds to all, the unwary thirst
Of youth often swallows a Circaean draught,
That sheds a baleful tincture over the eye
Of reason, till no longer he discerns,
And only guides to err. Then revel forth
A furious band that spurn him from the throne;
And all is uproar. Thus ambition grasps
The empire of the soul: thus pale revenge
Unsheaths her murderous dagger; and the hands
Of lust and rapine, with unholy arts,
Watch to o'erturn the barrier of the laws
That keeps them from their prey: thus all the plagues
The wicked bear, or over the trembling scene
The tragic muse discloses, under shapes
Of honor, safety, pleasure, ease or pomp,
Stole first into the mind. Yet not by all
Those lying forms which fancy in the brain
Engenders, are the kindling passions driven
To guilty deeds; nor reason bound in chains,
That vice alone may lord it: often adorned
With solemn pageants, folly mounts his throne,
And plays her ideot-anticks, like a queen.
A thousand garbs she wears; a thousand ways
She wheels her giddy empire. -- Lo! thus far
With bold adventure, to the Mantuan lyre
I sing of nature's charms, and touch well-pleased
A stricter note: now happily must my song
Unbend her serious measure, and reveal
In lighter strains, how folly's awkward arts -- how folly's awkward arts, etc.]
Notwithstanding the general influence of ridicule on private and civil life,
as well as on learning and the sciences, it has been almost constantly
neglected or misrepresented, by divines especially. The manner of treating
these subjects in the science of human nature, should be precisely the same as
in natural philosophy; from particular facts to investigate the stated order in
which they appear, and then apply the general law, thus discovered, to the
explication of other appearances and the improvement of useful arts.



Excite impetuous laughter's gay rebuke;
The sportive province of the comic muse.
See! in what crowds the uncouth forms advance,
Each would outstrip the other, each prevent
Our careful search, and offer to your gaze,
Unasked, his motley features. Wait awhile,
My curious friends! and let us first arrange
In proper orders your promiscuous throng.
Behold the foremost band; of slender thought, Behold the foremost band, etc.
] The first and most general source of ridicule in the characters of men, is
vanity or self-applause for some desirable quality or possession which
evidently does not belong to those who assume it.



And easy faith; whom flattering fancy sooths
With lying specter, in themselves to view
Illustrious forms of excellence and good,
That scorn the mansion. With exulting hearts
They spread their spurious treasures to the sun;
And bid the world admire! but chief the glance
Of wishful envy draws their joy-bright eyes,
And lists with self-applause each lordly brow.
In number boundless as the blooms of spring,
Behold their glaring idols, empty shades
By fancy gilded over, and then set up
For adoration. Some in learning's garb,
With formal band and sable-cinctur'd gown,
And rags of moldy volumes. Some elate
With martial splendor, steely pikes, and swords
Of costly frame, and gay Phoenician robes
Inwrought with flow'ring gold, assume the port
Of stately valor: listening by his side
There stands a female form; to her, with looks
Of earnest import, pregnant with amaze,
He talks of deadly deeds, of breaches, storms,
And sulfurous mines, and ambush: then at once
Breaks off, and smiles to see her look so pale,
And asks some wondering question of her fears.
Others of graver mien; behold, adorned
With holy ensigns, how sublime they move,
And bending often their sanctimonious eyes,
Take homage of the simple-minded throng;
Ambassadors of heaven! Nor much unlike
Is he whose visage, in the lazy mist
That mantles every feature, hides a brood
Of politic conceits; of whispers, nods,
And hints deep-omen'd with unwieldy schemes,
And dark portents of state. Ten thousand more,
Prodigious habits and tumultuous tongues,
Pour dauntless in and swell the boastful band.
Then comes the second order; all who seek Then comes the second order, etc.
] Ridicule from the same vanity, where though the possession be real, yet no
merit can arise from it, because of some particular circumstances, which, though
obvious to the spectator, are yet overlooked by the ridiculous character.



The debt of praise, where watchful unbelief
Darts through the thin pretense her squinting eye
On some retired appearance which belies
The boasted virtue, or annulls the applause
That justice else would pay. Here side by side
I see two leaders of the solemn train,
Approaching: one a female, old and gray,
With eyes demure and wrinkle-furrow'd brow,
Pale as the cheeks of death; yet still she stuns
The sickning audience with a nauseous tale;
How many youths her myrtle chains have worn,
How many virgins at her triumphs pined!
Yet how resolved she guards her cautious heart;
Such is her terror at the risques of love,
And man's seducing tongue! The other seems
A bearded sage, ungentle in his mien,
And sordid all his habit; peevish want
Grins at his heels, while down the gazing throng
He stalks, resounding in magnific phrase
The vanity of riches, the contempt
Of pomp and power. Be prudent in your zeal,
Ye grave associates! let the silent grace
Of her who blushes at the fond regard
Her charms inspire, more eloquent unfold
The praise of spotless honor: let the man
Whose eye regards not his illustrious pomp
And ample store, but as indulgent streams
To cheer the barren soil and spread the fruits
Of joy, let him by juster measure fix
The price of riches and the end of power.
Another tribe succeeds; deluded long Another tribe succeeds, etc.
] Ridicule from a notion of excellence in particular objects disproportioned to
their intrinsic value, and inconsistent with the order of nature.



By fancy's dazzling optics, these behold
The images of some peculiar things
With brighter hues resplendent, and portray'd
With features nobler far than ever adorned
Their genuine objects. Hence the fever'd heart
Pants with delirious hope for tinsel charms;
Hence often obtrusive on the eye of scorn,
Untimely zeal her witless pride betrays;
And serious manhood, from the towering aim
Of wisdom, stoops to emulate the boast
Of childish toil. Behold yon mystic form,
Bedecked with feathers, insects, weeds and shells!
Not with intenser brow the Samian sage
Bent his fixed eye on heaven's eternal fires,
When first the order of that radiant scene
Swelled his exulting thought, than this surveys
A muckworm's entrails or a spider's fang.
Next him a youth, with flowers and myrtles crowned,
Attends that virgin form, and blushing kneels,
With fondest gesture and a suppliant's tongue,
To win her coy regard: adieu, for him,
The dull engagements of the bustling world!
Adieu the sick impertinence of praise!
And hope, and action! for with her alone,
By streams and shades, to steal the sighing hours,
Is all he asks, and all that fate can give!
Thee too, facetious Momion, wandering here,
Thee, dreaded censor! often have I beheld
Bewildered unawares: alas! too long
Flushed with thy comic triumphs and the spoils
Of sly derision! till on every side
Hurling thy random bolts, offended truth
Assigned thee here thy station with the slaves
Of folly. Thy once formidable name
Shall grace her humble records, and be heard
In scoffs and mock'ry bandied from the lips
Of all the vengeful brotherhood around,
So often the patient victims of thy scorn.
But now, ye gay! to whom indulgent fate, But now ye gay, etc.
] Ridicule from a notion of excellence, where the object is absolutely odious
or contemptible. This is the highest degree of the ridiculous; as in the
affectation of diseases or vices.



Of all the muse's empire has assigned
The fields of folly, hither each advance
Your sickles; here the teeming soil affords
Its richest growth. A favorite brood appears;
In whom the demon, with a mother's joy,
Views all her charms reflected, all her cares
At full repaid. Ye most illustrious band!
Who scorning reason's tame, pedantic rules,
And order's vulgar bondage, never meant
For souls sublime as yours, with generous zeal
Pay vice the reverence virtue long usurped,
And yield deformity the fond applause
Which beauty wont to claim; forgive my song,
That for the blushing diffidence of youth,
It shuns the unequal province of your praise.
Thus far triumphant in the pleasing guile Thus far triumphant, etc.]
Ridicule from false shame or groundless fear.



Of bland imagination, folly's train
Have dared our search: but now a dastard-kind
Advance reluctant, and with fault'ring feet
Shrink from the gazer's eye: infeebled hearts,
Whom fancy chills with visionary fears,
Or bends to servile tameness with conceits
Of shame, of evil, or of base defect,
Fantastic and delusive. Here the slave
Who droops abashed when sullen pomp surveys
His humbler habit: here the trembling wretch
Unnerv'd and froze with terror's icy bolts
Spent in weak wailings, drowned in shameful tears,
At every dream of danger: here subdued
By frontless laughter and the hardy scorn
Of old, unfeeling vice, the abject soul
Who blushing half resigns the candid praise
Of temperance and honor; half disowns
A freeman's hatred of tyrannic pride;
And hears with sickly smiles the venal mouth
With foulest license mock the patriot's name.
Last of the motley bands on whom the power Last of the, etc.
Ridicule from the ignorance of such things as our circumstances require us to
know.



Of gay derision bends her hostile aim,
Is that where shameful ignorance presides.
Beneath her sordid banners, lo! they march,
Like blind and lame. Whatever their doubtful hands
Attempt, confusion strait appears behind,
And troubles all the work. Through many a maze,
Perplexed they struggle, changing every path,
O'erturning every purpose; then at last
Sit down dismayed, and leave th'entangled scene
For scorn to sport with. Such then is th'abode
Of folly in the mind; and such the shapes
In which she governs her obsequious train.
Though every scene of ridicule in things
To lead the tenor of my devious lay;
Through every swift occasion, which the hand
Of laughter points at, when the mirthful sting
Distends her sallying nerves and choaks her tongue;
What were it but to count each crystal drop
Which morning's dewy fingers on the blooms
Of May distill? Suffice it to have said, -- suffice it to have said, etc.]
By comparing these general sources of ridicule with each other, and examining
the ridiculous in other objects, we may obtain a general definition of it
equally applicable to every species. The most important circumstance of this
definition is laid down in the lines referred to; but others more minute we
shall subjoin here. Aristotle's account of the matter seems both imperfect and
false; (...), says he, (...): the ridiculous is some certain fault or turpitude
without pain, and not destructive to its subject. ( Poetic. c. v.) For allowing
it to be true, as it is not, that the ridiculous is never accompanied with
pain, yet we might produce many instances of such a fault or turpitude which
cannot with any tolerable propriety be called ridiculous. So that the
definition does not distinguish the thing defined. Nay farther, even when we
perceive the turpitude tending to the destruction of its subject, we may still
be sensible of a ridiculous appearance, till the ruin become imminent and the
keener sensations of pity or terror banish the ludicrous apprehension from our
minds. For the sensation of ridicule is not a bare perception of the agreement
or disagreement of ideas; but a passion or emotion of the mind consequential to
that perception. So that the mind may perceive the agreement or disagreement,
and yet not feel the ridiculous, because it is engrossed by a more violent
emotion. Thus it happens that some men think those objects ridiculous, to which
others cannot endure to apply the name; because in them they excite a much
intenser and more important feeling. And this difference, among other causes,
has brought a good deal of confusion into this question.

That which makes objects ridiculous is some ground of admiration or esteem
connected with other more general circumstances, comparatively worthless or
deformed; or it is some circumstance of turpitude or deformity connected with
what is in general excellent or beautiful: the inconsistent properties existing
either in the objects themselves, or in the apprehension of the person to whom
they relate; belonging always to the same order or class of being, implying
sentiment or design; and exciting no acute or vehement emotion of the heart.

To prove the several parts of this definition: The appearance of excellence or
beauty connected with a general condition comparatively sordid or deformed, is
ridiculous; for instance, pompous pretensions to wisdom joined with ignorance
and folly in the Socrates of Aristophanes; and the applause of military glory
with cowardice and stupidity in the Thraso of Terence.

The appearance of deformity or turpitude in conjunction with what is in
general excellent or venerable, is also ridiculous: for instance, the personal
weaknesses of a magistrate appearing in the solemn and public functions of his
station.

The incongruous properties may either exist in the objects themselves, or in
the apprehension of the person to whom they relate: in the last-mention'd
instances they both exist in the objects; in the instance from Aristophanes and
Terence, one of them is objective and real, the other only founded in the
apprehension of the ridiculous character.

The inconsistent properties must belong to the same order or class of being. A
coxcomb in fine clothes bedaubed by accident in foul weather, is a ridiculous
object; because his general apprehension of excellence and esteem is referred
to the splendor and expense of his dress. A man of sense and merit in the same
circumstances, is not counted ridiculous; because the general ground of
excellence and esteem in him, is, both in fact and in his own apprehension, of
a very different species.

Every ridiculous object implies sentiment or design. A column placed by an
architect without a capital or base, is laughed at: the same column in a ruin
causes a very different sensation.

And lastly, the occurrence must excite no acute or vehement emotion of the
heart, such as terror, pity, or indignation; for in that case, as was observed
above, the mind is not at leisure to contemplate the ridiculous.

Whether any appearance not ridiculous be involved in this description, and
whether it comprehend every species and form of the ridiculous, must be
determined by repeated applications of it to particular instances.



Wherever the power of ridicule displays
Her quaint-ey'd visage, some incongruous form,
Some stubborn dissonance of things combined,
Strikes on the quick observer: whether pomp,
Or praise, or beauty mix their partial claim
Where sordid fashions, where ignoble deeds,
Where foul deformity are wont to dwell,
Or whether these with violation loathed,
Invade resplendent pomp's imperious mien,
The charms of beauty, or the boast of praise.
Ask we for what fair end, Ask we for what fair end, etc.]
Since it is beyond all contradiction evident that we have a natural sense or
feeling of the ridiculous, and since so good a reason may be assigned to
justify the supreme being for bestowing it; one cannot without astonishment
reflect on the conduct of those men who imagine it is for the service of true
religion to vilify and blacken it without distinction, and endeavor to
persuade us that it is never applied but in a bad cause. Ridicule is not
concerned with mere speculative truth or falsehood. It is not in abstract
propositions or theorems, but in actions and passions, good and evil, beauty
and deformity, that we find materials for it; and all these terms are relative,
implying approbation or blame. To ask then whether ridicule be a test of truth,
is, in other words, to ask whether that which is ridiculous can be morally
true, can be just and becoming; or whether that which is just and becoming, can
be ridiculous. A question that does not deserve a serious answer. For it is
most evident, that as in a metaphysical proposition offered to the
understanding for its assent, the faculty of reason examines the terms of the
proposition, and finding one idea which was supposed equal to another, to be in
fact unequal, of consequence rejects the proposition as a falsehood: so in
objects offered to the mind for its esteem or applause, the faculty of ridicule
feeling an incongruity in the claim, urges the mind to reject it with laughter
and contempt. When therefore we observe such a claim obtruded upon mankind, and
the inconsistent circumstances carefully concealed from the eye of public, it
is our business, if the matter be of importance to society, to drag out those
latent circumstances, and by setting them full in view, convince the world how
ridiculous the claim is; and thus a double advantage is gained; for we both
detect the moral falsehood sooner than in the way of speculative inquiry, and
impress the minds of men with a stronger sense of the vanity and error of its
authors. And this and no more is meant by the application of ridicule.

But it is said, the practice is dangerous, and may be inconsistent with the
regard we owe to objects of real dignity and excellence. I answer, the practice
fairly managed can never be dangerous; men may be dishonest in obtruding
circumstances foreign to the object, and we may be inadvertent in allowing
those circumstances to impose upon us; but the sense of ridicule always judges
right: the Socrates of Aristophanes is as truly ridiculous a character as ever
was drawn. -- True; but it is not the character of Socrates, the divine
moralist and father of ancient wisdom. What then? did the ridicule of the poet
hinder the philosopher from detecting and disclaiming those foreign
circumstances which he had falsely introduced into his character, and thus
rendering the satirist doubly ridiculous in his turn? No: but it nevertheless
had an ill influence on the minds of the people. And so has the reasoning of
Spinoza made many atheists; he has founded it indeed on suppositions utterly
false, but allow him these, and his conclusions are unavoidably true. And if we
must reject the use of ridicule, because by the imposition of false
circumstances, things may be made to seem ridiculous, which are not so in
themselves; why we ought not in the same manner to reject the use of reason,
because by proceeding on false principles, conclusions will appear true which
are impossible in nature, let the vehement and obstinate declaimers against
ridicule determine.


the almighty sire
In mortal bosoms wakes this gay contempt,
These grateful stings of laughter, from disgust
Educing pleasure? Wherefore, but to aid
The tardy steps of reason, and at once
By this prompt impulse urge us to depress
The giddy aims of folly? Though the light
Of truth slow-dawning on the inquiring mind,
At length unfolds, through many a subtle tie,
How these uncouth disorders end at last
In public evil; yet benignant heaven
Conscious how dim the dawn of truth appears
To thousands; conscious what a scanty pause
From labors and from care, the wider lot
Of humble life affords for studious thought
To scan the maze of nature; therefore stamped
The glaring scenes with characters of scorn,
As broad, as obvious to the passing clown,
As to the lettered sage's curious eye.
Such are the various aspects of the mind --
Some heavenly genius, whose unclouded thoughts
Attain that secret harmony which blends
The ethereal spirit with its mold of clay;
O! teach me to reveal the grateful charm
That searchless nature over the sense of man
Diffuses, to behold, in lifeless things,
The inexpressive semblance The inexpressive semblance, etc.]
This similitude is the foundation of almost all the ornaments of poetic
diction.


of himself,
Of thought and passion. Mark the sable woods
That shade sublime yon mountain's nodding brow;
With what religious awe the solemn scene
Commands your steps! as if the reverend form
Of Minos or of Numa should forsake
The Elysian seats, and down the imbow'ring glade
Move to your pausing eye! Behold the expanse
Of yon gay landscape, where the silver clouds
Flit over the heavens before the sprightly breeze:
Now their gray cincture skirts the doubtful sun;
Now streams of splendour, through their opening veil
Effulgent, sweep from off the gilded lawn
The aerial shadows; on the curling brook,
And on the shady margin's quivering leaves
With quickest luster glancing: while you view
The prospect, say, within your cheerful breast
Plays not the lively sense of winning mirth
With clouds and sunshine checkered, while the round
Of social converse, to the inspiring tongue
Of some gay nymph amid her subject-train,
Moves all obsequious? Whence is this effect,
This kindred power of such discordant things?
Or flows their semblance from that mystic tone
To which the newborn mind's harmonious powers
At first were strung? Or rather from the links
Which artful custom twines around her frame?
For when the different images of things
By chance combined, have struck the attentive soul
With deeper impulse, or connected long,
Have drawn her frequent eye; however distinct
The external scenes, yet often the ideas gain
From that conjunction an eternal tie,
And sympathy unbroken. Let the mind
Recall one partner of the various league,
Immediate, lo! the firm confed'rates rise,
And each his former station strait resumes:
One movement governs the consenting throng,
And all at once with rosy pleasure shine,
Or all are sadden'd with the glooms of care.
'Twas thus, if ancient fame the truth unfold,
Two faithful needles, from the informing touch Two faithful needles, etc.]
See the elegant poem recited by Cardinal Bembo in the character of Lucretius;
Strada Prolus. vi. Academ. 2. c. 5.



Of the same parent-stone, together drew
Its mystic virtue, and at first conspired
With fatal impulse quivering to the pole;
Then, though disjoined by kingdoms, though the main
Rolled its broad surge betwixt, and different stars
Beheld their wakeful motions, yet preserved
The former friendship, and remembered still
The alliance of their birth: whatever the line
Which one possessed, nor pause, nor quiet knew
The sure associate, ere with trembling speed
He found its path and fixed unerring there.
Such is the secret union, when we feel
A song, a flower, a name at once restore
Those long-connected scenes where first they moved
The attention; backward through her mazy walks
Guiding the wanton fancy to her scope,
To temples, courts or fields; with all the band
Of painted forms, of passions and designs
Attendant: whence, if pleasing in itself,
The prospect from that sweet accession gains
Redoubled influence over the listening mind.
By these mysterious ties the busy power By these mysterious ties, etc.]
The act of remembering seems almost wholly to depend on the association of
ideas.



Of memory her ideal train preserves
Entire; or when they would elude her watch,
Reclaims their fleeting footsteps from the waste
Of dark oblivion; thus collecting all
The various forms of being to present,
Before the curious aim of mimic art,
Their largest choice: like spring's unfolded blooms
Exhaling sweetness, that the skillful be
May taste at will, from their selected spoils
To work her dulcet food. For not the expanse
Of living lakes in summer's noontide calm,
Reflects the bord'ring shade and sun-bright heavens
With fairer semblance; not the sculptured gold
More faithful keeps the graver's lively trace,
Than he whose birth the sister-pow'rs of art
Propitious viewed, and from his genial star
Shed influence to the seeds of fancy kind;
Than his attemper'd bosom must preserve
The seal of nature. There alone unchanged,
Her form remains. The balmy walks of May
There breathe perennial sweets: the trembling chord
Resounds for ever in the abstracted ear,
Melodious; and the virgin's radiant eye,
Superior to disease, to grief, and time,
Shines with unbating luster. Thus at length
Endowed with all that nature can bestow,
The child of fancy often in silence bends
Over these mixed treasures of his pregnant breast,
With conscious pride. From them he often resolves
To frame he knows not what excelling things;
And win he knows not what sublime reward
Of praise and wonder. By degrees the mind
Feels her young nerves dilate: the plastic powers
Labor for action: blind emotions heave
His bosom; and with loveliest frenzy caught,
From earth to heaven he rolls his daring eye,
From heaven to earth. Anon ten thousand shapes,
Like specter trooping to the wisard's call,
Fleet swift before him. From the womb of earth
From ocean's bed they come: the eternal heavens
Disclose their splendors, and the dark abyss
Pours out her births unknown. With fixed gaze
He marks the rising phantoms. Now compares
Their different forms; now blends them, now divides;
Inlarges and extenuates by turns;
Opposes, ranges in fantastic bands,
And infinitely varies. Hither now,
Now thither fluctuates his inconstant aim,
With endless choice perplexed. At length his plan
Begins to open. Lucid order dawns;
And as from Chaos old the jarring seeds
Of nature at the voice divine repaired
Each to its place, till rosy earth unveiled
Her fragrant bosom, and the joyful sun
Sprung up the blue serene; by swift degrees
Thus disentangled, his entire design
Emerges. Colors mingle, features join,
And lines converge: the fainter parts retire;
The fairer eminent in light advance;
And every image on its neighbor smiles.
A while he stands, and with a father's joy
Contemplates. Then with Promethean art,
Into its proper vehicle he breathes Into its proper vehicle, etc.]
This relates to the different sorts of corporeal mediums, by which the ideas
of the artist are rendered palpable to the senses; as by sounds, in music; by
lines and shadows, in painting; by diction, in poetry, etc.



The fair conception; which imbodied thus,
And permanent, becomes to eyes or ears
An object ascertained: while thus informed,
The various organs of his mimic skill,
The consonance of sounds, the featured rock,
The shadowy picture and impassioned verse,
Beyond their proper powers attract the soul
By that expressive semblance, while in sight
Of nature's great original we scan
The lively child of art; while line by line,
And feature after feature we refer
To that sublime exemplar whence it stole
Those animating charms. Thus beauty's palm
Betwixt 'em wavering hangs: applauding love
Doubts where to choose; and mortal man aspires
To tempt creative praise. As when a cloud
Of gathering hail with limpid crusts of ice
Enclosed and obvious to the beaming sun,
Collects his large effulgence; strait the heavens
With equal flames present on either hand
The radiant visage: Persia stands at gaze,
Appalled; and on the brink of Ganges waits
The snowy-vested seer, in Mithra's name,
To which the fragrance of the south shall burn,
To which his warbled orisons ascend.
Such various bliss the well-tuned heart injoys,
Favored of heaven! While plunged in sordid cares,
The unfeeling vulgar mocks the boon divine:
And harsh austerity, from whose rebuke
Young love and smiling wonder shrink away,
Abashed and chill of heart, with sager frowns
Condemns the fair enchantment. On, my strain,
Perhaps even now some cold, fastidious judge
Casts a disdainful eye; and calls my toil,
And calls the love and beauty which I sing,
The dream of folly. Thou grave censor! say,
Is beauty then a dream, because the glooms
Of dullness hang too heavy on thy sense
To let her shine upon thee? So the man
Whose eye never opened on the light of heaven,
Might smile with scorn while raptured vision tells
Of the gay, colored radiance flushing bright
Over all creation. From the wise be far
Such gross, unhallowed pride; nor needs my song
Descend so low; but rather now unfold,
If human thought could reach, or words unfold,
By what mysterious fabric of the mind,
The deep-felt joys and harmony of sound
Result from airy motion; and from shape
The lovely phantoms of sublime and fair.
By what fine ties has GOD connected things
When present in the mind; which in themselves
Have no connection? Sure the rising sun,
Over the caerulean unequal of the sea,
With equal brightness and with equal warmth
Might roll his fiery orb; nor yet the soul
Thus feel her frame expanded, and her powers
Exulting in the splendour she beholds;
Like a young conqu'ror moving through the pomp
Of some triumphal day. When joined at eve,
Soft-murm'ring streams and gales of gentlest breath
Melodious Philomela's wakeful strain
Attemper, could not man's discerning ear
Through all its tones the symphony pursue;
Nor yet this breath divine of nameless joy
Steal through his veins and fan th'awaken'd heart,
Mild as the breeze, yet rapturous as the song?
But were not nature still endowed at large
With all which life requires, though unadorned
With such enchantment? Wherefore then her form
So exquisitely fair? her breath perfumed
With such ethereal sweetness? Whence her voice
Informed at will to raise or to depress
The impassioned soul? and whence the robes of light
Which thus invest her with more lovely pomp
Than fancy can describe? Whence but from thee,
O source divine of ever-flowing love,
And thy unmeasured goodness? Not content
With every food of life to nourish man,
By kind illusions of the wondering sense
Thou make all nature beauty to his eye,
Or music to his ear: well-pleased he scans
The goodly prospect; and with inward smiles
Treads the gay verdure of the painted plain;
Beholds the azure canopy of heaven,
And living lamps that over-arch his head
With more than regal splendour; bends his ears
To the full choir of water, air, and earth;
Nor heeds the pleasing error of his thought,
Nor doubts the painted green or azure arch,
Nor questions more the music's mingling sounds
Than space, or motion, or eternal time:
So sweet he feels their influence to attract
The fixed soul; to brighten the dull glooms
Of care, and make the destined road of life
Delightful to his feet. So fables tell,
The adventurous hero, bound on hard exploits,
Beholds with glad surprise, by secret spells
Of some kind sage, the patron of his toils,
A visionary paradise disclosed
Amid the dubious wild: with streams, and shades,
And airy songs, the enchanted landscape smiles,
Chears his long labors and renews his frame.
What then is taste, but these internal powers
Active, and strong, and feelingly alive
To each fine impulse? a discerning sense
Of decent and sublime, with quick disgust
From things deformed, or disarrang'd, or gross
In species? This, nor gems, nor stores of gold,
Nor purple state, nor culture can bestow;
But GOD alone, when first his active hand
Imprints the secret bias of the soul.
He, mighty parent! wise and just in all,
Free as the vital breeze or light of heaven,
Reveals the charms of nature. Ask the swain
Who journeys homeward from a summer day's
Long labor, why, forgetful of his toils
And due repose, he loiters to behold
The sunshine gleaming as through amber clouds,
Over all the western sky; full soon, I ween,
His rude expression and untutored airs,
Beyond the power of language, will unfold
The form of beauty smiling at his heart,
How lovely! how commanding! But though heaven
In every breast has sown these early seeds
Of love and admiration, yet in vain,
Without fair culture's kind parental aid,
Without inlivening suns, and genial showers,
And shelter from the blast, in vain we hope
The tender plant should rear its blooming head,
Or yield the harvest promised in its spring.
Nor yet will every soil with equal stores
Repay the tiller's labor; or attend
His will, obsequious, whether to produce
The olive or the laurel. Different minds
Incline to different objects: one pursues
The vast alone, the wonderful, the wild; -- One pursues
The vast alone, etc.]
See the note to ver. 18 of this book.



Another sighs for harmony, and grace,
And gentlest beauty. Hence when lightning fires
The arch of heaven, and thunders rock the ground;
When furious whirlwinds rend the howling air,
And ocean, groaning from the lowest bed,
Heaves his tempestuous billows to the sky;
Amid the mighty uproar, while below
The nations tremble, Shakespeare looks abroad
From some high cliff, superior, and enjoys
The elemental war. But Waller longs, Waller longs, etc.]
O! how I long my careless limbs to lay
Under the plantane shade; and all the day
With amorous airs my fancy entertain, etc.
WALLER, Battle of the Summer-Islands. Canto I. And again, While in the park I
sing, the listening deer
Attend my passion and forget to fear, etc.
At Pens-hurst.



All on the margin of some flowery stream
To spread his careless limbs amid the cool
Of plantane shades, and to the listening deer,
The tale of slighted vows and love's disdain
Resound soft-warbling all the live-long day:
Consenting Zephyr sighs; the weeping rill
Joins in his plaint, melodious; mute the groves;
And hill and dale with all their echoes mourn.
Such and so various are the tastes of men.
Oh! blessed of heaven, whom not the languid songs
Of luxury, the Siren! not the bribes
Of sordid wealth, nor all the gaudy spoils
Of pageant honor can seduce to leave
Those ever-blooming sweets, which from the store
Of nature fair imagination culls
To charm the inliven'd soul! What though not all
Of mortal offspring can attain the heights
Of envied life; though only few possess
Patrician treasures or imperial state;
Yet nature's care, to all her children just,
With richer treasures and an ampler state
Indows at large whatever happy man
Will deign to use them. His the city's pomp,
The rural honors his. Whatever adorns
The princely dome, the column and the arch,
The breathing marbles and the sculptured gold,
Beyond the proud possessor's narrow claim,
His tuneful breast injoys. For him, the spring
Distills her dews, and from the silken gem
Its lucid leaves unfolds: for him, the hand
Of autumn tinges every fertile branch
With blooming gold and blushes like the morn.
Each passing hour sheds tribute from her wings;
And still new beauties meet his lonely walk;
And loves unfelt attract him. Not a breeze -- Not a breeze, etc.]
That this account may not appear rather poetically extravagant than just in
philosophy, it may be proper to produce the sentiment of one of the greatest,
wisest, and best of men on this article; one so little to be suspected of
partiality in the case, that he reckons it among those favors for which he was
especially thankful to the gods, that they had not suffered him to make any
great proficiency in the arts of eloquence and poetry, lest by that means he
should have been diverted from pursuits of more importance to his high station.
Speaking of the beauty of universal nature, he observes that there is a
pleasing and graceful aspect in every object we perceive, when once we consider
its connection with that general order. He instances in many things which at
first sight would be thought rather deformities, and then adds, that a man who
enjoys a sensibility of temper with a just comprehension of the universal order
-- will discern many amiable things, not credible to every mind, but to those
alone who have entered into an honorable familiarity with nature and her
works. M. Antonin. iii. 2.



Flies over the meadow, not a cloud imbibes
The setting sun's effulgence, not a strain
From all the tenants of the warbling shade
Ascends, but whence his bosom can partake
Fresh pleasure, unreprov'd. Nor thence partakes
Fresh pleasure only: for the attentive mind,
By this harmonious action on her powers,
Becomes herself harmonious: wont so long
In outward things to meditate the charm
Of sacred order, soon she seeks at home
To find a kindred order, to exert
Within herself this elegance of love,
This fair-inspir'd delight: her tempered powers
Refine at length, and every passion wears
A chaster, milder, more attractive mien.
But if to ampler prospects, if to gaze
On nature's form where negligent of all
These lesser graces, she assumes the port
Of that eternal majesty that weighed
The world's foundations, if to these the mind
Exalt her daring eye; then mightier far
Will be the change, and nobler. Would the forms
Of servile custom cramp her generous powers?
Would sordid policies, the barbarous growth
Of ignorance and rapine, bow her down
To tame pursuits, to indolence and fear?
Lo! she appeals to nature, to the winds
And rolling waves, the sun's unwearied course,
The elements and seasons: all declare
For what the eternal maker has ordained
The powers of man: we feel within ourselves
His energy divine: he tells the heart,
He meant, he made us to behold and love
What he beholds and loves, the general orb
Of life and being; to be great like him,
Beneficent and active. Thus the men
Whom nature's works can charm, with GOD himself
Hold converse; grow familiar, day by day,
With his conceptions; act upon his plan;
And form to his, the relish of their souls.
FINIS.
January 14.
The Beginning of next Month will be Published, In Ten neat POCKET VOLUMES, A
SELECT COLLECTION of Fifty OLD PLAYS. VIZ.
VOL. I.
1. A Tragedy or Interlude, manifesting the chief PROMISES OF GOD unto Man in
all Ages, from the Beginning of the World to the Death of Jesus Christ: a
Mystery. By John Bale, 1537. 2. NEW CUSTOM: a Morality. Written to promote the
Reformation. 3. The FOUR P's: an Interlude. By John Heywood, Jester to King
Henry VIII. 4. GAMMER GURTON'S NEEDLE: a Comedy. 5. The PINNER OF WAKEFIELD: a
Comedy.
VOL. II.
1. The Tragedy of GORBODUC. By Lord Buckhurst. 2. CAMPASPE: a Comedy. By John
Lilly. 3. The SPANISH TRAGEDY, or Hieronimo is mad again. 4. The HISTORY OF
EDWARD THE SECOND. By Christopher Marlow. 5. MUSTAPHA: a Tragedy. By Lord
Brook.
VOL. III.
1. GREENE'S TU QUOQUE, or the City Gallant. By Joseph Cook. 2. The HONEST
WHORE: a Comedy: With the Humors of the Patient Man and Longing Wife. By
Thomas Decker. 3. The HOG HAS LOST HIS PEARL: a Comedy. By Robert Tailor. 4.
FUIMUS TROES: The TRUE TROJANS. Being a Story of the Britons Valor at the
Romans first Invasion. 5. The WHITE DEVIL, or VITTORIA COROMBONA, a Lady of
Venice: a Tragedy. By John Webster.
VOL. IV.
1. The MALCONTENT: a Comedy. By John Marston. 2. A WOMAN KILLED WITH KINDNESS:
a Tragedy. By Thomas Heywood. 3. EASTWARD HOE: a Comedy. By Ben Johnson,
Chapman, and Marston. 4. The WIDOW'S TEARS: a Comedy. By George Chapman. 5. The
REVENGER'S TRAGEDY. By Cyril Turneur.
VOL. V.
1. LINGUA, or the Combat of the Tongue and the Five Senses for Superiority; a
Comedy. 2. A MAD WORLD MY MASTERS; a Comedy. By Thomas Middleton. 3. IT IS PITY
SHE IS A WHORE; a Tragedy. By John Ford. 4. GRIM THE COLLIER OF CROYDON, or the
Devil and his Dam; with the Devil and St. Dunstan. By J. T. 5. MICROCOSMUS: a
moral Mask. By Thomas Nabbs.
VOL. VI.
1. The WIDOW: a Comedy. By Ben Johnson, John Fletcher, and Thomas Middleton.
2. A MATCH AT MIDNIGHT: a Comedy. By William Rowley. 3. The DUMB KNIGHT: a
Comedy. By Lewis Machin. 4. The MUSES LOOKING-GLASS: a Comedy. By Thomas
Randolph. 5. The JOVIAL CREW, or the Merry Beggars: a Comedy. By Broom.
VOL. VII.
1. The HEIR: a Comedy. By May. 2. The OLD COUPLE: ditto. By May. 3. The
ANTIQUARY: a Comedy. By Shakerly Marmion, Esquire; 4. The GOBLINS: a Comedy. By Sir
John Suckling. 5. The SHEPHERD'S HOLIDAY: a Pastoral. By Mr. Rutter.
VOL. VIII.
1. The CITY MADAM: a Comedy. 2. A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS: a Comedy. 3. The
GUARDIAN: a Comedy. 4. The UNNATURAL COMBAT: a Tragedy. 5. The PICTURE: a
Tragi-Comedy. All by Philip Massenger.
VOL. IX.
1. ALBUMAZAR: a Comedy. 2. The GAMESTER: a Comedy. 3. The BIRD IN A CAGE: a
Comedy. Both by Mr. Shirley. 4. The CITY NIGHTCAP: a Comedy. By Mr. Davenport.
5. The PARSON'S WEDDING: a Comedy. By Thomas Killegrew, Esquire;
VOL. X.
1. The CITY-MATCH: a Comedy. By Mr. Jasper Maine. 2. The LOST LADY: a
Tragi-Comedy. By Sir William Barclay. 3. The ORDINARY: a Comedy. By Mr.
Cartwright. 4. The QUEEN OF ARRAGON: a Tragicomedy. By Mr. Habington. 5. The
MARRIAGE NIGHT: a Tragedy. By Lord Falkland.
To each PLAY will be prefixed a brief Account of the Life and Writings of its
AUTHOR. Also, by way of Preface, a short Historical Essay on the Rise and
Progress of the English Stage, from its earliest Beginnings, to the Death of
King Charles the First, when Play Houses were suppressed.

Printed for R. DODSLEY, at Tully's- Head, Pall Mall.

N. B. Two Supplemental Volumes will be published with all convenient Speed, in
order to render this COLLECTION more complete.


