A SATIRICAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Sea Captain and his Friend in Town: HUMBLY
ADDRESSED To the Gentlemen who deformed the PLAY of OTHELLO, On Th -- rs -- y,
M -- the 7th, 1750, at the Th-tre R-y-l, in Dr-y L-ne: TO WHICH IS ADDED, A
PROLOGUE AND EPILOGUE, Much more suitable to the Occasion than their Own.

Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam. LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by J. River, under St.
Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street.

[Price Sixpence.]

A more suitable, OCCASIONAL PROLOGUE
BY EBENEAZER PENTWEAZEL.
WHILE heedless Fops, affecting to be Sage,
With awkward Attitudes Disgrace the Stage;
Ours be the Task to Paint the Simple Elves,
And show the Race of Triflers in our Selves.
For this unmindful of the Cynic Tribe,
The Wrinkled Forehead, or the illnatur'd Gibe;
Dauntless, We Deign to face the unruly Pit
So famed for Clamor, Petulance, and Wit.
Merits our own, -- from no Peculiar Cause
Therefore be Sure we have -- our own Applause;
Heedless of what the selfish Miser says,
We venture Sense -- for Poverty and Praise:
A Thousand Pound's a trifling Sum for BAYS.
Yet this you will say is Wrong, -- we answer, no
'Twas always Right, and ever will be So
But Soft! what Noise was that approached mine Ear.
Help! Hoa, my friends! my Friends -- alas I fear,
Some Dire Event, our sad Presumption waits;
Fly from this Spot, and intercept the Fates:
For Lo! methinks. Descending from on High
The Ghost of injured SHAKESPEARE Draws nigh,
With aspect Stern! behold the BARD advance,
His Eyes, Resentment's fiercer Rays elance;
Justice before him wields her flaming Sword,
and only waits the BARD'S assenting Word!
Beside Him POESY knitts her angry Brow,
And Seems to Ruminate a Dreadful Vow;
Behind, a Numerous frightful Train appear
Rending, with Doleful Shricks, the ambient Air;
Furnished with whips and Stings to Scourge us hence,
And Murder Us, e're WE can murder Sense:
They come! -- "Ye mystic Forms which wreck the Soul
And thou much injured BARD -- nay do not Scowl,
Nor vent thy heightened Rage on me alone,
There Is more Behin'd -- I Am not the only One;
Illusion all -- it is fled -- and I Am at Rest --
'Twas but the Fancy of a guilty Breast.
"Sure it is the very Error of the Moon,
"Revenge grows Harsh, and Murder's out of Tune."
I cannot do it by Heaven -- I cannot do it:
"Yet she must Die -- Ay, that is beyond dispute.
The MUSE shall Die -- "else she will betray more Men,
Or may be, play her Tricks with us again.
So let us fairly do it Here to Night,
Put out the Light -- and then, put out the Light.
Come on my Lads -- nay hang me if I sham Her,
And when WE HAVE killed Her -- let the AUDIENCE damn Her.
A SATIRICAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Sea Captain and his Friend in Town.
Gent. WELL met noble Captain, you're welcome on Shore,
Pray when did you land?

(Capt.) last Night,

(Gent.) Not before?

Capt. No by G -- d; 'twas a wonder I landed so soon,
For the Wind has blown hard since the change of the Moon.

Gent. Pray what News do you bring from the African Coast?

Capt. Why good News I think -- I had surely been lost,
If NEPTUNE the Sovereign God of the Sea*
Had not interposed twixt EOLUS and ME.
But what is the most talked of in this famous City,
Where the PEOPLE are all so polite and so witty?
So extensive the Place, it must something afford:

Gent. Why faith honest Captain, I know not a Word
That Is worth my relating; yet list and you will hear;
Though 'twill rather chagrine you, than please you I fear:
Our GENTRY of late, to their Honor be it spoke,
(Who think themselves wiser than all other Folk)
Have acted, like People bereft of their Senses,
For Gentility's lost when the Player commences.

Capt. The Player commences! Why what do you mean?

Gent. Have Patience good Captain, I Will open the Scene:
You must know that in London some People there are,
So fond of the Greatness, that waits on a Play'r,
That at once they turned ACTORS themselves to expose;
To the Pity of Friends and the Censure of Foes:

Capt. Lord what could induce them such Madmen to be;

Gent. Oh you know the French Phrase, a la Mode de Paris,
Sir, the French have performed Alluding to an account in the Paper of a Play
performed by Some young Noblemen in France.


( Capt.) oh then it is all well
The English must follow them THOUGH 'TWERE TO HELL;
Where if Cerberus did not the French Men affright,
(But would let them go visit the Regions of Night)
Each Monkey, would after them, like a Brave Fellow,

Gent. As they have done now by playing the Fool -- and OTHELLO.
There Is a Fable I learned it at School Years ago,
I Will relate it, I think it is quite apropo:
On a Time, as (Fame says) the Apes acted a Play:
Tho I know not the Date of the Year or the Day,
Nor is it material since it was enacted.
And For Apes, 'twas done better than could be Expected?
The Asses Soon heard on it and they must Needs try.
Yet they used this Precaution that None should be by,
But Those Who Were really Asses indeed:
For (says they) they may Laugh? if we do not Succeed;
But our Gentry So Confident bold, and Conceited,
Ne'ver used this Precaution, But Fairly admitted.
An Audience of Critics, To See their Fine Play,

Capt. Then the Asses In Fact Acted wiser than They.
Pray How Was It Received were the Hearers quite Civil?

Gent. Ay, or else the Whole Play had Gone Souse to the Devil.
Good Manners Obliged, them Sometimes to applaud;
Tho they Little Deserved it:

( Capt.) I Believe so by G-d.
And Pray What expense Might attend this Affair,

Gent. Why FIFTEEN HUNDRED POUNDS our papers declare.

Capt. Fifteen Hundred! Do You Say, Why G-d Dam my Blood
So much Money Spent to do no Sort of Good,
How much more Commendable would it have been?
Since Objects of Pity So frequent are seen.
With benevolent Hands to have given it to Those,
And not paid so dearly themselves to expose;

Gent. Faith Captain you're right, my Opinion's the same,
For in every Respect they are greatly to blame:
Now if I was an Actor, this Method I Would take,
The Stage and its Drudgery both I Would forsake;
Turn GENTLEMAN now, as the GENTRY turn Players
And exhibit a Taste far genteeler than THEIRS.

EPILOGUE.
WHY what a Trick they have played me here egad,
Pray is'nt it enough to make one Mad:
Such idle Things these Men -- Dull dronish Rogues,
To make us tender Souls speak Epilogues:
But yet I partly guess what they are about;
And faith I Will tell, for Wit and Truth will out.
You too may guess -- but this I know the Case is,
The Chaps are all ashamed to show their Faces;
But shame's the Effect of Guilt -- it is most certain
No wonder then they have sneaked behind the Curtain.
And send me here to gild a dirty Cause,
To tickle your good-natures for Applause,
If I don't mawl 'em for it, Let them mawl me
I Will teach the scurvy Knaves Civillity.
Well but good Audience did you like the Play,
Ha! now you shake your Heads -- and well you may;
For sure such Wretches never trod the Stage,
Unless it were to lull a nodding Age;
Well for my Part, it pleased me to the Life,
To hear Oath -- llo bawl so for his Wife.
Wife! what Wife! -- he had a Wife last Summer,
And has so still -- He Is only parted from her.
But that is a c -- tly Fault -- no more of That,
They both consented, so 'twas Tit for Tat,
Suppose he had lost her -- why this mighty Pother,
His Monkey F -- t can help him to another.
But soft methinks I hear him rave behind,
Bear witness all -- he swears he will beat me blind:
Why let the great and mighty Hero come,
And beat his Fill -- he cannot beat me Dumb;
I Will have my Way in spite of Friends or Foes,
I Have said no more than what the Audience knows.
FINIS.
N. B On Monday Noon next will be published the third Edition, of the genuine
Life of Wm. Parsons, Esqr. lately executed at Tyburn, written by himself; and
contains (exclusive of his Head, from an original Picture) his entertaining
Amor with the late celebrated Miss E -- ds, both before and after her
separation from Lord -- n, his Intrigue with the present Lady V -- his polite
way of robbing the Ladies in Newfoundland: His Scheme with a Footman to run
away with his Sister, and several other remarkable and interesting Scenes, with
Original Letters, Verses, etc. etc. etc. none of which (nor his Picture) a^^ to
be found in any other Life yei published, Likewise all his other Transactions,
that are worthy the perusal of the Public. The first Impression was so well
received as to be all sold off in a few Hours after publication, and the Second
Edition in little more than a Week.

Sold by F. Stamper, in Pope's Head Alley, Cornhill, and J. Brook, at the
Golden Head, under St. Dunstans's Church, Fleet street, (Price 1 ^.)


