A DISCOURSE Concerning the ACTION OF THE SUN and MOON ON Animal Bodies; AND
The INFLUENCE which this may have in many Diseases.

By RICHARD MEAD, M. D. F. R. S.

In TWO PARTS.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1708.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the ACTION of the SUN and MOON on Animal Bodies.
PART I.
THAT some Diseases are properly the Effects of the Influence of the heavenly
Bodies, and that others do vary their Periods and Symptoms according to the
different Positions of one or other of those luminous Globes, is a very ancient
and certain Observation. Upon this Score Hippocrates Epist. ad Thessalum Filium.
advises his Son Thessalus to the Study of Geometry and Numbers, because the
Knowledge of the Stars is of very great Use in Physic (...). De Aere Aquis and
Locis.
. And the earliest Histories of Epidemick Distempers, particularly do all turn
upon the Alterations made in our Bodies by the Heavens.

But when in later Times Medicine came to be accommodated to the Reasonings of
Philosophers; no body being able to account for the Manner of this celestial
Action, it was allowed no farther Share in affecting our Health, than what
might be imputed to the Changes in the manifest Constitution of the Air,
excepting perhaps something of Truth which still remains disguised and blended
with the Jargon of judiciary Astrology.

In order therefore to set this Matter in a little clearer Light, I shall in
the first Place show, That the Sun and Moon regarding their Nearness and
Direction to the Earth only, besides the Effects of Heat, Moisture, etc.
thereby caused in our Atmosphere, must at certain Times make some Alterations
in all Animal Bodies; then enumerate some Histories and Observations of such
Changes, and enquire of what Use such Thoughts as these may be in the Practice
of Physic.

It is a constant Observation of those who write the History of the Winds, That
the most windy Seasons of the Year, are the Time about the Vernal and Autumnal
Equinox; for be the Air never so calm before or after, we never fail of having
Winds at that Juncture. Every body likewise knows, that in the most quiet
Weather we are sure of some Breeze at Midday and Midnight, as also at full
Sea, i. e. always about the Time the Sun or Moon arrive at the Meridian. Seamen
and Country People reckon upon this, and order their Affairs accordingly. And
the Changes of the Weather as to Winds or Calms especially about the new and
full Moon, are too well known to require any Authority to confirm such Remarks.
Those who desire a fuller Account of these Observations, may see it in De
Chales's Navigation, Gassendus's Natural Philosophy, and J. Goad, his
Astro-Meteoro-Logica.

These Things being Matters of Fact, and in a Manner regular and universal, it
may very well seem strange that Philosophers have not been more accurate in
their Enquiries into the Reason of such Appearances. True indeed it is, that
the Origin of Winds is various and uncertain, but however, so constant and
uniform an Effect must undoubtedly be owing to one necessary Cause.

It has been, now a considerable Time since, sufficiently made out, that our
Atmosphere is a thin elastic Fluid, one Part of which gravitates upon another,
and whose Pressure is communicated every Way in a Sphere to any given Part
thereof. From hence it follows, That if by any external Cause the Gravity of
any one Part should be taken off or diminished, that from all sides around this
Part, the more heavy Air would rush in to restore the Equilibrium which must of
necessity be preserved in all Fluids. Now this violent running in of the
heavier Air would certainly produce a Wind, which is no more than a strong
Motion of the Air in some determined Direction. If therefore we can find any
outward Cause that would at these stated Seasons we have mentioned, diminish
the Weight or Pressure of the Atmosphere; we shall have the genuine Reason of
these periodical Winds, and the necessary Consequences thereof.

The Flux and Reflux of the Sea was a Phoenomenon too visible, and too much
conducing to the Subsistence of Mankind, and all other Animals, to be neglected
by those who applied themselves to the Study of Nature; however all their
Attempts to explain this admirable Contrivance of infinite Wisdom were
unsuccessful, till Sir Isaac Newton revealed to the World juster Principles,
and by a truer Philosophy than was formerly known, showed us how by the united
or divided Forces of the Sun and Moon, which are increased and lessened by
several Circumstances, all the Varieties of the Tides are to be accounted for.
And since all the Changes we have enumerated in the Atmosphere do fall out at
the same Times when those happen in the Ocean; and likewise whereas both the
Waters of the Sea and the Air of our Earth, are Fluids subject, in a great
Measure, to the same Laws of Motion; it is plain, that the Rule of our great
Philosopher takes place here, viz. That natural Effects of the same kind are
owing to the same Causes Newton. Princip. p. 402.
.

What Difference that known Property of the Air, which is not in Water, makes
in the Case, I shall show anon; setting aside the Consideration of that for the
present; It is certain, That as the Sea is, so must our Air, twice every 25
Hours, be raised upwards to a considerable Height, by the Attraction of the
Moon coming to the Meridian; so that instead of a Spherical, it must form
itself into a Spheroidal, or Oval Figure, whose longest Diameter being
produced, would pass through the Moon. That the like raising must form itself
into a Spheroidal, or Oval Figure, whose longest Diameter being produced, would
pass through the Moon. That the like raising must follow as often as the Sun is
in the Meridian of any Place, either above or below the Horizon. Moreover, That
this Elevation is greatest upon the new and full Moons, because both Sun and
Moon do then conspire in their Attraction; least on the Quarters, in that they
then drawing different Ways, it is only the Difference of their Actions produces
the Effect. Lastly, That this Intumescence will be of a middle Degree, at the
Time between the Quarters, and new and full Moon.

From the same Principles, the Motion upwards of the Air will be strongest of
all about the Equinoxes; the Equinoctial Line being over that Circle of the
Globe, which has the greatest Diameter, either of the Luminaries when in that
are nearer, and the Agitation of the Fluid Spheroid revolving about a greater
Circle, is greater; besides, the centrifugal Force (arising from the diurnal
Rotation) is there greatest of all. This will still be more considerable about
the new and full Moons happening at these Times, for the Reasons just now
mentioned. And the least Attraction will be about the Quadratures of these
Lunar Months, because the Declination of the Moon from the Equator is then
greatest. The different Distances of the Moon in her Perigaeum and Apogaeum,
are the Reason that these full Changes fall out a little before the Vernal, and
after the Autumnal Equinox. Now the Inverse of all this happens when the
Luminaries are in the Solstitial Circles. Lastly, In the same Parallel, when
the Moon's Declination is toward the elevated Pole, the Attraction is
strongest when the Moon is in that Place's Meridian, and weakest when she is in
the opposite Place's Meridian: The contrary happens in the opposite Parallel;
by reason of the spheroidal Figure of the Earth and its Atmosphere.

Whatever has been said on this Head, is no more than applying what Sir Isaac
Newton has demonstrated of the Sea to our Atmosphere; and it is needless to
show how necessarily those Appearances, just now mentioned of Winds, at the
stated Times, etc. must happen hereupon. It will be of more use to consider the
Proportion of the Forces of the two Luminaries upon the Air, to that which they
have upon the Water of our Globe; that it may the more plainly appear what
Influence the Alterations hereby made, must have upon the Animal Body.

Sir Isaac Newton has demonstrated, Princip. Lib. 3. Prop. 36.
That the Force of the Sun to move the Sea, is to the Force of Gravity, as 1 to
12868200. Let that be ^ And that the Force of the Moon to raise the Sea is to
Gravity, as 1 to 2031821. Let this be ^

And since the centrifugal Force of the Parts of the Earth arising from its
diurnal Motion is to Gravity, as 1 to 291. Let this be ^

The same Philosopher has taught us Ibid. Lib. 3. Prop. 37.
that the centrifugal Force raises the Water at the Equator above the Water at
the Poles, to the Height of 85200 Feet. Wherefore if that Force which is as
6031, raises the Ocean to 85200 Feet, the united Forces of the Sun and Moon,
which are as 1. will raise the same to 14 Feet, for 85200*6031 = 14. Proxime.

Now we know that the more easily the Water can obey the Attraction, with the
more Force are the Tides moved; but since, as Mr. Halley has determined it,
Philos. Trans. No. 181.
our Atmosphere is extended to 45 Miles, whereas the middle Depth of the Ocean
is but about half a Mile; it is plain, that the Air revolving in a Sphere about
100 Times larger than that of the Ocean, will have a proportionably greater
Agitation.

Besides; Rocks, Shelves, and the Inequality of Shoars are a great Stop to the
Access and Recess of the Sea: But nothing repels the rising Air, whic his also
of such Thinness and Fluidity, that it is easily driven, and runs every Way.

Nor ought we to omit, that it is the universal Law of Bodies attracted, that
the Force of Attraction is reciprocally as the Squares of their Distances; so
that the Action of the Sun and Moon will be greater upon the Air than upon the
Water, upon the Account of its Nearness.

But the Consideration of the Elasticity is still of greater Moment here, of
which this is the Nature, that it is reciprocally as the Pressure, so that the
incumbent Weight being diminished by the Attraction, the Air underneath will
upon this Score be mightily expanded.

These and such like Causes will make the Tides in the Air to be much greater
than those of the Ocean; nor is it necessary to our purpose to determine, by
nice Calculations, their particular Forces; it is sufficient to have proved
that these Motions must both be universal, and also return at certain Intervals.

Now since the raising of the Water of the Ocean 14 Feet, produces Torrents of
such a prodigious Force, we may easily conceive what Tempests of Winds (if not
otherwise checked) the Elevation of the Air much higher (perhaps above a Mile)
will necessarily cause. And there is no doubt to be made, but that the same
infinitely wise Being who contrived the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, to secure
that vast Collection of Waters from Stagnation and Corruption (which would
inevitably destroy all the Animals and Vegetables on this Globe) has ordered
this Ebb and Flood of the Air of our Atmosphere, with the like good Design,
that is to preserve (in Case all other Causes should fail, as they may, and at
Times do in some Countries) the sweet Freshness, and brisk Temper of this
Fluid, so necessary to Life, and keep it, by a kind of continual Circulation,
from Deadness and Stinking.

This Reasoning is liable to only one Objection that I know of, and that is
this: That the Appearances we have mentioned cannot be owing to the Causes now
assigned; since by Calculation from them, the Mercury must at new and full Moon
subside in the Barometer to a certain Degree, which yet we do not observe to
happen.

In answer to which, (besides that there have been some Observations made of
the sinking of the Mercury at those Times; and it may perhaps be the Fault of
the Observers that these have not been reduced to any Rule) we are to consider,
That although Winds and Alterations in the Pressure of the Atmosphere, are the
necessary Consequents of the lunar Attraction, and true Causes of the different
Rise of the Mercury in the Barometer; yet these may be produced many other ways
too, and therefore though regularly the Mercury would always fall at the new and
full Moon, those other Causes may be strong enough, even to raise it at those
Seasons; in as much as two contrary Winds, for Instance, blowing toward the
Place of Observation, may accumulate the Air there, so as to increase both the
Height and Weight of the incumbent Cylinder; in like Manner, the Direction of
two Winds may be such, as meeting at a certain Angle they may keep the Gravity
of the Air in the middle Place unaltered; and a Thousand such Varieties there
may be, by which the Regularity of Appearances of this Nature may be hindered.
Now the other Springs, from which such Changes in the Air may arise, are these;

1. Elastic Vapors forced from the Bowels of the Earth, by subterraneous
Heats, and condensed by whatever Cause in the Atmosphere.

2. A Mixture of Effluvia of different Qualities in the Air, may by
Rarefactions, Fermentations, etc. produce Winds and other Effects like those
resulting from the Combination of some Chemical Liquors; and that such Things
happen, we are assured from the Nature of Thunder, Lightning, and Meteors.

3. From the Eruptions of Vulcanoes and Earthquakes in distant Places, Winds
may be propagated to remoter Countries.

4. The divided or united Forces of the other Planets and of Comets, may
variously disturb the Influence of the Sun and Moon, etc. We know that there
happen violent Tempests in the upper Regions of the Air, while we below enjoy a
Calm; and how many Ridges of Mountains there are on our Globe, which interrupt
and check the Propagation of the Winds; so that it is no wonder that the
Phenomenon we have ascribed to the Action of the Sun and Moon, are not always
constant and uniform, and that every Effect does not hereupon follow; which,
were there no other Powers in Nature able to alter the Influence of this, might
in a very regular and uniform Manner be expected from it.

These Things being premised, it will not be difficult to show (as was proposed
in the first Place) that these Changes in our Atmosphere at high Water, new and
full Moon, the Equinoxes, etc. must occasion some Alterations in all Animal
Bodies; and that from the following Considerations.

1. All living Creatures require Air of a determined Gravity to perform
Respiration easily, and with Advantage; for it is by its Weight that this Fluid
insinuates itself into the Cavity of the Breast and Lungs. Now the Gravity, as
we have proved, being lessened at these Seasons, a smaller Quantity only will
insinuate itself, and this must be of smaller Force to comminute the Blood, and
forward its Passage into the left Ventricle of the Heart, whence a slower
Circulation insues, and the Secretion of the Spirits is diminished.

2. This Effect will be the more sure, in that the Elasticity of the Atmosphere
is likewise diminished. Animals want Air as heavy so elastic to a certain
Degree; for as this is by its Weight forced into the Cavity of the Thorax in
Inspiration, so the Muscles of the Abdomen press it into the Bronchi in
Expiration, where the bending Force being somewhat taken off, and springy
Bodies when unbended, exerting their Power every Way, in Proportion to their
Pressures, the Parts of the Air push against all the Sides of the Vesiculae,
and promote the Passage of the Blood.

We have a convincing Instance of all this, in those who go to the Top of high
Mountains, for the Air is there so pure (as they call it) that is, wants so
much of its Gravity and Elasticity, that they breathe with very great
Difficulty.

3. All the Fluids in Animals have in them a Mixture of elastic Aura, which
when set at Liberty, shows its Energy, and causes those Fermentations we
observe in the Blood and Spirits: Now when the Pressure of the Atmosphere, upon
the Surface of our Body is diminished, the inward Air in the Vessels must
necessarily be enabled to exert its Force, in Proportion to the lessening the
Gravity and Elasticity of the outward; hereupon the Juices begin to ferment,
change the Union and Cohaesion of their Parts, break their Canals, etc.

This is very plain in living Creatures put into the Receiver, exhausted by the
Air-Pump, which always swell as the Air is more and more drawn out; their Lungs
at the same Time contracting themselves, and falling so together as to be
hardly discernible Esperienze dell' Academia del Cimento, p. m. 113.
.

E're we proceed to Matters of Fact, it may be worth the while to take Notice,
that Effects depending on such Causes as these, must of Necessity be most
visible in weak Bodies and morbid Constitutions, when other Circumstances
concur to their taking Place. For this Reason, whatever Mischiefs do hence
follow, cannot in the least disparage the wise Contrivance of infinite Power in
ordering these Tides of our Atmosphere. The Author of Nature, we know, has made
(...) Things to the greatest Advantage that could be, for the whole System of
Animals on our Globe, but it was impossible that such a Disposition should not
in some Cases be prejudicial to a few. The Position and Distance of the Sun are
so adjusted, as to give in the most beneficial Manner possible, Heat and Light
to the Earth; yet this notwithstanding, some Places may be too hot for some
weakly Bodies; some Autumns too sultry to agree with some Animals, and some
Winters too cold to be endured by some tender Creatures: The whole however we
must own, is most carefully provided for. Besides, as most of these last
mentioned Inconveniences are by easy Shifts to be avoided; so there are such
powerful Checks put to this aerial Flux and Reflux, so many ways of abating the
Damages accruing from it now and then; that these are of no Account in
comparison of the mighty Benefits hence arising, in which the Race of Mankind
does universally share.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the ACTION of the SUN and MOON on Animal Bodies.
PART II.
THERE are no Histories in Physic which we may more safely take upon the
Credit of the Authors who relate 'em, than such as we are now going to mention.
In some Cases a Point may perhaps be strained to serve a darling Hypothesis
which the Writer has taken up, but here we are much more likely to have pure
Matter of Fact, because hitherto no one has pretended the Appearances of this
Kind to be within the Reach of any Scheme of Philosophy.

Epileptical Diseases, besides the other Difficulties with which they are
attended, have this also surprising, that in some the Fits do constantly return
every New and Full Moon; the Moon (says Galen (...). De Dich. Critic. lib. 2.
governs the Periods of Epileptick Cases. Upon this Score, They who were thus
affected were called (...) Alexand. Trallian. lib. 1. c. 15.
and in the Histories of the Gospel (...) Matthew. c. xvii. v 13.
by some of the Latins afterward, Lunatici Apuleius de Virtutib. Herbar. cap.
6. and 95.
. Bartholin Anatem. Centur. 2. H. 72.
tells a Story of one Epileptick who had apparent Spots in her Face, which
according to the Time of the Moon, varied both their Color and Magnitude.

But no greater Consent in such Cases was perhaps ever observed than what I saw
some Time since in a Child about five Years old, in which the Convulsions were
so strong and frequent, that Life was almost despaired of, and by Evacuations
and other Medicines very difficulty saved. The Girl, who was of a lusty full
Habit of Body, continued well for a few Days, but was at Full Moon again seized
with a most violent Fit, after which, the Disease kept its Periods constant and
regular with the Tides; She lay always Speechless during the whole Time of
Flood, and recovered upon the Ebb. The Father who lives by the Thames Side, and
does Business upon the River, observed these Returns to be so punctual, that
not only coming Home, he knew how the Child was before he saw it, but in the
Night has risen to his Employ, being warned by Cries when coming out of her
Fit, of the turning of the Water. This continued 14 Days, that is, to the next
great Change of the Moon, and then a dry Scab on the Crown of the Head, (the
Effect of an Epispastick Plaster, with which I had covered the whole Occiput
in the Beginning of the Illness) broke, and from the Sore, though there had been
no sensible Discharge this Way for above a Fortnight, ran a considerable
Quantity of limpid Serum; upon which, the Fits returning no more, I took great
Care to promote this new Evacuation by proper Applications, with desired
Success, for some Time; and when it ceased, besides two or three Purges with
Mercurius Dulcis, etc. ordered an Issue in the Neck, which being thought
troublesome, was made in the Arm; the Patient however has never since felt any
Attacks of those frightful Symptoms.

Whether or no it be through Want of due Heed and Enquiry that we have not in all
the Collections of Histories and Cases, any Instance of the like Nature so
particular as this is, I know not; this is certain, that as the Vertigo is a
Disease nearly related to the Epilepsy, and the Hysterical Symptoms do partake
of the same Nature; so both one and the other are frequently observed to obey
the Lunar Influence. In like Manner, the raving Fits of mad People, which keep
Lunar Periods, are generally in some Degree Epileptic too.

Tulpius Observe. Med. lib. 1. cap. 12.
and Piso De Morb. a serosa Colluvie, Obs. 28.
afford us remarkable Instances of Periodical Palseys.

Every one knows how great a Share the Moon has in forwarding those Evacuations
of the weaker Sex, which have their Name from the constant Regularity they keep
in their Returns; and there is no Question to be made, but the Correspondency
we here observe, would be greater still, and even Universal, did not many
Accidents, and the infinite Varieties in particular Constitutions one Way or
other concur to make a Difference. It is very observable, that in Countries
nearest to the Equator, where we have proved the Lunar Action to be strongest,
these Monthly Secretions are in much greater Quantity than in those near the
Poles, where this Force is weakest. This Hippocrates De Aere Aquis and Locis.
takes Notice of, and gives it as one Reason why the Women in Scythia are not
very fruitful.

The Case being thus with Females, it is no wonder if we sometimes meet with
Periodical Haemorrhages answering to the Times of the Moon in Males also. For
as a greater Quantity of Blood in Proportion to the Bulk in one Sex, is the
Reason of its discharging itself through proper Ducts, at certain Intervals, when
the Pressure of the external Air being diminished, the internal Aura can exert
its Elasticity; so in the other, if at any Time there happens to be a
Superabundancy of the same Fluid, together with a weak Tone of the Fibers; it
is plain that the Vessels will be most easily burst, when the Resistance of the
Atmosphere is least. And this more especially, if any accidental Hurt, or
rarefying Force has first given Occasion to the other Causes to take Effect.

I know a Gentleman of a tender Frame of Body, who having once, by
overreaching, strained the Parts about the Breast; fell thereupon into a
Spitting of Blood, which for a Year and half constantly returned every New
Moon, and decreasing gradually, continued always four or five Days. The Fits
being more or less considerable, according as his Management about that Time,
contributed to a greater or lesser Fullness of the Vessels.

We have two notable Instances of the like Nature in our Philosophical
Transactions; the one No. 272.
of a Person, who from his Infancy to the 24th Year of his Age, had every full
Moon an Eruption of Blood on the right Side of the Nail of his left Thumb, at
first to three or four Ounces, and after his sixteenth Year, to half a Pound
each Time; which when by searing the Part with a hot Iron, it stopped, he fell
into a Sputum Sanguinis, and by frequent Bleeding, etc. was very difficultly
saved from a Consumption. The other Philes. Trans. No. 171.
is a Story of an Innkeeper in Ireland, who from the 43d Year of his Life, to
the 55th (in which it killed him) suffered a Periodical Evacuation at the Point
of the Forefinger of his Right Hand; and although the Fits here kept not their
Returns so certain as in the forementioned Case, (it may be either from the
irregular Way of living of the Patient, or the mighty Change every Effusion
made in his Habit of Body, the Quantity seldom amounting to less than four
Pounds at a Time) yet there is this remarkable Circumstance in the Relation,
that the first Beginning of this Haemorrhage was at Easter, that is, the next
Full Moon after the Vernal Equinox, which is one of the two Seasons of the
Year, at which we have proved the Attraction of the Air, or lessening of its
Pressure, to be greater than at any other Time whatsoever.

But we are besides this to consider, That the static Chair, and nice
Observation taught Sanctorius, Medicin Static. Sect. 1. Aph. 65.
That Men do increase a Pound or two in their Weight every Month, which
Overplus is discharged at the Month's End, by a Crisis of copious, or thick
turbid Urine.

It is not therefore at all strange, that we should once a Month be liable to
the Returns of such Distempers as depend upon a Fullness of the Vessels, that
these should take Place at those Times especially, when the ambient Air is
least able to repress the Turgency; and that though New and Full Moon are both of
equal Force, yet that sometimes one, and sometimes the other only should
Influence the Periods, according as this or that happens to fall in with the
inward Repletion.

The Afflux of Humors to Ulcers is sometimes manifestly altered by this Power;
De Experiment. circq Sanguin. p. m. 341.
Baglivi was acquainted with a learned young Man at Rome, who labored under a
Fistula in the Abdomen, penetrating to the Colon, which discharged so
plentifully in the Increase, and so sparingly in the Decrease of the Moon, that
he could make a very true Judgment of the Periods and Quadratures of that
Planet, from the different Quantity of the Matter that came from him.

Nephritic Paroxysms have frequently been observed to obey the Lunar
Attraction: Tulpius Observat. Lib. 2. c. 43. vid. etiam Observe. 52.
relates the Case of Mr. Ainsworth, an English Minister at Amsterdam, who had a
Fit of the Gravel and Suppression of Urine every Full Moon, of which he found
no Relief till the Moon decreased, unless by Bleeding at the Arm. After his
Death two large Stones were taken out of his Bladder, and the Pelvis of the
left Kidney was enlarged to that Degree by the Quantity of Urine so often
stopped there, as to contain almost as much as the Bladder itself.

I was present, not long since, at the Dissection of a Child about five or six
Years old, who died of the frequent Returns of Nephritic Fits, attended with
Vomitings and a Diarrhaea. The Kidneys and Ureters were quite stuffed with a
slimy calculous Matter, and it was very instructive to see the different
Degrees of Concretion in the several Parts of it, from a clear limpid Water, to
a hard friable Substance. Dr. Groenvelt, who had tended the Boy in his Illness,
observed him to be seized with his Pains at every Full Moon for several Months
together, which generally ended with the voiding of a Stone.

What Influence the Moon has in Asthmas, Asthma and Tuss. 22.
Van Helmont takes Notice, Exacerbatur Paroxysmus (says he) Lunae Stationibus,
and aevi tempestatibus quas ideo praesentit and praesagit. Treatise of the
Asthma, p. 17.
And Sir John Floyer, who has given us a more particular History of this
Disease than any Author, observes, that The Fits usually return once in a
Fortnight, and frequently happen near the Change of the Moon.

It Is a more uncommon Effect of this attractive Power that is related by the
learned Kerckringius. Observat. Anatomic. 92.
He knew a young Gentlewoman, whose Beauty depended upon the Lunar Force,
insomuch that at Full Moon she was Plump and very Handsome, but in the Decrease
of the Planet so wan and ill-favored, that she was ashamed to go abroad 'till
the Return of the New Moon gave Fullness to her Face, and Attraction to her
Charms.

Though this is indeed no more than an Influence of the same Kind, with that the
Moon has always been observed to have upon Shellfish, and some other living
Creatures. For as the old Latin Poet Lucilius says, Apud A. Gellium, lib. 20.
c. 8.
Luna alit Ostrea and implet Echinos, Muribu' Fibras
Et Pecui addit --


And after him Manilius Astronomic. lib. 2.
Sic submersa Fretris Concharum and Carcere Clausa,
Ad Lunae motum variant animalia Corpus.


It is very well worth the Pains to enquire what Share such an Alteration in
the Weight and Pressure of the Atmosphere may have in the Crises or Changes of
acute Diseases. The Ancients made great Account of critical Days, and regulated
their Practice according to the Expectation they had from them; This Part of
Physic is grown now into Disuse, quite slighted, and even ridiculed; and that
I suppose chiefly for these two Reasons. In the first Place, because the
earliest Observations of this Kind, which were drawn into Rules, being made in
Eastern Countries, when these came to be applied to the Distempers of the
Northern Regions, without Allowance given for the Difference of the Climate,
they were oftentimes found not to answer. And secondly, Fevers of old were
treated with few or no Medicines, the Motions of Nature were carefully watched,
and no Violence offered to interrupt her Work. The Histories therefore of
Crises, though of great Use, and Certainty under such Management as this, were
at length unavoidably set aside and lost; when acute Cases came to be cured,
according to this or that Hypothesis, not only by Evacuations, but hot or cold
Alteratives too; there being no longer any Room for those Laws of Practice,
which supposed a regular and uniform Progress of the Distemper.

Wherefore, in order to understand a little both what might induce the first
Masters of our Profession to so nice and strict an Observance in this Point;
and what Grounds there may be now, for a more due Regard to their Precepts,
even upon the Score of the Lunar Attraction only, I propose the following
Remarks.

1. All Epidemick Diseases, do in their regular Course require a stated Time,
in which they come to their Height, decline, and leave the Body free.

This is so constant and certain, that when a Fever of any Constitution which
is continual in one Subject, happens from some other Cause, in another to be
intermitting, the Paroxisms do always return so often as all together to make
up just as many Days of Illness as he suffers, whose Distemper goes on from
Beginning to End, without any Abatement.

Dr. Sydenham, a sworn Enemy to all Theories, learned thus much from downright
Observation; and gives this Reason why autumnal Quartans holds six Months,
because by Computation the Fits of so long a Time amount to 336 Hours, or 14
Days, the Period of a continual Fever of the same Season. De Febr. Intermit.
Ann. 1661. page m. 65.


So Galen takes Notice, that when an exquisite Tertain is terminated in seven
Paroxisms, a true Continual, at the same Time, has its Crisis in seven Days;
that is, the Fever lasts as long in one as in the other, in as much (says he)
as a Fit in an Intermitting Fever, answers to a Day in a Continual. Comment. in
Aphor. 59. lib. 4. and de Crisib. lib. 2. c. 6.
Now this so comes to pass, because,

2. In these Cases there is always a Fermentation in the Blood, which goes not
off till the active Particles are thrown out by those Organs of Secretion,
which, according to the Laws of Motion, are most fitted to separate 'em. And,

3. As different Liquors put upon a Ferment, are depurated in different Times,
so the Arterial Fluid takes up a determined Period, of which it is discharged
of an induced Effervescence.

4. The Symptoms, during this Ebullition, do not proceed all along in the same
Tenor; but on some Days particularly, they give such evident Marks of their
good or bad Quality, that the Nature of the ensuing Solution may very well be
guessed at, and foretold by 'em.

Things being thus, Those Days on which the Disease was so evidently terminated
one Way or other, might very justly be called the Days of Crisis; and those
upon which the Tendency of Illness was discovered by most visible Tokens, the
Indices of the critical Days.

And thus far the Foundation was good: but when a false Theory happened
unluckily to be joined to true Observations, this did a little puzzle the
Cause. Hippocrates, it is plain, knew not to what to ascribe that remarkable
Regularity with which he saw the Periods of Fevers were ended on the Seventh,
Fourteenth, One and Twentieth Day, etc. Pythagoras his Philosophy was in those
Ages very Famous, of which Harmony and the Mysteries of Numbers made a
considerable Part, Odd were more powerful than Even, and Seven was the most
perfect of all. Our great Physician espoused these Notions, Epidem. lib. 1.
Sect. 3.
and confined the Stages of acute Distempers to a Septenary Progression (...).
De Septimestri Parta.
, upon which this Inconvenience followed, that when a Crisis fell out a Day
sooner or later than this Computation required, his Measures were quite broken;
and that this must necessarily oftentimes happen, will appear by and by.

Upon this Score Asclepiades rejected this whole Doctrine as vain, Vid. Celsum.
lib. 3. c. 4.
and Celsus finding it to be too nice and scrupulous, observes that the
Pythagorean Numbers led the Ancients into the Error. Ibid.


Galen being aware of this, succeeded much better in his reasoning upon the
Matter, and very happily imputed the critical Changes not to the Power of
Numbers, but to the Influence of the Moon; which he observes, has a mighty
Action upon our Earth, exceeding the other Planets, not in Energy, but in
Nearness De Diebus Decretor lib. 3.
So that according to him, the Septenary Periods in Diseases are owing to the
Quarterly Lunar Phases, which are the Times of the greatest Force, and which
return in about seven Days. Ibid.


The Result of the whole Affair, in short is this: A Crisis is no more than the
Expulsion of the morbific Matter out of the Body, through some or other of the
Secretory Organs; in order to which, it is necessary that this should be
prepared and comminuted to such a Degree, as is required to make it pass into
the Orifices of the respective Glands; and therefore as the most perfect Crisis
is by Sweat, (both by Reason that the Subcutaneous Glands do naturally
discharge more than all the other put together, and also that their Ducts being
the smallest of any, whatsoever comes this Way is certainly very well divided
and broken) so the most imperfect is an Haemorrhage; because This is an
Argument that what offends is not fit to be cast off in any Part, and
consequently breaks the Vessels by the Effervescence of the Blood. An Abscess
in those Organs which separate thick slimy Juices, is of a middle Nature
betwixt these two.

Now it is very plain, That if the Time, in which either the Peccant Humor is
prepared for Secretion, or the Fermentation of the Blood is come to its Height,
falls in with those Changes in the Atmosphere which diminish its Pressure; the
Crisis will then be more complete and large. And also, that this Work may be
forwarded or delayed a Day upon the Account of such an Alteration in the Air;
the Distention of the Vessels upon which it depends, being hereby made more
easy, and a weak Habit of Body in some Cases standing in need of this outward
Assistance. Thus a Fever which requires about a Week to its Period, may
sometimes, as Hippocrates observed, have a good Crisis on the sixth, and
sometimes not 'till the eighth Day.

In Order therefore to make true Observations of this Kind, the Time of
Invasion is to be considered, The genuine Course of the Distemper must first be
watched, which is not to be interrupted by any violent Methods: The Strength of
Nature in the Patient is to be considered, and by what Secretions the Crisis is
most likely to be performed; and it will then be found, that not only the New
and Full Moons, but even the Southings, whether visible or latent, of the
Planet, are here of considerable Moment.

For Confirmation of which, we need only to reflect on what Mr. Paschal has
remarked, concerning the Motions of Diseases and Births and Deaths Philos.
Transact. No. 202.
. Dividing the (...) into Four Senaries of Hours; the first consists of three
Hours before the Southing of the Moon, and three after; the second of the six
Hours following, and the third and fourth of the remaining Quarters of the
natural Day: He takes Notice that none are born, or die a natural Death in the
first and third Senaries, which he calls first and second Tides, but all either
in the second or fourth Senaries, which he calls first and second Ebbs. In like
manner, that in Agues, the Tumult of the Fits generally lasts all the
Tiding-Time, and then goes off in kindly Sweats in the Ebbs. From whence he
very rationally concludes, that Motion, Vigor, Action, Strength, etc. appear
most, and do best in the Tiding Senaries; and that Rest, Relaxation, Decay,
Dissolution, etc. belong to the Ebbing Senaries.

A COROLLARY.
IT having been explained in the Beginning of this Discourse, how those
Influences of the Heavens, which favor the Returns of Diseases, may likewise
raise Winds at the same Times; and that we feel the different Effects of These
according as other Causes do concur to the Motion of the Air; it will not be
amiss to show, in one Instance or two, how much Natural History confirms this
Reasoning.

There happened on the 26th of November, 1703, a little before Midnight, a most
terrible Storm of Wind, the Fury of it is still fresh in every one's Mind,
which lasted above six Hours.

It is not to the present Purpose to relate its History and Causes; What we
observe is, That the Moon was at that Time in Perigaeo, and just upon the
Change to New. Upon both which Accounts its Action in raising the Atmosphere
must be great; And hence indeed the Tides which followed were also very great,
and the Mercury in the Barometer, at least, in most Places, fell very low.

This Influence was, without all doubt, assisted by some such other Causes of
Winds, as we have mentioned; these we cannot know, but may however take Notice
how much the manifest State of the Air contributed to this Calamity.

After a greater Quantity of Rains than ordinary had fallen in the Summer and
Autumn, in those Places where the Storm was felt, the Winter came on much
warmer than usual; so that the Liquor in a Thermometer, of which the 84th
Degree notes Frost, never fell below the 100th Vid. Philos. Transact. No. 289.
.

Hence we may very well believe, that the Atmosphere was at that Time filled
with Atoms of Salts and Sulphur, out of the Vapors raised by the Heat from the
moist Earth, which being variously combined and agitated, gave that deadly
Force to the Motion of the Air.

A Proof of this we have not only from the frequent Flashes of Lightning,
observed a little before the Storm, but also from what the Country People took
Notice of the next Day, viz. that the Grass and Twiggs of the Trees, in Fields
remote from the Sea, tasted very salt, so that the Cattle would not feed on
them.

Our Histories mention another Storm, which if not equal to this last in
Violence, is however thought the greatest that had then ever been known and
memorable from the Time at which it happened, viz. on the 3d of September,
1658, the Day on which the Usurper Oliver Cromwell died.

No Ephemerides that I know of relate the Condition of the Air that Year, but
it is sufficient to remark, That whatever other Causes concurred, their Force
was accompanied with a Full Moon, just before the Time of the Autumnal Equinox.

Upon the same Score it comes to pass, That in those Countries which are
subject to frequent Inundations, these Calamities are observed to happen at the
Time of the Moon's greatest Influence, so that the learned Baccius Del Tevere,
lib. 3. p. 228.
has rightly enough laid the Cause of such Mischiefs upon immoderate Tides of
the Ocean, being unhappily accompanied with the attractive Force of some or
other Stars.

Dr. Childrey, in his Britannia Baconica Page 97.
, has from several Instances shown the Lunar Action in Damages of this Kind.

Such and the like Natural Causes have Storms and Tempests; for as to the
Question of Divine Power, whether or no Calamities of this Kind do not
sometimes, by the Anger of Heaven, happen out of the Course of Nature, it is
not my Business to dispute, nor would I by any means endeavor to absolve Men's
Minds from the Bands of Religion. For although we must allow all the Parts of
the Machine of this World to be framed and moved by established Laws, and that
the same Disposition of its Fabric, which is most beneficial to the whole,
must of Necessity, in some few Places now and then occasion Hurts and
Mischiefs; it is however most highly reasonable, that we should yield to the
Supreme Creator an absolute Power over all his Works; Concluding withal, that
it was perhaps agreeable to Divine Wisdom, to order the Make of the World after
such a Manner, as might sometimes bring Mischiefs and Calamities upon Mankind,
whom it was necessary by the Frights of Storms, Thunder and Lightning to keep
in a continual Sense of their Duty.

FINIS.

