A TRACT UPON INDIGESTION AND THE HYPOCHONDRIAC DISEASE, WITH THE METHOD OF
CURE, AND A NEW REMEDY OR MEDICINE RECOMMENDED.

BY JAMES RYMER, SURGEON.

-- VIDES, UT PALLIDUS OMSIS CAENA DESURGAT DUBIA. --
-- VICTUS TENUIS QUAEQUANTAQUESECUM ADFERAT. --
HORACE. LONDON: Printed for T. EVANS, Paternoster Row MDCCLXXXV.

A TRACT UPON INDIGESTION, AND THE HYPOCHONDRIAC DISEASE.
THE dyspepsia of nosologists, namely, indigestion; and the hypochondriac
disease, the vapors or low spirits, are distempers generally so blended with
each other, and with the atonic, irregular, or flying gout, See my tract upon
the gout.
that I have universally found the medicine here recommended to mitigate the
various symptoms, and invigorate the whole habit, where it was used for a due
length of time in proper doses, and when the patients strictly pursued the
rules of regimen and exercise which I prescribed: but when the gout has
absolutely seized the stomach, then the other more powerful tincture must be
used.

It must be remembered and understood when I say that dyspepsia and
hypochondriasis are generally blended with the atonic gout, that I confine
myself chiefly to persons who never, or very rarely and imperfectly, have had
the inflammatory affection of the joints, viz. the regular gout in the
extremities.

To prove what I have advanced it is only necessary to enumerate the symptoms
of dyspepsia or indigestion, and of hypochondriasis, and then compare them with
the symptoms of the atonic or flying gout.

The chief symptoms of indigestion are a diminution of the appetite of hunger,
loathing of food, nausea, frequent inclination to reach, or sickness at
stomach, commonly in the morning, and frequently at the sight, or smell, or
even bare mention of particular dishes, which, when the stomach was in proper
order, and digestion and chylification were duly performed, not only had no
such effect, but used to be gratifying; cructation, four belchings and
heartburn; fullness of the stomach, with a grumbling noise in the bowels caused
by the motion of wind or air in the intestines; gnawing pains about the region
of the stomach, generally attended with costiveness; confused head-achs;
anxiety and oppressions at the heart, with frequent hiccups and palpitations; a
sense of weariness, faintness, and aversion to motion, or active undertakings;
sometimes pains in the back and loins, with a general fullness of the lower
belly; irregular appetites and strange cravings; also diarrhoea, or looseness,
accompanied with colic pains and gripings, wasting of the whole body, universal
debility, relaxation, loss of tone, and flabbiness of all the muscular or
fleshy parts.

In consequence of these sufferings of the body, the temper and mind are often
wonderfully affected. The patient becomes peevish and touchy at mere trifles;
dejected, timid, distrustful; bereft of hope as to his cure, and all future
events; with aversion to society.

In hypochondriasis, besides the foregoing symptoms of indigestion, the patient
is sometimes attacked with a copious spitting, like unto a salivation; with
various spasms, cramps, and pains about the chest, shoulders, and back.
Moreover the mind and temper are generally more affected by whim, fear,
despondency, and apprehension of a thousand horrors and evils; disturbed sleep,
dreadful dreams, tossing and watchfulness during the night. The patient shall
be cross-grained, and snappish at times without cause; and at other times he
shall manifest all the goodness and kind heartedness of human nature. Very
generally no persuasion can have any effect in removing his very dismal and
fixed expectation of a variety of evils which will never come to pass.

If we compare some of the principal symptoms of each of these diseases, we
shall discover a near and striking resemblance between them. For in the atonic
gout there are pretty constantly very marked symptoms of hypochondriasis, as
dejection of spirits, seriousness, timidity, distrustfulness, fickleness,
caution and care about absolute trifles; waspishness, and sometimes apparent
rudeness to inferiors, a want of kind and civil attention and good breeding to
equals, with indifference and great shyness to strangers; all the great powers
and generous passions of the mind being subdued by the depressing influence of
melancholy, and the conception of a variety of evils, santastical, and
groundless -- shadows and nonentities being represented to the mind as serious
realities, and magnified into the most important concerns.

Such a miserable state of mind deserves and demands our most sincere
commiseration; and our best offices and abilities should be exerted to palliate
and remove it. It ought to be a great consolation, however, that although the
sufferings of the patient be very distressing, yet the danger is in a great
measure imaginary; and that his cure rests and depends as much upon his own
conduct, as upon the attention and skill of his physician.

It is not unworthy of observation that hypochondriacs generally possess the
best rudiments of health and longevity notwithstanding the apparent flimsiness
and craziness of their constitutions; and that when in a company they like, if
the captious humor be absent, many will not only shine and excel in vivacity
and sprightliness of fancy, off-hand wit, and an aptness and rapidity in
arranging their ideas; but often raise our admiration by their elaborate and
abstruse thoughts, their depth of understanding, and the coherence and solidity
of their arguments.

Dyspepsia, or indigestion; the hypochondriasis, or low spirits; and the
atonic, or flying gout, appear more generally among men of learning, genius,
and property, whose minds are constantly upon the rack of thought, than among
the illiterate, the stupid, and the indigent, who seldom experience the fatigue
of study, the labor of reflection, or any cares but such as are necessary for
the supply of the present moment.

And even among persons of the first description, those who are possessed of
fine sensibility, and irritability, of great vivacity, spirits, and ready wit,
are more liable to these diseases than those who appear on all occasions easy,
careless and unconcerned; who have no humane and tender feelings, and upon
whose hardened hearts the distresses and calamities of human nature make no
impressions.

Intense thinking, or the labor of the brain, therefore, which exhausts the
finest spirits, the nervous influence, the pabulum cogitationis the internuncii
of the soul, (call it what you will) while the whole body remains inactive, and
the muscular system relaxed, must be a powerful remote cause of
hypochondriasis, etc.

The passions of hatred, envy, malice, love, fear, jealousy, anger, etc.
immoderate care, grief, troubles, and disappointments, study, night-watching,
close application to business requiring deep thought; excess in venery;
excessive drinking of warm watery fluids; frequent intoxication, and immoderate
and sumptuous meals; chewing and smoking of tobacco, which exhausts that saliva
requisite for digestion; a sedentary, inactive and indolent life, contribute
likewise to the production of these maladies, and ought carefully to be avoided.

It is to be observed that the temperature and gravity, or spring of the air,
and its dryness and moisture have wonderful effects upon hypochondriacs. Those
who are not conscious of this, and who pay no attention to the changes and
feelings which take place in their bodies, by the rising and falling of the
mercury in the barometer, and by particular winds, are apt to attribute their
sufferings either to the nature of their own distemper, to their own conduct,
or to the want of attention, management, and skill of their physician.

It is not unnecessary to mention, that in the above diseases, dyspepsia and
hypochondriasis especially, the patients are apt to harbor many incoherent,
whimsical, and groundless notions concerning the cause of their disorder. Some
persons will fancy, and insist upon it, that the cause of all their complaints
is a scorbutic humor in the blood which is thrown upon the offending parts, as
the stomach, and bowels, etc. others imagine the cause to be some relics of
insection, or the dregs of some violent and acute disease which they have had
twenty or thirty years before. Some will have the cause to be seated in the
internal surface of the oesophagus and stomach; others in the liver and
gallbladder; others in the pancreas and spleen; some again in the mesentery
and small guts only, with schirrhosity of the lacteal and lymphatic glands; and
others, in the great guts and rectum, with obstructions in these different
organs; convulsions, cramps, spasms, pullings, pinchings of the navel; gripings
and twisting of the guts; and (because strong purges abrade and discharge the
natural mucus which lines, sheathes and defends the inner coats of the
intestines from the stimulus of acrimonious matter, etc.) viscid phlegm glewing
up the passages and filling the bowels with hardened excrement, balls, etc.
with a variety of similar hypothetical absurdities, which frequently have no
existence but in the minds of the patients.

As it is not to be expected that every person can have philosophy, fortitude
and self-denial enough to avoid and abstain from all the remote causes of
indigestion and hypochondriasis, so a complete and what is called a radical
cure is an affair of a doubtful nature. But if the patient will follow some of
the principal rules I shall here give, and continue to take the remedy
according to the directions given with it, he may depend upon enjoying a far
better state of mind, temper, and constitution than he at present possesses;
and, probably, go through life to a good old age, with a share of comfort and
happiness he might have but little expected. To soften and mitigate the various
natural evils which in many instances render this life a load, while it yet
lasts, is surely well deserving of any pains and attention that can be
bestowed by a rational being.

With respect to a peculiar species of hypochondriasis and hysteria, nothing
need be advanced in this tract. As they proceed from very different causes they
require a different treatment. They must be relieved by a method altogether
different from that which I have taken the liberty to recommend for the cure of
the maladies I have been describing.

It is remarkable that eunuchs never, or very rarely, have the gout, or become
hypochondriacs.

In dyspepsia and hypochondriasis it is very certain that the stomach and
intestines have lost their natural tone and energy; that the peristaltic or
propulsive motion of the alimentary canal is greatly diminished and weakened;
that the office, or function of digesting the food, so as to produce that bland
nutritious chyle, assimilated into the animal nature, is deranged and
imperfect; and that, from this loss of tone and energy in the stomach and
intestines, the liquor or ferment of digestion in the stomach is so changed,
and become so peculiarly acid, that, instead of disposing the aliments to
dissolve or digest into the animal nature, it very evidently throws them into a
kind of vinous fermentation; in which process a great quantity of fixed and
other air or wind is separated; and remaining still hard and undigested,
nature, considering them as extraneous substances, brings on nausea, or
sickness, to eject them by vomiting; or, if such ingesta pass from the stomach
into the guts, from the loss of tone, want of a proper and natural stimulus,
and from the diminished energy of the peristaltic motion of the intestines,
they become a mere load; and it is often a long time before they can make their
way to the natural outlet. During their passage from the pylorus to the anus,
not being disposed to mix with the solvents of bile and pancreatic juice, they
yield very little nourishing chyle; and, fermenting in their own way, the
bowels are filled and distended with air continually evolving from them, till
their expulsion. In such a case, to ease the patient of his sufferings, if no
looseness occur, it becomes necessary to administer vomits, and purges or
clysters; by the repetition of which the whole alimentary canal becomes
insensible to every common stimulus; so that without strong emetics, drastic
purges, and very stimulating clysters, the patient can have neither comfort nor
stools; and thus the body being deprived of its due nourishment, and the brain
and nerves of spirits, the patient becomes at length entirely emaciated,
miserable in mind and body; and too frequently recurring to the last wretched
resource, spirituous and intoxicating liquors, and inefficacious cordials,
finally sinks under the pressure of his misfortunes and afflictions.

It is to be taken notice of, that all the symptoms I have enumerated, never
take place at one time, in any one person.

The CURE.
If sickness at stomach, and reaching or vomiting, be the principal symptoms,
with a want of appetite; and if these have been of long duration, or the
consequences of repeated excess, it would be necessary to cleanse the stomach
by drinking camomile tea, or by an emetic; after which, every morning, an hour
at least before breakfast, let the patient ink either a small tumbler-ful of a
cold infusion of camomile flowers, or about half a pint of pure cold water:
then, if the weather and other circumstances admit of it, let him take a walk
for the space of half an hour or so, and return to breakfast; which may consist
of water gruel, with a spoonful of rum, some crumbs of toast, and, if the
stomach can bear them, a little butter and sugar, or salt; or his breakfast may
be tea and toast only; or it may be panada, or thin weak broth, with a glass of
mountain, sherry, or madeira in it, and some toast or a crust of well-baked
bread. After breakfast let him use that kind of exercise which not only employs
the body, but also engages the attention, for an hour or more.

For which reason traveling in general, or through such a country as England,
from town to town, as it affords a variety of new and curious objects, and
draws off the attention of the mind from infirmities and bodily sufferings, is
always highly useful.

Every day at noon, or an hour or two before dinner, I beg leave to advise the
patient to take one table spoonful of my tincture, unmixed, and by itself.

At dinner let him eat of fish, or of any simple and tender meat, that quantity
which shall be less than he can and desires to eat. Of his bread, which must be
thoroughly baked, he ought to eat but little. He must either abstain altogether
from vegetables and fruit, or eat a small quantity of such as he finds to be of
easy digestion; of cheese very little; his drink during the meal should be fair
water with a toast. Every thing he eats must be minutely and thoroughly
masticated and chewed into a smooth pulp before deglutition.

After dinner, he may, if he choose, drink three or four glasses of some
generous wine, or rum, brandy, or true geneva mixed with water, a few bits of
sugar and preserved bitter orange peel being added; the proportion should be
one glass of spirits to four glasses of water.

At six or seven o'clock in the evening he may drink two or three dishes of
tea, or some coffee; the black tea, as congou or souchong, will be best.

His supper should be very trifling indeed; he may eat, if so disposed, a very
little of any thing there may be at table, which he knows to be of a light
nature. He should prefer toast and water for his drink, but if he be fond of
malt liquor, let him never exceed a pint of the best and clearest old porter,
which should by no means be stale and hard.

After supper, if he wish for something, let him drink a few glasses of warm
rum and water, mixed as above.

When he goes to bed if he should be uneasy at stomach in consequence of wind
or pains, let him take one table spoonful of the tincture, and then go to rest.

The day following he must proceed as before, and persevere in such a plan of
temperance, moderation, exercise, and amusements, till he shall have acquired a
better state of health, when he must never, or as seldom as may be, commit any
excess. His exercise should never be carried to such a degree as to induce
fatigue or a sense of weariness; and his amusements must be of that nature
which shall promote cheerfulness and rational mirth, taking care never to be
altogether idle, and in a state of ennui; that is never to be so thoroughly
vacant and lost as to have the fidgets, and not to know what to do with himself
or how to spend and kill his time.

Every time he shifts himself let him have his body well chafed and rubbed by a
stiff flesh-brush till he feel an universal glow.

If costiveness be the principal symptom, let the patient take a sinall dose of
physic before he begins with the tincture, and then proceed as above.

That kind of food which yields much nourishment, and is easy of digestion, is
always to be preferred, because of such aliment a less quantity will suffice,
and the stomach will not be loaded, nor the bowels distended with air.

The patient should always finish his meal before the appetite of hunger shall
be satisfied; that is, he should be able to say, I could eat more, but I will
not.

He must never add another meal to one yet undigested: of all absurdities and
evils in relation to the above diseases, none are greater than eating when one
is not hungry, and drinking when one is not dry. There must be no drinking
between meals; no relishes nor gills of wine before dinner; such a habit is
felo de se.

Stock fish is a nourishing food of easy digestion, and it will agree with, and
be proper for many patients, once or twice a week.

Cold bathing, as it strengthens and braces the whole body, will be very
beneficial.

Electricity quickens the circulation, and increases perspiration and all the
excretions; and sparks taken from the belly, or the application of electric
friction over the whole abdomen, will strengthen the alimentary canal remove
obstructions of the abdominal viscera; and by promoting the secretion of mucus
from the inner surface of the intestines, and by increasing their peristaltic
motion, will powerfully tend to remove costiveness.

Patients who suffer much from costiveness, sour belchings and heartburn, and
who are liable to spasms and cramps, will reap much benefit by taking one, two,
three, or four occasionally, at bed time, of the following pills. In order that
these pills may be made of the best ingredients and properly mixed, it will be
necessary to have them from the family Apothecary.

Aloes Socotor. i.
Extract. Flor. Chamoemel. ss.
Camphorae j (in spt. vin. rectificat. solut.)
Magness. alb. ij.
Sir. croc. q. s.
F. massa dividenda in pilulas xxiv.
Some patients will find it requisite to take two or more of the above pills
every night at bed time; and immediately after having swallowed them, the
patient should take one table-spoon full of the tincture.

The public is respectfully informed that the Tincture for the Gout in the
Stomach; and the Tincture for Indigestion and Low Spirits, are prepared and
sold by myself at my house in Reigate; and carefully delivered into the hands
of Messrs. Armitage and Roper, Stationers, No. 63, Bishopsgate Within, where
only they may be bought at the following prices.

The Tincture for the Gout in the Stomach, at half a guinea the half pint
bottle.

The Tincture for Indigestion and Low Spirits at five shillings and three pence
the bottle.

Every bottle has a label upon it which is signed by James Rymer.

If persons afflicted as above shall be desirous of corresponding with Mr.
Rymer, they may depend upon receiving every information and advice in his power
to grant.

Reigate, 22d Nov. 1784.
FINIS.

