THE STATE OF THE EXCISE After the UNION, COMPARED With what it is Now.

Printed in the Year MDCCVI.

THE State of the Excise After the UNION, compared with what it is now.
THE burden of the English Taxes, industriously buzzed about into the Ears of
the Commonalty, by such as upon other Views were prejudiced against the present
Treaty of Union, has no doubt contributed in a great measure, to work them into
so general a ferment against it. Their weakness and incapacity to inquire into,
and examine these Matters, joined with some mean prejudices from the fear of
losing the Crown and the like, made them a subject very easy to be wrought upon
this way.

That the Design might have the better Success, all methods have been used, to
scrue up these Burdens to extravagant heights, that their appearance might be
more frightful. It cannot be denied that in an Affair of this moment, to set
Matters in their due light, was the duty of every Person that ventured to give
the Public his Opinion; but to fish for ways to magnify things, seems to have
had some other End than the real Service of the Nation.

To give a fair and distinct view, and to rectify Mistakes as to these on
Liquors, is the design of the following Sheet. For understanding of which, the
Reader is desired to be informed of the following Particulars.

1. The English Barrel of Beer or Ale containing 34 English Gallons, by Stat.
1. W. and M. cap. 24. Contains 12 Gallons Scots. 2. Every such Barrel of above
6 shillings value, pays of Excise 2. lib. 17. shil. Scots. 3. Every such Barrel
of 6 shillings value or under, pays of Excise 15. shil. Scots. 4. Of every 22
such Barrels, there is an allowance of 2 Barrels or an 11th part for leakage.
5. After deduction of an 11th part as the allowance for leakage, the Excise of
1 Scots Pint of Ale above 6 shill. value, is scarce 6 pennies Scots and a half,
or 52 pennies on the Gallon. 6. After deduction of the allowance above, the
Excise of 1 Scots Gallon of Ale at 6 shillings value or under, is not full 14
pennies per Gallon, but for easier counting shall be supposed 16 pennies, or 2
pennies per Pint. 7. The Excise in Scotland is 3 pennies on the Pint without
distinction 8. The Town of Edinburgh, Leith, Glasgow, and some others, have
grants of a Duty of 2 pennies on the Pint of Ale vended in their Privileges. 9.
The Brewer allows the Retailer 1 Pint to every Gallon, and 1 Barrel to every
20, for which Profits, some sell at the price they lay at. 10. The Retailer
pays 20 pennies for the Ale sold ordinarily at 2 shil. Scots. 11. Ale above 9
pennies Scots per Scots Pint of nea^ and clear value to the Brewer, will fall
under the Excise of strong Ale. (...) order to discover which value with regard
to our present two penny Ale, the following compute will direct.
Price of a Pint of two penny Ale to the Brewer 20 pennies Deduce on account of
the Barrel to the score 1 penny On account of the Pint to the Gallon 2 penny
For the Excise to the Queen. 3 pennies In Edinburgh etc. for the Towns duty 2
pennies Total to be deduced 8 penny Rests the clear price of ^ Pint of two
penny Ale to the Brewer 11 penny This Ale being above 6 shil. sterling. value the
^^ Gallons, add to the foresaid price the Excise of strong Ale 6 penny Summa is
18 pennies Add 3 pennies for the Barrel to the score and the Pint the to Gallon
3 pennies The Brewers price from the Retailer is 21 pennies Allowing the
Retailer the common profit of ^d. 4 pennies Then Ale of the goodness of the
present Edinburgh two penny Ale might in the Country be sold at 25 pennies In
Edinburgh, by the foresaid Calcul Adding the Towns Duty, the Brewer would Sell
such Ale without allowances at 20 Pennies. And with Allowances computed at 3
Pennies at 23 Pennies. Thus the Retailer, would Sell such Ale at 27 Pennies. Or
for more easy division at 28 Pennies.

BY the above Calcul, it appears, how little ground there is for the common
Report spread about the country o^ our two Penny Ale being doubled in its
Price; since supposing the Excise to be Exacted in its Rigor it hightens the
Price only 3 Pennies per Pint, or 4 at most. And considering that the Excise in
England is managed by Collection, t cannot be thought the Surveys will be so
severe as here, where the Farming the Excise by Roup Screws up its Price, and
the Taxmen for their own gain Squeeze the poor People to the outmost Law
allows, if not beyond it.

This being the state of the English Excise, with regard to Ale above 6 sh.
sterling per Barrel; the lesser Excise supposed largely to be 2 Pennies per Pint,
falls next to be considered. As to which that we shall be easier, is obvious,
since the smallest Ale we can Brew now, pays 3 Pennies per Pint; and Ale of 9
Pennies true Price to the Brewer, which falls under the lesser Excise, not
being a full fourth part weaker then the present two Penny Ale, will be no
contemptible Table Drink, and no small ease to the Poor Trades People, who will
then find good Drink for 16 Pennies per Pint, whereas now none is under two
Pence. This appears plainer by the following Calcul.

The Brewers clear Price supposed to be 9 Pennies. Add the Queens Excise on
Small-Bear 2 Pennies. Add for the Allowance to the Score and Gallon 2 Pennies.
The Brewers Price to the Retailer will be 13 Pennies. And Allowing the
Retailler 3 Pennies per Pint 16 Pennies.

FRom these two Views of the greater and lesser Excise, It not only appears
that the greater is no such hideous monster, as is commonly believed; but also
that taking both Jointly we should be full as easy as now, especially with
regard to the Poorer sort of People. Nay further, we should be much easier,
than we have been for several Years since the Revolution. For from the 1st of
June 1693, to the 1st of May 1695, our Excise was 2 Merks per Boll, and 3
Pennies per Pint, in all 6 Pennies per Pint, only half a Penny less than the
English greater Excise. And from 1st of September 1695, to March 1697 5 Pennies
per Pint, from thence to March School, 4 Pennies, and from thence to March 99, 6
Pennies; So that for a Tract of 6 Years, we were under an Excise near equal to
the English in quantity, but vastly more burdensome, as will appear by the
following two Considerations, 1 ^^ That the 4 Dear Years were part of these
six, which considering the circumstance of the Poor were hard enough under any
Excise; but this is only a temporary Consideration, the next is perpetual, viz.
That we neither had then, nor have now, any distinction betwixt Small and
Strong Ale; The consequence of which, was that the Brewers finding all Ale
equal as to Excise, chose rather to Brew Strong Ale, which would yield them six
Pennies profit per Pint, than small which yielded only two Pennies, yet Paid
the same Excise; and accordingly the Ale commonly Sold then was 3 Pence per
Pint, or 2 Pence and a Plack, which the poor People behooved either to Buy or
Drink Water. Whereas should the Brewers Brew strong Ale under the English
Excise, yet there will still be good wholesome Drink for the poorer sort at an
easy Rate, by reason of the distinction of the Excise.

If what is here advanced be true, as there is little reason to doubt, since it
depends on Uncontraverted matters of fact, and a Plain and simple calcul: It
may seem odd, that the Author of the Short View of our present Trade and Taxes,
Page 4. Should suppose each Boll of Malt will produce 6. sh. sterling. Excise, and
should on this build his calcul of the Increase of Excise in case of the Union.
No doubt, a Brewer for a Wager may produce near 8 sh. Excise from a Boll, by
Brewing Ale at 10 pennies per Pint true value; but he is a Mad Man if he does so
for ordinary, since had he Brewed (...) at 9 pennies, the Excise would only be
near 2 sh. 8 d. sterling. and since we are supposing, I shall suppose and make
good, that a Brewer may bring the Excise of a Boll of Malt to 17 sh. and 4 d.
Scots, by Brewing only 4. Gallons of very strong Ale from it, which at 4 sh. 4
d. Scots per Gallon makes the foresaid Sum. But the Brewer will be regula^ by
none of our suppositions; he will Brew such Ale, as will best bear the respective
Excises, and at the same time please his Customers

FINIS.

