Observations on the Fifth Article of the Treaty of UNION, humbly offered to
the Consideration of the Parliament, relating to Foreign Ships.
THE Matter of Difficulty upon this Head, I take to be as follows. -- By the
Article, all Ships, any of whose Owners were Foreigners at the Signing of the
Treaty, shall be Deemed still Foreign Bottoms within the Terms of the Act of
Navigation.

The Reason of this is plain, Most of the Shipping employed on the South-East
of Scotland, are Foreign Bottoms, and severals of them owned by Foreigners,
principally Dutch. Now, as England is very careful to Encourage her own
Shipping; and as Britain will after the Union still be so the Increase,
Employment and Building of Ships being one of the Principal Foundations of her
Wealth. -- It would be hard to admit any Ships, which are Foreign built, to be
free Ships in Scotland, when none that are so in England can be admitted.

England freely admits all Ships built in Scotland to be free in all the Ports
and Trade of Britain; -- Nay, to go further, England allows by the Union, even
Dutch Ships, if bought by Scots Men, and belonging to Scots Owners, to be free,
which is more than any Englishman can be allowed. -- Nay, If a Foreign built
Ship lay now at Leith Road, and her Owners were all Englishmen, she would not
be Deemed a free Ship by the Union, but the English Owners would loose the
benefit of employing her; and the Reason of this is, to Encourage our own
Shipping, on which so much depends, and this Benefit will be plainly Scotland's
at last.

But the Objection here, is, We have a great many Ships in our Trade that are
Foreign built, and that are chiefly owned by Scots-men, but perhaps may have
one or more Owners abroad; and it would be hard that these Scots-men should
lose the Benefit of their Ships which they employ in the Trade of their Native
Country, only because they have some Dutchmen concerned with them, -- when at
the same time it is plain, that if these Dutchmen were not concerned, the Trade
of Scotland would with great difficulty be carried on.

The Expedient proposed for this, as I meet with it, is, That a reasonable time
should be given for the Subjects of Scotland to buy out their Dutch Owners or
sell their own Interest.

Or that it should have been said, All Ships etc. whose Owners were Scots-men,
at the End, or Ratification of the Treaty, etc. since till the Treaty is
Concluded, every Scots-man has a Right to employ any Ship whatever.

To Answer this, I crave leave to say, That this tho plausible in its self, has
yet Inconveniences of a nature Intolerable, because by this, any Man in
England, as well as in Scotland, may in the name of Scotsmen, Buy what number
of Ships in Holland they please, and at the end of the Union, they become free
Ships, to the general Ruin of the Shipping in the whole Island.

And this was Remarkably true, to England's prodigious Loss, when in the last
Dutch War, the Ships taken from Holland as Prize, were made free, the People
bought Dutch Ships, caused sham Privateers to take them, and for several years,
some hundereds of them were Employed in their Coal Trade, to the Ruin of the
Town of Ipswick, where all the large Coal Ships used to be Built, -- which Loss
that Town never recovered.

To give a time therefore, to have all Ships Owned by Scotsmen come in to be
free, is to open a Door to a Mischief, which it cannot be desired, England
should suffer in Trade; and the value now supposed to be Touched here, is but
very small.

All that I can see in this, is, That a Medium be found out, which if it must
be, tho I do not grant that necessity neither, is this, That at the time of the
Treaty, the MAJOR PART of such Vessel did belong to the Subjects of Scotland, I
confess this seems to have some color of Reason in it, that the Majority
should Denominate the whole, and I would hope England would not Dispute it,
since they do not deny any Foreigners, Holding or Owning any Share of an
English Vessel, but the Legitimacy of the Vessel consists in her Bottom.

Now if the Majority of Owners as to the Value, I mean, were not Scots, no Ship
can be accounted Legitimate. If a Scots Merchant Owns of a Ship, and a Dutchman
she cannot be accounted in Reason, any thing but a Dutch Ship, especially when
her Bottom is Dutch too, for the Denomination must go with the Major; and it is
not the Dutch Merchant is a part Owner of the Scotsman's Ship, but the Scotsman
is a part Owner of the Dutchman's Ship.

This small Medium, I think, will reduce this Article to a Square, and an
Explanatorie Clause to that purpose, will in two Lines determine that Point.

All which is Humbly Remitted to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.

