TAMERLANE. A TRAGEDY.

TAMERLANE. A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted at the NEW THEATER IN Little Lincolns -- Inn -- Fields. By Her
MAJESTY's SERVANTS.

Written by N. ROW, Esquire

-- Magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphraten bello, Victorque volentes
Per Populos dat jura, viamque affectat Olympo.
Virg. Georg. 4. The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson: And Sold by William Davis, at the Black Bull
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1703.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, LORD MARQUESS Of HARTINGTON.
My LORD,
EVery Body is now so full of Business, that things of this kind, which are
generally taken for the Entertainment of leisure Hours only, look like
Impertinence and Interruption. I am sure it is a Reason why I ought to beg your
Lordship's Pardon, for troubling you with this Tragedy; Not but that Poetry has
always been, and will still be the Entertainment of all wise Men, that have any
Delicacy in their Knowledge; Yet at so Critical a Juncture as this is, I must
confess I think your Lordship ought to give entirely into those Public
Affairs, which at this time seem to Demand you. It is that happy Turn which
your Lordship has to Business, that right Understanding of your Country's
Interest, and that constant Zeal to pursue it, that just Thinking, that strong
and per suasive Elocution, that firm and generous Resolution, which upon all
Occasions you have shown in Parliaments; and to add, that which is the crowning
good Quality, your Lordship's continual Adherence and Unshaken Loyalty to His
present Majesty, which make you at this time so necessary to the Public. I
must confess, (though there is no part in your Lordship's Character, but what the
World should be fond of) I cannot help Distinguishing the last Instance very
particularly: It is doing (methinks) such a Justice to Goodness, to Greatness,
and to Right Reason, that Posterity will believe there could be no Man of good
Sense, but what must have agreed with your Lordship in it. When the next Age
shall Read the History of this, What Excuse can they make for those who did not
Admire a Prince whose Life has been a Series of good Offices done to Mankind?
When they shall reckon up his Labors from the Battle of Seneff, to some
Glorious Action, which shall be his Last, (and which I therefore hope is very
far removed from the Present Time?) Will they ever believe that he could have
been too well loved, or too faithfully served and defended? The Great Things
which he did before we had that immediate Interest in him, which we now happily
have, is a noble and just Subject for Panegyric; but as Benefits done to
Others, can never touch us so sensibly as those we receive our selves, though the
Actions may be equally great; so, methinks, I can hardly have patience to run
back to his having saved his own Country, when I consider he has since done the
same for Us; Let that be sufficient to Us, for all we can say of him or do for
him. What Dangers and Difficulties has he not struggled through, for the Honor
and Safety of these Kingdoms? It Is a common Praise, and what every one speaks,
to say, He has continually exposed his Life for his People; But there are some
things more particular in his Character, some things rarely found amongst the
Policies of Princes; a Zeal for Religion, moderated by Reason, without the Rage
and Fire of Persecution; a charitable Compassion for those who cannot be
convinced, and an unalterable Perseverance in those Principles of whose Truth
he is satisfied; a desire of War for the sake of Peace; and of Peace for the
Good and Honor of his Subjects equally with his own; a pious Care for
composing Factions, though to foment them might make him Arbitrary; and a
generous Ambition that only aims at Power, to enable him to do good to all the
rest of the World. I might add here, that Inviolable and Religious Observance
of his Royal Word, which the best part of the Powers of Europe, have so
frequently and so happily, for themselves, depended upon in the greatest
Emergencies. But as this Virtue is generally reckoned as no more than that
common Honesty, which the meanest Man would blush to be without, so it can
hardly claim a Place amongst the more particular Excellencies of a Great
Prince. It were to be wished, indeed, that the World were honest to such a
degree, and that there were not that scandalous defect of common Morality.
Certainly nothing can be more shocking to Humanity, to the Peace and Order of
the World; nothing can approach nearer to that Savage state of Nature, in which
every Man is to eat his fellow if he can master him, than an avowed Liberty of
breaking through all the most solemn Engagements of public Faith. It Is something
that brands a Man with an Infamy, which nothing can extenuate or wipe out; he
may protest and pretend to explain his meaning, but the World has generally too
much indignation for the Affront, to bear it at that easy rate. Ministers and
Secretaries of State, may display their own Parts in Memorials, with as much
Pomp and Flourish as they please: I fancy the common answer upon such Occasions
will always be, You have deceived us grossly, and we neither can nor will trust
you any more. When this Vice comes amongst Men of the first Rank, it is the
more shocking, and I could wish there were none such, to whose charge it might
be laid.

Some People (who do me a very great Honor in it) have fancied, that in the
Person of Tamerlane I have alluded to the greatest Character of the present
Age, I don't know, whether I ought not to apprehend a great deal of Danger from
avowing a Design like that. It may be a Task indeed worthy the greatest Genius,
which this, or any other Time has produced: But therefore I ought not to stand
the shock of a Parallel, least it should be seen, to my Disadvantage, how far
the Hero has transcended the Poet's Thought. There are many Features, it is
true, in that Great Man's Life, not unlike His Majesty: His Courage, his Piety,
his Moderation, his Justice, and his Fatherly Love of his People, but above
all, his Hate of Tyranny and Oppression, and his zea lous Care for the Common
Good of Mankind, (...) large Resemblance of Him: Several Incidents are alike in
their Stories; and there wants nothing to his Majesty but such a deciding
Victory, as that by which Tamerlane gave Peace to the World. That is yet to
come: But I hope we may reasonably expect it from the unanimity of the present
Parliament, and so formidable a Force as that Unanimity will give Life and
Vigor to.

If your Lordship can find any thing in this Poem like a Prince, who is so
justly the Object of your Lordship's, and indeed of the World's Veneration, I
persuade my self it will prevail with you to forgive every thing else that you
find amiss. You will excuse the Faults in Writing, for the goodness of the
Intention. I hope too, your Lordship will not be displeased, that I take this
opportunity of renewing the Honor which I formerly had, to be known to your
Lordship, and which gives me at once the Pleasure of expressing those Just and
Dutiful Sentiments I have for his Majesty, and that strong Inclination which I
have always had to be thought,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient, Humble Servant, N. ROW

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Mr. BETTERTON.
OF all the Muses various Labors, none
Have lasted longer, or have higher flown,
Than those that tell the Fame by ancient Hero's won.
With Pleasure, Rome and Great Augustus, heard
Arms and the Man sung by the Mantuan Bard;
In spite of Time, the sacred Story lives,
And Caesar and his Empire still survives.
Like him, (though much unequal to his Flame)
Our Author makes a pious Prince his Theme,
High with the foremost Names in Arms he stood,
Had fought, and suffered for his Country's Good,
Yet sought not Fame, but Peace, in Fields of Blood.
Safe under him his happy People sat,
And grieved at distance for their Neighbors Fate.
Whilst with Success, a Turkish Monarch Crowned,
Like spreading Flame, deformed the Nations round:
With Sword and Fire he forced his impious way
To Lawless Power, and Universal Sway:
Some abject States for fear the Tyrant join;
Others for Gold their Liberties resign,
And venal Princes sold their Right Divine.
'Till Heaven, the growing Evil to redress,
Sent Tamerlane to give the World a Peace.
The Hero roused, asserts the Glorious Cause,
And to the Field the cheerful Soldier draws:
Around in Crowds his valiant Leaders wait,
Anxious for Glory, and secure of Fate;
Well pleased, once more to venture on his side,
And prove that Faith again, which had so often been ^y'd.
The peaceful Fathers, who in Senates meet,
Approve an Enterprise so Just, so Great;
While with their Prince's Arms, their Voice thus joined,
Gains half the Praise of having saved Mankind.
Even in a Circle, where, like this, the Fair
Were met, the bright Assembly did declare,
Their House with one consent were for the War.
Each urged her Lover to unsheath his Sword,
And never spare a Man who broke his Word.
Thus fired, the Brave on to the Danger press;
Their Arms were crowned abroad, with just Success,
And blessed at Home with Beauty and with Peace.
Dramatis Personae.
Tamerlane. Mr. Betterton Bajazet, Emperor of the Turks. Mr. Verbruggen.
Axalla, an Italian Prince, General and Favorite of Tamerlane. Mr. Booth.
Moneses, a Grecian Prince, and a Christian. Mr. Powell. Stratocles, his Friend.
Mr. Pack. Prince of Tanais, Kinsman and General to Tamerlane. Mr. Fieldhouse.
Omar, a Tartar General. Mr. Freeman. Parthian Generals to Tamerlane. Mirvan,
Mr. Cory. Zama, Mr. Husbands.
Haly, Favorite Eunuch to Bajazet. Mr. Baily. A Turkish Dervise. Mr. Arnold.
WOMEN.
Arpasia, a Grecian Princess. Mrs. Barry. Selima, Daughter of Bajazet. Mrs.
Bracegirdle. Parthian and Tartar Soldiers. Mutes belonging to Bajazet. Other
Attendants.
SCENE, Tamerlane's Camp, near Angoria in Galatia. TAMERLANE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE before Tamerlane's Tent. Enter the Prince of Tanais, Zama and Mirvan.
Pr. of T. HAIL to the Sun! from whose returning Light
The cheerful Soldier's Arms new Luster take,
To deck the Pomp of Battle; Oh, my Friends!
Was ever such a glorious Face of War?
See, from this height! how all Galatia's Plains
With Nations numberless are covered over;
Who like a Deluge, hide the Face of Earth,
And leave no Object, in the vast Horizon,
But glittering Arms, and Skies.

Zam. Our Asian World
From this important Day expects a Lord,
This day they hope an end of all their Woes,
Of Tyranny, of Bondage, and Oppression
From our Victorious Emp'ror, Tamerlane.

Mir. Well has our Holy Alha marked him out
The Scourge of lawless Pride, and dire Ambition,
The great Avenger of the groaning World.
Well has he worn the sacred Cause of Justice
Upon his prosperous Sword; approving Heaven
Still Crowned the Righteous Warrior with Success;
As if he said, Go forth, and be my Champion,
Thou most like me of all my Works below.

Pr. No lust of Rule, the common Vice of Kings,
No furious Zeal inspired by hot-brained Priests,
Ill hid beneath Religion's specious Name,
Ever drew his temperate. Courage to the Field:
But to redress an injured People's Wrongs,
To save the weak One from the strong Oppressor,
Is all his end of War; and when he draws
The Sword to punish, like relenting Heaven,
He seems unwilling to deface his Kind.

Mir. So rich his Soul in every virtuous Grace,
That, had not Nature made him great by Birth,
Yet all the Brave had sought him for their Friend:
The Christian Prince Axalla, nicely bred
In polished Arts of Europaean Courts,
For him forsakes his native Italy,
And lives a happy Exile in his Service.

Pr. Pleased with the gentle Manners of that Prince,
Our mighty Lord is lavish to his Friendship;
Though Omar, and the Tartar Lords repine,
And loudly tax their Monarch, as too partial.

Zam. Ever the mid Hour of Night, from Tent to Tent,
Unwearied, through the numerous Host he past,
Viewing with careful Eyes each several Quarter;
Whilst from his Looks, as from Divinity,
The Soldiers took presage; and cried, Lead on,
Great Alha, and our Emperor, Lead on,
To Victory, and Everlasting Fame.

Mir. Hear you of Bajazet?

Pri. Late in the Evening
A Slave, of near Attendance on his Person,
'Scap'd to our Camp: from him we learned, the Tyrant
With Rage redoubled, for the Fight prepares;
Some accidental Passion fires his Breast,
(Love, as it is thought, for a fair Grecian Captive)
And adds new Horror to his native Fury;
For five returning Suns, scarce was he seen
By any the most favored of his Court;
But in lascivious Ease, among his Women,
Lived from the War retired; or else, alone
In sullen mood sat meditating Plagues,
And Ruin to the World, 'till yester Morn,
Like Fire that laboring upwards rends the Earth,
He burst with Fury from his Tent, Commanding
All should be ready for the Fight, this Day.

Zam. I know his Temper well, since, in his Court
Companion of the brave Axalla's Embassy,
I often observed him, Proud, Impatient,
Of Ought Superior, even of Heaven, that made him.
Fond of false Glory, of the Salvage Power
Of ruling without Reason, of confounding
Just, and Unjust, by an Unbounded Will;
By whom Religion, Honor, all the Bands
That ought to hold the jarring World in Peace,
Were held the Tricks of State, Snares of wise Princes
To draw their easy Neighbors to Destruction.

Mir. Thrice, by our Law and Prophet, has he sworn,
By the World's Lord, and Maker, lasting Peace
With our great Master, and his Royal Friend
The Grecian Emperor; as often regardless
Of plighted Faith, with most Un-Kingly Baseness,
H' has taken the Advantage of their absent Arms,
Without a War proclaimed, or Cause pretended,
To waste with Sword and Fire their fruitful Fields:
Like some accursed Fiend, who 'scap'd from Hell,
Poisons the balmy Air through which he flies,
He blasts the bearded Corn, and loaded Branches,
The laboring Hind's best hopes, and marks his way with ruin.

Pr. But see! his Fate, the mighty Tamerlane
Comes like the Proxy of enquiring Heaven,
To Judge, and to Redress.
[Flourish of Trumpets.
Enter Tamerlane, Guards, and other Attendants. Tam. Yet, yet, a little and
destructive Slaughter
Shall rage around, and mar this beauteous Prospect;
Pass but an hour, which stands betwixt the Lives
Of Thousands and Eternity: What Change
Shall hasty Death make in yon gli^^'ring Plain?
Oh thou sell Monster, War! That in a moment
Lay'st waste the noblest part of the Creation,
The Boast, and Masterpiece of the Great Maker,
That wears in vain the Impression of his Image,
Unpriviledg'd from thee.
Health to our Friends, and to our Arms Success, To the Prince, Zama and Mir.
Such as the Cause for which we fight deserves.

Pr. Nor can we ask beyond what Heaven bestows,
Preventing still our Wishes. See Great Sir!
The Universal Joy, your Soldiers wear,
Omen of prosperous Battle.
Impatient of the tedious Night in Arms
Watchful they stood expecting opening day;
And now are hardly by their Leaders held
From darting on the Foe; like a hot Courser,
That bounding Paws the mouldering Soil, disdaining
The Rein that checks him, eager for the Race.

Tam. Yes, Prince, I mean to give a loose to War:
This Morn, Axalla, with my Parthian Horse
Arrives to join me, He, who like a Storm
Swept with his flying Squadrons all the Plain
Between Angoria's Walls, and yon tall Mountains
That seem to reach the Clouds; and now he comes
Laden with Spoils, and Conquest, to my aid.

Zam. These Trumpets speak his Presence -- [Flourish of Trumpets.

Enter Axalla with Soldiers. Moneses, Stratocles and Selima, Prisoners. [
Axalla kneels to Tamerlane. Tam. Welcome! thou worthy Partner of my Laurels,
Thou Brother of my Choice, a Band more Sacred
Than Nature's brittle Tie. By holy Friendship!
Glory, and Fame stood still for thy arrival,
My Soul seemed wanting in its better half,
And languish'd for thy absence, like a Prophet,
That waits the Inspiration of his God.

Ax. My Emperor! my ever Royal Master!
To whom my Secret Soul more lowly bends,
Than Forms of outward Worship can express;
How poorly does your Soldier pay this Goodness,
Who wears his every hour of Life out for you?
Yet it is his All, and what he has he offers;
Nor now disdain, to accept the Gift he brings,
This earnest of your Fortune. See my Lord
The noblest Prize, that ever graced my Arms;
Approach my Fair --

Tam. This is indeed to Conquer,
And well to be rewarded for thy Conquest;
The Bloom of opening Flowers, unsullied Beauty,
Softness, and sweetest Innocence she wears,
And looks like Nature in the World's first Spring;
But say, Axalla --

Sell. Most Renowned in War, Kneeling to Tam.
Look with Compassion on a Captive Maid, Kneeling to Tam.
Though born of Hostile Blood; nor let my Birth
Derived from Bajazet, prevent that Mercy,
Which every Subject of your Fortune finds;
War is the Province of Ambitious Man,
Who tears the miserable World for Empire;
Whilst our weak Sex, incapable of wrong,
On either side claims Privilege of Safety.

Tam. [Raising her.] Rise, Royal Maid, the pride of haughty Power,
Pays Homage, not receives it from the Fair:
Thy Angry Father fiercely calls me forth,
And urges me unwillingly to Arm;
Yet, though our frowning Battles menace Death
And mortal Conflict, think not that we hold
Thy Innocence and Virtue as our Foe.
Here, 'till the Fate of Asia is decided,
In safety stay. To Morrow is your own:
Nor grieve for who may Conquer, or who Lose;
Fortune on either side shall wait thy Wishes.

Sell. Where shall my Wonder and my Praise begin!
From the successful Labors of thy Arms?
Or from a Theme more soft, and full of Peace,
Thy Mercy, and thy Gentleness? Oh! Tamerlane!
What can I pay thee for this noble Usage
But greatful Praise? So Heaven it self is paid.
Give Peace, ye Powers above, Peace to Mankind
Not let my Father wage unequal War
Against the Force of such united Virtues.

Tam. Heaven hear thy pious Wish! -- But since our Prospect
Looks darkly on Futurity, 'till Fate
Determine for us, let thy Beauty's safety
Be my Axalla's Care; in whose glad Eyes
I read what Joy the pleasing Service gives him.
Is there amongst thy other Prisoners ought [To Axalla.
Worthy our Knowledge?

Ax. This brave Man, my Lord, Pointing to Moneses.
With long resistance held the Combat doughtful: Pointing to Moneses.
His Party, pressed with Numbers, soon grew faint,
And would have left their Charge an easy Prey;
Whilst he alone, undaunted at the odds,
Though hopeless to escape, fought well and firmly:
Nor yielded, 'till over matched by many Hands,
He seemed to shame our Conquest, whilst he owned it.

Tam. Thou speak him as a Soldier should a Soldier,
Just to the worth he finds. I would not war [To Moneses.
With ought that wears thy virtuous Stamp of Greatness:
Thy Habit speaks thee Christian -- Nay, yet more,
My Soul seems pleased to take acquaintance with thee,
As if allied to thine: Perhaps it is Sympathy
Of honest Minds; like Strings wound up in Music,
Where by one touch, both utter the same Harmony:
Why art thou then a Friend to Bajazet?
And why my Enemy?

Mon. If human Wisdom
Could point out every Action of our Lives,
And say, Let it be thus, in spite of Fate,
Or partial Fortune, then I had not been
The Wretch I am.

Tam. The Brave meet every Accident
With equal Minds: Think nobler of thy Foes,
Than to account thy Chance in War an Evil.

Mon. Far, far from that; I rather hold it grieveous
That I was forced even but to seem your Enemy;
Nor think the baseness of a vanquished Slave
Moves me to slatter for precarious Life,
Or ill-bought Freedom, when I swear by Heaven!
Were I to choose from all Mankind a Master,
It should be Tamerlane.

Tam. A noble Freedom
Dwells with the Brave, unknown to fawning Sycophants,
And Claims a Privilege of being believed.
I take thy Praise as earnest of thy Friendship.

Mon. Still you prevent the Homage I should offer,
O Royal Sir! let my Misfortunes plead,
And wipe away the hostile Mark I wore. --
I was, when not long since my Fortune hailed me,
Blessed to my wish, I was the Prince Moneses;
Born and bred up to Greatness: Witness the Blood
Which through successive Hero's Veins allied
To our Greek Emperors, rolled down to me,
Feeds the bright Flame of Glory in my Heart.

Tam. Even that! that Princely Tie should bind thee to me,
If Virtue were not more than all Alliance.

Mon. I have a Sister, (Oh severe Remembrance!)
Our Noble Houses, nay, her Sexe's Pride:
Nor think my Tongue too lavish, if I speak her
Fair as the Fame of Virtue, and yet chaste
As its cold Precepts, wise beyond her Sex
And blooming Youth, soft as forgiving Mercy,
Yet greatly brave, and jealous for her Honor:
Such as she was, to say I barely loved her,
Is poor to my Soul's meaning: From our Infancy
There grew a mutual Tenderness between us,
'Till not long since her Vows were kindly plighted
To a young Lord, the Equal of her Birth.
The happy Day was fixed, and now approaching,
When faithless Bajazet (upon whose Honor,
In solemn Treaty given, the Greeks depended)
With sudden War broke in upon the Country,
Secure of Peace, and for Defense unready.

Tam. Let Majesty no more be held Divine,
Since Kings, who are called Gods, profane themselves.

Mon. Among the Wretches, whom that Deluge swept
Away to Slavery, my self and Sister
Then passing near the Frontiers to the Court,
(Which waited for her Naptials) were surpised,
And made the Captives of the Tyrant's Power
Soon as we reached his Court, we found our Usage
Beyond what we expected, fair, and noble:
'Twas then the Storm of your victorious Arms
Looked black, and seemed to threaten, when he pressed me
(By often repeated Instances) to draw
My Sword for him? But when he found my Soul
Disdained his Purpose, he more fiercely told me,
That my Arpasia, my loved Sister's Fate
Depended on my Courage shown for him.
I had long learnt to hold my self at nothing,
But for her sake; to ward the Blow from her,
I bound my Service to the Man I hated.
Six Days are past, since by the Sultan's Order
I left the Pledge of my return behind,
And went to guard this Princess to his Camp:
The rest the brave Axalla's Fortune tells you.

Tam. Wisely the Tyrant strove, to prop his Cause
By leaguing with thy Virtue; but just Heaven
Has torn thee from his Side, and left him naked
To the avenging Bolt that drives upon him:
Forget the Name of Captive, and I wish
I could as well restore that Fair One's Freedom,
Whose loss hangs heavy on thee: Yet ever Night
Perhaps we may deserve thy Friendship nobler;
The approaching Storm may cast thy Shipwrecked Wealth
Back to thy Arms: 'Till that be past, since War
(Though in the justest Cause) is ever doubtful,
I will not ask thy Sword to aid my Victory,
Lest it should hurt that Hostage of thy Valor
Our common Foe detains.

Mon. Let Bajazet
Bend to his Yoke repining Slaves by sorce,
You, Sir, have found a nobler way to Empire,
Lord of the willing World.

Tam. Oh, my Axalla!
Thou have a tender Soul, apt for Compassion,
And art thy self a Lover and a Friend:
Does not this Prince's Fortune move thy Temper?

Ax. Yes, Sir, I mourn the brave Moneses Fate;
The Merit of his Virtue hardly matched
With disadvent'rous Chance: Yet, Prince, allow me,
Allow me from the Experience of a Lover
To say, one Person, whom your Story mentioned,
(If he survive) is far beyond you wretched:
You named the Bridegroom of your beauteous Sister.

Mon. I did: Oh, most accursed!

Ax. Think what he feels,
Dashed in the fierceness of his Expectation;
Then, when the approaching Minute of Possession
Had wound Imagination to the height,
Think if he lives! --

Mon. He lives, he does; it is true
He lives; but how? To be a Dog, and dead,
Were Paradise to such a State as his:
He holds down Life as Children do a Potion,
With strong Reluctance, and convulsive Strugglings,
Whilst his Misfortunes press him to disgorge it.

Tam. Spare the remembrance; it is a useless Grief,
And adds to the Misfortune by repeating it.
The revolution of a Day may bring
Such Turns, as Heaven it self could scarce have promised,
Far, far beyond thy Wish: Let that Hope cheer thee;
Haste my Axalla, to dispose, with safety,
Thy beauteous Charge, and on the Foe revenge
The Pain, which Absence gives; thy other care,
Honor and Arms, now summon thy Attendance;
Now, do thy Office well, my Soul, remember
Thy Cause; the Cause of Heaven and injured Earth.
O thou Supreme! if thy great Spirit warms
My glowing Breast, and fires my Soul to Arms,
Grant that my Sword, assisted by thy Power,
This Day may Peace and Happiness restore,
That War and lawless Rage may vex thy World no more.
[Exeunt Tamerlane, Moneses, Stratocles, Prince of Tanais, Zama, Mirvan, and
Attendants.
Manent Axalla, and Selima, with Soldiers. Ax. The Battle calls, and bids me
hasse to leave thee
Oh! (...) But let Destruction (...)
Are there not Hours enough for Blood and Slaughter?
This moment shall be Love's, and I will waste it
In soft Complainings, for thy Sighs and Coldness,
For thy forgetful Coldness; even at Birza,
When in thy Father's Court my Eyes first owned thee,
Fairer than Light, the Joy of their beholding,
Even then thou were not thus?

Sell. Art not thou changed?
Christian Axalla, Art thou still the same?
Those were the gentle Hours of Peace, and thou
The World's good Angel, that did kindly join
Its mighty Masters in harmonious Friendship:
But since those Joys, that once were ours, are lost,
Forbear to mention 'em, and talk of War:
Talk of thy Conquest, and my Chains, Axalla.

Ax. Yet I will listen, fair unkind Upbraider,
Yet I will listen to thy charming Accents,
Although they make me curse my Fame and Fortune,
My Laurel-wreaths, and all the glorious Trophies,
For which the Valiant bleed -- Oh! thou unjust one,
Do thou then envy me this small return
My niggard Fate has made for all the Mournings,
For all the Pains, for all the sleepless Nights
That cruel Absence brings?

Sell. Away, Deceiver;
I will not hear thy soothing: Is it thus
That Christian Lovers prove the Faith they swear?
Are War and Slavery the soft Endearments
With which they Court the Beauties they admire?
'Twas well my Heart was cautious of believing
Thy Vows, and thy Protesting. Know my Conqueror,
Thy Sword has vanquished but the half of Selima,
Her Soul disdains thy Victory.

Ax. Hear, sweet Heaven,
Hear the fair Tyrant, how she wrests Love's Laws,
As she had vowed my Ruin! What is Conquest?
What Joy have I from that but to behold thee,
To kneel before thee, and with lifted Eyes
To view thee, as Devotion does a Saint,
With awful, trembling Pleasure: Then to swear
Thou art the Queen and Mistress of my Soul?
Has not even Tamerlane (whose Word, next Heavens,
Makes Fate at second hand) bid thee disclaim
Thy Fears? And do thou call thy self a Slave?
Only to try how far the sad Impression
Can sink into Axalla.

Sell. Oh Axalla!
Ought I to hear you?

Ax. Come back, ye Hours,
And tell my Selima what she has done:
Bring back the time, when to her Father's Court
I came Ambassador of Peace from Tamerlane;
When hid by conscious Darkness and Disguise,
I past the Dangers of the watchful Guards;
Bold as the Youth who nightly swam the Hellespont:
Then, then she was not sworn the Foe of Love;
When, as my Soul confessed its Flame, and su'd
In moving sounds for Pity, she frowned rarely,
But, blushing, heard me tell the gentle Tale:
Nay, even confessed, and told me softly sighing
She thought there was no guilt in Love like mine.

Sell. Young and unskilful in the World's false Arts,
I suffered Love to steal upon my Softness,
And warm me with a lambent guiltless Flame:
Yes, I have heard thee swear a thousand times,
And call the conscious Powers of Heaven to witness
The tenderest, truest, everlasting Passion:
But, Oh! it is past; and I will charge Remembrance
To banish the sond Image from my Soul:
Since thou art sworn the Foe of Royal Bajazet,
I have resolved to hate thee.

Ax. Is it possible!
Hate is not in thy Nature; thy whole Frame
Is Harmony, without one jarring Atom.
Why do thou sorce thy Eyes to wear this Coldness
It damps the Springs of Life. Oh! bid me die,
Much rather bid me die, if it be true,
That thou have sworn to hate me. --

Sell. Let Life and Death
Wait the Decision of the bloody Field;
Nor can thy Fate (my Conqueror) depend
Upon a Woman's Hate. Yet since you urge
A Power, which once perhaps I had, there is
But one Request, that I can make with Honor.

Ax. Oh! name it! say! --

Sell. Forego your right of War,
And render me this instant to my Father.

Ax. Impossible! -- The tumult of the Battle,
That hastes to join, cuts off all means of Commerce
Betwixt the Armies.

Sell. Swear then to perform it,
Which way soever the chance of War determines,
On my first instance.

Ax. By the sacred Majesty
Of Heaven, to whom we kneel, I will obey thee;
Yes, I will give thee this severest Proof
Of my Soul's vowed Devotion, I will part with thee
(Thou Cruel, to command it!) I will part with thee,
As Wretches, that are doubtful of Hereafter,
Part with their Lives, unwilling, loath and fearful,
And trembling at Futurity. But is there nothing,
No small return that Honor can afford
For all this waste of Love?

Sell. The Gifts of Captives
Wear somewhat of Constraint; and generous Minds
Disdain to give, where freedom of the Choice
Does but seem wanting.

Ax. What! not one kind Look?
Then thou art changed indeed. Trumpets. Hark! I am summoned
And thou will send me forth like one unblessed;
Whom Fortune has forsaken, and ill Fate
Marked for Destruction. Thy surprising Coldness
Hangs on my Soul, and weighs my Courage down;
And the first feeble Blow I meet shall raze me
From all Remembrance: Nor is Life or Fame
Worthy my Care, since I am lost to thee. [Going.

Sell. Ha! Go thou to the Fight! --

Ax. I do. -- Farewell! --

Sell. What! and no more! A Sigh heaves in my Breast,
And stops the struggling Accents on my Tongue,
Else, sure, I should have added something more,
And made our Parting softer.

Ax. Give it way,
The niggard Honor, that affords not Love,
Forbids not Pity --

Sell. Fate perphaps has set
This Day, the Period of thy Life, and Conquests,
And I shall see thee born at Evening back,
A breathless Coarse; -- Oh! Can I think on that
And hide my Sorrows? -- No -- they will have way,
And all the Vital Air, that Life draws in,
Is rendered back in Sighs.

Ax. The murmuring Gale revives the drooping Flame,
That at thy Coldness languish'd in my Breast;
So breath the gentle Zephyrs on the Spring,
And waken every Plant, and odorous Flower,
Which Winter Frosts had blasted, to new Life.

Sell. To see thee for this moment, and no more --
Oh! help me to resolve against this Tenderness,
That charms my fierce Resentments, and presents thee
Not as thou art, mine, and my Father's Foe,
But as thou were, when first thy moving Accents
Won me to hear; when, as I listn'd to thee,
The happy Hours past by us unperceived,
So was my Soul fixed to the soft Enchantment.

Ax. Let me be still the same, I am, I must be.
If it were possible my Heart could stray,
One Look from thee would call it back again,
And fix the Wanderer for ever thine.

Sell. Where is my boasted Resolution now? Sinking into his Arms.
Oh! Yes! Thou art the same; my Heart joins with thee, Sinking into his Arms.
And to betray me will believe thee still:
It dances to the Sounds that moved it first,
And owns at once the weakness of my Soul:
So when some skilful Artist strikes the Strings,
The magic Numbers rouse our sleeping Passions,
And force us to confess our Grief, and Pleasure.
Alas! Axalla, say -- do thou not pity
My artless Innocence, and easy Fondness?
Oh! turn thee from me, or I die with blushing.

Ax. No -- let me rather gaze, for ever gaze,
And bless the newborn Glories that adorn thee;
From every Blush, that kindles in thy Cheeks,
Ten thousand little Loves, and Graces spring,
To revel in the Roses -- 'two' not be, [Trumpets.
This envious Trumpet calls, and tears me from thee --

Sell. My Fears increase, and doubly press me now,
I charge thee, if thy Sword comes cross my Father,
Stop for a moment, and remember me.

Ax. Oh! doubt not, but his Life shall be my care,
Even dearer than my own --

Sell. Guard that for me too.

Ax. Oh! Selima! thou have restored my quiet,
The noble ardour of the War, with Love
Returning, brightly burns within my Breast,
And bids me be secure of all hereafter.
So chears some pious Saint a dying Sinner,
(Who trembled at the thought of Pains to come)
With Heavens Forgiveness, and the hopes of Mercy:
At length the tumult of his Soul appeased,
And every Doubt, and anxious Scruple eased,
Boldly he proves the dark, uncertain Road,
The Peace, his holy Comforter bestowed,
Guides, and protects him, like a guardian God.
[Exit Axalla.
Sell. In vain all Arts a Lovesick Virgin tries,
Affects to frown, and seems severely wise,
In hopes to cheat the weary Lover's Eyes.
If the dear Youth her Pity strives to move,
And pleads, with tenderness, the cause of Love;
Nature asserts her Empire in her Heart,
And kindly takes the faithful Lover's part.
By Love, her self, and Nature thus betrayed,
No more she trusts in Pride's fantastic Aid,
But bids her Eyes confess the yielding Maid.
[Exit Selima, Guards following.
End of the first Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE Tamerlane's Camp. Enter Moneses. Mon. THE dreadful Business of the War
is over,
And slaughter, that, from yester Morn 'till Even,
With Giant Steps, past striding over the Field,
Besmeared, and horrid with the Blood of Nations,
Now weary sits among the mangled Heaps,
And slumbers over her Prey; while from this Camp
The cheerful Sounds of Victory, and Tamerlane,
Beat the high Arch of Heaven; deciding Fate,
That Crowns him with the Spoils of such a Day,
Has given it as an Earnest of the World
That shortly shall be his.
[Enter Stratocles. My Stratocles!
Most happily returned; might I believe
Thou bring'st me any Joy?

Str. With my best Diligence,
This Night, I have inquired of what concerns you.
Scarce was the Sun, who shone upon the Horror
Of the past day, sunk to the Western Ocean,
When by permission from the Prince Axalla,
I mixed among the Tumult of the Warriors,
Returning from the Battle: Here a Troop
Of hardy Parthians red with honest Wounds,
Confessed the Conquest, they had well deserved:
There a dejected Crew of wretched Captives
Sore with unprofitable Hurts, and groaning
Under new Bondage, followed sadly after
The haughty Victor's heels; but that, which fully
Crowned the Success of Tamerlane, was Bajazet,
Fallen like the proud Archangel from the height,
Where once (even next to Majesty Divine)
Enthroned he sat, down to the vile Descent
And lowness of a Slave; but oh! to speak
The Rage, the Fierceness, and the Indignation! --
It bars all Words, and cuts Description short.

Mon. Then he is fallen! that Comet, which, on high,
Portended Ruin; he has spent his Blaze,
And shall distract the World with Fears no more:
Sure it must bode me well, for often my Soul
Has started into Tumult at his Name,
As if my Guardian Angel took the Alarm,
At the approach of somewhat mortal to me:
But say, my Friend, what hear'st thou of Arpasia?
For there my Thoughts, my every Care is centered.

Str. Though on that purpose still I bent my Search,
Yet nothing certain could I gain, but this,
That in the Pillage of the Sultan's Tent,
Some Women were made Prisoners, who this Morning
Were to be offered to the Emperor's View;
Their Names, and Qualities, though often enquiring,
I could not learn.

Mon. Then must my Soul still labor
Beneath Uncertainty, and anxious Doubt,
The Mind's worst State. The Tyrant's Ruin gives me
But a Half-ease.

Str. 'Twas said, not far from hence
The Captives were to wait the Emperor's Passage.

Mon. Haste me to find the Place. Oh! my Arpasia!
Shall we not meet? Why hangs my Heart thus heavy
Like Death within my Bosom? Oh! it is well,
The Joy of Meeting pays the Pangs of Absence,
Else who could bear it?
When thy loved Sight shall bless my Eyes again,
Then I will own, I ought not to complain,
Since that sweet Hour is worth whole Years of Pain.
[Exeunt Moneses, and Stratocles.
SCENE II.
the Inside of a Magnificent Tent. Symphony of Warlike Music. Enter Tamerlane,
Axalla, Prince of Tanais, Zama, Mirvan, Soldiers and other Attendants. Ax. From
this Auspicious Day the Parthian Name
Shall date its Birth of Empire, and extend
Even from the dawning East to utmost Thule
The Limits of its Sway.

Pr. of T. Nations unknown,
Where yet the Roman Eagles never flew,
Shall pay their Homage to Victorious Tamerlane,
Bend to his Valor, and superior Virtue,
And own, that Conquest is not given by Chance,
But, bound by fatal and resistless Merit,
Waits on his Arms.

Tam. It is too much, you dress me
Like an Usurper in the borrowed Attributes
Of injured Heaven: Can we call Conquest ours?
Shall Man this Pigmy with a Giant's Pride
Vaunt of himself, and say, Thus have I done this?
Oh! vain Pretense to Greatness! Like the Moon,
We borrow all the Brightness, which we boast,
Dark in our selves, and useless. If that Hand
That rules the Fate of Battles strike for us,
Crown us with Fame, and gild our Clay with Honor;
'Twere most ungrateful to disown the Benefit,
And arrogate a Praise which is not ours.

Ax. With such unshaken Temper of the Soul
To bear the swelling Tide of prosperous Fortune,
Is to deserve that Fortune: In Adversity
The Mind grows tough by buffeting the Tempest;
Which, in Success dissolving, sinks to ease,
And loses all her Firmness.

Tam. Oh! Axalla!
Could I forget I am a Man, as thou art,
Would not the Winter's Cold, or Summer's Heat,
Sickness, or Thirst, and Hunger, all the Train
Of Nature's clamorous Appetites asserting
An Equal Right in Kings, and common men,
Reprove me daily? -- No -- If I boast of ought,
Be it, to have been Heaven's happy Instrument,
The means of Good to all my Fellow Creatures;
This is a King's best Praise.

Enter Omar. Om. Honor and Fame [Bowing to Tamerlane.
For ever wait the Emperor; may our Prophet
Give him ten thousand thousand Days of Life,
And every Day like this. The Captive Sultan
Fierce in his Bonds, and at his Fate repining,
Attends your sacred Will.

Tam. Let him approach.
Enter Bajazet and other Turkish Prisoners in Chains, with a Guard of Soldiers.
When I survey the Ruins of this Field,
The wild Destruction, which thy fierce Ambition
Has dealt among Mankind, (so many Widows,
And helpless Orphans has thy Battle made,
That half our Eastern World this day are Mourners)
Well may I in behalf of Heaven and Earth
Demand from thee Atonement for this wrong.

Baj. Make thy Demand to those that own thy Power,
Know I am still beyond it; and though Fortune
(Curse on that Changeling Deity of Fools!)
Has stripped me of the Train, and Pomp of Greatness,
That outside of a King, yet still my Soul,
Fixed high, and of it self alone dependant,
Is ever Free, and Royal, and even now,
As at the head of Battle does desie thee:
I know what Power the Chance of War has given,
And dare thee to the use on it. This vile Speeching,
This After-game of Words is what most irks me;
Spare that, and for the rest it is equal all --
Be it as it may.

Tam. Well was it for the World,
When on their Borders Neighboring Princes met,
Frequent in Friendly Parle, by cool Debates,
Preventing wasteful War; such should our Meeting
Have been, had thou but held in just regard
The Sanctity of Leagues so often sworn to,
Can thou believe thy Prophet, or what is more,
That Power Supreme, which made thee, and thy Prophet,
Will, with Impunity, let pass that Breach
Of sacred Faith given to the Royal Greek?

Baj. Thou Pedant Talker! ha! art thou a King
Possessed of sacred Power, Heavens darling Attribute,
And do thou prate of Leagues, and Oaths, and Prophets?
I hate the Greek (Perdition on his Name!)
As I do thee, and would have met you both,
As Death does human Nature, for Destruction.

Tam. Causeless to hate is not of human kind;
The salvage Brute, that haunts in Woods remote,
And Desart-wilds, tears not the fearful Traveller,
If Hunger, or some Injury provoke not.

Baj. Can a King want a Cause when Empire bids
Go on? what is he born for but Ambition?
It is his Hunger, it is his Call of Nature,
The Noble Appetite which will be satisfied,
And like the Food of Gods, makes him Immortal.

Tam. Henceforth I will not wonder we were Foes,
Since Souls that differ so, by Nature hate,
And strong Antipathy forbids their Union.

Baj. The noble Fire that warms me does indeed
Transcend thy Coldness, I am pleased we differ,
Nor think alike.

Tam. No -- for I think like Man
Thou like a Monster; from whose baleful Presence
Nature starts back; and though she six'd her Stamp
On thy rough Mass, and marked thee for a Man,
Now conscions of her Error, she disclaims thee,
As formed for her Destruction. --
It Is true, I am a King, as thou have been:
Honor, and Glory too have been my aim;
But though I dare face Death, and all the Dangers,
Which furious War wears in its bloody Front,
Yet would I choose to fix my Fame by Peace,
By Justice, and by Mercy; and to raise
My Trophies on the Blessings of Mankind;
Nor would I buy the Empire of the World
With Ruin of the People whom I sway,
Or Forfeit of my Honor.

Baj. Prophet, I thank thee. --
Damnation! -- Could thou rob me of my Glory,
To dress up this tame King, this preaching Dervise?
Unfit for War, thou should have lived secure
In lazy Peace, and with debating Senates
Shared a precarious Scepter, sat tamely still,
And let bold Factions canton out thy Power,
And wrangle for the Spoils they robbed thee of;
Whilst I (curse on the Power that stops my Ardour!)
Would, like a Tempest, rush amidst the Nations,
Be greatly terrible, and deal, like Alha,
My angry Thunder on the frighted World.

Tam. The World! -- 'twould be too little for thy Pride:
Thou would scale Heaven --

Baj. I would: -- Away: my Soul
Disdains thy Conference.

Tam. Thou vain, rash Thing,
That, with gigantick Insolence, have dared
To lift thy wretched self above the Stars,
And mate with Power Almighty: Thou art fallen! --

Baj. It Is false! I am not fallen from ought I have been;
At least my Soul resolves to keep her State,
And scorns to take Acquaintance with ill Fortune.

Tam. Almost beneath my Pity art thou fallen;
Since, while the avenging Hand of Heaven is on thee,
And presses to the Dust thy swelling Soul,
Foolhardy, with the stronger thou contendest;
To what vast heights had thy tumultuous Temper
Been hurried, if Success had crowned thy Wishes;
Say, What had I to expect, if thou had conquered?

Baj. Oh, Glorious Thought! By Heaven! I will enjoy it,
Though but in Fancy; Imagination shall
Make room to entertain the vast Idea.
Oh! had I been the Master but of Yesterday,
The World, the World had felt me; and for thee,
I had used thee, as thou art to me, -- a Dog,
The Object of my Scorn, and mortal Hatred:
I would have taught thy Neck to know my weight,
And mounted from that Footstool to my Saddle:
Then, when thy daily servile Task was done,
I would have cag'd thee, for the Scorn of Slaves,
'Till thou had begged to die; and even that Mercy
I had denied Thee: Now thou know my Mind,
And question me no farther.

Tam. Well do thou teach me
What Justice should exact from thee: Mankind
With one Consent cry out for Vengeance on thee;
Loudly they call, to cut off this League-breaker,
This wild Destroyer, from the Face of Earth.

Baj. Do it, and rid thy shaking Soul at once
Of its worst Fear.

Tam. Why slept the Thunder,
That should have armed thy Idol Deity,
And given thee Power, e're yester Sun was set,
To shake the Soul of Tamerlane: Had thou an Arm
To make thee feared, thou should have proved it on me,
Amidst the Sweat and Blood of yonder Field,
When, through the Tumult of the War, I sought thee,
Fenced in with Nations.

Baj. Curse upon the Stars,
That fated us to different Scenes of Slaughter!
Oh! could my Sword have met thee! --

Tam. Thou had then,
As now, been in my Power, and held thy Life
Dependant on my Gift. -- Yes Bajazet,
I bid thee, Live. -- So much my Soul disdains,
That thou should think, I can fear ought but Heaven:
Nay more; could thou forget thy brutal fierceness,
And form thy self to Manhood, I would bid thee,
Live, and be still a King, that thou may learn
What Man should be to Man, in War remembering
The Common Tie, and Brotherhood of Kind.
This Royal Tent, with such of thy Domestics,
As can be found, shall wait upon thy Service;
Nor will I use my Fortune, to demand
Hard Terms of Peace, but such as thou may offer
With Honor, I with Honor may receive, [ Tamerlane signs to an Officer, who
unbinds Bajazet.

Baj. Ha! say thou -- no! -- our Prophet's Vengeance blast me,
If thou shall buy my Friendship with thy Empire.
Damnation on thee! thou smooth, fawning Talker!
Give me again my Chains, that I may curse thee,
And gratify my Rage: Or, if thou will,
Be a vain Fool, and play with thy Perdition,
Remember I Am thy Foe, and hate thee deadly.
Thy Folly on thy Head!

Tam. Be still my Foe;
Great Minds (like Heaven) are pleased in doing good,
Though the ungrateful Subjects of their Favors
Are barren in return: Thy stubborn Pride
That spurns the gentle Office of Humanity,
Shall, in my Honor own, and thy Despite,
I have done, as I ought. Virtue still does
With Scorn, the Mercenary World regard,
Where abject Souls do good, and hope reward:
Above the worthless Trophies Men can raise,
She seeks not Honors, Wealth, nor airy Praise,
But with her self, Her self, the Goddess pays.
[Exeunt Tamerlane, Axalla, Prince of Tanais, Mirvan, Zama, and Attendants.
Manent Bajazet, Omar, Guards. Baj. Come, lead me to my Dungeon; plunge me down,
Deep from the hated Sight of Man, and Day,
Where, under Covert of the friendly Darkness,
My Soul may brood, at leisure, over its Anguish.

Om. Our Royal Master would, with noble Usage,
Make your Misfortunes light, he bids you hope. --

Baj. I tell thee, Slave, I have shook hands with Hope,
And all my Thoughts are Rage, Despair, and Horror,
Enter Haly, Arpasia, and Women Attendants. Ha! wherefore am I thus? --
Perdition seize me!
But my cold Blood runs shivering to my Heart,
As at some Fantom, that in dead of Night,
With dreadful Action stalks around our Beds.
The Rage, and fiercer Passions of my Breast
Are lost in new Confusion. -- Arpasia! -- Haly!

Ha. Oh, Emperor! for whose hard Fate our Prophet,
And all the Heroes of thy sacred Race
Are sad in Paradise, thy faithful Haly,
The Slave of all thy Pleasures, in this Ruin,
This Universal Shipwreck of thy Fortunes,
Has gathered up this Treasure for thy Arms:
Nor even the Victor, haughty Tamerlane,
(By whose Command, once more, thy Slave beholds thee)
Denies this Blessing to thee, but with Honor
Renders thee back thy Queen, thy beauteous Bride.

Baj. Oh! had her Eyes, with pity, seen my Sorrows,
Had she the softness of a tender Bride,
Heaven could not have bestowed a greater Blessing,
And Love had made amends for loss of Empire.
But see, what Fury dwells upon her Charms!
What Lightning flashes from her angry Eyes!
With a malignant Joy she views my Ruin:
Even Beauteous in her Hatred, still she charms me,
And awes my fierce tumultuous Soul to Love.

Arp. And dare thou hope, thou Tyrant! Ravisher!
That Heaven has any Joy in store for thee?
Look back upon the Sum of thy past Life,
(...) Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice,
(...), Murders, swell the black (...),
Where lost Arpasia's (...)
Thy last (...)
At length the (...)
My weary Soul shall be^^ a little longer
The pain of Life, to call for Justi^e on (...)
That once complete, sink to the peaceful Grave,
And lose the memory of my Wrongs and Thee

Baj. Thou rail'st! I thank thee for it -- Be perverse,
And muster all the Women in thy Soul;
Goad me with Curses, be a very Wife,
That I may fling off this tame Love, and hate thee.

Enter Moneses. Bajazet starting.] Ha! -- Keep thy temper Heart; nor take alarm
At a Slave's Presence.

Mon. It is Arpasia! -- Leave me, thou cold Fear.
Sweet as the rosy Morn she breaks upon me,
And Sorrow, like the Night's unwholesome Shade,
Gives way before the Golden Dawn she brings.

Baj. [Advancing toward him. Ha, Christian! Is it well that we meet thus?
[Advancing toward him. Is this thy Faith?

Mon. Why does thy frowning Brow
Put on this form of Fury? Is it strange
We should meet here Companions in Misfortune,
The Captives of one common Chance of War?
Nor should thou wonder, that my Sword has failed
Before the Fortune of Victorious Tamerlane,
When thou with Nations like the sanded Shore,
With half the warring World upon thy side,
Could not stand up against his dreadful Battle,
That crushed thee with its shock. Thy Men can witness,
Those Cowards, that forsook me in the Combat
My Sword was not unactive.

Baj. No, -- it is false.
Where is my Daughter, thou vile Greek? thou have
Betrayed her to the Tartar; or even worse,
Pale with thy Fears, did lose her like a Coward;
And like a Coward now, would cast the blame
On Fortune, and ill Stars.

Mon. Ha! said thou like a Coward?
What Sanctity, what Majesty Divine
Have thou put on, to guard thee from my Rage?
That thus thou dare to wrong me.

Baj. (...), thou Slave,
And know me for thy Lord --

Mon. I tell thee, Tyrant,
When in the Pride of Power thou sat'st on high,
When like an Idol thou were vainly worshipped,
By prostrate Wretches, born with slavish Souls:
Even when thou were a King, thou were not more,
Nor greater than Moneses; born of a Race
Royal, and Great as thine: What art thou now then?
The Fate of War has set thee with the Lowest;
And Captives (like the Subjects of the Grave)
Losing distinction, serve one common Lord.

Baj. Braved by this Dog! now give a loose to Rage,
And curse thy self, curse thy false, cheating Prophet.
Ha! Yet there is some Revenge. Hear me, thou Christian,
Thou left'st that Sister with me: -- Thou Impostor!
Thou Boaster of thy Honesty! Thou Liar!
But take her to thee back.
Now to explore my Prison. -- If it holds
Another Plague like this, the restless Damned
(If Mufty's lie not) wander thus in Hell?
From scorching Flames to chilling Frosts they run,
Then from their Frosts to Fires return again,
And only prove variety of Pain.
[Exeunt Bajazet and Haly.
Arp. Stay, Bajazet, I charge thee by my Wrongs!
Stay, and unfold a Tale of so much Horror,
As only sits thy telling. -- Oh, Moneses!

Mon. Why do thou weep? why this tempestuous Passion,
That stops thy falt'ring Tongue short on my Name?
Oh, speak! unveil this Mystery of Sorrow,
And draw the dismal Scene, at once, to sight,

Arp. Thou art undone, lost, ruined, and undone.

Mon. I will not think it is so, while I have thee,
While thus it is given to fold thee in my Arms;
For while I sigh upon thy panting Bosom,
The sad remembrance of past Woes is lost.

Arp. Forbear to sooth thy Soul with flattering Thoughts
Of Evils overpast, and Joys to come:
Our Woes are like the genuine Shade beneath,
Where Fate cuts off the very hopes of Day,
And everlasting Night and Horror reign.

Mon By all the Tenderness, and chaste Endearments
Of our past Love, I charge thee, my Arpasia,
To case my Soul of Doubts; give me to know
At once the utmost Malice of my Fate.

Arp. Take then thy wretched Share in all I suffer,
Still Partner of my Heart. Scarce had thou left
The Sultan's Camp, when the Imperious Tyrant,
Softning the pride and fierceness of his Temper,
With gentle Speech made offer of his Love.
Amazed, as at the shock of sudden Death,
I started into Tears, and often urged
(Though still in vain) the difference of our Faiths:
At last, as flying to the utmost Refuge,
With lifted Hands, and streaming Eyes, I owned
The Fraud; which when we first were made his Prisoners,
Conscious of my unhappy Form, and fearing
For thy dear Life, I forced thee to put on
Thy borrowed Name of Brother, mine of Sister;
Hiding beneath that Veil the nearer Tie,
Our mutual Vows had made before the Priest;
Kindling to Rage a^ hearing of my Story,
Then be it so, (...). Think thou thy Vows
Given to a Slave shall bar me from thy Beauties?
Then bad the Priest pronounce the Marriage Rites,
Which he performed, whilst shrieking with Despair,
I called in vain the Powers of Heaven to aid me.

Mon. Villain! Imperial Villain! -- Oh, the Coward!
Awed by his Guilt, though backed by Force and Power,
He durst not to my Face avow his Purpose;
But in my absence like a lurking (...)
Stole on my Treasure, and at once undid me.

Arp. Had they not kept me from the means of Death,
Forgetting all the Rules of Christian Suffering,
I had done a desperate Murder on my Soul,
Ever the rude Slaves, that waited on his Will,
Had forced me to his --

Mon. Stop thee there, Arpasia,
And bar my Fancy from the guilty Scene;
Let not Thought enter, lest the busy Mind
Should muster such a train of monstrous Images,
As would distract me. Oh! I cannot bear it.
Thou lovely Hoard of Sweets, where all my Joy,
Were treasured up, to have thee rifled thus!
Thus torn untasted from my eager Wishes!
But I will have thee from him. Tamerlane
(The Sovereign Judge of Equity on Earth)
Shall do me Justice on this mighty Robber,
And render back thy Beauties to Moneses.

Arp. And who shall render back my Peace, my Honor,
The spotless Whiteness of my Virgin Soul?
Ah! no, Moneses -- think not I will ever
Bring a polluted Love to thy chaste Arms:
I am the Tyrant's Wife. Oh, fatal Title!
And, in the sight of all the Saints, have sworn,
By Honor, Womanhood, and blushing Shame,
To know no second Bride-bed, but my Grave.

Mon. I swear it must not be, since still my Eye
Finds thee as heavenly white, as Angel pure,
As in the earliest hours of Life, thou were,
Nor art thou his, but mine; thy first Vow's mine,
Thy Soul is mine, --

Arp. Oh! think not, that the Power
Of most persuasive Eloquence can make me
Forget, I Have been another's, been his Wife;
Now by my Blushes! by the strong Confusion,
And Anguish of my Heart! spare me Moneses,
Nor urge my trembling Virtue to the Precipice.
Shortly, (oh! very shortly) if my Sorrows
Divine aright, and Heaven be gracious to me,
Death shall dissolve the fatal Obligation,
And give me up to Peace, to that blessed Place
Where the Good rest from Care and anxious Life.

Mon. Oh! teach me, thou fair Saint, like thee to suffer,
Teach me, with hardy Piety, to combat
The present Ills, instruct my Eyes to pass
The narrow bounds of Life, this Land of Sorrow,
And with bold Hopes, to view the Realms beyond,
Those distant Beauties of the future State.
Tell me Arpasia, -- say, what Joys are those,
That wait to crown the Wretch who suffers here
Oh! tell me, and sustain my sailing Faith.

Arp. Imagine somewhat exquisitly fine,
Which Fancy cannot paint, which the pleased Mind
Can barely know, unable to describe it;
Imagine, it is a Tract of endless Joys,
Without Satiety, or Interruption;
Imagine, it is to meet, and part no more.

Mon. Grant, gentle Heaven, that such may be our Lot!
Let us be blessed together, -- Oh! my Soul!
Build on that hope, and let it arm thy Courage,
To struggle with the Storm, that parts us now.

Arp. Yes! my Moneses, now the Surges rise,
The swelling Sea breaks in between our Barks,
And drives us to our Fate on different Rocks,
Farewell! -- my Soul lives with thee. --

Mon. Death is parting,
It Is the last sad Adieu 'twixt Soul and Body,
But this is somewhat worse -- my Joy, my Comfort,
All that was left in Life fleets after thee.
My aching Sight hangs on thy parting Beauties,
Thy lovely Eyes all drowned in Floods of Sorrow!
So sinks the setting Sun beneath the Waves,
And leaves the Traveller in pathless Woods,
Benighted and forlorn, -- Thus with sad Eyes
Westward he turns, to mark the Light's decay,
Till having lost the last faint Glimpse of Day,
Chearless, in darkness, he pursues his way.
[Exeunt Moneses and Arpasia severally.
End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE, the Inside of the Royal Tent. Enter Axalla, Selima, and Women
Attendants. Ax. CAN there be ought in Love, beyond this Proof,
This wondrous Proof, I give thee of my Faith?
To tear thee from my bleeding Bosom thus?
To rend the Strings of Life, to set thee free,
And yield thee to a cruel Father's Power,
Foe to my Hopes? What can thou pay me back,
What but thy self (thou Angel) for this Fondness?

Sell. Thou do upbraid me, Beggar as I am,
And urge me with my Poverty of Love.
Perhaps thou think, it is nothing for a Maid
To struggle through the Niceness of her Sex,
The Blushes, and the Fears, and own she loves:
Thou think, it is nothing for my artless Heart
To own my Weakness, and confess thy Triumph.

Ax. Oh! yes, I own it; my charmed Ears never knew
A Sound of so much Rapture, so much Joy.
Not Voices, Instruments, not warbling Birds,
Not Winds, not murmuring Waters joined in Consort,
Not tuneful Nature, not the according Spheres
Utter such Harmony, as when my Selima
With down cast Looks, and Blushes said, -- I love --

Sell. And yet thou say, I am a Niggard to thee:
I swear the Balance shall be held between us,
And Love be Judge, if after all the Tenderness,
Tears, and Confusion of my Virgin Soul,
Thou should complain of ought, Unjust Axalla!

Ax. Why was I ever blessed? -- Why is Remembrance
Rich with a thousand pleasing Images
Of past Enjoyments, since it is but to plague me?
When thou art mine no more, what will it ease me
To think of all the Golden Minutes past,
To think, that thou were kind, and I was happy:
But like an Angel fallen from Bliss, to curse
My present State, and mourn the Heaven I Have lost.

Sell. Hope better for us both; nor let thy Fears,
Like an unlucky Omen, cross my way.
My Father rough, and stormy in his Nature,
To me was always gentle, and, with Fondness
Paternal, ever met me with a Blessing.
Often when Offense had stirred him to such Fury,
That not grave Counselors for Wisdom sam'd,
Nor hardy Captains that had sought his Battles,
Presumed to speak, but struck with awful Dread,
Were hushed as Death; yet has he smiled on me,
Kill me, and bad me utter all my purpose;
Till, with my idle Prattle, I had soothed him,
And won him from his Anger.

Ax. Oh! I know,
Thou have a Tongue to charm the wildest Tempers.
Herds would forget to graze, and Savage Beasts
Stand still, and lose their Fierceness, but to hear thee,
As if they had Reflection, and by Reason
Forsook a less Enjoyment for a greater.
But oh! when I revolve each Circumstance,
My Christian Faith, my Service closely bound
To Tamerlane my Master, and my Friend:
Tell me (my Charmer) if my Fears are vain?
Think what remains for me, if the fierce Sultan
Should doom thy Beauties to another's Bed?

Sell. It Is a sad Thought, but to appease thy Doubts,
Here, in the awful Sight of Heaven, I vow,
No Power shall ever divide me from thy Love,
Even Duty shall not force me to be false.
My cruel Stars may tear thee from my Arms,
But never from my Heart; and when the Maids
Shall yearly come with Garlands of fresh Flowers,
To mourn with pious Office over my Grave,
They shall sit sadly down, and weeping tell,
How well I loved, how much I suffered for thee,
And while they grieve my Fate, shall praise my Constancy.

Ax. But see! the Sultan comes! -- my beating Heart
Bounds with exulting Motion; Hope and Fear
Fight with alternate Conquest in my Breast.
Oh! Can I give her from me? Yield her up?
Now mourn, thou God of Love, since Honor triumphs,
And crowns his cruel Altars with thy Spoils.

Enter Bajazet. Baj. To have a nauseous Courtesy forced on me
Spite of my Will, by an insulting Foe, --
Ha! they would break the Fierceness of my Temper,
And make me supple for their slavish purpose:
Curse on their fawning Arts; from Heaven it self
I would not, on such Terms, receive a Benefit,
But spurn it back upon the Giver's Hand.

Sell. My Lord; my Royal Father.
Selima comes forward and kneels to Bajazet.
Baj. Ha! what art thou?
What heavenly Innocence? that in a Form
So known, so loved, have left thy Paradise,
For joyless Prison, for this Place of Woe?
Art thou my Selima?

Sell. Have you forgot me?
Alas! my Piety is then in vain;
Your Selima, your Daughter whom you loved,
The Fondling once of her dear Father's Arms,
Is come to claim her share in his Misfortunes;
To wait, and tend him with obsequious Duty;
To sit, and weep for every Care he feels;
To help to wear the tedious Minutes out,
To soften Bondage, and the loss of Empire.

Baj. Now by our Prophet! If my wounded Mind
Could know a Thought of Peace, it would be now;
Even from thy prating Infancy thou were
My Joy, my little Angel; smiling Comfort
Came with thee still to glad me: Now I Am cursed
Even in thee too; Reproach and Infamy
Attend the Christian Dog, to whom thou were trusted:
To see thee here! -- 'twere better see thee dead.

Ax. Thus Tamerlane, to Royal Bajazet,
With Kingly Greeting sends: Since with the brave,
(The bloody Business of the Fight once ended)
Stern Hate, and Opposition ought to cease;
Thy Queen already to thy Arms restored,
Receive this second Gift, thy beauteous Daughter:
And if there be ought farther in thy Wish,
Demand with Honor, and obtain it freely.

Baj. Bear back thy fulsom Greeting to thy Master,
Tell him, I Will none on it: Had he been a God,
All his Omnipotence could not restore
My Fame diminished, loss of Sacred Honor,
The Radiancy of Majesty eclipsed.
For ought besides, it is not worth my Care;
The Giver, and his Gifts are both beneath me.

Ax. Enough of War the wounded Earth has known;
Weary at length, and wasted with Destruction,
Sadly she rears her ruined Head, to show
Her Cities humbled, and her Countries spoiled,
And to her mighty Masters sues for Peace.
Oh! Sultan! by the Power Divine I swear!
With Joy I would resign the Savage Trophies
In Blood and Battle gained, could I atone
The fatal Breach 'twixt thee and Tamerlane;
And think a Soldier's Glory well bestowed,
To buy Mankind a Peace.

Baj. And what art thou?
That do presume to mediate 'twixt the Rage
Of angry Kings?

Ax. A Prince, born of the noblest,
And of a Soul that answers to that Birth,
That dares not but do well. Thou do put on
A forced Forgetfulness, thus not to know me,
A Guest so lately to thy Court, then meeting
On gentler Terms. --

Sell. Could ought efface the Merit
Of brave Axalla's Name, yet when your Daughter
Shall tell, how well, how nobly she was used;
How light this gallant Prince made all her Bondage;
Most sure the Royal Bajazet will own,
That Honor stands indebted to such Goodness,
Nor can a Monarch's Friendship more than pay it.

Baj. Ha! Know thou that fond Girl? -- Go -- it is not well --
And when thou cou'd'st descend to take a Benefit
From a vile Christian, and thy Father's Foe,
Thou did an Act dishonest to thy Race;
Henceforth, unless thou mean to cancel all
My Share in thee, and write thy self a Bastard:
Die, Starve, know any Evil, any Pain,
Rather than taste a Mercy from these Dogs.

Sell. Alas! Axalla! [Weeping.

Ax. Weep not lovely Maid;
I swear, one pearly Drop from those fair Eyes
Would over pay the Service of my Life;
One Sigh from thee has made a large amends
For all thy angry Father's Frowns, and Fierceness.

Baj. Oh! my cursed Fortune! -- am I fallen thus low?
Dishonored to my Face? thou Earth-born thing,
Thou Clod! how have thou dared to lift thy Eyes
Up to the Sacred Race of mighty Ottoman?
Whom Kings, whom even our Prophet's holy Offspring
At distance have beheld; and what art thou?
What glorious Titles blazon out thy Birth?
Thou vile Obscurity! Ha! -- say -- thou base one.

Ax. Thus challenged Virtue, modest as she is,
Stands up to do her self a common Justice,
To answer, and assert that inborn Merit,
That Worth, which conscious to her self she feels.
Were Honor to be scanned by long Descent,
From Ancestors Illustrious, I could vaunt
A Lineage of the greatest, and recount
Among my Fathers, Names of ancient Story,
Heroes, and God-like Patriots, who subdued
The World by Arms, and Virtue, and being Romans
Scorned to be Kings; but that be their own Praise:
Nor will I borrow Merit from the Dead,
My self an Undeserver. I could prove
My Friendship such, as thou might deign to accept
With Honor, when it comes with friendly Office,
To render back thy Crown, and former Greatness:
And yet even this, even all is poor, when Selima
With matchless Worth weighs down the adverse Scale.

Baj. To give me back what yesterday took from me,
Would be to give like Heaven, when having finished
This World, (the goodly Work of his Creation)
He bid his Favorite, Man, be Lord of all.
But this --

Ax. Nor is this Gift beyond my Power;
Often has the mighty Master of my Arms
Urged me, with large Ambition to demand
Crowns and Dominions from his bounteous Power:
It Is true, I waved the Proffer, and have held it
The worthier Choice, to wait upon his Virtues,
To be the Friend and Partner of his Wars,
Than to be Asia's Lord: Nor wonder then,
If, in the Confidence of such a Friendship,
I promise boldly for the Royal Giver,
Thy Crown, and Empire.

Baj. For our Daughter thus
Mean thou to barter? ha! I tell thee, Christian,
There is but one, one Dowry, thou can give,
And I can ask, worthy my Daughter's Love.

Ax. Oh! name the mighty Ransom, task my Power,
Let there be Danger, Difficulty, Death,
TO enhance the Price.

Baj. I take thee at thy Word,
Bring me the Tartar's Head.

Ax. Ha!

Baj. Tamerlane's,
That Death, that deadly Poison to my Glory.

Ax. Prodigious! Horrid!

Sell. Lost! for ever lost!

Baj. And could thou hope to bribe me with ought else?
With a vile Peace patched up on slavish Terms?
With tributary Kingship? -- No -- to merit
A Recompense from me, sat my Revenge.
The Tartar is my Bane, I cannot bear him;
One Heaven and Earth can never hold us both;
Still shall we hate, and with Defiance deadly
Keep Rage alive, till one be lost for ever;
As if two Suns should meet in the Meridian,
And strive in fiery Combat for the passage.
Weep'st thou fond Girl? Now as thy King, and Father,
I charge thee, drive this Slave from thy remembrance:
Hate shall be pious in thee; Laying hold on her Hand. come, and join
To curse thy Father's Foes.

Sell. Undone for ever!
Now Tyrant Duty, art thou yet obeyed,
There is no more to give thee, Oh Axalla!
[ Bajazet leads out Selima, she looking back on Axalla.
Ax. It Is what I feared, Fool that I was to obey:
The Coward Love, that could not bear her Frown,
Has wrought his own Undoing, Perhaps, even now,
The Tyrant's Rage prevails upon her Fears.
(...) he storms, she weeps, and sighs, and trembles,
But swears at length, to think on me no more.
He bad me take her. -- But oh! gracious Honor!
Upon what Terms? My Soul yet shudders at it,
And stands, but half recovered of her Fright.
The Head of Tamerlane! monstrous Impiety!
Bleed, bleed to Death, my Heart, be Virtue's Martyr.
Oh, Emperor, I own I ought to give thee
Some nobler Mark, than Dying, of my Faith.
Then let the Pains I feel my Friendship prove,
It Is easier far to die, than cease to love.
[Exit Axalla
SCENE II.
Tamerlane's Camp. Enter severally Moneses, and Prince of Tanais. Mon. IF I not
press untimely on his Leisure,
You would much bind a Stranger to your Service,
To give me means of Audience from the Emperor.

Pr. Most willingly, though for the present Moment
We must entreat your stay; he holds him private.

Mon. His Council, I presume, --

Pr. No; the Affair
Is not of Earth, but Heaven -- a Holy Man,
(One whom our Prophet's Law calls such) a Dervise
Keeps him in Conference.

Mon. Hours of Religion,
Especially of Prince's, claim a Reverence,
Nor will be interrupted.

Pr. What his Business
Imports, we know not; but with earnest Suit
This Morn he begged Admittance. Our great Master
(Than whom none bows more lowly to high Heaven)
In reverend regard holds all that bear
Relation to Religion, and, on notice
Of his Request, received him on the instant.

Mon. We will attend his Pleasure.
[Exeunt.
Enter Tamerlane, and a Dervise. Tam. Thou bring'st me thy Credentials from the
Highest,
From Alha, and our Prophet: Speak thy Message,
It must import the best and noblest Ends.

Der. Thus speaks our Holy Mahomet, who has given thee
To reign, and conquer; Ill do thou repay
The Bounties of his Hand, unmindful of
The Fountain, whence thy Streams of Greatness flow,
Thou have forgot high Heaven, have beaten down,
And trampled on Religion's Sanctity.

Tam. Now, as I am a Soldier, and a King,
(The greatest Names of Honor) do but make
Thy Imputation out, and Tamerlane
Shall do thee ample Justice on himself;
So much the Sacred Name of Heaven awes me.
Could I suspect my Soul of harboring ought
To its Dishonor, I would search it strictly,
And drive the offending Thought with Fury forth.

Der. Yes, thou have hurt our Holy Prophet's Honor,
By fostering the pernicious Christian Sect;
Those, whom his Sword pursued with fell Destruction,
Thou take into thy Bosom, to thy Councils;
They are thy only Friends: The true Believers
Mourn to behold thee favor this Axalla.

Tam. I fear me, thou out-go'st the Prophet's Order:
And brings his venerable Name, to shelter
A Rudeness ill becoming thee to use,
Or me to suffer. When thou nam'st my Friend,
Thou nam'st a Man beyond a Monk's discerning,
Virtuous, and Great, a Warrior, and a Prince.

Der. He is a Christian; there our Law condemns him,
Although he were even all thou speak, and more.

Tam. It Is false; no Law Divine condemns the Virtuous,
For differing from the Rules your Schools devise.
Look round, how Providence bestows alike
Sunshine and Rain, to bless the fruitful Year,
On different Nations, all of different Faiths;
And (though by several Names and Titles worshipped)
Heaven takes the various Tribute of their Praise;
Since all agree to own, at least to mean,
One best, one greatest, only Lord of All.
Thus when he viewed the many Forms of Nature,
He found that all was good, and blessed the fair Variety

Der. Most Impious, and Profane! -- nay, frown not, Prince,
Full of the Prophet, I despise the Danger
Thy angry Power may threaten: I command thee
To hear, and to obey, since thus says Mahomet;
Why have I made thee dreadful to the Nations?
Why have I given thee Conquest? but to spread
My sacred Law even to the utmost Earth,
And make my Holy Mecca the World's Worship?
Go on, and wheresoe'er thy Arms shall prosper,
Plant there the Prophet's Name: with Sword and Fire,
Drive out all other Faiths, and let the World
Confess him only.

Tam. Had he but commanded
My Sword to conquer all, to make the World
Know but one Lord, the Task were not so hard;
'Twere but to do what has been done already;
And Philip's Son, and Caesar did as much:
But to subdue the unconquerable Mind,
To make one Reason have the same Effect
Upon all Apprehensions; to force this,
Or this Man, just to think, as thou and I do;
Impossible! Unless Souls were alike
In all, which differ now like Human Faces.

Der. Well might the Holy Cause be carried on,
If Mussulmen did not make War on Mussulmen.
Why hold'st thou Captive a believing Monarch?
Now, as thou hop'st to 'scape the Prophet's Curse,
Release the Royal Bajazet, and join
With Force united, to destroy the Christians.

Tam. It Is well -- I Have found the Cause that moved thy Zeal.
What shallow Politician set thee on,
In hopes to fright me this way to compliance?

Der. Our Prophet only. --

Tam. No -- thou do belie him,
Thou Maker of new Faiths! that dare to build
Thy fond Invensions on Religion's Name.
Religion's Luster is by (...) Innocence
Divinely pure, and simple from all Arts.
You daub and dress her like a common Mistress,
The Harlot of your Fancies, and by (...)
False Beauties, which she wants not, makes the World
Suspect, her Angel's Face is foul beneath,
And wo' not bear all Lights. Hence! I have found thee.

Der. I have but one resort. Now aid me, Prophet. [aside.
Yet have I somewhat further to unfold;
Our Prophet speaks to thee in Thunder -- [The Dervise draws a concealed
Dagger, and offers to stab Tamerlane. thus --

Tam. No, Villain, Heaven is watchful over its Worshippers, [Wresting the
Dagger from him.
And blasts the Murderer's Purpose. Think thou, Wretch,
Think on the Pains that wait thy Crime, and tremble
When I shall doom thee --

Der. It Is but Death at last,
And I will suffer greatly for the Cause
That urged me first to the bold Deed.

Tam. Oh, impious!
Enthusiasm thus makes Villains, Martyrs.
[Pausing.] It shall be so. -- To die! 'twere a Reward --
Now learn the difference 'twixt thy Faith and mine:
Thine bids thee lift thy Dagger to my Throat,
Mine can forgive the Wrong, and bid thee live.
Keep thy own wicked Secret and be safe:
If thou continu'st still to be the same,
It Is Punishment enough to be a Villain:
If thou repent'st, I have gained one to Virtue,
And am, in that, rewarded for my Mercy.
Hence! from my Sight! -- It shocks my Soul, to think
That there is such a Monster in my Kind. [Exit Dervise.
Whither will Man's Impiety extend?
Oh gracious Heaven! do thou withold thy Thunder,
When bold Assassines take thy Name upon 'em,
And swear, they are the Champions of thy Cause?

Enter Moneses. Mon. Oh, Emperor! before whose awsul Throne kneeling to Tam.
The asslicted never kneel in vain for Justice, kneeling to Tam.
Undone, and ruined, blasted in my Hopes,
Here let me fall before your sacred Feet,
And groan out my Misfortunes, till your Pity,
(The last Support and Refuge that is left me)
Shall raise me from the Ground, and bid me live.

Tam. Rise, Prince, nor let me reckon up thy Worth,
And tell, how boldly That might bid thee ask,
Lest I should make a Merit of my Justice,
The common Debt I owe to thee, to All,
Even to the meanest of Mankind, the Charter
By which I claim my Crown, and Heavens Protection:
Speak then as to a King, the Sacred Name
Where Power is lodged, for Righteous Ends alone.

Mon. One only Joy, one Blessing, my fond Heart
Had fixed its Wishes on, and that is lost;
That Sister, for whose safety my sad Soul
Endured a thousand Fears. --

Tam. I well remember,
When e're the Battles joined, I saw thee first,
With Grief uncommon to a Brother's Love,
Thou told'st a moving Tale of her Misfortunes,
Such as bespoke my Pity. Is there ought
Thou can demand from Friendship? ask, and have it.

Mon. First, Oh! let me entreat your Royal Goodness.
Forgive the Folly of a Lover's Caution,
That forged a Tale of Falsehood to deceive you:
Said I, she was my Sister? -- Oh! it is false,
She holds a dearer Interest in my Soul,
Such as the closest ties of Blood never knew:
An Interest, such as Power, Wealth and Honor
Cannot buy, but Love, Love only can bestow;
She was the Mistress of my Vows, my Bride,
By Contract mine; and long e're this, the Priest
Had tied the Knot for ever, had not Bajazet --

Tam. Ha! Bajazet! -- If yet his Power withholds
The Cause of all thy Sorrows, all thy Fears,
Even Gratitude for once shall gain upon him,
Spite of his savage Temper, to restore her.
This Morn a Soldier brought a Captive Beauty,
Sad, though she seemed yet of a Form most rare,
By much the noblest Spoil of all the Field;
Even Scipto, or a Victor yet more cold,
Might have forgot his Virtue, at her light
Struck with a pleasing Wonder, I beheld her
Till by a Slave that waited near her Person,
I learnt she was the Captive Sultan's Wife,
Strait I forbid my Eyes the dangerous Joy
Of gazing long, and sent her to her Lord.

Mon. There was Moneses lost. -- Too sure my Heart
(From the first mention of her wondrous Charms)
Presaged it could be only my Arpasia.

Tam. Arpasia! did thou say?

Mon. Yes, my Arpasia.

Tam. Sure I mistake, or fain I would mistake thee.
I named the Queen of Bajazet, his Wife.

Mon. His Queen! His Wife! He brings that Holy Title,
To varnish over the monstrous Wrongs he has done me.

Tam. Alas! I fear me, Prince, thy Griefs are just;
Thou art indeed unhappy. --

Mon. Can you pity me,
And not redress? [Kneeling. Oh, Royal Tamerlane!
Thou Succor of the Wretched, reach thy Mercy,
To save me from the Grave, and from Oblivion;
Be gracious to the Hopes that wait my Youth.
Oh! let not Sorrow blast me, lest I wither,
And fall in vile Dishonor. Let thy Justice
Restore me my Arpasia; give her back,
Back to my Wishes, to my Transports give her,
To my fond, restless, bleeding, dying Bosom:
Oh! give her to me yet while I have Life
To bless thee for the Bounty. Oh, Arpasia!

Tam. Unhappy Royal Youth, why do thou ask,
What Honor must deny? Ha! Is she not
His Wife, whom he has wedded, whom enjoyed?
And would thou have my partial Friendship break
That Holy Knot, which tied once, all Mankind
Agree to hold Sacred, and Undissolvable?
The Brutal Violence would stain my Justice,
And brand me with a Tyrant's hated Name
To late Posterity.

Mon. Are then the Vows,
The Holy Vows we registered in Heaven,
But common Air?

Tam. Could thy fond Love forget
The Violation of a first Enjoyment? --
But Sorrow has disturbed and hurt thy Mind.

Mon. Perhaps it has, and like an idle Madman,
That wanders with a Train of hooting Boys,
I do a thousand things to shame my Reason.
Then let me fly, and bear my Follies with me
Far, far from the World's Sight; Honor, and Fame,
Arms, and the glorious War shall be forgotten:
No noble Sound of Greatn ss, or Ambition,
Shall wake my drowsy Soul from her dead Sleep,
Till the last Trump do summon.

Tam. Let thy Virtue
Stand up, and answer to these warring Passions,
That vex thy manly Temper. From the moment
When first I saw thee, something wondrous noble
Shone through thy Form, and won my Friendship for thee,
Without the tedious Form of long Acquaintance;
Nor will I lose thee poorly for a Woman.
Come, droop no more, thou shall with me pursue
True Greatness, till we rise to Immortality;
Thou shall forget these lesser Cares, Moneses,
Thou shall, and help me to reform the World.

Mon. So the good Genius warns his mortal Charge,
To fly the evil Fate, that still pursues him,
Till it have wrought his Ruin. Sacred Tamerlane,
Thy Words are as the Breath of Angels to me:
But oh! too deep the wounding Grief is fixed
For any Hand to heal.

Tam. This dull Despair
Is the Soul's Laziness: Rouse to the Combat,
And thou art sure to conquer. War shall restore thee;
The Sound of Arms shall wake thy martial Ardour,
And cure this amorous Sickness of thy Soul,
Begun by Sloth, and nursed by too much Ease;
The idle God of Love supinely dreams,
Amidst inglorious Shades and purling Streams;
In rosy Fetters, and fantastic Chains,
He binds deluded Maids and simple Swains,
With soft Enjoyments, wooes 'em to forget
The hardy Toils, and Labors of the great.
But if the warlike Trumpet's loud Alarms
To virtuous Acts excite, and manly Arms;
The Coward Boy avows his abject Fear,
On silken Wings sublime he cuts the Air,
Scared at the noble Noise, and Thunder of the War.
[Exeunt.
End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE, Bajazet's Tent. Enter Haly and the Dervise. Ha. TO 'scape with Life
from an Attempt like this,
Demands my Wonder justly.

Der. True it may;
But it is a Principle of his new Faith;
It Is what his Christian Favorites have inspired,
Who fondly make a Merit of Forgiveness,
And give their Foes a second Opportunity,
If the first Blow should miss: -- Failing to serve
The Sultan to my wish, and even despairing
Of further means, to effect his Liberty,
A lucky Accident retrieved my Hopes.

Ha. The Prophet, and our Master will reward
Thy Zeal in their behalf; but speak thy Purpose.

Der. Just entering here I met the Tartar General, Fierce Omar.

Ha. He commands (if I mistake not)
This Quarter of the Army, and our Guards.

Der. The same; by his stern Aspect, and the Fires
That Kindled in his Eyes, I guessed the Tumult
Some Wrong had raised in his tempestuous Soul;
A Friendship of old Date had given me Privilege,
To ask of his Concerns; In short I learned,
That burning for the Sultan's beauteous Daughter,
He had begged her, as a Captive of the War,
From Tamerlane; but meeting with denial
Of what he thought his Services might claim,
Loudly he storms, and curses the Italian,
As cause of this Affront: I joined his Rage,
And added to his Injuries, the Wrongs
Our Prophet daily meets from this Axalla.
But see, he comes. Improve what I shall tell,
And all we wish is ours. --
They seem to talk together aside.
Enter Omar. Om. No -- if I forgive it,
Dishonor blast my Name; was it for this
That I directed his first Steps to Greatness?
Taught him to climb, and made him what he is?
When our great Came first bent his Eyes toward him,
(Then petty Prince of Parthia) and by me
Persuaded, raised him to his Daughter's Bed,
Called him his Son, and Successor of Empire:
Was it for this, that like a Rock I stood,
And stemmed the Torrent of our Tartar Lords,
Who scorned his upstart Sway? When Calibes
In bold Rebellion drew even half the Provinces
To own his Cause, I, like his better Angel,
Stood by his shaking Throne, and fixed it fast;
And am I now so lost to his Remembrance?
That when I ask a Captive he shall tell me,
She is Axalla's Right, his Christian Minion.

Der. Allow me, valiant Omar, to demand,
Since injured thus, why right you not your self?
The Prize you ask is in your Power.

Om. It is,
And I will seize it, in despite of Tamerlane,
And that Italian Dog.

Ha. What need of Force,
When every thing concurs to meet your Wishes?
Our mighty Master would not wish a Son
Nobler than Omar; from a Father's hand
Receive that Daughter, which ungrateful Tamerlane
Has to your Worth denied.

Om. Now by my Arms,
It will be great Revenge. What will your Sultan
Give to the Man that shall restore his Liberty,
His Crown? and give him Power to wreck his Hatred
Upon his greatest Foe?

Ha. All he can ask,
And far beyond his Wish. -- [Trumpets.

Om. These Trumpets speak
The Emperor's Approach; he comes, once more,
To offer Terms of Peace; retire -- within
I will know farther, -- he grows deadly to me,
And curse me, Prophet, if I not repay
His Hate, with retribution full as mortal.
[Exeunt.
Scene draws, discovers Arpasia lying on a Couch. A SONG to Sleep. By a Lady.
TO Thee, oh! gentle Sleep, alone
Is owing all our Peace,
By Thee our Joys are heightened shown,
By Thee our Sorrows cease.
The Nymph, whose Hand, by Fraud, or Force,
Some Tyrant has possessed,
By Thee, obtaining a Divorce,
In her own Choice, is blessed.
Oh! stay; Arpasia bids thee stay,
The sadly weeping Fair
Conjures Thee, not to lose in Day
The Object of her Care.
To grasp whose pleasing Form she sought,
That Motion chased her Sleep,
Thus by our selves, are oftnest wrought
The Griefs, for which we weep.
Arp. Oh! Death! thou gentle end of human Sorrows,
Still must my weary Eyelids vainly wake
In tedious Expectation of thy Peace:
Why stand thy thousand thousand Doors still open,
To take the Wretched in? if stern Religion
Guards every Passage, and forbids my Entrance? --
Lucrece could bleed, and Porcia swallow Fire,
When urged with Griefs beyond a mortal Sufferance;
But here it must not be. Think then, Arpasia,
Think on the Sacred Dictates of thy Faith,
And let that arm thy Virtue, to perform
What Cato's Daughter durst not, -- Live Arpasia,
And dare to be unhappy.

Enter Tamerlane, and Attendants. Tam. When Fortune smiles upon the Soldier's
Arms,
And adds even Beauty to adorn his Conquest,
Yet she ordains, the fair should know no Fears,
No Sorrows, to pollute their lovely Eyes;
But should be used even nobly, as her self,
The Queen and Goddess of the Warrior's Vows, --
Such Welcome, as a Camp can give, fair Sultaness,
We hope you have received; It shall be larger,
And better, as it may.

Arp. Since I have born
That miserable Mark of fatal Greatness,
I have forgot all difference of Conditions,
Scepters and Fetters are grown equal to me,
And the best Change, my Fate can bring, is Death.

Tam. When Sorrow dwells in such an Angel Form,
Well may we guess, that those above are Mourners;
Virtue is wronged, and bleeding Innocence
Suffers some wondrous Violation here,
To make the Saints look sad. Oh! teach my Power
To cure those Ills, which you unjustly suffer,
Lest Heaven should wrest it from my idle Hand,
If I look on, and see you weep in vain.

Arp. Not that my Soul disdains the generous Aid,
Thy Royal Goodness proffers; but oh! Emperor,
It is not in my Fate to be made happy:
Nor will I listen to the Cos'ner, Hope;
But stand resolved, to bear the beating Storm,
That roars around me; safe in this alone,
That I am not Immortal. -- Though it is hard,
It Is wondrous hard, when I remember thee
(Dear Native Greece) and you, ye weeping Maids,
That were Companions of my Virgin Youth:
My noble Parents! Oh! the grief of Heart!
The Pangs, that, for unhappy me, bring down
Their reverend Ages to the Grave with Sorrow:
And yet there is a Woe surpassing all,
Ye Saints and Angels, give me of your Constancy,
If you expect I shall endure it long.

Tam. Why is my Pity all, that I can give
To Tears like yours? And yet I fear it is all;
Nor dare I ask, what mighty Loss you mourn,
Lest Honor should forbid to give it back.

Arp. No, Tamerlane, nor did I mean thou shoud'st.
But know (though to the weakness of my Sex
I yield these Tears) my Soul is more than Man.
Think I am born a Greek, nor doubt my Virtue:
A Greek! from whose famed Ancestors of old,
Rome drew the Patterns of her boasted Heroes:
They must be mighty Evils, that can vanquish
A Spartan Courage, and a Christian Faith.

Enter Bajazet. Baj. To know no thought of Rest! to have the Mind
Still ministering fresh Plagues! as in a Circle,
Where one Dishonor treads upon another;
What know the Fiends beyond it? -- Seeing Arp. and Tam. Ha! by Hell!
There wanted only this, to make me mad.
Comes he to triumph here? to rob my Love?
And violate the last retreat of Happiness?

Tam. But that I read upon thy frowning Brow,
That War yet lives, and rages in thy Breast;
Once more, (in pity to the suffering World)
I meant to offer Peace. --

Baj. And mean Thou too
To treat it with our Empress? and to barter
The Spoils, which Fortune gave thee, for her Favors?

Arp. What would the Tyrant? -- [Aside.

Baj. Seek'st thou thus our Friendship?
Is this the Royal Usage, thou did boast?

Tam. The boiling Passion that disturbs thy Soul,
Spreads Clouds around, and makes thy Purpose dark. --
Unriddle what thy mystic Fury aims at.

Baj. Is it a Riddle? -- Read it there explained,
There in my Shame. Now judge me thou, O Prophet,
And equal Heaven, if this demand not Rage!
The Peasant-Hind, begot, and born to Slavery,
Yet dares assert a Husband's sacred Right,
And guard his homely Couch from Violation.
And shall a Monarch tamely bear the Wrong
Without complaining?

Tam. If I could have wronged thee,
If conscious Virtue, and all-judging Heaven
Stood not between, to bar ungoverned Appetite,
What hindered, but in spite of thee, my Captive,
I might have used a Victor's boundless Power,
And sated every Wish my Soul could form?
But to secure thy Fears, know, Bajazet,
This is among the Things I dare not do.

Baj. By Hell! it is false; else, wherefore art thou present?
What came thou for, but to undo my Honor?
I found thee holding amorous Parley with her,
Gazing, and gloting on her wanton Eyes,
And bargaining for Pleasures yet to come;
My Life, I know, is the devoted Price,
But take it, I am weary of the Pain.

Tam. Yet ever thou rashly urge my Rage too far,
I warn thee to take heed; I am a Man,
And have the Frailties common to Man's Nature;
The fiery Seeds of Wrath are in my Temper,
And may be blown up to so sierce a Blaze,
As Wisdom cannot rule. Know, thou have touched me
Even in the nicest, tenderest part, my Honor.
My Honor! which, like Power, disdains being questioned;
Thy Breath has blasted my fair Virtue's Fame,
And marked me for a Villain, and a Tyrant

Arp. And stand I here an idle Looker on?
To s e my innocence murdered and mangled
By barbarous Hands? nor can revenge the Wrong
Art thou a Man, and dare thou use me thus? [(...)
Have thou not torn me from my Native Country?
From the dear Arms of my (...) Friends?
From my Soul's Peace, and from my injured Love?
Have thou not ruined, blotted me for ever,
And driven me to the brink of black Despair?
And is it in thy Malice yet, to add
A Wound more deep, to sully my white Name,
My Virtue? --

Baj. Yes, thou have thy Sexes Virtues,
Their Affectation, Pride, Ill Nature, Noise,
Proneness to change, even from the Joy that pleased 'em:
So gracious is your Idol, dear Variety,
That for another Love you would forego
An Angel's Form, to mingle with a Devil's;
Through every State, and Rank of Men you wander;
Till even your large Experience takes in all
The different Nations of the Peopled Earth.

Arp. Why sought'st thou not from thy own Impious Tribe
A Wife, like one of these? for such thy Race
(If human Nature brings forth such) affords.
Greece, for chaste Virgins famed, and pious Matrons,
Teems not with Monsters, like your Turkish Wives;
Whom guardian Eunuchs, haggard and deformed,
Whom Walls and Bars make honest by constraint.
Know, I detest, like Hell, the Crime thou mention'st:
Not that I fear, or reverence thee, thou Tyrant:
But that my Soul, conscious of whence it sprung,
Sits unpolluted in its sacred Temple,
And scorns to mingle with a Thought so mean.

Tam. Oh Pity! that a Greatness so divine
Should meet a Fate so wretched, so unequal. --
Thou blind and wilful, to the Good that courts thee; [To Baj.
With open-handed Bounty Heaven pursues thee,
And bids thee (undeserving as thou art,
And monstrous in thy Crimes) be happy yet:
Whilst thou, in Fury, do avert the Blessings,
And art an evil Genius to thy self.

Baj. No -- Thou! thou art my greatest Curse on Earth.
Thou, who have robbed me of my Crown and Glory,
And now pursu'st me to the Verge of Life,
To spoil me of my Honor. Thou! thou Hypocrite!
That wear'st a Pageant outside show of Virtue,
To cover the hot Thoughts, that glow within,
Thou rank Adulterer!

Tam. Oh! That thou were
The Lord of all those Thousands, that lie breathless
On yonder Field of Blood: That I again
Might hunt thee in the Face of Death and Danger,
Through the tumultuous Battle, and there force thee,
Vanquished and sinking underneath my Arm,
To own, thou have traduced me, like a Villain.

Baj. Ha! does it gall thee, Tartar? By Revenge?
It joys me much, to find, thou feel'st my Fury.
Yes! I will Echo to thee, thou Adulterer!
Thou do profane the Name of King and Soldier,
And like a Ruffian-Bravo came with Force
To violate the Holy Marriage Bed.

Tam. Were thou not sheltered by thy abject State,
The Captive of my Sword, by my just Anger!
My Breath, like Thunder, should confound thy Pride,
And doom thee dead, this instant, with a Word.

Baj. It Is false! my Fate's above thee, and thou dare not.

Tam. Ha! dare not? Thou have raised my ponderous Rage,
And now it falls to crush thee at a Blow.
A Guard there. -- [Enter a Guard, they seize Bajazet. Seize and drag him to
his Fate.
Tyrant, I Will do a double Justice on thee,
At once revenge my self, and all Mankind.

Baj. Well do thou, ever thy Violence and Lust
Invade my Bed, thus to begin with Murder;
Drown all thy Fears in Blood, and sin securely.

Tam. Away! --

Arp. kneeling.] Oh stay! I charge thee, by Renown,
By that bright Glory, thy great Soul pursues!
Call back the Doom of Death.

Tam. Fair injured Excellence,
Why do thou kneel, and waste such precious Prayers,
(As might even bribe the Saints to partial Justice)
For one to Goodness lost? who first undid thee,
Who still pursues, and aggravates the Wrong.

Baj. By Alha! no -- I will not wear a Life
Bought with such vile Dishonor. -- Death shall free me
At once from Infamy, and thee, thou Traytress!

Arp. No matter, though the whistling Winds grow loud,
And the rude Tempest roars, it is idle Rage,
Oh! mark it not. But let thy steady Virtue
Be constant to its Temper; save his Life,
And save Arpasia from the sport of Talkers.
Think, how the busy, meddling World shall toss
Thy mighty Name about, in scurril Mirth;
Shall brand thy Vengeance, as a foul Design,
And make such monstrous Legends of our Lives,
As late Posterity shall blush in reading.

Tam. Oh matchless Virtue! Yes I will obey;
Though Laggard in the Race, admiring yet,
I will pursue the shining Path thou tread'st.
Sultan, be safe. Reason resumes her Empire, The Guards release Baj.
And I am cool again. -- Here break we off, The Guards release Baj.
Lest further Speech should minister new Rage.
Wisely from dangerous Passions I retreat,
To keep a Conquest, which was hard to get:
And oh! it is time I should for Flight prepare,
A War more fatal seems to threaten there,
And all my Rebel-blood assists the Fair:
One moment more, and I too late shall find,
That Love's the strongest Power that lords it over the Mind.
[Exit Tamerlane followed by the Guards.
Baj. To what new Shame, what Plague am I reserved?
Why did my Stars refuse me to die warm?
While yet my Regal State stood unimpeach'd,
Nor knew the Curse of having One above me;
Then too (although by force I graspt the Joy)
My Love was safe, nor felt the rack of doubt:
Why have thou forced this nauseous Life upon me?
Is it to triumph over me? -- But I will,
I will be free, I will forget thee all;
The Bitter and the Sweet, the Joy and Pain,
Death shall expunge at once, and ease my Soul.
Prophet, take notice, I disclaim thy Paradise,
Thy fragrant Bowers, and everlasting Shades,
Thou have placed Woman there, and all thy Joys are tainted.
[Exit Bajazet.
Arp. A little longer yet, be strong, my Heart,
A little longer let the busy Spirits
Keep on their cheerful round. -- It wo' not be:
Love, Sorrow, and the Sting of vile Reproach,
Succeeding one another in their Course,
Like Drops of eating Water on the Marble,
At length have worn my boasted Courage down:
I will indulge the Woman in my Soul,
And give a loose to Tears, and to Impatience;
Death is at last my due, and I will have it. --
And see, the poor Moneses comes to take
One sad Adieu, and then we part for ever.

Enter Moneses. Mon. Already am I onward of my way;
Thy tuneful Voice comes like a hollow Sound
At distance to my Ears. My Eyes grow heavy,
And all the glorious Lights of Heaven look dim;
It Is the last Office they shall ever do me,
To view thee once, and then to close and die.

Arp. Alas! how happy have we been, Moneses?
Ye gentle Days, that once were ours; what Joys
Did every cheerful Morning bring along?
No Fears, no Jealousies, no angry Parents,
That for unequal Births, or Fortunes frowned;
But Love, that kindly joined our Hearts, to bless us,
Made us a Blessing too to all besides.

Mon. Oh! Cast not thy remembrance back, Arpasia,
It Is Grief unutterable, it is Distraction!
But let this last of hours be peaceful Sorrow;
Here let me kneel, and pay my latest Vows;
Be witness, all ye Saints, thou Heaven and Nature,
Be witness of my Truth, for you have known it;
Be witness, that I never knew a Pleasure,
In all the World could offer, like Arpasia;
Be witness, that I lived but in Arpasia;
And oh! be witness, that her Loss has killed me.

Arp. While thou art speaking, Life begins to fail,
And every tender Accent chills like Death.
Oh! let me haste then yet, ever Day declines,
And the long Night prevail, once more, to tell thee
What, and how dear Moneses has been to me.
What has he not been? -- All the Names of Love,
Brothers, or Fathers, Husbands, all are poor:
Moneses is my self, in my fond Heart,
Even in my vital Blood he lives and reigns;
The last dear Object of my parting Soul
Will be Moneses; the last Breath that lingers
Within my panting Breast, shall sigh Moneses.

Mon. It is enough! Now to thy Rest, my Soul,
The World, and thou have made an end at once.

Arp. Fain would I still detain thee, hold thee still;
Nor Honor can forbid, that we together
Should share the poor few Minutes that remain;
I swear, methinks this sad Society
Has somewhat pleasing in it. -- Death's dark Shades
Seem, as we Journey on, to lose their Horror:
At near approach the Monsters formed by Fear
Are vanished all, and leave the Prospect clear:
Amidst the gloomy Vale, a pleasing Scene
With Flowers adorned, and never-fading Green,
Inviting stands to take the Wretched in.
No Wars, no Wrongs, no Tyrants, no Despair,
Disturb the Quiet of a Place so fair,
But injured Lovers find Elysium there.
[Exeunt.
Enter Bajazet, Omar, Haly, and the Dervise. Baj. Now by the glorious Tomb,
that shrines our Prophet,
By Mecca's sacred Temple! here I swear!
Our Daughter is thy Bride; and to that Gift
Such Wealth, such Power, such Honors will I add,
That Monarchs shall with Envy view thy State,
And own, Thou art a Demy-God to them.
Thou have given me what I wished, Power of Revenge,
And when a King rewards, it is ample Retribution.

Om. Twelve Tartar Lords, each potent in his Tribe,
Have sworn to own my Cause, and draw their Thousands
To Morrow, from the ungrateful Parthian's side;
The Day declining seems to yield to Night,
Ever little more than half her Course be ended,
In an auspicious Hour prepare for Flight;
The Leaders of the Troops through which we pass,
Raised by my Power, devoted to my Service,
Shall make our Passage secret, and secure.

Der. Already, mighty Sultan, art thou safe,
Since by yon passing Torches Light, I guess
To his Pavilion Tamerlane retires,
Attended by a Train of waiting Courtiers.
All, who remain within these Tents, are thine,
And hail thee, as their Lord.
Ha, the Italian Prince,
With sad Moneses are not yet gone forth.

Baj. Ha! With our Queen and Daughter?

Om. They are ours;
I marked the Slaves, who waited on Axalla;
They, when the Emperor past out, pressed on,
And mingled with the Crowd, nor mist their Lord:
He is your Prisoner, Sir, I go this moment,
To seize, and bring him, to receive his Doom.
[Exit Omar.
Baj. Haste, Haly, follow, and secure the Greek,
Him too I wish to keep within my Power.
[Exit Haly.
Der. If my dread Lord permit his Slave to speak,
I would advise to spare Axalla's Life,
Till we are safe beyond the Parthian's Power:
Him, as our Pledge of Safety, may we hold;
And, could you gain him to assist your Flight,
It might import you much.

Baj. Thou Counsell'st well;
And though I hate him, for he is a Christian,
And to my mortal Enemy devoted,
Yet to secure my Liberty, and Vengeance,
I wish he now were ours.

Der. And see! they come!
Fortune repents, again she courts your Side,
And, with this first fair Offering of Success,
She wooes you, to forget her Crime of yesterday.

Enter Omar with Axalla Prisoner, Selima following weeping. Ax. I wo'not call
thee Villain, it is a Name
Too holy for thy Crime; to break thy Faith,
And turn a Rebel to so good a Master,
Is an Ingratitude unmatched on Earth;
The first revolting Angel's Pride could only
Do more, than thou have done. Thou Copy'st well,
And keep'st the black Original in view.

Om. Do, Rage, and vainly call upon thy Master,
To save his Minion; my Revenge has caught thee,
And I will make thee curse that fond Presumption,
That set thee on, to rival me in ought.

Baj. Christian, I hold thy Fate at my Disposal.
One only way remains to Mercy open,
Be Partner of my Flight, and my Revenge,
And thou art safe. Thy other Choice is Death.

Om. What means the Sultan?

Der. I Conjure you, hold --
Your Rival is devoted to Destruction, [Aside to Omar.
Nor would the Sultan now defer his Fate
But for our common safety -- [Wispers. Listen further.

Ax. Then briefly thus. Death is the Choice, I make;
Since, next to Heaven, my Master, and my Friend
Has Interest in my Life, and still shall claim it.

Baj. Then take thy Wish. -- Call in our Mutes.

Sell. My Father,
If yet you have not sworn to cast me off,
And turn me out, to wander in Misfortune;
If yet my Voice be gracious in your Ears;
If yet my Duty and my Love offend not,
Oh! call your Sentence back, and save Axalla.

Baj. Rise, Selima, the Slave deserves to die,
Who durst, with sullen Pride, refuse my Mercy:
Yet, for thy sake, once more I offer Life.

Sell. Some Angel whisper to my anxious Soul
What I shall do to save him. -- Oh! Axalla!
Is it so easy to thee, to sorsake me?
Can thou resolve, with all this cold Indifference,
Never to see me more? To leave me here
The miserable Mourner of thy Fate,
Condemned, to waste my Widowed Virgin Youth,
My tedious Days and Nights in lonely Weeping,
And never know the Voice of Comfort more.

Ax. Search not too deep the Sorrows of my Breast;
Thou say, I am Indifferent, and Cold.
Oh! is it possible, my Eyes should tell
So little of the fighting Storm within.
Oh! turn thee from me, save me from thy Beauties,
Falsehood and Ruin all look lovely there.
Oh! let my laboring Soul yet struggle through --
I will -- I would resolve to die, and leave thee.

Baj. Then let him die. -- He trifles with my Favor;
I have too long attended his Resolves.

Sell. to Baj.] Oh! stay a Minute, yet a Minute longer;
A Minute is a little space in Life:
There is a kind Consenting in his Eyes,
And I shall win him to your Royal Will.
Oh! my Axalla, seem but to consent -- [To Axalla aside.
Unkind and Cruel, will you then do nothing?
I find, I am not worth thy least of Cares.

Ax. Oh! labor not to hang Dishonor on me:
I could bear Sickness, Pain, and Poverty,
Those mortal Evils worse than Death, for thee.
But this. -- It has the force of Fate against us,
And cannot be.

Sell. See, see, Sir, he relents, [To Bajazet.
Already he inclines to own your Cause:
A little longer, and he is all yours.

Baj. Then mark how far a Father's Fondness yields:
Till Midnight I defer the Death he merits,
And give him up till then to thy Persuasion.
If by that time he meets my Will, he lives;
If not, thy self shall own, he dies with Justice.

Ax. It Is but to lengthen Life upon the Rack.
I am resolved already.

Sell. Oh! be still,
Nor rashly urge a Ruin on us both,
It Is but a moment more I have to save thee
Be kind, auspicious Alha, to my Prayer,
More for my Love, than for my Self I fear,
Neglect Mankind awhile, and make him all thy Care.
[Exeunt Axalla and Selima.
Baj. Moneses! -- Is that Dog secured?

Om. He is.

Baj. It Is well -- My Soul perceives returning Greatness,
As Nature feels the Spring. Lightly she bounds,
And shakes Dishonor, like a Burden, from her,
Once more Imperial, awful, and her self.
So when of old Jove from the Titans fled,
Ammon's rude Front his radiant Face belied,
And all the Majesty of Heaven lay hid.
At length by Fate to Power Divine restored,
His Thunder taught the World, to know its Lord,
The God grew terrible again, and was again adored.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE, Bajazet's Tent. Enter Arpasia. Arp. SUre it is a Horror, more than
Darkness brings,
That sits upon the Night; Fate is abroad.
Some ruling Fiend hangs in the dusky Air,
And scatters Ruin, Death, and wild Distraction,
Over all the wretched Race of Man below:
Not long ago, a Troop of ghastly Slaves
Rushed in, and forced Moneses from my Sight;
Death hung so heavy on his drooping Spirits,
That scarcely could he say -- Farewell -- for ever.
And yet, methinks, some gentle Spirit whispers
Thy Peace draws near, Arpasia, sigh no more;
And see the King of Terrors is at hand;
His Minister appears.

Enter Bajazet, and Haly. Baj. aside to Haly.] The rest I leave
To thy dispatch. For oh! my faithful Haly,
Another Care has taken up thy Master;
Spite of the high-wrought Tempest in my Soul,
Spite of the Pangs, which Jealousy has cost me;
This haughty Woman reigns within my Breast:
In vain I strive to put her from my Thoughts,
To drive her out with Empire, and Revenge:
Still she comes back like a retiring Tide,
Still she comes back like a retiring Tide,
That Ebbs a while, but strait returns again,
And swells above the Beach.

Ha. Why wears my Lord
An anxious Thought, for what his Power commands?
When in an happy Hour, you shall ever long
Have born the Empress, from amidst your Foes,
She must be yours, be only, and all yours.

Baj. On that depends my Fear. Yes! I must have her,
I own I will not, cannot go without her;
But such is the Condition of our Flight,
That should she not consent, 'twould hazard all,
To bear her hence by force; Thus I resolve then,
By Threats, and Prayers, by every way to move her;
If all prevail not, Force is left, at last;
And I will set Life, Empire on the Venture,
To keep her mine. -- Be near, to wait my Will. [Ex. Haly.
When last we parted, 'twas on angry Terms,
Let the remembrance die, or kindly think
That jealous Rage is but a hasty Flame,
That blazes out, when Love too siercely burns.

Arp. For thee to wrong me, and for me to suffer,
Is the hard Lesson that my Soul has learnt;
And now I stand prepared for all to come:
Nor is it worth my leisure to distinguish,
If Love, or Jealousy commit the violence;
Each have alike been fatal to my Peace,
Confirming me a Wretch, and thee a Tyrant.

Baj. Still to deform thy gentle Brow with Frowns!
And still to be perverse! It is a manner
Abhorrent from the softness of thy Sex:
Women, like Summer Storms, a while are Cloudy,
Burst out in Thunder, and impetuous Showers;
But strait the Sun of Beauty dawns abroad,
And all the fair Horizon is serene.

Arp. Then to retrieve the Honor of my Sex,
Here I disclaim that Changing, and Inconstancy;
To Thee I will be ever, as I am.

Baj. Thou say, I am a Tyrant, think so still,
And let it warn thy Prudence, to lay hold
On the good Hour of Peace, that courts thee now;
Souls formed like mine, brook being scorned, but ill;
Be well advised, and profit by my Patience,
It is a short-lived Virtue.

Arp. Turn thy Eyes
Back on the Story of my Woes, Barbarian.
Thou that have violated all Respects
Due to my Sex, and Honor of my Birth,
Thou brutal Ravisher! that have undone me,
Ruined my Love! Can I have Peace with thee?
Impossible! first Heaven and Hell shall join,
They only differ more.

Baj. I see, it is vain,
To court thy stubborn Temper with Endearments.
Resolve this moment, to return my Love,
And be the willing Partner of my Flight,
Or by the Prophet's holy Law! thou dy'st.

Arp. And do thou hope, to fright me with that Fantome?
Death! It Is the greatest Mercy thou can give;
So frequent are the Murders of thy Reign,
One Day scarce passing by unmarked with Blood,
That Children, by long use, have learnt to scorn it:
Know, I disdain to aid thy treacherous purpose,
And should thou dare to force me, with my Cries
I will call Heaven and Earth to my Assistance.

Baj. Confusion! do thou brave me? But my Wrath
Shall find a Passage to thy swelling Heart,
And rack thee worse, than all the Pains of Death.
That Grecian Dog, the Minion of thy Wishes,
Shall be dragged forth, and butchered in thy sight;
Thou shall behold him, when his Pangs are terrible,
Then, when he stares, and gasps, and struggles strongly.
Even in the bitterest Agony of dying;
'Till thou shall rend thy Hair, tear out thy Eyes,
And curse thy Pride, while I applaud my Vengeance.

Arp. Oh! satal Image! All my Powers give way,
And Resolution sickens at the Thought;
A Flood of Passion rises in my Breast,
And labors fiercely upward to my Eyes.
Come, all ye great Examples of my Sex,

Arp. Of something soft,
Tender and kind, of something wondrous sad.
Oh! my full Soul!

Mon. My Tongue is at a loss,
Thoughts crowd so fast, thy Name is all I Have left,
My kindest! truest! dearest! best Arpasia!
[The Mutes struggle with him.
Arp. I have a thousand, thousand Things to utter,
A thousand more to hear yet. Barbarous Villains!
Give me a Minute. Speak to me, Moneses.

Mon. Speak to thee? It Is the Business of my Life,
It Is all the use I have for vital Air.
Stand off ye Slaves! To tell thee, that my Heart
Is full of thee; that even at this dread moment
My fond Eyes gaze with Joy and Rapture on thee,
Angels and Light it self are not so fair.

Enter Bajazet, Haly, and Attendants. Baj. Ha! wherefore lives this Dog? Be
quick, ye Slaves,
And rid me of the Pain.

Mon. For only Death,
And the last Night can shut out my Arpasia.
[The Mutes strangle Moneses.
Arp. Oh! dismal! it is not to be born. Ye Moralists,
Ye Talkers, what are all your Precepts now?
Patience? Distraction? blast the Tyrant, blast him!
Avenging Lightnings, snatch him hence, ye Fiends!
Love! Death! Moneses! Nature can no more,
Ruin is on her, and she sinks at once. [She sinks down.

Baj. Help, Haly, raise her up, and bear her out.

Ha. Alas! she saints.

Arp. No, Tyrant, it is in vain;
Oh! I am now beyond thy cruel Power:
The Peaceful Slumber of the Grave is on me;
Even all the tedious Day of Life I Have wandered,
Bewild r'd with Misfortunes;
At length it is Night, and I have reached my home:
Forg tting all the Toils and Troubles past,
Weary I Will lay me down, and sleep till -- Oh! [She dies.

Baj. Fly, ye Slaves,
And fetch me Cordials. No she shall not die.
Spite of her sullen Pride, I Will hold in Life,
And force her to be blessed against her Will

Ha. Already it is beyond the Power of Art;
For see a deadly Cold has froze the Blood,
The pliant Limbs grow stiff, and lose their use,
And all the animating Fire is quenched;
Even Beauty too is dead; an ashy Pale
Grows over the Roses, the red Lips have lost
Their flagrant Hew, for want of that sweet Breath
That blessed 'em with its Odours as it past.

Baj. Can it be possible? Can Rage and Grief,
Can Love and Indignation be so fierce,
So mortal in a Woman's Heart? Confusion!
Is she escaped then? What is Royalty?
If those, that are my Slaves, and should live for me,
Can die, and bid Defiance to my Power.

Enter the Dervise. Der. The valiant Omar sends, to tell thy Greatness,
The Hour of Flight is come, and urges haste,
Since he descries near Tamerlane's Pavilion,
Bright Troops of crowding Torches, who from thence
On either Hand stretch far into the Night,
And seem to form a shining Front of Battle.
Behold, even from this place, thou may discern 'em. [Looking out.

Baj. By Alha! yes! they cast a Day around 'em,
And the Plain seems thick set with Stars, as Heaven.
Ha! or my Eyes are false, they move this way.
It Is certain so. Fly, Haly, to our Daughter. [Exit Haly.
Let some secure the Christian Prince Axalla;
We will be gone this Minute.

Enter Omar. Om. Lost! Undone!

Baj. What mean thou?

Om. All our hopes of Flight are lost,
Mirvan and Zama, with the Parthian Horse,
Enclose us round, they hold us in a Toil.

Baj. Ha! whence this unexpected Curse of Chance?

Om. Too late I learnt, that early in the Night
A Slave was suffered by the Princess Order,
Chaste Virgins, tender Wives, and pious Matrons;
Ye holy Martyrs, who, with wondrous Faith,
And Constancy unshaken, have sustained
The Rage of cruel Men, and fiery Persecution;
Come to my Aid, and teach me to defy
The Malice of this Fiend. I feel, I feel
Your sacred Spirit arm me to Resistance.
Yes, Tyrant, I will stand this shock of Fate;
Will live to triumph over the^, for a Moment;
Then die well pleased, and follow my Moneses.

Baj. Thou talk it well: But talking is thy Privilege,
It Is all the boasted Courage of thy Sex;
Though, for thy Soul, thou dare not meet the Danger.

Arp. By all my hops of Happiness! I dare --
My Soul is come within her ken of Heaven;
Charmed with the Joys and Beauties of that place,
Her Thoughts, and all her Cares she fixes there,
And it is in vain for thee, to rage below:
Thus Stars shine bright, and keep their place above,
Though ruffling Winds deform this lower World.

Baj. This Moment is the Trial.

Arp. Let it come;
This Moment then shall show I am a Greek,
And speak my Country's Courage in my suffering.

Baj. Here, Mercy, I disclaim thee, mark me, Traitress!
My Love prepares a Victim to thy Pride,
And when it greets thee next, 'twill be in Blood.
[Ex. Baj.
Arp. My Heart beats higher, and my nimble Spirits
Ride swiftly through their purple Channels round:
It Is the last blaze of Life: Nature revives
Like a dim winking Lamp, that slashes brightly
With parting Light, and strait is Dark for ever.
And see! my last of Sorrows is at Hand:
Death and Moneses come together to me;
As if my Stars that had so long been cruel,
Grew kind at last, and gave me all I wish.

Enter Moneses, guarded by some Mutes, others attending with a Cup of Poison
and a Bow-string. Mon. I charge ye, (...) ye Ministers of Fate,
Be swift to execute your Master's Will,
Bear me to my Arpasia; let me tell her,
The Tyrant is grown kind. He bids me go,
And die beneath her Feet. A Joy shoots through
My drooping Breast, as often, when the Trumpet
Has called my youthful Ardour forth to Battle;
High in my Hopes, and ravished with the Sound,
I have rushed eager on amidst the foremost
To purchase Victory, or glorious Death.

Arp. If it be Happiness, alas! to die,
To lie forgotten in the silent Grave,
To Love, and Glory lost, and from among
The great Creator's Works expunged and blotted,
Then very shortly shall we both be happy.

Mon. There is no room for Doubt, it is certain Bliss;
The Tyrant's cruel Violence, thy Loss,
Already seem more light, nor has my Soul,
One unrepented Guilt upon remembrance,
To make me dread the Justice of hereafter;
But standing now on the last Verge of Life,
Boldly I view the vast Abyss, Eternity,
Eager to plunge, and leave my Woes behind me.

Arp. By all the Truth of our past Lives I vow!
To die! appears a very nothing to me:
But oh! Moneses, should I not allow
Somewhat to Love, and to my Sexes tenderness,
This very Now, I could put off my Being,
Without a Groan; but to behold thee die --
Nature shrinks in me, at the dreadful Thought,
Nor can my Constancy sustain this Blow.

Mon. Since thou art armed for all things, after Death.
Why should the Pomp and Preparation of it
Be frightful to thy Eyes? There Is not a Pain,
Which Age, or Sickness brings, the least Disorder,
That vexes any part of this fine Frame,
Is full as grievous: All that the Mind feels
Is much, much more. -- And see, I go to prove it.

Enter a Mute; he signs to the rest, who proffer the Bow-string to Moneses.
Arp. Think ever we part!

Mon. Of what?
To pass the Guard; I clove the Villain down,
Who yielded to his Flight; but that is poor Vengeance.
That Fugitive has raised the Camp upon us,
And unperceived by favor of the Night,
In silence they have marched to intercept us.

Baj. My Daughter! oh! the Traitress!

Der. Yet, we have
Axalla in our Power, and angry Tamerlane
Will buy his Favourite's Life, on any Terms.

Om. With these few Friends I have, I for a while,
Can face their Force; if they refuse us Peace,
Revenge shall sweeten Ruin, and 'twill Joy me,
To drag my Foe down with me, in my Fall.
[Exit Omar.
Enter Haly, with Selima weeping. Baj. See where she comes! with
well-dissembled Innocence,
With Truth, and Faith so lovely in her Face,
As if she durst even disavow the Falsehood. --
Hop'st thou to make amends with trifling Tears,
For my lost Crown, and disappointed Vengeance?
Ungrateful Selima! thy Father's Curse!
Bring forth the Minion of her foolish Heart;
He dies this Moment. --

Ha. Would I could not speak
The Crime of fatal Love, the Slave who fled,
By whom we are undone; was that Axalla.

Baj. Ha! say thou? --

Ha. Hid beneath that vile Appearance,
The Princess found a means for his Escape.

Sell. I am undone! even Nature has disclaimed me;
My Father! have I lost you all? -- My Father!

Baj. Talk thou of Nature? who have broke her Bands!
Thou art my Bane, thou Witch! thou Infant Parricide!
But I will study to be strangely cruel,
I will forget the Folly of my Fondness.
Drive all the Father from my Breast, now snatch thee,
Tear thee to pieces, drink thy treacherous Blood,
And make thee answer all my great Revenge:
Now, now, thou Traitress! [Offers to kill her.

Sell. Plunge the Poniard deep! [She embraces him.
The Life my Father gave shall hear his Summons,
And issue at the Wound -- Start not, to feel
My Heart's warm Blood gush out upon your Hands,
Since from your Spring I drew the Purple Stream,
And I must pay it back, if you demand it.

Baj. Hence! from my Thoughts! thou soft relenting Weakness.
Have thou not given me up a Prey? betrayed me?

Sell. Oh! not for Worlds, not even for all the Joys
Love, or the Prophet's Paradise can give;
Amidst the Fears, and Sorrows of my Soul,
Amidst the thousand Pains of anxious Tenderness,
I made the gentle kind Axalla swear,
Your Life, your Crown, and Honor should be safe.

Baj. Away! my Soul disdains the vile Dependence.
No, let me rather die, die like a King:
Shall I fall down at the proud Tartar's Foot?
And say, Have Mercy on me? Hark, they come. [Shout.
Disgrace will overtake my lingering Hand:
Die then, thy Father's Shame, and thine, die with thee. [Offers to kill her.

Sell. For Heaven, for Pity's sake.

Baj. No more, thou Trifler! [She catches hold of his Arm.
Ha! dare thou bar my Will? Tear off her Hold.

Sell. What not for Life? Should I not plead for Life?
When Nature teaches even the brute Creation,
To hold fast that, her best, her noblest Gift.
Look on my Eyes, whom you so often have kissed,
And swore, they were your best loved Queen's, my Mothers.
Behold 'em now streaming for Mercy, Mercy!
Look on me, and deny me, if you can;
It Is but for Life I beg, is that a Boon
So hard for me to obtain? or you to grant?
Oh! spare me! spare your Selima, my Father.

Baj. A lazy Sloth hangs on my Resolution;
It is my Selima! -- Ha! What? my Child?
And can I murder her? -- Dreadful Imagination!
Again they come. I leave her to my Foes! [Shout.
And shall they triumph over the Race of Bajazet?
Die Selima! Is that a Father's Voice?
Rouse, rouse my Fury! yes she dies, the Victim
To my lost hopes. Out! out! thou foolish Nature!
Justly she shares the Ruin she has made,
Seize her, [To the Mutes. ye Slaves, and strangle her this moment.

Sell. Oh! let me die by you! Behold my Breast!
I wo'not shrink; oh! save me but from these.
[The Mutes seize her.
Baj. Dispatch.

Sell. But for a moment, while I pray,
That Heaven may guard my Royal Father.

Baj. Dogs!

Sell. That you may only bless me, ever I die. [Shout.

Baj. Ye tedious Villains! then the Work is mine.

As Bajazet runs at Selima with his Sword, Enter Tamerlane, Axalla, etc. Axalla
gets between Bajazet and Selima, whilst Tamerlane and the rest drive Bajazet
and the Mutes off the Stage. Ax. And am I come to save thee? Oh! my Joy!
Be this the whitest Hour of all my Life;
This one Success is more, than all my Wars,
The noblest, dearest Glory of my Sword.

Sell. Alas, Axalla, Death has been around me,
My Coward Soul still trembles at the Fright,
And seems but half secure, even in thy Arms.

Ax. Retire, my Fair, and let me guard thee forth;
Blood and tumultuous Slaughter are about us,
And Danger in her ugliest Forms is here;
Nor will the pleasure of my Heart be full,
'Till all my Fears are ended in thy Safety.
[Exeunt Axalla, and Selima.
Enter Tamerlane, the Prince of Tanais, Zama, Mirvan, and Soldiers; with
Bajazet, Omar, and the Dervise, Prisoners. Tam. Morcy at length gives up her
peaceful Scepter,
And Justice sternly takes her turn to govern;
It Is a rank World, and asks her keenest Sword,
To cut up Villainy of monstrous growth.
Zama, take care, that with the earliest dawn,
Those Traitors meet the Fate, their Treason merits. [Pointing to Omar and the
Dervise.
To Baj.] For thee, thou Tyrant, whose oppressive Violence
Has ruined those, thou should protect at home,
Whose Wars, whose Slaughters, whose Assassinations,
(That basest thirst of Blood, that sin of Cowards)
Whose Faith so often given, and always violated,
Have been the Offense of Heaven, and Plague of Earth,
What Punishment is equal to thy Crimes?
The Doom, thy Rage designed for me, be thine:
Closed in a Cage, like some destructive Beast,
I Will have thee born about, in public View,
A great Example of that Righteous Vengeance
That waits on Cruelty, and Pride like thine.

Baj. It is beneath me, to decline my Fate:
I stand prepared to meet thy utmost Hate:
Yet think not, I will long thy Triumph see,
None want the means, when the Soul dares be free;
I Will Curse thee with my last, my parting Breath,
And keep the Courage of my Life in Death;
Then boldly venture on that World unknown,
It cannot use me worse, than this has done.
[Exit Bajazet guarded.
Tam. Behold the vain Effects of Earth-born Pride,
That scorned Heaven's Laws, and all its Power defied;
That could the Hand, which formed it first, forget,
And fondly say, I made my self, be great:
(...) justly those above assert their Sway,
(...) teach even Kings what Homage they should pay
(...) then Rule best, when mindful to Obey.
[Exeunt (...)
EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs. BRACEGIRDLE.
TOO well we saw what must have been our Fate,
When Harmony with Beauty joined of late,
Threatened the Ruin of our sinking State;
'Till you, from whom our Being we receive,
In pity bid your own Creation live.
With moving Sounds you kindly drew the Fair,
And fixed, once more, that shining Circle here.
The Lyre you bring is half Apollo's Praise;
Be ours the Task to win and wear his Bays.
Thin Houses were before so frequent to us,
We wanted not a Project to undo us.
We seldom saw your Honors but by chance,
As some Folks meet their Friends of Spain and France
'Twas Verse decayed, or Politics improved,
That had estranged you thus from what you loved.
Time was, when busy Faces were a Jest,
When Wit and Pleasure were in most request;
When cheerful Theaters with Crowds were graced
But those good Days of Poetry are past:
Now (...) an empty Pit,
(...) a Lecture, sit,
(...) take Notes and (...) Evidence against (...)
Those (...)
(...) Peace and (...)
With careful (...) at Tom's and Will's they (...)
And ask, who did Elections lose or get
Our Friend has lost it -- Faith I Am sorry for it
He Is a good Man, and never was for the Court
He to no Government will sue for Grace;
By want of Merit, safe against a Place:
By spite a Patriot made, and sworn to oppose
All who are uppermost, as England's Foes.
Let Whig or Tory, any side prevail,
Still it is his constant Privilege to rail.
Another, that the Tax and War may cease,
Talks of the Duke of Anjou's Right, and Peace;
And, from Spain's wise Example, is for taking
A Viceroy of the mighty Monarch's making;
Who should all Rights and Liberties maintain,
And English Laws by learned Dragoons explain.
Come, leave these Politics, and follow Wit;
Here uncontrolled you may in Judgment sit,
We'll never differ with a crowded Pit.
We'll take you all, even on your own Conditions,
Think you Great Men, and wondrous Politicians.
And if you slight the Offers which we make you,
No Brentford Princes will for Statesmen take you
FINIS.

