The Ambitious Stepmother. A TRAGEDY.

As 'twas Acted at the New Theater in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields. By His
Majesty's Servants.

By N. Row, Esquire.

-- Decet. haec dare dona noveream.
Ovid Metam. lib. 9. Vane Ligur, frustraque animis elate superbis,
Nequicquam...... tentasti lubricus arts
Advenit qui vestra dies muliebribus armis
Verba redargueret.
Virg. Aen. lib. 11. LONDON, ^rinted for Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple,
near the Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street. 1701.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Earl of Jersey, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household, etc.
My Lord,
IF any thing may atone for the Liberty I take in offering this trifle to your
Lordship, it is, that I will Engage not to be guilty of the Common Vice of
Dedications, nor pretend to give the World an account of the many good
qualities they ought to admire in your Lordship. I hope I may reckon on it as
some little piece of merit, in an age where there are so many people write
Panegyricks, and so few deserve 'em. I am sure you ought not to sit for your
Picture, to so ill a hand as mine. Men of your Lordship's Figure and Station,
tho Useful and Ornamantal to the Age they live in, are yet reserved for the
Labors of the Historian, and the Entertainment of Posterity; nor ought to be
aspersed with such pieces of Flattery while living, as may render the true
History suspected to those that come after. That which should take up all my
Care at present, is most humbly to beg your Lordships pardon for Importuning
you upon this account; for imagining that your Lordship, (whose hours are all
dedicated to the best and most important uses) can have any leisure for this
piece of Poetry. I beg, my Lord, that you will receive it, as it was meant, a
mark of my Entire Respect and Veneration.

I hope it may be some advantage to me, that the Town has not received this
Play ill; to have depended merely upon your Lordships good nature, and have
offered something without any degree of merit, would have been an unpardonable
fault, especially to so good a Judge. The Play it self, as I present it to your
Lordship, is a much more perfect Poem than it is in the representation on the
Stage. I was led into an Error in the writing of it, by thinking that it would
be easier to retrench than to add: But when I was at last necessitated, by
reason of the extreme length, to cut off near six hundred Lines, I found that
it was maimed by it to a great disadvantage. The Fable (which has no manner of
relation to any part of true History,) was left dark and intricate, for want of
a great part of the narration, which was left out in the first Scene; and the
Chain and Connection, which ought to be in the Dialogue, was interrupted in many
other places. But since what was omitted in the Acting, is now kept in, I hope
it may indifferently Entertain your Lordship at an unbending hour. The faults
which are most generally found, (and which I could be very proud of submitting
to your Lordship's Judgment, if you can have leisure for so trivial a cause,)
are, that the Catastrophe in the fifth Act is barbarous, and shocks the
Audience. Some people, whose Judgment I ought to have a deference for, have
told me that they wished I had given the latter part of the story quite another
turn; that Artaxerxes and Amestris ought to have been preserved, and made happy
in the Conclusion of the Play; that besides the satisfaction which the
Spectators would have had to have seen two Virtuous (or at least Innocent)
Characters, rewarded and successful, there might have been also a more Noble
and Instructive Moral drawn that way. I must confess if this be an Error, (as I
perhaps it may,) it is a voluntary one and an Error of my Judgment: Since in
the writing I actually made such a sort of an Objection to my self; and chose
to wind up the story this way. Tragedies have been allowed, I know, to be
written both ways very beautifully. But since Terror and Pity are laid down for
the Ends of Tragedy, by the great Master and Father of Criticism, I was always
inclined to fancy, that the last and remaining Impressions, which ought to be
left on the minds of an Audience, should proceed from one of these two. They
should be struck with Terror in several parts of the Play, but always Conclude
and go away with Pity, a sort of regret proceeding from good nature, which, tho
an uneasiness, is not always disagreeable, to the person who feels it. It was
this passion that the famous Mr Otway succeeded so well in touching, and must
and will at all times affect people, who have any tenderness or humanity. If
therefore I had saved Artaxerxes and Amestris, I believe (with submission to my
Judges) I had destroyed the greatest occasion for Compassion in the whole Play.
Any body may perceive, that she is raised to some degrees of happiness, by
hearing that her Father and Husband are living, (whom she had supposed dead,)
and by seeing the Enemy and Persecuter of her Family dying at her feet,
purposely, that the turn of her death may be more surprising and pitiful. As
for that part of the Objection, which says, that Innocent persons ought not to
be shown unfortunate; The success and general approbation, which many of the
best Tragedies that have been writ, and which were built on that foundation,
have met with, will be sufficient answer for me.

That which they call the Poetical Justice, is, I think, strictly observed, the
two principal Contrivers of Evil, the Statesman and Priest, are punished with
death; and the Queen is deposed from her authority by her own Son; which, I
suppose, will be allowed as the severest mortification that could happen to a
woman of her Imperious temper.

If there can be any excuse for my Entertaining your Lordship with this Detail
of Criticisms, it is, That I would have this first mark of the honor I have
for your Lordship appear with as few faults as possible. Did not the prevailing
Character of your Lordship's Excellent humanity and good nature encourage me,
what ought I not to fear from the niceness of your Taste and Judgment? The
delicacy of your reflections may be very satal to so rough a Draught as this is;
but if I will believe, (as I am sure I ought to do) all men that I have heard
speak of your Lordship, they bid me hope every thing from your Goodness. This
is that I must sincerely own, which made me extremely Ambitious of your
Lordship's Patronage for this Piece. I am but too sensible, that there are a
multitude of faults in it; but since the good nature of the Town has covered,
or not taken notice of 'em, I must have so much discretion, as not to look with
an affected nicety into 'em my self. With all the Faults and Imperfections
which it may have, I must own, I shall be yet very well satisfied with it, if
it gives me an opportunity of reckoning my self from this time,

Your Lordship's most Obedient, and devoted humble Servant, N. Row.

The Prologue.
Spoke by Mr Batterton.
IF Dying Lovers yet deserve a Tear,
If a sad story of a Maids despair,
Yet move Compassion in the pitying fair,
This day the Poet does his Art employ,
The soft accesses of your Souls to try.
Nor let the Stoic boast his mind unmoved,
The Brute Philosopher, who never has proved
The Joy of Loving or of being Loved;
Who scorns his humane nature to confess,
And striving to be more than man, is less.
Nor let the men, the weeping fair accuse
Those kind protectors of the Tragic Muse,
Whose Tears did moving Otway's labors crown,
And made the poor Monimia's Grief their own:
Those Tears, their art, not weakness has confessed,
Their Grief approved the niceness of their taste,
And they wept most, because they judged the best.
O could this Age's Writers hope to find
An Audience to Compassion thus inclined,
The Stage would need no Farce, nor Song nor Dance,
Nor Capering Monsieur brought from Active France.
Clinch and his Organ Pipe, his Dogs and Bear,
To native Barnet might again repair,
Or breathe with Captain Otter, Bankside Air.
Majestic Tragedy should once again
In Purple Pomp adorn the swelling Scene.
Her search should ransack all the Ancient's store,
The Fortunes of their Loves and Arms explore,
Such as might grieve you, but should please you more.
What Shakespeare durst not, this bold Age should do,
And famous Greek and Latian Beauties show.
Shakespeare, whose Genius to its self a Law,
Could men in every height of Nature draw,
And Copied all but women that he saw.
Those Ancient Heroines your concern should move,
Their Grief and Anger much, but most their Love;
For in the account of every Age we find
The best and fairest of that Sex were kind,
To Pity always, and to Love inclined.
Assert, ye fair ones, who in Judgment sit,
Your Ancient Empire over Love and Wit;
Reform our Sense, and teach the men to Obey,
They Will leave their Tumbling if you lead the way.
Be but what those before to Otway were;
O were you but as kind, we know you are as fair.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Artaxerxes, Prince of Persia, Eldest Son to the King Arsaces, by a former
Queen. Mr. Verbrugen. Artaban, Son to Arsaces, by Artemisa. Mr. Booth. Memnon,
Formerly General to Arsaces, now disgraced; a friend to Artaxerxes. Mr.
Batterton. Mirza, First Minister of State, in the interest of Artemisa and
Artaban. Mr. Freeman. Magas, Priest of the Sun, friend to Mirza and the Queen.
Mr. Bowman. Cleanthes, Friend to Artaban. Mr. Pack. Orchanes, Captain of the
Guards to the Queen. Mr. Baily.
WOMEN.
Artemisa, Formerly the Wife of Tiribasus a Persian Lord, now married to the
King, and Queen of Persia. Mrs. Barry. Amestris, Daughter to Memnon, in love
with, and beloved by Artaxerxes. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Cleone, Daughter to Mirza,
in love with Artaxerxes, and beloved by Artaban. Mrs. Bowman. Beliza, Confident
to Cleone. Mrs. Martin.
The Ambitious Stepmother.
ACT I. SCENE I. A Royal Palace.
Enter at several Doors Mirza and Magas. Mir. WHat bringst thou, Magas? Say,
how fares the King?

Mag. As one, whom when we number with the living,
We say the most we can; tho sure it must
Be happier far, to quit a wretched being,
Than keep it on such terms: For as I entered
The Royal Lodging, an universal horror
Struck through my Eyes, and chilled my very Heart;
The cheerful day was every where shut out
With care, and left a more than midnight darkness,
Such as might even be felt: A few dim Lamps,
That feebly lifted up their sickly heads,
Looked faintly through the shade, and made it seem
More dismal by such light; while those that waited,
In solemn sorrow, mixed with wild amazement,
Observed a dreadful silence.

Mirz. Did thou see him?

Mag. My Lord, I did; treading with gentle steps,
I reached the Bed, which held the poor remains
Of great Arsaces, just as I approacht,
His drooping lids, that seemed for ever closed,
Were faintly reared, to tell me that he lived:
The balls of sight, dim and deprived of motion,
Sparkled no more with that Majestic sire,
At which even Kings have trembled; but had lost
Their common useful office, and were shaded
With an eternal night; struck with a sight,
That showed me humane nature fallen so low,
I hastily retir d.

Mirz. He dies too soon;
And fate if possible must be delay d;
The thought that labors in my forming brain,
Yet crude and immature, demands more time.
Have the Physicians given up all their hopes?
Cannot they add a few days to a Monarch,
In recompense of thousand vulgar fates,
Which their Drugs daily hasten?

Mag. As I past
The outward Rooms, I found 'em in Consult;
I asked 'em if their art was at a stand,
And could not help the King; they shook their heads,
And in most grave and solemn wise, unfolded
Matter, which little purported, but words
Rankt in right learned phrase; all I could learn, was;
That Nature's kindly warmth was quite extinct,
Nor could the breath of art kindle again
The Etherial fire.

Mirz. My Royal Mistress Artemisa's fate,
And all her Son Young Artaban's high hopes,
Hang on this lucky Crisis; since this day.
The haughty Artaxerxes and old Memnon
Enter Persepolis: The yearly Feast
Devoted to our glorious God the Sun,
Hides their designs under a holy veil;
And thus Religion is a mask for Faction.
But let their Guardian Genii still be watchful,
For if they chance to nod, my waking vengeance
Shall surely catch that moment to destroy 'em.

Mag. It Is said the fair Amestris, Memnon's Daughter,
Comes in their company.

Mirz. That fatal Beauty,
With most malignant influence, has crossed
My first and great Ambition. When my Brother,
The great Cleander fell by Memnon's hand,
(You know the story of our Houses quarrel)
I sought the King for Justice on the Murderer;
And to confirm my interest in the Court,
In confidence of mighty wealth and power,
A long descent from Noble Ancestors,
And somewhat of the Beauty of the Maid,
I offered my Cleone to the Prince
Fierce Artaxerxes; he, with rude disdain
Refused the proffer; and to grate me more,
Publicly owned his passion for Amestris;
And in despite even of his Fathers Justice,
Espoused the Cause of Memnon.

Mag. Even from that noted Era, I remember
You dated all your service to the Queen,
Our Common Mistress.

Mirz. It Is true, I did so; Nor was it in vain;
She did me right, and satisfied my vengeance;
Memnon was banished, and the Prince disgraced
Went into Exile with him. Since that time,
Since I have been admitted to her Council,
And have seen her, with unerring judgment guide
The Reins of Empire, I have been amazed,
To see her more than manly strength of Soul,
Cautious in good success, in bad unshaken;
Still armed against the uncertain turns of Chance,
Untoucht by any weakness of her Sex,
Their Superstition, Pity, or their Fear;
And is a Woman only in her Cunning.
What story tells of great Semiramis,
Or Rolling Time, that gathers as it goes,
Has added more, such Artemisa is.

Mag. Sure 'twas a mark of an uncommon Genius,
To bend a Soul like that of great Arsaces,
And Charm him to her sway.

Mirz. Certainly Fate,
Or somewhat like the force of Fate, was in it;
And still whene're remembrance sets that scene
Before my eyes, I view it with amazement.

Mag. I then was young, a stranger to the Court,
And only took the story as reported
By different Fame, you must have known it better.

Mirz. Indeed I did, then favored by the King,
And by that means a sharer in the secret.
'Twas on a day of public Festival,
When Beauteous Artemisa stood to view,
Behind the Covert of a Golden Lattice,
When King and Court returning from the Temple;
When just as by her stand Arsaces past,
The Windows, by design or chance, fell down,
And to his view exposed her blushing Beauties.
She seemed surpised, and presently withdrew,
But even that moment was an age in Love;
So was the Monarchs heart for passion molded,
So apt to take at first the soft impression.
Soon as we were alone, I found the Evil
Already past a Remedy, and vainly
Urged the resentment of her injured Lord:
His Love was deaf to all.

Mag. Was Tiribasus absent?

Mir. He was then General of the Horse,
Under old Memnon in the Median War.
But if that distant view so much had charmed him,
Imagine how he burnt, when, by my means,
He viewed her Beauties nearer, when each action,
And every graceful sound conspired to charm him:
Joy of her Conquest, and the hopes of Greatness,
Gave Luster to her Charms, and made her seem
Of more than mortal Excellence. In short,
After some faint resistance, like a Bride
That strives a while, tho eager for the bliss,
The furious King Enjoyed her.
And to secure their Joys, a snare was laid
For her unthinking Lord, in which he fell
Before the fame of this could reach his Ears.
Since that, she still has by successful Arts
Maintained that power, which first her beauty gained.

Mag. With deepest foresight, wisely has she laid
A sure foundation of the future greatness
Of Artaban, her only darling Son.
Each busy thought, that rouls within her breast,
Labors for him; the King, when first he sicken'd,
Declared he should succeed him in the Throne.

Mir. That was a point well gained; nor were the Eldership
Of Artaxerxes worth our least of fears,
If Memnon's interest did not prop his Cause.
Since then they stand secured, by being joined,
From reach of open force; it were a Masterpiece
Worthy a thinking head, to sow division
And seeds of jealousy, to lose those bonds,
Which knit and hold 'em up, that so divided,
With ease they might be ruined.

Mag. That Is a difficulty, next to impossible.

Mir. Cease to think so;
The wise and active conquer difficulties,
By daring to attempt 'em; sloth and folly
Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and hazard,
And make the impossibility they fear;
Even Memnon's temper seems to give the occasion;
Of wrong impatient, headlong to revenge;
Tho bold, yet wants that faculty of thinking,
That should direct his anger. Valiant fools
Were made by Nature for the wise to work with;
They are their tools, and it is the sport of Statesmen,
When Heroes knock their knotty heads together,
And fall by one another.

Mag. What you have said,
Has waked a thought in me which may be lucky;
Ere he was banished for your Brothers murder,
There was a friendship 'twixt us; and tho then
I left his barren soil, to root my self
More safely, under your auspicious shade,
Yet still pretending ties of ancient Love,
At his arrival here I Will visit him;
Whence this advantage may at least be made,
To ford his shallow Soul.

Mirz. Oh much, much more;
'Twas happily remembered, nothing gulls
These open, unsuspecting fools, like friendship;
Dull heavy things! whom Nature has left honest
In mere frugality, to save the Charge
She Is at in setting out a thinking Soul:
Who, since their own short understandings reach
No farther than the present, think even the wise,
Like them, disclose the secrets of their breasts,
Speak what they think, and tell tales of themselves:
Thy function too will varnish over our arts,
And sanctify dissembling.

Mag. Yet still I doubt,
His caution may draw back, and fear a snare.

Mirz. Tell him, the better to assist the fraud,
That even I wish his friendship, and would gladly
Forget that cause of hate, which long has held us
At mortal distance, give up my revenge,
A grateful Offering to the public peace.

Mag. Could you afford him such a bribe as that,
A Brothers blood yet unatton'd --

Mirz. No Magas,
It is not in the power of fate to raze
That thought from out my memory;
Eternal night, it is true, may cast a shade
On all my faculties, extinguish knowledge;
And great Revenge may with my Being cease;
But while I am, that ever will remain,
And in my latest Spirits still survive.
Yet, I would have thee promise that, and more,
The friendship of the Queen, the restitution
Of his Command, and Honors, that his Daughter
Shall be the Bride of Artaban; say any thing;
Thou know the Faith of Courtiers, and their Oaths,
Like those of Lovers, the Gods laugh at 'em.

Mag. Doubt not my zeal to serve our Royal Mistress,
And in her Interest yours, my Friend and Patron.

Mirz. My worthy Priest! still be my friend, and share
The utmost of my power, by greatness raised. Embracing.
Thou like the God thou serv'st, shall shine aloft,
And with thy influence rule the under world.
But see! the Queen appears; she seems to muse,
Her thoughtful Soul, labors with some event
Of high import, which bustles like an Embryo
In its dark room, and longs to be disclosed.
Retire, lest we disturb her.
They retire to the side of the Stage.
Enter the Queen attended. Qu. Be fixed, my Soul, fixed on thy own firm basis!
Be constant to thy self; nor know the weakness,
The poor Irresolution of my Sex:
Disdain those shows of danger, that would bar
My way to glory. Ye Diviner Powers!
By whom it is said we are, from whose bright Beings
Those active sparks were struck which move our clay,
I feel, and I Confess the Etherial energy,
That busy restless principle, whose appetite
Is only pleased with greatness like your own:
Why have you clogged it then with dull mass,
And shut it up in Woman? Why debased it
To an Inferior part of the Creation?
Since, your own heavenly hands mistook my lot,
It Is you have erred, not I. Could Fate e're mean
Me, for a Wife, a Slave to Tiribasus!
To such a thing as he! a Wretch! a Husband!
Therefore in just assertion of my self,
I shook him off, and past those narrow limits,
Which Laws contrive in vain for Souls born great.
There is not, must not be a bound for greatness;
Power gives a sanction, and makes all things just.
Ha! Mirza! Worthy Lord! I saw thee not, Seeing Mirza.
So busy were my faculties in thought.

Mir. The thoughts of Princes dwell in sacred privacy,
Unknown and venerable to the vulgar; Bowing.
And like a Temples innermost recesses,
None enters, to behold the hallowed mysteries,
Unbidden of the God that dwells within.

Qu. Wise Mirza! were my Soul a Temple, fit
For Gods, and Godlike Counsels to inhabit,
Thee only would I choose of all mankind,
To be the Priest, still favored with access;
Whose piercing Wit, swayed by unerring Judgment,
Might mingle even with assembled Gods,
When they devise unchangeable decrees,
And call 'em Fate.

Mirz. Whatever I am, each faculty,
The utmost power of my Exerted Soul,
Preserves a being only for your service;
And when I am not yours, I am no more:

Qu. Time shall not know an end of my acknowledgments,
But every day of our continued lives
Be witness of my gratitude, to draw
The knot, which holds our Common Interest, closer;
Within six days, my Son, my Artaban,
Equally dear to me as life and glory,
In public shall Espouse the fair Cleone,
And be my pledge of Everlasting Amity.

Mir. O Royal Lady! you out-bid my service;
And all returns are vile, but words the poorest.

Qu. Enough! be as thou have been, still my friend,
I ask no more. But I observe of late,
Your Daughter grows a stranger to the Court;
Know you the cause?

Mirz. A melancholy Girl;
Such in her Infancy her Temper was,
Soft even beyond her Sexes tenderness;
By nature pitiful, and apt to grieve
For the mishaps of others, and so make
The sorrows of the wretched world her own.
Her Closet and the Gods share all her time,
Except when (only by some Maid attended)
She seeks some shady solitary Grove,
Or by the gentle murmur of some Brook
Sits sadly listening to a tale of sorrow,
Till with her tears she swell the narrow stream.

Qu. It is not well, these thoughts must be removed:
That eating Canker Grief, with wasteful spite,
Preys on the Rosy bloom of Youth and Beauty:
But Love shall chase away these clouds of sadness;
My Son shall breathe so warm a gale of sighs,
As shall dissolve those Isicles, that hang
Like death about her heart.
Attend us, holy Magus, to the King,
Nor cease to importune the mighty Gods
To grant him health, tho much I fear in vain.
Exit Queen, Magas, and Attendants.
Manet Mirza. Mirz. This meddling Priest longs to be found a fool;
Thinks he that Memnon, Soldier as he is,
Thoughtless, and dull, will listen to his soothing?
However, I gave his wise proposal way,
Nay, urged him to go on; the shallow fraud
Will ruin him for ever with my Enemies,
And make him firmly mine, spite of his fears
And natural inconstancy.
While Choice remains he will be still unsteady,
And nothing but necessity can fix him.
Exit.
Enter Artaxerxes, Memnon and Attendants. Artax. Methinks, my noble Father and
my Friend,
We enter here like strangers, and unlookt for:
Each busy face we meet, with wonder starts,
And seems amazed to see us.

Mem. Well may the ignoble herd
Start, if with heedless steps they unawares
Tread on the Lions walk; a Prince's genius
Awes with supiner greatness all beneath him.
With wonder they behold the great Arsaces
Revived again in Godlike Artaxerxes.
In you they see him, such as often they did
Returning from his Wars, and Crowned with Conquest,
When all our Virgins met him on the way,
And with their Songs and Dances blessed his Triumph:
Now basely awed by factious Priests and Women,
They start at Majesty, and seem surpised
As if a God had met 'em. In Honors name
Why have we let this be? Why have we languisht?
And suffered such a Government as this
To waste our strength, and wear our Empire low?

Art. Cursed be the means by which these ills arose,
Fatal alike to me as to my Country;
Which my great Soul, unable to revenge,
Has yet with indignation only seen,
Cut off by Arts of Coward Priests and Statesmen,
Whom I disdained with servile smiles to court,
From the great right which God and Nature gave,
My birthright to a Throne.

Mem. Nor Priests, nor Statesmen,
Could have completed such an ill as that,
If Woman had not mingled in the mischief;
If Artimesa had not, by her Charms,
And all her Sex's Cunning, wrought the King,
Old, obvious to her arts, decayed in greatness,
Dead to the memory of what once he was,
Just crawling on the verge of wretched life,
A burden to himself, and his friends pity;
Among his other failings, to forget
All that a Father and a King could owe
To such a Son as you were; to cut you off
From your Succession, from your hopes of Empire,
And graft her upstart offspring on to Royalty.

Artax. But if I beat it,
Oh may I live to be my Brothers Slave,
The scorn of those brave Friends that own my Cause;
May you my Father spurn me for a Coward,
May all my noble hopes of Love and Glory
Leave me to vile despair. By heaven, my heart
Sits lighter in my bosom, when I think
That I this day shall meet the Boy my Brother,
Whose young Ambition with aspiring wings
Dares even to mate my greatness.

Mem. Fame, that speaks
Minutely every circumstance of Princes,
Describes him bold, and fiercely fond of power,
Which even in spite of Nature he affects.
Impatient of Command, and hardly daigning
To be controlled by his Imperious Mother.
It Is said too (as no means were left untried,
Which might prepare and fit him to contend
With a superior right of birth and merit,)
That Books, and the politer Arts, (which those
Who know admire) have been his care; already
He mingles in their Councils, and they trust
His youth with secrets of important villainy.
The Crowd, taught by his Creatures to admire him,
Style him a God in Wisdom.

Artax. Be that his glory,
Let him with Pedants hunt for praise in Books,
Pore out his Life amongst the lazy Gown-men,
Grow old and vainly proud in fancied knowledge,
Unequal to the task of vast Ambition.
Ambition! the desire of active Souls,
That pushes 'em beyond the bounds of Nature,
And elevates the Hero to the Gods.
But see! my Love, your beauteous Daughter comes,
And even Ambition ckens at her sight.

Enter Amestris attended. Revenge, and fierce desires of Glory, cease
To urge my passions, mastered by her eyes;
And only gentle fires now warm my breast.
Amest. I come, my Father, to attend your order. To Memnon.

Mem. It Is well; and I would have thee still be near me,
The malice of the Faction which I hate,
Would vent it self even on thy Innocence,
Were thou not safe under a Fathers Care.

Art. Oh say a Lover's too; nor can you have
An Interest in her safety more than mine.
Love gives a Right superior even to Nature;
Or Love is Nature, in the noblest meaning,
The cause and the preserver of the world.
These arms that long to press thee to my bosom,
For ever shall defend thee.

Mem. Therefore, my Son,
Unto your Care I leave our common charge;
Tigranes with our friends expects my orders;
Those when I have dispatched, upon the instant
I will return, and meet at your apartment.
Exit Memnon.
Art. Come to my arms, and let me hide thee there
From all those fears that vex thy beating heart,
Be safe and free from all those fancied dangers,
That haunt thy Apprehension.

Ames. Can you blame me?
If from retirement drawn and pleasing solitude,
I fear to tempt this Stormy Sea the World,
Whose every Beach is strewn with wrecks of wretches,
That daily perish in it. Cursed Ambition!
Why do thou come to trouble my repose,
Who have even from my Infancy disclaimed thee?

Art. Cease to complain, my Love, and let no thought
But what brings peace and joy approach thy breast.
Let me impart my manly fires to thee,
To warm thy fancy to a taste of-glory;
Imperial power and Purple greatness wait thee,
And sue for thy acceptance; by the Sun,
And by Arsaces Head, I will not mount
The Throne of Cyrus, but to share it with thee.

Ames. Vain shows of happiness! deceitful pageantry!
Ah! Prince, had thou but known the joys which dwell
With humbler fortunes, thou would Curse thy Royalty.
Had fate allotted us some obscure Village,
Where only blessed with life's necessities,
We might have passed in peace our happy days,
Free from the Cares which Crowns and Empires bring;
There no Stepmother, no Ambitious Brother,
No wicked Statesmen, would with Impious Arts,
Have strove to wrest from us our small Inheritance,
Or stir the simple Hinds to noisie faction.
Our nights had all been blessed with balmy slumbers,
And all our waking hours been crowned with Love.

Art. Exquisite Charmer! now by Orosmades
I swear, thy each soft accent melts my Soul:
The joy of Conquest, and Immortal Triumph,
Honor and Greatness, all that fires the Hero
To high Exploits, and Everlasting Fame,
Grows vile in sight of thee. My haughty Soul,
By Nature fierce, and panting after glory,
Could be content to live obscure with thee,
Forgotten and unknown of all but my Amestris.

Ames. No, Son of great Arsaces, though my Soul
Shares in my Sexes weakness, and would fly
From noise and faction, and from fatal greatness,
Yet for thy sake, thou Idol of my heart,
(Nor will I blush to own the sacred flame,
Thy sighs and vows have kindled in my breast,)
For thy loved sake, spite of my boding fears,
I Will meet the danger which Ambition brings,
And tread one path with thee: Nor shall thou lose
The glorious portion which thy fate designs thee,
For thy Amestris fears.

Art. Give me those fears;
For all things will be well.

Ames. Grant it, ye powers:
This day before your Altars will I kneel,
Where all my Vows shall for my Prince be offered:
Still let success attend him, Let mankind
Adore in him your visible divinity;
Nor will I importune you for my self,
But sum up all I ask in Artaxerxes.

Art. And doubt not but the Gods will kindly hear
Their Virgin Votary, and grant her Prayer;
Our glorious Sun, the source of light and heat,
Whose influence chears the world he did create,
Shall smile on thee from his Meridian Skies,
And own the kindred Beauties of thy Eyes;
Thy Eyes, which, could his own fair beams decay,
Might shine for him, and bless the world with day.
Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An Apartment in the Palace.
Enter Memnon and Magas. Mem. THose who are wise in Courts, my holy Sir,
Make friendships with the Ministers of State,
Nor seek the ruins of a wretched Exile,
Lest there should be Contagion in misfortunes,
And make the alliance fatal.

Mag. Friends like Memnon
Are worth being sought in danger; since this age
Of most flagitious note, degenerates
From the famed virtue of our Ancestors,
And leaves but few Examples of their Excellence.
Whom should we seek for friendships but those few,
Those happy few, within whose breasts alone,
The footsteps of lost virtue yet remain?

Mem. I prithee peace! for nothing misbecomes
The man that would be thought a friend, like flattery;
Flattery! the meanest kind of base dissembling,
And only used to catch the grossest fools:
Besides, it stains the honor of thy function,
Which like the Gods thou servst, should be sincere.

Mag. By that sincerity, by all the service
My friendship can express, I would approve it;
And tho I went not from Persepolis
Companion of your exile, yet my Heart
Was with you still; and what I could I did,
Beseeching every God for your return;
Nor were those Vows in vain, since once again
It Is given me to behold my friend, nay more,
Would you agree, to keep you here for ever.

Mem. The Gods, it is true, are just, and have, I hope,
At length decreed an end of my misfortunes;
At least they give me this, to dye with honor,
When Life grows vile or burdensome.

Mag. By me they offer all that you can ask,
And point an easy way to happiness.
Spare then the Wounds our wretched Country fears,
The thousand ills which Civil discord brings,
Oh still that noise of war, whose dread alarms,
Frightens repose from Country Villages,
And stirs rude tumult up and wild distraction,
In all our peaceful Cities.

Mem. Witness for me,
Ye awful Gods, who view our inmost thoughts!
I took not arms, till urged by self defense,
The eldest law of Nature.
Impute not then those ills which may ensue
To me, but those who with incessant hate
Pursue my life; whose malice spreads the flame
To every part, that my devoted fabric
May in the universal ruin burn.

Mag. And yet even there perhaps you judge too rashly;
Impetuous passion hurries you so fast,
You cannot mark the advantage of your fortune.

Mem. Has not the Law been urged to set a brand
Of foul dishonor on my hoary head?
Ha! am I not proscribed?

Mag. Forget that thought,
That jarring grates your Soul, and turns the harmony
Of blessed peace to cursed infernal discord.
Hate and its fatal causes all shall cease,
And Memnon's name be honored as of old,
The bravest and the most successful warrior,
The fortunate defender of his Country.

Mem. It Is true, (nor will it seem a boast to own)
I have fought well for Persia, and repaid
The benefit of birth with honest service,
Full fifty years harnest in rugged Steel,
I have endured the biting Winters blast,
And the severer heats of parching Summer;
While they who loll'd at home on lazy Couches,
Amidst a Crew of Harlots and soft Eunuchs,
Were at my cost secure in luxury,
This is a Justice Mirza's self must do me.

Mag. Even he, tho fatal accidents have set
A most unhappy bar between your friendship,
Lamenting that there had been cause of Enmity,
And owning all the merit of your virtues,
Will often wish Fate had ordain d you friends.

Mem. Our God the Sun shall sooner change his Course,
And all the impossibilities, which Poets
Count to extravagance of loose description,
Shall sooner be.

Mag. Yet hear me, noble Memnon;
When by the duty of my Priesthood moved,
And in just detestation of the mischiefs
Intestine jars produce, I urged wise Mirza,
By his Concurrence, Help, and healing Counsels,
To stop those wounds at which his Country bleeds;
Grieved at the thought, he vow d, his whole endeavor
Should be to close those breaches:
That even Cleander's death, and all those Quarrels
That long have nourisht hatred in your Houses,
Should be in joy of public Peace forgotten.

Mem. Oh could thou charm the malice of a Statesman,
And make him quit his purpose of Revenge,
Thy preaching might reform the guilty world,
And Vice would be no more.

Mag. Nay, even the Queen
Will bind the Confirmation by her Son,
And asks the fair Amestris for Prince Artaban.

Mem. Were that the only terms, it were impossible.

Mag. You would not shun the alliance of a Prince?

Mem. No; for it is the glory of my fate,
That Artaxerxes is designed my Son,
With every Grace and Royal Virtue crowned;
Great, just and merciful, such as mankind,
(When, in the infant world, first governments
Began by chance) would have designed a King.

Mag. Unbounded power, and height of greatness, give
To Kings that luster, which we think divine;
The wise who know 'em, know they are but men,
Nay, sometimes weak ones too; the Crowd indeed,
Who kneel before the Image, not the God,
Worship the Deity their hands have made.
The Name of Artaban will be as great
As that of Cyrus, when he shall possess
(As sure he shall) his Throne.

Mem. Ha! what means he!
This Villain Priest! but hold my rage a little,
And learn dissimulation; I Will try him farther. aside.
You talk in Riddles, when you name a Throne
And Artaban, the Gods, who portion out
The Lots of Princes as of private men,
Have put a bar between his hopes and Empire.

Mag. What bar?

Mem. The best, an Elder Brothers Claim.

Mag That Is easily removed, the King their Father
On just and weighty reasons has decreed
His Scepter to the younger; add to this,
The joint Concurrence of our Persian Lords,
Who only want your voice to make it firm.

Mem. Can I? Can they? Can any honest hand,
Join in an act like this? is not the Elder
By nature pointed out for preference?
Is not his right enrolled amongst those Laws
Which keep the world's vast frame in beauteous order?
Ask those thou namest but now, what made them Lords?
What titles had they had, if merit only
Could have conferred a right? if Nature had not
Strove hard to thrust the worst deserving first,
And stamped the Noble mark of Eldership
Upon their baser metal?

Mag. Sure there may be
Reasons, of so much power and cogent force,
As may even set aside this right of Birth,
If Sons have rights, yet Fathers have 'em too.
'Twere an Invidious task to enter into
The Insolence, and other faults, which moved
Royal Arsaces, to a just displeasure
Against his Eldest Son Prince Artaxerxes.

Mem. Ha! dare not for thy life, I charge dare not
To brand the spotless virtue of my Prince,
With falsehoods of most base and damned contrivance.
I tell thee, envious Priest, should the just Gods
Require severe account of thy past life,
And charge remembrance to dispose thy Crimes,
In rank and hideous order to thy view,
Horror and guilt of Soul would make thee mad.

Mag. You take the matter farther than I meant it;
My friendship only aims at your advantage,
Would point you out a way to Peace and Honor,
And in return of this, your rage unkindly
Loads me with Injuries.

Mem. Away! I cannot bear thy base dissembling,
My honest Soul disdains thee and thy friendship.
How have thou dared to think so vilely of me;
That I would condescend to thy mean arts,
And traffic with thee for a Princes ruin;
A Prince! the Joy and Honor of Mankind,
As much superior to the rest of Kings,
As they themselves are above common men,
And is the very Image of the Gods,
Were thou not priviledg'd, like age and women,
My Sword should reach thee, and revenge the wrong
Thy Tongue has done his fame.

Mag. Ungrateful Lord!
Would thou invade my life, as a return
For proffered Love? But let the event declare
How great a good by me sincerely offered,
Thy dull Romantic honor has refused.
And since I have discharged the debt I owed
To former friendship, if the Gods hereafter
Send Ruin down, and plague thee with Confusion,
Remember me in vain, and Curse thy folly.
Exit Magas.
Mem. No my remembrance treasures honest thoughts,
And holds not things like thee; I scorn thy friendship;
And would not owe my life to such a Villain;
But thou art hardly Saint enough to prophecy.
Were all thy Tribe like thee, it might well startle
Our Lay unlearned faith, when through such hands
The knowledge of the Gods is reached to man.
But thus those Gods instruct us, that not all
(Who like intruders thrust into their service,
And turn the Holy Office to a trade,)
Participate their sacred influence.
This then is your own Cause, ye awful powers,
Revenge your selves, your violated Altars,
That those who with unhallowed hands approach,
May tremble at your justice.
Exit Memnon.
SCENE II. The Palace.
Enter the Queen, Artaban, Mirza, Magas, and Attendants. Artab. My Brother then
is come.

Mirz. My Lord, I saw him,
With him old haughty Memnon; as they past,
With fierce disdain they viewed the gazing Crowd,
And with dumb Pride seemed to neglect that worship
Which yet they wished to sind; this way they move,
It Is said to ask an Audience of the King.

Qu. Mirza, it is well, I thank thy timely care;
Here will we face this storm of insolence,
Nor fear the noisy, thunder, let it roll,
Then burst, and spend at once its idle rage.

Artab. Why meet we thus like wrangling Advocates,
To urge the justice of our Cause with words?
I hate this parle, it is tame; if we must meet,
Give me my Arms, and let us stake at once
Our rights of Merit and of Eldership,
And prove like Men our title.

Mirz. 'Twere unsafe,
They come surrounded by a crowd of friends,
To strike through these were dangerous and rash,
Fate waits for 'em elsewhere with certain ruin;
From Mirza's hand expect it.

Qu. Be it so:
Auspicions Sage, I trust thee with my fortune,
My hopes of greatness, do thou guide 'em all,
For me and for thy self. My Son give way,
Nor let thy hasty youth disturb with outrage
The present necessary face of peace;
Occasions great and glorious will remain
Worthy thy Arms and Courage.

Artab. I obey;
And willingly resign the unmanly task,
Words are indeed your province.

Mirz. My Royal Mistress,
Prepare to meet with more than brutal fury
From the fierce Prince and Memnon.

Qu. Well I know
The Insolence and native Pride of each,
With scurril taunts and blackest infamy
They load my name: But let the wretches rail,
A woman's vengeance waits 'em.

Mirz. They are here.

Enter Artaxerxes, Memnon, and Attendants. Artax. Ye tutelar Gods, who guard
this Royal fabric,
And thou, O Orosmades, the Protector
Of the great Persian race. E're yet my Father,
Royal Arsaces, mingle with your God heads,
Grant me once more to lay before his feet
His eldest-born, his once loved Artaxerxes,
To offer my Obedience to his Age;
All that a Son can owe to such a Father.
You, who with haggard eyes stare wildly on me,
If (as by your attendance here you seem)
You serve the King my Father, lead me to him.

Qu. And do thou wonder that mankind should start,
When Parricides and Rebels, in despite
Of Nature, Majesty, and Reverend Age,
With Impious force, and Ruffian violence,
Would rob a King and Father of his life;
Cut off his short remains --

Artax. Ha! say thou, woman;
I prithee peace, and urge not a reply,
I would not hold acquaintance with thy Infamy.

Qu. Ye Righteous powers, whose justice awes the world,
Let not your Thunders sleep when Crimes like these
Stalk in the open air.

Artax. Thy Priest instructs thee,
Else sure thou had not dared to tempt the Gods,
And trifle with their Justice: Can thou name it
And look on me? on me, whom thy Cursed arts
Have strove to bar from native Right to Empire,
Made me a stranger to a Fathers Love,
And broke the bands of Nature, which once held me
The nea rest to his heart.

Qu. Had he not reason,
When thou with Rebel Insolence did dare
To own and to protect that hoary Ruffian; [Pointing to Memnon.
And in dispight even of thy Fathers justice,
To stir the factious Rabble up to arms
For him; and make a murderer's cause thy own.

Mem. I had another name (nor should thou move me,
Insulting Queen, to words, did not remembrance
With horror sting my Soul for Tiribasus,
Thy murdered Tiribasus) when by my fatal orders,
And by his own high Courage urged, he fell,
To make thy way to guilty greatness easy.
I thought him then a Traitor (for thy arts
Had taught the Royal Mandate so to call him)
Too big for public Justice, and on that pretense
Consented to the snare, that caught his life;
So my obedient honesty was made
The Pandar to thy Lust and black Ambition.
Except the guilt of that accursed day,
In all my Iron years of wars and danger,
From blooming youth down to decaying age,
My fame never knew a stain of foul dishonor,
And if that make me guilty, think what thou art,
The Cause and the Contriver of that mischief.

Qu. What namest thou Tiribasus, be his guilt
Forgotten with his memory. Think on Cleander,
And let the Furies that enquire for blood,
Stir horror up, and bitterest remorse,
To gnaw thy anxiou Soul. Oh great Cleande
Unworthy was thy fate, thou first of Warriors,
To fall beneath a base Assassin's stab,
Whom all the thirsty instruments of death,
Had in the field of Battle sought in vain.

Mem. In sight of Heaven, and of the equal Gods,
I will avow that my Revenge was just;
My injured honor could not ask for less:
Since he refused to do a Soldiers Justice,
I used him as I ought.

Qu. Amazing boldness!
And dare'st thou call that act a Soldiers Justice?
Did thou not meet him with dissembled Friendship,
Hiding the rancour of thy heart in smiles;
When he (whose open unsuspecting nature
Thought thee a Soldier honest as himself)
Came to the Banquet, as secure of peace,
By mutual vows renewed; and in the revel
Of that luxurious day, forgetting hate,
And every cause of ancient animosity,
Devoted all his thoughts to mirth and friendship;
Then Memnon (at an hour when few are Villains
The sprightly juice infusing gentler thoughts,
And kindling love even in the coldest breasts,)
Unequal to him in the face of War,
Stole on Cleander with a Cowards malice,
And struck him to the heart.

Mem. By the stern God,
By Mars, the Patron of my honored Wars,
It Is basely false: In his own drunken brawl
The boaster fell. I bore his lavish tongue,
Nor thought him worth my Sword, till (his cold temper
Warmed with the Wine) he dared me to the Combat,
Then pleased to meet him in that fit of Valor,
I took him at his word, and (with my Sword
Drawn against his in equal opposition)
I killed him, while it lasted.

Artax. Cease we, my friend,
This women's war of railing, when they talk,
Men should be still, and let noise tire it self.
I came to find a Father, tho my fears
Suggest the worst of evils to my thoughts,
And make me dread to hear Arsaces fate.
Lead, Memnon, to the Presence.

Qu. Prince, you pass not;
Guards keep the door; the King your Father lives --

Artax. Ha! -- if he lives, why lives he not to me?
Why am I thus shut out and banished from him?
Why are my veins rich with his Royal blood?
Why did he give me Life if not to serve him?
Forbid me not to wait upon his Bed,
And watch his sickly slumbers, that my youth
May with its service glad his drooping age,
And his cold hand may bless me e're he dye.
Nay, be a Queen, and rob me of his Crown,
But let me keep my right to filial piety.

Qu Well have thou urged the specious name of Duty
To hide deform d Rebellion; Have thou not
With thy false arts poisoned his peoples Loyalty?
What meant thy pompous progress through the Empire,
Thy vast profusion to the factious Nobles,
Whose interest sways the Crowd, and stirs up Mutiny?
Why did thy haughty, fierce, disdainful Soul
Stoop to the meanest arts which catch the vulgar?
Herd with 'em, fawn upon 'em, and caress 'em;
Appeal to them, to them relate thy wrongs,
And make them Judges of thy Fathers Justice?
Thy cruel and unnatural lust of power
Have sunk thy Father more than all his years,
And made him wither in a green old age.

Artax. False all as hell: Nor had I armed my friends
But to defend that right. --

Qu. Do thou not come,
Impatient of delay to hasten fate?
To bring that death, the lingering disease
Would only for a day or two defer.

Artax. Thear thee, and disdain thy little malice,
That dares to stain my virtue with a Crime.
It views with most abhorrence; but reproach
Is lost on thee, since Modesty with all
The Virtues that adorn thy Sex is fled.

Qu. Audacious Rebel!

Artax. Infamous Adultress!
Stain of my Fathers Bed, and of his Throne!

Artab. Villain! thou lie! oh Madam give me way,
To the Queen, who holds him, drawing his Sword. Whatever bars my fury calls me
base,
Unworthy of the honor of your Son.

Qu. Hold Artaban! my honor suffers not
From his lewd breath, nor shall thy Sword profane
With brawls or blood the reverence of this place,
To peace and sacred Majesty devoted.

Artax. Ha! who art thou? To Artaban.

Artab. The son of great Arsaces,

Artax. No! it is false! thy forging mother's damned contrivance.
Seek for thy Father in that plotting fellow,
The Hero's race disclaims thee. Why do thou frown,
And knit thy boyish brow? Do thou dare ought
Worthy the rank of the Divine Arsacides?
If so, come forth, break from that woman's arms,
And meet me with thy good Sword like a man.

Artab. Yes! Artaxerxes, yes! thou shall be met:
The mighty Gods have held us in the balance,
And one of us is doomed to sink for ever.
Nor can I bear a long delay of Fate,
But wish the great decision were even now.
Proud and ambitious Prince, I dare like thee,
All that is great and glorious. Like thine,
Immortal thirst of Empire fires my soul,
My soul, which of superior power impatient,
Disdains thy Eldership; therefore in Arms
Which give the noblest right to Kings) I will
To death dispute with thee the Throne of Cyrus.

Artax. Do this, and thou art worthy of my anger:
O energy divine of great Ambition.
That can inform the souls of beardless Boys,
And ripen 'em to Men in spite of Nature.
I tell thee, Boy, that Empire is a Cause,
^or which the Gods might wage Immortal War.
^en let my soul exert her utmost virtue,
And think at least thou art Arsaces Son,
That the Idea of thy fancied Father
^ay raise and animate thy le^^er Genius,
And make thee fit to meet my arm in Battle.

Artab. Oh doubt not but my soul is charmed with greatness,
So much it rivals even the joy of Knowledge
And Sacred Wisdom. What makes Gods divine,
But Power and Science infinite?
Hear only this; our Father, pressed by age,
And a long train of Evils which that brings,
Languishes in the last Extremes of life:
Since thou would blot my birth with base dishonor,
Be this my proof of filial piety,
While yet he lives cease we our enmity;
Nor let the hideous noise of War disturb
His parting Soul.

Artax. I take thee at thy word:
Let his remains of life be Peace betwixt us,
And after that let all our time be War.
Remember when we meet, since one must fall,
Who Conquers and Survives, Survives to Empire.
Exeunt severally, Queen and Artaban, Artaxerxes, Memn. cum suis.
Manent Mirza and Magas. Mirz. Most fortunate Event! which gives us more
Than even our wishes could have asked. This Truce
Gives lucky opportunity for thinking;
'Twill lull these thoughtless Heroes to security.

Mag. The approaching Festival will more confirm it:
Of all those sacred times which heretofore
Religion has distinguished from the rest,
And to the service of the Gods devoted,
This has been still most venerable held;
Among the vulgar, toil and labor ceases
With Chaplets crowned, they dance to the shrill Pipe,
And in their Songs invoke those milder Deities,
That soften anxious life with peace and pleasure;
Slaves are enfranchised, and inveterate foes
Forget, or at the least suspend their hate,
And meet like friends. Pernicious discord seems
Out rooted from our more than Iron age:
The Gods are worshipped with unusual Reverence,
Since none, not even our Kings, approach their Temples
With any mark of Wars destructive Rage,
But Sacrifice unarmed.

Mirz. A lucky thought
Is in my mind at once completely formed,
Like Grecian Pallas in the head of Jove.
When Memnon, Artaxerxes, and their friends,
Shall, in obedience to the Holy Rites,
To morrow at the Altar bow unarmed,
Orchanes with a party of the Guards,
Who in my Palace shall this night be placed,
May at that private door which opens into
The Temple, rush at once, and seize 'em all.
The heads once safe, the mean and heartless Crowd
With ease may be dispersed.

Mag. What you propose
Wears a successful face, were it as innocent:
An act of such outrageous profanation,
May shock the thoughts even of our closest friends,
And make 'em start from an abhorred alliance,
That draws the vengeance of the Gods upon 'em.

Mirz. Art thou the first to start a doubt like that?
Art thou (who do inspire their Oracles,
And teach 'em to deceive the easy Crowd
In doubtful phrase) afraid of thy own Gods?
In every change they were on thy side still,
And sure they will not leave thee now for trifles.
The Gods shall certainly befriend our Cause,
At least not be our foes, nor will they leave
Their happy seats (where free from care and pain,
Blessed in themselves alone, of man regardless,
They loll serene in Everlasting Ease)
To mind the trivial business of our world.

Mag. But more I fear the Superstitious Vulgar,
Who tho unknowing what Religion means,
Yet nothing moves 'em more than zealous rage
For its defense, when they believe it violated.

Mirz. I was to blame to tax the Priest with scruples,
Or think his care of Interest was his Conscience. [Aside.
My Caution shall obviate all thy fears;
We will give out that they themselves designed
To fire the Temple, and then kill the King.
No matter tho it seem not very probable,
More monstrous tales have often amused the vulgar.

Mag. I yield to your direction, and to strengthen
The Enterprise, will secretly dispose
A party of my own within the Temple,
To join with yours.

Mirz. It joys my heart to think
That I shall glut my vengeance on this Memnon:
That I shall see him strive in vain, and Curse
The happy fraud that caught him. Like a Lion,
Who long has reigned the terror of the Woods,
And dared the boldest Huntsman to the Combat;
Till caught at length within some hidden snare,
With soaming Jaws he bites the Toils that hold him,
And roars and rowls his fiery eyes in vain;
While the surrounding Swains at pleasure wound him,
And make his death their sport.
Thus Wit still gets the mastery over Courage.
Long time unmatcht in War the Hero shone,
And mighty Fame in fields of Battle won;
Till one fine project of the Statesman's Brain Exeunt.
Bereaves him of the spoils his Arms did gain, Exeunt.
And renders all his boasted prowess vain.
Exeunt.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A Garden belonging to Mirza's Palace.
Cleone is discovered lying on a bank of Flowers, attending. SONG,
by B. Stote, Esquire
UPon a shady Bank reposed,
Philanthe, amorous, young, and fair,
Sighing to the Groves, disclosed
The story of her Care.
The Vocal Groves give some relief,
While they her notes return,
The Waters murmur over her grief,
And (...) seems to mourn.
A Swain that heard the Nymph complain,
In pity of the fair,
Thus kindly strove to Cure her pain,
And Ease her mind of Care.
It Is just that Love should give you rest,
From Love your Torments came;
Take that warm Cordial to your breast,
And meet a kinder flame.
How wretched must the woman prove,
Beware, fair Nymph, beware,
Whose folly scorns another Love,
And Courts her own Despair.
Cleo Oh Love! thou bane of an unhappy Maid!
Still art thou busy at my panting heart?
Still do thou melt my Soul with thy soft Images,
And make my ruin pleasing? fondly I try
By gales of Sighs and Floods of streaming Tears,
To vent my sorrows, and assuage my passions.
Still fresh supplies renew the exhausted stores.
Love reigns my Tyrant, to himself alone
He vindicates the Empire of my breast,
And banishes all thoughts of joy for ever.

Bell. Why are you still thus Cruel to your self?
Why do you feed and cherish the disease,
That preys on your dear life? how can you hope
To find a Cure for Love in solitude?
Why rather choose you not to shine at Court?
And in a thousand gay diversions there,
To lose the memory of this wretched passion?

Cleo. Alas! Beliza, thou have never known
The fatal power of a resistless Love;
Like that avenging guilt that haunts the Impious,
In vain we hope by flying to avoid it,
In Courts and Temples it pursues us still,
And in the loudest clamours will be heard:
It grows a part of us, lives in our blood,
And every beating pulse proclaims its force.
Oh! think not then that I can shun my self;
The Grave can only hide me from my sorrows.

Bell. Allow me then at least to share your griefs,
Companions in misfortunes make 'em less;
And I could suffer much to make you easy.

Cleo. Sit by me, gentle Maid, and while I tell
A wretched tale of unregarded Love,
If thou in kind compassion of my woes,
Shall sigh or shed a tear for my mishap,
My grateful eyes shall pay it back with interest.
Help me to rail at my too easy heart,
That rashly entertained this fatal guest:
And you, my eyes! why were you still impatient
Of any other sight but Artaxerxes?
Why did you make my woman's heart acquainted
With all the thousand graces and perfections,
That dress the lovely Hero up for Conquest?

Bell. Had you opposed this passion in its infancy,
E're time had given it strength, it might have died.

Cleo. That was the fatal Error that undid me:
My Virgin thoughts, and unexperienced Innocence,
Found not the danger till it was too late.
And tho when first I saw the charming Prince,
I felt a pleasing motion at my heart,
Short breathing sighs heaved in my panting breast,
The mounting blood flusht in my glowing face,
And died my cheeks with more than usual blushes,
I thought him sure the wonder of his kind,
And wished my fate had given me such a Brother:
Yet knew not that I loved, but thought that all
Like me, beheld and blessed him for his Excellence.

Bell. Sure never hopeless Maid was cursed before
With such a wretched passion; all the Gods
Join to oppose your happiness; it is said
This day the Prince shall wed the fair Amestris.

Cleo. No, my Beliza, I have never known
The pleasing thoughts of hope: certain despair
Was born at once, and with my love increased.

Bell. Think you the Prince has e're perceived your thoughts?

Cleo. Forbid it all ye chaster powers, that favor
The modesty and Innocence of Maids:
No, till my death no other breast but thine
Shall e're participate the fatal secret.
O could I think that he had ever known
My hidden flame, shame and confusion
Would force my Virgin soul to leave her mansion,
And certain Death ensue.
Thou name'st the fair Amestris, did thou not?

Bell. Madam, I did.

Cleo. I envy not her happiness;
Tho sure few of our Sex are blessed like her
In such a Godlike Lord.
Would I had been a man!
With honor then I might have sought his friendship!
Perhaps from long experience of my faith,
He might have loved me better than the rest.
Amidst the dangers of the horrid War,
Still had I been the nearest to his side;
In Courts and Triumphs still had shared his joys,
Or when the sportful Chase had called us forth,
Together had we cheered our foaming Steeds,
Together pressed the Savage over the plain.
And when o're-labour'd with the pleasing toil,
Stretched on the verdant soil had slept together.
But whither does my roving fancy wander?
These are the sick dreams of fantastic love.
So in a Calenture, the Seaman fancies
Green Fields and Flowery Meadows on the Ocean,
Till leaping in, the wretch is lost for ever.

Bell. Try but the Common Remedies of Love,
And let a second flame expel the first.

Cleo. Impossible; as well thou may imagine,
When thou complainst of heat at scorching noon,
Another Sun shall rise to shine more kindly.
Believe me, my Beliza, I am grown
So fond of the delusion that has charmed me,
I hate the officious hand that offers cure.

Bell. Madam, Prince Artaban.

Cleo My cruel Stars
Do ye then envy me my very solitude;
But death, the wretches only remedy,
Shall hide me from your hated Light for ever.

Enter Artaban. Artab. Ah! Lovely Mourner, still! still will thou blast
My eager Love with unauspicious Tears?
When at thy Feet I kneel, and sue for pity,
Or justly of thy cold regards complain,
Still will thou only answer me with sighs?

Cleo. Alas! my Lord, what answer can I give?
If still I entertain you with my grief,
Pity the temper of a wretched Maid,
By (...) sad and born the child of sorrow.
In vain you ask for happiness from me,
Who want it for my self.

Art Can blooming Youth,
And Virgin Innocence, that knows not guilt,
Know any cause for grief?

Cleo. Do but survey
The miserable state of humane kind,
Where wretches are the general Increase,
And tell me if there be not cause for grief

Art. Such thoughts as these, my fair Philosopher,
Inhabit wrinkled cheeks, and hollow eyes;
The marks which years set on the withered Sage;
The gentle Goddess Nature wisely has
Allotted other cares for youth and beauty.
The God of Love stands ready with his Torch
To light it at thy eyes, but still in vain,
For e re the slame can catch, it is drowned in tears.

Cleo. Oh! name not Love, the worst of all misfortunes,
The common ruin of my easy Sex,
Which I have sworn for ever to avoid,
In memory of all those hapless Maids,
That Love has plunged in unexampled woes.

Artab. For bear to argue, with that Angel face,
Against the passion thou were formed to raise.
Alas! thy frozen heart has only known
Love in Reverse, not tasted of its joys;
The wishes, soft desires, and pleasing pains,
That center all in most extatick bliss.
Oh, lovely Maid, mis-spend no more that treasure
Of Youth and Charms, which lavish Nature gives;
The Paphian Goddess frowns at thy delay;
By her fair self and by her Son she swears,
Thy Beauties are devoted to her service.
Now! now she shoots her fires into my breast,
She urges my desires, and bids me seize thee, [Taking her hand, and kissing it.
And bear thee as a Victim to her Altar,
Then offer up ten thousand thousand joys,
As an amends for all thy former coldness.

Clev. Forbear, my Lord; or I must swear to fly
For ever from your sight.

Artab. Why do thou frown?
And damp the rising joy within my breast?
Art thou resolved to force thy gentle nature,
Compassionate to all the World beside,
And only to me cruel? Shall my vows,
Thy Fathers intercession all be vain?

Cleo. Why do you urge my Fathers fatal power,
To Curse you with a sad unlucky Bride?
Cast round your eyes on our gay Eastern Courts,
Where smiling Beauties, born to better fates,
Give joy to the beholders.
There bless some happy Princess with your vows,
And leave the poor Cleone to her sorrows.

Artab. What Queens are those, of most celestial form,
Whose Charms can drive thy Image from my heart?
Oh were they cast in Natures fairest mold,
Brighter than Cynthia's shining train of Stars,
Kind as the softest she that ever claspt
Her Lover, when the Bridal night was past;
I swear I would prefer thee, O Cleone
With all thy scorn and cold indifference,
Would choose to languish and to dye for thee,
Much rather than be blessed, and live for them.

Cleo. Oh Prince, it is too much; nor am I worthy
The honor of your passion, since it is fixed
By certain and unalterable fate,
That I can never yield you a return:
My thoughts are all to chaste Diana vowed,
And I have sworn to die her Virgin Votary.

Artab. Impossible! thou can not give away
Mine and thy Fathers right, even to the Gods;
Diana will disown the unjust donation,
Nor favor such an injury to Love.
To every power divine I will appeal,
Nor shall thy Beauty bribe 'em to be partial:
Their Altars now expect us; Come, fair Saint,
And if thou will abide their righteous doom,
Their Justice must decree my happiness,
Reward my sufferings, and my flame approve,
For they themselves have felt the power of Love.
Exeunt.
SCENE II. The Temple of the Sun.
Enter Artaxerxes, Amestris, and Attendants. Artax. It Is done! It Is done! oh
let me find some way
To tell the mighty joy that fills my breast,
Lest I grow mad with height of furious bliss.
The holy Priest has tied the sacred knot,
And my Amestris now is all my own.
Oh thou soft Charmer! thou excelling Sweetness!
Why art thou not transported all like me:
I swear thou do not love thy Artaxerxes,
If thou art calm in this excess of happiness.

Amest. Alas! my Lord! my panting heart yet trembles
In vast suspense between unruly joys
And chilling fears; somewhat methinks there is
That checks my soul, and says I was too bold
To quit the pleasures of my Virgin state,
To barter 'em for cares and anxious love.

Artax. These are the fears which wait on every Bride,
And only serve for preludes to her joys;
Short sighs, and all those motions of thy heart,
Are Nature's call, and kindle warm desires;
Soon as the friendly Goddess of the night,
Shall draw her vail of darkness over thy blushes,
These little cold unnecessary doubts,
Shall fly the circle of my folding arms:
And when I press thee trembling to my bosom,
Thou shall confess (if there be room for words,
Or even for thoughts) that all those thoughts are bliss.

Amest. Yet surely mine are more than common fears;
For oh! my Prince, when my foreboding heart
Surveys the uncertain state of humane joys,
How secretly the malice of our fate
Unseen pursues, and often blasts our happiness
In full security; I justly dread,
Lest death or parting, or some unseen accident,
Much worse, if possible, than each of these,
Should curse us more than ever we were blessed.

Artax. Doubt not the Gods, my Fair! whose righteous power
Shall favor and protect our virtuous Loves.
If still thou apprehendst approaching danger,
Let us make haste, and snatch the uncertain joy,
While fate is in our power.
Now let us start, and give a loose to Love,
Feast every sense with most luxurious pleasure,
mprove our minutes, make 'em more than years,
Than ages, and even live the life of Gods:
f after this, death or ill fortune comes,
(...) cannot injure us, since we already
Have lived, and been beforehand with our fate.

Amest. Oh let me ease at once my tender heart,
and tell my dearest Lord my worst of fears:
^here is an ill which more than death I dread;
^ould you, by time and long fruition sated,
Grow faithless, and forget the lost Amestris;
^orget that Everlasting truth you vowed,
^ho sure I should not publicly complain
Nor to the Gods accuse my perjured Prince,
Yet my soft soul would sink beneath the weight.
I should grow mad, and curse my very being,
And wish I never had been, or not been loved.

Artax. Do thou? -- when every happier Star shines for us,
And with propitious Influence gilds our fortune,
Do thou invent fantastic forms of danger,
And fright thy soul with things that are Impossible?
Now by the Potent God of Love, I swear
I will have ample vengeance for thy doubts.
My soft complaining Fair, shall thou not pay me
In Joys too fierce for thought, for these suspicions.
The bands which hold our Love are knit by fate,
Nor shall decaying time or nature loose 'em.
Beyond the limits of the silent Grave,
Love shall survive, immortal as our beings,
And when at once we climb yon azure Skies,
We will be shown to all the blessed above,
For the most constant pair that e're deserved
To mingle with their Stars.

Amest. It Is true! it is true!
Nor ought I to suspect thee, O my Hero!
The Gods have formed thee for the nearest pattern
Of their own excellence and perfect truth.
Oh let me sink upon thy gentle bosom,
And blushing tell how greatly I am blessed.
Forgive me Modesty, if here I vow
That all the pleasures of my Virgin state
Were poor and trifling to the present rapture.
A gentle warmth invades my glowing breast,
And while I fondly gaze upon thy face,
Even thought is lost in exquisite delight.

Artax. Oh thou delicious perfect Angel Woman!
Thou art too much for mortal sense to bear:
The Vernal bloom and fragrancy of Spices
Wafted by gentle winds, are not like thee.
From thee, as from the Cyprian Queen of Love,
Ambrosial odours flow, my every faculty
Is charmed by thee, and drinks Immortal pleasure.
Oh glorious God of day fly swiftly forward,
And to thy Sisters rule resign the world:
Nor haste to rise again, but let the night
Long bless me with her stay; that thy return
At morn may find me happiest of my kind.
Enter Memnon. My Father! is there an Increase of joy?
What can ye give, ye Gods, to make it more?

Mem. Ye Blessings of my age: whom when I view,
The memory of former woes is lost.
Oh Prince! well has this glorious day repaid
My youth and blood spent in Arsaces service.
Nor had the Gods indulged my vainest wishes,
Durst I have asked for such a Son as you are.
But I am roughly bred, in words unknowing,
Nor can I phrase my speech in apt expression,
To tell how much I love and honor you.
Might I but live to fight one Battle for you,
Tho with my Life I bought the Victory,
Tho my old battered trunk were hewed to pieces,
And scattered over the field, yet should I bless
My fate, and think my years wound up with honor.

Artax. Doubt not, my noble Father, but even yet
A large remain of Glory is behind.
When Civil discord shall be reconciled,
And all the noise of Faction hushed to Peace,
Rough Greece, alike in Arts and Arms severe,
No more shall brand the Persian name with softness.
Athens and Sparta wondering shall behold us,
Strict in our discipline, undaunted, patient
Of Wars stern toil, and dread our hostile virtue.
Those stubborn Commonwealths, that proudly dare
Disdain the glorious Monarchs of the East,
Shall pay their homage to the Throne of Cyrus.
And when with Laurels covered we return,
My Love shall meet, and smiling bless our triumph,
While at her feet I lay the Scepters of the world.

Mem. Oh glorious theme! by heaven it fires my age,
And kindles youth again in my cold veins.

Artax. Ha! Mirza and the Queen! retire my fair,
Ungentle hate and brawling rage shall not
Disturb the peace, to which this happy day
Is doubly sacred. Forward, to the Altar.
Exeunt Artaxerxes, Amestris, Memnon, and Attendants.
Enter at the other door, Queen, Mirza, and Attendants. Mirz. All are disposed,
and fate but waits our orders
For a deciding blow.

Qu. Your Caution was
Both wise and faithful, not to trust my Son
Too rashly with a secret of this nature.
The youth, tho great of soul, and fond of glory,
Yet leans to the fantastic rules of Honor,
Would hesitate at such an act as this,
Tho future Empire should depend upon it.

Mirz. When time shall add experience to that knowledge,
With which his early youth is richly fraught,
He Will be convinced that only Fools would lose
A Crown for notionary Principles.
Honor is the unthinking Soldier's boast,
Whose dull head cannot reach those finer arts,
By which Mankind is governed.

Qu. And yet it gives a luster to the Great,
And Makes the Crowd adore 'em.

Mir. Your Son shall reap
The whole advantage, while we bear the guilt:
You, Madam, when the sacred Hymns are finished,
Must with the Prince retire; our foes when seized,
Within the Temple may be best secured,
Till you dispose their fare.

Qu. The Rites attend us, Solemn Music is hea^d.
This day my Son is Monarch of the East.

Mirz. Lend us, ye Gods, your Temples but this day,
You shall be paid with Ages of devotion,
And after this for ever undisturbed,
Brood over your smoking Altars.
Exeunt Queen, Mirza, and Attendants.
SCENE II.
The Scene opening shows the Altar of the Sun, Magas and several other Priests
attending. Solemn Music is heard; then Enter on one side Memmon, Artaxerxes,
Amestris, and Attendants, on the other side the Queen, Mirza, Artaban, Cleone,
Cleanthes, and Attendants; they all bow toward the Altar, and then range
themselves on each side of the Stage, while the following Hymn is performed in
Parts, and Chorus by the Priests. HYMN to the Sun,
by W. Shippen. Esquire
HAil Light, that doubly glads our sphere,
Glory and Triumph of the year!
Hail Festival for ever blessed,
By the adoring ravished East!
Hail Mithras, mighty Deity!
For Fire and Air, and Earth and Sea,
From thee their origin derive,
Motion and Form from thee receive.
When Matter yet unacted lay,
No sooner thou infused thy ray,
But the dull mass its power obeyed,
But an harmonious World was made.
Which still, when thou withdrawst thy beams,
An undistinguisht Chaos seems;
For what are objects without sight?
Or vision when involved in night?
Night is an universal Grave,
Where things but doubtful beings have,
Till them thy beams illuminate,
And as it were again create.
Chorus, etc. Hail source of immaterial fire,
That never begun, can never expire,
Whose Orh, with streaming Glories fraught,
Dazles the ken of human thought!
All the dependant Spheres above,
By thy direction shine and move.
All purer beings here below,
From thy immediate Essence flow.
What is the Soul of man but light,
Drawn down from thy transcendent height?
What but an Intellectual beam?
A spark of thy immortal flame?
For as thou rulest with gladsome rays
The greater world, so this the less,
And like thy own diffusive Soul,
Shoots life and vigor through the whole.
Since then from thee at first it came,
To thee, tho clogg d, it points its flame,
And conscious of superior birth,
Despises this unkindred Earth.
Chorus, etc. Hail Orosmades, Power Divine!
Permits us to approach thy shrine,
Permit thy Votartes to raise
Their grateful voices to thy praise.
Thou art the Father of our Kings,
The stem whence their high lineage springs,
The Sovereign Lord that does maintain
Their uncontrolled and boundless Reign.
O then assist thy drooping Son,
Who long has graced our Persian Throne!
O may he yet extend his sway!
We yet Arsaces Rule obey!
Let thy vitiality impart
New Spirits to his fainting Heart;
Let him like thee (from whom he sprung)
Be ever Active, ever Young.
Chorus, etc. When the Music is ended Memnon, Artaxerxes, etc. Queen, Artaban,
etc. go off as they Entered, severally: only Mirza comes forward and the Scene
shuts; he looks after Amestris going out, and then speaks. Mirz. What means
this foreign warmth within my Breast?
Is this a time for any thought but Vengeance?
That fatal Beauty dazles my weak Sense,
And blasts the resolution of my Soul:
My Eyes in contradiction to my purpose,
Still bent to her, and drunk the Poison in;
While I stood stupid in suspense of thought.
And now like Oil my flaming Spirits blaze,
My Arteries, my Heart, my Brain is scortch't,
And I am all one fury. Feeble Mirza!
Can thou give way to dotage, and become
The jest of Fools? No! it is Impossible:
Revenge shall rouse, and with her Iron whips
Lash sorth this lazy Ague from my Blood,
This Malady of Girls. Remember Statesman,
Thy Fate and future Fortunes now are forming,
And Summon all thy Counsels to their Aid;
Even thy whole Soul. It wo'not be; Amestris
Still rises uppermost in all my thoughts,
The Master piece of Nature. The Boy God
Laughs at my Rage, and triumphs over my Folly.
Ha! by the Gods it is doing! Now my Stars A tumultuous noise is heard.
Be kind and make me Master of my wish at once. A tumultuous noise is heard.
Enter Magas. But see the Priest! Why do thou stare and tremble,
Have we succeeded, say; and ease my Fears.

Mag. My Soul is pierced with Horror! Every God
Seems from his shrine to threaten us with Vengeance.
The Temple reels and all its ponderous Roof
Nods at the Profanation.

Mirz. Base and fearful!
How can thy wretched Soul conceive such Monsters?
Can thou who would be great be Superstitious?
But it is the Cowards Vice. Say; are our Enemies secured?

Mag. They are; the Prince, Old Memnon and his Daughter
Are in Orchanes hands, only Tigranes
With some of Lesser note are fled.

Mirz. No matter:
These are the Soul, the rest a lifeless Mass,
Not worth our Apprehension.

Mag. Will you stay,
To meet the furious Thunder of their Rage?

Mirz. I will; thou may retire and summon back.
Thy scattered Spirits; Let not the Crowd see
Thy Fears, 'twill make the Vile and Cheap among 'em
Exit Magas.
Enter Artaxerxes, Memnon and Amestris Prisoners, Orchanes and Guards. Artax.
Slave! Villain! Answer, say how have thou dared
To do this Insolence? --

Orch. I know my orders
Which from the Queen my Mistress I received,
Who will avow her own Authority.

Artax. Ha! from the Queen! She durst not! it is Impossible!
It Is Sacrilege! it is Treason! it is Damnation.
Am I not Artaxerxes? Born to Empire,
The next degree to God's. Oh thou bright Sun!
That roul'st above the Object of our Worship.
Can thou behold and not avenge thy Race?
Thy injured Race? If I could ought admit
Unworthy of thy great Original.
Let me be doomed to fall this Villain's Slave,
If not! -- Why am I made the scorn of Wretches?
So much below me that they hardly share
The Common privilege of Kind; but are
As Beasts to Men. --

Mem. See where the Master Villain stands! unmoved
And hardened in Impiety, he laughs
At the fictitious Justice of the God's,
And thinks their Thunder has not Wings to reach him;
but know the Joy thy Triumph brings is short,
My Fate (if the God's govern) or at least
My Mind's beyond thy reach, and scorns thy Malice.

Mirz. Dull valiant Fool thy Ruin is the least
The most ignoble Triumph of my Wit.

Cleander's Blood asks for substantial Vengeance,
And when the thought that labors in my Breast
Appears in Action, thou shall know the cause
Why I remain to view thy hated Face,
That blasts me with its Presence; thou shall know it
And Curse thy self, Curse the ill-omen'd day
That gave the Birth, renouncing all the God's,
Thy self of them renounced, shal't sink to Hell
In bitterest Pangs and mingle with the furies.

Mem. Unhallowed Dog, thou lie! The utmost force
Of all thy studied Malice cannot move me
To any act that misbecomes my Courage,
And if the God's in trial of my Virtue
Can yield my Life up to thy Hangman's Mercy;
I le show thee with what ease the Brave and Honest
Can put off Life till thou shal't damn thy Arts,
Thy wretched Arts, and Impotence of Malice.

Mirz. Rest well assured, thou shall have cause to try
The Philosophic sorce of Passive Virtue.

Artax. Oh death to Greatness! Can we fall so low
To be the slavish Objects of his Mirth?
Shall my just Rage and violated Honor
Play the Buffoon and Minister to laughter?
Down, down my swelling Heart, hide thy Resentments,
Nor prostitute the ruffled Majesty
Of injured Princes to the gazing Crow'd,
My Face shall learn to cover the Emotion
My wounded Soul endures. Ha! my Amestris!
My Love! my Royal Bride! the spoiler Grief
Defaces every Feature, like the Deluge
That ras't the Beauties of the first Creation;
I cannot bear it! Villains give me way!
He breaks from the Guards that hold him and catches hold of Amestris. Oh let
me hold thee in my throbbing Bosom,
And strive to hide thy Sorrows from my sight,
I cannot see thy Griefs; and yet I want
The power to bring Relief.

Ames. Ah! no my Prince!
There are no remedies for Ills like ours;
My helpless Sex by nature stands exposed
To all the Wrongs and Injuries of Fortune,
Defenseless in my self, you were my resuge,
You are my Lord, to whom should I Complain,
Since you cannot redress me: were you not
The Honor, Joy, and Safety of Amestris?
For you alone I lived, with you alone
I could be happy, oh my Artaxerxes!
One influence guides our Consenting Stars,
And still together are we Blessed or Cursed.

Mirz. With a malignant Joy my Ears drink in, Aside.
Hear cach Harmonious accent every glance, Aside.
Goes to my Heart and stirs, alternate Motions Aside.
Of Heat and Cold, a lazy pleasure now Aside.
Thrills all my Veins, anon Desire grows hot, Aside.
And my old Sinews shrink before the Flame. Aside.

Artax. Go on! And Charm me with thy Angels Voice,
Sooth and assuage the Fury in my Breast,
That urges me to unbecoming Passion,
My Rage grows cool amidst thy soft Complainings,
And though thou talk of Woes, of Death and Ruin,
It Is Heaven to hear thee.

Ames. Since this is all our wretched Consolation,
Let us indulge our Grief, 'till by long use,
It grows Habitual, and we lose the pain.
Here, on the Marble Pavement will we sit,
Thy Head upon my Breast; and if remembrance
Of Cruel Wrongs, shall vex thy noble Heart,
The Murmur of my Sighs shall Charm the Tumult,
And Fate shall fiind us Calm; nor will the Gods,
Who here inhabit and behold our Sufferings,
Delay to end our Woes in Immortality.

Artax. Ha! say thou? God's! Yes certain there are God's,
To whom my Youth with Reverence still has bowed,
Whose Care and Providence are Virtues Guard,
Think then my fair they have not made us great,
And like themselves for miserable ends.

Mirz. God's might behold her and forget their Wisdom, [Aside.
But I delay too long! Orchanes lend thy Ear.

Mem. My Children! you were still my Joy and Happiness. Mirza whispers Orchans,
and Exit.
Why am I made your Curse? this hated Head
To death devoted, has involved your Innocence
In my Destruction. [Guards lay hold on Artaxerxes and Amestris.

Ames. Alas, my Father! --

Artax. Barbarous Dogs! what mean you?

Orch. Convey the Lady to Lord Mirza's Palace,
It Is the Queen's will she shall be there confined.

Artax. Thou can not mean so damned a Villainy!
Thou dare not! shal't not part us! Fate cannot do it!

Mem. Cursed Old Age, why have I lived to see this?

Orch. Force 'em asunder.

Artax. Hew off my Limbs ye Dogs! I will not lose 'em --
Oh Devils! Death and Furies! my Wife! my loved Amestris! --

Ames. My Lord! my Husband! --

Orchanes and one party of the Guards force Artaxerxes and Memnon off one way,
and the other party bears Amestris another. Re-enter Mirza. Mirz. This was most
noble Mischief! it stung home,
'Twas Luxury of Vengeance! -- 'twas not ill
To keep aloof; these boistorous Beasts have Paws,
And might have scratch't: The Wise should not allow
A possibility to Fortunes Malice.
Now to the rest; this Prince! this Husband! dies:
To Morrows dawn brings his and Memnon's Fate.
This Night let 'em despair, and Bann, and Rage,
And to the wooden Deities within,
Tell frantic Tales; my Hours shall pass more pleasingly;
If Love, (which yet I know not,) can give Pleasure.
Love! What is Love? the Passion of a Boy,
That spends his time in Laziness and Sonnets:
Lust is the Appetite of Man; and shall
Be sated, till it loath the cloying Banquet.
The Wise are by Human frailty,
To taste these Pleasures, but not dwell upon 'em;
They mar and dull the faculty of thinking;
One Night I safely may indulge in Riot,
It Is Politic lewdness, and Assists my Vengeance;
I will grow Young, and surfeit on her Charms,
Her luscious Sweets; then rising from her Arms,
The nauseous, momentary Joy forget,
And be my self again; again be Wise and Great.
Exit Mirza.
End of the 3d Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. The Palace.
Enter Artaban and Cleanthes. Ar. IT IS Base and Impious! where are the Ties
shall keep Mankind in Order? if Religion
And public Faith be Violated; It Is an Injury
That beards both Gods and Men; and dares their Justice.

Clea. The fearful Crowd already take the Alarm,
Break off their Solemn Sports, their Songs and Dances,
And wildly in tumultuous Consort join;
Mischief and Danger sits in every Face,
And while they dread the Anger of the Gods,
The Wise who know the Effects of Popular Fury,
From them expect that Vengeance which they Fear.

Artab. The Sacred Power of Majesty, which should
Forbid, owns and protects the Violence;
It must not, shall not be; Who steals a Crown
By Arts like these, wears it unworthily.

Clean. The Queen your Mother, Sir! She will expect
You should approve that Act her Power has done.

Artab. I Will meet her as I ought, and show my self
Worthy the Noble Rivalship of Empire.

Enter the Queen, Mirza and Attendants. Qu. My Son, I come to Joy you of a Crown
And Glory certain now, your Fate at length,
Has Mastered that Malignant Influence
With which it struggled long: You are a King,
The greatest that our Eastern World beholds,
And though my Widowed Bed be Cause for Grief,
Yet for thy Sake, my Son, I joy to say,
Arsaces is no more.

Artab. 'Twere vain and foolish,
To Mourn his Death with Ceremonious Sorrow;
For though he died the Greatest of our Race,
Yet since decaying Age had sunk him low
And all the Native Majesty was lost,
'Twas time the Soul should seek for Immortality,
And leave the weary Body to Enjoy
An Honorable Rest from Care and Sickness:
Peace to his Ashes, and Eternal Fame
Dwell with his Memory, while we who Live
Look back with Emulation on his Greatness,
And with Laborious Steps strive to Ascend
That Height where once he sat.

Qu. Thou have already
Attained the lofty Summit of his Glory;
His Throne expects thee but to sit and fill it.

Artab. No, Madam, when the Gods choose worthy Subjects
On whom to place such Greatness, they surround
The Glorious Prize with Toil and thorny Danger,
And bid the Man who would be Great, Dare greatly.
Be it for dull Elder Brothers to Possess
Without deserving; Mine Is a Nobler Claim,
Nor will I Taste the godlike Joys of Power,
Till Men and Gods with Justice shall confess
It Is barely the Reward of what I meant.

Qu. What means my Son?

Artab. To Wrestle for a Crown!

Qu. With what fantastic Shadow would thou strive?
The Haughty Rival of thy Hopes is fallen,
He lives indeed, but it is to Grace thy Triumph,
And Bow before thee; then be swept away
Like the remembrance of an Idle Dream,
Which though of Yesternight, is now forgotten.

Artab. It greives me much to say, my Royal Mother,
I cannot take a Crown upon these Terms
Though even from your Hands: The Conscious Virtue
That witnesses within my Breast for Glory,
Points me to Greatness by the Paths of Honor,
And urges me to do as a King ought,
That would not wear his Purple as the Gift
Of impious Treachery and base Deceit.

Qu. Amazement turns my Senses! Or I Dream!
For sure thou can not mean so poor a folly.
Have thou been bred in the Wise Arts of Empire?
Been early taught to know the Worth of Power?
And would thou loose the Golden Opportunity
With which thy Fortune Courts thee for a Notion?
An Empty sound of Virtue? a dry Maxim
Which Pedants have devised for Boys to Canvas?
Can my Son think so meanly? Go set free
(Since Honor bids) this Lordly Elder Brother
Bow like a Slave before him, wait his Pleasures,
And live a dependant on his scanty Pension;
He may reward thy servile Loyalty,
And make thee ruler of some petty Province
In recompense of Royalty given up.

Artab. No! (though I must confess I would not hold him
Caught in a Villains Snare, nor do a Murder
Unworthy of a Hangman) yet to death
I still defy him as my Mortal Foe,
And fince my Father's Fate dissolves that Truce,
To which I stood engaged; it is War again.
Amid'st the steely Squadrons will I seek
This haughty Brother, by his Friends surrounded
And backed with all the Advantages of his Birth,
Then bravely prove upon him with my Sword;
He falsely brands me for a bookish Coward,
That Natures Error only gave him Preference,
Since Fate meant me the King.

Qu. A Mothers Care is watchful for thy safety,
Else were thou lost, thou honorable Fool;
Long might thou vainly hunt in Bloody Fields;
For that Advantage which thy willing Fortune
Now reaches to thy hands: In Battles with
Uncertain Wings the wavering Goddess flys,
And (...) with partial hand bestows her Favor
On Fools and thick Scull'd Heroes; seize her now
While she is thi^e, or she is lost for Ever.

Artab. No matter, Let her fly; the Eagle Virtue
Shall (...) beyond her and command her flight;
(...) not my Mistress but my Slave.
(...) reads the Name of Artaban
(...) of Empire, shall not blush
To think I plotted with a Knavish Priest,
The Scandal of his venerable Function
And mark of the God's Vengeance, to betray
(...) my Enemy; as if being Conscious
Of ^^sser worth, and of unequal Courage;
I durst not fairly strive with him for Greatness.
(...) abborr'd and Impious Treachery
(...) die, unknown to future Ages;
(...) our Shame must be delivered down
(...) all the Kingly hopes that fire my Soul,
(...) shall not pass without a brand of Punishment.

Qu. It Is wondrous well! Young Man you king rarely
You mean to be renowned for early Justice,
And mark your Ostentacious Love of Virtue,
Even in their Bloods, who lift up you to Power;
Perhaps we too, our self must be Arraigned
Before your puny Bar, and feel your Ax;
'Twill be a Noble Subject for your Praise,
And yield much Matter to declaiming Flatterers.

Artab. You, Madam, are my Mother, Nature blinds me,
And bids me see no Faults in her that bore me,
These other Slaves that dare --

Qu. May be Immortal,
For ought that thou Can do to cause their fate,
Is not thy Power the Creature of my Favor,
Which in precarious wise on me depending,
Exists by my Concurrence to its being?
Mistaken Youth! whose giddy Brain, Ambition
Has like the fume of drunken Vapors turned;
Think thou that I whose Soul was formed for Sway,
Would lay the Golden Reins of Empire down?
Or trust 'em to the guidance of a Boy?
Who shall dispose of me, or those that serve me,
According to the dictates of Old Morals,
His bearded Tutor gleans from musty Authors.

Artab. Nay then it is time I should Assert my self,
And though you gave me Birth; Yet from the Gods
(Who made my Father be as he was, Royal,
And stamp't the mark of Greatness on my Soul;)
I Claim my Right to Empire; may I sell
Vile and forgotten if I Ever own
Any Superior Being but those God's.

Qu. Thou rav'st! and have forgot me.

Artab. No, you are
My Mother, (...) a Woman, formed to Obey;
On that Condition all Sexes Privileges
Are founded, (...) Creating Hand has mixed
Softness and (...) in your Composition,
To Charm and bond the Mind of Man Impatient
Of the Ignoble Pleasure; you were made for
The weakness and necessities of Nature.
Ill are your feeble Souls for Greatness suited,
Desire of Government is Monstrous in you.

Qu. Thou mighty Goddess Nature! do thou he^^
This Rebel Son! this insolent Upbraider!
Still fondly Nursed in my indulgent Bosom!
To build whose future Greatness to the Skies,
My Anxious Soul has labored more than when
I felt a Mothers Sorrow for his Birth,
Ungrateful Boy! --
Know Fool! that vaunt'st thy self upon thy Manhood,
The greatest he thy rougher kind e're had,
Must have conses't Woman's Superior Wit,
And owned our Sexes just Prerogative.
Did not a Mother's fondness plead hard for thee,
Thy Head should pay the sorfeit of thy Insolence;
For know (Young King!) that I am Fate in Persia,
And Life and Death depend upon my Pleasure.

Artab. The World would be well governed, should the God's
Depute their Providence to Women's Care,
And trust them with the Fate of Kings and Empires.

Qu. Yet thou art Safe! away! nor tempt me farther,
The Patience even of God's themselves has limits,
Though they with long sorbearance view Man's Folly.
Yet if thou still persist to dare my Power,
Like them I may be urged to loose my Vengeance,
And though thou were my Creature, stike thee dead.

Mirz. 'Befeech you Sir, retire; the Queen your Mother
Labor's with wisest fore sight for yout Good,
And is incensed to see you thwart that purpose.

Artab. What is the good of Greatness but the Power?
Madam I leave you; my own Innate Virtue
Arms me against your Rage Unjust and Impotent,
Wait but the great Success my Soul divines
And you will own your little juggling Arts
Have only served to obstruct a while my Glory,
And Skreen this elder Brother ftom my Conquest.
[Exit Artaban and Cleanthes.
Qu. Some Envious power above, some Hostile Demon,
Works underhand against my stronger Genius,
And counter-mines me with Domestic jars.
Malicious Chance! when all abroad was safe,
To start an unseen Danger from my self!
Mirza! did thou not mark the haughty Boy?
With what assuming Pride he owned his daring?
And claimed superiority of Power?
Oh can I live, and bear to be Controlled?
To Share the pleasure of Supreme Command,
With him or any one? Oh Artemisa!
Did thou disdain subjection to a Husband,
The Proudest Title of that Tyrant Man?
And can thou yield to a Boy? A Son? By Nature
And grateful Duty to Obedience bound?

Mirz. Madam, Let me entreat you, by the ^od's,
To Calm your just Resentments; Meddling Fortune,
(Whose malice labors to perplex the Wise,)
If not prevented, will unravel all
Those finer Arts, which we with Care have wove.
The Prince, led on by this pernicious honor,
May set the Prisoners free, think, if that happen,
To what a shock of Fate we stand exposed.

Qu. It Is true! this foolish honor ruine's all,
Ridiculous Notion! as if, self-Interest
Were not the first and noblest Law of Nature.
Say then wise Lord, and let thy ready Wit,
Still present to it self, avert this blow.

Mirz. One Method though ungentle yet remains
To remedy the Fears this ill produces;
This instant let a Guard confine the Prince;
E're he can gain the means to Effect that Mischief
He meditates against himself, and us:
To Morrow, early as the Morning dawn's
The Prisoners all shall Die; that once dispatched,
This raging fit of Honor will relax,
And give him leisure to consider coolly,
The Advantage of his Fortune.

Qu. You have Reason;
And though I fear his haughty Temper will
But badly brook Confinement, he must learn
To bear it as he can, perhaps 'twill bend him
And make his Youth more plyant to my Will.

Mirz. Your Orders cannot be dispatched too soon,
Each Minute of the flying Hours is Precious.

Qu. The Eunuch Bagoas! let him attend us,
He shall receive Instructions on the Instant.
Exeunt the Queen and Mirza severally.
SCENE 2d Mirza's Palace.
Enter Cleone in Man's Habit, with a dark Lanthorn, Belisa following. Cleo. Ye
gentler Powers who View our Cares with Pity,
Lend your Compassion to the poor Amestris;
Oh my Belisa, was not thy Soul wounded,
To hear, (when now we past by her apartment)
The piercing Accents of her loud Complainings?
By Heaven my aching Heart bleeds for her Sufferings.

Bell. It Is sure she feels the bitterest Pangs of Woe,
And were not all my Thoughts to you devoted,
Her Grief would deeply sink into my Soul;
Why will you tempt alone ten thousand Dangers?
Your Father's and the furious Queen's Resentments?
The Cruel Guards? And all those fatal Accidents,
Which in the horror of this Dreadful Night
Might shock the Resolution of a Man?

Cleo. Prithee no more; thou know I am resolved,
And all thy kind Advice is urged in vain.
Thy sond mistaking Fears present the Danger
More dreadful than it is; this Master-key
Admits me through that Passage to the Temple,
By which the Guards who seized the unhappy Prince [Sigh^^
This Morning entered; that of all the rest
Is only left unguarded, and from thence
Assisted by the friendly Vail of Night,
We may Conduct him through my Father's Palace
In safety to the Street; there undistinguished
Amongst the busy discontented Crowd,
That swarm in Murmuring heaps he may retire;
Nor shall my Father or the Queen e're know
The Pious fraud my Love was guilty of.

Bell. Yet still I fear --

Cleo. No more! retire and leave me,
My drooping Heart sits lighter than it is wont,
And cheerfully presages good Success.

Bell. Where shall I wait you?

Cleo. At my own Apartment.

Bell. The Mighty Gods Protect you.

Cleo. Softly! Retire; [Exit Belisa.
What Noise was that? -- The Creature of my fears.
In vain, fond Maid, would thou belly thy Sex,
Thy Coward Soul Confesses thee a Woman;
A foolish, rash, fond Woman. Where am I going?
To save my Godlike Hero. Oh my Heart!
It Pants and Trembles; sure it is Joy not Fear;
The Thought has given me Courage; I shall save him,
That Darling of my Eyes. what if I fail?
Then Death is in my reach and ends my Sorrows. [Shewing a D^^ger.
Why do thou shake, my Hand? And fear to grasp
This Instrument of Fate? If I Succeed,
Yet Artaxerxes will not Live for me;
And my Despair will want thy friendly Aid.
Death every way shuts up my gloomy Prospect.
If then there be that Lethe and Elisium
Which Priests and Poets tell, to that dark Stream
My Soul of Life impatient shall make have.
One healing draught my Quiet shall Restore,
And Love forgotten never disturb me more.
[Exit Cleon
SCENE 3d. A Night Scene of the Temple of the Sun.
Enter Artaxerxes and Memnon. Artax. Still it is in Vain! This idle Rage is Vain!
And yet, my swelling Passions will have way;
And rend my laboring Breast till they find vent.
Was it for this, ye Cruel Gods, you made me
Great like your selves, and as a King, to be
Your Sacred Image? Was it but for this?
To be Cut down, and Mangled by vile Hands,
Like the false Object of mistaken Worship!
Why rather was I not a Pesant Slave?
Bred from my Birth a Drudge to your Creation,
And to my destined load inured betimes?

Mem. The Malice of our Fate were not Complete,
Had we not been by just degrees, to Happiness
Raised, only to be plunged the deeper down
In an Abyss of Woes. Early Success
Met and Attended all my youthful Wars;
And when I rush't amidst the dreadful Battle,
The weaker Genij of our Asian Monarchs,
Shrunk from the Force of a Superior Fate;
Over Marched they fell, and by my Sword were swept
Like Common beings from the Glorious Field.
Then was the day of joyous Triumph, then
My Soul was lifted high, even to the Stars.
But now! What am I now? O damned reverse of Fortune!
Now when my Age would be Indulged in Ease,
And joy in Pleasure of my former Fame,
Now I am Curs't; held at a Villains Mercy,
My Foe's Derision and the Scorn of Cowards.

Artax. Oh! Torture of my Soul! damned racking Thought!
Am not I too reserved for servile Vassalage?
To be the Subject of a Boys Command?
A Boy by Nature set beneath my Sway?
And born to be my Slave! shall he Triumph?
And bid me Live or Die? Shall he dispose
His Beardless Visage to a Scornful Smile,
And tell me that his Pleasure is my Fate?
No! my disdainful Soul shall struggle out
And start at once from its dishonored Mansion.

Mem. Oh! Royal thought! Nor shall they keep Death from us,
Although it is common means be not in reach.
Shall my Old Soldiers outside rough and hardy,
Scarr'd over wirh many an honorable Mark
Be cag'd for Public Scorn? Shall a Dog tell me
Thus did thou once, and now thou art my Slave;
My foot shall spurn thee, tread upon thy Neck,
And trample in the dust thy Silver Hairs?
Shall I not rather Choke? Hold in my Breath?
Or smear some Wall or Pillar with my Brains?

Artax. Rage or some God shall save us from Dishonor.
But oh! my Father! Can we take our flight,
Though to the Stars and leave my Love behind?
Where is she now? where is my Queen! my Bride!
My Charmer! my Amestris!

Mem. Speak not of her.

Artax. Not speak. --

Mem. Nor think of her if possible.

Artax. Was she not snatched, torn from my helpless Arms,
Whilst every God looked on and saw the wrong,
Heard her loud Cries which vainly strove to rouse
Their flow unready Vengeance? Was she not
Forced from my panting Bosom (yet I live!)
Even on our Bridal Day? Then, when our Flames
Were kindly joined and made but one desire;
Then, when she sighed and gazed, and blushed and sighed.
When every touch, when every Joy grew fiercer,
And those that were behind were more than Mortal.
To lose her then! Oh! --
And yet you bid me think of her no more?

Mem. I do; for the bare mention turns my Brain,
And even now I border upon Madness;
So dreadful is the very Apprehension
Of what may be.

Artax. Can we make thought go back?
Will it not turn again? Cleave to our Breasts?
And urge remembrance 'till it sting us home?
Ha! Now the Ghastly Scene is set before me;
And as thou said it runs me to distraction.
Behold her Beauties formed for Kings to serve
Held Vile, and treated like an abject Slave!
Helpless amidst her Cruel Foes she stands,
Insulting* Artemisa mocks her Tears,
And bids her call the God's and me in vain.

Mem. Would that were all.

Artax. Ha! whither would thou drive me?

Mem. Did you like me consider that Dog Mirza
Early to Hell devoted, and the Furies,
Born, Nursed, and bred a Villain, you would fear
The worst Effects his Malice could express
On Virtue which he hates, when in his Power.

Artax. What is the worst?

Mem. What my old faltring Tongue
Trembles to utter; Goatish Lust and Rape.

Artax. Ha! Rape! if there are God's it is impossible.

Mem. Oh! dreadful Image for a Father's thought,
To have his only Child, her Sexes boast,
The joy of sight and comfort of his Age,
Dragged by a Villain Slave his ruthless Hand
Wound in her Hair, to some remote dark Cell,
A Scene for Horror fit, there to be blotted
By his foul Lust, 'till Appetite be gorged.
Let me grow Savage first, let this old Hand
That often has blessed her in her Blood be drench't;
Let me behold her dead, dead at my foot
To spare a Father's greater Shame and Sorrow.

Artax. A Father! what is a Father's plague to mine?
A Husband and a Lover! If it can be,
If there is such a hoarded Curse in store,
Transfix me now ye God's, now let your Thunder
Fall on my Head, and strike me to the Center.
Least if I should survive my ruined Honor
And injured Love; I should even Curse your Godheads,
Run Banning and Blaspheming through the World,
And with my Execrations fright your Worshipers
From kneeling at your Altars.

Enter Cleone with a dark Lanthorn and Key. Cleo. This way the Ecchoing Accents
seem to come,
Sure it is the wretched Prince! Oh can you hear him
And yet refuse to lend your Aid ye Gods?

Artax. This Gloom of horrid Night suits well my Soul,
Love, Sorrow, Conscious worth, and Indignation,
Stir mad Confusion in my laboring Breast,
And I am all over Chaos.

Cleo. Is this, alas!
The State of Artaxerxes, Persia's Heir?
Not one Poor Lamp to cheer the dismal shade
Of this huge Holy Dungeon; Slaves Murderers,
Villains that Crosses wait for are not used thus;
I Will show my self. [She turns the light and comes toward Art. and Mem.

Mem. Ha! whence this gleam of Lght?

Artax. Fate is at hand, let us have to bid it welcome,
It brings an end of wretchedness.

Cleo. Speak lower.
I am a Friend; long live Prince Artaxerxes.

Artax. What wretch art thou, that hail'st me with a Curse?
Come from that Cloud that Mufles up thy Face,
And if thou have a Dagger, show it boldly.
We wish to die.

Cleo. Think better of my Errand,
I bring you Blessings, Liberty and Life,
And come the Minister of happier Fate; [Turns the light on her self
Now down my Blood! down to my trembling Heart, Aside.
Nor sparkle in my Visage to betray me. Aside.

Artax. Ha! as I live a Boy! a blushing Boy!
Thou were not formed sure for a Murderers Office,
Speak then and tell me what and whence thou art.

Cleo. Oh! seek not to unvail a trivial Secret,
Which known imports you not. I am a Youth
Abandoned to Misfortunes from my Birth,
And never new one Cause to joy in Life,
But this that puts it in my power to save
A Prince like Artaxerxes. Ask no more,
But follow through the mazes that I tread,
Until you find your safety.

Artax. Thus forbidding
Thou giv'st me cause to Enquire; are then the Guards,
That when the day went down, with strictest watch
Observed the Temple Gates, removed or fled?

Cleo. They are not; but with Numbers reinforced
Keep every Passage; only one Remains
Through Mirza's Palace, open to your flight.

Mem. Ha! Mirza! there is Damnation in his Name,
Ruin, Deceit, and Treachery attend it;
Can Life, can Liberty or safety come
From him? or ought that has an Interest in him?
Rather, suspect this feigning Boy his Instrument,
To plunge us deeper yet, if possible
In Misery; perhaps some happy accident
As yet to us unknown, preserves us from
The utmost Malice of his hate, while here.
This sets his wicked Wit at work to draw us
Forth from this Holy Place, much better be
The Prisoners of the God's, than wear his Fetters.

Cleo. Unfortunate Suspicion! what shall I say
To urge 'em to be safe and yet preserve
My wretched self unknown?

Artax. Surely that Face,
Was not designed to hide dissembled Malice,
Say Youth art thou of Mirza's House? (as sure thou must,
If thou pretend'st to lead us that way forth;)
And can thou be a Friend of Artaxerxes?
Whom that fell Dog, that Minister of Devils,
With most opprobrious Injuries has loaded.

Cleo. Though I am his, yet sure I never shared
His hate; shall I Confess and own my Shame Aside.
Oh Heavens! -- Aside.

Mem. Mark the unready Traitor stammers;
Half-bred and of the Mungril strain of Mischief,
He has not Art enough to hide the Cheat,
His Deep designing Lord had better plotted.
Away! thinks he so poorly of our Wit,
To gull us with a Novice? If our Fate
Has given us up, and marked us for Destruction,
Tell him we are resolved to meet it here.

Cleo. Yet hear me Prince; since you suspect me sent
By Mirza, to ensnare you, know I serve,
Oh God's! to what am I reduced! (Aside) -- his Daughter;
Some God Compassionate of your Woes has stirred
A Woman's pity, in her softer Breast:
And it is for her I come to give you Liberty.
I beg you to believe me. [She Weeps.

Artax. See he Weeps!

Mem. The waiting Tears stood ready for Command,
And now they flow to Varnish the false Tale.

Artax. His Daughter say thou? I have seen the Maid,
Do thou serve her? And could she send thee to me?
It Is an unlikely Riddle.

Mem. Perhaps it is meant,
That she who shares his Poisonous Blood, shall share
The Pleasure of his Vengeance, and inure
The Woman's Hands and Eyes to Death and Mischief.
But thou her Instrument, be gone and say,
The Fate of Princes is not sport for Girls.

Cleo. Some Envious power blasts my Pious purpose, Aside.
And naught but Death Remains; O that by that Aside.
I might persuade him to believe and trust me; Aside.
And fly that Fate which with the Morning waits him. Aside.
I grieve my Lord to find your hard Suspicion,
Debars me from preserving your dear Life
(Which not your own Amestris wishes more)
To Morrow's dawn (oh! let me yet prevail!)
The Cruel Queen resolves shall be your last.
Oh fly! Let me Conjure you save your self.
May that most awful God that here is worshipped
Deprive me of his cheerful Beams for ever,
Make me the wretched'st thing he sees while living,
And after death the lowest of the Damned
If I have any thought but for your safety.

Artax. No I have found the Malice of my Mistress,
Since I refused her Love when she was proffered
By her Ambitious Father for my Bride,
And on a worthier Choice bestowed my Heart,
She vows Revenge on me for slighted Beauty.

Cleo. My Lord you do her most unmanly wrong,
She own's the Merit of the fair Amestris,
Nor ever durst imagine she deserved you.
Oh spare that thought, nor blot her Virgin's Fame.
In silence still she wondered at your Virtues
Blessed you, nor at her own Ill Fate repined;
This wounds her most, that you suspect unkindly
The Officious Piety that would have saved you.
Careless of an offended Father's Rage;
For you alone concerned she charged me, guide you
When Midnight Sleep had closed observing Eyes,
Safe through her Father's with this Key --
And if I met with any that durst bar
Your Passage forth she bid me greet him thus -- [Stabs her self Artax.
catching her as she falls.
What have thou done rash Boy?

Cleo. Given you the last,
And only Proof remained that could convince you,
I held your Life much dearer than my own.

Mem. Horrid Amazement Chills my freezing Veins!

Cleo. Let me Conjure you with my latest Breath,
Make have to seize the means that may preserve you,
This Key amidst the Tumult of this Night [Giving the Key.
Will open you a way through Mirza's Palace,
May every God Assist and Guard your flight;
And oh when all your hopes of Love and Glory
Are Crowned wtih just Success; will you be good
And think with Pity on the lost Cleone.

Artax. Ten thousand dismal Fancies crowd my Thoughts!
Oh! is it possible thou can be she,
Thou most unhappy fair one?

Cleo. Spare my Shame,
Nor call the Blood that flows to give me Peace
Back to my dying Cheeks. Can you forget
Who was my Father? and remember only
How much I wished I had deserved your Friendship?
Nay let my Tongue grow bold and say your Love,
But 'twas not in my Fate.

Artax. What shall I say,
To witness how my grateful Heart is rouch'd?
But oh why would thou give this Fatal instance?
Why have thou stained me with thy Virgin Blood?
I swear sweet Saint for thee I could forgive
The Malice of thy Father, though he seeks
My Life and Crown, thy Goodness might atone
Even for a Nation's Sins; look up and live,
And then (...) still be near me as my Heart.

Cleo. Oh Charming Sounds! that gently lull my Soul
To Everlasting Rest; I swear it is more
More Joy to die thus blessed than to have lived
A Monarch's Bride; may every Blessing wait you
In War and Peace; still may you be the greatest,
The Favorite of the God's, and Joy of Men --
I faint! oh let me lean upon your Arm -- [She dies.

Artax. Hold up the Light my Father; ha! she Swoons!
The Iron hand of Death is on her Beauties,
And see like Lillies nip't with Frost they Languish.

Mem. My tough old Soldier's Heart melts at the sight,
And an unwonted Pity moves my Breast,
Ill fated Maid too good for that damned Race,
From which thou drew'st thy Being! Sure the God's
Angry e're while will be at length appeased
With this Egregious Victim; Let us tempt 'em
Now while they seem to smile.

Artax. A beam of Hope,
Strike's through my Soul like the first Infant light
That glanced upon the Chaos; if we reach
The open City, Fate may be ours again;
But oh whatever Success or Happiness
Attend my Life, still fair unhappy Maid
Still shall thy Memory be my Grief and Honor.
On one fixed day in each returning Year
Cypress and Myrtle for thy sake I Will wear,
Even my Amestris thy hard Fate shall Mourn,
And with fresh Roses Crown thy Virgin urn.
'Till in Elisium blessed thy gentle Shade
Shall own my Vows of Sorrow justly paid.
Exeunt.
End of the 4th Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I. Mirza's Palace.
Enter Mirza, Magas, and Attendants with lights. Mirz. PHO! You over rate the
Danger.

Mag. If I do
We err in the Extremes, since you Esteem it
As much too lightly; think you then it is nothing
This horrid jar of Tumult and Confusion?
Heads white with Years, and versed in long Experience,
Who yet remember all the different Changes
A Rolling Age produces, cannot call
To mind one instance dreadful as this Night.
Infernal Discord hideous to behold,
Hangs like it is evil Genius over the City,
And lend's a Snake to every vulgar Breast.
From several Quarters the mad Rabble swarm
Armed with the Instruments of hasty Rage,
And in Confused disorderly Array
Most formidable March; their differing Clamour's,
Together joined Compose one deasning sound;
Arm! Arm! they Cry, Religion is no more,
Our God's are slighted, whom if we revenge not
War Pestilence and Famine will ensue,
And Universal ruin swallows all.

Mirz. A Crew of mean unthinking heartless Slaves,
With ease stirred up to Mutiny and quelled
With the same ease, with like Expressions show
Their Joy or Anger both are noise and tumult.
And still when Holidays make Labor cease,
They meet and Shout; do these deserve our Fears?

Mag. Most certainly they may; if we consider
Each Circumstance of Peril that Concurrs;
Tigranes with the rest that escaped the Temple,
Are mixed amongst this Herd, and urge the Wrongs
Which with the God's their Prince and Memnon suffer.

Mirz. Nor need we fear even that, safe in the Aid
And Number of our Friends, who treble theirs,
For this mad Rout that hum and swarm together
For want of somewhat to Employ their Folly;
Indulge 'em in their fancy for Religion.
Thou and thy Holy Brotherhood of Priests,
Shall in Procession bear the sacred Fire,
And all our Golden God's; Let their Friends Judge
If still they look not kindly as of Old;
It Is a most apt Amusement for a Crowd,
They Will gaze, and gather round the gaudy Show,
And quite forget the thoughts of Mutiny;
A Guard shall wait you.

Mag. Why go not you too with us?
They hold your Wisdom in most high regard,
And will be greatly swayed by your persuasion,
The occasion is well worth your Care and Presence.

Mirz. O! you will not need my Aid: Besides, my Friend,
My Hours this Night are destined to a Task
Of more import, than are the Fates of Millions
Such grovelling Souls as theirs. As yet the secret
Is Immature nor worth your present knowledge;
To Morrow that and all my Breast is yours.
I must not, dare not trust him with my weakness, Aside.
'Twill mark me for his scorn, it is yet some Wisdom Aside.
If we must needs be fools to hide our folly. Aside.

Mag. He means the Prisoners death, let him engross Aside.
The Peoples hate, Monopolize Damnation, Aside.
I will be safely Ignorant of Mischief Aside.
Hereafter when your Wisdom shall think fit
To share those thoughts, and trust 'em with your Friend,
I shall be pleased to know; This instant Hour,
My Cares are all employed on my own Province,
Which hast's me hence.

Mirz. May all your God's assist you.
Exeunt.
SCENE 2d An Apartment in Mirza's Palace.
Enter Amestris. Ames. Will ye not hear ye ever Gracious God's?
Since sure you do not Joy in our Misfortunes,
But only try the strength of our frail Virtue.
Are not my Sorrows full? Can ought be added?
My Royal Lord! and Father! ye dear Names
In which my All of Happiness was summed.
What have the Ministers of Fate done with you?
Are you not dead? too sure! that is past a doubt;
O Memnon! oh my Prince! my Father! oh my Husband!

Enter Mirza. Mirz. Such Juno was (except alone those Tears)
When, upon Ida's top, she Charmed the God
That long had been a Stranger to her Bed;
Made him forget the Business of the World,
And lay aside his Providence, to Employ
The whole Divinity upon her Beauty.
And sure 'twas worth the while, had I been Jove,
So had I too been pleased, to be deceived
Into Immortal Joys. Oh cease thy Tears! --

Ames. Give 'em me back, or if the Grave and Thou
Restore to none, oh join my Fate to theirs;
Shut us together in some silent Vault,
Where I may sit and Weep 'till Death's kind Hand
Shall lay me gently by my Lord's dear side,
And hush my Sorrows in Eternal Slumber.

Mirz. In pity to your form assuage those Tears,
Sorrow is Beauty's bane; nor let your Breast
Harbor a Fear; I wage not War with fair ones;
But wish you would efface those ugly thoughts,
That live in your remembrance to perplex you;
Let Joy, the Native of your Soul return,
And love's gay God sit smiling in your Eyes,
As E'rst he did; I wish you wondrous well,
And would so fully Recompense the Loss
You fondly Mourn, that when you count the Gains,
Your self should own your Fortunes are well changed,

Ames. Oh Impious Comforter! talk thou of Joy,
When Nature dictates only Death and Horror?
Is there a God can break the Laws of Fate?
And give me back the precious lives I Have lost?
What nam'st thou Recompense? Can ought atone
For Blood? a Father's and a Husband's Blood?
Such Comfort brings the Hungry Midnight Wolf,
When having slain the Shepherd, smeared with Gore,
He leaps amid'st the helpless bleating Flock.

Mirz. Away with this Perverseness of thy Sex,
These foolish Tears, these peevish Sighs and Sobbings!
Look up be gay and Cheer me with thy Beauties,
And, to thy wish I will Indulge thy Fancy,
Not all the imagined Splendour of the God's
Shall match thy Pomp, sublimely shall thou Shine
The Boast and Glory of our Asian World;
Nor shall one She of all thy towering Sex
Outrival thee (thou lovely fair) in Power,
Oh think on Power, on power and place Supreme.

Ames. There is but one, one only thing to think on,
My Murdered Lord and his dark gaping Grave,
That waits unclos'd impatient of my coming.

Mirz. Oh listen gentle Maid while I impart
A Story of such softness to thy Ear,
As (like the Halcyon brooding over the Waves)
May with its influence hush thy stormy Griefs.

Ames. Begone, and if thou bear one thought of Pity
In that hard Breast; oh leave me to my self,
Nor by thy presence hideous to my Soul,
And horrid Consolations strive to add
To my full woes that swelled without thy help,
All ready rise and bubble over the Margent.

Mirz. What if I talked of Love?

Ames. Of Love! oh Monster!

Mirz. If Love be Monstrous so is this fair Frame,
This Beauteous World, this Canopy the Sky;
That sparkling shines with Gems of Light innumerable,
And so art thou and I; since Love made all;
Who kindly reconciled the jarring Atoms
In friendly league, and bid 'em be a World.
Prime not thy lovely Mouth then to Blaspheme
Thy great Creator, thou art his, and made for
His more peculiar Service; thy bright Eyes,
Thy moist Red Lip, thy rising snowy Bosom,
Thy every part was made to furnish Joy,
Even to a riotous Excess of Happiness;
Oh give me but to taste thy blissful Charms,
And take my Wealth, my Honor, Power, take all,
All, All for Recompense.

Ames. Execrable Wretch!
Thus! Is it thus thou would assuage my Sorrows?
When thy inhuman Bloody Cruelty,
Now with redoubling Pangs cleaves my poor Heart,
Come thou bespotted with the recent Slaughter
To pro^^er Impious Love? accursed Fiend!
Horror and Grief shall turn me to a Fury,
Still with my Ecchoing Cries, I will pursue thee,
And hallow Vengeance in thy guilty Ears;
Vengeance for Murder! for my Prince's Murder!
And so, my poor old Father think not Villain
Who art the plague and scourge of Human kind;
That there is Peace for thee whilst I run Mad
With raging Sorrow; Vengeance, Vengeance waits thee
Great as my Woes! -- My dear! dear! Artaxerxes!

Mirz. I am not lucky at the glossing Art Aside.
Of catching Girls with words, but it is no matter, Aside.
Force is a sure resort, and when at last Aside.
Fierce as a towering Falcon from her height, Aside.
I stoop to strike the Prey, it is my own. Aside.
Obstinate Fool! how dare thou Cross my wishes:
Since the same hand that has avenged me well,
Upon my other Foes Commands thy Fate,
Though Mercy in Compassion of thy Beauty
Reach out her Hand to save thee, yet if urged
Revenge may still take place; think well on that.

Ames. That, that is all the Mercy which I ask,
Indulge thy thirsty Malice in my Blood,
And hasten me to Peace. My Woman's Heart
Shall gather all it is little stock of Courage
To Arm me for the blow. Though Death be terrible,
Ghastly and Pale; yet I will joy to meet him;
My better Life already is destroyed,
Imperfect now and wanting half my self,
I wonder here in vain, and want thy Hand
To guide and re unite me to my Lord.

Mirz. Alas! thou have not read aright thy Destiny,
Matter of much import requires thy Life,
And still detains thee here; Come, I Will instruct thee,
And put thee in the way of Fates Design. [laying hold on her.

Ames. Unhand me Villain!

Mirz. Nay you must not struggle,
Nor frown and look askew; fantastic Sex!
That put Men on the drudgery to force you
To your own Satisfaction.

Ames. Let me go,
Abhorred detested Monster! Shall he brave you
You awful God's? Shall not your lightning blast him?

Mirz. Oh no! Your God's have pleasures of their own,
Some Mortal Beauty Charms the wanton Jove,
Within whose Arms he Revels; nor has leisure
To mind thy foolish screaming.

Ames. Hear me now, sweet Heaven,
Save me ye God's! oh save me! save me! save me!

Mirz. Come! come along! you see you strive in vain. [Striving with her.

Ames. Is there no hope of Aid from God's or Men?
Oh let me turn to thee then, kneel to thee,
And with my Prayers and Tears implore thy Pity.

Mirz. Speak, for Enchantment dwells upon thy Tongue,
And all the flattering Spirits in my Blood
Dance nimbly on to the Celestial Sound.

Ames. What shall I say to move him to Compassion?
Thus grovelling, prostrate thus upon the Earth,
Let me Conjure you, spare my Virgin Honor,
Spare to commit a Wrong to you unprofitable;
Yet worse to me than Torments, Racks, and Death,
Kill me the last of my unhappy Race,
And let old Memnon's Name with me be lost,
If Death be not enough let me live wretched,
Pull off these Robes and Cloth me like a Slave,
Then send me out to Labor at some Village,
Where I may groan beneath a Cruel Master,
Be hardly used and want even Food and Raiment;
'Till Cold, and Dirt, and Poverty shall Change
And make me loathsome as my fellow wretches.
Oh! Let my Rags Claim only this one Privilege,
To wrap me in the Grave a spotless Maid.

Mirz. That Tongue which pleads makes all entreating vain,
Thy every Motion, each complaining Accent
Warms me afresh and urges new desire;
Thou art, thou must be mine, not Heaven nor Earth,
Nor the Conspiring power of Hell shall save thee;
I long to lose my Age in thy Embraces,
To bask and wanton in thy warmer Sun
'Till a new Youth shoot through me.

Ames. Chaste Diana,
And thou the Guardian of the Marriage Bed, [Getting loose from him
Thou Royal Juno! oh protect thy Votary.

M^m. My jaded Age and weak Enervate Limbs
Falter and shrink unequal to their Office,
I prithee yeid! Come! yield and be a Queen! [Laying hold on her again
Yield and be any thing! I cannot bear
These fierce convulsive Starts, this raging Flame
That drinks my Blood;

Ames. Oh! never! never! never!
A Cause like this will turn me to a fighter,
To my last gasp to death I will resist.

Mirz. My Coward strength! do thou go back from Beauty?
Rouse and deserve the Pleasure thou would taste.

Ames. Unmanly Traitor! -- seize him all ye Fiends.

In the struggle she draws his own Poniard and stabs him. Mirza falling]
Damnation! oh my Heart! the cursed Steel
Has struck me to the Earth.

Ames. There sink for Ever!
Nor rise again to plague the wretched World.

Mirz. My heated Blood ebbs out, and now too late
My cooler Reason bids me Curse my folly;
Oh! Idiot! Idiot! to be caught so poorly!
Where are thy fine Arts now? Unravelled all,
Mangled and torn to pieces by a Girl!
Oh Shame of Wisdom! when Revenge was sure,
And Fate was in my grasp, to lose it all,
Neglect the Noble Game, and run out my Years,
On the pursuit of Joys I could not taste;
My Memory must be the jest of Boys.

Ames. My boasted Courage sinks at sight of Blood, [letting fall the Poniard.
Mirza attempting to rise falls again.
Though justly shed, and I grow stiff with Horror.
It wo'not be! life gushes out amain,
And I shall die without Revenge or Aid;
What Noise is that? without there! Help! [trampling without.

Ames. Oh Heavens!
What will become of me?

Enter Orchanes hastily. Orch. My Lord! where are you?
Bleeding! and on the ground! what wretched Accident? --
Then Fate resolves to make this Night Complete,
Such as succeeding Horrors never shall match.

Mirz. Oh my Orchanes! I am fallen vilely,
And this last part of Life will sully all
The Wisdom and Renown of what is past,
Methought thou talk of Horrors, speak 'em boldly,
And try if ought can add to this Confusion.

Orch. Prepare, my Lord, and Summon all your Wisdom,
Your utmost Constancy of Soul to hear --

Mirz. No more! I cannot wait thy Preparation,
Let the ill Fortune take me as it finds me.

Orch. Then hear it thus; your Daughter's dead. --

Mirz. My Daughter!
Thy words have met with at unguarded side,
And pierce even through my Soul. Say, how? where? tell me! --

Orch. As with a Guard I kept the Temple Gates,
I heard old Memnon and the Prisoner Prince
Loud as the roaring Ocean in a Storm,
Ecchoing their Rage through the vast sounding dome,
When on a sudden e're the Night had gained
Four hours at most, the Noise was hushed in Silence,
Wondering and Curious of the Cause, I entered,
And found, oh Grief to sight! your lovely Daughter
Dressed like a Boy, then warm and newly dead,
One Wound was on her Breast. Why she was there,
Or how we know not; to Complete the Ill,
The Prisoners both are fled.

Mirz. Fled! it is impossible!
Ha! which way? whither? how? they could not fly!

Ames. Oh wondrous turn of Joy, Are they not dead then?

Orch. They could not escape the Guards, no other Passage
Remained but yours, and even that was fast.
Upon the instant I beset each Avenue
Which to your Palace leads; happily as yet
They are not past from thence!

Ames. Guard 'em ye God's!

Mirz. Find 'em again Orchanes, e're I die,
Or I am more than double damned; this Loss
Is worse than mine, worse than my Daughter's Death,
It Is Death of my Revenge. Malicious Fortune!
She took the Moment when my Wisdom nodded,
And ruined me at once. O doting Fool!
Thou Fool of Love and of pernicious Woman!
I sicken! Nature fails me! oh Revenge!
Will not thy Cordial keep back flying Life?
It shall! Orchanes drag that traitress to me.

Ames. Oh if thou art a Man I charge thee loose me,
And scorn his bidding, scorn to be his Slave,
A Devil's drudge in Mischief. Save me from Death
Have pity on my Youth, oh spare my Youth!

Orchanes pulls Amestris down to Mirza. Mirz. Hearken not to her! drag her!
pull her down!
Shall Memnon boast of thee while I die Childless,
No to Cleone's Ghost thou art a Victim,
Oh could I but have seen thee with those Eyes
I view thee now, I had been Wise and Safe;
That Face shall make no more Fools in this World,
Down! bear thy fatal Beauties down to Hell,
And try if thou can Charm among'st the Dead.
Die Witch! Enchantress die! [He stabs her.

Ames. Ah! Mercy Heavens!

Mirz. I thank thee Hand at least for this last service,
Now fly Orchanes, have and tell the Queen
My latest Breath stays for her -- Something I would [Exit Orchanes.
Important to her Service -- I Breath short,
Life stays in pain, and struggles to be gone,
I strive in vain to hold it -- ha! what mean
These fleeting Shades that dance before my sight?
It Is Death I feel it plain; the dreadful Change
That Nature starts at. Death! -- Death! -- what is Death?
It Is a vast disquisition, Priests and Scholars
Enquire whole Ages, and are yet in Doubt.
My Head turns round! -- I eannot form one thought
That pleases me about it, -- dying -- must resolve me.

Ames. Oh my hard Fortune! must I die? die now? [ Mirza dies.
When Artaxerxes calls and bids me live.
His dear loved Image stays my parting Soul,
And makes it linger in its ruined House.
Ha! sure he is dead! -- it is so, and now he stands [looking on Mirza.
Arraigned before the dread Impartial Judges,
To answer to a long Account of Crimes;
Had I but strength perhaps my Fate may yet [rising.
Find out a way to save me.
My Love and Father make Life worth my Care,
Alas! My Blood flows fast; this way I think [goes off faintly

Enter at the other side Artaxerxes and Memnon with a Sword and Dark Lanthorn.
Mem. Ha! here are Lights! hold up thy Weapon Son.

Artax. And see Blood! and a Body on the floor!
What means this Scene of Death? what Wretch art thon?
Oh all ye juster Powers it is Mirza! see!
He seems now dead.

Mem. Damnation then is new to him,
And if there be one deeper pit of Sepulcher,
One Plague above the rest in those dark Regions,
He as the most abandoned Dog may claim it,
And vie for Preference with Devil's themselves.

Re-enter Amestris. Ames. The Doors are guarded; Fate has closed me round.

Artax. Ha! Art thou my Amestris?

Mem. Oh! my Daughter! [They run to her.

Ames. Are ye then come at last to bless my Eyes
That could not close without one parting view.
Oh hold me or I sink! --

Mem. Alas! My Child! --

Artax. My Cruel Fears! why art thou pale and faint?
Ha! whence this Blood? oh killing Spectacle!

Ames. Forth from my Heart the Crimson River flows,
My lavish Heart that hastily Consumes
Its small remain of Life: Oh lay me gently
On my last Bed the Earth, whose Cold hard Bosom
Must shortly be the place of my long rest.

Mem. What have we done? Or oh if we have fined,
What has thy Innocence done to merit this?

Ames. That Villain Mirza --

Mem. Ha! Say what of him.

Ames. Offered most brutal Outrage to my Honor.

Artax. Oh ye Eternal Rulers of the World!
Could you look on unmoved? But say, instruct me,
That I may bow before the God that saved thee.

Ames. Sure 'twas some Chaster Power that made me bold,
And taught my trembling hand to find the way
With his own Poniard to the Villains Heart.

Mem. Thou art my Daughter still! oh noble Action!
That gives in Death an Interval of Joy.

Ames. Just in that hour of Fate a Villain entered,
By whose Assistance the revengeful Mirza
Forced me to share Death with him.

Artax. It Is past, it is past; [lying down.
And all fires those that lighted up my Soul
Glory and bright Ambition languish now,
And leave me dark and gloomy as the Grave.
Oh thou soft dying swcetness! -- Shall I Rage
And Curse my self? Curse even the God's? -- Oh no;
I am the Slave of Fate, and bow beneath
The load that presses me; am sunk to Earth
And never shall rise again; here will I sit
And gaze 'till I am nothing.

Ames. Alas! My Lord,
Fain would I strive to bid you not be sad,
Fain would I Cheer your Grief; but it is in vain;
I know by my own Heart it is impossible;
For we have loved too well. Oh mournful Nuptials!
Are these the Joys of Brides? Indeed it is hard,
It Is very hard to part; I cannot leave you,
The Agonizing Thought distracts me; hold me,
Oh hold me fast, Death shall not tear me from you.

Artax. Oh could my Arms fence thee from Destiny,
The God's might launch their Thunder on my Head;
Plague me with Woes treble to what I feel,
With Joy, I would endure it all to save thee;
What shall I say? what shall I do to save thee?
Grief shakes my Frame, it melts my very Temper;
My manly Constancy and Royal Courage
Run gushing through my Eyes; Oh my Amestris!

Ames. And see my Father! his white Beard is wet
With the sad Dew.

Mem. I tried to Man my Heart,
But could not stand the Buffet of this Tempest,
It tears me up. -- My Child! ha! art thou dying?

Ames. Indeed I am very Sick! oh hold me up,
My Pain increases, and a Cold damp Dew
Hangs on my Face. Is there no help? no ease?
Have I your Arm my Love?

Artax. Thou have; My Heart
Do thou yet hold.

Ames. Say will you not forget me?
When I am laid to moulder in my Tomb?
It Is sure you will not, still there will be room
For my remembrance in your Noble Heart;
I know you loved me truly: Now! I faint!
Oh shield me; shield me from that ugly Fantome
The Cave of Death! how dark and deep it is!
I tremble at the sight: -- it is hideous horror! --
The gloom grows over me -- Let me not lie there [ Amestris dies.

Artax. There Life gave way, and the last Rosy Breath
Went in that Sigh. Death like a Brutal Victor
Already entered with rudehast defaces,
The lovely Frame he has mastered; see how soon
These Starry Eyes have lost their Light and Luster!
Stay let me close their Lids. Now for the rest
Old Memnon! ha! Grief has transfixed his Brain,
And he perceives me not! -- Now what of thee?
Think thou to live thou Wretch? Think not of any thing,
Thought is Damnation, 'ris the Plague of Devils
To think on what they are! and see this Weapon
Shall Shield me from it, plunge me in forgetfullness.
Er'e the dire Scorpion thought can rouse to sting me.
Lend me thy Bosom, my cold Bride; Ill Fortune [Lying by her
Has done its worst, and we shall part no more;
Wait for me, Gentle Spirit, since the Stars
Together must receive us! [Stabs himself] Oh well aimed!
How foolish is the Coward's fear of Death!
Of Death, the gentlest -- surest way to Peace. [ Artax. dies

Memnon stands looking on the Bodies some time and then speaks. Mem. Yet will I
gaze! Yet! Though my Eyes grow stiff
And turn to Steel or Marble; here is a sight
To Bless a Father! These! These were your Gifts,
Ye bounteous Gods! you will spare my Thanks for 'em,
You gave me Being too, and spun me out
To hoary Wretchedness; away! 'twas Cruelty!
Oh Cursed! Cursed! Cursed four Score Years!
Ye heap of Ills! Ye Monstrous pile of Plagues!
Sure they Loved well, the very streams of Blood
That flow from their pale Bosoms meet and miugle.
Stay, let me view 'em better! -- Nay! it is thus! --
If thou art like thy Mother? -- She died too! --
Where is she? -- Ha! that Dog, that Villain Mirza!
He bearsher from me; Shall we not pursue? --
The whirl of Battle comes across me, fly!
Begone! They shall not, dare not brave me thus!
Hey! It Is a glorious Sound, rush on my Prince,
We Will start and reach the Goal of Fate at once! [Runs off

Enter on the other side Queen and Attendants with lights. Qu. Why am I
Summoned with this call of Death?
This is no common Ruin; Artaxerxes!
And Memnon's Daughter. Mirza thon art fallen
In pompous slaughter, Could not all thy Arts,
That Dold about destruction to our Enemies,
Guard thy own Life from Fate? Vain boast of Wisdom
That with fantastic Pride, like busy Children,
Builds Paper Towns and Houses, which at once
The Hand of Chance o'erturns and loosly scatters.

1 At. Oh Dismal Sight, [Looking out.

Qu. What is it frights thy Eyes?

1 At. Old Memnon's Body.

Qu. It Is a grateful Horror.

1 At. Upon the Floor the battered Carcass lies
Weltring in gore, whilst on the Marble wall
A dreadful mass of Brains, Gray Hair, and Blood
Is smeared in hideous mixture.

Qu. Fierce despair
Has forced a way for the impetuous Soul.
It Is well he is in peace; -- What means this Tumult?

Shout, Clashing of Swords; Enter an Officer, his Sword drawn. Offic. Fly,
Madam, Lest your person be not safe,
The Traitor Bagoas, to whose Charge you trusted
The prince your Son, has drawn the Guards to join him;
And now assisted by the furious Rabble,
On every side they charge those few who keep
This Palace and the Temple, with loud Outcries,
Proclaiming, that they mean to free the Prisoners.
Orchanes, e're I fled to give you notice,
Fell by the Prince's hand, the raging Torrent
Bore down our weak resistance, and pursuing
With furious haste, even trod upon my flight.
This instant brings 'em here.

Qu. Let 'em come on,
I cannot fear; this Storm is raised too late,
I stand secured of all I wish already.

Shout and Clashing of Swords again; Enter Artaban, Cleanthes and Attendants,
their Swords drawn. Artab. Then Virtue is in vain, since base Deceit
And Treachery have triumphed over the Mighty.
Oh! Nature, let me turn my Eyes away,
Lest I am blasted by a Mothers sight.

Qu. Ungrateful Rebel! Do thy impious Arms
Pursue me for my too indulgent Fondness
And Care for thee?

Artab. Well has that Care been shown,
Have you not foully stained my sacred Fame?
Look on that Scene of Blood; the dire Effects
Of cruel Female Arts. But oh! what Recompense;
What can you give me for my murdered Love?
Has not the Labyrinth of your fatal Counsels
Involved my fair, my lovely lost Cleone?
By our bright Gods I swear I will assert
The Majesty of Manly Government,
Nor wear again your Chains, still as our Mother
Be honored; rule amongst your Maids and Eunuchs,
Nor mingle in our State, where mad Confusion
Shakes the whole frame, to boast a Woman's Cunning.

Qu. Thou talk as if thy Infant hand could grasp,
Guide and command the Fortune of the World,
But thou art young in power. Remember, Boy,
Thy Father once the Hero of his Age,
Was proud to be the Subject of my Sway,
The Warrior of the Woman's Wits gave way,
And found it was his Interest to obey.
And do thou hope to shake off my Command;
Do thou? The Creature of my forming hand.
When I assert the Power, thou dare invade,
Like Heaven I will resolve to be obeyed,
And rule or ruin that which once I made.
Exit Queen and Attendants.
Artab. Let a Guard wait the Queen, though nature plead
For reverence to her Person, jealous power
Must watch her subtle and ambitious wit.
Have thou secured the impious Priest Cleanthes?
Magas, that wretch, that prostitutes our Gods.

Clean. Already he has met the Fate he merited,
This night the Hypocrite in grand Procession
Marched through the City to appease the people,
And bore the Gods along to aid his purpose.
When on a sudden, like a Hurricane,
That Starts at once and ruffles all the Ocean,
Some fury more than Mortal seized the Crowd;
At once they rushed, at once they cried revenge;
Then snatched, and tore the trembling Priest to pieces.
What was most strange, no Injury was offered,
To any of the Brotherhood beside,
But all their Rage was ended in his Death.
Like formal Justice that severely Strikes,
And in an Instant is serene and calm.

Artab. Oh! my Cleanthes, do but cast thy Thoughts
Back on the recent Story of this Night;
And thou with me wilt wonder, and confess
The Gods are great and just. Well have you marked
Celestial powers, your righteous detestation
Of Sacrilege, of base and bloody Treachery.
May this Example guide my future sway;
Let Honor, Truth and Justice crown my Reign,
Never let my Kingly word be given in vain,
But ever sacred with my Foes remain.
On these foundations, shall my Empire stand,
The Gods shall vindicate my just Command,
And guard that Power they trusted to my hand.
Exeunt Omnes.
End of the 5th Act.
THE EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs. BRACEGIRDLE.
THE Spleen and Vapors, and this doleful Play,
Have mortified me to that height to day,
That I am almost in the mortal Mind,
To die indeed, and leave you all behind.
Know then, since I resolve in Peace to part,
I mean to leave to one alone my Heart.
(Last Favors will admit of no Partage,
I bar all sharing; but upon the Stage.)
To one who can with one alone be blessed
The peaceful Monarch of a single Breast.
To One -- but Oh! how hard 'twill be to find
That Pho^ix in your Fickle changing Kind!
New Loves, new Interests, and Religious new,
Still your Fantastic Appetites pursue.
Your sickly Fancies loath what you possess;
And every restless Fool would change his Place;
Some weary of their Peace, and quiet grown,
Want to be hoisted up alost, and shown;
Whilst from the envted height, the wise get safely down.
We find your wavering Temper to our Cost,
Since all our Pains and Care to please is lost.
Must (...) in vain, supports with Friendly aid
Her Sister Poetry's declining head.
Show but a Mimick Ape, or French Buffoon,
You to the other House in Shoals are gone,
And leave us here to Tune our Crowds alone.
Must Shakespeare, Fletcher, and laborious Ben,
Be left for Scaramouch and Harlaquin?
Allow you are unconstant; yet it is strange,
For Sense is still the same, and never can change;
Yet even in that you vary as the rest;
And every day New Notions are professed;
Nay there is a Wit has found, as I am told,
New ways to Heaven, dispairing of the Old,
He swears he will spoil the Clerks and Sexion's Trade,
Bells shall no more be rung, nor Graves be made.
The Hearse and Six no longer be in Fashion,
Since all the Faithful may expect Translation.
What think you of the Project? I Am for trying,
I Will lay aside these foolish Thoughts of Dying;
Preserve my Yonth and Vigor for the Stage,
And be translated in a good Old Age.
FINIS.

