ADVICE: A SATIRE.

Sed podice levi
Ceduntur tumidae medico ridente Mariscae. --
O Proceres! censore opus est an haruspice nobis?
JUVENAL. LONDON: Printed for GEORGE FREER, at the Bible in Bell-Yard, near
Temple Bar. MDCCXVI. [Price One Shilling.]

ADVICE: A SATIRE.
POET, FRIEND. P. ENough, enough; all this we knew before:
It Is infamous, I grant it, to be poor:
And who so much to sense and glory lost,
Will hug the curse that not one joy can boast?
From the pale hag, O teach me to get loose;
Divorced! all hell shall not retie the noose!
Not with more care shall H-me avoid his wife,
Not C-pe fly swifter, lashing for his life; 8. Not C-pe fly swifter.]
A General famous for an expeditious retreat, though not quite so deliberate as
that of the ten thousand Greeks from Persia; having unfortunately forgot to
bring his army along with him.

Than I to leave the meagre fiend behind.

Fr. Exert your Talents; Nature, ever kind,
Enough for happiness, bestows on all;
It Is sloth or pride that finds her gifts too small --
Why sleeps the muse? -- is there no room for praise,
When such bright names in constellation blaze?
When sage N -- c -- tle abstinently great, 15. When sage N-wc -- tle, etc.]
Alluding to the philosophical contempt which this great personage manifests
for the sensual delights of the stomach.

Neglects his food to cater for the State;
And Gr-ft-n towering Atlas of the throne, 17. And Gr-ft-n towering Atlas of
the throne, etc.]
This Noble Peer, remarkable for sublimity of parts, by virtue of his office,
conferred the laureat on C-lly C-bb-r, Esquire a delectable bard, whose character
has already employed, together with his own, the greatest pens of the age.

So well rewards a genius like his own:
Gr-nv -- le and B-th illustrious, need I name 19. Gr-nv -- le and B-th, etc.]
Two Noblemen famous in their day, for nothing more than their fortitude in
bearing the scorn and reproach of their country.

For sober dignity and spotless fame;
Or P -- t the unshaken Abdiel yet unsung; 21. Or P -- t the unshaken Abdiel,
etc.]
Abdiel, according to Milton, was the only seraph that preserved his integrity
in the midst of corruption -- Among innumerable, false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrify'd --


Thy candor, Ch -- -ly! and thy truth, O Y -- nge!

P. The advice is good; the question only, whether
These names and virtues ever dwelt together?
But what of that? the more's the poet's claim
That can create as well as cherish fame.
But one thing more, -- how loud must I repeat,
To gain th'ingag'd attention of the Great,
Amused, perhaps, with C -- -'s prolific bum, 29. Amused perhaps with C -- - 's
prolific bum,]
This alludes to a phenomenon, not more strange than true. The person here
meant, having actually laid upwards of forty eggs, as several physicians and
fellows of the r-y-l s-ci-ty can attest; one of whom (we hear) has undertaken
the incubation, and will (no doubt) favor the world with an account of his
success. Some virtuosi affirm, that such productions must be the effect of a
certain intercourse of organs, not fit to be named.

Or rapt amidst the transports of a drum; 30. Transports of a drum;]
This is a riotous assembly of fashionable people, of both sexes, at a private
house, consisting of some hundreds; not unaptly styled a drum, from the noise
and emptiness of the Entertainment. There are also drum-major, rout, tempest
and hurricane, differing only in degrees of multitude and uproar, as the
significant name of each declares.

While the grim porter watches every door,
Stern foe to tradesmen, poets, and the poor.
The Hesperian dragon not more fierce of old,
By every charm unmoved, but that of gold:
Thus at hell gates the affrighted shade must drop
For every mouth of Cerberus, a sop.
Even Atticus, (so wills the voice of Fate)
Inshrines in clouded Majesty, his state;
Nor to the adoring crowd vouchsafes regard,
Though priests adore, and every priest a bard.
Shall I then follow with the venal tribe,
And on the threshold the fell mongrel bribe?
Bribe him, to feast my mute-imploring eye,
With some proud Lord, that smiles a gracious lie!
A Lie that captivates my heedless youth;
(Absorpt at once my talents and my truth),
While fooled with hope, revolves my joyless day,
And friends, and fame, and fortune fleet away;
'Till scandal, indigence, and scorn, my lot,
The dreary jail entombs me, where I rot!
Is there, ye varnished ruffians of the state!
Not one, among the millions whom ye cheat,
That while he totters on the brink of woe,
Dares, ere he fall, attempt the avenging blow!
A steady blow! his languid soul to feast;
And rid his country of one curse at least!

Fr. What! turn assassin?

P. Let the assassin bleed:
My fearless verse shall justify the deed.
It Is he, that lures the unpracticed mind astray,
Then leaves the wretch to misery, a prey;
Perverts the race of virtue just begun,
And stabs the public in its ruined son.

Fr. Heavens how you rail! the man's consumed by spite!
If L -- km-n's fate attends you, when you write; 64. L -- km-n 's fate]
To be little read, and less approved.

Let prudence more propitious arts inspire:
The lower still you crawl, you will climb the higher.
Go then, with every supple virtue stored,
And thrive, the favored valet of my Lord.
Is that denied? a boon more humble crave;
And minister to him that serves a slave:
Be sure you fasten on promotion's scale;
Even if you seize some footman by the tail:
The ascent is easy, and the prospect clear,
From the smirch'd scullion to the embroidered Peer.
The ambitious drudge preferred, postilion rides,
Advanced again, the chair benighted guides;
Here doomed, if nature strung his sinewy frame,
The slave (perhaps) of some insatiate dame;
But if exempted from the Herculean toil,
A fairer field awaits him, rich with spoil;
There shall he shine, with ming'ling honors bright,
His master's pathic, pimp, and parasite;
Then strut a Captain, if his wish be war,
And grasp in hope, a truncheon and a star:
Or if the sweets of peace his soul allure,
Bask at his ease in some boon sinecure;
His fate in consul, clerk, or agent, vary,
Or cross the seas, an envoy's secretary:
Composed of falsehood, ignorance, and pride,
A prostrate sycophant shall rise a L -- yd: 90. A prostrate sycophant shall
rise a L -- yd:]
This child of dirt, (to use a great author's expression), without any other
quality than grovelling adulation, has arrived at the power of insulting his
betters, every day.

And won from kennels to the impure embrace,
Accomplished W-rr-n triumphs over disgrace. 92. Accomplished W-rr-n]
Another son of fortune, that owes his present affluence to the most infamous
qualifications.


P. Eternal infamy his name surround,
Who planted first that vice on British ground!
A vice that 'spite of sense and nature reigns,
And poisons genial love, and manhood stains!
Pollio! the pride of science and its shame,
The muse weeps over thee, while she brands thy name!
Abhorrent views that prostituted groom,
The indecent grotto and polluted dome!
Who starts to find the spurious passion glow,
Where not one laurel decks the Caitif's brow
Obscene with crimes avowed, of every dye,
Corruption, lust, oppression, perjury?
Let Ch-rd-n with a chaplet round his head, 105. Let Ch-rd-n with a chaplet
round his head, ]
This genial Knight wore at his own banquet a garland of flowers, in imitation
of the ancients; and kept two rosy boys robed in white, for the entertainment
of his guests.

The taste of Maro and Anacreon plead;
" Sir, Flaccus knew to live as well as write,
" And kept, like me, two boys arrayed in white.
Worthy to feel that appetence of fame
That rivals Horace only in his shame!
Let Isis wail in murmurs, as she runs, 111. Let Isis wail in murmurs as she
runs, etc.]
In allusion to the unnatural Orgies said to be solemnized on the banks of this
river; particularly at one place, where a much greater sanctity of morals and
taste might be expected.

Her tempting fathers and her yielding sons; 112. While dullness screens, etc.]
This is a decent and parental office, in which dullness is employed; namely,
to conceal the failings of her children: and exactly conformable to that
instance of filial piety, which we meet with in the son of Noah, who went
backward, to cover the nakedness of his father, when he lay exposed: from the
scoffs and insults of a malicious world.

While Dullness screens the failings of the church,
Nor leaves one sliding Rabbi in the lurch:
Such be the fate of F-nt-n, Sh -- lly, C-pe; 115. Such be the fate of F-nt-n,
Sh -- y, C-pe;]
Three courtly Knights, great admirers of that taste which the Greeks styled,
(...).

For swinish bliss the filthy jakes to grope;
Far other raptures let the breast contain,
Where heaven-born taste and emulation reign.

Fr. Shall not a thousand virtues, then, atone
In thy strict sensure for the breach of one?
If Bubo keeps a catamite or whore,
His bounty feeds the beggar at his door:
And though no mortal credits Curio's word,
A score of laquies fatten at his board:
To Christian meekness sacrifice thy spleen,
And strive thy neighbor's weaknesses to screen.

P. Scorned be the bard, and withered all his fame,
That wounds a brother weeping over his shame!
But if an impious wretch with frantic pride,
Throws honor, truth, and decency aside,
The indignant muse to Virtue's aid shall rise,
And fix the brand of infamy on vice.
What if arous'd at his imperious call,
An hundred footsteps echo through his hall;
And on high Columns reared, his lofty dome
Proclaims the united art of Greece and Rome:
What though whole Hecatombs his Crew regale,
And each Dependant slumbers over his ale;
While the remains through Mouths unnumber'd past,
Indulge the beggar and the dogs at last:
Say, friend, is it benevolence of soul,
Or pomp'ous vanity, that prompts the whole?
These sons of sloth that by profusion thrive,
His pride inveigled from the public hive;
And numbers pine in solitary woe,
That furnished out this fantasy of show.
When silent misery assailed his eyes,
Did ever his throbbing bosom sympathize?
Or his extensive charity, pervade
To those that languish in the barren shade,
Where often by want and modesty suppressed,
The bootless talent warms the lonely breast?
No! petrified by dullness and disdain,
Beyond the feeling of another's pain;
The tear of pity never bedewed his eye,
Nor his lewd bosom felt the social sigh!

Fr. Alike to thee his virtue or his vice,
If his hand liberal, owns thy merit's price.

P. Sooner, in hopeless anguish would I mourn,
Than owe my fortune to the man I scorn! --
What new Resourse?

Fr. A thousand yet remain,
That bloom with honors, or that teem with gain:
These arts, -- are they beneath -- beyond thy care?
Devote thy studies to the auspicious Fair:
Of truth divested, let thy tongue supply
The hinted slander, and the whispered lie;
All merit mock, all qualities depress,
Save those that grace the excelling patroness;
On others' follies, trophies to her raise,
And heard with joy, by defamation praise:
To this collect each faculty of face,
And every feat perform of sly grimace;
Let the grave sneer sarcastic speak thee shrewd,
The smutty joke ridiculously lewd;
And the loud laugh through all its changes rung,
Applaud the abortive sallies of her tongue:
Enrolled a member in the sacred list,
Soon shall thou sharp in company, at whist;
Her midnight rites and revels regulate, 180. Her midnight rites, etc.]
These are mysteries performed like those of the goddess Bona, by females only;
consequently it cannot be expected, that we should here explain them: We have,
notwithstanding, found means to learn some anecdotes concerning them, which we
shall reserve for another opportunity.

Priest of her love, and Demon of her hate.

P. But say, what recompense, for all this waste
Of honor, truth, attention, time, and taste?
To shine confessed, her Zany and her fool,
And fall by what I rose, low ridicule?
Again shall Handel raise his laureled brow,
Again shall harmony with rapture glow!
The spells disolve, the combination breaks,
And rival Punch no more in terror squeaks.
Lo, R-ss-l falls a sacrifice to whim, 190. Lo, R-ss-l falls, etc.]
The person here meant, by the qualifications above described, had insinuated
himself into the confidence of certain Ladies of Quality, who engaged him to
set up a puppet-shew, in opposition to the oratorio's of H -- d-l, against whom
they were unreasonably prejudiced. But the town not seconding the capricious
undertaking, they deserted their manager whom they had promised to support, and
let him sink under the expense they had entailed upon him: He was accordingly
thrown into prison, where his disappointment got the better of his reason, and
he remained in all the ecstasy of despair; till at last, his generous
patronesses, after much solicitation, were prevailed upon, to collect five
pounds, on the payment of which, he was admitted into Bedlam, where he
continues still happily bereft of his understanding.

And starts amazed in Newgate from his dream:
With trembling hands implores their promised aid;
And sees their favor like a vision fade!
Is this, ye faithless Sirens! -- this the joy
To which, your smiles the unwary wretch decoy?
Naked and shackled, on the pavement prone,
His mangled flesh devouring from the bone;
Rage in his heart, distraction in his eye!
Behold, inhuman Hags! your Minion lie!
Behold his gay career to ruin run,
By you seduced, abandoned and undone!
Rather in garret pent, secure from dun, 202. Rather in garret, etc.]
These are the dreams and fictions of Grubstreet, with which the good people of
this metropolis, are daily alarmed and entertained.

The town with rapes and murders let me stunn:
Or plunge in politics with patriot zeal,
And snarl like G-th-rie for the public weal; 205. Snarl like G-th-ie, etc.]
A political writer noted for gall.

Than crawl an Insect, in a Beldame's power,
And dread the crush of caprice every hour!

Fr. It Is well; -- enjoy that petulance of style,
And, like an evious adder, lick the file: 209. And, like an envious adder,
lick the file:]
This alludes to the fable of the viper and file, applicable to all the
unsuccessful efforts of malice and envy.

What 'tho' success will not attend on all?
Who bravely dares, must sometimes risk a fall.
Behold the bounteous board of fortune spread;
Each weakness, vice and folly yields thee bread;
Would thou with prudent condescension strive
On the long settled terms of life to thrive.

P. What! join the Crew that pilfer one another,
Betray my friend, and persecute my brother:
Turn usurer, over cent. per cent. to brood,
Or quack, to feed like fleas, on human blood?

Fr. Or if thy soul can brook the gilded curse,
Some changeling heiress steal -- 221. Some changeling heiress steal]
Why changeling? -- because no woman of common sense, can be supposed capable
of sacrificing her fortune and reputation to a passion for a common sharper,
the true character of all fortune-hunters.


P. Why not a purse?
Two things I dread, my conscience and the law.

Fr. How? dread a mumbling bear without a claw? 224. A mumbling bear without a
claw?]
Consequently a very inoffenfive adversary.

Nor this, nor that is fatal right or wrong,
'Till minted by the mercenary tongue,
And what is conscience, but a fiend of strife,
That chills the joys, and damps the schemes of life?
The wayward child of vanity and fear,
The peevish dam of poverty and care;
Unnumber'd woes engender in the breast
Of him that entertains the ungrateful guest!

P. Hail, sacred power! my glory and my guide!
Fair source of mental peace, what ever betide;
Safe in thy shelter, let disaster roll
Eternal hurricanes around my soul;
My soul serene, amidst the storms shall reign,
And smile to see their fury spent in vain!

Fr. Too coy to flatter, and too proud to serve,
Thine be the joyless dignity to starve.

P. No; -- thanks to discord, war shall be my friend;
And moral rage, heroic courage lend
To pierce the gleaming squadron of the foe,
And win renown by some distinguished blow.

Fr. Renown! ay, do -- unkennel the whole pack
Of military cowards on thy back.
What difference, say, 'twixt him that bravely stood,
And him that sought the bosom of the wood? 247. What difference, say, 'twixt
him that bravely stood,
248. And him that sought the bosom of the wood?]
-- This last line relates to the behavior of a General on a certain occasion,
who discovered an extreme passion for the cool shade during the heat of the day.

Envenomed calumny the First shall brand,
The Last enjoy a ribbon and command.

P. If such be life, its wretches I deplore,
And long to quit the unhospitable shore.

FINIS.

