Dyers News Examined as to His Sweddish Memorial against the Review.
HAD not the Town been alarmed with my Name in Print, and all my Friends
surprised with a prospect of something Fatal attending it; I had not for a long
time appeared in Print again in this part of Britain, -- But I can not be so
far wanting to the desires of those whom this has amused, as to forbear giving
the World some Account of it.

It Is sent down it seems in Dyers News from London, that the Sweddish
Ambassador Monsieur Liencroon has delivered in a Memorial to this Court,
complaining of the Review, as Reflecting on the King of Sweden, and demands
Satisfaction.

First, Gentlemen, I assure you I know nothing of this my self, neither from my
Friends in England, nor from the Government, neither do I believe one Word of
it. I have immediately on Notice of this Written to England, and desired some
of my Friends to wait on the Secretaries of State to acquaint them where I am,
and that if it be required, I will on the first Notice take Post for London,
and put my self into their Hands, to Answer any thing the Law shall require.

In the next place, I have Revised what I have Writ of the King of Sweden, and
I profess I can see nothing in it in the least, that is or ought to be an
Affront to His Swedish Majesty.

And lastly, I thank GOD, I Live in a Land where the Liberty of the Subject is
such, that should all this be true, I can receive no Hurt but by Law.

The King of Sweden indeed has carried it with so high a Hand in some parts of
the World, that their Princes deliver up their Subjects bound Hand and Foot for
him to use his Pleasure with them. -- But GOD be Praised, the Queen of England
is none of those: The Liberty of English Men is in a better Case, and no Man
can be Punished in England at the will of the Prince, much less at the will of
a Foreign Prince.

In England even the Sovereign can not punish but by Law, the Subject must have
a fair Trial, and a Jury of his Equals must Determine the Fact: If the King of
Sweden should demand the delivering up the meanest Subject the Queen has, even
a meaner, if such can be, than the Author of the Review, Her Majesty would
immediately Reply, That it is not in Her Power to deliver any of Her Subjects
up, or to punish them any farther than as the Law directs: And that the meanest
and most despicable Subject in England may even say to his Sovereign, That he
will not be delivered up.

Nor do I believe the King of Sweden can think he has an Emperor of Germany to
deal with in the Queen of Great Britain, and that he can demand a Count Zobor
of Her Majesty.

I am content to be answerable to the Law, if I have offended him or any Body
else; and it is no Arrogance to say I am a Subject of the Laws of England, and
of no other Mortal Power in the World.

This is to be a Subject to GOD and the Queen, for an Obedience to the Law is
all the Subjection, speaking of Humane Affairs, that either GOD or the Queen
requires.

But what is it you said of the King of Sweden, says the Enquirers, you must
have said some ill thing of him, or else he would not have Complained of your
Paper by his Ambassador?

Truly, Gentlemen, I Will tell you as near as I can what I said of him -- and if
I tell it again, you will say, It Is a sign I have not much fear upon me of his
Resentment.

1. I said, That the Swede lying in Saxony all this Summer with 50000 Men about
him, and doing nothing, while he suffered his new King of Poland to be ruined,
and the Country to be ravaged by the Muscovite, signified that he had some
secret design in his Head, some project on Foot, which no Body knew of but
himself.

2. I said, If he had no Design, no Meaning, no Prospect, and yet lay still
there, while his Subjects and his Allies were ruined by his Enemies, he was the
most Impolitick, Nothing-doing Prince in the World.

3. I said, That for a Prince to neglect the Defense of his own Subjects, and
leave them Exposed to the Invasion of Cruel and Barbarous Neighbors, when he
is at the same time pushing on the Conquests and Triumphs of Victory against
their Neighbors, is all one with a Father who neglects to provide for his
Family, of whom the Text says, he is worse than an Infidel.

4. I said, That if the Swede should fall on the Emperor, and thereby oblige
him to quitt the Confederacy, and make a separate Peace with France, we should
have but little Cause to thank him for his Care of the Protestant Religion.

5. I said, That if the Swede should fall upon the Emperor, and oblige him to
draw all his Troops from Hungaria, Naples, Provence and the Rhine, he would be
beaten, and not be able to stand before him.

These and such as these is the utmost of the Matter, and if the Swedish
Ambassador has made a Complaint of this, I shall always be ready to Answer it.

If I had really said any thing which was Unbecoming me of the King of Sweden
or any Body else, I should be willing to acknowledge it, and make Satisfaction;
But as what I have said are both known and useful Truths, with a great deal of
Calmness and Satisfaction I say I am ready to Answer him or any Man else, as
far as the Liberty and Laws of Britain require, and so much for the King of
Swedens Ambassador.

It Is a Happy thing, Gentlemen, to live under the laws of England, I hope you
are advancing apace to the same Liberty, you may be assured no Nation in Europe
enjoys the like Privileges, and I hope you will all partake of them, and learn
to value them.

No Resentment of Foreign Princes can affect us, no Threatenings terrify us,
an English man is born a free man, no Power can insult him, no Superior Oppress
him; The Law only is his Governor, no Magistrate, no Counselor, no Authority,
no not the Sovereign has the least illegal Power over him, he can have no
Sentence pronounced against him, no punishment inflicted, no Fine levied, no
not by the Queen Her Self, but according to Law.

This is the Confidence, the Peace and the Glory of this Island, and no
Foreign Power can interpose in it; If the greatest King or Emperor in the
World demands of the Queen of Britain the delivering up any one of Her Subjects
to them, they may lawfully refuse to go, -- if the Sovereign puts a Man in
Prison by His Royal Authority, -- the Man serves the Judge with a Writ of
Habeas Corpus, and he will let him out again, even Her Majesty her self, asking
Pardon for the Expression, cannot detain him.

He that will abandon this Liberty is not a Fool only but a Knave, a Knave to
himself, and to his Family, a Knave to his Posterity, and a Knave to the
Constitution of the Nation, for he gives up the Right of a Subject, and leaves
an Example of wilful Bondage to his Countrymen.

If there be any such, I have only to say, I am sure, I am not the Man:
Britains Gentlemen are none of the Tribe of Issachar, whose Coat of Arms is an
Ass couchant; what Burden the Law puts upon us, we freely submit to, and never
complain either of the Law or of the Sovereign.

But we always Kick at Oppression, and Resist Tyrrany, and it has hitherto, GOD
be praised, been found in vain to Enslave us.

Her Majesty, the best Queen that ever Governed us, has made it Her Glory to
Reign over a Free People, the Queen despises Tyrrany as infinitely below Her;
It Is Her Pleasure to see the Laws Triumph, it is Her Glory to see Justice
Uninterrupted, and it is Her Majesty's peculiar Blessing that there are none of
Her People complaining of Oppression.

Attempts enough have been made to surprise the Government into Tyrrany, but
both the Attempts and their Authors have found their Quietus in Her Majesty's
Justice, and in Her Native Aversion to Cruelty and Arbitrary Power.

It Is from hence, with satisfaction, any Subject may say, and I say it with a
secret Joy, that I can not express, the Innocent Man may fly with Safety to the
Law, if he has not Offended, he is sure he shall not be Oppressed, if he has, he
is sure to find Justice always mingled with the Princes Compassion.

Let none of my Friends be afraid for me, if I have broke the Law, they ought
to abandon me to the Law, and I ask no Favor; If I have not, no King, no
Power, no Threatening, no not all the Powers of Europe can make Her Majesty
break in upon Her Peoples Liberties, or Deviat from Justice, in the
Satisfaction of which all Her Subjects are easy and safe, and I among the rest.

As to Dyer's Letter, he was always Careful that it should not be seen in
London, whether for Shame or Fear is not Material, and from thence he often
takes the Liberty to Forge Stories that have not the least ground of Truth in
them, and this is not the first time he has done so by me in particular, which
Forgeries he spreads in the Country, and the Letter not being to be had in the
City, he is not so easily contradicted.

I must say, however, Dyer, the News Writer, ought to have been the last Man in
the World to have said this in his Paper, since Monsieur Liencroon never took
notice what he wrote in his public Paper, viz. that the Duke of Marlborrow
obtained his desire of the King of Sweden by Bribing Count Piper.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Preparing for the Press a brief Scheme of the Duty and Office of a Justice of
Peace and a Constable, conform to the Constitution of Scotland and England,
both separately and unitedly considered.

Also a Review of the Trade and Improvement of Britain. This last is designed
(if time in Scotland permits the Author) to be Published Weekly; And to be so
Ordered, that Gentlemen who think them worth it, may Collect them and Bind them
up in Volumes Yearly. They are designed to meddle neither with Whig nor Tory,
Church nor Dissenter, Williamite or Jacobite; but merely for the Benefit of all
Parties, endeavor to Talk to you of the Improvements of Trade, Land,
Navigation, Manufactures, etc. for the public Advantage of Scotland, and
without any Gain to the Author.

FINIS.

