A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE DESIGN, AND ADVANTAGES OF THE South Sea Trade: WITH
ANSWERS to all the OBJECTIONS raised against it. A List of the Commodities
proper for that Trade: And the Progress of the Subscription toward the
SOUTH SEA Company.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by J. Morphew, near Stationers' Hall, 1711. Price Six
Pence.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE SOVTH-SEA Trade, etc.
Great Debts of the Nation
IT is but too Notorious, That the Debts of the Nation, which, at Her Majesty's
happy Accession to the Throne, were very Great, instead of being lessened, were
rather accumulated to an immense Degree, when this present Parliament began
their first Session.

Necessity to satisfy them, to restore Public Credit.
Without invidiously tracing up this Evil to its Causes, either primary or
subordinate, it must be agreed, on all Hands, that there lay a Duty incumbent
on the Parliament and Ministry to apply to it a speedy Remedy: Without which,
Public Credit must have had such a Fall, as might have drawn after it, if not
the Ruin of the State, at least of a vast Number of private Persons.

Difficulties to do it, during the War.
When a Man seriously considered, That the Nation has, for near Twenty Years,
sustained the Weight of Two Burdensome expensive Wars, the second of which is
yet unfinished, and must, of Necessity, be carried on with the utmost Vigor;
and reflected, besides, that some of the best old Funds were clogged with
Mortgages and Anticipations, and that some New ones had proved Deficient, there
appeared insuperable Difficulties in satisfying Public Debts: Removed by the
Ministry and Parliament.
But the Wisdom and Skill of the Ministry, and the Honesty of the Parliament,
have surmounted all Obstacles.

The First Step they made, was, like able Physicians, to probe the Wound, and
inform themselves of all the Circumstances of the Evil they undertook to Cure.

Having, by this Means, come to a perfect Knowledge of the Debts of the Nation,
and found that they amounted to about Nine Millions Sterling; which 'twas
altogether impossible to discharge, whilst the War lasted, Provision made for
the Payment of an Interest on all Public Debit.
They made, however, Provision for the Payment of the Interest, at the Rate of
Six per Cent. for ever, redeemable by Parliament: Which, considering the
Goodness of the Security, and the Exemption of Public Taxes, may, in Time,
prove more advantageous to the respective Creditors, than the actual Payment of
the Capital Sum.

Advantage allowed to the Proprietors of those Debts, by Incorporating them, to
carry on a Trade to the South-Seas.
Besides this Provision for the Interest at Six per Cent. of all the National
Debts, the Parliament readily gave into a Project, formed with great Wisdom and
Public Spirit by the Prime Minister, for Incorporating the Proprietors of the
said Debts to carry on a Trade to the South-Seas: Whereby a further Advantage
will, in all Probibility, accrue to the said Proprietors, and, through their
Means, to the Whole Nation.

We have hitherto made War for Honor's sake.
For we may here observe, That hitherto we seem to have been Fighting, like
Knight-Errants, for Honor's sake, and to redress Public Grievances, without
any Regard to our private Interest. Thus, instead of making a good Use, either
of the Necessities and Streights of the House of Austria, or of the Misfortunes
of the Common Enemy, as the Duke of Savoy, in the first Case, and the Dutch in
the second, have wisely done, we have even neglected the Pursuit of those
advantageous Conditions on which we entered into the Grand Alliance, viz. That
we should remain Masters of such as we should possess our selves of in the
West Indies, during the Course of the War, to be undertaken for the Recovery of
the Spanish Dominions.

On the other Hand, it is melancholy to reflect, That France, notwithstanding
all the Difficulties she has struggled with, notwithstanding those repeated
Disgraces that have attended her Arms, and given such terrible Shocks to her
Power, has yet got a Handle to compass her main Design, viz. The Engrossing all
the Wealth of the West Indies: Which, if not prevented, will not only repair
all her former Losses, but enable her to arrive at Universal Empire in Europe.

Settlements of the French in America.
All the World knows, that upon Occasion of taking Possession of Old-Spain for
King Philip, and other specious Pretenses, the French took also Possession of
great Part of New-Spain: Pretending to put it into a Posture of Defense; which,
indeed, they have done but too well; having, in particular, built a strong Fort
at Calo that secures the Entrance to the wealthy City of Lima; and they have
improved this Possession to the infinite Advantage of France, in an open Trade
to the Spanish West Indies directly; a Thing they never attempted before.

At which the Spaniards were uneasy.
The Spaniards could not without Jealousy and Uneasiness see the Increase of the
French Trade and Power in America: So that, at last, the Chamber of Commerce in
Sevil, made earnest Application to King Philip to put a Stop to it. That Prince
represented to his Grandfather the absolute Necessity of yielding to the
Importunities of the Spanish Merchants, backed by the powerful Solicitations
of the Nobility; but the French King, who was resolved not to abandon the Trade
to America, contented himself with causing it to be publicly declared in
Spain, That his Subjects should be recalled from the Spanish West Indies; and
that the Trade thither should return to its old proper Channel; and, at the
same Time, contrary to this Declaration, that Politic Monarch connived at, if
not directed, the sending of several Ships more than usual to the South-Seas,
with Cannon, Mortars, Arms, Ammunition, Officers, Soldiers, and Ingeniers, to
put the several Ports of Peru and Chili in a Posture of Defense; in order to
keep Possession of them by Force, in Case the Spaniards should insist on the
Removing the French from their Settlements on that Coast.

But succeeding Events prevented the further Importunities of the Spaniards on
that Head; and rather favored the Designs of the Court of France, who made a
very politic Use of King Philip's Misfortunes. For the Spanish Army being
routed at Almenara, and, soon after, totally defeated near Saragossa, upon the
Application the Grandees of Spain made to the French King for immediate
Assistance, it was required from them, That they should give their solemn
Consent to the new Treaty of Alliance, then agitating between the Two Crowns,
whereby very advantageous Concessions were made to the French in the
West Indies: Which, through the desperate Condition of their Affairs, the
Grandees were obliged to agree to. By this Treaty the French retain several
Forts and Fortifications, and being planted over the whole Kingdom of Chili,
they have, at this Time, several Ships of Force Trading in those Seas, which
come Home with rich Cargoes, from at least 30000 to 200000 l. Ster. in Silver.

By this Means the French have laid a Foundation, not only to keep Old-Spain in
a perpetual Dependence upon them; by depriving them of that Commerce in which
their Riches and Subsistence mainly consist; but also, if not speedily
prevented, to supplant all the rest of the World in the Beneficial Trade to Old
and New-Spain; and to increase the Wealth and Power of France, to such a Degree
as (which I hinted before) in Process of Time, to put that ambitious Crown in a
Condition to give Laws to Europe, and to revive her lately baffled Project of
an Universal Monarchy. It is certain, at least, that as the Trade to the
Spanish West Indies is the present Support of our Enemies, so, consequently, as
long as they preserve that Trade, there is little Possibility of bringing this
necessary, but expensive War, to a safe and honorable Conclusion.

The French must be removed from the West Indies.
We may therefore lay down this Political Axiom, or Maxim, that The French must
be removed from their Settlements in the Spanish West Indies, as the most
effectual Means, both to procure a lasting Peace, and to settle the Grand Trade
and Wealth of Europe on a due Balance.

The Spaniards wish to do it, but cannot; therefore we must undertake it.
Though the Spaniards have it, undoubtedly, in their wishes, yet it is beyond
Dispute that they are not like ever to have it in their Power to drive the
French out of South-America. And as, next to the Spaniards, we are the most
concerned in that Undertaking, so we ought to exert our utmost Power to
accomplish it.

This was the main Design in Eresting the South Sea Company.
Upon this wise Consideration it was, that the Ministry and Parliament thought
fit to incorporate the Proprietors of the Army-Debentures, Navy-Bills,
Deficient-Tallies, and other Public Debts, to carry on a Trade to the
South-Seas: Which Corporation, when formed and regulated, will have the largest
Stock of any Trading-Company in the whole World; and therefore will be best
able, with a Small Contribution of each Proprietor; the concurrent Assistance
of the National Shipping and Landforces, and other Advantages that shall be
Specified in their Charter, to dislodge the French from the Spanish
West Indies; or, at least, to make Settlements there; and carry on a Trade most
benefical to the said Corporation, and to the whole British Nation.

This Undertaking no new Project.
It rather adds to, than derogates from the Honor and Praise due to the Great
Genius who brought this Undertaking so near Execution, to observe, that the
vast Advantages that will attend its Success, are so obvious, that a Project,
not unlike this, was formed above Fourscore Years ago; as appears by a
remarkable Speech made by Sir Benjamin Rudyerd at a Committee of the Whole
House of Commons, in the Parliament 21 Jac. 1. about a West-India-Association,
which was to the Effect following: Sir Benjamin Rudyerd's Speech at a Committee
of the Whole House of Commons, 21 Jac. 1. Anno 1624.
Sir Dudley Digs,
'I do profess, that as my Affection, my Reason and my Judgment, go strongly
with the Scope and Drift of this Proposition; so shall a good Part of my poor
Fortune, when it comes to Execution.'

'For to my Understanding, there was never propounded, in Parliament, a Design
more proper for this Kingdom, nor of more pregnant Advantage to it, whether we
consider the nature of our Situation, or the Quality of our Enemy's Forces.'

'As we are an Island, it concerns our very Being to have Store of Ships to
defend us, and also our Well-being by their Trade to enrich us.'

'This Association for the West Indies, when it shall be regulated and
established by Act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the Violence and
injury of any intruding hand, will certainly give many Men Encouragement and
Confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberal Contributions toward so
Noble, so Profitable an Enterprise: So that, in short time, we shall see many
new Ships built, many brave Men employed, and enabled for the Service of their
Country. None of this Money shall be carried out of the Kingdom, but laid out
for Shipping, which is the Defense of it, and bestowed upon our own Men, who
must be fed and maintained, though they stay at Home. For this we shall reap the
Fruit of whatsoever Benefit, Plantation, Traffic, or Purchase can procure us,
besides Honor and Security.'

'Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to encounter, the King of
Whatever was then said of the King of Spain, may, in the main, be now applied
to the French King.
Spain. They are not his great Territories which make him so powerful, and so
troublesome to all Christendom. For it is very well known, that Spain it self
is but weak in Men, and barren of natural Commodities. As for his other
Territories, they lie divided and asunder which is a weakness in it self.
Besides, they are held by Force, and maintained at an extraordinary Charge.
Insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet he is like that Giant, who was said
to have a Hundred Hands, but he had 50 Bellies to feed, so that ratably, he had
no more Hands than another Man.'

'No, Sir, they are his MINES in the WEST INDIES, which Minister Fuel to feed
his vast ambitious Desire of UNIVERSAL MONARCHY: It is the Money he has from
thence, which makes him able to levy, and pay Soldiers in all Places; and to
keep an Army continually on foot, ready to invade and endanger his Neighbors.'

'So that we have no other way, but to endeavor to cut him off at Root, and
seek to impeach, or to Supplant him in the West Indies. By part of which Course
that Famous Queen, of most Glorious Memory, had heretofore almost brought him
on his Knees. And this our Undertaking (if it please God to bless it) must
needs effect it sooner, and quicker; the whole Body of the Kingdom being United
and concurring in a perpetual Supply to this Action; so that he will have no
free Time given him to rest.'

'Moreover, this will be a Means not only to save, but to fill his Majesty's
Coffers, enabling the People to give him liberally, and often; the King's Ships
will have little to do but to guard the Coasts, for the Sea-War will chiefly be
made at the Charge of the Subject. Thus (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that,
in a short Time, both King and People shall be safe at Home, and feared Abroad.
To conclude, I shall be very glad to hear any Man make Objections against this
Design, so that he do it with an Intention to retine and perfect the Work; but
if any shall speak against it, with a Mind to hinder and destroy it, I must
entreat him to pardon me, if I do scarce think him to be a GOOD ENGLISHMAN.'



The Project of a South Sea Trade laid before King William.
About the Middle of King William's Reign, a Project of much the same Nature as
this, was also laid before his Majesty, who highly approved of it; and would
have pursued it, had he not been diverted from it, either by the short and
Self-Interested Views of some Persons about him, or by the Contradictions he
met with in most of his Publick-Spirited Undertakings. However, being informed
by Father Hennepin, who was introduced to his Majesty, and dedicated to him the
Account of his Voyages and Travels in the West Indies: That the French were, at
that Time, endeavoring to lay a Foundation to engross the Trade thither, by
Means of a Communication between the River Canada, and that of Missisippi,
which empties itself into the Gulf of Mexico; His Majesty, upon the Decease of
the King of Spain, resolved to pursue the Scheme beforementioned. In Order to
that, Commodore Bembow was sent with a strong Squadron to the West Indies, to
both intercept the Spanish Galleons, and to countenance some Attempts intended
to be made on the Spanish Settlements in America, and of which, History has
preserved us the following Particulars. Annals of Q. Anne, Vol. 1. p. 204, 205.
'About the Beginning of February 1702/3 Letters from Port Royal in Jamaica
brought the Melancholy News of the Death of that brave and experienced
Sea-Officer, Rear Admiral Bembow, who, upon the 4th of December, Died of the
Wound he received in his late Engagement with Monsieur Du Casse, etc. Successes
of the English in America, in the Year 1702.
These Letters added: Not long after his Death, Colonel Robert Daniel, arriving
at Port Royal from Carolina, brought an Account, that Colonel Moore, Governor
of that Plantation, marched from Charlestown in Carolina with 500 Men, in
order to attack a Colony of the Spaniards about 300 Miles distant, called St.
Augustine, near the Gulf of Florida; that he soon possessed himself of the
Town, the Inhabitants deserting it, and retiring with their best Effects into a
Strong Castle, surrounded by a very deep and broad Moat, in which Place they
had laid up Provisions enough to last them four Months, and that they defended
themselves there very obstinately; so it being impossible to take this Castle
by Storm, Colonel Moore had ordered it to be Blocked up; and sent Colonel
Daniel to Port Royal to borrow a Mortar and Stone-Shells to Bombard it, and
doubted not but he should by that means soon force them to surrender. If this
Expedition had succeeded, it would have greatly Contributed to the Security of
Carolina, there being no other Place from whence they could afterward be
disturbed, except a small Settlement which the French call the Palissadoes,
about 200 Miles farther into the Country, to the Westward: But some French and
Spanish Galleons being arrived at St. Augustine's Port, before the return of
Colonel Daniel, Colonel Moore was obliged to raise the Blockade, and to return
to his Government by Land, after having Burnt the Ship in which he was come.
The Same Letters brought advice, that Six or Eight Frigates of our small
Privateers, attacked a Place called Toulon, on the Continent, about 10 Leagues
from Carthagena, which they Took, Plundered and Burnt. From thence they sailed
to Caledonia; went up the River Darien, and in Twelve Days March to the Gold
Mines at Santa Cruz de Cana, near Santa Maria. The 9th Day of their March they
fell within an Out-Guard of Ten Men, which the Spaniards had at some Distance
from the Place, of whom they took Nine, but the other Escaping gave Notice at
the Mines of their approach, whereupon the richest of the Inhabitants retired
from thence with their Money and Jewels; however, our Party, which Consisted of
about Four Hundred Men being come up, Took the Fort, and possessed themselves
of the Mine, where there remained 70 Negroes, whom they set to Work, and
continued there 21 Days, in which time they got about 80 Pound weight of Gold
Dust; they also found several Parcels of Plate, which the Inhabitants had
buried at their leaving that Place. Our Men, at their Departure, burnt all the
Town, except the Church, and returned to their Sloops, bringing away the
Negroes. Some went further up the River in their Sloops, having a Design upon
another Gold Mine, called Chocoa, and two of the Sloops commanded by Captain
Plowman, and Captain Grandy, sailed toward Cuba, landed near Trinidado, and,
with 150 Men, took the Town, burnt a great part of it, and brought off a very
considerable Booty.'

K. William's Project resumed by Q. Anne.
Not long after Her Majesty's happy Accession to the Throne, some Advances were
made toward the Prosecution of King William's Project; The Lords pass an Act
to encourage it.
in Order to which, the Lords passed a Bill, entitled, An Act for the better
Carrying on the present War by Sea and Land in the West Indies, which the
Commons read a second Time on the 17th of February 170 2/3, and committed the
same to a Grand Committee; Which is lost.
but two Days after, ( February 19th) upon a Debate arising about the Speaker's
leaving the Chair to consider of the said Bill, the Debate was adjourned to the
29th of that Month; and the Parliament being prorogued the 27th, that Bill was
lost. The Dutch forward in the intended Expedition.
Nevertheless, the Court seemed still resolved upon an Expedition to the West
Indies, in Conjunction with the Dutch, under the Command of the Earl of
Peterborow: And there is no Doubt to be made, that if that Resolute, and Pushing
General, had carried our Victorious Forces, and his Good Fortune to the
West Indies, instead of going to Spain, the Enemy would long before now, have
been obliged to submit to the Conditions of a safe and lasting Peace. But though
the Dutch were very earnest and forward in this intended Expedition, having for
that purpose. sent a Squadron, with 1800 Land-Men on Board, to Portsmouth, in
the Beginning of the Spring of the Year 1703: Which, however, is laid aside.
Yet, either as 'twas reported, upon a Disgust given to that Noble Peer, by
refusing him several Necessaries, or for some other Reasons, that Undertaking
was then laid aside. The Design revived, and brought to Perfection by the
present Ministry.
This Design lay dormant for about Eight Years, till the Scheme of it was
New-Modell'd, and digested into better Consistency and Form, by the Present
Ministry, who did wisely Incorporate the Proprietors of Public Debts, to carry
it on.

Advantages resulting from a Settlement in the South-Seas.
The Settlements which the British Corporation are allowed to make in the
South-Seas, both by the Treaty of the Grand-Alliance, and by Act of Parliament,
will certainly be attended with infinite Advantages: 1. The Trade of such
Places as we shall Seize and Plant, will, by Degrees, increase both within it
self, and with others; and will open such a Vein of Riches, will return such
Wealth, as, in few Years, will make us more than sufficient Amends for the vast
Expenses we have been at since the Revolution. 2. For it will occasion a great
Consumption of our Woollen, Iron, and other Manufactures, as will be hereunder
specified. 3. Consequently it will find Work and Employment for Abundance of
our Poor, and thereby ease the Parishes of that heavy Burden. 4. It will
advance the Value of Land. 5. It will increase our Shipping, and the Number of
our Sea Men, in both which the chief and natural Strength of this Nation
consists. 6. Our Settling in South-America may open a beneficial Trade for our
Plantations in North America, who want a Market for the Overplus of those
Provisions that grow in those Countries. 7. The South-Sea-Trade may greatly
contribute toward the buoying up and supporting the sinking, and near expiring
Royal- African-Company, by affording it an Opportunity of Vending great Numbers
of Negroes to the Spaniards, who, by a Contract with the Jamaicans, did
formerly buy them at the Rate of 200 Pieces of Eight ahead. As an illustration
of this, it may be observed, That the chief Motive that engaged the French in
the Attempt they made, some Years ago, upon the Islands of Nevis and St.
Christopher's, was the Alluring Booty of the Negroes on those Plantations: The
French King having borrowed a great Sum from the Spaniards, upon Condition of
Furnishing them with a certain Number of Negroes, which he could not have
performed, but for the successful Invasion of the said Island. 8. In the Last
Place, though it was not thought consistent with the Honor of the Nation to
grant the Pirates of Madagascar a Pardon, yet since they have established and
formed themselves into a kind of regular Government, it will not be more
dishonorable for the South Sea Company to trade with them, than it was for the
People of Italy to hold a Commerce and friendly Correspondence with the First
Founders of Old Rome, who were but a Company of Public Robbers. It may,
indeed, be alleged, That the South-Sea-Corporation is not allowed to trade in
Madagascar, which would be an Incroachment on the East India Company; but as
the Act of Parliament only limits Places, and not Persons, so the
South-Sea-Company may, within the Limitations of the Act, carry on a very
beneficial Commerce with the Madagascarians, who drive themselves a
considerable Trade in the South-Seas, either in a Friendly, or a Piratical
Manner.


And here it may not be improper to subjoin the Account, which, in the Year
1703, was given of the Pirates of Madagascar, which was as follows: Account of
the Wealth of the Pirates in Madagascar, and of what they offered for their
Pardon.
'Captain Wheeler, Captain Brent, and Dr. Dawsone, who was within the Limitation
of King William's Proclamation, and had the Benefit of the same, as also
Captain Hicks, and others that were condemned for Piracy, but Pardoned by Her
present Majesty; as also Captain Brown, and Peter Dearlove, who were bailed out
of Prison, did all give the following Account of the Number and Wealth of the
Pirates, to Captain Martin Laycock, and did assure him, That if he could get a
General Pardon, without Exception of Crimes, Persons, or Places; as also
Liberty for their Effects, they could bring him to full Fifteen Hundred Men,
that would willingly give one Fourth Part of what they were worth, and that,
one with another, they had full 5000 l. a Man.'

Captain Avery's Crew was then 700, at 5000 l. each Man, is 3,500,000 l.
Captain Read's Crew was 400 Men, who shared at one Time 1100 l. at another Time
1300 l. at another Time 800 l. and at another Time 600 l. each Man; which to
each Man amounts to 3800 l. in all 1,520,000 l. Capt. Thomas Tongs's Crew
consisted of 600 Men, worth full 6000 l. each Man; he being a West-Indian born,
and one of the boldest and forwardest of them all: Worth in all 3,600,000 l.
Total 8,620,000 l. Captain Avery, Capt. Read, and Capt. Tongs, were reckoned to
be worth each as much as their entire respective Crews, viz. 8,620,000 l. And
the Officers under them were accounted to be worth about Three Millions more.
3,000,000 l. In All 20,240,000 l.

'Besides Captain Brown's Crew, and others in the South-Seas, and those that go
between Madagascar and the West Indies, whom they could give no certain Account
of to Captain Laycock; but who, they were sure, would readily give the Fourth
Part of what they were worth for their Pardon; so that, by a modest
Computation, the Fourth Part of the whole would bring in above Six Millions
Sterling to the Government.'

Thus far the Account of the Madagascarians given in 1703.

Upon the whole Matter, the real Advantages of this Trade, will, with God's
Blessing, abundantly answer the Charge and Expectation both of the private
Adventurers, and of the whole Nation.

Commodities proper for a Trade to the South-Seas.
A LIST of the Commodities proper for a Trade to the SOUTH SEA.
ALL sorts of Woollen Cloth. Colchester Bays, White and Died. Flannels. All
sorts of Serges. All sorts of Druggets. Shalloons. Says. Cottons. Norwich
Stuffs, and Worsted Stuffs made at other Places. Stuffs mixed with Silk.
Worsted Crapes. Silk Crapes. Silks of all kinds. Velvets. Silk Handkerchiefs.
Worsted Hose. Silk Hose for Men and Women. Thread Hose for Men and Women. Hats,
Beavers, and Carolins. Flanders and English Lace. Silver and Gold Thread.
Sowing Silk of all Colors. Linnens of all kinds, from the Coursest to the
Finest. The Vermillions, and Cotton-Goods of Lancashire. Callicoes, and the
Goods of India. All sorts of Iron-Ware, necessary in Building, and Country
Affairs. All sorts of Household Goods that are made of Iron. Stilliards. Scales
and Weights for Gold and Silver. Sheeres for cutting Gold and Silver. Tools of
all kinds for Carpenters, Joyners, Smiths, etc. Arms. Clocks. Watches. Toys,
and other Curiosities of Iron and Steel. Glass Ware of all sorts. Round Coral
for Necklaces and Beads. Paper. Sealing-Wax. White-Wax for Tapers. Castle-Soap.
Pepper. Cinnamon. Cloves. Mace. Nutmegs. Cheese. Pickles, and Sauce. Oils.
Objections raised against the South Sea Trade.
But though common Benefit was the only View of those that formed this Project:
Though the Undertaking be Noble, Great, and Advantageous, yet such is the
Perverseness of Humane Nature; so prone are the Generality of Men to Censure,
and find Fault, that it is no Wonder this Publick-Spirited Design has met with
Contradiction and Opposition; either from a Jealousy and Uneasiness of Temper,
almost inseparable from Money'd-Men, or from the Particular Disgusts of some
Persons, who, like Waspish and Sullen Patients, reject the most Wholesome
Physic, because they are not pleased with the Hand that administers it.

First Objection.
In the first Place, it is objected, That, considering what strong Footing the
French have got in the Spanish West Indies, the Attempt to remove them from
thence is like to be attended with insuparable Difficulties; the rather,
because they are in Conjunction with the Spaniards, both at Land and Sea: And
supposing we could get some Settlement in the Continent of South-America, yet
while the War lasts, we could Trade with no more of the Country than we
possess, unless it be clandestinely; and after the Peace we must expect to have
less Trade; whereas the French have an open uninterrupted Commerce with the
whole Country.

Answer to the First Branch of it.
As to the first Branch of this Objection, I answer, That the Necessity of
driving the French out of the Spanish West Indies being once laid down as a
Fundamental Maxim, no Difficulties whatsoover ought to deterr us from the
Undertaking; whereas, on the contrary, the infinite Advantage and Benefit that
will attend the Success of the Attempt, ought to be a powerful Incentive to it.
We have, in the Course of this War, with our Shipping, and a Handful of
Land-Men, compassed Things of far greater Difficulty; such as the Taking of
Barcelona, Gibraltar, and Port-Mahon: And to bring in a fresher Instance, did
not Colonel Nicholson, with inconsiderable Forces, make himself Master of
Port Royal in Nova Scotia; which, we may well suppose, was in a better Posture
of Defense than several Places in South-America, in which the French are but
newly settled.

Besides, can any Man of common Sense entertain so mean an Opinion of those who
made this Project, and have thereby justly merited public Acknowledgments and
Rewards, as to think that they did not foresee, and provide against all
Difficulties that might attend it? There Is no Doubt to be made, but the
Ministry have had all the Lights and Informations necessary to carry on so
great an Undertaking with Probability of Success: But the Scheme they have
framed, with the Assistance of several Persons, who are perfectly well
acquainted with those Countries, is, and ought to remain an absolute Secret,
till all Things be ready for Execution; otherwise the Enemy might take such
Measures and Precautions as might render the Design abortive.

Answer to the second Branch of the First Objection.
To the Second Part of the First Objection I answer, That by a Trade to the
South-Seas, it is not to be understood, that we shall take Possession of some
Ports or Places on the West Side of South-America, which being to be allowed as
our Acquisitions, pursuant to the Treaty of the Grand-Alliance
beforementioned, We shall possess the same after the Peace is made; and that,
from these Places, we shall carry on a Free Trade with the Spaniards and
Natives of America, throughout the rest of their Plantations, as the French do
now. To be sure, to expect such a Free Trade would be a fond Conceit: For, as
during the War, the French, in Conjunction with the Spaniards, will certainly
endeavor to prevent it; so, after the Peace, Old-Spain will not easily consent
to it. The same Reasons that induced them, notwithstanding their inbred
Antipathy to the French, rather to call the Duke of Anjou to the Throne, than
to suffer a Partition of their Monarchy, will, undoubtedly, incline them not to
acquiesce in a Partition of their Direct American Trade, which, as was hinted
before, is the main spring of their Riches, and would, in Effect, be the same
with a Partition of their Dominions.

But the Trade intended to be carried on by the British Corporation to the
South-Seas, will be so far from being Prejudicial to the Spaniards, that as we
may, with God's Blessing, during the War, deliver them from the intruding
French, of whom (as I hinted before) they wish themselves to be rid: So, in
Time of Peace, our Settlements in the South-Seas will rather be an Advantage
than a Detriment to Old-Spain. This Position may, at first Blush, look like a
Paradox: But as it is most certain, That there is room enough on the
Western-Coast of South-America for us to plant and establish a flourishing
Trade in, without invading the Property, or injuring the Original Commerce of
the Spaniards; so, on the other Hand, we may assist them in carrying on the
said Trade, by supplying them with what they stand most in need of, for that
Purpose, viz. Negroes; which we may easily do, with no final Advantage to our
selves; as was before mentioned. By this it appears, That the Spaniards have no
Reason to be ^^^^'d, but rather to rejoice at, and favor our Undertaking:
Since the Old Treaty of Commerce between England and Spain, of which the
exclusive Article was with Respect to New-Spain, may yet, with Exception only
to such Places as we may possess our selves of, during the War, remain entire,
after the Peace, notwithstanding our South Sea-Trade.

And here we may cursorily take Notice, That besides the Concessions made to us
by the Treaty of the Grand Alliance, of such Places as we shall possess in the
Spanish Dominions in America, Our Title to California.
we have also a Right to the great Island of California, as having been first
Discovered by our Countryman Sir Francis Drake: A Title of equal Validity with
any Pretensions of other European Princes, or States, to any Part of the West
or East Indies. And that Island lying to the North-West of Mexico, may be of
great Advantage to us, toward the carrying on, and improvement of the
South Sea Trade.

2d Objection.
In the Second Place, The vast Distance between England and the South-Seas, is
alleged as a great Obstacle to the Success of this Undertaking: Answered.
But this Objection will appear to be of no Weight, if we consider, That, by the
Benefit of our Ports in Ireland, we are, as to that Particular, upon a Level
with the French; and, in several other Respects, we have great Advantages over
them, as in the Strength of Shipping; Number of Seamen; Ports on the Coast of
Africa, and in our American Plantations, particularly in Jamaica, etc.

3d Objection:
A Third Outery has, by some ill designing People, been raised against this
Project, as if the Parliament intended to pay all National Debts, with the
floating Expectations of a precarious South Sea Trade: Confuted.
Than which nothing can be more maliciously, or more falsely suggested. For the
Parliament has provided an Interest of Six per Cent, which will be punctually
paid, till the Nation be in a Condition to redeem the same, by paying off the
Capital Sum; And the South Sea Corporation, as was hinted before, was erected
only as an Additional Advantage, both to the Proprietors of the said Debts;
and, through their Means, to the whole Nation.

4th Objection.
But the loudest, most popular, and, indeed, most plausible Clamor against this
Undertaking, is the Cumpulsion put upon the Proprietors of Public Debts to
subscribe their Tallies, Debentures, Bills, etc. into this New Company: As if
the whole Debt was to be the Stock in Trade; and this Stock was to be employed
toward the Dislodging the French out of the Spanish West Indies, etc.

First Part of it answered.
As to the First Part of this Objection, I answer, That, between Man and Man, to
force a free Debtor to take an Interest for his Debt, and not receive the
Principal according to Contract, is certainly very hard and unjust: But the
Case is vastly different between a Private Man and a Nation; for the first may
fail, and prove insolvent; the latter never can. It is too visible that the
Public Debts, were too Great to be paid off in any Number of Years, while the
Burden of an expensive War lies heavy upon the Nation; and therefore, all that
an Honest Parliament and Wise Ministry could do, was to secure those Debts, by
ascertaining them, and putting them into one Lump, and by allowing an Interest
of Six per Cent; that is, as large an Interest as was ever allowed by
Parliament, (except upon extraordinary Emergencies) and One per Cent. more than
some of those Debts, viz. the Army and Transport-Debentures, had before. So far
the Justice and Honor of the Nation are clear and unblemished.

On the other Hand, the Parliament and Ministry, upon a Contemplation of the
absolute Necessity of Removing the French out of South-America, in Order to
attain a Safe, Honorable, and Lasting Peace; and of the other great Advantages
(beforementioned) that will result from a South Sea Trade, resolved to erect a
Company for that Purpose; and thereupon incorporated the Proprietors of the
Public Debts, who, by reason of their large Stock, are, certainly, the most
able to carry on this Undertaking with Probability of Success. Now, if ever
Compulsion can be justified, (and no Government can subsist without it) it is
certainly in a Case not only of Necessity, but Visible Benefit. The Forcing
therefore the Proprietors of Public Debts, that is, a Multitude of Persons of
different Humors, Interests, and Views, to agree and meet in one Common
Center, viz. the Public Good, and their own Private Advantage, is certainly a
very happy and commendable Violence. Not but that such a Compulsion may
occasion Inconveniences to several particular Persons: But as Salus Populi
Suprema Lex, so Private, ought to yield to Public Considerations.

2d. Branch of the Fourth Objection answered.
The Second Branch of the Fourth Objection is grounded either upon a Mistake, or
a false Suggestion: For the South Sea Company is not to make War, and endeavor
to dislodge the French out of the Spanish West Indies, at their own Sole Cost
and Expense; but only with the Assistance of the National-Navy, and
Landforces, as will be Specified in their Charter.

5th Objection.
From the Fourth there arises a Fifth Objection, viz. That the Call for the
Fishery being limited to Twenty Shillings upon every Hundred Pound, and the
Calls for the South Sea Trade left Unstinted and Discretionary, the Proprietors
of the Public Debts are justly apprehensive, that great Sums of Money will be
called in, for carrying on the said Undertaking, which has hitherto kept many
of the said Proprietors from Subscribing.

Answered.
To this I answer, First, That the Company shall be at no further Charge, than
shall be thought necessary for their own Benefit and Advantage.

Secondly, That their Capital-Stock being near Ten Millions Sterling, a Call of
Five Pound upon very Hundred Pound will raise near 500000 l. a Sum much greater
than the Capital Joint Stock with which the French King, his Grandson, and the
Subjects of the Two respective Crowns, undertook and have Settled the Trade to
the South Sea, and which was only of Six Millions of French Livers, that is
about 400000 l. Sterling.

Thirdly, That, according to Her Majesty's Charter, all the several Calls
toward the South Sea Trade are not to exceed Ten Pound upon every Hundred
Pound.

Fourthly, And in the last Place, That the Company being under the Conduct and
Management of a Governor and Directors, who shall have the largest Share in the
Adventure, and consequently be most concerned in the Prosperity of the Whole;
there is no Doubt to be made that, if after such Trials as are Necessary to be
made in all great and difficult Undertakings, they find that the South Sea
Trade will turn to no Account, they will fairly throw it up; and sit down
contented with an Interest of Six per Cent. for their Capital-Stock, till the
Parliament is in a Condition, and thinks fit to redeem it: For the Company is
only empowered, and not compelled to trade, exclusive of all others, to the
South-Seas; which is so far from being a Hardship, that it really is, as it was
meant, a distinguishing Favor.

False Report about the Subscription.
And here we may take Notice of a false Report, broached either through Mistake,
or a Sinister Design, viz. That a Fourth Part of the Subscription into this
Company was to be made in ready Money; which, being inserted in one of the
Public Foreign Prints of the best Credit, has undoubtedly hindered many
Foreigners, who are Proprietors of Army-Debentures, or other Public Debts,
from Subscribing.

Notwithstanding all Difficulties Four Millions were subscribed in Three Weeks
But notwithstanding these false Reports, and Surmizes; notwithstanding the
malicious Endeavors, and discouraging Suggestions of some disgusted, on
ill-designing Persons; notwithstanding all the great Trouble that has,
unavoidably, attended the Subscription; such as the Examining the Title, and
casting up the broken Sums of every particular Bill, and Debenture, and other
Difficulties, yet it is very remarkable, That in the few Days the Books were
open, which did not exceed Three Weeks, near Four Millions were Subscribed. Two
Millions more ready to be subscribed.
To this if we add above Two Millions, that are to be Subscribed for the Use of
the Public; but which cannot be done till the Accounts of the several Offices
are made up, it may be computed, that above Six Millions are as good as
Subscribed; and the greatest Part of the Three Millions and a Half remaining
would have also come in, had it not been for the Uncertainty of the Time, when
the Transferr-Books will be opened, which cannot be before the CHARTER of this
Corporation has passed the Seals; and the Remoteness from Great Britain of
several Proprietors of the Public Debts, who could not have Time to send
Orders to their Correspondents, while the Subscription-Books were opened: This
great Undertaking brought so near Perfection, one of the Wonders of this
glorious Reign.
So that, the Bringing so great an Undertaking so near Perfection, in so short a
Time, may well be reckoned among the Wonders of Her Majesty's glorious Reign.

To conclude, Some Doubts that have arisen, about some Clauses in the Act of
Parliament, for the erecting the South Sea Corporation, have filled the Minds
of some of the Proprietors of the Public Debts with ill-grounded jealousies;
which may also have put some stop to the Subscription. But, as it is next to
impossible. That an Act of so vast Magnitude; so comprehensive of Public Ends
and Private Details, the Framing of which seemed to require whole Years; and
which, nevertheless, was necessarily to be perfected in few Days, should be
altogether without Flaws: Any Defects in the Act of Parliament will be
rectified.
So any Defects that may appear to be in it, will be rectified, pursuant to the
Intent of the said Act.

FINIS.

