THE CHARACTERS AND CONDUCT OF Sir John Edgar, etc.

THE CHARACTERS AND CONDUCT OF Sir John Edgar, AND HIS Three Deputy-Governours.
During the Administration of the late SEPARATE MINISTRY. In a Third and Fourth
Letter to the KNIGHT. WITH A Picture of Sir JOHN, Drawn by a Pen, exactly after
the Life.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. 1720. Price Six Pence.

To His GRACE the DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.
My LORD,
ADresses of this nature are but too often Petitions for Favors to come. But
the Intention of this is to return thanks to your Grace for the Favor you did
me the Honor to confer upon me in November last. Your Grace, perhaps, may
inclined to believe, that my Acknowledgment comes somewhat of the latest. I
therefore being concerned to vindicate the Reputation of my Gratitude, take the
Liberty to assure your Grace, that I knew nothing certainly of the Favor,
which by your Order was conferred upon me in November last, till within this
Fortnight. And as I had heard nothing certain of it, till so long after your
Grace had commanded it; for that very Reason, I had believed nothing of it,
when I did hear of it, if a Gentleman of undoubted Honor had not assured me,
that he was present, when you were pleased to give Directions about it. As I
knew nothing of it till within this Fortnight, so all I know of it now, is the
assurance which that Gentleman has given me that your Grace has ordered it.
For, tho, depending upon that Gentleman's Honor and his Integrity, I have
endeavored to have Evidence of Sense in the Case, as much as I could endeavor
it with any manner of Decency, and without subjecting my self to be treated, in
my Messengers, with repeated and intolerable Insolence, by that Servant who
received your Grace's Command, to convey your Favor to me, I have found to my
infinite Surprise, that, at the very time that I have been, laboring to unmask
and expose an Hypocritical, Wretch, who has had the Impudence and the
Ingratitude publicly to affront your Grace, as far, as Animals of his Species
can affront you; at that very time one of your own Domestic Servants, your
errant Creature, who subsists entirely by your Bounty, has been diligent and
industrious, in giving me all the Disappointment, and all the Disturbance,
that, it has been in his, Power to give me; and consequently all the Diversion
that he could possibly give me in favor of your Grace's declared and mortal
Enemy.

But as your Grace's conferring this Favor consisted in your ordering it to be
done, and not in my receiving it, I am obliged to return you my humble Thanks
for it, as much as if I were in actual Possession of it.

I am Very sorry that upon Addressing my self twice to your Grace after this
manner, I have been obliged each time, to make a Complaint to you. But I cannot
absolutely despair of your Pardon for it, when I consider that your Grace's
Honor has been more concerned in each Complaint than any Inrerest of mine.
Since I made the first Complaint to you, I have had the Satisfaction to see,
that your Grace has retrieved the Jurisdiction over our Theaters, which is
annexed to your Office, as Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household; and have
had the Pleasure to hear that you have mortified four Insolent Wretches, who
had dared to usurp it from you.

As for the Complaint which I lay before you at present, I must leave it to be
determined by your Grace's Wisdom and Justice, whether the Insolence of the
late Separate Ministry, whether the Insolence of Sir John Edgar himself, was
ever so flagrant or so insupportable, as that of your Domestic and Menial
Servant, who has presumed to abuse your Grace's Service in the most Injurious
Manner; to treat a Person insolently, whom you had treated favorably; to
intercept and retain your Favor, and betray the Trust reposed in him, and to
control you in your very Domain; where because you are most independent, you
ought to be most uncontrollable.

My Lord, if your Grace should be in the least surpised at the uncommon Method
of conveying this Complaint to you, I am inclined to believe that you will have
the Goodness to consider, that the subject Matter of it is a great deal more
strange and more extraordinary, than the manner of conveying it to you. For I
appeal to all those Persons of Condition, who have been used to receive
Addresses of this nature, if they ever knew, or ever heard of any thing like
it, in any of their Servants before.

Besides, I had a great deal of Reason to believe, that I had no other way of
approaching your Grace. For he who has had the Assurance for four Months
together, to intercept and retain your Grace's Favor, would certainly have
ventured to intercept any Letter that should have come from me, or to hinder my
having any personal Access to you. But I believe he dare hardly do that by the
little Book to which this is prefixed, and which I have here the Honor to send
you. If his Presumption should extend so far, my Comfort is, that your Grace
will hear of the Contents of this Epistle from a Hundred of your Humble
Servants.

I am, My Lord, Your Grace's most obedient, and most humble Servant,

LETTER III. TO Sir John Edgar.
My Dear KNIGHT,
SINCE I perceive that there is like to be a long Commerce of Paper Civilities
between us two, I think we could not do better, for the making the
Correspondence perfectly easy to us both, than to continue, as we have begun,
to throw off all manner of Ceremony, and to treat each other with that
Familiarity, which is so becoming our long and old Acquaintance. This is then
one branch of the Cartel established between us, that thou should seem not
to remember that the King has made me a Gentleman, and that I should not fail
to forget that he ever made thee a Knight. So that for the future I shall be
downright What do you call with thee; and thou my dear Knight shall be plain Jack
Edgar with me. In which branch of the Cartel, thou have by much the Advantage
of me. For my diminutive Honor was establishd by no less than two Patents, the
one granted by the late Queen, and the other by His present Majesty; whereas
thine was conferred only by a transitory Blow given upon Shoulder Blade; which
when some jeering malicious Persons heard of, they said, they rejoiced that
Honor was got so near as within a Foot of thy Pericranium.

But now to enter upon business; how agreeably was I surpised with that
notable Distinction in the beginning of thy eleventh Paper, which makes thy
Apology for thy going by an Alias. And that is, that when a Man goes by an
alias, in order to commit a Robbery, or a Murder, or lie, with his Neighbor's
Wife, why that is not so well: But when an old Soldier of the Queen takes up a
nom-de-guerre, only for the promotion of Virtue; why that is a laudable Action.
Now here cannot I forbear for my Life using the same expression to you, which
was formerly used to another old Thraso in the Eunuch of Terence.
Soldier. Di vostram Fidem! Quanti est sapere! Nunquam accedo, Quin abs te
abeam Doctior. For my part, I have all along been weak enough to believe, that
to go by an alias is a manifest Cheat, and that every Impostor means Interest
and not Virtue. But this notable Distinction has almost convinced me, that if
the writer of a Libel puts but a sham Name to it, he has a Dispensation by that
alias to injure, slander, and threaten all that is Powerful and Noble in Great
Britain. But that if any one pretends to write even a just Satire, upon the
vilest Poetaster or Politicaster, between Dover and the Orcades without putting
any Name at all to it; why the Action is abominable, it cries aloud for the
extremest Vengeance, and deserves Death without Mercy. But, honest Jack Edgar,
I have one scruple in my Head. Boileau was certainly a Man of true Judgment, of
nice Honor and a very just and admirable Satirist. His Censures were always
just, and so were his Praises, if you except a very few addressed to his Great
Monarch. Merit and Virtue were always Sacred to him, and Vice and Folly the
objects of his Scorn and Hatred. Now when he published a Book of Satires, which
were chiefly levelled at the Edgars and Ironsides, who flourished then at
Paris, that is, at a number of Coxcombs who dared to appear upon Parnassus,
without any lawful Summons thither, or in plain English, without either Genius
or Judgment, you know very well, Jack Edgar, that he put no name to his Book.

The violence and virulence of the contending Parties in England, have, I am
afraid, been one great cause, why we have had no just Satire in England, since
the Author of Hudibras published his, which seems to me, to be a very just one
on Hypocrisy. But you are not to be told, that the Author of it put no Name to
it. We have since had Libels which have passed for Satires, as Absalom and
Achitophel, the Medal, Mac Fleckno, and the Dispensary. They are indeed, if you
please, beautiful Libels, but they are every where full of Flattery or Slander,
and a just Satire admits of neither. In the two first, how many were abused
only for being true to the Religion and Liberties of their Country? And on the
other side, some were extolled only for being false to both. The attempt to
lessen Shadwell in Mackflecno, is every whit as unworthy of Satire. For
Shadwell pretended to no Species of Poetry but the Comic, in which he was
certainly very much superior to Dryden; as the latter acknowledges by a very
fair implication in his Preface to the State of Innocence, which was writ
before the Quarrel between them began. The business of Sir Samuel Garth in his
Dispensary was to expose much better Physicians than himself, for no other
reason but because they were not of his Opinion in the affair of the
Dispensary. Now though these were Libels, and very injurious, yet the Authors
justly thought it more creditable to suffer them to be published without any
Name rather than to make use of false ones.

I am heartily glad, my dear Friend, that I have pleased thee so, by saying
that thou have done more harm to the Stage, than any hundred Men in all
England. For say thou, the World is so Wicked, that it is hardly a
Disparagement to be great even in Ill. But I am afraid, honest Jack, thou
mistakest me. For when I accused thee of doing this harm to the Stage, I did
not affirm, that thou did it altogether through a sinister Design, or a
wicked Motive of Interest; but that there was always a mixture with the other
two, of want of Knowledge and Judgment. And though it may be reputable in this
wicked World to be great in Ill, I believe it will hardly ever be creditable to
be great in Folly. I do not say, but that there may be a very wise Man, who may
know nothing of Theatrical matters. But then this Person who does not know
them, must not pretend to know them, nor to dictate to the World in an affair
which he does not at all understand. For there is a wise and a knowing
Ignorance, an Ignorance that reflects upon its self, and restrains him who has
it from exposing or hurting himself or others, by undertaking things which he
does not in the least understand.

And now, my dear Friend, thou art for mounting that War Horse a-fresh, from
which I showed thee descending. Methinks I see thee upon him in all thy
Accoutrements, thy cocked Hat, thy broad Sword, thy Shoulder Belt, and thy Jack
Boots, and a hugeous merry Figure thou make upon him. But when thou talkest
of planting thy self behind King William the Third, against Lewis the
Fourteenth, does not thy Memory fail thee a little? If thou meanest planting
thy self behind the Coach of King William, I have nothing to say against that.
But I never heard a great deal of thy attendance on him, when he got on
Horseback. He seldom held the Honor of thy Company, to express my self in the
quaint Dialect of thy elder Brother of Brentford, either on the Boyne or the
Shannon, or the Maese, or the Sambre. Thou had that aversion for the effusion
of Christian Blood, that rather than go into the Field with thy broad Sword,
and thy dead doing Hand, to make piteous Slaughter of the Enemy, thou made it
thy choice to stay here at Home, and make wicked Jokes with thy Irish Goose
Quill, upon the Funerals of thy Friends.

But here my dear Friend, thou art in a terrible fuss about going to Law. Thou
pretend'st to be even Mad, that thou art hindered from going to Law; the Law is
not open to thee; thou have not the freedom of the Law. But, Quaere peregrinum
vicinia rauca reclamat. For do not we all know that thou art up to the Ears in
Law; that thou have been up to the Ears in Law these twenty Years; and wilt be
up to the Ears in Law, if thou should live these hundred Years? Can we
forbear laughing then, to hear thee cry out, that thou should be the happiest
Man in the World, if thou could but go to Law? Ah, my dear Friend, I could
name some certain Persons, who if they were no more restrained from going to
Law than thou art, would be happy indeed. But what is it that hinders thee from
going to Law? The Gate of Madam Justice, like that of Hell, is open at all
Hours. Free ingress is denied to none that have but Money to pay their
Entrance; Egress, I must confess, is not altogether To easy. What is it then
that thou pretendest should restrain thee from going to Law? Have thou not
Money to pay thy Lawyers? Or art thou suing some unaccountable Debtors, who
having Money to spare for their Liberalities and their Profusions, have that
irregular greatness of Soul, that they scorn to pay a just Debt till it comes
to Execution; and who instead of discharging, or so much as owning the
Obligation they have to thee, pretend to keep thee at Arms length, and bid thee
open Defiance? Should that be the Case, I believe I can give thee wholesome
Advice. Know then, that there is a certain notable Sergeant at Law, with a hard
Name, who, if thou repairest to him, will instruct thee in an admirable Method
of dealing with such Persons. But at the same time I cannot help acquainting my
dear Friend, that he ought to be ashamed to have the word Law in his Mouth, as
long as he pretends to undo an Act of the Legislature, by an Act of the
Executive Power.

We are come now from Law, by a Whirl of Imagination, to Conjurers and Hoop
Petticoats. But why will you go abroad for Intelligence, which you may have at
home; or go for Counsel to the Deputy, when you may be advised by the
Principal? For does not every Mortal who reads your Papers, say, the Devil in
Hell is in you? Besides, how come you so earnest to get a Patent for the Hoop,
which you were so eager to demolish in your wonderful Speculations?

But, my dear Friend, thou have been pleased in this thy eleventh Paper, to
return the Title of Pedant, by which I saluted thee in one of my former,
according to thy usual Method of giving what is thy own, to those who do not in
the least deserve it. Though I plainly perceive that thou art not quite so proud
of this Title, as thou art of that of Knight; yet to show thee that I saluted
thee with proper Greeting, I shall endeavor to prove, that however
disagreeable the Sound of Pedant may be to thee, thou art certainly the Thing;
and in order to this, will endeavor to show thee what a Pedant, and Pedantry
are, of which in thy Lucubrations and Speculations thou have so often treated
In proper terms, such as Men smatter,
When they throw out and miss the matter.
Hud.

The Pedant then is, literally and originally speaking, he who has the
Instruction of Boys; and the Pedant in the figurative Appellation, which is now
come to be the common one, is he who in his Conversations with Men, or in his
Writings to Men, shows the qualities of an Instructor of Boys. Now Boys not
being come to the use of their Judgment, nor the force of their Imagination,
are chiefly instructed by Memory. Their Instructors therefore never argue with
them, but only dictate to them, and make use of Authority instead of Reason
with them. And to exert their Authority the more, and to cause it to make the
stronger Impression, they dictate with a haughty and imperious Air, which
sometimes is augmented to such a Degree, by Weakness, Ill-Breeding, Pride and
Choler, that it becomes insupportable, even to their dearest Friends and
Relations. And if their Pupils are backward in receiving their Instructions, or
give them the slightest Provocation, they treat them with all those Flowers of
Rhetoric, with which those Persons are always inspired, who frequent the
sonorous Nymphs of the Flood, that haunt the Banks of the vocal Thames between
the Bridge and the Tower.

Thus have I shown, that the Pedant, in the Acceptance in which the Word is
commonly used, has the same qualities with an Instructor of Boys; the chief of
which qualities are a dogmatizing Spirit, a presumptuous Arrogance, and a
soaring Insolence.

Now the Man of Sense, and the Gentleman, being diametrically opposite to the
Pedant, must be one, who in his Conversations and in his Writings, has the
qualities of one who converses with or writes to Men. Now he who knows the
World, and converses with, or writes to Men, always Argues, and never Dictates;
as well knowing, that reasonable Creatures are to be convinced by Reason, and
not by Authority. And as Reason and Truth are calm and modest things, he never
assumes the Dictatorian Air, is never Haughty, never Insolent.

But if at any time, he barely asserts, he does it with Modesty, if not with
Diffidence; as very well knowing, that, though a Man by an insolent decisive Air,
may pass upon those who are governed by Fancy or Opinion; it never fails to
render him suspected to those who are resolved never to submit to any Opinion
till they be convinced by Reason; which latter sort only may be truly said to
be Men. He therefore treats his Companion or Reader with respect, and would
look upon it as a scandalous Indignity, the breaking out into those Tropes and
Figures which are so much in use, with those who converse with, or who write to
Boys, of what Age, or Rank, or Condition whatsoever those Boys are; whether
they are in Infancy, or Youth, or Virility, or Gravity or Decrepitude; whether
they are Ignorant or Learned Boys, of the Lees of the People, or of Equestrian
Dignity.

And now by applying all this to my very worthy Friend, I make no doubt but to
make it appear, not only that thou have the Spirit of Pedantry in thee, equal
to any of thy Contemporaries or Predecessors; but that thou have by Nature and
Genius, what they have acquired by Industry and hard Labor; (for thou art
certainly an illiterate Pedant) and art the very Cock Pedant of all the Nest of
Pedants. For besides, that in all thy Writings, whether Papers or Pamphlets,
whether Lucubrations, Speculations, Guardian, Lover or Englishman, I hardly
ever knew thee argue once; thou have carried Authority to a more ridiculous
Height, than ever Pedant before thee did. For if the rest of thy Brethren have
had the Extravagance, and the Presumption, to bear down Human Reason, by
downright Human Authority, they have still had so much shadow of Modesty left,
as to attempt it by the Authority of others, and not by their own. If shoals of
modern Pedants have arrived to that height of Extravagance, as to pretend to
decide Disputes, where Reason alone ought to prevail, by an Ipse dixit; yet
none before thy self has had the Arrogance and the Impudence to do it by an
Ipse dixi. But thou have often set up thy own Authority, not only against Human
Reason, but against all other Human Authority. Thou have thought thy own
dogmatick Assertion, enough to establish any Opinion, which thy private
Interest required; and like an Absolute Monarch upon the Throne of Pedantry,
have believed it sufficient to say, Car tell est notre plaisir.

I must confess that several of the Tatlers have Wit and Humor in them, a fine
Raillery, and an agreeable Pleasantry; and some of the Spectators likewise have
some of these good Qualities; but I have powerful reasons to believe, that for
the most part the good Qualities in those Writings are derived from thy
Correspondents, and that only the Pedantry of them is thine. For when thou
endeavourdst to entertain the World with a Paper called the Guardian, after
that Mr. Addison had abandoned thee, and Mr. Manwaring was entirely employed
against the Examiner, I found nothing in that Paper of the Qualities of the
other, but only thy eternal Dogmatizing, and the haughty and pedantick Air of a
Schoolmaster. Nay in this Paper thou were dwindled into a Pedant, even
according to the Litteral Acceptance of the Words; and appear'dst every
Morning with thy formal Instructors amidst thy Boys and thy Girls.

I come next to the Vindication of thy Beauty. But here, my dear Jacky Boy, let
us be serious a little. Thou know I am thy Friend, and wish thee well, I
would not have thee make thy self a Jest and a Byword, and a Butt to all the
World. Thy Beauty, Man! Why thou may as well brag in thy old Age of thy
Dancing a Jig. I never heard thee mentioned by any Woman, for these three Years
last past, but thou either wentst by the Appellation of the Black Knight with
her, or she said she could resemble thee to nothing so nearly as to the Knave
of Clubs. I received the following Letter from a Friend, immediately upon the
publication of the 11th and 12th Theater.

Dear Sir,
YOURS of Yesterday I received this Morning. I have seen the noble Knight's
Production which you mention, and could not but laugh to read of the Knight's
Tears. I suppose they were produced by the Author of the two Letters
questioning his Beauty, which he takes some pains in a most ridiculous manner
to vindicate. He seems patient enough under the Confutation of his Reason and
Understanding, to which he replies not one Word. But the Beau Garcon of Sixty
cannot bear an attack on his Beauty, and is forced to write Letters to himself
like other old Beaux, from supposed Ladies, to vindicate what he never
possessed. The Knight has discovered a great deal of Malice, and uttered a
great deal of Slander in his last Paper; but this Verse of Dryden's will fit
his Performance.

In his Felonious Heart though Venom lies,
It does but touch his Irish Pen and dies.
I am, etc.


This is only under one Man's Hand, but this, you may depend upon it, is the
Voice of the People. And whereas thou say, that thou art so far from having a
dusky Countenance, that all Orders of Men smile on thee; thou putst me in mind
of part of a Dialogue between Monsieur Nathaniel Paris, and his Cousin
Hippolita in the Gentleman Dancing Master of the late Mr. Wycherly. It Is in the
beginning of the Third Act.

Mons. Am I so happy den Cousin in the bon quality of making People laugh?


Hipp. Mighty Happy, Cousin.


Mons. De-grace?


Hipp. Indeed.


Mons. Nay, Sans vanity, I observe that wheresoever I come, I make every body
Merry, Sans vanity, Da.


Hipp. I do believe you do.


Mons. Nay, as I march in de Street, I can make de dull Apprentie Laugh and
Sneer.


Hipp. This Fool, is as apt I see as an ill Poet, to mistake the Contempt and
Scorn of People, for Applause and Admiration.


Thus far the Gentleman Dancing Master. But tell me one thing my dear Friend,
has an Owl a dusky. Countenance? Most certainly, a very reverend dusky
Countenance. Now does not an Owl, wheresoever it appears, make every mortal
Smile?

And now, if I should call upon thee, according to thy pretended desire, to see
what treatment a Ghost would give a Mortal, I have reason to question very
much, whether thou would appear to me; for thou know I am in the number of
those things, which during thy whole life time, have always been most terrible
to thee; I mean in the number of thy Creditors. Thou have owed me these two
Years twelve Guineas, for the first Payment of twelve certain Receipts, which
upon taking the Receipts, thou did promise to pay in a Week. But since that
time, I never could see either the Money or the Receipts; so that, if I should
enquire for thee, the answer that Snug thy Servant would make, would certainly
be, the Ghost will not appear to Day.

I am, etc.

LETTER IV. TO Sir John Edgar.
My Excellent FRIEND,
I Come now to consider thy twelfth Paper, in which thou pretendst to Draw
Pictures; for which thou art just as much Qualifyed as thou art to Criticize;
for to draw Characters, and to Criticize, requires the same Talent, that is,
Judgment, which God and Nature have never vouchsafed to endow thee with. And
therefore, all who know thee an errant Bungler, that is, all who do know thee,
are very well satisfied, that they are no more to expect any more Resemblance
in thy Draughts, than from a Sign Post Painter, nay, not the twentieth part so
much. For no Sign Post Painter was ever yet such a Blockhead, as to Draw the
Picture of a Rat, when he designed that of an Elephant; or to Draw the Figure
of an Elephant, when he designed that of a Rat. But now to whom is it not
known, that thou have given us the Picture, of a Wren, instead of that of an
Eagle; and the Picture of an Eagle, instead of that of a Wren. And after thou
have called thy dead Friend Wren, and thy self Eagle, does not every Body know,
that thou have not the knowledge of Adam in thee, nor art qualified to give
Names to Creatures agreeable to their Natures? But as thou art able to draw no
body, no body can have any occasion to draw thee. Thy Name alone is thy
Picture, and comprehends as severe and as entire a Satire in it as Boileau says
that of the Ass does.

Don't le nom seul en soy comprend une Satire.
Thou can draw no Picture, but it wants a Name to distinguish it; no one who
names thee has occasion to draw any Picture of thee.

What! art not thou the famous Distinguisher, the celebrated Knower of the
World, and of Merit, who art continually endeavoring to bespatter and expose
Ministers of State, of admirable Abilities; and who have done the most
important Services for their King, their Country, and the whole Christian
World; and among whom, I have convincing Reasons to believe, there are such,
who are as much thy Superiors in solid Learning, or in Polite Litterature; in
Wit, and graceful Court-like Behavior, and the fine Conversation of Gentlemen;
as they are above thee in Sagacity and Penetration, in the profoundness of
State Affairs, and the depths of Politics? Art thou, I say, the famous
Distinguisher, the celebrated Knower of the World, and of Merit, who at the
same time that thou art vainly and impertinently endeavoring to expose and
ridicule these Illustrious Patriots, art most ridiculously attempting to make
two or three paultry Players, pass upon the World for Men of Manly, Generous,
Elegant, Ornamental Qualities? After this need any one care whom it is thou
Censurest, and whom it is thou Commendest? And yet to make thy Judgment manifest
still further, at the same time that thou art endeavoring to expose those whom
the King most confides in, and whom he most values; thou art at every turn
printing thy. insipid Madrigals in the Praise of His Majesty; and still the
Burden of thy Song is the same with that of an old Starling, who is moulting
his borrowed Plumes in a Cage, Dick is a Bird for the King! Dick is a Bird for
the King! But how much preferable to thine is the Song of the Starling? Tho it
does not mean what it says, like thee; yet it does not like thee, mean
something contrary to it. The Bird itself is not such a Beast as not to know,
that a Libel upon all a Man's best Friends, can never be interpreted a
Panegyric upon the Man. Thus we see, that thou never Censurest, and never
Commendest by Reason and by Judgment, because Reason and Judgment are things
which thou never had. But thy Dislike, or Approbation, proceeds perpetually
from thy Passions, thy Malice, and thy Interest; but especially from the last,
which is thy great Diana.

I come now to an Error of thy Understanding, about which I shall use the more
Words, because thou say thou have so often repeated it; and that is, it is
generally for want of Judgment, that Men set up for the Character of being
Judicious.

And here I cannot for my Soul forbear talking to thee in the Language of thy
Brother of Brentford; Thou art mighty Ignorant poor Man, my dear Friend is very
Silly, I gad he is. For to what purpose can this jingle of Words serve, but to
rattle in the Noddle of a wrong-headed Fellow? For was there ever any Mortal
who was not reckoned a Beast and an Idiot by his own, Acquaintance, but who set
up for the Character of being Judicious in the Profession which he had
embraced? Does not a Shoemaker, a Tailor, a Hosier, set up for the Character
of being Judicious in the nature and fashion and make of Shoes and Stockings,
and Coats and Breeches and Cloaks? Does not a Mercer set up for the Character
of being Judicious, in the nature, and fashion of Stuffs and Silks, and
Brocades? Does not a StockJobber, or an Exchange Broker set up for the
Character of being Judicious, in the Turns, the Rise and Fall of the Public
Funds? When ten or more Clergymen Preach for a vacant Benefice, does not each
of them pretend to be more skilful and Judicious in the ways of Salvation, than
his other Antagonists? Would thou Fee a Lawyer in an important Cause, who
should tell thee seriously, that he did not set up for having more Judgment
than his Neighbors in Statute and Common Law? Would thou trust thy Life upon
a dangerous Crisis, in the Hands of a Physician, who should assure thee, that
he had no more Judgment in Physic than one of his Patients? But to come to
Authors, does not every one who publishes a Book in any Art or Science, pretend
to instruct at least some of his Readers? But which of his Readers can he
pretend to Instruct, but those who are more Ignorant than himself in the
matters of which he treats? But if he supposes that some of his Readers are
more Ignorant than himself in the matters of which he treats, does not he set
up for the Character of being more Judicious in those matters than they are?

When Copernicus published his System of the World, did not he pretend to a
little more Judgment in Astronomy, than some who had gone before him, and
others who lived at the same time with him, and who still adhered to the
Piolemaick System? When Des Carts published his System of Natural Philosophy,
did not he by those wonderful Discoveries of the motion of the Earth, and
others, pretend to a little more Judgment in that Science, and to penetrate
further into the Secrets of Nature than those who had gone before him? When the
Celebrated Harvey gave the World his Treatise of the Circulation of the Blood,
could he have obliged and adorned the Commonwealth of Learning by that noble
and useful Discovery, if he had not set up for the Character of having more
Judgment in Anatomy, than either his Predecessors, or his Contemporaries? And
when Sir Isac Newton, whose Merit is above what the Muses themselves can
Commend, obliged and astonished the Learned World by his Immortal and
unparalled Treatises; those Treatises which have made him an Honor to his
Country, An Advancer of the noblest Learning, and an Enlarger of the Empire of
the Mind; what, did he pretend to no more Judgment in Mathematics, than the
herd of Mathematicians?,

Is it not now most apparent, that every one sets up for the Character of being
Judicious in his own Profession, and his own Art? Why then should not that be
allowed to a Poet, which is granted to all the rest? And why should it be
denied by thee of all Men; and be denied in a Paper, in which you are doing the
very same thing which you pretend to ridicule in others? For are not you
pretending to write a Paper here for the Improvement of-the Stage? And how
do thou pretend to Improve it, by endeavoring to impose upon the World
according to thy laudable Custom, and setting up for the Character of being
more Judicious in Theatrical matters, than most of your Readers; or by speaking
the Truth, and telling the World that thou art a very Silly Fellow, and an
eternal Jabberer about, matters of which thou understandest not a Syllable?
What is become now of that fine Maxim, that it is generally for want of Judgment
that Men set up for the Character of being Judicious? Why thou errant Trisler!
Thou ridiculous Maxim Monger! Thou have a hundred such pretty Jingles in thy
wonderful Speculations, I mean the Speculations which are peculiarly thine, and
to which thou, have let thy Mark; Maxims which are calculated for
Understandings of the same Latitude with thine, and which are under the same
Elevation of Pole; Maxims which showed thee as blind as Hector, or Pompey, or
Caesar's Offspring, that came into the World but Yesterday. But as I have now
some leisure to consider them, I will try, if by my little Art I can Couch the
Cataracts of thy Understanding.

But the mischief of it is, that there is this difference between a four Legged
Puppy, and a two Legged one; that whereas a four Legged one is Blind but for nine
Days, a two Legged one does not only come into the World Blind, but for the most
part continues to be Blind, when he comes to be an old Dog.

To this blessed Maxim, thou art pleased to subjoyn these Words, Every body of
any standing in Town, knows that the dullest and most stupid Writers we have
had, have set up for Critics; why yes truly, this has been the Cant for forty
Years, together, among Persons of thy noble Understanding. The Cry has gone
round, that it is impossible for any one who has shown himself a Critic by his
Prose, to show himself a good Poet by his Verse; which was occasioned first, by
the late Mr. Rymer's publishing a very dull Tragedy of Edgar, after he had
published a Book in Prose, in which there was a great deal of good and just
Criticism. It Is true indeed, Edgar was so absurd a Monarch, that he seemed to
be a forerunning Type of thy self, who were to strut upon the Stage in the,
succeeding Century, under the same Heroic Name. From this accident, the
Poetasters of the Age, who believed it their Interest to fix a Brand upon
Criticism, immediately cried out, and made all their Disciples repeat after
them, that no Critic could be a Poet; not considering that one of the greatest
of the Roman Poets, and, one of the greatest of the French, were Critics by
Professon, as well as Poets; and set up for the Character of being Judicious in
their own Art; nay, and had the Impudence to appear publicly out of Humor
with some Popular Scriblers, who had had Success. But to return to Mr. Rymer;
whether that Gentleman's ill Performance proceeded from his want of
Imagination, without which no Man can make a Poet, let him have what Judgment
he will; or from his want of Exercise and Practice, we should have been better
able to determine, if that Judicious Gentleman had writ more. If Mr. Rymer's
Tragedy is an ill one, neither Shakespeare's or Ben. Johnson's first Damatick
Poems were Masterpieces; and neither Ben nor Shakespeare, they had left nothing
behind them but these, would have passed with Posterity tor great Poets. But
whatever was the Reason of Mr. Rymer's Miscarriage, if these Authors had only
inferred from it, that a Man may sometimes have the Theory of an Art, which yet
he may not be fully qualifyed to practice with Success, nothing could have been
more just. But for them to draw not only a general Inference from a particular
Fact, but an Inference so very absurd, as that a Man cannot Practice an Art
with Success, for no other reason, but because he has shown that he Understands
it, was Bestial and Abominable. I am afraid, my dear Friend, that it will be
found upon enquiry, that the very contrary of this is an eternal Truth. He who
Practices an Art with Success, which he does not understand, is most infallibly
an ill Artist, notwithstanding all his Success; and is indebted for that
Success, to the gross Ignorance and Barbarity of those whom he has the Luck to
please.

If ever that Assertion, that the dullest and most stupid Writers which we have
had, have set up for Critics is proved it must be by thy Example. For as there
is not one Author alive, who has set up for Criticism so much as thou have,
there is not in all Great Britain so stupid and so dull a Writer as thou art,
when thou art left to thy self.

To make good both the Branches of this Assertion: when old Bickerstaff
published his Tatlers, did he set up for a Critic, did he set up for the
Character of being Judicious or not? Let us see what he says himself in his
Dedication to the late Mr. Maynwaring.

The general purpose of this Paper is to expose the false Arts of Life, and to
pull off the Disguises of Cunning, Vanity, and Affectation; and to recommend a
general Simplicity in our Dress, our Discourse, and our Behavior. No Man has a
better Judgment for the Discovery, or a nobler Spirit for the Contempt of all
Imposture, than your self; which Qualities render you the most proper Patron
for the Author of these Essays.

Thus far old Bickerstaff. Now this as I take it, is setting* up for something
more than the Character of being barely Judicious; it is setting up for Sagacity,
it is setting up for Penetration, which are the Accomplishments, and the
Perfections of Judgment. Now if it be true, that it is generally for want of
Judgment, that a Man sets up for the Character of being Judicious; what shall
we say of the Man who sets up for the Character of Sagacity, for the Character
of Penetration? For such a one arrogates a hundred times more to himself, than
one who sets up for the Character of being barely Judicious in passing his
Judgment on the Works of Authors. To know the Hearts of Men requires infinitely
more Capacity, than barely to know Books. A Book alas, has but one meaning;
whatever it speaks it thinks. But the Heart of Man has Folds and Doubles, and
Recesses innumerable. Yet through all these have thou pretended to pierce, and
consequently have pretended to Criticism, of a nobler and more difficult
Nature, than any Author living. But though thou did pretend to do all this,
what thou really did of it was by the Sagacity and Penetration of others. And
when thou had got ingenious Tools to write thee into an Income of two
Thousand Pounds a Year, thou coulst not be satisfied, till like the most dull
and stupid of all Writers thou had writ thy self out of it again.

The Courtship which Sir Martin Mar-all made to Mrs. Millesant, and that which
thou did formerly make to Dame Fortune, and to Madam Fame, will certainly
make a Parallel that will run upon all Four. Sir Martin had a mind to Mrs.
Millesant, but not having Capacity, nor Address to gain her, he prevailed upon
Warner to do that for him, but to do it in such a way that Sir Martin was to
have the Credit and the Benefit of it. Now the Lady being a Lover of Music,
Sir Martin was to give her a Lesson upon the Theorbo, and a Song. In order to
this Sir Martin is to appear in a Balcony, at a distance from her, with a Lute
in his Hand, and the Motions of a Thrummer, and the Grimaces of a Singer, while
Warner is to Sing and to Play for him behind the Curtain. Well! All this was
very well concerted; but the Success of all was to depend upon the Signal
agreed upon between them, and that was, that Sir Martin should leave off his
Grimaces, and his Thrummings upon his dumb Lute, upon the Ringing of a Bell.
But the foolish Knight was so full of his Mistress and himself, that though the
Bell rung twice, yet his Hand and Jaws still went, and exposed him to the Scorn
of his Mistress and the Chambermaid.

I will leave thee, my dear Friend, to apply all this to thy self. But I cannot
forbear taking notice, that it was very imprudent in thee not to leave off upon
the Bells ringing twice; that is, upon the Bell that rung for Mr. Maynwaring's,
and Mr. Addison's Funeral.

I come now to some of the pretended Facts of which thou have been pleased to
accuse me; and I will begin with that which relates to Mr. Congreve and Mr.
Addison, upon whom thou say I have been more severe than upon any other
Persons. As for being severe upon Mr. Congreve, it is a figure in Speech, which
Jeremy says in Love for Love, interlards the greatest part of his Conversation.
As for Mr. Addison, I must confess, I did write the Remarks upon Cato; but I
did not basely flatter and sawn upon Mr. Addison while he was living, and then
more basely insult him as soon as he was Dead. I did not while he was living,
write a flattering fulsom Dedication to him, in which I made him a Thousand
times greater than my self; and then as soon as he was Dead write a flattering
fulsom Dedication to my self, in which I made my self a Thousand times greater
than him. A little below there is another extraordinary Figure, where thou
pretendst to insinuate that I have been used by some People so as a Man of
Honor ought not to be used. Who are those People? Thou can not, thou dare
not name them. Because then the Lie would appear too gross and palpable. I Will
tell thee whom I have used at that rate, and that is, thy Friend, thy Priest,
thy Worshipper, thy Viceroy. Thou either know or ought to know that I
have beat him; and I do not know but I might have been provoked to do as much
by his Wooden God, if he had dared to offer to my Face, what he has basely
writ. Thou say that my Pamphlet is so cruel, that it could be writ by none
but a Coward. I believe I have given other sort of Proofs of my Courage, than
one who in the time of a Bloody War, for twenty Years together, took the King's
Pay as a Soldier and never was in any Action; than one who for twenty Years
together fought as he writ, by Proxy. The Cruelty of a Coward consists not in
Words but Actions: Then, then, was the Cruelty, then was the Cowardice, when
upon a certain Night in November last, three villainous Foot-Pads robbed a poor
defenseless Passenger of all that he had, and said that they did it by a
Deputation from thee. And thou were afterward pleased to abet this Action, and
call those Foot-Pads, Men of Manly, Elegant, Generous, Ornamental Qualities.
Hinc illae Lachrymoe. From hence arose those Crocodile Tears, which thou have
showed in some of thy Papers.

Did thou not snew thy Courage in a notable manner, by giving such Language
in thy Theaters, after having declared against single Combat by thy
Lucubrations, and against Siege and Battle by thy Conduct? Was it not Bravely
and Heroically done to call upon both the Living and the Dead to revenge thy
Cause upon one of Sixty Five; and to endeavor to set both the King's Horse and
Foot Guards upon one of Sixty Five? For my part, I have always firmly believed,
that I have more true Courage than any one, than whom I have more
Understanding. For if Fortitude is a Virtue, of which I know no Man who doubts,
it must depend upon the Reason and not upon the Complexion; but if it depends
upon the Reason, then the stronger the Reason is, the stronger must be the
Virtue. And I have always thought, that as God and Nature have given to Man the
Dominion over Beast, they have so far given to reasonable Men the Dominion over
Blockheads, that they are rather born to scorn them than to fear them. And I
appeal to all my Acquaintance in Town, of whom there are several living of 30
and 40 Years standing, if these Sentiments were ever contradicted by any Action
or Accident of my Life.

But if by the continual Fears thou have given me, thou meanst, as thou seemst
to insinuate, my apprehensions of Persons to whom I may owe Money; thou of all
Men have as little reason to upbraid me with these Fears as the others. For who
was it that lay skulking so many Years, at the Tilt-yard Sutlers, when he was
so strongly possessed with Fear, that he could not think himself in safety,
unless he had the Horse and Foot-Guards for his Security? When the late
facetious Daniel Purcel gave him the name of Major General Hide; and the chief
Maxim of his Life seemed to be, Qui latuit been vixit. If I had the Misfortune
to be an Insolvent Debtor, I should have this Apology to make for my self, that
my Insolvency would not be owing to any Extravagance or want of taking Pains,
but to the hard, not to say the unjust Usage which I have met with in the
World; and in great part to your Injustice and Barbarity, and the Injustice and
Barbarity of those who derived their Power from you. The being an Insolvent
Debtor, is rather to be pitied than condemned, when it has not been occasioned
either by Profuseness or Idleness, but tho being in Debt is both odious and
contemptible in one, who is at the same time a Squanderer, a Bankrupt, and an
Oppressor. But yet to show you that I am not in the condition which you
imagine, I have for these last four Years lodged continually in the
Neighborhood of White Hall, and I appeal to the Honorable Board of
Greencloth, if during that time, so much as one Complaint as been preferred
against me.

I should now say something of the Falsehoods, of which you accuse me, in my two
former Letters, and of the Ingratitude of which thou pretendest to accuse me,
for writing against those, who have endeavored to serve me. As these two
Letters will be shortly followed by a Fifth and a Sixth, I shall endeavor to
show in them, who are the Lovers of Truth, and who are the Slanderers, who are
the Benefactors, and who the Unjust and Oppressors. And then, if with thy
little Understanding, thou have not lost all Sense of Shame, I shall cause thy
dusky Countenance to turn Red, as the Morning does, or as a Lobster boiled.

But having said more already than I designed to do at present, and you having
heard more than thou had a mind to hear, I shall take my leave for a little
time; only adding, that as thou have formed a Fantom in thy Mind, which thou
would pass upon the World for thy Friend, and which every impartial Man who
has seen it, has declared to be just as like to me, as a Wren is like to the
late Mr. Addison, or as thou art like to an Eagle; I shall, by way of Gratitude
or Acknowledgment, subjoin to these Letters, the Picture of my dear Friend; and
I appeal to all who shall see it, if I am not the happier Painter of the two,
and draw the livelier Resemblance. And so at present, my very worthy Friend, I
heartily bid thee Farewell.

THE PICTURE OF Sir John Edgar.
SIR John Edgar, the County of -- in Ireland, is of a middle Stature, broad
Shoulders, thick Legs, a Shape like the Picture of somebody over a Farmers
Chimney, a short Chin, a short Nose, a short Forehead, a broad flat Face, and a
dusky Countenance. He used to compare himself to an Eagle; and to oblige the
first Fool that he met with, to give it under his Hand that he was so. But
neither his Nose, nor his Eyes, nor his Discernment, nor his broad flat Face,
nor his dusky Countenance were held to be Aquiline. He was believed to be in
all these more like to another Bird than an Eagle. Yet with such a Shape, and
such a Face, he discovered at Sixty that, he took himself for a Beauty, and
appeared to be more mortified upon his being told he was Ugly, than he was by
any reflection that was ever made upon his Honor or his Understanding.

He is a Gentleman born, Witness himself: of a very Honorable Family,
certainly of a very Ancient one. For his Ancestors flourished in Tipperary
long before the English ever set Foot in Ireland. He has Testimony of this more
Authentic than the Heralds Office, or than any Human Testimony; for God has
marked him more abundantly than he did Cain, and stamped his Native Country
upon his Face, his Understanding, his Writings, his Actions, his Passions, and
above all his Vanity. The Hibernian Brogue is still upon all these, tho long
Habitude and length of Days have worn it from off his Tongue.

He is the greatest Pretender but one, of the Age in which he lives; a
Pretender both to Understanding and Virtue, but especially to the latter, But
some malicious People have thought, that he made constant Court to that
venerable Lady, not out of any Affection which he had for her Person, but
because he was struck by the Charms of the Jointure which he believed might
follow her. And they were confirmed in this Opinion, by observing the Quarrels,
which he had every Day with one or other of her four Daughters. Yet this
pretended Passion did him great Service. It was to him Major Domo, Factotum,
Housekeeper, Cook, Butler, Tailor and Sempstress; because we live in a noble
Climate, where Persons who are universally known to be Cheats and Sharpers,
keep their Coaches by being so.

Yet to one of the Daughters of that venerable Lady, he paid great respect in
Public, videlicet, to Madam Justice. And to gain her Favor, and obtain her
Protection, he thought it not beneath him, to admit the meanest of her Servants
and Officers into the greatest familiarity with him. So that there was no
respect of Persons among them. But it was Jack and Tom, and Will and Hal, and
Dick with them. But he always combined with these her Servants to injure and
abuse her in Private, and unknown to her played a hundred Pranks with them to
the prejudice of her Interest and Reputation; which were not long kept so very
Private, but the World took notice that neither he nor the Servants cared one
Farthing for the Mistress they pretended to serve. He would very often do
Extravagant things, very seldom Generous ones, and never by his good will Just
ones. Yet was he a great pretender to Generosity; but Generosity with him was
squandring away his Money upon Knaves and Fools who flattered him. Thus a
Bubble is a very generous Creature to the Shark who preys upon him; and a
Beggar is generous to the Vermin that feed upon him.

He had that seeming respect for the Laws of his Country, and appeared to be so
delighted with them, that though he had the Happiness of enjoying them as much as
the most zealous of his Fellow Subjects, even as those to whom one may say, the
Zeal of the Law has eaten them up; yet that he might be sure the
Correspondence between them might be for Life, he had, through a greatness of
Soul peculiar to him, assumed a noble Resolution that would never suffer him to
pay any one a Farthing, 'till it came to Execution. Yet notwithstanding all
this he was not satisfied; but was always crying out Law, Law, more Law, more
Law.

He appears to be mighty zealous for the Rights of the People, and to be
terribly afraid of the return of the old Aristocracy, by which he has got the
nick Name with some of Aristocracy Edgar. No Man had ever so much in his Mouth,
Benevolence and Beneficence to Mankind, as he; which to his Creditors seems a
great Fable: For, say they, since he hates us who have most obliged him, to
that degree, that he cannot endure to see our Faces, how can he possibly love
the rest? He used one while to call himself the Christian Hero, till it grew a
public Jest. For the People would not allow him to be a Hero, because, tho he
had been a Soldier so many Years in the time of a Bloody War, he never had been
present either at Siege or Battle; and he could not possibly, they used to say,
be a Christian, because he used constantly to spend the Mornings in Cursing the
Household of Faith, though they came in shoals to his Levees, out of pure Zeal to
exhort him to do his Duty.

He valued himself exceedingly, upon being a great Improver, and a great
Reformer, though the truth of the matter is, that he never had half Skill enough
to improve any thing, nor half Virtue enough to reform any thing. During the
time that he was Governor of the Bear-Garden, the Diversions of that place
were more Stupid and Barbarous than ever they were known to be before, and the
wild Beasts more mischievous and untractable. And he was especially so far from
Reforming any thing, that it was generally observed, that the greater part of
those who had been most intimate with him, were very far from being more
Virtuous than their Neighbors; though he never failed of doing one thing in
order to the making them so, and that is, entering them in the School of
Adversity.

Now as for Temperance, another Daughter of the abovementioned venerable Lady,
he caresses and courts her all the live-long Day; and compliments her as the
Queen of Morals, and the Empress of Life. But as soon as the Night approaches,
then sparkling Champaign puts an end to her Reign.

He judiciously believes, that by preaching Abstinence up by Daylight, he has
made an honorable Composition for his drinking three Bottles by Candlelight.

We may say of his Fortitude, What Butler said of Hudibras's Wit; He may be
Master of a very great deal, but through abundance of Modest'y is shie of making
any Parade of it, but reserves it for an occasion which no body can diving. For
he has declared against single Combat by his Writings, and against Siege and
Battle by his Conduct and Actions, that is, by staying at home in a time of
War, with a Commission in a Pennyless Pocket, and choosing rather to run the
Risk of being taken Prisoner by the English, than of being killed by the French.

Now as for Prudence, the fourth Daughter, he has a Magnanimity which teaches
him utterly to despise her, and to regard her as an abandoned Person, that
prostitutes her self to the lowest Mechanics. He therefore makes it the
business of his Life to Affront her, and abuses her in all his Conversation,
his Writings and his Actions; of which there can be ho stronger Testimony, than
his mortally disobliging his cordial though partial Friends who raised him, and
going over to a Party whom he had exasperated beyond any possibility of a
sincere Reconcilement.

He is so great a Friend to Union, that almost all Orders and Ranks of Men are
united in his Person. For he has been Poet, Orator, Soldier, Officer,
Projector, News-monger, Casuist, Scribe, Politician, Fish monger, Knight* and
Gold finder; and what is never enough to be admired, he has been all these, by
virtue of other Men's Capacities. Like a very Patentee, he has performed the
Functions of all these by Proxy, and by Deputy. As an Author he Writ by Proxy;
as a Soldier by proxy he fought; He is so given to do every thing by Proxy and
by Deputy, that one would swear he lies with his Mistress by Proxy and by
Deputy, as several honest worthy Gentlemen of his Antiquity are used to lie
with theirs.

Tho no Man in Great Britain is so fit a Subject for Satire as himself, yet has
he been always writing Waggish Lampoons upon others. And whenever he exposes a
Lord in one of his Libels, he has got a trick of affronting him ten times more
by way of begging his Pardon.

He has been always begging something of the Government; and tho he has
obtained ten times more of it than he deserved, yet he grumbling thinks they
have given him nothing, because he has retained nothing; and is outragiously
angry with some of the great Officers of the Crown, because they have refused
to wast the whole time of their Administration in pouring Water into a Sieve.

He had one while, as I hinted above, obtained a Patent to be Governor of the,
Bear-Garden; tho that Patent was invalid and void, by virtue of a previous
Statute. Yet when he thought himself established in that Post, he chose a Bear,
a Baboon, and a Wolf for his Deputy Governors; but partly growing Lazy, and
being partly convinced, that the Deputies were fitter for Government than the
Principal, he abandoned all to them; who conducting themselves by their Bestial
Appetites, played such Pranks, that both Governors and Deputies were all
removed, and the Bear-Garden turned into a Theater. Which Conduct of his puts
me in mind of one Sempronius a Roman Knight, who was made Director of the Ludi
Fescennini, a rough sort of Bear-Garden Drama, in use among the uncultivated
Romans, before they were polished by the Grecian Arts; into which Employment he
introduced three Wretches as his Deputies, who were the utter ruin of that
Diversion. For these four Persons had not among them all as much Judgment as a
Ballad maker. And yet upon having this paultry Office conferred upon him,
Sempronius most vainly and impertinently usurped the name of Censor; which
coming to alarm the true Censors, they inquired into his Life, upon which
finding him to be the greatest Fourbe, and the greatest Impostor, that had
appeared among them since the Foundation of the City, they turned him with
Disgrace out of his Government, dismounted him, and took his Horse from him;
and not contented with this, banished him from Rome it self; and upon his
Departure, caused the same general Lustration to be made, that was used, when a
certain boding, broad, flat, duskyfac'd Prodigy had been hooted from out the
Walls.

Postscript.
IF upon perusing this piece of Painting, or upon reading, the preceding
Letters, any honest impartial Gentlemen shall say, as they did upon reading the
two Former, that I ought not to enter into the private Concerns of Life; I
desire them to consider, that these Letters, tho written in Prose, were
designed to be Just and Legitimate Satires; and that the private Concerns of
Life are the just and adaequate Subjects of Satire, and make the chief Beauties
of the ancient Satirists, that is, of Lucilius, Horace, Persius and Juvenal.

The unmasking of Hypocrites is the great business of Satire, according to that
of Horace in the first Satire of his Second Book.

-- Est Lucilius ausus
Primus in hunc operis componere carmina morem,
Detrabere and pellem, nitidus qua quisque per ora
Cederet, introrsum Turpis. --
But how is it possible, for the most part, to unmask a Hypocrite without
entering into the private Concerns of Life?

Juvenal tells us in his first Satire, that all Human Actions, all the Passions
of Men, all their Desires, and all their Inclinations, are the constant
Subjects of his Satire.

Quidquid agunt Homines, votum, timor, ira voluptas,
Gaudia, Discursus, nostri est farrago Libelli.
Now will any one pretend that the private Concerns of Life are not included in
these Verses?

I must confess the celebrated French Satirist has been a little more
retentive; but yet they must know very little of him, who are to be told that
he sometimes enters, into the private Concerns of Life; which once more are the
just and adaequate Subjects of Satire. But then the Satirist ought to take care
that the Censures are always Just, and that either the Vices Satiriz'd are very
Flagrant, and of pernicious Example, or the Persons egregious Hypocrites.

FINIS.

