THE FARCE OF THE MODERN ANTIQUES, OR THE MERRY MOURNERS.

IN TWO ACTS.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, SMOKE-ALLEY.

M,DCC,XCII.

PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Mr Cockletop, Mr QUICK, Frank, MR MUNDEN, Joey, Mr BLANCHARD, Napkin, Mr
WILSON, Hearty, Mr POWEL, Thomas, Mr THOMPSON.
WOMEN.
Mrs Cockletop, Mrs MATTOCKS, Mrs Camomile, Miss CHAPMAN, Belinda, Mrs HARLOWE,
Nan, Mrs CROSS, Flounce, Mrs ROCK, Betty, Miss BRANGIN,
MODERN ANTIQUES, OR THE MERRY MOURNERS.
ACT I.
SCENE. -- MRS CAMOMILE'S House. Enter MRS CAMOMILE and BETTY. Mrs Camomile.
BETTY, any body here since?


Bet. No madam, but here is a strange servant.


Mrs Ca. Mrs Cockletop desired me, as I passed along Charing Cross; to enquire
for one for her, at the Register-Office, and this is he, I suppose, ha, ha, ha,
she is too fine a lady, to look after these things herself.


Bet. Walk up young man.


Exit. Enter JOEY. Joey. Servant. (nods.)


Mrs Ca. Quite a rustic! how long have you been in town?


Joey. Our town?


Mrs Ca. London.


Joey. I thought as how you meant our town, I com'd from Yorksop, in the county
of Norfolk, to get a place.


Mrs Ca. Your name?


Joey. What of it?


Mrs Ca. What is it?


Joey. Oh! my name is Joey; but volks called me Mr Joey all the way up; that I
com'd upon the coach roof, for as it is near Christmas time; all the inside
passengers were turkeys. I quitted-our-village in a huff, with one Nan
Hawthorn, my sweetheart; cause why, she got jealous, and saucy given.


Mrs Ca. The wages, this lady gives to her* footboy, are eight guineas a year.


Jeoy. Guineas! that will not do, I must have eight pounds.


Mrs Ca. Well, if you insist upon eight pounds, ha, ha, ha.


Jeoy. Oh! I Am hired.


(lays his hat and stick upon the table.) Mrs Ca. You can give, and take a
message.


Jeoy. Yes sure.


(a loud knocking without.) Mrs Ca. Then, let us see, run.


Jeoy. Where?


Mrs Ca. To the door, you blockhead.


Joey. (goes to the door, and stands) Well, I be's at the door, what now?


Mrs Ca. The deuce! open the street door.


Joey. (going) Oh! here comes a lady.


Enter BELINDA, in a riding dress. Mrs Ca. My dear Belinda! come up ( to Joey)
when you hear the bell.


Joey. These gentle volks don't mind what trouble they give a poor zarvant man.


Exit Joey. Belin. My dear friend, I Have quitted Southampton boarding school
without leave; though.


(Lays her hat on the table.) Mrs Ca. My sweet girl! I Am very glad to see you,
but is this a prudent step?


Belin. To be sure, when I was kept there; so long against my will, by my aunt.


Mrs Ca. Ah, Belinda! confess the truth, was not it to see your uncle's nephew,
Frank, that you have scamper'd up to town?


Belin. Ha, ha, ha, 'pon my honor you're a witch; but suppose so, why not? you
and I were school-fellows the other day, yet here you're married; a propos, how
is your dear husband?


Mrs Ca. The Doctor is well.


Belin. You're already happy with the man you love, while I Am kept at a
boarding-school, when I Am able to teach my dancing master.


Mrs Ca. Why then my dear Belinda, since your last letter, I Have been planning
schemes how to make you happy with the man you love.


Belin. My good creature, do tell me.


Mrs Ca. You know if your uncle, Mr Cockletop's tooth but aches, he fancies
he will die directly, if he hasn't my husband Doctor Camomile's advice, he is the
grand oracle of his health, the barometer, and thermometer of his animal
system; now as the Doctor is at Winchester, on a visit to some of his old
College chums, and will not leave his good orthodox bottle of old port, to visit
him here in London; he shall visit the Doctor at Winchester; if we can but get
your uncle to leave town, on that hangs my grand scheme for the establishment
of you and Frank; your aunt's maid, Mrs Flounce, and Mr Napkin the butler are
my confederates.


Belin. Oh charming! but I must know it though.


Enter JOEY, stands some time mute. Joey. Well?


Belin. And well?


Joey. I Am com'd up, as you bid me.


Mrs Ca. But you shou'dn't have come, 'till you had heard the bell.


Joey. And wounds, it is ringing yonder, hard enough to pull church steeple down.


Mrs Ca. and Belin. Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs Ca. Joey, carry those to your master.

( gives him a basket of plants) Plants and Simples, culled for him, by the
Doctor. -- Your uncle will now be a botanist, as well as an antiquarian.


Belin. Ha, ha, ha! but my aunt's new fangled rage for private theatricals, are
to the full as unacountably ridiculous, as my crazy uncle's passion for musty
antiquities.


Mrs Ca. Come be cheerful my sweet Belinda, for I Am going there directly, on
your affairs.


Belin. My kind friend!


Mrs. Ca. Call a coach ( to Joey, who takes up his stick, and puts on Belinda's
hat.) Ha, ha, ha! why you have put on the Lady's hat.


Joey. ( Takes off the hat and compares it with his own.) Ecod one would think
the Lady had put on mine.

Exeunt Mrs Camomile, and Belinda.
Joey. ( Laying hold of the basket.) Your London Ladies are so manified, with
their Switch Rattans, and their coats and waistcoats, and their tip-top hats,
and their cauliflower cravats; that ecod, I shall be in London a long time
before I know a man from a woman.( Takes up the basket, and Exit.)


SCENE. -- MRS COCKLETOP'S Dressing Room, MRS COCKLETOP discovered dressing,
FLOUNCE attending. Mrs C. What a strange incident, my marrying this old Mr
Cockletop; 'pon my honor, was I single, I Would have the most beautiful Theater in
my house, and his nephew Frank, should be the Manager, of late he looks at me
in a very particular manner; I can scarce think it possible for these features,
to strike any body with admiration.


Flounce. Ma'am those features must strike every body with admiration.


Mrs C. you flatter 'em.


Flounce. Not in the least ma'am -- but what signifies your beauty, or my skill
in setting it off, my master since he is turned his brain --


Mrs C. Aye, since my husband has turned Antiquarian --


Flouce. With his curiosities, foreign cockleshells, moldy farthings, and all
his old fashioned trumperies, -- I dare say, he would sell you for the wing of a
butterfly.


Mrs C. Flounce; I Will take you to see Lear, tomorrow night at Lord Rantum's
private Theater.


Flounce. Thank'ee ma'am; but Miss Toepit's maid told me all of them, except
your Ladyship, made a strange piece of bungling work of their play there last
Wednesday.


Mrs C. Work! Oh heavens, if Shakespeare could have taken a peep at them, ha,
ha, ha! Romeo and Juliet the play; the hero, on breaking open the tomb, totally
forgot what he had to say next; in vain, the prompter whispers the word; poor
Juliet might have remained in Capulet's Monument, 'till Doomsday; at length
impatient; (for it grew monstrous cold) I softly bid him speak; why don't you
speak? He, taking it, for what he should say, with all the fervor of
distractted love, burst out "speak, speak, why don't you speak." Ha, ha, ha!


Enter JOEY, with a basket, which he throws on the Toilette. Joey. My first
piece of service in my new place.

Exit Joey.
Mrs. C. Ah! ( screams.)


Enter MR COCKLETOP, with a scroll of Parchment. Mrs C. ( angrily.)
Astonishing, Mr Cockletop, you will not even let me have my dressing room to
myself.


Cock. Oh Mrs Cockletop, what a prize! I have bought one of the long books of
Livy, a manuscript so capitally illegible, that no man on the globe can
distinguish or read a letter of it; let us see, what change he has given me. (
reckons money.)


Flounce. Full of snails.


( To the plants flinging them off the table, knocks the money out of
Cockletop's hand, and Exit.) Cock. The botanical plants from Doctor Camomile,
carefully pick 'em up, every leaf has the virtue --


Enter FRANK, in a riding dress. Frank. Will they heal my wounded pocket?


( picks up the money.) Cock. ( takes the money from him.) Eh! what you lizard!
the valuable simples.


Mrs C. Do my dear, let poor Frank have a little money, give him a few guineas.


Frank. Aye Sir, a few guineas could never come in better time, as I Am just
whip and spur, you see? hey, spank to Southampton.


Mrs C. ( alarmed) Pray Frank, what business have you there?


Frank. What! but to see, my lovely cousin.


Cock. ( putting up the money.) Eh!


Mrs C. Oh! is that your business.


Cock. May be you like --


Mrs C. Aye, do you admire my niece?


Frank. Admire! I love her to distraction.


Cock. the sweet girl dote on myself (aside) get out of my sight you Locust.


Mrs C. Love her! after all my fond hints to him (aside) pray sir, give me
leave to express my obligations to you, when I was rehearsing Imogen with you
the other night, and was to have fainted in your arms --


Cock. Aye, you villain, you stepped aside, and let my dear wife tumble
backwards, and knock her fine head against the brass fender -- take a double
hop out of your two boots, you jackdaw, how dare you stand before me with your
horse-whip in your hand?


Enter FLOUNCE. Flounce. Ma'am, Mrs Camomile.


Mrs C. Sir, command your nephew to think no more of my niece; love another,
you Amateur; stand from the entrance.


Exit Mrs Cockletop in a passion, Flounce following. Frank. Why, my dear uncle,
you are really a good natured old lad, but for this nonsensical passion for
antiquities, in which you have no more judgment than my boot.


Cock. What Is that?


Frank. Didn't you give twenty pounds for the first plate ever Hogarth
engraved; though 'twas only a porter pot from the barley mow?


Cock. No.


Frank. Didn't you throw a lobster in the fire, swearing it was a salamander?


Cock. Yes, but that was when I was sick. In bodily health my mind is bright
and polished; but you most audacious dromedary! traduce my skill in
antiquities! -- Hark'ee, when you can prove to me, that it is possible I can be
imposed on in antiques, that is when I am in bodily health, I consent to give
you Belinda; here is my hand on it. Begone, your face is as odious to me as a new
copper halfpenny.

Exit. Enter HEARTY. ( Calls after Mr Cockletop.) Sir here is the receipt.


Frank. Ah Hearty! you're my uncle's steward, receiver of his cash, and yet do
tip me a few guineas; cheat him a little, my honest fellow.


Hear. Mustn't.


Frank. Plague of the money! I Am sure I want it; my friend Jack Frolic, the
player frank'd me into Covent Garden, sat down in the upper boxes, between Miss
Trump, and Mrs Roll about, when the cursed orange woman thrust in her basket,
with. "sweet gentleman treat the ladies," I was obliged to clap my hand on my
pocket, say my purse gone 'pon my honor; no entering a public place for the
light fingered gentry; so the ladies treated the sweet gentleman; coming home
yesterday, caught in a soaking shower; "your honor; coach unhir'd," in I
jumps, not recollecting his dismal honor had not a shilling to pay for it; so as
the fellow clapped to one door, out I pops at the other, but then I got mobb'd by
the watermen, and broke my nose over a post running away from the link loy.


Hear. Why Frank, I Will lend you my own money with all my heart.


Frank. No, before I strip you of what you may yet want to cherish your old
age, I Will perish; yet this is my Belinda's birth day, by heavens, I will wish,
aye, and give her joy, though I foot it every mile to Southampton, and dine on
watercresses, by the ditch-side.

Exit Frank.
Hear. Spirited lad! I hope by means of this letter, I shall be able to serve
him. I Will sell my old master the small collection of odd sort of rarities Ive
made him, but as his knowing them to be mine may lessen their value in his
opinion; this letter rouses his desire to buy them; then if I can but make him
believe they are from Italy, or Herculaneum, or -- ( Enter Joey in a livery.)
You're the new footmen?


Joey. Yes, I be's, I Have put on my livery.


Hear. Here Is a letter for your master, give it to him directly.

-- (Gives the letter and exit.)
Joey. So I must give this letter too; Ecod! they are resolved in London to keep
no cats that wont catch mice.


Enter NAN with a sweeping brush. Nan. (singing as she, enters) "A service in
London is no such disgrace."

(begins to sweep.)
Joey. Is Not that?


Nan. Why Joey. (surpised.)


Joey. Nan! how glad I be's to see thee. (kisses her.)


Nan. But what brings you here, and this fine laced coat?


Joey. Why I be fixed here, for a zarvant man.


Nan. Zure! lard how comicle! and I hired here to day as maid.


Joey. Hills and mountains will meet. O dear -- O -- dear!


Nan. I Am now sent in here by Mrs Flounce, to do up lady's dressing room, that
it seems some clumsy booby has thrown leaves about'n.


Joey. I Am not a booby Nan; I find you're as saucy tongued as ever.


Nan. O la! was it you Joey! I ax pardon.


Joey. 'Twas all along of your crossness, I com'd up to London.


Nan. And 'twas your false heartedness drove me to seek my bread here.


Joey. Well, since good luck has brought us into one house -- we'll never
quarrel, nor be unkind any more.


Nan. Nor I never more will be jealous. -- O ho! you have had this letter from
Poll Primrose; oh! you deceitful! (snatches the letter from Joey, and break's
it open.)


Joey. The devil! a'dy'e see, what you have done now, this letter was for measter
-- if I hav'n't a mind. --


Nan. Reads, "Sir, encouraged!" why Joey don't be angry, the first letter I
ever get for my lady, you shall open for me, that you shall.

Exit Nan, singing, "Better my fortune as other girls do!


Joey. (Solus) Ecod!, you have spoiled my fortune! what will become of me? before
I Have time enough to be set down in my place, I shall be kicked out on it.


Enter FRANK. Frank. Where Is Hearty? (Joey gives him a letter, he looks at it.)
For my uncle, how came it open?


Joey. It Is opened.


Frank. Why if it is you that -- do you know that opening another man's letter
is transportation.


Joey. Is it? then ecod I Will take the blame upon myself, rather than Nan should
go to Botany Bay, (aside) 'twas I broke it open Sir -- but I meant only to --
to break it open -- all accident.


Frank. (Reads letter) "Sir, Encouraged by your character, I shall to morrow in
person offer you for sale some Antique Rarities!" this promises something,
(aside) well my lad, keep your own secret, and I Will bring you out of this
cursed scrape.


Joey. Do Sir.


Frank. Any wafers here?


Joey. I believe there is some in that box; but I Will get you a haperth.


Frank. My old conceited uncle has engaged to give me Belinda, when I can prove
that its possible to impose on him in Antiquities. This may do it, and bring me
a convenient sum besides, for with all the ridiculous enthusiasm of a virtuoso,
my uncle has small reading, no taste, but has a plentiful stock of credulity.
(wafers the letter.)


Joey. Why I could have done that myself.


Frank. There' you dog, stand to it stoutly ( gives Joey the letter) that is the
very one you received.


Joey. A thousand thanks, kind Sir,

(going)
Frank. But I shall want a disguise; (aside) harkyee, you have put on your new
livery since you came, where are your own clothes?


Joey. In the butler's pantry, for you must know, Sir, when I com'd I was
waundy hungry, so I went there to get a snack.


Frank. Quick, go give the letter.


Joey. Yes, Sir.

Exit Joey.
Frank. (solus) Ha, ha, ha! yes, uncle, if you have cash to buy Antiquities,
I Am a stupid fellow indeed, if I cannot find some to sell you, and if I succeed;
hey to Southampton with the triumphant news to Belinda.

Exit Frank.
SCENE. -- COCKLETOP'S Study. Enter COCKLETOP with spectacles on, reading
letter, JOEY following. Joey. That Is the very letter, I was desired to give it
you, I assure you, Sir, it was not opened.


Cock. The things this learned man mentions here are really very curious.


Joey. Sir, here be Mr Napkin, the butler, coming.

Enter Napkin.
Nap. Sir, a man wants you there below.


Cock. Then Sir, do you send him up here above.


Nap. ( to Joey) Eh! what are you idling here? come, come, I Will show you the
business of a footman, you must toast the muffins for mine and Mrs Flounce's
breakfast.


Joey. I will Sir, and broil a beef-stake for my own,

Exit Napkin, Joey following.
Cock. (solus) Only that my brain is for ever running on my wife's charming
niece Belinda; (oh! how I do love her: I love every thing old, but girls, and
guineas;) I should certainly be second a Sir Hans Sloane -- I Would be a Solander,
and a Monmouth Geoffry. -- Now, who is this?


Enter FRANK, disguised in Joey's first cloths with a small hamper on his
shoulders. Frank. If my uncle knows me now, he must have good spectacles.
(aside) Measter told me, as he told you in a letter, he would call on you tomorrow
with some rarities.


Cock. Oh, then you belong to the gentleman who sent me this letter, where does
your matter live?


Frank. At Brentford, but I be's from Taunton Dean, and as I was coming to Town
to day, he thought I might as well drop them here; if you will buy them, these be
they.


Cock. Oh! what he is sent you, with the things that are mentioned here

(pointing to the letter.)
Frank. I warrant 'em all waundy rich; he gave me such strict charge about'n.


Cock. Rich! ah, these fordid souls cannot conceive that the most extreme
delight to the eye of an antiquarian is beautiful brown rust, and heavenly
green verdigrease. Let Us see, (reads) the first is a Neptune's trident from the
barbarian gallery.


Frank. That Is it --

(gives, a toasting fork.)
Cock. (reads.) One of Niobe's tears, preserved in spirits.


Frank. That --

(gives a phial)
Cock. Curious! a piece of household furniture from the ruins of Herculaneum,
comprizing the genuine section of the Escurial, Precious indeed! (aside)
section of the Escurial; aye then, it must be in the shape of --


Frank. That Is it --

(gives an old griditon.)
Cock. (reading) "The cap of William Tell, the celebrated Swiss patriot, worn
when he shot the apple off his son's head.


Frank. I Have forgot to bring any thing even like that, what shall I do (aside)
I warrant it is here Sir.


Cock. I hope it is, for I will not buy one without all.


Frank. Then all you shall have, (aside) Pretends to look in the hamper, but
picks up Cockletop's hat, and with a penknife) cuts out the brim. "That Is it
may hap?"


Cock. Great! this is indeed, what the Romans called the Pi-leus, or Cap of
Liberty: puts it on his had and reads; " half a yard of cloth from Otahiete,
being a part of the mantle of Queen Oberea, presented by her to Captain Cook."


Frank. Zounds, I was in such a hurry to get to work, that I Have forgot half my
tools.


Cock. Where Is the cloth from Otahiete?


Frank. I dare say it is here, (feels the coat he has on) no, mustn't hurt poor
Joey. Eh! ( cuts of the skirt of Cockletop's coat while he is admiring the
things) belike that is it, -- (gives it.)


Cock. What wonderful soft texture; we have no such cloth in England, this must
have been the fleece of a very fine sheep.


Frank. Aye, taken from the back of an old stupid ram.


Cock. Speak of what you understand you clown, much talk may betray little
knowledge. Cut your coat according to your cloth.


Frank. Yes, Sir, I cut your coat according to your cloth. I must fix him in
his opinion now, with a little finesse, (aside.) Measter do expect fifty pounds
for this balderdash.


Cock. Here Is the money.


Frank. No, if he even thought you such a fool to give it, he must be a rogue
to take it, but he shall not make me a party. I Will let him know, I Am an honest
man; damm'e if I don't throw them in the kennel, and quit his service -- (going
to take them.)


Cock, (bastily) Leave them there, and take the money to your master, or I Will
make him send you to the devil, you thick scull'd buffalo.


Frank. Not a penny of it will I touch.


Cock. Here my good fellow; here is a guinea for yourself; there. --

(gives money.)
Frank. Thank you, Sir; though I do think you're an old fool, and that you're
most confoundedly humm'd.


Cock. Old fool! get you out of my house you scoundrel, or I Will -- (takes up a
blunderbuss,) blow you to Taunton Dean you dog, I will. (Frank runs off.) Enter
Mrs COCKLETOP and MRS CAMOMILE,

they both scream.
Mrs Ca. Heavens! Mr Cockletop, will you kill us?


Mrs C. Lord! what is on your head?


Cock. The cap of liberty; oh the super-beautiful purchase I have just made;
such a charming addition to my little curious collection; Mis Camomile you have
taste, I Will give you a treat. -- I Will show her all, (aside.)


Mrs C. (looking at the things) Heavens! who has done this!


Cock. Pliny the elder.


Enter FLOUNCE. Mrs C. Here take these, and fling them --


Cock. Lay your fingers on them, and I Will -- Strabo, Campden -- and Bishop
Pocock -- madam you should, ( to Mrs Camomile) that is you -- you do know --
you're a Dilitnete. I say you are a celebrated Dili -- and -- now what a fine
discourse an F. R. S. would make on these, madam, I say.


Mrs C. Bless me! who has trimmed you thus?


Cock. Sir Ashton Lever, I wish your husband Doctor Camomile was in town; I Have
here such a feast, for the venerable Bede. Travelers, come, and lay at my
feet, the wonderful fruits of their wise researches. A wake! -- prepare your
understanding, here is a tear of -- the devil, I forgot who cried this tear
(aside.) Hem! it is a precious drop preserved in spirits.


Flounce. Ha, ha, ha!


Cock. Get along you most scandalous tongued, I desire Mrs Cockletop you will
order your slip-slop out of the museum, then, here is a most valuable --

(takes up the toasting fork.)
Enter JOEY. Joey. Here, I Am sent to broil beef-stakes, and toast muffins, the
cock said Mr Frank took, and brought out of the kitchen the --


Cock. They all cost me only fifty pounds; this is a Neptune's trident, and
this piece of furniture from Herculaneum, the model of the Escurial, built in
honor of St Lawrence who was broiled on --


Joey. Thanke'e, Sir; I was looking for the toasting fork, and gridiron.

takes them and exit.
Flounce. Ha, ha, ha!


Cock. What is that?


Mrs C. Why Mr Cockletop what have you been about here?


Mrs Ca. Only look.


Cock. I believe I Am bit. Taunton Dean, he was a a rogue, (looks at his coat
and hat) Is my face genuine?


Mrs C. Why it is an antique; but indeed my dear, you don't look well.


Cock. Don't I?


Mrs Ca. This may help my scheme, to get him out of town (aside) my dear Sir, I
would, not shock you' but you look --


Cock. Do I?


Mrs Ca. My husband, the Doctor, often told me, that your bodily illness always
had an effect upon your mind.


Cock. No man living understands my constitution, but Doctor Camomile; I must
be (feeling his pulse) phlebotomiz'd.


Mrs Ca. When a gentleman of your knowledge is so grossly dup'd, it is a certain
sign --


Cock. It is, that I Am ill, or I never could have been taken in.


Mrs C. Lud, I wish your husband, the Doctor, was in town.


Mrs Ca. I advise Mr Cockletop to go to him to Winchester.


Mrs C. Here (...) Napkin, order horses too: Your poor master will go to the
Doctor at Winchester. Enter Napkin.


Cock. Aye, aye, to the Doctor, -- to Winchester.

Exeunt Mr and Mrs Cockletop.
Mrs Ca. Napkin, ha, ha, ha! here is an opportunity for our plan; you know, as
we have all without success repeatedly endeavored to persuade the old couple, to
settle some provision on their neice and nephew Frank and Belinda.


Nap. Aye, we must try stratagem.


Mrs Ca. The excuse your mistress gives is the chance of her having children of
her own, whom she cannot wrong, by lavishing their patrimony on others.


Nap. Ha, ha, ha! then to put her out of all hopes of that, as you have
settled, we'll make her believe my master's dead, and as I am now going into
the country with him, leave that to me.


Mrs Ca. I fancy 'twill be easy, as she already thinks him ill --


Nap. And weak; heard him threaten to climb up the mouldering walls of
Nettleston Abbey in search of a sprig of ivy, or an owl's nest, and if I cannot
invent a story to bring the old gentleman tumbling down --


Mrs Ca. Ha, ha, ha! and make your mistress the mourning widow, establish the
dear, amiable young couple, well and happy.


Nap. 'Twill be an excellent joke to laugh at over their wedding supper, but I
must prepare for the journey.


Mrs Ca. And I, home, to comfort poor Belinda, only do you act your part, most
dolefully natural, and we must prosper.

Exeunt,
End of Act First.
Act II.
SCENE. -- MRS CAMOMILE's House. Enter FRANK in high spirits, and JOEY. Frank.
HOLLO! Mrs Camomile! here is a nick, ha, ha, ha! honest fellow; my horse is at
the livery stables the other side of Westminster bridge, you would best step on
before me, have him out ready, you will not have a moment to lose ( Exit Joey)
ha, ha, ha! well my mock curiosities may. have a better effect, on my uncle
than Hearty's real ones; if they can help to cure him of an absurd whim, that
makes him the dupe of imposters, siinging his money after things of no utility
(looks at his watch) getting late, I Would like to see if Mrs Camomile has any
commands for her friend Belinda, ( Enter Belinda) then hey for my divine
Belinda.


Belin. Pray Sir, whither in such a monstrous hurry.


Frank. My love, in the name of miracles how did you get here?


Belin. You know we have the best friend in the world, in dear Mrs Camomile, the
mistress of this house.

Enter MRS CAMOMILE.
Mrs Ca. Come, come, you happy pair of turtles -- this room is the stage for a
little comedy I Am to act with your aunt, of which I hope your union will prove
the denouement.


Enter FLOUNCE. Flounce. Madam, my mistress is just drove up to the door.


Belin. Oh heavens! if she finds that I have run to town,

(going.)
Mrs Ca. Stop, she will meet you on the stairs.


Belin. This way, Frank -- when my aunt comes in here, we'll slip down.


Mrs Ca. But Belinda, you will tell Frank what we are both at, and trip directly
home, and you, and all the servants on with your sables.


Frank. Sables! what, to celebrate my true-love's birthday, no, now that my
crusty uncle's out of town, and I have cash, I Will have such a roaring
entertainment at home -- Tol -- derol lol.

(sings.)
Belin. Will you hold your tongue, and come along.

(pulls him.) Exit Belinda and Frank.
Mrs Ca. If my little plot on their aunt but prospers -- Flounce, run and
desire Napkin to con over the lesson I taught him, and look as dismal as an
executor left without a legacy.


Flounce. And Madam, I Will bid him keep his handkerchief to his eyes for fear an
unfortunate laugh should come on his face, and spoil all -- Here Is my mistress,
madam, I wish you success.

Exit Flounce.
Enter Mrs COCKLETOP, elegantly dressed. Mrs C. Oh Mrs Camomile!


Mrs Ca. Well, how do you do?


Mrs C. Our house seems so melancholy since my poor dear man has left town,
that now I cannot bear to stay at home.


Mrs Ca. (aside) And when he was at home, you was always gadding.


Mrs C. I forgot to show you my dress, had it made up for Cordelia, in our
intended play at Mr Pathos's; as you were not there, I put it on to consult
your taste.


Mrs Ca. Oh my dear creature, I forgot to thank you for my ticket, but excuse
me, that an engagement --


Mrs C. Ha, ha, ha! You had no loss, for our tragedy was converted into a ball.
-- Lear you know was our play -- which we got up with every care and elegance;
Well, Ma'am, Colonel Toper, who was to have played Gloucester, having conquered
too many bottles of Burgundy after dinner, (mimicks) "No, damme, I be for none
of your stage -- I Will sit in the side boxes among the ladies, begin your play
by yourselves." -- So says my Lord Brainless, I Will make an apology, and I Will --
"Ladies and Gentlemen, Colonel Toper having been taken suddenly ill, hopes for
your usual indulgence to accept a dance instead of the tragedy." -- The fiddles
struck up Mrs Casey, and audience and actors joined in a country dance -- 'Pon
my honor, though I laugh I am exceedingly melancholy.


Mrs Ca. You Have nothing to make you uneasy; you are sure, that with my husband.
Doctor Camomile, Mr Cockletop is in safe hands.


Mrs C. Well, Mrs Camomile it astonishes me how you can be cheerful while your
husband's absent; but indeed it is rather unfortunate when people are found with
hearts of more sensibility than others.

Enter BETTY.
Bet. Why, Ma'am, here is Mr Napkin just come below.


Mrs C. But is his matter returned too?


Mrs Ca. Well, if he is not, why should that alarm you?


Mrs C. Then perhaps Napkin has brought word, where is he? why don't he come up
-- Napkin -- (call's) Torture me with suspense -- Oh Lord Mrs Camomile if any
thing's the matter, I shall die.

(agitated.)
Enter NAPKIN, much splash'd, in a large Traveling Dress, and seemingly
fatigued. Nap. My dear good master.

(crying.)
Mrs C. My husband -- Oh Lord! speak, pray speak.


Nap. Madam, will you have him brought up to town, or shall he be buried in the
country?

(weeps)
Mrs Ca. Dead!


Nap. I wish, Henry the Eighth had levelled Nettleston Abbey, my sweet master's
thirst of knowledge-such a height -- top of the old spire -- his head giddy --
feeble limbs -- stretching too far, a stone giving way -- though I caught him
by the heel -- head foremost -- corner of a tombstone -- dash -- Oh!

Weeps and Exit.
Mrs C. My fears are true -- I faint -- I die -- please to reach that chair.

(Mrs Camomile places a chair; Mrs Cockletop deliberately wipes it with her
handkerchief, seats herself -- takes out a smelling bottle, applies it, and
affects to swoon.)
Mrs Ca. Nay, nay, my dear friend, pray be comforted.


Mrs C. (recovering.) Comforted, did you say? how is that possible, my dear Mrs
Camomile, when I Have heard you yourself remark that mourning don't become me --
though if I was to dress like Almeria in the Mourning Bride --


Mrs Ca. To confess the truth, I was afraid to tell you, but I before knew of
this melancholy event, and there that foolish boy your nephew Frank, through
his zealous respect for the memory of his uncle, has, contrary to all custom
and decorum, already ordered the whole family to put on the black clothes that
were only the other day laid by when the mourning for your brother-in-law expired.


Mrs C. Madam, you're very obliging.


Mrs Ca. I see his loss bears hard upon your mind, therefore it may not be
proper so soon troubling you with worldly affairs -- but now my dear, you will
have no children of your own, indeed you should think of some establishment for
your niece Belinda.


Mrs C. I Will first establish my husband's nephew Frank, merely to show I prefer
my dear man's relations to my own.


Mrs Ca. This will answer the same purpose, as Frank marries Belinda, (aside.)
-- Well shall I tell the lad your good intentions toward him?


Mrs C. You're very good, I Will tell him myself -- but I Will first consult you my
good friend on the thoughts I have in my mind how to make him happy, but in my
interview with the boy I wouldn't have any body else by; the hour of sorrow's
sacred, it is a cruel world, and people luxurious, sensual, gay, and fortunate,
have no feeling for the disconsolate, widow.


Mrs Ca. My dear creature endeavor to keep up your spirits.


Mrs Ca. Ah friend, what should a poor woman do that has lost so good a
husband, but try to -- get a better.

(aside.) Exeunt.
SCENE. -- COCKLETOP'S House. Enter FRANK, elevated with wine, and BELINDA,
both in mourning -- and NAN. Frank. Ha, ha, ha! this is the most whimsical
thought of your friend Mrs Camomile.


Belin. Is Not it charming?


Frank. Your aunt, and indeed the whole family, except Mrs Flounce, actually
believe, that my uncle's dead; this is your natal day, the birth of beauty;
I Will give an entertainment upon my soul, ha, ha, ha! pert Mrs Flounce says, Oh,
Sir; I Cannot run any bills with the trades people -- but them bills and credit,
while we have money -- my uncle's curiosity guineas shall fly -- Illuminate the
rooms, brilliant lustres, gerandoles and chandeliers.


Nan. Yes sir! la! how where is Joey to do all this? Mr John, light the
clusters, jeridoles, and chanticleers. (calls of.)


Belin. Lord Frank what is come to you?


Frank. Money and long separated friends have a joyful meeting -- prepare the
saloon-bell, we will have a ball.


Nan. Air the balloon, for master's going to play ball.


Frank. And lay supper, then let Napkin send for a pipe and tabor for a dance
we must have, tol, lol, lol.


Belin. But indeed now this is extravagance.


Frank. Cannot I afford a little extravagance? an't my kind aunt to give me my
uncle's cash, then my Belinda you and I go to church, and Hymen in his saffron
robes shall lead us to the rosy bower.


Belin. For Heavens sake Frank, a little decency before the servants, how
unfeeling they must think you.


Frank. I Will show you the feeling of servants for such a master.


Enter THOMAS and two maids in mourning. Harkee! Tom, the coachman, you know
your master's no more.


Tho. Aye, Sir, death has whipped his horses to their journey's end, to our
great sorrow.


Frank. Poor Tom! I Am told you're so grieved, you have sworn never to touch a
drop of punch as long as you live.


Tho. Me! I Will be damned if I ever swore any such thing.


Frank. Ha, ha, ha! a jovial bout the servants shall have. Fly, and every one
bring in his hand something toward the good cheer of the night.

Exeunt.
SCENE. -- A Saloon illuminated, table and cloth laid. Enter COCKLETOP in a
storm cap. Cock. All my doors open, this blowy night reminds me of Lisbon
earthquake, but my storm cap has protected me, -- odd my not finding Belinda at
Southampton -- I wish I had come into town over London Bridge; that now is a
sort of young ruin -- but then over Westminster-Bridge, to see my man Joey;
mounted like the emperor of Morocco's blackamoor -- I Am not sorry Napkin left
me, nobody knows now I Have been after my sweet Belinda -- how glad my loving
wife will be when she finds I am come home and well -- (looks out.) Eh, my
dearee has company -- this don't speak much feeling for my illness.


Enter THOMAS with plates, not perceiving him. Tho. While Napkin is uncorking
the wine, I Will see if I cannot spread a table cloth as well as a hammer cloth.
(Lays plates.) I wonder who drives my old master now in the other world? -- does
he go up or down hill?


Cock. Eh! now who has put Thomas my coachman into mourning? -- As I left you a
pied zebra, why do I find you a black bear? (strikes him with a cane.)


Tho. Gee up! (suddenly turning, is terrified and sneaks off.)


Cock. What Is all this about?


Enter NAN with sallad, places it on table, then plucks a bit. Nan. I love's
beet-root -- (puts it to her mouth)


Cock. Yes, and so do I -- Tell me young woman, for whom are you in mourning.

Exit Nan screaming.
Haven't, I mistook the house? I believe I Am at next door.

Enter NAPKIN and FLOUNCE. Nap. Ha, ha, ha! Flounce if you had seen how
capitally doleful I played my part.


Flounce. None of your dolefuls now master's out of town, Mistress safe at Mrs
Camomile's, the house to ourselves and the young pair -- since Mr Frank will
treat us to a little hop.


Nap. Aye Flounce, for music you know, Im no bad scraper.


Flounce. No, Napkin, nothing gives so much spirit to a dance as a pipe and
tabor -- so send out and see if one can be had.


Enter two Maid and Foctmen, with a violin. Nap. My fiddle John. (takes it) Now
listen Flounce for our country dance; only mind the violin, why I Will Lift up
Ja^ky Bull sprightly enough to move the dead, aye, even to make our old master
caper about. -- ( plays -- Servants join the dance, in the midst of which
Cockletop comes dancing before them, they scream and run off (...) frightened,
except Napkin.)


Cock. So my good friend, I bring you into the country, you leave me sick,
sneak away, and here I find you like N^ro at Rome, rasping your Cremona,
explain what brings you all in black -- if any body's deceased, why do you
celebrate the funeral rites with feasting and fiddling; and if no body's dead,
why change my dovehouse into a rookery. (Napkin puts a handkerchief to his
eyes.) Oh then there is somebody! who is it? Eh, tell me! Vexation, an't I to
know? Sblood, are people to die in my house, and the master not to be told?


Nap. What, or who shall I say? (aside)


Cock. What am I to think of all this?


Nap. Why Sir, from seeing us all in black -- you're to think -- that -- that
--


Cock. What?


Nap. That we are in mourning.


Cock. But for whom? it cannot be my friend Mrs Camomile, or my nephew Frank? oh
Lord, if it should be Miss Belinda -- no, no, they would not fiddle and dance
for them -- now there is one beloved person that I don't care a farthing for
(aside) -- yet I left her so well -- I see they are afraid to shock me --
Napkin is it -- is it --


Napkin shakes head and exits slowly. Cock. It is -- my -- wi -- wi -- wife --
it is so, his silence is a funeral oration. (capers about.)


Enter JOEY shivering as if cold. Joey. Oh, ho? it be a bitter sharp night, my
hands are stone.


Cock. Are you petrified, I wish you were; I Would put you in a case.


Joey. But, Sir, here we come home, and find all our servants in mourning, and
when I ask for whom, they shake their heads and walk away.


Cock. Joey, its for -- for your mistress.


Joey. My Lady dead! I believe I ought to cry (aside) -- (Lifts up the skirt of
his coat.)


Cock. The gentle friend and companion of my youth. (weeps)


Joey. Yes, I should cry. (aside.) Oh! (cries.)


Cock. The best of wives -- (sorrowful)


Joey. The kindest mistress, (imitating)


Cock. Yet my servants' rejoicing shows how ill she was beloved.


Joey. Yes Sir, I said to myself when I com'd, Joey, said I, you have got a
good master, but a bad mistress.


Cock. Stay, I Am released from her extravagant vagaries, why she would give as much
for a little toilette patch box as would purchase the black letter palace of
pleasure -- her week's hair dressing would buy me Colly Cibber's, Foppington
wig -- then her temper.


Joey. She was a wixen devil.


Cock. With her lace cap and her fripperies, -- her private plays, with her
denouement and catastrophe.


Joey. If I didn't suspect she played in private with that Mr Denoumong behind
the tapestry.


Cock. I Have no right to be so sad.


Joey. Yes, Sir, we man be glad, ha, ha, ha, ha! he, he, he!


Cock. The funeral over -- I Will do what I Have long wished, convert her dressing
room into my museum -- the room has an easter prospect -- the windows face
Athens -- though disgraced now by cockspur Persumery, and Fleet Street
japannery -- I Will remove her things out of it.


Joey. Kick them down stairs, an't you man of the house?


Cock. I am! you're but a boy -- but I see you have spirit -- follow me to her
dressing room.


Joey. Yes, Sir. -- Hem!

Exeunt.
Enter Mrs COCKLETOP and NAN in mourning. Mrs C. Every room, every article of
furniture only reminds me of my dear man -- my beloved Frank's ill timed mirth
don't correspond with his haste in getting Every body into mourning, but indeed
my poor husband was never an uncle ^o him.


Nan. Oh madam, you look so well in your weeds.


Mrs C. Do I? -- though I revere the memory of my late husband, yet his
ridiculous passion for shells, fossils, and antique nonsense was got to such an
intolerable height -- was determined on the first opportunity I Would fling all his
rubbish out of the house, and now I Will do it, it is a good large room, and I
think tastily ^itted up will make me a most beautiful little theater -- the
thought charms me, but alas my charmer is no more. I Will instantly go up, and
throw all his old coppers and crocodiles out -- his museum (as he called
it)(...) most horrid place, but I will have it cleared out, (...) you come and
help me.


Nan. Yes, an't please you.

Exeunt.
Enter JOEY with ban-boxes, and toilette furniture. Joey. Ha, ha, ha! if our
mistress could but pop her head out of her coffin and see what a fine rummage
we have made among her falderals, trinketies, and ginglibobs (reads the
inscription of a bottle.) A, by itself A-l-o-lo-t-i-ti-on, lotion for the face,
(drinks) face! ecod I think it is a good notion for the stomach -- the very
thing I wanted to warm my gay little heart -- they say what people set their
hearts on in this world, runs so much in their heads, that even in the other they
cannot rest if they should be disturbed -- Master says he will give these to the
flames -- I Will ask him to give them to my flame pretty Nan -- if she gets this
here cap upon her ^ate, and our lady mistress was to come stalking in with a
candle in her dead hand.


Enter MRS COCKLETOP with a candle. And then says Nan, with a trembling voice
"Who Is here" not pereciving her.

Mrs G. Don't be afraid Joey, its only me.


Joey. Mercy on us. (trembling.)


Mrs G. Heaven's! who pulled my things about this way?


Joey. Now the devil was in our master, that he couldn't let'n bide. -- I
thought we should have her up (aside.)


Mrs C. Who did it?


Joey. Will it quiet your poor soul? (frightened.)


Mrs C. Bid Nan make haste down to me.


Joey. Down! then she is, (points down,) Ah, these London ladies lead tory rory
lives, (aside.)


Mrs C. Nan, (calls.)


Joey. Don't hurt Nan -- I Will go for a Parson.

Exit terrified.
Mrs C. Parson! then my intentions to marry Frank is already known among the
servants -- but I Will see how Flounce dare to let my room be ransacked in this
manner.

Exit in a passion.
SCENE. -- Changes to a dark Apartment. -- A table covered with green cloth on.
Enter JOEY with a candle. Joey. I Have left the parson in the room -- who is
there? but he insists it be auld master that is dead -- the good gentleman that
just now with me for madam's death cried so fine, all alive and merry: but this
stupid mister will not believe it, so if he meets her there, and (...) still
disturbed about her rumplified caps, she will gave it him for certain; I know
naught where master's got to, and the servant's seem all to hide. Cannot find
Nan, I would we were both safe again in the country -- Well, I Have saved this
drop of cordial -- who is you? Heaven defend us she is come again -- I have no
hopes now but my bottle and this table.

(Puts out candle and gets under the table.)
Enter MRS COCKLETOP. Mrs C. Frank! (calls) this is the room I desired Mrs
Camomile to bid him meet me in, and here he comes this way -- Frank -- (calls
in a low voice) I Am glad there is no light though; to discover my blushes at the
open declaration I must make him.


Enter COCKLETOP. Cock. As dark as an Egyptian catacomb. Belinda venturing to
town must be on the report of her aunt's death, and if Hearty has told her --
I Will speak to her here.


Mrs C. Are you there?


Cock. Yes, it is she. I wish we had a light -- where are you, you little guinea
pig?


Mrs C. Eh, my dear when I bury Mr Cockletop.


Cock. Bury me -- (aside.) -- When for you I Will make a mummy of Mrs Cockletop.


Mrs C. Angels and Ministers! it is the ghost of my deceased husband come to
upbraid me -- oh much wronged spouse!


Cock. Spouse! it is the spirit of my wife -- Oh Lord! oh great injured goblin!

(falls on their knees at opposite sides.)
Joey. Oh here is the parson striving to lay my mistress -- but shell surely
tear his head off -- it is my poor dear master -- help, murder!


Enter HEARTY with candles -- MRS CAMOMILE and BELINDA.
Mrs C. Eh! what work's here?


Joey. My lady's ghost tearing old master to pieces.

(Rising in haste, oversets the table and runs off.)
Mrs C. Mr Cockletop alive!


Cock. My wife not dead.


Frank. Uncle, you promised that when proved to be deceived in Antiquities,
Belinda should be mine, (speaking in a feigned voice.) Now zure besides the
fifty pounds, give her to poor Taunton Dean.


Cock. Was It you? take her: I was a wise man till my brain got Love coddl'd --
so my dear let us forgive Frank and Belinda, and forget our follies.


Hear. Come, come, let us transfer our passion for ancient virtue to the
encouragement of Modern Genius. -- Had not Rome, and Athens, cherished the arts
of their times, they would have left no antiquities for us to admire.


Mrs C. Why rake for gems in the ashes of the dead,
And see the living artest pine for bread.

Frank. Give,
While you live.
Heirs that find cash in corners,
Will at your Funeral, make Right Merry Mourners.

FINIS.

