A BRIEF CASE OF THE DISTILLERS, And of the Distilling Trade IN ENGLAND,
SHOWING How far it is the Interest of England to encourage the said Trade, as
it is so considerable an Advantage To the Landed Interest, To the Trade and
Navigation, To the Public Revenue, and To the Employment of the Poor. Humbly
recommended to the Lords and Commons of Great Britain, in the present
Parliament assembled.

LONDON, Printed for T. WARNER at the Black-Bay in Paternoster Row.
M.DCC.XXVI. Price One Shilling.

THE PREFACE.
AS almost every thing in this criticizing Age is liable to be cavil'd at and
disputed, so contrary to the Rules of Charity and good Humor, it is the avowed
Temper, or at least the Practice of the Age, where any thing so disputed is
liable to a double or differing Construction, always to take it in the worst.

To prevent this, and anticipate the Cavils of those who would suggest Evil
where no Evil ought to be suggested, a short Preface is thought needful to this
Work, tho otherwise plain enough, to prepare the Reader to be at least honest
and just, if he should not incline to be candid and generous, in his looking
over the following Sheets.

Here Is no Apology to be made for Vice, no extenuating of Crimes, no Harangues
for Drunkenness; when, at the same time, the Liquors, which it has been
suggested are instrumental to our Immoralitys, are, as the Reader may think,
spoken favorably of.

But we are stating the Case of the Distilling Business as a Commerce, and of
the Distillers as a Society improving that Commerce, for the Good of their
Country; enquiring whether they are a public Good, and Encouragers of the
Trade yea or no: if they are, the Parliament of Great Britain now sitting will
judge whether it is meet to encourage them or not; and if not, vice versa.

But it seems needful to hint, and this is the Reason of this Preface, That the
Question does not seem to lie here, Whether the Spirits shall be distilled and
consumed among us, and whether the Poor shall drink them? But, Whether the
Dutch shall surnish us with them, and cheat and impose upon us, as well
publicly as privately, in the grossest and most barefaced manner? or whether
our own Manufacture shall supply us, our own Growth be consumed, and our own
People employed?

These are indeed very short Questions, and I think few Words will decide them:
If the first be encouraged, and Fraud and clandestine Trade be continued, for
want of due Regulations, and proper Measures taken to prevent it, I shall only
say it shall not be for want of due Information. But if our own Manufacture,
the Labor and Industry of our own People, and the Consumption of our own
Growth be encouraged, as we cannot doubt they will, I take the Liberty to say,
the Distilling-Trade in England, which is already so much improved and
increased, will in a very few Years conquer all foreign Importations, all the
clandestine and corrupt Management of other Countries, who impose upon us, and
even the smuggling and running of French Brandy itself.

The same Ignorance that occasions most of the Prejudice at the Distilling
Trade among us, obliged me to enter into the Detail of the Dutch Operations
with their Malt Spirits; and the first Introduction of Geneva among the common
People, which otherwise some might pretend is useless in the Case before us.
But it is needful we should know Things in their Original, and be able to see
from what Fountain every Mischief flows, that we may not lay the Weight where
it ought not to lie.

The Dutch were doubtless looked upon as great Benefactors to our Commerce, and
who by taking off yearly so great a Quantity of our Corn, were so great an
Advantage to our Landed Interest, our Navigation, and our Poor; and while the
Product, let it be what it will, was consumed abroad, and their Geneva and
other Spirits reached no farther than their Camps and Fleets (and withal while
they did not cheat us in the Draw-backs too, if ever that time was) they were
really so.

But here you will see that it is possible, in the general turn of things, and
the Changes which matters of Trade, in common with the rest of human Affairs,
are subject to, what is a public Good to day, may be a public Grievance to
morrow; and what a Law is made to encourage at one time, may require a Law to
prohibit and prevent at another: And this is the true Case of the Dutch
Distilling Trade, as it shocks with, and at this time interferes with our own,
as will be seen from p. 24 to 36. of this Work, in which an Account of that
Part is given.

Time, and a short Discourse, swelled also beyond expectation in other needful
parts, prevents entering further into these things at present; but by this may
be seen the great Difficultys this valuable Business of the English Distillery
has struggled with, and the great and just Arguments for its farther
Encouragement. All which is humbly submitted to the Wisdom and Justice of the
Parliament.

A BRIEF STATE OF THE CASE OF THE DISTILLERS, etc.
THE Distilling of Spirits, is indeed an ancient Art; and the Distillers
Company is ancient, having been incorporated in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
But as the Nature of their Business is quite changed, that they work in a new
Method, and from new Materials, are under new Limitations, and their Interest
and Trade stand in a new and quite different Situation from what was the Case
formerly; so it may be said, their very Constitution is modern, and they are
young in the Manufacture.

But however young the Trade may be, and that the Materials they work from are
different from what they formerly made use of, it is apparent, that they are
infinitely more a public Benefit to the Nation, than they were before; and
that the Distilling Trade, considered in its present Magnitude, is one of the
greatest Improvements, and the most to the Advantage of the Public, of any
Business now carried on in England.

In former Times, the Distillers, like other incorporated Arts and Mysterys,
worked wholly for themselves and for their own Profit: now they, without a Pun,
may be truly said to be public spirited People; for they work for the whole
Body, and that immediately and in a particular manner.

1. They work for the Gentlemen or Landed Interest, in consuming the Produce of
their Soil, and encouraging Tillage and Husbandry.

2. They work for the Tenant and Farmer, in helping them off with their Corn,
and particularly in finding them a Market for those Grains of the meanest
Quality, and which it would be difficult, if not impossible for them to dispose
of to Advantage any other way.

3. They work for the Navigation of the Kingdom; abundance of Shipping and
other Vessels, being daily and constantly, and some wholly employed, in
bringing the Corn and Coal which is consumed by the Distillers Trade, up to
London, from the remotest Parts of the Kingdom.

4. They work for the Poor; many Thousands of Familys being necessarily
employed as well in the Husbandry of the Corn they use, as in the Malting it,
then in carrying and removing it to and from the Malting-Places, to the Ports
for shipping it to London, or otherwise to London directly by Land.

5. But above all this, they work for the Public in the extraordinary Sums of
Money, which they pay to the Crown, as well in the Excise upon the Spirits they
extract, as in the Duty upon the Malt paid before it comes to their Hands, and
in the Tax upon Coals.

To explain these Particulars a little farther, tho as briefly as we can, let
it be considered,

1. The landed Gentlemen must be sensible the Distillers work for them, since
the Distilling Trade in and about London only, consumes about 200000 Quarters
of Corn, and that Corn necessarily employs 100000 Acres of Land for the Produce
of it; for this kind of Corn being generally the Product of the remote Countys,
where the Lands are not rich, we may venture to say, two Quarters upon an Acre
one with another, is no mean Crop, and is sufficient to make a due Calculation
upon.

N. B. The Horses employed in the Husbandry of 100000 Acres of Land every Year,
and in the Carriage of this Corn to the Malsters, and the Re-carriage of the
Malt either to the Market, or to the Port where it is to be shipped, tho no
guess can be made at their Number; yet this may with Modesty be allowed, that
those Cattle being very many, must necessarily consume the Growth and Produce
of many Thousands of Acres of Land more.

Nor is it sufficient to say, that if those Lands did not produce this Corn,
they would produce something else; or that if the Distillers did not take off
and consume this Corn, somebody else would; seeing it is evident, England being
now become what they properly call a Corn Country, produces much more Corn than
it can consume: And if that Consumption should be lessened, many of those Lands
must lie uncultivated, as it is manifest many Thousands of Acres did before. It
is also a received Maxim, that every Quarter of Corn which is carried off, and
consumed more than was consumed before, (no Scarcity being occasioned at Home)
is so much clear Gain to the public Stock of the Nation.

If it be objected, that the Liquor distilled is consumed at Home, and so is
not equally beneficial to the public Stock, as what is exported; it is
answered, (1.) But much of it is also exported, and more would be, if
Encouragement were given. (2.) That most of what is consumed at Home, is used
in the stead and room of French and Foreign Brandys and Spirits, which are
generally bought abroad with ready Money, and smuggl'd on Shore to the Ruin of
the fair Trader, and lessening the Revenue by a constant abcminable Fraud, and
which it appears no Laws yet made, have been sufficient to prevent.

2. The Tenant or Farmer is particularly worked for, being assisted by the
Distilling Trade, and that in several respects; as the Distillers not only take
off a great Quantity of their Corn, but also take off those Kinds which are not
marketable for other Uses: As, particularly, (1.) When through long Drought the
Grain appears thin and light, as is often the Case; or by unseasonable Rains in
Harvest the Farmers cannot get their Corn well in; or when by that or other
Disasters and Accidents it is damaged, either in the Field, or in the Barn, in
the Ear, or in the Sack; in all which Cases the Farmer is put to great
Difficulty to dispose of it, and were it not for the DistillingTrade could do
little with it but feed his Hogs, which would not enable him to pay his Rent.
(2.) The Farmers have oftentimes Lands which not only will not bear any other
Corn, but that for want of Manure and Improvement. (which in some Places is
hard to be had) of through the Sterility and Poverty of the Soil, are unable to
produce either better Corn, or a better and fuller Grain of the Kind; and which
Lands, if they could not employ them thus, must lie waste and untilled, but are
profitably cultivated by the Vent which they find for that meaner Kind of Grain
to the Distillers. This is visible in the Northern and Eastern Countys and
Coasts of England, where a very great Quantity of poor and unimproveable Lands,
which formerly lay waste, are now plowed and sowed, to the Advantage of the
poor Tenants, tho much more of the Landlord.

3. The Encouragement given to Navigation by the Distilling-Trade in England,
is visible in many Branches of it: For the Corn and the Coals which they
consume, being a bulky and heavy Carriage, and not to be easily brought far by
Land, the Number of Coasting Ships and Vessels of all Kinds are visibly
increased since the Increase of this Trade, and consequently the Number of
Seamen employed are increased; the Advantage of which is so well known, it
needs not be enlarged on: The Coasting-Navigation also being the greatest and
best Nursery of able Seamen in the whole Nation.

To the Increase of the Number of Ships and Vessels thus employed, might be
added here, the Addition which that Increase is to all the numerous Trades,
both Foreign and Home-Trades, and to the Employment of Hands, and Increase of
Business, which necessarily attends the building, fitting out, furnishing, and
victualling all those Vessels. But I forbear to run it out to its full Length,
contenting my self to represent that this Trade is a great Addition to the
Marine Interest, and an Increase and Encouragement of all its Dependencys.

That they work for the Poor is evident by their setting the Poor to work,
which indeed is the best way of working for them. The Number of Hands employed,
or whose Employments are bettered and increased by this Trade, would take up a
Volume by it self to calculate and cast it up. It is sufficient to say, that as
all Increase of Business is an Increase of Employment for the Poor, so all
Increase of Employment for the Poor is an Increase of the public Stock; as it
enables those People to gain their Bread, who were not able to do it, or not so
well able, before. And this again assists the landed Interest too, in abating
the heavy Rates of the Parish-Poor, and enabling several thousands of poor
People to support themselves and Familys, which must otherwise be left upon the
Parishes to maintain.

This runs through all the several Branches of Business and People, through whose
Hands the said Manufactures pass, as well the Distilling Part it self, as the
Materials made use of for the Production, as Corn and Coals, and the Shipping
and other Carriages already mentioned; as also the vast expensive Works of the
Distillers themselves, the Copper and Iron-Work they make use of, the Vessels
and large Utensils, and the Number of Hands employed, and the exceeding Charge
daily expended by them in all these Things.

But we wave the multiplying Particulars, and come to the last Article, namely,
the great Benefit to the Public, arising by the Dutys with which this Trade is
loaded, and which have now for many Years increased the Funds upon which the
Public Credit has been so long upupheld; and these are considerable in three
Branches. 1. The several Excises upon the Spirits themselves, laid in several
Branches and at several Times, and which amount in the whole to above a hundred
thousand Pounds per Annum. 2. The Duty upon Malt, which is paid by the
Distillers in the Price of the Goods, when they buy, and which amounts to a
very great Sum. 3. The Duty upon Coals, of which the Distillers consume, by
Calculation, above twenty thousand Chaldrons a Year.


The Advantages of this Trade being thus considered, it occurs in the next
Place, to show, (1.) That this Trade is yet improving, that it is a growing
Trade, and that if not discouraged by unreasonable Hardships and Impositions,
it is likely to increase in an extraordinary manner. And, (2.) That this
Increase is likely to be obtained, not by an Increase of Excesses and
Immoralities, but by changing the Gust of the People, from drinking those other
Spirits and Brandys, which being manufactured, corrupted, and adulterated
abroad, are not only imported, as well clandestinely as otherwise, to the great
Injury of the Health of our People, but being bought by our ready Money, are a
great Disadvantage to our Commerce, and Injury to the Revenue.

1. That the Distilling Trade is a still improving and growing Business; and it
is worth considering to what a Height, and on what a just Foundation it is
likely to improve; for if it be already, even while it is not much above twenty
Years old, in its present Magnitude, so advanced, as has been already said, as
to pay so great a Revenue to the Crown, and employ such a prodigious Number of
Acres of Land, besides Ships, Cattle and Men, what may it not do, when by the
Improvement of the Art, and the granting such Regulations by which it would
flourish, it shall from the mere Goodness of the Goods that shall be produced,
entirely suppress the Importation of Foreign Mixtures, and even of French
Brandy itself; the Spirit distilled from Corn in England, prevailing over them
all by the Force of its own Merit?

Nor is this Question unworthy the Consideration of the Crown it self; whether
the Encouraging the Distilling Trade, is not really a better and more effectual
way to raise a Revenue by it, than loading it with new Taxes, which can have no
other Effect than to lessen the Consumption, and bring a rising Manufacture
under a Decay.

It is evident, that as well by the Dearness of French Brandy, and the
Corruption and Fraud of the Dutch Importation, as by the improved and still
advancing Goodness of the English Malt Spirit, which I shall make appear is
coming fairly up to be equal to the best French Brandy; the great and opiniated
Gust of the People to French and Foreign Brandy, is already much abated, and
the Consumption of our own Product gains Ground on them every Day, to the great
Advantage of the whole Nation.

As the Consumption increases, the public Revenue increases of course, without
the Addition of new Taxes, with this undeniable Difference to the Advantage of
England, namely, That this way as the Revenue increases, all the forementioned
Advantages will increase: The Quantity of Lands to be cultivated, will
increase: The Advantage to the Farmer, the Employment of Cattle, Ships and Men,
will all increase with it* whereas by burdening the Trade with new Dutys, it
cannot be pretended the Consumption will encrese, tho the Duty should; on the
contrary, if it should decrease, as is most natural, the Dearness of all Goods
lessening the Consumption, then all those national Advantages above must
decrease in proportion.

As to the weak Pretenses of the Malt Spirits being destructive to the Health
of the People, they seem only fit to be jested with, as they have been: and I
must say, I am sorry to see some Magisterial People have exposed their Weakness
in this Point so much.

They have no where showed the World a Reason why as good and wholesome a Spirit
may not be drawn from the Corn, (whose mere Decoction in other Preparations is
allowed to be so good) as from any other Materials; and if, as the Learned say,
the Spirit only is the nutritive Part of all our Food, whether Meat or Drink,
there can then be no question, but that a Spirit carefully extracted from the
gross and humid Parts, and faithfully prepared without any Adulterations or
corrupt Mixtures, must be as wholesome to the Body, as the same Spirit
unextracted and mixed with the common Liquids by Infusion and Ebullition; or as
any Spirit extracted from other Principles of any kind whatsoever.

As for the Excesses and Intemperances of the People, and their drinking
immoderate Quantitys of Malt Spirits, the Distillers are not concerned in it at
all; their Business is to prepare a Spirit wholesome and good. If the People
will destroy themselves by their own Excesses, and make that Poison, which is
otherwise an Antidote; it is the Magistrate's Business to help that, not the
Distillers. It Is humbly conceived also, they would do the same with Foreign
Brandy and Spirits, if there was no distilling at Home in the whole Nation.

It is in the next place, humbly offered to the Public to consider, what a
Trade, and how ruinous to the Nation in several considerable Articles, the
Distilling Trade in England is now opposed to; and how necessary it is to have
that pernicious Commerce, if possible, suppressed. And this Part is the more
useful, because it seems very few, even of our most penetrating Gentlemen, are
fully Masters of it.

Were the Foreign Importation of Spirits confined only to that Species we call
French, which it is generally allowed is a wholesome and well extracted Spirit;
yet as the French Brandys are a Product infinitely injurious to our Commerce,
bought from a Nation with whom we having no Treaty of Commerce, cannot exchange
our Manufactures, but must pay for them in Specie, to the evident turning the
Balance of Trade against us: In this respect they are injurious to the Health
of the Public, if not to the Health of particular Bodies; and consequently it is
a public Good to discourage them, and abate their Consumption.

But when we come to speak of the Foreign Spirits, (however falsely called
Brandys) it is evident there the Case differs extremely, and we are so great
Sufferers in that Part, as well in respect to the Health of the Body as the
Prosperity of Commerce, and the Frauds put upon the Crown to the great Loss of
the Revenue; that as it is a public Good in our Distilling Trade, that we gain
upon and lessen that Trade, so it must be some Service to expose the Abuses of
it, and let our People see how gr^^sly they are imposed upon in it, both in the
public and private Interest of our Country

To set this dark Commerce in a clear Light, it is needful to take notice, by
what unhappy Artifice the subtle Dutch Traders are enabled, our own Weakness
concurring, not only to underwork us, but to impose upon us, and sell us
Spirits distilled from our own Materials, cheaper than we can make them at
Home; tho as it happens, their Avarice, so natural to their Climate, will not
suffer them to make them so good.

First then, we are to suppose they have the Malt from England, as generally
they have from Norfolk, and the Parts adjacent.

The Fraud begins at the very Beginning; for the Dutch approving to have their
Malt far grown on the Floor, and without dressing and skreening off the Tails,
as we call them; the Malster lets it run in such manner, that 20 Quarter of
Barley shall measure out 40 Quarter of Malt: I speak within Compass, for it has
been known to measure 50 to 60 Quarter, from 20. Now the Fraud of this lies
here, The Malt in the Maker's Hands being gaged in the Barley, the Duty, which
is 4 s. per Quarter, is paid by the Measure or Gage of the Barley wetted; so
the Score, or 20 Quarter pays 4 l. to the King.

When this Barley is malted, and the Malt comes to be exported, the Duty of 4
s. per Quarter is drawn back by Debenture; and then the Malt being measured
anew, the 20 Quarter being increased to 40, draws back upon that Measure, and
so the Exporter receives 8 l. Draw-back, upon that which paid but 4 l. Duty.
This is so vile a Fraud, and so openly practiced, that nothing is more
wonderful to me, than that no notice has yet been taken of it, except this,
that being so well known no care has been taken to put a stop to it.

But it does not end here: As there is a Draw-back allowed for the Malt-Duty,
upon all the exported Malt, so there is a Bounty paid to the Exporter, by the
Crown, for the encouraging the Exportation; and this is 2 s. 6 d. per Quarter
more, which being likewise paid upon the 40 Quarter made out of 20, increases
the Fraud 5 l. more. So that the Crown pays back to the Exporter 13 l. for
every Score of Barley malted, and receives but 4 l. by which it is no wonder
that the Malt-Tax should be deficient.

Suppose then the Dutch pay a sham Price per Quarter for their Malt, and thus
receive double for it again, it is no wonder that they can distill a Spirit from
it cheaper than the Distillers in England, who fairly pay 6 s. per Bushel to
the Crown for all their Malt, and full 6 d. a Gallon for the Spirits they draw
from it.

Nor have the Dutch done with us yet; but let us examine it thoroughly, and we
shall see a greater Fraud yet behind.

The Dutch, I know not by what Error on our Side, are allowed to import here
foreign Brandy, the Duty upon Importation being 4 s. 2 d. per Gallon, or
thereabouts; whereas the French Brandy pays 6 s. 8 d. per Gallon. This our
People take up with, and call it French Brandy; and having sufficient Proof
that it comes from abroad, are satisfied with it as such.

The Dutch tell us, it is not French, tho we have good Reason to believe that
all the real Brandy that is in it is French, by which we are cheated that way.
But that is not the Case; it is apparent, the Dutch mix their own Malt Spirits
with this Brandy, and send it to us, while our People, deluded with the Notion
that it must be right Brandy, because it comes by a foreign Permit, eagerly buy
it for right Brandy, and give a Price accordingly.

Let any one judge then under what Disadvantages we carry on this Trade with
the Dutch, and how much it is the Interest of England to put a Stop to it; and
granting it is our Interest, the next thing is to consider what is the Way to
do it: And that is easily answered; the only Way is, to discourage the
Importation of their adulterated Brandys, and encourage and increase the
Distilling Trade at home, by which so many Advantages accrue to the Nation, and
the Consequences of which would yet be greater than perhaps is expected, or
than is thought possible, except by some Men of more Penetration than ordinary,
viz.

1. The People will by little and little be brought off from being so fond of
foreign Spirits, by the Difficulty of coming at them, and the Badness of their
Quality; as we see the Taste of the Nation was effectually brought off from the
French to Portuguese Wines, by the Prohibitions and high Dutys of the late War.

2. The Distillers here are apparently able to make as good, as fine, as clean
and as wholesome a Spirit, from our own Materials, as any of those imported from
abroad; infinitely better than the Dutch: and as they are every Day improving,
will very soon, if they are not discouraged, be able to outdo even the French
Brandy itself. And it is apparent they produce so fine a Spirit already, that a
very nice Palate cannot distinguish it from French; and had they the Dutch
Trick of importing it from abroad, they might easily sell it for French Brandy,
among the People.

I foresee, that as abundance of People are apt ignorantly to charge the
Immoralitys, and particularly the Drunkenness of the Age, upon the great
Encouragement of the distilling Malt Spirits; so they would make that growing
Evil, a Reason against the just Encouragement, which ought to be given to the
Business of the Distillers as a Trade; as if the encouraging the Distillers
Business, would be an encouraging of Drunkenness: whereas we are speaking of
it, as a needful and an advantageous Commerce; a Benefit to the Public, to the
Poor, and to the whole Nation. And that would be infinitely more so, if it may
be encouraged, in keeping out and putting a stop to that Foreign pernicious
Commerce, carried on to our great Loss and Disadvantage. As to the Vice of
Drinking to Excess, we are no way concerned in it; the Brewing Trade, and the
Wine Trade, are liable to the same Objections: Yet I do not find it argued by
any body, that therefore we must have no Beer, nor Wine.

So hasty Showers, when they from Heaven flow down,
Are sent to fructify, and not to drown;
And in the Torrent if a Drunkard sink,
It Is not the Brook that drowns him but the Drink.
But it would be hard, because the Sinner's slain,
For fear of Drowning, we must have no Rain.
But to clear up this Case, upon which so much weak Cavilling has been made, I
beg leave in a kind of Historical way, to enter a little into the State of
National Drinking in England, as it has been, and as it now is. And tho I shall
be very brief, I slatter myself it shall be both useful and diverting;
especially, I answer for it, that it shall come directly to the Case in hand;
and clear not only the Distillers and the Distilling Trade, but even all the
Liquors they make, from the Charge of being destructive to the Morals of the
People, or an Encouragement to Drunkenness and Excess, any otherwise than, nay
not so much as, all strong Liquors are so to those, who drink to Excess.

Our Drunkenness as a National Vice, takes its Epoch at the Restoration Anno
1661-62, or within a very few Years after. Some run it back to James I. Time,
and refer us to the Paintings on the Ceiling of the Banqueting House, for Proof
of it; but I am not writing Satyrs; I am upon a Search after not so much the
Vice, as the Materials and Manufactures upon which it is fed, and by which it
was supported.

Joy, Mirth, good Cheer, and good Liquor, were the Solace of the common People
in the Year 1661. They rejoiced that after a long Usurpation, the King should
enjoy his own again; that after a long Series of Blood and Confusion, and a
Civil War in the Bowels of their Country, the People should enjoy a public
Peace and Tranquillity; that Trade should flourish, and Plenty succeed Misery
and Want. These were the several Reasons of their Joy; and very merry, and very
mad, and very drunken, the People were, and grew more and more so every Day.

As to the Materials, Beer and Ale were considerable Articles; they went a
great way in the Work at first, but were far from being sufficient. Strong
Waters, which had not been long in Use, came in play; the Occasion was this: In
the Dutch Wars, it had been observed, That the Captains of the Hollanders Men
of War, when they were to engage with our Ships, usually set a Hogshead of
Brandy abroach, before the Mast; and bid the Men drink lustick, then they might
fight lustick: and our poor Seamen felt the Force of the Brandy, sometimes to
their cost.

We were not long behind them; but suddenly after the War, we began to abound
in strong Water-Shops. These were a sort of petty Distillers, who made up those
compound Waters from such mixed and confused Trash, as they could get to work
from, such as damaged and eager, or sour Wines; Wines that had taken Salt Water
in at Sea; Lees and Bottoms; also damaged Sugars, and Melasses, Grounds of
Syder, and innumerable other such like. For till then there was very little
Distilling known in England, but for physical Uses. The Spirits they drew were
foul, and gross; but they mixed them up with such Additions as they could get,
to make them palatable, and so gave them in general, the Name of Cordial
Waters. And thus the strong-Water-Shops usually made a vast Show of Glasses,
labell'd and written on, like the Gallypot Latin of the Apothecarys, with
innumerable hard Names to set them off.

Here, as at a Fountain, the good Wives furnished their little Fireside
Cupboards, with a needful Bottle for a cherishing Cup: And hence, as from
wholesale Dealers, all the little Chandlers Shops, not in London, and its
adjacent Parts only, but over great Part of England, were furnished for Sale;
and to the personal Knowledge of the Writer hereof, and of Thousands still
living, not the Chandlers Shops only, but just as is now complained of, the
Barbers Shops ( Barber Surgeons they were then called) were furnished with
the same, and sold it by Retail, to the poor People who came under their
Operations.

And why should it be so suprising a Thing then in our Opinion, that the Geneva
which, as I shall show presently, is but the same Thing returned again, should
be so generally received among the inferior Poor? seeing would we but look thus
a little way behind us, it would appear that it was so with our Ancestors; and
our poor People are only set down where their Forefathers were before them,
(as to the Liquors I mean.) As to the Difference of the Quantitys, and whether
they drank more to Excess, than our People do now, that is a Question by
itself, and not much to the present Case.

But it is objected, They did not drink such destructive Liquors then, as we do
now: That is, in short, they did not drink Geneva; for that is the Meaning of
it.

This Objection must be spoken to as we go along; because it comes into the
History I am upon; for it leads me to give a brief Account of what they did
drink, and where they had it. I have mentioned the Introduction of the
strong-Water-Shops, and petty Distillers, who began this Trade. I come now to
the Liquors; some of their Names were as follow.

Aqua Vitae. Aqua Mirabilis. Aqua Solis. Aqua Dulcis.
These in Latin. Anniseed Water. Cinnamon Water. Clove Water. Plague Water.
Cholick Water, which in short was Geneva.
These and many more in English.
But to sum up the whole, Aqua Vitae and Anniseed Water, were the Captains or
Leaders; and the strong Inclinations of the People run all into those two: And
in a little while the latter prevailed over the former too; and as Anniseed
Water was the only Liquor for some Years, the Quantity that was drunk of it,
was prodigious great: In a word, it was the Geneva of these Times, it was not
only sold in the Chandlers Shops, and in the Barbers Shops, as above; and
perhaps in Bulks and Stalls too; but it had this particular Article attending
it, (which we are not yet arrived to with the Geneva) viz. That it was cried
about Sreets, of which, the Memory of the famous Anniseed Robin, will be a
never-dying Testimony; who was so well known in Leaden Hall, and the
Stocks-Market for his Liquor, and his broad-brim'dHat, that it became
proverbial, when we saw a Man's Hat hanging about his Ears, to say, he looks
like Anniseed Robin.

This Part, viz. of going about the Streets, and into the Fields, to Shows, and
Musters of the Trained Bands, to cry a Dram of the Bottle, has not been so long
omitted, but that we can all remember it: And the Bumboats, who continue to
this Day, crying a Dream of the Bottle, in the River, among the Ships, are a
Remainder of that Custom, and which was never left off at-all.

I should not however have troubled you with these Instances from Low Life, but
that it is in the Scene we are now acting; and this Anniseed Robin was a
magnipotent Fellow in his Day, I assure you.

Having thus brought you back to the Dramdrinking Age, I must let you see how a
full Stop was put to it on a sudden, and what became of the drinking World in
the mean time.

As all these various sorts of good Liquor had their Meridian, so they had too
their Declination, and after some time they fell into a general Dislike: For
the French out-did them exceedingly, and pouring in their Liquors at a very
cheap rate, and the Goodness of the Brandy recommending it self also, the
famous Anniseed Water began to lose Ground, and the People took their Drams in
plain Brandy; the Physicians also, on all Occasions, telling the People, it was
better than any of their compounded Waters.

Thus the best Brandy being sold for 2 d. per Quartern, the Poor could have a
large Dram for a Halfpenny; and the Fellows that cried it about the Streets,
carried with them little double Dram-Cups, which being held up on one side was
a Penny, and on the other side a Halfpenny.

This held on for several Years, and the Custom-house Books will show the
prodigious Consumption, till the late Revolution; when a furious and continued
War the France breaking out, a Prohibition of Trade followed, Brandy rose from
2 d. to 6 d. per Quartern, and from thence to a Scarcity, so that none good was
be had. The Distillers not being yet come into the way of Distilling from Malt,
could not supply them; and thus the Poor were thrown off from the Dram-Cup to
the Alehouse-Pot, to their great Regret, as well as Expense: For now they could
call for nothing less than a Pint, which tho for a while it was but a Penny,
yet soon after, by doubling the Excise, came up to three Halfpence, where it
still stays. And thus I have gone through the first Part of my History.

It remains a Question, which I believe is not yet determined, tho I see not
much Difficulty in it, Whether the Morals of the People were the better or the
worse by this Change? If I may use so much Freedom, I insist that they are much
the worse: And as my Reasons for it are of some weight in the present Debate, I
beg you will hear them summed up as briefly for your Convenience as I can.

1. The Charge was immediately increased, and a poor Man that could before be
refreshed in his Labor, at the small Expense of a Halfpenny, was now obliged
to spend three Halfpence at a time, as often as either Necessity or Inclination
called him.

2. The Expense of Time was immediately also increased; for then poor Men in
their Stails, or Garrets, or Shops, or wherever they were at their work, could
call in, and call up, poor Anniseed Robin, or any of his Contemporarys or
Successors, and take a Dram, without the least Loss of their Time, and go on
with their Work: Or if they were at Day-Labour in the Field or the Street, in
the Wet and the Cold, they could call for a Dram for a Penny or a Halfpenny,
as their Pockets could afford, and go on with their Business; whereas upon this
Change the Poor were really distressed, and they made loud Complaints of it, as
I very well remember.

Having thus gone through the History of what is past, and given you some Account
of the manner of our Drinking till within these few Years, allow me to bring it
on to our own Times, and view our Poor in the present Situation of their great
Affair, I mean of Liquor; for what they shall drink is (I assure you) no matter
of mean Concern to them.

The Poor, as above, having been reduced to the miserable Necessity of this
Alehouse-Tippling, and grown sick of the tedious and dull, as well as expensive
way of Drinking, were apparently ripe for a Change, if they could have found
any way to their Advantage; when on a sudden the diligent Dutch, fruitful at
Invention, as the English are at Imitation, (and with their own Advantage at
the bottom you may be sure,) helped them out again, as they had done once
before: for the Dutch Sutlers carried into the Camps in Flanders, during the
late long Wars against France, a certain new distilled Water called Geneva,
being a good wholesome Malt Spirit, if rightly prepared, wrought up with
Juniper Berries; a Thing not only wholesome, but really physical, and for many
Years allowed to be so by the most celebrated Physicians.

It was strange to observe, how this Liquor prevailed in the Army; how the
Soldiers were surprised at the Goodness of it; the Spirit, the Vigor it put
into them: They declared publicly to one another, there never was any such
Liquor heard of in the World; it put a perfectly new Spirit, and new Life into
them; and invigorated them at such a rate, that it made them quite a new kind
of People.

At first, like the Champaign and Burgundy, it was drank among the Gentlemen
only; a Drink for Generals, and for Officers: Nay, they tell us in Holland,
that even the great D^ of M^ gave it a Character as a Thing that inspired
Nature with a new Flame; and put a sort of Vigor into the Mind, which Nature
itself was a Stranger to before; and that he recommended the (moderate) Use of
it, to the greatest Men, when they were going at any time to engage the Enemy.

It is a great Mistake to argue from hence, that the Dutch always made their
Soldiers mad with Drink, before they led them out to fight; for what I am
saying of them now, is of the Generals and Officers, before the Soldiers came
to have any fellow-feeling of this Article.

At first, no doubt the Dutch made a fine Spirit of it, and as perfect as it
was possible to be expected: But as the Dutch are hardly to be charged with any
Deficiency in needful Craft, and that they saw plainly what was good for the
High, was also good for the Low; and that the poor Soldiers Money was as good
to them as the great Generals, if they could but make it out in Quantity; they
soon came into the old Trading Maxim, viz. that Cheapness causes Consumption,
and found out a Way to make a Sort of the same Spirit, and drawn perhaps from
the same Ingredients; that being made meaner in Quality, should be proportioned
to the Purse, as well as to the Palate of the common Soldiers.

And thus the Soldiers in the Confederate Camp, came to the honor of Drinking
upon a Level with their Officers, or at least, flattering themselves that they
did so, which indeed was almost the same Thing; and if there was any apparent
Difference, it was such that neither Officers or Soldiers were nice enough in
their Palates to judge of.

It would interrupt our Business and the main Design of this Work, to dwell too
long upon the particular Steps and Gradations, by which Geneva gained so much
upon the Minds of the common People; or to enquire into the Reasons of it: If
what I have said, viz. its being thus approved by their general Officers, gave
the first Occasion, it is sufficient to tell you, that by this means the Geneva
gained a vast Credit among the Dutch Troops; from the Dutch, it spread
universally among all the Confederate Armies; and the English Soldiers became as
great Admirers of it, as any other Nation whatsoever; except the mere Dutch
themselves, for they indeed drank it like Mothers-Milk.

But you are to take notice here, that the subtle Distillers, and particularly
the wise Merchants of Amsterdam, who had felt the Sweet of the Trade, had
consulted together to bring this Part to suit with their Interest also; namely,
That the Geneva which they sent to the Army for the Use of the Officers and
Gentlemen, (especially General Officers) bore a different Price from that which
was opened for the ordinary use of the Army, and for the common Soldiers:
Whether it differed in Virtue and Value or not, I cannot enter into here; for
in such Liquors as these, I shall not answer for it, that what is sold for the
highest Price, is always of best Quality in proportion: sometimes, Fancy
grounded upon an advanced Demand, answers to Goodness, and makes an Equivalent
to the Quality of the Liquor; nor could those little needful Frauds be always
carried on without it: but of that by itself.

Let this Part be one way or other, and be the Liquor better or worse, this is
certain, the Price was reduced in the common Suttlers-Carriages; and the poor
Soldiers had their Gin at a Rate fit for a poor Soldier to pay: And this too
betrayed a Secret in the Dutch Commerce, which it has been proper to mention
already; and for the sake of which, this Part has been mentioned here; and is
absolutely necessary to speak of, namely, That the Dutch were enabled to bring
down the Price of their Geneva, even without reducing the Goodness.

I must be allowed to say, that it seems exceeding hard, that as our Distillers
were not then come into the Thing, and that Geneva was not known here; they
should find themselves so oppressed, at their first Entrance; and the Dutch
should be able not only to make their own Spirits Cent. per Cent. cheapter than
we could, but that they shall be still able to import them upon us fifty per
Cent. cheaper than we can make them, and yet raise them from the same
Materials, namely, from our own Corn.

And here there is such an allowed Concession made by the whole Legislature of
Great Britain, to one of the Articles summed up in the first Part of this Work,
namely, of the vast Advantage the consuming of Corn is to the Landed Interest,
that I could not but remind the Reader of it; namely, The allowing back all the
Duty upon Malt, and 2 s. 6 d. Bounty-Money upon the exporting it as Barley,
which if the Sums drawn back by Certificate, in the Countries of Norfolk and
Kent only, are cast up, will appear surprising in Value: I say, it is a full
Concession to our Argument, and nothing but a full Conviction that the
exporting it, is infinitely advantageous to Great Britain, can be a justifiable
Reason for it.

Were the Commons of Great Britain to have been told when that Law was made,
that all or the greatest Part of the Bounty, whatever Sums were drawn from the
Public by it, would only have two Effects, and both of them pernicious to the
British Commerce in general, and to the Revenue in particular; it is my Opinion
they would have considered better of it, before they had passed it into a Law,
or have put it in the Power of a voracious Set of Men, to have ruined so great
and rising a Manufacture, and Branch of our Commerce, at our own Expense.

Were those Bountys taken off for a while, or were they reduced a little to a
tolerable Degree, the Consequence would presently be this, That the Dutch could
no more draw a Spirit 50 per Cent. cheaper from our own Materials, than we
could, or import it upon us, mixed among French or other Foreign Brandys, so
much to our Disadvantage.

What Reason can be alleged, why the Dutch should be able to extract a better
Spirit from the fame Goods? Nay, it is evident, they do not, and we are assured
they cannot; but they have gotten into a Course of uncontrolled K^ry, and by
this they can send it over cheaper, and that is sufficient to all the rest; for
Cheapness causes Consumption.

But to return to the Article above: When first the Dutch came into this Trade,
as I hinted before p. 25. they took their Malt so rough, so grown, and so
undressed, that it was frequent for a Score of English Barley at that time, to
hold out 50 to 60 quarters of Malt, at the Exportation; which accordingly
magnified the Fraud, and entitled the Exporter to receive back twelve Pound for
a Score of Barley; which upon being gaug'd in the Cistern, paid to the Crown
but 4 l. Duty; and so again in the Bounty: But they have been pleased to be a
little less barefaced since, and have (thanks to their Modesty) reduced it by a
slight Dressing, as above, to forty Quarters for twenty.

N. B. There is a little Cavil which may be raised here; and we doubt not our
Opposers will think, they have some Advantage in it, namely, That the Barley
does generally swell one in the Score, before the gauging: but we may answer
that by itself.

To what Extremes do we see wise Men run, upon wrong Information of Things; and
yet how little Care do they take to be rightly and better informed of the
Things they are mistaken about? It will perhaps be very hard to persuade Men of
common Sense to believe, that the Dutch can import their Spirits extracted from
our Materials, 50 per Cent. cheaper than we can make them; and yet, at the same
time prove too, that all the ordinary Parts of the Workmanship about them, may
be performed as cheap in London, as in Amsterdam.

But it must be confessed, that when they come to be more fully and rightly
informed of things, and to see what a Cheat is put upon the English Crown, in
the Conditions upon which they get their Corn, which are the Materials; the
Riddle is expounded presently, and we cannot suppose Men to have common Sense,
who will not then open their Eyes to it.

But to come back to theCamp: Our soldiers tasting this Liquor, brought the
Desire, as well as the Fame of it, over with them at the ensuing Peace; and our
Distillers preparing it as well here, as the Dutch abroad, they supplied the
People with it, wrought from our own Corn the Product of our own Land, very
much to our Advantage, as has been said already: the Increase of the Demand,
afterward encreassing the Consumption of our own Malt, to a very great degree.

It seems, Bacchus and the Brewer take Umbrage at this Invasion: and tho what
between the Wine-Brewer, and the Beer-Brewer, they have had the poisoning Trade
to themselves to long, that one would think they should be satiated with the
Mischiefs of it, tho they were not with the Profits, yet it seems they do not
sit easy under it; tho I am told the Pretense of the Brewing Trade being
declined on this Account, is but a Pretense, and no more. It seems they could
have been content with it in the Apothecarys Shops, and allowed it among the
Materia Medica, to pass for good Physic: but when they found it applied to the
defeat of Tippling and Sotting, as above, they resolved against it, as fatal
and destructive to the Health, and Understanding; and that as to the Tempers of
the People, it was safer to be drunk with any thing, rather than Geneva.

It is a poor Foundation to raise Clamor upon; viz. To single out the vicious
Temper of the Poor, to exclaim against; when here is a Vice in our Trade, that
wants reforming first, and which if an End were put to it, would both do the
Crown and the Revenue Justice: It would block up the Door to any more Dutch
Cheats, (of this kind at least) and put it into our own Power to reform the
rest with more ease; and till then, I doubt, it will never be reformed, while
we live.

It has been suggested by some, (how weakly, we shall see presently) that
burdening the Distilling Trade in England with new Dutys, will be a Means to
cure all the Evils which they acknowledge seem to be growing upon us, by the
immoderate Use or drinking of the Malt Spirits, among the Poor. If these Men's
Zeal for the Reformation of the People, was no greater than their Knowledge of
the true Interest of their Country; they would never propose a Method which
should only shut the Door against the drinking our own Manufacture, our Spirits
distilled at home, and open the Door to a Flux or Tide of the same, or worse
Spirits imported from Holland, and so bring in Dutch Drunkenness among us too:
which, by the way, is yet something of a worse kind than our own, feeding the
Intemperance of the People with the same or worse Ingredients; but giving the
Dutch the Profit of it, and leaving us nothing but the Poverty and the Crime.

Had not this preposterous Notion started itself into the World, just when
these Sheets were in the Press, and so fair an Opportunity was left to answer
and expose it, this Tract had not swelled to such a bulk: but since the
Politics of these Gentlemen have taken such a Turn, and this Flight of their
Wit has carried them to such a height, I must trespass a little on the Patience
of the Gentlemen, that shall see these Sheets, to give in a Word or two, upon
so weighty a Suggestion.

All wise Crowns, and ours of England in particular, make it a Maxim in their
laying Dutys, never by loading their own Product, to encourage Importations
from abroad, in prejudice of the same Goods manufactur'd at Home. But if it
shall be proved,

1. That burthening the English Distillery, will only serve to increase the
Advantage of Foreigners, and ruin the Manufacture of Spirits distilled from our
own Corn at Home; how will it answer the wise Maxims of State and of Trade,
which we all depend so much upon?

2. If it shall appear that such a burthening the Manufacture at Home, will but
increase the Frauds of Foreigners; and instead of detecting the vilest
clandestine Commerce in England, and the opennest and grossest Abuse of
Parliamentary Bounty, with a lessening to the public Good, which it was
appointed to increase; wherre then will the good End of the Parliament be
answered; and how well are such People qualified for Politicians?

And if after all it should further appear that the Proposal itself comes from
a Quarter where no such sanative Principles as these of preserving our Trade
are to be found; but that it is all from a View to separate and corrupt Ends,
tending in themselves to support the Interest of a Set of Men, who carry on a
Trade a thousand times more pernicious to Trade and to the Morals of the People
than this: I say, if this should be proved by it all, then it must give a new
Turn to our Conceptions about these Things themselves; we must run 'em all over
again in our Thoughts.

Let us then endeavor to state the Case clearly, among us

1. That the Dutch do cheat, and impose upon us already, most grossly and
barefacedly; or rather to put it right, the Exporters of the Malt to Holland,
do cheat and impose upon us: (for if the Dutch are not the Men, let us not
wrong the Devil, but lay the Saddle on the right Horse.)

2. That by this Cheat, let who will be in it, the Dutch Distillers (for we are
not talking of the Dutch as a Nation, but as Traders, and especially as
Distillers) are enabled to buy their Malt for less than half the Price which
our English Distillers give for it.

3. That by this means they are likewise enabled to work their Spirits (whether
the Geneva or other Spirits) for we are not now speaking of one sort more than
another, so cheap as to sell them one time with another for at least 50 per
Cent. less Price, than our Distillers can work them for, from the same
Materials.

4. That by the Advantages, Disguises, and various Kinds of crafty Ways which
the Dutch have, for disposing and dispersing these Spirits among our People,
under the Names of Foreign Brandys, and by the Aid of Foreign Permits, (for
they always find the way to make us the Tools of our own Delusions) they have
an Opportunity to sell that 50 per Cent. dearer than we do, which they can make
50 per Cent. cheaper.

Let any considering Person take these Things in pieces a little, and examine
them separately.

All Errors and Mistakes of Mankind, are much better and easier prevented in
Principle, than corrected in Practice; as Fire is easier suppressed in the
Sparks, than in the Flame: The first and grossest of all the Mischiefs that can
be complained of in the Distilling Trade, are founded in this Original Fraud of
putting 13 l. of the Crown-Money in the Pocket of the Exporters, for every
Score of Barley which is malted for their Exportation, whether to Holland or
any other Part, and for which they pay 4 l. Duty, and no more, or very little
more, as has been said.

Let us first see the Magnitude of this Cheat, and then a little of the
Consequence of it: Suppose the Dutch take off an hundred thousand Quarters of
Malt a Year for their Distillery; if I under-calculate it, the Gentlemen can
make an Allowance for that, upon all their own Estimations; and I doubt not but
I speak much below the Quantity: But, I say, suppose the Dutch take off for the
Use of their Distilling Trade, one hundred thousand Quarters of Malt from
England every Year; l. s. d. This ought by the Malt Debentures to draw back
after the rate of 4 s. Sterling per Quarter, which is in the whole 20000 00 00
And for the Bounty allowed by Act of Parliament, on the Exportation of it as
Corn, it ought to receive also 2 s. 6 d. per Quarter more, which is upon the
whole 12500 00 00 Total 32500 00 00

This Encouragement, were there nothing more in it, is very considerable; and
gives the Dutch a vast Advantage over our Distillers here at home, who pay this
whole Duty without any Draw-back, Bounty, or other Encouragement whatsoever;
except it be, that they also pay a heavy Duty upon the Spirits again, after
they are distilled; instead of which, the Dutch sending their Spirits hither,
by the help of another Fraud subsequent to all the rest, have a Price for
theirs superior to ours, and pay no Duty at all; and whatever Duty is paid, we
pay it our selves, as we are the last Consumers.

But after we have considered the heavy Weight of 32500 l. upon every hundred
thousand Quarter of Malt, which the Dutch take off, and the Disadvantages which
our Distillers lie under upon this account, let us add to it, what is mentioned
p. 13. and undeniably made out, namely, That the Dutch, or somebody for them,
draw off from us just two and thirty Thousand five hundred Pounds Sterling
more, upon every hundred Thousand Quarter of Malt they take off, and which is
done by the mere Craft and Fraud of the Exporter, as has been said; which our
Offices are so supinely negligent in, as to pass upon themselves for Law; or
our Officers so well interested in as to connive at. I do not pretend to
enquire, whether it is Ignorance or Corruption, let the Gentlemen concerned
acquit themselves of it as well as they can; it is equal to the poor
discouraged Distillers, whether they are oppressed by one or the other; it is
manifest they are oppressed by it, be it which way it will: it is the same
thing, if my House be fired, whether it were done by a Fool-Servant, or a
Rogue-Servant; the House is burnt, and I feel the Loss, let it be done how it
will.

Not but that it may come in my way in this Debate, to say something of the
probable Causes, or at least the Encouragements of these gross pieces of Fraud;
and how a wise Nation, as we are esteemed to be, or at least think our selves
to be, should come to shut our Eyes so apparently to our own Interest, as to
lie open to such Cheats as these are, and to be so abused every Day; nay not to
shut our Eyes to them, but to be abused with our Eyes open, (for certainly this
can never be said to be a Secret) if it has been practiced so long, and never
seen before; we must have been as unhappy in the Ignorance, as I think we are
exposed in the Fraud of it.

But to return to the Point, about loading the Distillers Trade with farther
Weight: I would humbly recommend to those Gentlemen who have this Design under
Consideration, if any are so weak, that they would first consider of unloading
it; and then they may put it into a Condition to bear any Hardships they shall
afterward put upon it, with the greater Ease.

Let them unload it from the dead Weight, which these clandestine Practices are
not to the Trade only, but to the whole Nation; for in short, it is a Tax levied
upon us, to give to a set of clandestine Traders: whether they are Dutchmen or
Englishmen, or any Men, where the Malt is shipped for Holland, it is the same
thing, it is a National Grievance, and a Burden upon the Trade, which ought to
be removed.

All Inequality of Burdens, is a Prejudice to the fair Trader; in the Sense of
which Maxim, it has always been the Care of our Crown by an Equality of
Burdens, to give the fair Trader a due Advantage: Hence smuggling and
clandestine Trade, is on so many Accounts guarded against, and by so many Laws
made criminal among us, tho so impossible to be fully prevented.

But here is a Law, which however good in it self, and intended with the same
just View, is unhappily, and by the Craft of a set of Foreigners, perverted,
the Point of it turned upon the fair Traders; and the greatest clandestine
Fraud that ever was, (of its kind) practiced in England, is set up by its
Authority: So that the Cheat is supported by the very Law that was made to
prevent it; may, it is founded upon the very Execution of that Law of Equality,
on which Justice was to have been expected.

Instead of an encouraging Draw-back, by which the Consumption of our Growth
was supposed to be secured, and in order to which the Exporter to have the
Benefit of all; the Duty that was paid being returned to him, he receives 4 l.
per Score in one Article more than ever was paid, and 2 l. 10 s. in another,
more than ever was intended.

I have often heard it spoken of, with some wonder, in England, how it came to
pass, that in some particular Places on the Coasts, the Draw-back upon the Duty
on Malt came to more than the Duty it self; as was alleged once likewise in
the Affair of the Salt-Duty, and by which, as I have been told, a gross Abuse
of the Public afterward was detected. Whether it was so in the Salt or no,
and how it came about, is none of my Business: But if it be so likewise in the
Malt Draw-back, I believe, upon a due Enquiry into the Reason of it, some of
these wicked Things might come to light, and perhaps more than some People are
aware of.

But to reduce all this to the true End for which all such Complaints ought to
be made, namely, the preventing the like; and supposing it to be detected and
prevented, as we hope it may, what are we to enquire next?

The next Question is, How would this reform the Abuses of the Distilling? My
Answer is direct, in two Heads. 1. You would then have no Abuses to correct but
our own; whereas now all the Corruptions and Adulterations of Foreigners, are
put to our home-Account. 2. The Distillers then being, as is said, again
secured and formed into a Body, with due Powers to act by, and sufficient
Encouragement, are able to answer for all Abuses of the Trade, that is, they
are able to answer that there should be no Abuses committed, no unwholesom
Liquors distilled, or sold if they were distilled.


This being the Case, there would be nothing left for the Crown to be concerned
in, but to prevent if they can, the Intemperance of the People,

Nor would such a Regulation want its Encouragement even in the Nature of the
thing; there are many Ways to increase the Revenue, besides loading Trade with
new Taxes. If this particular Branch, clogged with Difficulties, and oppressed
by Foreigners, Smuglers, and the like, may be set free from those Oppressions
and Weights, giving it room to increase, increases the Revenue of course;
whereas while it sinks under those Weights, adding Dutys only serves to sink it
deeper, and so even lessens the Revenue which it paid before.

This was the Case exactly with the late high Dutys upon Pepper; while those
Dutys subsisted, the Revenue was devoured, I think I may say wholly devoured,
by the Draw-backs; and all the Home-Consumption of Pepper was supplied by
clandestine Trade, that is to say, by Smuglers; whereas those high Duties being
again taken off, the Trade returned into its own Channel, and the Revenue
revived which was sunk before.

Thus if the Distilling Trade should be loaded with more Duties, while these
Frauds on the Foreign Trade still remain unredress'd, what must be the Case but
this, namely, The Foreigners would have all the Business, and the Distillers
might put out their Fires and sit still?

But I meet with another popular Objection still, and it shows a little from
what Quarter all the rest has come. The Objection is this:

That the Distillers pay too small an Excise, that they may pay a little higher
Duty very well, and that they do not pay an Equality with the Brewer upon a
Quarter of Malt.

Now, tho this seems a little envious at best, supposing we should grant the
Suggestion, as if the Brewer was uneasy that any Malt should be consumed but
what should pay as great a Duty as that which their own Trade pay; yet as it
happens not to be so in fact, it exposes the Objector so much the more, and
leaves us to guess (a little the plainer) whence these Clamours at the
Distillers had at least some of their Original. I shall enquire into the
Particulars presently, but shall name another Objection of something a like
nature along with it.

It is also said, there is a sudden and great Decay of the Brewing Trade in
London; and this too they would place to the account of the Distilling Trade;
as if the Distillers were rising upon the Fall of the Brewers; all which are
mere groundless Jingles of a few designing Men, who would deserve more regard
if they spoke truth, and as they are mistaken, deserve indeed little or none at
all.

It is true, we have not room here to give a large and particular Answer to all
these Cavils; for such we hope to prove them to be and no more. But yet we
cannot close this Tract without letting them know that we have heard all they
have to say upon these material Heads; which upon the whole, amounts to but
very little in Substance, tho much perhaps in Noise and Pretenses. The whole
may be briefly answered in the following Particulars, reserving a more full and
particular Answer, as we may hereafter see occasion. But to take them as they
lie:

1. It is so far from being true, that the Distillers pay less Duty upon a
Quarter of Malt than the Brewer, that it is evident they pay more. And not to
enter at this time into a Calculation of the Particulars, here not being room
for it, this we may undertake to assert, namely, That the Distillers pay near
12 s. per Quarter upon the Malt they use, allowing a just proportion for its
being not dressed down to the same Fineness, and consequently the same Measure as
that of the Brewers.

Whereas on the contrary, the Brewers, the Dressing of their Malt being
likewise considered, do not pay above 8 s. to 8 s. 6 d. on each Quarter.

For let it be considered here what is observed already in its place, and ought
to have notice taken of it on all occasions; namely, that for the Double-Beer,
Pale-Ales, Stout, and such like Drinks, which the Brewers now run so much upon,
and in which they do not draw near so great a length from a Quarter as in the
ordinary Brewing, they of course do not pay so much to the Crown for the
Excise; nay, for these Liquors they may be said not to pay six Shillings per
Quarter on the Malt: whereas the Distillers always extracting the utmost Spirit
the Malt will put forth, and paying as much Duty for the meanest Malt as the
Brewer does for the best, has an infinite Disadvantage, and pays more for his
Malt, by how much the less Spirit he extracts from it.

This, as above, will require a more full Explanation, and on occasion such an
Explanation will not be wanting; but in the mean time, those who make the
Objection know so much of the Truth of it, that they are able to save us the
Labor, and answer themselves, tho at this time perhaps such generous Treatment
may not be for their Interest.

I go back then to the first Head, namely, That there is a great and sudden
Decay of the Brewing Trade. My Answer is,

1. There has been no apparent Decay of the Brewing Trade, one Year with
another, for above four Years past, to last Midsummer; what Decay has been must
be since that time.

2. By consequence then the great increase of the Consumption of Spirits in
England has not been the Cause of the Decay of the said Brewing: for as that
Increase has been of three or four Years continuance, why, if it decayed the
Brewing Trade, was it never felt till since Midsummer last?

3. There has been no proportioned Advance upon the Distillery since Midsummer
last; why then should the Decay of one be occasioned by the other, which has
not felt the Effect of it? If the Distilling had increased in proportion during
that time, and that, so much more than ever it had done before, then indeed the
Water of one Channel being found in the Stream of another, would account for
the difference. But as that is not so in fact, the Deficiency must be from some
other more apparent Cause, and that we shall see presently.

The apparent Causes of the Decay or sudden stop of the Brewing, so far as the
Fact may be granted, (for it is not so mighty in Fact as in Noise) are these:

1. The excessive Dearness of Hops the last Season, which was so heavy a
Rentcharge upon the Brewer, that it really put a check to their whole
Business; and some of them found it hard to furnish themselves with a suitable
Stock upon any Terms whatever: That Difficulty has of course caused them to
lessen the Quantity of Beer among their Customers, as much as they could, when
they came to lay in their Stores.

2. The Dearness of Malt it self, which by the universal Badness of the Season
in all the Malting Counties, has had an effect upon the Malt as well as upon
other Grain; this has both lessened the Quantity and advanced the Price, so
that Malt in particular has been 5 to 6 s. per Quarter dearer this Year than it
was the last. These things have been so apparent, and here so well known to
other People as well as to the Brewers themselves, that it is something strange
they should lay themselves open to so effectual a Reply.

But this too will appear less strange when we shall add, that the K^ery of the
Brewers themselves, to say no worse of it, may have some share in the Reasons
for a sudden Decay of their Trade; especially if it be true that they have come
into that barefaced piece of Policy, viz. To strike their Work in order to
lessen the Excise, and so make a joint Clamor for promoting the Design. But of
this we may say more in its proper Place.

But now, to put in a Word for the Poor, as well as for the Trade, and so to
close this Discourse; you must allow me to say, that were it so that they had
quite forsaken the drinking Beer and Ale, and were wholly come into the
drinking of Spirits, Brandy, Geneva, or what you please; it seems to me they
have done not only that which their Ancestors did before them, but even what
their Superiors have seemed to lead them into just now, by a general Example.
As follows.

There has been for some Years, and still continues among us. a national Gust
or Inclination to drinking stronger and high pric'd Liquors than formerly; I
do not say we drink more, or more to Excess, that is a Subject of another
Nature, and however true, is not to my present Purpose. But the Stream of the
Nation's Palate runs, I say, for stronger and dearer Liquors. Let me begin at
the Head.

The Ladys and Gentlemen of Quality and Distinction, not content with the
usual, and as I have said above, most wholesome Dram, called right French
Brandy, now treat with Ratafia and Citron, at a Guinea a Bottle.

The Punch Drinkers of Quality, (if any such there be) not contented with the
best French Brandy in their Bowls, must have Arrack at 16 s. to 18 s. per
Gallon.

The Wine Drinkers of the better sort, not content with the Portugal and
Barcelona Wines, must have high Country Morgeau, O Brian and Hermitage Clarets,
at 5 s. to 6. per Bottle; and after that Champagn and Burgundy at 7 s. to 8 s.
per Bottle.

The common Draft of Red Wine of Oporto and Viana, tho all stronger than the
French Wines formerly drank, is not now strong enough for the Citizens; but
they must be made up (so the Wine-Brewers call it) with Lisbons, with Alicants,
and Bene-Carloes: and the Oporto and Lisbon Whites, tho very strong, are turned
out of Doors, for the yet stronger Mountain Malaga.

To descend still lower: Our common Drinkers of Ale or Beer, are not contented
as formerly, with the ordinary Beer and Beer, or Porters Ale; but they are
advanced, first to Two-penny, then to double-Beer, and Stout; and now to the
strongest North-Country Burton, and Tamworth Pale Ale; Dorchester and Newbury
Beers, and the like; of which great Quantitys are brought up by Land Carriage,
above 100 Miles, and for which, above 300 small-Brew-houses, have, as I am
told, been erected within these few Years, in the City and the adjacent Parts;
which Ales are sold from 6 d. to 10 d. per Quart.

In like manner then, the Poor following this unhappy Humor of the Rich, and
finding themselves as willing to gratify their Palate, only not equally able to
bear the Expense, are fallen into the old Dram-drinking Way, which their
Fathers practiced before them; and which, as it is easy to their Pockets,
spends less of their Time; and unless they please, no more prompts their
Excesses, than the Beer and the Ale did before; and if I may give my Opinion, I
think indeed not so much. And thus I have brought down the History to our
present Times.

I shall close this Tract, which is already swelled to a larger Bulk than was
intended, with a few very short Hints at the Disadvantage which the Distillers
at present are under in the Course of their Trade, and which they hope to be
delivered from, by the Justice of the Parliament, and the Encouragements which
they have reason to hope for and expect.

Some of the Disadvantages they are under, are as follows.

1. That whereas all the Malt exported to Holland, and from which the Dutch
extract the Spirits which they import upon us, draws back the whole Duty,
besides a Bounty of 2 s. 6 d. per Quarter to the Exporter (not to speak of the
Fraud mentioned above, and which doubles both the Draw-back and the Bounty) yet
our own distilled Spirit upon Exportation draws back but 4 l. 4 s. per Tun of
the Excise paid, and nothing at all of the Malt Duty.

Thus the Dutch are enabled exceedingly to under-work and under-sell the
English Distiller (even by our selves) and at the Expense of our own Crown,
whom they so many ways injure in the said Allowances.

2. That by the Advantages given to the Dutch for the importing Brandy 2 s. 6
d. per Gallon Duty less than the French, which Dutys are also paid by the
Importers, not by the Dutch, they have an unrestrained Liberty of imposing
their Mixtures upon us, of a baser Kind; which Mixtures, because they
apparently come from abroad, and are called Brandy at the Custom-house, our
People are easily persuaded to take for true Brandy, whereas it is very well
known, that many times it is inferior to our common Malt Spirits, and our
Distillers affirm, they are able to outdo even the best of it.

The Dutch, by the like Artifice, come into our Rivers and Ports, or at least
into the open Roads where our Ships ride, as in Yarmouth Roads, the Downs, St.
Helens, and even into the River of Thames, up to the Nore and the Hope, and
there supply our outward-bound Ships with their Spirits, or Brandys (as they
call them) not only for the said Ship's use, but also in Quantities for Trade;
for all which no Entry is made, or any Duty at all paid: So that our Guinea and
East India Ships in particular, which used to take in large Quantities of
Liquors of our Distillers, go away now with little or no Stores, depending to
be supplied by the Dutch in the Downs and other Places.

These are all great Obstructions to the Distilling Trade; and as they are
withal great Abuses upon the fair Traders in general, and injurious to the
Crown in particular, we cannot doubt, but if fairly represented, the Distillers
shall have such Relief, as in right and justice they ought to expect.

Besides these apparent Discouragements in favor of Foreigners, and in favor
of clandestine Trade, they are unjustly attacked with Clamours and popular
Pretenses, as if their Trade was a public Nuisance, and ought to be regulated
by the Magistrates; suggesting, that their Liquors are unwholesom, and
destructive, Incentives to Vice, and tempting to the Poor, to the Waste of
their Health, Money, Time and Understandings; Things which tho not worth
replying to, their apparent Partiality being sufficiently already exposed, and
as all the Excesses of the People, either in these Liquors or any other are
founded in their own Intemperance; the Distillers say, if they may obtain such
Powers and just Authority, which as a Company they once had, and still ought to
have, and which other Companys in Cases less essential to the Health of the
People now have, so as they may be able to inspect and regulate the Trade as it
ought to be regulated, they would answer to the World for the Wholesomness of
the Liquors they extract, and appeal to the Understanding and Sense of the most
experienced Physicians, if unprejudiced.

As for the learned and worthy Physician, who, if Report lies not, is to be
employed to show to the World the pernicious Consequence of drinking Geneva or
Malt Spirits, and how many Thousands it has slain, we impatiently wait his
elaborate Performance; and to help it forward, only beg he will not omit to
prove also, the few needful Particulars following. 1. That the Malt Spirits
made in England are much more pernicious than those made in Holland and sent
over hither, tho made all from the same Materials. 2. That the Liquor called
Geneva is mortal in it self, and that the Juniper Berries put into it are
Poison. 3. That it is the Liquor it self, not the immoderate Use or Excess of
it, that does the Mischief. 4. That it is much better to be drunk with
Strong-Beer and Pale-Ales brewed from Malt, than with Spirits extracted from
the same Malt, tho it is the Spirit alone in the Beer and Ale that intoxicates.
5. That Drunkenness by Ale and Beer, destroys no Health, wastes no Time, spends
no Money, weakens no Understandings; and that it is only the Geneva that does
such wicked Things as those. 6. That there are more People drunk with Geneva
than with Ale and Beer, and that a poor Man can be drunk for a Halfpenny. 7.
And lastly, to clench it all, Let him prove that more People die of drinking
Geneva, than die of the Doctor; not failing to tell to the World, where that
formidable Geneva Shop stands, that has slain more Christians than himself.


FINISH.

