AN ESSAY UPON Buying and Selling OF SPEECHES. IN A LETTER To a Worshipful
Justice of the Peace, Being also A MEMBER of a certain Worshipful Society of
SPEECH-MAKERS.

LONDON: Printed for J. Baker, and T. Warner, in Paternoster Row. 1716. Price
Sixpence.

AN ESSAY UPON Buying and Selling OF SPEECHES.
And't please your Worship.
BEING to Write of Matters of State, and particularly of some Steps lately
taken by the Masters in State Policy, I could not pass over your Worship, who
of late has so Distinguished your self, as well by Writings and Speeches, as
other ways, in Matters of the greatest Moment, and therefore I have Directed
this ESSAY to your Worship, beseeching your Protection on to an Author who has
thus ventured to reprove a little, the Pride of the Men of great Talents, like
your self; a Practice which you have made L udable by your great Example, when
your Worship was pleased to Jest with the World a little, and gave your self
the Trouble of telling other Men their Faults, and taking no Care of your own.

I shall not presume so much upon your Worship, as to make your own Character
illustrate the Work I am upon, however aptly it might suit with the Design;
there are so many other flagrant Examples before me, that I am under no
Necessity of running the risque of your Displeasure; perhaps your Worship may
see your own Picture in the History, as plain as you may desire, and have some
reason to express your Satisfaction that it is no plainer.

Your Worship knows, that in the Case of true Satyrs, it is Application makes
the Ass, and when Men see their Crimes touched so sensibly, as that it masters
their Temper, we say, It discovers that they are the Men, and that the Coat
fits them: But I doubt not your Worship can bear the brief Reflections made
here upon a scandalous Practice, without appropriating any Part of it to your
self.

That I may therefore with the more Life represent the Crime of Buying and
Selling SPEECHES, I shall give you the History of a once famous Person, who
knowing how successful the Ancients practiced that gainful Trade; with what
secure Measures they persued their Game, and how boldly they made their Market
of their Interest in Parliament; how effectually they Bantered their Sovereign,
when they found it for their Advantage, and how sure they were to be Bought
off, as soon as they thought fit to OPEN against the Court; resolved, some few
Years ago, for the raising his declining Fortune, for the satisfying his
unsatiable Ambition, and for supplying the most unmannaging profuse
Inclination, to try the Experiment upon his Prince: You will see with what
detestable Ingratitude he Set Out, with what Insolence and Assurance he
Proceeded, and with what just Reproach he Miscarried.

This History, and't please your Worship, or whether it be a History or no,
will, doubtless, sufficiently answer the Design; for it will fully lay open the
base Measures taken by such Politicians to get into Employment: It will also
lay before your Worship, the narrow selfish Ends which many, if not most of
those who have formerly made popular Speeches in the Councils and Assemblies of
Great Men, pusht at: HOW they aimed at their private Advantages, all the while
they made pretenses of pleading the Cause of Justice, and the Peoples Liberty.
HOW, when they railed at the Mismanagments of Men in Place, the Design was not
so much the detecting the Frauds of others in great Posts, in order to have
Justice done to the Nation, as for the sake of getting themselves put in their
Room.

It will also show, by the Royal Example of a Wise and truly Great Prince, HOW
every Government ought to treat such Creatures as these; with what just
Contempt they should disappoint their Expectations, and HOW they should always
be above the fear either of their Malice or their Treachery.

I doubt not but when your Worship shall have read this Story, you will join in
recommending the scandalous Practice of Buying and Selling of Speeches, to
every honest Man's Detestation.

The Gentleman I speak of was an Irishman by Nation, a Man of a Liberal
Education; well Read, especially in that excellent School-Accomplishment,
called, Classick Learning: He had also a competent Stock of Natural Wit; and by
keeping good Company, and running some Changes of Fortune, had gone through so
much Variety as to know the World pretty well, and the Town very well; all which
had very much fitted him for Conversation: His Thoughts were Clear, and he had
some happy Turns in Expression which gave some Beauty to his Discourse,
especially if he did not happen to Talk TOO MUCH which, however, he was a
little inclined to.

With these Accomplishments he set out in the World, and it was Observed, That
for some Years before he made himself Popular, he was mightily addicted to make
Speeches, for which he once got a Friendly Reproof, and was told, That If he
had not a great care of his Modesty, he would get the general Character of a
TALKING FELLOW, the thing which of all Worldly Reproaches, a Wise Man is most
affaid of, and most studious to avoid. His Answer was remarkable it seems, to
the Gentleman that was so kind as to give him the Caution, viz. I have Courage
enough to carry me over all that. The Gentleman only Replied, Cousin, Cousin,
you should not call it Courage, call it -- However, for all his -- or Courage,
call it as you will, he had another more insuperable Obstruction to his Rising
in the World: For having neither Virtue or Principles, and, which was still
worse, No Money to put him forward in the World, he found it very Difficult to
force his Way through, or, as I may say, over the Belly of the Misfortunes which
generally attend a Narrow Circumstance; and though he had made himself Agreeable
amongst some Men of good Sense, and had even got Acquaintance with some above
himself, yet all this could not effectually assist him to surmount the Fate of
his Family, or to master that great Difficulty, viz. of seperating between Wit
and Poverty.

With all his Acquirements, he had some Vices, which I must touch at, that I
may make his History complete; but I shall be brief in that ungrateful Part of
History: With his Wit, (1) he had, and alas! who is without it, an unbridled
Passion for his own dear Praiee: Impatient to the last degree of the least
Reproach, nay, though it were just; and yet this Exorbitance did not at all
restrain him from laying himself open every Day to the most just Satyr, and
exposing himself a thousand ways, by the most ungarded Conduct in the World;
but believing it in his power to establish his Character upon the foot of his
extraordinary Merit, he thought he had a right to stop the Enquiries of curious
Malice, into those Parts of his Fame which were less Shining, and that it was
a saucy unmannerly thing for any Man to say an ill Word of him, however Just,
or how much Truth soever there might be in the Fact.

To carry on this Haughty Humor, his first Care was to let the World believe
he was a Person of BIRTH as well as Merit, and he Carried himself most
ridiculously High upon that head: Indeed this was the weakest Step he could
ever have taken, because there were some things in his Family, which his
Fathers being called a Gentleman could by no means Balance; and besides that,
as the Poverty of his Fathers Circumstances exposed his Children to be bred up
by the Charity of others, so it happened, that those Relations of his which
showed that Charity, seemed to have acquired the Capasity by some scandalous
Methods.

Now though Poverty is rather the Misfortune than the Crime of a Gentleman, yet
all Men know, that when there are Circumstances of those kinds in the Rear of a
Man's Family, it is not thought the wisest Step that Man can take, to place
them in the Front of his own History; because it gives Envy a handle to Speak
detractingly: It was this Vanity of his, which caused an ill-natured Poet of
those Times, among other bitter Things, to publish this Distich upon him,
occasioned by his unseasonable Boasting of being a Gentleman Born. A Gentleman
Born, and Charity Bred,
Much Brass in his Face, more than Brains in his Head.


But we pass over his Pride, as a thing too common to Men of Wit: Anex't to
this, he had the most unhappy Spirit of Profusion in his Way of Living, that a
Wise Man could be guilty of; and it was the more Scandalous to him, because he
had no suitable Fund to justify or support it: This Humor was come to such an
extravagant Hight in him, that even Good Fortune it self could not supply it,
and this faild not to make him Necessitous even in spite of the Bounty of
Princes. This Poverty was accompanied with its constant Yoak-Fellow, Debt,
which, however, was grown so natural a Grievance to him, that, like a riveted
Gout, which when it is grown familiar to us, we take no Physic for, nor are
alarmed at; so to be Dun'd, or Arrested, was no breach of his Tranquillity, nor
did he ever load himself with the unnecessary Care of getting out of it,
thinking that those People he owed Money to, had more need to be Uneasy and
Thoughtful, about that main Point, How they should get him out of their Books,
than he, whose much greater Care was, to find Ways and Means to get farther in.

But being by these thing reduced all most to his Primitive State, viz. Living
upon Charity, at length a Friend let him into the Secret, viz. That Railing at
Princes, making Satyrs upon Great Men, and long Speeches against the Vices of
the Public Management; was the best way that could be thought of, for a Man of
his Capacity, to get a start into the World.

That nothing was wanting to a Man of his Capacity, but to be known: That for
an Author to be Popular, was to be formidable to Great Men, whose Conduct would
very seldom bare a History, or their Virtues a Character; and that therefore,
if he once could Establish his Fame in this Town as a Satyr, he would find very
quickly that he might sell Silence at a good Price, or get enough by one good
Speech, to make it worth while to hold his Tongue all his Life after.

Upon this prospect he set out, he railed in Print upon several Occasions, very
Magnificently, but unhappily sunk under two Circumstances, (1) He was afraid to
own what he Writ, and that kept him too much Jncog. In the World: And (2) He
struck too low, and fell upon Men not able to buy him off.

But he soon found his Mistake, and in one flaming half Sheet, he made amends
for that Modesty, and fell upon the Greatest Men in the Kingdom: In short, he
Damned all the White-Staffs in the Nation, as Rogues by Employment; and
threatened what Devilish Things he would Discover of them in the Process of his
Studies.

He had no sooner done this, but it was every Man's Business to enquire who this
TALKING Fellow was: There is seldom much difficulty in seeking those People
that desire to be found; the Author was of easy access, and being found, Tasted
the first Fruits of the good Advice given him, and was let know, that one of
the greatest Staffs in the Nation had a mind to Serve him. Immediately we
received a full and true Account, That a Great Man with a White-Staff might be
very Honest; that there was a White-Staff in the World who eminently Merited to
be esteemed; and whose Character it was "to be Frugal of the Public Money, and
Prodigal of his own."

This was the first Attempt he made, according to the Advice given him; and
having met with Success, he was Encouraged afterward to go on in a more
public Manner: In a course of Time he received some Civilities from another
Person bearing a Staff, and in hopes of more, was heard to say, That he had
entertained indeed some hard Thoughts of that Gentleman, but that he found he
was possessed of a Genius, Born to Conquer Universal Prejudice, and that he was
afterward resolved to Number himself among his Friends.

But finding every Man not alike apprehensive of the Power of a sharp Pen, and
that he knew not how to make himself feared there, as he expected; his good
Opinion abated in a little time.

In the mean time the Sovereign at that time Reigning, influenced by the first
Person mentioned, had heaped accumulated Royal Favors upon this Irish
Creature. But after the Possession of them a reasonable time, the Vallue of
them seemed to abate in his Thought, though the Revenue of them abated nothing in
his Pocket, for Favors to some Men appear with a different aspect, and sink
always in their Magnitude after they have been long enjoyed.

It was not for want of Application, or of assurance to Crave, that the Mortal
Wight crep't no higher; but that Age had its share of Penetration in some
Things, as it had of Mistakes in others; and he was, perhaps sooner than he
thought was decent, observed to distinguish his dear self from his attachment
to any Interest or Party, and therefore he thought fit very early to show
himself to be what it seems he thought it was best, to be in all Governments
viz. a Malecontent.

We must not say, For we must do him Justice, that his Passion for the
Character of a Malecontent, was derived from his ill Nature, for we give that
Tribute to his Immorality, that he was never Cinical or Morose in his Temper;
But that his Politics brought him into those Measures, founded upon the
mistaken Notion of his own Merit, which he always had Prudence enough to keep
up an Opinion of, though not Modesty enough to confine it.

Upon this Foundation it was, that he was not easily brought to acknowledge
himself obliged; all ways pretending to have it in his Power, not only to make
himself useful, but necessary to the Public; so that their employing, and
supplying him, was all ways to be esteemed as a Testimony, not of the
Sovereign's Good Will, so much as Good Sense; and of their being able to Judge
who, or who not, it was their Interest to be Bountiful to.

But the Consequences of this showed more plainly the Truth of what is here
asserted; for no sooner did he find that the Sovereign once dared to run the
Risque of his Displeasure, but he made no difficulty to show it, and that in
the most disobliging Way imaginable; Insulting the Crown he Served, and
carrying it in such a Manner, as evidently showed he doubted not by appearing
against them, to be bought off at a good Price.

But the Sovereign not being in need of his Service, or afraid of his Power,
ventured his Indignation; and forbore to Purchase what it was well known could
not be Retained any longer, than the Royal Bounty should flow in a manner equal
to his unbounded Profusion.

During this Dilemma of his Affairs, there happened a great Revolution in the
Government where he lived, the Crown being Transposed by that Providence, in
whom the Original Right of disposing all Things remains, from one Head to
another; and that Transposition giving a round turn to the Administration, even
from one Extreme almost to another, it gave him also a new Rise, and put him
into a Posture to show himself again: He was Politician enough to act his part
in the first appearance of Things, and to look like other Men: He had been
taught to Cloth himself with such shapes as best might serve his grand Design;
and to this purpose failed not to make all the disobliging Steps which he had
taken in the preceding Reign, pass for Merit in the next; and happening to
have the good Fortune to fall now into the Hands of a Prince of Immense
Beneficence, that knew how to engage Ingenious Spirits beyond their Power of
return, and Rewarded in proportion to his own Bounty, rather than the Subjects
Character, he failed not to meet with an acceptance as much beyond his
Expectations, as those Expectations were above his Merit.

This set him at the first dash above all his Rivals, and would have
Established his Fame, if it had not, to his great Misfortune, set him also
above himself.

But as nothing is more rare, than for one Born in a low Station, to know how
to move in just proportion to a more extended Orb, so the Velocity of his
Motion in his new Sphere was so unequal to himself, and to what he ought to
have been, that it cast him immediately back into the same Disorder that he was
in before: I have hinted just now, that the Sovereigns greatness of Spirit
caused him to measure his Bounty by his own Magnificence, rather than by the
bare Desert of the Object, and this was in him a Test of an extensive Goodness:
But our Irish Man run into the contrary Extreme, and measuring his own Merit by
his Princes Bounty, he fell into the most gross and most offensive Absurdity in
Nature; for as it filled him with unsufferable Arrogance, by which he became
intolerable to his Friends, so it push't him upon that most scandalous Folly
of clashing with himself, fixing a stated Contradiction between the Days of his
Humiliation, and those of his Exhaltation.

Being come this length, there wanted nothing to complete the ruin of his
Character, and make him perfectly Contemptible, but that he should think, as
formerly he thought, viz. That all Rewards which were not equal to his
Extravagance, were Extravagantly short of his Merit, and so bring him to Treat
his new Benefactor as he had done his former, I mean with Ingratitude.

Fate that had determined this Mushroom the due Punishment of Upstarts, failed
not to bring this to pass also, by the following Circumstances, with which I
shall conclude his History.

By the Favor and Bounty of his Prince, of which mention is made, he was so
far recommended to the Subject, Or, which if Fame lies not, was part of the
Case, made Capable to recommend himself, that upon an Election of a Parliament,
he was chosen to sit in the House of Commons, for there were new Parliaments
frequently called in those Days, as well as in these. He was no sooner entered
into the House, but even the first Day, as Authors relate, he began to make
Speeches, and Flattring Panegyricks. Persuing thus the Dictates of his first
Instructor most exactly, for it seems he was told, That in that place was the
best Market for GOOD SPEECHES, and that he might take it for Granted, that to
make a long Speech against the Public Mannagement, was the only way to get a
share in it, according to Mr. And. Marvill. That Parliament Men should rail at
the Court,
And get a Preferment immediately for it.


Upon this Principle the unhappy Politician took his Measures; he had been
Treated, as I have said, so far above his capasity of Deserving, that had not
most People known his Character, and that he would soon let his Sovereign see
his Bounty was ill bestowed, he would almost have arrived to the Dignity of
being Envied: But that unbounded Spirit of Profusion, which was however a
Judgment upon his Ambition, soon made way through all that his Princes Bounty had
bestowed, and he grew Necessitous in the midst of a Sufficency for a Lord.
Three times the God-like Goodness of his Prince bore with the Infirmity,
believing it might be the remains of former Misfortunes, and with no less than
Five Hundred Pounds at a time, if History does not mistake, Recruited the Wity
Extravagant. But it was all in vain, it was a Stream, not a Bucket, an Ocean,
not a Stream that must be sufficient to supply the Outlet of his Vanity; and
that Wisdom which was as inseparable from his Sovereign's just Character as his
Bounty, dictated, that in charity to the Lunacy of this Man's Temper, he must
shut up his Expectation, within the Bounds of what he had in Possession; and
that it was the kindest Thing that could be done for him, to let him know, it
was in vain for him to Ask, who had already Surfeited.

His Sovereign had almost as good have declared him a Traitor, as told him,
That his Account of Merit was Balanced by past Favors; for his Merit being
exhausted as well as the Money, it follows of course, that Ways and Means were
to be found out to supply the Last, whether the First were concerned or no.

The Devil, who, they say, is the cunningest Fellow at his Trade in the World,
finding the Man's Nature Wicked, and his Circumstances Favorable, failed not to
take hold of the advantage, and presented him with an Opportunity, as he
fraudulently told him, to raise his Fortunes; Nor did he long stick at the
Motion, though at the expense of his Virtue.

In a Word, the Advice Satan administered, was upon the old Foot, Oppose the
Court, and make your self Necessary, then they will Buy you. Though the Face of this
Man was as Case-hardn'd as the very Metal it self which we call so; yet it is
related in his Favor, That he started at the first Proposal, and told the
Devil, It was damned Ungrateful, that he was a Gentleman Born, and he could not
do any Thing so base; he did not add, Get thee behind me Satan, because there
was more Business between them to Treat of; but he gave him a very handsome
Repulse it must be confessed.

But Satan is not used to be said nay. The Devil knew his Inside, better
perhaps, than he did himself, and Banter'd him upon his Nicety; A Pox of your
Modesty, says old Beelzebub, is it any more than you have done by all the
Benefactors ever you had in your Life? And besides, says the old Prevaricator,
have you not the best Plea in the World for it? (viz.) NECESSITY. Prithee,
Dick, says he, try the other Experiment, can you Starve? You must do one or
the other, that you know, therefore Consider of it.

I do not find that History has Recorded the whole Dialogue between them, nor
how the Devil they made the Bargain. But this is Recorded as a certain Truth,
That he came into the Proposal.

Now to cut short the Story, for the best part of it is behind, the generous
Prince defeated both the Devil and the Traitor, for as soon as he saw his
Goodness abused, he was so far from stooping to gratify the Wicked Design, and
to draw him back by more Gifts, as he expected; that he contemned the Impotence
of his Malice; withdrew his Favors; and Condemned the Wretch to Rail on.

He continued a while according to Sentence, till he was Hissed at, and P -- d
upon by all wise Men, his Friends ashamed of him, and his Enemies above him,
and that he laid himself below the dignity of Lampoon.

In this condition, Heaven in Mercy to him, cleared up his Understanding, and
he became a mighty Penitent; but as it is not in Man to answer for Sincerity,
and no Man cared to venture upon one that had been always otherwise till then:
The compassionate Prince Pardoned him, gave him a Pension for Bread, and laid
him up as an Invalid.

THIS HISTORY, and't please your Worship, I was willing to lay before you, that
I might have your Worship's Opinion, whether it is not worth while to bring it
upon the Stage in Terrorem, to Deter Incendaries from making Speeches against
their Masters, and against their Principles, with a design to get up higher in
their Favor, though they have already been Rewarded in a manner, which it was
never in their Power to deserve.

I doubt not, but if your Worship casts your Eye back upon the Histories of
those Times, for it is many Years since those things were done, you will find I
have not wronged the Memory of the Person, and that you will be satisfied great
part of the Account is true in Fact.

Now, I most humbly beseech your Worship to give your aid and assistance, in
crying down this Unchristian Practice in all its parts; and let the World know
from your Authentic Hand, how justly the Vice of Speech-making is abhorred by
all honest Men; but observe, if you please, that I do not condemn Speech-making
in general as such, for that may be very useful in its place, but making
Speeches against Principles, and against Benefactors, on purpose to appear
considerable, and to be drawn off again by a frail Argument which I am ashamed
to name.

I know your Worship abhors these Things; and though fame lay's it to your
Charge, that you spoke somewhat after this sort lately, upon the Subject of
Showing Mercy, etc. yet as common Fame is a false Jilt, and has long since lost
her Reputation, I assure your Worship, I shall give no credit to her Words in
that Case.

Besides, Sir, I cannot entertain a Thought, that you, who understands what
belongs to Humane Mercy so much, having wanted it so often in Civil Affairs,
though not in Criminal; could open your Mouth, unless Paid for it beyond the
ordinary Price, for the showing Mercy to those who are no ways the proper
objects of Mercy, either of God or Man.

I need not tell you, Sir, what (I hear) you very nobly insisted upon, (viz.)
How Kings should imitate the King of Kings, in that Superior Attribute of
showing Mercy, and how glorious it was for Princes to come up to that Sublime
Pattern: But as our Jacobites have enlarged upon that Point to an extreme
hight, higher to be sure than your Worship ever intended it, I know your
Judgment must join with the Kings in this, That it may be his Majesty's Duty to
imitate the Merciful God of Heaven in Forgiveness, but that we no where find,
that any King ought to go beyond that Sacred Pattern: For example, our Religion
teaches us, That if we confess, and forsake, we shall find Mercy; our Rubric
says, Spare thou them, O God, which confess their Faults. But neither does God
himself Pardon any, but the Penitent, neither can any Man, but on the highest
Presumption, so much as Pray for Pardon for himself, or any one else, but on
the Supposition of Repentance and Reformation.

Now, and't please your Worship, we have not yet heard of one of these
Prisoners, or Condemned People that confess their Fault; for your Worship
knows, there is a vast difference between confessing the Fact, and confessing
the Fault, and those who would have the King show Mercy to the first, without
the last, are for having the King go farther, your Worship knows, than ever God
Almighty himself went yet.

It is most certain therefore, that your Worship was for having the King be
Merciful to those who by a Penitent acknowledgment of their Crime, as well as
of the Fact, rendered themself Objects worthy of Compassion; for otherwise it is
most certain, your Worship was for having the King Pardon those, who we are
sure God himself will not Pardon.

All these things I thought, for your Worship's Service, to Communicate to you,
that you may make such use thereof, for the Conviction of our Mercenary
Speech-makers of this Age, as to your Worship in your great Wisdom shall seem
meet.

I am, Your Worship's most Humble and obedient Servant. A D.

ADENDA.
IT has often been Complained of as a Grievance, that our Court have formerly
by Bribery, Pensions, Preferment, with other Arts, formed their Interest among
their People: But the present Complaint is the reverse of that Practice, viz.
The Subjects, by a new fashioned Method of Chagrin, Raillery, and Discontent,
forcing their Interest in the Public.

Nothing is more Certain, than that for Fifty Years past, this has been the
growing Practice of the Times: It was at first, indeed, a State Secret, and
esteemed to be a Secret of great value; few understood it; and therefore when
we found the Politicians clamorous and loud one Week, and as silent as Mutes
the next, we used to be Surpised at it, till old Colonel Birch, in the Days of
King Charles II. broke into it, and discovered the Trick. The Case was thus,

An Eminent Member had, for some Years, made himself known by his leading
Interest in the House; He was a Man of Sense, a Patron of Liberty, warm against
Favorites; had made himself very popular in Parliament by his Zeal against the
Popish Plot; constantly opposed giving Money without redress of Grievances; a
mighty Habeaus Corpus-Man; an Enemy to French Whores, French Counselors, etc.
And this Warmth continued till the Time that famous Attempt was made in the
House, called, The Bill of Exclusion.

But his Friends were strangely surpised, when after so long Experience of his
Forwardness, they found on a sudden, he had not one Word to say, no not in that
popular Cause, of the Excluding a Popish Successor; neither did he meet at the
Clubs as usual, where those things were ordinarily Concerted: It happened once,
that upon a Committee, where they were altogether upon that famous Debate, an
old Member who sat next him, pressed him to give his Opinion, but he declined
it, and the old Member still urging him, Let him alone, says Col. Birch, he has
received HUSH-MONEY.

The Jest took, the Word became Proverbial, and it grew very Public; but for
all that, the Court, who found their Account in it, continued the Practice:
King Charles II. who loved a good Turn of Wit, made that Word his Common Place
for the Occasion; and if they found a troublesome Man begin to lead a Party, and
make warm Speeches, etc. it was the Word presently at Court, he must have some
Hush-Money.

But as this was a Practice scandalous enough upon the Court, and made use of
in a Way most particularly mischievous to the Nation, so when once it became
Public, the Country Gentlemen turned the Tables upon the Ministry, and made it
a bite upon the Court; For as soon as they found that the Court, to cover their
Designs, and keep the People Easy, were very willing to stop the Mouth of
every Complainer with Hush-Money, and that to be a Malecontent of Note, was a
certain Step to advance a Man's Interest. This Hush-Money became a Plague upon
the Court, they turned all Malcontents on purpose to be Bought off: Yet such
was the Conduct of that Court, so much were they afraid to let their Practices
be exposed, and so little were they able to bear a Plain-Dealer, that though they
knew they were Imposed upon to the last degree, yet they were obliged to wink,
and let it go on, having no other way to stop the Clamours of the People, but
to buy off the Complainer; and this grew a dreadful Rentcharge upon them at
last; especially if it be true, as some have said, that it cost King Charles
II. Four Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year in Hush-Money, to stop the Mouths of
Parliament Men.

But if this was a Satyr upon the Court, whose business it was to stand still
and see their Pockets picked, that they might at the same Time, by the help of
those Mercenary Creatures, get an Opportunity to pick the Nations Pocket of
three times as much; Yet it was much more scandalous upon the People concerned,
who, by selling themselves to the Government, divested themselves of the Power
of serving their Country; and like a Soldier, who in the heat of Action quits
his Post, making a breach in the Line of Battle, at which the Enemy breaks in,
and destroys the whole Body, so these Men made a monstrous Breach in the
Constitution, at which Tyrany, Arbitrary Government, Persecution of
Protestants, and at last, a Popish Successor broke in, to the endangering the
Liberties and Religion of Great Britain.

It cannot but be remembered very well by many, how Merry King Charles II, used
to make himself with those Hush-Money-Men; 'Ds Fish, says the King one Day,
upon seeing the Account for Secret Service, I believe they will go Halves with me
at last. At another Time, when an Eminent Member had made a flameing Speech
against giving more Money, and it was proposed to get him off, Vijs et Modis,
as before; Well, said the King, I have heard of Buying and Selling of Places,
but I never heard of Buying and Selling of SPEECHES before. But the King fell
out with 'em at last; for after all they had got of the King, and after all the
King had got of the Nation by them, at last the King would Give no more to
Them, and then they would Give no more to Him; upon which they were sent home,
Cursed and Exposed, as they deserved; of whom the famous A. Marvel has these two
Lines, But thanks to the Wh -- who made the K -- Dogged,
For Giving no more, the Rogues were Prorogued.


But let us now bring this down to the present Time, that the folly and
absurdity of this Speech-making may appear; and this indeed is the Reason of
reciting the scandalous History of the Days past; What can those Gentlemen
promise to themselves? Or what do they propose? Is there a King now Reigning
that wants such Mercenaries, that fears their Tongues, or can stoop to
entertain them in His Pay? Sure they cannot have such scandalous Notions in
their Minds, of a Government of which themselves have said so many fine Things
before!

Let us examine a little the Circumstances of their new Phenomenon, which have
appeared so lately in a certain Place, and whence the Original of their Motion
may be drawn: It is evident they are not Tories; they are not so either Simply,
or by Composition; neither Naturally or Politically; the Air they have put upon
their Conduct, has so little of Art in it, that even the Torys themselves say,
It has not Disguise enough in it to do their Cause any Service, or the Whigg
Cause any Harm; So that it is perfectly Impotent, and serves for no other End,
but to expose the People that put it on, and give the Hissing Part of the
Bystanders an opportunity to Divert themselves.

But are they Whiggs then! Is it possible that Whiggs can be found making
Speeches for Mercy to Rebels! Who never yet were Penitent enough to
acknowledge their rising in Arms against King George was a Rebellion! Who
strove to obtain their Pardon by a Party Spirit! And make a Faction for Mercy,
against Prudence! Can this be done by a Friend to King George, and as such! It
is impossible. But if it be True, and the Speakers are Whiggs, they must either
have renounced the Name of Whigg, and be what, as Whiggs, they always esteemed
Scandalous, nay, Infamous, I mean Jacobits, and Friends to Jacobites; or it
must be from some Private Spirit, some Parl -- t Policy, such as selling of
Speeches was in former Days, getting Hush-Money, and the like.

Again, Upon what Principle can any Thing that calls it self a Whigg, or is
attached to the Interest of King George, oppose, at such a Time as this, the
passing of a Bill, which is the only step to put an entire End to the Spirit of
Rebellion among us, the only thing that can entirely extinguish the hopes and
expectations of the Jacobites, by removing that one, and only Difficulty, upon
which alone the expectation of reviving the Interest of Rebellion did depend,
whether this be the Affair of Trienneal Parliaments, or any other Thing.

Nay, though there should be some Niceties of Privilege, or any thing else,
which at another time it would be very rational and commendable to Insist upon;
yet is it absolutely necessay for a Person to dispense with some Laws which are
justly esteemed the Bulwark of our Liberties; and shall we not dispense with
Circumstances? Shall we stand upon Niceties and Punctilios, to the hazard of
the whole Nation? Shall we pass over the Great, and not abate the Small? How
strangely Nice must these Men be, and how contrary to common Prudence do they
Act? Do not Men blow up Houses when the Street is on Fire, to save the
remainder of the Town? Is the Damage to a few a sufficient Argument to prevent
it? Was ever any Man afraid it should be made a Precedent, to blow up other
Peoples Houses when there is not the same Necessity, or when there was no Fire
at all?

If a Tory had made use of such Arguments against the Habeas Corpus Bill, or
the Trienneal, etc. we should not have thought it strange; but for Whiggs to
act thus! It must be upon some meaner, lower Principle than those who deserve
the Name of Whiggs always acted from; and although these Sheets shall not
undertake to charge any Modern Gentleman with Speaking upon the foot of
Mercenary Expectations, either within the House, or without it; yet as Buying
and Selling of Speeches, receiving of Hush-Money, etc. has been Practices
recent in our Memory; and by which the Sovereign has been abused, and the
Nation betrayed; it is hard to avoid the injection of such things to our
Thoughts, when we are at a loss to find any other probable Reason for the
extraordinary Measures of some People, whose Actions and Speeches we could
always till now account for.

What shall we say then to these Speech-makers? Shall we speak to them as
Whiggs? Why even in that predicament they appear most Ridiculous. Let us refer
them back to some of their own Speeches, when they were in their Senses, and
let them be judges for themselves, after all they have said of King George, of
his standing by his Friends; doing Justice to his Enemies, and fearing no body;
let us ask now, whether they can ever believe, that his Majesty can be capable
of any apprehension from the present Grimace they put upon their Conduct? And
that their Speeches, in Opposition to his just Measures, can have any other
Effect upon the King, than to give his Majesty a needful Knowledge of the Men,
and a just Contempt of their Designs?

Besides their own former Speeches, let them Read Sir Richard Steel's Letter to
the Pope, and see there the just Character which he gives, not of the Kings
Person only, but of his Administration: Let them look over Mr. L -- mer's
Speech upon the Impeachments, where he is pleased to say, That the Wisdom and
Steddiness of his Majesty's Government, have retrieved the Honor and
Reputation of his Kingdom: Let these things speak the Absurdity and Folly of
those who, being at the Bottom Embark't solidly, by Principle and Inclination,
for the Kings Interest, can yet be so Mercenary as to put on the Countenance of
Malecontent, upon the base Notions of making themselves Necessary; and this in
a Reign too, where they ought to know better than to think it can be made to
answer so mean a Design.

Let those People look into the Conduct of the present Administration, and see
whether there is any thing done, or doing, that it is in their Power to expose;
or that the Ministers are at all in their reach: Let them Remember his Majesty
gives no Hush-Money, there are no Court Pensions to complain of but what are
known, and the Court has chosen to let the World know that some Men have been
rewarded beyond their Merit, rather than to have them think they have had more
Rewards than are known.

To what end than do Men, who have shared so much of the Royal Bounty, turn
their Backs upon their Principles? And open their Mouths at their Benefactors?
Is it that they think by this Method to get more, when they are even ashamed to
ask upon any other Foundation? It cannot be! Nothing can be so Base! It must
certainly be that they are Sensible they have been too well used, and can no
longer in Conscience deceive a Prince of so much Benignity, but like Murderers,
who are hurried by their own Terrors to discover themselves, they find
themselves necessitated to tell the King he has been mistaken in them; That
they are of the Number of those who no Bounty can bind, nor Favor oblige to be
Faithful, unless they have a continual flux of Supplies, sufficient to gratify
the necessary Avarice of an unbounded Expense, occasioned by the Practice of
all manner of scandalous Vices; That they are Servants who will never be Paid,
and would be always Receiving; that their Services are small and few, and that
it would be very necessary to let the Nation see they can go on without such
Men as these; That the Market for long Speeches is over, and that having now
exposed themselves sufficiently, they are grown perfectly Useless either to one
side or other, and are, at last, arrived to that meanest condition a public
Man can ever come to, (viz.) to be neither Valued or Feared.

FINIS.

