A DISCOURSE ON THE NATURE, CAUSES, and CURE OF CORPULENCY.

[Price One Shilling.]

A DISCOURSE ON THE NATURE, CAUSES, and CURE OF CORPULENCY.

Illustrated by a REMARKABLE CASE, Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY, November 1757.

And Now first published, By MALCOLM FLEMYNG, M.D.

LONDON: Printed for L. DAVIS and C. REYMERS, Printers to the ROYAL SOCIETY,
over against Gray's-Inn, Holborn.

MDCCLX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE AUTHOR of the following DISCOURSE had, above ten years ago, formed a
resolution of writing a full Treatise on Corpulency; both theoretical, and
practical; with an appendix concerning its opposite extreme, thinness or
leanness. And had accordingly not only drawn his plan, but began to raise part
of the structure in the year 1752, then living in London; but soon after
returning into the country, at a great distance from well-furnished libraries,
he could not come at the necessary books, for rendering his treatise as
complete as he intended; especially the foreign periodical literary
transactions: which, he knew, furnished many observations relating to his
subject. He was therefore obliged to lay aside his intention. However, having
succeeded in an extraordinary case of Corpulency, beyond his most sanguine
hopes; and that solely by pursuing a method, which his own reflections had
suggested, he drew up the following pages, in which the nature and causes of
that burdensome and dangerous state of body, and the principal methods of cure
indicated therein, are briefly, but he hopes clearly explained; and
particularly the method which proved successful, is fully described and
accounted for. The paper was read in a meeting of the ROYAL SOCIETY, November
3, 1757. Though he had not obtained leave to mention in print, the person's
name, upon whom the cure was made; yet he then produced authentic, and
satisfactory vouchers for the truth of the facts; as the very learned and
worthy secretary of the said Soiety, Dr. BIRCH, will testify.

Caister, in Lincolnshire, April 10, 1760.
A DISCOURSE ON CORPULENCY.
CORPULENCY, when in an extraordinary degree, may be reckoned a disease, as it
in some measure obstructs the free exercise of the animal functions; and has a
tendency to shorten life, by paving the way to dangerous distempers.

It is too great an accumulation of animal oil or fat, more or less over the
whole body; but chiefly immediately under the skin, in the interstices of the
muscles; and within the cavity of the abdomen or lower belly.

That Corpulency is caused by an increased quantity of fat, and not of blood,
or any other substance whatsoever, is so clear and evident, that we may spare
ourselves the trouble of proving it. Butchers stalls sufficiently evince it is
truth, and the common sense of mankind acquiesces in it; fat and corpulent
being synonymous epithets in common conversation.

Till within a century ago, anatomists had a very imperfect notion of the
manner, in which the fat is distributed, and lodged in the animal body; they
imagined that it lies in confused clusters or heaps, sticking to the parts
where it is found, without being contained in cells, or small membranous
cavities. But now it is generally and certainly known, that it is reposited in
the cells or vesicles of a certain web or texture, called membrana, or tela
cellulosa; which is spread over the whole body, not only immediately under the
skin, but penetrating likewise into it is inmost recesses; and entering, more or
less, into the composition of almost every part. The cells of this web or
tissue are so framed, as to communicate together all over. Where they are
widest, they contain oil or fat. Where they are too minute for that purpose,
they receive a fluid jelly or moist vapor.

The fat is a secretion from the blood, made by the most simple secretory
apparatus, to wit, arteries bringing the blood, from which the fat is to be
separated; and lateral vessels of a lesser diameter arising from these
arteries, which strain off the fat or oil, and convey it to the cells or
vesicles, where it is to be reposited; while small veins, continued with the
arteries, return into the common channel of circulation that part of the blood,
which has passed by the mouths of the lateral secretory canals. The tumidity,
with which the oil, when new separated, abounds, is sucked up by extremely
small tubules of the venous kind, opening into or communicating with the fatty
cells, and so the fat or oil remains more pure or unmixed.

The use of the fat is in general to lubricate the parts, that they may move
and slip over one another easily, and therefore muscles are plentifully
supplied with it; to prevent brittleness in the bones, which for that reason
are furnished with marrow (for marrow and fat scarce differ at all from one
another) to temper, and, as it were, sheath acrimony; and lastly, to fill up
the chasms and interstices, which, without some such contrivance, would be left
between parts adjacent to each other, thus procuring a beautiful sleekness to
the skin. In particular we have good reason to believe, that the fat of the
omentum or cawl, where it is always found in considerable quantity, if the
subject is not very much emaciated, is subservient to the functions of the
liver, and contributes toward the matter of the bile. But I confine myself to
the principal subject of this discourse.

The efficient causes of Corpulency may be deduced to these following:

First, the taking in of too large a quantity of food, especially of the rich
and oily kind, with a suitable digestion. Every thing that nourishes, contains
oil more or less, which however scanty in proportion to the other constituent
parts, is yet actually separated and extracted from them by the powers of the
animal machine, and, as it were, treasured up for it is proper uses. Horses,
cows, sheep, and many other animals, thrive and fatten upon grass, hay, and
even straw, with water. But the poorest diet, that can nourish, and tolerably
support the human species, contains much more oil, than grass or straw. Oil may
be pressed out of the farinaceous grains in common use. Animals of every kind,
however lean, yet contain some fat, and those we daily feed on, a very great
deal. Whoever, therefore, throws in a large quantity even of the plainest
wholesome food, at the same time lays in matter, out of which Corpulency is
more likely to be produced, than out of a more sparing measure thereof. And,
beyond all doubt, that effect will more speedily and certainly be brought
about, if the aliment is oily and rich; provided it is rightly digested. Not
that all corpulent persons are great eaters; or all thin persons spare feeders.
We daily see instances of the contrary. Though a voracious appetite be one cause
of Corpulency, it is not the only cause; and very often not even the conditio
sine qua non thereof.

Secondly, too lax a texture of the cellular or fatty membrane, we have already
mentioned, whereby it is cells or vesicles are liable to be too easily
distended; and therefore receive and retain too great a quantity of fat. And
perhaps these cells may be originally of a larger size and capacity in some,
than in others. This disposition may be connected with a general laxity of the
solids, but it may likewise be in a great measure local, and subsist by itself;
there being no absurdity in supposing one part or set of parts in the human
frame to be over-relaxed, while the rest continue in a laudable state. This
particular cause of Corpulency I incline to believe often runs in families. It
may likewise be connate, that is, interwoven with the original stamina, and
brought into the world by the infant, though it is parents and ancestors had been
otherwise constituted. But, no doubt, it is much ofter acquired by the manner
of living of the corpulent persons; such as a plentiful, rich, relaxing diet; a
sedentary life; much sleep; an indolent tranquillity of mind; warm bathing, etc.

Thirdly, such a mixture or crasis of the blood and it is serum, as suffers the
only parts to be too safely separated from it is other principles, especially
it is aqueous vehicle; the whole being too weakly and imperfectly blended and
united together. This fault may either depend upon the general inaction of the
solids, whether constitutional or acquired; and the chief means of bringing it
on are, as has been said, plentiful, luxurious diet, and want of exercise; or
upon an over-proportion of oily particles in the blood, and it is serum; which
may require a greater energy in the solids, though otherwise laudably
constituted, than they can exert, in order to get the better of that excess,
and complete the union of the heterogeneous parts.

Fourthly and lastly, Corpulency is caused by a defective evacuation through
the outlets of the body, of that fat or oil, which has been already separated
from the blood, and reposited in it is proper cells. As whatever is alimentary
contains oil, if we did not daily expel part of it out of the body, we should
soon be buried under our own fat. Those, who keep up for a considerable number
of years nearly the same weight of body, must discharge daily a quantity of oil
or fat, nearly equal to what they take in. Sweat, urine, foeces, and no doubt
insensible perspiration likewise, all contain oil in an healthy state; and
therefore, if they are not in a pretty constant way sufficiently charged
therewith, to balance the quantity constantly introduced with our meats and
drinks, Corpulency must necessarily ensue. This deficiency is, I believe, most
frequently occasioned by a too sedentary way of life. But it likewise may be
influenced by the fat's not being so easily dissolvible in, and remixed with
the blood as it should be, in order to be readily enough brought to the
emunctories; and so may in some cases be a consequence of the cause described
in the preceding paragraph. For, if the blood and it is serum has already too
easily parted with it is oily particles, that happened because in them the oil
was not strongly enough united and blended with the other constituent
principles, and therefore the same quality of the blood and juices will render
them so much the more unfit to re-dissolve, and sweep it out of the cells, in
which it is laid up, back into the channels of circulation and excretion.

To recapitulate, Corpulency being an accumulation of too great a quantity of
fat, or animal oil in the vesicles of the membrana cellulosa, wherever they are
large enough to admit oily particles, it can be caused either by the
introduction of too much oil into the habit, through the channels of
nourishment, whereby there is so much the greater chance of it is being retained
in too great a quantity -- or by the over-laxity, or perhaps original
over-largeness of the cells, in which it is reposited, disposing them to admit,
and retain an over-proportion of it -- Or by such a crasis or temperament of
the blood, as renders it liable to part too easily with it is oily particles,
and let them be strained off in too great plenty by the secretory vessels -- Or
lastly, by a deficient evacuation or expulsion of oil already taken in and
separated from the blood, and laid up in it is cells through the outlets of the
body -- By one, or more of these causes, or perhaps all of them concurring in
the same constitution, and, I think, scarce by any other of moment, can
Corpulency be produced and established.

Having enquired into the nature, seat, and efficient causes of Corpulency, we
now proceed to lay down the rational methods of cure, founded on the result of
this our enquiry. In the doing of which, we shall but briefly treat of such
things relating to the subject, as are commonly known and delivered in books;
and be more full concerning the particular means we propose, in order to
diminish and keep under this burdensome state of body, and prevent it is bad
consequences; to recommend and enforce the use of which, this paper is
principally intended.

Diseases, like other faults and imperfections, are, in a general way, to be
attacked and conquered by remedies, opposite or contrary to the causes that
brought them on; and that is exquisitely the case with respect to Corpulency.
We shall therefore, in delivering the method of cure, follow the order, in
which we have treated of it is causes.

And first, the diet of corpulent persons ought to be as moderate in quantity
as prudence may direct, and one's patience can submit to. Celsus advises such
to eat only one meal a day. With us cutting off suppers may be substituted in
the place of this rule. As to how much food is to be taken at one time, the
best advice I can give is, after eating such a quantity, as is known in a
common way to support persons in health and strength, to stop, as soon as the
craving of the stomach will permit; and so rise from table with an appetite. In
some cases it may be expedient to damp the stomach immediately before meals, by
eating fruits or sweetmeats; by drinking a glass of sweet wine; or other such
safe means, as one's own experience will best direct. Variety of dishes should
not be made free with; as they are apt to tempt one to transgress in quantity.

With respect to quality, the food of the corpulent should be lean and plain,
rather than rich and palatable. Celsus enumerates amongst the causes that fill
or plump the body. Assumpta per cibus aut potus maxim dulcia and pinguia.
Course brown bread is here preferable to the white, finer sort, as being more
opening and less nourishing -- Roots, greens, and other esculent vegetables,
with a sparing quantity of butter, difpose less to Corpulency, than animal
foods; as they contain less oil; yield juices less viscid, and pass more
readily out of the body -- Wines in a general way are less feeding than malt
liquors; especially such as are thin, sharp and old -- Acids, and vinegar in
particular, have a remarkably emaciating quality; but must be used sparingly,
and with caution.

The cause of Corpulency, mentioned in the second place, being a flabby,
relaxed state of the membranous texture, in the cells of which the fat is
collected, the indication of cure answering thereto, is to strengthen that
texture, so enabling it the better to resist distension; and, by it is
contractile power, to expel some part of it is contents. In order to answer this
end the more effectually, it is requisite, first to diminish, if we can, in a
considerable degree, the quantity of fat already contained in these cells, that
they may be the more at liberty to contract themselves; and afterward
remaining in a contracted state, recover their tone. In the next place we must
take care so to concert measures in order to strengthen either the solids in
general, or the cellular texture, where the fat is lodged, in particular, as
neither to counteract the other methods directed against Corpulency, of which
more in the sequel; nor risk hurting the particular constitution we are
treating. Cold bathing (proper diet and exercise being supposed to go along)
bids fairest to answer the end we have in view. But it will be both safer and
more effectual after the bulk is considerably diminished than before. And it
ought never to be used without great caution, lest it should prove hurtful in
other respects; for I scarce know any remedy that is more generally, and more
dangerously misapplied, than cold bathing. As to strengtheners taken inwardly,
whether under the title of diet or medicines, they for the most part either
whet the appetite, or render the body costive, both which are unfavourable to
the cure of Corpulency; and upon that account they, as well as cold bathing,
will come into use with greater advantage, after the body is considerably
reduced, than before.

The third cause of Corpulency being too easy a separation of the oily
particles of the blood from it is other contents, especially the aqueous
vehicle, arising from a weak and imperfect union of the different elements
together, what occurs to me as most directly tending to it is removal, is,

First, by a spare and plain diet to withhold, or at least diminish the daily
fresh supplies of oily matter to the blood; that the solids, by whose action
and energy that union, and as it were cohesion of the principles of the blood
effected, may not have more work, to do than enough: And,

Next to excite the action of the solids; which is to be done chiefly by
exercise; under which, I comprehend friction or dry rubbing of the surface of
the body, especially the trunk, as a meterial article. And this kind of
exercise is so much the more necessary to extremely corpulent persons, that
they can scarcely use any other with remarkable effect. Strengtheners, that
heat moderately, if judiciously chosen, may come in as auxiliaries.

The cause of Corpulency assigned in the fourth and last place, being a
defective evacuation through the outlets of the body of the animal oil or fat
already taken in, the curative indication naturally arising therefrom, is to
promote and increase that discharge, by the safest and most effectual methods;
that so the daily waste of the oily parts being brought to exceed the constant
supplies thereof, the quantity remaining within the habit may be properly
diminished. Now the common natural excretions, to wit, urine, foeces, sweat,
and insensible perspiration being in a healthy state, always more or less
charged with animal oil, its expulsion is to be procured through these
channels; and indeed it can scarce be brought about any other way, without
violence to the constitution. If therefore, one or more of these excretions be
increased with safety to the general health, and without lessening
proportionably the rest, the quantity of fat in the body must in time be
diminished.

Insensible perspiration, in our climate can carry off but little oil,
especially in corpulent persons, where the extraordinary accumulation of fat
under the skin must compress the arteries that go to it; through the small
excretory vessels, that arise from which, the matter of perspiration passes,
and is conveyed off; and therefore no mighty stress is to be laid upon
promoting that discharge, more than what friction may effect.

Frequent purging, if it could be safely brought on, would no doubt be a speedy
and effectual means of reducing Corpulency. We see often in practice what vast
quantities of animal juices, all which contain oil more or less, are evacuated
per annum, in a diarrhaea or cholera morbus; and how much the patient is
emaciated thereby in not many hours. But it is dangerous to proceed far this
way by art. Purgatives often exhibited, besides weakening the general habit by
carrying off the nutritive serum, hurt the stomach through which they must
pass; and the intestines still more, where they exert their principal efficacy,
and must remain longer; they may bring on dysenteries and ulcerations of the
guts, with all their direful train of symptoms, by abating the natural mucus of
the parts, dysenteries, hemorrhoids, etc. What therefore is most advisable to
be done by the corpulent person in this respect is, to use such a diet and
manner of living, as may prevent costiveness; and occasionally take safe
openers in small doses, and no oftener than is necessary to remove it. Aloetic
medicines are here preferable to rhubarb (except where piles are troublesome)
as they are less apt to leave a binding quality after their operation is over,
walking, in a general way, promotes the evacuation per anum. Riding, as well as
a sedetary life, encourages costiveness.

Sweat seems to contain more oil than the other fluid excretions; and therefore
promoting it often, if it could be done safely and conveniently, might no doubt
be of the highest efficacy in reducing a corpulent habit -- The safest way of
raising sweat is by increased muscular motion, as walking hard, playing at
tennis, exercising some laborious mechanic employment, or the like. The next
safest way in my opinion, is by moist heat; as in a bagnio. Medicines given to
sweat upon, besides the uncertainty of their operation, may do hurt by
overheating and by changing the crasis of the blood and juices, for the worse,
if they are frequently administered.

The last of the natural excretions, by which animal oil is carried out of the
body, is urine. The urine of a sound person, made after a due concoction of the
aliments and chyle, contains an animal oil exalted by repeated circulations,
and the heat of the body, and tending somewhat to the volatile and putrid, as
all chemists of note agree. Now, as the excretion of urine may be promoted by a
variety of diuretics, with less shock to the constitution, than that by sweat,
or stools; and with tolerable certainty too, where there is no morbid
obstruction of the passages; it would appear highly reasonable to conclude,
that animal oil may both more safely, and more effectually in the end, be
discharged out of the body through the channels of urine, than by any of the
other ways already treated of; as the increasing of that evacuation can be
brought about more constantly and uniformly; and longer persisted in, because
attended with less danger or inconveniency. But that diureticts may be employed
to the best advantage, in order to discharge the animal oil, and by that means
reduce Corpulency, it is requisite to choose out of that extensive class of
medicines, such as, besides increasing the quantity of urine, may at the same
time render the animal oil more mixible with the watery vehicle of the blood,
than otherwise it would be. Urine, besides water, which constitutes much the
greatest part of it, contains oil, as has been already said, an essential salt
peculiar to itself, resembling sal ammoniac in many respects, but differing
from it in some material properties; and a fine subtilised earth abraded from
the vessels, by the constant motion of the liquids through them. But it is the
increase of the evacuation of the oil only, that can diminish Corpulency; and
therefore it is evident that such diuretics, as are endowed with the property
abovementioned, are to have the preference here.

Now we are so happy as to be in possession of a diuretic medicine, which has
that quality in a singularly eminent degree; and is withal so safe, as that it
may be taken in large quantities every day for years together, without
remarkably impairing the general health: that medicine is soap, which we shall
here endeavor to prove, both by reason and observation, to be exquisitely
proper for reducing Corpulency, in the safest and most effectual manner; in a
word, its true remedy where it is curable.

Soap in general (for there is a variety of soaps) is a composition consisting
of a vegetable, fixed, alcaline salt, made by incineration, and oil or fat,
whether animal or vegetable, with the addition of quicklime, in some form or
other, intimately and inseparably incorporated together, by boiling according
to art. Quicklime, by the assistance of boiling, has been found by experience
to be the fittest bond of union between these two so different and repugnant
substances, without which it cannot be completely effected, at least not so
easily and commodiously. Soap, as is well known, is entirely dissolvable in
soft water; and that solution assisted by heat, agitation and friction,
dissolves, besides gums and resins, likewise oil, and animal fat, incorporating
them with itself, thus fitting them to be scoured and washed off from the
substances they adhere to. And therefore its general, as well as its original
use, is to clean clothes, especially linen, when soiled with animal filth, in
which oil is the predominant ingredient, as being both most penetrating, and
adhering most obstinately; at the same time cementing with itself other soiling
particles of whatever kind. And yet, by the means of soap, they are easily
restored to cleanness, sweetness, and whiteness.

It is less to be wondered that soap should have been introduced into the
regular practice of physic, as an inward medicine, considering its wonderful
dissolving virtue; than that it was introduced so late. In Lemery's Dictionaire
des Drogues, first published at Paris, in 1694, the fullest and most noted book
of its kind in the hands of the public at that time, and for some years after,
there is no mention made of the internal use of soap. It has been much used
inwardly since, and deservedly held in great esteem as a resolvent, detergent,
and deobstruent; and of late as a lithontriptic. It is found to be a diuretic
of the milder sort. The great run of Mrs. Stephen's medicines, both as
published by herself, and as since new modeled and amended, not to mention
numberless cases well known to the public, in which soap has been given for
the stone either by itself or with lime water, sufficiently evince its safety,
whole ounces having been exhibited every day for years together, without
remarkably injuring the constitution.

As therefore soap is diuretic; has a singular power of rendering oil or fat
mixible with water; and withal is so fafe, as that it may be given in large
quantities, and its use long continued, we may fairly conclude, that it is a
most effectual, harmless and easy remedy for reducing Corpulency; and, to sum
up all, more to be depended upon than any other yet proposed. This will farther
appear from the following considerations. Persons inclined to Corpulency seldom
think on reducing their size, till they grow very bulky; and then they scarce
can, or will use exercise enough to be remarkably serviceable. It becomes a
great trouble to them: Indolence usually gets the better of resolution, and
feeds the growing evil, until what was at first only disagreeable and
difficult, becomes at length impracticable -- Where a rich and plentiful diet
is one principal cause of Corpulency, as it often is, the habits of good eating
and drinking becomes so deeply rivetted, as scarce to be conquered. A luxurious
table, a keen appetite, and good company are temptations to exceed often too
strong for human nature to resist. Sweating and purging for the increase of
insensible perspiration, as has been already observed, is herein
insignificant, though very proper now and then, yet cannot be used with safety
frequently and constantly enough to do the business by itself, and atone for
errors in point of regimen -- whereas soap may be safely used in large
quantities every day for years together.

It is no small additional recommendation in favor of this remedy, that it is
highly proper for relieving complaints, and curing diseases arising from
Corpulency, even independently on diminishing it, such as amongst the chronic
tribe, short windedness; lethargy, etc. of the acute kind, bastard
peripneumonics, which are more difficult to cure in very sat persons than
others: and in general whatever disorders may be owing to viscidity of juices,
a never failing attendant on plenitude, and defect of motion. But to prosecute
this head farther, would lead us beyond the bounds we have at present
prescribed to ourselves.

We now proceed to take into consideration the manner of exhibiting soap, with
a view to reduce Corpulency. And first let us choose the fittest kind for that
purpose. Spanish soap, particularly that from Alicant, is at present most
esteemed for inward use. And although in the observation I am going to relate,
the common home made Castile soap was used, yet, I hesitate not to give the
preference to that from Alicant. It is not only a more cleanly and less
disagreeable medicine, but is much more easily dissolved in water; and
therefore must answer better in every intention where soap is required.

As to the manner of exhibiting it, I think once a day may be sufficient. And I
apprehend the properest time is at night when going to bed. A dram (the
eighth part of an ounce) may be tried for the first four or five days: and if
that creates no remarkable disorder in the stomach or bowels, the quantity
should be increased to two, three, and in very stubborn cases, to four drachms;
which last dose, I think, needs not in any case to be exceeded. It may be taken
either sliced down small, and made into the form of a bolus or electuary, with
any palatable syrup, as that made with orange or citron peel; or it may be
swallowed in the shape of pills; or it may be dissolved in a gill or more of
soft water, and so drank.

This course should be continued at least three months, in order to give it a
fair trial; in which time, without great errors on the corpulent person's side,
I think it highly probable, that remarkable benefit will be felt in a common
way. If good service is really done, the patient will, at least ought to be,
encouraged to go on. If his patience should sometimes be tired out, he may
intermit the use of the remedy for some days; and afterward resume it for
three or four months longer; and so on, dropping or renewing the course, as his
own direction, or skilful advice may best direct.

The following case, will, I hope, greatly both illustrate and confirm what
has been hitherto said. A worthy acquaintance of mine, a judicious and
experienced physician, in his younger days had been very active, and used much
exercise, both on foot and on horseback; and for many years seemed as little
liable to extreme Corpulency as most people. By insensible degrees, as he
diminished his daily labors, satness stole upon him, and kept increasing;
insomuch that, when I met with him about six years ago, I found him in the
greatest distress through mere Corpulency, of any person not exceeding middle
age, I ever knew. He was then about forty-five. He was obliged to ride from
house to house to visit his patients in the town where he practiced, being
quite unable to walk an hundred yards at a stretch; and was in no small degree
lethargic. In other respects, he seemed pretty clear of any remarkable disease,
except gout, of which he had felt some, not very violent, attacks. I warmly
recommended the inward use of soap, in order to reduce his Corpulency, as the
only safe and effectual remedy in his case, and a remedy which he might
continue to use the longest; I enforced my advice by the reasonings above
urged, of which he was too good a judge not to perceive their full cogency.
Accordingly, he began to take it July, 1754, at which time he weighed twenty
stone and eleven pounds, jockey weight, a vast load for him to bear, who is
little above middle stature, and withal small boned. He took every night at
bedtime, a quarter of an ounce of common home-made castile soap, dissolved in
a quarter of a pint of soft water. In about two or three months time, he began
to feel more freedom, and an increase of activity, which encouraged him to
persevere. And that he did with such success, that in August, 1756, (as he
informs me in a letter now lying before me) his bulk was reduced two whole
stone weight; and he could walk a mile with pleasure. He had continued the use
of the soap all the time between June, 1754, and August, 1756, with very short
interruptions, in the manner and quantity above mentioned; it operated
remarkably by urine, without ever producing the least troublesome effect. And
now, while I am sending these pages to the press, (April 1760) I am certainly
informed that he is hearty, and well.

These facts are well known all over the town, where my friend resides, and
it is neighborhood; and it is the general opinion, that, had it not been for
the relief that was then given him, he must have been in his grave long before
now. Let me add, that he used no other method or medicine all the while, to
which the extraordinary change in his favor, can with any color of reason be
imputed.

I have taken opportunities of recommending the same remedy to others, in
similar circumstances; but have not been as yet informed of any case, in which
a thorough trial thereof was made. However, as it proved so signally
serviceable in the instance abovementioned, under such disadvantages, I hope
it may be fairly concluded it may prove useful in a general way, at least in
cases less stubborn: which consideration is sufficient to recommend it to the
attention of physicians, and the public.

FINIS.
This Day is published,
[Price One Shilling,]
A DISSERTATION on Dr. JAMES'S FEVER POWDER, in which the Different
Circumstances, wherein that Remedy may prove beneficial or hurtful, are
considered and distinguished, according to Observation and Reason.

By MALCOLM FLEMYNG, M.D.

Printed for L. DAVIS and C. REYMERS, Printers to the ROYAL SOCIETY,
over against Gray's-Inn, Holborn.

Lately published by L. DAVIS and C. REYMERS, Printers to the ROYAL SOCIETY,
I. A Treatise on the Disorders of the Teeth; in which the several Operations
on the Teeth are considered; and such Things as are found destructive to them
particularly pointed out. By Fred. Hoffman, M.D. Physician to his prefent
Majesty, the King of Prussia, price 1s. II. An Account of the Sore Throat
attended with Ulcers. By John Fothergill, M.D. pr. 1s. III. Doctor Warren's
Treatise on the malignant Fever in Barbados, and the neighboring Islands, in
a Letter to Dr. Mead, pr. 1s. IV. Clifton Wintringham's Medical Works, 2 Vol.
pr. 6s. V. Dr. Malcolm Flemyng's Dissertation on Dr. James's Fever Powder; in
which the different Circumstances, wherein that Remedy may prove beneficial or
hurtful, are considered and distinguished, according to Observation and Reason,
pr. 1s. VI. Dr. Parson's Analogy between the Propagation of Animals and that of
Vegetables, pr. 4s. VII. The History of England, as it relates to Religion and
the Church, from the earliest Accounts to the present Century. By F. Warner, L.
L. D. Chaplain to the Right Hon. the Lord Keeper, 2 Vol. Folio, pr. 1l. 16s.
half bound. VIII. Lord Somers's Tracts; the last Eight Vol. being the third and
fourth Collections. Three Guineas will be allowed for the first Eight Volumes
to any Gentleman that may be inclined to part with them. IX. Travels in Egyt
and Nubia, by Frederick Lewis Norden, F. R. S. Elegantly printed in Two Vol.
Fol. with near 200 very fine Copper Plates. X. The same Work in Octavo, with
Plates, pr. 6s. XI. The learned Mr. Chishull's Travels in Turkey, and back to
England, by Dr. Mead, 14s.

