CLARISSA. OR, THE HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY: Comprehending The most Important
Concerns of Private LIFE. And particularly showing, The DISTRESSES that may
attend the Misconduct Both of PARENTS and CHILDREN, In Relation to MARRIAGE.
Published by the EDITOR of PAMELA. VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for S. Richardson: And Sold by A. MILLAR, over against
Catharine-street in the Strand: J. and JA. RIVINGTON, in St. Paul's
Churchyard: JOHN OSBORN, in Paternoster Row; And by J. LEAKE, at Bath.

M.DCC.XLVIII.

PREFACE.
THE following History is given in a Series of Letters, written principally in
a double, yet separate, Correspondence;

Between Two young Ladies of Virtue and Honor, bearing an inviolable
Friendship for each other, and writing upon the most interesting Subjects: And

Between Two Gentlemen of free Lives; one of them glorying in his Talents for
Stratagem and Invention, and communicating to the other, in Confidence, all the
secret Purposes of an intriguing Head, and resolute Heart.

But it is not amiss to premise, for the sake of such as may apprehend Hurt to
the Morals of Youth from the more freely-written Letters, That the Gentlemen,
though professed Libertines as to the Fair Sex, and making it one of their wicked
Maxims, to keep no Faith with any of the Individuals of it who throw themselves
into their Power, are not, however, either Infidels or Scoffers: Nor yet such
as think themselves freed from the Observance of other moral Obligations.

On the contrary, it will be found, in the Progress of the Collection, that
they very often make such Reflections upon each other, and each upon himself,
and upon his Actions, as reasonable Beings, who disbelieve not a future State
of Rewards and Punishments (and who one day propose to reform) must sometimes
make: -- One of them actually reforming, and antidoting the Poison which some
might otherwise apprehend would be spread by the gayer Pen, and lighter Heart,
of the other.

And yet that other, [altho' in unbosoming himself to a select Friend, he
discover Wickedness enough to entitle him to general Hatred] preserves a
Decency, as well in his Images, as in his Language, which is not always to be
found in the Works of some of the most celebrated modern Writers, whose
Subjects and Characters have less warranted the Liberties they have taken.

Length will be naturally expected, not only from what has been said, but from
the following Considerations:

That the Letters on both Sides are written while the Hearts of the Writers
must be supposed to be wholly engaged in their Subjects: The Events at the Time
generally dubious: -- So that they abound, not only with critical Situations;
but with what may be called instantaneous Descriptions and Reflections; which
may be brought home to the Breast of the youthful Reader: -- As also, with
affecting Conversations; many of them written in the Dialogue or Dramatic Way.

To which may be added, that the Collection contains not only the History of
the excellent Person whose Name it bears, but includes The Lives, Characters,
and Catastrophes, of several others, either principally or incidentally
concerned in the Story.

But yet the Editor [to whom it was referred to publish the Whole in such a Way
as he should think would be most acceptable to the Public] was so diffident in
relation to this Article of Length, that he thought proper to submit the
Letters to the Perusal of several judicious Friends; whose Opinion he desired
of what might be best spared.

One Gentleman, in particular, of whose Knowledge, Judgment, and Experience, as
well as Candor, the Editor has the highest Opinion, advised him to give a
Narrative Turn to the Letters; and to publish only what concerned the principal
Heroine; -- striking off the collateral Incidents, and all that related to the
Second Characters; though he allowed the Parts which would have been by this
means excluded, to be both instructive and entertaining. But being extremely
fond of the affecting Story, he was desirous to have everything parted with,
which he thought retarded its Progress.

This Advice was not relished by other Gentlemen. They insisted, that the Story
could not be reduced to a Dramatic Unity, nor thrown into the Narrative Way,
without divesting it of its Warmth; and of a great Part of its Efficacy; as
very few of the Reflections and Observations, which they looked upon as the
most useful Part of the Collection, would, then, find a Place.

They were of Opinion, That in all Works of This, and of the Dramatic Kind,
STORY, or AMUSEMENT, should be considered as little more than the Vehicle to
the more necessary INSTRUCTION: That many of the Scenes would be rendered
languid, were they to be made less busy: And that the Whole would be thereby
deprived of that Variety, which is deemed the Soul of a Feast, whether mensal
or mental.

They were also of Opinion, That the Parts and Characters, which must be
omitted, if this Advice were followed, were some of the most natural in the
whole Collection: And no less instructive; especially to Youth. Which might be
a Consideration perhaps overlooked by a Gentleman of the Adviser's great
Knowledge and Experience: For, as they observed, there is a Period in human
Life, in which, youthful Activity ceasing, and Hope contenting itself to look
from its own domestic Wicket upon bounded Prospects, the half-tired Mind aims
at little more than Amusement. -- And with Reason; for what, in the instructive
Way, can appear either new or needful to one who has happily got over those
dangerous Situations which call for Advice and Cautions, and who has filled up
his Measures of Knowledge to the Top?

Others, likewise gave their Opinions. But no Two being of the same Mind, as to
the Parts which could be omitted, it was resolved to present to the World, the
Two First Volumes, by way of Specimen; and to be determined with regard to the
rest by the Reception those should meet with.

If that be favorable, Two others may soon follow; the whole Collection being
ready for the Press: That is to say, If it be not found necessary to abstract
or omit some of the Letters, in order to reduce the Bulk of the Whole.

Thus much in general. But it may not be amiss to add, in particular, that in
the great Variety of Subjects which this Collection contains, it is one of the
principal Views of the Publication, To caution Parents against the undue
Exertion of their natural Authority over their Children, in the great Article
of Marriage:

And Children against preferring a Man of Pleasure to a Man of Probity, upon
that dangerous, but too commonly received Notion, That a Reformed Rake makes
the best Husband.



But as the Characters will not all appear in the Two First Volumes, it has
been thought advisable, in order to give the Reader some further Idea of Them,
and of the Work, to prefix

A brief Account of the principal Characters throughout the Whole.
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, a young Lady of great Delicacy; Mistress of all the
Accomplishments, natural and acquired, that adorn the Sex; having the strictest
Notions of filial Duty.

ROBERT LOVELACE, Esquire a Man of Birth and Fortune: Haughty, vindictive,
humourously vain; equally intrepid and indefatigable in the Pursuit of his
Pleasures -- Making his Addresses to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.

JAMES HARLOWE, Esquire the Father of Miss Clarissa, Miss Arabella, and Mr. James
Harlowe: Despotic, absolute; and, when offended, not easily forgiving.

Lady CHARLOTTE HARLOWE, his Wife, Mistress of fine Qualities; but greatly
under the Influence not only of her arbitrary Husband, but of her Son.

JAMES HARLOWE, jun. proud, fierce, uncontrollable, and ambitious; jealous of
the Favor his Sister Clarissa stood in with the Principals of the Family; and
a bitter and irreconcilable Enemy to Mr. Lovelace.

Miss ARABELLA HARLOWE, elder Sister of Miss Clarissa; ill-natured,
overbearing, and petulant; envying her Sister; and the more, as Mr. Lovelace
was first brought to make his Addresses to herself.

JOHN HARLOWE, Esquire elder Brother of Mr. James Harlowe, sen. an unmarried
Gentleman; good-natured, and humane; but easily carried away by more boistrous
Spirits.

ANTONY HARLOWE, Third Brother, who ha^ acquired a great Fortune in the Indies;
positive, rough, opinionated.

Mr. ROGER SOLMES, a Man of sordid Manners; disagreeable in his Person and
Address. Immensely rich: Proposed with an high han^ for an Husband to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe.

Mrs. HERVEY, Half-Sister of Lady Charlotte Harlowe; a Lady of good Sense, and
Virtue. In her Heart against the Measures taken to drive her Niece to
Extremities; but not having Courage to oppose herself to so strong ^ Stream,
sailing with it.

Miss DOLLY HERVEY, her Daughter; good-natured, gentle, sincere; and a great
Admirer of her Cousin Clarissa.

Mrs. NORTON, a Gentlewoman of Piety, and good Understanding; the Daughter of
an unpreferred Clergyman of great Merit, whose Amanuensis she was: -- Married
unhappily (and left a Widow), engaged to nurs^ Miss Clarissa Harlowe: In whose
Education likewise she had a principal Share.

Colonel MORDEN, a Man of Fortune, Generosity, and Courage, nearly related to
the Harlowe-Family: For some time past residing at Florence.

Miss HOW, the most intimate Friend, Companion, and Correspondent of Miss
Clarissa Harlowe: Of great Vivacity, Fire, and Fervency in her Friendships and
Enmities.

Mrs. HOW, Mother of Miss How; a Widow Lady of high Spirit; a notable
Manager: Having high Notions of the Parental Authority.

Mr. HICKMAN, a Man of Family, Fortune, Sobriety, and Virtue: Encouraged by
Mrs. How in his Addresses to her Daughter.

Lord M. Uncle to Mr. Lovelace; a Nobleman of middle Genius; and a great
Proverbialist.

Lady SARAH SADLEIR, Lady BETTY LAWRANCE, Half-Sisters of Lord M. Widow-Ladies
of Honor and Fortune.

Miss CHARLOTTE and PATTY MONTAGUE, Maiden Ladies of Character; Nieces of the
same Nobleman.

Dr. LEWIN, a Divine of great Piety and Learning; to whom Miss Clarissa Harlowe
owed much of her Improvement.

Dr. H. a Physician of Humanity, Generosity, and Politeness.

Mr. ELIAS BRAND, a pedantic young Clergyman, fond of Latin Scraps, and
Classical Quotations.

RICHARD MOWBRAY, THOMAS DOLEMAN, JAMES TOURVILLE, THOMAS BELTON, Libertine
Gentlemen, Companions of Mr. Lovelace.

JOHN BELFORD, Esquire a Fifth Friend and Companion of Mr. Lovelace; and his
principal Intimate and Confident.

Mrs. SINCLAIR, the pretended Name of a private Brothel-keeper in London.

Capt. TOMLINSON, the assumed Name of a vile and artful Pander to the
Debaucheries of Mr. Lovelace.

Mrs. MOORE, a Widow-Gentlewoman, keeping a Lodging-house at Hampstead.

Miss RAWLINS, a notable young Gentlewoman in that Neighborhood.

Mrs. BEVIS, a lively Widow of the same Place.

SALLY MARTIN, POLLY HORTON, Assistants of, and Partners with, the infamous
Mrs. Sinclair.

Joseph Leman, William Summers, Hannah Burton, Betty Barnes, Dorcas Wykes, and
others, Servants to the principal Persons.

THE HISTORY OF Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER I. Miss ANNA HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Jan. 10.
I AM extremely concerned, my dearest friend, for the disturbances that have
happened in your family. I know how it must hurt you, to become the subject of
the public talk: And yet, upon an occasion so generally known, it is impossible
but that whatever relates to a young lady, whose distinguished merits have made
her the public care, should engage every-body's attention. I long to have the
particulars from yourself; and of the usage I am told you receive upon an
accident you could not help; and in which, as far as I can learn, the sufferer
was the aggressor.

Mr. Diggs Her brother's surgeon.
, whom I sent for at the first hearing of the rencounter, to inquire, for your
sake, how your brother was, told me, That there was no danger from the wound,
if there were none from the fever; which, it seems, has been increased by the
perturbation of his spirits.

Mr. Wyerley drank tea with us yesterday; and though he is far from being partial
to Mr. Lovelace, as it may be well supposed, yet both he and Mr. Symmes blame
your family for the treatment they gave him, when he went in person to inquire
after your brother's health, and to express his concern for what had happened.

They say, That Mr. Lovelace could not avoid drawing his sword: And that either
your brother's unskilfulness or violence left him, from the very first pass,
entirely in his power. This, I am told, was what Mr. Lovelace said upon it;
retreating as he spoke: 'Have a care, Mr. Harlowe -- Your violence puts you out
of your defense. You give me too much advantage! For your sister's sake, I will
pass by everything; -- if -- '

But this the more provoked his rashness, to lay himself open to the advantage
of his adversary -- Who, after a slight wound in the arm, took away his sword.

There are people who love not your brother, because of his natural
imperiousness, and fierce and uncontrollable temper: These say, That the young
gentleman's passion was abated, on seeing his blood gush plentifully down his
arm; and that he received the generous offices of his adversary, who helped him
off with his coat and waistcoat, and bound up his arm, till the surgeon could
come, with such patience, as was far from making a visit afterward from that
adversary to inquire after his health, appear either insulting, or improper.

Be this as it may, everybody pities you. So steady, so uniform in your
conduct: So desirous, as you always said, of sliding through life to the end of
it unnoted; and, as I may add, not wishing to be observed even for your silent
benevolence; sufficiently happy in the noble consciousness which rewards it:
Rather useful, than glaring, your deserved motto; though now pushed into blaze,
as we see, to your regret; and yet blamed at home for the faults of others; --
How must such a virtue suffer on every hand! -- Yet it must be allowed, that
your present trial is but proportioned to your prudence! --

As all your friends without doors are apprehensive, that some other unhappy
event may result from so violent a contention, in which, it seems, the families
on both sides are now engaged, I must desire you to enable me, on the authority
of your own information, to do you occasional justice.

My mamma, and all of us, like the rest of the world, talk of nobody but you,
on this occasion, and of the consequences which may follow, from the
resentments of a man of Mr. Lovelace's spirit; who, as he gives out, has been
treated with high indignity by your uncles. My mamma will have it, that you
cannot now, with any decency, either see him, or correspond with him. She is a
good deal prepossessed by your uncle Antony; who occasionally calls upon us, as
you know; and, on this rencounter, has represented to her the crime, which it
would be in a sister, to encourage a man, who is to wade into her favor, (this
was his expression) through the blood of her brother.

Write to me therefore, my dear, the whole of your story, from the time that
Mr. Lovelace was first introduce^ into your family; and particularly an account
of all that passed between him and your sister; about which there are different
reports; some people supposing that the younger sister (at least by her
uncommon merit) has stolen a lover from the elder: And pray write in so full a
manner, as may gratify those, who know not so much of your affairs, as I do. If
any thing unhappy should fall out from the violence of such spirits as you have
to deal with, your account of all things previous to it, will be your
justification.

You see what you draw upon yourself, by excelling all your sex: Every
individual of it, who knows you, or has heard of you, seems to think you
answerable to her for your conduct in points so very delicate and concerning.

Every eye, in short, is upon you, with the expectation of an example. I wish
to heaven you were at liberty to pursue your own methods: All would then, I
dare say, be easy, and honorably ended. But I dread your directors and
directresses: for your mamma, admirably well qualified as she is to lead, must
submit to be led. Your sister and brother will certainly put you out of your
course.

But this is a point you will not permit me to expatiate upon: Pardon me
therefore, and I have done. -- Yet, why should I say, Pardon me? When your
concerns are my concerns? When your honor is my honor? When I love you, as
never woman loved another? And when you have allowed of that concern and of
that love; and have for years, which in persons so young, may be called many,
ranked in the first class of your friends,

Your ever-grateful and affectionate ANNA HOW?
Will you oblige me with a copy of the preamble to the clauses in your
grandfather's will in your favor; and allow me to send it to my aunt Harman?
-- She is very desirous to see it. Yet your character has so charmed her, that,
though a stranger to you personally, she assents to the preference given you in
it, before she knows his reasons for that preference.



LETTER II. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Harlowe-Place, Jan. 13.
HOW you oppress me, my dearest friend, with your politeness! I cannot doubt
your sincerity; but you should take care, that you give me not reason, from
your kind partiality, to call in question your judgment. You do not
distinguish, that I take many admirable hints from you, and have the art to
pass them upon you for my own: For in all you do, in all you say, nay, in your
very looks (so animated!), you give lessons, to one who loves you and observes
you, as I love and observe you, without knowing that you do: -- So, pray, my
dear, be more sparing of your praise for the future, lest, after this
confession, we should suspect, that you secretly intend to praise yourself,
while you would be thought only to commend another.

Our family has indeed been strangely discomposed. -- Discomposed! -- It has
been in tumults, ever since the unhappy transaction; and I have borne all the
blame; yet should have had too much concern, from myself, had I been more
justly spared by every one else.

For, whether it be owing to a faulty impatience, having been too indulgently
treated to be inured to blame, or to the regret I have to hear those censured
on my account, whom it is my duty to vindicate; I have sometimes wished, that
it had pleased God to have taken me in my last fever, when I had everybody's
love, and good opinion; but oftener, that I had never been distinguished by my
grandpapa as I was: Which has estranged from me, I doubt, my brother's and
sister's affections; at least, has raised a jealousy, with regard to the
apprehended favor of my two uncle, that now-and-then overshadows their love.

My brother being happily recovered of his fever, and his wound in a hopeful
way, although he has not yet ventured abroad, I will be as particular as you
desire in the little history you demand of me. But heaven forbid, that any
thing should ever happen, which may require it to be produced for the purpose
you so kindly mention!

I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's address to my sister; and be
as brief as possible. I will recite facts only; and leave you to judge of the
truth of the report raised, that the younger sister has robbed the elder.

It was in pursuance of a conference between Lord M. and my uncle Antony, that
Mr. Lovelace (my papa and mamma not forbidding) paid his respects to my sister
Arabella. My brother was then in Scotland, busying himself in viewing the
condition of the considerable estate which was left him there by his generous
godmother, together with one as considerable in Yorkshire. I was also absent at
my Dairy-house, as it is called Her grandfather, in order to invite her to him,
as often as her other friends would spare her, indulged her in erecting and
sitting-up a dairy-house in her own taste. When finished, it was so much
admired for its elegant simplicity and convenience, that the whole seat,
before, of old time, from its situation, called The Grove, was generally known
by the name of The Dairy-house; her grandfather, particularly, was fond of
having it so called.
, busied in the accounts relating to the estate which my grandfather had the
goodness to bequeath me; and which once a year are left to my inspection,
although I have given the whole into my papa's power.

My sister made me a visit there the day after Mr. Lovelace had been
introduced; and seemed highly pleased with the gentleman. His birth, his
fortune in possession, a clear 2000 l. per annum, as Lord M. had assured my
uncle; presumptive heir to that nobleman's large estate: His great expectations
from Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance; who, with his uncle,
interested themselves very warmly (he being the last of his line) to see him
married.

'So handsome a man! -- O her beloved Clary!' (for then she was ready to love
me dearly, from the overflowings of her good humor on his account!) 'He was
but too handsome a man for her! -- Were she but as amiable as somebody, there
would be a probability of holding his affections! -- For he was wild, she
heard; very wild, very gay; loved intrigue -- But he was young; a man of sense:
Would see his error; could she but have patience with his faults, if his faults
were not cured by marriage.'

Thus she ran on; and then wanted me 'to see the charming man,' as she called
him. -- Again concerned, 'that she was not handsome enough for him:' With, 'A
sad thing, that the man should have the advantage of the woman in that
particular.' -- But then, stepping to the glass, she complimented herself,
'That she was very well: That there were many women deemed passable, who were
inferior to herself: That she was always thought comely; and, let her tell me,
that comeliness having not so much to lose as beauty had, would hold, when that
would evaporate and fly off: -- Nay, for that matter,' (and again she turned to
the glass), 'her features were not irregular; her eyes not at all amiss.' And I
remember they were more than usually brilliant at that time. -- 'Nothing, in
short, to be sound fault with, though nothing very engaging, she doubted -- Was
there, Clary?'

Excuse me, my dear, I never was thus particular before; no, not to you. Nor
would I now have written thus freely of a sister; but that she makes a merit to
my brother, of disowning that she ever liked him; as I shall mention hereafter:
And then you will always have me give you minute descriptions, nor suffer me to
pass by the air and manner in which things are spoken, that are to be taken
notice of; rightly observeing, that air and manner often express more than the
accompanying words.

I congratulated her upon her prospects. She received my compliments with a
great deal of self-complacency.

She liked the gentleman still more at his next visit: And yet he made no
particular address to her; although an opportunity was given him for it. This was
wondered at, as my uncle had introduced him into our family, declaredly as a
visitor to my sister. But as we are ever ready to make excuses, when in good
humor with ourselves, for the supposed slights of those whose approbation we
wish to engage; so my sister found out a reason, much to Mr. Lovelace's
advantage, for his not improving the opportunity that was given him. -- It was
bashfulness, truly, in him. (Bashfulness in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!) -- Indeed,
gay and lively as he is, he has not the look of an impudent man. But, I fancy,
it is many, many years ago, since he was bashful.

Thus, however, could my sister make it out -- 'Upon her word, she believed Mr.
Lovelace deserved not the bad character he had as to women. He was really, to
her thinking, a modest man. He would have spoken out, she believed: But once or
twice, as he seemed to intend to do so, he was under so agree-able a confusion!
Such a profound respect he seemed to show her: A perfect reverence, she
thought: She loved dearly, that a gentleman in courtship should show a
reverence to his mistress.' -- So indeed we all do, I believe: And with reason;
since, if I may judge from what I have seen in many families, there is little
enough of it shown afterward. -- And she told my aunt Hervey, that she would
be a little less upon the reserve next time he came: 'She was not one of those
flirts, not she, who would give pain to a person that deserved to be
well-treated; and the more for the greatness of his value for her.' -- I wish,
she had not Somebody whom I love in her eye. Yet is not her censure unjust, I
believe: -- Is it, my dear? -- Excepting in one undue and harsh word?

In his third visit, Bella governed herself by this kind and considerate
principle: So that, according to her own account of the matter, the man might
have spoken out. -- But he was still bashful: He was not able to overcome this
unseasonable reverence. So this visit went off, as the former.

But now she began to be dissatisfied with him: She compared his general
character, with This his particular behavior to her; and, having never been
courted before, owned herself puzzled, how to deal with so odd a lover. 'What
did the man mean! -- Had not her uncle brought him declaredly as a suitor to
her? -- It could not be bashfulness (now she thought of it), since he might
have opened his mind to her uncle, if he wanted courage to speak directly to
her. -- Not that she cared much for the man neither: But it was right, surely,
that a woman should be put out of doubt, early, as to a man's intentions, in
such a case as This, from his own mouth. -- But, truly, she had begun to think,
that he was more solicitous to cultivate her mamma's good opinion, than hers!
-- Everybody, she owned, admired her mamma's conversation. -- But he was
mistaken, if he thought that would do with her. And then, for his own sake,
surely, he should put it into her power to be complaisant to him, if he gave
her cause of approbation. This distant behavior, she must take upon her to
say, was the more extraordinary, as he continued his visits, and declared
himself extremely desirous to cultivate a friendship with the whole family; and
as he could have no doubt about her sense, if she might take upon her to join
her own with the general opinion; he having taken great notice of, and admired
many of her good things, as they fell from her lips. -- Reserves were painful,
she must needs say, to open and free spirits, like hers: And yet she must tell
my aunt' (to whom all this was directed) 'that she should never forget what she
owed to her sex, and to herself, were Mr. Lovelace as unexceptionable in his
morals, as in his figure, and were he to urge his suit ever so warmly.'

I was not of her council. I was still absent. And it was agreed between my
aunt Hervey and her, that she was to be quite solemn and shy in his next visit,
if there were not a peculiarity in his address to her.

But my sister, it seems, had not considered the matter well. This was not the
way, as it proved, to be taken with a man of Mr. Lovelace's penetration, for
matters of mere omission: -- Nor with any man; since if love has not taken root
deep enough to cause it to shoot out into declaration, if an opportunity be
fairly given for it, there is little room to expect, that the blighting winds
of anger or resentment will bring it forward. Then my poor sister is not
naturally goodhumour'd. This is too well known a truth for me to endeavor to
conceal it, especially from you. She must therefore, I doubt, have appeared to
great disadvantage, when she aimed to be worse-temper'd than ordinary.

How they managed it in this conversation I know not: One would be tempted to
think by the issue, that Mr. Lovelace was ungenerous enough to seek the
occasion given See Mr. Lovelace's Letter, No. xxxi. in which he briefly
accounts for his conduct in this affair.
, and to improve it. Yet he thought fit to put the question too: -- But, she
says, it was not till by some means or other (she knew not how) he had wrought
her up to such a pitch of displeasure with him, that it was impossible for her
to recover herself, at the instant: Nevertheless he re-urged his question, as
expecting a definitive answer, without waiting for the return of her temper, or
endeavoring to mollify her: so that she was under a necessity of persisting in
her denial: Yet gave him reason to think, that she did not dislike his address,
only the manner of it; his court being rather made to her mamma than to
herself, as if he were sure of her consent at any time.

A good encouraging denial, I must own: -- As was the rest of her plea; to wit,
'A disinclination to change her state. -- Exceedingly happy as she was: She
never could be happier!' And suchlike consenting negatives, as I may call
them; and yet not intend a reflection upon my sister: For what can any young
creature, in the like circumstances, say, when she is not sure, but a too ready
consent may subject her to the slights of a sex, that generally values a
blessing, either more or less, as it is obtained with difficulty or ease? Miss
Biddulph's answer to a copy of verses from a gentleman, reproaching our sex, as
acting in disguise, is not a bad one, although you perhaps may think it too
acknowleging for the female character, Ungen'rous sex! -- To scorn us, if we are
kind;
And yet upbraid us, if we seem severe!
Do YOU, to encourage us to tell our mind,
Yourselves, put off disguise, and be sincere.
YOU talk of Coquetry! -- Your own false hearts
Compel our sex to act dissembling parts.


Here I am obliged to lay down my pen. I will soon resume it.

LETTER III. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Jan. 13, 14.
AND thus, as Mr. Lovelace thought fit to take it, had he his answer from my
sister. It was with very great regret, as he pretended (I doubt the man is an
hypocrite, my dear!), that be acquiesced in it. 'So much determinedness; such a
noble firmness in my sister; that there was no hope of prevailing upon her to
alter sentiments she had adopted on full consideration.' 'He sighed, as Bella
told us, when he took his leave of her: 'Profoundly sighed: Grasped her hand,
and kissed it with such an ardor. -- Withdrew with such an air of solemn
respect. -- She had him then before her. -- She could almost find in her heart,
although he had vexed her, to pity him.' A good intentional preparative, this
pity; since, at the time, she little thought that he would not renew his offer.

He waited on my mamma, after he had taken leave of Bella, and reported his ill
success, in so respectful a manner, both with regard to my sister, and to the
whole family, and with so much concern that he was not accepted as a relation
to it, that it left upon them all (my brother being then, as I have said, in
Scotland) impressions in his favor; and a belief, that this matter would
certainly be brought on again. But Mr. Lovelace going up directly to town,
where he stayed a whole fortnight; and meeting there with my uncle Antony, to
whom he regretted his niece's unhappy resolution not to change her state; it
was seen that there was a total end put to the affair.

My sister was not wanting to herself on this occasion; but made a virtue of
necessity; and the man was quite another man with her. 'A vain creature! too
well knowing his advantages: Yet those, not what she had conceived them to be!
-- Cool and warm by fits and starts: An ague-like lover: A steady man, a man of
virtue, a man of morals, was worth a thousand of such gay flutterers. Her
sister Clary might think it worth her while perhaps, to try to engage such a
man: She had patience: She was mistress of persuasion; and indeed, to do the
girl justice, had something of a person: But as for her, she would not have a
man, of whose heart she could not be sure for one moment; no, not for the
world: And most sincerely glad was she, that she had rejected him.'

But when Mr. Lovelace returned into the country, he thought fit to visit my
papa and mamma; hoping, as he told them, that, however unhappy he had been in
the rejection of the wished for alliance; he might be allowed to keep up an
acquaintance and friendship with a family which he should always respect. And
then, unhappily, as I may say, was I at home, and present.

It was immediately observed, that his attention was fixed on me. My sister, as
soon as he was gone, in a spirit of bravery, seemed desirous to promote his
address, should it be tendered.

My aunt Hervey was there; and was pleased to say, We should make the finest
couple in England; if my sister had no objection. -- No, indeed, with a haughty
toss, was my sister's reply! -- It would be strange if she had, after the
denial she had given him upon full deliberation.

My mamma declared, That her only dislike of his alliance with either daughter,
was on account of his faulty morals.

My uncle Harlowe, That his daughter Clary, as he delighted to call me from
childhood, would reform him, if any woman in the world could.

My uncle Antony gave his approbation in high terms: But referred, as my aunt
had done, to my sister.

She repeated her contempt of him; and declared, that were there not another
man in England, she would not have him. She was ready, on the contrary, she
could assure them, to resign her pretensions under hand and seal, if Miss Clary
were taken with his tinsel; and if every one else approved of his address to
the girl.

My papa, indeed, after a long silence, being urged to speak his mind, by my
uncle Antony, said, That he had a letter from his son James, on his hearing of
Mr. Lovelace's visits to his daughter Arabella; which he had not shown to
anybody but my mamma; that treaty being at an end when he received it: That in
this letter he expressed great dislikes to an alliance with Mr. Lovelace, on
the score of his immoralities: That he knew, indeed, there was an old grudge
between them: That, being desirous to prevent all occasions of disunion and
animosity in his family, he would suspend the declaration of his own mind, till
his son arrived, and till he had heard his further objections: That he was the
more inclined to make his son this compliment, as Mr. Lovelace's general
character gave but too much ground for his son's dislike of him; adding, That
he had heard, (So, he supposed, had every-one) that he was a very extravagant
man: that he had contracted debts in his travels: And, indeed, he was pleased
to say, he had the air of a spendthrift.

These particulars I had partly from my aunt Hervey, and partly from my sister;
for I was called out, as soon as the subject was entered upon. And, when I
returned, my uncle Antony asked me, How I should like Mr. Lovelace? Everybody
saw, he was pleased to say, that I had made a conquest.

I immediately answered, Not at all: He seemed to have too good an opinion both
of his person and parts, to have any great regard to his wife, let him marry
whom he would.

My sister, particularly, was pleased with this answer, and confirmed it to be
just; with a compliment to my judgment: -- For it was hers.

But the very next day Lord M. came to Harlowe-Place: I was then absent: And,
in his nephew's name, made a proposal in form; declaring, That it was the
ambition of all his family to be related to ours: And he hoped his kinsman
would not have such an answer on the part of the younger sister, as he had had
on that of the elder.

In short, Mr. Lovelace's visits were admitted, as those of a man who had not
deserved disrespect from our family; but, as to his address to me, with a
reservation, as above, on my papa's part, that he would determine nothing
without his son. My discretion, as to the rest, was confided in: For still I
had the same objections as to the man: Nor would I, when we were better
acquainted, hear anything but general talk from him; giving him no opportunity
of conversing with me in private.

He bore this with a resignation little expected from his natural temper, which
is generally reported to be quick and hasty; unused, it seems, from childhood,
to check or control: A case too common in considerable families, where there
is an only son: And his mother never had any other child. But, as I have
heretofore told you, I could perceive, notwithstanding this resignation, that
he had so good an opinion of himself, as not to doubt, that his person and
accomplishments would insensibly engage me: And could That be once done, he
told my aunt Hervey, he should hope from so steady a temper, that his hold in
my affections would be durable: While my sister accounted for his patience in
another manner, which would perhaps have had more force, if it had come from a
person less prejudiced: 'That the man was not fond of marrying at all: That he
might perhaps have half-a-score mistresses; and that delay might be as
convenient for his roving, as for my well-acted indifference.' -- That was her
kind expression.

Whatever were his motive for a patience so generally believed to be out of his
usual character, and where the object of his address was supposed to be of
fortune considerable enough to engage his warmest attention, he certainly
escaped many mortifications by it: For while my papa suspended his approbation
till my brother's arrival, he received from every-one those civilities which
were due to his birth: And although we heard, from time to time, reports to his
disadvantage with regard to morals; yet could we not question him upon them,
without giving him greater advantages, than the situation he was in with us
would justify to prudence; since it was much more likely, that his address
would not be allowed of, than that it would.

And thus was he admitted to converse with our family, almost upon his own
terms; for while my friends saw nothing in his behavior but what was extremely
respectful, and observed in him no violent importunity, they seemed to have
taken a great liking to his conversation: While I considered him only as a a
common guest, when he came; and thought myself no more concerned in his visits,
nor at his entrance or departure, than any other of the family.

But this indifference of my side was the means of procuring him one very great
advantage; for upon it was grounded that correspondence by letters, which
succeeded; -- and which, had it been to be begun, when the family-animosity
broke out, would never have been entered into on my part. The occasion was this:

My uncle Hervey has a young gentleman entrusted to his care, whom he has
thoughts of sending abroad, a year or two hence, to make the Grand Tour, as it
is called; and, finding Mr. Lovelace could give a good account of everything
necessary for a young traveller to observe upon such an occasion, he desired
him to write down a description of the courts and countries he had visited; and
what was most worthy of curiosity in them.

He consented, on condition that I would direct his subjects, as he called it:
And, as every-one had heard his manner of writing commended; and thought his
relations might be agreeable amusements in winter evenings; and that he could
have no opportunity particularly to address me in them, since they were to be
read in full assembly, before they were to be given to the young gentleman; I
made the less scruple to write, and to make observations, and put questions,
for our further information -- Still the less, perhaps, as I love writing; and
those who do, are fond, you know, of occasions to use the pen: And then, having
every one's consent, and my uncle Hervey's desire that I would, I thought, that
if I had been the only scrupulous person, it would have shown a particularity,
that a vain man would construe to his advantage; and which my sister would not
fail to animadvert upon.

You have seen some of these letters; and have been pleased with his account of
persons, places, and things; and we have both agreed, that he was no common
observer upon what he had seen.

My sister herself allowed, that the man had a tolerable knack of writing and
describing: And my papa, who had been abroad in his youth, said, That his
remarks were curious, and showed him to be a person of reading, judgment, and
taste.

Thus was a kind of correspondence begun between him and me, with general
approbation; while everyone wondered at, and was pleased with, his patient
veneration of me; for so they called it. However, it was not doubted, that he
would soon be more importunate; since his visits were more frequent, and he
acknowleged to my aunt Hervey a passion for me, accompanied with an awe, that
he had never known before; to which he attributed what he called his but
seeming acquiescence with my papa's pleasure, and the distance I kept him at.
And yet, my dear, this may be his usual manner of behavior to our sex; for had
not my sister, at first, all his reverences?

Mean time, my father, expecting this importunity, kept in readiness the
reports he had heard in his disfavour, to charge them upon him then, as so many
objections to his address. And it was highly agreeable to me, that he did so:
It would have been strange, if it were not; since the person who could reject
Mr. Wyerley's address for the sake of his free opinions, must have been
inexcusable, had she not rejected another's for his freer practices.

But I should own, that in the letters he sent me, upon the general subject, he
more than once enclosed a particular one, declaring his passionate regards for
me, and complaining, with fervor enough, of my reserves: But of these I took
not the least notice; for as I had not written to him at all, but upon a
subject so general, I thought it was but right, to let what he wrote upon one
so particular, pass off as if I never had seen it; and the rather, as I was not
then at liberty, from the approbation his letters met with, to break off the
correspondence, without assigning the true reason for doing so. Besides, with
all his respectful assiduities, it was easy to observe, (if it had not been his
general character) that his temper is naturally haughty and violent; and I had
seen enough of that untractable spirit in my brother, to like it in one who
hoped to be still nearer related to me.

I had a little specimen of this temper of his, upon the very occasion I have
mentioned: For, after he had sent me a third particular letter with the general
one, he asked me, the next time he came to Harlowe-Place, If I had not received
such a one from him? -- I told him, I should never answer one, so sent; and,
that I had waited for such an occasion as he had now given me, to tell him so:
I desired him therefore not to write again on the subject; assuring him, that
if he did, I would return both, and never write another line to him.

You cannot imagine how saucily the man looked; as if, in short, he was
disappointed, that he had not made a more sensible impression upon me: And when
he recollected himself (as he did immediately), what a visible Struggle it cost
him to change his haughty airs for more placid ones. But I took no notice of
either; for I thought it best to convince him, by the coolness and
indifference, with which I repulsed his forward hopes (at the same time
intending to avoid the affectation of pride or vanity), that he was not
considerable enough in my eyes to make me take over-ready offense at what he
said, or how he looked: In other words, that I had not value enough for him, to
treat him with peculiarity either by smiles or frowns. Indeed, he had cunning
enough to give me, undesignedly, a piece of instruction which taught me this
caution; for he had said in conversation once, 'That if a man could not make a
lady in courtship own herself pleased with him, it was as much, and oftentimes
more, to his purpose, to make her angry with him.'

I must break off here. But will continue the subject the very first
opportunity. Mean time, I am,

Your most affectionate friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER IV. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Jan. 15.
THIS, my dear, was the situation Mr. Lovelace and I were in, when my brother
arrived from Scotland.

The moment Mr. Lovelace's visits were mentioned to him, he, without either
hesitation or apology, expressed his disapprobation of them. He found great
flaws in his character; and took the liberty to say, in so many words, That he
wondered, how it came into the hearts of his uncles to encourage such a man for
either of his sisters: At the same time returning his thanks to my father for
declining his consent till he arrived, in such a manner, I thought, as a
superior would do, when he commended an inferior, for having well performed
his duty in his absence.

He justified his avowed inveteracy, by common fame, and by what he had known
of him at college; declaring, That he had ever hated him; ever should hate him;
and would never own him for a brother, or me for a sister; if I married him.

That college-begun antipathy I have heard accounted for in this manner:

Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and courage; and no less, it
seems, for the swift and surprising progress he made in all parts of
literature: For diligence in his studies, in the hours of study, he had hardly
his equal. This, it seems, was his general character at the university; and it
gained him many friends among the more learned youth; while those who did not
love him, feared him, by reason of the offense his vivacity made him too ready
to give, and of the courage he showed in supporting the offense when given;
which procured him as many followers as he pleased among the mischievous sort.
-- No very amiable character, you will say, upon the whole.

But my brother's temper was not happier. His native haughtiness could not bear
a superiority so visible; and whom we fear more than love, we are not far from
hating: And, having less command of his passions, than the other, was evermore
the subject of his, perhaps indecent, ridicule: So, that they never me^ without
quarreling: And everybody, either from love or fear, siding with his
antagonist, he had a most uneasy time of it, while both continued in the same
college. -- It was the less wonder, the efore, that a young man, who is not
noted for the gentleness of his temper, should resume an antipathy early begun,
and so deeply-rooted.

He found my sister, who waited but for the occasion, ready to join him in his
resentments against the man he hated. She utterly disclaimed all manner of
regard for him: 'Never liked him at all: -- His estate was certainly much
encumbered: It was impossible it should be otherwise; so entirely devoted as he
was to his pleasures. He kept no house; had no equipage: Nobody pretended that
he wanted pride: The reason therefore was easy to be guessed at.' And then did
she boast of, and my brother praise her for, refusing him: And both joined on
all occasions to depreciate him, and not seldom made the occasions; their
displeasure against him causing every subject to run into this, if it began not
with it.

I was not solicitous to vindicate him, when I was not joined in their
reflections. I told them, I did not value him enough to make a difference in
the family on his account: And as he was supposed to have given too much cause
for their ill opinion of him, I thought he ought to take the consequence of his
own faults.

Now-and-then, indeed, when I observed, that their vehemence carried them
beyond all bounds of probability, I thought it but justice to put in a word for
him. But this only subjected me to reproach, as having a prepossession in his
favor that I would not own. -- So that when I could not change the subject, I
used to retire either to my music, or to my closet.

Their behavior to him, when they could not help seeing him, was very cold and
disobliging; but, as yet, not directly affrontive: For they were in hopes of
prevailing upon my papa to forbid his visits. But, as there was nothing in his
behavior, that might warrant such a treatment of a man of his birth and
fortune, they succeeded not: And then they were very earnest with me to forbid
them. I asked, What authority I had to take such a step in my father's house;
and when my behavior to him was so distant, that he seemed to be as much the
guest of any other person of the family, themselves excepted, as mine? -- In
revenge, they told me, That it was cunning management between us; and that we
both understood one another better than we pretended to do. And at last, they
gave such a loose to their passions, all of a sudden The reason of this their
more-openly shown animos^ty is given in letter xiii.
, as I may say, that instead of withdrawing, as they used to do when he came,
they threw themselves in his way, purposely to affront him.

Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brooked this: But, nevertheless,
contented himself to complai^ of it to me: In high terms, however; telling me,
that but for my sake, my brother's treatment of him was not to be borne.

I was sorry for the merit this gave him, in his own opinion, with me: And the
more as some of the affronts he received, were too flagrant to be excused: But
I told him, That I was determined not to fall out with my brother, if I could
help it, whatever were his faults: And, since they could not see one another
with temper, should be glad, that he would not throw himself in my brother's
way; and I was sure my brother would not seek him.

He was very much nettled at this answer: But said, He must bear his affronts,
if I would have it so. He had been accused himself of violence in his temper:
But he hoped to show on this occasion, that he had a command of his passions,
which few young men, so provoked, would be able to show; and doubted not, but
it would be attributed to a proper motive by a person of my generosity and
penetration.

My brother had just before, with the approbation of my uncles, employed a
person related to a discharged bailiff or steward of Lord M. who had had the
management of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs (from which he was also
dismissed by him), to inquire into his debts; after his companions; into his
amors; and the like.

My aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following particulars of what the
man said of him.

'That he was a generous landlord: That he spared nothing for solid and lasting
improvements upon his estate: And that he looked into his own affairs, and
understood them: That he had, when abroad, been very expensive; and contracted
a large debt (for he made no secret of his affairs); yet chose to limit himself
to an annual sum, and to decline equipage, in order to avoid being obliged to
his uncle and aunts; from whom he might have what money he pleased; but that he
was very jealous of their control; had often quarrels with them, and treated
them so freely, that they were all afraid of him. However, that his estate was
never mortgaged, as my brother had heard it was; his credit was always high;
and, he believed, he was by this time, near upon, if not quite, clear of the
world.

'He was a sad gentleman, he said, as to women: -- If his tenants had pretty
daughters, they chose to keep them out of his sight. He believed, he kept no
particular mistress; for he had heard newelty, that was the man's word, was
everything with him. But for his uncle's and aunts teazings, fansy'd he would
not think of marriage: Was never known to be disguised with liquor: But was a
great plotter, and a great writer: That he lived a wild life in town, by what
he had heard: Had six or seven companions as bad as himself; whom now-and-then
he brought down with him; and the country was always glad when they went up
again. He would have it, that, although passionate, he was good-humored; loved
as well to take a jest, as to give one, and would railly himself, upon
occasion, the freest of any man he ever knew.'

This was his character from an enemy; for, as my aunt observed, every thing
the man said commendably of him, came grudgingly, with a Must needs say -- To
do him justice, etc. while the contrary was delivered with a free good will.
And this character, as a worse was expected, though This was bad enough, not
answering the end of inquiring after it, my brother and sister were more
apprehensive than before, that his address would be encouraged: since the worst
part of it was known, or supposed, when he was first introduced to my sister.

But, with regard to myself, I must observe in his disfavour, that,
notwithstanding the merit he wanted to make with me, for his patience upon my
brother's ill-treatment of him, I owed him no compliments for trying to
conciliate with him. Not that I believe it would have signified any thing, if
he had made ever such court, either to him, or to my sister: Yet one might have
expected, from a man of his politeness, and from his pretensions, you know,
that he would have been willing to try. Instead of which, such a hearty
contempt he showed of them both, of my brother especially, that I ever heard of
it with aggravations. And for me to have hinted at an alteration in his
behavior to my brother, was an advantage I knew he would have been proud of;
and which therefore I had no mind to give him. -- But I doubted not, that
having so very little encouragement from anybody, his pride would soon take
fire, and he would of himself discontinue his visits, or go to town; where,
till he came acquainted with our family, he used chiefly to reside: And in this
latter case he had no reason to expect, that I would receive, much less answer,
his letters; the occasion, which had led me to receive any of his, being by
this time over.

But my brother's antipathy would not permit him to wait for such an event; and
after several excesses, which Mr. Lovelace still returned with contempt, and a
haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, my brother took upon himself
to fill up the door-way, once, when he came, as if to oppose his entrance: and,
upon his asking for me, demanded, What his business were with his sister?

The other, with a challenging air, as my brother says, told him, He would
answer a gentleman any question: But he wished, that Mr. James Harlowe, who had
of late given himself high airs, would remember, that he was not now at college.

Just then the good Dr. Lewin, who frequently honors me with a visit of
conversation, as he is pleased to call it, and had parted with me in my own
parlour, came to the door; and, hearing the words, interposed; both having
their hands upon their swords: And telling Mr. Lovelace where I was, he burst
by my brother, to come to me; leaving him chafing, he said, like a hunted boar
at bay.

This alarmed us all. My father was pleased to hint to Mr. Lovelace; and I, by
his command, spoke a great deal plainer; that he wished he would discontinue
his visits, for the peace-sake of the family.

But Mr. Lovelace is not a man to be easily brought to give up his purpose, in
a point, especially, wherein he pretends his heart is so much engaged: And an
absolute prohibition not having been given, things went on for a little while
as before: For I saw plainly, that to have denied myself to his visits (which,
however, I declined receiving, as often as I could) was to bring forward some
desperate issue between the two; since the offense so readily given on one
side, was only brooked by the other, out of consideration to me. And thus did
my brother's rashness lay me under an obligation where I would least have owed
it.

The intermediate proposals of Mr. Symmes and Mr. Mullins, both (in turn)
encouraged by my brother, were inducements for him to be more patient for a
while; he being in hopes, as nobody thought me over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's
favor, that he should engage my father and uncles to espouse the one or the
other in opposition to him. But when he found, that I had interest enough to
disengage myself from their addresses, as I had (before he went to Scotland,
and, before Mr. Lovelace visited here) of Mr. Wyerley's, he then kept no
measures: And first set himself to upbraid me for a supposed prepossession;
which he treated, as if it were criminal: And then to insult Mr. Lovelace in
person. And it being at Mr. Edward Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes,
two miles off, and no good Dr. Lewin again to interpose, the unhappy rencounter
followed. My brother was disarmed in it, as you have heard; and on being
brought home, and giving us ground to suppose he was much worse hurt than he
really was, and a fever ensuing, every-one flamed out; and all was laid at my
door.

Mr. Lovelace, for three days together, sent twice each day to inquire after my
brother's health; and, although he received rude, and even shocking returns, he
thought fit, on the fourth day, to make in person the fame inquiries; and
received still greater incivilities from my two uncles, who happened to be both
there. My papa also was held by force from going to him with his sword in his
hand, although he had the gout upon him.

I fainted away with terror, seeing every-one so violent; and hearing his
voice, swearing he would not depart without seeing me, or making my uncles ask
his pardon for the indignities he had received at their hands: A door being
also held fast locked between them; my mamma struggling with my papa; and my
sister, after treating him with virulence, insulting me, as fast as I
recovered. But, when he was told how ill I was, he departed, vowing revenge.

He was ever a favorite with our domestics. His bounty to them, and having
always something facetious to say to each, had made them all of his party: And
on this occasion they privately blamed everybody else, and reported his
patience and gentlemanly behavior (till the provocations given him ran very
high) in such favorable terms, that those reports, and my apprehensions of the
consequence of this treatment, induced me to read a letter he sent me that
night; and, it being written in the most respectful terms, offering to submit
the whole to my decision, and to govern himself entirely by my will, to answer
it some days after.

To this unhappy necessity was owing our renewed correspondence, as I may call
it: Yet I did not write, till I had informed myself from Mr. Symmes's brother,
that he was really insulted into the act of drawing his sword, by my brother's
repeatedly threatening, upon his excusing himself out of regard to me, to brand
him if he did not; and, by all the inquiry I could make, that he was again the
sufferer from my uncles, in a more violent manner than I have related.

The same circumstances were related to my papa, and other friends, by Mr.
Symmes; but they had gone too far, in making themselves parties to the quarrel,
either to retract or forgive; and I was forbid corresponding with him, or to be
seen a moment in his company.

But one thing I can say, but that in confidence, because my mamma commanded me
not to mention it: -- That, expressing her apprehension of the consequences of
the indignities offered to Mr. Lovelace, she told me, She would leave it to my
prudence, to prevent, all I could, the impending mischief on one side.

I am obliged to break off. But, I believe, I have written enough to answer
very fully all that you have commanded from me. It is not for a child to seek
to clear her own character, or to justify her actions, at the expense of the
most revered ones: Yet, as I know, that the account of all those further
proceedings, by which I may be affected, will be interesting to so dear a
friend (who will communicate to others no more than what is fitting), I will
continue to write as I have opportunity, as minutely as we are used to write to
each other. Indeed I have no delight, as I have often told you, equal to that
which I take in conversing with you: -- By letter, when I cannot in person.

Mean time, I cannot help saying, that I am exceedingly concerned to find, that
I am become so much the public talk, as you tell me, and as everybody tells
me, I am. Your kind, your precautionary regard for my fame, and the opportunity
you have given me to tell my own story, previous to any new accident, which
heaven avert! is so like the warm friend I have ever found my dear Miss How,
that, with redoubled obligation, you bind me to be

Your ever-grateful and affectionate CLARISSA HARLOWE.


Copy of the requested PREAMBLE to the clauses in her grandfather's will, in
her favor, enclosed in the preceding letter.
AS the particular estate I have mentioned and described above is principally
of my own raising: As my three sons have been uncommonly prosperous; and are
very rich: The eldest by means of the unexpected benefits he reaps from his
newfound mines: The second, by what has, as unexpectedly, fallen in to him, on
the deaths of several relations of his present wife, the worthy daughter by
both sides of very honorable families; over and above the very large portion
which he received with her in marriage: My son Antony, by his East India
traffic, and successful voyages: As furthermore my grandson James will be
sufficiently provided for by his godmother Lovell's kindness to him; who,
having no near relations, assures me, that she has, as well by deed of gift, as
by will, left him both her Scottish and English estates: For never (blessed be
God therefore!) was there a family more prosperous in all its branches: And as
my second son James will very probably make it up to my grandson, and also to
my granddaughter Arabella; to whom I intend no disrespect; nor have reason;
for she is a very hopeful and dutiful child: And as my sons John and Antony
seem not inclined to a married life; so that my son James is the only one who
has children, or is likely to have any: -- For all these reasons; and because
my dearest and beloved granddaughter Clarissa Harlowe has been from infancy a
matchless young creature in her duty to me, and admired by all who knew her, as
a very extraordinary child; I must therefore take the pleasure of considering
her, as my own peculiar child; and this, without intending offense; and I hope
it will not be taken as any, since my son James can bestow his favors
accordingly, and in greater proportion, upon Miss Arabella, and Master James:
-- These, I say, are the reasons which move me to dispose of the
above-described estate in the precious child's favor; who is the delight of my
old age; and, I verily think, has contributed, by her amiable duty, and kind
and tender regards, to prolong my life.

Wherefore it is my express will and commandment, and I injoin my three sons
John, James, and Antony, and my grandson James, and my granddaughter Arabella,
as they value my blessing, and my memory, and would wish their own last wills
and desires to be fulfilled by their survivors, that they will not impugn or
contest the following bequests and dispositions in favor of my said
granddaughter Clarissa, although they should not be strictly conformable to law,
or the forms thereof; nor suffer them to be controverted or disputed on any
pretense whatsoever.

And in this confidence, etc. etc. etc.


LETTER V. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Jan. 20.
I HAVE been hindered from prosecuting my intention. Neither nights nor
mornings have been my own. My mamma has been very ill; and would have no other
nurse but me. I have not stirred from her bedside; for she kept her bed; and
two nights I had the honor of sharing it with her.

Her disorder was a very violent colic. The contentions of these fierce, these
masculine spirits, and the apprehension of mischiefs that may arise from the
increasing animosity which all here have against Mr. Lovelace, and his too-well
known resentful and intrepid character, she cannot bear. Then the foundations
laid, as she dreads, for jealousy and heart-burnings in her own family, late so
happy and so united, afflict exceedingly a gentle and sensible mind, which has
from the beginning, on all occasions, sacrifice its own inward satisfaction to
outward peace. My brother and sister, who used very often to jar, are now so
much one, and are so much together ( caballing was the word that dropped from
her, as if at unawares), that she is full of fears of consequences that may
follow; -- to my prejudice, perhaps, is her kind concern; since she sees that
they behave to me every hour with more and more shyness and reserve: Yet, would
she but exert that authority, which the superiority of her fine talents gives
her, all these family-feuds might perhaps be crushed in their but-yet
beginnings; especially as she may be assured, that all fitting concessions
shall be made by me, not only as they are my elders, but for the sake of so
excellent and so indulgent a mother.

For, if I may say to you, my dear, what I would not to any other person
living, it is my opinion, that, had she been of a temper that would have borne
less, she would have had ten times less to bear than she has had. No
commendation, you will say, of the generosity of those spirits, which can turn to
its own disquiet so much condescending goodness.

Upon my word, I am sometimes tempted to think, that we may make the world
allow for and respect us as we please, if we can but be sturdy in our wills,
and set out accordingly. It is but being the less beloved for it, that is all.
And, if we have power to oblige those we have to do with, it will not appear to
us, that we are. Our flatterers will tell us any thing sooner than our faults.

Were there not truth in this observation, is it possible, that my brother and
sister could make their very failings, their vehemences, of such importance to
all the family? 'How will my son, how will my nephew, take this or that
measure? What will he say to it? Let us consult him about it;' are references
always previous to every resolution taken by his superiors, whose will ought to
be his. Well may he expect to be treated with this deference by every other
person, when my papa himself, generally so absolute, constantly pays it to him;
and the more since his godmother's bounty has given independence to a spirit
that was before under too little restraint. -- But whither may these
reflections lead me? -- I know you do not love any of us, but my mamma and me;
and, being above all disguises, make me sensible that you do not, oftener than
I wish you did. -- Ought I then to add force to your dislikes of those whom I
wish you more to like? -- my father, especially; for he, poor gentleman! has
some excuse for his impatience of contradiction. He is not naturally an
ill-temper'd man; and in his person and air, and in his conversation too, when
not under the torture of a gouty paroxysm, everybody distinguishes the
gentleman born and educated.

Our sex, perhaps, must expect to bear a little uncourtliness, shall I call it?
-- from the husband, whom, as the lover, they let know the preference their
hearts gave him to all other men. -- Say what they will of generosity being a
manly virtue; but, upon my word, my dear, I have ever yet observed, that it is
not to be met with in that sex one time in ten, that it is to be found in ours.
-- But my father was sour'd by the cruel distemper I have named; which seized
him all at once in the very prime of life, in so violent a manner, as to take
from the most active of minds, as his was, all power of activity, and that, in
all appearance, for life; -- It imprisoned, as I may say, his lively spirits in
himself, and turned the edge of them against his own peace; his extraordinary
prosperity adding but to his impatiency: For those, I believe, who want the
fewest earthly blessings, most regret that they want any.

But my brother! what excuse can be made for his haughty and morose temper? He
is really, my dear, I am sorry to have occasion to say it, an ill-temper'd
young man; and treats my mamma sometimes -- Indeed he is not dutiful. -- But,
possessing everything, he has the vice of age, mingled with the ambition of
youth, and enjoys nothing -- but his own haughtiness and ill-temper, I was
going to say. -- Yet again am I adding force to your dislikes of some of us. --
Once, my dear, it was, perhaps, in your power to have molded him as you
pleased. -- Could you have been my sister! -- Then had I had a friend in a
sister. -- But no wonder that he don't love you now; who could nip in the bud,
and that with a disdain, let me say, too much of kin to his haughtiness, a
passion, that would not have wanted a fervor worthy of the object; and which
possibly would have made him so. --

But no more of this. I will prosecute my former intention in my next; which I
will sit down to as soon as breakfast is over; dispatching this by the
messenger whom you have so kindly sent to inquire after us, on my silence. Mean
time, I am,

Your most affectionate and obliged friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER VI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Harlowe-Place, Jan. 20.
I WILL now resume my narrative of proceedings here. -- My brother being in a
good way, although you may be sure, that his resentments are rather heightened
than abated by the galling disgrace he has received, my friends (my papa and
uncles, however, if not my brother and sister) begin to think, that I have been
treated unkindly. My mamma has been so good as to tell me this, since I sent
away my last.

Nevertheless, I believe they all think that I receive letters from Mr.
Lovelace. But Lord M. being inclined rather to support than to blame his
nephew, they seem to be so much afraid of him, that they do not put it to me,
whether I do, or not; conniving on the contrary, as it should seem, at the only
method left to allay the vehemence of a spirit, which they have so much
provoked: For he still insists upon satisfaction from my uncles; and this,
possibly (for he wants not art) as the best way to be introduced again, with
some advantage, into our family. And indeed my aunt Hervey has put it to my
mamma, whether it were not best to prevail upon my brother to take a turn to
his Yorkshire estate, which he was intending to do before; and to tarry there
till all is blown over.

But this is very far from being his intention: For he has already begun to
hint again, that he shall never be easy or satisfied, till I am married; and,
finding neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be accepted, has proposed Mr.
Wyerley once more, on the score of his great passion for me. This I have again
rejected; and but yesterday he mentioned one who has applied to him by letter,
making high offers. This is Mr. Solmes; rich Solmes, you know they call him.
But this has not met with the attention of one single soul.

If none of his schemes of marrying me take effect, he has thoughts, I am told,
of proposing to me to go to Scotland, in order, as the compliment is, to put
his house there in such order as our own is in. But this my mamma intends to
oppose for her own sake; because, having relieved her, as she is pleased to
say, of the household cares (for which, my sister, you know, has no turn), they
must again devolve upon her, if I go. And if she did not oppose it, I should;
for, believe me, I have no mind to be his housekeeper; and, I am sure, were I
to go with him, I should be treated rather as a servant than a sister: --
Perhaps, not the better because I am his sister. And, if Mr. Lovelace should
follow me, things might be worse than they are now.

But I have besought my mamma, who is apprehensive of Mr. Lovelace's visits,
and for fear of whom my uncles never stir out without arms and armed servants,
(my brother also being near well enough to go abroad again), to procure me
permission to be your guest for a fortnight, or so. -- Will your mamma, think
you, my dear, give me leave?

I dare not ask to go to my dairy-house, as my good grandfather would call it:
For I am now afraid of being thought to have a wish to enjoy that independence
to which his will has entitled me: And, as matters are situated, such a wish
would be imputed to my favor to the man whom they have now so great an
antipathy to. And, indeed, could I be as easy and happy here, as I used to be,
I would defy that man, and all his sex; and never repent, that I have given the
power of my fortune into my papa's hands.

Just now, my mamma has rejoiced me, with the news, that my requested
permission is granted. Everyone thinks it best, that I should go to you, except
my brother. But he was told, that he must not expect to rule in every thing. I
am to be sent for into the great parlour, where are my two uncles and my aunt
Hervey, and to be acquainted with this concession in form.

You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of solemnity among us. But never
was there a family more united, in its different branches, than ours. Our
uncles consider us as their own children; and declare, that it is for our sakes
they live single. So that they are advised with upon every article relating to,
or that may affect, us. It is therefore the less wonder, at a time when they
understand, that Mr. Lovelace is determined to pay us an amicable visit, as he
calls it (but which I am sure cannot end so) that they should both be consulted
upon the permission I had desired to attend you.

I will acquaint you with what passed at the general leave given me to be your
guest. And yet I know, that you will not love my brother the better for my
communication. But I am angry with him myself, and cannot help it. And,
besides, it is proper to let you know the terms I go upon, and their motives
for permitting me to go.

Clary, said my mamma, as soon as I entered the great parlour, your request, to
go to Miss Howe's for a few days, has been taken into consideration, and
granted --

Much against my liking, I assure you, said my brother, rudely interrupting her.

Son James! said my father, and knit his brows.

He was not daunted. His arm is in a sling. He often has the mean art to look
upon that, when any thing is hinted, that may be supposed to lead toward the
least favor to, or reconciliation with, Mr. Lovelace. -- Let the girl then (I
am often the girl with him!) be prohibited seeing that vile libertine.

Nobody spoke.

Do you hear, sister Clary? taking their silence for approbation of what he had
dictated; you are not to receive visits from Lord M's nephew.

Every-one still remained silent.

Do you so understand the license you have, Miss? interrogated he.

I would be glad, Sir, said I, to understand that you are my brother; -- and
that you would understand, that you are only my brother.

O the fond, fond heart! with a s^eer of insult, lifting up his hands.

Sir, said I to my papa, to your justice I appeal: If I have deserved
reflection, let me not be spared. But if I am to be answerable for the rashness
--

No more! -- No more, of either side, said my papa. You are not to receive the
visits of that Lovelace, though: -- Nor are you, son James, to reflect upon your
sister: She is a worthy child.

Sir, I have done, replied he; -- and yet I have her honor at heart, as much
as the honor of the rest of the family.

And hence, Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections upon me!

Well, but, you observe, Miss, said he, that it is not I, but your papa, that
tells you, that you are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace.

Cousin Harlowe, said my aunt Hervey, allow me to say, That my cousin Clary's
prudence may be confided in.

I am convinced it may, joined my mamma.

But, Aunt, but, Madam (put in my sister) there is no hurt, I presume, in
letting my sister know the condition she goes to Miss How upon; since, if he
gets a knack of visiting her there --

You may be sure, interrupted my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavor to see her
there.

So would such an impudent man here, said my uncle Antony: And it is better
there than here.

Better nowhere, said my papa. -- I command you, turning to me, on pain of my
displeasure, that you see him not at all.

I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do assure you; Nor at all, if
I can decently avoid it.

You know with what indifference, said my mamma, she has hitherto seen him. --
Her prudence may be trusted to, as my sister Hervey says.

With what ap- pa-rent indifference, drolled my brother --

Son James! said my father, sternly --

I have done, Sir, said he. -- But again, in a provoking manner, reminded me of
the prohibition.

Thus ended this conference.

Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man shall not come near your house?
-- But what an inconsistence is this, when they consent to my going, thinking
his visits here no otherwise to be avoided! -- But, if he does come, I charge
you, never leave us alone together.

As I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your mamma, I will put everything
in order here, and be with you in two or three days.

Mean time, I am

Your most affectionate and obliged CLARISSA HARLOWE.

LETTER VII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW. (After her return from her.)
Harlowe-Place, Feb. 20.
I BEG your excuse for not writing sooner. Alas, my dear, I have sad prospects
before me! My brother and sister have succeeded in all their views. They have
found out another lover for me; an hideous one: -- Yet he is encouraged by
everybody. -- No wonder that I was ordered home so suddenly! -- At an hour's
warning! -- No other notice, you know, than what was brought with the chariot
that was to carry me back. -- It was for fear, as I have been informed (an
unworthy fear!), that I should have entered into any concert with Mr. Lovelace,
had I known their motive for commanding me home; apprehending, it is evident,
that I should dislike the man.

And well might they apprehend so: -- For who do you think he is? -- No other
than that Solmes! -- Could you have believed it? -- And they are all determined
too; my mamma with the rest! -- Dear, dear excellence! how could she be thus
brought over! -- when I am assured, that, on his first being proposed, she was
pleased to say, That, had Mr. Solmes the Indies in possession, and would endow
me with them, she should not think him deserving of her Clarissa Harlowe.

The reception I met with at my return, so different from what I used to meet
with on every little absence (and now I had been from them three weeks),
convinced me, that I was to suffer for the happiness I had had in your company
and conversation for that most agreeable period. I will give you an account of
it.

My brother met me at the door, and gave me his hand, when I stepped out of the
chariot. He bowed very low: Pray, Miss, favor me. -- I thought it in good
humor; but found it afterward mock respect: And so he led me, in great form,
I prattling all the way, inquiring of every-body's health (although I was so soon
to see them, and there was hardly time for answers), into the great parlour;
where were my father, mother, my two uncles, and my sister.

I was struck all of a heap as soon as I entered, to see a solemnity which I
had been so little used to on the like occasions, in the countenance of every
dear relation. They all kept their seats. I ran to my papa, and kneeled: Then
to my mamma: And met from both a cold salute: From my papa, a blessing but
halfpronounced: My mamma, indeed, called me, Child; but embraced me not with
her usual indulgent ardor.

After I had paid my duty to my uncles, and my compliments to my sister, which
she received with solemn and stiff form, I was bid to sit down. But my heart
was full: And I said it became me to stand, if I could stand a reception so
awful and unusual. I was forced to turn my face from them, and pull out my
handkerchief.

My unbrotherly accuser hereupon stood forth, and charged me with having
received no less than five or six visits at Miss Howe's from the man they had
all so much reason to hate (that was the expression); notwithstanding the
commands I had received to the contrary. And he bid me deny it, if I could.

I had never been used, I said, to deny the truth; nor would I now. I owned I
had, in the passed three weeks, seen the person I presumed he meant oftener
than five or six times (Pray hear me out, brother, said I; for he was going to
flame). -- But he always came and asked for Mrs. or Miss How.

I proceeded, That I had reason to believe, that both Mrs. How and Miss, as
matters stood, would much rather have excused his visits; but they had more
than once apologiz'd, that, having not the same reason my papa had, to forbid
him their house, his rank and fortune entitled him to civility.

You see, my dear, I made not the pleas I might have made.

My brother seemed ready to give a loose to his passion: My papa put on the
countenance, which always portends a gathering storm: My uncles mutteringly
whispered: And my sister aggravatingly held up her hands. While I begged to be
heard out; -- and my mamma said, Let the child, that was her kind word, be
heard. --

I hoped, I said, there was no harm done: That it became not me to prescribe to
Mrs. or Miss How who should be their visitors: That Mrs. How was always
diverted with the raillery that passed between Miss and him: That I had no
reason to challenge her guest for my visitor; as I should seem to have done,
had I refused to go into their company, when he was with them: That I had never
seen him out of the presence of one or both of those ladies; and had signified
to him, once, on his urging for a few moments private conversation with me,
that, unless a reconciliation were effected between my family and his, he must
not expect, that I would countenance his visits; much less give him an
opportunity of that sort.

I told them further, That Miss How so well understood my mind, that she never
left me a moment, while he was there: That, when he came, if I was not below in
the parlour, I would not suffer myself to be called to him: Although I thought it
would be an affectation, which would give him advantage rather than the
contrary, if I had left company when he came in; or refused to enter into it,
when I found he would stay any time.

My brother heard me out with such a kind of impatience, as showed he was
resolved to be dissatisfied with me, say what I would, The rest, as the event
has proved, behaved as if they would have been satisfied, had they not further
points to carry, by intimidating me. All this made it evident, as I mentioned
above, that they themselves expected not my voluntary compliance; and was a
tacit confession of the disagreeableness of the person they had to propose.

I was no sooner silent, than my brother swore, although in my papa's presence
(swore, uncheck'd either by eye or countenance), That, for his part, he would
never be reconciled to that libertine: And that he would renounce me for a
sister, if I encouraged the addresses of a man so obnoxious to them all.

A man who had like to have been my brother's murderer, my sister said, with a
face even bursting with restraint of passion.

The poor Bella has, you know, a plump, high-fed face, if I may be allowed the
expression. -- You, I know, will forgive me for this liberty of speech, sooner
than I can myself: Yet, how can one be such a reptile, as not to turn when
trampled upon! --

My papa, with vehemence both of action and voice (my father has, you know, a
terrible voice, when he is angry!), told me, that I had met with too much
indulgence, in being allowed to refuse this gentleman, and the other gentleman;
and it was now his turn to be obeyed.

Very true, my mamma said: -- And hoped his will would not now be disputed by a
child so favored.

To show they were all of a sentiment, my uncle Harlowe said, He hoped his
beloved niece only wanted to know her papa's will, to obey it.

And my uncle Antony, in his rougher manner, That I would not give them reason
to apprehend, that I thought my grandfather's favor to me had made me
independent of them all. -- If I did, he could tell me, the will could be set
aside, and should.

I was astonished, you must needs think. -- Whose addresses now, thought I, is
this treatment preparative to! -- Mr. Wyerley's again! -- or whose? -- And
then, as high comparisons, where self is concerned, sooner than low, come into
young peoples heads; be it for whom it will, this is wooing as the English did
for the heiress of Scotland in the time of Edward the sixth. -- But that it
could be for Solmes, how should it enter into my head?

I did not know, I said, that I had given occasion for this harshness: I hoped
I should always have a just sense of their favor to me, superadded to the duty
I owed as a daughter and a niece: But that I was so much surprised at a
reception so unusual and unexpected, that I hoped my papa and mamma would give
me leave to retire, in order to recollect myself.

No one gainsaying, I made my silent compliments, and withdrew; -- leaving my
brother and sister, as I thought, pleased; and as if they wanted to
congratulate each other on having occasioned so severe a beginning to be made
with me.

I went up to my chamber, and there, with my faithful Hannah, deplored the
determined face which the new proposal, it was plain they had to make me, wore.

I had not recovered myself when I was sent for down to tea. I begged, by my
maid, to be excused attending: But, on the repeated command, went down, with as
much cheerfulness as I could assume; and had a new fault to clear myself of:
For my brother, so pregnant a thing is determined ill will, by intimations
equally rude and intelligible, charged my desire of being excused coming down,
to sullens, because a certain person had been spoken against, upon whom, as he
supposed, my fancy ran.

I could easily answer you, Sir, said I, as such a reflection deserves: But I
forbear. If I do not find a brother in you, you shall have a sister in me.

Pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly said; looking at my brother, and lifting
up her lip in contempt.

He, with an imperious air, bid me deserve his love, and I should be sure to
have it.

As we sat, my mamma, in her admirable manner, expatiated upon brotherly and
sisterly love; indulgently blamed my brother and sister upon having taken up
displeasure too lightly against me; and politically, if I may so say, answered
for my obedience to my papa's will. -- Then it would be all well, my papa was
pleased to say: Then they should dote upon me, was my brother's expression:
Love me as well as ever, was my sister's: And my uncles, That I should then be
the pride of their hearts. -- But, alas! what a forfeiture of all these must I
make!

This was the reception I had on my return from you!

Mr. Solmes came in before we had done tea. My uncle Antony presented him to
me, as a gentleman he had a particular friendship for. My uncle Harlowe in
terms equally favorable for him. My father said, Mr. Solmes is my friend,
Clarissa Harlowe. My mamma looked at him, and looked at me, now-and-^hen, as he
sat near me, I thought with concern. -- I at her, with eyes appealing for pity.
-- At him, when I could glance at him, with disgust, little short of
affrightment. While my brother and sister Mr. Solmes'd-him, and Sirr'd-him up,
with high favor. So ca^ess'd, in short, by all; -- yet such a wretch! -- But I
will at present only add, My humble thanks and duty to your honored mamma (to
whom I will particularly write, to express the grateful sense I have of her
goodness to me); and that I am,

Your ever obliged CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER VIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Feb. 24.
THEY drive on here at a furious rate. The man lives here, I think. He courts
them, and is more and more a favorite. Such terms, such settlements! That Is
the cry!

O, my dear, that I had not reason to deplore the family fault, immensely rich
as they all are! But this I may the more unreservedly say to you, as we have
often joined in the same concern: I, for a father and uncles; you, for a
mother; in every other respect faultless.

Hitherto, I seem to be delivered over to my brother, who pretends as great
love to me as ever.

You may believe, I have been very sincere with him. But he affects to railly
me, and not to believe it possible, that one, so dutiful and so discreet as his
sister Clary, can resolve to disoblige all her friends.

Indeed, I tremble at the prospect before me; for it is evident, that they are
strangely determined.

My father and mother industriously avoid giving me opportunity of speaking to
them alone. They ask not for my approbation, intending, as it should seem, to
suppose me into their will. And with them I shall hope to prevail, or with
nobody. They have not the interest in compelling me, as my brother and sister
have: I say less therefore to them, reserving my whole force for an audience
with my father, if he will permit me a patient ear. How difficult is it, my
dear, to give a negative, where both duty and inclination join to make one wish
to oblige! --

I have already stood the shock of three of this man's particular visits,
besides my share in his more general ones; and find it is impossible I should
ever endure him. He has but a very ordinary share of understanding; is very
illiterate; knows nothing but the value of estates, and how to improve them;
and what belongs to land-jobbing, and husbandry. Yet am I as one stupid, I
think. They have begun so cruelly with me, that I have not spirit enough to
assert my own negative.

My good Mrs. Norton they had endeavored, it seems, to influence, before I
came home: So intent are they to carry their point: And her opinion not being
to their liking, she has been told, that she would do well to decline visiting
here for the present: Yet she is the person of all the world, next to my mamma,
the most likely to prevail upon me, were the measures they are engaged in,
reasonable measures; or such as she could think so.

My aunt likewise having said, that she did not think her niece could ever be
brought to like Mr. Solmes, has been obliged to learn another lesson.

I am to have a visit from her tomorrow. And, ^ince I have refused so much as
to hear from my brother and sister what the noble settlements are to be, she is
to acquaint me with the particulars; and to ^eceive from me my determination:
For my father, I am told, will not have patience but to suppose, that I shall
stand in opposition to his will.

Mean time it has been signified to me, that it will be acceptable, if I do not
think of going to church next Sunday.

The same signification was made me for last Sunday; and I obeyed. They are
apprehensive, that Mr. Lovelace will be there, with design to come home with me.

Help me, dear Miss How, to a little of your charming spirit: I never more
wanted it.

The man, you may suppose, has no reason to boast of his progress with me. He
has not the sense to say any thing to the purpose. His courtship, indeed, is to
them; and my brother pretends to court me as his proxy, truly! I utterly to my
brother refuse his application; but thinking a person so well received, and
recommended, by all my family, entitled to good manners, all I say against him
is affectedly attributed to coyness: And he, not being sensible of his own
imperfections, believes that my avoiding him when I can, and the reserves I
express, are owing to nothing else: -- For, as I said, all his courtship is to
them; and I have no opportunity of saying No, to one who asks me not the
question. And so, with an air of mannish superiority, he seems rather to pity
the bashful girl, than apprehend that he shall not succeed.


February 25.
I have had the expected conference with my aunt.

I have been obliged to hear the man's proposal^ from her; and all their
motives for espousing him a they do. I am even loath to mention, how equally
unjust it is for him to make such offers, or for those I am bound to reverence
to accept of them. I hate him more than before. One great estate is already
obtained at the expense of the relations to it, though distant relations; my
brother's, I mean, by his god mother: And this has given the hope, however
chimerical that hope, of procuring others; and that my own, at least, may
revert to the family: And yet in my opinion, the world is but one great family
originally it was so: What then is this narrow selfishness that reigns in us,
but relationship remembre^ against relationship forgot?

But here, upon my absolute refusal of him upon any terms, have I had a
signification made me, tha^ wounds me to the heart. How can I tell it you? Ye^
I must. It is, my dear, that I must not, for a mon^ to come, or till license
obtained, correspond with any body out of the house.

My brother, upon my aunt's report (made, however, as I am informed, in the
gentlest manner, an^ even giving remote hopes, which she had no commission from
me to give), brought me, in authoritative terms, the prohibition.

Not to Miss How? said I.

No, not to Miss How, Madam, tauntingly: For have you not acknowleg'd, that
Lovelace is a favorite there?

See, my dear Miss How! --

And do you think, brother, this is the way? --

Do you look to that: -- But your letters will be stopped, I can tell you. -- And
away he flung.

My sister came to me soon after. -- Sister Clary, you are going on in a fine
way, I understand. But, as there are people who are supposed to harden you
against your duty, I am to tell you, that it will be taken well, if you avoid
visits or visitings for a week or two, till further order.

Can this be from those who have authority --

Ask them; ask them, child, with a twirl of her finger. -- I have delivered my
message. Your papa will be obeyed. He is willing to hope you to be all
obedience; and would prevent all incitements to refractoriness.

I knew my duty, I said; and hoped I should not find impossible conditions
annexed to it.

A pert young creature, vain and conceited, she called me. I was the only
judge, in my own wife opinion, of what was right and fit. She, for her part,
had long seen through my specious ways: And now I should show everybody what I
was at bottom.

Dear Bella, said I! hands and eyes lifted up, -- why all this? -- Dear, dear
Bella, why --

None of your dear, dear Bella's to me. -- I tell you, I see through your
witchcrafts. -- That was her strange word: And away she flung; adding, as she
went, -- And so will everybody else very quickly, I dare say.

Bless me, said I to myself, what a sister have I! -- How have I deserved this?
Then I again regretted my grandfather's too distinguishing goodness to me.


Feb. 25. in the evening.
What my brother and sister have said against me, I cannot tell: -- But I am in
heavy disgrace with my papa.

I was sent for down to tea. I went with a very cheerful aspect: But had
occasion soon to change it.

Such a solemnity in every-body's countenance! -- My mamma's eyes were fixed
upon the tea-cups; and when she looked up, it was heavily, as if her eyelids
had weights upon them; and then not to me. My papa sat half-aside in his
elbow-chair, that his head might be turned from me; his hands folded, and
waving, as it were, up and down; his fingers, poor dear gentleman! in motion,
as if angry to the very ends of them. My sister sat swelling. My brother looked
at me with scorn, having measured me, as I may say, with his eyes, as I
entered, from head to foot. My aunt was there, and looked upon me, as if with
kindness restrained, bending coldly to my compliment to her, as she sat; and
then cast an eye first on my brother, then on my sister, as if to give the
reason (so I am willing to construe it) of her unusual stiffness. -- Bless me,
my dear! that they should choose to intimidate rather than invite a mind, till
now, no^ thought either unpersuadable or ungenerous! --

I took my seat. Shall I make tea, Madam, to my mamma? -- I always used, you
know, my dear, to make tea.

No! a very short sentence, in one very short word was the expressive answer:
And she was pleased to take the canister in her own hand.

My sister's Betty attending, my brother bid her go: -- He would fill the water.

My heart was up at my mouth. I did not know what to do with myself. What is to
follow? thought I

Just after the second dish, out stepped my mamma. -- A word with you, sister
Hervey! taking her in he^ hand. Presently my sister dropped away. Then my
brother. So I was left alone with my papa.

He looked so very sternly, that my heart failed me as twice or thrice I would
have addressed myself to him: Nothing but solemn silence on all hands having
passed before.

At last, I asked, If it were his pleasure, that I should pour him out another
dish?

He answered me with the same angry monosyllable which I had received from my
mamma before; and then arose, and walked about the room. I arose too, with
intent to throw myself at his feet; but was too much overawed by his
sternness, even to make such an expression of my duty to him, as my heart
overflowed with.

At last, as he supported himself, because of his gout, on the back of a chair,
I took a little more courage; and approaching him, besought him to acquaint me,
in what I had offended him?

He turned from me, and, in a strong voice, Clarissa Harlowe, said he, know,
that I will be obeyed.

God forbid, Sir, that you should not! -- I have never yet opposed your will --

Nor I your whimsies, Clarissa Harlowe, interrupted he. -- Don't let me run the
fate of all who show ^ndulgence to your sex; To be the more contradicted for
mine to you.

My papa, you know, my dear, has not (any more than my brother) a kind opinion
of our sex; although there is not a more condescending wife in the world than my
mamma.

I was going to make protestations of duty. -- No protestations, girl! -- No
words. -- I will not be prated to! -- I will be obeyed! -- I have no child. --
I will have no child, but an obedient one.

Sir, you never had reason, I hope --

Tell me not what I never had, but what I have, and what I shall have. --

Good Sir, be pleased to hear me -- My brother and my sister, I fear --

Your brother and sister shall not be spoken against, girl! -- They have a just
concern for the honor of my family.

And I hope, Sir, --

Hope nothing. -- Tell me not of hopes, but of facts. I ask nothing of you but
what is in your power to comply with, and what it is your duty to comply with.

Then, Sir, I will comply with it. -- But yet I hope from your goodness, --

No expostulations! -- No but's, girl! -- No qualifyings! -- I will be obeyed,
I tell you! -- and cheerfully too! -- or you are no child of mine! --

I wept.

Let me beseech you, my dear and ever-honoured papa (and I dropped down on my
knees) that I may have only yours and my mamma's will, and not my brother's,
to obey. -- I was going on; but he was pleased to withdraw, leaving me on the
floor; saying, That he would not hear me thus by subtilty and cunning aiming to
distinguish away my duty; repeating, that he would be obeyed.

My heart is too full; -- so full, that it may endanger my duty, were I to
unburden it to you on this occasion: So I will lay down my pen. -- But can --
Yet, positively, I will lay down my pen! --


LETTER IX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Feb. 26. in the morning.
MY aunt, who staid here last night, made me visit this morning, as soon as it
was light. She tells me, that I was left alone with my papa yesterday on
purpose that he might talk with me on my expecte^ obedience; but that he owned
he was put beside his purpose by reflecting on something my brother had tol^
him in my disfavour, and by his impatience but to suppose, that such a gentle
spirit as mine had hitherto seemed to be, should presume to dispute his will,
in ^oint where the advantage of the whole family was to ^e so greatly promoted
by my compliance.

I find, by a few words which dropped from her unawares, that they have all an
absolute dependence upon what they suppose to be a meekness in my temper But in
this they may be mistaken; for I verily think upon a strict examination of
myself, that I have almost as much in me of my father's as of my mother's
family.

My uncle Harlowe, it seems, is against driving me upon extremities: But his
unbrotherly nephew has engaged, that the regard I have for my reputation, and
my principles, will bring me round to my duty, that is the expression. Perhaps I
shall have reason to wish I had not known this.

My aunt advises me to submit, for the present, to the interdicts they have
laid me under; and, indeed, to encourage Mr. Solmes's address. I have
absolutely refused the latter, let what will, as I have told her, be the
consequence. The visiting prohibition I will conform to. But as to that of not
corresponding with you, nothing but the menace, that our letters shall be
intercepted, can engage my observation of it.

She believes, that this order is from my father, without consulting my mother
upon it: And that purely, as she supposes, in consideration to me, left I
should mortally offend him; and this from the incitements of other people
(meaning you and Miss Lloyd, I make no doubt), rather than by my own will. For
still, as she tells me, he speaks kind and praiseful things of me.

Here is clemency! Here is indulgence! -- And so it is, To prevent a headstrong
child, as a good prince would wish to do disaffected subjects, from running
into rebellion, and so forfeiting everything! But this is all my brother's
young man's wisdom; a blotter without a head, and a brother without a heart!

How happy might I have been with any other brother in the world, but Mr. James
Harlowe; and with any other sister, but his sister! Wonder not, my dear! that
I, who used to chide you for these sort of liberties with my relations, now am
more undutiful than you ever were unkind. I cannot bear the thought of being
deprived of the principal pleasure of my life; for such is your conversation by
person and by letter. And who besides can bear to be made the dupe of such low
cunning, operating with such high and arrogant passions?

But can you, my dear Miss How, condescend to carry on a private
correspondence with me? If you can, there is one way I have thought of, by
which it may be done.

You must remember the Green Lane, as we call it, that runs by the side of the
wood-house and poultry-yard, where I keep my bantams, pheasants, and pea-hens,
which generally engage my notice twice a day; the more my favorites, because
they were my grandfather's, and recommended to my care by him; and therefore
brought hither from my dairy-house, since his death.

The lane is lower than the floor of the wood-house; and in the side of the
wood-house the boards are rotted away down to the floor, for half an ell
together, in several places. Hannah can step into the lane, and make a mark
with chalk where a letter or parcel may be pushed in, under some sticks; which
may be so managed, as to be an unsuspected cover for the written deposites from
either.

I HAVE been just now to look at the place, and find it will answer. So your
faithful Robert may, without coming near the house, and as only passing through
the green lane, which leads to two or three farm-houses (out of livery, if you
please), very easily take from thence my letters, and deposite yours.

This place is the more convenient, because it is seldom resorted to, but by
myself or Hannah, on the abovementioned account; for it is the general
storehouse for firing; the wood for constant use being nearer the house.

One corner of this being separated off for the roosting-place of my little
poultry, either she or I shall never want a pretense to go thither.

Try, my dear, the success of a letter this way; and give me your opinion and
advice what to do, in this disgraceful situation, as I cannot but call it; and
what you think of my prospects; and what you would do in my case.

But, beforehand, I must tell you, that your advice must not run in favor of
this Solmes: And yet it is very likely they will endeavor to engage your
mamma, in order to induce you, who have such an influence over me, to favor
him.

Yet, on second thoughts, if you incline to that side of the question, I would
have you write your whole mind. Determined, as I think I am, and cannot help
it, I would at least give a patient hearing to what may be said on the other
side. For my regards are not so much engaged (upon my word, they are not; I
know not myself if they be) to another person, as some of my friends suppose;
and as you, giveing way to your lively vein, upon his last visits, affected to
suppose. What preserable favor I may have for him to any other person, is
owing more to the usage he has received, and for my sake borne, than to any
personal consideration.

I write a few lines of grateful acknowlegement to your mamma for her favors
to me in the late happy period. I fear I shall never know such another! -- I
hope she will forgive me, that I did not write sooner.

The bearer, if suspected and examined, is to produce that, as the only one he
carries. How do needless watchfulness and undue restraint produce artifice and
contrivance! I should abhor these clandestine correspondencies, were they not
forced upon me. They have so mean, so low an appearance, to myself, that I
think I ought not to expect, that you should take part in them.

But why (as I have also expostulated with my aunt) must I be pushed into a
state, which, although I reverence, I have no wish to enter into? -- Why should
not my brother, so many years older, and so earnest to see me engaged, be first
engaged? -- And, if not so, why not my sister be first provided for?

But here I conclude these unavailing expostulations, with the assurance, that
I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate CLARISSA HARLOWE.

LETTER X. Miss HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Febr. 27.
WHAT odd heads some people have! -- Miss Clarissa Harlowe to be sacrificed in
marriage to Mr. Roger Solmes! Astonishing!

I must not, you say, give my advice in favor of this man! -- You now
half-convince me, my dear, that you are allied to the family that could think
of so preposterous a match, or you could never have had the least notion of my
advising in his favor.

Ask me for his picture: You know I have a good hand at drawing an ugly
likeness. But I Will see a little farther first: For who knows what may happen;
since matters are in such a train; and since you have not the courage to oppose
so overwhelming a torrent.

You ask me to help you to a little of my spirit. Are you in earnest? But it
will not now, I doubt, do you service. -- It will not fit naturally upon you.
You are your mamma's girl, think what you will, and have violent spirits to
contend with. Alas! my dear, you should have borrowed some of mine a little
sooner; -- that is to say, before you had given the management of your estate
into the hands of those who think they have a prior claim to it. What, though a
father's? -- Has not that father two elder children? -- And do they not both
bear his stamp and image, more than you do? -- Pray, my dear, call me not to
account for this free question; lest your application of my meaning prove to be
as severe as that.

Now I have launched out a little, indulge me one word more in the same strain:
I will be decent, I promise you. -- I think you might have known, that AVARICE
and ENVY are two passions that are not to be satisfied, the one by giving, the
other by the envied person's continuing to deserve and excel. -- Fuel, fuel
both, all the world over, to flames insatiate and devouring.

But since you ask for my opinion, you must tell me all you know or surmise of
their inducements. And if you will not forbid me to make extracts from your
letters, for the entertainment of my cousin in the little island, who longs to
hear more of your affairs, it will be very obliging.

But you are so tender of some people, who have no tenderness for any body but
themselves, that I must conjure you to speak out. Remember, that a friendship
like ours admits of no reserves. You may trust my impartiality: It would be an
affront to your own judgment, if you did not: For do you not ask my advice? And
have you not taught me, that friendship should never give a bias against
justice? -- Justify them therefore, if you can. Let us see if there be any
sense, whether sufficient reason or not, in their choice. At present, I cannot
(and yet I know a good deal of your family) have any conception, how all of
them, your mamma in particular, and your aunt Hervey, can join with the rest
against judgments given. As to some of the others, I cannot wonder at any thing
they do, or attempt to do, where Self is concerned.

You ask, Why may not your brother be first engaged in wedlock? -- I Will tell
you why: His temper and his arrogance are too well known to induce women he
would aspire to, to receive his addresses, notwithstanding his great
independent acquisitions, and still greater prospects. Let me tell you, my
dear, those acquisitions have given him more pride, than reputation. To me he
is the most intolerable creature that I ever saw. The treatment you blame, he
merited from one whom he would have addressed with the air of a person
intending to confer, rather than hoping to receive a favor. I ever loved to
mortify proud and insolent spirits. What, think you, makes me bear Hickman near
me, but that the man is humble, and knows his distance?

As to your question, Why your elder sister may not be first provided for? I
answer, Because she must have no man, but who has a great and clear estate;
that is one thing. Another is, Because she has a younger sister: -- Pray, my
dear, be so good as to tell me, what man of a great and clear estate would
think of that elder sister, while the younger were single?

You are all too rich to be happy, child. For must not each of you, by the
constitutions of your family, marry to be still richer? People who know in what
their main excellence consists are not to be blamed (are they?) for cultivating
and improving what they think most valuable? Is true happiness any part of your
family-view? -- So far from it, that none of your family, but yourself, could
be happy were they not rich. So let them fret on, grumble and grudge, and
accumulate; and wondering what ails them that they have not happiness when they
have riches, think the cause is want of more; and so go on heaping up, till
death, as greedy an accumulator as themselves, gathers them into his garner!

Well then once more, I say, do you, my dear, tell me what you know of their
avowed and general motives; and I will tell you more than you will tell me of
their failings! Your aunt Hervey, you say, See p. 46.
has told you: -- Why, as I hinted above, must I ask you to let me know them;
when you condescend to ask my advice on the occasion?

That they prohibit your corresponding with me, is a wisdom I neither wonder
at, nor blame them for: Since it is an evidence to me, that they know their own
folly: And if they do, is it strange that they should be afraid to trust
another's judgment upon it?

I am glad you have found out a way to correspond with me. I approve it much. I
shall more, if this first trial of it proves successful. But should it not, and
should it fall into their hands, it would not concern me, but for your sake.

We had heard before you wrote, that all was not right between your relations
and you, at your coming home: That Mr. Solmes visited you, and that with a
prospect of success. But I concluded, the mistake lay in the person; and that
his address was to Miss Arabella: And indeed had she been as good-natured as
your plump ones generally are, I should have thought her too good for him by
half: -- Thought I, this must be the thing; and my beloved friend is sent for
to advise and assist in her nuptial preparations. Who knows, said I to my
mamma, but that, when the man has thrown aside his yellow, full-buckled peruke,
and his broad-brimm'd beaver, both of which I suppose were Sir Oliver's Best of
long standing, he may cut a tolerable figure dangling to church with Miss Bell!
-- The woman, as she observes, should excel the man in features: And where can
she match so well for a foil?

I indulged this surmize against rumor, because I could not believe, that the
absurdest people in England could be so very absurd, as to think of this man
for you.

We heard moreover, that you received no visitors: I could assign no reason for
this; except that the preparations for your sister were to be private, and the
ceremony sudden: Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph were with me to inquire what I
knew of this; and of your not being at church, either morning or afternoon, the
Sunday after your return from us; to the disappointment of a little hundred of
your admirers, to use their words. It was easy for me to guess the reason to be
what you confirm: -- Their apprehensions that Lovelace would be there, and
attempt to wait on you home.

My mamma takes very kindly your compliments in your letter to her. Her words
upon reading it were; 'Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an admirable young lady;
Wherever she goes, she confers a favor: Whomever she leaves, she fills with
regret.' -- And then a little comparative reflection; 'O my Nancy, that you had
a little of her sweet obligingness!'

No matter. The praise was yours. You are me; and I enjoyed it. The more
enjoyed it, because -- shall I tell you the truth? -- Because I think myself as
well as I am -- Were it but for this reason; That had I twenty brother James's,
and twenty sister Bell's, not one of them, nor all of them joined together,
would dare to treat me, as yours presume to treat you. The person who will bear
much shall have much to bear, all the world ^hro': It Is your own sentiment,
grounded upon the strongest instance that can be given in your own family; though
you have so little improved by it.

The result is this, That I am fitter for this world than you: You for the next
than me; -- that is the difference. -- But long, long, for my sake, and for
hundreds of sakes, may it be, before you quit us for company more congenial,
and more worthy of you! --

I communicated to my mamma the account you give of your strange reception;
also what a horrid wretch they have found out for you; and the compulsory
treatment they give you. It only set her on magnifying her lenity to me, on my
tyrannical behavior, as she will call it (mothers must have their way, you
know), to the man she so warmly recommends, against whom, it seems, there can
be no just exception; and expatiating upon the complaisance I owe her for her
indulgence. So I believe I must communicate to her nothing farther, --
especially as I know she would condemn the correspondence between us, and That
between you and Lovelace, as a clandestine and undutiful thing: For duty
implicit is her cry. And moreover she lends a pretty open ear to the
preachments of that starch old bachelor your uncle Antony; and for an example
to her daughter, would be more careful how she takes your part, be the cause
ever so just. Yet is not this right policy neither. For people who will allow
nothing, will be granted nothing: In other words, those who aim at carrying too
many points will not be able to carry any.

But can you divine, my dear, what that old preachment-making plump-hearted
soul, your uncle Antony, means, by his frequent amblings hither? -- There is
such smirking and smiling between my mamma and him! Such mutual praises of
economy; and ' That is my way!' -- and ' This I do!' -- and 'I am glad it has
your approbation, Sir!' -- and ' You look into every thing, Madam!' -- 'Nothing
would be done, if I did not!' -- Such exclamations against servants: Such
exaltings of self! -- And dear-heart, and good-lack! -- and ' las-a-day! -- And
now and then their conversation sinking into a whispering accent, if I come
cross them! -- I Will tell you, my dear, I don't above half like it.

Only that these old bachelors usually take as many years to resolve upon
matrimony, as they can reasonably expect to live; or I should be ready to fire
upon his visits; and recommend Mr. Hickman, as a much properer man, to my
mamma's acceptance: For what he wants in years, he makes up in gravity: And if
you will not chide me, I will say, That there is a primness in both, especially
when the man has presumed too much with me upon my mamma's favor for him, and
is under discipline on that account, as makes them seem near of kin: And then
in contemplation of my sauciness, and what they both bear from it, they sigh
away! -- and seem so mightily to compassionate each other, that if Pity be but
one remove from Love, I am in no danger, while they both are in a great deal,
and don't know it.

Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with your grave airs: So in for the
lamb, as the saying is, in for the sheep; and do you yourself look about you:
For I Will have a pull with you, by way of being aforehand. Hannibal, we read,
always advised to attack the Romans upon their own territories.

You are pleased to say, and upon your word too! -- That your regards (a mighty
quaint word for affections) are not so much engaged, as some of your friends
suppose, to another person. What need you give one to imagine, my dear, that
the last month or two has been a period extremely favorable to that other
person! -- whom it has made an obliger of the niece for his patience with the
uncles.

But, to p^ss that by, -- So much engaged! -- How much, my dear? Shall I infer?
Some of your friends suppose a great deal. -- You seem to own a little.

Don't be angry. It is all fair: Because you have not acknowleg'd to me That
little. People, I have heard you say, who affect secrets always excite
curiosity.

But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon your averrment, as if
recollection had given you a doubt. -- You know not yourself, if they be [so
much engag'd]. Was it necessary to say This, to me? -- and to say it upon your
word too? -- But you know best. -- Yet you don't neither, I believe. For a
beginning Love is acted by a subtle spirit; and oftentimes discovers itself to
a bystander, when the person possessed (why should I not call it possessed?)
knows not it has such a demon.

But further you say, What PREFERABLE favor you may have for him, to any other
person, is owing more to the usage he has received, and for your sake borne,
than to any personal consideration.

This is generously said. It is in character.. But, O my friend, depend upon
it, you are in danger. Depend upon it,. whether you know it or not, you are a
little in for it. Your native generosity and greatness of mind endanger you: All
your friends, by fighting against him with impolitic violence, fight for him.
And Lovelace, my life for yours, notwithstanding all his veneration and
assiduities, has seen further than that veneration and those assiduities (so
well calculated to your meridian) will let him own he has seen. -- Has seen, in
short, that his work is doing for him more effectually than he could do it for
himself. And have you not before now said, That nothing is so penetrating as
the vanity of a lover; since it makes the person who has it frequently see in
his own favor what is not; and hardly ever fail of observing what is. And who
says Lovelace wants vanity?

In short, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from the easiness of his heart
and behavior, that he has seen more than I have seen; more than you think
could be seen; -- more than I believe you yourself know, or else you would have
let me know it.

Already, in order to restrain him from resenting the indignities he has
received, and which are daily offered him, he has prevailed upon you to
correspond with him privately. I know he has nothing to boast of from what you
have written. But is not his inducing you to receive his letters, and to answer
them, a great point gained? -- By your insisting, that he should keep this
correspondence private, it appears, that there is one secret, that you do not
wish the world should know: And he is master of that secret. He is indeed
himself, as I may say, that secret! -- What an intimacy does this beget for the
lover! -- How is it distancing the parent! --

Yet who, as things are situated, can blame you? -- Your condescension has no
doubt hitherto prevente^ great mischiefs: It must be continued, for the sam^
reasons, while the cause remains. You are draw^ in by a perverse fate, against
inclination: But custom with such laudable purposes, will reconcile the
inconveniency, and make an inclination. -- And I would advise you (as you would
wish to manage, on an occasion so critical with that prudence which governs all
your actions) not to be afraid of entering upon a close examination into the
true springs and grounds of this your generosity to that happy man.

It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that, on inquiry, it will come
out to be LOVE. -- Don't start, my dear! -- Has not your man himself had
natural philosophy enough to observe already to your aunt Hervey, that Love
takes the deepest root in the steadiest minds? The duce take his sly
penetration, I was going to say; for this was six or seven weeks ago.

I have been tinctured, you know. Nor, on the coolest reflection, could I
account how, and when, the jaundice began: But had been over head and ears, as
the saying is, but for some of that advice from you, which I now return you.
Yet my man was not half so -- So what, my dear? -- To be sure Lovelace is a
charming fellow. -- And were he only -- But I will not make you glow, as you
read! -- Upon my word, I will not. -- Yet, my dear, don't you find at your heart
somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, throb, as you read just here? -- If
you do, don't be ashamed to own it. -- It is your generosity, my love! that is
all. -- But, as the Roman augur said, Caesar, beware of the ides of March!

Adieu, my dearest friend, and forgive; and very speedily, by the newfound
expedient, tell me, that you forgive

Your ever-affectionate ANNA HOW.

LETTER XI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Wednesday, March 1.
YOU both nettled and alarmed me, my dearest Miss How, by the concluding part
of your last. At first reading it, I did not think it necessary, said I to
myself, to guard against a critic, when I was writeing to so dear a friend. But
then recollecting myself, Is there not more in it, said I, than the result of a
vein so naturally lively? Surely, I must have been guilty of an inadvertence.
-- Let me enter into the close examination of myself, which my beloved friend
advises.

I did so; and cannot own any of the glow, any of the throbs you mention. --
Upon my word, I will repeat, I cannot. And yet the passages in my letter upon
which you are so humourously severe, lay me fairly open to your agreeable
rail^ery. I own they do. And I cannot tell what turn my mind had taken, to
dictate so oddly to my pen.

But-pray-now -- Is it saying so much, when one, who has no very particular
regard to any man, says, There are some who are preferable to others? And is it
blameable to say, Those are the preferable, who are not well used by one's
relations; yet dispense with that usage out of regard to one's self, which they
would otherwise resent? Mr. Lovelace, for instance, I may be allowed to say, is
a man to be preferred to Mr. Solmes; and that I do prefer him to that man: But,
surely, this may be said, without its being a necessary consequence, that one
must be in love with him.

Indeed, I would not be in love with him, as it is called, for the world:
First, because I have no opinion of his morals; and think it a fault in which
our whole family, my brother excepted, has had a share, that he was permitted
to visit us with a hope; which, however being distant, did not, as I have
observed heretofore, entitle any of us to call him to account for such of his
immoralities as came to our ears. Next, because I think him to be a vain man,
capable of triumphing, secretly at least, over a person whose heart he thinks
he has engaged. And, thirdly, because the assiduities and veneration which you
impute to him, seem to carry an haughtiness in them, as if his address had a
merit in it, that would be an equivalent for a lady's favor. In short, he
seems to me so to behave, when most unguarded, as if he thought himself above
the very politeness which his birth and education (perhaps therefore more than
his choice) oblige him to show. In other words, his very politeness appears to
me to be constrained; and, with the most remarkably easy and genteel person,
something seems to be behind in his manner, that is too studiously kept in.
Then, good-humored as he is thought to be in the main to other peoples
servants, and this even to familiarity (although, as you have observed, a
familiarity that has dignity in it, not unbecoming a man of quality), he is apt
sometimes to break out into passion with his own: An oath or a curse follows;
and such looks from those servants as plainly show terror; and that they should
have fared worse, had they not been in my hearing: With a confirmation in the
master's looks of a surmize too well justified.

Indeed, my dear, THIS man is not THE man. I have great objections to him. My
heart throbs not after him: I glow not, but with indignation against myself,
for having given room for such an imputation. -- But you must not, my dearest
friend, construe common Gratitude into Love. I cannot bear that you should. But
if ever I should have the misfortune to think it Love, I promise you, upon my
word, which is the same as upon my honor, that I will acquaint you with it.

You bid me to tell you very speedily, and by the newfound expedient, that I
am not displeased with you for your agreeable raillery: I dispatch this
therefore immediately; postponing to my next the account of the inducements
which my friends have to promote with so much earnestness the address of Mr.
Solmes.

Be satisfied, my dear, mean time, that I am not displeased with you: Indeed I
am not: On the contrary, I give you my hearty thanks for your friendly
premonitions. And I charge you, as I have often done, that if you observe any
thing in me so very faulty, as would require, from you to others, in my behalf,
the palliation of friendly and partial love, you acquaint me with it: For,
methinks, I would ^o conduct myself, as not to give reason even for an
adversary to censure me: And how shall so weak and so young a creature avoid
the censure of such, if my friend will not hold a looking-glass before me, to
let me see my imperfections?

Judge me then, my dear, as any indifferent person knowing what you know of me)
would do: -- I may, ^t first, be a little pained; may glow a little, perhaps,
^o be found less worthy of your friendship, than I wish ^o be; but assure
yourself, that your kind correction will give me reflection, that shall amend
me. If it do not, you will have a fault to accuse me of, that will be utterly
in-excusable: A fault, let me add, that should you not accuse me of it, if in
your opinion I am guilty, you will not be so much, so warmly, my friend, as I
am yours; who have never spared you, you know, my dear, on the like occasions.

Here I break off; to begin another letter to you; with the assurance, mean
time, that I am, and ever will be,

Your equally affectionate and grateful CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER XII. Miss HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thursday Morn, March 2.
INdeed you would not be in love with him for the world! -- Your servant, my
dear. Nor would I have you: For I think, with all the advantages of person,
fortune, and family, he is not by any means worthy of you. And this opinion I
give as well from the reasons you mention, which I cannot but confirm, a^ from
what I have heard of him but a few hours ago from Mrs. Fortescue, a favorite
of lady Betty Lawrance, who knows him well. -- But let me congratulate you,
however, on your being the first of our se^ that ever I heard of, who has been
able to turn the lion, Love, at her own pleasure, into a lap-dog.

Well but, if you have not the throbs and the glow^ you have not: And are not
in love; good reason why -- because you would not be in love; and there'^ no
more to be said. -- Only, my dear, I shall keep good look-out upon you; and so
I hope you wi^ upon yourself: For it is no manner of argument, the because you
would not be in love, you are not. -- B^ before I part entirely with this
subject, a word in you^ ear, my charming friend -- It Is only by way of caution,
and in pursuance of the general observation, the a stander-by is often a better
judge of the game the those that play. -- May it not be, that you have had and
have, such cross creatures, and such odd head to deal with, as have not allowed
you to attend t^ the throbs? -- Or, if you had them a little now an^ then,
whether, having had two accounts to pla^ them to, you have not, by mistake, put
them to the wrong one?

But whether you have a value for this Lovelace, ^ not, I know you will be
impatient to hear what Mr^ Fortescue has said of him. Nor will I keep you
longer in suspense.

An hundred wild stories she tells of him, from childhood to manhood: for, as
she observes, having never been subject to contradiction, he was always as
mischievous as a monkey. But I shall pass over these whole hundred of his
puerile rogueries, although indicative ones, as I may say, to take notice as well
of some things you are not quite ignorant of, as of others you know not; and to
make a few observations upon him and his ways.

Mrs. Fortescue owns, what everybody knows, that he is notoriously, nay,
avowedly, a man of pleasure; yet says, that in any thing he sets his heart
upon, or undertakes, he is the most industrious and persevering mortal under
the sun. He rests, it seems, not above six hours in the twenty-four, any more
than you. He delights in writing. Whether at his Uncle's, or at Lady Betty's,
or Lady Sarah's, he has always, when he retires, a pen in his fingers. One of
his companions, confirming his love of writing, has told her, that his thoughts
flow rapidly to his pen: And you and I, my dear, have observed, on more
occasions than one, that though he writes even a fine hand, he is one of the
readiest and quickest of writers. He must indeed have had early a very docile
genius; since a person of his pleasurable turn, and active spirit, could never
have submitted to take long or great pains in ^ttaining the qualifications he
is master of; qualifications so seldom attainable by youth of quality and
fortune; by such especially of those of either, who, like him, have never known
what it was to be controuled.

He had once the vanity, upon being complimented ^n these talents (and on his
surprising diligence for a man of pleasure) to compare himself to Julius
Cae^ar; who performed great actions by day, and wrote them down at night: And
valued himself, that he only wanted Caesar's outsetting, to make a figure among
his cotemporaries.

He spoke this, indeed, she says, with an air o^ pleasantry: For she observed,
and so have we, the he has the art of acknowleging his vanity, with s^ much
humor, that it sets him above the contemp^ which is due to vanity and
self-opinion; and at the same time half-persuades those who he^r him, that h^
really deserves the exaltation he gives himself.

But supposing it to be true, that all his vacan^ nightly hours are employed in
writing, what can be hi^ subjects? If, like Caesar, his own actions, he must u^
doubtedly be a very enterprising and very wicked man since nobody suspects him
to have a serious turn And, decent as he is in his conversation with us, hi^
writings are not probably such as will redound either to his own honor, or to
the benefit of others, we^ they to be read. He must be conscious of this, fin^
Mrs. Fortescue says, that, in the great correspondence by letters which he
holds, he is as secret a^ careful, as if it were of a treasonable nature; -- y^
troubles not his head with politics, though no bod^ knows the interests of
princes and courts better the he.

That you and I, my dear, should love to write, no wonder. We have always, from
the time eac^ could hold a pen, delighted in epistolary correspondencies. Our
employments are domestic and sede^tary; and we can scribble upon twenty
innocent subjects, and take delight in them because they are innocent; though
were they to be seen, they might n^ much profit or please others. But that such
a ga^ lively young fellow as this, who rides, hunts, tr^vels, frequents the
public entertainments, and h^ means to pursue his pleasures, should be able to
set himself down to write for hours together, as you and have heard him say he
frequently does, that is ^ strange thing.

Mrs. Fortescue says, that he is a complete master of shorthand writing. By
the way, what inducements could such a swift writer as he have, to learn
shorthand?

She says (and we know it as well as she) that he has a surprising memory; and
a very lively imagination.

Whatever his other vices are, all the world, as well as Mrs. Fortescue, say,
he is a sober man. And among all his bad qualities, gaming, that great waster
of time, as well as fortune, is not his vice: So that he must have his head as
cool, and his reason as clear, as the prime of youth, and his natural gaiety,
will permit; and, by his early morning hours, a great portion of time upon his
hands, to employ in writing, or worse.

Mrs. Fortescue says, he has one gentleman, who is more his intimate and
correspondent than any of the rest. You remember what his dismissed bailiff
said of him, and of his associates. I don't find, but that man's character of
him was in general pretty just. Mrs. Fortescue confirms this part of it, that
all his relations are afraid of him; and that his pride sets him above owing
obligations to them. She believes he is clear of the world; and that he will
continue so: No doubt from the same motive that makes him avoid being obliged
to his relations.

A person willing to think favorably of him would hope, that a brave, a
learned, and a diligent man, cannot be naturally a bad man. -- But if he be
better than his enemies say he is (and, if worse, he is bad indeed), he is
guilty of an inexcusable fault, in being so careless as he is of his
reputation. I think a man can be so but from one of these two reasons: Either
that he is conscious he deserves the evil spoken of him; or, that he takes a
pride in being thought worse than he is: -- Both very bad and threatening
indications: Since the first must show him to be utterly abandoned; and it is
but natural to conclude from the other, that what a man is not ashamed to have
imputed to him, he will not scruple to be guilty of, whenever he has
opportunity.

Upon the whole, and upon all that I could gather from Mrs. Fortescue, Mr.
Lovelace is a very faulty man: You and I have thought him too gay, too
inconsiderate, too rash, too little an hypocrite, to be deep. You see he never
would disguise his natural temper (haughty as it certainly is), with respect to
your brother's behavior to him: Where he thinks a contempt due, he pays it to
the uttermost: Nor has he complaisance enough to spare your uncles.

But were he deep, and ever so deep, you would soon penetrate him, if they
would leave you to yourself. His vanity would be your clue. Never man had more:
Yet, as Mrs. Fortescue observed, never did man carry it off so happily. There
is a strange mixture in it of humourous vivacity: -- For but one half of what
he says of himself, when he is in the vein, any other man would be insufferable.

TALK of the devil, is an old saying. -- The lively wretch has made me a visit,
and is but just gone away. He is all impatience and resentment, at the
treatment you meet with; and full of apprehensions too, that they will carry
their point with you.

I told him my opinion, that you will never be brought to think of such a man
as Solmes; but that i^ will probably end in a composition, never to have either.

No man, he said, whose fortunes and alliances are so considerable, ever had so
little favor from a lady, for whose sake he had borne so much.

I told him my mind, as freely as I used to do. But who ever was in fault, Self
being judge? He complained of spies set upon his conduct, and to pry into his
life and morals; and this by your brother and uncles.

I told him, that this was very hard upon him; and the more so, as neither the
one nor the other, perhaps, would stand a fair inquiry.

He smiled, and called himself my servant. -- The occasion was too fair, he
said, for Miss How, who never spared him, to let it pass. -- But, Lord help
their shallow souls, would I believe it? they were for turning plotters upon
him. They had best take care he did not pay them in their own coin. Their
hearts were better turned for such works, than their heads.

I asked him, if he valued himself upon having a head better turned than theirs
for such works, as he called them?

He drew off: And then ran into the highest professions of reverence and
affection for you. The object so meritorious, who can doubt the reality of his
professions?

Adieu, my dearest, my noble friend! -- I love and admire you for the generous
conclusion of your last more than I can express. Though I began this letter with
impertinent raillery, knowing that you always loved to indulge my mad vein, yet
never was there a heart that more glowed with friendly love, than that of

Your own ANNA HOW.


LETTER XIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Wedn. March 1.
I NOW take up my pen, to lay before you the inducements and motives which my
friends have to espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. Solmes.

In order to set this matter in a clear light, it is necessary to go a little
backward, and even perhaps to mention some things which you already know: And
so you may look upon what I am going to relate, as a kind of supplement to my
letters of the 15th and 20th of January last.

In those letters, of which I have kept memorandums, I gave you an account of
my brother's and sister's implacableness to Mr. Lovelace; and the methods they
took (so far as they had then come to my knowledge) to ruin him in the opinion
of my other friends: And I told you, that after a very cold, yet not a directly
affrontive behavior, to him, they all of a sudden See Letter iv. p. 21.
became more violent, and proceeded to personal insults; which brought on, at
last, the unhappy rencounter between my brother and him.

Now you must know, that from the last conversation which passed between my
aunt and me, ^ comes out, that this sudden vehemence on my brother's and
sister's parts, was owing to stronger reasons than to the college-begun
antipathy on his side, or t^ slighted love on hers; to wit, to an apprehensio^
that my uncles intended to follow my grandfather'^ example, in my favor; at
least, in a higher degree that they wish they should: An apprehension founded,
i^ seems, on a conversation between my two uncles, an^ my brother and sister;
which my aunt communicated to me in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon
me to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble settlements; urging that such a seasonable
compliance would frustrate my brother's and sister's views, and establish me
for eve^ in the opinion and love of my father and uncles.

I will give you the substance of this communicate^ conversation, after I have
made a brief introductory observation or two: Which, however, I hardly need to
make to you, who are so well acquainted with ^ all, did not the series or
thread of the story require it.

I have more than once mentioned to you the darling view some of us have long
had of raising a family as it is called: A reflection, as I have often thought
upon our own; which is no inconsiderable or upsta^ one, on either side: Of my
mamma's, especially. -- A view too frequently, it seems, entertained by
families, which having great substance, cannot be satisfied without rank and
title.

My uncles had once extended this view to each of us three children; urging,
that as they themselves intended not to marry, we each of us might be so
portion'd, and so advantageously matched, as that our posterity, if not
ourselves, might make a first figure in our country -- While my brother, as the
only son, thought the two girls might be very well provided for by ten or
fifteen thousand pounds apiece: And that all the real estates in the family, to
wit, my grandfather's, father's, and two uncles, and the remainder of their
respective personal estates, together with what he had an expectancy of from
his godmother, would make such a noble fortune, and give him such an interest,
as might entitle him to hope for a peerage: Nothing less would satisfy his
ambition.

With this view, he gave himself airs very early; 'That his grandfather and
uncles were his stewards: That no man ever had better: That daughters were but
encumbrances and drawbacks upon a family:' And this low and familiar expression
was often in his mouth, and uttered always with the self-complaisance which an
imagined happy thought can be supposed to give the speaker; to wit, 'That a man
who has sons brings up chickens for his own table;' (though once I made his
comparison stagger with him, by asking him, If the sons, to make it hold, were
to have their necks wrung off?); 'whereas daughters are chickens brought up for
the tables of other men.' This, accompanied with the equally polite reflection,
'That, to induce people to take them off their hands, the family-stock must be
impaired into the bargain,' used to put my sister out of all patience: And
although ^he now seems to think a younger sister only can be an encumbrance, she
was then often proposing to me to make a party in our own favor against my
brother's rapacious views, as she used to call them: While I was for
considering the liberties he took of this sort, as the effect of a temporary
pleasantry; which in a young man not naturally good-humored, I was glad to
see; or as a foible, that deserved raillery, but no other notice.

But when my grandfather's will (of the purport of which in my particular
favor, until it was opened, I was as ignorant as they) had lopped off one
branch of my brother's expectation, he was extremely dissatisfied with me.
Nobody indeed was pleased: For although every-one loved me, yet being the
youngest child, father, uncles, brother, sister, all thought themselves
postpon'd, as to matter of right and power (Who loves not power?): And my
father himself could not bear that I should be made sole, as I may call it, and
independent; for such the will, as to that estate, and the powers it gave
(unaccountably, as they all said), made me.

To obviate therefore every-one's jealousy, I gave up to my father's
management, as you know, not only the estate, but the money bequeathed me
(which was a moiety of what my grandfather had by him at his death; the other
moiety being bequeathed to my sister); contenting myself to take, as from his
bounty, what he was pleased to allow me, without desiring the least addition to
my annual stipend. And then I hoped I had laid all envy asleep: But still my
brother and sister (jealous, as now is evident, of my two uncles favor for me,
and of the pleasure I had given my father and them, by this act of duty) were
every-now-and-then occasionally doing me covert ill offices: Which I took the
less notice of; having, as I imagined, removed the cause of their envy; and
imputed every thing of that sort to the petulance they are both pretty much
noted for.

My brother's acquisition then took place: This made us all very happy; and he
went down to take possession of it: And his absence (on so good an account too)
made us still happier. -- Then followed Lord M.'s proposal for my sister: And
this was an additional felicity for the time. I have told you how exceedingly
good-humored it made my sister.

You know how that went off: You know what came on in its place.

My brother then returned; and we were all wrong again: And Bella, as I
observed in my letters abovementioned, had an opportunity to give herself the
credit of having refused Mr. Lovelace, on the score of his reputed faulty
morals. This united my brother and sister in one cause. They set themselves on
all occasions to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and his family too, (a family which
deserves nothing but respect): And this gave rise to the conversation I am
leading to, between my uncles and them: Of which I now come to give the
particulars; after I have observed, that it happened before the rencounter, and
soon after the inquiry made into Mr. Lovelace's affairs had come out better
than my brother and sister hoped or expected See Letter iv. p. 22.
.

They were bitterly inveighing against him, in their usual way, strengthening
their invectives with some new stories in his disfavour; when my uncle Antony,
having given them a patient hearing, declared, 'That he thought the gentleman
behaved like a gentleman; his niece Clary with prudence; and that a more
honorable alliance for the family, as he had often told them, could not be
wished for: Since Mr. Lovelace had a very good paternal estate; and that, by
the evidence of an enemy, all clear: Nor did it appear, that he was so bad a
man as had been represented: Wild indeed; but it was at a gay time of life: He
was a man of sense: And he was sure that his niece would not have him, if she
had not good reason to think him reformed, or, by her own example, likely to be
so.'

He then gave one instance, my aunt told me, as a proof of a generosity in his
spirit, which showed him, he said, to be no very bad man in nature; and of a
temper, he was pleased to say, like my own: Which was, that when he, my uncle,
had represented to him, that he might, if he pleased (as he had heard Lord M.
say), make three or four hundred pounds a year of his paternal estate, more
than he did; he answered, 'That his tenants paid their rents well: That it was
a maxim with his family, from which he would by no means depart, never to
rack-rent old tenants, or their descendants; and that it was a pleasure to him,
to see all his tenants look fat, sleek, and contented.'

I indeed had once occasionally heard him say something like this; and thought
he never looked so well as at the time; -- except once; on this occasion:

An unhappy tenant came petitioning to my uncle Antony for forbearance, in Mr.
Lovelace's presence. When he had fruitlesly withdrawn, Mr. Lovelace pleaded his
cause so well, that the man was called in again, and had his suit granted. And
Mr. Lovelace privately followed him out, and gave him two guineas, for present
relief; the man having declared, that, at the time, he had not five shillings
in the world.

On this occasion, he told my uncle of the good action I hinted at, and that
without any ostentatious airs; to wit, That he had once observed an old tenant
and his wife in a very mean habit at church; and questioning them about it next
day, as he knew they had no hard bargain in their farm, the man said, he had
done some very foolish things with a good intention, which had put him
behind-hand, and he could not have paid his rent, and appear better. He asked
him, how long it would take him to retrieve the foolish step he had made. He
said, perhaps two or three years. Well then, said he, I will abate you five
pounds a year for seven years, provided you will lay it out upon your wife and
self, that you may make a Sunday appearance like MY tenants. Mean time take
This (putting his hand in his pocket, and giving him five guineas), to put
yourselves in present plight; and let me see you next Sunday at church, hand in
hand, like an honest and loving couple; and I bespeak you to dine with me
afterward.

Although this pleased me when I heard it, as giving an instance of generosity
and prudence at the same time, not lessening, as my uncle took notice, the
yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had no throbs, no glows upon it; --
upon my word, I had not. Nevertheless I own to you, that I could not help
saying to myself on the occasion, 'Were it ever to be my lot to have this man,
he would not hinder me from pursuing the methods I so much delight to take.' --
With 'A pity, that such a man were not uniformly good!'

Forgive me this digression.

My uncle went on, my aunt told me, 'That, besides his paternal estate, he was
the immediate heir to very splendid fortunes: That, when he was in treaty for
his niece Arabella, Lord M. told him, what great things he and his two
half-sisters intended to do for him, in order to qualify him for the title
(which would be extinct at his Lordship's death); and which they hoped to
procure for him, or a still higher, that of those Ladies father, which had been
for some time extinct, on failure of heirs male: That this view made his
relations so earnest for his marrying: That as he saw not where Mr. Lovelace
could better himself; so, truly, he thought there was wealth enough in their
own family to build up three considerable ones: That therefore, he must needs
say, he was the more desirous of this alliance, as there was a great
probability, not only from Mr. Lovelace's descent, but from his fortunes, that
his niece Clarissa might one day be a peeress of Great Britain: -- And upon
that prospect (here was the mortifying stroke) he should, for his own part,
think it not wrong, to make such dispositions as should contribute to the
better support of the dignity.'

My uncle Harlowe, it seems, far from disapproving of what his brother had
said, declared, 'That there was but one objection to an alliance with Mr.
Lovelace; to wit, his morals: Especially as so much could be done for Miss
Bella, and for my brother too, by my father; and as my brother was actually
possessed of a considerable estate, by virtue of the deed of gift and will of
his godmother Lovell.'

Had I known this before, I should the less have wondered at many things I have
been unable to account for in my brother's and sister's behavior to me; and
been more on my guard than I imagined there was a necessity to be.

You may easily guess how much this conversation affected my brother at the
time. He could not, you know, but be very uneasy, to hear two of his stewards
talk at this rate to his face.

He had from early days, by his violent temper, made himself both feared and
courted by the whole family. My father himself, as I have lately mentioned,
very often (long before his acquisitions had made him still more assuming) gave
way to him, as to an only son, who was to build up the name, and augment the
honor of it. Little inducement therefore had he to correct a temper, which
gave him so much consideration with everybody.

'See, sister Bella,' said he, in an indecent passion before my uncles, on the
occasion I have mentioned -- 'See how it is! -- You and I ought to look about
us! -- This little Siren is in a fair way to out-uncle, as well as
out-grandfather us both!'

From this time, as I now find it plain upon recollection, did my brother and
sister behave to me, as to one who stood in their way (sometimes as to a
creature in love with their common enemy); and to each other, as having but one
interest: And were resolved therefore to bend all their force to hinder an
alliance from taking effect, which they believed was likely to oblige them to
contract their views.

And how was this to be done, after such a declaration from both my uncles?

My brother found out the way. My sister, as I have said, went hand in hand
with him. Between them, the family union was broken, and every-one was made
uneasy. Mr. Lovelace was received more and more coldly by all: But not being to
be put out of his course by slights only, personal affronts succeeded;
defiances next; then the rencounter: That, as you have heard, did the business:
And now, if I do not oblige them, my grandfather's estate is to be litigated
with me; and I, who never designed to take advantage of the independency
bequeathed me, am to be as dependent upon my papa's will, as a daughter ought
to be who knows not what is good for herself. This is the language of the
family now.

But if I will suffer myself to be prevailed upon, how happy, as they lay it
out, shall we all be! -- Such presents am I to have, such jewels, and I cannot
not tell what, from every one of the family! Then Mr. Solmes's fortunes are so
great, and his proposals so very advantageous (no relation whom he values),
that there will be abundant room to raise mine upon them, were the
high-intended favors of my own relations to be quite out of the question.
Moreover it is now, with this view, found out, that I have qualifications,
which, of themselves, will be a full equivalent to him for the settlements he
is to make me; and leave him, as well as them, under an obligation to me for my
compliance. He himself thinks so, I am told; so very poor a creature is he,
even in his own, as well as in their eyes.

These charming views answered, how rich, how splendid, shall we all three be!
And I -- what obligations shall I lay upon them all! -- And that only by doing
an act of duty so suitable to my character, and manner of thinking; -- if
indeed I am the generous, as well as dutiful creature, I have hitherto made
them believe I am.

This is the bright side that is turned to my father and uncles, to captivate
them: But I am afraid, that my brother's and sister's design is to ruin me with
them at any rate. Were it otherwise, would they not, on my return from you,
have rather sought to court than frighten me into measures their hearts are so
much bent to carry? A method they have followed ever since.

Mean time, orders are given to all the servants to show the highest respect to
Mr. Solmes; the generous Mr. Solmes is now his character with some of our
family! But are not these orders a tacit confession, that they think his own
merit will not procure him respect? He is accordingly, in every visit he makes,
not only highly-caressed by the principals of our family, but obsequiously
attended and cring'd to by the menials. -- And the noble settlements are echoed
from every mouth.

Noble is the word used to enforce the offers of a man, who is mean enough
avowedly to hate, and wicked enough to propose to rob of their just
expectations, his own family (every one of which at the same time stands in too
much need of his favor), in order to settle all he is worth upon me; and, if I
die without children, and he has none by any other marriage, upon a family
which already abounds. Such are his proposals.

But were there no other motive to induce me to despise the upstart man, is not
this unjust one to his family enough? -- The upstart man, I repeat; for he was
not born to the immense riches he is possessed of: Riches left by one niggard
to another, in injury to the next heir, because that other is a niggard. And
should I not be as culpable, do you think, in my acceptance of such unjust
settlements, as he in the offer of them, if I could persuade myself to be a
sharer in them, or suffer a reversionary expectation of possessing them to
influence my choice?

Indeed it concerns me not a little, that my friends could be brought to
encourage such offers on such motives as I think a person of conscience should
not presume to begin the world with.

But this, it seems, is the only method that can be taken to disappoint Mr.
Lovelace; and at the same time to answer all my relations have to wish for each
of us. And sure I will not stand against such an accession to the family, as
may happen from marrying Mr. Solmes: Since now a possibility is discovered
(which such a grasping mind as my brother's can easily turn into a
probability), that my grandfather's estate will revert to it, with a much more
considerable one of the man's own. Instances of estates falling in, in cases
far more unlikely than this, are insisted on; and my sister says, in the words
of an old saw, It is good to be related to an estate.

While Solmes, smiling no doubt to himself at a hope so remote, by offers only,
obtains all their interests; and doubts not to join to his own the estate I am
envied for; which, for the convenience of its situation between two of his,
will it seems be of twice the value to him that it would be of to any other
person; and is therefore, I doubt not, a stronger motive with him than the wife.

These, my dear, seem to me the principal inducements of my relations to
espouse, so vehemently as they do, this man's suit. And here, once more, must I
deplore the family-fault, which gives those inducements such a force, as it
will be, difficult to resist.

And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes and me come out as they
will, my brother has succeeded in his views: that is to say, he has, in the
first place, got my FATHER to make the cause his own, and to insist upon my
compliance as an act of duty.

My MAMMA has never thought fit to oppose my father's will, when once he has
declared himself determined.

My UNCLES, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous bachelors, give me leave to say,
though very worthy gentlemen in the main, have as high notions of a child's duty,
as of a wife's obedience; in the last of which, my mamma's meekness has
confirmed them, and given them greater reason to expect the first.

My aunt HERVEY (not extremely happy in her own nuptials, and perhaps under
some little obligation) is got over, and chooses not to open her lips in my
favor, against the wills of a father and uncles so determined.

This passiveness in her and in my mamma, in a point so contrary to their own
first judgments, is too strong a proof that my papa is absolutely resolved.

Their tre^tment of my worthy Mrs. NORTON is a sad confirmation of it: A woman
deserving of all consideration for her wisdom; and everybody thinking so; but
who, not being wealthy enough to have due weight in a point against which she
has given her opinion, and which they seem bent upon carrying, is restrained
from visiting here, and even from corresponding with me, as I am this very day
informed.

Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and this great motive paternal
authority! -- What a force united! -- when, singly, each consideration is
sufficient to carry all before it!

This is the formidable appearance which the address of this disagreeable man
wears at present!

My BROTHER and my SISTER triumph. -- They have got me down, is their
expression, as Hannah, over-hearing them, tells me. And so they have (yet I
never knew that I was insolently up); for now my brother will either lay me
under an obligation to comply, to my own unhappiness, and so make me an
instrument of his revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuse, throw me into
disgrace with my whole family.

Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried on by undermining courtiers
against one another, when a private family, but three of which can possibly
have clashing interests, and one of them, as she presumes to think, above such
low motives, cannot be free from them?

What at present most concerns me, is, the peace of my mamma's mind! How can
the husband of such a wife (a good man too! -- But oh! this prerogative of
manhood!) be so posi-tive, so unper- suade-able, to one who has brought into
the family, means, which they know so well the value of, that methinks they
should value her the more for their sake!

They do indeed value her: But, I am sorry to say, she has purchased that value
by her compliances: Yet has merit for which she ought to be venerated; prudence
which ought of itself to be trusted and conformed to in everything.

But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverse girl take these liberties with
relations so very respectable, and whom she highly respects? -- What an unhappy
situation is that which obliges her, in her own defense as it were, to expose
their failings?

But you, who know how much I love and reverence my mamma, will judge what a
difficulty I am under, to be obliged to oppose a scheme which she has engaged
in. Yet I must oppose it (to comply is impossible), and must declare without
delay my opposition, or my difficulties will increase; since, as I am just now
informed, a lawyer has been this very day consulted (would you have believed
it?) in relation to settlements.

Were ours a Roman-Catholic family, how much happier for me, that they thought
a Nunnery would answer all their views! -- How happy, had not a certain person
slighted somebody! All then would have been probably concluded on between them
before my brother had arrived to thwart the match: Then had I had a sister;
which now I have not; and two brothers; -- both aspiring; possibly both titled:
While I should only have valued that in either which is above title, that which
is truly noble in both!

But what long-reaching selfishness is my brother governed by! By what remote,
exceedingly remote views! -- Views, which it is in the power of the slightest
accident, of a fever, for instance (the seeds of which are always vegetating,
as I may say, and ready to burst forth, in his own impetuous temper), or of the
provoked weapon of an adversary, to blow up, and destroy!

I will break off here. Let me write ever so freely of my friends, I am sure of
your kind construction: And I confide in your discretion, that you will avoid
reading to or transcribing for others, such passages as may have the appearance
of treating too freely the parental, or even the fraternal character, or induce
others to censure for a supposed failure in duty to the one, or decency to the
other,

Your truly affectionate CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER XIV. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Thursday Evening, March 2.
ON Hannah's depositing my long letter, begun yesterday, but by reason of
several interruptions, not finished till within this hour, she found and
brought me yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for this kind expedition:
-- These few lines will perhaps be time enough deposited, to be taken away by
your servant with the others: Yet they are only to thank you, and to tell you
my increasing apprehensions.

I must beg or seek the occasion to apply to my mamma for her mediation; -- for
I am in danger of having a day fixed, and antipathy taken for bashfulness. --
Should not sisters be sisters to each other? Should they not make a common
cause of it, as I may say, a cause of sex, on such occasions as the present?
Yet mine, in support of my brother's selfishness, and, no doubt, in concert
with him, has been urging in full assembly, as I am told, and that with an
earnestness peculiar to herself when she sets upon any thing, that an absolute
day be given me; and if I comply not, to be told, that it shall be to the
forfeiture of all my fortunes, and of all their loves.

She need not be so officious: My brother's interest, without hers, is strong
enough; for he has found means to confederate all the family against me. Upon
some fresh provocation, or new intelligence concerning Mr. Lovelace (I know not
what it is), they have bound themselves, or are to bind themselves, by a signed
paper, to one another (the Lord bless me, my dear, what shall I do!), to carry
this point of Mr. Solmes, in support of my father's authority, as it is called,
and against Lovelace, as a libertine, and an enemy to the family: And if so, I
am sure, I may say against me. -- How impolitic in them all, to join two people
in one interest, whom they wish for ever to keep asunder!

What the discharged steward reported of him was bad enough: What Mrs.
Fortescue said, not only confirms that bad, but gives room to think him still
worse: -- And something my friends have come at, which, as Betty Barnes tells
Hannah, is of so heinous a nature, that it proves him to be the worst of men.
-- But, hang the man, I had almost said, -- what is he to me? What would he be
-- were not this Mr. Sol -- O, my dear, how I hate that man in the light he is
proposed to me! -- All of them at the same time afraid of Mr. Lovelace; -- yet
not afraid to provoke him! -- How am I entangled! -- to be obliged to go on
corresponding with him for their sakes -- Heaven forbid, that their
persisted-in violence should so drive me, as to make it necessary for my own!
-- But surely they will yield -- Indeed I cannot. -- I believe the gentlest
spirits when provoked (causlesly and cruelly provoked) are the most determined.
-- The reason may be, That not taking up resolutions lightly, their very
deliberation makes them the more immovable. -- And then, when a point is clear
and self-evident to everybody, one cannot, without impatience, think of
entering into an argument or contention upon it.

An interruption obliges me to conclude myself, in some hurry, as well as
fright, what I must ever be,

Yours more than my own, CLARISSA HARLOWE.

LETTER XV. Miss HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Friday, March 3.
I HAVE both your letters at once. It is very unhappy, my dear, since your
friends will have you marry, that such a merit as yours should be addressed by
a succession of worthless creatures, who have nothing but their presumption for
their excuse.

That these presumers appear not in this very unworthy light to some of your
friends, is, because their defects are not so striking to them, as to others.
-- And why? Shall I venture to tell you? -- Because they are nearer their own
standard. -- Modesty, after all, perhaps has a concern in it; for how should
they think, that a niece or a sister of theirs (I will not go higher, for fear
of incurring your displeasure) should be an angel? -- But where indeed is the
man to be found, who has the least share of due diffidence, that dares to look
up to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with hope, or with any thing but wishes? Thus the
bold and forward, not being sensible of their defects, aspire; while the
modesty of the really worthy fills them with too much reverence to permit them
to explain themselves. Hence your Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's, your
Wyerley's (the best of the herd), and your Solmes's, in turn invade you --
Wretches that, looking upon the rest of your family, need not despair of
succeeding in an alliance with it: -- But, to you, what an inexcusable
pr^sumption!

Yet I am afraid all opposition will be in vain. You must, you will, I doubt,
be sacrificed to this odious man! -- I know your family! -- There will be no
resisting such baits as he has thrown out. -- O, my dear, my beloved friend!
and are such charming qualities, is such exalted merit, to be sunk in such a
marriage! -- You must not, your uncle tells my mamma, dispute their authority.
AUTHORITY! what a full word is that in the mouth of a narrow-minded person, who
happened to be born thirty years before one! -- Of your uncles I speak; for as
to the parental authority, That ought to be sacred. -- But should not parents
have reason for what they do?

Wonder not, however, at your Bell's unsisterly behavior in this affair: I
have a particular to add to the inducements your insolent brother is governed
by, which will account for all her driving. Her outward eye, as you have owned,
was from the first struck with the figure and address of the man whom she
pretends to despise, and who it is certain thoroughly despises her: But you have
not told us, that still she loves him of all men. Bell has a meanness in her
very pride; and no one is so proud as Bell. She has owned her love, her uneasy
days, and sleepless nights, and her revenge grafted upon it, to her favorite
Betty Barnes. -- To lay herself in the power of a servant's tongue! -- Poor
creature! -- But LIKE little souls will find one another out, and mingle, as
well as LIKE great ones. This, however, she told the wench in strict
confidence: And thus, by way of the female round-about, as Lovelace had the
sauciness on such another occasion, in ridicule of our sex, to call it, Betty
(pleased to be thought worthy of a secret, and to have an opportunity of
inveighing against Lovelace's perfidy, as she would have it to be) told it to
one of her confidants: That confidant, with like injunctions of secrecy, to
Miss Lloyd's Harriot -- Harriot to Miss Lloyd -- Miss Lloyd to me -- I to you
-- with leave to make what you please of it. -- And now you will not wonder to
find in Miss Bell an implacable rivaless, rather than an affectionate sister;
and will be able to account for the words witchcraft, siren, and suchlike,
thrown out against you; and for her driving on for a fixed day for sacrificing
you to Solmes: In short, for her rudeness and violence of every kind. -- What a
sweet revenge will she take, as well upon Lovelace, as upon you, if she can
procure her rival and all-excelling sister to be married to the man that sister
hates; and so prevent her having the man whom she herself loves (whether she
have hope of him, or not), and whom she suspects her sister loves! Poisons and
poniards have often been set to work by minds inflamed by disappointed love and
revenge; will you wonder then, that the ties of relationship in such a case
have no force, and that a sister forgets to be a sister?

This her secret motive (the more resistless, because her pride is concerned to
make her disavow it), joined with her former envy, and with the general and
avowed inducements particularized by you, now it is known, fills me with
apprehensions for you: Joined also by a brother, who has such an ascendant over
the whole family; and whose interest, slave to it as he always was, and whose
revenge, his other darling passion, are engaged to ruin you with everyone: Both
having the ears of all your family, and continually misrepresenting all you
say, all you do, to them: Their subject the rencounter, and Lovelace's want of
morals, to expatiate upon. -- O, my dear! how will you be able to withstand all
this? -- I am sure ( -- alas! I am too sure) that they will subdue such a fine
spirit as yours, unused to opposition; and, Tell it not in Gath, you must be
Mrs. Solmes!

Mean time, it is now easy, as you will observe, to guess from what quarter the
report I mentioned to you in one of my former came, That the younger sister has
robbed the elder of her lover: For Betty whispered it, at the time she
whispered the rest, that neither Lovelace nor you had done honorably by her
young mistress. -- How cruel, my dear, in you, to ^ob the poor Bella of the
only lover she ever had! -- At the instant too that she was priding herself,
that ^ow, at last, she should have it in her power not only ^o gratify her own
susceptibilities, but to give an ex^mple to the flirts of her sex (my worship's
self the ^rincipal, I suppose, with her) how to govern their man with a silken
rein, and without a kerb-bridle!

Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their ^ersevering in favor of the
despicable Solmes; and of their dependence upon the gentleness of your temper,
and the regard you have for their favor, and for your ^wn reputation. And now
I am more than ever con^inced of the propriety of the advice I formerly gave
^ou, to keep in your own hands the estate bequeathed ^o you by your
grandfather. -- Had you done so, it ^ould have procured you at least an outward
respect ^om your brother and sister; which would have made ^em conceal the envy
and ill will that now is bursting ^oon you from hearts so narrow.

I must harp a little more upon this string -- Don't you observe, how much your
brother's influence has over-topp'd yours, since he has got into fortunes so
considerable; and since you have given some of them an appetite to continue in
themselves the possession of your estate, unless you comply with their terms?

I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and one would have thought, that
you might have trusted to a father who so dearly loved you. But had you been
actually in possession of that estate, and living up to it, and upon it (your
youth protected from blighting tongues by the company of your prudent Norton,
as you had purposed), do you think that your brother, grudging it to you at the
time, as he did, and looking upon it as his right, as an only son, would have
been practicing about it, and aiming at it? -- I told you some time ago, that I
thought your trials but proportioned to your prudence: -- But you will be more
than woman, if you can extricate yourself with honor, having such violent
spirits and sordid minds, as in some, and such tyrannical and despot^ wills, as
in others, to deal with. -- Indeed, all may be done, and the world be taught
further to admire you, for your blind duty and will-less resignation, if yo^
can persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes!

I am pleased with the instances you give me of Mr. Lovelace's benevolence to
his own tenants, and with his little gift to your uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue
allows him to be the best of landlords: I might have told yo^ That, had I
thought it necessary to put you in some little conceit of him. He has
qualities, in short, that may make him a tolerable creature on the other side ^
fifty: But God help the poor woman to whose lot he shall fall till then! Women,
I should say perhaps; since he may break half a dozen hearts before that time.
-- But to the point I was upon -- Shall we not have reason to commend the
tenant's grateful honesty, if we a^ told, that with joy the poor man called out
your uncl^ and on the spot paid him in part of his debt those two ^uineas? --
But what shall we say of that landlord, who, though he knew the poor man to be
quite destitute, ^ould take it; and, saying nothing while Mr. Love^ce staid, as
soon as he was gone, tell of it, praising ^he poor fellow's honesty? -- Were
this so, and were ^ot that landlord related to my dearest friend, how ^ould I
despise such a wretch! -- But perhaps the ^ory is aggravated. Covetous people
have every^ne's ill word: And so indeed they ought; because ^hey are only
sollicitous to keep that which they pre^er to every-one's good one. -- Covetous
indeed would they be, who deserved neither, yet expected both!

I long for your next letter. Continue to be as par^cular as possible. I can
think of no other subject but that relates to you, and to your affairs: For I
am, and ever will be, most affectionately,

All your own ANNA HOW.

LETTER XVI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW. (Her last, not at the time
received.)
Friday, March 3.
O MY dear friend, I have had a sad conflict! trial upon trial; conference upon
conference! -- But that law, what ceremony, can give a man a right to heart
which abhors him more than it does any of God Almighty's creatures?

I hope my mamma will be able to prevail for me. -- ^ut I will recount all,
though I sit up the whole night ^ do it; for I have a vast deal to write; and
will be minute as you wish me to be.

In my last, I told you, in a fright, my apprehen^ons; which were grounded upon
a conversation that passed between my mamma and my aunt, part ^ which Hannah
overheard. I need not give you the further particulars; since what I have to
relate to yo^ from different conversations that have passed between my mamma
and me in the space of a very few hour^ will include them all. I will begin
then.

I went down this morning, when breakfast w^ ready, with a very uneasy heart,
from what Hanna^ had told me yesterday afternoon; wishing for an opportunity,
however, to appeal to my mamma, in hopes ^ engage her interest in my behalf,
and purposing ^ try to find one, when she retired to her own apartment after
breakfast: -- But, unluckily, there was the odious Solmes sitting asquat
between my mamma an^ sister, with so much assurance in his looks! -- But yo^
k^ow, my dear, that those we love not, cannot ^ anything to please us.

Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have bee^ well enough: But the bent and
broad-shoulder'd creature must needs rise, and stalk toward a chair, whi^ was
just by that which was set for me.

I removed it at a distance, as if to make way ^ my own: And down I sat,
abruptly I believe; wha^ I had heard, all in my head.

But this was not enough to daunt him: The m^ is a very confident, he is a very
bold, staring man! -- Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident.

He took the removed chair, and drew it so ne^ mine, squatting in it with his
ugly weight, that ^ pressed upon my hoop. -- I was so offended (all I h^ heard,
as I said, in my head), that I removed to a^ other chair. I own I had too
little command of m^self: It gave my brother and sister too much adva^tage; I
dare say they took it: -- But I did it involu^tarily, I think: I could not help
it. -- I knew n^ what I did.

I saw my papa was excessively displeased. Wh^ angry, no man's countenance ever
showed it so mu^ (...) my papa's. Clarissa Harlowe! said he, with a big ^oice;
and there he stopped. -- Sir! said I, and courte^'d. -- I trembled; and put my
chair nearer the ^retch, and sat down; my face I could feel all in a ^ow.

Make tea, child, said my kind mamma: Sit by ^e, love; and make tea.

I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had ^itted; and being thus
indulgently put into employ^ent, soon recovered myself; and in the course of ^e
breakfasting officiously asked two or three que^tions of Mr. Solmes, which I
would not have done, ^ut to make up with my papa. -- Proud spirits may ^e
brought to; whisperingly spoke my sister to me, ^ver her shoulder, with an air
of triumph and scorn: ^ut I did not mind her.

My mamma was all kindness and condescension. ^ asked her once, if she were
pleased with the tea? ^he said, softly, and again called me dear, she was
^leased with all I did. I was very proud of this en^ouraging goodness: And all
blew over, as I hoped; ^etween my papa and me; for he also spoke kindly ^o me
two or three times.

Small incidents these, my dear, to trouble you with; only as they lead to
greater; as you shall hear.

Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my papa withdrew with my mamma,
telling her he wanted to ^eak to her. My sister, and my aunt, who was with ^s,
next dropped away.

My brother gave himself some airs of insult, that ^ understood well enough;
but which Mr. Solmes ^ould make nothing of: -- And at last he arose from is
seat -- Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to show ^ou: I will fetch it: And
away he went; shutting ^he door close after him.

I saw what all this was for. I arose; the man hem^ing up for a speech, rising,
and beginning to set is splay-feet (indeed, my dear, the man in all his ways is
hateful to me) in an approaching posture. -- I will save my brother the trouble
of bringing to me his curiosity, said I. -- I courtesy'd -- Your servant, Sir
-- The man cried, Madam, Madam, twice, and looked like a fool. -- But away I
went -- to find my brother, to save my word. -- But my brother was gone,
indifferent as the weather was, to walk in the garden with my sister. A plain
case, that he had left his curiosity with me, and designed to show me no other.

I had but just got into my own apartment, and began to think of sending Hannah
to beg an audience of my mamma (the more encouraged by her condescending
goodness at breakfast), when Shorey, her woman, brought me her commands to
attend her in her closet.

My papa, Hannah told me, had just gone out of it with a positive, angry
countenance. Then I as much dreaded the audience, as I had wished for it before.

I went down, however; but, apprehending the subject, approached her trembling,
and my heart in visible palpitations.

She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms, as she sat, Come kiss me, my
dear, said she, with a smile like a sunbeam breaking through the cloud that
overshadowed her naturally benign aspect. Why flutters my jewel so?

This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just before, confirmed my
apprehensions. My mamma saw the bitter pill wanted gilding.

O my mamma! was all I could say; and I clasped my arms round her neck, and my
face sunk into her bosom.

My child! my child! restrain, said she, your powers of moving! -- I dare not
else trust myself with you. -- And my tears trickled down her bosom, as hers
bedewed my neck.

O the words of kindness, all to be expressed in vain, that flowed from her
lips!

Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own Clarissa Harlowe! -- O my
daughter, best-beloved of my heart, lift up a face so ever-amiable to me! --
Why these sobs? -- Is an apprehended duty so affecting a thing, that before I
can speak -- But I am glad, my love, you can guess at what I have to say to
you. I am spared the pains of breaking to you what was a task upon me
reluctantly enough undertaken to break to you.

Then rising, she drew a chair near her own, and made me sit down by her,
overwhelmed as I was with tears of apprehension of what she had to say, and of
gratitude for her truly maternal goodness to me; sobs still my only language.

And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she put her arms round my neck,
and my glowing cheek, wet with my tears, close to her own: Let me talk to you,
my child; since silence is your choice, hearken to me, and be silent.

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and undergo, for the sake of
peace: Your papa is a very good man, and means well; but he will not be
controuled; nor yet persuaded. You have seemed to pity me sometimes, that I am
obliged to give up every point. Poor man! his reputation the less for it; mine
the greater; yet would I not have this credit, if I could help it, at so dear a
rate to him and to myself. You are a dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child, she
was pleased to say (in hope, no doubt, to make me so): You would not add, I am
sure, to my trouble: You would not wilfully break that peace which costs your
mamma so much to preserve. Obedience is better than sacrifice. O my Clary
Harlowe, rejoice my heart, by telling me I have apprehended too much! -- I see
your concern! I see your perplexity! I see your conflict (loosing her arm, and
rising, not willing I should see how much she herself was affected). I will
leave you a moment. -- Answer me not (for I was essaying to speak, and had, as
soon as she took her dear cheek from mine, dropped down on my knees, my hands
clasped and lifted up in a supplicating manner): I am not prepared for your
irresistible expostulation, she was pleased to say. -- I will leave you to
recollection: And I charge you, on my blessing, that all this my truly maternal
tenderness be not thrown away upon you.

And then she withdrew into the next apartment; wiping her eyes, as she went
from me; as mine overflowed; my heart taking in the whole compass of her
meaning.

She soon returned, having recovered more steadiness.

Still on my knees, I had thrown my face cross the chair she had sat in.

Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe. No sullenness, I hope!

No, indeed, my ever-to be-revered mamma. -- And I arose. -- I bent my knee.

She raised me, No kneeling to me, but with knees of duty and compliance. --
Your heart, not your knees, must bend. -- It is absolutely determined. --
Prepare yourself therefore to receive your papa, when he visits you by-and-by,
as he would wish to receive you: But on this one quarter of an hour depends the
peace of my future life, the satisfaction of all the family, and your own
security from a man of violence: And I charge you besides, on my blessing, that
you think of being Mrs. Solmes.

There went the dagger to my heart, and down I sunk; and when I recovered,
found myself in the arms of my Hannah, my sister's Betty holding open my
reluctantly opened palm, my laces cut, my linen scented with hartshorn; and my
mamma gone. -- Had I been less kindly treated, the hated name still forborne to
be mentioned, or mentioned with a little more preparation and reserve, I had
stood the horrid sound with less visible emotion -- But to be bid, on the
blessing of a mother so dearly beloved, so truly reverenced, to think of being
Mrs. SOLMES, what a denunciation was that!

Shorey came in with a message, delivered in her solemn way: Your mamma, Miss,
is concerned for your disorder: She expects you down again in an hour; and bid
me say, that she then hopes every thing from your duty.

I made no reply; for what could I say? And leaning upon my Hannah's arm,
withdrew to my own apartment. There you will guess how the greatest part of the
hour was employed.

Within that time, my mamma came up to me.

I love, she was pleased to say, to come into this apartment! -- No emotions,
child! No flutters! -- Am I not your mother! -- Am I not your fond, your
indulgent mother! Do not discompose me by discomposing yourself! -- Do not
occasion me uneasiness, when I would give you nothing but pleasure. Come, my
dear, we will go into your library!

She took my hand, led the way, and made me sit down by her: And after she had
inquired how I did, she began in a strain, as if she had supposed I had made
use of the intervening space, to overcome all my objections.

She was pleased to tell me, that my papa and she, in order to spare my natural
modesty, had taken the whole affair upon themselves --

Hear me out, and then speak (for I was going to expostulate). You are no
stranger to the end of Mr. Solmes's visits. --

O Madam --

Hear me out; and then speak. He is not indeed every thing I wish him to be:
But he is a man of probity, and has no vices --

No vices, Madam! --

Hear me out, child -- You have not behaved much amiss to him: We have seen
with pleasure that you have not. --

O Madam, must I not now speak! --

I shall have done presently -- A young creature of your virtuous and pious
turn, she was pleased to say, cannot surely love a profligate: You love your
brother too well, to wish to marry one who had like to have killed him, and who
threatened your uncles, and defies us all. You have had your own way six or
seven times: We want to secure you against a man so vile. Tell me; I have a
right to know; whether you prefer this man to all others? -- Yet God forbid,
that I should know you do! for such a declaration would make us all miserable.
Yet, tell me, are your affections engaged to this man?

I knew what the inference would be, if I had said they were not.

You hesitate: You answer me not: You cannot answer me. -- Rising -- Never more
will I look upon you with an eye of favor. --

O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your displeasure: I would not, I need not,
hesitate one moment, did I not dread the inference, if I answer you as you
wish. -- Yet be that inference what it will, your threatened displeasure, will
make me speak. And I declare to you, that I know not my own heart, if it be not
absolutely free. And pray, let me ask, my dearest mamma, in what has my conduct
been faulty, that, like a giddy creature, I must be forced to marry, to save me
from -- From what? Let me beseech you, Madam, to be the guardian of my
reputation. -- Let not your Clarissa be precipitated into a state she wishes
not to enter into with any man! And this upon a supposition that otherwise she
shall marry herself, and disgrace her whole family.

Well then, Clary (passing over the force of my plea), if your heart be free --

O my beloved mamma, let the usual generosity of your dear heart operate in my
favor. Urge not upon me the inference that made me hesitate.

I will not be interrupted, Clary. -- You have seen in my behavior to you, on
this occasion, a truly maternal tenderness; you have observed that I have
undertaken this task, with some reluctance, because the man is not every thing;
and because I know you carry your notions of perfection in a man too high --

Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me! -- Is there then any danger that I
should be guilty of an imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint at?

Again interrupted! -- Am I to be questioned, and argued with? You know this
will not do somewhere else. You know it will not. What reason then, ungenerous girl,
can you have for arguing with me thus, but because you think from my indulgence
to you, you may?

What ^an I say? What can I do? What must that cause be, that will not bear
being argued upon?

Again! Clary Harlowe! --

Dearest Madam, forgive me: It was always my pride and my pleasure to obey you.
But look upon that man -- see but the disagreeableness of his person --

Now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in your eye! -- Now is Mr. Solmes,
I see, but comparatively disagreeable; disagreeable only as another man has a
much more specious person.

But, Madam, are not his manners equally so? -- Is not his person the true
representative of his mind? -- That other man is not, shall not, be any thing
to me, release me but from this one man, whom my heart, unbidden, resists.

Condition thus with your papa. Will he bear, do you think to be thus dialogu'd
with? Have I not conjured you, as you value my peace -- What is it that I do
not give up? -- This very task, because I apprehended you would not be easily
persuaded, is a task indeed upon me. And will you give up nothing? Have you not
refused as many as have been offered to you? If you would not have us guess for
whom, comply; for comply you must, or be looked upon as in a state of defiance
with your whole family.

And saying this, she arose, and went from me. But at the chamber door stopped,
and turned back; I will not say below, in what a disposition I leave you.
Consider of every thing. The matter is resolved upon. As you value your
father's blessing and mine, and the satisfaction of all the family, resolve to
comply. I will leave you for a few moments. I will come up to you again: See
that I find you as I wish to find you; and since your heart is free, let your
duty govern it.

In about half an hour, my mamma returned: She found me in tears. She took my
hand; It is my part evermore to be of the acknowleging side. I believe I have
needlessly exposed myself to your opposition, by the method I have taken with
you. I first began as if I expected a denial, and by my indulgence brought it
upon myself.

Do not, my dearest mamma! do not, say so!

Were the occasion for this debate, proceeded she, to have risen from myself;
were it in my power to dispense with your compliance; you too well know what
you can do with me --

Would anybody, my dear Miss How, wish to marry, when one sees a necessity
for such a sweet temper as my mamma's, either to be ruined, or deprived of all
power?

-- When I came to you a second time, knowing that your contradiction would
avail you nothing, I refused to hear your reasons: And in This I was wrong too,
because a young creature, who loves to reason, and used to love to be convinced
by reason, ought to have all her objections heard: I now, therefore, this third
time, see you; and am come resolved to hear all you have to say: And let me, my
dear, by my patience engage your gratitude; your generosity, I will call it;
because it is to You I speak, who used to have a mind wholly generous: Let me,
if your heart be really free, let me see what it will induce you to do to
oblige me: And so as you permit your usual discretion to govern you, I will
hear all you have to say; but with this intimation, that say what you will, it
will be of no avail elsewhere.

What a dreadful saying is that! But could I engage your pity, Madam, it would
be somewhat.

You have as much of my pity, as of my love. But what is person, Clary, with
one of your prudence, and your heart disengaged? --

Should the eye be disgusted, when the heart is to be engaged? -- O Madam, who
can think of marrying, when the heart must be shocked at the first appearance,
and where the disgust must be confirmed by every conversation afterward?

This, Clary, is owing to your prepossession. Let me not have cause to regret
that noble firmness of mind in so young a creature, which I thought your glory,
and which was my boast in your character. In this instance it would be
obstinacy, and want of duty. -- Have you not made objections to several --

That was to their minds, their principles, Madam -- But this man --

Is an honest man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good mind. -- He is a virtuous man.

He an honest man! His a good mind, Madam! He a virtuous man! --

Nobody denies him these qualities.

Can he be an honest man who offers terms that will rob all his own relations
of their just expectations? -- Can his mind be good --

You, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offers so much, are the last person that
should make this observation.

Give me leave, to say, Madam, that a person preferring happiness to fortune,
as I do; that want not even what I have, and can give up the use of that, as an
instance of duty --

No more, no more of your merits! -- You know you will be a gainer by that
cheerful instance of your duty; not a loser. You know you have but cast your
bread upon the waters -- So no more of that! -- For it is not understood as a
merit by everybody, I assure you; though I think it a high one; and so did your
papa and uncles at the time --

At the time, Madam! -- How unworthily do my brother and sister, who are afraid
that the favor I was so lately in --

I hear nothing against your brother and sister -- What family feuds have I in
prospect, at a time when I hoped most comfort from you all!

God bless my brother and sister, in all their worthy views! You shall have no
family feuds, if I can prevent them. You yourself, M^dam, shall tell me what I
shall bear from them, and I will bear it: But let my actions, not their
misrepresentations (as I am sure has been the case, by the disgraceful
prohibitions I have met with), speak for me --

Just then, up came my Papa, with a sternness in his looks, that made me
tremble! -- He took two or three turns about my chamber -- And then said to my
mamma, who was silent as soon as she saw him --

My dear, you are long absent -- Dinner is near ready. What you had to say, lay
in a very little compass. Surely, you have nothing to do but to declare your
will, and my will! -- But, perhaps, you may be talking of the preparations --
Let us have you soon down -- Your daughter in your hand, if worthy of the name.

And down he went, casting his eye upon me with a look so stern, that I was
unable to say one word to him, or even, for a few minutes, to my mamma.

Was not this very intimidating, my dear?

My mamma, seeing my concern, seemed to pity me. She called me her good child,
and kissed me; told me my papa should not know, that I had made such
opposition. He has kindly furnished us with an excuse for being so long
together. -- Come, my dear, -- Dinner will be upon table presently -- Shall we
go down? And took my hand.

This made me start: What, Madam, go down, to let it be supposed we were
talking of preparations! -- O my beloved mamma, command me not down upon such a
supposition.

You see, child, that to stay longer together, will be owning that you are
debating about an absolute duty: And that will not be borne. Did not your papa
himself, some days ago, tell you, he would be obeyed? I will a third time leave
you. I must say something by way of excuse for you: And that you desire not to
go down to dinner -- That your modesty on the occasion --

O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: For that will be to give hope
--

And design you not to give hope? -- Perverse girl! -- Rising, and flinging
from me, take more time for consideration! -- Since it is necessary, take more
time -- And when I see you next, let me know what blame I have to cast upon
myself, or to bear from your papa, for my indulgence to you.

She made, however, a little stop at the chamber door; and seemed to expect,
that I would have besought her to make the gentlest construction for me; for
hesitating, she was pleased to say, I suppose, you would not have me make a
report --

O Madam, interrupted I, whose favor can I hope for, if I lose my mamma's?

To have desired a favorable report, you know, my dear, would have been
qualifying upon a point that I was too much determined upon, to give room for
any of my friends to think I have the least hesitation about. And so my mamma
went down stairs.

I will deposite thus far; and as I know you will not think me too minute in my
relation of particulars so very interesting to one you honor with your love,
proceed in the same way. As matters stand, I don't care to have papers so
freely written about me.

Pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare him, whether I have any thing
ready or not.

I should be glad you would not send him empty-handed. What a generosity in
you, to write as frequently from friendship, as I am forced to do from
misfortune! The letters being taken away will be an assurance that you have
them. As I shall write and deposite as I have opportunity, the formality, of
super and sub-scription, will be excused. For I need not say how much I am,

Your sincere and ever-affectionate, CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER XVII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
MY mamma, on her return, which was as soon as she had dined, was pleased to
inform me, that she told my papa, on his questioning her about my cheerful
compliance (for it seems, the cheerful was all that was doubted), that she was
willing, on so material a point, to give a child whom she had so much reason to
love (as she condescended to acknowledge were her words) liberty to say all that
was in her heart to say, that her compliance might be the freer: Letting him
know, that when he came up, she was attending to my pleas; for that she found I
had rather not marry at all.

She told me, that to this my papa angrily said, Let her take care -- Let her
take care -- that she give me not ground to suspect her of a preference
somewhere else. But, if it be to ease her heart, and not to dispute my will,
you may hear her out.

So, Clary, said my mamma, I am returned in a temper accordingly, if you do not
again, by your peremptoriness, show me, how I ought to treat you.

Indeed, Madam, you did me justice, to say, I have no inclination to marry at
all. I have not, I hope, made myself so very unuseful in my papa's f^mily, as
--

No more of your merits, Clary! You have been a good child: You have eased me
of all the family cares: But do not now add more than ever you relieved me
from. You have been richly repaid in the reputation your skill and management
have given you: -- But now there is soon to be a period to all those
assistances from you. If you marry, there will be a natural, and, if to please
us, a desirable period; because your own family will employ all your talents in
that way: If you do not, there will be a period likewise, but not a natural
one: -- You understand me, child.

I wept.

I have made inquiry already after a housekeeper. I would have had your good
Norton; but I suppose you will yourself wish to have the worthy woman with you.
If you desire it, that shall be agreed upon for you.

But, why, dearest Madam, why am I, the youngest, to be precipitated into a
state, that I am ver^ far from wishing to enter into with anybody?

You are going to question me, I suppose, why your sister is not thought of for
Mr. Solmes?

I hope, Madam, it will not displease you, if I were?

I might refer you for an answer to your papa. -- Mr. Solmes has reasons for
preferring you --

And so have I, Madam, for disliking him. And why am I --

This quickness upon me, interrupted my mamma, is not to be borne! I am gone,
and your father comes, if I can do no good with you.

Madam, I would rather die, than --

She put her hand to my mouth. -- No peremptoriness, Clary Harlowe! Once you
declare yourself inflexible, I have done.

I wept for vexation. This is all, all, my brother's doings -- His grasping
views --

No reflections upon your brother: He has entirely the honor of the family at
heart.

I would no more dishonor my family, Madam, than my brother would.

I believe it: But I hope you will allow your papa, and me, and your uncles, to
judge what will do it honor, what dishonor!

I then offered to live single; never to marry at all; or never but with their
full approbation.

If I meant to show my duty, and my obedience, I must show it in their way; not
my own.

I said, I hoped I had so behaved myself hitherto, that there was no need of
such a trial of my obedience as this.

Yes, she was pleased to say, I had behaved extremely well: But I had no trials
till now: And she hoped, that now I was called to one, I should not fail in it.
Parents, said she, when children are young, are pleased with every thing they
do. -- You have been a good child upon the whole: But we have hitherto rather
complied with you, than you with us. Now that you are grown up to marriageable
years, is the test; especially as your grandfather has made you independent, as
we may say, in preference to those who had prior expectations upon that estate.
--

Madam, my grandfather knew, and expressly mentions in his will his desire, that
my papa will more than make it up to my sister -- I did nothing but what I
thought my duty, to procure his favor. It was rather a mark of his affection,
than any advantage to me: For, do I either seek or wish to be independent? Were
I to be queen of the universe, that, dignity should not absolve me from my duty
to you and my papa. I would kneel for your blessings, were it in the presence
of millions -- So that --

I am loath to interrupt you, Clary; though you could more than once break in upon
me -- You are young and unbroken -- But, with all this ostentation of your
duty, I desire you to show a little more deference to me when I am speaking.

I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience with me on such an occasion
as this. -- If I did not speak with earnestness upon it, I should be supposed
to have only maidenly objections against a man I never can abide. --

Clary Harlowe --

Dearest, dearest Madam, permit me to speak what I have to say, this once -- It
is hard, it is very hard, to be forbid to enter into the cause of all, because
I must not speak disrepectfully of one who supposes me in the way of his
ambition, and treats me like a slave --

Whither, whither, Clary --

My dearest mamma! -- My duty will not permit me so far to suppose my father
arbitrary, as to make a plea of that arbitrariness to you. --

How now, Clary! -- O girl! --

Your patience, my dearest mamma: -- You were pleased to say, you would hear me
with patience. -- PERSON, in a man is nothing, because I am supposed to be
prudent: So my eye is to be disgusted, and my reason not convinced. --

Girl, girl! --

Thus are my imputed good qualities to be made my punishment; and I am to be
wedded to a monster. --

(Astonishing! -- Can this, Clarissa, be from you? --

The man, Madam, person and mind, is a monster in my eye.) -- And that I may be
induced to bear this treatment, I am to be complimented with being indifferent
to all men: Yet, at other times, and to serve other purposes, am I to be
thought prepossessed in favor of a man against whose moral character lie just
objections. -- Confined, as if, like the giddiest of creatures, I would run
away with this man, and disgrace my whole family! -- O my dearest mamma! who
can be patient under such treatment?

Now, Clary, I suppose you will allow me to speak. I think I have had patience
indeed with you. -- Could I have thought -- But I will put all upon a short
issue. Your mamma, Clarissa, shall show you an example of that patience, you so
boldly claim from her, without having any yourself.

O my dear, how my mamma's condescension distressed me at the time! infinitely
more distressed me, than rigor could have done. But she knew, she was to be
sure aware, that she was put upon a harsh service; an unreasonable service, let
me say; or she would not, she could not, have had so much patience with me.

Let me tell you then, proceeded she, that all lies in a small compass, as your
papa said. -- You have been hitherto, as you are pretty ready to plead, a
dutiful child -- You have indeed had no cause to be otherwise; no child was
ever more favored -- Whether you will discredit all your past actions;
whether, at a time and upon an occasion that the highest instance of duty is
expected from you (an instance that is to crown all); and when you declare that
your heart is free -- you will give that instance; or whether, having a view to
the independence you may claim (for so, Clary, whatever be your motive, it will
be judged), and which any man you favor, can assert for you against us all; or
rather for himself, in spite of us -- Whether, I say, you will break with us
all; and stand in defiance of a jealous papa; needlessly jealous, I will
venture to say, of the prerogatives of his sex, as to me, and still ten times
more jealous of the authority of a father; -- This is now the point with us.
You know your papa has made it a point; and did he ever give up one he thought
he had a right to carry?

Too true, thought I to myself! And now my brother has engaged my father, his
fine scheme will walk alone, without needing his leading-strings; and it is
become my father's will that I oppose; not my brother's grasping views.

I was silent. To say the truth, I was just then sullenly silent. My heart was
too big. I thought it was hard to be thus given up by my mamma; and that she
should make a will so uncontrollable as my brother's, her will.

But this silence availed me still less. --

I see, my dear, said she, that you are convinced. Now, my good child, now, my
Clary, do I love you! It shall not be known, that you have argued with me at
all: All shall be imputed to that modesty, which has ever so much distinguished
you. You shall have the full merit of your resignation.

I wept.

She tenderly wiped the tears from my eyes, and kissed my cheek -- Your papa
expects you down, with a cheerful countenance -- But I will excuse your going:
All your scruples, you see, have met with an indulgence truly maternal from me.
I rejoice in the hope that you are convinced. This indeed seems to be a proof
of the welcome truth you have asserted, That your heart is free.

Did not this seem to border upon cruelty, my dear, in so indulgent a mamma? --
It would be wicked (would it not?) to suppose my mamma capable of art -- But
she is put upon it; and obliged to take methods her heart is naturally above
stooping to; and all intended for my good, because she sees that no arguing
will be admitted any-where else.

I will go down, proceeded she, and excuse your attendance at afternoon-tea, as
I did to dinner: For I know you will have some little reluctances to conquer. I
will allow you those; and also some little natural shynesses -- And so you
shall not come down, if you choose not to come down -- Only, my dear, don't
disgrace my report when you come to supper. And besure behave as you used to do
to your brother and sister; for your behavior to them will be one test of your
cheerful obedience to us. I advise as a friend, you see, rather than command as
a mother -- So adieu, my love: And again she kissed me; and was going.

O my dear mamma, said I, forgive me! -- But surely you cannot believe, I can
ever think of having that man!

She was very angry, and seemed to be greatly disappointed. She threatened to
turn me over to my papa and my uncles: -- She bid me (generously bid me)
consider, if I thought my brother and sister had views to serve by making my
uncles dissatisfied with me, what a handle I gave them. She told me, That she
had early said all that she thought could be said against the present proposal,
on a supposition, that I, who had refused several others (whom she owned to be
preferable as to person) should not approve of it; and could she have
prevailed, I had never heard of it: And if SHE could not, how could I expect
it? -- That it was equally my good (in order to preserve to me the share I had
hitherto held in every-body's affections), and her own peace, that she wished
to promote by the task she had undertaken: -- That my papa would flame out,
upon my refusal to comply: -- That my uncles were so much convinced of the
consistence of the measure with their favorite views of aggrandizing the
family, that they were as much determined as my papa: -- That my aunt Hervey
and my uncle Hervey were of the same party: -- That it was hard, if a father
and mother, and uncles, and aunt, all conjoined, could not be allowed to direct
my choice: -- That, surely, I was not the more averse, because the family view
would be promoted by the match: -- That this would be the light, she could
assure me, in which my refusal would be taken by everybody: -- That all the
asseverations I could make of living single, while the man who was so obnoxious
to everybody, remained unmarry'd, and while he buzzed about me, was the word,
would have no weight with any of them: -- That if Mr. Lovelace were an angel,
and my father made it a point that I should not have him, I must be sensible he
would not have his will disputed: Especially, as it was not doubted, that I
corresponded with him: To the belief of which, and that it was by Miss Howe's
means, were owing the prohibition, laid upon me, so much against her liking,
she was pleased to say.

I answered to every article she had spoken to as above, in such a manner, as I
am sure would have satisfied her, could she have been permitted to judge for
herself; and then inveighed with bitterness against the disgraceful
prohibitions laid upon me.

They would serve to show me, she was pleased to say, how much in earnest my
papa was. They might be taken off, whenever I thought fit, and no harm done,
nor disgrace received. But if I were to be contumacious, I might thank myself
for all that would follow.

I sighed. I wept. I was silent.

Shall I, Clary, said she, tell your papa, that these prohibitions are as
unnecessary, as I hoped they would be? That you know your duty, and will not
offer to controvert his will? -- What say you, my love?

O Madam, what can I say to questions so indulgently put? I do indeed know my
duty: No creature in the world is more willing to practice it: But, pardon me,
dearest Madam, if I say, That I must bear these prohibitions, if I am to pay so
dear to have them taken off.

Determined and perverse, my dear mamma called me: And after walking twice or
thrice in anger about the room, she turned to me; -- Your heart free! Clarissa!
How can you tell me your heart is free? Such extraordinary antipathies to a
particular person must be owing to extraordinary prepossessions in another's
favor! -- Tell me, Clary; and tell me truly -- Do you not continue to
correspond with Mr. Lovelace?

Dearest Madam, replied I, you know my motives: To prevent mischief, I answered
his Letters. The reason for our apprehensions of this sort are not over.

I own to you, Clary, although now I would not have it known, that I once thought
a little qualifying among such violent spirits, was not amiss. I did not know
but all things would come round again by Lord M.'s and his two sisters
mediation: But as they all three think proper to resent for their nephew; and
as their nephew thinks fit to defy us all; and as terms are offered on another
hand, that could not be asked, which will very probably prevent your
grandfather's estate going out of the family, and may be a means to bring a
still greater into it; I see not, that the continuance of your correspondence
with him either can, or ought to be permitted. I therefore now forbid it to
you, as you value my favor.

Be pleased, Madam, only to advise me how to break it off with safety to my
brother and uncles; and it is all I wish for. Would to heaven, the man so hated
had not the pretense to make of having been too violently treated, when he
meant peace and reconciliation! It would always have been i^ my own power to
have broke with him: -- His reputed immoralities would have given me a just
pretense at any time to do so -- But, Madam, as my uncles and my brother will
keep no measures; -- as he has heard what the view is; and as I have reason to
think, that he is only restrained by his regard for me from resenting their
violent treatment of him and his family; what can I do? -- Would you have me,
Madam, make him desperate?

The Law will protect us, child! -- Offended magistracy will assert itself --

But, Madam, may not some dreadful mischief first happen? -- The Law asserts
not itself, till it is offended.

You have made offers, Clary, if you might be obliged in the point in question:
-- Are you really in earnest, on that condition to break off all correspondence
with Mr. Lovelace? -- Let me know this.

Indeed, I am; and I will. You, Madam, shall see every letter that has passed
between us. You shall see I have given him no encouragement, independent of my
duty: -- And when you have seen them, you will be better able to direct me how,
on that condition, to break entirely with him.

I take you at your word, Clarissa: Give me his letters; and the copies of
yours.

I am sure, Madam, you will keep the knowledge that I write, and what I write --

No conditions with your mamma -- Surely my prudence may be trusted to.

I begged her pardon; and besought her to take the key of the private drawer in
my escrutoire, where they lay, that she herself might see, that I had no
reserves to my mamma.

She did; and took all his letters, and the copies of mine. -- Un-condition'd
with, she was pleased to say, they shall be yours again, unseen by anybody
else.

I thanked her; and she withdrew to read them; saying, she would return them,
when she had.

YOU, my dear, have seen all the letters that have passed between him and me,
till my last return from you: You have acknowleg'd, that he has nothing to
boast of, from them: Three others I have received since, by the private
conveyance I told you of; the last I have not yet answered.

In these three, as in those you have seen, after having besought my favor,
and, in the most earnest manner, professed the sincerity of his passion for me;
and set forth the indignities done him; the defiances my brother throws out
against him in all companies; the menaces, and hostile appearance of my uncles,
wherever they go, or come; and the methods they take to defame him; he
declares, 'That neither his own honor, nor his family's (involved as that is
in the undistinguishing reflections cast upon him for an unhappy affair, which
he would have shunned, but could not), permit him to bear these confirmed
indignities: That as my inclinations, if not favorable to him, cannot be, nor
are, to such a man as the new-set-up Solmes, he is interested the more to
resent my brother's behavior; who to everybody avows his rancour and malice;
and glories in the probability he has, through this Solmes's address, of
mortifying me, and avenging himself on him: That it is impossible, he should
not think himself concerned to frustrate a measure, so directly levelled at him,
had he not still a higher motive for hoping to frustrate it: That I must
forgive him, if he enters into conference with Solmes upon it. He earnestly
insists upon what he has so often proposed, That I will give him leave, in
company with Lord M. to wait upon my uncles, and even upon my papa or mamma;
promising patience, if new provocations, absolutely beneath a man to bear, are
not given:' Which, by the way, I am far from being able to engage for.

In my answer, I absolutely declare, as I tell him I have often done, 'That he
is to expect no favor from me, against the approbation of my friends: That I
am sure their consents for his visiting any of them will never be obtained:
That I will not be either so undutiful, or so indiscreet, as to suffer my
interests to be separated from the interests of my family, for any man on
earth: That I do not think myself obliged to him for the forbearance I desire
one flameing spirit to have with others: That in this desire I require nothing
of him, but what prudence, justice, and the laws of his country, oblige from
him: That if he has any expectations of favor from me, on that account, he
deceives himself: That I have no inclination, as I have often told him, to
change my condition: That I cannot allow myself to correspond with him any
longer in this clandestine manner: It is mean, low, undutiful, I tell him; and
has a giddy appearance, which cannot be excused: That therefore he is not to
expect, that I will continue it.'

To this, in his last, among other things, he replies; 'That if I am actually
determined to break off all correspondence with him, he must conclude, that it
is with a view to become the wife of a man, whom no woman of honor and fortune
can think tolerable. And in that case, I must excuse him for saying, that he
shall neither be able to bear the thoughts of losing for ever a person in whom
all his present, and all his future hopes are centred; nor support himself with
patience under the insolent triumphs of my brother upon it: But that he will
not presume to threaten either his own life, or that of any other man. He must
take his resolutions as such a dreaded event shall impell him, at the time. If
he shall know that it will be with my own consent, he must endeavor to resign
to his destiny: But if it be brought about by compulsion, he shall not be able
to answer for the consequence.'

I will send you these letters for your perusal, in a few days. I would enclose
them; but that it is possible something may happen, which may make my mamma
require to see them again. -- You will see, my dear, by his, how he endeavors
to hold me to this correspondence.

IN about an hour my mamma returned. Take your letters, Clary: I have nothing
to task your discretion with, as to the wording of yours to him: You have even
kept up a proper dignity, as well as decorum: And you have resented, as you
ought to resent, his menacing invectives. But can you think from the avowed
hatred of one side, and the avowed defiance of the other, that this can be a
suitable match? Can you think it becomes you to encourage an address from a man
who has fought a duel with your brother, let his fortune and professions be
what they will?

By no means it can, Madam; you will be pleased to observe, that I have said as
much to him. But now, Madam, the whole correspondence is before you; and I beg
your commands what to do in a situation so very disagreeable.

One thing I will tell you, Clary Harlowe: But I charge you, as you would not
have me question the generosity of your spirit, to take no advantage of it,
either mentally or verbally, were the words: That I am so much pleased with the
offer of your keys to me, in so cheerful and unreserved a manner, and in the
prudence you have shown in your letters, that were it practicable to bring
every one, or your father only, into my opinion, I should readily leave all the
rest to your discretion, reserving only to myself the direction or approbation
of your future letters; and to see, that you broke off the correspondence, as
soon as possible. But as it is not, and as I know your papa would have no
patience with you, should it be acknowleg'd that you correspond with Mr.
Lovelace, or that you have corresponded with him since the time he prohibited
you so to do; I forbid you continuing such a liberty. Yet, as the case is
difficult, let me ask you, What you yourself can propose? Your heart, you say,
is free. You own, that you cannot think, as matters are circumstanced, that a
match with a man so obnoxious as he now is to us all, is proper to be thought
of: What do you propose to do? -- What, Clary, are your own thoughts of the
matter?

Without hesitation (for I saw I was upon a new trial) thus I answered -- What
I humbly propose is this: -- 'That I will write to Mr. Lovelace (for I have not
answered his last) that he has nothing to do between my father and me: That I
neither ask his advice, nor need it: But that since he thinks he has some
pretense for interfering, because of my brother's avowal of the interest of Mr.
Solmes in malice to him, I will assure him, without giving him any reason to
impute the assurance to be in the least favorable to himself, that I never
will be that man's.' And if, proceeded I, I may be permitted to give him this
assurance; and Mr. Solmes, in consequence of it, be discouraged from
prosecuting his address; let Mr. Lovelace be satisfied or dissatisfied, I will
go no farther; nor write another line to him; nor ever see him more, if I can
avoid it: And shall have a good excuse for it, without bringing in any of my
family.

Ah! my love! -- But what shall we do about the terms Mr. Solmes offers? Those
are the inducements with everybody: He has even given hopes to your brother
that he will make exchanges of estates; or at least, that he will purchase the
northern one; for, you know, it must be entirely consistent with the family
views, that we increase our interest in this county. Your brother, in short,
has given in a plan that captivates us all: And a family so rich in all its
branches, that has it is views to honor, must be pleased to see a very great
probability of being on a footing with the principal in the kingdom.

And for the sake of these views, for the sake of this plan of my brother's, am
I, Madam, to be given in marriage to a man I never can endure! -- O my dear
mamma, save me, save me, if you can, from this heavy evil! -- I had rather be
buried alive, indeed I had, than have that man!

She chid me for my vehemence; but was so good as to tell me, That she would
venture to talk with my uncle Harlowe, and, if he encouraged her (or would
engage to second her), with my papa; and I should hear further in the morning.

She went down to tea, and kindly undertook to excuse my attendance at supper:
And I immediately had recourse to my pen, to give you these particulars.

But is it not a sad thing, I repeat, to be obliged to stand in opposition to
the will of such a mamma? Why, as I often say to myself, was such a man as this
Solmes fixed upon? The only man in the world, surely, that could offer so much,
and deserve so little!

Little indeed does he deserve! -- Why, my dear, the man has the most
indifferent of characters. Every mouth is opened against him for his sordid
ways -- A foolish man, to be so base-minded! -- When the difference between the
obtaining of a fame for generosity, and incurring the censure of being a miser,
will not, prudently managed, cost fifty pounds a year.

What a name have you got, at a less expense? And what an opportunity had he of
obtaining credit at a very small one, succeeding such a wretched creature as
Sir Oliver, in fortunes so vast? -- Yet has he so behaved, that the common
phrase is applied to him, That Sir Oliver will never be dead, while Mr. Solmes
lives.

The world, as I have often thought, ill-natured as it is said to be, is
generally more just in characters (speaking by what it feels), than is usually
apprehended: And those who complain most of its censoriousness, perhaps should
look inwardly for the occasion oftener than they do.

My heart is a little at ease, on the hopes that my mamma will be able to
procure favor for me, and a deliverance from this man; and so I have leisure
to moralize: But if I had not, I should not forbear to intermingle occasionally
these sort of remarks, because you command me never to omit them when they
occur to my mind: And not to be able to make them, even in a more affecting
situation, when one sits down to write, would show one's-self more engaged to
self, and one's own concerns, than attentive to the wishes of a friend. If it
be said, that it is natural so to be, what makes that nature, on occasions
where a friend may be obliged, or reminded of a piece of instruction, which,
writing down, one's-self may be the better for, but a fault; which it would set
a person above nature to subdue?

LETTER XVIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sat. Mar. 4.
WOULD you not have thought, that something might have been obtained in my
favor, from an offer so reasonable, from an expedient so proper, as I imagine,
to put a tolerable end, as from myself, to a correspondence I hardly know how,
otherwise, with safety to some of my family, to get rid of! -- But my brother's
plan (which my mamma spoke of, and of which I have in vain endeavored to
procure a copy, with a design of taking it to pieces, and exposing it, as I
question not there is room to do), together with my papa's impatience of
contradiction, is irresistible.

I have not been in bed all night; nor am I in the least drousy. Expectation,
and hope, and doubt (an uneasy state!), kept me sufficiently wakeful. I stepped
down at my usual time, that it might not be known I had not been in bed; and
gave directions in the family way.

About eight of clock Shorey came to me from my mamma, with orders to attend
her in her chamber.

My mamma had been weeping, I saw by her eyes: But her aspect seemed to be less
tender, and less affectionate, than the day before; and this struck me with an
awe, as soon as I entered her presence, which gave a great damp to my spirits.

Sit down, Clary Harlowe; I shall talk to you by-and-by: And was looking into a
drawer among laces and linen, in a way neither busy nor unbusy.

After some time, she asked me coldly, What directions I had given for the day?

I gave her the bill of fare for this day, and tomorrow, if, I said, it pleased
her to approve of it.

She made a small alteration in it; but with an air so cold and so solemn, as
added to the emotions I entered into her presence with.

Mr. Harlowe talks of dining out today, I think, at my brother Antony's. --

Mr. Harlowe! -- Not my papa! -- Have I not then a papa! -- thought I?

Sit down when I bid you.

I sat down.

You look very sullen, Clary.

I hope not, Madam.

If children would always be children -- parents -- And there she stopped.

She then went to her toilette, and looked in the glass, and gave half a sigh
-- the other half, as if she would not have sighed, could she have helped it,
she gently hemmed away.

I don't love to see the girl look so sullen.

Indeed, Madam, I am not sullen. -- And I arose, and, turning from her, drew
out my handkerchief, for the tears ran down my cheeks. I thought, by the glass
before me, I saw the mother in her softened eye cast toward me. -- But her
words confirmed not the hop'd-for tenderness.

One of the provoking'st things in the world is, to have people cry for what
they can help!

I wish to heaven I could, Madam! -- and I sobb'd again.

Tears of penitence and sobs of perverseness are mighty well suited! -- You may
go up to your chamber. I shall talk with you by-and-by.

I courtesy'd with reverence. --

Mock me not with outward gesture of respect. The heart, Clary, is what I want.

Indeed, Madam, you have it. It is not so much mine, as my mamma's!

Fine talking! -- As somebody says, If words were duty, Clarissa Harlowe would
be the dutifullest child breathing.

God bless that somebody! -- Be it whom it will, God bless that somebody! --
And I courtesy'd, and, pursuant to her last command, was going.

She seemed struck; but was to be angry with me.

So turning from me, she spoke with quickness, Whither now, Clary Harlowe?

You commanded me, Madam, to go to my chamber.

I see you are very ready to go out of my presence. Is your compliance the
effect of sullenness, or obedience? -- You are very ready to leave me.

I could hold no longer; but threw myself at her feet: O my dearest mamma! Let
me know all I am to suffer: Let me know what I am to be! I will bear it, if I
can bear it: But your displeasure I cannot bear!

Leave me, leave me, Clary Harlowe! -- No kneeling! -- Limbs so supple; Will so
stubborn! -- Rise, I tell you.

I cannot rise! I will disobey my mamma, when she bids me leave her, without
her being reconciled to me! No sullens, my mamma: No perverseness: But, worse
than either, This is direct disobedience! -- Yet tear not yourself from me!
(wrapping my arms about her as I kneeled; she struggling to get from me; my
face lifted up to hers, with eyes running over, that spoke not my heart if they
were not all humility and reverence.) You must not, must not, tear yourself
from me! (for still the dear lady struggled, and looked this way and that, in a
sweet disorder, as if she knew not what to do.) -- I will neither rise, nor
leave you, nor let you go, till you say you are not angry with me.

O thou ever-moving child of my heart! (folding her dear arms about my neck, as
mine embraced her knees.) Why was this task! -- But leave me! -- You have
discomposed me beyond expression! -- Leave me, my dear! -- I will not be angry
with you -- if I can help it -- if you will be good.

I arose trembling, and, hardly knowing what I did, or how I stood or walked,
withdrew to my chamber. My Hannah followed me, as soon as she heard me quit my
mamma's presence, and with salts and spring water just kept me from fainting;
and that was as much as she could do. It was near two hours before I could so
far recover myself as to take up my pen, to write to you how unhappily my hopes
have ended.

My mamma went down to breakfast. I was not fit to appear: But if I had been
better, I suppose I should not have been sent for; my papa's hint, when in my
chamber, being, To bring me down, if worthy of the name of daughter. That, I
doubt, I never shall be in his opinion, if he be not brought to change his mind
as to this Mr. Solmes.

LETTER XIX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW. [In answer to Letter XV.]
Sat. March 4. 12 of clock.
HANNAH has just now brought me from the usual place your favor of yesterday.
The contents of it have made me very thoughtful; and you will have an answer in
my gravest style. -- I to have that Mr. Solmes! -- No indeed! -- I will sooner
-- But I will write first to other parts of your letter that are less
concerning, that I may touch upon this part with more patience.

As to what you mention of my sister's value for Mr. Lovelace, I am not very
much surprised at it. She takes such officious pains, and it is so much her
subject, to have it thought that she never did, and never could like him, that
she gives but too much room to suspect her. Then she never tells the story of
their parting, and of her refusal of him, but her color rises, she looks with
disdain upon me, and mingles anger with the airs she gives herself: -- Both
anger and airs, at least, demonstrating, that she refused a man whom she
thought worth accepting: Where else is the reason either for anger or boast? --
Poor Bella! She is to be pitied! -- She cannot either like or dislike with
temper! -- Would to heaven she had been mistress of all her wishes! -- Would to
heaven she had! --

As to the article of giving up to my papa's control the estate bequeathed me,
my motives at the time, as you acknowledge, were not blameable. Your advice to
me on the subject was grounded, as I remember, on your good opinion of me;
believing that I should not make a bad use of the power willed me: Neither you
nor I, my dear, although you now assume the air of a diviner (pardon me), could
have believed That would have happened which has happened, as to my father's
part particularly. You were indeed jealous of my brother's views against me; or
rather of his predominant love of Self; but I did not think so hardly of my
brother and sister, as you always did. You never loved them; and ill will has
eyes always open to the faulty side; as good will or love is blind even to real
imperfections. I will briefly recollect my motives.

I found jealousies and uneasiness rising in every breast, where all before was
unity and love: The honored testator was reflected upon: A second childhood
was attributed to him; and I was censured, as having taken advantage of it. All
young creatures, thought I, more or less, covet independency; but those who
wish most for it, are seldom the fittest to be trusted either with the
government of themselves, or with power over others. This is certainly a very
high and unusual bequest to so young a creature. We should not aim at all we
have power to do. To take all that goodnature, or indulgence, or good opinion
confers, shows a want of moderation, and a graspingness that is unworthy of
that indulgence; and are bad indications of the use that may be made of the
power bequeathed. It is true, thought I, that I have formed agreeable schemes
of making others as happy as myself, by the proper discharge of the stewardship
entrusted to me (Are not all estates stewardships, my dear?): But let me
examine myself: Is not vanity, or secret love of praise, a principal motive
with me at the bottom? -- Ought I not to suspect my own heart? If I set up for
myself, puffed up with every one's good opinion, may I not be left to myself?
-- Every one's eyes are upon the conduct, upon the visits, upon the visit- ors
of a young creature of our sex, made independent: And are not such, moreover,
the subjects of the attempts of the worst of the other? -- And then, left to
myself, should I take a wrong step, though with ever so good an intention, how
many should I have to triumph over me, how few to pity? -- The more of the one,
and the fewer of the other, for having aimed at excelling.

These were some of my reflections at the time: And I have no doubt, but that
in the same situation I should do the very same thing; and that upon the
maturest deliberation. Who can command or foresee events? To act up to our best
judgments at the time, is all we can do. If I have erred, it is to worldly
wisdom only that I have erred. If we suffer by an act of duty, or even by an
act of generosity, is it not pleasurable on reflection, that the fault is in
others, rather than in ourselves? -- I had rather, a vast deal, have reason to
think others unkind, than that they should have any to think me undutiful. And
so, my dear, I am sure had you.

And now for the most concerning part of your letter.

You think I must of necessity be Mr. Solmes's wife, as matters are
circumstanced. I will not be very rash, my dear, in protesting to the contrary:
But I think it never, never can, nor ought to be! -- My temper, I know, is
depended upon: But I have heretofore said, that I have something in me of my
father's family, as well as of my mother's See Letter ix. p. 50.
. And have I any encouragement to follow too implicitly the example which my
mamma sets of meekness, and resignedness to the wills of others? -- Is she not
for ever obliged to be, as she was pleased to hint to me, of the forbearing
side? In my mamma's case, your observation is verified, that those who will
bear much, shall have much to bear: -- What is it, as she says, that she has
not sacrificed to peace? -- Yet, has she by her sacrifices always found the
peace she has deserved to find? Indeed No! -- I am afraid the very contrary.
And often and often have I had reason, on her account, to reflect, that we poor
mortals, by our over-sollicitude to preserve undisturbed the qualities we are
constitutionally fond of, frequently lose the benefits we propose to ourselves
from them: Since the designing and incroaching, finding out what we most fear
to forfeit, direct their batteries against these our weaker places, and, making
an artillery, if I may so phrase it, of our hopes and fears, play it upon us at
their pleasure.

Steadiness of mind (a quality which the ill-bred and censorious deny to any of
our sex), when one is convinced of being in the right (otherwise it is not
steadiness, but obstinacy), and in material cases, is a quality, my good Dr.
Lewin was wont to say, that brings great credit to the possessor of it; at the
same time that it usually, when tried and known, raises such above the attempts
of the meanly machinating. He used therefore to inculcate upon me this
steadiness, upon laudable convictions. And why may I not think that I am now
put upon an exercise of it? -- I have said, that I never can be, that I never
ought to be, Mrs. Solmes. -- I repeat, that I ought not: For surely, my dear, I
should not give up to my brother's ambition the happiness of my future life. --
Surely I ought not to be the instrument to deprive Mr. Solmes's relations of
their natural rights and reversionary prospects, for the sake of further
aggrandizing a family (although that I am of) which already lives in great
affluence and splendour; and who might be as justly dissatisfied, were what some
some of them aim at to be obtained, that they were not princes, as now they
are, that they are not peers (for when ever was an ambitious mind, as you
observe in the case of avarice See Letter x. p. 55.
, satisfied by acquisition?). The less, surely, ought I to give into these
grasping views of my brother, as I myself heartily despise the end aimed at; as
I wish not either to change my state, or better my fortunes; and as I am fully
persuaded, that happiness and riches are two things, and very seldom meet
together.

Yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflicts I know I must encounter with.
It is possible, that I may be more unhappy from the due observation of the good
doctor's general precept, than were I to yield the point; since what I call
steadiness is attributed to stubbornness, to obstinacy, to prepossession, by
those who have a right to put what interpretation they please upon my conduct.

So, my dear, were we perfect, which no one can be, we could not be happy in
this life, unless those with whom we have to deal (those, more especially, who
have any control upon us), were governed by the same principles. What have we
then to do, but as I have hinted above, to choose right, and pursue it
steadily, and leave the issue to Providence?

This, if you approve of my motives (and if you don't, pray inform me), must be
my aim in the present case.

But what then can I plead for a palliation to myself of my mamma's sufferings
on my account? Perhaps This consideration will carry some force with it; --
That her difficulties cannot last long; only till this great struggle shall be
one way or other determined. -- Whereas my unhappiness, if I comply, will (from
an aversion not to be overcome) be for life. To which let me add, That, as I
have reason to think that the present measures are not entered upon with her
own natural liking, she will have the less pain, should they want the success
which I think in my heart they ought to want.

I have run a great length in a very little time. The subject touched me to the
quick. My reflections upon it will give you reason to expect from me a perhaps
too steady behavior in a new conference, which, I find, I must have with my
mamma. My father and brother, as she was pleased to tell me, dine at my uncle
Antony's, on purpose, as I have reason to believe, to give an opportunity for
it.

Hannah informs me, that she heard my papa high and angry with my mamma, at
taking leave of her: I suppose for being too favorable to me; for Hannah heard
her say, as in tears, 'Indeed, Mr. Harlowe, you greatly distress me! -- The
poor girl does not deserve -- ' Hannah heard no more, but that he said, he
would break somebody's heart -- Mine, I suppose. -- Not my mother's, I hope.

As only my sister dines with my mamma, I thought I should have been commanded
down: But she sent me up a plate from her table. I wrote on. I could not touch
a morsel: I ordered Hannah however, to eat of it, that I might not be thought
sullen.

I will see, before I conclude this, whether any thing offers from either of my
private correspondencies, that will make it proper to add to it; and will take
a turn in the wood-yard and garden for that purpose.

I am stopped. Hannah shall deposite this. She was ordered by my mamma, who
asked where I was, to tell me, that she would come up and talk with me in my
own closet. -- She is coming! Adieu, my dear.

LETTER XX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sat. P. M.
THE expected conference is over: But my difficulties are increased. This, as
my mamma was pleased to tell me, being the last persuasory effort that will be
attempted, I will be as particular in the account of it as my head and my heart
will allow me to be.

I have made, said she, as she entered my room, a short as well as early
dinner, on purpose to confer with you: And I do assure you, that it will be the
last conference I shall either be permitted or inclined to hold with you on the
subject, if you should prove as refractory as some, whom I hope you will
disappoint, imagine you will; and thereby demonstrate, that I have not the
weight with you that my indulgence to you deserves.

Your papa both dines and sups at your uncle's, on purpose to give us this
opportunity; and as I shall make my report (which I have promised to do very
faithfully) on his return, he will take his measures with you.

I was offering to speak -- Hear, Clarissa, what I have to tell you, said she,
before you speak, unless what you have to say will signify to me your
compliance -- Say -- will it? -- If it will, you may speak.

I was silent.

She looked with concern and anger upon me -- No compliance, I find! -- Such a
dutiful young creature hitherto! -- Will you not, can you not, speak as I would
have you speak? -- Then, rejecting me, as it were, with her hand, then,
continue silent. -- I, no more than your father, will bear your avowed
contradiction! --

She paused, with a look of expectation, as if she waited for my consenting
answer.

I was still silent; looking down; the tears in my eyes.

O thou determined girl! -- But say; speak out; are you resolved to stand in
opposition to us all, in a point our hearts are set upon?

May I, Madam, be permitted to expostulate?

To what purpose expostulate with me, Clarissa? Your father is determined. Have
I not told you, that there is no receding; that the honor, as well as the
benefit, of the family is concerned? Be ingenuous: You used to be so, even
against yourself -- Who at the long run must submit -- all of us to you; or you
to all of us? -- If you intend to yield at last if you find you cannot conquer,
yield now, and with a grace -- for yield you must, or be none of our child.

I wept. I knew not what to say; or rather how to express what I had to say.

Take notice, that there are flaws in your grandfather's will: Not a shilling
of that estate will be yours, if you do not yield. Your grandfather left it to
you, as a reward of your duty to him and to us. -- You will justly forfeit it,
if --

Permit me, good Madam, to say, that, if it were unjustly bequeathed me, I
ought not to wish to have it. But I hope Mr. Solmes will be apprized of these
flaws.

This was very pertly said, she was pleased to tell me: But bid me reflect,
that the forfeiture of that estate, through my opposition, would be attended with
the total loss of my papa's favor; and then how destitute I must be; how
unable to support myself; and how many benevolent designs and good actions must
I give up!

I must accommodate myself, I said, in the latter case, to my circumstances:
Much only was required where much was given. It became me to be thankful for
what I had had: And I had reason to bless her and my good Mrs. Norton, for
bringing me up to be satisfied with little -- with much less, I would venture
to say, than my papa's indulgence annually conferred upon me. -- And then I
thought of the old Roman and his lentiles.

What perverseness! said my mamma. -- But if you depend upon the favor of
either or both your uncles, vain will be that dependence. They will give you
up, I do assure you, if your papa does, and absolutely renounce you.

I told her, I was sorry that I had had so little merit, as to have made no
deeper impressions of favor for me in their hearts: But that I would love and
honor them as long as I lived.

All this, she was pleased to say, made my prepossession in a certain man's
favor the more evident. Indeed my brother and sister could not go any-whither,
but they heard of these prepossessions.

It was a great grief to me, I said, to be made the subject of the public talk:
But I hoped she would have the goodness to excuse me for observing, that the
authors of my disgrace within-doors, the talkers of my prepossession without,
and the reporters of it from abroad, were originally the same persons.

She severely chid me for this.

I received her rebukes in silence.

You are sullen, Clarissa! I see you are sullen! -- And she walked about the
room in anger. Then turning to me -- You can bear the imputation, I see! -- You
have no concern to clear yourself of it. I was afraid of telling you all I was
injoined to tell you, in case you were to be unpersuadeable: -- But I find that
I had a greater opinion of your delicacy and gentleness than I needed to have.
-- It cannot discompose so steady, so inflexible, a young creature, to be told,
that the settlements are actually drawn; and that you will be called down, in a
very few days, to hear them read, and to sign them: for it is impossible, if
your heart be free, that you can make the least objection to them; except that
they are so much in your favor, and in all our favor, be one.

I was speechless, absolutely speechless: Although my heart was ready to burst,
yet could I neither weep nor speak.

She was sorry, she said, for my averseness to this match (match she was
pleased to call it!): But there was no help. The honor and interest of the
family, as my aunt had told me, and as she had told me, were concerned; and I
must comply.

I was still speechless.

She folded the warm statue, as she was pleased to call me, in her arms; and
entreated me, for God's sake, and for her sake, to comply.

Speech and tears were lent me at the same time. -- You have given me life,
Madam, said I, clasping my uplifted hands together, and falling on one knee; a
happy one, till now, has your goodness, and my papa's, made it! O do not, do
not, make all the remainder of it miserable!

Your papa, replied she, is resolved he will not see you till he sees you as
obedient a child as you used to be. You have never been put to a test till now,
that deserved to be called a test. This is, This must be, my last effort with
you. Give me hope, my dear child: My peace is concerned: I will compound with
you but for hope; and yet your father will not be satisfied without an
implicit, and even a cheerful obedience: -- Give me but hope, my child!

To give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent mamma, is to give you every
thing. Can I be honest, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm?

She was very angry. She again called me perverse: She upbraided me with
regarding only my own inclinations, and respecting not either her peace of
mind, or my own duty: -- 'It was a grating thing, she said, for the parents of
a child, who delighted in her in all the time of her helpless infancy, and
throughout every stage of her childhood, and in every part of her education to
womanhood, because of the promises she gave of proving the most grateful and
dutiful of children; to find, that just when the time arrived which should
crown all their wishes, she should stand in the way of her own happiness, and
her parents comfort, and, refusing an excellent offer, and noble settlements,
give suspicions to her anxious friends, that she would become the property of a
vile rake and libertine, who (be the occasion what it would) defied her family,
and had actually embrued his hands in her brother's blood.'

She added, 'That she had a very hard time of it between my father and me; That
seeing my dislike, she had more than once pleaded for me; but all to no
purpose. She was only treated as a too fond mother, who, from motives of a
blameable indulgence; would encourage a child to stand in opposition to a
father's will: She was charged, she said, with dividing the family into two
parts; she and her youngest daughter standing against her husband, his two
brothers, her son, her eldest daughter, and her sister Hervey. She had been
told, that she must be convinced of the fitness as well as advantage to the
whole (my brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the question) of carrying the
contract with Mr. Solmes, on which so many contracts depended, into execution.'

She repeated, 'That my father's heart was in it: That he had declared, he had
rather have no daughter in me, than one he could not dispose of for her own
good: Especially as I had owned, that my heart was free; and as the general
good of his whole family was to be promoted by my obedience: That he had
pleaded, that his frequent gouty paroxysms (every Fit more threatening than the
former) gave him no extraordinary prospects either of worldly happiness, or of
long days: That he hoped, that I, who had been supposed to have contributed to
the lengthening of his father's life, would not, by my disobedience, shorten
his.'

This was a most affecting plea, my dear; I wept in silence upon it; I could
not speak to it: And my mamma proceeded: 'What therefore could be his motives,
she asked, in the earnest desire he had to see this treaty perfected, but the
welfare and aggrandizement of his family; which already having fortunes to
become the highest condition, could not but aspire to greater distinctions:
That, however slight such views as these might appear to me, I knew, that they
were not slight ones to any other of the family: And my papa would be his own
judge of what was, and what was not, likely to promote the good of his
children: That my abstractedness (affectation of abstractedness some called it)
savored of greater particularity, than what they aimed to carry: That modesty
and humility would therefore oblige me rather to mistrust myself of
peculiarity, than censure views, which all the world pursued, as opportunity
offered.'

I was still silent; and she proceeded -- 'That it was owing to the good
opinion which my papa had of me, and of my prudence, duty, and gratitude, that
he had engaged for my compliance, in my absence (before I returned from Miss
How); and had built and finished contracts upon it, that could not be made
void, or cancelled.'

But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on my return from Miss How,
with so much intimidating solemnity? -- To be sure, this argument, as well as
the rest, was obtruded upon my mamma.

She went on, 'That my papa had declared, that my unexpected opposition (
unexpected, she was pleased to call it), and Mr. Lovelace's continued menaces
and insults, more and more convinced him, that a short day was necessary, in
order to put an end to all that man's hopes, and to his own apprehensions
resulting from the disobedience of a child so favored: That he had therefore
actually ordered patterns of the richest silks to be sent for from London --

I started! -- I was out of breath -- I gasped, at this frightful precipitance:
I was going to open with warmth against it. I knew whose the happy expedient
must be: Female minds, I once heard my brother say, that could but be brought
to balance on the change of their state, might easily be determined by the
glare and splendour of the nuptial preparations, and the pride of becoming the
mistress of a family. -- But she was pleased to hurry on, that I might not have
time to express my disgusts at such a communication -- to this effect:

'That neither for my sake, nor his own, could my father labor under a
suspense so affecting to his repose: That he had even thought fit to acquaint
her, on her pleading for me, that it became her, as she valued her own peace
(How harsh to such a wife!), and as she wished, that he should not suspect that
she secretly favored the address of a vile rake (a character which all the
sex, he was pleased to say, virtuous and vicious, were but too fond of!), to
exert her authority over me: And that This she might the less scrupulously do,
as I had owned (the old string!) that my heart was free.'

Unworthy reflection This of our sex's valuing a libertine, in my mamma's case,
surely! who made choice of my papa in preference to several suitors of equal
fortune, because they were of inferior reputation for morals!

She added, 'That my papa had left her at going out, with this command, That if
she found that she had not the proper influence over me, she should directly
separate herself from me; and leave me, singly, to take the consequence of my
double disobedience.'

She therefore entreated me in the most earnest and condescending manner, 'To
signify to my papa, on his return, my ready obedience: And this, she was
pleased to say, as well for her sake, as mine.'

Affected by my mamma's goodness to me, and by that part of her argument which
related to her own peace, and to the suspicions they had of her secretly
inclining to prefer the man so hated by them, to the man so much my aversion, I
could not but wish it were possible for me to obey. I therefore paused,
hesitated, considered, and was silent for a considerable space. I could see,
that my mamma hoped that the result of this hesitation would be favorable to
her arguments. But then, recollecting, that all was owing to the instigations
of a brother and sister, wholly actuated by selfish and envious views: That I
had not deserved the treatment I had of late met with: That my disgrace was
already become the public talk: That my aversion to their man was too generally
known, to make my compliance either creditable to myself or to them; as it
would demonstrate less of duty than of a slavish, and even of a sordid mind,
seeking to preserve its worldly fortunes; by the sacrifice of its future
happiness; That it would give my brother and sister a triumph over me, and over
Mr. Lovelace, which they would not fail to glory in; and which, although it
concerned me but little to matter on his account, yet might be attended with
fatal mischiefs -- And then Mr. Solmes's disagreeable person, his still more
disagreeable manners; his low understanding -- Understanding! the glory of a
man! so little to be dispensed with in the head and director of a family, in
order to preserve to him that respect which a good wife (and that for the
justification of her own choice) should pay him herself, and wish everybody to
pay him -- And as Mr. Solmes's inferiority in this respectable faculty of the
human mind (I must be allowed to say this to you, and no great self-assumption
neither) would proclaim to all future, as well as present observers, what must
have been my mean inducement -- All these reflections, which are ever present
with me, crouding upon my remembrance; I would, Madam, said I, folding my
hands, with an earnestness that my whole heart was engaged in, bear the
cruellest tortures, bear loss of limb, and even of life, to give you peace. But
this man, every moment I would, at your command, think of him with favor, is
the more my aversion. You cannot, indeed you cannot, think, how my whole soul
resists him! -- And to talk of contracts, concluded upon; of patterns; of a
short day! -- save me, save me, O my dearest mamma, save your child, from this
heavy, from this insupportable evil! --

Never was there a countenance that expressed so significantly, as my mamma's,
an anguish, which she struggled to hide, under an anger she was compelled to
assume. -- Till the latter overcoming the former, she turned from me with an
uplifted eye, and stamping -- Strange perverseness! were the only words I heard
of a sentence that she angrily pronounced; and was going. I then, half
franticly I believe, laid hold of her gown -- Have patience with me, dearest
Madam! said I -- Do not you renounce me totally! -- If you must separate
yourself from your child, let it not be with absolute reprobation on your own
part! -- My uncles may be hard-hearted -- My papa may be immovable -- I may
suffer from my brother's ambition, and from my sister's envy! -- But let me not
lose my mamma's love; at least, her pity.

She turned to me with benigner rays -- You have my love! You have my pity!
But, O my dearest girl -- I have not yours.

Indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: And all my reverence, all my gratitude, you
have! -- But in this one point -- Cannot I be this once obliged? -- Will no
expedient be accepted? Have I not made a very fair proposal as to the man so
hated?

I wish, for both our sakes, my dear unpersuadable girl, that the decision of
this point lay with me. But why, when you know it don't, should you thus
perplex and urge me? -- To renounce Mr. Lovelace is now but half what is aimed
at. Nor will anybody else believe you in earnest in the offer, if I would.
While you remain single, Mr. Lovelace will have hopes -- and you, in the
opinion of others, inclinations.

Permit me, dearest Madam, to say, That your goodness to me, your patience,
your peace, weigh more with me, than all the rest put together: For although I am
to be treated by my brother, and, through his instigations, by my papa, as a
slave in this point, and not as a daughter, yet my mind is not that of a slave.
You have not brought me up to be mean.

So, Clary, you are already at defiance with your papa! I have had too much
cause before to apprehend as much -- What will this come to? -- I, and then my
dear mamma sighed -- I, am forced to put up with many humors --

That you are, my ever-honour'd mamma, is my grief. And can it be thought that
this very consideration, and the apprehension of what may result from a much
worse-temper'd man (a man, who has not half the sense of my papa), has not made
an impression upon me, to the disadvantage of the married life? Yet it is
something of an alleviation, if one must bear undue control, to bear it from a
man of sense. My papa, I have heard you say, Madam, was for years a very
good-humored gentleman -- Unobjectible in person and manners. -- But the man
proposed to me --

Forbear reflecting upon your papa (Did I, my dear, in what I have repeated,
and I think they are the very words; reflect upon my papa?): It is not
possible, I must say again, and again, were all men equally indifferent to you,
that you should be thus sturdy in your will. -- I am tired out with your
obstinacy -- The most unper- suade-able girl! -- You forget, that I must
separate myself from you, if you will not comply: You do not remember that your
papa will take you up, where I leave you. -- Once more, however, I will put it
to you, -- Are you determined to brave your papa's displeasure? -- Are you
determined to defy your uncles? -- Will you choose to break with us all, rather
than encourage Mr. Solmes? -- Rather than give me hope?

Cruel alternative! -- But is not my sincerity, is not the integrity of my
heart, concerned in my answer? May not my everlasting happiness be the
sacrifice? Will not the least shadow of the hope you just now demanded from me,
be driven into absolute and sudden certainty? Is it not sought to ensnare, to
entangle me in my own desire of obeying, if I could give answers that might be
construed into hope? -- Forgive me, Madam: Bear with your child's boldness in
such a cause as This! -- Settlements drawn! -- Patterns sent for! -- An early
day! -- Dear, dear Madam, how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's?

Ah, girl, never say your heart is free! You deceive yourself if you think it
is.

Thus to be driven (and I wrung my hands through impatience) by the instigations
of a designing, an ambitious brother, and by a sister, that --

How often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly reflections? -- Does not your
father, do not your uncles, does not everybody, patronize Mr. Solmes? -- And
let me tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmovable as ungrateful, let me
repeatedly tell you, that it is evident to me, that nothing but a love unworthy
of your prudence can make a creature late so dutiful, so sturdy. You may guess
what your father's first question on his return will be. He must know, that I
can do nothing with you. I have done my part. Seek me, if your mind change
before he comes back: You have yet a little more time, as he stays supper: I
will no more seek you, nor to you. -- And away she flung.

What could I do but weep?

I am extremely affected on my mamma's account -- more, I must needs say, than
on my own. -- And indeed, all things considered, and especially, that the
measure she is engaged in, is (as I dare say it is) against her own judgment,
she deserves more compassion than myself. -- Excellent woman! What pity, that
meekness and condescension should not be attended with the due rewards of those
charming graces! -- Yet had she not let violent spirits, as I have elsewhere
observed with no small regret, have found their power over hers, it could not
have been thus.

But here, run away with by my pen, I suffer my dear mamma to be angry with me
on her own account. She hinted to me, indeed, that I must seek her, if my mind
changed; which is a condition that amounts to a prohibition: -- But, as she
left me in displeasure, will it not have a very obstinate appearance, and look
like a a kind of renunciation of her mediation in my favor, if I go not down
to supplicate her pity, and her kind report, before my papa comes back? --

I will attend her. I had rather all the world should be angry with me, than my
mamma!

Mean time, to clear my hands from papers of such a nature, Hannah shall
deposite this. If two or three letters reach you together, they will but
express, from one period to another, the anxieties and difficulties which the
mind of your unhappy, but ever affectionate, friend labors under.

CL. H.

LETTER XXI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sat. Night.
I HAVE been down. I am to be unlucky in all I do, I think, be my intention
ever so good. I have made matters worse instead of better; as I shall now tell
you.

I found my mamma and sister together in my sister's parlour. My mamma, I fear,
by the glow in her fine face (and as the browner, sullener glow in my sister's
confirmed), had been expressing herself with warmth, against her unhappier
child: Perhaps giving such an account of what had passed, as should clear
herself, and convince Bella, and through her, my brother and uncles, of the
sincere pains she had taken with me! --

I entered like a dejected criminal, I believe; -- and besought the favor of a
private audience. My mamma's return, both looks and words, gave but too much
reason for my surmize.

You have, said she (looking at me with a sternness that never sits well on her
sweet features), rather a requesting than a conceding countenance, Clarissa
Harlowe: If I am mistaken, tell me so; and I will withdraw with you wherever
you will. -- Yet, if so, or not so, you may say what you have to say before
your sister.

My mamma, I thought, might have withdrawn with me, as she knows, that I have
not a friend in my sister.

I came down, I said, to beg of her to forgive me for anything she might have
taken amiss in what had passed above respecting herself; and to use her
interest to soften my papa's displeasure, when she made the report she was to
make to him.

Such aggravating looks; such lifting-up of hands and eyes; such a furrowed
forehead, in my sister! --

My mamma was angry enough without all that; and asked me, To what purpose I
came down, if I were still so untractable?

She had hardly spoke the words, when Shorey came in to tell her, that Mr.
Solmes was in the hall, and desired admittance.

Ugly creature! What, at the close of day, quite dark, brought him hither? --
But, on second thoughts. I believe it was contrived, that he should be here at
supper, to know the result of the conference between my mamma and me; and that
my papa, on his return, might find us together.

I was hurrying away; but my mamma commanded me, since I had come down only, as
she said, to mock her, not to stir; and at the same time see if I could behave
so to him, as might encourage her to make the report to my papa which I had so
earnestly besought her to make.

My sister triumphed. I was vexed to be so caught, and to have such an angry
and cutting rebuke given me, with an aspect more like the taunting sister than
the indulgent mother, if I may presume to say so. -- For my mamma herself
seemed to enjoy the surprise upon me.

The man stalked in. His usual walk is by pauses, as if (from the same vacuity
of thought which made Dryden's clown whistle) he was telling his steps: and
first paid his clumsy respects to my mamma; then to my sister; next to me, as
if I were already his wife, and therefore to be last in his notice; and sitting
down by me, told us in general what weather it was. Very cold he made it; but I
was warm enough. Then addressing himself to me; And how do you find it, Miss,
was his question; and would have took my hand.

I withdrew it, I believe with disdain enough: My mamma frowned; my sister bit
her lip.

I could not contain myself: I never was so bold in my life; for I went on with
my plea, as if Mr. Solmes had not been there.

My mamma colored, and looked at him, looked at my sister, and looked at me.
My sister's eyes were opener and bigger than ever I saw them before.

The man understood me. He hemmed, and removed from one chair to another.

I went on, supplicating for my mamma's favorable report: Nothing but
invincible dislike --

What would the girl be at? Why, Clary! -- Is this a subject! -- Is this! -- Is
this! -- Is this a time -- And again she looked upon Mr. Solmes.

I am sorry, on reflection, that I put my mamma into so much confusion. -- To
be sure it was very saucy in me.

I begged pardon. But my papa, I said, would return. I should have no other
opportunity. I thought it was requisite, since I was not permitted to withdraw,
that Mr. Solmes's presence should not deprive me of an opportunity of such
importance for me to embrace; and at the same time, if he still visited on my
account (looking at him), to show, that it could not possibly be to any purpose.

Is the girl mad? said my mamma, interrupting me.

My sister, with the affectation of a whisper to my mamma -- This is -- This is
spite, Madam (very spitefully she spoke the word), because you commanded her to
stay.

I only looked at her, and turning to my mamma, Permit me, Madam, said I, to
repeat my request. I have no brother, no sister! -- If I lose my mamma's
favor, I am lost for ever!

Mr. Solmes removed to his first seat, and fell to gnawing the head of his
hazel; a carved head, almost as ugly as his own. I did not think the man was so
sensible.

My sister rose, with a face all over scarlet, and stepping to the table, where
lay a fan, she took it up, and, although Mr. Solmes had observed that the weather
was cold, fanned herself very violently.

My mamma came to me, and angrily taking my hand, led me out of that parlour
into my own; which, you know, is next to it -- Is not this behavior very bold,
very provoking, think you, Clary?

I beg your pardon, Madam, if it has that appearance to you. But indeed, my
dear mamma, there seem to be snares laying for me. Too well I know my brother's
drift. With a good word he shall have my consent for all he wishes to worm me
out of. -- Neither he, nor my sister, shall need to take half this pains. --

My mamma was about to leave me in high displeasure.

I besought her to stay: One favor, but one favor, dearest Madam, said I,
give me leave to beg of you --

What would the girl?

I see how every thing is working about. -- I never, never can think of Mr.
Solmes. My papa will be in tumults, when he is told that I cannot. They will
judge of the tenderness of your heart to a poor child who seems devoted by
every-one else, from the willingness you have already shown to hearken to my
prayers. There will be endeavors used to confine me, and keep me out of your
presence, and out of the presence of every one who used to love me -- (This, my
dear, is threatened) -- If This be effected; if it be put out of my power to
plead my own cause, and to appeal to You, and to my uncle Harlowe, of whom only
I have hope; -- then will every ear be opened against me; and every tale
encouraged. -- It is, therefore, my humble request, That, added to the
disgraceful prohibitions I now suffer under, you will not, if you can help it,
give way to my being denied your ear.

Your listening Hannah has given you this intelligence, as she does many others.

My Hannah, Madam, listens not! -- My Hannah --

No more in her behalf -- She is known to make mischief -- She is known -- But
no more of that busy intermeddler -- It Is true, your father threatened to
confine you to your chamber, if you complied not, in order the more assuredly
to deprive you of the opportunity of corresponding with those who harden your
heart against his will. He bid me tell you so, when he went out, if I found you
refractory. But I was loath to deliver so harsh a declaration; being still in
hope that you would come down to us in a compliant temper. -- Hannah has
overheard this, I suppose; and has told you of it; as also, that he declared he
would break your heart, rather than you should break his. And I now assure you,
that you will be confined, and prohibited making teazing appeals to any of us:
And we shall see who is to submit, You, or everybody to you!

I offered to clear Hannah, and to lay the latter part of the intelligence to
my sister's echo, Betty Barnes, who had boasted of it to another servant: But I
was again bid to be silent on that head. I should soon find, she was pleased to
say, that others could be as determined as I was obstinate: And, once for all,
would add, that since she saw that I built upon her indulgence, and mattered
not involving her in contentions with my father, and his brothers, and her
other children, she would now assure me, that she was as much determined
against Mr. Lovelace, and for Mr. Solmes and the family-schemes, as anybody;
and would not refuse her consent to any measures that should be thought
necessary to reduce a stubborn child to her duty.

I was ready to sink. She was so good as to lend me her arm to support me.

And this is all I have to hope for from my mamma?

It is. But, Clary, this one further opportunity I give you -- Go in again to
Mr. Solmes, and behave discreetly to him; and let your papa find you together,
upon civil terms at least.

My feet moved (of themselves, I think) farther from the parlour where he was,
and toward the stairs; and there I stopped and paused.

If, proceeded she, you are determined to stand in defiance of us all -- then
indeed may you go up to your chamber (as you are ready to do) -- And God help
you!

God help me indeed! for I cannot give hope of what I cannot intend -- But let
me have your prayers, my dear mamma! -- Those shall have mine, who have brought
me into all this distress!

I was moving to go up --

And will you go up, Clary?

I turned my face to her: My officious tears would needs plead for me: I could
not just then speak; and stood still.

Good girl, distress me not thus! -- Dear, good girl, do not thus distress me!
-- holding out her hand; but standing still likewise --

What can I do, Madam? -- What can I do? --

Go in again, my child -- Go in again, my dear child! -- repeated she; and let
your papa find you together! --

What, Madam, to give him hope? -- To give hope to Mr. Solmes?

Obstinate, perverse, undutiful Clarissa Harlowe! with a rejecting hand, and
angry aspect; then take your own way, and go up! -- But stir not down again, I
charge you, without leave, or till your papa's pleasure be known concerning you.

She flung from me with high indignation: And I went up with a very heavy
heart; and feet as slow as my heart was heavy.

MY father is come home, and my brother with him. Late as it is, they are all
shut up together. Not a door opens; not a soul stirs. Hannah, as she moves up
and down, is shunned as a person infected.

THE angry assembly is broke up. My two uncles and my aunt Hervey are sent for,
it seems, to be here in the morning to breakfast. I shall then, I suppose, know
my doom. It Is past eleven, and I am ordered not to go to bed.


Twelve of clock.
THIS moment the keys of every thing are taken from me. It was proposed to send
for me down: But my papa said, he could not bear to look upon me. -- Strange
alteration in a few weeks! Shorey was the messenger. The tears stood in her
eyes when she delivered her message.

You, my dear, are happy! -- May you always be so! -- And then I can never be
wholly miserable. Adieu, my beloved friend!

CL. HARLOWE.


LETTER XXII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sunday morning, March 5.
HANNAH has just brought me, from the private place in the garden-wall, a
letter from Mr. Lovelace, deposited last night, signed also by Lord M.

He tells me in it, 'That Mr. Solmes makes it his boast, that he is to be
married in a few days to one of the shyest women in England: That my brother
explains his meaning to be me; assuring every-one, that his youngest sister is
very soon to be Mr. Solmes's wife. He tells me of the patterns bespoke, which
my mamma mentioned to me.'

Not one thing escapes him that is done or said in this house!

'My sister, he says, reports the same things; and that with such particular
aggravations of insult upon him, that he cannot but be extremely piqued, as
well at the manner, as from the occasion; and expresses himself with great
violence upon it.

'He knows not what my relations inducements can be, to prefer such a man as
Solmes to him. If advantageous settlements be the motive, Solmes shall not
offer what he will refuse to comply with.

'As to his estate, or family; the first cannot be excepted against: And for
the second, he will not disgrace himself by a comparison so odious. He appeals
to Lord M. for the regularity of his life and manners, ever since he has made
his addresses to me, or had hope of my favor.'

I suppose, he would have his Lordship's signing to this letter to be taken as
a voucher for him.

'He desires my leave, in company with my Lord, in a pacific manner, to attend
my father or uncles, in order to make proposals that must be accepted, if they
will but see him, and hear what they are: And tells me, that he will submit to
any measures that I shall prescribe, in order to bring about a reconciliation.'

He presumes to be very earnest with me 'to give him a private meeting some
night, in my father's garden, attended by whom I please.'

Really, my dear, were you to see his letter, you would think I had given him
great encouragement, and were in direct treaty with him; or that he were sure
that my friends would drive me into a foreign protection; for he has the
boldness to offer, in my Lord's name, an asylum to me, should I be tyrannically
treated in Solmes's behalf.

I suppose it is the way of this sex to endeavor to entangle the thoughtless
of ours by bold supposals and offers, in hopes that we shall be too complaisant
or bashful to quarrel with them; and, if not checked, to reckon upon our
silence, as assents voluntarily given, or concessions made in their favor.

There are other particulars in this letter which I ought to mention to you:
But I will take an opportunity to send you the letter itself, or a copy of it.

For my own part, I am very uneasy to think how I have been drawn on one hand,
and driven on the other, into a clandestine, in short, into a mere Lover-like
correspondence, which my heart condemns.

It is easy to see, that if I do not break it off, Mr. Lovelace's advantages,
by reason of my unhappy situation, will every day increase, and I shall be more
and more entangled: Yet if I do put an end to it, without making it a condition
of being freed from Mr. Solmes's address -- May I, my dear, is it best, to
continue it a little longer, in hopes, by giving him up, to extricate myself
out of the other difficulty? -- Whose advice can I now ask but yours?

All my relations are met. They are at breakfast together. Solmes is expected.
I am excessively uneasy. I must lay down my pen.

THEY are all going to church together. Grievously disordered they appear to
be, as Hannah tells me. She believes something is resolved upon.


Sunday noon.
WHAT a cruel thing is suspense! -- I will ask leave to go to church this
afternoon. I expect to be denied: But if I do not ask, they may allege, that my
not going is owing to my self.

I desired to speak with Shorey: Shorey came: I directed her to carry my
request to my mamma, for permission to go to church this afternoon. What think
you was the return? Tell her, that she must direct herself to her brother for
any favor she has to ask. -- So, my dear, I am to be delivered up to my
brother! --

I was resolved, however, to ask of him this favor. Accordingly, when they
sent me up my solitary dinner, I gave the messenger a billet, in which I made
it my humble request to my papa, through him, to be permitted to go to church
this afternoon.

This was the contemptuous answer: Tell her, that her request will be taken
into consideration tomorrow. -- My request to go to church today to be taken
into consideration tomorrow! --

Patience will be the fittest return I can make to such an insult. But this
method will not do, indeed it will not, with your Clarissa Harlowe. And yet it
is but the beginning, I suppose, of what I am to expect from my brother, now I
am delivered up to him.

ON recollection, I thought it best to renew my request. I did. The following
is a copy of what I wrote, and what follows that, of the answer sent me. SIR,
I KNOW not what to make of the answer brought to my request of being permitted
to go to church this afternoon. If you designed to show your pleasantry by it,
I hope that will continue; and then my request will be granted. You know, that
I never absented myself, when well, and at home, till the two last Sundays;
when I was advised not to go. My present situation is such, that I never more
wanted the benefit of the public prayers. I will solemnly engage only to go
thither, and back again. I hope it cannot be thought that I would do otherwise.
My dejection of spirits will give a too just excuse on the score of
indisposition, for avoiding visits. Nor will I, but by distant civilities,
return the compliments of any of my acquaintance. My disgraces, if they are to
have an end, need not to be proclaimed to the whole world. I ask this favor,
therefore, for my reputation's sake, that I may be able to hold up my head in
the neighborhood, if I live to see an end of the unmerited severities, which
seem to be designed for

Your unhappy sister, CL. HARLOWE.


To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
FOR a girl to lay so much stress upon going to church, and yet resolve to defy
her parents, in an article of the greatest consequence to them, and to the
whole family, is an absurdity. You are recommended, Miss, to the practice of
your private devotions: May they be efficacious upon the mind of one of the
most pervicacious young creatures that ever was heard of! The in- ten-tion is,
I tell you plainly, to mortify you into a sense of your duty. The neighbors
you are so sollicitous to appear well with, already know, that you defy that.
So, Miss, if you have a real value for your reputation, show it as you ought.
It is yet in your own power to establish or impair it.

JA. HARLOWE.
Thus, my dear, has my brother got me into his snares, and I, like a poor silly
bird, the more I struggle, am the more entangled.







LETTER XXIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Mond. morning, Mar. 6.
THEY are resolved to break my heart. My poor Hannah is discharged --
disgracefully discharged! -- Thus it was.

Half an hour after I had sent the poor girl down for my breakfast, that bold
creature Betty Barnes, my sister's confident and servant (if a favorite maid
and confident can be deemed a servant), came up.

What, Miss, will you please to have for breakfast?

I was surprised. What will I have for breakfast, Betty! -- How! -- What! --
How comes it! -- Then I named Hannah! -- I could not tell what to say.

Don't be surprised, Miss: -- But you will see Hannah no more in this house! --

God forbid! -- Is any harm come to Hannah! -- What! What is the matter with
Hannah? --

Why, Miss, the short and the long is this: Your papa and mamma think Hannah
has staid long enough in the house to do mischief; and so she is ordered to
troop (that was the confident creature's word); and I am directed to wait upon
you.

I burst into tears: -- I have no service for you, Betty Barnes, none at all.
-- But where is Hannah? -- Cannot I speak with the poor girl. I owe her half a
year's wages. May I not see the honest creature, and pay her her wages? -- I
may never see her again perhaps, for they are resolved to break my heart.

And they think, you are resolved to break theirs: So tit for tat, Miss.

Impertinent I called her; and asked her, if it were upon such confident terms
that her service was to commence.

I was so very earnest to see the poor maid, that, to oblige me, as she said,
she went down with my request.

The worthy creature was as earnest to see me; and the favor was granted in
presence of Shorey and Betty.

I thanked her, when she came up, for her past service to me.

Her heart was ready to break. And she fell a vindicating her fidelity and
love; and disclaiming any mischief she had ever made.

I told her, that those, who occasioned her being turned out of my service,
made no question of her integrity: That it was an indignity levelled at me: That
I was very sorry for it, and hoped she would meet with as good a service.

Never, never, wringing her hands, a mistress she loved so well. And the poor
creature ran on in my praises, and in professions of love to me.

We are all apt, you know, my dear, to praise our benefactors, because they are
our benefactors; as if everybody did right or wrong as they obliged or
disobliged us. But this good creature deserved to be kindly treated; so I could
have no merit in favoring one, whom it would have been ungrateful not to
distinguish.

I gave her a little linen, some laces, and other odd things; and, instead of
four pounds which were due to her, ten guineas: And said, If ever I were again
allowed to be my own mistress, I would think of her in the first place.

Betty enviously whispered Shorey upon it.

Hannah told me, before their faces, having no other opportunity, that she had
been examined about letters to me, and from me: And that she had given her
pockets to Miss Harlowe, who looked into them, and put her fingers in her
stays; to satisfy herself that she had not any.

She gave me an account of the number of my pheasants and bantams; and I said,
they should be my own care twice or thrice a day.

We wept over each other at parting. The girl prayed for all the family.

To have so good a servant so disgracefully dismissed, is a cutting thing: And
I could not help saying, That these methods might break my heart, but not any
other way answer the end of the authors of my disgraces.

Betty, with a very saucy fleer, said to Shorey, There would be a trial of
skill about that, she fancied. But I took no notice of it. If this wench thinks
I have robbed her young mistress of a lover, as you say she has given out, she
may think it a merit in herself to be impertinent to me.

Thus have I been forced to part with my faithful Hannah. If you can commend
the good creature to a place worthy of her, pray do, for my sake.

LETTER XXIV. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Mond. near 12 o'Clock.
THE enclosed Letter is just now delivered to me. My brother has now carried
all his points.

I send you also the copy of my answer. No more at this time can I write.

Mond. March 6. Miss CLARY,
BY your papa's and mamma's command, I write, expressly to forbid you to come
into their presence, or into the garden when they are there: Nor when they are
not there, but with Betty Barnes to attend you, except by particular license or
command.

On their blessings, you are forbidden likewise to correspond with the vile
Lovelace; as it is well known you did by means of your sly Hannah: Whence her
sudden discharge: As was fit.

Neither are you to correspond with Miss How; who has given herself high airs
of late; and might possibly help on your correspondence with that libertine.
Nor, in short, with anybody without leave.

You are not to enter into the presence of either of your uncles, without their
leave first obtained. It is in mercy to you, after such a behavior to your
mamma, that your papa refuses to see you.

You are not to be seen in any apartment of the house, you so lately governed
as you pleased, unless you are commanded down.

In short, are strictly to confine yourself to your chamber, except now and
then, in Betty Barnes's sight (as aforesaid) you take a morning and evening
turn in the garden: And then you are to go directly, and without stopping at
any apartment in the way, up and down the back-stairs, that the sight of so
perverse a young creature may not add to the pain you have given everybody.

The hourly threatenings of your Lovelace, as well as your own unheard of
obstinacy, will account to you for all this. What a hand has the best and most
indulgent of mothers had with you, who so long pleaded for you, and undertook
for you; even when others, from the manner of your setting out, despaired of
moving you! -- What must your perverseness have been, that such a mother can
give you up! She thinks it right so to do: Nor will take you to favor, unless
you make the first steps, by a compliance with your duty.

As for myself, whom, perhaps, you think hardly of (in very good company, if
you do, that is my consolation); I have advised, that you may be permitted to
pursue your own inclinations [Some people need no greater punishment than such
a permission]; and not to have the house incumbered by one who must give them
the more pain for the necessity she has laid them under of avoiding the sight
of her, although in it.

If any thing I have written, appear severe or harsh, it is still in your power
(but perhaps, will not always be so) to remedy it; and that by a single word.

Betty Barnes has orders to obey you in all points consistent with her duty to
those to whom you owe it, as well as she.

JA. HARLOWE.


To JAMES HARLOWE junior, Esquire
SIR,
I WILL only say, That you may congratulate yourself on having so far succeeded
in all your views, that you may report what you please of me, and I can no more
defend myself, than if I were dead. Yet one favor, nevertheless, I will beg of
you: It is this; -- That you will not occasion more severities, more disgraces,
than are necessary for carrying into execution your further designs, whatever
they be, against

Your unhappy Sister, CL. HARLOWE.


LETTER XXV. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Tues. March 7.
BY my last deposite, you will see how I am driven, and what a poor prisoner I
am: No regard had to my reputation. The whole matter is now before you. Can
such measures be supposed to soften? -- But surely they can only mean to try to
frighten me into my brother's views. -- All my hope is, to be able to weather
this point till my cousin Morden comes from Florence; and he is expected soon.
Yet, if they are determined upon a short day, I doubt he will not be here time
enough to save me.

It is plain, by my brother's letter, that my mamma has not spared me, in the
report she has made of the conferences between herself and me: Yet she was
pleased to hint to me, that my brother had views which she would have had me
try to disappoint. -- But she had engaged to give a faithful account of what
was to pass between herself and me: And it was doubtless, much more eligible to
give up a daughter, than to disoblige a husband, and every other person of the
family.

They think they have done everything by turning away my poor Hannah: But as
long as the liberty of the garden, and my poultry-visits are allowed me, they
will be mistaken.

I asked Mrs. Betty, If she had any orders to watch or attend me? or, Whether I
were to ask her Leave, whenever I should be disposed to walk in the garden, or
to go to feed my Bantams?

Lord bless her! what could I mean by such a question! -- Yet she owned, that
she had heard, that I was not to walk in the garden when my papa, mamma, or
uncles were there.

However, as it behoved me to be assured on this head, I went down directly,
and staid an hour, without question or impediment: And yet a good part of the
time, I walked under, and in sight (as I may say) of, my brother's
Study-window; where both he and my sister happened to be. And I am sure they
saw me, by the loud mirth they affected; by way of insult, as I suppose.

So this part of my restraint was doubtless a stretch of the authority given
him. The enforcing of that may perhaps come next. But I hope not.


Tuesday night.
SINCE I wrote the above, I have ventured to send a letter by Shorey, to my
mamma. I directed her to give it into her own hand, when nobody was by.

I shall enclose the copy of it. You Will see that I would have it thought, that
now Hannah is gone, I have no way to correspond out of the house. I am far from
thinking all I do, right. I am afraid, this is a little piece of art, that is
not so. But this is an after-thought: The letter went first.

Honored Madam,
HAVING acknowleged to you, that I had received letters from Mr. Lovelace, full
of resentment, and that I answered them purely to prevent further mischief; and
having showed you copies of my answers, which you did not disapprove of, although
you thought fit, after you had read them, to forbid me any further
correspondence with him; I think it my duty to acquaint you, that another
letter from him has since come to my hand, in which he is very earnest with me
to permit him to wait on my papa, or you, or my two uncles, in a pacific way,
accompanied by Lord M. -- On which I beg your commands.

I own to you, Madam, that had not the prohibition been renewed, and had not
Hannah been so suddenly dismissed my service, I should have made the less
scruple to have written an answer, and to have commanded her to convey it to
him with all speed, in order to dissuade him from these visits, lest any thing
should happen on the occasion, that my heart aches but to think of.

And here, I cannot but express my grief, that I should have all the
punishment, and all the blame, who, as I have reason to think, have prevented
great mischief, and have not been the occasion of any. For, Madam, could I be
supposed to govern the passions of either of the gentlemen? -- Over the one
indeed, I have had some little influence, without giving him hitherto any
reason to think he has fastened an obligation upon me for it. -- Over the
other, Who, Madam, has any?

I am grieved at heart, to be obliged to lay so great blame at my brother's
door, although my reputation and my liberty are both to be sacrificed to his
resentment and ambition. May not, however, so deep a sufferer be permitted to
speak out?

This communication being as voluntarily made, as dutifully intended; I humbly
presume to hope, that I shall not be required to produce the letter itself. I
cannot either in honor or prudence do that, because of the vehemence of his
style; for having heard [not, I assure you, by my means, or through Hannah's] of
some part of the harsh treatment I have met with; he thinks himself entitled to
place it to his own account, by reason of speeches thrown out by some of my
relations equally vehement.

If I do not answer him, he will be made desperate, and think himself justified
[tho' I shall not think him so] in resenting the treatment he complains of: If
I do, and if, in compliment to me, he forbears to resent what he thinks himself
entitled to resent; be pleased, Madam, to consider the obligation he will
suppose he lays me under.

If I were as strongly prepossessed in his favor as is supposed, I should not
have wished this to be considered by you. -- And permit me, as a still further
proof that I am not prepossessed, to beg of you to consider, Whether, upon the
whole, the proposal I made of declareing for the Single Life (which I will
religiously adhere to) is not the best way, to get rid of his pretensions with
honor. To renounce him, and not to be allowed to aver, that I will never be
the other man's, will make him conclude (driven as I am driven), that I am
determined in that other man's favor.

If this has not its due weight, my brother's strange schemes must be tried,
and I will resign myself to my destiny, with all the acquiescence that shall be
granted to my prayers. And so leaving the whole to your own wisdom, and whether
you choose to consult my papa and uncles upon this humble application, or not;
or whether I shall be allowed to write an answer to Mr. Lovelace, or not (and
if allowed so to do, I beg your direction, by whom to send it); I remain,

Honored Madam, Your unhappy, but ever-dutiful daughter, CL. HARLOWE.



Wednesday morning.
I have just received an answer to the enclosed letter. My mamma, you will
observe, has ordered me to burn it: But, as you will have it in your safe
keeping, and nobody else will see it, her end will be equally answered. It has
neither date nor superscription. CLARISSA,
SAY not all the blame, and all the punishment, is yours. I am as much blamed,
and as much punished, as you are; yet am more innocent. When your obstinacy is
equal to any other person's passion, blame not your brother. We judged right,
that Hannah carried on your correspondencies. Now she is gone, and you cannot
write (we think you cannot) to Miss How, nor she to you, without our knowledge,
one cause of uneasiness and jealousy is over.

I had no dislike to Hannah. I did not tell her so; because Somebody was within
hearing, when she desired to pay her duty to me at going: I gave her a caution,
in a raised voice, To take care, wherever she went to live next, if there
were any young Ladies, how she made parties, and assisted in clandestine
correspondencies: -- But I slid two guineas into her hand. Nor was I angry to
hear you were more bountiful to her -- So much for Hannah.

I don't know what to write, about your answ^^ing that man of violence. What
can you think of it, that such a family as ours, should have such a rod held
over it? -- For my part, I have not owned that I know you have corresponded: By
your last boldness to me (an astonishing one it was, to pursue before Mr.
Solmes, the subject that I was forced to break from above stairs) you may, as
far as I know, plead, that you had my countenance for your correspondence with
him; and so add to the uneasiness between your papa and me. You was once all my
comfort: You made all my hardships tolerable: -- But now! -- However, nothing,
it is plain, can move you; and I will say no more on that head: For you are
under your papa's discipline now; and he will neither be prescribed to, nor
entreated.

I should have been glad to see the letter you tell me of, as I saw the rest:
-- You say, both honor and prudence forbid you to show it me! -- O Clarissa!
what think you of receiving letters that honor and prudence forbid you to show
to a mother! -- But it is not for me to see it, if you would choose to show it
me. I will not be in your secret. I will not know that you did correspond. And,
as to an answer, take your own methods. But let him know it will be the last
you will write. And, if you do write, I will not see it: So seal it up, if you do,
and give it to Shorey, and she -- Yet do not think I give you license to write!

We will be upon no conditions with him, nor will you be allowed to be upon
any. Your papa and uncles would have no patience were he to come. What have you
to do to oblige him with your refusal of Mr. Solmes? -- Will not That refusal
be to give him hope? And while he has any, can we be easy or free from his
insults? Were even your brother in fault, as that fault cannot be conquered, is
a sister to carry on a correspondence that shall endanger her brother? But your
papa has given his sanction to your brother's dislikes, and they are now your
papa's dislikes, and my dislikes, your uncles and every-body's! -- No matter to
whom owing.

As to the rest, you have by your obstinacy put it out of my power to do
anything for you. Your papa takes upon himself to be answerable for all
consequences. You must not therefore apply to me for any favor. I shall
endeavor to be only an observer; Happy, if I could be an unconcerned one! --
While I had power, you would not let me use it as I would have used it. Your
aunt has been forced to engage not to interfere but by your papa's direction.
You Will have severe trials. If you have any favor to hope for, it must be from
the mediation of your uncles. And yet I believe, they are equally determined:
For they make it a principle -- (Alas! they never had children!) that that
child, who in marriage is not governed by her parents, is to be given up as a
lost creature!

I charge you, let not this letter be found. Burn it. There is too much of the
mother in it, to a daughter so unaccountably obstinate.

Write not another letter to me, I can do nothing for you. But you can do every
thing for yourself.

Now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy narrative.

After this letter, you will believe, that I could have very little hopes, that
an application directly to my father, would stand me in any stead: But I
thought it became me to write, were it but to acquit myself to myself, that I
have left nothing unattempted, that has the least likelihood to restore me to
his favor. Accordingly I wrote to the following effect:

'I presume not, I say, to argue with my papa, I only beg his mercy and
indulgence in this one point, on which depends my present and perhaps my future
happiness; and beseech him not to reprobate his child for an aversion which it
is not in her power to conquer. I beg, that I may not be sacrificed to
projects, and remote contingencies: I complain of the disgraces I suffer in
this banishment from his presence, and in being confined to my chamber. In
every thing but this one point, I promise implicit duty and resignation to his
will. I repeat my offers of a Single Life; and appeal to him, whether I have
ever given him cause to doubt my word. I beg to be admitted to his, and to my
mamma's presence, and that my conduct may ^e under their own eye: And this with
the more earnestness, as I have too much reason to believe, that snares are
laid for me; and tauntings and revilings used, on purpose to make a handle of
my words against me, when I am not permitted to speak in my own defense. I
conclude with hoping, that my brother's instigations may not rob an unhappy
child of her father.'





This is the cruel answer, sent without superscription, and unsealed, although by
Betty Barnes, who delivered it with an air, as if she knew the contents.

Wednesday.
I Write, perverse girl, but with all the indignation that your disobedience
deserves. To desire to be forgiven a fault you own, and yet resolve to
persevere in, is a boldness, no more to be equaled, than passed over. It is my
authority you defy. Your reflections upon a brother, that is an honor to us
all, deserve my utmost resentment. I see how light all relationship sits upon
you. The cause I guess at, too: I cannot bear the reflections that naturally
arise from this consideration. Your behavior to your too indulgent, and too
fond mother -- But, I have no patience -- Continue banished from my presence,
undutiful as you are, till you know how to conform to my will. Ungrateful
creature! Your letter but upbraids me for my past indulgence. Write no more to
me, till you can distinguish better; and till you are convinced of your duty to

A justly incensed Father.


This angry letter was accompanied with one from my mamma, unsealed, and
unsuperscribed also. Those who take so much pains to confederate every one
against me, I make no doubt, obliged her to bear her testimony against the poor
girl.

This letter being a repetition of some of the severe things that passed
between my mamma and me, of which I have given you an account, I shall not need
to give you the contents -- Only thus far, that she also praises my brother,
and blames me for my freedoms with him.

LETTER XXVI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Thursd. morn. Mar. 9.
I Have another letter from Mr. Lovelace, although I had not answered his former.

This man, some how or other, knows every thing that passes in our family: My
confinement; Hannah's dismission; and more of the resentments and resolutions
of my father, uncles, and brother, than I can possibly know, and almost as soon
as things happen. He cannot come at these intelligences fairly.

He is excessively uneasy upon what he hears; and his expressions both of love
to me, and resentment to them, are very fervent. He sollicits me much 'To
engage my honor to him, Never to have Mr. Solmes.' I think I may fairly
promise him that I will not.

He begs, 'That I will not think he is endeavoring to make to himself a merit
at any man's expense, since he hopes to obtain my favor on the foot of his
own; nor that he seeks to intimidate me into a consideration for him. But
declares, that the treatment he meets with from my family is so intolerable,
that he is perpetually reproached for not resenting it; and that as well by
Lord M. and his two aunts, as by all his other friends: And if he must have no
hope from me, he cannot answer for what his despair will make him do.'

Indeed, he says, his relations, the Ladies particularly, advise him to have
recourse to a legal remedy: 'But how, he asks, can a man of honor go to law
for verbal abuses, given by people entitled to wear swords?'

You see, my dear, that my mamma seems as apprehensive of mischief as I, and
has indirectly offered to let Shorey carry my answer to the letter he sent me
before.

He is full of the favor of the Ladies of his family to me: To whom,
nevertheless, I am personally a stranger; except, that once I saw Miss Patty
Montague at Mrs. Knollys's.

It is natural, I believe, for a person to be the more desirous of making new
friends, in proportion as she loses the favor of old ones: Yet, had I rather
appear amiable in the eyes of my own relations, and in your eyes, than in those
of all the world besides: -- But these four Ladies of his family have such
excellent characters, that one cannot but wish to be thought well of by them.
Cannot there be a way to find out by Mrs. Fortescue's means, or by Mr. Hickman,
who has some knowledge of Lord M. (covertly, however), what their opinions are
of the present situation of things in our family; and of the little likelihood
there is, that ever the alliance once approved of by them, can take effect? --
I cannot, for my own part, think so well of myself, as to imagine, that they
can wish him to persevere in his views with regard to me, through such
contempts and discouragements -- Not that it would concern me, should they
advise him to the contrary. -- By my Lord's signing Mr. Lovelace's former
letter; by Mr. Lovelace's assurances of the continued favor of all his
relations; and by the report of others; I seem to stand still high in their
favor: But, methinks, I would be glad to have this confirmed to me, as from
themselves, by the lips of an indifferent person; and the rather, as they are
known to put a value upon their alliance, fortunes, and family; and take it
amiss, as they have reason, to be included by ours in the contempt thrown upon
their kinsman.

Curiosity at present is all my motive: Nor will there ever, I hope, be a
stronger, notwithstanding your questionable throbs: Even were Mr. Lovelace to
be less exceptionable than he is.

I have answered his letters. If he take me at my word, I shall need to be the
less sollicitous for his relations opinions in my favor: And yet one would be
glad to be well thought of by the worthy. This is the substance of my letter:

'I express my surprise at his knowing (and so early) all that passes here. I
assure him, That were there not such a man in the world, as himself, I would
not have Mr. Solmes.'

I tell him, 'That to return, as I understand he does, defiances for defiances,
to my relations, is far from being a proof with me, either of his politeness,
or of the consideration he pretends to have for me.

'That the moment I hear he visits any of my friends without their consent, I
will make a resolution, never to see him more, if I can help it.'

I apprise him, 'That I am connived at in sending this letter (although no one
has seen the contents), provided it shall be the last I will ever write to him:
That I had more than once told him, that the Single Life was my choice: And
this, before Mr. Solmes was introduced as a visitor in our family: That Mr.
Wyerley, and other gentlemen, knew it well to be my choice, before he was
acquainted with any of us: That I had never been induced to receive a line from
him on the subject, but that I thought he had not acted ungenerously by my
brother; and yet had not been so handsomely treated by my friends, as he might
have expected: That had he even my friends of his side, I should have very
great objections to him, were I to get over my choice of a Single Life, so
really preferable to me as it is; and that I should have declared as much to
him, had I reg^rded him as more than a common visitor. On all these accounts, I
desire, that the one more letter which I will allow him to deposite in the
usual place, may be the very last; and That only, to acquaint me with his
acquiescence, that it shall be so; at least till happier times!'

This last I put in, that he may not he quite desperate. But if he take me at
my word, I shall be rid of one of my tormentors.

I have promised to lay before you all his letters, and my answers: I repeat
that promise: And am the less sollicitous for that reason, to amplify upon the
contents of either. But I cannot too often express my vexation, to be driven to
such streights and difficulties, here at home, as oblige me to answer letters
(from a man I had not absolutely intended to encourage, and had really great
objections to) filled as his are with such warm protestations, and written to
me with a spirit of expectation.

For, my dear, you never knew so bold a supposer. As commentators find beauties
in an author, which the author perhaps was a stranger to; so he sometimes
compliments me in high strains of gratitude, for favors, and for a
consideration, which I never designed him; insomuch that I am frequently under
a necessity of explaining away the attributed goodness, which if I showed him,
I should have the less opinion of myself.

In short, my dear, like a restiff horse, he pains one's hands, and half
disjoints one's arms, to rein him in. And, when you see his letters, you must
form no judgment upon them, till you have read my answers: If you do, you will
indeed think you have cause to attribute self-deceit, and throbs, and glows to
your friend: -- And yet, at other times, the contradictory creature complains,
that I show him as little favor, and my friends as much inveteracy, as if in
the rencounter betwixt my brother and him, he had been the aggressor; and as if
the catastrophe had been as fatal, as it might have been.

If he has a design by this conduct (sometimes complaining of my shyness, at
others exulting in my imaginary favors) to induce me at one time to acquiesce
with his compliments, at another to be more complaisant for his complaints; and
if the contradiction be not the effect of his inattention and giddiness; I
shall think him as deep and as artful (too probably, as practiced) a creature,
as ever lived; and were I to be sure of it, should hate him, if possible, worse
than I do Solmes.

But enough for the present of a creature so very various! --

LETTER XXVII. Miss HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thursday night, March 9.
I Have no patience with any of the people you are with. I know not what to
advise you to do. How do you know, that you are not punishable for being the
cause, though to your own loss, that the will of your grandfather is not complied
with? -- Wills are sacred things, child. You see, that they, even they, think
so, who imagine they suffer by a will, through the distinction paid you in it.

I allow of all your noble reasonings for what you did at the time: But since
such a charming, such a generous instance of filial duty, is to go thus
unrewarded; Why should you not resume?

Your grandfather knew the family-failing: He knew what a noble spirit you had
to do good. -- He himself, perhaps (excuse me, my dear), had done too little in
his lifetime; and therefore he put it in your power to make up for the defects
of the whole family. Were it to me, I would resume it. Indeed I would.

You will say, you cannot do it, while you are with them. I don't know that. Do
you think they can use you worse than they do? -- And is it not your right? And
do they not make use of your own generosity to oppress you? Your uncle Harlowe
is one trustee, your cousin Morden is the other: Insist upon your right to your
uncle; and write to your cousin Morden about it. This, I dare say, will make
them alter their behavior to you.

Your insolent brother, what has he to do to control you? -- Were it me (I
wish it were for one month, and no more), I Would show him the difference. I Would be
in my own mansion, pursuing my charming schemes, and making all around me
happy. I Would set up my own chariot. I Would visit them when they deserved it. But
when my brother and sister gave themselves airs, I Would let them know, that I was
their sister, and not their servant: And, if that did not do, I would shut my
gates against them; and bid them be company for each other. --

It must be confessed, however, that this brother and sister of yours, judging
as such narrow spirits will ever judge, have some reason for treating you as
they do. It must have long been a mortifying consideration to them (set
disappointed love on her side, and avarice on his, out of the question) to be
so much eclipsed by a younger sister. -- Such a sun in a family, where there
are none but faint twinklers, How could they bear it! -- Why, my dear, they
must look upon you as a prodigy among them: And prodigies, you know, though they
obtain our admiration, never attract our love. The distance between you and
them is immense. Their eyes ache to look up at you. What shades does your full
day of merit cast upon them! -- Can you wonder then, that they should embrace
the first opportunity that offered, to endeavor to bring you down to their
level?

Depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of it, and more still, as you bear
it.

As to this odious Solmes, I wonder not at your aversion to him. It is needless
to say any thing to you, who have so sincere an antipathy to him, to strengthen
your dislike: Yet, who can resist her own talents? One of mine, as I have
heretofore said, is to give an ugly likeness. Shall I indulge it? -- I will.
And the rather, as, in doing so, you will have my opinion in justification of
your aversion to him, and in approbation of a steadiness, that I ever admired,
and must for ever approve in your temper.

I was twice in this wretch's company. At one of the times your Lovelace was
there. I need not mention to you, who have such a pretty curiosity, though at
present, only a curiosity, you know! the unspeakable difference! --

Lovelace entertained the company in his lively gay way, and made everybody
laugh at one of his stories. It was before this creature was thought of for
you. Solmes laughed too. It was, however, his laugh: For his first three years,
at least, I imagine, must have been one continual fit of crying; and his
muscles have never yet been able to recover a risible tone. His very smile (you
never saw him smile I believe; never at least gave him cause to smile) is so
little natural to his features, that it appears in him, as hideous as the grin
of a man in malice.

I took great notice of him, as I do of all the noble Lords of the creation, in
their peculiarities; and was disgusted, nay, shocked at him even then. I was
glad I remember, on that particular occasion, to see his strange features
recovering their natural gloominess; though they did this but slowly, as if the
muscles which contributed to his distortions, had turned upon rusty springs.

What a dreadful thing must even the Love of such a husband be! For my part,
were I his wife! ( -- But what have I done to myself, to make but such a
supposition?) I should never have comfort but in his absence, or when I was
quarreling with him. A splenetic Lady, who must have somebody to find fault
with, might indeed be brought to endure such a wretch: The sight of him would
always furnish out the occasion, and all her servants, for That reason, and for
That only, would have cause to bless their master. But how grievous, and
apprehensive a thing must it be for his wife, had she the least degree of
delicacy, to catch herself in having done something to oblige him?

So much for his person: As to the other half of him, he is said to be an
insinuating, creeping mortal to anybody he hopes to be a gainer by: An
insolent, over-bearing one, where he has no such views: And is not this the
genuine spirit of meanness? -- He is reported to be spiteful and malicious,
even to the whole family of any single person, who has once disobliged him; and
to his own relations most of all. I am told, that they are none of them such
wretches as himself. This may be one reason, why he is for disinheriting them.

My Kitty, from one of his domestics, tells me, that his tenants hate him: And
that he never had a servant who spoke well of him. Vilely suspicious of their
wronging him, probably from the badness of his own heart, he is always changing.

His pockets, they say, are continually crammed with keys: So that when he
would treat a guest (a friend he has not out of your family), he is half as
long puzzling which is which, as his niggardly treat might be concluded in. --
And if it be wine, he always fetches it himself: Nor has he much trouble in
doing so; for he has very few visitors -- only those, whom business or
necessity brings: For a gentleman who can help it, would rather be benighted,
than put up at his house.

Yet this is the man they have found out, for the sake of considerations as
sordid as those he is governed by, for a husband (that is to say, for a Lord
and Master) for Miss Clarissa Harlowe!

But perhaps, he may not be quite so miserable as he is represented. Characters
extremely good, or extremely bad, are seldom justly given. Favor for a person
will exalt the one, as disfavour will sink the other. But your uncle Antony has
told my mamma, who objected to his covetousness, that it was intended to tie
him up, as he called it, to your own terms; which would be with a hempen,
rather than a matrimonial cord, I dare say! But, is not this a plain
indication, that even his own recommenders think him a mean creature; and that
he must be articled with -- perhaps for necessaries? But enough, and too much,
of such a mortal as this! -- You must not have him, my dear -- That I am clear
in -- though not so clear, how you will be able to avoid it, except you assert
the independence which your estate gives you.

HERE my mamma broke in upon me. She wanted to see what I had written. I was
silly enough to read Solmes's character to her.

She owned, that the man was not the most desirable of men; had not the
happiest appearance: But what was person in a man? And I was chidden for
setting you against complying with your father's will. Then followed a lecture
upon the preference to be given in favor of a man who took care to discharge
all his obligations to the world, and to keep all together, in opposition to a
spendthrift or profligate: A fruitful subject, you know, whether any particular
person be meant by it, or not: Why will these wise parents, by saying too much
against the persons they dislike, put one upon defending them? Lovelace is not
a spendthrift; owes not obligations to the world; though, I doubt not, profligate
enough. Then, putting one upon doing such but common justice, we must needs be
prepossessed, truly! -- And so we are put, perhaps, upon curiosities first, how
such a one or his friends may think of one; -- And then, but too probably, a
distinguishing preference, or something that looks like it, comes in.

My mamma charged me, at last, to write that side over again. -- But excuse me,
my good mamma! I would not have the character lost upon any consideration;
since my vein ran freely into it: And I never wrote to please myself, but I
pleased you. A very good reason why: -- We have but one mind between us --
Only, that sometimes you are a little too grave, methinks; I, no doubt, a
little too flippant in your opinion.

This difference in our tempers, however, is probably the reason that we love
one another so well, that, in the words of Norris, no third love can come in
between: Since each, in the other's eye, having something amiss, and each
loving the other well enough to bear being told of it; and the rather, perhaps,
as neither wishes to mend it; This takes off a good deal from that rivalry
which might encourage a little, if not a great deal, of that latent spleen,
which in time might rise into envy, and That into ill will. So, my dear, if
This be the case, let each keep her fault, and much good may do her with it,
say I: For there is constitution in both to plead for it: And what an hero or
heroine must he or she be, who can conquer a constitutional fault? Let it be
avarice, as in some I dare not name: Let it be gravity, as in my best friend:
Or let it be flippancy, as in -- I need not say whom.

It is proper to acquaint you, that I was obliged to comply with my mamma's
curiosity. -- My mamma has her share, her full share, of curiosity, my dear --
and to let her see here and there, some passages of your letters. --

I am broke in upon -- But I will tell you by-and-by, what passed between my
mamma and me, on this occasion -- And the rather, as she had her GIRL, her
favorite HICKMAN, and your LOVELACE, all at once in her eye. --

Thus it was:

'I cannot but think, Nancy, said she, after all, that there is a little
hardship in Miss Harlowe's case: And yet, as her mamma says, it is a grating
thing to have a child, who was always noted for her duty in smaller points, to
stand in opposition to her parents will, in the greater; yea, in the greatest
of all. And now, to middle the matter between both, it is pity, that the man
they insist upon her accepting has not that sort of merit, which so delicate a
mind as Miss Harlowe's might reasonably expect in a husband. -- But then, this
man is surely preferable to a libertine: To a libertine too, who has had a duel
with her own brother. Fathers and mothers must think so, were it not for that
circumstance -- And it is strange if they do not know best.'

And so they must, thought I, from their experience, if no little, dirty views
give them also that prepossession in one man's favor, which they are so apt to
censure their daughters for having in another's -- And if, as I may add in your
case, they have no creeping, old, musty, uncle Antony's to strengthen their
prepossessions, as he does my mamma's -- Poor, creeping, positive soul, what
has such an old bachelor as he to do, to prate about the duties of children to
parents; unless he had a notion that parents owe some to their children? But
your mamma, by her indolent meekness, let me call it, has spoiled all the three
brothers.

'But you see, child, proceeded my mamma, what a different behavior MINE is to
YOU. I recommend to you one of the soberest, yet politest, men in England. -- '

I think little of my mamma's politest, my dear. She judges of honest Hickman
for her daughter, as she would have done, I suppose, twenty years ago, for
herself: For Hickman appears to me to be a man of that antiquated cut; as to
his mind I mean: A great deal too much upon the formal, you must needs think
him to be, yourself.

'Of a good family, continued my mamma; a fine, clear, and improving estate (a
prime consideration with my mamma, as well as with some other folks, whom you
know): And I beg and I pray you to encourage him: At least, not to use him the
worse, for his being so obsequious to you.'

Yes, indeed! To use him kindly, that he may treat me familiarly -- But
distance to the men-wretches is best -- I say.

'Yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I would have you. What would
you say, were I to treat you as Miss Harlowe's father and mother treat her?'

'What would I say, Madam! -- That Is easily answered. I would SAY nothing. Can
you think such usage, and to such a young lady, is to be borne?

'Come, come, Nancy, be not so hasty: You have heard but one side; and that
there is more to be said is plain, by your reading to me, but parts of her
letters. They are her parents. They must know best. Miss Harlowe, as fine a
child as she is, must have done something, must have said something (you know
how they loved her), to make them use her thus.'

'But if she should be blameless, Madam, how does your own supposition condemn
them?'

Then came up Solmes's great estate; his good management of it -- 'A little too
NEAR indeed,' was the word! -- (O how money-lovers, thought I, will palliate!
Yet my mamma is a princess in spirit to this Solmes!) 'What strange effects
have prepossession and love upon young ladies!'

I don't know how it is, my dear; but people take strange delight in finding
out folks in love; Curiosities beget curiosities: I believe that is the thing!

She proceeded to praise Mr. Lovelace's person, and his qualifications natural
and acquired: But then she would judge as mothers will judge, and as daughters
are very loath to judge: -- But could say nothing in answer to your offer of
living single; and breaking with him -- if -- if -- (three or four If's she
made of one good one, If) that could be depended on, she said.

But still obedience without reserve, reason what I will, is the burden of my
mamma's song: And This, for my sake, as well as yours.

I must needs say, that I think duty to parents is a very meritorious
excellence: But I bless God I have not your trials. We can all be good when we
have no temptation nor provocation to the contrary: -- But few young persons
(who can help themselves too) would bear what you bear.

I will not mention all that is upon my mind, in relation to the behavior of
your father and uncles, and the rest of them, because I would not offend you:
But I have now a higher opinion of my own sagacity, than ever I had, in that I
could never cordially love any one of your family but yourself. I am not born
to like them. But it is my duty to be sincere to my friend: And this will
excuse her Anna How to Miss Clarissa Harlowe. I ought indeed to have excepted
your mamma; a lady to be reverenced; and now to be pitied. What must have been
her treatment, to be thus subjugated, as I may call it? Little did the good old
Viscount think, when he married his darling, his only, daughter to so
well-appearing a gentleman, and to her own liking too, that she would have been
so much kept down. Another would call your father a tyrant, if you will not:
All the world indeed would: And if you love your mother, you should not be very
angry at the world for taking that liberty. Yet, after al^ I cannot help
thinking, that she is the less to be pitied, as she may be said (be the gout,
or what will, the occasion of his moroseness) to have long behaved unworthy of
her birth and fine qualities, in yielding to incroaching spirits (you may
confine the reflection to your brother, if it will pain you to extend it); and
This for the sake of preserving a temporary peace to herself; which is the less
worth attempting to preserve, as it always produced a strength in the will of
others, and a weakness in her own, that has subjected her to an arbitrariness
which grew, and became established, upon her patience. -- And now to give up
the most deserving of her children, against her judgment, a sacrifice to the
ambition and selfishness of the least deserving -- But I fly from this subject
-- having, I fear, said too much to be forgiven for -- and yet much less than
is in my heart to say upon the over-meek subject.

Mr. Hickman is expected from London this evening. I have desired him to
inquire after Lovelace's life and conversation in town. If he has not, I shall
be very angry with him. Don't expect a very good account of either. He is
certainly an intriguing wretch, and full of inventions.

Upon my word, I most heartily despise that sex! I wish they would let our
fathers and mothers alone; teazing them to teaze us with their golden promises,
and protestations, and settlements, and the rest of their ostentatious
nonsense. How charmingly might you and I live together, and despise them all!
-- But to be cajoled, wire-drawn, and ensnared, like silly birds, into a state
of bondage, or vile subordination: To be courted as princesses for a few weeks,
in order to be treated as slaves for the rest of our lives -- Indeed, my dear,
as you say of Solmes, I cannot endure them! -- But for your relations ( friends
no more will I call them, unworthy as they are even of the other name!) to take
such a wretch's price as That; and to the cutting off all reversions from his
own family! -- How must a mind but commonly just resist such a measure!

Mr. Hickman shall sound Lord M. upon the subject you recommend. But
beforehand, I can tell you what he and what his sisters will say, when they are
sounded. Who would not be proud of such a relation as Miss Clarissa Harlowe? --
Mrs. Fortescue told me, that they are all your very great admirers.

If I have not been clear enough in my advice about what you shall do, let me
say, that I can give it in one word: It is only by re-urging you to RESUME. If
you do, all the rest will follow.

We are told here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as your aunt Hervey, has given her
opinion on the implicit side of the question. If she can think, that the part
she has had in your education, and your own admirable talents and acquirements,
are to be thrown away upon such a worthless creature as Solmes, I could
heartily quarrel with her. You may think I say this to lessen your regard for
the good woman. And perhaps not wholly without cause, if you do. For, to own
the truth, methinks, I don't love her so well as I should do, did you love her
so apparently less, that I could be out of doubt, that you love me better.

Your mamma tells you, 'That you will have great trials: That you are under
your papa's discipline.' -- The word's enough for me to despise them who give
occasion for its use! -- 'That it is out of her power to help you!' And again:
'That if you have any favor to hope for, it must be by the mediation of your
uncles!' I suppose you will write to the oddities; since you are forbid to see
them! -- But can it be, that such a lady, such a sister, such a wife, such a
mother, has no influence in her own family? Who indeed, as you say, would
marry, that can live single? My choler is again beginning to rise. RESUME, my
dear: -- And that is all I will give myself time to say further, lest I offend
you, when I cannot serve you -- Only this, that I am

Your truly affectionate friend and servant, ANNA HOW.


LETTER XXVIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Friday, Mar. 10.
YOU will permit me, my dear, to touch upon a few passages in your last favor,
that affect me sensibly.

In the first place, you must allow me to say, low as I am in spirits, that I
am very angry with you for your reflections on my relations, particularly on my
father, and on the memory of my grandfather. Nor, my dear, does your own mamma
always escape the keen edge of your vivacity. One cannot one's self forbear to
write or speak freely of those we love and honor; that is to say, when grief
wrings the heart: But it goes against one to hear any body else take the same
liberties. Then you have so very strong a manner of expression, where you take
a distaste, that when passion has subsided, and I come by reflection to see by
your severity what I have given occasion for, I cannot help condemning myself.
Let me then, as matters arise, make my complaints to you; but be it your part
to soothe and soften my angry passions, by such advice as nobody better knows
how to give: And this the rather, as you know what an influence your advice has
upon me.

I cannot help owning, that I am pleased to have you join with me in opinion of
the contempt which Mr. Solmes deserves from me. But yet, permit me to say, that
he is not quite so horrible a creature as you make him: As to his person, I
mean; for with regard to his mind, by all I have heard, you have done him but
justice: But you have such a talent at an ugly likeness, and such a vivacity,
that they sometimes carry you out of verisimilitude. In short, my dear, I have
known you, in more instances than one, sit down resolved to write all that wit,
rather than strict justice, could suggest upon the given occasion. Perhaps it
may be thought, that I should say the less on this particular subject, because
your dislike to him arises from love to me: But should it not be our aim to
judge of ourselves, and of every thing that affects us, as we may reasonably
imagine other people would judge of us, and of our actions?

As to the advice you give, to resume my estate, I am determined not to
litigate with my papa, let what will be the consequence to myself. I may give
you, at another time, a more particular answer to your reasonings on this
subject: But, at present, will only observe, that it is my opinion, that
Lovelace himself would hardly think me worth addressing, were he to know this
to be my resolution. These men, my dear, with all their flatteries, look
forward to the PERMANENT. Indeed, it is fit they should. For Love must be a
very foolish thing to look back upon, when it has brought persons born to
affluence into indigence; and laid a generous mind under the hard necessity of
obligation and dependence.

You very ingeniously account for the love we bear to one another, from the
difference in our tempers. I own, I should not have thought of That. There may
possibly be something in it: But whether there be, or not, whenever I am cool,
and give myself time to reflect, I will love you the better for the correction
you give me, be as severe as you will upon me. Spare me not therefore, my dear
friend, whenever you think me in the least faulty. I love your agreeable
raillery: You know I always did: Nor, however over-serious you think me, did I
ever think you flippant, as you harshly call it. One of the first conditions of
our mutual friendship was, that each should say or write to the other whatever
was upon her mind, without any offense to be taken: A condition, that is indeed
an indispensable in all friendship.

I knew your mamma would be for implicit obedience in a child. I am sorry my
case is so circumstanced, that I cannot comply: As my Mrs. Norton says, it
would be my duty to do so, if I could. You are indeed very happy, that you have
nothing but your own agreeable, yet whimsical, humors to contend with, in the
choice she invites you to make of Mr. Hickman! -- How happy should I be, to be
treated with so much lenity! I should blush to have my mamma say, that she
begged and prayed me, and all in vain, to encourage a man so unexceptionable as
Mr. Hickman.

Indeed, my beloved Miss How, I am ashamed to have your mamma say, with ME in
her view, 'What strange effects have Prepossession and Love upon young
creatures of our sex!' This touches me the more sensibly, because you yourself,
my dear, are so ready to persuade me into it. I should be very blameable to
endeavor to hide any the least byas upon my mind, from you: And I cannot but
say, -- that this man -- this Lovelace -- is a person that might be liked well
enough, if he bore such a character as Mr. Hickman bears; and even if there
were hopes of reclaiming him: But LOVE, methinks, as short a word as it is, has
a broad sound with it. Yet do I find, that one may be driven, by violent
measures, step by step, as it were, into something that may be called -- I
don't know what to call it -- A conditional kind of liking, or so: -- But as to
the word LOVE -- justifiable and charming as it is in some cases (that is to
say, in all the relative, in all the social, and, what is still beyond both, in
all our superior duties, in which it may be properly called divine); it has,
methinks, in this narrow, circumscribed, selfish, peculiar sense, no very
pretty sound with it: Treat me as freely as you will in all other respects, I
will love you, as I have said, the better for your friendly freedom: But,
methinks, I could be glad, for SEX-sake, that you would not let this imputation
pass so glibly from your pen, or your lips, as attributable to one of your own
sex, whether I be the person or not: Since the other must have a double
triumph, when a person of your delicacy (armed with such contempts of them all,
as you would have one think) can give up a friend, with an exultation over her
weakness, as a silly, lovesick creature!

I could make some other observations upon the contents of your last two
letters; but my mind is not free enough at present. The occasions for the above
stuck with me; and I could not help taking the earliest notice of them.

I will now acquaint you with all proceedings here: But these shall be the
subject of another Letter.

LETTER XXIX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Saturday, March 11.
I Have had such taunting messages, and such repeated avowals of ill-offices,
brought me from my brother and sister, if I do not comply with their wills
(delivered, too, with provoking sauciness by Betty Barnes), that I have thought
it proper, before I entered upon my intended address to my uncles, in pursuance
of the hint given me in my mamma's letter, to expostulate a little with them.
But, I have done it in such a manner, as will give you (if you please to take
it as you have done some parts of my former letters) great advantage over me.
In short, you will have more cause than ever, to declare me far gone in Love,
if my reasons for the change of my style, in these letters, with regard to Mr.
Lovelace, do not engage your more favorable opinion. -- For I have thought
proper to give them their own way; and, since they will have it, that I have a
preferable regard for Mr. Lovelace, I give them cause rather to confirm their
opinion than doubt it.

These are my reasons in brief, for the alteration of my style.

In the first place, they have grounded their principal argument for my
compliance with their will, upon my acknowlegements that my heart is free; and
so supposing I give up no preferable person, my opposition has the look of
downright obstinacy in their eyes; and they argue, that, at worst, my aversion
to Solmes, is an aversion that may be easily surmounted, and ought to be
surmounted in duty to my father, and for the promotion of family views.

Next, although they build upon this argument in order to silence me, they seem
not to believe me, but treat me as violently, and as disgracefully, as if I
were in love with one of my father's footmen: -- So that my conditional
willingness to give up Lovelace, has procured me no favor.

In the next place, I cannot but think, that my brother's antipathy to him is
far from being well-grounded: His inordinate passion for the sex is his crime,
that is always rung in my ears; and a very great one it is: But, does my
brother recriminate upon him thus, in love to me? -- No -- His whole behavior
shows me, that That is not his motive, and that he thinks me rather in his way,
than otherwise.

It is then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak up a little for a man,
who, although provoked by my brother, did not do him all the mischief he could
have done him, and which my brother had endeavored to do him. It might not be
amiss therefore, I thought, to alarm them a little with an apprehension, that
the methods they are taking with me, are the very reverse of those they should
take to answer the end they design by them: And after all, what is the
compliment I make Mr. Lovelace, if I allow it to be thought, that I do really
prefer him to such a man, as him they terrify me with? Then, my Miss How
(concluded I) accuses me of a tameness, which subjects me to insults from my
brother: I will keep that dear friend in my eye; and for all these
considerations, try what a little of her spirit will do -- sit it ever so
aukwardly upon me.

In this way of thinking, I wrote to my brother and sister. This is my Letter
to him.

TREATED, as I am treated, and, in a great measure, if not wholly, by your
instigations, brother, you must permit me to expostulate with you upon the
occasion. It is not my intention to displease you in what I am going to write:
And yet I must deal freely with you: The occasion calls for it.

And permit me, in the first place, to remind you, That I am your sister; and
not your servant; and that, therefore, the bitter revilings and passionate
language brought me from you, upon an occasion, in which you have no reason to
prescribe to me, are neither worthy of my character to bear, or of yours to
offer.

Put the case, that I were to marry the man you dislike, and that he were not
to make a polite or tender husband, Is that a reason for you to be an unpolite
and disobliging brother? -- Why must you, Sir, anticipate my misfortunes, were
such a case to happen? -- Let me tell you plainly, that the husband who could
treat me, as a wife, worse than you, of late, have treated me as a sister, must
be a barbarous man indeed.

Ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, If you would thus have treated your sister
Bella, had she thought fit to receive the addresses of the man so much hated by
you? -- If not, let me caution you, my brother, not to take your measures by
what you think will be borne, but rather by what ought to be offered.

How would you take it, if you had a brother, who, in a like case, were to act
by you, as you do by me? You cannot but remember what a laconic answer you gave
even to my papa, who recommended to you Miss Nelly D'Oily: -- You did not like
her, were your words: And that was thought sufficient.

You must needs think, that I cannot but know to whom to attribute my
disgraces, when I recollect my papa's indulgence to me, in permitting me to
decline several offers; and to whom, that a common cause is endeavored to be
made, in favor of a man whose person and manners are more exceptionable, than
those of any of the gentlemen I have been permitted to refuse.

I offer not to compare the two men together: Nor is there, indeed, the least
comparison to be made between them. All the difference to the one's
disadvantage, if I did, is but in one point -- Of the greatest importance,
indeed -- But to whom of most importance? -- To myself, surely, were I to
encourage his application: -- Of the least to you. Nevertheless, if you do not,
by your strange policies, unite that man and me as joint-sufferers in one
cause, you shall find me as much resolved to renounce him, as I am to refuse
the other. I have made an overture to this purpose: I hope you will not give me
reason to confirm my apprehensions, that it will be owing to you, if it be not
accepted.

It is a sad thing, to have it to say, without being conscious of ever having
given you cause of offense, that I have in you a brother, but not a friend.

Perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the reasons of your late conduct
with a foolish sister: But, if politeness, if civility, be not due to that
character, and to my sex, justice is.

Let me take the liberty further to observe, that the principal end of a young
gentleman's education at the university, is, to learn him to reason justly, and
to subdue the violence of his passions: I hope, brother, that you will not give
room for anybody who knows us both, to conclude, that the ^oilette has learned
the one more of the latter doctrine, than the university has taught the other.
I am truly sorry to have cause to say, that I have heard it often remarked,
that your uncontrouled passions are not a credit to your liberal education.

I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I have taken with you: You have
given me too much reason for it, and you have taken much greater with me,
without reason; -- so, if you are offended, ought to look at the cause, and not
at the effect: -- Then examining yourself, that cause will cease, and there
will not be any-where a more accomplished gentleman than my brother.

Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir (unkindly, as you have used me), and
not the pertness which of late you have been so apt to impute to me, is my
motive in this hint. Let me invoke your returning kindness, my only brother!
And give me cause, I beseech you, to call you my compassionating friend. For I
am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate sister, CL. HARLOWE.


This is my brother's answer.

To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
I Know, there will be no end of your impertinent scribble, if I don't write to
you. I write therefore: But, without entering into argument with such a
conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it is, to forbid you to plague me
with your quaint nonsense. I know not what Wit in a woman is good for, but to
make her overvalue herself, and despise everybody else. Yours, Miss Pert, has
set you above your duty, and above being taught or prescribed to, either by
parents, or anybody else -- But go on, Miss, your mortification will be the
greater; That Is all, child. It shall, I assure you, if I can make it so, so
long as you prefer that villainous Lovelace, who is justly hated by all your
family. We see by your Letter now, as well as we too justly suspected before,
most evidently, what hold he has got of your forward heart. But the stronger
the hold, the greater must be the force (and you shall have enough of that) to
tear such a miscreant from it. In me, notwithstanding your saucy lecturing, and
as saucy reflections before, you are sure of a friend, as well as a brother, if
it be not your own fault. But if you will still think of such a husband as that
Lovelace, never expect either in

JA. HARLOWE.


I will now give you a copy of my letter to my sister; with her unsisterly
answer.

IN what, my dear sister, have I offended you, that instead of endeavoring to
soften my father's anger against me (as I am sure, I should have done for you,
had my unhappy case been yours) you should, in so hard-hearted a manner, join
to aggravate not only his displeasure, but my mamma's against me. Make but my
case your own, my dear Bella; and suppose you were commanded to marry Mr.
Lovelace (to whom you are believed to have an antipathy), would you not think
it a very grievous injunction? -- Yet cannot your dislike to Mr. Lovelace be
greater than mine is to Mr. Solmes. Nor are Love and Hatred voluntary passions.

My brother may, perhaps, think it a proof of a manly spirit, to be an utter
stranger to the gentle passions. We have both heard him boast, that he never
loved with distinction; and, having predominating passions, and checked in his
first attempt, perhaps he never will: It is the less wonder then, raw from the
college, so lately himself the tutored, that he should set up for a tutor, a
prescriber to our gentler sex, whose tastes and manners are differently formed;
For what, according to his account, are colleges, but classes of tyrants, from
the upper students over the lower, and from them to the tutor? -- That he, with
such masculine passions, should endeavor to control and bear down an unhappy
sister, in a case where his antipathy, and, give me leave to say, his ambition
(once you would have allowed the latter to be his fault), can be gratified by
so doing, may not be quite so much to be wondered at -- But, that a sister
should give up the cause of a sister, and join with him to set her father and
mother against her, in a case relative to sex; in a case that might have been
her own -- Indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you.

There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought reclaimable, and when it was
far from being deemed a censurable view to hope to bring back to the paths of
virtue and honor, a man of his sense and understanding. I am far from wishing
to make the experiment: -- But nevertheless will say, That if I have not a
regard for him, the disgraceful methods taken to compel me to receive the
addresses of such a man as Mr. Solmes, are enough to inspire it.

Do you, my sister, for one moment, lay aside all prejudice, and compare the
two men in their births, their educations, their persons, their understandings,
their manners, their air, and their whole deportments; and in their fortunes
too, taking in reversions; And then judge of both: Yet, as I have frequently
offered, I will live single with all my heart, if that will do.

I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace! -- I would, if I could, oblige
all my friends -- But will it be just, will it be honest, to marry a man I
cannot endure? -- If I have not been used to oppose the will of my father, but
have always delighted to oblige and obey, judge of the strength of my
antipathy, by the painful opposition I am obliged to make, and cannot help it.

Pity then, my dearest Bella, my sister, my friend, my companion, my adviser,
as you used to be when I was happy, and plead for,

Your ever-affectionate CL. HARLOWE.


To Miss CLARY HARLOWE.
LET it be pretty, or not pretty, in your wise opinion, I shall speak my mind,
I Will assure you, both of you and your conduct, in relation to this detested
Lovelace. You are a fond, foolish girl, with all your wisdom. Your letter shows
that enough in twenty places. And as to your cant of living single, nobody will
believe you, This is one of your fetches to avoid complying with your duty, and
the will of the most indulgent parents in the world, as yours have been to you,
I am sure -- Though now they see themselves finely requited for it.

We all, indeed, once thought your temper soft and amiable: But why was it? --
You never was contradicted before: You had always your own way. But no sooner
do you meet with opposition in your wishes to throw yourself away upon a vile
rake, but you show what you are! -- You cannot love Mr. Solmes! that is the
pretense; but sister, sister, let me tell you, that is because Lovelace has got
into your fond heart: A wretch hated, justly hated, by us all; and who has
dipped his hands in the blood of your brother: -- Yet him you would make our
relation, would you?

I have no patience with you, but for putting the case of my liking such a vile
wretch as him. As to the encouragement you pretend he received formerly from
all our family, it was before we knew him to be so vile: And the proofs that
had such force upon us, ought to have had some upon you: -- And would, had you
not been a foolish forward girl; as on this occasion everybody sees you are.

O how you run out in favor of the wretch! -- His birth, his education, his
person, his understanding, his manners, his air, his fortune -- Reversions too
taken in to augment the surfeiting catalogue! What a fond string of lovesick
praises is here! -- And yet you would live single -- Yes, I warrant! -- When so
many imaginary perfections dance before your dazzled eye! -- But no more -- I
only desire, that you will not, while you seem to have such an opinion of your
wit, think every one else a fool; and that you can at pleasure, by your whining
flourishes, make us all dance after your lead.

Write as often as you will, this shall be the last answer or notice, you shall
have upon this subject from

ARABELLA HARLOWE.


I had in readiness a letter for each of my uncles; and meeting in the garden a
servant of my uncle Harlowe, I gave them to him to deliver according to their
respective directions. If I am to form a judgment by the answers I have
received from my brother and sister, as above, I must not, I doubt, expect any
good from them. But when I have tried every expedient, I shall have the less to
blame myself for, if any thing unhappy should fall out. I will send you copies
of both, when I shall see what notice they will be thought worthy of, if of any.

LETTER XXX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sunday night, March 12.
THIS man, this Lovelace, gives me great uneasiness. He is extremely bold and
rash. He was this afternoon at our church: In hopes to see me, I suppose: And
yet, if he had such hopes, his usual intelligence must have failed him.

Shorey was at church; and a principal part of her observation was upon his
haughty and proud behavior, when he turned round in the pew where he sat, to
our family-pew. -- My papa and both my uncles were there; so were my mamma and
sister. My brother happily was not! -- They all came home in disorder. Nor did
the congregation mind anybody but him; it being his first appearance there,
since the unhappy rencounter.

What did the man come for, if he intended to look challenge and defiance, as
Shorey says he did, and as others observed it seems as well as she? Did he come
for my sake; and, by behaving in such a manner to those present of my family,
imagine he was doing me either service o^ pleasure? -- He knows how they hate
him: Nor will he take pains, would pains do, to obviate their hatred.

You and I, my dear, have often taken notice of his pride; and you have rallied
him upon it; and instead of exculpating himself, he has owned it; and, by
owning it, has thought he has done enough.

For my own part, I thought pride, in his case, an improper subject for
raillery. -- People of birth and fortune to be proud, is so needless, so mean a
vice! -- If they deserve respect, they will have it, without requiring it. In
other words, for persons to endeavor to gain respect by a haughty behavior,
is to give a proof that they mistrust their own merit: To make confession that
they know that their actions will not attract it. -- Distinction or Quality may
be prided in by those to whom distinction or quality is a new thing. And then
the reflection and contempt which such bring upon themselves, by it, is a
counter-balance.

Such added advantages too, as this man has in his person and mien; learned
also, as they say he is; -- Such a man to be haughty, to be imperious! -- The
lines of his own face at the same time condemning him -- How wholly
inexcusable! -- Proud of what? Not of doing well: The only justifiable pride.
-- Proud of exterior advantages! -- Must not one be led by such a stop-short
pride, as one may call it, in him or her who has it, to mistrust the interior.
Some people may indeed be afraid, that if they did not assume, they would be
trampled upon. A very narrow fear, however, since they trample upon themselves
who can fear this. But this man must be secure, that humility would be an
ornament to him.

He has talents, indeed: But those talents, and his personal advantages, have
been snares to him. It is plain they have. And this shows, that, weighed in an
equal balance, he would be found greatly wanting.

Had my friends confided, as they did at first, in that discretion which they
do not accuse me of being defective in, I dare say I should have found him out:
And then should have been as resolute to dismiss him, as I was to dismiss
others, and as I am never to have Mr. Solmes. O that they did but know my
heart! -- It shall sooner burst, than voluntarily, uncompelled, undriven,
dictate a measure that shall cast a slur either upon them, my sex, or myself.

Excuse me, my dear friend, for these grave soliloquies, as I may call them.
How have I run from reflection to reflection! But the occasion is recent! --
They are all in commotion below upon it!

Shorey says, that he watched my mamma's eye, and bowed to her: And she
returned the compliment. He always admired my mamma. She would not, I believe,
have hated him, had she not been bid to hate him; and had it not been for the
rencounter between him and her only son.

Dr. Lewin was at church; and observing, as everyone else did, the disorder
into which Mr. Lovelace's appearance had put all our family, was so good as to
engage him in conversation, when the service was over, till they were all gone
to their coaches.

My father it seems is more and more incensed against me. And so are my uncles:
They had my letters in the morning. Their answers, if they vouchsafe to answer
me, will demonstrate, I doubt not, the unseasonableness of this rash man's
presence at our church.

They are angry, it seems, at my mamma, for returning his compliment. What an
enemy is hatred, even to the common forms of civility! which, however, more
distinguish the payer of a compliment, than the receiver. But they all see,
they say, that there is but one way to put an end to his insults. So I shall
suffer: And in what will the rash man have benefited himself, or mended his
prospects?

I am extremely apprehensive, that this worse than ghost-like appearance of
his, bodes some still bolder step. If he come hither (and very desirous he is
of my leave to come), I am afraid there will be murder. To avoid That, if there
were no other way, I would most willingly be buried alive.

They are all in consultation: Upon my letters, I suppose: So they were in the
morning, which occasioned my uncles to be at our church. I will send you the
copies of those letters, as I promised in my last, when I see whether I can
give you their answers with them. This letter is all -- I-cannot-tell-what --
the effect of apprehension and displeasure at the man who has occasioned these
apprehensions: Six lines would have contained all that is in it to the purpose
of my story.

CL. H.

See Letter xxxvi. for Mr. Lovelace's account of his behavior and intentions
in his appearance at their church.

LETTER XXXI. Mr. LOVELACE, To JOHN BELFORD, Esquire.
Monday, March 13.
IN vain do These gentlemen affected the Roman style, as they called it, in
their letters: And it was an agreed rule with them, to take in good part
whatever freedoms they treated each other with, if the passages were written in
that style.
thou and thy compeers press me to go to town, while I am in such an
uncertainty as I am at present with this proud Beauty. All the ground I have
hitherto gained with her, is entirely owing to her concern for the safety of
people whom I have reason to hate.

Write then, thou biddest me, if I will not come. That, indeed, I can do; and
as well without a subject, as with one. And what follows shall be a proof of it.

The Lady's malevolent brother has now, as I told thee at M. Hall, introduced
another man; the most unpromising in his person and qualities, the most
formidable in his offers, that has yet appeared.

This man has, by his proposals, captivated every soul of the Harlowe's --
Soul! did I say? -- There is not a soul among them but my charmer's: And she,
withstanding them All, is actually confined, and otherwise maltreated, by a
Father the most gloomy and positive; at the instigation of a Brother the most
arrogant and selfish -- But thou know their characters; and I will not
therefore sully my paper with them.

But is it not a confounded thing to be in love with one, who is the daughter,
the sister, the niece, of a family I must eternally despise? And the devil of
it, That Love increasing, with her -- What shall I call it? -- It Is not scorn:
-- It Is not pride: -- It Is not the insolence of an adored beauty: -- But it is
to virtue, it seems, that my difficulties are owing: And I pay for not being a
sly sinner, an hypocrite: for being regardless of my reputation; for permitting
slander to open its mouth against me. But is it necessary for such a one as I,
who have been used to carry all before me, upon my own terms -- I, who never
inspired a Fear, that had not a discernibly-predominant mixture of Love in it;
to be an hypocrite? -- Well says the poet: He who seems virtuous does but act a
part;
And shows not his own nature, but his art.


Well, but, it seems, I must practice for This art, if I would succeed with
this truly admirable creature! But why practice for it? -- Cannot I indeed
reform? -- I have but one vice; -- Have I, Jack? -- Thou know my heart, if
any man living does. As far as I know it myself, thou know it. -- But it is a
cursed deceiver -- For it has many and many a time imposed upon its master --
Master, did I say? That am I not now: Nor have I been, from the moment I beheld
this angel of a woman: Prepared indeed as I was by her character, before I saw
her: For what a mind must that be, which, though not virtuous itself, admires not
virtue in another? -- My visit to Arabella, owing to a mistake of the sisters,
into which, as thou have heard me say, I was led by the blundering uncle; who
was to introduce me (but lately come from abroad) to the divinity, as I
thought; but, instead of her, carried me to a mere mortal. And much difficulty
had I, so fond and so forward my Lady, to get off, without forfeiting All with
a family that I intended should give me a goddess.

I have boasted, that I was once in love before: -- And indeed I thought I was.
It was in my early manhood -- with that Quality-jilt, whose infidelity I have
vowed to revenge upon as many of the sex as shall come into my power. I
believe, in different climes, I have already sacrificed an hecatomb to my
Nemesis, in pursuance of this vow. But upon recollecting what I was then, and
comparing it with what I find in myself now, I cannot say, that I was ever in
love before.

What was it then, do thou ask me, since the disappointment had such effects
upon me, when I found myself jilted, that I was hardly kept in my senses? --
Why I Will tell thee what, as near as I can remember; for it was a great while
ago: -- It was -- egad, Jack, I can hardly tell what it was -- But a vehement
aspiration after a novelty, I think -- Those confounded Poets, with their
celestially-terrene descriptions, did as much with me as the Lady: They fired
my imagination, and set me upon a desire to become a goddess-maker. I must
needs try my new-fledg'd pinions, in sonnet, elogy, and madrigal. I must have a
Cynthia, a Stella, a Sacharissa, as well as the best of them: Darts, and
flames, and the devil knows what, must I give to my Cupid. I must create
beauty, and place it where nobody else could find it: And many a time have I
been at a loss for a subject, when my new-created goddess has been kinder than
it was proper for my plaintive sonnet she should be.

Then I had a vanity of another sort in my passion: I found myself
well-received among the women in general; and I thought it a pretty lady-like
tyranny (I was very young then, and very vain) to single out some one of the
sex, to make half a score jealous. And I can tell thee, it had its effect: For
many an eye have I made to sparkle with rival indignation: Many a cheek glow;
and even many a fan have I caused to be snapped at a sister-beauty; accompanied
with a reflection, perhaps, at being seen alone with a wild young fellow, who
could not be in private with both at once.

In short, Jack, it was more Pride than Love, as I now find it, that put me
upon making such a confounded rout about losing this noble var^etess. I thought
she loved me at least as well as I believed I loved her: Nay, I had the vanity
to suppose she could not help it. My friends were pleased with my choice. They
wanted me to be shackled. For early did they doubt my morals, as to the sex.
They saw, that the dancing, the singing, the musical Ladies were all fond of my
company: For who (I am in a humor to be vain, I think! -- for who) danced, who
sung, who touched the string, whatever the instrument, with a better grace than
thy friend?

I have no notion of playing the hypocrite so egregiously, as to pretend to be
blind to qualifications which every-one sees and acknowleges. Such
praise-begging hypocrisy! Such affectedly-disclaim'd attributes! Such
contemptible ^raise-traps! -- But yet, shall my vanity extend only to
personals, such as the gracefulness of dress, my debonnaire, and my assureance?
-- Self-taught, self-acquired, these! -- For my PARTS, I value not myself upon
them. Thou will say, I have no cause. -- Perhaps not: But if I had any thing
valuable as to intellectuals, those are not my own: And to be proud of what a
man is answerable for the abuse of, and has no merit in the right use of, is to
strut, like the jay, in a borrowed plumage.

But to return to my fair jilt -- I could not bear, that a woman, who was the
first that had bound me in silken fetters (they were not iron ones, like those
I now wear) should prefer a'coronet to me: And when the bird was flown, I set
more value upon it, than when I had it safe in my cage, and could visit it when
I would.

But now am I in- deed in love. I can think of nothing, of nobody else, but
the divine Clarissa Harlowe. -- Harlowe! -- How that hated word sticks in my
throat -- But I shall give her for it, the name of Love Lovelace.
.

CLARISSA! -- O there is music in the name,
That softening me to infant tenderness,
Makes my heart spring like the first leaps of life!
But could thou have thought that I, who think it possible for me to favor
as much as I can be favored; that I, who for this charming creature think of
foregoing the life of honor for the life of shackles; could adopt those
over-tender lines of Otway?

I check myself, and l^aving the three first lines of the following of Dryden's
to the family of the whiners, find the workings of the passion in my stormy
soul better expressed by the three last: Love various minds does variously
inspire;
He stirs in gentle natures gentle fire:
Like that of incense on the altar laid.
But raging flames tempestuous souls invade:
A fire, which every windy passion blows;
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.


And with REVENGE it shall glow! -- For, do thou think, that if it were not
from the hope, That this stupid family are all combined to do my work for me, I
would bear their insults? -- Is it possible to imagine, that I would be braved
as I am braved, threatened as I am threatened, by those who are afraid to see
me; and by this brutal brother too, to whom I gave a life (A life, indeed, not
worth my taking!); had I not a greater pride in knowing, that by means of his
very Spy upon me, I am playing him off as I please; cooling, or inflaming, his
violent passions, as may best suit my purposes; permitting so much to be
revealed of my life and actions, and intentions, as may give him such a
confidence in his double-fac'd agent, as shall enable me to dance his employer
upon my own wires?

This it is, that makes my pride mount above my resentment. By this engine,
whose springs I am continually oiling, I play them all off. The busy old
tarpaulin uncle I make but my ambassador to Queen Annabella How, to engage her
(for example sake to her Princessly daughter) to join in their cause, and to
assert an authority they are resolved, right or wrong (or I could do nothing),
to maintain.

And what my motive, do thou ask? No less than this, That my beloved shall
find no protection out of my family; for, if I know hers, fly she must, or have
the man she hates. This, therefore, if I take my measures right, and my
Familiar fail me not, will secure her mine, in spite of them all; in spite of
her own inflexible heart: Mine, without condition; without
reformation-promises; without the necessity of a siege of years, perhaps; and
to be even then, after wearing the guise of a merit-doubting hypocrisy, at an
uncertainty, upon a probation unapproved of -- Then shall I have all the
rascals, and rascalesses of the family come creeping to me: I prescribing to
them; and bringing that sordidly-imperious brother to kneel at the footstool
of my throne.

All my fear arises from the little hold I have in the heart of this charming
frost-piece: Such a constant glow upon her lovely features: Eyes so sparkling:
Limbs so divinely turned: Health so florid: Youth so blooming: Air so animated:
To have an heart so impenetrable -- And I, the hitherto successful Lovelace,
the addressor -- How can it be? -- Yet there are people, and I have talked with
some of them, who remember, that she was born: -- Her nurse Norton boasts of
her maternal offices in her earliest infancy; and in her education gradatim. --
So that there is full proof, that she came not from above, all at once an
angel! How then can she be so impenetrable?

But here is her mistake; nor will she be cured of it -- She takes the man she
calls her father (her mother had been faultless, had she not been her father's
wife); she takes the men she calls her uncles; the fellow she calls her
brother; and the poor contemptible she calls her sister; to be her father, to
be her uncles, her brother, her sister; and that, as such, she owes to some of
them reverence, to others respect, let them treat her ever so cruelly! --
Sordid ties! Mere cradle-prejudices! -- For had they not been imposed upon her
by Nature, when she was in a perverse humor, or could she have chosen her
relations, Would any of these have been among them?

How my heart rises at her preference of them to me, when she is convinced of
their injustice to me! Convinced that the alliance would do honor to them all
-- herself excepted; to whom every-one owes honor; and from whom the most
princely family might receive it. But how much more will my heart rise with
indignation against her, if I find she hesitates but one moment (however
persecuted) about preferring me to the man she avowedly hates! But she cannot
surely be so mean, as to purchase her peace with them at so dear a rate. She
cannot give a sanction to projects formed in malice, and founded in a
selfishness (and that at her own expense) which she has spirit enough to
despise in others; and ought to disavow, that we may not think her a Harlowe.

By this incoherent ramble thou will gather, that I am not likely to come up in
haste; since I must endeavor first to obtain some assurance from the beloved
of my soul, that I shall not be sacrificed to such a wretch as Solmes! Woe be
to the fair-one, if ever she be driven into my power (for I despair of a
voluntary impulse in my favor), and I find a difficulty in obtaining this
security!

That her indifference to me is not owing to the superior liking she has for
any other man, is what rivets my chains: But take care, fair-one; take care, O
thou most exalted of female minds, and loveliest of persons, how thou debasest
thyself, by encourageing such a competition as thy sordid relations have set on
foot in mere malice to me! -- Thou will say I rave. And so I do!

Perdition catch my soul, but I do love her. Else, could I bear the perpetual
revilings of her implacable family? -- Else, could I basely creep about -- not
her proud father's house -- but his paddock -- and garden-walls? -- Yet (a
quarter of a mile's distance between us) not hoping to behold the least glimpse
of her shadow? -- Else, should I think myself repaid, amply repaid, if the
fourth, fifth, or sixth midnight stroll, through unfrequented paths, and over
briery enclosures, afford me a few cold lines; the even expected purport only
to let me know, that she values the most worthless person of her very worthless
family, more than she values me; and that she would not write at all, but to
induce me to bear insults, which un- man me to bear! -- My lodging in the
intermediate way, at a wretched alehouse; disguised like an inmate of it:
Accommodations equally vile, as those I met with in my Westphalian journey.
It Is well, that the necessity for all This arises not from scorn and tyranny;
but is first imposed upon herself!

But was ever hero in romance (opposing giants and dragons excepted) called
upon to harder trials? -- Fortune and family, and reversionary grandeur, on my
side! Such a wretched fellow my competitor! -- Must I not be deplorably in
love, that can go through these difficulties, encounter these contempts? By my
soul, I am half-asham'd of myself: I, who am perjured too, by priority of
obligation, if I am faithful to any woman in the world!

And yet, why say I, I am half ashamed? -- Is it not a glory to love her whom
every-one who sees her, either loves, or reveres, or both? Dryden says, The
cause of Love can never be assigned,
It Is in no face; -- But in the lover's mind.


And Cowley thus addresses Beauty as a mere imaginary: Beauty! thou wild
fantastic ape,
Who do in every country change thy shape:
Here black; there brown; here tawny; and there white;
Thou flatterer! who comply'st with every sight!
Who have no certain What, nor Where.
But both these, had they been her cotemporaries, and known her, would have
confessed themselves mistaken: And, taking together person, mind, and
behavior, would have acknowleg'd the justice of the universal voice in her
favor.

-- Full many a Lady
I Have eyed with best regard; and many a time
The harmony of their tongues has into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues
Have I liked several women. Never any
With so full soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
And put it to the foil. But SHE! -- O SHE!
So perfect and so peerless is created,
Of every creature's best. --
Thou art curious to know, If I have not started a new game? -- If it be
possible for so universal a lover to be confined so long to one object? Thou
know nothing of this charming creature, that thou can put such questions
to me; or think thou know me better than thou do. All that is excellent
in her sex is this Lady! -- Until by matrimonial, or equal intimacies, I have
found her less than angel, it is impossible to think of any other. Then there
are so many stimulatives to such a spirit as mine in this affair, besides Love:
Such a field for stratagem and contrivance, which thou know to be the
delight of my heart: Then the rewarding end of all; -- To carry off such a girl
as This, in spite of all her watchful and implacable friends; and in spite of
a prudence and reserve, that I never met with in any of the sex: -- What a
triumph! -- What a triumph over the whole sex! And then such a Revenge to
gratify; which is only at present politically rein'd-in, eventually to break
forth with the greater fury: -- Is it possible, think thou, that there can
be room for a thought that is not of her, and devoted to her?

BY the advices I have this moment received, I have reason to think, that I
shall have occasion for thee here. Hold thyself in readiness to come down upon
the first summons.

Let Belton, and Mowbray, and Tourville, likewise prepare themselves. I have a
great mind to contrive a method to send James Harlowe to travel for
improvement. Never was there Booby-'Squire that more wanted it. Contrive it,
did I say? I have already contrived it; could I but put it in execution without
being suspected to have a hand in it. This I am resolved upon; If I have not
his sister, I will have him.

But be This as it may, there is a present likelihood of room for glorious
mischief. A confederacy had been for some time formed against me; but the
uncles and the nephew are now to be double-servanted ( single-servanted they
were before), and those servants are to be double-arm'd when they attend their
masters abroad. This indicates their resolute enmity to me, and as resolute
favor to Solmes.

The reinforced orders for this hostile apparatus are owing, it seems, to a
visit I made yesterday to their church; a good place to begin a reconciliation
in, were the heads of the family christians, and did they mean any thing by
their prayers. My hopes were to have an invitation (or, at least, to gain a
pretense) to accompany home the gloomy sire; and so get an opportunity to see
my goddess: For, I believed they durst not but be civil to me, at least. But
they were filled with terror, it seems, at my entrance; a terror they could not
get over. I saw it indeed in their countenances; and that they all expected
something extraordinary to follow. -- And so it should have done, had I been
more sure than I am of their daughter's favor. Yet not a hair of any of their
stupid heads do I intend to hurt.

You shall all have your directions in writing, if there be occasion. But,
after all, I dare say there will be no need but to show your faces in my
company.

Such faces never could four men show -- Mowbray's so fierce and so fighting:
Belton's so pert and so pimply: Tourville's so fair and so foppish: Thine so
rough and so resolute: And I your leader! -- What hearts, although meditating
hostility, must those be which we shall not appall? -- Each man occasionally
attended by a servant or two, long ago chosen for qualities resembling his
master's.

Thus, Jack, as thou desire, have I written: Written upon Something; upon
Nothing; upon Revenge, which I love; upon Love, which I hate, heartily hate,
because it is my master: And upon the devil knows what besides: -- For, looking
back, I Am amazed at the length of it. Thou may read it: I would not for a
King's ransom -- But so as I do but write, thou say thou will be pleased.

Be pleased then. I command thee to be pleased: If not for the writer's, or
written's sake, for thy word's sake. And so in the royal style (for am I not
likely to be thy King and thy Emperor, in the great affair before us?) I bid
Thee very heartily

Farewell.

LETTER XXXII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Tuesday, March 14.
I Now send you copies of my letters to my uncles: With their answers. Be
pleased to return the latter, by the first deposite. I leave them for you, to
make remarks upon. I shall make none.

To JOHN HARLOWE, Esquire
Sat. March 11.
ALLOW me, my honored Second Papa, as in my happy days you taught me to call
you, to implore your interest with my papa, to engage him to dispense with a
command, which, if insisted upon, will deprive me of my free will, and make me
miserable for my whole life.

For my whole life! let me repeat: Is that a small point, my dear uncle, to
give up? Am not I to live with the man? Is anybody else? Shall I not therefore
be allowed to judge for myself, whether I can, or can- not live happily, with
him?

Should it be ever so un-happily, will it be prudence to complain, or appeal?
If it were, to whom could I appeal with effect against a husband? And would not
the invincible and avowed dislike I have for him at setting out, justify, as it
might seem, any ill usage from him, in that state; were I to be ever so
observant of him? And if I were to be at all so, it must be from Fear, not
Love. --

Once more, let me repeat, That this is not a small point to give up: And that
it is for life. Why, I pray you, good Sir, should I be made miserable for life?
Why should I be deprived of all comfort, but that which the hope, that it would
be a very short one, would afford me?

Marriage is a very solemn engagement, enough to make a young creature's heart
ache, with the best prospects, when she thinks seriously of it! -- To be given
up to a strange man; To be ingrafted into a strange family; To give up her very
name, as a mark of her becoming his absolute and dependent property: To be
obliged to prefer this strange man, to father, mother, -- to every body: -- And
his humors to all her own -- Or to contend, perhaps, in breach of a vowed
duty, for every innocent instance of free will: To go no whither: To make
acquaintance: To give up acquaintance: -- To renounce even the strictest
friendships perhaps; all at his pleasure, whether she think it reasonable to do
so or not: -- Surely, Sir, a young creature ought not to be obliged to make all
these sacrifices, but for such a man as she can approve. -- If she is, how sad
must be the case! -- How miserable the life, if to be called life!

I wish I could obey you all. What a pleasure would it be to me, if I could!
Marry first, and Love will come after, was said by one of my dearest friends!
But, it is a shocking assertion! A thousand things may happen to make that state
but barely tolerable, where it is entered into with mutual affection: What must
it then be, where the husband can have no confidence in the love of his wife;
but has reason rather to question it, from the preference he himself believes
she would have given to somebody else, had she been at her own option? What
doubt, what jealousies, what want of tenderness, what unfavourable
prepossessions, will there be, in a matrimony thus circumstanced? How will
every look, every action, even the most innocent, be liable to misconstruction?
-- While, on the other hand, an indifference, a carelessness to oblige, may
take place; and Fear only can constrain even an appearance of what ought to be
the real effect of undisguised Love?

Think seriously of these things, dear good Sir, and represent them to my papa,
in that strong light which the subject will bear; but in which my sex, and my
tender years and inexperience, will not permit me to paint it; and use your
powerful interest, that your poor niece may not be consigned to a misery so
durable.

I have offered to engage not to marry at all, if that condition may be
accepted. What a disgrace is it to me to be thus sequestered from company, thus
banished my papa's and mamma's presence, thus slighted and deserted by you,
Sir, and my other kind uncle! And to be hindered from attending at that public
worship, which, were I out of the way of my duty, would be most likely to
reduce me into the right path again! -- Is this the way, Sir, can it be
thought, to be taken with a free and open spirit? -- May not this strange
method rather harden than convince? -- I cannot bear to live in disgrace thus:
The very servants, so lately permitted to be under my own direction, hardly
daring to speak to me; my own servant discarded with high marks of undeserved
suspicion and displeasure, and my sister's maid set over me.

The matter may be too far pu^h'd: Indeed it may: And then, perhaps, every one
will be sorry for their parts in it.

May I be suffered to mention an expedient? -- If I am to be watched, banished,
and confined; Suppose, Sir, it were to be at your house? -- Then the
neighboring gentry will the less wonder, that the person of whom they used to
think so favorably, appeared not at church here; and that she received not
their visits.

I hope, there can be no objection to This. You used to love to have me with
you, Sir, when all went happily with me: And will you not now permit me, in my
troubles, the favor of your house, till all this displeasure be overblown? --
Upon my word, Sir, I will not stir out of doors, if you require the contrary of
me: Nor will I see any body, but whom you will allow me to see; provided you will
not bring Mr. Solmes to persecute me there.

Procure, then, this favor for me; if you cannot procure the still greater,
that of a happy reconciliation; which nevertheless I presume to hope for, if
you will be so good as to plead for me: And you will then add to those favors,
and to that indulgence, which have bound me, and then will for ever bind me, to
be

Your dutiful and obliged Niece, CL. HARLOWE.


The ANSWER.
Sunday night. My dear Niece,
IT grieves me to be forced to deny you any thing you ask. Yet it must be so;
for unless you can bring your mind to oblige us in this one point, in which our
promises and honor were engaged before we believed there could be so sturdy an
opposition, you must never expect to be what you have been to us all.

In short, niece, we are an embattel'd phalanx; your reading makes you a
stranger to nothing, but what you should be most acquainted with -- So you will
see by that expression, that we are not to be pierced by your persuasions, and
invincible persistence. We have agreed all to be moved, or none; and not to
comply without one another: So you know your destiny; and have nothing to do
but to yield to it.

Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in obliging when you can be
obliged again: -- But give up an inclination, and there is some merit in That.

As to your expedient: You shall not come to my house, Miss Clary; though this is
a prayer I little thought I ever should have denied you: For were you to keep
your word as to seeing nobody but whom we please, yet can you write to
somebody else, and receive letters from him: This we too well know you can, and
have done -- More is the shame and the pity!

You offer to live single, Miss -- We wish you married: But because you may not
have the man your heart is set upon, why, truly, you will have nobody we shall
recommend: And as we know, that some how or other you correspond with him, or
at least did, as long as you could; and as he defies us all, and would not dare
to do it, if he were not sure of you in spite of us all (which is not a little
vexatious to us, you must think); we are resolved to frustrate him, and triumph
over him, rather than he over us: That Is one word for all. So expect not any
advocateship from me: I will not plead for you; and that is enough. From

Your displeased Uncle, JOHN HARLOWE.
P. S. For the rest, I refer to my brother Antony.




To ANTONY HARLOWE, Esquire.
Saturday, March 11. Honored Sir,
AS you have thought fit to favor Mr. Solmes with your particular
recommendation, and was very earnest in his behalf, ranking him (as you told
me, upon introducing him to me) amongst your select friends; and expecting my
regards to him accordingly; I beg your patience, while I offer a few things,
out of many that I could offer, to your serious consideration, on occasion of
his address to me, if I am to use that word.

I am charged with prepossession in another person's favor: You will be
pleased, Sir, to consider, that, till my brother returned from Scotland, that
other person was not discouraged, nor was I forbid to receive his visits: And
is it such a crime in me, if I should prefer an acquaintance of Twelve months
to one of Two? -- I believe it will not be pretended, that in birth, education,
or personal endowments, a comparison can be made between the two. And only let
me ask you, Sir, if the one would have been thought of for me, had he not made
such offers, as, upon my word, I think, I ought not in justice to accept, nor
he to propose: Offers, which if he had not made, I dare say, my papa would not
have required them of him.

But the one, it seems, has many faults: -- Is the other fault- less? -- The
principal thing objected to Mr. Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) is, that
he is immoral in his Loves: -- Is not the other in his Hatreds? -- Nay, as I
may say, in his Loves too (the object only differing), if the love of money be
the root of all evil?

But, Sir, if I am prepossessed, what has Mr. Solmes to hope for? -- Why should
he persevere? What must I think of the man who would wish me to be his against
my inclination? -- And is it not a very harsh thing for my friends to desire to
see me married to one I cannot love, when they will not be persuaded but that
there is one I do love?

Treated as I am, now is the time for me to speak out, or never. -- Let me
review what it is Mr. Solmes depends upon on this occasion. Does he believe,
that the disgrace which I suffer on his account, will give him a merit with me?
Does he think to win my esteem, through my uncles sternness to me; by my
brother's contemptuous usage; by my sister's unkindness; by being denied to
visit, or be visited; and to correspond with my chosen friend, although a person
of unexceptionable honor and prudence, and of my own sex; my servant to be
torn from me, and another servant set over me; to be confined, like a prisoner,
to narrow and disgraceful limits, in order avowedly to mortify me, and to break
my spirit; to be turned out of that family-management which I loved, and had
the greater pleasure in it, because it was an ease, as I thought, to my mamma,
and what my sister chose not; and yet, though time hangs heavy upon my hands, to
be so put out of my course, that I have as little inclination as liberty to
pursue any of the choice delights of my life -- Are these steps necessary to
reduce me to a standard so low, as to make me a fit wife for this man? -- Yet
these are all he can have to trust to -- And if his reliance is on these
measures, I would have him to know, that he mistakes meekness and gentleness of
disposition for servility and baseness of heart.

I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent of his mind, and my mind
be considered: What are his qualities, by which he would hope to win my esteem?
-- Dear, dear Sir, if I am to be compelled, let it be in favor of a man that
can read and write -- That can teach me something: For what a husband must that
man make, who can do nothing but command; and needs himself the instruction he
should be qualified to give?

I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little reading; of my writing; as
of late I have more than once been told I am -- But, Sir, the more unequal the
proposed match, if so: The better opinion I have of myself, the worse I must
have of him; and the more unfit are we for each other.

Indeed, Sir, I must say, I thought my friends had put a higher value upon me.
My brother pretended once, that it was owing to such value, that Mr. Lovelace's
address was prohibited. -- Can this be; and such a man as Mr. Solmes be
intended for me?

As to his proposed settlements, I hope I shall not incur your greater
displeasure, if I say what all who know me have reason to think, and some have
upbraided me for, that I despise those motives. Dear, dear Sir, what are
settlements to one who has as much of her own as she wishes for? -- Who has
more in her own power, as a single person, than it is probable she would be
permitted to have at her disposal, as a wife! -- Whose expenses and ambition
are moderate; and, if she had superfluities, would rather dispense them to the
necessitous, than lay them by her useless? If then such narrow motives have so
little weight with me for my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain view
of family-aggrandizement, and that in the person of my brother and his
descendants, be thought sufficient to influence me?

Has the behavior of that brother to me of late, or his consideration for the
family (which had so little weight with him, that he could choose to hazard a
life so justly precious as an only son's, rather than not gratify passions
which he is above attempting to subdue, and, give me leave to say, has been too
much indulged in, either for his own good, or the peace of anybody related to
him; Has his behavior, I say) deserved of me in particular, that I should make
a sacrifice of my temporal (and, who knows? of my eternal) happiness, to
promote a plan, that, if I might be permitted to examine it, I will venture to
engage to demonstrate it to be, if not absurd, very precarious, and what must
depend upon improbable contingencies?

I am afraid you will condemn my warmth: But does not the occasion require it?
To the want of a greater degree of earnestness in my opposition, it seems, it
is owing, that such advances have been made, as have been made. Then, dear Sir,
allow something, I beseech you, for a spirit raised and imbittered by
disgraces, which (knowing my own heart) I am confident to say, are unmerited.

But why have I said so much, in answer to the supposed charge of
prepossession, when I have declared to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do to you, that
if it be not insisted upon that I shall marry any other person, particularly
this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any engagements never to have the other, nor
any man else, without their consents; that is to say, without the consents of
my Father and Mother, and of you my Uncle, and my eldest Uncle, and my cousin
Morden, as he is one of the trustees for my grandfather's bounty to me. -- As
to my Brother indeed, I cannot say, that his treatment of me has been, of late,
so brotherly, as to entitle him to more than civility from me: And for this,
give me leave to add, he would be very much my debtor.

If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my dislike to Mr. Solmes, that
the charge of prepossession may not be supposed to influence me against him, I
do declare solemnly, That, were there no such man as Mr. Lovelace in the world,
I would not have him. It is necessary, in some one of my letters to my dear
friends, that I should write so clearly as to put this out of all doubt: And to
whom can I better address myself, with an explicitness that can admit of no
mistake, than to a gentleman who professes the highest regard for plain-dealing
and sincerity?

Let me then, for these reasons, be still more particular in some of my
exceptions to him.

Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world indeed) to have a very narrow mind,
and no great capacity: He is coarse and indelicate; as rough in his manners as
in his person: He is not only narrow, but covetous: Being possessed of great
wealth, he enjoys it not; nor has the spirit to communicate to a distress of
any kind. Does not his own sister live unhappily, for want of a little of his
superfluities? And suffers he not his aged uncle, the brother of his own
mother, to owe to the generosity of strangers the poor subsistence he picks up
from half-a-dozen families? -- You know, Sir, my open, free, communicative
temper: How unhappy must I be, circumscribed in his narrow, selfish circle? out
of which, being withheld by this diabolical parsimony, he dare no more stir,
than a conjurer out of his; nor would let me.

Such a man as this, love! -- Yes, perhaps he may, my grandfather's estate;
which he has told several persons (and could not resist hinting it to me, with
that sort of pleasure which a low mind takes, when it intimates its own
interest as a sufficient motive for it to expect another's favor) lies so
extremely convenient for him, that it would double the value of a considerable
part of his own. That estate, and an alliance which would do credit to his
obscurity and narrowness, may make him think he can love, and induce him to
believe he does: But, at most, it is but a second-place Love. Riches were, are,
and always will be, his predominant passion. His were left him by a miser, on
this very account: And I must be obliged to forego all the choice delights of
my life, and be as mean as he, or else be quite unhappy! Pardon, Sir, this
severity of expression! -- One is apt to say more than one would, of a person
one dislikes, when more is said in his favor than he can possibly deserve; and
when he is urged to my acceptance with so much vehemence, that there is no
choice left me.

Whether these things be perfectly so, or not, while I think they are, it is
impossible I should ever look upon him in the light he is offered to me. Nay,
were he to be proved ten times better than I have represented him, and
sincerely think him; yet would he be still ten times more disagreeable to me
than any other man I know in the world. Let me therefore beseech you, Sir, to
become an advocate for your niece, that she may not be made a victim of, to a
man so highly disgustful to her.

You, and my other uncle, can do a great deal for me, if you please, with my
papa. Be persuaded, Sir, that it is not obstinacy I am governed by: It is
aversion; an aversion I cannot overcome: For, if I have but endeavored to
reason with myself (out of regard to the duty I owe to my papa's will), my
heart has recoiled, and I have been averse to myself, for offering but to argue
with myself, in behalf of a man who, in the light he appears to me, has no one
merit; and who, knowing this aversion, could not persevere as he does, if he
had the spirit of a man, and a gentleman.

If, Sir, you can think the contents of this letter reasonable, I beseech you
to support them with your interest: If not -- I shall be most unhappy! --
Nevertheless, it is but just in me so to write, as that Mr. Solmes may know
what he has to trust to.

Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and suffer it to have weight with you;
and you will for ever oblige

Your dutiful and affectionate Niece, CL. HARLOWE.


Mr. ANTONY HARLOWE, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Niece CLARY,
YOU had better not write to us, or to any of us. To me, particularly, you had
better never to have set pen to paper, on the subject whereupon you have
written. He that is first in his own cause, says the wise man, seems just:
But his neighbor comes, and searches him. And so, in this respect, will I be
your neighbor; for I will search your heart to the bottom; that is to say, if
your letter be written from your heart. Yet do I know what a task I have
undertaken, because of the knack you are noted for at writing: But in defense
of a father's authority, in behalf of the good, and honor, and prosperity of a
family one comes of, what a hard thing would it be, if one could not beat down
all the arguments a rebel child (how loath I am to write down that word of Miss
Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her obstinacy?

In the first place, don't you declare (and that contrary to your declarations
to your mother) that you prefer the man we all hate, and who hates us as bad?
-- Then what a character have you given of a worthy gentleman! I wonder you
dare write so freely of a man we all respect. But possibly it may be for that
very reason.

How you begin your letter! -- Because I value Mr. Solmes as my friend, you
treat him the worse -- That Is the plain Dunstable of the matter, Miss! -- I am
not such a fool but I can see That. -- And so a noted whore-monger is to be
chosen before a man who is a money-lover! Let me tell you, niece, this little
becomes so nice a one as you have been always reckoned. Who, think you, does
most injustice, a prodigal man, or a saving man? -- The one saves his own
money; the other spends other people's: But your favorite is a sinner in
grain, and upon record.

The devil's in your sex! God forgive me for saying so -- The nicest of them
will prefer a vile rake and Wh -- I suppose I must not repeat the word: -- The
Word will offend when the Vicious denominated by that word will be chosen! -- I
had not been a bachelor to this time, if I had not seen such a mass of
contradictions in you all. -- Such gnat-strainers and camel-swallowers, as
venerable Holy Writ has it. What names will perverseness call things by -- A
prudent man, who intends to be just to everybody, is a covetous man! -- While
a vile, prossigate rake is christened with the appellation of a gallant man,
and a polite man, I Will warrant you!

It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so much regard for you as he
professes; but for two reasons. And what are these? -- Why out of spite to all
of us -- one of them: The other, because of your independent fortune. I wish
your good grandfather had not left what he did so much in your own power, as I
may say. But little did he imagine his beloved granddaughter would have turned
upon all her friends as she has done!

What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepossessed! Hey-day! Is this
you, cousin Clary! -- Has he then nothing to hope for from your father's, and
mother's, and our recommendations? -- No nothing at all, it seems! -- O brave!
-- I should think that this, with a dutiful child, as we took you to be, was
enough. Depending on this your duty, we proceeded: And now there is no help for
it: For we will not be balked: Neither shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you
that.

If your estate is convenient for him, what then? Does that, pert cousin, make
it out that he does not love you? He had need to expect some good with you,
that has so little good to hope for from you; mind that. But pray, is not this
estate our estate, as we may say? Have we not all an interest in it, and a
prior right, if right were to have taken place? And was it more than a good old
man's dotage, God rest his soul! that gave it you before us all? -- Well then,
ought we not to have a choice who shall have it in marriage with you? And would
you have the conscience to wish us to let a vile fellow who hates us all, run
away with it? -- You bid me weigh what you write: Do you weigh this, girl: And
it will appear we have more to say for ourselves than you were aware of.

As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank yourself for That: It may be
over when you will: So I reckon nothing upon that: You was not banished and
confined till all entreaty and fair speeches were tried with you: Mind that.
And Mr. Solmes cannot help your obstinacy: -- Let that be observed too.

As to being visited, and visiting, you never was fond of either: So that is a
grievance put into the scale to make weight. -- As to disgrace, that is as bad
to us as to you: So fine a young creature! -- So much as we used to brag of
you! -- And too, besides, this is all in your power, as the rest. -- But your
heart recoils, when you would persuade yourself to obey your parents -- Finely
described, i'n't it! -- Too truly described, I own, as you go on. I know, that
you may love him if you will. -- I had a good mind to bid you hate him; then,
perhaps, you would like him the better: For I have always found a most horrid
romantic perverseness in your sex. To do and to love what you should not, is
meat, drink, and vesture, to you all.

I am absolutely of your brother's mind, That reading and writing, though not too
much for the wits of you young girls, are too much for your judgments. -- You
say, you may be conceited, cousin; you may be vain! -- And so you are, to
despise this gentleman as you do. He can read and write as well as most
gentlemen, I can tell you that. Who told you Mr. Solmes cannot read and write?
But you must have a husband who can learn you something! -- I wish you knew but
your duty as well as you do your talents -- That, niece, you have of late to
learn; and Mr. Solmes will therefore find something to instruct you in. I will not
show him this letter of yours, though you seem to desire it, lest it should
provoke him to be too severe a schoolmaster, when you are his'n.

But now I think of it, suppose you are readier at your pen than he -- You will
make the more useful wife to him; will not you? For who so good an oeconomist as
you? -- And you may keep all his accounts, and save yourselves a steward. --
And, let me tell you, this is a fine advantage in a family: For those stewards
are often sad dogs, and creep into a man's estate, before he knows where he is;
and not seldom is he forced to pay them interest for his own money. I know not
why a good wife should be above these things. -- It Is better than lying abed
half the day, and junketing and card-playing all the night, and making
yourselves wholly useless to every good purpose in your own families, as is now
the fashion among ye -- The duce take ye all that do so, say I! -- Only that,
thank my stars, I am a bachelor! -- Then this is a province you are admirably
versed in: You grieve that it is taken from you here, you know. So here, Miss,
with Mr. Solmes you will have something to keep account of, for the sake of you
and your children: With the other, perhaps, you will have an account to keep, too
-- But an account of what will go over the left shoulder: only of what he
squanders, what he borrows, and what he owes, and never will pay. Come, come,
cousin, you know nothing of the world; a man's a man, and you may have many
partners in a handsome man, and costly ones too, who may lavish away all you
save. Mr. Solmes therefore for my money, and I hope for yours!

But Mr. Solmes is a coarse man, he is not delicate enough for your niceness,
because I suppose he dresses not like a fop and a coxcomb, and because he lays
not himself out in complimental nonsense, the poison of female minds. He is a
man of sense, I can tell you. No man tal^s more to the purpose to us: -- But
you sly him so, that he has no opportunity given him, to express it to you: And
a man who loves, if he have ever so much sense, looks like a fool; especially
when he is despised, and treated as you treated him the last time he was in
your company.

As to his sister; she threw herself away, (as you want to do) against his full
warning: For he told her what she had to trust to, if she married where she did
marry. And he was as good as his word; and so an honest man ought: Offenses
against warning ought to be smarted for. Take care This be not your case. Mind
that.

His uncle deserves no favor from him, for he would have circumvented him, and
got Sir Oliver to leave to himself the estate he had always designed for him
his nephew; and brought him up in the hope of it. Too ready forgiveness does
but encourage offenses: That Is your good father's maxim: And there would not be
so many headstrong daughters as there are, if this maxim were kept in mind. --
Punishments are of service to offenders; Rewards should be only to the
meriting: And I think the former are to be dealt out rigorously, in wilful
cases.

As to his love; he shows it but too much for your deservings, as they have
been of late; let me tell you That: And This is his misfortune; and may in time
perhaps be yours.

As to his parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical -- a very free word in
your mouth, let me tell ye -- Little reason have you of all people for this, on
whom he proposes, of his own accord, to settle all he has in the world: A
proof, let him love riches as he will, that he loves you better. But that you
may be without excuse on this score, we will tie him up to your own terms, and
oblige him, by the marriage articles, to allow you a very handsome quarterly
sum, to do what you please with. And this has been told you before; and I have
said it to Mrs. How, that good and worthy lady, before her proud daughter,
that you might hear of it again.

To contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace, you offer never to have
him without our consents: And what is This saying, but that you will hope on
for our consents, and to wheedle and tire us out: Then he will always be in
expectation, while you are single: And we are to live on at this rate (are
we?), vexed by you, and continually watchful about you; and as continually
exposed to his insolence and threats. Remember last Sunday, girl! -- What might
have happened, had your brother and he met? -- Moreover, you cannot do with such
a spirit as his, as you can with worthy Mr. Solmes: The one you make tremble;
the other will make you quake. Mind that: And you will not be able to help
yourself. And remember, that if there should be any misunderstanding between
one of them and you, we should all interpose; and with effect, no doubt: But
with the other, it would be self-do self-have, and who would either care or
dare to put in a word for you? Nor let the supposition of matrimonial
differences frighten you: Honey-moon lasts not nowadays above a fortnight;
and Dunmow flitch, as I have been informed, was never claimed; though some say
once it was. Marriage is a queer state, child, whether paired by the parties or
by their friends. Out of three brothers of us, you know, there was but one had
courage to marry. And why was it, do you think? We were wise by other people's
experience.

Don't despise money so much; you may come to know the value of it: That is a
piece of instruction that you are to learn; and which, according to your own
notions, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you.

I do indeed condemn your warmth. I will not allow for disgraces you bring upon
yourself. If I thought them unmerited, I would be your advocate. But it was
always my notion, that children should not dispute their parents authority.
When your grandfather left his estate to you, though his three sons, and a
grandson, and your elder sister were in being, we all acquiesced: And why?
Because it was our father's doing. Do you imitate that example: If you will
not, those who set it you have the more reason to hold you inexcusable. Mind
that, Cousin.

You mention your brother too scornfully: And, in your letter to him, are very
disrespectful, as well as in your sister's, to her. He is your brother; a third
older than yourself: And a man: And while you can pay so much regard to one man
of a twelve month's acquaintance only, pray be so good as not to forget what is
due to a brother, who (next to us three brothers) is the head of the family;
and on whom the name depends: As upon your dutiful compliance depends the
success of the noblest plan that ever was laid down for the honor of the
family you are come of. And pray now let me ask you, If the honor of That will
not be an honor to you? -- If you don't think so, the more unworthy you. You
shall see the plan, if you promise not to be prejudiced against it, right or
wrong. If you are not besotted to that man, I am sure you will like it. If you
are, were Mr. Solmes an angel, it would signify nothing: For the devil is Love,
and Love is the devil, when it gets into any of your heads. Many examples have
I seen of that.

If there were no such man as Lovelace in the world, you would not have Mr.
Solmes. -- You would not, Miss! -- Very pretty, truly! -- We see how your
spirit is embittered indeed. -- Wonder not, since it is come to your will nots,
that those who have authority over you, say, You shall have the other. And I am
one. Mind that. And if it behooves You to speak out, Miss, it behooves US not to
speak in. What Is sauce for the goofe is sauce for the gander: Take that in your
thought too.

I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes has the spirit of a man, and a gentleman.
I would admonish you therefore not to provoke it. He pities you as much as he
loves you. He says, He will convince you of his love by deeds, since he is not
permitted by you to express it by words. And all his dependence is upon your
generosity hereafter. We hope he may depend upon That: We encourage him to
think he may. And this heartens him up. So that you may lay his constancy at
your parents and your uncles doors; and This will be another mark of your duty,
you know.

You must be sensible, that you reflect upon your parents, and all of us, when
you tell me you cannot in justice accept of the settlements proposed to you.
This reflection we should have wondered at from you once; but now we don't.

There are many other very censurable passages in this free letter of yours;
but we must place them to the account of your imbittered spirit: I am glad you
mentioned that word, because we should have been at a loss what to have called
it: -- Much rather have had reason to give it a better name.

I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, though my niece, one of the finest
young gentlewomen I ever saw. But, upon my conscience, I think you ought to
obey your parents, and oblige me, and my brother John: For you know very well,
that we have nothing but your good at heart; consistently, indeed, with the
good and honor of all of us. What must we think of any one of it, who would
not promote the good of the whole? and who would set one part of it against
another? -- Which God forbid, say I! -- You see I am for the good of all. What
shall I get by it, let things go as they will? Do I want any thing of any body
for my own sake? Does my brother John? -- Well, then, cousin Clary, What would
you be at, as I may say?

O but, You cannot love Mr. Solmes! -- But, I say, you know not what you can do.
You encourage yourself in your dislike. You permit your heart (little did I
think it was such a froward one) to recoil. Take it to task, niece; drive it on
as fast as it recoils (we do so in all our sea fights, and land-fights too, by
our sailors and soldiers, or we should not conquer); and we are all sure you
will overcome it. And why? Because you ought. So we think, whatever you think:
And whose thoughts are to be preferred? You may be wittier than we; but, if you
are wiser, we have lived some of us, let me tell you, to very little purpose
thirty or forty years longer than you.

I have written as long a letter as yours. I may not write in so lively, or so
polite a style as my niece: But I think I have all the argument on my side: And
you will vastly oblige me, if you will show me, by your compliance with all our
desires, that you think so too. If you do not, you must not expect an advocate,
or even a friend, in me, dearly as I love you. For then I shall be sorry to be
called

Your Uncle, ANTONY HARLOWE.
Tuesday, Two in the morning. Postscript.
You must send me no more letters: But a compliable one you may send. But I
need not have forbid you; for I am sure, this, by fair argument, is
unanswerable: I know it is. I have written day and night, I may say, ever since
Sunday morning, only church-time, or the like of that: But this is the last, I
can tell you, from

A. H.




LETTER XXXIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Thursday, March 16.
HAVING met with such bad success in my application to those of my own family,
I have taken a step that will surprise you. It is no other than writing a
letter to Mr. Solmes himself. I sent it; and have his answer. He had certainly
help in it. For I have seen a letter of his; as indifferently worded, as poorly
spelt. Yet the superscription is of his dictating, I dare say; for he is a
formal wretch. With these, I shall enclose one from my brother to me, on
occasion of mine to Mr. Solmes. I did think that it was possible to discourage
this man from proceeding; and that would have answered all my wishes. It was
worth the trial. But you will see nothing will do. My brother has taken his
measures too securely.

To ROGER SOLMES, Esquire
Wednesday, Mar. 15. SIR,
YOU will wonder to receive a letter from me, and more still at the uncommon
subject of it. But the necessity of the case will justify me, at least in my
own apprehension; and I shall therefore make no other apology for it.

When you first came acquainted with my father's family, you found the writer
of This one of the happiest creatures in the world; beloved by the best and
most indulgent of parents, and rejoicing in the kind favor of two affectionate
uncles, and in the esteem of every one.

But how is this happy scene now changed! -- You was pleased to cast a
favorable eye upon me. You addressed yourself to my friends: Your proposals
were approved of by them; approved of without consulting me; as if my choice
and happiness were of the least signification. Those who had a right to all
reasonable obedience from me, insisted upon it without reserve. I had not the
felicity to think as they did; almost the first time my sentiments differed
from theirs. I besought them to indulge me in a point so important to my future
happiness: But, alas, in vain! And then (for I thought it was but honest) I
told you my mind; and even that my affections were engaged. But, to my
mortification, and surprise, you persisted, and still persist.

The consequence of all is too grievous for me to repeat: You, who have such
free access to the rest of the family, know it too well; too well you know it,
either for the credit of your own generosity, or for my reputation. I am used,
on your account, as I never before was used, and never before was thought to
deserve to be used; and this was the hard, the impossible condition of their
returning favor, that I must prefer a man to all others, that of all others I
cannot prefer.

Thus distressed, and made unhappy, and all for your sake, and through your cruel
perseverance, I write, Sir, to demand of you the peace of mind you have robbed
me of: To demand of you the Love of so many dear friends, of which you have
deprived me; and, if you have the generosity that should distinguish a man, and
a gentleman, to adjure you not to continue an address that has been attended
with such cruel effects to the creature you profess to esteem.

If you really value me, as my friends would make me believe, and as you have
declared you do, must it not be a mean and selfish value? A value that can have
no merit with the unhappy object of it, because it is attended with effects so
grievous to her? It must be for your own sake only, not for mine. And, even in
this point, you must be mistaken; for would a prudent man wish to marry one who
has not a heart to give? Who cannot esteem him? Who therefore must prove a bad
wife? -- And how cruel would it be to make a poor creature a bad wife, whose
pride it would be to make a good one?

If I am capable of judging, our tempers and inclinations are vastly different.
Any other of my sex will make you happier than I can. The treatment I meet
with, and the obstinacy, as it is called, with which I support myself under it,
ought to convince you of this; were I not able to give so good a reason for
this my supposed perverseness, as that I cannot consent to marry a man whom I
cannot value.

But if, Sir, you have not so much generosity in your value for me, as to
desist, for my own sake, let me conjure you, by the regard due to yourself, and
to your own future happiness, to discontinue your suit, and place your
affections on a worthier object: For why should you make me miserable, and
yourself not happy? By this means you will do all that is now in your power, to
restore me to the affection of my friends; and, if That can be, it will leave
me in as happy a state as you found me. You need only to say, That you see
there are no HOPES, as you will perhaps complaisantly call it, of succeeding
with me ( -- And indeed, Sir, there cannot be a greater truth than this --) and
that you will therefore no more think of me; but turn your thoughts another way.

Your compliance with this request, will lay me under the highest obligation to
your generosity, and make me ever

Your well-wisher, and humble servant, CLARISSA HARLOWE.


To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
These most humbly present. Thursday, March 16. Dearest Miss,
YOUR letter has had a very contrary effect upon me, to what you seem to have
expected from it. It has doubly convinced me of the excellency of your mind,
and the honor of your disposition. Call it selfish, or what you please, I must
persist in my suit; and happy shall I be, if by patience and perseverance, and
a steady and unalterable devoir, I may at last overcome the difficulty laid in
my way.

As your good parents, your uncles, and other friends, are absolutely
determined you shall never have Mr. Lovelace, if they can help it; and as I
presume no other person is in the way; I will contentedly wait the issue of
this matter. And, forgive me, dearest Miss; but a person should sooner persuade
me to give up to him my estate, as an instance of my generosity, because he
could not be happy without it, than I would a much more valuable treasure, to
promote the felicity of another, and make his way easier to circumvent myself.

Pardon me, dear Miss, but I must persevere, though I am sorry you suffer on my
account, as you are pleased to think; for I never before saw the Lady I could
love: And while there is any hope, and that you remain undisposed of to some
other happier man, I must and will be

Your faithful, and obsequious admirer, ROGER SOLMES.


Mr. JAMES HARLOWE, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Thursday, March 16.
WHAT a fine whim you took into your head, to write a letter to Mr. Solmes, to
persuade him to give up his pretensions to you! -- Of all the pretty romantic
flights you have delighted in, this was certainly one of the most
extraordinary. But to say nothing of what fires us all with indignation against
you (your owning your prepossession in a villain's favor, and your
impertinence to me and your sister, and your uncles; one of which has given it
you home, child); How can you lay at Mr. Solmes's door, the usage you so
bitterly complain of? -- You know, little fool, as you are, that it is your
fondness for Lovelace that has brought upon you all these things; and which
would have happened, whether Mr. Solmes had honored you with his addresses or
not.

As you must needs know This to be true, consider, pretty, witty Miss, if your
fond lovesick heart can let you consider, what a fine figure all your
expostulations with us, and charges upon Mr. Solmes, make! -- With what
propriety do you demand of him to restore to you your former happiness, as you
call it, and merely call it, for if you thought our favor so, you would
restore it to yourself; since it is yet in your own power to do so. Therefore,
Miss Pert, none of your pathetics, except in the right place. Depend upon it,
whether you have Mr. Solmes, or not, you shall never have your heart's delight,
the vile rake Lovelace, if our parents, if our uncles, if I, can hinder it. No!
you fallen angel, you shall not give your father and mother such a son, nor me
such a brother, in giving yourself that profligate wretch for a husband. And so
set your heart at rest, and lay aside all thoughts of him, if ever you expect
forgiveness, reconciliation, or a kind opinion, from any of your family; but
especially from him, who, at present, styles himself

Your Brother, JAMES HARLOWE.
P. S. I know your knack at letter-writing. If you send me an answer to this,
I Will return it unopen'd, for I will not argue with your perverseness in so plain a
case -- Only once for all, I was willing to put you right as to Mr. Solmes;
whom I think to blame to trouble his head about you.




LETTER XXXIV. Mr. LOVELACE, To JOHN BELFORD, Esquire
Friday, March 17.
I Receive, with great pleasure, the early and cheerful assurances of your
loyalty and love. And let our principal and most trusty friends named in my
last know that I do.

I would have thee, Jack, come down, as soon as thou can. I believe I shall
not want the others so soon. Yet they may come down to Lord M's. I will be
there, if not to receive them, to satisfy my Lord, that there is no new
mischief in hand, which will require his second intervention.

For thyself, thou must be constantly with me: Not for my security: The family
dare do nothing but bully: They bark only at distance: But for my
entertainment: That thou may, from the Latin and the English Classics, keep
my lovesick soul from drooping.

Thou had best come to me here, in thy old corporal's coat; thy servant out
of livery; and to be upon a familiar foot with thee, as a distant relation, to
be provided for by thy interest above; I mean not in heaven, thou may be
sure. Thou will find me at a little alehouse; they call it an inn; The
White-Hart; most terribly wounded (but by the weather only) the sign: -- In a
sorry village; within five miles from Harlowe-Place. Everybody knows
Harlowe-Place -- For, like Versailles, it is sprung up from a dunghill, within
every elderly person's remembrance: Every poor body, particularly, knows it:
But that only for a few years past, since a certain angel has appeared there
among the sons and daughters of men.

The people here, at the Heart, are poor, but honest; and have gotten it into
their heads, that I am a man of quality in disguise; and there is no reining-in
their officious respect. There is a pretty little smirking daughter; seventeen
six days ago: I call her my Rose-bud: Her grandmother (for there is no mother),
a good neat old woman, as ever filled a wicker-chair in a chimney-corner, has
besought me to be merciful to her.

This is the right way with me. Many and many a pretty rogue had I spared, whom
I did not spare, had my power been acknowleged, and my mercy been in time
implored. But the Debellare superbos should be my motto, were I to have a new
one.

This simple chit, (for there is a simplicity in her thou will be highly
pleased with: All humble; all officious; all innocent -- I love her for her
humility, her officiousness, and even for her innocence) will be pretty
amusement to thee; while I combat with the weather, and dodge and creep about
the walls and purlieus of Harlowe-Place. Thou will see in her mind, all that
her superiors have been taught to conceal, in order to render themselves less
natural, and more undelightful.

But I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would not permit myself to do, for
the world -- I charge thee, that thou do not) crop my Rose-bud. She is the only
flower of fragrance, that has blown in this vicinage for ten years past; or
will for ten years to come: For I have looked backward to the have-been's, and
forward to the will-be's; having but too much leisure upon my hands in my
present waiting.

I never was so honest for so long together since my matriculation. It behooves
me so to be -- Some way or other, my recess may be found out; and it will then
be thought that my Rose-bud has attracted me. A report in my favor, from
simplicities so amiable, may establish me; for the grandmother's relation to my
Rose-bud may be sworn to: And the father is an honest poor man: Has no joy, but
in his Rose-bud. -- O Jack! spare thou therefore (for I shall leave thee often
alone; spare thou) my Rose-bud! -- Let the rule I never departed from, but it
cost me a long regret, be observed to my Rose-bud! Never to ruin a poor girl,
whose simplicity and innocence was all she had to trust to; and whose fortunes
were too low to save her from the rude contempts of worse minds than her own,
and from an indigence extreme: Such an one will only pine in secret; and at
last, perhaps, in order to refuge herself from slanderous tongues and
virulence, be induced to tempt some guilty stream, or seek an end in the
knee-incircling garter, that, peradventure, was the first attempt of abandoned
Love. -- No defiances will my Rose-bud breathe; no self-dependent,
thee-doubting watchfulness (indirectly challenging thy inventive machinations
to do their worst), will she assume. Unsuspicious of her danger, the lamb's
throat will hardly shun thy knife! -- O be not thou the butcher of my lambkin!

The less be thou so, for the reason I am going to give thee -- The gentle
heart is touched by Love! Her soft bosom heaves with a passion she has not yet
found a name for. I once caught her eye following a young carpenter, a widow
neighbor's son, living (to speak in her dialect) at the little white-house
over the way: A gentle youth he also seems to be, about three years older than
herself: Play-mates from infancy, till his eighteenth and her fifteenth year,
furnished a reason for a greater distance in show, while their hearts gave a
better for their being nearer than ever: For I soon perceived the Love
reciprocal: A scrape and a bow at first seeing his pretty mistress; turning
often to salute her following eye; and, when a winding lane was to deprive him
of her sight, his whole body turned round, his hat more reverently d'off'd,
than before. This answered (for, unseen, I was behind her) by a low courtesy,
and a sigh, that Johnny was too far off to hear! -- Happy Whelp! said I to
myself! -- I withdrew; and in tript my Rose-bud, as if satisfied with the dumb
show, and wishing nothing beyond it.

I have examined the little heart: She has made me her confident: She owns, she
could love Johnny Barton very well: And Johnny Barton has told her, He could
love her better than any maiden he ever saw -- But, alas! it must not be
thought of. Why not be thought of? -- She don't know! -- And then she sighed:
But Johnny has an aunt, who will give him an hundred pounds, when his time is
out; and her father cannot give her but a few things, or so, to set her out
with: And though Johnny's mother says, she knows not where Johnny would have a
prettier, or notabler wife, yet -- And then she sighed again -- What signifies
talking? -- I would not have Johnny be unhappy, and poor for me! -- For what
good would that do me, you know, Sir!

What would I give ( -- By my soul, my angel will indeed reform me, if her
friends implacable folly ruin us not both! -- What would I give) to have so
innocent, and so good a heart, as either my Rose-bud's, or Johnny's!

I have a confounded mischievous one -- by nature too, I think! -- A good
motion now-and-then rises from it: But it dies away presently -- A love of
intrigue! -- An invention for mischief! -- A triumph in subduing! -- Fortune
encouraging and supporting! -- And a constitution -- What signifies palliating?
But I believe I had been a rogue, had I been a plough-boy.

But the devil's in this sex! Eternal misguiders! Who, that has once
trespassed, ever recovered his integrity? And yet where there is not virtue,
which nevertheless we free-livers are continually plotting to destroy, what is
there even in the ultimate of our wishes with them? -- Preparation and
Expectation are, in a manner, everything: Reflection, indeed, may be
something, if the mind be hardened above feeling the guilt of a past trespass:
But the Fruition, what is there in that? And yet, That being the end, nature
will not be satisfied without it.

See what grave reflections an innocent subject will produce! It gives me some
pleasure to think, that it is not out of my power to reform: But then, Jack, I
am afraid I must keep better company, than I do at present -- For we certainly
harden one another. But be not cast down, my boy; there will be time enough to
give thee, and all thy brethren, warning to choose another leader: And I fansy
thou will be the man.

Mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very capital
enormity, to do some good, by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a pretty
deal indebted on that score, I intend, before I leave these parts (successfully
shall I leave them, I hope, or I shall be tempted to do double the mischief by
way of revenge, though not to my Rose-bud any), to join an hundred pounds to
Johnny's aunt's hundred pounds, to make one innocent couple happy. -- I repeat,
therefore, and for half-a-dozen more therefores, spare thou my Rose-bud.

An interruption: -- Another letter anon; and both shall go together.

LETTER XXXV. Mr. LOVELACE, To JOHN BELFORD, Esquire.
I HAVE found out by my watchful Spy almost as many of my charmer's motions, as
those of the rest of her relations. It delights me to think how the rascal is
caressed by the uncles and nephew; and let into their secrets; yet proceeds all
the time by my line of direction. I have charged him, however, on forfeiture of
his present weekly stipend, and my future favor, to take care, that neither my
beloved, or any of the family, suspect him: I have told him, that he may indeed
watch her egresses and regresses; but that only to keep off other servants from
her paths; yet not to be seen by her himself.

The dear creature has tempted him, he told them, with a bribe (which she never
offered), to convey a letter (which she never wrote) to Miss How; he believes,
with one enclosed (perhaps to me): But he declined it: And he begged they would
take no notice of it to her. This brought him a stingy shilling; great
applause; and an injunction followed it to all the servants, for the strictest
look-out, lest she should contrive some way to send it -- And, about an hour
after, an order was given him to throw himself in her way; and (expressing his
concern for denying her request) to tender his service to her, and to bring
them her letter: Which it will be proper for him to report, that she has
refused to give him.

Now see thou not, how many good ends this contrivance answers?

In the first place, The Lady is secured by it, against her own knowledge, in
the liberty allowed her of taking her private walks in the garden: For this
attempt has confirmed them in their belief, that now they have turned off her
maid, she has no way to send a letter out of the house: If she had, she would
not have run the risque of tempting a fellow who had not been in her secret: So
that she can prosecute, unsuspectedly, her correspondence with me, and Miss
How.

In the next place, It will afford me an opportunity, perhaps, of a private
interview with her, which I am meditating, let her take it as she will; having
found out by my Spy (who can keep off everybody else), that she goes every
morning and evening to a wood-house remote from the dwelling house, under
pretense of visiting and feeding a set of Bantam-poultry, which were produced
from a breed that was her grandfather's, and which for that reason she is very
fond of; as also of some other curious fowls brought from the same place. I
have an account of all her motions here. -- And as she has owned to me in one
of her letters that she corresponds privately with Miss How, I presume it is
by this way.

The interview I am meditating, will produce her consent, I hope, to other
favors of the like kind: For, should she not choose the place I am expecting
to see her in, I can attend her any-where in the rambling, Dutch-taste garden,
whenever she will permit me that honor: For my implement, hight Joseph Leman,
has given me the opportunity of procuring two keys (one of which I have given
him, for reasons good) to the garden-door, which opens to the haunted coppice,
as tradition has made the servants think it; a man having been found hanging in
it about twenty years ago: And Joseph, upon the least notice, will leave it
unbolted.

But I was obliged to give him, previously, my honor, that no mischief shall
happen to any of my adversaries, from this liberty: For the fellow tells me,
that he loves all his masters; and, only that he knows I am a man of honor;
and that my alliance will do credit to the family; and, after prejudices are
overcome, every body will think so; or he would not for the world act the part
he does.

There never was a rogue, who had not a salvo to himself for being so. -- What
a praise to honesty, that every man pretends to it, even at the instant that he
knows he is pursuing the methods that will perhaps prove him a knave to the
whole world, as well as to his own conscience!

But what this stupid family can mean, to make all this necessary, I cannot
imagine. My REVENGE and my LOVE are uppermost by turns. If the latter succeed
not, the gratifying of the former will be my only consolation: And, by All
that is good, they shall feel it; although, for it, I become an exile from my
native country for ever.

I will throw myself into my charmer's presence: I have twice already attempted
it in vain. I shall then see what I may depend upon from her favor. If I
thought I had no prospect of that, I should be tempted to carry her off. --
That would be a rape worthy of a Jupiter!

But all gentle shall be my movements: All respectful, even to reverence, my
address to her! -- Her hand shall be the only witness to the pressure of my lip
-- my trembling lip: I know it will tremble, if I do not bid it tremble. As
soft my sighs, as the sighs of my gentle Rose-bud. By my humility will I invite
her confidence: The loneliness of the place shall give me no advantage: To
dissipate her fears, and engage her rellance upon my honor for the future,
shall be my whole endeavor: But little will I complain of, not at all will I
threaten, those who are continually threatening me: But yet with a view to act
the part of Dryden's lion; To secure my Love, or to let loose my vengeance upon
my hunters.

What though his mighty soul his grief contains?
He meditates revenge, who least complains:
And, like a lion slumbering in his way,
Or sleep dissembling, while he waits his prey,
His fearless foes within his distance draws;
Constrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:
Till at the last, his time for fury found,
He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground:
The prostrate vulgar passes over, and spares;
But, with a lordly rage, his hunters tears.
LETTER XXXVI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Sat. night, Mar. 18.
I HAVE been frighted out of my wits -- Still am in a manner out of breath. --
Thus occasioned -- I went down, under the usual pretense, in hopes to find
something from you. Concerned at my disappointment, I was returning from the
woodhouse, when I heard a rustling, as of somebody behind a stack of wood. I
was extremely surprised: But still more, to behold a man coming from behind the
furthermost stack. O thought I, at that moment, the sin of a prohibited
correspondence!

In the same point of time that I saw him, he besought me, not to be frighted:
And, still nearer approaching me, threw open a horseman's coat: And who should
it be but Mr. Lovelace! I could not scream out (yet attempted to scream, the
moment I saw a man; and again, when I saw who it was) For I had no voice: And
had I not caught hold of a prop, which supported the old roof, I should have
sunk.

I had hitherto, as you know, kept him at distance: And now, as I recovered
myself, judge of my first emotions, when I recollected his character from every
mouth of my family; his enterprising temper; and found myself alone with him,
in a place so near a bye-lane, and so remote from the house.

But his respectful behavior soon dissipated these fears, and gave me others,
lest we should be seen together, and information of it given to my brother: The
consequences of which, I could readily think, would be, if not further
mischief, an imputed assignation, a stricter confinement, a forfeited
correspondence with you, my beloved friend, and a pretense for the most violent
compulsion: And neither the one set of reflections, nor the other, acquitted
him to me for his bold intrusion.

As soon therefore as I could speak, I expressed with the greatest warmth my
displeasure; and told him, that he cared not how much he exposed me to the
resentments of all my friends, provided he could gratify his own impetuous
humor; and I commanded him to leave the place that moment: And was hurrying
from him; when he threw himself in the way at my feet, beseeching my stay for
one moment; declaring, that he suffered himself to be guilty of this rashness,
as I thought it, to avoid one much greater: -- For, in short, he could not bear
the hourly insults he received from my family, with the thoughts of having so
little interest in my favor, that he could not promise himself, that his
patience and forbearance would be attended with any other issue, than to lose
me for ever, and be triumphed over and insulted upon it.

This man, you know, has very ready knees. You have said, that he ought, in
small points, frequently to offend, on purpose to show what an address he is
master of.

He run on, expressing his apprehensions, that a temper so gentle and obliging,
as he said mine was, to everybody but him (and a dutifulness so exemplary
inclining me to do my part to others, whether they did theirs or not by me),
would be wrought upon in favor of a man set up in part to be revenged upon
myself, for my grandfather's envied distinction of me; and in part to be
revenged upon him, for having given life to one, who would have taken his; and
now sought to deprive him of hopes dearer to him than life.

I told him, he might be assured, that the severity and ill-usage I met with
would be far from effecting the intended end: That although I could, with great
sincerity, declare for a Single Life, which had always been my choice; and
particularly, that if ever I married, if they would not insist upon the man I
had an aversion to, it should not be with the man they disliked --

He interrupted me here: He hoped, I would forgive him for it; but he could not
help expressing his great concern, that, after so many instances of his
passionate and obsequious devotion --

And pray Sir, said I, let me interrupt you in my turn: -- Why don't you
assert, in still plainer words, the obligation you have laid me under by this
your boasted devotion? Why don't you let me know, in terms as high as your
implication, that a perseverance I have not wished for, which has set all my
relations at variance with me, is a merit, that throws upon me the guilt of
ingratitude, for not answering it as you seem to expect?

I must forgive him, he said, if he, who pretended only to a comparative merit
(and otherwise thought no man living could deserve me), had presumed to hope
for a greater share in my favor, than he had hitherto met with, when such men
as Mr. Symmes, Mr. Wyerley, and now, lastly, so vile a reptile as this Solmes,
however discouraged by myself, were made his competitors. As to the
perseverance I mentioned, it was impossible for him not to persevere: But I
must needs know, that were he not in being, the terms Solmes had proposed were
such, as would have involved me in the same difficulties with my relations that
I now labored under. He therefore took the liberty to say, that my favor to
him, far from increasing those difficulties, would be the readiest way to
extricate me from them. They had made it impossible (he told me, with too much
truth) to oblige them any way, but by sacrificing myself to Solmes. They were
well apprised besides of the difference between the two; one, whom they hoped
to manage as they pleased; the other, who could and would protect me from every
insult; and who had natural prospects much superior to my brother's foolish
views, of a title.

How comes this man to know so well all our foibles? But I more wonder, how he
came to have a notion of meeting me in this place!

I was very uneasy to be gone; and the more as the night came on apace. But
there was no getting from him, till I had heard a great deal more of what he
had to say.

As he hoped, that I would one day make him the happiest man in the world, he
assured me, that he had so much regard for my fame, that he would be as far
from advising any step that were likely to cast a shade upon my reputation,
(although That step were to be ever so much in his own favor) as I would be to
follow such advice. But since I was not to be permitted to live single, he
would submit it to my consideration, whether I had any way but one to avoid the
intended violence to my inclinations: My father so jealous of his authority:
Both my uncles in my father's way of thinking: My cousin Morden at a distance:
My uncle and aunt Hervey awed into insignificance, was his word: My brother and
sister inflaming every one; Solmes's offers captivating: Miss Howe's mother
rather of party with them, for motives respecting example to her own daughter.

And then he asked me, if I would receive a letter from his aunt Lawrance, on
this occasion: For his aunt Sadleir, he said, having lately lost her only
child, hardly looked into the world, or thought of it farther, than to wish him
married, and, preferably to all the women in the world, with me.

To be sure, my dear, there is a great deal in what the man said: -- I may be
allowed to say This, without an imputed glow or throb. -- But I told him,
nevertheless, that although I had great honor for the Ladies he was related to
(for his two aunts in particular), yet I should not choose to receive a letter
on a subject, that had a tendency to promote an end I was far from intending to
promote: That it became me, ill as I was treated at present, to hope
everything, to bear everything, and to try everything: When my father saw my
steadfastness, and that I would die rather than have Mr. Solmes, he would
perhaps recede. --

Interrupting me, he represented the unlikelihood there was of that, from the
courses they had entered upon; which he thus enumerated: -- Their engaging Mrs.
How against me, in the first place, as a person I might have thought to fly
to, if pushed to desperation: -- My brother continually buzzing in my father's
ears, that my cousin Morden would soon arrive, and then would insist upon
giving me possession of my grandfather's estate, in pursuance of the will;
which would render me independent of my father: -- Their disgraceful
confinement of me: -- Their dismissing so suddenly my servant, and setting my
sister's over me: -- Their engaging my mamma, contrary to her own judgment,
against me: These, he said, were all so many flagrant proofs, that they would
stick at nothing to carry their point; and were what made him inexpressibly
uneasy.

He appealed to me, whether ever I knew my papa recede from any resolution he
had once fixed; especially, if he thought either his prerogative, or his
authority, concerned in the question. His acquaintance with our family, he
said, enabled him to give several instances (but they would be too grating to
me) of an arbitrariness that had few examples even in the families of princes:
An arbitrariness, which the most excellent of women, my mamma, too severely
experienced.

He was proceeding, as I thought, with reflections of this sort; and I angrily
told him, I would not permit my father to be reflected upon; adding, That his
severity to me, however unmerited, was not a warrant for me to dispense with my
duty to him.

He had no pleasure, he said, in urging any thing that could be so construed;
for, however well warranted he was to make such reflections, from the
provocations they were continually giving him, he knew how offensive to me any
liberties of this sort would be. -- And yet he must own, that it was painful to
him, who had youth and passions to be allowed for, as well as others; and who
had always valued himself upon speaking his mind; to curb himself, under such
treatment. Nevertheless, his consideration for me would make him confine
himself in his observations, to facts, that were too flagrant, and too openly
avowed, to be disputed. It could not therefore justly displease, he would
venture to say, if he made this natural inference from the premises, That if
such were my father's behavior to a wife, who disputed not the imaginary
prerogative he was so unprecedently fond of asserting, what room had a daughter
to hope, he would depart from an authority he was so earnest, and so much more
concerned, to maintain? family-interests at the same time engaging; an
aversion, however causelessly conceived, stimulating; my brother's and sister's
resentments and selfish views cooperating; and my banishment from their
presence depriving me of all personal plea or entreaty in my own favor.

How unhappy, my dear, that there is but too much reason for these
observations, and for this inference; made, likewise, with more coolness and
respect to my family than one would have apprehended from a man so much
provoked, and of passions so high, and generally thought uncontrollable! --

Will you not question me about throbs and glows, if, from such instances of a
command over his fiery temper, for my sake, I am ready to infer, that were my
friends capable of a reconciliation with him, he might be affected by arguments
apparently calculated for his present and future good?

He represented to me, that my present disgraceful confinement was known to all
the world: That neither my sister nor brother scrupled to represent me as an
obliged and favored child, in a state of actual rebellion: -- That,
nevertheless, everybody who knew me was ready to justify me for an aversion to
a man, whom everybody thought utterly unworthy of me, and more fit for my
sister: That unhappy as he was, in not having been able to make any greater
impression upon me in his favor, all the world gave me to him: -- Nor was
there but one objection made to him, by his very enemies (his birth, his
fortunes, his prospects all unexceptionable, and the latter splendid); and
that, he thanked God, and my example, was in a fair way of being removed for
ever: Since he had seen his error, and was heartily sick of the courses he had
followed; which, however, were far less enormous than malice and envy had
represented them to be. But of This he should say the less, as it were much
better to justify himself by his actions, than by the most solemn
asseverations, and promises: And then complimenting my person, he assured me
(for that he always loved virtue, although he had not followed its rules, as he
ought), that he was still more captivated with the graces of my mind: And would
frankly own, that till he had the honor to know me, he had never met with an
inducement sufficient to enable him to overcome an unhappy kind of prejudice to
matrimony; which had made him before impenetrable to the wishes and
recommendations of all his relations.

You see, my dear, he scruples not to speak of himself, as his enemies speak of
him. I cannot say, but his openness in these particulars gives a credit to his
other professions. I should easily, I think, detect an hypocrite: And this man
particularly, who is said to have allowed himself in great liberties, were he
to pretend to instantaneous lights and convictions -- at his time of life too:
Habits, I am sensible, are not so easily changed. You have always joined with
me in remarking, that he will speak his mind with freedom, even to a degree of
unpoliteness sometimes; and that his very treatment of my family is a proof
that he cannot make a mean court to any body for interest sake. -- What pity,
where there are such laudable traces, that they should have been so mired, and
choked up, as I may say! -- We have heard, that the man's head is better than
his heart: But do you really think Mr. Lovelace can have a very bad heart? Why
should not there be something in blood in the human creature, as well as in the
ignobler animals? None of his family are exceptionable -- but himself, indeed.
The Ladies characters are admirable. But I shall incur the imputation I wish to
avoid. Yet what a look of censoriousness does it carry, to take one to task for
doing that justice, and making those charitable inferences in favor of one
particular person, which one ought without scruple to do, and to make, in the
behalf of any other man living?

He then again pressed, that I would receive a letter from his aunt Lawrance of
offered protection. He said, that people of birth stood a little too much upon
punctilio; as people of virtue also did: ( -- But indeed Birth, worthily lived
up to, was Virtue; Virtue, Birth; the inducements to a decent punctilio the
same; the origin of both, one [How came this notion from him!]) --: Else, his
aunt would write to me: But she would be willing to be first appris'd, that her
offer would be well received -- as it would have the appearance of being made
against the liking of one part of my family; and which nothing would induce her
to make, but the degree of unworthy persecution which I actually labored
under, and had further reason to apprehend.

I told him, that, however greatly I thought myself obliged to Lady Betty
Lawrance, if This offer came from herself; yet it was easy to see to what it
led. It might look like vanity in me, perhaps, to say, That this urgency in
him, on this occasion, wore the face of art, in order to engage me into
measures I might not easily extricate myself from. I said, that I should not be
affected by the splendour of even a Royal title. Goodness, I thought, was
Greatness: That the excellent characters of the Ladies of his family weighed
more with me, than the consideration that they were half-sisters to Lord M. and
daughters of an Earl: That he would not have found encouragement from me, had
my friends been consenting to his address, if he had only a mere relative merit
to those Ladies: Since, in that case, the very reasons that made me admire
them, would have been so many objections to their kinsman.

I then assured him, that it was with infinite concern, that I had found myself
drawn into an epistolary correspondence with him; especially since that
correspondence had been prohibited: -- And the only agreeable use I could think
of making of this unexpected and undesired interview, was, to let him know,
that I should from henceforth think myself obliged to discontinue it. And I
hoped, that he would not have the thought of engaging me to carry it on, by
menacing my relations.

There was light enough to distinguish, that he looked very grave upon this. He
so much valued my free choice, he said, and my unbias'd favor (scorning to set
himself upon a foot with Solmes, in the compulsory methods used in that man's
behalf), that he should hate himself, were he capable of a view of intimidating
me by so very poor a method. But, nevertheless, there were two things to be
considered: First, That the continual outrages he was treated with; the spies
set over him, one of which he had detected; the indignities all his family were
likewise treated with; as also, myself, avowedly in malice to him, or he should
not presume to take upon himself to resent for me, without my leave [The artful
wretch saw he would have lain open here, had he not thus guarded]: All these
considerations called upon him to show a proper resentment: And he would leave
it to me to judge, whether it would be reasonable for him, as a man of spirit,
to bear such insults, if it were not for my sake. I would be pleased to
consider, in the next place, whether the situation I was in (a prisoner in my
father's house, and my whole family determined to compel me to marry a man
unworthy of me; and that speedily, and whether I consented or not) admitted of
delay in the preventive measures he was desirous to put me upon, in the last
resort only. Nor was there a necessity, he said, if I were actually in Lady
Betty's protection, that I should be his, if I should see any thing objectible
in his conduct, afterward.

But what would the world conclude would be the end, I asked him, were I to
throw myself into the protection of his friends, but that it was with such a
view?

And what less did the world think now, he asked, than that I was confined that
I might not? You are to consider, Madam, you have not now an option; and to
whom it is owing that you have not; and that you are in the power of those
(Parents why should I call them?) who are determined, that you shall not have
an option. All I propose is, that you will embrace such a protection; -- but
not till you have tried every way, to avoid the necessity for it.

And give me leave to say, that if a correspondence, on which I have founded
all my hopes, is, at this critical conjuncture, to be broken off; and if you
are resolved not to be provided against the worst; it must be plain to me, that
you will at last yield to That worst -- Worst to me only -- It cannot be to you
-- And then! (and he put his hand clenched to his forehead) how shall I bear
the supposition? -- Then will you be That Solmes's! -- But, by all that is
Sacred, neither he, nor your brother, nor your uncles, shall enjoy their
triumph: -- Perdition seize my soul, if they shall!

The man's vehemence frightened me: Yet, in resentment, I would have left him;
but, throwing himself at my feet again, Leave me not thus, I beseech you,
dearest Madam, leave me not thus, in despair. I kneel not, repenting of what I
have vowed in such a case as That I have supposed. I re-vow it, at your feet!
-- And so he did. But think not it is by way of menace, or to intimidate you to
favor me. If your heart inclines you [and then he arose] to obey your father
(your brother, rather), and to have Solmes, although I shall avenge myself on
those who have insulted me, for their insults to myself and family; yet will I
tear out my heart from This bosom (if possible, with my own hands), were it to
scruple to give up its ardors to a woman capable of such a preference.

I told him, that he talked to me in very high language; but he might assure
himself, that I never would have Mr. Solmes (Yet that this I said not in favor
to him): And I had declared as much to my relations, were there not such a man
as himself in the world.

Would I declare, that I would still honor him with my correspondence? -- He
could not bear, that, hoping to obtain greater instances of my favor, he
should forfeit the only one he had to boast of.

I bid him forbear rashness or resentment to any of my family, and I would, for
some time at least, till I saw what issue my present trials were likely to
have, proceed with a correspondence, which, nevertheless, my heart condemned.
--

And his spirit him, the impatient creature said, interrupting me, for bearing
what he did; when he considered, that the necessity of it was imposed upon him;
not by my will; for then he would bear it cheerfully, and a thousand times
more; but by creatures -- And there he stopped.

I told him plainly, that he might thank himself (whose indifferent character,
as to morals, had given such a handle against him) for all. It was but just,
that a man should be spoken evil of, who set no value upon his own reputation.

He offered to vindicate himself: But I told him, I would judge him by his own
rule -- by his actions, not by his professions.

Were not his enemies, he said, so powerful, and so determined; and had they
not already shown their intentions in such high acts of even cruel compulsion;
but would leave me to my choice, or to my desire of living single; he would
have been content to undergo a twelvemonth's probation, or more: But he was
confident, that one month would either complete all their purposes, or render
them abortive: And I best knew what hopes I had of my father's receding: He did
not know him, if I had any.

I said, I would try every method, that either my duty or my influence upon any
of them should suggest, before I would put myself into any other protection.
And, if nothing else would do, would resign the envied estate; and that I dared
to say would.

He was contented, he said, to abide that issue. He should be far from wishing
me to embrace any other protection, but, as he had frequently said, in the last
necessity. But, dearest creature, said he, catching my hand with ardor, and
pressing it to his lips, if the yielding up that estate will do -- Resign it;
-- and be mine -- And I will corroborate, with all my soul, your resignation!
-- This was not ungenerously said, my dear! But what will not these men say to
obtain belief, and a power over one?

I made many efforts to go; and now it was so dark, that I began to have great
apprehensions -- I cannot say from his behavior: Indeed, he has a good deal
raised himself in my opinion, by the personal respect, even to reverence, which
he paid me during the whole conference: For although he flamed out once, upon a
supposition that Solmes might succeed, it was upon a supposition that would
excuse passion, if any thing could, you know, in a man pretending to love with
fervor; although it was so levelled, that I could not avoid resenting it.

He recommended himself to my favor at parting, with great earnestness, yet
with as great submission; not offering to condition any thing with me; although
he hinted his wishes for another meeting: Which I forbid him ever attempting
again in the same place. -- And I Will own to you, from whom I should be really
blameable to conceal any thing, that his arguments (drawn from the disgraceful
treatment I meet with) of what I am to expect, make me begin to apprehend, that
I shall be under an obligation to be either the one man's or the other's -- And
if so, I fancy I shall not incur your blame, were I to say, which of the two it
must be. You have said, which it must not be. But, O my dear, the Single Life
is by far the most eligible to me: Indeed it is. And I yet hope to obtain the
blessing of making that option.

I got back without observation: But the apprehension that I should not, gave
me great uneasiness; and made me begin my letter in a greater flutter than he
gave me cause to be in, except at the first seeing him; for then, indeed, my
spirits failed me; and it was a particular felicity, that, in such a place, in
such a fright, and alone with him, I fainted not away.

I should add, That having reproached him with his behavior the last Sunday at
church, he solemnly assured me, That it was not what had been represented to
me: That he did not expect to see me there: But hoped to have an opportunity to
address himself to my father, and to be permitted to attend him home. But that
the good Dr. Lewin had persuaded him not to attempt speaking to any of the
family, at that time; observing to him the emotions his presence had put
everybody in. He intended no pride, or haughtiness of behavior, he assured
me; and that the attributing such to him was the effect of that ill will which
he had the mortification to find insuperable: Adding, That when he bowed to my
mamma, it was a compliment he intended generally to every one in the pew, as
well as to her, whom he sincerely venerated.

If he may be believed (and I should think he would not have come purposely to
defy my family, yet expect favor from me), one may see, my dear, the force of
hatred, which misrepresents all things: -- Yet why should Shorey (except
officiously to please her principals) make a report in his disfavour? He told
me, That he would appeal to Dr. Lewin for his justification on this head;
adding, that the whole conversation between them turned upon his desire to
attempt to reconcile himself to us all, in the face of the Church; and, upon
the Doctor's endeavoring to dissuade him from making such a public overture,
till he knew how it would be accepted. But, alas! I am debarred from seeing
that good man, or any one who would advise me what to do in my present
difficult situation! --

I fancy, my dear, however, that there would hardly be a guilty person in the
world, were each suspected or accused person to tell his or her own story, and
be allowed any degree of credit.

I have written a very long letter. To be so particular as you require, in
subjects of conversation, it is impossible to be short. I will add to it only
the assurance, That I am, and ever will be,

Your affectionate and faithful friend and servant, CL. HARLOWE.
You Will be so good, my dear, as to remember, that the date of your last letter
to me, was the 9th of this instant March.



LETTER XXXVII. Miss HOW, To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Sunday, March 19.
I Beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for having given you occasion to remind
me of the date of my last. I was willing to have before me as much of the
workings of your wise relations as possible; being verily persuaded, that one
side or the other would have yielded by this time: And then, I should have had
some degree of certainty to found my observations upon. And indeed, what can I
write, that I have not already written? -- You know, that I can do nothing but
rave at your stupid persecutors: And That you don't like. I have advised you to
resume your own estate: That you will not do. You cannot bear the thoughts of
having their Solmes: And Lovelace is resolved you shall be his, let who will
say to the contrary. I think you must be either the one man's or the other's.
Let us see what their next step will be. As to Lovelace, while he tells his own
story; having behaved so handsomely on his intrusion in the woodhouse; and
intended so well at Church; who can say, That the man is in the least
blameworthy? -- Wicked people! to combine against so innocent a man! -- But, as
I said, Let us see what their next step will be, and what course you will take
upon it; and then we may be more inlighten'd.

As to your change of style to your uncles, and brother, and sister, since they
were so fond of attributing to you a regard for Lovelace, and would not be
persuaded to the contrary; and since you only strengthened their arguments
against yourself by denying it; you did but just as I would have done, in
giving way to their suspicions; and trying what That would do -- But if -- But
if -- Pray, my dear, indulge me a little -- You yourself think it was necessary
to apologize to me for that change of st^le to them -- And till you will speak
out like a friend to her un- question-able friend, I must teaze you a little --
Let it run, therefore; for it will run --

If, then, there be not a reason for this change of style, which you have not
thought fit to give me, be so good as to watch, as I once before advised you,
how the cause for it will come on: Why should it be permitted to steal upon
you, and you know nothing of the matter?

When a person gets a great cold, he or she puzzles, and studies, how it began;
how he -- she got it: And when that is accounted for, down he -- she sits
contented, and lets it have its course, or takes a sweat, or the like, to get
rid of it, if it be very troublesome. -- So, my dear, before the malady you wot
of, yet wot not of, grows so importunate, as that you must be obliged to sweat
it out, let me advise you to mind how it comes on. For I am persuaded, as
surely as that I am now writing to you, that their indiscreet violence on one
hand, and his insinuating address on the other, if the man be not a greater
fool than any body thinks him, will effectually bring it to This, and do all
his work for him.

But let it -- If it must be Lovelace or Solmes, the choice cannot admit of
debate. -- Yet, if all be true that is reported, I should prefer almost any of
your other lovers to either; unworthy as they also are. But who, indeed, can be
worthy of Miss Clarissa Harlowe?

I wish you don't tax me of harping too much upon one string. I should, indeed,
think myself inexcusable so to do (the rather, as I am so bold, as to imagine
it is a point out of all doubt, from fifty places in your letters, were I to
labor the proof), if you would ingenuously own --

Own what? you will say. Why, my Anna How, I hope, you don't think, that I am
already in love! --

No, to be sure! How can your Anna How have such a thought? -- Love, though so
short a word, has a broad sound with it. What then shall we call it? You have
helped me to a phrase that has a narrower sound with it; but a pretty broad
meaning, nevertheless: A conditional kind of liking! -- that is it. -- O my
friend! Did I not know how much you despise Prudery; and that you are too
young, and too lovely to be a Prude --

But, avoiding such hard names, let me tell you one thing, my dear (which
nevertheless I have told you before); and that is This, That I shall think I
have reason to be highly displeased with you, if, when you write to me, you
endeavor to keep from me any Secret of your heart.

Let me add, That if you would clearly and explicitly tell me, how far Lovelace
has, or has not, a hold in your affections, I could better advise you what to
do, than at present I can. You, who are so famed for prescience, as I may call
it, and than whom no young Lady ever had stronger pretensions to a share of it;
have had, no doubt, reasonings in your heart about him, supposing you were to
be one day his (No doubt but you have had the same in Solmes's case: -- Whence
the ground for the hatred of the one; and of the conditional liking of the
other): Will you tell me, my dear, what you have thought of his best and of his
worst? -- How far eligible for the first; how far rejectible for the last? --
Then weighing both parts in opposite scales, we shall see which is likely to
preponderate; or rather which does preponderate. Nothing less than the knowledge
of the inmost recesses of your heart, can satisfy my love and my friendship.
Surely, you are not afraid to trust yourself with a secret of this nature: If
you are, then you may the more allowably doubt me. But I dare say, you will not
own either: Nor is there, I hope, cause for either.

Be pleased to observe one thing, my dear, that whenever I have given myself
any of those airs of raillery, which have seemed to make you look about you
(when, likewise, your case may call for a more serious turn from a sympathizing
friend), it has not been upon those passages which are written, though perhaps
not intended, with such explicitness (don't be alarmed, my dear!) as leaves one
little cause of doubt: But only when you affect reserve; when you give new
words for common things; when you come with your curiosities, with your
conditional likings, and with your PRUDE-encies (mind how I spell the word) in
a case, that with every other person defies all prudence -- Overt-acts of
treason, all these against the sovereign friendship we have vowed to each
other! --

Remember, that you found me out in a moment. You challenged me. I owned
directly, that there was only my pride between the man and me; for I could not
endure, I told you, to think it in the power of any fellow living to give me a
moment's uneasiness. And then my man, as I have elsewhere said, was not such a
one as yours: So I had reason to impute full as much to my own inconsideration,
as to his power over me: Nay, more. But still more to yours. For you reasoned
me out of the curiosity first; and when the liking was brought to be
conditional -- Why then, you know, I throbb'd no more about him.

O! pray now, as you say, now I have mentioned that my fellow was not such a
charming fellow as yours, let Miss Biddulph, Miss Lloyd, Miss Campion, and me,
have your opinion, how far Figure ought to engage us: With a view to your own
case, however -- Mind that -- as Mr. TO Antony says -- And whether at all, if
the man be vain of it; since, as you observe in a former, that vanity is a
stop-short pride in such a one, that would make one justly doubt the worthiness
of his interior. You, our pattern, so lovely in feature, so graceful in person,
have none of it; and have therefore with the best grace always held, that it is
not excusable even in a woman.

You must know, that this subject was warmly debated among us in our last
conversation, and Miss Lloyd wished me to write to you upon it for your
opinion; to which, in every debated case, we always defered. I hope you will
not be so much engrossed by your more weighty cares, as not to have freedom of
spirits enough to enter upon the task. -- You know how much we all admire your
opinion on such topics; which ever produces something new and instructive, as
you handle the subjects. And pray tell us, to what you think it owing, that
your man seems so careful to adorn that self-adorned person of his; yet so
manages, that one cannot for one's heart think him a coxcomb? -- Let this
question, and the above tasks, divert, and not displease you, my dear. -- One
subject, though ever so important, could never yet ingross your capacious mind.
If they should displease you, you must recollect the many instances of my
impertinence, which you have forgiven, and then say, This is a mad girl: -- But
yet I love her! -- And she is my own

ANNA HOW.

LETTER XXXVIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Monday, March 20.
YOUR last so sensibly affects me, that I must postpone every other
consideration, however weighty, to reply to it: And this I will do very
distinctly, and with all the openness of heart, which our mutual friendship
demands.

But let me observe, in the first place, gratefully observe, That if I have in
fifty passages of my letters given you such undoubted proofs of my value for
Mr. Lovelace, that you have spared me for the sake of my explicitness, it is
acting by me with a generosity worthy of yourself.

But lives the man, think you, who is so very bad, that he does not give even a
doubting mind reason at one time to be better pleased with him, than at
another? And when that reason offers, is it not just to express one's self
accordingly? I would do the man who addresses me as much justice, as if he did
not address me: It has such a look of tyranny, it appears so ungenerous,
methinks, to use a man worse for his respect to one (no other cause for
disrespect occurring), that I would not by any means be that person who should
do so.

But, although I may intend no more than justice, it will, perhaps, be difficult
to hinder those who know the man's views, from construing it as a partial
favor: And especially if the eager-ey'd observer has been formerly touched
herself, and would triumph that her friend had been no more able to escape than
she! -- Noble minds, emulative of perfection (and yet the passion, properly
directed, I do not take to be an im-perfection neither), may be allowed a
little generous envy, I think!

If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it is but a revenge, my
dear, in the soft sense of the word! -- I love, as I have told you, your
pleasantry -- Although at the time, it may pain one a little; yet on
recollection, when one feels in the reproof more of the cautioning friend, than
of the satirizing observer, an ingenuous mind will be all gratitude upon it.
All the business will be This, I shall be sensible of the pain in the present
letter perhaps; but I shall thank you in the next, and ever after.

In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of that
sensibility which you will find above, and perhaps still more, as I proceed. --
You frequently remind me, by the best example, that I must not spare you!

I am not conscious, that I have written any thing of this man, that has not
been more in his dispraise than in his favor. Such is the man, that I think I
must have been faulty, and ought to take myself to account, if I had not: But
if you think otherwise, I will not put you upon laboring the proof, as you
call it! My conduct must then have a faulty appearance at least, and I will
endeavor to rectify it. But of this I assure you, That whatever interpretation
my words were capable of, I intended not any reserve to you. I wrote my heart,
at the time: -- If I had had thoughts of disguising it, or been conscious, that
there was reason for doing so; perhaps I had not given you the opportunity of
remarking upon my curiosity after his relations esteem for me; nor upon my
conditional liking, and suchlike. All I intended by the first, I believe I
honestly told you at the time: To that letter I therefore refer, whether it
make for me, or against me: And by the other, that I might bear in mind, what
it became a person of my sex and character to be and to do, in such an unhappy
situation, where the imputed love is thought an undutiful, and therefore a
criminal, passion; and where the supposed object of it is a man of faulty
morals too. And I am sure you will excuse my desire of appearing at those times
the person I ought to be; had I no other view in it, but to merit the
continuance of your good opinion.

But that I may acquit myself of having reserves -- O, my dear, I must here
break off! --

LETTER XXXIX. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Monday, March 20.
THIS letter will account to you, my dear, for my abrupt breaking off in the
answer I was writing to yours of yesterday; and which, possibly, I shall not be
able to finish, and send you, till tomorrow or next day; having a great deal
to say to the subjects you put to me in it. What I am now to give you are the
particulars of another effort made by my friends, through the good Mrs. Norton.

It seems they had sent to her yesterday, to be here this day, to take their
instructions, and to try what she could do with me. It would, at least, I
suppose they thought, have this effect; To render me inexcusable with her; or
to let her see, that there was no room for the expostulations she had often
wanted to make in my favor to my mamma.

The declaration, that my heart was free, afforded them an argument to prove
obstinacy and perverseness upon me; since it could be nothing else that
governed me in my opposition to their wills, if I had no particular esteem for
another man: And now, that I have given them reason (in order to obviate this
argument) to suppose that I have a preference to another, they are resolved to
carry their schemes into execution as soon as possible. And in order to this,
they sent for This good woman, for whom they know I have even a filial regard.

She found assembled my papa and mamma, my brother and sister, my two uncles,
and my aunt Hervey.

My brother acquainted her with all that had passed since she was last
permitted to see me; with my letters avowing my regard to Mr. Lovelace, as they
all interpreted them; with the substance of their answers to them; and with
their resolutions.

My mamma spoke next; and delivered herself to this effect, as the good woman
told me afterward:

After reciting how many times I had been indulged in my refusals of different
gentlemen; and the pains she had taken with me, to induce me to oblige my whole
family, in one instance out of five or six; and my obstinacy upon it; O my good
Mrs. Norton, said the dear Lady, could you have thought, that my Clarissa and
your Clarissa was capable of so determined an opposition to the will of parents
so indulgent to her? But see what you can do with her. The matter is gone too
far to be receded from, on our parts. Her papa had concluded every thing with
Mr. Solmes, not doubting her compliance. Such noble settlements, Mrs. Norton,
and such advantages to the whole family! -- In short, she has it in her power
to lay an obligation upon us all. Mr. Solmes, knowing she has good principles,
and hoping, by his patience now, and good treatment hereafter, to engage her
gratitude, and by degrees her love, is willing to overlook All! --

[ Overlook all, my dear! Mr. Solmes to overlook all! There Is a word!]

So, Mrs. Norton, if you are convinced, that it is a child's duty to submit to
her parents authority, in the most important point as well as in the least, I
beg you will try your influence over her: I have none. Her papa has none: Her
uncles neither. Although it is her apparent interest to oblige us All; for, on
that condition, her grandfather's estate is not half of what, living and dying,
is purposed to be done for her. If any body can prevail with her, it is you;
and I hope you will heartily enter upon this task with her.

She asked, Whether she was permitted to expostulate with them upon the
occasion, before she came up to me?

My arrogant brother told her, she was sent for to expostulate with his sister,
and not with them. And This, Goody Norton [She is always Goody with him!], you
may tell her, that matters are gone so far with Mr. Solmes, that there is no
going back! -- Of consequence, no room for your expostulation, or hers either.

Be assured of This, Mrs. Norton, said my papa, in an angry tone, that we will
not be baffled by her. We will not appear like fools in This matter, and as if
we had no authority over our own daughter. We will not, in short, be bully'd
out of our child by a cursed rake, who had like to have killed our only son! --
And so she had better make a merit of her obedience: For comply she shall, if I
live; independent as she thinks my father's indiscreet bounty has made her of
me, her father. Indeed since That, she has never been what she was before. An
unjust bequest! -- And it is likely to prosper accordingly! -- But if she marry
that vile Lovelace, I will litigate every shilling with her: Tell her so; and
that the Will may be set aside, and shall.

My uncles joined, with equal heat.

My brother was violent in his declarations.

My sister put in with vehemence, on the same side.

My aunt Hervey was pleased to say, There was no article so proper for parents
to govern in, as This of marriage: And it was very fit, mine should be obliged.

Thus instructed, the good woman came up to me. She told me all that had
passed; and was very earnest with me to comply; and so much justice did she to
the task imposed upon her, that I more than once thought, that her own opinion
went with theirs. But when she saw what an immovable aversion I had to the
man, she lamented with me their determined resolution: And then examined into
the sincerity of my profession, that I would gladly compound with them by
living single: Of this being satisfied, she was so convinced, that this offer
(which would exclude Lovelace effectually) ought to be accepted, that she would
go down, although I told her, it was what I had tendered over-and-over to no
purpose, and undertake to be guaranty for me on that score.

She went accordingly; but soon returned in tears; being used harshly for
urging this alternative: -- They had a right to my obedience upon their own
terms, they said: My proposal was an artifice, only to gain time: Nothing but
marrying Mr. Solmes should do: They had told me so before: They should not be
at rest till it was done; for they knew what an interest Lovelace had in my
heart: I had as good as owned it in my letters to my uncles, and brother, and
sister, although I had most disingenuously declared otherwise to my mamma. I
depended, they said, upon their indulgence, and my own power over them: They
had not banished me their presence, if they did not know that their
consideration for me was greater than mine for them. And they would be obeyed,
or I never should be restored to their favor, let the consequence be what it
would.

My brother thought fit to tell the good woman, that her whining nonsense did
but harden me. There was a perverseness, he said, in female minds, a
Tragedy-pride, that would make a romantic young creature, such a one as me,
risque any thing to obtain pity. I was of an age, and a turn (the insolent
said), to be fond of a lover-like distress: And my grief (which she pleaded)
would never break my heart; it would sooner break That of the best and most
indulgent of mothers. He added, That she might once more go up to me: But that,
if she prevailed not, he should suspect, that the man they all hated had found
a way to attach her to his interest.

Everybody blamed him for this unworthy reflection; which greatly affected the
good woman. But nevertheless he said, and nobody contradicted him, that if she
could not prevail upon her sweet child (as it seems she had fondly called me),
she had best withdraw to her own home, and there tarry till she was sent for;
and so leave her sweet child to her father's management.

Sure nobody ever had so insolent, so hard-hearted a brother, as I have! So
much resignation to be expected from me! So much arrogance, and to so good a
woman, and of so fine an understanding, to be allowed in him!

She nevertheless told him, that however she might be ridiculed for speaking of
the sweetness of my disposition, she must take upon her to say, that there
never was a sweeter in the sex: And that she had ever found, that by mild
methods, and gentleness, I might at any time be prevailed upon, even in points
against my own judgment and opinion.

My aunt Hervey hereupon said, it was worth while to reflect upon what Mrs.
Norton said: And that she had sometimes allowed herself to doubt, whether I had
been begun with by such methods as generous tempers are only to be influenced
by, in cases where their hearts are supposed to be opposite to the will of
their friends.

She had both my brother and sister upon her for This: Who referred to my
mamma, whether she had not treated me with an indulgence that had hardly any
example?

My mamma said, She must own, that no indulgence had been wanting from her: But
she must needs say, and had often said it, that the reception I met with on my
return from Miss How, and the manner in which the proposal of Mr. Solmes was
made to me (which was such as left nothing to my choice), and before I had had
an opportunity to converse with him, were not what she had by any means
approved of.

She was silenced, you will guess by whom, -- with, My dear! my dear! -- You
have ever something to say, something to palliate, for this rebel of a girl! --
Remember her treatment of you, of me! -- Remember, that the wretch, whom we so
justly hate, would not dare to persist in his purposes, but for her
encouragement of him, and obstinacy to us. -- Mrs. Norton (angrily to her), go
up to her once more -- and if you think gentleness will do -- you have a
commission to be gentle. -- If it will not, never make use of that plea again.

Ay, my good woman, said my mamma, try your force with her. My sister Hervey
and I will go up to her, and bring her down in our hands, to receive her
father's blessing, and assurances of every-body's love, if she will be
prevailed upon: And, in that case, we will all love you the better for your
good offices.

She came up to me, and repeated all these passages with tears: -- But, after
what had passed between us, I told her, that she could not hope to prevail upon
me to comply with measures so wholly my brother's; and so much to my aversion.
-- And then folding me to her maternal bosom, I leave you, my dearest Miss,
said she! -- I leave you, because I must! -- But let me beseech you to do
nothing rashly; nothing unbecoming your character. If all be true that is said,
Mr. Lovelace cannot deserve you. If you can comply, remember it is your duty to
comply. They take not, I own, the right method with so generous a spirit. But
remember, that there would not be any merit in your compliance, if it were not
to be against your own will. Remember also, what is expected from a character
so extraordinary as yours: Remember, it is in your power to unite or disunite
your whole family for ever. Although it should at present be disagreeable to you
to be thus compelled, your prudence, I dare say, when you consider the matter
seriously, will enable you to get over all prejudices against the one, and all
prepossessions in favor of the other: And then the obligation you will lay all
your family under, will be not only meritorious in you, with regard to them,
but in a few months, very probably, highly satisfactory, as well as reputable,
to yourself.

Consider, my dear mamma Norton, said I, only consider, that it is not a small
thing that is insisted upon; nor for a short duration: It is for my Life. --
Consider too, that all This is owing to an overbearing brother, who governs
everybody. Consider how desirous I am to oblige them, if a single ^ife, and
breaking all correspondence with the man they hate because my brother hates
him, would do it.

I consider everything, my dearest Miss: And, added to what I have said, do
you only consider, that if, by pursuing your own will, and rejecting theirs,
you should be unhappy, you will be deprived of all that consolation which those
have, who have been directed by their parents, although the event prove not
answerable to their wishes.

I must go, repeated she; -- your brother will say (and she wept), that I
harden you by my whining nonsense. It Is indeed hard, that so much regard should
be paid to the humors of one child; and so little to the inclination of
another. But let me repeat, that it is your duty to acquiesce, if you can
acquiesce: Your father has given your brother's schemes his sanction; and they
are now his. Mr. Lovelace, I doubt, is not a man that will justify your choice,
so much as he will their dislike. It is too easy to see that your brother has a
view in discrediting you with all your friends, with your uncles in particular:
But for that very reason, you should comply, if possible, in order to
disconcert his ungenerous measures. I will pray for you; and that is all I can
do for you. I must now go down, and make a report, that you are resolved never
to have Mr. Solmes: -- Must I? -- Consider, Miss, -- Must I?

Indeed you must! -- But of This I do assure you, that I will do nothing to
disgrace the part you have had in my education. I will bear everything, that
shall be short of forcing my hand into his, who never can have any share in my
heart. I will try, by patient duty, by humility, to overcome them. But death
will I choose, in any shape, rather than That man.

I dread to go down, said she, with so determined an answer: They will have no
patience with me. -- But let me leave you with one observation, which I beg of
you always to bear in mind: --

'That persons of prudence, and distinguished talents, like yours, seem to be
sprinkled through the world, to give credit, by their example, to Religion and
Virtue. When such persons wilfully err, how great must be the fault! How
ungrateful to that God, who blessed them with such talents! What a loss
likewise to the world! What a wound to Virtue! But this, I hope, will never be
to be said of Miss Clarissa Harlowe!'

I could give her no answer, but by my tears. And I thought, when she went
away, the better half of my heart went with her.

I listened to hear what reception she would meet with below; and found it was
just such a one as she apprehended.

Will she, or will she not, be Mrs. Solmes? None of your whining
circumlocutions, Mrs. Norton! -- (You may guess who said this.) -- Will she, or
will she not, comply with her parents will?

This cut short all she was going to say.

If I must speak so briefly, Miss will sooner die, than have --

Anybody but Lovelace! interrupted my brother -- This, Madam, This, Sir, is
your meek daughter! This is Mrs. Norton's sweet child! -- Well, Goody, you may
return to your own habitation. I am empowered to forbid you to have any
correspondence with this perverse girl, for a month to come, as you value the
favor of our whole family, or of any individual of it.

And saying this, uncontradicted by anybody, he himself showed her to the door
-- No doubt, with all that air of cruel insult, which the haughty Rich can put
on to the unhappy Low, who have not pleased them.

So here, Miss, am I deprived of the advice of one of the most prudent and
conscientious women in the world, were I to have ever so much occasion for it.

I might, indeed, write, as I presume, under your cover, and receive her
answers to what I should write. But should such a correspondence be charged
upon her, I know she would not be guilty of a falsehood for the world; nor even
of an equivocation: And should she own it, after this prohibition, she would
forfeit my mamma's favor for ever. And in my dangerous fever, some time ago, I
engaged my mamma to promise me, that, if I died before I could do anything for
the good woman, she would set her above want for the rest of her life, should
her eyes fail her, or sickness befall her, and she could not provide for
herself, as she now so prettily does by her fine needleworks, etc.

What measures will they fall upon next? -- Will they not recede, when they
find, that it must be a rooted antipathy, and nothing else, that could make a
temper, not naturally inflexible, so sturdy?

Adieu, my dear. Be you happy! -- To know that it is in your power to be so, is
all that seems wanting to make you so.

CL. HARLOWE.

LETTER XL. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW. [In continuation of the
subject in Letter XXXVIII.]
I WILL now, though midnight (for I have no sleep in my eyes), resume the subject
I was forced so abruptly to quit; and will obey yours, Miss Lloyd's, Miss
Campion's, and Miss Biddulph's call, with as much temper as my divided thoughts
will admit. The dead stillness of this solemn hour will, I hope, contribute to
calm my disturbed mind.

In order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as that of having reserves to
so dear a friend, I will acknowledge (and I thought I had over and over), that
it is owing to my particular situation, if Mr. Lovelace appears to me in a
tolerable light: And I take upon me to say, that had they opposed to him a man
of sense, of virtue, of generosity; one who enjoyed his fortune with credit;
who had a tenderness in his nature for the calamities of others, which would
have given a moral assurance, that he would have been still less wanting in
grateful returns to an obliging spirit: -- Had they opposed such a man as this
to Mr. Lovelace, and been as earnest to have me married, as now they are, I do
not know myself, if they would have had reason to tax me with that invincible
obstinacy which they lay to my charge: And this, whatever had been the Figure
of the man: Since the Heart is what we women should judge by in the choice we
make, as the best security for the party's good behavior in every relation of
life.

But, situated as I am, thus persecuted, and driven; I own to you, that I have
now and then had a little more difficulty than I wished for, in passing by Mr.
Lovelace's tolerable qualities, to keep up my dislike to him for his others.

You say, I must have argued with myself in his favor, and in his disfavour,
on a supposition, that I might possibly be one day his. I own, that I have: And
thus called upon by my dearest friend, I will set before you both parts of the
argument.

And first, what occurred to me in his favor.

At his introduction into our family, his negative virtues were insisted upon:
-- He was no gamester; no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker: My poor aunt
Hervey had, in confidence, given us to apprehend much disagreeable evil,
especially to a wife of the least delicacy, from a wine-lover: And common sense
instructed us, that Sobriety in a man, is no small point to be secured, when so
many mischiefs happen daily from excess. I remember, that my sister made the
most of this favorable circumstance in his character, while she had any hopes
of him.

He was never thought to be a niggard: Not even ungenerous: Nor, when his
conduct came to be inquired into, an extravagant, or squanderer: His pride (so
far was it a laudable pride) secured him from that. Then he was ever ready to
own his errors: He was no jester upon sacred things: Poor Mr. Wyerley's fault;
who seemed to think, that there was wit in saying bold things, which would
shock a serious mind. His conversation with us was always unexceptionable; even
chastely so; which, be his actions what they would, showed him capable of being
influenced by decent company; and that he might probably therefore be a led
man, rather than a leader, in other. And one late instance, so late as last
Saturday evening, has raised him not a little in my opinion, with regard to
this point of good (and, at the same time, of manly) behavior.

As to the advantage of birth, that is of his side, above any man who has been
found out for me: If we may judge by that expression of his, which you was
pleased with at the time; 'That upon true quality, and hereditary distinction,
if good sense were not wanting, honor sat as easy as his glove:' That, with as
familiar an air, was his familiar expression; 'while none but the prosperous
upstart, MUSHROOM'D into rank (another of his peculiars) was arrogantly proud
of it.' If, I say, we may judge of him by this, we shall conclude in his
favor, that he knows what sort of behavior is to be expected from persons of
Birth, whether he act up to it or not. Conviction is half way to amendment.

His fortunes in possession are handsome; in expectation, splendid: So nothing
need be said on that subject.

But it is impossible, say some, that he should make a tender or kind husband.
Those who are for imposing upon me such a man as Mr. Solmes, and by methods so
violent, are not entitled to make this objection: But now, on this subject, let
me tell you how I have argued with myself -- For still you must remember, that
I am upon the extenuating part of his character.

A great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from him, will, possibly,
depend upon herself. Perhaps she must practice, as well as promise, obedience
to a man so little used to control; and must be careful to oblige. And what
husband expects not this? -- The more, perhaps, if he has not reason to assure
himself of the preferable love of his wife, before she became such. And how
much easier and pleasanter to obey the man of her choice, if he should be even
unreasonable sometimes, than one she would not have had, could she have avoided
it? Then, I think, as the men were the framers of the matrimonial office, and
made obedience a part of the woman's vow, she ought not, even in policy, to
show him, that she can break through her part of the contract, however lightly
she may think of the instance; lest he should take it into his head (himself is
judge) to think as lightly of other points, which she may hold more important.
But indeed no point, so solemnly vowed, can be slight.

Thus principled, and acting accordingly, what a wretch must that husband be,
who could treat such a wife brutally! -- Will Lovelace's wife be the only
person, to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of civility and good-manners?
He is allowed to be brave: Who ever knew a brave man, if a man of sense, an
universally base man? And how much the gentleness of sex, and the manner of our
training-up and education, make us need the protection of the brave, and the
countenance of the generous, let the general approbation which we are all so
naturally inclined to give to men of that character, testify.

At worst, will he confine me prisoner to my chamber? Will he deny me the
visits of my dearest friend, and forbid me to correspond with her? Will he take
from me the Mistresly management, which I had not faultily discharged? Will he
set a servant over me, with license to insult me? Will he, as he has not a
sister, permit his cousins Montague, or would either of those Ladies accept of
a permission, to insult and tyrannize over me? -- It cannot be. -- Why then,
think I often, do you tempt me, O my cruel friends, to try the difference?

And then has the secret pleasure intruded itself, to be able to reclaim such a
man to the paths of virtue and honor: To be a secondary means, if I were to be
his, of saving him, and preventing the mischiefs so enterprising a creature
might otherwise be guilty of, if he be such a one.

In these lights when I have thought of him (and that as a man of sense he will
sooner see his errors, than another), I own to you, that I have had some
difficulty to avoid taking the path they so violently endeavor to make me
shun: And all that command of my passions, which has been attributed to me, as
my greatest praise, and, in so young a creature, as my distinction, has hardly
been sufficient for me.

And let me add, that the favor of his relations (all but himself
unexceptionable) has made a good deal of additional weight, thrown into the
same scale.

But now, in his disfavour. When I have reflected upon the prohibition of my
parents: The giddy appearance, disgraceful to sex, that such a preference would
have: That there is no manner of likelihood, inflamed by the rencounter, and
upheld by art and ambition on my brother's side, that ever the animosity will
be got over: That I must therefore be at perpetual variance with all my own
family: Must go to him, and to his, as an obliged, and half-fortun'd person:
That his aversion to them all, is as strong, as theirs to him; That his whole
family are hated for his sake; they hating ours in return: That he has a very
immoral character as to our sex: That knowing this, it is a high degree of
impurity, to think of joining in wedlock with such a man: That he is young,
unbroken, his passions unsubdued: That he is violent in his temper; yet artful:
I am afraid vindictive too: That such an husband might unsettle me in all my
own principles, and hazard my future hopes: That his own relations, two
excellent aunts, and an uncle, from whom he has such large expectations, have
no influence upon him: That what tolerable qualities he has, are sounded more
in pride than in virtue: That allowing, as he does, the excellency of Moral
Precepts, and believing the doctrine of future Rewards and Punishments, he can
live as if he despised the one, and defied the other: The probability that the
taint arising from such free principles, may go down into the manners of
posterity: That I knowing these things, and the importance of them, should be
more inexcusable than one who knows them not; since an error against judgment,
is worse, infinitely worse, than an error in judgment: -- Reflecting upon these
things, I cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to pray with me, and to pray for
me, that I may not be pushed upon such indiscreet measures, as will render me
inexcusable to myself: For that is the test, after all; the world's opinion
ought to be but a secondary consideration.

I have said, in his praise, that he is extremely ready to own his errors: But
I have sometimes made a great drawback upon this article, in his disfavour;
having been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuity may possibly be
attributable to two causes, neither of them, by any means, creditable to him.
The one, that his vices are so much his masters, that he attempts not to
conquer them; the other, that he may think it policy, to give up one half of
his character, to save the other, when the whole may be blameable: By this
means, silencing by acknowlegement the objections he cannot answer; which may
give him the praise of ingenuousness, when he can obtain no other; and when the
challenged proof might bring out, upon discussion, other evils. These, you will
allow, are severe constructions; but everything his enemies say of him cannot
be false.

I will proceed by and by.

SOMETIMES we have both thought him one of the most undesigning merely witty
men we ever knew; at other times one of the deepest creatures we ever conversed
with. So that, when in one visit, we have imagined we fathomed him, in the
next, he has made us ready to give him up as impenetrable. This, my dear, is to
be put among the shades in his character. -- Yet, upon the whole, you have been
so far of his party, that you have contested, that his principal fault is
over-frankness, and too much regardlesness of appearances, and that he is too
giddy to be very artful: You would have it, that at the time he says any thing
good, he means what he speaks; That his variableness and levity are
constitutional, owing to sound health, and to a soul and body, that was your
observation, fitted for, and pleased with, each other. And hence you concluded,
that could this consentaneousness, as you called it, of corporal and animal
faculties, be pointed by discretion; that is to say, could his vivacity be
confined within the pale of but moral obligations; he would be far from being
rejectible as a companion for life.

But I used then to say, and I still am of opinion, that he wants a heart: And
if he does, he wants everything. A wrong head may be convinced, may have a
right turn given it: But who is able to give a heart, if a heart be wanting?
Divine Grace, working a miracle, or next to a miracle, can only change a bad
heart. Should not one fly the man who is but suspected of such a one? -- What,
O what, do parents do, when they precipitate a child, and make her think better
than she would otherwise think of a man of an indifferent character, in order
to avoid another that is odious to her!

I have said, that I think him vindictive: Upon my word, I have sometimes
doubted, whether his perseverance in his addresses to me, has not been the more
obstinate, since he has found himself so disagreeable to my friends. From that
time, I verily think he has been more fervent in them; yet courts them not; but
sets them at defiance. For this, indeed, he pleads disinterestedness (I am sure
he cannot politeness) and the more plausibly, as he is apprized of the ability
they have to make it worth his while to court them. It Is true, he has declared,
and with too much reason, or there would be no enduring him, that the lowest
submissions on his part, would not be accepted; and to oblige me, has offered
to seek a reconciliation with them, if I would give him hope of success. As to
his behavior at church, the Sunday before last, I lay no stress upon that,
because I doubt there was too much outward pride in his intentional humility,
or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have mistaken it.

I do not think him so deeply learned in human Nature, or in Ethics, as some
have thought him. Don't you remember how he stared, at the following trite
observations, which every moralist could have furnished him with? Complaining,
as he did, in a half-menacing strain, of the obloquies raised against him --
'That if he were innocent, he should despise the obloquy: If not, revenge would
not wipe off his guilt.' 'That nobody ever thought of turning a sword into a
sponge!' 'That it was in his own power, by reformation of an error laid to his
charge by an enemy, to make that enemy one of his best friends; and (which was
the noblest revenge in the world) against his will; since an enemy would not
wish him to be without the faults he taxed him with.'

But the intention, he said, was the wound.

How so, I asked him, when That cannot wound without the application? 'That the
adversary only held the sword: He himself pointed it to his breast? -- And why
should he resent mortally that malice, which he might be the better for, as
long as he lived?' -- What could be the reading he has been said to be master
of, to wonder, as he did, at these observations?

But, indeed, he must take pleasure in revenge; and yet holds others to be
inexcusable for the same fault. -- He is not, however, the only one who can see
how truly blameable those errors are in another, which they hardly think such
in themselves.

From these considerations; From these over-balances; it was, that I said, in a
former, that I would not be in Love with this man for the world: And it was
going further than prudence would warrant, when I was for compounding with you,
by the words conditional liking; which you so humorously railly.

Well but, methinks you say, what is all this to the purpose? This is still but
reasoning: But, if you are in Love, you are: And Love, like the vapors, is the
deeper rooted for having no sufficient cause assignable for its hold. And so
you call upon me again, to have no reserves, and so-forth.

Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his
preponderating faults, I like him better than I ever thought I should like him;
and, those faults considered, better perhaps than I ought to like him. And, I
believe, it is possible for the persecution I labor under, to induce me to
like him still more: -- Especially while I can recollect to his advantage our
last interview, and as every day produces stronger instances of tyranny, I will
call it, on the other side. -- In a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot
think any thing I say too explicit), that were he now but a moral man, I would
prefer him to all the men I ever saw.

So that This is but conditional liking still, you will say. -- Nor, I hope, is
it more. I never was in Love; and whether This be it, or not, I must submit to
you: -- But will venture to think it, if it be, no such mighty monarch, no such
unconquerable power, as I have heard it represented; and it must have met with
greater encouragements than I think I have given it, to be so irresistible. --
Since I am persuaded, that I could yet, without a throb, most willingly give up
the one man to get rid of the other.

But now to be a little more serious with you: If, my dear, my particularly
unhappy situation had driven (or led me, if you please,) into a liking of the
man; and if that liking had, in your opinion, inclined me to the other L,
should you, whose mind is susceptible of the most friendly impressions; who
have such high notions of the delicacy of sex; and who actually do enter so
deeply into the distresses of one you love; should you have pushed so far that
unhappy friend on so very nice a subject? -- Especially, when I aimed not (as
you could prove by fifty instances, it seems), to guard against being found
out. Had you raillied me by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have
been more in character; especially, if your friend's distresses had been
surmounted; and if she had affected Prudish airs in revolving the subject: But
to sit down to write it, as methinks I see you, with a gladden'd eye, and with
all the archness of exultation -- Indeed my dear (and I take notice of it,
rather for the sake of your own generosity, than for my sake; for, as I have
said, I love your raillery) it is not so very pretty; the delicacy of the
subject, and the delicacy of your own mind, considered.

I lay down my pen, here, that you may consider of it a little, if you please.

I RESUME; to give you my opinion of the sorce which figure or person ought to
have upon our sex: And this I shall do both generally, and particularly, as to
this man: Whence you will be able to collect how far my friends are in the
right, or in the wrong, when they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favor
of one man, and in disfavour of the other, on the score of figure. But, first,
let me observe, That they see abundant reason, on comparing Mr. Lovelace and
Mr. Solmes together, to believe that this may be a consideration with me; and
therefore they believe it is.

There is certainly something very plausible and attractive, as well as
creditable to a woman's choice, in figure. It gives a favorable impression at
first sight, in which one wishes to be confirmed: And if, upon further
acquaintance, we find reason so to be, we are pleased with our own judgment,
and like the person the better, for having given us cause to compliment our own
sagacity, in our first-sighted impressions. But, nevertheless, it has been
generally a rule with me, to suspect a fine figure, both in man and woman; and
I have had a good deal of reason to approve my rule. With regard to men
especially; who ought to value themselves rather upon their intellectual than
personal qualities. For, as to our sex, if a fine woman should be led by the
opinion of the world, to be vain and conceited upon her form and features; and
that to such a degree, as to have neglected the more material and more durable
recommendations; the world will be ready to excuse her; since a pretty fool, in
all she says, and in all she does, will please, we know not why.

But who would grudge this pretty fool her short day! Since, with her summer's
sun, when her butterfly-flutters are over, and the winter of age and furrows
arrives, she will feel the just effects of having neglected to cultivate her
better faculties; for then, like another Helen, she will be unable to bear the
reflection even of her own glass; and being sunk into the insignificance of a
mere old woman; she will be entitled to the contempts which follow that
character. While the discreet matron, who carries up (we will not, in such a
one's case, say down) into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of
virtuous prudence, and useful experience, finds solid veneration take place of
airy admiration, and more than supply the want of it.

But for a man to be vain of his person, how effeminate? If such a one has
genius, it seldom strikes deep into intellectual subjects. His cutside usually
runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps, intending to adorn, to render
ridiculous, that person, takes up all his attention. All he does is personal;
that is to say, for himself: All he admires, is himself: And in spite of the
corrections of the stage, which so often, and so justly exposes a coxcomb, he
generally dwindles down, and sinks into that character; and, of consequence,
becomes the scorn of one sex, and the jest of the other.

This is generally the case of your fine figures and gay dressers of men:
Whence it is, that I repeat, that mere person in a man, is a despicable
consideration. But if a man, besides figure, has learning, and such talents, as
would have distinguished him, whatever were his form; then indeed person is an
addition: And if he has not run too egregiously into self-admiration; and if he
has preserved his morals, he is truly a valuable being.

Mr. Lovelace has certainly taste; and, as far as I am able to determine, he
has judgment in most of the politer arts. But although he has a humorous way of
carrying it off, yet one may see, that he values himself not a little, both on
his person and his parts, and even upon his dress; and yet he has so happy an
ease in the latter, that it seems to be the least part of his study. And as to
the former, I should hold myself inexcusable, if I were to add to his vanity by
showing the least regard for what is too evidently so much his.

And now, my dear, let me ask you; Have I come up to your expectation? If I
have not, when my mind is more at case, I will endeavor to please you better.
For, methinks, my sentences drag; my style creeps; my imagination is sunk; my
spirit serves me not; only to tell you, That whether I have little or much, it
is all devoted to the commands of my dear Miss How.

CL. HARLOWE.
Postscript.
The insolent Betty Barnes has just now fired me anew, by reporting to me the
following expressions of the hideous creature, Solmes -- 'That he is sure of
the coy girl; and that with little labor to himself.' 'That be I ever so
averse to him beforehand, he can depend upon my principles; and it will be a
pleasure to him to see by what pretty degrees I shall come-to.' [ -- Horrid
wretch!] 'That it was Sir Oliver's observation, who knew the world perfectly
well, that Fear was a better security than Love, for a woman's good behavior
to her husband; although, for his part, to such a fine creature, he would try
what Love would do; for a few weeks at least: Being unwilling to believe what
the old Knight used to averr, That fondness spoils more wives than it makes
good.'

What think you, my dear of such a wretch as this! tutored, too, by that old
surly Misogynist, as he was deemed, Sir Oliver? --




LETTER XLI. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Tuesday, March 21.
HOW willingly would my dear mamma show kindness to me, were she permitted!
None of this persecution should I labor under, I am sure, if that regard were
paid to her prudence and fine understanding, which they so well deserve.
Whether oweing to her, or to my aunt, or to both, that a new trial was to be
made upon me, I cannot tell; but this morning her Shorey delivered into my hand
the following condescending letter. My dear girl,
FOR so I must still call you; since dear you may be to me, in every sense of
the word -- We have taken into particular consideration, some hints that fell
yesterday from your good Norton, as if we had not, at Mr. Solmes's first
application, treated you with that condescension, wherewith we have in all
other instances treated you. If it had been so, my dear, you were not excusable
to be wanting in your part, and to set yourself to oppose your father's will in
a point he had entered too far into, to recede with honor. But all yet may be
well. On your single will, my child, depends all our present happiness! --

Your father permits me to tell you, that if you now at last comply with his
expectations, all past disobligations shall be buried in oblivion, as if they
had never been: But withal, that this is the last time that that grace will be
offered you.

I hinted to you, you must remember, that patterns of the richest silks were
sent for. They are come: And as they are come, your papa, to show how much he
is determined, will have me send them up to you. I could have wished they might
not have accompanied this letter -- But there is no great matter in that. I
must tell you, that your delicacy is not to be quite so much regarded, as I had
once thought it deserved to be.

These are the newest, as well as richest, that we could procure; answerable to
our station in the world; answerable to the fortune, additional to your
grandfather's estate, designed you; and to the noble settlements agreed upon.

Your papa intends you six suits (three of them dressed) at his own expense.
You have an entire new suit; and one besides, which I think you never wore but
twice. As the new suit is rich, if you choose to make That one of the six, your
papa, will present you with an hundred guineas in lieu.

Mr. Solmes intends to present you with a set of jewels. As you have your
grandmother's and your own, if you choose to have the former new-set and to
make them serve, his present will be made in money; a very round sum -- which
will be given in full property to yourself; besides a fine annual allowance for
pin-money, as it is called. So that your objection against the spirit of a man
you think worse of than he deserves, will have no weight; but you will be more
independent than a wife of less discretion than we attribute to you, perhaps
ought to be. You know full well, that I, who first and last brought a still
larger fortune into the family, than you will carry to Mr. Solmes, had not a
provision made me of near This, that we have made for you. -- Where people
marry to their liking, terms are the least things stood upon. -- Yet should I
be sorry if you cannot, to oblige us all, overcome a dislike.

Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly and freely upon this
subject. Your behavior hitherto has been such, that we have had no opportunity
of entering minutely into the subject with you. Yet, after all that has passed
between you and me in conversation, and between you and your uncles by letter,
you have no room to doubt what is to be the consequence. -- Either, child, we
must give up our authority, or you your humor. You cannot expect the one: We
have all the reason in the world to expect the other. You know I have told you
more than once, that you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes, or never to be looked
upon to be our child.

The draught of the settlements you may see whenever you will. We think there
can be no room for objection to any of the articles. There is still more in
them in our family's favor, than was stipulated at first, when your aunt
talked of them to you. More so, indeed, than we could have asked. If, upon
perusal of them, you think any alteration necessary, it shall be made. -- Do,
my dear girl, send to me within this day or two, or rather ask me, for the
perusal of them.

As a certain person's appearance at church so lately, and what he gives out
everywhere, make us extremely uneasy, and as that uneasiness will continue
while you are single, you must not wonder that a short day is intended.
This-day-fortnight we design it to be, if you have no objection to make, that I
shall approve of. But, if you determine as we would have you, and signify it to
us, we shall not stand with you for a week or so.

Your sightliness of person, may perhaps make some think this alliance
disparaging. But I hope you will not put such a personal value upon yourself; if
you do, it will indeed be the less wonder that person should weigh with you,
(however contemptible the consideration!) -- in another man. -- Thus we
parents, in justice, ought to judge: That our two daughters are equally dear
and valuable to us: If so, why should Clarissa think that a disparagement,
which Arabella would not (nor we for her) have thought any, had the address
been made to her? -- You will know what I mean by this, without my explaining
myself further.

Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance with our wishes. -- And then
there is an end of your confinement: An act of oblivion, as I may call it,
shall pass upon all your former refractoriness: And you will once more make us
happy in you, and in one another. You may, in this case, directly come down to
your papa and me, in his study; where we will give you our opinions of the
patterns, with our hearty forgiveness and blessings.

Come, be a good child, as you used to be, my Clarissa. I have (notwithstanding
your past behavior, and the hopelesness which some have expressed of your
compliance) undertaken this one time more for you. Discredit not my hopes, my
dear girl. I have promised never more to interfere between your father and you,
if this my most earnest application succeed not. I expect you down, Love. Your
papa expects you down. But be sure don't let him see any thing unchearful in
your compliance. If you come, I will clasp you to my fond heart, with as much
pleasure as ever I pressed you to it in my whole life. You don't know what I
have suffered within these few weeks past; nor ever will be able to guess, till
you come to be in my situation; which is that of a fond and indulgent mother,
praying night and day, and struggling to preserve, against the attempts of more
ungovernable spirits, the peace and union of her family.

But, you know the terms. Come not near us, if you resolve to be undutiful: But
this, after what I have written, I hope you cannot be.

If you come directly, and, as I said, cheerfully, as if your heart were in
your duty (and you told me it was free, you know --) I shall then, as I said,
give you the most tender proofs, how much I am

Your truly affectionate Mother.




Think for me, my dearest friend, how I must be affected by this letter; the
contents of it so surprisingly terrifying, yet so sweetly urged! -- O why,
cried I to myself, am I obliged to undergo this severe conflict between a
command that I cannot obey, and language so condescendingly moving! -- Could I
have been sure of being struck dead at the altar before the ceremony had given
the man I hate a title to my vows, I think I could have submitted to have been
led to it. But to think of living with, and living for, a man one cannot abide,
what a sad thing is that! --

And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament be supposed any inducement
to one, who has always held, that the principal view of a good wife in the
adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve the affection of her husband,
and to do credit to his choice; and that she should be even fearful of
attracting the eyes of others? -- In this view, must not the very richness of
the patterns add to my disgusts? -- Great encouragement indeed, to think of
adorning one's-self to be the wife of Mr. Solmes! --

Upon the whole, it was not possible for me to go down upon the prescribed
condition. Do you think it was? -- And to write, if my letter would have been
read, what could I write that would be admitted, and after what I had written
and said to so little effect? I walked backward and forward: I threw down with
disdain the patterns: Now to my closet retired I; then, quitting it, now threw
I myself upon the Settee; now upon this chair; now upon that; and then into one
window, then into another -- I knew not what to do! -- And while I was in this
suspense, having again taken up the letter to re-peruse it, Betty came in,
reminding me, by order, That my papa and mamma waited for me in my papa's study.

Tell my mamma, said I, that I beg the favor of seeing her here for one
moment; or to permit me to attend her any where by herself.

I listened at the stair's-head -- You see, my dear, how it is, cried my
father, very angrily: All your condescension (as your indulgence heretofore) is
thrown away. You blame your son's violence, as you call it, [I had some
pleasure in hearing this] but nothing else will do with her. You shall not see
her alone. Is my presence an exception to the bold creature?

Tell her, said my mamma to Betty, she knows upon what terms she may come down
to us. Nor will I see her upon any other.

The maid brought me this answer. I had recourse to my pen and ink; but I
trembled so, that I could not write, nor knew I what to say had I had steadier
fingers. At last Betty brought me these lines from my papa. Undutiful and
perverse Clarissa,
NO condescension, I see, will move you. Your mother shall not see you; nor
will I. Prepare, however to obey. You know our pleasure. Your uncle Antony,
your brother, and your sister, and your favorite Mrs. Norton, shall see the
ceremony performed privately at your said uncle's chapel. And when Mr. Solmes
can introduce you to us, in the temper we wish to behold you in, we may perhaps
forgive his wife, although we never can, in any other character, our perverse
daughter. As it will be so privately performed, clothes and equipage may be
provided afterward. So prepare to go to your uncle's for an early-day in next
week. We will not see you till all is over: And we will have it over the
sooner, in order to shorten the time of your deserved confinement, and our own
trouble, in contending with such a rebel, as you have been of late. I Will hear
no pleas. Will receive no letter, nor expostulation. Nor shall you hear from me
any more till you have changed your name to my liking. This from

Your incensed Father.




If this resolution be adhered to, then will my papa never see me more! -- For
I will never be That Solmes's wife -- I will die first! -- Tuesday evening.
HE, this Solmes, came hither soon after I had received my papa's letter. He
sent up to beg leave to wait upon me. I wonder at his assurance!

I said to Betty, who brought me his message, Let him restore a lost creature
to her father and mother, and then I may hear what he has to say. But, if my
friends will not see me on his account, I will not see him upon his own.

I hope, Miss, said Betty, that you will not send me down with this answer. He
is with your papa and mamma.

I am driven to despair, said I. I cannot be used worse. I will not see him.

Down she went with my answer. She pretended, it seems, to be loath to repeat
it: So was commanded out of her affected reserves, and gave it in its full
force.

O how I heard my papa storm! --

They were all together, it seems, in his study. My brother was for having me
turned out of the house that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil destiny. My mamma
was pleased to put in a gentle word for me: I know not what it was: But thus
she was answered -- My dear, this is the provoking'st thing in the world in a
woman of your good sense! -- To love a rebel, as well as if she were dutiful.
What encouragement for duty is this? -- Have I not loved her as well as ever
you did, and why am I changed? Would to the Lord, your sex knew how to
distinguish? But the fond mother ever made a hardened child! --

She was pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the wench owned, for giving my
answer its full force. But my father praised her for it.

The wench says, That he would have come up in his wrath, at my refusing to see
Mr. Solmes: But my brother and sister prevailed upon him to the contrary.

I wish he had! -- And, were it not for his own sake, that he had killed me.

Mr. Solmes condescended (I am mightily obliged to him, truly!) to plead for me.

They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know not! -- I am quite weary of
my life! -- So happy, till within these few weeks! -- So miserable now!

Well, indeed, might my mamma say, That I should have great trials! --

P. S. The idiot (such a one am I treated like!) is begged, as I may say, by my
brother and sister. They have desired, that I may be consigned over entirely to
their management. If it be granted (It is, on my father's side, I understand,
but not yet on my mother's) what cruelty may I not expect from their envy,
jealousy, and ill will? -- I shall soon see, by its effects, if I am to be so
consigned. -- This is a written intimation privately dropped in my
Wood-house-walk, by my cousin Dolly Hervey. The dear girl longs to see me, she
tells me: But is forbidden till she see me as Mrs. Solmes, or consenting to be
his. I will take example by their perseverance! -- Indeed I will! --






LETTER XLII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
AN angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has passed between my sister and
me. Did you think I could scold, my dear?

She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see Mr. Solmes -- Let loose upon me,
I think! -- No intention, on their parts, to conciliate! I am to be given up to
my brother and her I suppose, by general consent.

Every thing she said against me, which carried force with it, I will do
justice to. As I ask for your approbation or disapprobation of my conduct, upon
the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign of a very bad cause, if
I endeavored to mislead my judge.

She began with representing to me the danger I had been in, had my father come
up, as he would have done, had he not been hindered, by Mr. Solmes, among the
rest. She reflected upon my good Mrs. Norton, as if she encouraged me in my
perverseness. She ridiculed me for my supposed esteem for Lovelace. Was
surprised that the witty, the prudent, nay, the dutiful and pi-ous (so she
sneeringly pronounced the word) Clarissa Harlowe, should be so strangely fond
of a profligate man, that her parents were forced to lock her up, to keep her
from running into his arms. Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how you now keep
your account of the disposition of your time? How many hours in the twenty-four
do you devote to your Needle? How many to your Prayers? How many to
Letter-writing? And how many to Love? -- I doubt, I doubt, my little dear, was
her arch expression, The latter article is like Aaron's rod, and swallows up
all the rest! -- Tell me; is it not so?

To these I answered, That it was a double mortification to me to owe my safety
from my papa's indignation to a man I could never thank for any thing. -- I
vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with a warmth that her merit required from me.
-- With equal warmth I resented her unsisterly reflections upon me on Mr.
Lovelace's account. As to the disposition of my time, in the twenty-four hours,
I told her it would better have become her to pity a sister in distress, than
to exult over her -- Especially, when I could too justly attribute to the
disposition of some of her wakeful hours no small part of that distress.

She raved extremely at this last hint: But reminded me of the gentle treatment
of all my friends, my mamma's particularly, before it came to This: She said,
that I had discovered a spirit they never had expected: That, if they had
thought me such a championess, they would hardly have ventured to engage with
me: But that now, the short and the long was, that the matter had gone too far
to be given up: That now it was a contention between duty and wilfulness;
Whether a parent's authority was to yield to a daughter's obstinacy, or the
contrary: That I must therefore bend or break, that was all, child.

I told her, that I wished the subject were of such a nature, that I could
return her pleasantry with equal lightness of heart: But that, if Mr. Solmes
had such merit in every-body's eye, in hers particularly, why might he not be a
brother to me, rather than a husband?

O child, she thought I was as pleasant to the full as she was: She began to
have some hopes of me now. But did I think she would rob her sister of her
humble servant? Had he first addressed himself to me, said she, something might
have been said: But to take my younger sister's refusal! No, no, child; it is
not come to that neither! Besides, That would be to leave the door open in your
heart for you know who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. In
short (and then she changed both her tone, and her looks), had I been as
forward as somebody, to throw myself into the arms of one of the greatest
profligates in England, who had endeavored to support his claim to me through
the blood of my brother, then might all my family join together to save me from
such a wretch, and to marry me as fast as they could, to some worthy gentleman,
who might oppor- tune-ly offer himself. And now, Clary, all is out, and make the
most of it.

Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it did, to justify my reply. --
Alas! for my poor sister! said I. -- The man was not always so great a
profligate. How true is the observation, That unrequited love turns to deepest
hate!

I thought she would have beat me. -- But I proceeded -- I have heard often of
my brother's danger, and my brother's murderer. When so little ceremony is made
with me, why should I not speak out? -- Did he not seek to kill the other, if
he could have done it? Would he have given him his life, had it been in his
power? -- The aggressor should not complain. -- And, as to oppor- tune offers,
would to heaven some one had offered oppor- tune-ly to somebody. It is not my
fault, Bella, the oppor- tune gentleman don't come!

Could you, my dear, have shown more spirit? I expected to feel the weight of
her hand. She did come up to me, with it held up: Then, speechless with
passion, ran down half way of the stairs, and then up again.

When she could speak -- God give her patience with me!

Amen, said I: But you see, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you provoke.
Will you forgive me; and let me find a sister in you, as I am sorry, if you
have reason to think me unsisterly in what I have said?

Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; considering my gentleness as
a triumph of temper over her. She was resolved, she said, to let everybody
know how I took the wicked Lovelace's part against my brother.

I wished, I told her, I could make the plea for my-self, which she might for
her-self: That my anger was more inexcusable than my judgment. But I presumed
she had some other view in coming to me, than she had hitherto acquainted me
with. Let me, said I, but know (after all that has passed) if you have anything
to propose that I can comply with; any thing that can make my only sister once
more my friend?

I had before, upon her ridiculing me on my supposed character of meekness,
said, that, although I wished to be thought meek, I would not be abject; although
humble, not mean: And here, in a sneering way, she cautioned me on that head.

I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable than her anger: But I
wished she would let me know the end of a visit that had hitherto (between us)
been so unsisterly?

She desired to be informed, in the name of everybody, was her word, what I was
determined upon: And whether to comply or not? -- One word for all: My friends
were not to have patience with so perverse a creature, for ever.

This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break with the man they were all
so determined against: Upon condition, however, that neither Mr. Solmes, nor
any other, were urged to me with the force of a command.

And what was this, more than I had offered before? What, but ringing my
changes upon the same bells, and neither receding nor advancing one tittle?

If I knew what other proposals I could make, that would be acceptable to them
all, and free me from the address of a man so disagreeable to me, I would make
them. I had indeed before offered, never to marry without my father's consent
--

She interrupted me, That was because I depended upon my whining tricks to
bring my father and mother to what I pleased.

A poor dependence! I said: -- She knew those who would make that dependence
vain --

And I should have brought them to my own beck, very probably, and my uncle
Harlowe too, as also my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden their sight, and
thereby hindered from playing my pug's tricks before them.

At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me to whom I am obliged, that my
father and mother, and everybody else, treat me thus harshly. But surely you
make them all very weak. Indifferent persons, judging of us two, from what you
say, would either think me a very artful creature, or you a very spiteful one.

You are indeed a very artful one, for that matter, interrupted she in a
passion: One of the artfullest I every knew! And then followed an accusation so
low! so unsisterly! -- That I next-to-bewitch'd people, by my insinuating
address: That nobody could be valued or respected, but must stand like ciphers
wherever I came. How often, said she, have I and my brother been talking upon
a subject, and had everybody's attention, till you came in, with your
bewitching meek pride, and humble significance; and then have we either been
stopped by references to Miss Clarissa's opinion, forsooth; or been forced to
stop ourselves, or must have talked on unattended to by everybody.

She paused. Dear Bella, proceed! -- She indeed seemed only gathering breath.

And so I will, said she. Did you not bewitch my grandfather? Could any thing
be pleasing to him, that you did not say or do? How did he use to hang, till he
slabber'd again, poor doting old man! on your silver tongue! Yet what did you
say, that we could not have said? What did you do, that we did not endeavor to
do? -- And what was all this for? His Last Will showed what effect your smooth
obligingness had upon him! -- To leave the acquired part of his estate from the
next heirs, his own sons, to a grandchild; to his youngest grandchild! a
daughter too! -- To leave the family-pictures from his sons to you, because you
could tiddle about them, and, though you now neglect their examples, could wipe
and clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too, in such
quantities, of two or three generations standing, must not be changed, because
his precious child Alluding to his words in the preamble to the clauses in his
Will, in her favor. See p. 28.
, humouring his old fal-lal taste, admired it, to make it all her own.

This was too low too move me: O my poor sister! said I: Not to be able, or at
least willing, to distinguish between art and nature! If I did oblige, I was
happy in it: I looked for no further reward: My mind is above art, from the
dirty motives you mention. I wish with all my heart my grandfather had not thus
distinguished me: He saw my brother likely to be amply provided for out of the
family, as well as in it: He desired that you might have the greater share of
my papa's favor for it; and no doubt but you both will. You know, Bella, that
the estate my grandfather bequeathed me was not half the real estate he left.

What Is all that to an estate in possession, and left you with such
distinctions, as gave you a reputation of greater value than the estate itself?

Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your Envy, I doubt! But have I not given up
that possession in the best manner I could --

Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that best manner. Specious little
witch! she called me: Your best manner, so full of art and design, had never
been seen through, if you, with your blandishing ways, had not been put out of
sight, and reduced to positive declarations! -- Hindered from playing your
little, whining tricks; curling, like a serpent, about your mamma; and making
her cry to deny you any thing your little obstinate heart was set upon!

Obstinate heart, Bella!

Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up any thing? Had you not the art
to make them think all was right you asked, though my brother and I were
frequently refused favors of no greater import?

I knew not, Bella, that I ever asked any thing unfit to be granted. I seldom
asked favors for myself, but for others.

I was a reflecting creature for this!

All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I cannot go so far back into our
childish follies. Little did I think of how long standing this your late-shewn
antipathy is.

I was a reflecter again! Such a saucy meekness; such a best manner; and such
venom in words! -- O Clary! Clary! Thou were always a two-faced girl!

Nobody thought I had two faces, when I gave up All into my papa's management;
taking from his bounty, as before, all my little pocket-money, without a
shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring it --

Yes, cunning creature! -- And that was another of your fetches! -- For did it
not engage my fond papa (as no doubt you thought it would) to tell you, that,
since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he would keep entire, for
your use, all the produce of the estate left you, and be but your steward in
it; and that you should be entitled to the same allowances as before: Another
of your hook-in's, Clary! -- So that all your extravagancies have been
supported gratis.

My extravagancies, Bella! -- But did my papa ever give me anything he did not
give you?

Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I should have had the conscience
to ask. But I have still the greater part to show! But you! What have you to
show? -- I dare to say, not fifty pieces in the world!

Indeed I have not!

I believe you! -- Your mamma Norton, I suppose -- But mum for that!

Unworthy Bella! -- The good woman, although low in circumstance, is great in
mind! Much greater than those who would impute meanness to a soul incapable of
it.

What then have you done with the sums given you from infancy to squander? --
Let me ask you (affecting archness), Has, has, has, Lovelace, has your Rake,
put it out at interest for you?

O that my sister would not make me blush for her! It is, however, out at
interest! -- And I hope it will bring me interest upon interest! -- Better than
to lie rusting in my cabinet, as yours does.

She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she should suppose I was aiming to
carry the County. Popularity! A crowd to follow me with their blessings, when I
went to and from church, and nobody else to be regarded, were agreeable
things! Housetop proclamations! I hid not my light under a bushel, she would
say that for me. But was it not a little hard upon me, to be kept from blazing
on a Sunday? -- And to be hindered from my charitable ostentations?

This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so largely contributed to my
confinement. -- But go on. You Will be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot wish to
be able to return this usage. -- Poor Bella! And I believe I smiled a little
too contemptuously for a sister.

None of my saucy contempts (rising in her voice): None of my poor Bella's,
with that air of superiority in a younger sister!

Well then, rich Bella! courtesying -- that will please you better -- And it is
due likewise to the hoards you boast of.

Look-ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are not a little more abject in
your meekness, a little more mean in your humility, and tre^t me with the
respect due to an elder sister -- you shall find --

Not that you will treat me worse than you have done, Bella! -- That cannot be;
unless you were to let fall your uplifted hand upon me -- And that would less
become you to do, than me to bear.

Good, meek creature! -- But you were upon your overtures just now! -- I shall
surprise everybody by tarrying so long. They will think some good may be done
with you -- And supper will be ready.

A tear would stray down my cheek -- How happy have I been, said I, sighing, in
the supper-time conversations, with all my dear friends in my eye, round the
hospitable board!

I met only with insult for this -- Bella has not a feeling heart: The highest
joy in this life she is not capable of: But then she saves herself many griefs,
by her impenetrableness. -- Yet, for ten times the pain that such a sensibility
is attended with, would I not part with the pleasure it brings with it.

She asked me, upon my turning from her, If she should say any thing below of
my compliances?

You may say, That I will do everything they would have me do, if they will
free me from Mr. Solmes's address.

This is all you desire at present, creeper-on! (What words she has!) But will
not the other man flame out, and roar most horribly, upon a prey's being snatched
from his paws, that he thought himself sure of?

I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall never come to a point. I
shall not matter his roaring, as you call it: I will promise him, that, if I
ever marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married. And if he be not
satisfied with such a condescension as this, I shall think he ought: And I will
give any assurances, that I will neither correspond with him, nor see him.
Surely this will do.

But I suppose then you will have no objection to see and converse, on a civil
foot, with Mr. Solmes -- as your papa's friend, or so?

No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment whenever he comes: I would
no more converse with the one, than correspond with the other: That would be to
make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on a belief, that I broke with him,
to have Mr. Solmes.

And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a control over you, that you
are not to be civil to your papa's friends, at his own house, for fear of
incensing him! -- When this comes to be represented, be so good as to tell me,
what it is you expect from it?

Everything, I said, or nothing, as she was pleased to represent it. -- Be so
good as to give it your interest, Bella: And say farther, That I will by any
means I can, in the Law, or otherwise, make over to my papa, to my uncles, or
even to my brother, all I am entitled to by my grandfather's will, as a
security for the performance of my promises. And as I shall have no reason to
expect any favor from my papa, if I break them, I shall not be worth
any-body's having. And further still, unkindly as my brother has used me, I
will go down to Scotland privately, as his housekeeper (I now see I may be
spared here), if he will promise to treat me no worse than he would do an hired
one. -- Or I will go to Florence, to my cousin Morden, if his stay in Italy
will admit of it: And, in either case, it may be given out, that I am gone to
the other; or to the world's end: I care not whither it is said I am gone, or
do go.

Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty proposal in writing?

Yes, with all my heart. And I stepped to my closet, and wrote to the purpose I
have mentioned; and, moreover, a few lines to my brother with it; expressing
'my concern for having offended him; beseeching him to support with his
interest the accompanying proposal; disdaining subterfuge and art; referring to
him to draw up a writing to bind me to the observance of my promises;
declaring, that what the law would not establish, my resolution should. -- I
told him, That he could do more than anybody to reconcile my father and mother
to me: And I should be infinitely obliged to him, if he would let me owe this
favor to his brotherly mediation.'

And how do you think Bella employed herself while I was writing? -- Why,
playing gently upon my harpsichord: And humming to it, to show her
unconcernedness.

When I approached her with what I had written, the cruel creature arose with
an air of levity -- Why, love, you have not written already! -- You have, I
protest! -- O what a ready penwoman! -- And may I read it?

If you please, Bella.

She read it; and burst into an affected laugh: How wise-ones may be taken in!
-- Then you did not know, that I was jesting with you all this time! -- And so
you would have me carry down this pretty piece of nonsense?

Don't let me be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness, Bella. I hope it is
but seeming. There can be no wit in such jesting as this.

The folly of the creature! How natural it is for people, when they set their
hearts upon anything, to think everybody must see with their eyes! -- Pray,
dear child, what becomes of your papa's authority here? -- Who stoops here, the
parent, or the child? -- How does this square with the engagements actually
agreed upon between your Papa and Mr. Solmes? What security, that your Rake
will not follow you to the world's-end? -- Pr'ythee, pr'ythee, take it back;
and put it to thy lovesick heart, and never think I will be laughed at for
being taken-in by thy whining nonsense. I know thee better, my dear. -- And,
with another spiteful laugh, she flung it on my toilette; and away she went. --
Contempts for contempts, as she passed! -- That Is for your poor Bella's!

Nevertheless, I enclosed what I had written, in a few lines directed to my
brother: As modestly as I could, accounting, from my sister's behavior, for
sending it down to him; lest she, having, in her passion, mistaken me, as I
said, should set what I had written in a worse light than, as I apprehended, it
deserved to appear in. The following is the answer I received to it, delivered
to me just as I was going to bed. His passion would not let him stay till
morning.

To Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE.
I Wonder that you have the courage to write to me, upon whom you are so
continually emptying your whole female quiver. I have no patience with you, for
reflecting upon me as the aggressor in a quarrel which owed its beginning to my
consideration for you.

You have made such confessions in a villain's favor, as ought to cause all
your relations to renounce you for ever. For my part, I will not believe any
woman in the world, who promises against her avowed inclination. To put it out
of your power to ruin yourself, is the only way lest to prevent your ruin. I
did not intend to write; but your too-kind sister has prevailed upon me. As to
your going into Scotland, that day of grace is over! -- Nor would I advise,
that you should go to grandfather-up your cousin Morden. Besides, that worthy
gentleman might be involved in some fatal dispute, upon your account; and then
be called the aggressor.

A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to propose to hide yourself
from your Rake, and to have falsehoods told, to conceal you! -- Your
confinement, at this rate, is the happiest thing that could befall you. Your
Bravo's behavior at church, looking out for you, is a sufficient indication of
his power over you, had you not so shamelesly acknowleged it.

One word for all -- If, for the honor of the family, I cannot carry this
point, I will retire to Scotland, and never see the face of any one of it more.

JA. HARLOWE.


There Is a brother! -- There Is flaming duty to a father, and mother, and
uncles! -- But he sees himself valued, and made of consequence; and he gives
himself airs accordingly! --

LETTER XLIII. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
Wednesday morning, 9 o'clock.
MY aunt Hervey lay here last night, and is but just gone from me. She came up
to me with my sister. They would not trust my aunt without this ill-natured
witness. When she entered my chamber, I told her, That this visit was a high
favor to a poor prisoner, in her hard confinement. I kissed her hand. She,
kindly saluting me, said, Why this distance to your aunt, my dear, who loves
you so well?

She owned, That she came to expostulate with me, for the peace sake of the
family: For that she could not believe it possible, if I did not conceive
myself unkindly treated, that I, who had ever shown such a sweetness of temper,
as well as manners, should be thus resolute, in a point so very near to my
father, and all my friends. My mamma and she were both willing to impute my
resolution to the manner I had been begun with; and to my supposing, that my
brother had originally more of a hand in the proposals made by Mr. Solmes, than
my father, or other friends. And fain would she have furnished me with an
excuse to come off of my opposition; Bella all the while humming a tune, and
opening this book and that, without meaning; but saying nothing. After having
showed me, that my opposition could not be of signification, my father's honor
being engaged, she concluded with enforcing upon me my duty, in stronger terms
than I believe she would have done, the circumstances of the case considered,
had not my sister been present. It would but be repeating what I have so often
mentioned, to give you the arguments that passed on both sides. So I will only
recite what she was pleased to say, that carried with it the face of newness.

When she found me inflexible, as she was pleased to call it, she said -- For
her part, she could not but say, that if I were not to have either Mr. Solmes
or Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friends easy, must marry, she should not
think amiss of Mr. Wyerley. What did I think of Mr. Wyerley?

Ay, Clary, put in my sister, what say you to Mr. Wyerley?

I saw through this immediately. It was said on purpose, I doubted not, to have
an argument against me of absolute prepossession in Lovelace's favor: Since
Mr. Wyerley everywhere proclaims his value, even to veneration, for me; and is
far less exceptionable, both in person and mind, than Mr. Solmes: And I was
willing to turn the tables, by trying how far Solme's terms might be dispensed
with; since the same terms could not be expected from Mr. Wyerley?

I therefore desired to know, Whether my answer, if it should be in favor of
Mr. Wyerley, would release me from Mr. Solmes? -- For I owned, that I had not
the aversion to him, that I had to the other.

Nay, she had no commission to propose such a thing -- She only knew, that my
papa and mamma would not be easy till Mr. Lovelace's hopes were entirely
defeated.

Cunning creature! said my sister. -- And this, and her joining in the
question-before, confirmed me, that it was a designed snare for me.

Don't YOU, dear Madam, said I, put questions that can answer no end, but to
support my brother's schemes against me. -- But are there any hopes of an end
to my sufferings and disgrace, without having this hated man imposed upon me?
Will not what I have offered be accepted? I am sure it ought: I will venture to
say That.

Why, niece, if there be not any such hopes, I presume you don't think yourself
absolved from the duty due from a child to her parents?

Yes, said my sister, I do not doubt but it is Miss Clary's aim, if she does
not fly to her Lovelace, to get her estate into her own hands, and go to live
at The Grove, in that independence upon which she builds all her perverseness.
And, dear heart! my little love, how will you then blaze away! Your mamma
Norton your oracle, with your Poor at your gates, mingling so proudly and so
meanly with the ragged herd! Reflecting, by your ostentation, upon all the
Ladies in the county, who do not as you do. This is known to be your scheme!
And the Poor without-doors, and Lovelace within, with one hand building up a
name, pulling it down with the other! -- O what a charming scheme is this! --
But let me tell you, my pretty little frighty one, that my papa's living Will
shall control my grandfather's dead one; and That estate will be disposed of
as my fond grandfather would have disposed of it, had he lived to see such a
change in his favorite. In a word, Miss, it will be kept out of your hands,
till my papa sees you discreet enough to have the management of it, or till you
can dutifully, by Law, tear it from him.

Fie, Miss Harlowe, said my aunt, this is not pretty to your sister.

O Madam, let her go on. This is nothing to what I have borne from Miss
Harlowe. She is either commissioned to treat me ill by her envy, or by an
higher authority, to which I must submit. -- As to revoking the estate, what
hinders, if I pleased? I know my power; but have not the least thought of
exerting it. Be pleased to let my papa know, that, whatever be the consequences
to myself, were he to turn me out of doors (which I should rather he would,
than to be confined and insulted as I am), and were I to be reduced to
indigence and want, I would seek no resources, that should be contrary to his
will.

For that matter, child, said my aunt, were you to marry, you must do as your
husband will have you. If that husband be Mr. Lovelace, he will be glad of any
opportunity of embroiling the families more. And let me tell you, niece, if he
had the respect for you he pretends to have, he would not be upon such
defiances as he is. He is known to be a very revengeful man; and were I you,
Miss Clary, I should be afraid he would wreak upon me that vengeance, though I
had not offended him, which he is continually threatening to pour upon the
family.

Mr. Lovelace's threatened vengeance is in return for threatened vengeance. It
is not everybody will bear insult, as, of late, I have been forced to bear it.

O how my sister's face shone with passion!

But Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, as I have said twenty and twenty times, would
be quite out of the question, were I to be generously treated!

My sister said something with great vehemence: But only raising my voice, to
be heard, without minding her, Pray, Madam, provokingly interrogated I, was he
not known to have been as wild a man, when he was at first introduced into our
family, as he now is said to be? Yet then, the common phrases of wild oats, and
black oxen, and suchlike, were qualifiers; and marriage, and the wise's
discretion, were to perform wonders -- But (turning to my sister) I find I have
sai^ too much.

O thou wicked reflecter! -- And what made me abhor him, think you, but the
proof of those villainous freedoms that ought to have had the same effect upon
you, were you but half so good a creature as you pretend to be?

Proof, did you say, Bella! I thought you had not proof? -- But you know best.
[Was not this very spiteful, my dear?]

Now, Clary, would I give a thousand pounds to know all that is in thy little
rancorous and reflecting heart, at this moment.

I might let you know for a much less sum, and not be afraid of being worse
treated than I have been.

Well, young Ladies, I am sorry to see things run so high between you. You
know, niece (to me), you had not been confined thus to your apartment, could
your mamma by condescensions, or your papa by authority, have been able to have
done any thing with you. But how can you expect, when there must be a
concession on one side, that it should be on theirs? If my Dolly, who has not
the hundredth part of your understanding, were thus to set herself up in
absolute contradiction to my will, in a point so material, I should not take it
well of her -- Indeed I should not.

I believe not, Madam: And if Miss Hervey had just such a brother, and just
such a sister (you may look, Bella!) -- and if both were to aggravate her
parents, as my brother and sister do mine -- Then, perhaps, you might use her
as I am used: And if she hated the man you proposed to her, and with as much
reason as I do Mr. Solmes --

[And loved a Rake and Libertine, Miss, as you do Lovelace, said my sister -- ]

Then might she (continued I, not minding her) beg to be excused from obeying.
But yet if she did, and would give you the most solemn assurances, and security
besides, that she never would have the man you disliked, against your consent
-- I dare say, Miss Hervey's father and mother would sit down satisfied, and
not endeavor to force her inclinations.

So! -- said my sister, with uplifted hands, father and mother now come in for
their share!

But if, child, replied my aunt, I knew she loved a Rake, and suspected, that
she sought only to gain time, in order to wire-draw me into a consent --

I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupting you; but if Miss Hervey could obtain
your consent, what further would be to be said?

True, child; but she never should.

Then, Madam, it never would be.

That I doubt, niece.

If you do, Madam, can you think confinement and ill usage is the way to
prevent the apprehended rashness?

My dear, this sort of intimation would make one but too apprehensive, that
there is no trusting to yourself, when one knows your inclination.

That apprehension, Madam, seems to have been conceived before this intimation
was made, or the least cause for it given. Why else the disgraceful confinement
I have been laid under? -- Let me venture to say, that my sufferings are rather
owing to designed terror, knowing there were too good grounds for my
opposition, than doubt of my conduct; for, when they were inflicted upon me
first, I had given no cause of doubt; nor should there now be room for any, if
my discretion might be trusted to.

My aunt, after a little hesitation, said, But, consider, my dear, what
confusion will be perpetuated in your family, if you marry this hated Lovelace?

And, let it be considered, what misery to me, Madam, if I marry that hated
Solmes?

Many a young creature has thought she could not love a man, with whom she has
afterward been very happy. Few women, child, marry their first loves.

That may be the reason there are so few happy marriages.

But there are few first-impressions fit to be encouraged.

I am afraid so too, Madam. I have a very indifferent opinion of light and
first impressions. But, as I have often said, all I wish for is, to have leave
to live single.

Indeed you must not, Miss. Your father and mother will be unhappy till they
see you married, and out of Lovelace's reach. -- I am told, that you propose to
condition with him (so far are matters gone between you), never to have any
man, if you have not him.

I know no better way to prevent mischief on all sides, I freely own it -- And
there is not, if he be out of the question, another man in the world, I can
think favorably of. -- Nevertheless, I would give all I have in the world,
that he were married to some other person -- Indeed I would, Bella, for all you
put on that smile of incredulity.

May be so, Clary: But I will smile for all that.

If he be out of the question! repeated my aunt -- So, Miss Clary, I see how it
is. -- I will go down. -- (Miss Harlowe, shall I follow you?) -- And I will
endeavor to persuade your papa to let my sister herself come up: And a happier
event may then result. --

Depend upon it, Madam, said my sister, This will be the case: My mamma and she
will be both in tears; but with this different effect; My mamma will come down
softened, and cut to the heart; but will leave her favorite hardened, from the
advantages she will think she has over my mamma's tenderness. -- Why, Madam, it
was for this very reason the girl is not admitted into her presence.

Thus she run on, as she went down-stairs.

LETTER XLIV. Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, To Miss HOW.
MY heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of seeing my mamma, and with the
shame and the grief of having given her so much uneasiness. But it needed not:
She was not permitted to come. But my aunt was so good as to return; yet not
without my sister: And, taking my hand, made me sit down by her.

She came, she must own, officiously, she said, this once more; though against
the opinion of my father: But knowing, and dreading, the consequence of my
opposition, she could not but come.

She then set forth to me, my friends expectations from me; Mr. Solmes's riches
(three times as rich he came out to be as anybody had thought him); the
settlements proposed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; their aversion to him; all
in a very strong light; but not a stronger, than my mamma had before placed
them in. My mamma, surely, could not have given the particulars of what had
passed between herself and me: If she had, my aunt would not have repeated many
of the same sentiments, as you will find she did, that had been still more
strongly urged, without effect, by her venerable sister.

She said, it would break the heart of my father to have it imagined, that he
had not a power over his child; and that, as he thought, for my own good: A
child too, whom they always had doated upon! -- Dearest, dearest Miss,
concluded she, clasping her fingers, with the most condescending earnestness,
let me beg of you for my sake, for your own sake, for a hundred sakes, to get
over this averseness, and give up your prejudices, and make every-one happy and
easy once more. -- I would kneel to you, my dearest niece -- Nay, I will kneel
to you! --

And down she dropped, and I with her, kneeling to her, and beseeching her not
to kneel; clasping my arms about her, and bathing her worthy bosom with my
tears!

Oh rise! rise! my beloved aunt, said I: You cut me to the heart with this
condescending goodness.

Say then, my dearest niece, say then, that you will oblige all your friends!
If you love us, I beseech you do!

How can I promise what I can sooner choose to die than to perform! --

Say then, my dear, you will consider of it. Say you will but reason with
yourself. Give us but hopes. Don't let me entreat, and thus entreat, in vain.
For still she kneeled, and I by her.

What a hard case is mine! -- Could I but doubt, I know I could conquer. --
That which is an inducement to my friends, is none at all to me! -- How often,
my dearest aunt, must I repeat the same thing! -- Let me but be single --
Cannot I live single? Let me be sent, as I have proposed, to Scotland, to
Florence; any-whither: Let me be sent a slave to the Indies; any-whither: Any
of these I will consent to. But I cannot, cannot think of giving my vows to a
man I cannot endure! --

Well then rising; (Bella silently, with uplifted hands, reproaching my
supposed perverseness) I see nothing can prevail with you to oblige us.

What can I do, my dearest aunt Hervey? What can I do? Were I capable of giving
a hope I meant not to enlarge, then could I say, I would consider of your kind
advice. But I would rather be thought perverse than insincere. Is there,
however, no medium? Can nothing be thought of? Will nothing do, but to have a
man who is the more disgustful to me, because he is unjust in the very articles
he offers?

Who now, Clary, said my sister, do you reflect upon? Consider That.

Make not invidious applications of what I say, Bella. It may not be looked
upon in the same light by every one. The giver and the accepter are principally
answerable, in an unjust donation. While I think of it in this light, I should
be inexcusable to be the latter. But why do I enter upon a supposition of this
nature? My heart, as I have often, often said, recoils at the thoughts of the
man, in every light. -- Whose father, but mine, agrees upon articles, where
there is no prospect of a liking? Where the direct contrary is avowed, all
along avowed, without the least variation, or shadow of a change of sentiment?
-- But it is not my father's doing originally. O my cruel, cruel brother, to
cause a measure to be forced upon me, which he would not behave tolerably
under, were the like to be offered to him!

The girl is got into her altitudes, aunt Hervey, said my sister. You see,
Madam, she spares nobody. Be pleased to let her know what she has to trust to.
Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam, pronounce her doom.

My aunt retired to the window, weeping, with my sister in her hand: I cannot,
indeed I cannot, Miss Harlowe, said she, softly (but yet I heard every word she
said): There is great hardship in her case. She is a noble child, after all.
What pity things are gone so far! But Mr. Solmes ought to be told to desist.

O Madam, said my sister, in a kind of loud whisper, are you caught too by the
little Siren? -- My mamma did well not to come up! -- I question whether my
papa himself, after his first indignation, would not be turned round by her.
Nobody but my brother can do anything with her, I am sure.

Don't think of your brother's coming up, said my aunt, still in a low voice --
He is too furious by much. I see no obstinacy, no perverseness in her manner!
If your brother comes, I will not be answerable for the consequences: For I
thought twice or thrice she would have gone into fits.

O Madam, she has a strong heart! -- And you see there is no prevailing upon
her, though you were upon your knees to her.

My sister left my aunt musing at the window, with her back toward us; and
took that opportunity to insult me still more barbarously: For, stepping to my
closet, she took up the patterns which my mamma had sent me up, and bringing
them to me, she spread them upon the chair by me; and, offering one, and then
another, upon her sleeve and shoulder, Thus she ran on, with great seeming
tranquillity, but whisperingly, that my aunt might not hear her. This, Clary,
is a pretty pattern enough: But This is quite charming! I would advise you to
make your appearance in it. And This, were I you, should be my wedding
nightgown -- and This my second dressed suit! Will Not you give orders, love, to
have your grandmother's jewels new set? -- Or will you think to show away in
the new ones that Mr. Solmes intends to present to you? He talks of laying out
two or three thousand pounds in presents, child! Dear heart! -- How gorgeously
will you be arrayed! -- What! silent, my dear, mamma Norton's sweet dear! What!
silent still? -- But, Clary, will not you have a Velvet suit? It would cut a great
figure in a country church, you know: And the weather may bear it for a month
yet to come. Crimson Velvet, suppose! Such a fine complexion as yours, how
would it be set off by it! What an agreeable blush would it give you! --
High-ho! (mocking me; for I sighed to be thus fooled with): And do you sigh,
love? -- Well then, as it will be a solemn wedding, what think you of black
Velvet, child? -- Silent still, Clary! -- Black Velvet, so fair as you are,
with those charming eyes, gleaming through a wintry cloud, like an April Sun! --
Does not Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes! -- How lovely will you
appear to every one! -- What! silent still, love! -- But about your laces,
Clary! --

She would have gone on still further, had not my aunt advanced toward us,
wiping her eyes -- What! whispering, Ladies! You seem so easy and so pleased,
Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I hope I shall carry down good
news.

I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns, here. -- Unasked indeed. --
But she seems, by her silence, to approve of my judgment.

O Bella! said I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken you at your word! -- You had
before now been exercising your judgment on your own account: And I had been
happy, as well as you! -- Was it my fault, I pray you, that it was not so? -- O
how she raved!

To be so ready to give, Bella, and so loath to take, is not very fair in you.

The poor Bella descended to call names.

Why, sister, said I, you are as angry, as if there were more in the hint, than
possibly might be designed. My wish is sincere, for both our sakes! -- for the
whole family's sake! -- And what (good now) is there in it? -- Do not, do not,
dear Bella, give me cause to suspect, that I have found a reason for your
unsisterly behavior to me; and which till now was wholly unaccountable from
sister to sister --

Fie, fie, Miss Clary! said my aunt.

My sister was more and more outrageous.

O how much fitter, said I, to be a jest, than a jester! -- But now, Bella,
turn the glass to you, and see how poorly sits the robe upon your own
shoulders, which you have been so unmercifully fixing upon mine!

Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeated my aunt.

And fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe, you would say, were you
to have heard her barbarous insults upon me!

Let us go, Madam, said my sister, with great violence; let us leave the
creature to swell till she bursts with her own poison. -- The last time I will
ever come near her, in the mind I am in!

It is so easy a thing, returned I, were I to be mean enough to follow an
example that is so censureable in the setter of it, to vanquish such a teazing
spirit as yours, with its own blunt weapons, that I am amazed you will provoke
me! -- Yet, Bella, since you will go (for she had hurried to the door), forgive
me: I do you. And you have a double reason to do so, both from eldership, and
the offense so studiously given to one in affliction. -- But may you be happy,
though I never shall! -- May you never have half the trials I have had! Be this
your comfort, that you cannot have a sister to treat you, as you have treated
me! And so God bless you!

O thou art a -- And down she flung without saying what.

Permit me, Madam, said I to my aunt, sinking down, and clasping her knees with
my arms, to detain you one moment -- Not to say any thing about my poor sister
-- She is her own punisher -- Only to thank you for all your condescending
goodness to me. I only beg of you, not to impute to obstinacy the
immoveableness I have shown to so tender a friend; and to forgive me every
thing I have said or done amiss in your presence: For it has not proceeded from
inward rancour to the poor Bella. But I will be bold to say, that neither She,
nor my Brother, nor even my Father himself, knows what a heart they have set a
bleeding.

I saw, to my comfort, what effect my sister's absence wrought for me. -- Rise,
my noble-minded niece! -- charming creature! -- [Those were her kind words]
kneel not to me! -- Keep to yourself what I now say to you: I admire you more
than I can express -- And if you can forbear claiming your estate, and can
resolve to avoid Lovelace, you will continue to be the greatest miracle I ever
knew at your years. -- But I must hasten down after your sister. -- These are
my last words to you: Conform to your father's will, if you possibly can. How
meritorious will it be in you to do so! Pray to God to enable you to conform.
You don't know what may be done.

Only, my dear aunt, one word, one word more (for she was going) -- Speak up
all you can for my dear Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: Should ill
health overtake her, she may not know how to live without my mamma's favor. I
shall have no means to help her; for I will want necessaries before I will
assert my right: And I do assure you, she has said so many things to me in
behalf of my resigning to my father's will, that her arguments have not a
little contributed to make me resolve to avoid the extremities, which
nevertheless I pray to God they do not at last force me upon. And yet they
deprive me of her advice, and think unjustly of one of the most excellent of
women.

I am glad to hear you say This: And take This, and This, and This, my charming
niece (for so she called me at every word almost); kissing me earnestly, and
clasping her arms about my neck: And God protect you, and direct you! But you
must submit: Indeed you must. Some one day in a month from This, is all the
choice that is left you.

And this, I suppose, was the doom my sister called for; yet not worse than
what had been pronounced upon me before.

She repeated these last sentences louder than the former. And remember, Miss,
added she, it is your duty to comply -- And down she went, leaving me with my
heart full, and my eyes running over.

The very repetition of this, fills me with almost equal concern, to that which
I felt at the time. I can write no more; mistinesses of all the colors in the
rainbow twinkling upon my deluged eye.

Wednesday, Five o'Clock.
I WILL add a few lines -- My aunt, as she went down from me, was met at the
foot of the stairs by my sister, who seemed to think she had stayed a good
while after her: And hearing her last words prescribing to me implicit duty,
praised her for it, and exclaimed against my obstinacy, with, Did you ever hear
of such perverseness, Madam? Could you have thought, that your Clarissa, and
every body's Clarissa, was such a girl? -- And who, as you said, is to submit,
her father or she?

My aunt said something in answer to her, compassionating me, as I thought, by
her accent: But I heard not the words.

Such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable! -- But my brother
and sister are continually misrepresenting all I say and do; and I am deprived
of the opportunity of defending myself! -- My sister says See p. 287.
, that had they thought me such a championess, they would not have engaged with
me: And now, not knowing how to reconcile my supposed obstinacy with my general
character, and natural temper, they seem to hope to tire me out, and resolve to
vary their measures accordingly. My brother, you see, In his Let. p. 297.
, is determined to carry this point, or to abandon Harlowe-place, and never to
see it more: -- So they are to lose a son, or to conquer a daughter -- the
perversest and most ungrateful that ever parents had! -- This is the light he
places things in: And has undertaken, it seems, to subdue me, if his advice be
followed. It will be further tried, that I am convinced of; and what will be
their next measure, who can divine?

I shall dispatch, with this, my answer to yours of Sunday last; begun on
Monday See Let. xl.
; but which is not yet quite finished. It is too long to copy: I have not time
for it. In it I have been very free with you, my dear, in more places than one.
I cannot say, that I am pleased with all I have written: -- Yet will not now
alter it. -- My mind is not at ease enough for the subject. -- Don't be angry
with me. Yet, if you can excuse one or two passages, it will be, because they
were written by

Your CLARISSA HARLOWE.


END of VOL. I.

