THE FAIR CIRCASSIAN. A TRAGEDY.

[Price 1 s. 6 d.]

THE FAIR CIRCASSIAN. A TRAGEDY. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE,

BY THE AUTHOR OF SYMPATHY, A POEM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR R. BALDWIN, NO. 47, PATERNOSTER ROW. M DCC LXXXI.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES.
SIR,
YOU are of an age when the heart opens to the most warm and generous
impressions; an age, when all that gives worth and dignity to elevated rank,
takes full possession of the bosom. At this bright and unprejudiced crisis of
your life, the precepts of Omar and the practice of Hamet, as drawn by
Hawkesworth, and dramatized by the author of this tragedy, will win upon your
attention; not indeed by the attraction of poetry, but by the natural reverence
which unspotted youth ever renders, and with delight, to faithful
representations of wisdom and of virtue; the wisdom of the patriot, the virtue
of the prince.

That your Royal Highness may very long reflect blessings on the people of
England, and prove a distinguished honor to the illustrious family who have
that generous people in charge, is the zealous prayer, as it is the most
empassioned expectation, of

YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS's Most devoted, And most dutiful servant, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THIS tragedy borrows its general story, and some of its incidents, with as
much of its sentiment as could be preserved, from the very beautiful "Almoran
and Hamet" of Hawkesworth. Except that truth and justice call for such
acknowledgement, it would on any other score have been unnecessary; for what
can be added to the fame of a work universally celebrated? The original
machinery has been rejected, because it would have been too daring an attempt
to interweave it with the fable of a modern composition, and perhaps too mighty
a task to manage without violating the first great law of dramatick
probability. At the same time, it has been the author's most assiduous
endeavor, to "convert the sententious display of eastern wisdom, as far as
character would permit, into the language of passion, varied by every motive
which might most forcibly affect the human mind in the most warm and
interesting situations." These are the words of a critic, who seems fully to
have penetrated the design of the author. The lines with inverted commas were
omitted in the representation, to favor the rapidity of the action. They are
retained in the printed copy, not more at the instance of particular friends,
than on general experience that those passages which retard the force of the
passion on the theater, are frequently read with most satisfaction in the
closet.

The Play still continuing to be received on the stage with the most brilliant
success, the author would but half discharge the debt of equity were he to
confess obligations to Hawkesworth only. The liberal, perhaps the unequalled
support which the managers have afforded by the scenery, the interesting manner
in which Mr. Linley has set the Epithalamium, the taste of Mr. De Loutherberg,
and the splendor which the performers have thrown over the characters by their
EXCELLENT representation, demand and receive the most warm and pointed
expressions of gratitude. There remains but one tribute of justice more, and
that is due to Mr. Sheridan, whose attention has, on this occasion, been
friendship, and whose assistance must always be fame.

PROLOGUE
BY A FRIEND. Spoken by Mr. BANNISTER, Jun.
WITH trembling steps, as if suspicious grown,
Why does the tragic muse approach her throne?
Her golden throne, where once with grace divine,
The goddess sat, "supreme of all the nine."
Turns her fair palace to the festive bower,
Where jest and sport usurp her nobler power?
Lost is each lovelier feeling that imparts
To her the sovereign rule over British hearts?
Sunk the pure taste which once secured her sway,
Or wanes that virtue which admired her lay?
Vain fears! A generous race assembled here,
Still pay to grief compassion's softest tear;
Still pay the heartfelt sigh which Britons owe
To nature's feelings, and to nature's woe.
When jealous fiends Othello's heart strings tear,
When guilty Richard groans with dire despair;
When injured Lear, with torturing anguish wild,
Pours the deep curse on each ungrateful child;
When plaintiff notes speak poor Ophelia's woes,
Or love in Juliet's tender bosom glows;
The glistening eye, the trembling lip proclaim
Nature and virtue here are still the same.
In sceptered state affliction's soothing strain
Still in YOUR bosoms fix their steadfast reign --
Blessed seat of empire! Where the affections wait,
To shield the mourner from the shocks of fate --
Where the best passions with allegiance fair,
For suffering worth the healing balms prepare;
Nor ever shall your hearts such rights forego;
What social sorrow asks, these hearts shall still bestow!
No longer then oppressed with anxious fear,
The muse shall REASUME her station here --
Shall court each virtue that is a nation's pride,
And gain the nobler passions to her side. --
If, in the tenor of her pensive lay,
In nature's path, TO NIGHT she holds her way;
If she excites the sympathising mind,
To generous acts, the glory of our kind!
This dread To the Pit.
tribunal, shall suspend its zeal,
Spurn its proud office, and grow proud to feel:
This radiant To the Boxes.
circle too her hopes approve,
And grace the triumph of the muse they love!

The following prologue, from an honour-giving muse, of which it is truly
worthy, did not arrive till after Mr. Bannister was put in possession of the
excellent poetry which precedes it; and which another ingenious friend had been
solicited to supply. The author of the tragedy, however, thinks Miss Seward's
composition too valuable to circulate only in manuscript. Indeed, to keep such
verses out of print, would not only be a private injury to the piece (which
they will adorn) but an unpardonable injustice to the public.

PROLOGUE
BY MISS SEWARD.
SLOW from an ebon throne's majestic height,
A lovely form descends upon my sight!
The floating purple, and the lofty mien
Proclaim the empress of the tragic scene,
Divine Melpomene! -- Aggrieved she stands,
Her tears fast falling on her folded hands.
The show'ry cloud thus dims the azure skies,
Thus round the moon the misty halos rise.
Why, beauteous mourner, ere the hour of woe,
Throb those quick sighs, those crystal sorrows flow?
Thy Fair Circassian yet no griefs molest,
Nor love, nor fear assail her virgin breast!
But soft! -- the muse of anguish sadly speaks!
Faint on my ear the murmuring accent breaks;
Low hollow gales its mournful sounds convey,
And thus the goddess says -- or seems to say:
"Can then the tender female bosom prove
"A keener pang than disappointed love?
"Ah me! -- For light Thalia more than shares
"My darling Sheridan's too partial cares:
"On her vain brows his lavish wreaths are thrown,
"His thousand radiant gems emblaze her zone!
"What though she gave to his supreme command
"Each laughing grace that waits her potent wand,
"Yet with sublimer force my chemic-fire
"'With proud distinction decked his sacred lyre;' Parody on a beautiful line
in Mr. Sheridan's monody.

"To purest gold its warbling wires I turned,
"When their sweet lays over lifeless Garrick mourned.
"And once he sung in See prologue to Semiramis.
elevated strain
"My charms superior, and my right to reign;
"Then, with the majesty my impulse throws
"In chasten'd splendour round the poet's brows,
"He bade the tears that streamed over Asia's queen,
"Flow soft in real sorrow's lonely scene. --
"But soon he smiled those graceful tears away,
"And faithless owned my frolic rival's sway.
"Perchance, however, the jocund pride of youth
"Alone has warped from me his love and truth;
"Ere long the rover may again be mine,
"And with his blooming laurels deck my shrine!
"This night no vulgar hand the meed bestows,
"That now for me in pristine beauty glows. --
"Oh! may the fost'ring breath of public praise
"Preserve from cruel blight the votive bays!"
I hear no more -- For, with a pensive smile,
Slow glides the muse down yonder winding isle!
May you, ye brave and wise, ye good and fair,
Fulfill with suffrage kind her fervent prayer!
And since no force of wit and comic art
Can shut to pity's plaint the British heart,
We hope your just applause may bless our bard,
His first ambition, and his bright reward.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ALMORAN MR. PALMER. HAMET MR. SMITH. OMAR MR. BENLLEY. ALI MR. PACKER. CALED
MR. FARREN. OSMYN MR. R. PALMER. PRINCIPAL IMAN MR. WRIGHTEN. ALMEIDA MISS
FARREN. CRISANTHE MISS SIMPSON. ASIATIC AMBASSADORS, GUARDS, EUNUCHS, MUTES,
etc.
SCENE PERSIA.

THE FAIR CIRCASSIAN. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A BEAUTIFUL GARDEN IN THE ORIENTAL TASTE, WITH SEVERAL RICH
PAVILIONS, AND A SIDE VIEW OF A MAGNIFICENT PALACE ADJOINING. THE ROYAL
APARTMENTS OPEN INTO THE GARDEN THROUGH A SPLENDID PORTICO. SCENE I.
ALI, CALED. ALI. CALED, behold once more our Persian court
From twice six moons of mourning for the king,
Great Solomon emerge, bright as yon sun,
From the surrounding shades of sable night --
That gorgeous palace re-assumes its luster,
And these pavilions once more breathe around
The soul of eastern fragrance.

CALED. Ali, yes;
Hither advance from Asia's vassal shores,
Ambassadors, high fraught with luscious burdens,
Till Persia blooms in flattery: Late they came
With solemn homage to condole; and now,
Heaping their lavish incense on our shrines,
Congratulation wreathes the ready smile.
The scene is fair, my friend; but soon again
Shall each proud blossom of the realm be withered.

ALI. Thou think that Solomon has ill bequeathed
The crown between his sons.

CALED. Has ill bequeathed!
To bind the warring elements, to fix
In closest league the extremes of frost and fire,
And every opposite in nature force
Into reluctant union. -- Such, my friend,
Such is the will of Solomon.

ALI. The king
Was scarce entombed, ere brooding jealousies
Broke forth. -- Remember'st thou the hour
When Omar, with the lords of state around,
The will first gave to Almoran? Ye heavens!
How proud the triumph, while with subject zeal,
Unconscious of his fortune Hamet bowed.
And, oh, what deep abasement followed swift
Upon the elder king as Omar drew
From the concealing robe another scroll,
That named young Hamet partner of the throne!

CALED. Preposterous distribution! thus to leave
A splendid source of endless discontent.

ALI. And this in spite of Omar's bearded wisdom.


CALED. Omar the sage, to whom the seal of Solomon,
In royal confidence was still revealed.
Omar, who trims the lonely lamp of wisdom,
When half the lazy globe is wrapped in slumber.
Omar, the prince's guardian, master, oracle;
The proud philosopher, the seer profound;
That he should thus dispose the dotard's scepter,
And get the start of men like thee, my Ali.

ALI. Ali's holy function still protects him
Fom every rebel murmur of ambition.

CALED. Ali, it is false -- I know thy temper better.
Like some repining spirit here thou walk'st,
And yon thrice blessed orb has witnessed often,
Thy soul's deep sigh at Omar's better fortune.
Here do thou dwindle in the train of courtiers,
At once deemed inoffensive, unimportant,
A mitr'd slave of Hamet's royal household,
While Omar --

ALI. Rules half the Persian empire;
Directs, proscribes, and governs uncontrolled.

CALED. Ali, meantime, with tame dominion, sways
A band of humble Imans, poor and prostrate;
Or bids the peasant tremble at the altar,
As superstition points the labored omen.
O vain pre-eminence of pageant priesthood,
Compared with seats sublime, that Ali's soul
Is yet, I trust the fates, decreed to fill.

ALI. Forbear, my friend -- O Caled, tempt no more;
Wake not the fatal flame I long have smothered:
Already have thy strong suggestions led
My feet astray -- Even now, against command
Of him I serve, of Hamet, and --

CALED. Of Omar.


ALI. Well then, of Omar -- since it must be so,
Have I contrived that Almoran should view
That hidden treasure of the lovesick kin,
That fair Circassian --

CALED. Thou have, I own it --
There, there, my friend, springs up another cause
Of rivalry and vengeance.

ALI. Vengeance!


CALED. Away with counterfeitings, forced disguises --
I Have read thy heart. Converse we then like men
That know each other's bias. Ali, my friend,
My reverend friend, we both are wronged and outrag'd:
Me, Hamet, by his minister, has thrust
From that rich sunshine where so long I bask'd
In the broad ray of Hamet's royal favor.
THY state is tottering too -- insulted priest!
Head of thy tribe no longer then the glance
Of Omar shall dismiss thee deep degraded --
Now, if no false concealments, wayward scruples --

ALI. 'Twere best confer apart -- it is near the hour
When the Circassian lady --

CALED. See she comes.
With speed retire --

ALI. Should Hamet or should Omar --


CALED (going.) Short be their sway. --


ALI (going.) Much have thou moved me, Caled.


CALED. Much are we wronged.


ALI. This way are we secure.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
ALMEIDA, CRISANTHE. ALMEIDA. Yes, my Crisanthe, I confess it all,
Confess that I am happy: Still remembrance
Steals over my conscious heart her sweet ideas,
And in soft vision charms Almeida's bosom.

CRISANTHE. And Hamet well deserves --


ALMEIDA. Deserves, Crisanthe!
Not all the lavish luxury of praise
By Imans offered at the holy altars;
Not the rich tides of eloquence that roll
Upon the poet's tongue, by every muse,
And every god inspired, to grace the song,
Can pay just tribute to the soul of Hamet:
It Is not my friend the busy breath of rumor
That pours the doubtful hint into the ear,
The dazzling scepter, the effulgent robe,
Nor yet the vollied burst of public fame
Which stamps true splendour on the hearts of kings.
Arrayed in ALL these trappings they may beat
Less fair, less friendly to the rights of man,
And fill a smaller space in nature's circle
Than the poor peasant toiling at the car,
Monarch of many a private, useful virtue,
Without the power, the dangerous power, to prove
A tyrant -- over the rest of human kind.

CRISAN THE. But even the untutored clown delighted talks
Of Hamet's princely virtues.

ALMEIDA. Oh, he does!
Each hind may see the royal soul expand
Like some etherial light supplying fire,
That feeds unnumber'd stars with constant rays:
But, oh Crisanthe, never can he see.
The soft enchantments of the tender heart,
Friendship's divine effusion, love's pure flame,
Each grace of life retired. -- These shine alone
Like silent dews that shed their balms unheard;
Like planets deep in heaven, that bless unseen
The favored few that share the sacred hour.

CRISANTHE. The sacred hour reserved for fair Almeida:
But say, my gentle friend -- for still delayed
The tale of wonder -- heard but yet in part --
Did he not act like some superior power
When he with venurous arm rushed through the flames
To save thee from destruction?

ALMEIDA. Like a god,
My guardian god! Hear then, in full, the story.
Midnight had hung the silent air in black,
Not one bright star displayed it is beamy brow,
The wat'ry-bosom'd clouds were bent to earth,
When swift the desolating light'ning's flash
Spread the far-blazing ruin through the palace.
Sudden it struck my venerable sire:
In vain I pressed him in these filial arms --
He fell -- In that tremendous moment
Came my deliverer, my king, my Hamet,
And rescued child and parent from the flames.

CRISANTHE. Gracious Heaven!


ALMEIDA. Soon as fled sense returned,
I saw the gentle, generous, kneeling king
Bent in soft sorrows over his wretched charge;
And as the deep confusion tinged my cheek
With tender force he strained me to his heart;
While good Abdallah, by his care protected,
From all the hurry of the court reposes;
And still unable as the veteran is
To view the sun, or move from his pale couch
He cheery laughs, thou know, the hours away,
Still Hamet or Almeida by his side.

CRISANTHE. Behold the king -- The royal lover comes.


ALMEIDA. Ah, faithful fondness -- leave us, gentle friend --
Yet stay, Crisanthe -- Stay, attest his kindness.

SCENE III.
HAMET, ALMEIDA, CRISANTHE. HAMET. Dear, heavenly maid -- thou treasure of my
soul,
How poor is language to the feeling heart?
Oh, let me thus supply the want of words,
Thus speak the transports of my wondrous fondness.

ALMEIDA. How shall Almeida mark her gratitude?


Offering to kneel. HAMET. Almeida rise: Oh do not thus o'erpay
The common duties of a common man:
To help the wretched is the debt of nature;
A debt, which every honest mind should pay
To all that wear the kindred forms of men.

ALMEIDA. Oh Hamet -- Oh my king -- if rising blushes --
If these reveal not -- the obedient subject --

HAMET. Obedient subject! most unkind Almeida;
Rob not the great prerogative of virtue,
The generous bosom knows no vain superior;
And pitied be the wretch, or king, or subject
Who at proud distance holds the heart he loves.

ALMEIDA. Thou have subdued -- I can conceal no more:
My humble station bade me long restrain
Affection for a prince, for Persia's king,
But now --

HAMET. Yes now receive,
Now deign to share my love, my life, my throne.
Oh, witness heaven the glowing exultation,
Witness the triumphs of this throbbing heart,
As thus it owns Almeida for a queen.
And yet my brother --

ALMEIDA. What of him, my lord?


HAMET. Oh, I have doubts --


ALMEIDA. Ha! doubts -- have doubts my lord?


HAMET. How shall I speak, Almeida, to thy softness?
How hope thy pardon for a tender fraud?
By some dire chance my brother knows our story,
And, as in jest, he taxed me with concealment,
Desired to view a sister in Almeida.

ALMEIDA. Where was the fault in this, or where the danger?


HAMET. At this, a sudden sickness seized my heart;
'Twas plain I loved -- he pierced the thin disguise,
Enjoyed my pain, and triumphed in discovery.

ALMEIDA. And what of that? Your feelings are too nice,
Too delicately fine to bear the shaft;
Which laughter ever levels at the lover,
Spirits less lively meet the mirth with smiles,
And wit's pert jest falls pointless to the ground.

HAMET. How little do thou know the soul of Almoran,
That even blazes at the view of beauty;
How would he catch soft fury from this hand,
And drink large draughts of passion from those eyes?
And then --

ALMEIDA. What then, my lord?
Have thou no credit in Almeida's faith?
Ungenerous prince! the heart that rules this bosom
Courts not the kingly crown, nor splendid scepter.
Had thou been born the lowliest of the poor,
Still had I sought alliance with thy virtues,
Still had I scorned variety of lovers.

HAMET. I know it all, dear maid; I know it all;
Yet, Almoran --

ALMEIDA. Can Almoran forget
The ties of nature, or the bonds of honor,
The dear domestic duties of the brother,
The awful virtues of the public station,
The law which binds the monarch to the man?
Or if he could, and this ill-fated form
Should chance to touch him with a transient passion,
What would avail the momentary liking?
Soon would his power o'erlook an humble maid,
And gladly leave her to the partial Hamet.
Or at the worst -- should he pursue Almeida,
Firm in the pure resolves of virtuous love
Even I, the subject daughter of Abdallah,
Bold in her virgin truth, would own her fondness,
Assert the native freedom of the heart,
Clasp her loved lord, and thus avow her passion.

HAMET. Oh, thou dear maid -- once more receive my thanks;

embracing. Receive a willing heart that doats to death!
Forgive the delicate alarms of love:
I have no doubts -- my sickly fears are past,
I tread in ether and I breathe in heaven!
I am -- oh, all ye Powers -- I am most blessed.

ALMEIDA. My lord, behold --


Seeing Almoran and Caled at a distance. HAMET. It Is Almoran with Caled --
haste my love
And shield thy beauties from his dangerous gaze,
In this pavilion -- Soon he will be gone,
Ah! quick retire, and ever tomorrow's dawn
I will prepare -- by heaven they are here -- away.

Hamet conducts Almeida into a pavilion. SCENE IV.
ALMORAN, CALED. CALED. Yonder, my lord, he steals.


ALMORAN. But where the lady?


CALED. Dread sire, I see her not.


ALMORAN. Did thou not leave him with her?


CALED. Hypocrisy assist thy long tried favorite.
aside. I left him lost in one soft dream of passion,
Invoking every power fantastical
To register his vows -- then would he kneel,
Her lovely hand embathe with sigh-sick tears,
And earnest press it to his glowing bosom;
While she --

ALMORAN. Go on.


CALED. Repulsed his freedom
With a sweet resistance -- and in soft coyness
Sported with refusal.

ALMORAN. Spoke they of me,
Or ought suspects my brother I have seen her?

CALED (looking.) Methought, my lord, I saw in yon pavillion
A female robe that -- yes, by heaven it is she.
going up. Oh powers of heaven! behold, my lord, behold,
See where she walks -- what majesty of mein?
looking out. What native beauties in her artless air?
Soft as the first fair breeze that fans the spring.
What glories beam even from her downcast eye!
While her disorder wales a newborn charm
As the bloom ripens on her rosy lips!

ALMORAN. At every glance more lovely than before;
Never did each feature flame so full to view,
Caled, by heaven her eye shot suns, out-blaz'd
That symbol of the God to which we bow.

CALED. Well may the happy Hamet wish to screen
The fair recluse from each obtrusive eye,
And hide her from an elder brother's gaze.
Ah! heaven preserve the sultan of the world,
My sovereign labors with some secret sorrow;
Oh, that the slave could aught administer
To his imperial master!

ALMORAN. Ha! imperial
Said thou Caled? that I were imperial;
aside. My pulses fever at the glorious thought.
Caled.

CALED. My lord.


ALMORAN. I will no more disguise -- Caled -- hither --
Yet nearer -- love thou thy sovereign master?
I know thou do, I read it in thine eye,
I Will trust thee -- thou shall share a secret, Caled,
Denied to every vassal but thyself.

CALED. Great ruler of the East whose boundless sway --

prostrates.
ALMORAN. Rise and approach. Still closer and attend --
Thrice has the year renewed the robes of spring,
Since from the circling crowds that guard the palace,
An undistinguished multitude of slaves,
Thee I marked out for favor, bade thee meet
The eye of Almoran without prostration,
And ranked thee next to Osmyn.

CALED. Next to Osmyn.

aside,
ALMORAN. In thy settled look
Firm and unawed, I saw the aspiring soul
That suited well the servant of a prince,
Soon to be more -- At length my father died,
The throne I mounted -- a divided throne.

CALED (kneeling.) Essence of light and life, assist my prayer;
Angel of death, quick moulder in the dust
The officious Omar's bold and busy hand,
Which brought the will of Solomon to light,
And thus curtailed the rights of Almoran.

ALMORAN. Since that most wretched, most disgraceful moment,
Mark its return my soul -- Since that cursed hour.
No joy, no transport has this bosom known;
Nor shall these watchful, waking eyes ever close,
Ever taste again the balmy bliss of sleep,
Till --

CALED. Every bar to empire, love, and glory,
And each dire obstacle be swept away.

ALMORAN. Thy sovereign's soul is on thy lip -- but how?
How compass these great ends?

CALED. Great ends require
Means well proportioned, and such means
Are ever ready to the mind resolved.
Honest Ambition, in expedients fruitful,
Still crowds a thousand images at once
Upon the forming brain -- the dart -- the bowl,
The smiling banquet, and the midnight sabre.

ALMORAN. My boundless hopes are rushing to a point.
Declare thy purpose -- Caled speak direct.

CALED. Direct then thus -- My sover'ign would be king,
Supreme, sole, undivided, fill the throne
Without a weak associate -- be the fate
Of subject earth -- The thought is great -- and great
Must be the enterprise -- naught less than --

ALMORAN. What!


CALED. Death.


ALMORAN. Said thou?


CALED. Murder.


ALMORAN. Whose?


CALED. What need of names? but still to be direct,
The man that thwarts thee in the road to glory,
That stops thee midway in the bright career,
And intercepts thy radiance --

ALMORAN. Ha! my brother!
Murder! my very heart turns from it. No,
One mother gave us being. We were twins.
The bloomy days of youth were passed together;
He ever loved me, made this breast his pillow,
And wept upon it all his little sorrows;
Long, long ere love or mad ambition
The rosy bonds of Nature broke and made
Us rivals -- And shall I murder Hamet?

CALED. Empire and love shall consecrate the deed,
But I have erred, and will offend no more,
Hamet loves rule, and therefore shares the throne,
If Omar aids, perhaps shall more than share it.
Perhaps the wily sage --

ALMORAN. Audacious traitor!
Think thou the feeble dotard ever will dare --

CALED. The snake, my lord, that twists around the feet,
With bold aspiring crest at length may tower
Even to the seat of life.

ALMORAN. First will I seize
With arm indignant its impoison'd throat,
Dash the fell viper instant to the earth,
And see it writhe its life out in the dust.

CALED. The happy younger king too, runs before
Even in the race of love: auspicious still
The fair Circassian melts before he sighs;
Soon shall the Persian throne confess a queen;
Again the mangled crown shall know division,
And a fair third of empire yield to her,
To Hamet's beauteous wife, divine Almeida.

ALMORAN. Hold, Caled, hold -- shall Almoran then stoop
To see his rich inheritance thus torn,
Thus ravished, plundered by each bold usurper,
And made the prey of vassals, boys, and women!
Caled, dispatch -- concert the great design --
Quick let us be gone -- I sicken at delay;
Love, empire, and ambition, drive me on;
Methinks already I redeem the scepter,
And over the obedient world triumphant wave it.
The awful name of Almoran alone
Floats on the faithful gale -- from shore to shore
The undiminish'd homage spreads around,
And my defrauded world's at length restored.

CALED. Oh, glorious emulation -- By yon heaven
I light ambition at my master's blaze!
The soul of Caled catches fire from his;
I rise, I tower to do some noble deed
That the imperial Almoran shall fix,
Secure, uncrouded on his rightful throne.

ALMORAN. Then take a rich reward -- thy king's embrace.
But oh, this languid pause! I pine, I die,
'Till from that boy's encircled brow I seize
My sullied diadem, and place it here.
Oh, how my soul exults in the idea;
Then shall I revel in Almeida's beauties;
Then each high bliss by turns shall know and prove
The fate and fortune of our Eastern world.

Exeunt. END OF ACT THE FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A VIEW OF THE TOMBS OF THE KINGS OF PERSIA, CUT OUT OF THE ROCKS, AND A
PROSPECT OF A VENERABLE MOSQUE. THE WHOLE AWFULLY MAGNIFICENT. HAMET, OMAR.
HAMET. THOU good old man -- Thou full of days and honor,
Guide of my youth, and glory of my crown,
My bosom labors with a friend's impatience
As now I lead thee to these sacred seats --
These awful sepulchers, where Persia's kings,
My ancestors, repose in solemn silence --
Oh, my heart throbs till I have told thee all.

OMAR. My prince, my child! I praise thy tender zeal,
And though oppressive time upon this head
Has heavy snow'd full many a winters whiteness,
Yet once this heart -- the memory still is dear --
Felt a fond passion, pure and warm as thine.
To all that rateth high a virgin's worth,
Sense, beauty, soul, long since was Omar wed.

HAMET. If thou have loved, with unfatigued ear,
Thou will allow the sweet prolixity,
Love's soft delay, and tender repetition.
"But, oh! by what sad stroke of cruel fortune
"Fell from thy reverend arms this dearest treasure?"

OMAR. "Full forty years Olmana to this bosom
"Minister'd every balm of virtuous softness.
"Passion from reason caught the wish composed,
"The hope obedient, and the steady purpose,
"A life devote to nature and to Heaven.
"At length it pleased the gods to take her from me,
"And pluck this pillow from my aged head;
"Her death was sudden, but her life prepared.
"In my first widowed days I felt as man;
"At length her sacred spirit seemed to chide,
"And whispered that it only went before
"To intercede the Merciful for mine.
"I left her with the gods, and wept no more."
But come, what says Almeida?

HAMET. How her name
Like sudden sunbeams darting through a cloud,
Lights up an instant joy in Hamet's bosom.
Oh, had thou seen her all dissolved in passion --
Passion, though yielding, modestly chastis'd,
"And shaded by a delicate reserve,
"Only to look more lovely through the veil" --
Had thou but seen her, eloquently dumb,
Sink in her father's arms, confess her softness
In all the sweet disorders of the heart,
Then blush, and sigh, and even weep for words! --

OMAR. When does Abdallah's daughter then consent. --


HAMET. Hear it, ye favoring heavens, and every breeze,
Bear on your viewless wings the tender tidings,
I shall tomorrow claim --

OMAR. Tomorrow!
Knows royal Almoran this sudden purpose?

HAMET. Ah Omar thou have sprinkled drops of ice
Cold on my heart, to freeze the flame of love.
Not all the jealous vigilance of fondness;
Not the still waking eyes of faithful Ali
Can foil the felon arts of wily Caled.
Almoran again has seen her, friend -- and much,
Still much I fear lest --

OMAR. Oh, forbear;
Wear not a doubtful eye upon a brother,
Nor let suspicion fear thy generous heart.

HAMET. Heaven knows my fondness; knows the generous love,
"Respect sincere, and tenderness I bear him,
"And the soft shade I cast over all his failings;"
Dear is my brother to this faithful heart,
As the warm tide that constant flows to feed it.

OMAR. The sainted Solomon thou know decreed,
That ye should wear his yet unblemished crown
In amity together, wield his scepter
As brothers and as friends. -- Unite to bless,
By a well-ordered government, the land;
The smiling arts of peace diffuse around,
Or give -- where patriot virtue points the cause
To be the cause of heaven -- fresh nerves to war;
Over the wide wave to spread the adventurous sail,
Lift modest genius from the lowly vale,
And bid it blossom in a warmer soil,
More near its native skies. --

HAMET. Dear, parent sage,
Deep are thy counsels 'grav'd upon this heart.

OMAR. Yet spare a moment to the voice of truth,
Even from the hour of panting softness spare it.
Oh never forget, thou noble youth, it is thine
To taste with Almoran the bliss supreme
That flows from all the great, the glorious virtues,
Worthy of kings, on kings alone conferred;
Pity that softens justice; merit, guarded
From bolder arrogance, even by the shield,
The tempered shield of royalty itself.
"Blessings derived from blessings well bestowed,
"Delights like these -- oh, may they long be thine,
"Grow greater by division." Yet remember
If ever you are tempted -- which the gods forbid --
Should thou, as faction or as favor urges;
Should private passions, or domestic broils,
Frauds of the state, or follies of the palace,
A mistress or a minister, ever lead
Thine eye, thy hand, thy heart from what thou ow'st,
From what the laws, the land, the people claim --
Claim as a duty from the prince they serve,
Not Persia's utmost pomp combined to soothe thee,
"Not all the graces of the loved Almeida,
"Nor yet the princely pledges of her faith
"Climbing thy knee and blooming round thy board,
"Not even the husband's pride, the father's transport,"
Can snatch thee from the shame reserved for him,
Who, base and lawless, wantons with his power,
"Covers with blood his violated country,
"To an ensanguin'd sabre turns his scepter,
And more than traitor desolates the empire.

HAMET. Oh, never, never may this breast, which throbs
With all a patriot's, all a parent's ardour,
To serve the weal of Persia, feel a curse
So charged with anguish, or so full of horror!
With my loved subjects teach me, gods, to share
The plenteous glories of this fertile land,
While royal Almoran partakes the joy,
And late posterity attests our virtue!
Now, then, my friend, I must require thy aid.

OMAR. What would my gracious prince?


HAMET. Engage
His second father in an instant office
Of tender import -- This letter -- take it Omar.
Why trembles thus my foolish hand to give it?
It Is to my brother, and contains -- oh heavens!

OMAR. "The tidings of tomorrow. This perchance --
"'It Is dangerous; [aside] soft -- is there no other way?

HAMET. "Why pauses Omar?
"Why deeply bent to earth his thoughtful eye?

OMAR. "Thy love has spoke, I doubt not, brotherly.


HAMET. "Omar, my heart was in it. Take it then,
"O take it, friend! There, in that little space
Are all my future hopes and fears inscribed;
It is the history of a brother's love,
Writ to a brother's friendship -- Yes, my Omar,
This is the hour which Almoran devotes
To private kindness, and unburthen'd freedom:
Upon his sacred moments thou have claim;
And who so fit as thee to grace a message
Where Hamet's happiness so closes, centres?

OMAR. Dear to this feeble bosom are ye both;
I honor, love, respect -- do all but fear you.
The man we dread was never truly loved.

HAMET. Delay no Ionger then -- oh think a little,
Something allow to ardent love's impatience;
No rest shall Hamet know till thy return,
But trembling, anxious, wait thy coming, Omar. --
In the blessed grove that shades Almeida's chamber,
There will I kneel, there awful bend to heaven,
That all our wishes may be crowned in peace.

Exit HAMET. OMAR alone. I would not check his joys too far; and yet
Too plain, alas, these aged eyes can see
A train of mischiefs gathering round our heads.
This letter notes the hour, when to the mosque
Hamet conducts his Fair Circassian bride.
Ye mighty Powers, who rule the royal soul,
And touch the master chords that sway our nature,
Let kindred kindness save my kings from discord,
Preserve the public welfare, private quiet;
And these old eyes shall pour their thanks in tears.

Exit. SCENE II.
A MAGNIFICENT APARTMENT IN THE PALACE. ALMORAN, OSMYN. ALMORAN. Osmyn, thy
conduct has been ever humble,
Wary, and watchful. Now the time is ripe
To note thy subject services more amply;
Caled, thou know, is our obedient slave,
Thy present post of honor shall be his,
And thou to larger dignities arise;
It Is Almoran that lists thee from the dust.

OSMYN. Dread king, and father of the eastern world,
Thy sacred purpose ever in my view
Bounds all the hopes of thy observant Osmyn;

ALMORAN. aside. This is another Caled at the core;
Long have I marked his hypocritick look,
Disguising falsehood in the fraudful smile:
'Twere not amiss to make the slave secure.
Osmyn. --

OSMYN. Yonder, my lord, with sober step
Old Omar, that sage pillar of the state,
Comes slowly onward -- venerably sweet
His reverend aspect. --

ALMORAN (pausing.) Happily that were well.
Osmyn!

OSMYN. Imperial sultan.


bows. ALMORAN. The important office of a minister
Might suit thy vigorous years and mind mature,
That feeble pillar soon must fall. Of this
Anon. -- Ere night her sable wing shall spread
Over day's fair bosom, see that thou attend,
Just where the clust'ring citrons form a shade
Near to our chief seraglio, there I Will meet thee.
Go. Thou will remember and obey.
Exit OSMYN. I would not rashly lose a sabre, when
Happily, I may want to try its temper.
aside. My curses on this dotard. Caled, now
Shall Almoran take heed to observe thy counsel;
A smile -- Yes, smiles are well till all be sure;
And yet my soul disdains the narrow art
Of seeming that I am not. But he comes;
Take me hypocrisy, awhile I Am thine.

Enter OMAR (offers to kneel.) Thou shall not bend. The venerable knee
Grown feeble in the service of the state
Should only bow to heaven. Thy silver locks,
Those sacred signals of the experienced mind,
Command the reverence of the kings they honor;
Even Almoran respects them. O the falsehood,
aside. Shame on my abject tongue for thus dissembling.
OMAR. My fears were surely wrong. [aside] O gracious king,
This old fond bosom feels a father's joy
Thus to be welcomed by the prince he loves.
Even in the tenderest hours of earliest life,
Thy mother sent her little pride to Omar,
And ere thy tongue began to lisp its purpose,
The name of Omar first employed its efforts;
Then, as a presage of thy future friendship --
Oh! be it heaven prophetic -- thou did throw
Thy infant arms around my neck -- there clung'st
As if thou lov'dst the soft repose I gave thee;
My bosom throbb'd as if thou were mine own;
Upon this breast sweet sleep did visit thee;
It was thy cradle, and thou often have blessed it.

ALMORAN. Thou worthy sage! Nor in maturer manhood,
Lord as I am of half the subject world,
Am I less tender of the faithful Omar,
The sense, the soul of Persia's blooming empire.

OMAR. The mighty Solomon, as sick he lay,
Upon his last, last bed, bequeathed you to me,
Gave Almoran and Hamet to my care;
He pressed me as I promised, smiled, and died:
And far, dear youth, beyond the glowing gold
Which grows beneath the wealthy breast of earth,
I prize the royal legacy -- O sire
Forgive me -- I am old, and age is tedious;
But it is the heart offends, and thou will pardon.

ALMORAN (aside) Again he teaches me to be sincere;
Nature's all-conquering language from his lip
Flows on the heart with meek serenity;
He cannot be ambitious -- Caled wrongs him.
What welcome message of fraternal love advancing.
Brings Omar from his Hamet -- Ha! a letter.
May its contents be happy! --

OMAR (aside.) His motion is disturbed -- 'Twere best withdraw
A moment -- I wait, my lord, your sacred leisure.
Bows and retires, Almoran not marking him.
ALMORAN. Hell to my hopes, and horrors to my heart!
Wed her! so soon! tomorrow! wed Almeida!
Oh, dire confusion -- some protecting God
Descend, descend to ward the fatal blow;
May rolling thunders, lightenings intercept it!
But curse on invocation, what avails it?
Even while I supplicate the hour draws nigh,
The fatal hour that is to crush my hopes,
As I this murderous scroll -- away with prayer;
The tardy striking gods deny their succor.
What must be done? Ye powers of darkness rise!
Spirits infernal leave your flaming beds --

Omar reenters suddenly. OMAR. My lord.


ALMORAN. Ha! dotard, traitor, trembling hoary traitor,
Dare not to think I wish it were concealed;
My rage, my grief, my ruin -- Dotard, no!
Though thou have stolen the secret from my lips,
The soul of Almoran by fear unawed
Smiles on thy powerless perfidy. -- The world,
The vassal universe, is mine -- Away --
Begone with life -- I give it thee -- I scorn
To stain my arm, but leave thee thus despised.
Going, Omar catches his robe and kneels.
OMAR. Bowed as I am already to the earth
By time's oppressive hand -- with all the weight
Of fourscore winters on my aged head,
I fall still lower, with submission fall,
To clasp these sacred knees and beg an audience.
Ah, dear, unhappy prince, repress these starts;
Subdue the unmanly rage that checks thy virtue;
Conquer thy sury, and resume the king.
There is no cause, my soul disdains to listen,
Affection brought me back. --

ALMORAN. And what art thou,
That Almoran should care, or clear, or guilty?

OMAR (rises.) And what am I? A long-try'd faithful subject;
A man who honors and a friend who loves thee.
If these white hairs, grown silver in thy service;
If age, if truth, no kind attentions warrant,
Still Omar's duty dictates to his tongue.

ALMORAN. Hah!


OMAR. The pride of health now blooms upon thy cheek,
High bounds each fervid pulse with vigorous life;
Unbounded power, unbounded wealth are thine;
Beauty has thrown her manly graces round thee,
And lavish nature has done all she can:
Yet misery and grief, and rage unseemly
Blot every blessing, wither every joy,
"Rob of its radiance thy imperial crown,
"From the soft pillow rudely tear repose,"
And make thee, Almoran, supremely wretched.

ALMORAN. "And if I were; thou like a meddling fool,
"Like the dark raven on the blasted branch,
"Art come officiously to croak despair,
"And spread more gloom upon the troubled mind:
"I thank thee for it. --

OMAR. Heaven knows thou do me wrong.
"That heaven can tell, I pity, love, revere thee.
"My very heart now bleeds to see the prince;
"To see the youth, who, from the prattling hour
"Of unoffending infancy, these eyes
"Have viewed with all the fondness of a father,
"Thus sink to earth, the victim of the passions.
"But oh! the abode of bliss is still before thee;
"The flowers of peace, and joy, and soft content,
"Smile beautiful around -- plain lies the path,
"Nor is it difficult to keep the track,
"Marked by the cherub hand of truth to man,
"Pursue it -- oh, pursue it, and be happy."

ALMORAN. Do thou presume with a bold pedant's tongue
To school the son of Solomon -- thy master?
Bold monitor, I am my own adviser;
Think, speak, act, dictate, only for myself,
Nor will I brook a vassal's interuption.

OMAR. Even Solomon himself, thou cruel prince,
That sceptered saint, who from the King of Kings
Now takes the crown of virtue -- He disdained not
To catch instruction from the voice of Omar;
Nor did he weigh in pride's too partial balance
The station or descent of usesul wisdom.
But this avails not: Though my lord thou scorn'st
The honest cautions of my zeal to serve thee,
I must not see thee -- for thy sire is dead;
The oath I gave is with him in the skies,
And all the parent sits upon this bosom --
I will not see thee rush on shame and ruin.

ALMORAN. Ha! traitor, dare thou --


OMAR. In a cause like this,
Though death stood ready with the bloody bowstring,
Omar dare show the firmness of his virtue:
Nay, if his duty urges, dare do more.

ALMORAN. What more, insulting minister, what more?


OMAR. Unawed, undaunted, like a faithful subject --
Dare, unappall'd, tell Almoran he is guilty --
Tell him -- whenever he deviates into vice,
Presumes that kings are left to range at large
Over the heaven-guarded property of others,
And trespass on the sovereign rights of man;
Or yield to passions that debase his station,
Kindle intestine slames, embroil the state --
Then tell him that he merits well the scorn
Of every loyal heart -- A king no more --
A king, the public father, born to bless,
And court the smiles of all his subject children.

ALMORAN. Loquacious babbler -- cease thy rude upbraidings,
Lest I be tempted to destroy the web
Wove with such waste of toil -- Away thou fool:
Go school thy Hamet -- we disdain prescription.

OMAR. My duty is discharged and I have done.
Farewell -- There is an hour on wing -- Oh heavens!
I tremble for thee -- Prince, there is an hour
That will, alas, when thou art all unfriended,
When the proud monarch, like the slave he spurns,
Shall drop the lofty eye, the sultan's crest,
"And fell disease unsmoothe the chearless pillow,"
Thunder conviction on thee -- Oh, expect it --
It Is terrible -- a pang without a name --
To meet it unawares or unprepared.

Exit. ALMORAN (alone, greatly agitated.) Thunder conviction!
-- Curse upon the slave,
He starts a thought that quite disarms my soul.
-- But wherefore pause I thus, the fool of fancy?
Gray steals the dawn upon me, and tomorrow,
That mountain to my hopes, is near at hand,
Veiled only by the transient shades of night.
Hamet, Almeida, Omar, all oppose me:
No more delays -- the measures must be swift.
Enter CALED. (Hastily) Again! Audacious villain die. -- Ha, Caled!

Almoran draws a sabre, CALED. How! sovereign of the world, have I offended?


ALMORAN. Rise, Caled, rise: I thought thee that vile Omar --
Wherefore this haste?

CALED. Passing the western gate
That opens on the eye the gliding barks,
I saw but now the lovers arm in arm
Pursue the tender walk, and sighing say
Tomorrow -- oh! tomorrow. --

ALMORAN. I Have heard it all,
That Omar brought the tidings, fretted, chid me;
Prated cold maxims to my burning rage,
And though he saw my very soul disordered
Persisted still to preach me into patience:
At length the pent-up tempest tore its way
Through this indignant bosom, and all wild
With anguish and despair, I spurned him from me.

CALED. Short is the time my lord -- If instant acts]
Prevent not the solemnity, all is foiled.
What may be done?

ALMORAN. Be quick then, tardy thinker,
Dispatch, determine, execute at once:
And let a moment do the work of ages.

CALED. Suspecting somewhat of love's forward zeal,
And from the faithful Ali gathering more,
I am not wholly unprepared, my lord;
Ali, it is true, is somewhat stubborn, thoughtful,
Of temper often resisting; but a priest, my lord,
Open to great aspirings, wary, plausible:
We have conferred of late.

ALMORAN. Ha! light breaks in upon me.
I have it all -- Haste, Caled, then to Ali,
The night is far advanced -- the time most precious.
Lose not a moment to bring Ali with thee,
Even to my secret chamber thou conduct him:
The blow we have to strike shall -- but away --
It Is unexpected thunder stuns us most,
And terror doubles when the flash is sudden --
Let Osmyn too be summoned; all combine --
Sure of immortal honor -- to defend
The throne, the heart of the insulted Almoran.

END OF ACT THE SECOND.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
AN APARTMENT IN HAMET'S PALACE. OMAR. A Change so sudden -- every tumult
hushed --
So wild an hurricane blown over already?
It Is most suspicious, and I yet have doubts.
Perhaps some plan of deep drawn policy --
Perhaps -- but hither speeds the younger king:
He comes with all the lover in his step,
And the fond bridegroom beaming from his eye:
(looking out) O blessed state of unsuspecting youth,
Gay, worthy, ardent, generous, and warm,
It Is barbarous to destroy thy gilded dreams
And wake thee to the cunning turns of life.

SCENE II.
HAMET, OMAR. HAMET. My reverend father, guardian ever dear,
My spirit could not rest till it had found thee.
I left thee late with gloom upon thy brow,
And all unevenly thy accents fell,
As if contention 'twixt thy heart and tongue
Waged war severe.

OMAR. It was but fancy;
The eye of friendship magnifies each trifle.

HAMET. If 'twas but fancy, wherefore droop'st thou now?
What may this mean, my friend?

OMAR. Regard it not;
Age is uncertain, weak, and full of starts;
Precarious life then hangs but by an hair,
And a babe's breath will shake it --

HAMET. Happily, still
Thou art with Almoran displeased -- Forgive him!
The letter brought by Osmyn might excuse
His warmth. 'Twas to invite my Omar's pardon;
What could my brother more? We all are men:
Error confessed, is, to a noble mind,
Error's atonement. Heaven requires no more!

OMAR. If I am sad, thou have not guessed the cause.
Power's vain parade, and Passion's rudest burst,
Fall unregarded on this aged bosom;
And all their force is blunted ever they reach me.
The pangs which now I feel are all for thee.

HAMET. For me -- and art thou sad for me -- for Hamet.
Have not the gods been more than lavish to him?
Will not the music of the harmonious choir
Soon echo Hamet's joys throughout the palace?
Are not the priests already in the mosque?
Are not the virgins with their wreathes prepared
To strew the roseate paths of love with flowers?
Nay, will not Almoran himself attend?
Come, let us be gone. Ali ere this expects us.

OMAR. I have deceived thee, Hamet -- much deceived thee.


HAMET. Deceived me! -- Thou! -- Has Omar much deceived me?


OMAR. Yes -- thy brother -- there it begins -- thy brother --
Yet, say his life upon thy kindness rested,
Would not thy virtuous heart do much to save it?

HAMET. To save his life! -- O much indeed, my Omar.
I Would rush undaunted through the perilous war,
Even where the bleeding battle thickest raged,
And spread my body as a shield before him.
I Would rush into the wild and fearful waves,
When their chafed fury drenched the sailing clouds,
I Would fight, I Would fall, I Would DIE to save his life.

OMAR. There spoke at once the monarch and the man;
And oh! still dearer, there the brother spoke.
Should he then ask a treasure at thy hand,
Thy soft humanity would grant his suit,
Even though it pointed to -- the fair Almeida.

HAMET. To fair Almeida! -- Hear me, Holy Powers;
kneels. Hear me each power that in Fate's awful volume
Record'st the vows of men -- the oaths of kings,
That ought to bear, like thine, the seals of truth;
Oh hear me swear -- while kneeling thus before thee,
I pledge my soul's fixed ardours to Almeida,
Nor should the congregated globe united
Ever rend her from these clasping, constant arms,
'Till their last sinew sunk beneath the sabre:
This witness, gods -- the guardians of our love.
rises.
OMAR (aside.) It Is as I thought -- all gentle as he is,
At the fond heart he is a very lover:
'Twill be in vain to warn him. -- O, my son,
Forgive the cautious scruples of my age;
No more I chill with doubts thy generous hopes.

HAMET. Doubts! -- there is no cause of doubt -- I am most blessed.


OMAR. Go then, dear youth, indulge the sacred joy.
Go -- and with this eternal truth be happy,
Though yonder orb should from its sphere be hurled,
And this firm-sealed earth -- with all her towers,
The mighty labor of three thousand years --
Should instant mingle with the dust that formed them,
The equitable soul, by truth upborn,
Far over the vapors of this mouldering world,
Shall bold resist each perishable power,
And greatly triumph in the crush of nature.

HAMET (looking out.) Omar, behold! my Almoran appears.
In the fraternal look he comes arrayed.
You wronged him, friend -- indeed you wronged him much.

SCENE III.
ALMORAN, HAMET, OMAR. HAMET. Welcome, thrice welcome, on this happy day,
For ever, ever welcome to these arms.
embrace.
ALMORAN. Yon Heaven alone can tell how much I thank thee;
And yet I feel the tinge of glowing shame
Burn on my cheek as I embrace my brother.
Indeed I Have been to blame, forgive me, Omar;
Brother, speak for me -- I have used him harshly.

OMAR. O think me what I am, I ask no more.


ALMORAN. Thou art a friend, and still wilt bear my failings.


HAMET. Did I not tell thee, Omar, he would act,
Even as thou see, a brother's tenderest part.
But love is full of fears. I feared myself --
At first I feared thee, but when riper thought
Recalled to view the associate and the friend;
The dear companion of my early cradle,
Sharer in every sport, in every toy,
Deposit loved of every little care,
I chid my cruelty, and all was well.

ALMORAN. And yet, my Hamet, could thou guess the pangs,
The trying agonies, this conquest cost me,
Then thou indeed would pity.

HAMET. Generous friend,
O do not wound me thus, my other self.
What shall I do, 'twixt two extremes I Am torn,
And nature strains the chords of love and friendship
With too severe a hand.

ALMORAN. Hamet, no!
Here, in the presence of the faithful Omar,
My flame I sacrifice to purer fires.
Dear as she is, my brother, take Almeida,
Lead undisturbed the virgin to the altar,
And from this hand receive thy charming bride.

HAMET. Oh, Almoran, with unexampled greatness
Thy virtue soars above me -- Still my elder:

ALMORAN. But wherefore waste we thus the precious moments,
Even now the jocund, joy announcing note,
Harmonious calls thee to the scene of bliss;
Love's vermeil blushes, height'ned by a charm,
Which kind disorder wakes in every feature,
Now bloom around Almeida; while her eye
Shines ardent forth to chide the tardy Hamet.

HAMET. With a tumultuous heart I wait the summons.
Come then, oh come, my father and my friend,
Together let us seek the heavenly maid --
Together lead her to the sacred altar;
There thou, before the gay assembled throng,
Kindly presiding over the nuptial rites,
Shall, with a brother's gentle privilege,
And like a parent, give her to my arms.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
OMAR (alone). How this old bosom aches with tender joy;
Such joy as only friends and fathers feel,
To see them thus agreeing, thus united!
Ah, bliss supreme of subjects and of kings:
Our richest joys still court the private scene,
And life's prime hope is to be blessed at home.
He is indeed convinced, and I have wronged him.
O thou, who thus infusest kindred love
Into their social hearts, still ardent, fix,
Aid, and invigorate the generous cement;
Then like two planets may they gild the land
With undiminish'd luster. Through the realm
Of Persia's wide domain may they dispense
The effulgent rays of truth and virtue round,
Bless every object in their glad career,
Imparting mutual brightness to each other.

Exit. SCENE V.
THE INSIDE OF THE CHIEF MOSQUE, MAGNIFICENTLY ILLUMINATED -- ALI, IMANS,
OFFICERS, AND THE ASSIATICK AMBASSADORS, PREPARED FOR THE CEREMONY -- CHORUS OF
YOUTHS AND VIRGINS, WHO ENTER WITH THE PRIESTS TO SING THE EPITHALAMIUM -- AN
ALTAR SUPERBLY DECORATED. ALMORAN. Ali approach; begin the sacred rites.


ALI. Deep in yon consecrated grove's recess,
Even now the holy men, their sanctities
Unseen prepare. We wait their high report.
after a pause. And yet so blessed a marriage may rely
Upon approving heaven. On virtuous love
The gods will surely smile. Advance, ye pair,
On to the sacred altar -- we delay not.

Hamet and Almeida go a few paces and stop. ODE. Angels of truth, in robes of
living light,
From yonder radiant sphere,
Expand your starry pinions bright,
And lend a favoring ear.
And thou benign, refulgent Source of day.
Bestow a tutelary ray;
Behold thy holy ministers prepare,
To join this heav'n-elected pair.
Behold, advancing to thy shrine,
They humbly beg the boon divine.
O then, from yonder regions pure above
Descend thy cherub choir on beams of love.

CHORUS of Youths and Virgins. Angels of truth, in robes of living light,
From yonder radiant sphere,
Expand your starry pinions bright,
And lend a favoring ear.
ALMORAN. Thus then I take the fair Almeida's hand,
And to our happy brother thus present it.

Joining their hands. ALI. Henceforward be these hands for ever --


Enter PRIEST (in great consternation). PRIEST. Cease, cease your rites,
unhallowed and unblest.
As but even now we kneeled before the shrine,
Sudden tremendous darkness brooding sat,
Full on the grove, and shadowed all beneath;
In adverse spires the angry flames arose,
And from the sacred sepulcher of Solomon
Deep sounds were heard, of inauspicious groans --
As if the troubled spirit there entombed
Opposed the nuptials -- When lo! a voice,
Like thunder vollied through tempestuous air,
Said -- take this scroll -- commissioned from above.
It is the will divine -- to Ali bear it.
Trembling we bowed, and promised swift obedience.

ALI. Ye powers, is this the heaven directed scroll?


ALMORAN (eagerly). But what imports it?


ALI (reads). Fate has decreed to ALMORAN Almeida!


OMAR (aside). It Is as I feared -- Ali has played us false.


HAMET. Away with prodigies dissembling Ali,
Finish the rites this moment, or expect --

ALMEIDA to ALI. The profanation then, false priest, is thine:
Art thou to learn -- and from a woman's tongue --
The duties of thine office? "Know thou not,
"That the just gods, with whom thou dare to trifle,
"Act by consistent and unerring laws
"Of truth, of love, and everlasting virtue."
And would thou charge -- oh, force of impious fraud! --
The dext'rous artifice of wicked men
To the account of heaven! Of heaven, which sheds
It Is freshest dews of blessedness on all
Whom faith and fondness hold in bonds of honor.

HAMET. Are these thy arts? -- Oh, most unhallowed Ali.


ALMEIDA. "Hence each iniquity, each dark design,
"The lures of interest, and the gusts of passion,
"The insidious project, and the sordid purpose,
"With each complotting juggle of the state,
"That venal ministers or holy minions,
"Full often practice to advance themselves,
"Or feed the lusts of some deluded master,
"Receives a sanction from the powers above."

HAMET. Yes, priest, there is not a crime which meanness prompts,
Vain folly sighs for, mad ambition kindles;
There Is not a daring dreadful villainy,
"Nor yet a fraud that the smooth courtier wishes
"To pass on prince or people, as a virtue,
"And trick it off in reverend robes, like thine,"
But still the instrument is wronged RELIGION,
And heaven itself is made the guilty cause
Of heaped enormities, which hell would start at.

ALMORAN. Brother forbear --


ALI. The gods must be obeyed.


ALMEIDA. Yes, priest, I know it. Then obey them straight.
Do thou still waver to expound their will --
Their will is obvious, simple, unperplex'd,
And never leads the enquiring mind astray,
But when entangled in thy mystic toils.
"O slow of soul as destitute of honor,
"Had thou ever heard the heavenly voice of truth,
"Or could that bosom, dark and drear as death,
"Sacred to viler passion, ever have felt
"The unblemished fervors of a generous love,
"Without disguise the oracle would tell thee
" -- That pure plain oracle, an honest heart --
"The sacred duties at the bridal altar."

ALI. Still we repeat the gods, and fate --


HAMET. Peace sacrilegious -- much thou talk of gods,
And much of fate -- thy guileful lips have uttered?
But when did fate work miracles for tyrants?
Or when invert the order of the skies
To favor lust, impiety, and shame?

ALMORAN. I Will hear no more -- Ali renew the rites
For Almoran, renew them. Fate decrees
Almeida to my arms.

HAMET. Brother it is false,
And with my life --

ALI. Monarch desist -- With reverence obey.
Omar himself can tell --

OMAR. Yes priest, he can;
For long his wary eye has watched thy sliding.
Omar CAN tell thee all thou dare forget;
That marked for holiness, thy heart should prove,
A temple worthy the pure truth it teaches;
That thou should spurn ambition's fatal fires,
And kiss the shrine, unspotted and adored,
Of meek humility -- "Religion's chief
"Guide of the Persian faith -- that thy example
"Should, to the countless crowds thou have in charge,
"The undefiled charities dispense,
"Cleans'd as the dews of heaven -- Amid'st thy wealth,
"Poured in large tribute to thy honored order,
"That still the willing offering of the rich
"Should poize the lots of life, and bless the poor;
"The everlasting fire that thou should guard,
"Even 'till that sacred element subdue
"The world whereon we move -- But above all,
"That thou should never pervert the holy flame
"With fancied visions that confound the soul;
"Nor terrify with mystic forgeries
"The simple and sincere; but calm to teach,
"Powerful to aid, and patient to instruct,
"Distinguish vice from virtue, truth from error;
"Check the bold sinner whatsoever his station;
"Even in the royal presence to assert,
"If a more awful presence prompts the duty,
"The man of truth;" nor even dare, as thou
Have dared, to KNOW these glorious truths,
Yet turn them all to mockery and baseness.

HAMET. The holy mosque is tainted with their crimes:
'Twere best retire, my love; nor will I deign
Once to reproach the priest -- man's faint rebuke
Is lost where heaven prevails not -- But for thee,
Brother and friend no more -- Dishonest man!
Be mine, or thine, henceforth the Persian throne.

The PRIESTS and ALI confer. ALMORAN (interrupting.) Deep-judging Ali,
Is this the boasted issue of thy wiles?
Is this the proud result of all thy wisdom?
Of flaming altars and concerted groans:
This the rare miracle -- the rich device --
That was to bring Almeida to my arms,
A gift of heaven! Away, ye hoary traitors,
This instant quit the temple -- hence -- begone --
Dare not to justify -- I Will hear no more.
Curse on thy prodigies, I here renounce them.
She shall be mine without your feeble aid;
Force, sceptered force, ensues, avowed and bold:
Spurned from this heart be every vain disguise,
My passion knows no bounds -- henceforth I seize
My beateous victim in the face of day.

Exit with OSMYN and CALED. SCENE VI.
CHANGES TO A GROVE NEAR, PRESENTING AN OUTSIDE VIEW OF THE MOSQUE, BUT
DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF THE TOMBS. HAMET, ALMEIDA, OMAR. HAMET. Still onward,
friend, to where yon branching palms
Embow'r the shrubs beneath. There, loved Almeida,
Awhile shall thou remain with virtuous Omar,
"Till I explore some yet unbribed Iman,
That straight may foil the wicked arts of Ali.
This way, my love -- I will with speed return.
Hamet goes with them to the upper wing, and returns. The time admits not of
delay -- When fraud's on foot
And guilt is once detected -- Ha! -- by heaven!
looking out. Even in this sacred privacy he haunts me --
The man on earth my soul would wish to shun --
I would avoid thee.
To ALMORAN entering.
ALMORAN. I know thou would;
But Almoran forbids.

HAMET. Does Almoran?
Does Almoran forbid? And who is he
That thus presumes, with mock prerogative,
To bar the passage of the injured Hamet?
And has this mighty monarch been reduced
To poor hypocrisy, and foul contrivance?
Is the rich blood of Solomon debased
To mix with mercenaries, who can forge
Upon the gods they worship? Shame upon thee!

ALMORAN. Tempt me no further, boy; thy life's at stake.

puts his hand on his sabre.
HAMET. Yes, draw thy sabre -- rise upon the friend;
Convert the sultan to the common stabber:
Assail -- oh glorious -- Hamet while unarmed --
The only moment thou would dare to meet him.

ALMORAN. Hah -- would dare --


HAMET. Tyrant, I said so -- dare.
Have thou not stooped to despicable frauds,
To vile deceits, and arts of little cunning,
Beneath thy manhood, even beneath thy pride --
To arts which cowards practice -- mark it -- cowards.
When did the brave -- the brave are ever generous --
When did the brave man skulk in the disguise
Of priestly prodigies, or bribe a slave
To traffic with his function -- sell his gods --
And tear the trembling virgin from the altar.

ALMORAN. Villain, forbear.


HAMET. Nay, more than virgin yet more sacred,
The appointed wife -- Yes, royal ravisher,
Fraudful to steal thy brother's wife away.
Ha! -- were thy ruffians ready -- Oh, insidious!

Enter CALED with guards. They offer to seize HAMET, ALMORAN prevents. ALMORAN.
Caled, forbear. Now then, Insulter,
In manly scorn of all thy base aspersions,
The outrag'd Almoran, to thy confusion,
Even on thy heart shall PROVE his want of courage.
There, vaunting insolent, defend thyself --
Throws his sabre to HAMET and takes CALED'S. Now try thy boasted bravery.

HAMET. Thanks to thy wounded pride for this one virtue.


Prepare to fight. SCENE VII.
Enter ALMEIDA. Guards seize HAMET. ALMEIDA. Desist, inhuman murderer, nor
deeper plunge
Thy soul in guilt.

ALMORAN. Ah, Almeida here!
Now see if thou escape a second time.

HAMET. Off, ruffians, off. Art thou a coward now?


ALMORAN. I will not take life, nor hear thee rail,
But thus assert an elder brother's right.

ALMEIDA. What right, thou violating man? -- What right?
To whom have thou a right? -- And is it thus
Thy horrid reign begins? -- Is this, vain boaster --
Thou large of promise, but of deeds, penurious --
Is this the first great act of Persia's king?

ALMORAN. Now thank the gods!


ALMEIDA. For what do thank them?
That yet, forbearing, they suspend the thunder,
And do not fend the ready lightning forth
To crush thee, proudly blooming in thy crimes.
But death were lenity -- live on despised --
Live, to endure the extremities of shame,
The pangs of conscience, and the realm's contempt,
The people's hatred, and thy own reproach.

ALMORAN. Full dearly shall these base aspersions cost thee:
This instant seize, and bear her to our palace.
They seize her.
HAMET. Oh! by the gods I charge thee --
It is your prince -- your future queen.

ALMORAN. Caled, along.

Guards drag her.
ALMEIDA. Invisible power of nature, truth, and justice --
If ever innocence -- how the ruffians tear me --
I will not go -- ye shall not -- Hamet --
Drops on her knees. Oh, Hamet, Hamet --
Dragged off.
HAMET. In pity, brother -- on my knees --
Oh! -- murderous -- barbarous -- cruel --
Torn away.
ALMORAN. The lady once secured, be Hamet free.


Exeunt. END OF ACT THE THIRD.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
AN APARTMENT IN ALMORAN'S PALACE. ALMORAN, OSMYN, CALED. ALMORAN. THEN empire
is our own; dominion courts
At length the smile of Almoran alone,
And proud Almeida, the Circassian maid,
Like some rich jewel, the reward of conquest,
Decreed to sparkle on the victor's brow,
Shall yield her beauties to these longing arms.

CALED. Ali, dread king, industriously loyal,
Still plies the rabble with fomenting zeal,
And deaf of fair Almeida's eloquence,
The oaths of Hamet, and the arts of Omar,
Even now the multitude tumultuous shout --
"We saw the altar flame, we heard the groans,
"And heaven decrees to Almoran Almeida."

ALMORAN. See, Osmyn, that each soothing art be tried
To reconcile Almeida to our power:
Let Persia's utmost pride and pomps await her:
Breathe forth the soul of harmony around:
To his inventive mind who starts a joy
Unknown, be recompense adjudg'd. Let slaves
In splendid vassalage attend the fair,
Our future queen, the new, the loved sultana.
But, above all, beware no female forms
Obedient to our passion, or our pride,
That swell the chosen train of the seraglio,
Approach apartments sacred to Almeida.

CALED. Monarch of nations, ever-glorious sultan,
Thus let me pay the debt of adoration.
prostrates.
OSMYN. Great ruler of the world, accept my homage.


prostrates. ALMORAN. Hold, lavish Fortune, hold thy bounteous hand;
Too fast increase the thronging joys upon me,
And my soul labors with the soft oppression.
Rise, both rise -- vicegerents of my greatness:
On ye, as my deputed delegates,
Henceforth devolve the shining toils of state;
All Persia's vulgar care's beneath the sultan:
Guard ye my paradise from all obtrusion,
Next in command to Almoran and fate.
Yet still beware -- let strict fidelity
And nice obedience justify our favor;
Remember still -- the breath that gives ye sway --
The immortal arm that raises, can destroy.

Exit with OSMYN. SCENE II.
CALED. Lo! such the wages of successful vice.
Vice did I say! oh, infamy of slander!
It Is pious artifice, it is glorious thrift!
While virtue starves, bold spirits will burst forth
Beyond the lying letter of the law,
The shackling trammels of the moral fool,
And fly to arts like Caled's for support.
I stand excused. Let but the gale of virtue
Waft Caled as conveniently to port,
The golden port of interest and ambition;
"Let but the slighting world on truth bestow
"Dissimulation's gay and gorgeous robe,"
Then naught but holy maxims shall be heard
From this converted tongue. -- But, oh! my soul,
This rock impassable -- this towering Osmyn --
Be swift prolifick brain to work his fall,
And shake the fabric he has raised above me.

Exit. SCENE III.
THE SERAGLIO GATES. OSMYN (alone). While Caled takes his station near the
palace,
Here must I wait the coming of the sultan. --
Ah! servitude abhorred, disgraceful state!
The recent honors he has heaped upon me,
Chill on my brow, and sicken at my heart.
O, conscience! conscience! smite me not so sore,
Thou scourge invisible! Who placed thee here,
With thy dread arrowy store, to goad and wound us?
Something far sharper than the sabre's point
Now strikes this breast and calls me slave and minion.
What may be done? This constant care distracts me --
The account of infamy is large against me.
Long have I inly mourned --

SCENE IV.
Enter HAMET (in a mute's habit) Stand! Who approaches?
What step forbidden, thus intrusive -- Hamet?
HAMET. Yes, traitor, Hamet. Where is that inhuman
That forces Hamet to assume these robes,
And seize upon his sacred rights by stealth?
Where is that king? -- that monster-brother -- Speak!
Where, villain, is Abdallah? -- Where Almeida?
Answer me straight -- behold this scymeter --
Delay will make me desperate.

OSMYN. Abdallah
Still is safe. -- Oh! ask, dread king, no more.

HAMET. Equivocating slave, my heart is broke;
Loosed is the chord that tied it to my breast.
Tell me each atom of the damning truth,
Or --

OSMYN. Thus compelled, my lord -- She Is there.


Points to the seraglio. HAMET. There!


OSMYN. My heart bleeds for him. -- Even there, my lord;
In that seraglio --

HAMET. Seraglio! What?
My destined bride? -- Almeida -- Persia's mistress?
Has he then turned her to the train of victims,
Mixed her soft purity with venal beauty,
Stained the pure blossom of our virtuous joys,
And like the hapless sacrifice of riot --
Oh, nature! nature! this -- I cannot bear it.

Bursts in tears. OSMYN. No, gracious sovereign, it is the sultan's orders,
That far apart --

HAMET. Open not thy villain lips.
Already have they more than murdered me -- Ha!
I Will weep no more. How did the monster dare?
And thou the accursed slave that brought her hither;
And this the hell that holds my stolen treasure.
Oh! give me strength of armies, righteous powers!
Sinew my arm with force omnipotent,
That I may hit the center of his heart;
Then to you -- Blast, blast me not sweet heavens,
Going to stab Osmyn. Keep me, kind gods -- Oh! keep my hands from blood.
Ha! will thou force him on me -- Nay then, thus --
Thus let me meet the robber ere he plunders --

Seeing Almoran. SCENE III.
HAMET, ALMORAN. ALMORAN. Osmyn, what daring slave --


HAMET. Strike swiftly then,
Stab sure -- or die.

ALMORAN. Hamet turned slave -- to murder? Most intrepid!
Skulks he beneath the habit of the mute
To rob the wretched vassal of his office?
O worthy emulation.

HAMET. No -- I cannot strike --
All frantic as I am, the unspotted soul
Shudders at brother's blood -- Away foul purpose,
Detested instrument away -- Oh! Almoran,
throws away the dagger. Even she who shared her matron breast between us,
Then died the martyr of the lives she gave,
Seems beck'ning from the tomb to ward the blow:
Obey the summons of the saint who bore us,
Admit the touch of nature to thy bosom,
And open yet thy heart to meet thy brother.

ALMORAN. What shall I do? He melts my six'd resolves,
Nor can this bosom, slave of every passion,
Thus inly touched, shrink back from his embraces.
Generous -- too generous -- Hamet.
embracing him.
HAMET. Thy heart relents --
I have thee in my arms -- thou art subdued;
It Is the blessed moment of returning virtue;
Truth, justice, and humanity prevail,
Thou art my brother still -- The gods be praised.

again embrace. SCENE IV.
CALED and GUARDS. CALED. Sultan and sovereign of the world, thy life --
Thy sacred life's at hazard.

ALMORAN. Said thou life?


CALED. As at the palace gate I plae'd the guard,
Redoubling shouts assailed my started ear;
When rushing on, with every slave in arms,
Full in the city's heart I saw a crowd
Of Persian peasants -- Omar at their head --
Vollying the rights of Hamet in each ear,
'Till every gaping fool abused the Sultan,
And tossed their saucy turbans up for Hamet.
Injuriate Omar cried -- REVENGE -- when straight,
With my own arm, I seized the hoary traitor.

HAMET. Slave, speak with reverence of that noble Persian.


ALMORAN. Swift, Osmyn, load the bald conspirator
With ponderous chains -- Bid him expect a fate
Well suited to his crimes -- then bring him to us.
Exit Osmyn. Well, young dissembler, but deep-learned in fraud,
Well may thou start; but ere the veil of night
Shall hide his shame from the attending crowd
That cluster curious over each scene of death,
Omar, thy oracle, shall bleed before thee.

HAMET. Insensate as I was -- how could I hope?
How could I ever frame a thought so wild
As to expect from that tempestuous soul
Or truth, or justice, pity, love, or honor:
My heart, that knows thee, throbs with keen reproach
To chide its own simplicity.

ALMORAN. 'Twas truth --
Happily 'twas Hamet's justice, love, and pity,
That bade thee try the force of artful tears,
Well managed warmth, and counterfeited fondness.
'Twas honor taught him, like an hypocrite,
To wind his serpent arms about my neck,
To triumph in the theft of fair Almeida;
While his arch minister, the virtuous Omar,
Backed by the traitorous phalanx he had formed,
Concerted measure of escape and rescue:
O flight of stratagem sublime and noble!

HAMET. I scorn to answer thee, disnatur'd taunter.


ALMORAN. Thou have prepared for punishment and prison!
Thy heart, so skilled in Almoran, has told thee
These guards shall drag thee instant to the dungeon,
Unarmed and undefended as thou art. --
Slaves, leave the traitor free -- Go, man of virtue,
Captivity would swell thy pride -- Go, haste,
Array thy troops, and lead them on to battle --
Even to this bosom bid the slaves advance,
Then see if Almoran retreats before them --
See if thy traitors, or thyself, their king,
Can awe this heart, or check one promised joy
It made to transport, and the fair Almeida.
Caled, unbar the gates -- Farewell! my brother --
My kind, my just, my honorable brother.
Going.
HAMET. Hold -- yet hold -- Ah, Almoran, forbear!
If there is courage, pride, or manhood in thee,
Yet -- yet desist -- I charge thee by the pangs --
The bitterest pangs of conscience and the soul,
Not to invade -- Turn back, base ravisher;
Thus on my knees --

ALMORAN. What, at thy arts again?
It Is thus I answer them -- I Will talk no more.

Exit, closing the gates against him, he falls. SCENE V.
HAMET (alone.) Is this permitted -- Is this suffered, gods?
Spurned to the earth -- Ha! left alone -- gone from me --
Gone whither! -- Did he not say to -- horror! horror!
To make a hell of heaven -- My senses shake!
The brain begins to totter on its basis --
This is the gate that leads to Paradise,
rises. And Satan is within -- Still fast upon us. --
No means of death -- The scymetar removed --
Death! -- I Will not die. -- First grant me rich revenge.
Demons of vengeance here possess me quite;
Take me infuriate -- Take me to yourselves!
Oh! bring the villain once again before me,
Arm my firm hand, and I shall die content.

Exit. SCENE VI.
THE INSIDE OF THE SERAGLIO. ALMEIDA DISCOVERED IN A SUPERB APARTMENT OPENING
INTO SEVERAL OTHERS MAGNIFICENTLY DECORATED. MUSIC AND VOICES, ATTEMPT HER
ENTERTAINMENT BEFORE SHE SPEAKS. MUTES RICHLY DRESSED ATTENDING. ALMEIDA. O
vain magnificence of impious grandeur --
Poor ineffectual gildings to set off
The imprisoned victim with a show of pleasure,
Oh! for Circassia's unpolluted shores,
And all the unblemished scenes of guiltless life!
Tell me, ye instruments of Persia's tyrant --
Tell me with instant speed -- Alas! ye dare not --
Chained, by your hapless slavery, to silence,
Vain is to you the blessed power of speech.
Retire, retire -- Ye may not give me comfort.
Torn from my father, Omar, Hamet too --
From Hamet -- hold my heart -- what have I said?
It wakes a thought so full of tender sorrow
I cannot bear it -- it overwhelms my foul.

Reclines on one of the sophas. SCENE II.
Enter ALMORAN to ALMEIDA. ALMORAN. The bursting anguish rushes to her eye,
And her fair form, more lovely in distress,
Droops like the tender blossom of the spring,
Beat by the gathered force of pitiless showers.
Fierce as I am, unbidden softness steals,
In gentlest sighs, from an unwonted source.
My very heart's subdued. Almeida, cease --
Repress those tears, this anguish, this despair.
I come to smoothe the tumults of thy bosom,
And at thy feet to lay the Persian scepter.

ALMEIDA. The Persian scepter -- Why must I reproach thee?
Such trappings are, alas! thy sole dependence.
Keep them, my lord, to awe the vulgar mind.
The sceptered conscience wants no crown to grace it.

ALMORAN. For thee, behold, I leave the Persian throne --
For thee, forgetting empire and command,
Lo! Almoran now bends his knee to earth,
And, with a subject's low humility,
Thus deigns to court the smile of fair Almeida.
kneels.
ALMEIDA. And do thou strip me of each dearer joy,
Fix the fell poignard in the quivering heart,
And, as the ruddy lifeblood gushes from it,
Calmly survey thy work, and bid me smile?

ALMORAN. By Heaven, you charge unjustly, my Almeida.


ALMEIDA. Oh! Almoran, the human form is thine,
Yet where is the honor that should mark thy manhood.
Reluctant thousands call thee mighty sovereign;
Yet where is the virtues that should grace thy station?
But leave me to myself -- I Will not upbraid thee.
One mournful boon is all that I shall ask;
I beg the privilege to weep alone.

ALMORAN. Sorrow and solitude be far away.
You Are too severe Almeida. Long I strove
To hide MY love in pity to my brother.

ALMEIDA. He talks of pity too, who never felt it.
Where is thy brother, tyrant? -- Where is Hamet?

ALMORAN. He lives -- is free -- But wherefore talk of him --
Regard him not --

ALMEIDA. Mark me, Almoran.
Thou bid'st me not regard him -- then observe me!
If thy unhallowed, desolating hand,
In utter darkness could that spark extinguish,
That viewless, vital spark of heaven-born fire,
Which the Omnipotent in this true breast
Has kindly kindled, here to glow for ever,
Pure as the source that first supplied the flame,
Then might thy prisoner cease to think of Hamet.
But long as that inspires my faithful fondness,
Though waters wide as yonder heaven from earth,
Though worlds remote as planets from each other,
Should from his honored presence far divide me,
Still should Almeida's prayers be offered for him --
Still should her ardent tenderness increase --
And still, as now, in all his pride of splendor,
'Midst the vain glitter of his vacant greatness,
Still should perfidious Almoran be scorned.

ALMORAN. Then be it so -- Lady, it is well -- I Will not complain,
For the cursed stripling can obstruct no more.

ALMEIDA. Ha! -- how! -- What said thou? -- Is it possible,
Thou man of blood? -- Sure thy barbarian hand --
And yet I fear -- for in thy sanguine eye
Murder's inserib'd -- Yes, yes, thy silence speaks --
The characters of death are legible
In every cruel feature. Oh, distraction!
Here then, unnatural -- here, well-pleased, behold,
Indulge thy genius -- take thy fill of blood,
Point thy insatiate sabre here -- yes, strike;
Think me a sister, and enjoy the slaughter.

ALMORAN. By heaven he lives, uncircumscrib'd he walks
Through Persia's realm, save this one dear apartment.

ALMEIDA. Praised be the guardian god that shields his virtues;
Adored the power that watches all his ways.

ALMORAN. Ah! lavish not these raptures on a wretch,
But kindly treat thy heav'n-allotted husband.

ALMEIDA. Speak thou of heaven? -- and after foul detection? --
Of heaven, where sceptre'd virtue sits enthroned,
Sublime, amid'st the stars, to register
The deeds of human kind. "Oh, bethink thee:
"Can he who hangs, in yonder spangled vault,
"The even scale of justice, ever ordain
"That I should violate this wretched form,
"And weary out a life of loveless perfidy?"
No, Almoran, thy priests have led the wrong:
Whatever is made thy deity -- ah! think not
Thou do him honor, when thou make him pleased
With what offends the secret judge within thee --
Yes, start; but know, insidious king,
Even now, thou stand'st beneath a piercing eye,
That notes thy crimes, and will one day requite them.

ALMORAN. I thought to have sound thee, lady, less reluctant:
I Will talk no more -- nor have I time to lose
In idle parley with a haughty beauty.
Thus in a word -- if thou, with yielding kindness,
Within an hour, consent to crown my wishes,
The next shall honor thee as Persia's queen,
(Something thou see I can allow to pride)
If not, then learn the issue -- That vile boy
Who has usurped a gem, than crown more worth --
The throne of thy affections -- think upon it --
Dies the succeeding instant -- so resolve.

ALMEIDA. The very image hurries me to phrenzy.
See, cruel, see Almeida at thy feet;
She condescends to kneel -- for whom? -- Thy brother.
Is human pity quite extinct, my lord -- Oh, heaven!
Where is thy nature that it sleeps so sound?
Nay, turn not from me -- spare the generous Hamet --
Shed not thy brother's blood -- Thou will not kill him?

ALMORAN. It Is in Almida's power to save or ruin.


ALMEIDA. Oh, name the means -- Almeida dies to save him.


ALMORAN. I Have marked out easier terms, thou know.


ALMEIDA. See, Sultan, see! behold! -- ye shall not stir.


Catches hold of him in great agony. ALMORAN. By hell he dies this moment --
nay, thou
Shall SEE him struggling in the pangs of death;
That hoary traitor too, thy sire Abdallah,
HE from the palace shall be dragged.

ALMEIDA. My father!


ALMORAN. Yes; thou shall gaze upon them -- powerless gaze --
With frantic hand tear those luxuriant locks,
And shriek, and weary the reverberant air
With unavailing, impotent complainings.
Thy tears, thy strugglings, and thy woman's arts,
Assail in vain. Away, and hang not thus
Idly upon me, for I now can hate thee -- Go --
Go and prepare for anguish, blood, and horror.

Exit. SCENE VIII.
ALMEIDA. Oh, barbarous, barbarous man, inhuman tyrant --
Then they must die: Well, well, I will not weep.
Am I not very patient, righteous gods?
Am I not very calm? -- Yes, let them bleed,
The pitying heavens shall open to receive them.
Bleed! whom bleed? -- My lord, my love, my father!
Oh, shrouding darkness, hide me from the sight,
And I, I murder them -- What can I do?
Point out the path to me, some kindly power,
Instruct my staggering senses how to act,
And save the innocent from the assassin.
It shall not be -- I cannot bear the thought.
Oh, I will save their loved, their precious lives;
Prevent the fatal blow, or with them die.

END OF ACT THE FOURTH
ACT V.
SCENE I.
A GRAND SALOON IN THE PALACE. ALMORAN, CALED. ALMORAN. OH! torture, torture --
infamous abasement!
Shall Almoran -- the oriental god --
Stoop meanly from his throne to fawn and sigh --
To fawn and sigh yet be repulsed -- rejected?

CALED. Take then, my gracious lord, without delay
The offered remedy -- a rich revenge.

ALMORAN. What power can give it me!


CALED. Thy faithful Caled. --


ALMORAN. Quick pour the balsam on my bleeding wounds.


CALED. Sultan, foul treason lurks around thy throne --
That solemn Osmyn --

ALMORAN. Osmyn!


CALED. He! my lord! -- Our ever faithful Ali,
Still busy in the service of the sultan,
Informs me of a dark conspiracy
Planned by that very Osmyn.

ALMORAN. O the slave!
The ungrateful slave --

CALED. By him concerted,
Thy rival brother still has power to hurt thee;
This very night, when darkness wraps the sphere,
In the deep zenith of its gloom he goes,
Masked in the robes of thy domestic Iman,
(The priest appointed to attend Almeida)
To meet the fair in the seraglio garden --
Access how easy, by the priest conducted!

ALMORAN. Persia teems with traitors!


CALED. This shallow Iman, wrought upon by Osmyn,
Favored the treason, and betrayed his master.
A slave was trusted -- Aladin the eunuch --
Observe the hand of heaven, my lord -- As Aladin
Conveyed the borrowed robes to wily Osmyn,
Ali perceived the traitor steal along,
And soon by menaces the truth extorted:
At length the venal slave is wholly our's.

ALMORAN. Down, down, aspiring rage. -- What followed, Caled?


CALED. The slave secured, straight Ali wrote, my lord,
To Osmyn, in the Iman's character,
Exactly fein'd -- that all things were prepared;
That Aladin by chance had met the king,
The injured Hamet, who detained the slave
'Till the blessed hour of meeting. -- Long ere that
Shall happy Almoran defeat the project --
Long, long ere that shall triumph over Almeida.

ALMORAN. First see that Osmyn, and that villain Iman,
Perish in pains unheard of --

CALED. Leave their fate
To me, my lord -- but now enjoy thy victory.
Of this assured, this night they breathe their last.
The robes are now without, the hour advances.

ALMORAN. Thou ready counselor -- but this voice -- this face --

CALED. Art, art, my lord. -- Nature is easy marred --
The face may be concealed -- it will be night --
Thick the disguise -- thou go as Hamet too --
Almeida is appriz'd -- expects her Hamet --
Osmyn at hand -- all ready to receive thee,
And trembling love may breathe its sighs in whisper.

ALMORAN. Yet to what end this labored artifice?


CALED. The end of happiness -- To make her hate
To kindle all the pride of virtue in her:
By well-sown hints of an unbounded passion,
Perhaps by menaced FORCE, and other lures,
To rouse her fury, and provoke her scorn
Even against the REAL Hamet -- Then retire --
Resume thyself -- as Almoran appear,
And in the fever'd hour of --

ALMORAN. Vain attempt!
Oh! impotent device to move a love,
Fixed as the central heart within her bosom.
And how, presumptuous, do thou dare to think
That Almoran will act the base dissembler;
Still by thy arts imposed, and still successless?

CALED. Pardon my zealous duty, mighty sultan,
Since it is thy sacred pleasure to resign
The beauteous maid -- perhaps --

ALMORAN. Resign her! No!
No, by the love and rage that rends my heart,
First shall this executing arm -- Away!
The effort shall be tried -- Some circumstance
Perchance may rise -- at least 'twill foil the arts
Of those vile minions, and secure Almeida:
Caled prepare the robes, and wait my coming.
Exit CALED. Meantime this feeble traitor -- Ha! he comes,
And Osmyn too; but Caled will destroy --

SCENE II.
OSMYN with OMAR in Chains. GUARDS WITH THEIR SABRES DRAWN. ALMORAN, OMAR,
OSMYN. ALMORAN. Well, proud philosopher, is this thy virtue?
Do thou at length go forth to preach rebellion?
Lo! thy reward.

OMAR. And what, vain man, is thine?
In thy own toils entangled, shamed, defeated!
Treason and Omar never can be joined --
What thou haft styled rebellion, he calls justice!
And, deeming that a virtue -- glories in it.

ALMORAN. Thou do, audacious? Then say, rude boaster,
What have thou gained by all this wondrous virtue,
But ignominious chains, that now enfold thee?
And the tremendous death which waits to seize thee.

OMAR. Thou have miscounted, sultan, of my gains,
Nor can thy most malignant tyranny
Blast the bright wreathe that waits to crown my triumph.
I Have acted as became me -- That Is a victory
Thou never wilt know.

ALMORAN. Insensate moralist!
Conduct him, Osmyn, instant to his cell,
Within the traitor's cave enclose the dotard,
And leave him to his fate.
Going.
OMAR. A moment stop!
I deign to ask it as a parting favor.
Unmoved I heard my sentence, Almoran,
Unmoved shall brave whatever thy pride inflicts,
To stop the pulse that soon, without thy aid,
Would cease to beat; yet a last prayer remains;
Let thine own eye survey me in my fall;
Let thine own eye attest the unruffled calmness
With which old Omar lays down weary being;
And though he could not teach thee how to live,
Let him yet teach thee -- what it is to die.
Going.
ALMORAN. Exulting slave. Death shall not be thy lot,
Convey the traitor, Osmyn, from our presence;
Double his weight of fetters; bind them hard;
Let every crevice that admits the light,
And every wholesome gale of heavenly air,
Save what may chain the rebel down to life,
To lingering, hated life, be fast repelled. --
See thou obey, or tremble for thyself.
Remember, I am Almoran, whose power
Can in a moment crush thee. -- Hence! -- Dispatch.

Exit. SCENE III.
OMAR, OSMYN. OMAR. Unhappy, wretched, raging man, farewell!
"In what a blessed time his father died:
"The gods foresaw the mischiefs in advance,
"And took him from such anguish to themselves."
Come, thou disgraceful servant of the guilty,
Lead to these glooms -- I follow thee undaunted. --
Dearer to Omar far the dungeon'd darkness,
Than all the sunshine Osmyn can enjoy,
While Osmyn is the pandar of a tyrant.

OSMYN. Slaves, leave your prisoner, and wait without;
Remove the massy bars that close his cave --
I will myself conduct the captive thither.

Exit guards. OMAR. Why trifles Osmyn with his king's command?
He seems disturbed. --

OSMYN. Omar, thou strik'st me hard --
Survey this face -- is naught depicted there
'I hat speaks an altered soul?

OMAR. An altered soul!


OSMYN. Yes, Omar, thou have shown me to myself,
Long since, prepared to seize some fair occasion
Of breaking from the manacles I wore --
Worse than these bonds to thee -- Yes, Omar, thou,
Like the pure mirror in a cherub's hand,
Has held the hideous picture to my view,
And shown to Osmyn his deformity.
Here, by the holy powers of heaven, I swear --
Kneels.
OMAR. Osmyn, forbear -- If thou inded art fixed, --
If vows have past between thy soul and thee,
Oaths are surperfluous, impious, and vain:
The solemn secret purpose be thy bond,
And note of that is marked above already.

OSMYN. In all things far above me. I Will not swear,
But do a deed shall better speak my truth
Than all the lavish language of the lip.
Thy glory is at hand -- thine and Almeida's. --
I have, my friend, devised a pious fraud
To serve an injured king. Hamet, this night,
Visits his loved Almeida. That the least --
Freedom and virtue will attend the issue --
A fit disguise, already is prepared
A slave -- the trusty Aladin -- attends,
Silent and safe to guide the happy Hamet
To the appointed place. -- What Is further purposed
I will unfold hereafter.

OMAR. Generous Osmyn,
I need not thank thee -- there is a god within
Each honest breast, that well rewards the virtuous.
What Is to be done?

OSMYN. I Will tell thee as we pass.
A thousand slaves look up to me for life;
The tyrant placed me over them for his pride;
Yet do they hate the person they protect. --
These, at a nod, I summon to the cave,
Where I will now conduct thee. -- There remain
Till the rich crisis of a just revenge.
Trust to my says, and fortune is our own.

OMAR. Now, Osmyn, thou indeed art good and virtuous,
And with an honest joy my heart enfolds thee!
Embraces. But haste, my friend -- fie on these loitering limbs --
Oh, that awhile I could shake of my age!
But even now, should nature close the scene,
Still should I doubly triumph in my death,
Since I have served my king -- and saved a soul.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
THE GARDEN OF THE SERAGLIO; THE MOON ABOUT TO SET. Enter HAMET. At length, by
many a maze, I Have reached the garden,
Scaled the high walls, and passed the sentinels. --
Ha! at yon window flames the distant taper!
There! there! even now, perchance -- O! hold my brain!
No more will I arouse the sons of Persia,
But my own cause with my own arm avenge.
Omar, ever this, has breathed his latest prayer --
Almeida too -- I will not think -- Almeida! --
O! never more this sabre will I sheathe,
Till on its point a brother's blood! -- Forgive --
Forgive me, gods! -- Ye have not formed me sanguine:
Wrongs, wrongs have wrought me to this dire extreme.
Nor shall I strike a brother, but a tyrant.
Remote from notice will I wait the morn,
Till Almoran, as is his custom, walks
To the seraglio, from the palace -- then
Shall injured Hamet pay the important debt
He owes himself, Almeida, and his country.
Exit. SCENE V.
Enter OSMYN. The moon has veiled her orb, a few faint streaks
Silver the somb'rous shades, to note her parting.
It Is near the moment Aladin should come.
The monarch his high charge -- soft -- they are here,
Aladin leads the way.
SCENE VI.
ALMORAN (disguised). Starts back at seeing OSMYN.
OSMYN. My royal master,
Accept the willing homage of my heart,
A first fair offering at the shrine of virtue.
Welcome to liberty and fair Almeida.
Thy Omar's safe -- the guards are far removed --
The tyrant sleeps, perchance; or if he wakes,
Suspects not -- all is secure -- Almeida waits
The signal.

ALMORAN. This speaks for me, Osmyn.
Embracing. Oh! Almoran, to what art thou reduced!
Aside.
OSMYN. It Is the twelfth hour -- and see, my gracious lord,
Faithful Almeida comes. -- Thou, Aladin,
Still wait -- Farewell! my lord -- be happy.
I go to guard thy privacy.

Exit. SCENE VII.
ALMEIDA with CRYSANTHE, from the seraglio. ALMEIDA. This is the place my Hamet
has appointed,
And this the silent unsuspected hour. --
Yonder he walks, Crisanthe -- O! my heart!
Going to him, Muffled, as he now is, by night's dun shades
And gloomy robes, my bosom owns its lord --
My love, my Hamet! -- Thus receive my welcome.

Embraces. ALMORAN. Her tender pressure pays for every pang.

Aside.
ALMEIDA. Much did I fear the tyrant Almoran.
"Yes, gracious prince, still does thy virtuous spirit,
"Even against thyself, defend a brother's fame --
"Defend the man which wrongs thee" -- But, nor toil,
Unwearied watchfulness, nor life itself,
Past in subservience to his dark designings,
Prevents the sudden whirlwind of his rage,
Nor checks the frenzy of that lawless soul.

ALMORAN. Is It possible!


ALMEIDA. Osmyn has told me all --
All that relates to that perfidious monster.
The man who serves him, like a wretch condemned,
Fancies he hears, in every passing gale --
That rushes by his dungeon, some swift fate;
The savage bowstring, or the sanguine mute.

ALMORAN (aside.) Oh! agony extreme! -- Said Osmyn this?


ALMEIDA. Were this a place for words, O! much loved youth,
Insulted partner of a throne degraded --
Were this a place for converse -- I could tell thee,
How sovereign hate surrounds the gloomy palace,
And sheds tremendous darkness over the scepter,
How all the hearts of Persia wrung with slavery,
Throb in their loyal bosoms to be free --
And how that gem, which in thy father's reign
Shone brightly lambent as the flame of life --
That gem which regal power would seize in vain,
Prerogative usurp, or riches bribe --
THE AFFECTION OF HIS SUBJECTS -- All is lost:
"While hate and horror, flattery, and falsehood --
"The secret murmur, and the mining treason,
"Are gone abroad, like some wide-wasting pest,
"To frighten every virtue from the empire."

ALMORAN. Indeed! -- Is Almoran? -- My heart is rent.

aside.
ALMEIDA. But soon the lofty tyrant from his height --
O! my best Hamet, hail the radiant hour --
Falls, like a star from heaven. The time's at hand
When Hamet shall resume the wrested scepter;
When peace her sacred birthplace shall regain,
And honest loyalty once more look upwards:
All Persia watches the eventful crisis,
And not a slave -- a vassal here immured,
But has to virtuous Hamet vowed allegiance:
This very night will wait his sovereign mandate,
Avow their scorn of Almoran and guilt,
Led on by daring spirits formed for freedom:
Shows a dagger. And I -- even I -- my lord, behold am armed
To aid the glorious cause --
Ha! -- thou art not well, my lord -- You feel too much
For an ungrateful brother -- But no more
I Will name the tyrant -- since it pains my Hamet.
Come then, my lord -- behold Almeida ready;
Osmyn conducts my sire -- Crisanthe's here,
Lead thou the way.

ALMORAN. Soft -- some safer means.


ALMEIDA. What means remain?


ALMORAN. The means to seize
That joy which slavish forms --

ALMEIDA. Away,
Thou worse than Almoran -- Away!

ALMORAN. Thus let me claim the rights of generous love.


ALMEIDA. All, all but this Almeida could have borne:
Her fate was never desperate 'till this moment.
Even in the darkest hour of her distress,
She thought on thee -- she thought on virtuous Hamet;
Hoarded his fondness with a miser's care;
And when the piercing sorrow smote her heart,
His loved idea, like a charm divine,
Stilled the sad sigh, and checked the falling tear.

ALMORAN. When will Almeida from these dreams awake?


ALMEIDA. Nay then it is time to treat thee as thou art.
In the soft hour of peace, I am a woman,
And not unmindful of my sex's province;
But in the trying moment of dishonor
draws the dagger. I tower above the female's fancied terrors,
And meet the russian with a hero's boldness:
See heaven has armed my hand -- Desist or fall.

SCENE VIII.
Enter HAMET. Surely I heard --
Villain forbear -- O! all ye gods -- Almeida!
ALMORAN (throws off the disguise.) Ha! -- Who art thou -- It Is Almoran -- Ha!
-- Hamet!


ALMEIDA. Almoran! -- Ah! poor betrayed Almeida.

Faints.
HAMET. Ha! betrayed! -- Now then accursed king --
They fight, ALMORAN disarmed. Guilt brings the haughty tyrant to the earth --
Behold the mighty Almoran disarmed!

ALMORAN. Strike -- strike -- I will not bear the load of life.


HAMET. I need not shed thy blood -- Thy conscience bleeds
Already

SCENE IX.
CALED and ALI (with lights.) ALMORAN. Ye loitering villains -- seize -- this
instant seize --


HAMET. Approach and die --


SCENE X.
ENTER OMAR AND OSMYN, AT THE HEAD OF A LARGE PARTY. ALMORAN. More
treason-slaves!


OMAR. Seize, but shed no blood.


HAMET. Hah! -- Omar! -- Osmyn! -- Almoran disguised!
Oh! my brave friends, help, help, thy wretched master.
Rise injured excellence to life and Hamet.

ALMORAN. Kill me, ye slaves, and I forgive the treason:
Unhand me, or by heaven -- O! shame, shame, shame!

ALMEIDA. Profound astonishment chains every sense!
Ah! righteous providence, what art's involved.

HAMET. My fears for thee --


ALMEIDA. Thy fears were vain, my lord --
Thou saw me armed --

HAMLET. Then I am blessed indeed -- Thy father's safe,
And all the tears he sheds are tears of joy.
But still that hapless man -- It wounds my soul
To see the lofty spirit sinking in despair;
And nature yet demands a brother's pause
Suspended over his fate.

ALMORAN. Thou shall not chain me to the wheel of life --
Fierce throes of heart, and agonies unheard of,
Sit vulture-like upon -- Stand off -- I will not,
No -- no power on earth shall hold the hand of justice:
Breaks from the guards. Lo it is poised -- Brother, I owe thee much --
How then to pay thee? -- thus -- thus -- and thus.
Stabs himself. Hamet, thy fears are past -- I faint apace -- approach --
Ah! gently -- Let me die upon thy bosom.
Much have I wronged -- I can offend no more.
Dies.
HAMET. Ha! Almoran -- my brother -- once loved friend,
Alas! too late convinced.
Save me, Almeida, from this dreadful sight.

ALMEIDA. Unhappy Almoran -- My soul forgives thee!


OSMYN. Hail injured king, the eastern world is thine.


HAMET. I ask not now the means of this strange fortune;
But ere I taste the bounty of the gods
Dashed with some bitternss -- prepare that corpse
For the cold grave, with every regal honor:
And may his failings with his dust be buried.
The forfeit paid, how dark soever the crimes,
It Is our's to pardon, friends, and not to punish.

OMAR. Then Persia shall revive, and all be well.
Behold Ambition humbled in the dust,
The guilty Minion trembles at his crimes,
In this good man returning virtue smiles,
In your blessed selves, my children, we may trace
The sure rewards of constancy and truth,
The meed of goodness -- and CONSENT OF HEAVEN,

FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoken by Miss FARREN. OF late at West minster The first night's
representation happened on the opening of parliament.
, in order due,
A gracious speech first made, debates ensue.
Ere then, in this full house, our author's fate
Becomes the subject of your warm debate --
Ere yet you opposition critics rise
To move for censures, and refuse supplies;
Or partial friends pour down corrupt applause,
By orders pension'd in the author's cause,
From either party -- none will sure impeach
My sovereign title to pronounce the speech.
Through me the muse her loyal subjects greets --
Though I speak standing, and you keep your seats --
Pleased that so full a house attends the summons --
Pit -- Box -- and Gallery -- Peers and faithful Commons --
With deep concern she bids me here relate
What dangers threaten the dramatic state --
What hosts of foes her tottering realms invade,
By fashion mustered, and by folly paid:
While Taste, her old ally, unmoved we see,
And Spleen preserves an armed neutrality.
See first come on -- all armed in whale-bone hoops --
The tuneful leaders of the Italian troops.
Long have they waged -- too often with conquest crowned --
The doubtful conflict betwixt sense and sound.
Allied with these -- in hostile bands advance
The light-heel'd legions of invading France.
To point her thunders on our British coast,
Year after year, has been vain Gallia's boast.
Their troops embark -- the bold attempt is planned --
Their heroes threaten -- and their dancers land, --
These only put their threats in execution,
And lay all London under contribution.
Immortal chiefs! who on one leg can do
What yet no warrior has achieved on two.
Like Rome's proud victor, in their fierce attack,
They come, they see, they conquer, and -- go back.
And, modern Jasons, as of old in Greece,
Sail home triumphant with the golden fleece.
Before such dangers shall we prostate fall?
Or, like true Britons, boldly brave them all?
If fairly led, we'll bid their host defiance,
Dissolved a late unnatural alliance;
Our leader too shall now assistance lend,
Not promise succors, and delay to send:
But chiefly here -- our hopes and courage lie
In you, our truest friend and best ally --
Support our Bard tonight, and on his part
Receive the tribute of a grateful heart --
Through me receive, and here again I Will meet ye,
Act as ambassadress, and sign the treaty.


