THE DOUBLE DISAPPOINTMENT: OR, THE FORTUNE Hunters.

A COMEDY IN TWO ACTS

Written by a GENTLEMAN.

Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus Mus. Printed in the Year 1755

PROLOGUE
THIS Author sure must be a low Dog
to pick out Me to speak his Prolog'
an Irishman! the silly Elf
had better come and prate himself
But since the foolish Rapparee
will Verse impose on such as Me
I Will tell some Things that late befell
and let the Poet go to Hell
I Have been involved in peaceful Wars
among Regiments of marching Tars;
Sea Fights on Land we have all been losing,
(These Rhymes are of my own exposing)
and to the shame of our brave Fleet
we Victories have got complete
though we have stupidly been beat:
But by my shoul our fine Commanders
were Geeses Husbands, two great Ganders!
Our Ship was manned hy Women all
from the large Boys down to the small:
Then pray observe the pretty Fun
We'd never a Pistol but one Gun:
and one old Halbert for a Sword
with a Steel Cutlass made of board
Those are the necessary Arms
that filled the Spaniards with alarms
One Frenchman I saw lying dead,
to end him I shot off his Head;
and yet, dear Sirs, that very day
I saw the Rascal run away.
Pray don't of what I say now prattle --
I murdered Six Men in fair Battle!
If I can be a Commadore
I Will show that Three and Two make four:
I Will make a Captain of my Mother,
She shall Command as well's another;
for true as our good Ship's a swimming
We'd several Officers old Women
I never to my Hammock creep
but I am waked before I sleep
but hold! while I thus prate away
They cannot go forward with the Play!
good Night, sweet Honies, fen I next appear
you will see an honest Fortune-Hunter here.

Dramatis Personae
GRIPE Mr, Farrel LOVEMORE Mr Dodd PHAELIM O BLUNDER Mr Whitley Marquis de
FANPARON Mr Young JEREMY Mr Stanford CONSTABLE Mr Bryan SERVANT Mr Pero ISABEL
Mrs Stanford
SCENE LONDON.

THE DOUBLE DISAPPOINTMENT.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Enter GRIPE and ISABEL. GRIPE. WAS there ever so Perverse a Baggage.


Isa: Was there ever so unreasonable a Guardian.


Gripe: What Cause have I given you to be so undutiful, have I exerted the
Power your deceased parents invested me with does not choice of Lovers visit
you but your mind is so set on that young rake-hell LOVEMORE that nothing but
my Steadiness could keep you from the Ruin you so justly deserve.


Isa: Yes indeed uncle you do admit variety of Lovers to visit me and both
alike are hateful, the Frenchman is all feather the Irishman all lead, and of
the two coxcombs I Have my choice, but I tell you once for all I Have set my
affections on LOVEMORE, he and only he you nor your great barred gates shall
not keep me from, so now I Have told you my (...), trouble me no farther.

AIR I. what beauteous s^^^^s and
Your Idle threats on one like me
Are all in vain employed
Thus still remains the constant tree
By tempests undestroy'd
Love never shall be once removed
But with a constant heart
To see the man I ever Loved
When pierced by Cupid's Dart
2
Could Argus from his watchful Tower
Long keep the trusted fair
Or say did Da^'s shady Bower
Elude a Lover's care
Force a while with Iron sway
May s^ver nymph and swain
Like parted waters they obey
But quickly meet again.

Enter OF BLUNDER O Blun: Parmit me, Madam, to assure you I long to die in your
service that I may show you I Would be your most faithful humble Sarvant all the
days of life afterward, that good Gentleman your uncle, has often told me you
was not disagreeable to me, and if I may judge by the grace of my Person and
and the beauty of my Complexion I may hope that a Tall Brave IRISHMAN may give
you a heart that nobody's before but his own and not that neither upon my Shoul
Madam. --


Gripe: O Mr. OF BLUNDER you're so taken up with your Mistress that I may
expect but little of your most sweet conversation.


O Blun: Och upon my Shoul my Dear you was hid so clear in a mist that I saw
you as plain as -- Sir I hope you are very well -- Harkee my Dear Mr. GRIPE
suppose now I was married to your Niece what Relation would you be to me then?
-- O, yes you would be my Father in Law -- but come my Dear Miss ISABEL because you
look so Colly-Molly, I Will sing you an Irish Song AIR II. Ballinamony and
Where ever I Am going and all the day long
At home o^ abroad or alone in a throng
I find that my Passion's so liveby and strong
That your name when I Am silent still runs in my Song
Ballinamony ^ra etc
2
Since the first time I saw you, I take no repose
But sleep all the day to forget half my woes
So hot is the flame in my Stomach that glows
By Sr. PATRICK I fear it will burn through my clothes
3
Och now I Am afraid I will die in my grave
Unless you comply and poor PHELIM will save
And grant the Petition your Lover does crave
Whenever was free till you made him your Slave
4
On that happy day when I make you my Bride
(...) l^ng sword (...) I Will str^ut and I Will stride
In (...) with (...) to ride*
A^ (...) you I walk to the Church by your side etc



Isa: Odious Blockhead! (ASIDE.) I Am sure Sir a Gentleman of your address must
always be very desirable among the Ladies.


O Blun: So all the Ladies did say of Little PHAELIM OF BLUNDER, and if I was
in their company they would laugh at me so that I could plainly discover their
affections. But let an Irishman alone to get sweet heart.


Isa: But pray Mr. OF BLUNDER in all your travels was you never mistaken in
your Opinion?


O Blun: Never my Dear for when I took my Post chaise Horses and came by long
sea from PARIS, there did two Ladies die with grief a twelvemonth before I did
take my leave of them and two more Six months after that, which I never heard
of in my Life, and last Sunday will be a month since I did come to England to
make love upon you, for you are the Phaenix of the age and I never saw any body
so pretty as you, except one JUGGY CAVENA and one SHEELINAH GUIR^ACH in Ireland
and by my Shoul they was as Carroty as a black Dog.


Enter a SERVANT. Ser: Sir there is a French Marquis below --


Gripe: O Pray desire the Gentleman to walk up.

EXIT SERVANT
Enter MARQUIS. MAR. Ma Charmante Mademoiselle, permit me Madam at de
invitation of Monsieur Votree Uncle to offer once more in my Person all that
France has noble and Polite -- my Grand Father that is de Marquis de la
BOMARDE, has taken more Towns (if Possible) than you have hearts, and my Father
Monsieur L' count de L' CINQUECALARIE was emplo'yd in the cabinet council of de
Grand Monarch and me Madam, Monsieur CINQUECALARIE Marquis de FANFARON have
left my country, to show that to command a Prince is less than to obey the
smiles of a Mistress.


Isa: Sir without dispute a Gentleman of your Family, education and polite
behavior, would make any Lady extremely happy*


Mar: Madam! Beauty so attracts, that the luster of a Crown is less engaging
than one little sight of your Bon-grace! -- oh! Monsieur GRIPE avoustres humble
Servieur Monsieur how you do. -- pray (...) Fine Gentleman is that alon with
you there?


Gripe: That Is PHAELIM OF BLUNDER Esquire: of Ireland a Gentleman of great fortune
and is lately come from Paris.


Mar: Lately come from Paris, me will go and have some conversation with him --
Monsieur a voutres humble Servitieur, France Parie est En beau Paoui France is
the finest Country, as I never saw in my life.


O Blun: Sir I could nver learn how to twist my tongue round your discourse in
all my life, but Sir I understand you as well as if you said nothing at all to
me.


Mra: what Monsieur, not speak de french! it is very great pity upon my vord,
for almost every body speaks french now. -- Monsieur when I take my leave at
Paris, Madam Le Duchess de Quinvil that is my Grandmother, did say to me ah
Marquis de FANFARON you go to England prenez cord vou take care of your heart
for de English Ladies be very great Beauties and alloways lay their snares for
our men of Quality -- me say never fear for that. -- my Sister La Marque Le
Chavelseys Likewise say to me ah my Dear Brother if yon will marry is there not
Mademoiselle de LAMARMITE for you.


O Blun: Harkee my dear would she have you marry a Mermaid?


Mar: No, no, Monsieur, Mademoiselle MARMITE is the Lady's Name or is there not
Mademoiselle Pet ONGUELEAR she is in Love with you but my fortune has thrown me
to England to see a much fairer Lady. oh speak my fate madam I Have been dans les
armies du rusi in many battles, but I never was in such danger before.


O Blun: If this frenchman be as great a rogue as I, upon my soul it will be
very comical.


Mar: (Sings) AIR. III.
Petit Cupid now has caught me
And me feel the cruel smart
In chains the rogue to you has brought me
Take (...) wounded heart with a Merliton etc.
2
Aford dumoi some compassion
Nor let me too long complain
When a Frenchman tells his Passion
Can he ever Plead in vain with a Merliton etc
When shall I be the happy man to conduct you to my Grand Chiteau in Daupheine.
she is Verry pretty upon my vord.


Isa: Mr. OF BLUNDER it is in vain for me to hide the esteem I Have for you so if
you will meet to night at the bottom of the Garden I Will have a Parson ready to
fix us together in happiness.


O Blun: I know that my dear; but I tell you what as it will be very dark, my
dear I Will tie sixpenny worth of Black ribband in my button hole, so that you
may know me by the tone of my voice and the grace of my Person.


Isa: Do so for I must be gone for fear of Suspion Exit


Gripe: Lookee MARQUIS upon condition that you give me a thousand Guineas out
of my nieces ten Thousand I Will manage the affair so that she shall be yours in
eight and forty hours so till you consider of it I Am your humble Servant. Exit.


Mar: A thousand guineas is a great deal of Lorshong but begar I Will be revenged
by denying all my engagements, and follow the Pollticks of France.

Hem! Sir you make me very uneasy to see you here, so I Desire you not to
repeat your visit on Pain of my displeasure.


O Blun: Sir I never was bred nor born a Physician in my Life but I Will tell you
how you will cure your self that is I would not have you come here your self, and
then you wont see me here, for if you was blind of both your eyes you should
see I Would come and visit that Getlewoman.


Mra: Sir you are a Gentleman I suppose.


O Blun: Why my dear you may know that by the softness of my Thumb feel it.


Mar: your thumb Sir! me no understand your thumb but if you are a Gentleman
meet me an hour hence in the fields, for an officer of the arms duroui cannot
bear a rival either in Love, or in Glory. begar I Will cut your throat.


O'Blun: you french son of a whore have at you.


(Both Draw) GRIPE, Enters and interposes. Gripe: For Heavens sake Gentlemen be
quiet.


O Blun: O Let him alone my Dear, I Will not meet him except he comes behind me
to my Throat


Mar: Begar Sir if you do meet me, I will make one, two, three twenty trust in
your Body. Monsieur Gripe good bye to you. Ext


O Blun: Upon my Soul I believe this old GRIPE is an old raparee and when I Am
married to his neice I Will forswear the Bonds and not give him a groat which is
nothing, nor that neither, which is less and I Will make him pay me back all the
money I never pa^d him (to GRIPE) Well my dear Father in Law the Blessing of
St. PATRICK be about your House and upon all the pretty Little Children that
I Will ^eget upon that pretty gentlewoman your niece. Exit


Gripe: So let things go how they will, I Am sure of a thousand guineas. Exit


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE the STREET. Enter LOVEMORE and JEREMY. Love (Sings) AIR. IV.
As pleasing as shade to the way faring swain,
Where the ard^ur of Phoebus had scorched the sweet plain
As groves to the Lynit or Thyme to the be
So welcome my fair one so welcome to me
2
When Love's once united, no Tyrant shall part
Nor can time efface what is engraved on my heart,
Remembrance still knows when all raptures are past
For friendship's a flame that burns bright at the last
3
It cheers our sad hours it heightens our joy:
This nor whim can abate, nor can fashion destroy
While beauty alone on too fickle a wing
Like the fairest of blossoms often dies in her spring.

JEREMY Jer: Sir.


Love: Be double diligent to night, my ISABEL writes me word she has appointed
her two boobies to meet her in the orchard, do you go and take such
instructions as she will give you.


Jer: yes Sir -- but I saw the Irishman last week, and though it is five years
since I Have seen him before, I remember him perfectly well; when he was helper
in Sir JOHN FRIENDLY's Stables, he was turned out of the Family for stealing a
Silver spoon.


Love: Ha, ha, ha, dear JEREMY mind your instructions for my affairs are
brought to a crisis, and on your fidelity depends my everlasting felicity.


Jer: You may give yourself no farther trouble Sir -- so fortune be my guide.
EXEUNT


Enter O BLUNDER O Blun: Well said Little Phaelim, upon my soul you have done
for your self -- why then it was a happy day for you when Sir JOHN FRIENDLY
turned you off for stealing a silver spoon -- which you did not steal neither
but put in your Pocket by way of mistake, why then upon my soul I believe if I
was to be hanged I should live to be a Great man after, but this I know as well
as if nobody did tell me that Miss ISABEL has ten thousand Pounds, and when I Am
married to her I Will go by my self, that is along with her into Ireland and
there we'll live as loving as two cock sparrows on a thatched Cabin, then
PHAELIM O BLUNDER will be an Esquire in good earnst and I Will go up to Dublin in
the Parliament winter, and I Will leave my wife behind me to take care of me in my
absence -- why then upon my soul I think a Single life is very disagreeable
till a man's married.

(Sing:) I Am walking all the night
Like a Ghost that had lost his sight

Enter MARQUIS Mar: What do you make all dis noise here for? villain! coquain.


OF Blun: I did not make no noise.


Mar: Iss you did for when me turn the corner of de Park me hear you.


O Blun: you lie perhaps.


Mar: Me no understand your perhaps.


O Blun: Why then you lie without any haps at all.


Mar: Oh, Monsieur you give me the lie.


O Blun: Yes my Dear and put it in your Pocket.


Mar: Did you know my farther my Grandfather were all Generals in the arms du
roi? and yet you come court my mistress villain -- What be your family


O BLUN: Sir did you know my Grandfather? and that he had a longer name than
yours?


Mar: What was his name eh?


O BLUN: His name was SHAMUS JAMES M' CARTY M' KILLNEGAD M' KILLNEGOOD M'
KILLNEDUFF M' SHANE M' RAGAN M' FAGAN Ugus, M 'THONAMON JOUL you french son of
a whore, and he was a greater traveller than yours.


MAR: A Traveleer!


O BLUN: yes Sir, he was twice to the, west Indies, before he was twenty years
of age but upon my shoul he was transported there [ASIDE] and what is more than
that I never had no Grandfather at all, because my mother had me before she was
married. (ASIDE)


MAR: I cannot bear -- alons Monsieur draw your sword, begar I Will cut your
throat.


O BLUN: O my dear I Will be with you in a crack (DRAWS) now you french son of a
whore, I Will be in your Gizzard


MAR: Hold, hold Monsieur, BLUNDER let me speak to you.


O BLUN: O you scoundrel speak after I kill you I Will not hear a word out of
your mouth till you're (...).


MAR: I did not tink he would Fight, par^lie^! Aside. Monsieur BLUNDER it is all
a joke put up your sword I Would not quarrel with my very good friend, I do assure
you I esteem you en cavalier accompli, What de devil you no understand a joke?


O BLUN: O my Dear I know you never loved the s^ell of cold Iron, but since it
is so, I Will put up, for I Am as peaceable in all my Quarrels as no Body at all,
but remember the family of the O BLUNDERS will never ^e used ill in public
company except it be behind their backs.


MAR: Come come, let us be friends.


O BLUN: Ay my dear and to show I mean you no harm give us you fist, but I Will
tell you what; if you come near Miss ISABEL, that is within a great distance of
her, nation to my soul but I Will beat you longer than I can stand over you, I Will
Skiver you like a Rabbit you French Hottentot son of a whore.


EXIT Singing. MAR: the Devil take that dam Irishman he has frighten me out of
my wits: but this is the time I did promise to meet my dear Chormante Miss
ISABEL at the bottom of the Garden. EXIT. Enter ISABEL Well sure my heart
hasn't gone so pit a Pat a long while what a Severe thing it is for a young
creature as I am, to be under the government of an old cocovetous Uncle, he would
for the sake of a thousand guineas surrender me into the arms of either of
these wretches whom I abhor: but this is the time I promised to meet them, so I
trust to fortune for a fair riddance. [Enter JEREMY] O you are the one I wanted
I Have appointed O BLUNDER and Marquis to meet me here at this hour, so as it is
very dark you may counterfiet my voice as near as you can to deceive 'm, while
I as swift as CUPID's wings fly to the arms of Mr. LOVEMORE, so now good JEREMY
be watchful and success attend you. Exit.


JER: So now to my place, I hear some body, so must retire. Exit. Enter O
BLUNDER Upon my soul it is so dark that I cannot see the Moon so I Will take out my
spy glass to see whether it is up or no, faith when, I get this fortune I Will
study Philosophy, and know the reason the the Moon shines one night and will not
come out of another, I wish I had a candle and lanthorn to look for it.


Enter JEREMY JER: Who Is there? Mr, O BLUNDER!


O BLUN: faith is it my dear, and your eyes look so bright that I believe you
stick candles in them.


JER: I beg you wont speak loud for fear of my uncle hearing you, for then we
should both be ^^in'd so to avoid accidents, let me lead you into (...)
Green-house, till I can fetch a Parson; for I long to be yours.


O BLUN: faith I knew that, but my little wise, (...) you a Song that I writ
extrumpery Yes^^^. (Sings) AIR V.
One Saturday Morning about twelve a Clock
I parted from Ring's End and left the black Rock,
^^n Rejoicing at two the next Night upon shore
I cried, my dear Life, 'till my Heart it was sore.
2
I will be from Home almost more than a Year,
Next Lady Day past and came very fast here;
If I Would stayed there 'till now, by my Shoul they drink so
I would have been dead a full fortnight ago.
3
My Successors, Honey, all going before
were worth ten Hundred pounds in good Copper, and more,
and my Father, for whom I cry Och, och och Hone!
lies buried beneath a brave wooden Tomb Stone.
4
I wish I was blind before I did see
a Woman well bodied in Face such as thee,
for you will kill me with Kindness, and if you do so
I Will come and torment you wherever I go
5
Should you prove false hearted and not be Untrue
O how will I cry Sul, lul, luh! Hub hub boo.
Yet should I die soon, Och! I Will take care and see
that You the chief Mourner at my Funeral will be.
6
to CORK will I carry yeu fen you're my Bride
and in your own Cock boat woth Splendor you will ride
You Have Beef there for Nothing, and, I Will tell you what,
Good Mutton and Veal, dear Joy, cheaper than that
Och! Let me kiss your Little white fist, and be sure my dear Joy you will be
after coming before me. it lead off by Jeremy who Returns So, I Have got rid of
one Let the other come as soon as he Pleases -- Egad I hear him.


Enter MARQUIS MAR: De devil take that damned rolling Stone it did break my leg.


JER: Whose there?


MAR: Ah! ma charmante where are you.


JER: Here Sir; but make no noise for fear of my uncle: the Irishman was here
so I was obliged to show outward complisance to him on purpose to get rid of
him; for it is an easy matter to distinguish between a Gentleman of your
figure, and an Irish Bogtrotter.


MAR: Oui cermant, yes certainly, an air of a man of Distinction carries such a
Pass with it, that there is no resisting of it, so I long to carry you to my
Grand chateu, and make you the first Lady in Dauphane.


JER: I know you do Sir, but Pray let me convey you into the Green -- house
till I can run and fetch Parson.


MAR: I will; but be sure you no stay long -- there be no fishpond in my way.


JER: No, no, Sir. Exeunt.


Scene Discovers the MARQUIS leaning against a Tree, and O BLUNDER asleep on
the ground. Enter GRIPE, with a Candle GRIPE: Sure there is something more than
common going forward, for I could not sleep for an odd noise I heard this way,
I Am afraid my niece is about Playing me a slippery trick.


MAR: I wish my Dear Miss ISABEL would come, I am quite fateague with Impatience
ah! here she is no it is Monsieur GRIPE, parbleau.


GRIPE: Well I cannot think but my niece has deceived me.


MAR: Begar Sir I fear she has deceived me too for she say Monsieur Le Marquis,
meet me to night at the Bottom of the Garden in the green house and I will
marry you for I hate the Irishman and when I did come you see there is Monsieur
Le FLUNDER Like wise, so if she has made a fool of me she shall see a gentleman
of my Rank and Quality will seek opportunity of Revenge.


GRIPE: be appeared good Sir 'till I enquire into the affair. Mr. O Blunder,
Mr. O Blunder.


wakes him. O BLUN: Och my dear if I had not been asleep you might have wakened
me as often as you would


GRIPE: Pray Sir upon what account did you come here?


O BLUN: why my dear my coming here is a secret but I Will communicate it to the
loving company -- you must know that Miss ISABEL (being struck with my voice
and Person) did give me an assignation to meet her in the dark that nobody
might hear us, so after I did meet her she did not come; so my dear I was
recreating my self with a nap to pass away the time -- Arrah my dears I wish
you would both go about your business for she will not come if there be any body here
besides my self.


MAR: Sir she tell me, she love me, and nobody else, mafoi


O BLUN: Sir she loves me better than you.


MAR: How you know that?


O BLUN: Because I dream of her every night.


MAR: What signifies that, I dream of the Devil sometimes.


Enter JEREMY. JER: Mr. LOVEMORE is come to wait on you.


GRIP: Show him up Exit JEREMY.


Enter LOVEMORE and ISABEL LOV: Your servant Sir.


GRIPE: O, ho, so madam, you have made your choice I see and got a husband.


LOV: Yes Sir I Am the happy man.


MAR: What you be the husband parableau.


GRIPE: Oh, death! ruin! destruction! I Am finely bilkt.


LOV: your niece has showed hereself a girl of Spirit and she has got her
writings out of your desk and I have them in my Possession and have Discovered
all your roguery.


GRIP: O Lord, he has to be sure discovered all the agreements between Hellfire
the Lawyer and I Aside O you inconsiderate Jade I Am glad your Poor Parents did
not live to see this day but since I can do nothing else I Will have you hanged
for robbery. Exit


OF BLUN: I wish you were all hang 'd together, seperately in one rope.


LOVE: Pray Sir have not I seen your face before?


O BLUN: Like enough my de^r but I remember I never saw yours in all my Life
before.


LO^^: Pray was not you a helper in Sir John FRIENDLY's stables and was not you
turned out for this very?


Mar: A Thief! One must take care of my Pocket


OF BLUN: Upon my soul he remembers me too well I wish the Devil would burn his
memory ASIDE Sir if I did use to rub down horses it was by way of recreation
and because an I rishman hates to be Idle.


I^A: O Sir consider he is a Stranger, you will make him blush.


OF BLUN: O never fear my dear by my Soul I never blushed in my life nor spoke
truth neither, and when I did no one would believe me.


MAR: I Have stay here a great while, and say nothing, at all, because I would no
interupt the a affairs La family but what is the reason you choose a Gentleman
of my rank and Quality to impose on.


I^A: Because Sir your Vanity mixed with an equal Share of stupidity must always
render you a Proper object to be imposed upon.


Enter JEREMY JER: Sir here is a Servant of my Lord Eitherside's come after a
French Valet de Chamber who robbed his master of above five hundred Pounds and
by the description this must be he.


MAR: I wonder such feigner as this BLUNDER shoud appear in the Beaumonde, when
any Body may tell a Gentleman by his Politeness and Bone-Grace:


LOVE: Tell him to come up. Exit JEREMY


Enter CONSTABLE and SERVANT SER: I beg pardon of the company for this, but Mr
constable I charge with that fellow; Sir, that was my Master's valet, who not
being content with a Great many marks of his friendship has robb'b him of above
five hundred Pounds besides effects to a Considerable Value.


OF BLUN: Hurra! upon my Soul I Will make game of the french man -- Monsieur what
Long name is that your Grandfather had just now? come, give me your fist till I
wish you Joy, because you will be hanged by your Self, and I shall live all the
days of my Life after you.


MAR: Madam -- Gentleman, I beg of you to make some intercession for me that I
may not be hanged in a Strange country and in the flower of my age.


LOVE: If procuring you a stronger halter than ordinary will be of any service
to you, you may command my Interest.


MAR: O me be ver much obliged to you upon my vord. what the Devil business had
I to be a Gentleman ambition has been my ruin! here, Monsieur le Constable,
carry me to the Devil if you please. Exit with the Constable.


O BLUN: upon my shoul, Miss ISABEL, you have used me ill, for if you had a
mind to decieve me, why did not you tell me so at first: besides, my dear I
bought a yard of sixpenny ribband for a groat which I hope you will repay me back
again that I may be no Loser by my Loss.


LOVE: Look'ee Sir, since we don't use you as you deserve I desire you will quit
the House this instant, and appear in another kind of garb, for if ever I see
you, or hear of you assuming any thing like a gentleman, I Will send you to a
proper Place -- a pretty fellow to pretend to a fortune.


O BLUN: by Saint Patrick I beg both your Pardons, and if I did endeavor to
get a fortune 'twas only because I Would get an honest Livelihood, so as fortune
was always a foe to poor PHAELIM O'BLUNDER I Will pull off my long sword and wig
and fine clothes, for I believe they don't become me so, wishing you both as
happy as nobody at all, I wish you may live to see your children and your great
Grand children crying at your own funerals. Exit


ALL Ha! ha! ha!


LOVE: (Singe) AIR VI.
Thus blessed with the maiden I love
Contentment shall guild the new day
While Hymen the time shall improve
And scatter with myrtle the way
2
With a garland of never dying flowers
O Peace from thy dwelling repair
Soft joys shall direct our fond hours
And smile on so happy a pair.

FINIS

