AN ENQUIRY Into the EXILITY of the VESSELS In a Human Body, etc.

Sold by M. COOPER in Paternoster Row. Price 1 s.

AN ENQUIRY Into the EXILITY of the VESSELS In a Human Body: WHEREIN ANIMAL
IDENTITY is Explained, and shown Incommunicable to any Individual throughout
the whole Species.

By CLIFTON WINTRINGHAM, Jun. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Profecto verisimile est, and Hippocratem and Erasistratum and quicunque alii,
non contenti Febres and Ulcera agitare, verum quoque Naturam aliqua ex part
scrutati sunt, non ideo quidem Medicos fuisse, verum ideo quoque majores
Medicos extitisse.

CELSUS in Praefat.

LONDON: Printed for THOMAS OSBORNE in Gray's-Inn. MDCCXLIII.

TO Edward Wilmot, M.D. Physician in Ordinary to His Most Sacred MAJESTY the
KING of Great Britain, and to his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales; Fellow of
the College of Physicians in London, and of the Royal Society.
SIR,
THE following Enquiry containing several Particulars, which, though they have
not been hitherto either regarded, or perhaps understood by vulgar Anatomists,
may not on those Accounts at all the less tend to illustrate the surprising
Structure of Animal Bodies, requires the Protection of One, whose known
Abilities in every Branch of Physic, may silence the Cavils of those, whose
Penetration ends with the Edge of their Knife, or the Flowing of an Injection.
This Consideration alone, had I no other, is a sufficient Warrant for my
Application to you. But if the spontaneous conferring of Favors on such, as
had no Claim to them, but the mere Benevolence of the Donor, demands a public
Acknowledgment; I should be wholly unpardonable, did I not take this
Opportunity of returning you my Thanks for those singular Lights you was
pleased to afford me during my Attendance at St. Thomas's Hospital, where I had
not only my own Doubts resolved, but new Steps pointed out, by that uncommon
Sagacity, which has raised you to the highest Pitch of the Profession, and
rendered you so justly esteemed by all, who have the Honor of your
Acquaintance. As these, Sir, were the Motives of this my Application to you, I
thought myself excusable in not acquainting you with it, lest you should
prevent me from thus acknowledging the Obligations I lie under, as well as
declaring how much I am,

Sir, Your most obliged humble Servant, C. Wintringham.
Feb. 3. 1742. Bennet-Street, St. James's.
AN ENQUIRY Into the EXILITY of the VESSELS In a Human Body, etc.
THE Structure of the Animal Body, whether we consider the Size, Situation and
Uses of its larger and more complex Parts, with relation to each other, and
their Subservience to the whole, or by diving deeper into the secret and more
mysterious Parts of Nature, we scrutinize the several Parts of which these are
composed, exhibits to our View such an amazing Scene of unbounded Power and
Wisdom, as infinitely exceeds all the Contrivance of the rest of the visible
Creation, how great the Bodies, or astonishing soever their Motions and
Revolutions may upon a strict Enquiry appear to us.

(...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 1.
. But though this Position is sufficiently evident from the Structure of every
Organ in the Animal Body, yet it is in no Part so singularly astonishing, as in
the Growth of Animals, from their first original Stamina in the Animalcule,
till they arrive at their appointed Size.

That every Vessel and Fiber in the Body is contained in Miniature in an
Animalcule, few, I believe, will dispute, it being absolutely impossible, that
mere Matter and Motion, without its being conducted by the Vessels proper to an
Animal, should produce an Animal at all; and still more absurd, if there can be
Degrees in Absurdity, to suppose such a Cause capable of producing that Variety
of Species, in their regular Order, which, we see, is constantly kept up through
so great a Series of Years and Generations; but that instead of a Calf, a Cow
might as naturally produce a Lion, Camel, or any other Creature, as frequently
as its own proper Species.

Besides, could the Parts or Limbs, or even the most minute Organ be produced
by the Motion of the Fluids, without their being conducted by the Vessels of
the Organ itself already latent in the Stamina, what should hinder, why any
Part taken away by Amputation should not again be perfectly formed and
restored, since all the adductory Vessels continue in their former State, and
are capable of supplying the same Fluids as before? Consequently since the most
minute Organ cannot be supplied by any other than the forementioned Method, can
any thing be so absurd, as to suppose that all the regular Order of Vessels
necessary to compose the whole Bodily Machine should be produced by such a
Cause, as is utterly incapable of forming the least Part imaginable in a
regular Manner? This is no less exemplified in the Seeds or proper Embryos of
Plants. Thus the Seed of the Fir Tree, whose Bulk with all its Integuments
scarce equals the Head of the smallest Pin, has its Fibers and Vessels so
enlarged by the Addition of fresh Particles, as to grow to an enormous Size,
without ever deviating (in whatever Soil it grows) from its own Species into
any other kind of Tree. Which can be owing to no other Cause than the original
Stamina latent in its Seed; which not only separate, but conduct the Particles
proper for its Nourishment, each to its proper Place in a manner peculiar to
itself, thereby distinguishing it from all other Vegetables of what kind
soever. But a Branch once lopped off can no more be restored by the Gardener's
Art, than an amputated Limb by the Surgeon's: It Is true, indeed, new Buds may
be thrust forth by the redundant Nourishment, both in the adjacent and more
remote Parts, to compensate in some measure this Defect: but whether this
Mutilation of the Plant be of its Summit, or of a lateral Branch, the Extremity
must shrivel and dry up, and will bud and blossom no more.

If therefore mere Matter, although supposed to be in Motion, must be thus
conducted by the Vessels of an Animal, it must be conducted by the Animal
itself, no Application of different Forces ab extra to the Vessels (was there
any such thing, as it is evident from the Structure of the Uterus, there is
not) being capable of regulating and directing such an innumerable Variety of
Motions, or indeed of contributing to its Operations, any farther than
supplying it with a proper Nidus, and furnishing it with Materials ready
prepared for the Purpose, as sufficiently appears, not only from the
Observations of the accurate Malpighi, Bellini, Redi, Merian and others, but
discovers itself to our Senses, in the Generation of innumerable other Species
of Animals, some depositing their Eggs on Vegetables, or in the Earth, to be
brought to Light by the genial Warmth of the Sun, others in Dunghills, and
other putrefying Substances, and others in Streams of Water, where it is
impossible for any such Force to be applied.

Hence then Nutrition must consist not only in the mere Distension, but in the
Apposition of new Particles into such Parts of the Animal Body, as by the
Enlargement of the Pores, and Vacuities in the Solids, are fitted to receive
them, as I have elsewhere shown by Experiment See Sect. 7. Exp. 11. of an
Experimental Enquiry on some Parts of the Animal Structure.
: And, indeed, was it otherwise, the Animal would have a Power of making its
own Fibers and Vessels, and consequently of producing itself; nay the
Circulation of the Fluids must be performed in Vessels, before the Vessels
themselves, through which it is to be conveyed, have a Being; which are such
Absurdities, as I shall not give myself the Trouble of confuting.

That these new Particles by adhering firmly to the original Stamina increase
the Bulk of the Animal, till such time as it arrives at the Perfection its
Structure is capable of, needs no Proof; but that the Strength of the original
Animal owes its gradual Improvement to the same Cause, is likewise evident from
the common Practice of several of our mechanic Workmen, who by steeping and
saturating porous Woods, or the like light and brittle Substances in glutinous
Decoctions, vastly increase their natural Strength, without any Addition to
their external Bulk, which would be still farther increased, was that also
enlarged by a regular Distension of Parts, as in the Case of Animal Bodies.

Hence then it will follow, that these adventitious Particles, which by their
Cohesion with the original Stamina, increase the Bulk and Strength of the Body,
and thereby enable it to perform the proper Offices, for which it was created,
are not really any Part of the Body itself, but extraneous to it, actuated and
regulated entirely by it, and consequently contribute no farther to its
exercising the Powers, it is designed to exert when perfect, than would be
performed by a strong Lever acting with such a Power, as would be impossible
for a weak one to sustain, though in all other Respects the Case might be exactly
parallel.

Nor is this less true with regard to the Sensations, than Strength of the
Body. A proper Tension in the nervous Fibers being as requisite in this Case,
as Strength in those designed for Muscular Motion, as appears from the
pernicious Effects of too great Laxity, as well as Rigidity, in several
Diseases, the one rendering the Sensations so languid and slow through their weak
Vibrations, as not to affect the Animal with sufficient Force and Vivacity;
whilst the other, through too great Stiffness and Inflexibility, scarce allows
them to vibrate at all, as is the Case in old Age; or lastly by being too
springy and elastic, and thence exciting too strong and frequent Vibrations in
such as are younger, either renders their Sensations painful and uneasy, or so
quick in their Successions to each other, as to prove useless, nay often
prejudicial to the Animal, as is the Case in Phrensies, Maniacal Persons, and
the like.

How far the Strength of the Body depends upon the adventitious Particles
derived to it by Nutrition has been explained above, and it is hence no less
evident, that they cannot possibly contribute farther to its Sensations, than
as they add such a Degree of Firmness, as may prevent any external Species from
acting upon the nervous Fibrils so forcibly, as to injure them; whilst at the
same time by their intimate Adhesion with the original sensitive Organs, they
cannot act upon the one, without exciting a proper Degree of Motion in the
other; and consequently the real Sensitive Part of an Animal can contain no
greater Quantity of Matter, than is included in the Nervous Parts of the
Animalcule.

This then being the State of an Animal when arrived at its Perfection, how
amazing must it be to consider, how small and weak Organs do really actuate the
whole Machine! But that this may more fully appear, and also afford us some
determinate Idea of their extreme Tenuity, I shall endeavor to reduce such
Microscopical Observations as are of best Credit to a certain Standard; that by
comparing them with each other, and reducing them to Numbers, our Notions of
them may not be altogether so vague and indeterminate as at present they are.

Leeuwenhoek, that curious and diligent Inquirer into those Works of Nature,
which till his Time had by their Minuteness escaped all Discovery, has by his
repeated Microscopical Observations on the Semen Masculinum of Animals, not
only shown, that it abounds with Animalcula proper to each Species, but that,
according to his Judgment, a thousand of them would scarce be equal in
Thickness to a Grain of Sand Leeuwenhoek Epist. 41. Tom. IV.
; and consequently that a cubical Inch would contain a thousand Millions of
Millions of these little Beings. Professor Keil indeed, in his elegant Inquiry
into the actual Divisibility of the Particles of Matter, has from a Principle
of Dioptrics computed their Magnitude to be somewhat greater than that just now
mentioned; but he has however demonstrably shown, that the Length of a single
Animalculum cannot possibly exceed the 3*100000th Part of an Inch Introductio
ad veram Physicam, p. 48.
. That our present Enquiry may therefore be wholly confined within the Limits
of Truth, rather than proceed upon probable Conjecture, we will make Choice of
this latter Estimate, and for the further Convenience of Calculation, take it
for granted, that when the Foot is decimally divided, even such a Cubical Inch
will exceed the Bulk of a single Animalculum, in no greater a Proportion, than
that of a thousand Millions of Millions to 27.

Now the specific Weight of the various Parts of an Animal Body reduced to a
Medium amounts to a little more than the Weight of an equal Bulk of Water; if
therefore we suppose one of these Animalcula to be to Water, as the other Parts
of young Animals are, (and greater it cannot be, as appears from what I have
elsewhere demonstrated with relation to the increased specific Gravity in the
Arteries of aged Animals Sect. 5. Exp. 11. of an Experimental Enquiry on some
Parts of the Animal Structure.
, it follows, that as a Cubical Inch of Water is equivalent to 0.5271 parts of
an Ounce Troy, the Weight of a single Animalcule will be equal to the
1*140391450739th part of a Grain nearly.

But by the Experiments of the ingenious Dr. Keil it appears, that in a Man of
12 Stone-weight, the Fluids are to the Solids when taken at a Medium, at the
least in the Proportion of 8 to 3 Essays on several Parts of the Animal O
Economy, p. 38. to 63.
, exclusive of those, which by the Help of Fire and a Chemical Process may be
extracted without the Destruction of a single Fiber, which amounts to no small
Quantity. It has also been farther shown by Experiment, that the Vessels in
young Animals bear a much less Proportion to their Cavities, than the like
Vessels in old ones of the same Species bear to theirs Sect. 3. Exp. 11 of the
Experimental Enquiry, etc.
; consequently, since the Density of any Body is as the Weight of the Body
directly, and its Magnitude inversely, we shall find, by comparing the
foregoing Proportions of the Fluids and Solids together in each different State
of the Animal, as well before its Birth, as after it has arrived at full
Maturity, that all the Stamina, from which so noble a Being as Man himself was
at first derived, could not contain so much solid Matter as would be equal in
Bulk, to that of a Quantity of Water, of no greater a Weight than the
1*92408129934910602442073752000th part of a Grain.

If the preceding Exility of the Solids in general be so surpizingly small,
That of the Sensitive Parts alone, could their Relation to the rest be once
adjusted, would doubtless, to speak in the Language of the Mathematicians,
appear a mere Infinitesimal. For even Leeuwenhoek has declared in express
Words, that " Hae Cerebri Fibrillae, tenuibus puto amiciuntur Membranulis, quae
ob insignem Exilitatem nunquam sese nudabunt conspectui nostro: Quod nisi
statuamus, quo pacto Fibrillarum Disparationem vel Distinctionem Oculis
assequeremur? Leeuwenhoek Epist. 34. Tom. IV.
" To which he might have added our Intellectual Faculties also, it being scarce
possible to conceive Fibers always growing and increasing in Bulk, should be
kept separate, and perform their various Operations, but must soon prove
immovable, without being divided from each other by these slender Partitions.

This is not only evident from the Nature of the Fibers, but demonstrable from
Fact in the larger Parts even of full-grown Animals; which, when contiguous and
deprived of their proper Integuments, never fail to adhere and unite firmly to
each other, as is sufficiently known to the Practitioners in Surgery. How much
sooner then would this Adhaesion be produced in growing Animals, where the
Fibers are not only more supple, and thence more easily united, but if deprived
of these Membranes, would daily as they increase in Bulk, press more strongly
against each other?

The Writers in Geometry have laid it down as an established Maxim, that
ubicunque deficit Modulus, in aeternum latebit Mensura; on which account, though
we may rest satisfied, that the Subtility of the sensitive Parts in an Animal
Body must necessarily so far surpass the Extent of human Abilities, as to put
their Bulk beyond a Possibility of being ever determined to a Mathematical
Exactness; yet even the Nerves themselves, those delicate Instruments of all
our Knowledge, may be brought under such an Examination, as to afford us a much
clearer Idea of their exquisite Minuteness, than what can be obtained from
those conjectural Descriptions, the Anatomists have hitherto given us
concerning it.

For it is evident, that all the Membranes of an Animal Body have Muscular
Fibers, and that even the greatest Number of them are principally made up of
such; consequently we could not err very far from the Truth, were we to
estimate the Bulk of the Membranous Fibers in the same Proportion with the
Muscular ones. But we shall examine the Bulk and Proportion they bear to each
other a little more distinctly.

Now Leeuwenhoek in his Observations on the Muscular Fibers has shown, that
some of them were equal to the 1/9th, others to the 1/16th part of a Hair
Leeuwenhoek, Epist. 6. Tom. IV.
; consequently supposing each Fiber to be the Length of a Decimal Inch, there
will be contained in such a Cubic Inch seven Millions two hundred ninety
thousand of the former, and twenty-three Millions forty thousand of the latter
Kind. But these Muscular Fibers are by later Observations found to be really
small Muscles, consisting of Parts similar to the large one, which they
constitute, and terminating in Tendons after the same Manner as the former; and
consequently the Fibers, of which the more lax and cavernous Parts of the
Muscle are composed, must be much smaller than the muscular Fibers rendered
visible by his Glasses. Whether these be the same individual Fibers, which
constitute the Tendon, by being more closely compacted in their Parts, I shall
not undertake to determine; but this we learn from the forecited Author, that a
hundred of these exceed not the Bulk of a Hair Leeuwenhoek Epist. 14. Tom. IV.
, and consequently nine hundred Millions of them will be contained in the
forementioned Cubic Inch.

But these are far from being the smallest Fibers in the Body. For that the
pellucid Membranes consist of Fibers of still smaller Dimensions, decreasing
probably to the 1*300th part of a Hair, or upwards, is evident from the
Structure of those fine Capillary Arteries, which are destined to convey a
Fluid to them. For the whole Diameter of such an extreme Artery does not exceed
the 1*1620th part of an Inch Hale's Haemaest. Exp. 9.
that is, the 1*5th of a Hair nearly, and yet the Coat of this Vessel is made
up of at least three distinct Species of Membranes, each of them furnished with
Vessels peculiar to itself. And farther, if we consider, that the transverse
Section of every Vessel is of a circular Form, we must necessarily allow, that
the Longitudinal Fibers must be much smaller than any of those abovementioned;
otherwise instead of a Circle, a Polygon would be produced, as is evident from
Geometry.

Now even these are bulky Substances, when compared with the nervous Fibrils
destined to Sensation, as appears from those which form the Retina. For these
Fibers were manifestly before their Expansion into this Membrane collected
within the Bulk of what is styled by Anatomists the Optic Nerve, and are, as
the ingenious Professor Monro assures us, so extremely small, that it is
demonstrable, they cannot exceed the Thickness of the 1*32400th part of a Hair
Monro's Anatomy of the Human Bones and Nerves, p. 3.
. If therefore we reject the odd four hundred in the foregoing Fraction, and
suppose, that no more than 32000 of these Nervous Fibrils are necessary to make
up a Thickness equal to that abovementioned, and also set the Muscular,
Tendinous, and Membranous Fibers to be at a Medium, of no greater a Thickness
than the 1*200th Part of a Hair, (which, from what has been just now explained
above, is apparently a very large Allowance with respect to the Subtility of
the Fibers in general) it will then follow, that the Thickness of one of these
Fibrils in the Retina will be to that of such Fibers, as constitute the other
Membranes and Organs of the Body, in the proportion of 1 to 160. But we have
already shown, that all the Stamina in an Animalcule could not contain so much
solid Matter, as is equal in Bulk to a Particle of Water weighing the
1*92408129934910602442073752000th part of a Grain; consequently, if we suppose,
that a Nervous Fibril does accompany every individual Fiber in the Animal
System, and compare the Proportions they bear to each other as given above, we
shall find, that the whole sensitive Parts in the Animalcule taken together
could not amount to a greater Bulk than that of the
1*3764060396563654679984851840619241th part of a cubical Inch, or that all the
solid Matter of the Nerves, by which the Sensations in the human System are
actually communicated to the Mind, cannot possibly weigh the
1*14877708919520606993173874072000th part of a Grain.

That the stupendous Expansion and Action of the Fibers and Vessels of an
Animalcule up to that of a full grown Man should be owing to an Entity like
this, a mere fluxionary Increment with respect to Quantity and Magnitude, will,
I doubt not, to many appear impossible, to all incomprehensible; but are not
all other of the Creator's Works equally so? Or is this more than infinite
Power acting on Matter infinitely divisible is capable of, whose Particles must
be still higher subtilised, and spun into Fibers inconceivably more minute in
the Bodies of Insects, than is here specified of the human, as they are all
furnished with Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, and Tendons suitable to
their various Structures, and Manner of subsisting.

The incomparable Mr. Lock, speaking of the Identity of the same Person,
resolves it wholly into its Consciousness, even though the whole Substance,
material or immaterial, should be entirely changed. Many Physicians have also
been of opinion, and some even laid it down as a Maxim, that the whole
Substance of the BOdy, during the Length of an ordinary Life, is several times
so entirely changed, as to consist wholly of new Particles, of the same Nature
and Kind as the preceding. How far these Opinions may agree with what is
taught by Divine Revelation, where this very Sameness, in its strictest
Acceptance, seems to be expressly declared, is not my province to determine.
But this we may plainly deduce from what has been premised, that the whole
Substance of the Body, except these original Stamina of the Animalcule, may be
many times changed, and yet the real Body continue the same, and be possessed
of the same personal Identity, with regard both to Body and Mind, at the End of
the longest Life, as it was at the instant of its Birth; nay even in the
Animalcule itself.

That these original Stamina should all remain unhurt, and fit to perform their
several Functions to the End of Life, is a Position not to be admitted; but
that without a competent Number of them so remaining, the Animal will decline
both in its vital and intellectual Faculties, notwithstanding the Body be
replenished with a sufficient Number of homogeneous Particles to supply the
Place of such Parts as are abraded and worn away, or otherwise hindered from
performing their natural Functions, seems equally certain; both from the Decay
of our intellectual Faculties, and the gradual Loss of Vigor in the Body, even
whilst the Force of the vital Organs seems no ways impaired. Consequently
something more must be necessary, than the mere Application of homogeneous
Matter to supply this Demand. But that can be no other, than that particular
Texture, with which they were originally formed, and by which they become
capable of transmitting the Effects of external Agents to the Mind.

It may possibly be objected, that all Matter being equally incapable of
Sensation, no Reason can possibly be assigned, why such homogeneous Matter, as
supplies the constant Loss, the Body sustains by the Attrition of its Parts on
each other, and serves for its Accretion, Strength, and Nutrition, may not be
equally capable of conveying our Sensations to the Mind, as the original
Stamina above mentioned. But if we may reason from what ensues in the larger
Parts, which are compounded of these very Stamina, upon their being wounded, or
broken with Loss of Substance, it is evident, that though by the Addition of
homogeneous Matter to the different Species of Vessels, the Body to Appearance,
may have received no great Detriment, and be sufficient for the principal
Purposes of Life; yet are such Parts of very dull and obscure Sensation, if
they may be said to enjoy it in any other manner, than by their Union with the
original Stamina. So that could we suppose these Stamina quite destroyed, and
the Body so far changed, as to consist only of such homogeneous Matter, though
with Vessels in Form and Bulk similar to the former, yet these united by a
Texture different from that of the original Fibers; it is evident from what
ensues upon a like Change in the Fibers constituting the larger Parts, that
such a Person, if he had either Sensitive or Intellectual Faculties at all,
must have them in a manner vastly different from those of the former. And
consequently this Sameness or Identity must remain in a great Measure fixed and
unalterable in the Body from its Birth to its Dissolution.

Nor is this Difference in the original Stamina confined in its Effects to the
fibrous Parts of the Body only, but communicates them to the circulating Juices
themselves, distinguishing thereby the different Kinds of Flesh of each Species
of Animals from each other, even where they are sustained by the same Kind of
Food. Otherwise it would happen in Cases of this Kind, that the Taste,
Complexion, Odor, and Cohesion of the Flesh would of Necessity be nearly the
same in all.

The same would be the Consequence with regard to the Glands of the same Body,
which would separate nearly the same Kind of Juice, and consequently be
useless, or perhaps prejudicial, was it not prevented by the different
Structure both of the Strainer itself, and the Preparatory Vessels. For
howsoever we may imagine the Juice to be separated from the circulating Mass,
we cannot with any Color of Reason suppose such a various and exquisite
Contrivance, as is discovered not only in the Formation of the Gland itself,
but also in that of the Vessels leading to and from it, so widely differing
among themselves in their Structure, Texture, and Capacity Sect. 6. Exp. 47. of
the Experimental Inquiry on, etc.
, should ever be designed only to perform what any one Species of them was
capable of.

Hence then it must follow, that the principal Differences in Animal Bodies are
owing to the different Structure of the original Stamina, with regard not only
to their exterior Shape and Actions, but that even the Fluids themselves, and
that solid Part called the Flesh, derive their chief and principal Difference
from this Source; and consequently, that there is a real Identity of Animal
Bodies incommunicable to any other, depending on this very Cause.

Nor is this relating to the Fluids a mere Conjecture, but a real Fact, as
appears from those morbid Cases, where either the Glands, Preparatory Vessels,
or even the fleshy Parts are vitiated and depraved; which never fail to
separate unnatural Juices, though derived from the most healthful Blood.

Analogous to this we see in the Vegetable World, that it is not the Root, or
even Trunk of the Tree, though all the Juices are thereby supplied, but the Bud
or Scion only, which governs the whole, and produces the Species of Blossoms
and Fruit peculiar to itself. In like manner the Vessels of the Animalcule, of
what Species soever it be, convert the Juices designed for its Nourishment,
each, into such as are suitable to their different Structures; and thence keep
up an infinite Variety in Animals, though supplied by the same kind of Food,
according to the different Vessels by whose means it is elaborated and
perfected, being in some highly volatilised and attenuated, which gives the
high Taste; in others more viscous and inactive, which produces the opposite,
and are therefore less pleasing to a voluptuous Appetite.

I am not here supposing, that the Qualities of the circulating Juices of
Animals depend so entirely upon the Structure of the Solids, that the Diversity
of Food is herein of no Consequence, daily Experience sufficiently confuting so
absurd an Opinion. But only that in those of a different Species, the Taste,
Odor, and other Qualities of their Juices, are principally owing to this
different Structure; as is manifest from hence, viz. that the Qualities of the
Juices of differing Animals, though sustained with the same Kind of Food, are
more dissonant to each other, than are those of the same Species, though
sustained with Food of a very different Nature; and consequently, this Identity
in the various Species of Animals, must principally consist in the Structure of
the Solids, or, in other Words, in the original Stamina of each individual
Species.

Thus has our Reasoning at length led us to the Discovery and Demonstration of
a Truth, which at first Sight must appear beyond all Probability, and we can
now with Certainty affirm, that from so simple a Cause as the different
Modification of the same Matter, the wise Author of Nature has produced not
only one kind of Flesh of Men, another of Beasts, another of Fishes, and
another of Birds; but these also infinitely different in the different Species
of each.

Hence we may see, why some Animals shall necessarily require such a Degree of
Warmth, to preserve their Juices sufficiently exalted and attenuated for their
comfortable Subsistence, as others cannot sustain without Prejudice, even
scarcely without a Dissolution; and vice versa, why such a Degree of Cold, as
is only agreeable, or perhaps necessary to the Health of these, should prove so
far destructive of others, as on the least Condensation of the Fluids from that
Cause, to render them torpid, motionless, and seemingly dead, till restored by
the kindly Influence of the approaching Summer.

Hence also it is obvious, why the Blood and Juices of some particular Species
of Animals shall be affected with Diseases of a Pestilential Nature with regard
to them, from such Causes, as shall produce very few Inconveniences to many
other Kinds.

Hence also we may see the Reason, why each individual Person has some
Particularities in his Constitution peculiar to himself, not to be found in the
Generality of the Species, nor depending on his Manner of Life, by which he is
as it were distinguished from the rest: Which also probably may sometimes be
the Case in Brutes, though more rarely than in Men, could we equally arrive at
the Knowledge of it, as is manifest from the different Sprightliness, Vigor,
and Activity of some compared with others of the same Species.

Lastly, hence we may see, why an entire Change of the Constitution should be
attended with almost insuperable Difficulties: Why great Alterations require a
long and gradual Process, nor are to be attempted by hasty Methods, lest the
Patient, instead of Relief, meet with certain Ruin and Destruction.

FINIS.

