THE DUENNA:

THE DUENNA: A COMIC OPERA. IN THREE ACTS. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL,
COVENT GARDEN: WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE.

BY R. B. SHERIDAN, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: MESSRS. G. BURNET, ABBEY-STREET, P. WO^AN, P.

BYRNE, W. JONES, AND J. MILLIKEN. 1794.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ORIGINAL CAST OF CHARACTERS, 1775.
Don Jerome, Mr. Wilson. Ferdinand, Mr. Mattocks. Antonio, Mr. Du Bellamy.
Carlos, Mr. Leoni. Isaac Mendoza, Mr. Quick. Father Paul, Mr. Mahon. Lopez, Mr.
Wewitzer. Lewis, Mr. Castevens.
Louisa, Mrs. Mattocks. Clara, Miss Brown. Margaret ( the Duenna.) Mrs. Green.
THE DUENNA: AN OPERA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A STREET.
Enter LOPEZ, with a dark Lanthorn. LOPEZ. PAST three o'clock! soh! a notable
hour for one of my regular disposition to be strolling like a bravo through the
streets of Seville; well, of all services, to serve a young lover is the
hardest -- not that I am an enemy to love; but my love and my master's differ
strangely -- Don Ferdinand is much too gallant to eat, drink or sleep -- now,
my love gives me an appetite -- then I am fond of dreaming of my mistress, and
I love dearly to toast her -- This cannot be done without good sleep, and good
liquor, hence my partiality to a feather bed and a bottle -- what a pity now,
that I have not further time for reflections; but my master expects thee,
honest Lopez, to secure his retreat from Donna Clara's window, as I guess
[Music without] hey! sure I heard music! so! so! who have we here? Oh, Don
Antonio, my master's friend, come from the masquerade to serenade my young
mistress, Donna Louisa, I suppose! soh! we shall have the old gentleman up
presently -- lest he should miss his son, I had best lose no time in getting to
my post. [Exit.


Enter ANTONIO, with Masks and Music. ANTONIO. -- SONG. -- (Soft sym.)
Tell me, my lute, can thy soft strain
So gently speak thy master's pain;
So softly sing, so humbly sigh,
That though my sleeping love shall know
Who sings -- who sighs below.
Her rosy slumbers shall not fly?
Thus may some vision whisper more
Than ever I dare speak before.



1st Mask. Antonio, your mistress will never wake while you sing so dolefully;
love, like a cradled infant, is lulled by a sad melody.


Antonio. I do not wish to disturb her rest.


1st Mask. The reason is, because you know she does not regard you enough, to
appear if you waked her.


Antonio. Then, I Will convince you.


SINGS. The breath of morn bids hence the night,
Unveil those beauteous eyes, my fair,
Nor till the dawn of love is there,
I feel no day, I own no light.

LOUISA replies from a Window. Waking I heard thy numbers chide,
Waking, the dawn did bless my sight,
It Is Phoebus sure that woos, I cried,
Who speaks in song, who moves in light.

Don JEROME from a Window. What vagabonds are these I hear
Fidling, fluting, rhyming, ranting,
Piping, scraping, whining, canting,
Fly, scurvy minstrels, fly.




TRIO.
Louisa. Nay, pray thee, father, why so rough?

Ant. An humble lover I,

Jer. How durst you, daughter, lend an ear
To such deceitful stuff?
Quick from the window fly.

Louisa. Adieu, Antonio!

Ant. Musi you go?

Louisa. We soon perhaps, may meet again,

Ant. For though hard fortune is our foe,
The god of love will fight for us.

Jer. Reach me the blunderbuss.

Ant. and Lou. The god of love, who knows our pai^,

Jer. Hence, or these slugs are through your brain.

[Exeunt severally.


SCENE II. -- A PIAZZA.
Enter FERDINAND and LOPEZ. Lopez. Truly, sir, I think that a little sleep once
in a week or so --


Ferd. Peace, fool, don't mention sleep to me.


Lopez. No, no, sir, I don't mention your low-bred, vulgar, sound sleep; but I
cannot help thinking that a gentle slumber, or half an hour's dozing, if it were
only for the novelty of the thing.


Ferd. Peace, booby, I say, O Clara, dear, cruel disturber of my rest.


Lopez. And of mine too.


Ferd. God's Death! to trifle with me at such a juncture as this -- now to stand on
punctilios -- love me! I don't believe she ever did.


Lopez. Nor I either.


Ferd. Or is it that her sex never know their desires for an hour together.


Lopez. Ah, they know them oftener than they will own them.


Ferd. Is there in the world so inconstant a creature as Clara?


Lopez. I could name one.


Ferd. Yes; the tame fool who submits to her caprice.


Lopez I thought he could not miss it.


Ferd. Is she not capricious, teizing, tyrannical, obstinate, perverse, absurd,
ay, a wilderness of faults and follies, her looks are scorn, and her very
smiles -- god's death! I wish I had not mentioned her smiles; for she does smile
such beaming loveliness, such fascinating brightness -- O death and madness, I
shall die if I lose her.


Lopez. O those damned smiles have undone all.


AIR. -- FERDINAND.
Could I ber faults remember,
Forgetting every charm,
Soon would impartial reason
The tyrant love disarm.
But when enraged I number
Each failing of her mind,
Love still suggests each beauty.
And sees -- while reason's blind.



Lopez. Here comes Don Antonio, sir.


Ferd. Well, go you home -- I shall be there presently.


Lopez. Ah those cursed smiles. [Exit.


Enter ANTONIO. Ferd. Antonio, Lopez tells me he left you chaunting before our
door -- was my father waked?


Ant. Yes, yes; he has a singular affection for music, so I left him roaring at
his barred window like the print of Bajazet in the cage. And what brings you
out so early?


Ferd. I believe I told you that to morrow was the day fixed by Don Pedro and
Clara's unnatural stepmother, for her to enter a convent, in order that her
brat might possess her fortune, made desperate by this, I procured a key to the
door, and birb'd Clara's maid to leave it unbolted; at two this morning I
entered, unperceived, and stole to her chamber -- I found her waking and
weeping.


Ant. Happy Ferdinand!


Ferd. 'Sdeath, hear the conclusion -- I was rated as the most confident
ruffian, for daring to approach her room at that hour of night.


Ant. Ay, ay, this was at first.


Ferd. No such thing! she would not hear a word from me, but threatened to
raise her mother if I did not instantly leave her.


Ant. Well; but at last?


Ferd. At last! why I was forced to leave the house as he came in.


Ant. And did you do nothing to offend her?


Ferd. Nothing, as I hope to be saved -- I believe I might snatch a dozen or
two of kisses.


Ant. Was that all? well, I think I never heard of such assurance.


Ferd. Zounds! I tell you I behaved with the utmost respect.


Ant. O lord! I don't mean you, but in her -- but, hark'y', Ferdinand, did you
leave your key with them?


Ferd. Yes; the maid who saw me out took it from the door.


Ant. Then my life for it, her mistress elopes after you.


Ferd. Ay, to bless my rival perhaps -- I am in a humor to suspect every body
-- you loved her once, and thought her an angel, as I do now.


Ant. Yes, I loved her till I found she would not love me, and then I discovered
that she had not a good feature in her face. AIR.
I never could any luster see
In eyes that would not look on me:
I never saw nectar on a lip,
But where my own did hope to sip.
Has the maid who seeks my heart
Cheeks of rose untouched by art?
I will own the color true,
When yielding blushes aid their hue.
Is her hand so soft and pure?
I must press it to be sure:
Nor can I be certain then
'Till it grateful press again:
Must I with attentive eye
Watch her heaving bosom sigh?
I will do so when I see
That heaving bosom sigh for me.
Besides, Ferdinand, you have full security in my love for your sister, help me
there, and I can never disturb you with Clara.


Ferd. As far as I can consistently with the honor of our family, you know I
will; but there must be no eloping.


Ant. And yet now, you would carry off Clara.


Ferd. Ay, that is a different case, we never mean that others should act to our
sisters and wives as we do to others -- But tomorrow Clara is to be forced
into a convent.


Ant. Well: and am not I so unfortunately circumstanc'd? Tomorrow your father
forces Louisa to marry Isaac, the Portugueze -- but come with me, and we'll
devise something, I warrant.


Ferd. I must go home.


Ant. Well, adieu.


Ferd. But, Antonio, if you did not love my sister, you have too much honor
and friendship to supplant me with Clara.


AIR. -- ANTONIO.
Friendship is the bond of reason,
But if beauty disapprove,
Heaven dissolves all other treason
In the heart that is true to love.
The faith which to my friend I swore
As a civil oath I view,
But to the charms which I adore,
It Is religion to be true.


[Exit Antonio.
Ferd. There is always a levity in Antonio's manner of replying to me on this
subject, that is very alarming -- 'Sdeath, if Clara should love him after all.
AIR.
Though cause for suspicion appears,
Yet proofs of her love too are strong;
I Am a wretch if I Am right in my fears,
And unworthy of bliss if I Am wrong.
What heartbreaking torments from jealousy flow,
Ah, none but the jealous, the jealous can know.
When blessed with the smiles of my fair,
I know not how much I adore;
Those smiles let another but share,
And I wonder I prized them no more.
Then whence can I hope a relief from my woe,
When the falser she seems still the fonder I grow.


[Exit.
SCENE -- A room in Don JEROME 's house.
Enter LOUISA and DUENNA. Louisa. But my dear Margaret, my charming Duenna, do
you think we shall succeed?


Duenna. I tell you again I have no doubt on it; but it must be instantly put to
the trial -- Every thing is prepared in your room, and for the rest we must
trust to fortune.


Louisa. My father's oath was never to see me till I had consented to --


Duenna. I was thus I overheard him say to his friend, Don Guzman, "I will
demand of her tomorrow, once for all, whether she will consent to marry Isaac
Mendoza -- If she hesitates, I will make a solemn oath never to see or speak to
her till she returns to her duty" -- these were his words.


Louisa. And on his known obstinate adherence to what he has once said, you
have formed this plan for my escape -- But have you secured my maid in our
interest?


Duenna. She is a party in the whole -- but remember, if we succeed, you resign
all right and title in little Isaac the Jew, over to me.


Louisa. That I do with all my soul, get him if you can, and I shall wish you
joy most heartily. He is twenty times as rich as my poor Antonio. AIR.
Thou cans't not boast of fortune's store,
My love, vhile me they wealthy call,
But I was glad to find thee poor,
For with my heart I Would give thee all.
And then the grateful youth shall own,
I loved him for himself alone.
But when his worth my hand shall gain,
No word or look of mine shall show,
That I, the smallest thought retain
Of what my bounty did bestow.
Yet still his grateful heart shall own,
I loved him for himself alone.



Duenna. I hear Don Jerome coming -- Quick, give me the last letter I brought
you from Antonio -- you know that is to be the ground of my dismission -- I
must slip out to seal it up as undelivered. [Exit


Enter Don JEROME and FERDINAND. Jerome. What, I suppose you have been
serenading too! Eh, disturbing some peaceable neighborhood with villainous
catgut and lascivious piping, out on it! you set your sister here a vile example
-- but I come to tell you, madam, that I Will suffer no more of these midnight
incantations, these amorous orgies that steal the senses in the hearing; as
they say Egyptian embalmers serve mummies, extracting the brain through the ears;
however, there is an end of your frolics -- Isaac Mendoza will be here
presently, and tomorrow you shall marry him.


Louisa. Never while I have life.


Ferd. Indeed, sir, I wonder how you can think of such a man for a son-in-law.


Jerome. Sir, you are very kind to favor me with your sentiments -- and pray,
what is your objection to him?


Ferd. He is a Portugueze in the first place.


Jerome. No such thing, boy, he has forsworn his country.


Louisa. He is a Jew.


Jerome. Another mistake: he has been a Christian these six weeks.


Ferd. Ay, he has left his old religion for an estate, and has not had time to
get a new one,


Louisa. But stands like a dead wall between church and synagogue, or like the
blank leaves between the Old and New Testament.


Jerome. Any thing more?


Ferd. But the most remarkable part of his character, is his passion for
deceit, and tricks of cunning.


Louisa. Though at the same time, the fool predominates so much over the knave,
that I am told he is generally the dupe of his own art.


Ferd. True, like an unskilful gunner, he usually misses his aim, and is hurt
by the recoil of his own piece.


Jerome. Any thing more?


Louisa. To sum up all, he has the worst fault a husband can have -- he is not
my choice.


Jerome. But you are his; and choice on one side is sufficient -- two lovers
should never meet in marriage -- be you sour as you please, he is
sweet-temper'd, and for your good fruit, there is nothing like ingrafting on a
crab.


Louisa. I detest him as a lover, and shall ten times more as a husband.


Jerome. I don't know that -- marriage generally makes a great change -- but to
cut the matter short, will you have him or not?


Louisa. There is nothing else I could disobey you in.


Jerome. Do you value your father's peace?


Louisa. So much, that I will not fasten on him the regret of making an only
daughter wretched.


Jerome. Very well, ma'am, then mark me -- never more will I see or converse
with you till you return to your duty -- no reply -- this and your chamber
shall be your apartments, I never will stir out without leaving you under lock
and key, and when I Am at home no creature can approach you but through my library
-- we'll try who can be most obstinate -- out of my sight -- There remain till
you know your duty. [Pushes her out.


Ferd. Surely, sir, my sister's inclinations should be consulted in a matter of
this kind, and some regard paid to Don Antonio, being my particular friend.


Jerome. That, doubtless, is a very great recommendation -- I certainly have
not paid sufficient respect to it.


Ferd. There is not a man living I would sooner choose for a brother-in-law.


Jerome. Very possible; and if you happen to have ever a sister, who is not at
the same time a daughter of mine, I Am sure I shall have no objection to the
relationship -- but at present, if you please, we'll drop the subject.


Ferd. Nay, sir, it is only my regard for my sister makes me speak.


Jerome. Then, pray, sir, in future, let your regard for your father make you
hold your tongue.


Ferd. I have done, sir -- I shall only add a wish that you would reflect what
at our age you would have felt, had you been crossed in your affection for the
mother of her you are so severe to.


Jerome. Why I must confess I had a great affection for your mother's ducats,
but that was all, boy -- I married her for her fortune, and she took me in
obedience to her father, and a very happy couple we were -- we never expected
any love from one another, and so we were never disappointed -- If we grumbled
a little now and then, it was soon over, for we were never fond enough to
quarrel, and when the good woman died, why, why -- I had as lieve she had
lived, and I wish every widower in Seville could say the same -- I shall now go
and get the key of this dressing room -- So, good son, if you have any lecture
in support of disobedience to give your sister, it must be brief; so make the
best of your time do you hear. [Exit Jerome.


Ferd. I fear indeed, my friend Antonio, has little to hope for -- however
Louisa has firmness, and my father's anger will probably only increase her
affection -- In our intercourse with the world, it is natural for us to dislike
those who are innocently the cause of our distress; but in the heart's
attachment, a woman never likes a man with ardour till she has suffered for his
sake [Noise] Soh! what bustle is here! between my father and the Duenna too --
I Will even get out of the way. [Exit.


Enter Don JEROME (with a letter) putting in the DUENNA. Jerome. I Am
astonished! I Am thunder struck! here is treachery and conspiracy with a
vengeance! you, Antonio's creature, and chief manager of this plot for my
daughter's eloping! you that I placed here as a scarecrow.


Duenna. What?


Jerome. A scarecrow -- To prove a decoy-duck -- what have you to say for
yourself?


Duenna. Well, sir, since you have forced that letter from me, and discovered
my real sentiments, I scorn to renounce 'em -- I am Antonio's friend, and it
was my intention that your daughter should have served you as all such old
tyrannical sots should be served -- I delight in the tender passions, and would
befriend all under their influence.


Jerome. The tender passions! yes, they would become those impenetrable
features -- why, thou deceitful hag! I placed thee as a guard to the rich
blossoms of my daughter's beauty -- I thought that dragon's front of thine
would cry aloof to the sons of gallantry -- steel traps and spring guns seemed
writ in every wrinkle of it -- but you shall quit my house this instant -- the
tender passions, indeed! go, thou wanton sybil, thou amorous woman of Endor, go!


Duenna. You base, scurrilous old -- but I will not demean myself by naming what
you are -- yes, savage, I Will leave your den, but I suppose you don't mean to
detain my apparel -- I may have my things I presume.


Jerome. I took you, mistress, with your wardrobe on -- what have you pilfer'd,
heh?


Duenna. Sir, I must take leave of my mistress, she has valuables of mine,
besides, my cardinal and veil are in her room.


Jerome. Your veil forsooth! what, do you dread being gazed at? or are you
afraid of your complexion? well, go take your leave, and get your veil and
cardinal! soh! you quit the house within these five minutes -- In -- in --
quick [Exit Duenna.

Here was a precious plot of mischief! these are the comforts daughters bring
us. AIR.
If a daughter you have she is the plague of your life,
No peace shall you know, though you have buried your wife,
At twenty she mocks at the duty you taught her,
O, what a plague is an obstinate daughter!
Sighing and whining,
Dying and pining,
O, what a plague is an obstinate daughter!
When scarce in their teens, they have wit to perplex us,
With letters and lovers for ever they vex us,
While each still rejects the fair suitor you have brought her,
O, what a plague is an obstinate daughter!
Wrangling and jangling,
Flouting and pouting,
O, what a plague is an obstinate daughter!



Enter LOUISA dressed as the DUENNA, with Cardinal and Veil, and seeming to
cry. Jerome. This way, mistress, this way -- what, I warrant, a tender parting
-- soh! tears of turpentine down those deal cheeks -- Aye, you may well hide
your head -- yes, whine till your heart breaks, but I Will not hear one word of
excuse -- so you are right to be dumb, this way -- this way.

[Exeunt.
Enter DUENNA. Duenna. So speed you well, sagacious Don Jerome! O, rare effects
of passion and obstinacy -- now shall I try whether I cannot play the fine lady
as well as my mistress, and if I succeed, I may be a fine lady for the rest of
my life -- I Will lose no time to equip myself. [Exit.


SCENE IV. The Court before DON JEROME's house.
Enter DON JEROME and LOUISA. Jerome. Come, mistress, there is your way -- The
world lies before you, so troop, thou antiquated Eve, thou original sin --
hold, yonder is some fellow skulking, perhaps it is Antonio -- go to him, do you
hear, and tell him to make you amends, and as he has got you turned away, tell
him I say it is but just he should take you himself, go.

[Exit Louisa. Soh! I am rid of her, thank heaven! and now I shall be able to
keep my oath, and confine my daughter with better security. [Exit.


SCENE V. -- The PIAZZA.
Enter CLARA and her Maid. Maid. But where madam, is it you intend to go?


Clara. Any where to avoid the selfish violence of my mother-in-law, and
Ferdinand's insolent importunity.


Maid. Indeed, ma'am, since we have profited by Don Ferdinand's key in making
our escape, I think we had best find him, if it were only to thank him.


Clara. No -- he has offended me exceedingly. [Retire.


Enter LOUISA. Louisa. So, I have succeeded in being turned out of doors -- but
how shall I find Antonio? I dare not enquire for him for fear of being
discovered; I would send to my friend Clara, but that I doubt her prudery would
condemn me.


Maid. Then suppose, ma'am, you were to try if your friend Donna Louisa would
not receive you.


Clara. No, her notions of filial duty are so severe, she would certainly
betray me.


Louisa. Clara is of a cold temper, and would this step of mine highly forward.


Clara. Louisa's respect for her father is so great, she would not credit the
unkindness of mine. [Louisa turns, and sees Clara and Maid.


Louisa. Ha! who are those? sure one is Clara -- if it be, I Will trust her --
Clara! [Advances.


Clara. Louisa! and in Masquerade too!


Louisa. You will be more surprised when I tell you that I have run away from
my father.


Clara. Surprised indeed! and I should certainly chide you most horridly, only
that I have just run away from mine.


Louisa. My dear Clara! [Embrace.


Clara. Dear sister truant! and whither are you going?


Louisa. To find the man I love to be sure -- And I presume you would have no
aversion to meet with my brother.


Clara. Indeed I should -- he has behaved so ill to me, I don't believe I shall
ever forgive him.

AIR. -- CLARA.
When sable night, each drooping plant restoring,
Wept over the flowers her breath did cheer,
As some sad widow over her babe deploring,
Wakes its beauty with a tear;
When all did sleep, whose weary hearts did borrow
One hour from love and care to rest,
Lo! as I pressed my couch in silent sorrow,
My lover caught me to his breast;
He vowed he came to save me
From those who would enslave me!
Then kneeling,
Kisses stealing.
Endless faith he swore,
But soon I ^hid him thence
For had his fond pretense,
Obtained o^e favor then,
And he had press d^gain
I feared my treacherous heart might grant him more.



Louisa. Well, for all this, I would have sent him to plead his pardon, but
that I would not yet a while have him know of my flight. And where do you hope
to find protection?


Clara. The lady Abbess of the convent of St. Catherine is a relation and kind
friend of mine -- I shall be secure with her, and you had best go thither with
me.


Louisa. No; I am determined to find Antonio first, and as I live, here comes
the very man I will employ to seek him for me.


Clara. Who is he? he is a strange figure!


Louisa. Yes, that sweet creature is the man whom my father has fixed on for my
husband.


Clara. And will you, speak to him? Are you mad?


Louisa. He is the fittest man in the world for my purpose -- for, though I was
to have married him tomorrow, he is the only man in Seville, who, I am sure
never saw me in his life.


Clara. And how do you know him?


Louisa. He arrived but yesterday, and he was shown me from the window as he
visited my father.


Clara. Well, I Will be gone


Louisa. Hold, my dear Clara -- a thought has struck me, will you give me leave
to borrow your name as I see occasion.


Clara. It will but disgrace you -- but use it as you please -- I dare not stay
( going) but, Louisa, if you should see your brother, be sure you don't inform
him that I have taken refuge with the Dame Prior of the convent of St.
Catherine, on the left hand side of the Piazza which leads to the church of St
Anthony.


Louisa. Ha, ha, ha! I Will be very particular in my directions where he may not
find you. [Exeunt. Clara and Maid.] So! my swain yonder has done admiring
himself and draws nearer. [Retires.


Enter ISAAC and CARLOS, ISAAC with a pocket glass. Isaac. ( Looking in the
glass.) I tell you, friend Carlos, I will please myself in the habit of my chin.


Clara. But, my dear friend, how can you think to please a lady with such a
face?


Isaac. Why, what is the matter with the face? I think it is a very engaging
face; and I am sure a lady must have very little taste, who could dislike my
beard ( Sees Louisa.) See now -- I Will die if here is not a little damsel struck
with it already.


Louisa. Signor, are you disposed to oblige a lady who greatly wants your
assistance? [Unveils.


Isaac. Egad, a very pretty black-eyed girl; she has certainly taken a fancy to
me, Carlos -- first ma'am. I must beg the favor of your name.


Louisa. Soh! It Is well I am provided. ( aside.) My name, sir, is Donna Clara
D'Almanza.


Isaac. What! -- Don Guzman's daughter? In Faith, I just now heard she was
missing.


Louisa: But sure, sir, you have too much gallantry and honor to betray me,
whose fault is love.


Isaac. So! a passion for me! poor girl! why, ma'am, as for betraying you, I
don't see how I could get any thing by it; so you may rely on my honor; but as
for your love, I am sorry your case is so desperate.


Louisa. Why so, signor?


Isaac Because I Am positively engaged to another -- an't I, Carlos?


Louisa. Nay, but hear me.


Isaac. No, no; what should I hear for? It is impossible for me to court you in
an honorable way; and for any thing else, if I were to comply now; I suppose
you have some ungrateful brother, or cousin, who would want to cut my throat
for my civility -- so, truly you had best go home again.


Louisa. Odious wretch! ( aside) But, good signor, it is Antonio d'Ercilla, on
whose account I have eloped.


Isaac. How! what! it is not with me then, that you are in love?


Louisa. No indeed it is not.


Isaac. Then you are a forward, impertinent simpleton! and I shall certainly
acquaint your father.


Louisa. Is this your gallantry


Isaac. Yet hold -- Antonio d'Ercilla did you say? egad, I may make something
of this -- Antonio d'Ercilla?


Louisa. Yes, and if ever you hope to prosper in love, you will bring me to him.


Isaac. By St. Iago, and I will too -- Carlos, this Antonio is one who rivals
me (as I have heard) with Louisa -- now, if I could hamper him with this girl,
I should have the field to myself, hey, Carlos! A lucky thought, is not it? --


Carlos. Yes, very good -- very good --


Isaac. Ah, this little brain is never at a loss -- cunning Isaac! cunning
rogue! Donna Clara, will you trust yourself awhile to my friend's direction?


Lousa. May I rely on you, good signor?


Carlos. Lady, it is impossible I should deceive you. AIR.
Had I a heart for falsehood framed
I never could injure you;
For though your tongue no promise claimed,
Your charms would make me true.
To you no soul shall bear deceit,
No stranger offer wrong,
But friends in all the ag d you will meet;
And lovers in the young.
But when they learn that you have blessed
Another with your heart,
They Will bid aspiring passions rest,
And act a brother's part;
Then, lady, dread not here deceit,
Nor fear to suffer wrong;
For friends in all the aged you will meet,
And lovers in the young.



Isaac. I Will conduct the lady to my lodgings, Carlos; I must haste to Don
Jerome -- perhaps you know Louisa, ma'am. She is divinely handsome -- is not she?


Louisa. You must excuse me not joining with you.


Isaac. Why, I have heard it on all hands.


Louisa. Her father is uncommonly partial to her, but I believe you will find
she has rather a matronly air.


Isaac. Carlos, this is all envy -- you pretty girls never speak well of one
another -- harky', find out Antonio, and I Will saddle him with this scrape, I
warrant! oh, 'twas the luckiest thought -- Donna Clara, your very obedient --
Carlos, to your post.


DUETT.
Isaac. My mistress expects me and I must go to her,
Or how can I hope for a smile?

Louisa. Soon may you return a prosperous wooer,
But think what I suffer the while:
Alone and away from the man whom I love,
In stranger I Am forced to confide,

Isaac. Dear lady my friend you may trust and, he will prove,
Your servant, protector, and guide.




AIR -- CARLOS.
Gentle maid, ah! why suspect me?
Let me serve thee -- then reject me,
Can thou trust, and I deceive thee?
Art thou sad, and shall I grieve thee?
Gentle maid, ab! why suspect me?
Let me serve thee -- then reject me.



TRIO.
Louisa. Never may thou happy be,
If in aught you are false to me.

Isaac. Never may be happy be,
If in aught he is false to thee.

Carlos. Never may I happy be,
If in aught I Am false to thee.

Louisa. Never may thou etc.

Isaac. Never may be etc.

Carlos. Never may I etc.



[Exeunt.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I -- A Library in Jerome's House.
Enter DON JEROME and ISAAC. Jerome. Ha, ha, ha! run away from her father! has
she given him the slip! Ha, ha, ha! poor Don Guzman!


Isaac. Ay; and I am to conduct her to Antonio; by which means you see I shall
hamper him so that he can give me no disturbance with your daughter -- this is
trap, is not it? a nice stroke of cunning, heh!


Jerome. Excellent! Excellent! yes, yes, carry her to him, hamper him by all
means, ha, ha, ha! poor Don Guzman! an old fool! imposed on by a girl!


Isaac Nay, they have the cunning of serpents, that is the truth on it.


Jerome. Psha! they are cunning only when they have fools to deal with -- why
don't my girl play me such a trick -- let her cunning overreach my caution, I
say -- heh little Isaac!


Isaac. True, true; or let me see any of the sex make a fool of me -- No, no,
egad, little Solomon, (as my aunt used to call me) understands tricking a
little too well.


Jerome. Ay, but such a driveller as Don Guzman.


Isaac. And such a dupe as Antonia.


Jerome. True; sure never were seen such a couple of credulous simpletons, but
come, it is time you should see my daughter -- you must carry on the siege by
yourself, friend Isaac,


Isaac. Sir, you will introduce --


Jerome. No -- I have sworn a solemn oath not to see or speak to her till she
renounces her disobedience: win her to that, and she gains a father and a
husband at once.


Isaac. Gad, I shall never be able to deal with her alone; nothing keeps me in
such awe as perfect beauty -- now there is something consoling and encouraging
in ugliness. SONG.
Give Isaac the nymph who no beauty can boast;
But health and good humor to make her his toast,
If strait, I don't mind whether slender or sat,
And six feet or four -- well never quarrel for that.
Whatever her complexion, I vow I don't care,
If brown it is lasting more pleasing if fair;
And though in her face I no dimples should see,
Let her smile, and each dell is a dimple to me.
Let her locks be the reddest that ever were seen,
And her eyes may be even any color but green,
Be they light, gray or black, their luster and hue,
I swear I Have no choice, only let her have two.
It Is true I Would dispense with a throne on her back,
And white teeth I own, are genteeler than black,
A little round chin too's a beauty I Have heard,
But I only desire she may not have a heard.



Jerome. You will change your note, my friend, when you have seen Louisa.


Isaac. O Don Jerome, the honor of your alliance --


Jerome. Aye, but her beauty will affect you -- she is, though I say it, who am
her father, a very prodigy -- there you will see Peatures with an eye like mine
-- yes In Faith, there is a kind of wicked sparkling -- something of a roguish
brightness that shows her to be my own.


Isaac. Pretty rogue!


Jerome. Then, when she smiles, you will see a little dimple in one cheek only; a
beauty it is certainly, yet you shall not say which is prettiest, the cheek
with the dimple, or the cheek without.


Isaac. Pretty rogue!


Jerome. Then the roses on those cheeks are shaded with a sort of velvet down,
that gives a delicacy to the glow of health.


Isaac. Pretty rogue!


Jerome. Her skin pure dimity, yet more fair, being spangled here and there
with a golden freckle.


Isaac. Charming pretty rogue! how is the tone of her voice?


Jerome. Remarkably pleasing -- but if you could prevail on her to sing you
would be enchanted -- she is a nightingale -- a Virginia nightingale -- but
come, come, her maid shall conduct you to her Antichamber.


Isaac. Well, egad, I Will pluck up resolution and meet her frowns intrepidly.


Jerome. Aye! who her briskly -- win her and give me a proof of your address,
my little Solomon.


Isaac. But hold -- I expect my friend Carlos to call on me here -- If he comes
will you send him to me?


Jerome. I will -- Lauretta, come -- she will show you to the room -- what! do
you droop? here is a mournful face to make love with.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II. LOUISA's Dressing Room.
Enter MAID and ISAAC. Maid. Sir, my mistress will wait on you presently. [Goes
to the door.


Isaac. When she is at leisure -- don't hurry her. [Exit Maid.

I wish I had ever practiced a love-scene -- I doubt I shall make a poor figure
-- I cou'd'nt be more afraid if I was going before the Inquisition -- so! the
door opens -- yes, she is coming -- the very rustling of her silk has a
disdainful sound.

Enter DUENNA ( dressed as LOUISA.) Now dar'n't I look round for the soul of me
-- her beauty will certainly strike me dumb if I do. I wish she would speak first.


Duenna. Sir, I attend your pleasure.


Isaac So! the ice is broke, and a pretty civil beginning too! hem! madam --
Miss -- I Am all attention.


Duenna. Nay, sir, it is I who should listen, and you propose.


Isaac. Egad, this is'nt so disdainful neither -- I believe I may venture to
look -- No -- I dar'n't -- one glance of those roguish sparklers would fix me
again.


Duenna. You seem thoughtful, Sir -- let me persuade you to sit down.


Isaac. So, so; she mollifies apace -- she is struck with my figure, this
attitude has had its effect.


Duenna. Come, sir, here is a chair.


Isaac. Madam, the greatness of your goodness overpowers me -- that a lady so
lovely should deign to turn her beauteous eyes on me so. [She takes his hand,
he turns and sees her.


Duenna. You seem surpised at my condescension.


Isaac. Why, yes, madam, I am a little surprised at it; zounds! this can never
be Louisa -- she is as old as my mother. ( aside.


Duenna. But former prepossessions give way to my father's commands.


Isaac ( aside,) Her father! Yes, it is she then -- Lord, lord; how blind some
parents are!


Duenna. Signor Isaac.


Isaac. Truly, the little damsel was right -- she has rather a matronly air
indeed! ah! it is well my affections are fixed on her fortune and not her person.


Duenna. Signor, will not you sit? ( she sits.


Isaac. Pardon me, madam, I have scarce recovered my astonishment at -- your
condescension, madam -- she has the devil's own dimples to be sure. ( aside.


Duenna. Nay, you shall not stand ( he sits) I do not wonder, sir, that you are
surpised at my affability -- I own, Signor, that I was vastly prepossessed
against you, and being teiz'd by my father, I did give some encouragement to
Antonio, But then, sir, you were described to me as a quite different person.


Isaac. Aye, and so you was to me upon my soul, madam.


Duenna. But when I saw you, I was never more struck in my life.


Isaac. That was just my case too, madam; I was struck all on a heap for my
part.


Duenna. Well, sir, I see our misapprehension has been mutual -- you expected
to find me haughty and averse, and I was taught to believe you a little black
snub-nosed fellow, without person, manners or address.


Isaac. Egad, I wish she had answered her picture as well.


Duenna. But, sir, your air is noble -- something so liberal in your carriage,
with so penetrating an eye, and so bewitching a smile.


Isaac. Egad, now I look at her again, I don't think she is so ugly.


Duenna. So little like a jew, and so much like a gentleman.


Isaac. Well, certainly there is something pleasing in the tone of her voice.


Duenna. You will pardon this breach of decorum in praising you thus, but my
joy at being so agreeably deceived has given me such a flow of spirits.


Isaac. O dear lady, may I thank those dear lips for this goodness ( kisses
her) why, she has a pretty sort of velvet down, that is the truth on it. ( aside.


Duenna. O sir, you have the most insinuating manner, but indeed you should get
rid of that odious heard -- one might as well kiss an hedge hog.


Isaac. Yes ma'am the razor wou'd'nt be amiss for either of us ( aside) Could
you savor me with a song?


Duenna. Willingly, sir, though I am rather hoarse -- Ahem! [Begins to sing.


Isaac. Very like a Virginia nightingale -- ma'am, I perceive you're hoarse --
I beg you will not distress --


Duenna. O not in the least distressed; -- now, sir. SONG.
When a tender maid
Is first essayed,
By some admiring swain,
How her blushes rise,
If she meets his eyes,
While he unfolds his pain;
If he takes her hand, she trembles quite,
Touch her lips, and she swoons outright,
While a pit a pat, etc.
Her heart avows her fright.
But in time appear,
Fewer signs of fear,
Though youth she boldly views,
If her hand he grasps,
Or her bosom clasps,
No mantling blush ensues.
Then to church well pleased the lovers move,
While her smiles her contentment prove,
And a pit a pat, etc.
Her heart avows her love.



Isaac. Charming, ma'am! Enchanting! and truly your notes put me in mind of one
that is very dear to me, a lady indeed, whom you greatly resemble.


Duenna. How! is there then another so dear to you?


Isaac. O, no, ma'am, you mistake; it was my mother I meant.


Duenna. Come, sir, I see you are amazed and confounded at my condescension,
and know not what to say.


Isaac. It is very true indeed, ma'am -- but it is a judgment, I look on it as
a judgment on me for delaying to urge the time when you will permit me to
complete my happiness, by acquainting Don Jerome with your condescension.


Duenna. Sir, I must frankly own to you that I can never be yours with my
father's consent.


Isaac. Good lack! how so?


Duenna. When my father in his passion swore he would never see me again 'till
I acquiesced in his will -- I also made a vow that I would never take a husband
from his hand -- nothing shall make me break that oath -- but if you have
spirit and contrivance enough to carry me off without his knowledge, I Am yours.


Isaac. Hum!


Duenna. Nay, sir, if you hesitate --


Isaac. In Faith no bad whim this -- if I take her at her word, I shall secure
her fortune, and avoid making any settlement in return; thus I shall not only
cheat the lover but the father too, Oh! cunning rogue, Isaac! Ay, ay, let this
little brain alone -- Egad, I Will take her in the mind.


Duenna. Well, sir, what is your determination?


Isaac. Madam, I was dumb only from rapture -- I applaud your spirit, and
joyfully close with your proposal; for which, thus let me on this lilly hand
express my gratitude.


Duenna. Well, sir, you must get my father's consent to walk with me in the
garden. But by no means inform him of my kindness to you.


Isaac. No, to be sure -- that would spoil all -- But trust me when tricking is
the word -- let me alone for a piece of cunning; this very day you shall be out
of his power.


Duenna Well, I leave the management of it all to you, I perceive plain, sir,
that you are not one that can be easily outwitted.


Isaac. Egad, you're right, madam -- you're right In Faith.


Enter Maid. Here Is a gentleman at the door, who begs permission to speak with
Signor Isaac.


Isaac. A friend of mine, ma'am, and a trusty friend -- Let him come in. [Exit
Maid.

He is one to be depended on, ma'am.


Enter Carlos. So, coz. ( aside.


Carlos I have left Donna Clara at your lodgings; but can no where find Antonio.


Isaac. Well I will search him out myself -- Carlos, you rogue, I thrive, I
prosper.


Carlos. Where is your mistress?


Isaac. There, you booby, there she stands.


Carlos. Why she is damned ugly.


Isaac. Hush! [Stops his mouth.


Duenna. What is your friend saying, Signor?


Isaac. O ma'am, he is expressing his raptures at such charms as he never saw
before, hey Carlos?


Carlos. Aye, such as I never saw before, indeed.


Duenna. You are a very obliging Gentleman -- well, Signor Isaac, I believe we
had better part for the present. Remember our plan.


Isaac. O, ma'am, it is written in my heart, fixed as the image of those divine
beauties -- adieu, Idol of my soul -- yet, once more permit me. -- [kisses her.


Duenna Sweet, courteous sir, adieu.


Isaac. Your slave eternally -- come Carlos, say something civil at taking
leave.


Carlos. In Faith, Isaac, she is the hardest woman to compliment I ever saw,
however, I Will try something I had studied for the occasion.

SONG.
Ah! sure a pair was never seen,
Si justly formed to meet by nature.
The youth excelling so in mien,
The maid in every grace of feature.
O how hap'y are such lovers,
When kindred beauties each discovers.
For surely she
Was made for thee,
And thou to bless this lovely creature.
So mild your looks, your children thence,
Will early learn the task of duty,
The boys with all their father's sense,
The girls with all their mother's beauty.
Oh! how happy to inherit,
At once such graces and such spirit.
Thus while you live
May fortune give,
Each blessing equal to your merit.


[Exeunt Isaac, Carlos, and Duenna.
SCENE, -- A Library.
JEROME and FERDINAND discovered. Jerome. Object to Antonio? I have said it!
his poverty, can you acquit him of that?


Ferd. Sir, I own he is not over rich -- but he is of as ancient and honorable
a family as any in the kingdom.


Jerome. Yes, I know the beggars are a very ancient family in most kingdoms;
but never in great repute, boy.


Ferd. Antonio, sir, has many amiable qualities.


Jerome. But he is poor, can you clear him of that, I say -- is he not a gay,
dissipated take, who has squandered his patrimony?


Ferd. Sir, he inherited but little; and that his generosity, more than his
profuseness, has stripped him of -- but he has never sullied his honor, which,
with his title, has outlived his means.


Jerome. Psha! you talk like a blockhead! nobilility without an estate is as
ridiculous as gold-lace on a frize-coat.


Ferd. This language, sir, would better become a Dutch or English trader, than
a Spaniard.


Jerome. Yes; and those Dutch and English traders, as you call them, are the
wiser people. Why, booby, in England they were formerly as nice as to birth and
family as we are -- but they have long discovered what a wonderful purifier
gold is -- and now no one there regards pedigree in any thing but a horse -- O,
here comes Isaac! I hope he has prosper'd in his suit.


Ferd. Doubtless, that agreeable figure of his must have helped his suit
surprizingly.


Jerome. How now? [Ferd. walks aside.

Enter ISAAC. Well, my friend, have you softened her?


Isaac. O yes; I have softened her.


Jerome. What, does she come to?


Isaac. Why, truly, she was kinder than I expected to find her.


Jerome. And the dear little Angel was civil, hey!


Isaac. Yes, the pretty little Angel was very civil.


Jerome. I Am transported to hear it, well, and you were astonished at her
beauty, hey?


Isaac. I was astonished indeed! pray, how old is miss?


Jerome. How old? let me see -- eight and twelve -- she is twenty.


Isaac. Twenty?


Jerome. Aye, to a month.


Isaac. Then, upon my soul, she is the oldest looking girl of her age in
Christendom.


Jerome. Do you think so? but I believe you will not see a prettier girl.


Isaac. Here and there one.


Jerome. Louisa has the family face.


Isaac. Yes, egad, I should have taken it for a family face, and one that has
been in the family some time too. ( aside.


Jerome. She has her father's eyes.


Isaac. Truly I should have guessed them to have been so -- If she had her
mother's spectacles I believe she would not see the worse. ( aside.


Jerome. Her aunt Ursula's nose, and her grandmother's forehead.


Isaac. Ay, faith, and her grandmother's chin to a hair. ( aside.


Jerome. Well, if she was but as dutiful as she is handsome -- and harky, friend
Isaac, she is none of your made up beauties -- her charms are of the lasting
kind.


Isaac. I says, so they should -- for if she be but twenty now, she may double
her age, before her years will overtake her face.


Jerome. Why, zounds, master Isaac, you are not sneering, are you?


Isaac. Why, now seriously, Don Jerome, do you think your daughter handsome?


Jerome. By this light, she is as handsome a girl as any in Seville.


Isaac. Then, by these eyes, I think her as plain a woman as ever I beheld.


Jerome. By St. Iago you must be blind.


Isaac. No, no; it is you are partial.


Jerome. How! have I neither sense nor taste? If a fair skin, fine eyes, teeth
of ivory, with a lovely bloom, and a delicate shape -- if these, with a
heavenly voice, and a world of grace, are not charms, I know not what you call
beautiful.


Isaac. Good lack, with what eyes a father sees! As I have life, she is the
very reverse of all this, as for the dimity skin you told me of, I swear it is a
thorough nankeen as ever I saw; for her eyes, their utmost merit is in not
squinting -- for her teeth, where there is one of ivory; its neighbor is pure
ebony, black and white alternately, just like the keys of an harpsicord. Then
as to her singing, and heavenly voice -- by this hand, she has a shrill cracked
pipe, that sounds for all the world like a child's trumpet.


Jerome. Why, you little Hebrew scoundrel, do you mean to insult me? out of my
house, I say.


Ferd. Dear sir, what is the matter?


Jerome. Why, this Israelite here, has the impudence to say your sister's ugly.


Ferd. He must be either blind or insolent.


Isaac. So, I find they are all in a story. Egad, I believe I have gone too far.


Ferd. Sure, sir, there must be some mistake -- It cannot be my sister whom he
has seen.


Jerome. God's Death! you are as great a fool as he, what mistake can there be? did
not I lock up Louisa, and hav'n't I the key in my own pocket? And didn't her
maid show him into the dressing room? and yet you talk of a mislake, no, the
Portugueze meant to insult me -- and, but that this roof protects him, old as I
am, this sword should do me justice.


Isaac. I must get off as well as I can -- her fortune is not the less handsome.


DUET.
Isaac. Believe me, good Sir, I never meant to offend,
My mistress I love, and I value my friend:
To win her, and wed her, is still my request,
For better, for worse, and I swear I don't jest.

Jerome. Zounds! you would best not provoke me, my rage is so high.

Isaac. Hold him fast, I beseech you, his rage is so high,
Good Sir, you're too hot and this place I must fly.

Jerome. You're a knave and a sot, and this place you would best fly.




Isaac. Don Jerome, come now, let us lay aside all joking and be serious.


Jerome. How?


Isaac. Ha, ha, ha! I Will be hanged if you hav'n't taken my abuse of your
daughter seriously.


Jerome. You meant it so, did not you?


Isaac. O mercy, no! a joke -- just to try how angry it would make you.


Jerome. Was that all In Faith! I did'n't know you had been such a wag; ha, ha,
ha! By St. Iago, you made me very angry though, well, and you do think Louisa
handsome?


Isaac. Handsome! Venus de Medicis was a sybil to her.


Jerome. Give me your hand, you little jocose rogue -- Egad, I thought we had
been all off.


Ferd. So! I was in hopes this would have been a quarrel; but I find the Jew is
too cunning.


Jerome Aye, this gust of passion has made me dry -- I am seldom ruffled; order
some wine in the next room -- let us drink the poor girl's health -- poor
Louisa! ugly, heh! Ha, ha, ha! 'Twas a very good joke indeed.


Isaac. And a very true one for all that.


Jerome. And, Ferdinand, I insist upon your drinking success to my friend


Ferd Sir, I will drink success to my friend with all my heart.


Jerome. Come, little Solomon, if any sparks of anger had remained, this would
be the only way to quench them.


TRIO.
A bumper of good liquor,
Will end a contest quicker,
Than justice, judge or vicar.
So fill a cheerful glass,
And let good humor pass.
But if more deep the quarrel,
Why, sooner drain the barrel,
Than be the hateful fellow,
That Is crabbed when he is mellow.
A bumper, etc.


[Exeunt.
SCENE -- VI. ISAAC's Lodgings.
Enter LOUISA. Louisa. Was ever truant daughter so whimsically circumstanced as
I am! I have sent my intended husband to look after my lover -- the man of my
father's choice is gone to bring me the man of my own, but how dispiriting is
this interval of expectation? SONG.
What bard, O Time, discover,
With wings first made thee move;
Ah! sure he was some lover,
Who never had left his love.
For who that once did prove,
The pangs which absence brings,
Though but one day,
He were away,
Could picture thee with wings,
Enter CARLOS. So, friend, is Antonio found?


Carlos. I could not meet with him, lady; but I doubt not my friend Isaac will
be here with him presently.


Louisa. O shame! you have used no diligence -- Is this your courtesy to a lady
who has trusted herself to your protection?


Carlos. Indeed, madam, I have not been remiss.


Louisa. Well, well; but if either of you had known how each moment of delay
weighs upon the heart of her who loves, and waits the object of her love, O, ye
would not then have trifled thus.


Carlos. Alas! I know it well.


Louisa. Were you ever in love then?


Carlos. I was, lady: but while I have life will never be again.


Louisa. Was your mistress so cruel?


Carlos. If she had always been so, I should have been happier. SONG.
O had my love never smiled on me,
I never had known such anguish;
But think how false, how cruel she,
To bid me cease to languish.
To bid me hope her hand to gain,
Breathe on a flame half perished,
And then with cold and fixed disdain,
To kill the hope she cherished.
Not worse his fate, who on a wreck,
'That drove as winds did blow it,
Silent had left the shattered deck,
To find a grave below it.
Then land was cried -- no more resigned,
He glowed with joy to hear it,
Not worse his fate, his woe to find,
The wreck must sink e're near it.



Louisa. As I live, here is your friend coming with Antonio -- I Will retire for
a moment to surprise him. [Exit.


Enter ISAAC and ANTONIO. Antonio. Indeed, my good friend, you must be
mistaken. Clara D'Almanza in love with me, and employ you to bring me to meet
her! It is impossible!


Isaac That you shall see in an instant -- Carlos, where is the lady? ( Carlos
points to the door.) In the next room is she?


Antonio. Nay, if that lady is really here, she certainly wants me to conduct
her to a dear friend of mine, who has long been her lover.


Isaac. Psha! I tell you it is no such thing -- you are the man she wants, and
nobody but you. Here Is, ado to persuade you to take a pretty girl that is dying
for you.


Antonio. But I have no affection for this lady.


Isaac. And you have for Louisa, hey? but take my word for it, Antonio, you
have no chance there -- so you may as well secure the good that offers itself
to you.


Antonio. And could you reconcile it to your conscience, to supplant your
friend?


Isaac Pish! Conscience has no more to do with gallantry that it has with
politics -- why, you are no honest fellow, if love cannot make a rogue of you
-- so come, -- do go in and speak to her at last.


Antonio. Well, I have no objection to that.


Isaac. [opens the door] There -- there she is -- yonder by the window -- get
in, do ( pushes him in, and half shuts the door) now, Carlos, now I shall
hamper him I warrant -- stay -- I Will peep how they go on -- egid, he looks
consoundedly posed -- now she is coaxing him -- see, Carlos, he begins to come
to -- aye, aye, he will soon forget his conscience.


Carlos. Look! now they are both laughing


Isaac. Aye! so they are -- yes, yes, they are laughing at that dear friend he
talked of -- aye poor devil, they have outwitted him.


Carlos. Now he is kissing her hand.


Isaac Yes, yes, faith, they are agreed -- he is caught, he is entangled -- my
dear Carlos, we have brought it about. O, this little cunning head! I Am a
Machiavel, a very Machiavel.


Carlos. I hear somebody enquiring for you -- I Will see who it is. [Exit Carlos.


Enter ANTONIO and LOUISA. Antonio. Well, my good friend, this lady has so
entirely convinced me of the certainty of your success at Don Jerome's, that I
now resign my pretensions there.


Isaac. You never did a wiser thing, believe me -- and as for deceiving your
friend, that is nothing-at-all -- tricking is all fair in love, is not it, ma'am?


Louisa. Certainly, sir, and I am particularly glad to find you are of that
opinion.


Isaac. O lud, yes, ma'am -- let any one outwit me that can, I say -- but here
let me join your hands -- there, you lucky rogue, I wish you happily married
from the bottom of my soul.


Louisa. And I am sure, if you wish it, no one else should prevent it.


Isaac. Now, Antonio, we are rivals no more, so let us be friends, will you?


Antonio. With all my heart, Isaac.


Isaac. It is not every man, let me tell you, that would have taken such pains,
or been so generous to a rival.


Antonio. No, faith, I don't believe there is another beside yourself in all
Spain.


Isaac. Well, but you resign all pretensions to the other lady?


Antonio. That I do most sincerely.


Isaac. I doubt you have a little hankering there still.


Antonio. None in the least, upon my soul.


Isaac. I mean after her fortune?


Antonio. No, believe me. You are heartily welcome to every thing she has.


Isaac. Well, In Faith, you have the best of the bargain as to beauty, twenty to
one -- now I Will tell you a secret -- I am to carry off Louisa this very evening.


Louisa. Indeed.


Isaac. Yes, she has sworn not to take a husband from her father's hand -- so,
I Have persuaded him to trust her to walk with me in the garden, and then we
shall give him the slip.


Louisa. And is Don Jerome to know nothing of this?


Isaac. O lud no: there lies the jest! Don't you see that, by this step, I
overreach him, I shall be entitled to the girl's fortune without settling a
ducat on her, ha, ha, ha! I Am a cunning dog, a'n't I? A fly little villain, heh?


Antonio. Ha, ha, ha! you are indeed!


Isaac. Roguish you will say -- but keen, hey? -- devilish keen?


Antonio. So you are indeed -- keen -- very keen.


Isaac. And what a laugh we shall have at Don Jerome's, when the truth comes
out, hey?


Louisa. Yes, I Will answer for it, we shall have a good laugh when the truth
comes out, ha, ha, ha!


Enter CARLOS. Carlos. Here are the dancers come to practice the fandango you
intended to have honored Donna Louisa with.


Isaac. O, I sha'n't want them, but as I must pay them, I Will see a caper for my
money -- will you excuse me?


Louisa. Willingly.


Isaac. Here Is my friend, whom you may command for any services, Madam, your
most obedient -- Antonio, I wish you all happiness. O the easy blockhead! what
a tool I have made of him? -- This was a master piece. [Exit Isaac.


Louisa. Carlos, will you be my guard again, and convey me to the convent of
St. Catherine?


Antonio. Why, Louisa, why should you go there?


Louisa. I have my reasons, and you must not be seen to go with me; I shall
write from thence to my father, perhaps, when he finds what he has driven me
to, he may relent.


Antonio. I have no hope from him -- O Louisa, in these arms should be your
sanctuary.


Louisa. Be patient but for a little while -- my father cannot force me from
thence. But let me see you there before evening, and I will explain myself.


Antonio. I shall obey.


Louisa. Come, friend -- Antonio, Carlos has been a lover himself.


Antonio. Then he knows the value of his trust.


Carlos. You shall not find me unfaithful.


TRIO.
Soft pity never leaves the gentle breast,
Where love has been received a welcome guest,
As wandering saints poor huts have sacred made,
He hallows every heart he once has swayed;
And when his presence we no longer share,
Still leaves compassion as a relic there.


[Exeunt Carlos, Louisa, and Antonio.
END OF ACT II.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- A Library.
Enter JEROME, and Servant. Jerome. Why, I never was so amazed in my life!
Louisa gone off with Isaac Mendoza! what, steal away with the very man whom I
wanted her to marry -- elope with her own husband as it were -- it is
impossible.


Servant. Her maid says, sir, they had your leave to walk in the garden while
you was abroad: The door by the shrubbery was found open, and they have not
been heard of since.


Jerome. Well, it is the most unaccountable affair! s'de th, there is certainly
some infernal mystery in it, I cannot comprehend.


Enter 2d Servant, with a letter. Servant. Here is a letter, sir, from Signor
Isaac.


Jerome. So, so, this will explain -- ay, "Isaac Mendoza," let me see. (
Reads.) "Dearest sir, you must, doubtless, be much surprised at my flight with
your daughter" -- Yes, faith, and well I may. "I had the happiness to gain her
heart at our first interview" -- The devil you had! -- "But she having
unfortunately made a vow not to receive a husband from your hands, I was
obliged to comply with her whim" So, so! "We shall shortly throw ourselves at
your feet, and I hope you will have a blessing, ready for one who will then be
Your son-in-law, ISAAC MENDOZA."

A whim, heigh? Why the devil's in the girl I think -- This morning she would
die sooner than have him, and before evening she runs away with him. Well,
well, my will's accomplished -- let the motive be what it will -- and the
Portugueze, sure, will never deny to fulfill the rest of the article.


Enter Servant with another letter. Servant. Sir, here is a man below who says
he brought this from my young lady, Donna Louisa.


Jerome. How! yes, it is my daughter's hand indeed! Lord, there was no occasion
for them both to write; well, let us see what she says: ( reads) "My dearest
father, how shall I entreat your pardon for the rash step I have taken, how
confess the motive?" Pish! hasn't Isaac just told me the motive? one would
think they weren't together when they wrote. "If I have a spirit too resentful
of ill usage, I have also a heart as easily affected by kindness" -- So, so,
here the whole matter comes out, her resentment for Antonio's ill usage, has
made her sensible of Isaac's kindness -- yes, yes, it is all plain enough --
well " -- I am not married yet, though with a man I am convinced adores me" --
Yes, yes, I dare say Isaac is very fond of her -- "but I shall anxiously expect
your answer, in which, should I be so fortunate as to receive your consent, you
will make completely happy, Your ever affectionate daughter, LOUISA."

My consent! to be sure she shall have it; egad, I was never better pleased --
I have fulfilled my resolution -- I knew I should -- O there is nothing like
obstinacy -- Lewis?

Enter Servant. Let the man who brought the last letter wait, and get me a pen
and ink below. I am impatient to set poor Louisa's heart at rest, holloa!
Lewis! Sancho!

Enter Servants. See that there be a noble supper provided in the Saloon
tonight -- serve up my best wines, and let me have music, do you hear?


Servants. Yes, sir.

[Exeunt.
Jerome. And order all my doors to be thrown open -- admit all guests with
masks or without masks -- In Faith, we'll have a might of it -- And I Will let
them see how merry an old man can be. SONG.
O the days when I was young,
When I laughed at fortune's spite,
Talked of love the whole day long,
And with nectar crowned the night,
Then it was old father Care,
Little-reck'd I of thy frown,
Half thy malice youth could bear,
And the rest a bumper drown.
Truth they say lies in a well,
Why I vow I never could see,
Let the water drinkers tell,
There it always lay for me.
For when sparkling wine went round,
Never saw I falsehoods mask,
But still honest truth I found,
In the bottom of each flask.
True, at length my vigour's flown,
I have years to bring decay;
Few the locks that now Town,
And the few I have, are gray.
Yet, old Jerome, thou may boast,
While thy spirits do not tire,
Still beneath thy age's frost;
Glows a spark of youthful fire.


[Exit.
SCENE II. -- The New Piazza.
Enger FERDINAOD, and LOPEZ. Ferdinand. What, could you gather no tidings of
her? Nor guess where she was gone? O Clara! Clara!


Lopez. In truth, Sir, I could not -- that she was run away from her father,
was in every body's mouth, -- and that Don Guzman was in pursuit of her, was
also a very common report -- where she was gone, or what was become of her, no
one could take upon 'em to say.


Ferdinand. God's Death and fury, you blockhead, she cant be out of Seville.


Lopez. So I said to myself, Sir! God's Death and fury, you blockhead, says I, she
cannot be out of Seville -- then some said, she had hanged herself for love, and
others have it, Don Antonio had carried her off.


Ferdinand. It Is false, scoundrel! no one said that.


Lopez. Then I misunderstood 'em, Sir.


Ferdinand. Go, fool, get home, and never let me see you again, till you bring
me news of her. [Exit Lopez.

O! how my fondness for this ungrateful girl, has hurt my disposition? SONG.
Ah, cruel maid, how have thou changed
The temper of my mind?
My heart by thee from mirth estranged
Becomes, like thee, unkind.
By fortune favored, clear in fame
I once ambitious was;
And friends I had, that fanned the flame,
And gave my youth applause.
But now my weakness all abuse,
Yet vain their taunts on me;
Friends, fortune, fame itself I Would lose,
To gain one smile from thee.
Yet, only thou should not despise
My folly, or my woe;
If I am mad in others eyes,
It Is thou have made me so.
But days like these, with doubting cursed
I will not long endure;
Am I despised, I know the worst,
And also know my cure
If false, her vows she dare renounce,
She instant ends my pain,
For, Oh, that heart must break at once;
Which cannot bate-again.


Enter ISAAC.
Isaac. So, I have her safe -- and have only to find a priest to marry us,
Antonio now may marry Clara, or not, if he pleases.


Ferd. What? what was that you said of Clara?


Isaac. O Ferdinand! my brother-in-law that shall be, who thought of meeting
you.


Ferd. But what of Clara?


Isaac. In Faith, you shall hear. -- This morning as I was coming down, I met a
pretty damsel, who told me her name was Clara d'Almanza, and begged my
protection.


Ferd. How?


Isaac. She said she had eloped from her father, Don Guzman, but that love for
a young gentleman in Seville, was the cause.


Ferd. O heavens! did she confess it?


Isaac. O yes, she confessed at once -- but then, says the, my lover is not
informed of my flight, nor suspects my intention.


Ferd. Dear creature! no more I did indeed! O, I am the happiest fellow --
well, Isaac! [aside.


Isaac. Why, then she entreated me to find him out for her, and bring him to
her.


Ferd Good heavens, how lucky! well, come along, let us lose no time. [pulling
him.


Isaac. Zooks! where are we to go?


Ferd. Why, did any thing more pass?


Isaac. Any thing more! -- yes, the end on it was, that I was moved with her
speeches, and complied with her desires.


Ferd. Well, and where is she?


Isaac. Where is she? why, don't I tell you I complied with her request, and
left her safe in the arms of her lover.


Ferd. God's Death! you trifle with me -- I have never seen her.


Isaac. You! O lud, no! How the devil should you? 'Twas Antonio she wanted, and
with Antonio I left her.


Ferd. Hell and madness ( aside) what Antonio d'Ercilla?


Isaac. Aye, aye, the very man; and the best part of it was, he was shy of
taking her at first -- He talked a good deal about honor and conscience, and
deceiving some dear friend; but, lord, we soon over ruled that.


Ferd. You did?


Isaac. O yes, presently -- such deceit, says he -- Pish! says the lady,
tricking is all fair in love -- but then, my friend, says he -- Psha! damn your
friend, says I -- so, poor wretch, he has no chance -- no, no -- he may hang
himself as soon as he pleases.


Ferd. I must go, or I shall betray myself.


Isaac. But stay, Ferdinand, you have not heard the best of the joke.


Ferd. Curse on your joke.


Isaac. Goodlack! what is the matter now? I thought to have diverted you.


Ferd. Be racked, tortured, damned --


Isaac. Why, sure you're not the poor devil of a lover are you? In Faith, as
sure as can be, he is -- this is a better joke than the other, ha, ha, ha!


Ferd. What do you laugh, you vile, mischievous varlet ( collars him) but that
you're beneath my anger; I Would tear your heart out. [Throws him from him.


Isaac. O mercy! here is usage for a brother in-law!


Ferd. But, harky, rascal tell me directly where these false friends are gone,
or by my soul ( draws)


Isaac. For heavens sake, now, my dear brother-in-law, don't be in a rage --
I Will recollect as well as I can.


Ferd. Be quick then!


Isaac. I will, I will -- but people's memories differ -- some have a
treacherous memory -- now mine is a cowardly memory -- it takes to its heels at
sight of a drawn sword, it does In Faith -- and I could as soon fight as
recollect.


Ferd. Zounds, tell me the truth, and I will not hurt you.


Isaac. No, no; I know you will not, my dear brother-in-law -- but that ill
looking thing there.


Ferd. What, then, you will not tell me?


Isaac. Yes, yes, I will -- I Will tell you all upon my soul, but why need you
listen sword in hand?


Ferd. Why there ( puts up) now.


Isaac. Why then, I believe they are gone to -- that is my friend, Carlos, told
me he had left Donna Clara -- dear Ferdinand keep your hands off -- at the
Convent of St. Catherine.


Ferd. St. Catherine!


Isaac. Yes; and that Antonio was to come to her there.


Ferd. Is this the truth?


Isaac. It is indeed; and all I know, as I hope for life.


Ferd. Well, coward, take your life -- it is that false, dishonorable Antonio,
who shall feel my vengeance.


Isaac. Ay, ay, kill him -- cut his throat and welcome.


Ferd. But for Clara -- infamy on her -- she is not worth my resentment.


Isaac. No more she is, my dear brother-in-law, In Faith I would not be angry
about her -- she is not worth it indeed.


Ferd. It Is false -- she is worth the enmity of princes.


Isaac. True, true; so she is, and I pity you exceedingly for having lost her.


Ferd. God's Death, you rascal! how durst you talk of pitying me.


Isaac. O dear brother-in law, I beg pardon -- I don't pity you in the least,
upon my soul.


Ferd. Get hence, fool, and-provoke me no further -- Nothing but your
insignificance saves you.


Isaac. In Faith, then my insignificance is the best friend I have -- I Am going,
dear Ferdinand -- What a cursed, hot headed bully it is!

Exeunt.
SCENE III. -- The Garden of the Convent.
Enter LOUISA and CLARA. Louisa. And you really wish my brother may not find
you out?


Clara. Why else, have I concealed myself under this disguise?


Louisa. Why, perhaps, because the dress becomes you, for you certainly don't
intend to be a nun for life.


Clara. If, indeed, Ferdinand had not offended me so, last night.


Louisa. Come, come, it was his fear of losing you, made him so rash.


Clara Well, you may think me cruel -- but I swear, if he were here this
instant, I believe I should forgive him.

SONG, -- CLARA.
By him we love offended,
How soon our anger flies,
One day apart, it is ended,
Behold him and it dies,
Last night, your roving brother,
Enraged I bade depart,
And sure his rude presumption,
Deserved to lose my heart.
Yet, were he now before me,
In spite of injured pride,
I fear my eyes would pardon,
Before my tongue could chide.
With truth, the bold deceiver,
To me thus often has said,
" In vain would Clara slight me,
" In vain would she upbraid;
" No scorn those lips discover,
" Where dimples laugh the while,
No frowns appear resentful,
Where Heaven has stamped a smile.



Louisa. I protest, Clara, I shall begin to think you are seriously resolved to
enter on your probation.


Clara. And, seriously, I very much doubt whether the character of a nun would
not become me best.


Louisa. Why, to be sure, the character of a nun is a very becoming one -- at a
masquerade -- but no pretty woman in her senses ever thought of taking the veil
for above a night.


Clara. Yonder I see your Antonio is returned -- I shall only interrupt you;
ah, Louisa, with what happy eagerness you turn to look for him!

[Exit.
Enter ANTONIO. Antonio. Well, my Louisa, any news since I left you?


Louisa. None -- The messenger is not returned from my father.


Antonio. Well, I confess, I do not perceive what we are to expect from him.


Louisa. I shall be easier however, in having made the trial, I do not doubt
your sincerity, Antonio: but there is a chilling air round poverty that often
kills affection, that was not nursed in it -- If we would make love our
household god, we had best secure him a comfortable roof. [Enter Maid, with a
letter.

My father's answer I suppose.


Antonio. My dearest Louisa, you may be assured that it contains nothing but
threats and reproaches.


Louisa. Let us see however ( reads) "Dearest daughter, make your lover happy,
you have my full consent to marry as your whim has chosen, but be sure come
home to sup with your affectionate father."


Antonio. You jest, Louisa.


Louisa. ( Gives him the Letter) Read -- read.


Antonio. It Is so, by heavens! sure there must be some mistake; but that is none
of our business -- now, Louisa, you have no excuse for delay.


Louisa. Shall we not then return and thank my father?


Antonio. But first let the priest put it out of his power to recall his word
-- I Will fly to procure one.


Louisa Nay; if you part with me again, perhaps you may lose me.


Antonio. Come then -- there is a friar of a neighboring convent is my friend;
you have already been diverted by the manners of a nunnery -- let us see,
whether there is less hypocrisy among the holy fathers.


Louisa. I Am afraid not, Antonio -- for in religion, as in friendship, they who
profess most are ever the least sincere. [Exeunt.


Enter CLARA. Clara. So, yonder they go, as happy as a mutual and confessed
affection can make them; while I am left in solitude. Heigho! love may perhaps
excuse the rashness of an elopement from one's friend; but I am sure; nothing
but the presence of the man we love can support it -- Ha! what do I see;
Ferdinand as I live, how could he gain admission -- by potent gold I suppose,
as Antonio did -- how eager and disturbed he seems -- he shall not know me as
yet. [Lets down her veil.]


Enter FERDINAND. Ferd. Yes, those were certainly they -- my infortion was
right. [going.


Clara. ( Stops him) Pray, Signor, what is your business here?


Ferd. No matter -- no matter -- Oh, they stop -- ( looks out) yes, that is the
perfidious Clara indeed.


Clara. So, a jealous error -- I Am glad to see him so moved. [aside.


Ferd. Her disguise cannot conceal her -- No, no, I know her too well.


Clara. Wonderful discernment! but Signor --


Ferd. Be quiet, good nun, don't teize me -- by heavens she leans upon his arm,
hangs fondly on it! O woman! woman!


Clara. But, Signior, who is it you want?


Ferd. Not you, not you, so, prithee don't teize me. Yet pray stay -- gentle
nun, was it not Donna Clara d'Almanza just parted from you?


Clara. Clara d'Almanza, Signor, is not yet out of the garden.


Ferd. Aye, aye, I knew I was right -- and pray, is not that gentleman now at
the porch with her, Antonio d'Ercilla?


Clara. It is indeed, Signior.


Ferd. So, so, now but one question more -- can you inform me for what purpose
they have gone away?


Clara. They are gone to be married, I believe.


Ferd. Very well -- enough -- now if I don't mar their wedding. [Exit.


Clara. ( unveils) I thought jealousy had made lovers quick-sighted, but it has
made mine blind -- Louisa's story accounts to me for this error, and I am glad
to find I have power enough over him to make him so happy -- but why should not
I be present at his surprise when undeceived? When he is through the porch I Will
follow him, and, perhaps, Louisa shall not singly be a bride. SONG.
Adieu, thou dreary pile, where never dies,
The sullen echo of repentant sighs:
Ye sister mourners of each lonely cell,
Inured to hymns and sorrow, fare ye well;
For happier scenes I fly this darksome grove,
To saints a prison, but a tomb to love.


[Exit.
SCENE. -- A Court before the Priory.
Enter ISAAC, crossing the Stage. Enter ANTONIO. Antonio. What my friend Isaac:


Isaac. What, Antonio! wish me joy! I have Louisa safe.


Antonio. Have you? I wish you joy with all my soul.


Isaac. Yes, I am come here to procure a priest to marry us.


Antonio. So, then we are both on the same errand, I am come to look for Father
Paul.


Isaac. Hah! I am glad on it -- but In Faith he must tack me first, my love is
waiting.


Antonio. So is mine -- I left her in the porch.


Isaac. Aye, but I am in haste to get back to Don Jerome.


Antonio. And so am I too.


Isaac. Well, perhaps he will save time and marry us both together -- or I Will be
your father and you shall be mine -- Come along -- but you're obliged to me for
all this.


Antonio. Yes, yes.

[Exeunt.
SCENE V. -- A Room in the Priory.
Friars at the Table drinking. GLEE and CHORUS.
This bottle's the sun of our table,
His beams are rosy wine;
We, planets that are not able,
Without his help to shine,
Let mirth and glee abound,
You Will soon grow bright,
With borrowed light;
And shine as he goes round.



Paul. Brother Francis, toss the bottle about, and give me your toast.


Francis. Have we drank the abbess of St. Ursuline?


Aug. Yes, yes; she was the last.


Francis. Then I Will give you the blue-eyed nun of St. Catherine's.


Paul. With all my heart ( drinks). Pray brother Augustine, were there any
benefactions left in my absence?


Francis. Don Juan Carduba has left an hundred ducats to remember him in our
masses.


Paul. Has he! let them be paid to our wine merchant, and we'll remember him in
our cups, which will do just as well. Any thing more?


Aug. Yes; Baptista, the rich miser, who died last week, has bequeathed us a
thousand pistoles, and the silver lamp he used in his own chamber, to burn
before the image of St. Anthony.


Paul. 'Twas well meant; but we'll employ his money better -- Baptista's bounty
shall light the living, not the dead -- St. Anthony is not afraid to be left in
the dark, though he was -- see who is there. [A knocking, Francis goes to the
door and opens it.


Enter PORTER. Porter. Here Is one without in pressing haste to speak with
Father Paul.


Aug. Brother Paul! [Paul comes from behind a curtain, with a glass of wine,
and in his hand a piece of cake]


Paul. Here! how durst you, fellow, thus abruptly break in upon our devotions?


Porter. I thought they were finished.


Paul. No they were not -- were they, brother Francis?


Aug. Not by a bottle each.


Paul. But neither you or your fellows mark how the hours go -- no, you mind
nothing but the gratifying of your appetites; ye eat and swill, and sleep, and
gormandize, and thrive while we are wasting in mortification.


Porter. We ask no more than nature craves.


Paul. It Is false, ye have more appetites than hairs, and your flushed, sleek,
and pampered appearance is the disgrace of our order -- out on it -- if you are
hungry, cannot you be content with the wholesome roots of the earth, and if you
are dry, is not there the crystal spring ( drinks)? Put this away ( gives a
glass) and show me where I Am wanted. ( Porter drains the glass -- Paul going,
turns) -- so, you would have drank it, if there had been any left. Ah, glutton!
glutton!

[Exeunt.
SCENE VI. -- The Court before the Priory.
Enter ISAAC and ANTONIO. Isaac. A plaguey while coming this same father Paul --
He Is detained at vespers I suppose, poor fellow.


Antonio. No, here he comes. Good father Paul, ( Enter Paul) I crave your
blessing.


Isaac. Yes good father Paul, we are come to beg a favor.


Paul. What is it pray?


Isaac. To marry us, good father Paul; and in truth, thou do look the very
priest of Hymen.


Paul. In short I may be called so; for I deal in repentance and mortification.


Isaac. No, no, thou seem an officer of Hymen, because thy presence speaks
content and good humor.


Paul. Alas! my appearance is deceitful. Bloated I am, indeed, for fasting is a
windy recreation, and it has swollen me like a bladder.


Antonio But thou have a good fresh color in thy face, father, rosy In Faith.


Paul. Yes, I have blushed for mankind, till the hue of my shame is as fixed as
their vices.


Isaac. Good man!


Paul. And I have labored too -- but to what purpose? they continue to sin
under my very nose.


Isaac. Esecks, father, I should have guessed as much, for your nose seems to
be put to the blush more than any other part of your face.


Paul. Go, you're a wag.


Antonio. But to the purpose, father -- will you officiate for us?


Paul. To join young people thus clandestinely is not safe, and indeed, I have
in my heart many weighty reasons against it.


Antonio And I have in my hand many weighty reasons for it. -- Isaac, hav'n't
you an argument or two in our favor about you?


Isaac. Yes, yes; here is a most unanswerable purse.


Paul. For shame, you make me angry; you forget that I am a Jacobin, and when
importunate people have forced their trash -- aye, into this pocket here -- or
into this -- why, then the sin was theirs ( they put money into his pockets)
fie! now, how you distress me? -- I would return it, but that I must touch it
that way, and so wrong my oath.


Antonio. Now then, come with us.


Isaac. Aye, now give us your title to joy and rapture.


Friar. Well, when your hour of repentance comes, don't blame me.


Antonio. No bad caution to my friend Isaac ( aside). Well, well, father, do
you do your part and I Will abide the consequence.


Isaac. Aye, and so will I ( they are going.)


Enter LOUISA, (running) Louisa. O, Antonio, Ferdinand is at the porch and
enquiring for us.


Isaac Who? Don Ferdinand! he is not enquiring for me I hope.


Antonio. Fear not, my love, I Will soon pacisy him.


Isaac. Egad, you will not -- Antonio, take my advice and run away; this Ferdinand
is the most unmerciful dog! and has the cursedest long sword! and upon my soul
he comes on purpose to cut your throat.


Antonio. Never fear, never fear.


Isaac. Well, you may stay if you will -- but I Will get some one to marry me,
for by St. Iago, he shall never marry me again, while I am master of a pair of
heels. [Runs out.


Enter FERDINAND and LOUISA. Ferd. So, Sir, I have met with you at last.


Antonio. Well, Sir?


Ferd. Base treacherous man! whence can a false, deceitful soul like yours
borrow confidence to look so steadily on the man you have injured?


Antonio. Ferdinand, you are too warm -- it is true you find me on the point of
wedding one I love beyond my life, but no argument of mine prevailed on her to
elope -- I scorn deceit as much as you -- by heaven, I knew not she had lest
her father's till I saw her.


Ferd. What a mean excuse! you have wronged your friend then, for one, whose
wanton forwardness anticipated your treachery -- of this indeed, your Jew
pander informed me; but let your conduct be consistent, and since you have
dared to do a wrong, follow me, and show you have spirit to avow it.


Louisa. Antonio, I perceive his mistake -- leave him to me.


Paul. Friend, you are rude to interrupt the union of two willing hearts.


Ferd. No, meddling priest, the hand he seeks is mine.


Enter CLARA, behind. Paul. If so, I Will proceed no further -- lady, did you
ever promise this youth your hand? [To Louisa, who shakes her head.]


Ferd. Clara, I thank you for your silence -- I would not save heard your
tongue avow such falsity -- be it your punishment to remember I have not
reproached you -- Antonio, you are protected now, but we shall meet. [Going,
Clara holds one arm and Louisa the other.]


DUET.
Louisa. Turn thee round I pray thee,
Calm awhile thy rage,

Clara. I must help to stay thee,
And thy wrath assuage.

Louisa. Could thou not discover
One so dear to thee?

Clara. Can thou be a lover,
And thus fly from me?



[both unveil.
Ferd. How Is this! my sister! Clara too -- I Am confounded.


Louisa. It Is even so, good brother.


Paul. How! what impiety! Did the man want to marry his own sister?


Louisa. And arn't you ashamed of yourself not to know your own sister?


Clara. To drive away your own mistress --


Louisa. Don't you see how jealousy blinds people?


Clara. Aye, and will you ever be jealous again?


Ferd. Never -- never -- you, sister, I know will forgive me -- but now, Clara,
shall I presume --


Clara. No, no, just now you told me not to teize you "Who do you want, good
Signior?" "not you, not you." O you blind wretch! but swear never to be jealous
again, and I Will forgive you.


Ferd. By all --


Clara. There, that will do -- you will keep the oath just as well. [gives her
hand.


Louisa. But, brother, here is one, to whom some apology is due.


Ferd. Antonio, I am ashamed to think --


Antonio. Not a word of excuse, Ferdinand -- I have not been in love myself,
without learning that a lover's anger should never be resented -- but come --
let us retire with this good father, and we'll explain to you the cause of this
error.


GLEE and CHORUS.
Often does Hymen smile to hear,
Wordy vows of feigned regard;
Well he knows when they are sincere.
Never slow to give reward:
For his glory is to prove,
Kind to those who wed for love.


[Exeunt.
SCENE VII. -- and Last. A Grand Saloon.
Enter DON JEROME, SERVANTS and LOPEZ. Jerome. Be sure now let every thing be
in the best order -- let all my Servants have on their merriest faces -- but
tell 'em to get as little drunk as possible till after supper. So, Lopez,
where is your master? sha'n't we have him at supper?


Lopez Indeed, I believe not, Sir -- he is mad, I doubt; I Am sure he has
frighted me from him.


Jerome. Aye, aye, he is after some wench, I suppose, a young rake! Well, well,
we'll be merry without him.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, here is Signior Isaac.


Enter ISAAC. Jerome. So, my dear son-in law -- there, take my blessing and
forgiveness, but where is my daughter? where is Louisa?


Isaac She Is without impatient for a blessing, but almost afraid to enter.


Jerome. O fly and bring her in. [Exit Isaac.

Poor girl, I long to see her pretty face.


Isaac. ( without) Come, my charmer! my trembling Angel!


Enter ISAAC and DUENNA, DON JEROME runs to meet them (she kneels.) Jerome.
Come to my arms. my -- ( starts back) why who the devil have we here?


Isaac. Nay, Don Jerome, you promised her forgiveness; see how dear (...) droops


Jerome. Droops indeed! Why, gad take me this is so Margaret -- but where is my
daughter, where is Louisa?


Isaac. Why here, before your eyes -- nay, don't be ab^shed, my sweet wife!


Jerome. Wi^e with a vengeance! Why, zounds you have not married the Duenna!


Margaret. ( Kneeling) O dear papa! you will not disown me sure!


Jerome Papa! dear papa! Why, zounds, your impudence is as great as your
ugliness.


Isaac Rise, my charmer, go throw your snowy arms about his neck, and convince
him you are --


Duenna. O Sir, so give me! [Embraces him.


Jerome. Help! murder!


Servants What Is the matter, Sir?


Jerome. Why here, this damned Jew has brought an old Harridan to strangle me.


Isaac. Lord, it is his own daughter, and he is so hard hearted he will not
forgive her.


Enter ANTONIO and LOUISA, they kneel. Jerome. Zounds and sury, what is here
now? who sent for you, Sir, and who the devil are you?


Antonio. This lady's husband, Sir.


Isaac. Aye, that he is I Will be sworn; for I left 'em with the Priest, and was
to have given her away.


Jerome. You were?


Isaac. Aye; that is my honest friend, Antonio; and that is the little girl I
told you I had hampered him with.


Jerome Why, you are either drunk or mad -- this is my daughter.


Isaac. No, no; it is you are both drunk and mad, I think -- here is your
daughter.


Jerome. Hark'ee, old iniquity, will you explain all this or not?


Duenna. Come then, Don Jerome, I will -- though our habits might inform you all
-- look on your daughter there, and on me.


Isaac. What Is this I hear?


Duenna. The truth is, that in your passion this morning, you made a small
mistake, for you turned your daughter out of doors, and locked up your humble
servant.


Isaac. O lud! O lud! here is a pretty fellow! to turn his daughter out of doors
instead of an old Duenna.


Jerome. And, O lud! O lud! here is a pretty fellow to marry an old Duenna
instead of my daughter -- but how came the rest about?


Duenna. I have only to add, that I remained in your daughter's place, and had
the good fortune to engage the affections of my sweet husband here.


Isaac. Her husband! why, you old witch, do you think I Will be your husband now!
this is a trick, a cheat, and you ought all to be ashamed of yourselves.


Antonio. Hark'ee, Isaac, do you dare to complain of tricking -- Don Jerome, I
give you my sword, this cunning Portugueze has brought all this upon himself,
by endeavoring to over reach you by getting your daughter's fortune, without
making any settlement in return.


Jerome. Overreach me!


Antonio. It Is so indeed, Sir, and we can prove it to you.


Jerome. Why, gad take me, it must be so, or he could never have put up with
such a face as Margaret's -- so, little Solomon, I wish you joy of your wife
with all my sol.


Louisa. Isaac, tricking is all fair in love -- let you alone for the plot.


Antonio. A cunning dog ar'n't you? A sly little villain, heh!


Louisa. Roguish, perhaps; but keen, devilish keen.


Jerome. Yes, yes, his aunt always called him little Solomon.


Isaac. Why, the plague of Egypt upon you all -- but do you think I Will submit
to such an imposition?


Antonio. Isaac, one serious word -- you would better be content as you are, for
believe me, you will find, that in the opinion of the world, there is not a
fairer subject for contempt and ridicule, than a knave become the dupe of his
own art.


Isaac. I don't care -- I Will not endure this -- Don Jerome, it is you have done
this -- you would be so cursed positive about the beauty of her you locked up,
and all the time, I told you she was as old as my mother, and as ugly as the
Devil.


Duenna. Why you little insignificant reptile.


Jerome. That Is right -- attack him, Margaret.


Duenna. Dares such a thing as you pretend to talk of beauty -- a walking
rouleau -- a body that seems to owe all its consequence to the dropsy -- a pair
of eyes like two dead beetles in a wad of brown dough. A beard like an
artichoke, with dry shrivelled jaws that would disgrace the mummy of a monkey.


Jerome. Well done, Margaret.


Duenna. But you shall know that I have a brother who wears a sword, and if you
don't do me justice --


Isaac. Fire seize your brother, and you too -- I Will fly to Jerusalem to avoid
you.


Duenna. Fly where you will, I Will follow you.


Jerome. Throw your snowy arms about him, Margaret. [Exeunt Isaac and Duenna.

But Louisa, are you really married to this modest gentleman?


Louisa. Sir, in obedience to your commands I gave him my hand within this hour.


Jerome. My commands!


Antonio. Yes, Sir, here is your consent under your own hand.


Jerome. How? would you rob me of my child by a trick, a false pretense, and do
you think to get her fortune by the same means? why s'life, you are as great a
rogue as Isaac.


Antonio. No, Don Jerome, though I have profited by this paper in gaining your
daughter's hand, I scorn to obtain her fortune by deceit, there Sir, [Gives a
letter] now give her your blessing for a dower, and all the little I possess,
shall be settled on her in return. Had you wedded her to a prince, he could do
no more.


Jerome. Why, gad take me, but you are a very extraordinary fellow, but have
you the impudence to suppose no one can do a generous action but yourself? Here
Louisa, tell this proud fool of yours, that he is the only man I know that would
renounce your fortune; and by my soul, he is the only man in Spain that is worthy
of it -- there, bless you both, I Am an obstinate old fellow when I am in the
wrong; but you shall now find me as steady in the right.

Enter FERDINAND and CLARA. Another wonder still! why, Sirrah! Ferdinand, you
have not stole a nun, have you?


Ferd. She is a nun in nothing but her habit, Sir -- look nearer, and you will
perceive it is Clara d'Almanza, Don Guzman's daughter, and with pardon for
stealing a wedding, she is also my wise.


Jerome. Gadlbud, and a great fortune -- Ferdinand, you are a prudent young
rogue and I forgive you; and isecks you are a pretty little damsel. Give your
father-in-law a kiss, you smiling rogue.


Clara. There old gentleman, and now mind you behave well to us.


Jerome. Esecks, those lips have not been chilled by kissing beads -- Egad, I
believe I shall grow the best humored fellow in Spain -- Lewis, Sancho,
Carlos, do you hear, are all my doors thrown open? Our childrens weddings are the
only hollidays our age can boast, and then we drain with pleasure, the little
stock of spirits time has left us. [Music within] But see, here come our
friends and neighbors.

Enter MASQUERADERS. And In Faith we'll make a night on it, with wine and dance,
and catches -- then old and young shall join us.


FINALE.
Jerome. Come now for jest and smiling,
Both old and young beguiling,
Let us laugh and play, so blyth and gay,
Till we banish care away.

Louisa. Thus crowned with dance and song,
The hours shall glide along,
With a heart at ease, merry, merry glees,
Can never fail to please.

Ferdinand. Each bride with blushes glowing,
Our wine as rosy flowing,
Let us laugh and play, so blythe and gay,
Till we banish care away, --

Antonio. Then, health's to every friend,
The night's repast shall end,
With a heart at ease, merry, merry glees,
Can never fail to please.

Clara. Nor while we are jo joyous,
Shall anxious fear annoy us,
Let us laugh and play, so blythe and gay,
Till we banish care away.

Jerome. For generous guests like these,
Accept the wish to please,
So we'll laugh and play, so blythe and gay,
Your smiles drive care away.




FINIS.

