The CERTAIN METHOD to KNOW the DISEASE.

A LECTURE ADDRESSED TO STUDENTS IN PHYSIC.

Medicus, si quidem suffecerit ad cognoscendum; sufficient etiam ad sanandum.

HIPPOCRATES de Art. LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. MDCCXLII.

TO STUDENTS in Physic.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is universally agreed, that among the several other Branches of Learning,
necessary to the Accomplishment of those, who are Candidates in the Art of
Healing; the judicious Instructions of an able, practical Physician, is a
Qualification of the first Moment. The Reason of the present Concession is very
evident: Because the Pupil, as the Result of such an happy Institution,
according to the Standing of his Professor, may, in a few Years, enter upon
Business, with greater Advantage, than he could possibly do, in many, without
such Assistance. For myself, I own, I am too vain, not to account it a singular
Felicity in my Life, that I have been blessed with an Opportunity of attending
Sir RICHARD MANNINGHAM'S Lectures in Midwifery and Physic.

I PAY a greater Deference to that GENTLEMAN'S good Sense and distinguished
Modesty, than either to affront the one, or insult the other, by attempting any
thing, that might carry the Appearance of an Encomium, though religiously
confined to his just Praise: Nevertheless, as every generous and honest Mind
would be equally careful, neither to offend against the Laws of Gratitude to an
ingenious Tutor, for the most instructive Dictates; nor those of Justice and
Zeal due to the Public, for whose Service, Gentlemen, you are preparing: I
expect it be allowed me, on the present Occasion, as a necessary Instance of
Duty to Both; that I am at Liberty to declare, I want no Veneration for Sir
RICHARD'S Whole Course. -- It is composed, indeed, of Two grand Branches, which
are those of Midwifery and Physic. The former of these is by no means destitute
of its Beauties: Such as the Improvements in the Apparatus itself; the Chastity
of the Institution; and the Exclusion of all Instruments. -- For the first: The
greater Machine is the most finished, in its way, that has, as yet, ever
appeared, for conducting the different Kinds of Deliveries; while the Glass
Machine gives ocular Proof of the Reason and Justness of the Rules to be
observed in Operations on the Other; and, consequently, in Genuine Labors. --
For the next: It is not possible, by this Manner of Instruction, to give the
least Offense to the chastest Mind, the most scrupulous Modesty. -- And with
respect to the Affair of Instruments: It is evident to a Demonstration, from
this Method of Practice, that there is so little Occasion for the present
frequent Use of them, that excepting in a Case or two, which but rarely happen;
the judicious Management of the Hand, is all that is required in the Art of
Midwifery.

GENTLEMEN, I abhor Flattery and Ostentation: And I cannot but persuade myself,
you will acquit me of Both, when I assure you, I should, at no rate, have taken
upon me to have been either so particular, or positive in the Articles above,
if I were not very well acquainted, with the utmost, that has been done Abroad
on the Subject of Midwifery. I studied under Two Masters, the late Messieurs
GREGOIRE and DUSSE, at PARIS; and came from thence with no small Freight of
Self-sufficiency and Confidence: Nor is it probable to me, I should ever have
been dispossessed of my personal Prejudices and dangerous Mistakes (especially
in the Use of Instruments) had I not fell under Sir RICHARD's Institution, and
formed myself on His Practice.

THESE things notwithstanding: As I always thought the matter of Deliveries the
least Branch of the Man-Midwife's Character; and was assured, that He would
ever have most Success in Operations, who was best acquainted with the
Structure of the Human Body: So I could not help being especially charmed with
those Lectures in Sir RICHARD's Course, which properly belong to the latter
Branch, the Head of Physic. The superior Utility of the Subject will excuse my
passionate Regard on this Part: Since it is plain, that the Science, which
leads to a general View of the animal Machine, and to a perfect Knowledge of
all the Diseases to which the whole Nature, in common, is incident; must be
vastly preferable to all that is partial and confined, however exalted and
worthy in itself.

WHAT was last observed, Gentlemen, you will please to remember, is designed,
not only to account for the extraordinary Pains I was at in securing this
Lecture; but is also offered as a Reason, why you are to believe it tolerably
correct. For the latter indeed, you have this additional Assurance, that I had
not only several Opportunities of attending the Repetition of it; but was,
moreover, allowed the peculiar Indulgence of taking it in shorthand, as
delivered.

I CONFESS, it would give me no small Pain, were I the least apprehensive, I
was taking any Freedom, that might justly expose me to the Resentment of Sir
RICHARD MANNINGHAM: But, I flatter myself with less Danger in this Point, so
far as concerns the present Publication, however; since, I am only indulging
the English Reader with his excellent Method of Investigating Diseases, in the
manner he explained it to Us, in his first Evening's Lecture in Physic; at the
same time, that it is to be observed, he has already communicated the Method
itself to the learned World in his Latin Compendium: Though some of the best
Judges have acknowledged it is Claim to an higher Title.

THERE is one Circumstance, Gentlemen, of great Importance in the present
Lecture, I mean: That the whole Argument is built on the most venerable
Antiquity, and not on any precarious, modern Theories. I take the Liberty of
inserting this previous Hint; not but your own Attention in Reading would have
excused me the Trouble; because you will from hence immediately argue its
intrinsic Value, and give more boldly into its Use. -- The Histories of
Diseases, originally put together by the most accurate Observations of
HIPPOCRATES, and established on the Authority of his Successors, the most
celebrated ancient Physicians, is here your Standard. Nature, since her various
morbid Phenomenon were, in their manner, first reduced to any regular System,
appears to have suffered no Deviation for some thousand Years past; nor can,
indeed, be capable of any, for the future, while the animal Economy, and the
Laws, under which the human Species continues to act, remain invariable.

I WISH nothing more ardently, than that, as the Subject, on which the Lecture
before you is raised, is of general Use in itself; and it is hardly possible,
every Student's Situation should allow him an Opportunity of attending on the
Spot: Those, into whose Hands it may now fall, may find as much Pleasure and
Advantage in receiving it from the Press, as the Publisher has perpetually
retained, since he first took it from Sir RICHARD's own Mouth. I am,

LONDON: Bow-lane, Feb. 4. 1741-2. GENTLEMEN, Your most Obedient, Humble
Servant,SAYER RUDD, M.D. and MAN-MIDWIFE.

The CERTAIN METHOD to KNOW the DISEASE.
IN the Course of our LECTURES in Physic, we propose, chiefly to confine
ourselves to the Diseases of Children, from Infancy up to ripe Age; and to the
Diseases, peculiar to the Female Sex; those especially, belonging to Pregnancy
and Childbed: Nevertheless, as Women are liable to all the Distempers incident
to Men, besides the many peculiar to their own Sex, as they are, by Nature,
ordained for the Preservation of Mankind; it will be necessary, in a great
measure, to treat of Diseases at large; and more particularly of Fevers, which,
indeed, make up a very great Part of the Disorders that afflict us, and do also
associate themselves, with every other Disease: Febris, maxim communis Morbus,
omnium aliorum Morborum, praecipue Inflammationis, comes est. HIPPOCRATES. The
Truth of which we daily experience; and, moreover, often observe that, a Fever
shall even elude that Method of curing a Disease, which, without a Fever, has
been generally found successful; an Observation well worthy our particular
Notice.

WOMEN with Child, and in Childbed, are often afflicted with Distempers, no
ways cognate to Pregnancy or Childbed; especially Fevers of all Kinds, whose
Essence and Nature, indeed, differ nothing from other Fevers, and require a
like Method of Cure; yet, by reason of their happening at the Times
abovementioned, are attended with greater Difficulties in Curing, and demand
our greatest Caution and Prudence, in the Administration of the proper Remedies
for the Fever; the Physician at this time, not being at Liberty, so freely to
make use of Bleeding, Vomiting, Blistring, Sweating, Purging, and Method of
Diet: And during Pregnancy, our chief View must always be to prevent a
Miscarriage, or even the bringing on of Labor, whenever the Disease has no
Affinity to Pregnancy. For though Diseases, which are owing to Pregnancy, either
decrease, or go off upon Delivery; yet, those which are no ways cognate, are
for the most part found to increase after the Delivery; and as HIPPOCRATES
observes: Si mulier, Utero gestans, morbum habuerit non cognatum, in Puerperii
purgatione, perit.

WHEREFORE, as in all Diseases not cognate to Pregnancy, our chief View, as I
observed above, must be, to prevent Abortion and untimely Labor; so in all
Diseases happening in Childbed, our principal Aim, must then be directed, to
the due Regulation of the Lochia. Many, and great Difficulties surround us, in
this dangerous and complicated Situation, which exact our most diligent Care
and Attention: And, as it is oftentimes no easy Matter to distinguish between
the cognate Distemper, and that which has no relation to Pregnancy or Childbed;
and at all times, very difficult rightly and safely to conduct Affairs, in this
nice and critical Situation; I shall therefore, in my subsequent Lectures,
endeavor, to the best of my Judgment and Knowledge, to inform and direct you
in each Particular, from the repeated Observations of the most approved Authors
in Physic, both ancient and modern; and also from Experiences and Successes,
collected from my own Adversaria, confirming their Doctrine; besides which, I
shall illustrate each Case, by the particular Application of the Method of
Investigating the Nature of all Diseases.

IT is a Maxim universally received among Physicians: That Medicine should
begin, where Philosophy ends. And as it is, undoubtedly, a necessary
Qualification in a Physician to be knowing in Philosophy; and the Animal
Economy is that Part of Philosophy, which is more especially conducive to the
Knowledge of the Practice of Physic: I make no doubt, but you, Gentlemen, who
have in this City the best Opportunities of being instructed in this Branch of
Science; especially by that most accurate, and excellent Anatomist and
Physician, Dr. NICHOLLS; who, it must be confessed, is an Ornament of our
Profession, and worthy of singular Praise: I say, I make no doubt, but with
such Advantages, you have already obtained a competent Knowledge in the Animal
Economy; and will, therefore, be enabled to make the best Use of our Lectures,
and Method of Investigating the Nature of Diseases.

NOW, the human Body, we all know, may be properly considered, as a most
perfect Machine; whose Parts are extremely well configurated and joined
together; whose Symmetry is most beautiful; and whose Actions, resulting from
this admirable Compages, are reciprocally carried on by Solids and Fluids, of
which it is made up. And as many of its Actions and Motions, are easily
demonstrated to be the necessary Consequences of it is Structure; so its
Diseases, and all their Symptoms, are only the irregular Motions, or Disorders
of this very complicated Machine: Nor is the Case the least altered, that we
have a Principle within us, not subject, in itself, to the Laws of Motion.

IT is, therefore, highly incumbent on every one, who would attain to the due
Knowledge of the Art of Healing, that he make himself very well acquainted with
this curious Machine: that knowing well the Parts, and the natural Actions, and
Secretions of the human Body; he may be enabled to judge, when, and how, these
natural Actions are perverted: all the Symptoms of Diseases, being the
necessary Consequences of the Alteration of the Animal Economy. It Is Actions
therefore being performed by Fluids secerned from the Blood; without the
Knowledge of Secretions, we cannot understand the Nature of Diseases: Secretion
being the Spring of all animal Functions. Wherefore, the greater our Knowledge
is of the Animal Economy, the more likely we shall be, to discover the Seat
and Nature of its Diseases; and of course be better enabled to rectify all its
Disorders.

EXPERIENCE is, no doubt, of great and necessary Use, in promoting the Art of
curing Diseases, if directed by a Knowledge in the Animal Economy; forasmuch
as it is only by a just reasoning on our Experiences, that we can come at the
Knowledge of any Phenomenon of Nature. So that Experience, or the Knowledge of
the Histories of Diseases, added to that of the Animal Economy, is what can
only make a Physician; and, wherever the History of a Disease is exactly
known, if the right Method of curing it cannot be deduced, it must be, because
the Animal Economy is not sufficiently understood: For our Skill in curing
Diseases, whose Histories are exactly known, is, for the most part,
proportional to our Knowledge of the Animal Economy. For in order to find out
the Seat and Nature of a Distemper, and from them to deduce a right Method of
Cure, it will be absolutely necessary to reason on those Histories; which we
cannot do, as we ought, if we are ignorant of the Structure of the Machine, we
are about to rectify.

DESCRIPTIONS and Diagnostic Signs of Diseases, are the proper Business of
Observation and Experience; but, Indications of Cure arise from our reasoning
upon those Observations. Diagnostics are properly a Collection of particular
Symptoms only; but Indications are those Conclusions, which our Knowledge of
the Animal Economy enables us to make on these Observations, and Descriptions:
So that the Histories of Diseases, and the Knowledge of the Animal Economy,
must always go hand in hand, in order to the obtaining the due Knowledge of the
Practice of Physic. He therefore, who is sufficiently knowing in Philosophy and
the Animal Economy, and makes a proper Use of this Knowledge, by reasoning on
real Facts, grounded on repeated Experience and Observation, may justly be said
to use his Philosophy aright; and may then reasonably hope for Success, in
finding out the genuine Indications of Cure, in which, the Practice of Physic
chiefly consists: And without this Caution our Reasonings will certainly be to
very little purpose.

THE great HIPPOCRATES has this Assertion: That Nature cures Diseases. The
Truth of it we, of this Day, may experience, if we will carefully keep up to
his excellent Directions, and Method: It being his only Aim to relieve Nature
when oppressed, in the very Way, and Manner he observed her endeavoring to
expel Diseases. And it was by a constant Diligence of this Kind, joined with
his wonderful Sagacity, that he arrived to that great Degree of Perfection in
the Knowledge of Physic: Hence he perceived that, Nature herself judges
Diseases; and, indeed, does all, being properly assisted; nay, and, sometimes,
without any Assistance.

HIPPOCRATES also informs us, and our own Experience cannot but confirm it:
That those People who have Fevers, and are left to themselves, and take no
Medicines; if they do recover, get rid of their Fevers by Sweating, a
Looseness, an Haemorrhage, Diabetes, or the like: From whence HIPPOCRATES, and
the ancient Practitioners in Physic, took their first Intimation to provoke
Sweat and the other Evacuations. And from their repeated Observations and
Successes, they have formed for us, a most rational Method of Cure. And if we
duly consider, and attend to the different Ways by which Nature extricates
herself from Diseases, when left to herself; we shall soon be convinced, that
they are not the confused and disordered Effects of Nature, ill defending
herself; but, in fact, the gradual, steady, and measured Operations of that
exquisite Mechanism, and innate, incessant Principle of Self-preservation, with
which Providence has been pleased to endow our Bodies: A very strong
Confirmation of the Necessity of a careful and diligent Observance of the
Tendencies of Nature, in all her Disorders; and the Method she takes to get rid
of Diseases, when left to herself: And also, a very good Caution to us all, not
to be over hasty, or too busy in the Administration of our Remedies; lest we
should be found to ruffle and disturb, rather than assist Nature, with the
untimely Use, or Multitude of our Medicines. And really, the Ne quid nimis, in
the Practice of Physic, is a Matter of no small Consequence. He therefore, in
my Opinion, is most likely to prove the best, most prudent, and rational
Physician, who most diligently observes, and constantly follows, the Motions,
and Dictates of Nature herself.

IF an altogether new Distemper should at any time arise among us, the only Way
of getting into the Nature of such new Disease, would be to copy HIPPOCRATES's
Example; I mean, his Method of observing, joined to the Rule of finding out the
Nature of Diseases: For we must, first, be led by Symptoms to find a Disease;
after that it is Nature, and from thence the Method of Cure. And here it may be
proper to observe, that there are several Seasons, which have Diseases peculiar
to themselves; and may, in some measure, indeed, be called new Diseases: It
will therefore be necessary to know, and carefully observe the Seasons, as
HIPPOCRATES, and, our renowned Countryman, SYDENHAM advise; wherein such
Diseases are wont to appear; otherwise we shall be unsuccessful in curing the
Diseases peculiar to those different Seasons. It must also be observed, that
these Diseases are generally stated, and regular in each Constitution, and have
an Affinity to each other: He therefore, who is able to come at the Nature and
Cure of one Epidemical Distemper, in any Constitution, has an Advantage in the
Cure of all the other. For though they may differ in several respects, yet they
require something common in their Cure, as proceeding from a common Cause. And
a few Cases diligently enquired into, by recollecting and carefully examining
their Symptoms, as directed by our Method of discovering the Nature of
Diseases; will be sufficient to give us the Nature, Causes, and Method of Cure,
of the Disease of every Constitution whatever. Here we can by no means omit a
pertinent Observation of CELSUS: Quod si jam incidat Mali genus aliquod
ignotum, non ideo tamen fore Medico de rebus cogitandum obscuris; sed eum
protinus visurum, cui morbo id proximum sit; tentaturumque remedia fimilia
illis, quae vicino malo saepe succurrerint, and per ejus similitudinem opem
reperturum.

THE many accurate and charming Descriptions of Distempers, delivered down to
us by HIPPOCRATES in his Histories of Diseases; wherein the Phenomenon of each
Distemper, even in its minutest Circumstances, are observed; present us with a
most exquisite Delineation of Nature: and if duly attended, will always be
found, of the greatest Service for advancing our Progress in the Art of
Healing. Because, from his Diagnostics in particular, and others of the
Ancients, and such among the Moderns, who have closely copied after His manner;
we readily discover the Nature of the Disease. And as, whenever we arrive at
the true and exact History of any Distemper, whether from Books, or our own
careful Observations; we may, at all times, by the right and diligent
Application of the Method of Investigation, most assuredly discover the
immediate and conjunct Cause; so may we likewise, on those Principles, easily
come at the Nature of the Disease; when, having that given, it will be no
difficult matter to find out Remedies to Cure, in all curable Cases; and to
administer Relief, even in those, which are incurable.

THIS unwearied Diligence in Observation, and close Attendance on Nature in
that sagacious, great Man HIPPOCARTES, and others of the Ancients; might
probably be heightened in them, from the Scantiness of their Materia Medica,
and the exceeding Harshness of the then known Remedies; however, much to our
Benefit: since the excellent Descriptions of Diseases they have given us, can
not only never be exceeded, but will always remain invariably true, while Human
Nature continues the same. And had those of later Ages, who have been so
happily provided with a more copious and salutary Materia Medica; and who, it
must be allowed, have been greatly improved in the Knowledge of the Animal
Economy: had these, I say, constantly persevered in the Use of HIPPOCRATES'S
great Diligence and Manner of observing; they might, doubtless, long ago, have
brought the Practice of Physic to a considerable Degree of Perfection; though
they had not been blessed with his extraordinary Sagacity: For that, indeed, is
a peculiar Happiness, and the Lot of a very few; in which Particular, I
believe, we may say of the Physician, as is commonly done of the Poet:
Nascitur, non fit.

Now, should we of this Age, flushed with our superior Knowledge in the Animal
Economy, and the Variety of our Materia Medica; neglect to make use of that
Prudence and Diligence, which is necessary in attending the Motions and
Intentions of Nature; and, instead of endeavoring to assist her on these
Principles, when oppressed, become too precipitate and officious, in the
Administration of our Medicines; the Consequence will inevitably be, that we
shall only obscure the Disease, by multiplying, rather than taking off the
Symptoms; and this to our own personal Confusion, the manifest Injury of our
Patients, and the great Disrepute of our Profession. Whereas, would we consult
the true and proper Use of the many happy Improvements of our own Age, I think,
it cannot be done more effectually, than by keeping close to our most skilful
Leader, HIPPOCRATES; together with the ancient Practitioners in Physic, in
their Manner of observing, and in their Method of healing; founded upon the
Knowledge of the conjunct Causes of Distempers, from whence alone, the curative
Indications are to be taken: agreeable to the Method here mentioned, and
HIPPOCRATES'S Manner of observing. And by a careful Perseverance in these
Methods, I imagine, we may reasonably hope for the greatest Success; and may,
perhaps, in a few Ages, arrive at the highest Perfection in the Practice of
Physic, that human Nature is capable of attaining.

FROM what I have already advanced, you will naturally conclude, that it is no
easy Matter to become a prudent and skilful Physician: Much Reading, much
Thought and Pains will really be required; many Things are necessary to be
learnt* much Diligence in Inquiry, much Assiduity in Observation is to be used,
before we can be duly qualified, either with Peace of Mind to ourselves, or
Relief to our Patients, to undertake a Trust, in which the Lives of our
Fellow Creatures are so nearly concerned.

IF this be a just State of the Case, what shall we say of those Persons, who
boldly take upon them the Practice of Physic, without the least previous
Knowledge of the Requisites absolutely necessary for the regular Discharge of
this important Office? Certainly it can be no other than the greatest Folly,
and the highest Presumption, for Those to expect Success, or hope for a
Blessing on their Endeavors; who are altogether ignorant of the Province in
which they engage: And would such Persons but give themselves Time to reflect,
and seriously consider, the great Consequence of Physic, in the practical Part
of it; where Life itself is so immediately at stake: I am persuaded, they would
not thus rashly venture to administer Medicines, before they had acquired the
proper and necessary Qualifications.

IT is a mighty Mistake, that has seized some of our young Candidates in
Physic, who are not much addicted to Study or Pains-taking, to imagine: That,
if they are but well furnished with Books of Recipes, they have every
Qualification sufficient to commence Doctor upon; because in those Books, as
they think, agreeable to the common Saying, they are sure to find a Salve for
every Sore. But, alas! these base, empirical Books, the Pest of the present
Age, will greatly deceive them. They are by no means to be confided in; but, on
the contrary, are rather to be looked upon as very injurious: Forasmuch as they
only furnish all Sorts of People, with great Opportunities of destroying each
other's Health. And should any Person pretend to set up to practice Physic on
this deceitful Foundation, He would soon find himself miserably misled; to the
great and manifest Injury of Himself, as well as his Patients. For it is most
certain, that every Medicine, be it never so good, must always be administered
in the most proper Dose, and at the most proper Times of the Disease, to make
it of any Advantage to the Patient; but the Chance of the Mischief arising from
the contrary Practice, no one, I think, would covet: Yet this Knowledge can no
otherwise be come at, than in the arduous and diligent Manner of studying
abovementioned; joined with the Method of Investigating the Nature of
Diseases. Not that this is the only Advantage, which follows on our Doctrine of
Investigation; fince it not only leads us into the true Nature of the Disease,
and the certain Method of Cure; but also, at the same time, into the very
Nature and Power of Medicines themselves, if rightly attended to and applied.
And were it possible, even to find out an Universal Remedy for all Distempers;
it must still be subject to the due Timeing and Dosing; the accurate Knowledge
of which, can no otherwise be obtained, than by the Manner and Method already
laid down. And this, indeed, is the only real and true Arcanum, in the Practice
of Physic. All your Panaceas, Nostrums, Specifics, and the like; without this
perfect Knowledge of administering them, in the most proper Dose, and at the
most proper Times of the Disease, will, for the most part, prove very
mischievous. And here the Opinion of the late learned Professor BOERHAAVE
concurs with us: Nec speciosos Medicamentorum titulos Morbis addidi. Cur? Nihil
Arti exitiale magis novi; neque vero ipse ullum cognosco, quin solo tempestivo
Usu tale fiat. BOERHAAVE in Epistola Aphorismis praefixa.
And these Remedies can only, by the greatest Hazard and Chance imaginable,
ever prove of good Effect, in any Disease of Consequence: Though we all know,
indeed, that, in many Cases, let the Medicine given be ever so improper in
itself, or ever so unseasonably administered; the Strength of Nature may
sometimes get the better of both. But this is by no means Curing; nor can it be
any Excuse for our Ignorance.

HAVING thus prepared you for the Method to be observed in finding out the
Distemper; I shall now proceed to give it you, in the plainest, and most
methodical Manner, I am able.

I CANNOT introduce, what I have to offer on this Head, with greater Advantage,
than by laying before you, the following practical Observation of SCHEFFLER: Ut
Rationalis Medicus curativis Scopis satisfacere, Materias Medicas invenire,
inventis recte uti valeat: non satis erit, Vires custodire, and morbificas
Causas amovere; sed and Morbi Speciem, and Locum affectum exquisite cognitum
habeat, necesse est.

AGREEABLE with this, you will observe that, in order to Cure any Disease, it
is necessary to have a thorough Knowledge of the Disease itself, and of the
Remedy peculiarly adapted to it; it being impossible to cure a Disease
according to Art, if the Nature of the Disease be hid from the Artist: And for
want of this Knowledge, the Care and Pains of many Physicians have proved
ineffectual. For these Physicians, for the most part, making little other Use
of the Diagnostic Symptoms, than the mere naming the Distemper only; have, very
injudiciously, taken their Indications of Cure, from secondary and casual
Symptoms: Whereas the true Nature of a Disease is ever best found out, from the
Diagnostic Signs or Marks alone; and from thence also, the true Indications of
Cure, must always be drawn, in order to the best and most effectual Method of
curing the Disease. And as these Indications wholly arise from our Reasoning
upon the Observations of the Phenomenon of Nature; therefore, the greater our
Knowledge of the Animal Economy is, the better we shall be enabled to find out
the Nature of the Disease. For it is the Animal Economy alone, which must
enable us, by reasoning upon the Causes, Signs, and Symptoms of Diseases, to
find out their Natures, and to deduce true and just Indications of Cure.

THIS, however, in general; more expressly: To come at the true Method of
investigating all Diseases, incident to the Human Body; and from thence proceed
to the most effectual Methods of treating and curing them; the solid Knowledge
of the following Particulars is absolutely required, viz.

1. The next, and ever-concomitant Cause of the Disease. 2. The Seat and Part
affected. 3. The Ways and Passages, through which the Evil takes its Course. 4.
The inseparable Signs of the Distemper. 5. The Symptoms, which commonly
accompany the Disease; and 6. That we be careful the Symptoms of the Disease
are rightly distinguished.
IF we err not in these main Points, we are in the right Way of arriving to an
happy Cure of the Disease.

IT is very necessary at all times, carefully to distinguish between the
Disease itself, and the Symptom; the want of which has been the Stumblingstone
of some, even very learned Men, in all Ages: Since it is to be imputed to the
want of this Distinction, as a principal, if not the only Obstacle; that
Physicians have been so much at a Loss, for the true Cause of the Disease, and
have therefore so often taken the Symptom for the Disease itself; not rightly
distinguishing the next, and immediate conjunct Cause, from its Symptoms or
Accidents; which may not be occasioned by the next, and always accompanying
Cause of the Disease, but by some other Symptom; and what is so far from being
the Mark of the Disease, that it is a Symptom of a Symptom only.

IN the Toothache, for Example, when it does not proceed from a Caries; the
genuine Essence of this Disease, is the violent Distension or Stretching of the
Periostium, by some sort of Humor; by which means this Membrane, being forced
out of its natural Form and Situation, excites a most exquisite Pain; which
Pain is not the Disease, but the true Mark of the Disease; and the Humor
occasioning this Pain, the Cause of the Disease. The Inflammation, Fever,
swelled Face, etc. which may succeed, are neither of them the true Mark; but
proceed from the Pain, which is the true Diagnostic Sign or Mark of the
Disease; each of the abovementioned being the Symptom of a Symptom only.

Of the DIAGNOSTICS or SIGNS of a Disease.
THE true Marks or Signs of a Disease are such, which are present from the
Beginning, and, as it were, born with the Disease; they grow up with the
Distemper to it is height; abate also, and vanish with the Disease. These are
the only sure Marks or Signs: other Signs or Symptoms, which do not immediately
follow the Disease, nor any proper Effects of it; and which do not always
appear in the Disease, are therefore deceitful Signs, and not to be trusted to;
though such as have, inadvertently, misled some, even sagacious Men.

NOW, these deceitful Signs are not to be reckoned among the proper Symptoms of
the Disease; being only such as proceed from some proper Symptom of the
Disease; and are, indeed, Symptoms of Symptoms only. For the true, and proper
Diagnostic Marks or Signs of the Disease, must always begin, grow up, decline
and vanish with the Disease itself; and, from such Marks only, we must ever
draw our Indications of Cure.

Of the SYMPTOMS of a Disease.
AS to the Symptoms of any Disease, the first Business is to distinguish the
Symptoms in general, from the Disease itself; and then to make a Distinction
between the Symptoms themselves: That is, the Symptoms which arise and vanish
with the Disease, are to be distinguished from those, which are bred, not from
the Disease itself, but from the Symptoms of the Disease: And the Symptoms, as
we before observed, which immediately accompany the Disease, and are born and
die with it; are the only sure Marks or Signs of the Disease.

TO illustrate this by our former familiar Instance of the Toothache: Here the
Pain is the chief and most grievous Symptom, but is neither the Disease itself,
nor the Cause of the Disease; nor, yet, is it a simple Symptom only, forasmuch
as it is the Cause of other Symptoms, which succeed; as the Fever,
Inflammation, swelled Face, etc. especially when the Pain is violent. Those
several Accidents, now mentioned, are caused only by the raging Pain of the
Toothache (the true Mark of the Disease) and are Symptoms of a Symptom only.
And farther, these Accidents of Fever, Inflammation, swelled Face, etc. are
neither in whole, nor in part, the Cause of the Toothache; neither are they
inseparable Companions of the Toothache; for the Toothache may be, and often
is, without them. And the swelled Face, in particular, does not begin, nor end
with the Disease; nor does it always accompany it; nor is it of the same Nature
with the Humor, occasioning that violent Pain, but is a Symptom only of the
Toothache; being raised by the Pain, and bred by Consent of Parts from an
Afflux of Humors.

THUS you see plainly the Method of investigating the Nature and Causes of a
Disease; it is Seat and Part affected; it is Diagnostic Symptoms; and the
Necessity of distinguishing these latter, not only from the Disease itself, but
also from one another: All which will make way to judge the better of a fit
Remedy to cure the Disease; for we cannot reasonably hope for a Cure, before
the Disease be thoroughly understood. And in this manner we must come at the
Nature, Cause, and Cure of all Diseases whatever. -- And, indeed, Diseases have
that surprising Analogy to one another, that we cannot find the Nature of any
one Disease; but the Nature of several other will, by the same means, become
manifest to us. So that a general Knowledge arises from a particular Inquiry;
and we are instructed from the Discovery of any one, into the Nature of many
other Diseases, and the most perfect Practice in Curing them.

FROM this Method also of finding out the Distemper, is discovered, at the same
time, the only Way of making a right and true Prognostic; which is only a
Declaration of a Physician's Expectation in curing a sick Person. And this
Expectation can no otherwise be truly framed, than from the Nature of the
Disease; the Quantity and Intenseness of it; the natural Strength of the Sick;
and the Power of Medicines conjunctly. The Knowledge therefore of Prognostics
is not otherwise to be acquired, than by rightly investigating the Diagnostic
Marks of a Disease, whereby it is Nature is discovered; with that the Quantity
of the Disease, and the Strength of the Sick, at the same time. And as by this
Method, we are also led into the Nature, and Power of Medicines themselves; so
here again, the very Medicine reflects Light, and, in some measure, confirms
the Knowledge of the Disease; as HIPPOCRATES well observes: The Medicine
declares the Disease.

THIS then is the Method, by which the Nature of all Diseases, to which human
Bodies are, or may be liable, is discovered. And should ever any altogether
new, and unheard of Disease, at any time, appear amongst us; this will be found
the sure way of coming at it is Nature: by only thus carefully recollecting, and
examining its Symptoms. Again, this will of Consequence direct to the most
proper Method of Curing; the Knowledge of a Disease being the first Step
toward its Cure.

"ALL the Difficulty of Philosophy," says the great Sir ISAAC NEWTON, "seems to
consist in this: From the Phenomenon of Motions to investigate the Forces of
Nature; and then, from these Forces, to demonstrate the other Phenomenon."

AGREEABLE to which, we observe: That the Symptoms of any Disease being given,
it is Nature may readily be discovered.

NOW the Method of curing Diseases, by drawing Indications from the evident and
conjunct Causes, has been most approved of by the best and Generality of
Physicians. To this purpose CELSUS: Rationalem quidem puto Medicinam esse
debere: instrui vero ab evidentibus Causis; obscuris omnibus, non a Cogitatione
Artificis, sed ab ipsa Art rejectis. As to the Knowledge of these Causes, it
is allowed, they can only be attained by a close and assiduous Observation of
all the Appearances in the several Stages of the Distemper: Whoever therefore
is Master of an exact Knowledge in the Histories of Diseases, having also due
Regard to the Diagnostics, as by our Method directed; may readily investigate
their Nature. Natural Philosophy and the History of Diseases, as we observed
before, must ever go hand in hand in improving the Art of Healing; it not being
possible to make any great Use of the latter, without some Degree of Knowledge
in the former: and the greater our Knowledge is in the Animal Economy, the
better the Nature of Diseases will be known.

I HAVE always found, the keeping close to this Method of investigating the
Nature of Diseases, of the greatest Use to me in the Course of my Practice. For
having long since drawn up our Method from the most approved Authors in Physic,
Ancient and Modern; I have constantly applied it, not only to all those
Histories of Diseases, which I read in Authors, whose Descriptions of evident
Causes, Signs, and Symptoms are just; where the several Species of the same
Disease are judiciously distinguished; but also to all those Diseases, together
with their several Appearances, I have at any time met with among my Patients.
And I am verily persuaded, that you, Gentlemen, will likewise reap the same
Advantage, by the Use and Application of our Method, if duly attended, in your
future Practice; as well to the great Relief of your Patients, as the abundant
Satisfaction of your own Minds.

NOW, in order the more strongly to inculcate on your Minds this most necessary
and useful Method of investigating, we will here again give it you in a closer
Manner, and in a somewhat different Light; setting out with an Observation of
LOMMIUS: Noscere Morbum proximus est ad Sanitatem Gradus: Nemo sane hanc aut
praesagire, aut reddere affectis recte potest, qui non animadvertere Genus
Aegritudinis, quod sit; non ejus Eventum omnem praenunciare, certis Indiciis
norit.

WE said before, that the Symptoms of any Disease being given, it is Nature may
be discovered.

NOW, the Symptoms of every Disease are no other than the Effects of some
Cause, or some Number of Causes, which pervert and overturn the natural Actions
of one or more Parts; for which reason by explaining these Symptoms, we become
apprised of the perverted Action, or discover the Disease: for nothing can be
the Cause of a Disease, that does not produce the Symptoms, in which the Nature
of the Disease consists.

WHEREFORE, the Symptoms of any Disease being given, it is Nature may thence be
discovered: And the Nature of a Disease being assigned, we have also the
Methods of curing it. Farther, having the Nature and Causes of any Disease, we
shall be able to determine how far the Disease is curable or incurable; the
Probabilities of curing any Distemper; and the most proper Methods of
attempting it.

NOW the Ancients, as we have already observed, having accurately described the
Diagnostic Signs or Marks of Diseases, together with their most natural and
simple Appearances; whoever is thoroughly acquainted with the Histories, as
delivered down to us by them, and is accurate, or well versed in the Structure
and Nature of the Fluids and Solids of the Human Body; may, from their
Diagnostic Signs, in particular, be able to discover the Nature and Seat of the
Disease, and the Way it is produced. By the same means also, he will have it in
his Power to show in what manner, the Symptoms attending the Disease do flow
from it is Nature, thus found out from it is Symptoms; and likewise be capable of
perceiving how those Symptoms give way, or are cured, by changing the
distempered Condition of the Parts affected.

IN this Examination of the Nature of the Disease from it is Symptoms, we must
be most careful, that every casual and foreign Symptom be separated from the
constant and permanent, in the manner the Method, more at large, directs; it
being easy by observing the Rule there laid down, to distinguish the constant
and inseparable Symptoms from those, which are merely casual and secondary.

THE principal Symptoms are, for the most part, casy to be explained; the false
Symptoms are most commonly found among the secondary Sort, and are the Symptoms
of Symptoms only; for which reason they ought to be rejected from the Number of
Symptoms properly belonging to the Disease.

INDICATIONS of Cure must be drawn from the Nature of the Disease, and not from
their precarious and supposed Causes; nor from their adventitious and casual
Symptoms: And there must run an uninterrupted Chain, from the Diagnostic Signs
of the Disease, through it is Nature and Causes, 'till it ends in a rational and
evident Method of Cure.

THUS we see that, in order to cure any Disease, the most natural, easy, and
practical Way, is first, to collect the most constant Symptoms and Effects of
the Disease. But in doing this, we must always remember; that our utmost
Diligence will be absolutely necessary, rightly to distinguish the Symptoms:
That in our collecting the genuine Diagnostic Signs of any Disease, we never
suffer the secondary Signs, or Symptoms of Symptoms, to creep into the Number
of the genuine Diagnostic Signs. For, if we do, we shall certainly render our
Inquiries into the true Nature of the Disease, almost fruitless and
impracticable. But, by strictly observing this Caution, we shall readily
discover the Disease, and it is Symptoms; together with the Causes of Both. And
if we can come at the Nature of the Disease, we are about to Cure; there
remains no Difficulty as to the Way of curing, be the Appearances of the
Symptoms ever so various or complicated.

THE direct Method of Cure being thus obvious, the Probabilities of Success
must be, as the Nature of the Distemper we come to Cure, and the Force and
Efficacy of the Medicines we administer, respectively: And if we already know,
or can discover by Practice, the peculiar Ways, in which the Medicines, we make
use of, will act; we shall be thereby instructed, when one Method, or any one
Medicine, is most properly administered; and why it must be continued, or laid
aside: which is the Sum and Substance of Physic.

THE MATERIALS, which compose the Method of Investigating, and finding out the
Nature of Diseases, having been only dispersed in several Parts of the Works of
HIPPOCRATES, CELSUS, and other most approved Authors in Physic, both ancient
and modern; and having never yet, as I know of, been thoroughly collected and
digested into a regular Form: As it may, to this Day, be justly supposed one
great Reason, why those excellent Hints and Admonitions have not, always, been
so duly regarded and attended to, as they certainly deserve; so was it, long
ago, an Incentive to me to throw them together, with some Care and Pains, in
the Method, in which I have now delivered them. And I have, for many Years,
with much Satisfaction and Success, experienced the great Benefit and
Usefulness of so good a Monitor in my own Practice; and I flatter myself, it
may become equally serviceable to others of my Profession, if rightly made use
of: It being the whole Business of the Physician to find out the Distemper, and
from that to draw the Method of Cure; and to know the Power and Efficacy of his
Medicines, together with the true and exact Manner of Timeing and Dosing them,
in each particular Disease, and its Variations.

THIS METHOD, therefore, of investigating the Nature of all Diseases, being the
most natural, most rational, and certain Way of attaining that complete
Knowledge; I think, it may not improperly be esteemed the very Master-Key to
the Knowledge of the Practice of Physic: And I imagine, if thoroughly
understood, and then properly applied, it will most safely conduct us, from the
very Threshold of Physic even to its Consummation; and that, with much greater
Expedition and Success, than any other, hitherto known, Method. And, as it will
be of very great Service to the Beginner; so likewise, will it continue to be
the most useful and necessary Companion, we can associate withal, through the
whole Course of our Practice. Wherefore, that I might make this Method familiar
to you, I have gradually opened it in the Beginning of this Lecture, and have
through the whole variously represented it: More particularly, I have given it
you in two different Views; that I might the more strongly inculcate, and
impress it on your Minds. And, that nothing may be wanting to it is complete
Use; I shall endeavor, in my subsequent Lectures, not only to make it still
more familiar, but also as serviceable as possibly may be, both to yourselves
and Patients; by illustrating it with frequent Examples, and the constant
Application of it to the several Disorders, we shall hereafter be obliged to
treat of. By this means, Gentlemen, I hope, you will be altogether Masters of
the right Use of our Method of Investigation, and the Application of it in all
the Diseases, and the Varieties of them, you may either meet with in Authors,
or observe in your own future Practice.

FOR the rest: I shall take care to direct you, how to judge of the Efficacy
and Powers of Medicines, with their peculiar Way of acting: How to administer
each Medicine in the most proper Dose, and most proper Time of the Disease:
When it may be necessary to alter, entirely change, or continue the Methods and
Medicines: When, and how, properly to Bleed, and apply Blisters, in the several
Stages and Complications of a Distemper. I shall, besides, furnish you with a
select Materia Medica, and Methodus Praescribendi, suitable to each Disease.
This introductory Knowledge, joined to your own necessary Diligence and
constant Attention; will, I apprehend, most effectually qualify you, to
practice with Success, in every Disorder, we shall have occasion to lay before
you in this Part of our Course.

FINIS.

