AN ESSAY ON CUTANEOUS DISEASES, AND ALL IMPURITIES OF THE SKIN.

PROPOSING A SPECIFIC, AND, METHOD OF CURE.

BY JOHN GOWLAND, APOTHECARY TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS FREDERICK, LATE PRINCE OF
WALES, THE PRINCESS DOWAGER OF WALES, AND ALSO TO HIS PRESENT MAJESTY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETORS, NO. 55, LONG ACRE; AND SOLD BY MR.
JOHNSON, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD, AND MR. MURRAY, IN FLEET STREET.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

(Entered at Stationers Hall.)

INTRODUCTION.
INNUMERABLE are the agents which disturb our health, and make us liable to a
wonderful variety of disorders and diseases; and it has ever been the business
of the good Physician to exert his application, study, and diligence, in
proportion to their danger and malignancy -- Physicians, I say, whose lives are
occupied in destroying the existing causes of the different maladies to which
we are subject, and of re-establishing the good order of the animal economy,
are certainly the most noble portion of society, the most useful, and (as
Cicero has expressed himself) "Who nearest approach the Divinity."

Cutaneous Eruptions, although an affection so very general, an affection,
common to all ages, all constitutions, all cities and countries, have, from the
enlightened, received little more than mere theoretical discussion; and thus,
unhappily they are not even yet, advanced a long way in this branch of their
art.

The only reason of their not having made progress in this part of the science,
arises from an error, which, till lately, was universally adopted concerning
the ORIGIN of these diseases.

Every one seemed sure that a vice did exist in the blood, which when carried
to the surface of the body, produced the different morbific appearances: and
each, as vainly endeavored to determine the CHARACTER and QUALITIES of this
imaginary vice; their labors were necessarily abortive, and, as will ever be
the case where the criterion cannot be found, a variety of opinions necessarily
arose.

From these erroneous and false principles they deduced their medical
indications, or, in other terms, their method of cure; and these methods were
not unique, but as numerous and as different, as had been their particular
opinions: consequently, by pursuing the FALSE, the true means were neglected.
This accounts for their backwardness and universal want of success in these
complaints.

The case is now different; I say different, because in those latter times
Physicians have known, that the diseases of the skin, are a local affection,
produced by a depraved and altered secretion of the extreme arterial vessels,
or, the cutaneous glands, which are in a PRETERNATURAL STATE: consequently,
this knowledge has led them to attempt the cure, with topical, or external
medicines. The effects have often corresponded with their expectation; but
often also, their expectations have been frustrated, for want of a SPECIFIC
REMEDY.

Experience only could bring forward this specific, which Physicians, by simple
reasoning alone, never could discover.

As all new doctrines in medicine amount to an impeachment of, and directly
militate against, the judgment and practice of the day in which they are
proposed; they have therefore, not only men's prejudices to encounter, but also
their pride; and frequently, nothing but the determination of the patients
themselves can make their adoption general: this was particularly instanced in
the introduction of the Bark, Inoculation, etc. etc.

The situation of Mr. Gowland, as Apothecary to the Three Royal Households, was
particularly favorable, and gave more frequent occasion to his experience in
the complaints of which we are about to speak, than most others; and he
laudably availed himself at an early stage of this doctrine, with that
alertness, and observation, which eventually produced the specific in question.

He had observed the treatment employed on Miss Chudleigh, by the Physicians
under whose care she was, and the inefficacy, with which it was attended; and
although his Lotion was not administered, until their efforts had failed of
success, its wonderful effects went beyond his own, or even his patient's hopes
For a more particular account see the Proprietor's Eleemosynary Pamphlet.
. This fact alone, was not sufficient to canonize the Lotion and ensure to it
the reputation of SPECIFIC: but a long use, a scrutinizing and judicious
observation, was further necessary. The fact, however, being known, a great
number of afflicted persons, the more readily concurred to try the remedy. This
afforded him the opportunity of verifying and establishing, the vast power of
his Lotion, and at the same time, was the most complete defense of his doctrine
and his reputation, against the invidious attacks of those interested men of
his time, whose practice it so directly militated against.

This happy discovery of Mr. Gowland's has been much more interesting, and more
useful to mankind, than all the volumes written to this day upon Eruptions of
the Skin, as they contain nothing but Theories, and have always been defective
in the most essential part, namely, THE MANNER OF CURING, etc.

It is not enough to SPEAK well upon diseases; the thing more important is to
RELIEVE them.

This recalls to my recollection, the history of those two Greek sculptors, who
were called by the Senate, in order to learn from them, how they would execute
a statue which might be allusive to an hero of Greece, and erect it to his
glory. One of them made a long discourse, which showed him to have an exquisite
taste, and proved, that he was completely master, at least of the theory of his
art: as he finished, the opinion of the other was required; he answered in a
few words, "I will DO what my colleague has SAID;" and he was chosen by the
Senate, because they desired THE WORK, and not a dissertation upon the work.

I have no doubt that many Physicians have spoken with more elegance and
eloquence, upon the impurities of the skin than Mr. Gowland has done -- but Mr.
Gowland RELIEVED HIS PATIENTS.

Nor is this the only advantage enjoyed by him; it will appear, by this essay,
that he was acquainted with the true causes of this disease.

The many reasons and proofs, which both demonstrate his knowledge, and the
truth of the doctrine, have received additional weight, from having since
appeared, in the works of the most enlightened Physicians of the present day,
and which prove incontrovertibly, that the cutaneous affections are mere LOCAL
affections.

It is to be lamented that medical works are chiefly confined to the readings
of medical men; and of course, however indispensable and wholesome, the
doctrine may be, are therefore never thoroughly disseminated, especially, when
repugnant to the general consumption of medicine. How far that has been the
case in what has formerly been written on this subject, is left to the
discernment of the reader. This remark, however, may be made, that, the use of
a Topical Remedy, in cutaneous diseases, must entirely supersede the use of
internal medicine for these complaints; from its pleasantness, ease, and
certainty of cure. Hence some opposition may be expected from the selfish as
well as the ignorant: characters unhappily too common, even in this profession
-- characters, on whom the remark of CICERO should be reversed There exists in
this country a very vulgar, but at the same time a very universal error,
respecting the term Humor; it is never used, or thought of, but we have an
idea of virus or acrimony: whereas the term literally means a fluid, and this
fluid is as likely to be good as bad; the blood itself is a humor; there is
also a fluid or humor of the pericardium, and of all cavities, fit and
necessary for preserving the viscera, etc. from friction, and many others:
these are not morbid or vicious, but absolutely GOOD. The only place in which
the term is generally properly understood is when we speak of the humidity of
the weather, meaning a dampness in the air: here the idea is just, see any
dictionary. "HUMOR, Wet, Moist, Watery. -- HUMIDITY, Moisture. -- HUMID,
Moisture, Watery, etc." And thus the ignorance of charlatans; I say the
ignorance of some, and the wickedness of others, in distorting this senseless
term merely to frighten or alarm us thereby into a course of useless internal
medicine, and instead of forwarding, to deter us from the only means of cure:
falls beneath our pity, and are deservedly objects of our abhorrence and
contempt.


.

In the course of this essay the term SECRETION is of necessity often used: --
on a thorough knowledge, and indeed, intimate acquaintance with this term, and
the exact meaning of it in its fullest extent, depends all the information the
reader can gain; and in proportion to his acquaintance therewith, will be his
information, and acquaintance with the subject.

By the term secretion people generally understand no more than certain
secreted fluids, or matters; without considering AT ALL, the organs that
produce them, or the power of those organs, to alter their properties, from a
natural state, and according to the circumstances, impress them with new
characters, and frequently characters of disease.

By the term SECRETION, physiologists understand a particular operation,
performed by the extremities of arterial vessels, from which results a new
animal product, or in other terms, a fluid which is furnished with new
characters and properties, ("sui generis") and of their own distinct kind: for
instance, the bile is elaborated in the liver, and is not in the blood, nor are
its characters to be found in any other part of the human body. Again, the fat
is not in the blood, but the arteries, which terminate in the cellular
membrane, elaborate and compose it by a secret and inimitable combination of
principles: the poison of vipers is not found in the mass of their fluids, (on
the contrary they are very innocent) but it is created by particular organs
endowed with that power.

The same observation applies to all the secretions, particularly that which
takes place and is performed in the skin, or surface of the body, CALLED
PERSPIRATION.

These operations are themselves very surprising and difficult to be
understood, it is however, enough to know the effects, and these effects are,
as has been observed, generally, of their own proper and natural kind.

Nor is this doctrine confined to animals alone, it is the same in greens,
plants, and flowers themselves; their different colors, smell, taste, etc. are
from a specific combination of parts, the consequence of different secretions.

Since then the EARTH, from which they have their nourishment, has not in
itself, ALL the different principles, qualities, salts, and juices, which they
themselves possess, so it is necessary to allow, that this combination, is the
result of the vessels of those vegetables, adapted to an inherent power in
them, the same as the secretions of animals: and if it is absurd to assert (as
it certainly is) that these different products and matters exist READY
PERFORMED in the earth; so it should be equally absurd to think that the
different secreted fluids in animals exist READY PERFORMED, or that their
characters, are in the BLOOD.

In the perusal of this little work, the intelligent reader, it is presumed,
will find reasoning and fact founded on reflection and experiment, agreeing
with the truest principles of the art, and not on simple speculation: nor is it
doubted but the truth and candor of Mr. Gowland's Essay will entitle his
Specific to that confidence which the experience of fifty years, and the
testimony of thousands, in the first ranks of society, have proved it to
deserve.

THAT the following Pages had been intended for Publication by Mr. GOWLAND in
his lifetime, is evident: -- why it did not take place, we are at a loss to
surmise. They were found among other MS. papers after his death, and have been
submitted in that manuscript to a Gentleman, who, from his philanthropy and
medical talents, is an ornament and a blessing to the Country in which he
lives. The truth of the doctrine, he declared was such, and withal so little
known, that he should regret extremely if it was withheld. This observation
determined the present Proprietors of his specific, on its publication, and
they conceive they are doing no more than their duty, to the public, and to
themselves, in demonstrating also, that this remedy has not suffered any
diminution, or lost any of its virtues, in its mission from the inventor's hand
to their's; in proof of which, they here adduce the following general testimony:

CERTIFICATE OF THE EFFICACY OF THE GENUINE GOWLAND's LOTION, PREPARED BY
ROBERT DICKINSON, UNDER THE INSPECTION OF HIS FATHER-IN-LAW, THOMAS VINCENT.
We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being well satisfied that the use of
the Genuine Gowland's Lotion is calculated, and adequate to cure the most
violent eruptions of the face, etc. and also to cleanse and clear the skin in
general, We seel, as if promoting a general benefit, in permitting the
Proprietors, to refer any person to us who may desire such satisfaction, and
also, in authorizing them thus publicly to use our names.

A. CRUGER, son to the Member of Parliament for Bristol. THO. MAYER, of
Queen-square, Westminster, and Malton, in Yorkshire. RICHARD BETHEL COX,
Craig's-court, Charing Cross. THO. HOLLOWAY, Chancery Lane. PETER CRAWFORD,
York House, Albemarl-street. JAMES BAILY, York House, Albemarl-street. JAMES
FOZARD, Park-lane, ALEX. WEATHERLEY, Crown-and-scepter-court, St. James's.
street. FRANCIS UNDERWOOD, No. 228, High Holborn.
A letter from Mrs. Jane Fountain, of High Street, Maryle-bone, has in it also
this very remarkable passage:

"I have recommended the Lotion for upwards of thirty years to all my female
acquaintance, as a general cleanser and clearer of the skin, and have as
constantly received the thanks of those who have used it."

Mrs. Patterson Anstruther, of Ely House, Fifeshire, and sister-in-law to the
Member of Parliament, has savoured the Proprietors with this very expressive
declaration:

"I have found it^ a great cleanser, and clearer of the skin, though at first
it occasioned rather an alarming scurf. A. P. W. ANSTRUTHER."

The respectability of those testimonies is such as must supersede the
necessity of all further remark.

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
AMONG the Chronical Diseases, the Eruption of the Skin is one affection, the
most common, and, at the same time the least dangerous: it is not preceded by
any causes, capable of inducing a disorder in the animal economy, and those who
are thus afflicted always enjoy the best state of health. This excludes the
idea of that humoral vice, to which some Physicians, ascribe every disorder,
when the cause thereof is unknown to them. Some learned English Physicians,
however, of the present day, have taken away the veil to this species of
imposture, and have brought to light the vacuum that did exist in the
hypothesis of humors; and yet, notwithstanding their efforts, the same
prejudices nevertheless exist, and indeed, are almost general, from their works
having been chiefly confined to the reading of medical men. The humourists have
never been able to support their opinion beyond the most simple conjecture, the
strongest of which is, that the work of Chylification and Sanguification, or of
Chyle and Blood, is often ill performed, and consequently the fluids remove
more or less from their natural state. One might answer these gentlemen, that
if the aliments are not all converted into chyle, the lymphatics or lacteal
vessels of the intestines do not absorb the remainder, and that they refuse
admission to all matters which have either an acid or alkaline quality; that
is, these vessels have a power of attracting what is proper for them, and of
repelling what is not: thus their mouths become shut the instant their outer
extremities are approached by these substances, and except to some violent
medicines, open only to what is neutralised and fit for nutrition. In order to
demonstrate this, we need but observe, that there are always matters in the
intestinal canal, which are naturally in a corrupted state, namely the residium
of the chylification or excrements, and which, are refused upon the same
principle.

There is also in the intestines a quantity of gaz really mixed with the
aliments and chyle; but this is never absorbed by the lymphatics in the pure
state of gaz; I say never, because if it should happen, immediate death would
be the certain consequence of such absorption: in fact, when this gaz, or
ethereal fluid are injected into the cellular of the skin, or into the vessels
of any animal, the most dreadful disorders ensue, and, in general, death
itself. This has been demonstrated by the experiments of the Abbe Vassalli.
And, as to the sanguification, it is demonstrated, that the atmosphere makes
this admirable process, -- changes and converts the fluids into animal
substances, and renders them proper for nutrition: it is for this reason, that
in individuals who have a bad temperament or constitution, the blood is as
good, as in the most robust, and healthy. This fine and precious observation,
is made by Dr. Ballonius, the Hyppocrates of France.

There are also positive vital powers, in the life of the animal, which prevent
the degeneration of humors, as is demonstrated by experiments and facts; from
which it results, that the circulating fluids, though they are not refreshed by
new aliments, preserve themselves innocent. V. Haller Physiolog: -- Tit de fame
et Siti, etc. And lastly, many organs exist in the animal body, which
continually purge and purify the mass of blood, if by any accident
heterogeneous matter should intermix therewith: but without stopping any longer
on this question, I return to my subject.

I have said that the Cutaneous Eruptions do not originate by any acrimony of
the fluids: their proximate cause is an altered secretion, which takes place in
the skin.

That the perspiration be a secretion, sui generis, is a fact which wants no
proof, and it would be ridiculous to doubt, and question, upon any
physiological point so evident as this is. That every secretion is liable to be
changed, and more or less altered, by a variety of circumstances, there are
many instances. Individuals who are seasick, often bring up a great quantity of
bile, which is black and corrosive, and is very far from being in a natural
state. It also happens frequently that children when cutting their teeth have
very fetid Diarrhoea, from the stimulus of the gums communicating with the
intestines. It is an observation of Sydenham, that hysterical women sometimes
vomit bilious and depraved matters, which did not exist before the paroxism in
the stomach nor in the bowels, but which had been separated during the paroxism
itself.

In the same women, as well as in the hypochondriacal, when afflicted by their
maladies, a very copious quantity of urine is instantaneously separated, and it
is as limpid and clear, as spring water. This secretion is the sure, or as
Physicians say, the pathognomonicon sign of this disorder. Sometimes fear alone
will suddenly arrest the menstrua; sometimes anger will provoke an hemorrhage
of the uterus. Grief and sorrow constantly occasion a greater secretion of
bile, and this fluid is sometimes so acrid as to produce convulsions, or the
more dreadful effects of melancholy, or pains in the intestines, or colic; and
if it be by any accident absorbed and brought into circulation, excites some
serious or fatal disorders. The secretion of the milk, by violent pathemata, or
passions of the mind, has been on several occasions stopped, and it often
happens that its qualities are changed and vitiated: in the last case the child
is violently purged, or affected with convulsion-fits, and other indispositions
and disorders. In a word, every organ, which nature has destined to perform any
secretion, is subjected to the influence of the nerves, and as a certain
consequence receives and partakes of all the affections of this system.

Now nothing is more certain, than that those organs, which are supplied with
the greatest share of sensibility, and which have a more intimate connection
(let me say) with the nervous system, will suffer more than other parts in
exact proportion to the closeness of that connection. I will now ask what part
in the animal body, has so much connection with, or dependence on the nerves,
as the skin? Certainly none. It is from the innumerable quantity of nerves
which are interspersed throughout, and actually terminate in the skin See the
Anatomy of the Skin, page 25.
, that this dependence and connection exists, and thus it is that the
anxieties, emotions, and troubles of the mind, -- the morbific state of the
viscera, the toothache, a bad digestion, and a hundred other CAUSES, are
capable of influencing the transpiration, and thereby materially affecting the
health of the skin; besides, that the action of the atmosphere must be
calculated, and considered, as one of the most obvious, and powerful agents.

The causes last spoken of, do not always act; for instance, they do not act
when the tone of the Cutaneous vessels is above the irritability of the
muscular fiber; and sometimes, although an impression be made upon those
vessels, nevertheless no eruption takes place, because in this case, the other
secretions are augmented, in the same proportion, as the cutaneous secretion is
diminished: This is especially observable in cold weather Every person must
have remarked in themselves an unusual discharge of urine under this
circumstance of cold.
. Hyppocrates says -- Cutis densitas ventris laxitas. It is not only by the
belly that this compensation of secretion is executed, but the Reins are also
another Canal, by which the superfluous fluids are commonly evacuated.

Persons of an irritable temper, a great mobility, a fine a delicate skin, and
a disposition to the cutaneous eruptions, suffer very much from the humidity
and vicissitudes of the air, and every kind of irritation. The animal powers in
such individuals are very often insufficient to prevent the disorders in
question.

One reflection ought here to be made; it is, that a great number of persons
are ignorant of the cause of their complaint, although it really exists in
themselves; but where the causes are so extremely numerous, it cannot be
expected I should enumerate them all: yet in order to be understood, I shall
instance a few facts, and at the same time observe, that the effects frequently
remain, when the primary cause has ceased.

There are many women, who, in certain delicate circumstances, are frequently
troubled with efflorescences, pimples, etc. in their faces, hands, legs, etc.
but who, not perceiving any sensible unusual trouble, or inconvenience, do not
immediately think of the stimulus that exists in the internal organs, and are
therefore far from conceiving it to be the cause of the present cutaneous
affection.

A great eater, who vigorously executes all the functions of life, and is
perfectly well, never suspects that his stomach is stimulated by the farrago of
aliments, with which it is continually assailed; but seeing the surface of his
body covered with eruptions, is disposed to attribute them to any cause rather
than the true one. But there is a variety of stimulus, of which our internal
organs are sensible, that we do not perceive; thus, we have no sense of the
stimulus excited by the blood circulating in the heart, nor of that which the
juices of the stomach occasion in its nervous membrane, and which the bile and
other juices, occasion in the intestines, etc. etc.

If these different stimulus, and many others, I do not speak of, are
increased, and become violent, then not only the proper organ where the
specific fluids are separated and collected, but other parts, are, by sympathy,
sensible thereof, without any knowledge or consciousness of the mind. It is
from effects that a knowledge of the wonderful laws of the animal economy is
obtained; and in order to prevent mankind's being any longer mistaken, as to
the real sources of cutaneous eruptions, I have endeavored to explain them the
more fully, that they may be the better understood.

I have said, that the sensibility and mobility of the arterial vessels are so
very great In the Anatomy of the Skin, page 25, it is seen, that all the nerves
of the body interweave themselves and actually terminate in the skin.
, that they sympathize, extremely, with all the nervous system, but,
particularly with the stomach, the intestines, and the womb, etc. and also, of
the peculiar influence, which, the passions of the mind, affecting the nerves,
have upon the skin; nor, must we forget what is still greater, the action of
the atmosphere, to which the face, particularly, is always exposed. Since then,
there are so many agents to disturb the functions of the skin, it is not
extraordinary to see the surface of the body, and particularly the face, so
often affected with lumps, blotches, pimples, efflorescence, herpeys, etc. etc.
-- indeed, it would be more extraordinary if it was otherwise.

The action of stimulus, directed now to one part, and now to another, gives
occasion to partial eruption, and the character of this eruption differs,
according to the nature of the stimulus, its duration, and, of the sensibility
of the person affected.

These appearances, sometimes, resemble scorbutic spots, and the practitioner,
not well instructed, often confounds the one with the other, but without
reason; because the real symptoms of scurvy, never attend the affections we are
speaking of.

It is truly important to determine the true cause of this disorder, for, from
hence, one ought to deduce the medical indications; and I have endeavored, in
my little work, to fix this point, assisted by reason, experience, and
authority.

In order then, to demonstrate the severe consequences which obtain, by a wrong
and false principle, we need but reflect upon the ordinary method of humourists
in the case in question; they always begin by purging and bleeding, and so
prepare the body to the use of remedies, which they call sweeteners and
balsamicks.

This plan is as infamous as their theory, as it serves merely to weaken more
and more the constitution, and, from hence, the cutaneous affections take a
greater extent, and its character becomes more hurtful, severe, and uneasy.
Experience so fatal ought to teach them to renounce a practice which is always
useless, and frequently dangerous.

Another remark must be made on the method of humorists; it is, that they
attempt to cure in the same manner all the unhappy persons which fall into
their hands, however various may have been the cause. If in their opinion an
acrimony does exist, it cannot be the same in all individuals; nay, it must
extremely differ from one another from their tempers, constitution, age,
customs, and passions, and, to be corrected, its nature should be known, etc.
It is another argument of the absurdity of the treatment employed by the
humorists, and is also, equally a proof, that they have not an idea, nor just
nor false, of the acrimony which they undertake, and pretend to destroy, and,
that they exercise the art blindly.

The good practitioners, instead of occupying themselves, to correct an
imaginary vice of the blood, direct their thoughts to the skin, as there is the
focus and seat of the disorder.

The qualities of the eruption are not always the same, nay, they differ
materially, not only in different subjects, but also in the same individual;
for a person may have spots, herpeys, blotches, etc. etc. all at the same time,
which could not happen if the vice was in the blood, for then they would be all
of the same species of eruption, which is not here necessary, as it proceeds
from an altered secretion, and this secretion is not every where the same, but
changes in different parts in the same body, because every part, nay, every
point of the body, is furnished with ITS OWN sensibility, and as the
physiologists say, " Sua fruntur vita."

It might seem contradictory and paradoxical, that we should propose one remedy
as the specific in all these cases; but it is not so, for we are NOT intending
by THIS remedy to attack the bad qualities of the matters which occasion the
local disorder, because we know not their intrinsic nature; there is another
way for us to take that is more short, easy, and at the same time sure; it is
to alter the action of the vessels which prepare it improperly, -- IT IS TO
CHANGE THE CUTANEOUS SECRETION, by applying to the vessels themselves. The
small arteries which filtrate the perspirable matter, are affected with spasm;
I say, with spasm, for I see that the remote causes of the eruption act upon
the skin as stimulants; and I observe, that, if the stimulus be momentary, the
eruptions almost always disappear spontaneously, with swiftness and facility.
When the stimulus has been of long continuation, the spasm continues though the
stimulus has subsided, and EXISTS NO MORE.

From the foregoing reflections, it is easy to perceive, that the principal
indication in the cutaneous affections is TO RESOLVE THE SPASM, from which the
preternatural secretion depends, and to give a bland tone to the cutaneous
vessels.

The Lotion produces this effect, by calming the spasmodic contraction, and
restoring the tone of the excretories, and the cutaneous vessels.

It often happens, that in the first moments, the use of the Lotion increases
the eruption, because the action of the skin becomes more easy and natural:
this symptom, besides being demonstrative and satisfactory, announces always a
very quick recovery.

Generally the recovery is not rapid, but comes on slowly, and in proportion as
the vessels approach their former state, and usual manner of acting.

THE ANATOMY OF THE SKIN.
ITS IMPURITIES, AND THE CAUSES THEREOF.
NATURE has been no less bountiful and attentive to the structure of the
external covering, than to the more noble parts of our frame; it is no less
remarkable for its general use, than for its beauty; it is composed of two
parts, viz. the epidermis, or scarf-skin, which is the external, and the cutis,
or true skin, which is underneath: the first is inorganic; the other is, what
anatomists call highly organized, being made up of arteries, veins, and nerves,
and exquisitely formed to convey to the mind, the various impressions we
receive, which impressions, we call feeling.

It is beset with many small glands, for separating the perspirable matter, and
with others also, which furnish a different and a more mucilaginous fluid,
contained in a fine reticular, or network substance, between the outward and
inward skins, to sheath the nerves from injury, and regulate the sense of
feeling, which would, without such protection, be too exquisite. The internal
surface becomes insensibly of a less firm texture, and at length degenerates
into the cellular membrane; a great number of arteries, and still greater
number of veins, extend themselves within its substance; the lymphatics
distributed upon it, are also very numerous, as well as the nerves, the
extremities of which evade the observation of the most discerning anatomists.

The scarf, or outward skin, is a very fine transparent membrane, in the
composition of which, neither vessels or fibers are observable; it is, in
itself, not endued with a sense of feeling, -- easily separated from the parts
beneath, -- is renewable when it peels off, or is destroyed by any accident; --
it is pierced by an infinite number of pores, which afford a passage to the
hairs, and in which, terminate, the lymphatics and excretory ducts of the
sebaceous glands; it is preserved soft and supple, by the mucus secretion below
it, and by the perspirable matter opening on it, through those innumerable
pores. It is generally imagined by anatomists, that, this membrane is formed by
the condensation of a fluid, furnished by the extremities of the capillary
arteries.

Under the true skin, and over the muscles, Nature has placed another covering,
called the membrana cellularis, or cellular membrane; between this membrane and
the true skin, lie a number of small glands, called sebaceous glands: these
glands have one or more excretory ducts, every where opening on the surface of
the skin, through which is transmitted the fluid the glands secret, to
lubricate the skin, and keep it lax, and a very important office they do
perform. Other glands separate a fatty matter of the skin, of the nature of
suet, and these are found, in those parts of the body, which are most exposed
to the action of the air; in other parts it does not contain any.

The skin is capable of being distended, and of contracting itself to a
surprising degree; it has a variety of uses; but we shall confine ourselves to
that one only, which is most particularly interesting to our subject, namely,
the secretion of the matter of perspiration. I must not here be understood as
speaking of a fluid floating in, and circulating with the blood, but, of a
fluid which the vessels and glands themselves prepare and elaborate, upon
which, they impress characters of a greater, or lesser, degree of malignity,
according to the degree of stimulus with which they are oppressed. This matter,
in its natural state, is only a watery fluid, but when by any exciting cause,
its quantity is increased, its nature is changed, and it immediately appears to
contain a saline principle, along with a certain quantity of inflammable air.

In acute diseases, convulsions, and epilepsy, its alterations are frequently
very remarkable, so that its smell becomes disgusting and intolerable. From
numberless other causes, it frequently happens, that this secretion is
wonderfully changed, so that the matter furnished by it, adheres to, and
corrodes the skin, and forms a chronic cutaneous disease.

This last subject, is meant to be investigated in this Treatise.

OF CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS.
THE appearance, of cutaneous eruptions, varies considerably, either on account
of the different sensibility of the persons affected, or, of the different
character of the secreted fluid.

Sometimes they present themselves, as a red efflorescence, under which a white
powder is formed, which, after some time, falls off, and leaves the skin
apparently healthy; the efflorescence, however, again makes its appearance, and
again goes off in the same way. These alterations continue for life, unless
cured by a topical remedy.

At other times, there are very small pustules or pimples, like millet-seed,
filled with a transparent water, which when shed, condenses and forms crusts or
scabs; these detach themselves, but the skin underneath being inflamed, pours
out fresh matter, which undergoes the same change as the first.

Sometimes, likewise, there are pustules, containing serum, which at first is
white, then becomes yellow, excudes, and is converted into crusts; at other
times the disease puts on the appearance and symptoms of the itch. What is
called black worms frequently appear on the nose, the chin, the cheek bones,
etc. this is the sebaceous matter of the glands, obstructed and lodging in the
ducts, which when squeezed out, have the appearance of worms; the blackness at
the outward extremity is dirt, too much insinuated to wash off; and the reason
they infest these parts particularly, is owing to the ducts being larger on
those extremities than in other parts.

And lastly, in other instances, there is only a redness in the skin, or spots,
which prove extremely troublesome, from the itching which attends them.
Sensations of pricking and itching almost constantly attend diseases of this
nature, and it scarcely ever happens, that they go off of themselves.

That these diseases of the skin, are, in general, simply local affections, was
an opinion entertained by Dr. Cullen, one of the most enlightened Physicians of
the present age; and from the numerous remote causes, it evidently appears,
that a DEPRAVED SECRETION, in the cutaneous capillary arteries, and the vicious
elaborated matter, by the cutaneous glands, are the proximate cause of the
disease.

I. This acrid and corrosive matter, could not exist in the mass of blood,
without exciting grievous disorders in the animal economy; but, as the latter
does not exist, there is not any reason for supposing the existence of the
former.

II. Those persons who are subject to eruption, generally enjoy good health,
and execute their functions without inconvenience.

III. Those who have a bad constitution, and in whom one might, with some
appearance of probability, suppose an acrimony existing in their fluids, are
least of all subject to eruptions. They are never met with in cases of
chlorosis and cachexy.

IV. The eruption is generally confined to some one particular part; as to the
nose, the cheeks, the breast, or the extremities, but almost, always, to the
face alone.

If it were true, that the arteries received from the blood, the matter which
occasioned the eruption, and that they discharge it upon the surface of the
body, why do they not discharge it in equal proportion upon every part of it?
Would it not be absurd to suppose, that the artery A, or the artery B alone,
should have a power of selecting, every thing viciated, from the general mass,
whilst all the other vessels of the system receive their blood from the same
source?

V. Cutaneous disorders, are not peculiar to any particular class of
individuals, but attack all without distinction.

Thus, we meet with them alike, in the voluptuary, and the ascetic; in those
who are little sensible to the allurements of wine, or the still softer ones of
love; in those who do not work, as in those who do: in a word, the disease
attacks persons of all temperaments, characters, and passions. This, precludes
every suspicion of a specific acrimony of the humors, as it could not be found
in the midst of circumstances so opposite to each other.

VI. And lastly, if there really existed a disease in the fluids, some
advantage might be derived from the use of those means, which Physicians have
characterised under the titles of edulcorants, refrigerants, balsamic and
antisceptic medicines; but, on the contrary, experience has unfortunately
shown, that instead of the patients receiving benefit from their employment,
the disease is uniformly exasperated, and becomes worse and worse: for
confirmation of this fact I have only to appeal to the tribunal of those who
have been the victims of their credulity. The skin is therefore the source of
the eruption.

M. Lorry, a very ingenious French Physician, who has written a very voluminous
work upon cutaneous diseases, adduces many instances of persons, who the
instant after having eaten of certain kinds of aliment, or taken certain
liquids, had the face, or some other part of the body covered with pimples,
which disappeared as soon as the irritation of the stomach had subsided.

Eruptions, also, frequently appear, in a very remarkable short time after
drinking cold liquors, particularly cider, when heated; this is one eruption
which often finally becomes a real chronical cutaneous disease.

Riverious Hoffman, and all eminent practitioners, have remarked, that, the
saburra of the alimentary canal, frequently occasions erysipelatous affections,
which go off as soon as the saburra is evacuated.

Pechlin, quotes examples, of instantaneous eruptions, produced by violent
emotions of the mind, and the history of medicine teems with similar examples.

A woman, Hyppocrates tells us, had, during pregnancy, an exanthematous
affection of the face, which went off immediately after delivery.

There are many women, as M. Lory has observed, who in certain delicate
circumstances, have eruptions which last as long as their cause continues to
exist, and no longer.

From these observations, it is evident, that the skin has a consent or
sympathy with every part of the nervous system, -- that every impression,
whether physical or moral, may easily become an indirect stimulus to the skin,
and, that this stimulus is capable of altering its functions in such a way, as
to give rise to a secretion of an acrid matter, and consequent eruption.

Since we are here in possession of causes which explain, in the most
satisfactory manner, the origin of cutaneous diseases, it is by no means
necessary to seek for another in the blood, and gratuitously suppose the
existence of an universal acrimony.

The term acrimony, is, in its application, extremely analogous, to the occult
qualities so much in use, among the ancients; that is to say, a term void of
sense, a term, to which Physicians only associate false and arbitrary ideas.

The acrimony which is generally accused, is that of the scurvy.

It is commonly the want of sound fresh animal food, with the want of
vegetables, which gives rise to the scurvy; but, in London, neither of these is
wanting: we are provided with excellent fermented malt liquors, as beer and
porter, with brandy, rum, and other spirits, and foreign wines, which may all
be considered as so many antiscorbutics See Van-Swieten, Millman, Lind, etc.
etc. on the Scurvy.
. We are not in the neighborhood of marshes; salted or smoak-dryed flesh or
fish do not constitute any considerable part of our food, neither do we drink
putrid or stagnated water, which give the disposition to scurvy. In a word,
however it may have suited the interest of regulars or irregulars to insist
upon it, our mode of living, and our situation, are by no means, favorable to
its production.

Scurvy is preceded or accompanied by symptoms, which are never met with in the
cutaneous affections of which we are speaking. In fact, the scurvy begins by a
spontaneous weakness, or sense of weight in the whole body, pain in the
muscles, inability to walk, a difficult and laborious respiration. The color
of the face of scorbutic patients, is pale and sallow, the mouth exhales a
fetid smell, the gums become red, painful, and flabby, and liable to bleed upon
the slightest pressure, the teeth fall out, flying pains are felt in different
parts of the body, bleedings come on, and lastly, (and not till then)
ulcerations make their appearance, particularly in the legs, and the skin
becomes covered with an itchy eruption, pustules, and crusts.

The matter which produces the eruption is so acrid as to corrode the skin, and
its smell is highly disgusting and alkaline. This short sketch evinces the
enormous difference, which obtains between simple affections of the skin, and
the real scurvy.

Those who confound them together, either are unacquainted with the causes, and
nature of these diseases, or they abuse the confidence which the world, without
sufficient examination, may repose upon their talents or integrity.

Having laid down these principles, which are supported both by reasoning and
facts, I may advance, without running a risk of being accused of temerity,
that, cutaneous affections, being a local disease, require a local treatment.

(NOTE.) The single authority of Mr. Gowland upon this point, may not, perhaps,
be of sufficient weight to carry along with it conviction and persuasion, but,
the world, surely, will not refuse to accord its confidence to that of men of
science. The Proprietors, therefore, take the liberty of adducing the
authority, of one of the most respectable surgeons, this, or any other country
can boast of, and, whose works are known in every part of Europe; we mean the
Professor Bell, of the University of Edinburgh.

"It was" says he, "till lately believed, that eruptive diseases of this nature
(herpetic) could never appear but in consequence of some general morbid
affection of the system, and, accordingly, a great variety of internal remedies
have been recommended, by almost every author who has written upon the subject.
It has even been commonly considered, as an unsafe and dangerous practice, to
attempt the cure of such eruptions in any other way, than by correcting the
fluids which at first were supposed to have produced them: it is somewhat
singular, however, that the opinion should have remained so long uncontroverted
by regular practitioners; as, from the writings of many old authors it appears,
that complaints of this kind were constantly and easily cured, as they still
are, by every itinerant, with local external application only.

"This, we should imagine, ought, very soon, to have overturned the general
notion, which prevailed with respect to the nature of those disorders, and
which seemed, all along, to have no other foundation than antiquity for its
support. Modern practitioners, however, not being shackled by such authority,
have, in many instances, ventured to dispute, and boldly to deviate from, the
opinions of their predecessors, and the improvements which have universally
resulted from such a free spirit of enquiry, have never yet given them reason
to repent their having done so.

"This, in no instance, has been more remarkable, nor attended with better
effects, than in the treatment of cutaneous disorders, which, from having been
very perplexed, and intricate, will soon, it is hoped, become a very simple,
and easy part of the practitioner's employment.

"Instead of the tedious, and debilitating courses of medicines, which patients
went through formerly, and which, perhaps, they are still too frequently
obliged to undergo, it is now found, that the greatest number of these
complaints, are more certainly, and speedily removed, by the use of local
remedies merely, than they ever were by a contrary course."

BELL, on the Theory and Management of Ulcers.

Sect. ix, page 336. The Proprietors may here be allowed to remark, that Mr.
Bell had no Specific to recommend, no view or interest whatever, but the
benefit of his fellow creatures.


Bell became convinced, by long experience, that the external application of
medicaments, rarely disappoint the expectations of the Physician and Patient.
He enumerates several of those employed, as well by him as others, and
observes, that the principle dependence, is to be placed upon those which are
of an astringent and drying quality.

I have been able to discover a remedy which I may with the greatest propriety
style "the Specific for Cutaneous Diseases;" it has a great advantage over
those which have generally been employed, namely, that so far from possessing
any the slightest repellant quality, it is the very reverse, and acts in a mode
diametrically opposite thereto. Its operation confists in taking off the spasm
of the extremities of the capillary arteries, removing the inflammation where
it exists, and gradually bringing back the excretorious vessels to the
discharge of their natural functions.

Some days after its employment, the inflammation disappears, and consequently
the transudation; after which, the skin resumes its natural state and
complexion. If there are any pustules, they become in the first place less
troublesome, which show that the lymph they contain has lost somewhat of its
malignant properties.

Lastly, they disappear altogether, and never appear again in any part of the
body, except some new cause arises, or that the natural texture of the skin
should be inadequate to resist the power of the external air, in which case its
application should be sometimes repeated.

In those cases, which, actually owe their rise to some specific virus, as the
scrofulus, venereal, etc. even though the morbific cause be destroyed, the
local disease of the skin is incapable of curing itself. Vessels which have
been in the habit of making, a depraved secretion, do not of themselves, change
this disposition, although the mass of blood and the constitution be in a
healthy and natural state. Van Swieten, when speaking of venereal ulcers, has
made this observation: Here the necessity of a topical treatment becomes
particularly evident; that is, the application, of a remedy, to the part
affected. Thus, the Lotion is productive of the greatest advantage, even in
scrofulus, and scorbutic cases.

We have said, that there are sebaceous glands in the skin, the excretory ducts
of which, throw out a suetty matter, and that there is likewise a great number
of excretory vessels, which are, a continuation of the capillary arteries.

These ducts and vessels, are frequently, constricted by sudden cold, so, that
the matter which ought to be exhaled, is pent up, and if not evacuated by the
intestines or kidneys, it forms tubercles, or hard knots, and small vissicles,
as has been observed, by the celebrated Ludwig.

The face, is the most common seat of the eruption of which we are speaking, on
account of its being exposed more than any other part of the body, to the
action of the air. Eruptions will sometimes frequently remain, after the cause
has ceased; for, nature is not always equal, by its own power, of
reestablishing these minute organs in their natural functions; in consequence
of which, the skin remains disfigured, not only by a partial redness, but by
scabious irregularities on its surface, and even by matter contained in
pustules, and by crusts, which arise from the condensation of the lymph,
escaping from the vesicles.

If this affection be unfortunately neglected on its first appearance, it soon
overleaps its first limits, extends its sphere of action, and every day gives
additional force to its malignity. This disease, commits horrid ravages on
those persons whose general system is in a state of debility.

The female sex, the endearing bond of society, when once attacked by these
disorders, suffer more from them than men, on account of their skin being
possessed of a far greater degree of delicacy and sensibility.

How distressing must it not be to a fine woman, to the perfecting of whose
face nature has lavished all her power, to find the beauteous fabric spotted
and discolored with disgusting pimples, which destroy the effect of all her
charms? It is in this case, that the imagination, whose influence on the softer
sex is so very extensive, takes the lead, exasperates the disease, and renders
it a thousand times more obstinate: and yet I can assure my readers, from long
and assiduous observation, drawn from the experience of many years, that these
impurities, arising from obstructed perspiration, are the easiest of all others
to overcome. The vessels, when once freed from the matter contained in them,
and which has become foreign and vitiated by stagnation, readily resume the
tone and energy necessary for cutaneous secretion.

The Lotion, constantly produces this effect; it washes and cleanses the
surface, and, by penetrating within the small, obstructed vessels, dissolves
the condensed fluids contained in them, and facilitates their expuision.

When this is executed, the skin resumes its natural state, becomes smooth and
polished, and, exhibits that brilliancy of tint which depends upon the free
circulation of the fluids in the cutaneous arteries, and, the continual afflux
of those, furnished by the different glands and vessels, which are found in the
skin.

In addressing my reflections to the public, I have advanced, that simple
cutaneous diseases, are local affections only, and I have given proofs of the
truth of this assertion; I have said, that, the mode of treating them, ought to
be local; and, both authority, facts, and reasoning, have confirmed what I have
advanced.

I have asserted, that my Lotion, is a Specific for these Eruptions; and I
appeal to those who have experienced its efficacy, after they had been
disappointed by internal means: thus, the goodness and infallibility of my
Specific, is a sufficient answer to, and completely confutes the invidious
attacks that have been made against me, for its introduction.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Although this Medicine was originally invented for diseased skins, yet, every
impurity or defect, however trifling, being a degree of disease, it has been
found the only composition capable of cleansing and clearing the thickness and
opacity of the skin, and of restoring it to its original state of nature,
clearness, and perfection. An account of its efficacy in this particular, with
the most undeniable evidences of this fact, may be had in a pamphlet (gratis,)
of

THE PROPRIETORS, NO. 55, LONG-ARE, LONDON, Where Gowland's Lotion is prepared
and sold...... Quarts, 8s. 6d. Pints, 5s. 3d.


