AN ESSAY ON Ordinary FEVERS.

AND The METHODS to be used, to prevent their becoming so grievous, and mortal,
as they are often found to be.

IN THREE PARTS.

BY JOHN CURRY, M. D.

Rationalem quidem puto Medecinam Esse debere, Instrui vero ab evidentibus
Causis; obscuris omnibus, non a Cogitatione Artificis, sed ab Art ipsa
rejectis.

CELLS. LONDON: Printed for J. ROBINSON at the Golden Lion in Ludgate Street,
and sold by the other Booksellers and Publishers of London and Westminster,
MDCCXLIII.

THE INTRODUCTION.
IT has been observed, that Fevers have always been more frequent, and done
more general Mischief, than any other Disorders whatsoever; that they have
often produced grievous and fatal Effects, even when they have arisen from
Accidents, seemingly, not dangerous; and that, far from being confined to the
infirm, and Valetudinary, they are most apt to seize upon, and destroy Bodies,
that are young, Vigorous, and sound.

THESE Observations have long since induced me to endeavor to point out some
Means (easy, and intelligible to the generality of People) to prevent, at least
in some Measure, so great an Evil; and I have fixed upon those as the most
probable and authentic, which are mentioned in the following Essay. For, in
making Choice of them, I have not been influenced by any Hypothetical
Reasoning, how plausible soever; but I have proceeded, solely, upon the sure
Footing of such Observations of Physicians, as have been confirmed by long, and
accurate Experience, and handed down to us through many succeeding Ages.

I have likewise subjoined a short and plain, Account of the Production of the
Symptoms of Fevers, as evidently deduced from Experience, and Observation;
which Account, perhaps, I shall hereafter attempt to illustrate, and enlarge.
But I should be much better pleased to find some abler Person excited, by these
imperfect Hints, to take that Task out of my Hands.

ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 7. del. before, and put in soon after page 59. l. 4. after Humors,
put in moving.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
OF the Causes by which ordinary Fevers are often made grievous, and mortal.
Page. 1 Of the commonly received Opinion of the Nature of Fevers. Page. 3, 4
The Danger with which that Opinion seems to be attended. Page. 5 At what Time
that Opinion took its Rise. Page. 6 Of the commonly received Opinion of putrid
Fevers; and in what that Opinion seems unreasonable, and dangerous. Page. 7, 8,
9 What the Signs of Corruption, that are sometimes found in the critical
Evacuations in Fevers-should be thought to signifye. Page. 9, 10 The Notion of
a febrile Matter not always so universally entertained by Physicians, as some
would have us think. Page. 11, 12 The Danger of Bleeding, Vomiting, and Purging
in the Beginning of all Fevers without Distinction. Page. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 22, 23, 24.
PART II.
Of the Sentiments of ancient, and modern Physicians concerning ordinary
Fevers, and the Methods to be used to prevent their becoming griveous and
mortal. Page. 26 What is meant by ordinary Fevers. Page. 26, 27 Ordinary Fevers
are, in their own Nature, simply Diary. Page. 27 Diary Fevers not excited by
any peccant Matter in the Blood, or Humors. Page. 27 Diary Fevers are harmless
in their own Nature; yet they often do Mischief, when not known in Time. Page.
28, 30 An History of a Diary Fever from FORESTUS. Page. 30, 31 By what Signs we
may know a Diary Fever. Page. 33 The Danger of neglecting Diary Fevers. Page.
34 The Method of Cure used by GALEN, and the ancient Physicians in Diary
Fevers. Page. 34, 35 Sweating, promoted by proper Means, beneficial in the
Beginning of Fevers. Page. 36, 37 Proved by the Authority of several eminent
Physicians. Page. 38, 39 Pestilential Fevers have been cured by promoting Sweat
from their Beginning. Page. 39, 40. The Danger of using strong Sudorifics in
the Beginning of Fevers. Page. 40, 41 What Sudorifics may be safely used in the
Beginning of Fevers. Page. 42, 43, 44 On what Account Baths of warm Water were
anciently thought to be a certain Cure in Diary Fevers. Page. 45 An Advice of
CELSUS, to prevent the Increase of Fevers from their Beginning. Page. 47, 48,
49
PART III.
Of the Production of the Symptoms of ordinary Fevers, as evidently deduced
from Experience, and Observations. Page. 51, 52, 53 The Opinion of HYPPOCRATES
on that Head. Page. 53, 54 This Opinion illustrated from Experience, and
Observation. Page. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 How Fevers are generally cured, and by
what Means they kill. Page. 59 What is to be understood by crudity in Fevers,
and what their Crisis are. Page. 60, 61 Of the critical Days. Page. 61, 62
Fevers are not caused by acrimonious impuritys in the Blood. Page. 63, 64 In
the Progress of Fevers, the Blood may become foul, and bow. Page. 64, 65, 66
The Appearances of Blood drawn in Sickness various, and uncertain. Page. 66,
67, 68, The Operation of Medecines is confined to the solid Parts of the Body.
Page. 69 What are the Causes of those Rigors, that commonly introduce Fevers.
Page. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74
AN ASSAY ON Ordinary FEVERS, etc.
PART I. Of the Causes by which Ordinary Fevers are often made grievous, and
mortal.
I. WHAT Medecin. p. 112.
CELSUS has insinuated, concerning Chronic Diseases, is, in some Respects,
applicable to those that are called Acute, viz. That they are seldom mortal in
their own Nature: "And that, if a Phisitian's Advice, is followed from their
Beginning, hardly any dye of them, unless through his Fault."

II. FOR the first Attacks of Fevers, (even of such as are most dangerous) are
generally so light, that People are apt to persuade themselves, that they can
easily get rid of them, without the Pain of Confinement, or a strict Regimen;
and therefore many are seen walking abroad, for some Days, with the Sickness
upon them* every Hour increasing. And when they are at length forced to lie
down under the Burden, which they find themselves unable to shake off, they
often think they act a prudent Part in delivering themselves up to the
Management of Persons, who (through a fatal, and too common Mistake) are deemed
able, and honest enough to cure every slight, feverish Disorder.

III. AND in this Sense it is strictly true, that many ordinary Fevers have
been made grievous, and mortal, which, if rightly handled in the Beginning,
would not have been attended with any considerable Prejudice.

IV. THERE is likewise some Reason to suspect, that the commonly-received
Opinion of the Nature of these Diseases has a tendency to retard, and sometimes
absolutely to hinder their Cure. The Opinion I mean, is, "that a Fever is
excited by a Foulness, or Distemperature in the Blood, which is, for that
Reason, called the Febrile Matter; that this Disorder itself is a kind of
Instrument which Nature makes Use of to clear the Blood of that Foulness; that
(as Vid. Etmull. de feb. p. 217. Bagliv. prax. p. 231.
in the Depuration of Wine, and other fermentative Liquors) a certain number of
Days is necessary for carrying on, and completing this salutary Work, and
therefore that we ought not to think of removing this Febrile Matter in the
beginning of the Sickness, while it is yet Crude; nor until such Time, as by
some particular Signs, it shall be found so attenuated, and concocted, as to be
fit for what is called a Critical Expulsion out of the Body."

V. THIS Opinion, I say, seems to be attended with no small Danger on account,
among other Things, of the Delay, and inaction which it necessarily implys on
the Part of the Physician. And I know not any Vid. Bagl. prax. and Epist. ad
Andry. Archb. Pitcairn Diss. de Opera quam Pressed. Corpa. Acida vel Alcal. etc.
Evacuation whatsoever (bleeding itself not excepted) which, according to it,
can with safety be advised in the Beginning of Fevers; or even until the Signs
of Coction appear in them. For, as before this Time, no Separation is made of
the pretended morbid Humors from the sound, bleeding, and every other
Evacuation that is then put in Practice, must indiscriminately take away both;
and perhaps, more of the Treasure of Life, than of the Cause of the Disease!
And when the Signs of Cognoscitur Coctio I0 quiet morbi, ejusque decremento,
etc. Boerh. Inst.
Coction have once appeared, every arteficial Evacuation is, generally
speaking, useless, if not hurtful. For, when Nature has of herself done so much
toward a Cure in this, or any other Disorder, as to have brought about those
Appearances by which the Coction of the Humors is said to be known, she seldom
or never stands in need of the Assistance of Art to enable her to complete it.

VI. BUT the Truth is, that this Opinion had its rise in the very infancy of
Physic; when Physicians were rather Observers than Assistants of Nature; which
latter, however, they afterward became in an eminent Degree, by Means chiefly
of such Observation; and hence it was that few or no Medecines were then
prescribed by them in these, or any other Disorders.

VII. IF what we are told concerning putrid Fevers, and the morbific Matter in
them be true, viz, that they consist as Method. 11.
GALEN affirms, in a Change of the whole Body into Corruption; or, as modern
Physicians more cautiously express it, that they are caused by an Alkalescence,
or Degree of putrefaction in the Mass of Blood, the Case of those who are sick
of them must be very deplorable. For, to omit other Reasons, such a State of
the Blood can be amended by no other Medecines, but a sufficient Quantity of
Acids intimately mixed, and blended with it; but this cannot be done by Acids
given in the Usual way; for it is known by Vid. Boil Apud. Pitcair. Diss. de
Opera quam pressed, etc. Arbuth. on Aliments.
Experience, that all acid Vegetables are very much altered in the Stomach and
Guts; and that they are even made alkalescent, before they are Received into
the Blood; and it is highly probable, that no Mineral Acids can be admitted
through the Mouths of the lacteal Vessels.

VIII. AND such shocking Ideas of any Distemper, when entertained by the Sick,
are apt to make it, though light in its own Nature, both grievous, and mortal.
For Barth. in Act. Haffn. Vol. 1. Obs. 76.
great anxiety of Mind has often produced dangerous, and malignant Fevers in
Bodies, that were otherwise Sound. And Bag. p. 158. Hodg. de Pest. p. 1, 2.
Writers of good Credit Assure us that, in the Beginning of the Plague itself,
Numbers have been seized with that Disease, and Dyed of it, who Contracted it
rather through fear of so great an Evil, than by any Contagion.

IX. FROM the critical Evacuations in Fevers having, very often, a strong,
fetid Smell, and other Signs of Corruption in them, it has been generally
concluded, that they must necessarily have been derived from an infected
Source; and that the same morbid State of the whole Mass of Humors must,
therefore, have given rise to these Distempers. But it may be as well infered
that an harsh ill-scented Perspiration, to which many People enjoying good
Health are subject, can be thought to show, that the Blood of such People is in
a State of Putrefaction, or that their Bodies are infected with putrid Fevers,
Gouraigne de feb. p. 275.
If a Vein be opened in these Diseases, while the most faetid Sweat is ouzing
through the Pores of the Skin, there shall not be found the least, disagreeable
Smell, or Taste in the Blood that is drawn. And therefore all that can be
concluded from the abovementioned Evacuations, is, that as the Matter of them
is always obstructed, or otherwise altered in the Emunctorys themselves, Vid.
de Gorter de Secret. hum. a Sanguine.
(which may happen many different Ways) they must, necessarily have something
preternatural in them, without implying, at the same Time, any original
Impurity, or Corruption in the Mass of Blood, from whence they were derived.

X. "The Humors that are critically cast forth in the Decline of Fevers, says
the juditious (b) SYDENHAM on this Occasion, are no doubt vicious, although the
Blood was before pure. But this is not more to be wondered at, than that some
Part of our Food is made corrupt, and faetid, after having undergone a
considerable change in the Body, and been separated from the rest."

XI. UPON the whole, the Notion of a febrile Matter has not always been so
universally entertained by Physicians, De Febrib. p. 30.
as some would have us believe* for we learn from Medecin. p. 118.
CELSUS that AESCLEPIADES, who had many Followers, seemed to show no Regard to
it in the Cure of Fevers. And many eminent Physicians, says De praesag. Vit.
and Mor. p. 346.
PROSPER ALPINUS, have maintained that good, and profitable Evacuations have
happened in these Diseases, before the Signs of Coction appeared in them. As
for putrid Fevers, TRALLIAN expressly De Feb. p. 685, 686. Vid. Forest. de Feb.
p. 87. Fernel. p. 453.
assures us, that it was the Opinion of several among the Ancients, that they
do not arise from the Corruption of any other Humors, but those that are
contained in the Stomach and Guts, and that the vital Juices cannot be the
Subject of Putrefaction in these Cases. And De Feb. p. 30.
SYDENHAM, among the Moderns, does not scruple to affirm, that Fevers happen
more frequently, without the Concurrence of any vicious Particles in the Blood,
than otherwise.

XII. I must observe here, that it was a Point agreed upon by all the Vid. Part
the 2d. of this Essay.
ancient Physicians, that DIARY Fevers are not excited by any peccant Matter
inherent in the Blood, or humors; and that they were accordingly cured by them,
in a very short Time, and by the simplest Methods. But although these Fevers
were formerly accounted harmless, (and in their own Nature indeed they are so)
yet we now often see them made griveous, and mortal, by Ignorance and Neglect.
For it is my Design to show hereafter, that the Fevers, which now-adays do so
much Mischief among us, for the most Part arise from the same Causes, and are
of the same Nature, with the DIARY in their Beginning.

XIII AND it may be no improper Introduction to this Design, to take Notice
beforehand, of that dangerous Custom, (so prevalent of late, though contrary
to the Sentiments of the best Physicians,) of Bleeding, Purging, and Vomiting
in the Beginning of all Fevers without Distinction. For although these Remedys,
when administered with Judgment, are of the greatest Service to the sick; yet
nothing is more certain, than that an improper Application of any of them, may
make Nature Nihil mirum si frequenter observamus aegros post Ordinatam
Plebotomiam interire Statim -- idemque. Succedere post imprudenter praescriptum
Catharticum. Bagliv. p. 46.
sink under a Disease, which, if left to herself, she might have easily
overcome.

XIV. Thoner. Obs. p. 48. Willis.
BLEEDING has been known to have kindled Fevers in Bodies, which, before they
had undergone that Operation, had not the least Disposition to them. And the
Writings both of ancient and modern Physicians, are full of the strictest
Cautions against opening a Vein in some Fevers, which impudent Pretenders
frequently undertake to cure by profuse Blood-letting. Apud. Prosp. Mart. in
Hyp. p. 591. Vid. Ramaz. Dissert. 2da de Constut. An. 1691.
HYPPOCRATES was so far from Thinking Bleeding necessary in all Fevers, that he
expressly forbids it in some other Disorders, on Account of their having Fevers
joined with them.

XV. WHEN, in the Beginning of these Diseases, the Body is known to abound in
Blood; when its Veins are turgid, and its Surface red, and inflamed, and when
the Brain, or any other Viscus, is threatened or attacked by this fullness; and
no spontaneous Hemorage ensues; then indeed large, and sometimes, repeated
Bleeding, is not only safe, but necessary; but when, on the contrary, these
Distempers happen to Persons already weakend by excessive Labor, too frequent
Venery, or great Evacuations; or when, from being intermitting, they become
acute and continual; in such Cases I say, Bleeding has been often found
pernicious, and always will be so.

XVI Hyp. Aphor. 24. Sect. 1.
THE giving of purgative Medicines, in the Beginning of Fevers, has been
generally forbidden by Physicians, since the Days of HYPPOCRATES, down to our
own Times. Yet nothing is more common, than to transgress this established
Rule, on the most frivolous Pretenses; and they who do so, never confider that,
as such Medicines are always apt to increase the already too frequent Vid.
Bagl. Epist. ad Andry. and alios.
Oscillations of the Solids, they bid much fairer to augment, than diminish
these Disorders, and their Symptoms. There is no Question, but that sharp,
indigested Humors in the Guts, often produce Fevers, which must cease as soon
as these Causes have been removed; but it is equally certain, that this does
not happen as often as it is pretended; and that when it does happen, such
Fevers do not require, or even admit of, CATHARTICS for their Cure. The
following extraordinary Case, and the Observations naturally arising therefrom,
may serve to put this Matter in a clearer Light.

XVII IN the Year 1738, a Man, of about fifty, was brought to the CHARITABLE
INFIRMARY on the INSQUAY, DUBLIN, with a Tumor in his Groin, which in due Time,
and by proper Applications, came to Suppuration. He had complained, for some
Time before he was taken in there, of an Uneasiness, and Shooting Pain in the
Part affected, but of no other Sickness. However, when this Tumor was opened,
some Bones of a Chickensneck were extracted from it; by which, and the Patients
own Confession, it appeared, that he had some Weeks before, hastily swallowed
down these Bones unchewed; and that they had gradually Vid. Anton. Beniven.
Obs. cap. 10. Joan. Lang. Epist. 40. lib. 2. Alex. Benedict. Hist. Human. Corp.
cap. 13. lib. 5.
forced themselves a Passage through the Intestine, and the Parts about it,
into his Groin. This Man eat, and slept well, when I saw him; and he had done
so from the very Beginning of his Complaint, as he himself avered. And, while
in the INFIRMARY, he was free from every Feverish Symptom, except what the
Suppuration of his Tumor naturally occasioned. Of this I was assured by Mr.
FRANCIS DUANY, one of the Surgeons of that INFIRMARY, who had often visited him
while he was there, and by whom I saw some of these Bones taken out entire,
with great Dexterity. Mr. DUANY likewise informed me, that Mr. KELLY, in his
Turn of Visiting, had also extracted, from this Person, some Bones of the same
Kind.

XVIII. Now if an Irritation of the Intestines, which was so great, that it at
length destroyed Part of their Substance, did not produce any considerable
Fever (which as I have said is indeed an extraordinary Case) may it not easily
happen, that the so much feebler Stimulus of indigested Humors on these Parts,
may be often hindered, by the MUCUS which defends them, from having any such
Effect? And as in Case a Fever had ensued from that great Irritation, an
Attempt to carry off these Bones by a Stimulating Purge, would in all
probability, have increased the Evil, Vid. Bagliv. Boerhaave, Hoffman. and
alios passim.
(it being the only safe Method in such Cases, as when Fragments of Glass,
Needles, or Corrosive Poisons have been swallowed, to plye the Patient with a
sufficient Quantity of such Liquids only, as are fit to soften, relax, and
lubricate his contracted Intestines) so, whenever sharp Cruditys in the
Stomach, or Guts, have occasioned a Fever, and it is, therefore, necessary to
empty these Parts, we should have Recourse to no other Remedys for that
Purpose, but such as are lenient, and diluting, and as free as possible from
any irritating Quality. Thus p. 674.
TRALIAN, in the Cure of such Fevers, does not once mention emetic, or
purgative Medicines; but advises the Digesting, and Washing away of these
Cruditys with plentiful Draughts of warm Water only. And a more excellent
Remedy, adds he, I know not for those who, being of an hot Temperament, fall
into DIARY Fevers from such a Cause.

XIX. In like Manner, when the Rigors, that commonly introduce Fevers, are
caused, as they often are, by bilious Humors lying in the Stomach, and a Vomit
is therefore wanting to Discharge them, Medecin. p. 141.
CELSUS directs nothing else for that End, but warm Water, seasoned with a
little Salt. And as the Caution of the Ancients, in these Particulars, was
wise, and worthy of Imitation, so is the Rashness of some modern Practitioners,
as much to be dreaded and avoided. For there is, (much oftener than is vulgarly
imagined) an Frederic. Hoff. Dissert. de inflam. Ventric.
Inflammation of the Stomach in these Disorders; and so very latent this
Inflammation sometimes is, that it is with Difficulty discovered even by the
most thinking, and experienced! Profecto Veteranus hic habet quod timeat
Medicus. Rega. de Consens. part. p. 151.
and Vomiting Medicines to an inflamed Stomach are certainly pernicious. It has
been besides Wintringh. Comment. Noso. p. 123.
observed, that Vomits, when given in such Fevers as, in a particular Manner,
attack the Head, have often produced fatal Symptoms in the Course of the
Sickness, on Account of that Fullness, and Concussion of the Vessels of the
Brain, which they always occasion.

XX. BUT if Bleeding, Purging, and Vomiting in the Beginning of all Fevers
without Distinction, have often done Mischief, there is not less to be feared
from the too dilatory Practice of those who, as we have already observed, have
nothing else in View, in the Cure of these Distempers, but the gradual
Correction, or distant Expulsion of some preconceived foulness of the Blood, or
Humors. For while such are waiting for the imaginary Coction of a FEBRILE
MATTER, they are frequently Suffering the real Cause of the Disease to take
such deep Root in some of the noble Parts, that it cannot, perhaps, be
afterward removed from thence, by any Efforts of Nature, or Art.

PART II. Of the Sentiments of Ancient, and Modern Physicians concerning
Ordinary Fevers, and the Methods to be used to prevent their becoming grievous,
and mortal.
I. BY Ordinary Fevers I understand such, as happen to the Body, when otherwise
sound, and in Health, from outward, or sensible Causes; as from the taking of
Cold, excesses in Eating or Drinking, immoderate Exercise of Body or Mind, the
Suppression of some usual Discharge, and the like. The Sentiments of ancient
and modern Physicians concerning the Nature of these Fevers, and their Events,
are briefly as follow.

II. Vid. Gal. de feb. Ephem. and alios omnes.
ALL Fevers proceeding merely from outward, or sensible Causes are, in their
own Nature, simply DIARY; so called, from their commonly ending, or declining
on the first Day; although they are sometimes prolonged to the second, or third.

III. Id. ibid. etc.
DIARY Fevers are not excited by any peccant Matter pre-existing in the Blood;
yet they, for (the most Part, Dolaeus, p. 510.
precede other Fevers; and Id. ibid.
differ from them, chiefly by the mildness of their Symptoms, and Causes;
insomuch, that the Fernel. p. 454, 456.
same Causes which, when light, produce only DIARY Fevers, will, when more
violent, occasion such as are often dangerous, and fatal.

IV. Vid. Galen. and alios passim.
DIARY Fevers are harmless in their own Nature, and never become griveous, or
mortal, until by Ignorance, Mismanagement, or neglect, they have been first
changed into such, as are known by the Name of putrid, hectic, malignant, or
the like.

V. Vid. Fernel. p. 455. Lom. Obs. p. 2. etc.
WHEN a DIARY Fever is made by improper Treatment, Ignorance, or neglect, to
exceed the Term of three Days, it degenerates into a Fever of a worse Kind; as
likewise when it seems to decline without Sweat, or some dewy moisture on the
Skin.

VI. A DIARY Fever then chiefly Turns into that which is called putrid, when
the proper Occasion of opening the Pores of the Skin has been neglected.

VII. THAT DIARY Fevers are capable of being changed into such as are very
malignant, appears, among many other Instances, from the SWEATING-SICKNESS that
prevailed in ENGLAND in 1486. For although this Sickness was called, and, in
itself was no other but, the British DIARY Fever, yet by Mead Discourse on
pestil. Contag.
Mismanagement in stopping the Sweats, it became very griveous, and did great
Mischief. De Sud. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 15.
SENNERTUS informs us, that scarce one Patient, out of an hundred, was
recovered from it.

VIII. As the DIARY Fever often Gal. 1. ad Glauc. c. 2. Lom. obs. p. 2. etc.
does Mischief before it is known, (and that chiefly because it is not known)
it may not be amiss, to transcribe an History of it from FORESTUS, wherein he
gives us the Rise, Progress, and Cure of it in his own Person.

IX. De feb. diar. fol 8.
"GOING to see a Patient, says he, that lay at some Distance from me, in a very
cold and windy Season, the Pores of my Skin were closed by the Sharpness of the
Weather, and I fell ill of a DIARY Fever. It seized me about Eleven o'Clock in
the Morning, not with a Shuddering, but with a Coldness that seemed to have
pierced my Skin, and Muscles. But after I had placed myself by a Good Fire, I
begun to be a little heated, without thirst; and my Pulse became quicker, but
was equal; about four in the Afternoon a Moisture came through my Skin, and I
grew better. As I had taken no Nourishment through the whole Day, I then
refreshed myself with a little Ale, in which a small Quantity of Sugar, and
Butter was boiled; and about six I went into a warm Bed, where covering myself
up, I begun to Sweat. Nevertheless, about two Hours after, having felt such a
Pain in my Stomach, as had like to have made me faint, I took some Pearl-Sugar,
by which Means I came again to myself, and my Pain and Anxiety vanished. Then I
fell into a Sweet Sleep, in which I past the whole Night, and a copious,
Vaporose Sweat exhaled from the lower Parts of my Body. In the Morning, when I
found myself entirely free from the Fever, I ordered the Sweat to be wiped off,
having first used long, and gentle Friction, to open the Pores of my Skin."

X. IT has been already observed, that DIARY Fevers differ from others only in
Degree; and as the Proceeding from outward, or sensible Causes is so
distinguishing a Mark of them, that De Feb. Ephesians. Forest. fol. 4.
FERNELIUS, and others tell us, even putrid Fevers, when occasioned by such
Causes, are necessarily preceded by them, it follows that, Vid. Fernel. p. 452.
Lom. Obs. p. 2.
whenever we find ourselves all at once seized, with any of the lighter
Symptoms of a Fever, (as with a small Rigor or Coldness, to which an unusual
Heat, Headache, Pain in the Stomach, or other Sickness, attended with a quick
Pulse, succeeds,) and are, at the same Time, sensible that these Symptoms have
arisen from some outward, or evident Cause, we may safely conclude that Fever
to be simply DIARY, to which, however a proper Remedy should be immediately
applied, because when these Disorders, light as they are in their own Nature,
have been neglected but a few Days, and the Symptoms abovementioned have been
all along felt, gradually increasing, it is to be feared, that they are no
longer DIARY; but that they have degenerated into other Fevers, of much greater
Danger, and Duration.

XI. THE Method of Cure used by Vid. Dodon. prax. p. 3. and alios passim.
GALEN, and the ancient Physicians in general, in DIARY Fevers was (besides a
spare and regular Diet) no other, but that of relaxing the Surface of the Body,
and opening the Perspiratory, or surdorific Pores. And although this was done
chiefly by external Applications, such as Baths of warm Water, Friction, and
Unction; yet inward Means were sometimes found proper for the same End,
according to the Nature, and Exigence of the particular Cause. "Thus CASSIUS,
the most ingenious Physician of our Age, says Praef. Medic. p. 18.
CELSUS, cured a Person of a Fever (which was got by Drinking too much Wine,
and attended with great Thirst,) by giving him large Draughts of cold Water,
and thereby putting him into a Sweat, and making him Sleep."

XII. "THE same Author Medecin. p. 137.
informs us, that among the Ancients, before the Days of HEROPHILUS, and
ERASISTRATUS, and very soon after those of HYPPOCRATES, there was one PETRON,
who, when he undertook to Cure any one of a Fever, covered him up with a large
Quantity of Clothes, in order to excite a great Heat, and Thirst in him; and
afterward, when his Fever begun to be a little abated, he gave him cold Water
to Drink, by which Means, if he made him Sweat, he thought he had extricated
him from all Danger."

XIII. NOR are the Objections commonly raised against the Promoting of Sweat,
in the Beginning of Fevers, of any Force here; for Vid. de Gort. Med. Comp. p.
277. and alios passim.
such Sudorifics only are, in this Case, forbidden by Physicians, as are apt to
stimulate the Fibers too much, and thereby increase the Causes of these
distempers. Whereas those Things, which procure that Evacuation by Relaxing the
Solids, and by Thining and Diluting the Humors, are allowed to do great
Service, in the Beginning, and every other Period of these Diseases.

XIV. AND it is, no Doubt, from frequent, and successful Experience, grounded
on this Maxim, that People are generally so fond of Sweating in the Beginning
of all Fevers. And indeed this Method, when not abused by hot and inflaming
Medecines (as it too often is) may be supported by the Authority of several
eminent Physicians. De Morb. acut. infant. p. 73.
Doctor HARRIS observes that in the first Infults of Fevers, when the sensible,
or insensible Perspiration is much obstructed, Sweats, whether natural, or
procured by Art, are very beneficial. Doctor Sup. to Anim. Aecon.
BRYAN ROBINSON has mentioned some Fevers, in which a constant, gentle Sweat in
the Beginning, is of much use; and he says, that it often cures them in a
little Time.

XV. I have frequently seen, says De Feb. p. 359.
Doctor FREDERIC HOFFMAN, poor laboring People, (who had been seized with
Fevers by being exposed to the Injurys of the Weather,) safely and speedily
cured by Means of a Sweat, which was excited with warm Draughts of the
decoction of SCABIOUSE and blessed THISTLE in equal Quantitys of Wine and
Water. And River. Obs. com. p. 228.
another Author assures us, that in Fevers from the same Cause, he has found
nothing more successful than, after having first opened a Vein, to relax the
Surface of the Body by a Sudorific Decoction. "And my Success in this
particular, adds he, has brought over several Physicians to approve of my
Method, who before never thought of giving Sudorifics in such Cases."

XVI. I must add, that even pestilential Fevers have been cured, by promoting
Sweat, from their Beginning, as De Pest. p. 225. and alibi.
DIEMOERBROCK, De Pest. p. 2.
BAR and others testify from their own Experience. And SYDENHAM affirms that,
after he had begun to follow that Method closely, in the pestilential Fever of
1655 at LONDON, he did not lose one Patient out of all those he attended in
that terrible Distemper.

XVII. BUT the Danger of using Vid. Sydenh. de Feb. p. 72.
strong Sudorifics, in the Beginning of Fevers, cannot be too often, nor too
strictly cautioned against. Of this Danger Obs. p. 151.
Doctor HARRIS has given us a notable instance, in a very distinguished
Personage. He tells us that MARY, Queen of ENGLAND, had once acquainted him in
Conversation, that she was accustomed, by the Advice of the famous Doctor
LOWER, then sometime dead, to take, about bedtime, time, a pretty large Dose of
the Treacle of Andromachus, in Order to promote Sweat, as often as she found
herself inclined to a Fever. And although this Conversation happened two Years
before the Appearance of the Smallpox, of which she dyed, and Doctor HARRIS
had given her all the necessary precautions against the Use of that Medecin,
yet, so great was her Confidence in the Advice of her former Physician, that
afterward on the very Night, in which she fell ill of that Disease, she had
Recourse to her Dose of Treacle, which not having its usual Effect of making
her Sweat (althought it was repeated next Morning in a double quantity) put her
Humors into so great a Ferment, that, when the Smallpox, appeared, it was
attended with a Spitting of Blood, purple Spots, and other such desperate
Symptoms, that she dyed of it in a very few Days.

XVIII. FROM this Passage, however, it is manifest, that Doctor LOWER thought
Sweating at the Beginning of Fevers the best Method to prevent their Increase;
and that the Royal Patient had before experienced the good Effects of that
Method.

XIX. THE famous Apheris. 624.625.626.
BOERHAAVE, after having warned us against the Use of hot, stimulating Things
to remove that Coldness and Rigor, which are felt at the Beginning of Fevers,
acquaints us, that if, instead of these, we have immediate Recourse to Draughts
of warm Water, with which a little Nitre, Wine, and Honey are mixed; and to
Bathing, Fomenting, and Washing with the same, that Rigor and Coldness will
happily Cease, and all the worst Symptoms of these Distempers be speedily
prevented.

XX. DOCTOR Suppl. to Anim. Aeconom.
BRYAN ROBINSON promotes Sweat in the Beginning of some Fevers, by Means that
are not attended with any Danger. To grown Persons laboring under this
Disease, he gives a Dram of the testaceous Powders, in three or four Ounces
of Cold Water, every third or fourth Hour; and to Children five or six Years
old, he gives half the Quantity of Powders, in half the Quantity of Water;
adding this Precaution, that Persons thus treated ought to be Bled and vomited,
before they Begin the Use of the Powders, and he proposes this Method, not only
in the Beginning of Colds and slight Fevers, but also in high inflammatory
Fevers in young Bodies.

XXI. THE Sudorifics, says Doctor De Morb. infant. p. 73. 74.
HARRIS, which are the Use in the Beginning of Fevers, ought to be mild and
temperate; not dry, spirituous Things, taken from the Apothecaryes Shop, but
liquid and simple, Such the Kitchen affords; Things, which by their Quantity,
will yield Copious Matter to the Sweats, and call them forth, not by any innate
Heat, but by external, and acquired warmth.

XXII. IT was, no Doubt, by causing an easy and general Relaxation of the
Surface of the Body, that Baths of warm Water anciently acquired the universal
Character of being a certain Cure in DIARY Fevers. For Perspiration, from
Bathing in warm Water, has been observed by Medecin. Stat. Brittan. p. 15. 16.
KEIL, to arise to the Quantity of a pound, and an half in the Space of an
Hour. And there is this further Advantage in perspiration thus caused, above
that which is promoted by Exercise and Motion, that the large Evacuation in the
former Case, does not lessen the usual Perspiration in the subsequent Hours, as
it always does in the Latter. De Feb. p. 696.
TRALLIAN advises those who Labor under a Causus or burning Fever, to have
themselves bathed all over in warm Water. And De Medec Egypt. p. 114.
PROSPER ALPINUS not only gives the same Advice, in Fevers that are called
putrid, but he likewise informs us, that the best Physicians among the
Ancients, made Use of this Remedy in almost all Kinds of Fevers.

XXIII. I shall conclude this Head with a Passage from CELSUS, relating chiefly
to Diet, wherein are Directions to prevent the Increase of Fevers from their
Beginning, given with such Exactness, and promised Certainty, that they very
well deserve to be transcribed at Large.

"If any Signs of approaching illness appear, says that De Medecin. p. 114.
Excellent Writer, the best of all Remedys are quiet, and abstinence. If the
Person indisposed must Drink, let him Drink Water; and generally speaking, it
will be sufficient for him to keep to that Drink for one Day; sometimes, if the
Symptoms still remain, it will be necessary to continue it for two. Next to
abstinence, a very spare Diet is proper; with which Water must be drunk one
Day, and Wine the next; and so on, until all Cause of Fear is removed. By these
Means an heavy, and iminent Disease is often prevented. And many are deceived,
who think to put of a Beginning Sickness, by Exercise, or Bathing, or Purging,
or Vomiting, or Sweating, or the Use of Wine, on the first Day of its
Appearance. Not that these Things have not sometimes a good Effect; but because
they are oftener attended with a bad one; while abstinence alone Cures without
any Danger; for it may be lessened, or increased according to the Degree of the
Sickness; insomuch, that, if the Symptoms be light, it will suffice to abstain
from Wine only, the Disuse of which in this Case, will be, of more Service to
the Sick, than lessening the Quantity of his Food can be. And although his
Complaints should be somewhat greater, it will be enough to forbid him the Use
of Flesh in his Diet, and to confine him to the Drinking of Water. Sometimes,
indeed, it will be necessary to allow him less even of Bread than usual, and to
tie him down to a moist Herb-diet. And should even the Signs of a violent
Distemper treaten him, it will be sufficient to abstain entirely from Food, the
Use of Wine, and all Motion of the Body. Nor is it at all to be doubted, that
scarce any one has fallen into an heavy Fit of Sickness, who has seriously,
and in Time, taken those Methods to prevent it."

XXIV. I must observe by the Way, that when CELSUS acquaints us, that many are
deceived, who think to put off a Beginning Sickness by Bathing, or Sweating etc
he ought to be presumed to mean those Pople, who place their entire Confidence
in such Methods, without having at the same Time, any Regard to abstinence and
quiet.

Part III. Of the Production of the Symptoms of Ordinary Fevers, as evidently
deduced from Experience and Observation.
ALTHOUGH Vid. de Gort. de Feb.
it be extremely difficult, to give an exact Definition of the Nature of
Fevers, on Account of the great Variety of their Causes, and Symptoms; yet we
are sure to find in all Bodies, affected with them, a SICKNESS, that is
generally brought oh by a COLDNESS and SHUDDERING, to which a BURNING HEAT
succeeds; and lastly a SWEAT breaks forth, by which an End is put to all the
Symptoms.

AND it is plain, from Vid. Fred. Hoffn. de Feb.
the dryness, and Contraction of the external Parts of the Body, in the
Beginning of these Distempers; from the Smallness of the Pulse, the Coldness of
the Hands and Feet, and the Subsiding of the Vessels in them: from the
Breathing difficult, and the Feeling of Blood, as it were, boil about the
Praecordia; "from all these Things, I say, happening in the Beginning of
Fevers, it is plain Id. ibid.
that the vital Fluids are, then, first driven, from the Surface, of the Body,
into the internal, large Vessels, and toward the Heart; and that these Fluids
are, afterward, by the increased Contraction of the Heart, and Arterys,
swiftly and forceably pushed outward into the narrower Vessels; until such
Time as, by the Removal of the Spasms, the usual Secretions return, and the
Fever ceases."

THIS retrograde Motion of the vital Fluids from the constringed Surface of the
Body into its Center, has been long since discovered, and accurately described
by Hypp. Foes. Lib. de flat. Fol. 298
HYPPOCRATES himself. For, treating of the Beginning of Fevers, he tells us,
"That the Blood, then, creeps over the whole Body, and runs together into its
warmest Parts. -- But, when, continues he, the Blood has FORSAKEN the
EXTREMITYS, the Bowels and the Flesh tremble. For some Parts of the Body are
replenished with a great Quantity of Blood, and others are left bloodless. And
those Parts, which the Blood has forsaken, cannot rest through Cold, but are
shaken; and those Parts, which are filled with a great Quantity of Blood,
tremble on account of that fullness, and INFLAMMATIONS are excited in them."

A remarkable Instance of the great Power of the constriction of the Surface,
in repelling whatever is therein contained, into the larger Cavitys of the
Body, we find in Prax. p. 313.
BAGLIVI, who informs us, that when he had opened a very strong Man (who had
dyed of a Fever that begun with violent Rigors, succeeded by Convulsions,)
almost all the Fat, which had layn toward his Skin was by the great
Contractions of the external Fibers, driven inwards to the Center; and that in
such Quantity, and so dissolved, that his lax, and flaccid Intestines were
found swimming in it.

FROM hence it follows, that the first apparent Symptom of a Fever is a
Constriction, Coldness, Rigor, or Trembling in the Surface of the Body, which,
by driving the Blood in great Quantity, from thence into the inner, and larger
Vessels, and thereby preternaturaly distending them, is the Retrogrado enim (in
Febrium Initio) and morante Sanguine in Corporis Centro, quae Fluidorum, quae
Solidorum exurgunt CRUDITATIS Signa se produnt -- arescit os, siccatur Alvus,
nitent Urinae, feriantur secretiones. Hequ. de purg. Med. p. 206. Quippe
densata est, in Febrium Principio, ac Incremento cutis, and ea, quae subhac
habetur, Carnea substantia. Gal. Meth. Lib. 2


Cause of that Pain in the Head, Back, or Breast; of that Heat, Thirst,
Anxiety, and Oppression about the Heart, and all the other Griveances that
commonly attend this Disease. Boerh. Aph. 623.
Thus the greater the Coldness, or Rigor is, at the Beginning of Fevers, the
more dangerous always are these Distempers; and the Coldness, which Ushers in
the Plague, is generally greatest. Thus likewise whatever Occasions a
considerable, and lasting Constriction of the Surface of the Body, as Fred.
Hoff. de aqu. min. Vid. Gal. meth. med. lib. 8. cap. 2.
Bathing in Waters that are too hot, or astringent, is apt to produce Fevers of
all Sorts. And, on the other Hand, whatever brings about an early Removal of
this Rigor, or Constriction, and thereby promotes an easy, and universal
Moisture of the Skin, will (as we have already shown at large in the second
Part of this ESSAY) speedily prevent all the worst Symptoms of those Disorders.

THE Truth of this Reasoning is further confirmed, by the prognostic Signs that
are observed, both in Bodies recovering from these Distempers, and in those
that are dying of them. For as to the first, Experience and Observation have
always shown us, that no Fevers are completely cured, until the Skin, from
being dry, and contracted, becomes all over Vid. Etmull. de Feb. p. 218. and
alios
soft, relaxed, and moist. And as to the second, it is well known, that the
Continuance, and Increase of the Contraction of the Skin in the decline of
these Disorders, (which Vid. Hypp. praen. Coac. Celf. Med. p. 54.
Cold Extremitys, the Temples collapsed, the Nose sharpened, the Eyes sunk, and
the Drying up of Issues, and Ulcers plainly indicate) are but too often the
certain forerunners of Death.

AND the Reason of these Prognostics is very evident, and naturally flows from
the Idea we have given of Fevers. For, as the sick then only recover from them,
when, by the Removal of the Spasms in the superficial Parts of the Body, a free
Passage is again opened to the Humors that way, from the overloaded VISCERA,
(as in a complete and salutary CRISIS) so, by a too long Continuance, or great
increase of these Spasms, and by the morbid Fullness and Distension of the
Parts within, consequent thereto, the Heart, and Brain must, at length, be
entirely disabled from performing those Functions, on which the Lives of all
Animals do absolutely depend. For this Reason it is, that the sick are in Lom.
Obs. p. 7.
great Danger in continual Fevers, when, after a Rigor or Shuddering, they do
not grow warm. Hence likewise those who dye of intermitting Fevers, commonly
expire in the Cold Fit. And in all dead Bodies the right Ventricle of the Heart
is found very much distended with Blood.

FROM what has been said, it follows that CRUDITY in Fevers, so much talked of,
and so little understood, is in Truth nothing else, but an Vid. Heq. de Purg.
Med. p. 206.
irregular, and devious Motion of the Vital Fluids, from the constringed
Surface of the Body, into the VISCERA, causing such a Fullness, and Distension
in them, as are apt to produce the usual Symptoms of these Distempers; and that
their CRISIS, therefore, consists, not in the Expulsion of any morbisic Matter
out of the Body; but only in the Removal of that Constriction of the Surface,
and in an Opportunity, thereby, given to Nature to restore to the vital Juices
their due, and regular Motion through all their usual Channels. Wherefore the
Evacuations, commonly happening in this Period of Fevers, ought to be looked
upon merely as the Effects of that general Relaxation of the Solids, which then
always ensues; and to be helpful to the sick, in no other manner, but by taking
off that extraordinary Fullness in the Bowels, from whence all their Complaints
arose.

AND, although, when these Diseases are left to themselves, and Art does not
interfere with them, these Evacuations, for the most Part, happen on certain
Days, which are therefore distinguished by the Name of CRITICAL; yet we often
find the Matter otherwise, when proper Remedys have been administered from the
Beginning, in order to put a Stop to them. For which Reason Vid. Etmul. Fol.
214. Helmont. de Feb. cap. XI.
modern Physicians pay not altogether so scrupulous a Regard to those Days, as
the Ancients have done; who were more employed in observing the Progress, and
Changes of Distempers, than in applying Medecines for their Cure. Thus we have
already shown, from the concurring Testimonys of the best Physicians, that an
End may be put to ordinary Fevers on the first, or second Day of their
Appearance, though neither of these Days was ever accounted CRITICAL.

IN this manner, may be explained both the Symptoms, and Events of ordinary
Fevers, as arising solely from a preternatural Change in the Solid Parts of the
Body; and without having Recourse to hypothetical Conjectures of their being
caused by any acrimonious Impuritys in the Blood itself. For it is highly
probable, that no such Impuritys can be admitted through the extremely small,
and delicate Orifices of the lacteal Vessels; and that as well on Account of
the great Irritability of these Orifices, (which the Contact of every thing
that is acrimonious must immediately close) as likewise, because these Vessels
are formed only for the Reception of such a Liquor as may contribute to the
Nourishment, and Preservation of the Animal, or at least is not destructive of
it. Thus we says De Purg. M^dec.
HEQUET, that a sower Chyle is always refused by them, and cast out of the Body
in loose Stools. Or, if any such Impuritys, wrapped up perhaps in smooch Chyle,
should be suffered to pass through these Vessels into the Blood, Nature has
provided various Outlets to discharge them by; and more Superfluitys of any
Kind, than can be readily discharged by these Outlets, it is not reasonable to
think she will receive.

IN the Progress of Fevers indeed, when, by Means of the Spasms in the Surface,
Obstructions have been already formed in the Bowels, and the usual Secretions
have been stopped, the Blood may become too thick, or otherwise impure, as
slow-moving, or stagnating Waters may be foul and corrupted; Id ibid.
but as this happens only secundarily, and by accident, it ought to be
considered, in these Distempers, meetly as a Symptom, but never as a Cause.
Thus it has been observed, that Fevers frequently happen to Bodies, Vid. Syd.
de Feb.
whose Humors are pure; though these Humors may be afterward tainted in the
Course of the Sickness. And it has been always remarked, that Vid. Lom. Obs. p.
4. and alio^.
putrid Fevers themselves are most incident to Persons, of a found, laudable,
and well-conditioned Blood.

THAT the Tenacity of the Blood, in these Diseases, is in Truth nothing more
than the Effect of those Rigors at the Beginning of them, which slacken, and
obstruct its Motion in the superficial Parts of the Body, appears, I think,
from hence, that, if Blood be drawn during those Rigors, it shall be found so
thick, and tenacious, as to pass with Difficulty through the Orifice that is
made in the Vein; but it will be much thiner, and come out with greater
Freedom, if it be drawn either sometime before those Rigors have been felt, or
when they are abated.

AND, in general, the Appearances of Blood drawn in these, and other
Distempers, are so various and uncertain, that a prudent Physician will hardly
lay any Stress upon them in Choosing his Method of Cure. Prax. p. 141.
BAGLIVI has observed, that almost all those have been recovered from acute
Diseases, whose Blood, when drawn, was covered with a White, and Chylous Crust;
which, however, is vulgarly looked upon as a Mark of bad, and even corrupted
Blood. And Therapeut. p. 277.
FREDERIC HOFFMAN informs us, that he has often seen Blood, taken from
scorbutical and hectical People, that was elegantly Red and fluid, while that
which had been drawn from sound, and healthy Persons, was thick, black, and
glutinous. And I have observed, Id ibid.
continues he, Blood to flow from Arterys opened in a virulent Cancer, which
was fluid, of a fine Red Color, and in all Appearance, without Fault. De sang.
Miss.
BALLONIUS affirms, "that impure Blood has been taken from many, whose inward
Parts appeared, after Death, to have been sound; and that pure Blood has been
drawn from others, whose Lungs, and Bowels have been found to be rotten."

ALL Attempts therefore to cure Fevers by directly attenuating the Blood; or by
correcting, or expelling any morbific Matter supposed to be in it, must be
vain, and fruitless; inasmuch as they are levelled, not at the Causes, but
merely at the Effects of these Disorders. And indeed, that the rectifying of
the solid Parts of the Body, ought to be the Phisitian's chief Care, in these
and other Diseases, seems reasonable from this Consideration, that the Vid.
Fred. Hoffm. diss. de Intest. duoden.
Operation of such Medecines, as have been found successful against the most
dangerous and obstinate Distempers, is, in all Probability, confined to these
Parts; and that they produce their most salutary Effects, in the Id. diss. de
just. Ventric. Helmont. Fol. 300.
Stomach and Guts, by affecting principally their nervous Coats, and other
Parts of the Body by Consent only. We have already observed, that acid
Medecines, which are allowed to be of great Use in Fevers, are entirely changed
in the first Ways; or at least, soon after they have been received into the
Blood.

IT now remains to show, by what Means that Rigor and Constriction of the
Surface, from which, we have proved, all the other Symptoms of Fevers arise,
are themselves produced; and these Means I take to be no other, but those very
Things which are commonly called the remote Causes of these Disorders; viz.
Cold taken, Excesses in Eating and Drinking, the Suppression of some usual
Discharge, Trouble of Mind, and other Accidents of the like Nature, when great
and sudden.

FOR, First; as to Gold taken, a Rigor and Constriction of the Surface, and a
Fever thence ensuing, are such common and obvious Effects of it, that all Proof
on this Head is unnecessary.

Thus the Vid. Gal. 11. Meth. etc.
ancient Physicians generally attributed the Rise even of putrid Fevers, to no
other Cause, but the Obstruction of the Pores of the Skin.

SECONDLY; Excesses in Eating and Drinking are apt to leave Crudities in the
Stomach, which, by remaining there for a certain Time, grow acrid, and
vellicate its nervous Coat; and from thence a Rigor or Constriction may be
propagated, by Consent, to the Surface of the Body. Of this Consent of the
Stomach with the Skin, we have a plain Proof, in those who are apt to shudder
after having taken Things that are acrid or sower. And CELSUS, FERNELIUS, and
ETMULLER plainly insinuate, that the Cause of those Horrors, which commonly
introduce Fevers, often lies in the Stomach only.

THIRDLY; In the Suppression of every usual Discharge, especially when great
and sudden, there is a morbid Fullness, in the Vessels, from whence the
Discharge used to be made; and this Fullness, must necessarily occasion a
Spasm, or Constriction in other Parts; but in none to such a Degree, as in
those at the Surface and Extremities, by Reason of their great and general
Consent with all the rest of the Body. Thus Coac. Praen. Fol. 444.
HYPPOCRATES has observed, that a dangerous Rigor ensues upon the untimely
Suppression of the Purgations of Women in Childbed, or after a Miscarriage.
And hence, on the other Hand, Baths of warm Water Vid. Prosp. Alp. de Med.
Egypt. p. 114.
, by relaxing the Skin, inviting the Humors thither, and opening the
perspiratory Pores, are apt to remove Obstructions in the inner Vessels, and by
that Means, often renew those Discharges from them, which had been suppressed.

LASTLY, That Trouble of Mind occasions Fevers by affecting the Surface in the
same Manner, appears from the Method of Cure, successfully used by the ancient
Physicians in the Beginning of Fevers so caused, which was no other, but
Friction, Unction, and the warm Bath.

THUS have we assigned for the Production of those Rigors, that generally usher
in Fevers, Causes, which are plain and sufficient, and may be easily removed,
together with their ill Effects, by a timely Application of Vid. Part the
second of this Essay.
proper Remedies. And we have excluded, from that Denomination, such Things
only as, whatever may be thought of them, have been proved to be merely Effects
of these Distempers, hardly, if at all, to be come at by the Medecines usual in
these Cases, and which, therefore, serve for no other Purpose, but to terrify
the Sick, and mislead the Physician.

FINIS.

