The so much talked of and expected Old Woman's DUNCIAD.

OR, MIDWIFE's MASTERPIECE.

CONTAINING The most choice Collection of Humdrums and Drivellers, that was
ever exposed to public View.

BY MARY MIDNIGHT.

WITH Historical, Critical, and Explanatory NOTES, BY Margelina Scribelinda
Macularia.

Quos fama recens and celebravit Anus. BARROW. No Author ever spared a Brother;
Wits are Game Cocks to one another. GAY. Out with it DUNCIAD. POPE. Published
pursuant to Act of Parliament, as the greatest Work ever before attempted in
any Age, Country, or Language.

LONDON: Printed for THEO. CARNAN, and sold by F. STAMPER, in Pope's-Head
Alley, Cornhill; J. ROBINSON, at the Golden-Lion, Ludgate Street; R. WILSON, in
Pall Mall; and at all the Pamphlet-Shops. MDCCLI.

PREFACE
BY Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.
AS there are so many Impostors and Imitators Abroad, it is highly requisite
the Public should be satisfied, that this is the true and genuine Dunciad of
Mrs. Mary Midnight; to which End I have wrote this short Preface. The Reader,
therefore, is desired to attend to me with a little Patience, before he enters
upon this great and wonderful Work. The extensive Fame our Author has gained,
by her learned Lucubrations, in all the Courts and Universities in Europe, has
excited many (who have, by some Means or other, met with some of her Fragments)
to vend among them their Heaps of Trash in her Name; but it is hoped the World
will do her the Justice, to think she is not the Author of such poor paultry,
wishy, washy, shim-sham Performances.

To reward, among many others, the Authors of such Proceedings in a Manner due
to their Deserts, Mrs. Midnight has designed and executed this Work; but, as an
Affair of so much Consequence could not but get Air in the World, several of
these, who were conscious of their Guilt, applied to her to be excused a Place;
or, in other Words, to be left out of her Dunciad: Among which came the
celebrated Pentweazle, and meanly offered her five Guineas in part, on
Subscription to her Miscellany of Poems, to be published some Time in February
next. But Mrs. Midnight being above any mercenary View, was deaf to all
Overtures, however considerable, of this kind: Upon which, with their usual
Assurance, her Enemies advertised even this intended Work, the Old Woman's
Dunciad, in here is and in my Name, intending to impose some Trumpery or other on
the World, before this Poem could appear; and, with the most consummate
Impudence, put out Advertisements against the fictitious Imitators of Mrs.
Midnight's Works, to outface, if possible, the very Truth itself. But we have,
through a surprising Quickness of Genius, peculiar to our Author, anticipated
their Designs, to their utter Confusion: Since the World will, by reading the
following Work, be convinced of the genuine and elevated Spirit of Mrs.
Midnight, and will not, for the future, be so easily imposed on. I shall just
add a Word or two on our Author's Character in general, and on this Work in
particular. As to Mrs. Midnight's Reputation as an Author, notwithstanding she
has made herself known but lately under that Name, yet it has been very
extensive, under the more general one of Old Woman; she having had the
principal Hand in most of the Performances that have been wrote within these
few Years past; all which have been infallibly known by the Critics, who upon
Perusal of them, have immediately laid them down, and crying out, the Author's
an Old Woman; intimating thereby their Knowledge of her Works, and her
established Reputation that raised them above Criticism. As to this Poem in
particular, the Public can never enough acknowledge the Obligations they owe
her, in these Improvements of our Language; which, however, fall vastly short
of what she purposes to do, having selected several thousands of the most
curious and copious in the Sea Eulogium on the Welsh Tongue. Cambria Book II.
Line 20.
Gemerian or Welsh Tongue, which will far exceed any Embellishment whatsoever
drawn from the Greek or Latin.

MARGELINA SCRIBELINDA MACULARIA.

THE Old Woman's DUNCIAD.
O Thou, whatever Title to thine Ear,
Whether Tom Jones, Joe Andrews, or what not,
Sound pleasing: thou, to my aspiring Song
Indulgent smile, while to high Pindus Top, Line I. O thou, etc.] Our judicious
and learned Author, Mrs. Midnight seems, at first setting out, to give us an
Instance, that she knows what she is about, by this Imitation of the great
Satyrist Mr. Pope; in whose Dunciad are the following Lines addressed to Swift,
as are the above to Fielding. O thou whatever Title please thine Ear,
Swift, Drapier, Bickerstaff; or Gulliver.




Apex excelse! I volitate, nor frown
Elenthical. Of Dunces, and the Tribe
Of Nose-obesate, atramental Sons
I sing: nor PHOEBUS call, but to my Aid
Invoke MELPOMENE, of all the nine
My chief, best Patron; and THALIA, thou,
Haste thee from Avon's Banks, nor cull more Flowers
For Shakespeare's Wreath: but help to assist my Flight; Line 5. Apex excelse!
-- high Top!] We never can enough admire this Instance of the superexcellent
Beauty of Expression, made use of by our modern Poets; in endeavoring to make
our Tongue so nearly resemble that truly noble and elevated Language the Latin.
Martina Scribeinda Macularia.

Line 7. Of Nose obesete-snotty Noses This Epithet, which, as a compound one,
is not a little to be commended, is yet more admirable, as it has its
Derivation from the Latin; in which Language a judicious and witty Man is
signified by a Man with his Nose wiped; and a Blockhead by a Fellow with a
nasty or fat Nose, according to our vulgar Phrase a snotty one. Martina
Scribelinda Macularia.

Line 11. Cull more Flowers -- nor Rosemary cull] The Text is here extremely
well expressed in the Interpretation, as the so often repeated Thought of the
Muses gathering Flowers upon the Banks of the River Avon, for Shakespeare, can
certainly mean no more than the old fashioned Custom of gathering Rosemary for
the Dead. -- The Reader may find the above Thought in the Pleasures of
Imagination, also in a late Piece called the Rosciad and many others; whose
Merit is a sufficient Reason, I suppose, for its being inserted here.



For high on Pegasean Wing, I mean
To soar velocitate. O swifter far
Than fleet the winged Atoms in the Air,
When Auster its Euroclydon dilates:
Or when pervading Night excessive pours
The Twilight dun; with archimagic Art,
(A thrice repeated Charm by Hecate taught!)
The Dame venefic, on a Virgult borne,
Or courser stramentitious, Ether Wings.
Line 16. When Austor its Euroclydon dilates] Mrs. Midnight is here openly
indebted to the Author of the Rosciad, Line 58. We have before observed the
Beauty of Latinizing our Language, we have in this Line a happy Instance of
both Greek and Latin, without the least Variation in the Idiom, becoming easy
and flowing English, very intelligible to the meanest Reader, and
notwithstanding the Herd of Critics of low Taste, inveigh bitterly against this
Practice, and call it a bastardiz'd Innovation of Dialect, I advise all, who
would make any Figure in these Days, to lug in by the Ears all Manner of
uncommon Phrases and Epithets they can lay hold of, and subject them to their
own Use as lawful Prizes. Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.


Thanks to the Power of Verse! lo! now I soar
And lo! the House of Dullness is in view
See towering Paul's eeclesiastic Dome
Its Head rears altitudinate: O far
The meaner emulating Tribe above
Of Spires parochial: so famed Cambria's Hills.
Like Alps on Alps, Pelion over Ossa pil'd Line 26. The meaner emulating Tribe
above.] I cannot think Mrs. Midnight the Author of that surprising Beauty in
this Line, by the Position of the Preposition above, it seeming to me, that she
has borrowed the Hint from the celebrated Dr. Young, whose Elegances of that
Kind are numerous; he says, if I mistake not, Life is a Stage. Inch high the
Grave above --

Line 28. Like Alps on Alps, etc] This and the following Line are taken from
Cambria, where they seem to be the Effect, to use the Author's own Words, of a
Regard for A Land renowned of old for nobelst Deeds, For which Reason every
Mountain must be the highest in the World, as he says The Pyrenoeans, Appenine,
and Alps,
With meaner Altitude invade the Skies,
Than Cambrian Mountains --
Now, it is not to be supposed that the Author has ever seen Italy, France or
Spain; or that he has taken the Altitude of his own Country Hills with the
Barometer -- No, -- Reader, there is a Figure in Rhetoric called the Hyperbole,
by which a Man may assert what he knows nothing at all of, and tell as many
Lies as he pleases -- It is by this Figure, Reader, that Mrs. Midnight has
ornamented her Poem by this Simile from the above famous Writer, for it is
impossible she should know so little as to imagine the Alps, etc. stand in the
same Comparison below the Welsh Mountains as the common Parish Churches do to
St. Paul's -- Margelina Seribelinda Macularia.



High as Olympus, lose in airy Height
Their Heads; as ancient as the Pen of Time.
There is a Cave fast by the House of Prayer,
Where Hebetudo dwells; so low its Site,
That it may merit well speluncal Name.
Its vestibule that gulphy Influx near,
Where the Colluvian Current pouring on, Line 30. As ancient as the Pen of
Time] Endless have been the Disputes that Mrs. Midnight has had with some
Critics, to which she has communicated this Design on this Passage -- they
assert that it is the first Time, Time ever was taken for an Author (as giving
him a Pen seems to imitate he is) but that, on the contrary, they are a Set of
People he has a mortal Aversion to; as they are Enemies to his Employment, by
immortalizing those very Persons and Things he endeavors to erase -- in answer
to this, let them only see Cambria, Line 33. Book I. and be satisfied, from the
Credit of that Author, of its Propriety; whose very Words she has borrowed,
Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.



Rushing sonorous Falls the hoarse Cascade,
The illucid Lapse adown, with Torrent thick
Regurgling lutulent. The Cave within
The torpid Wretch, by igneal Glimmer seen. Line 37. The illucid Lopse, etc.]
The Reader may observe how our Author has imitated the great Men of our own Day
in five or six of the preceding Lines; in which she has not an elegant Word but
belongs to some of them. Nay, she has even almost copied whole Lines from them,
in particular, from Cambria; and the beautiful Expression of the lucid Lapse,
from the Excursion of Mr. Mallet -- I am somewhat surprised, however, that Mrs.
Midnight could condescend to imitate, in so unpoetical a Line as There is a
Cave fast by this House of Prayer, a Writer of so little Credit in Point of
Language as Milton; since it might have been modernized beautifully thus; This
Deem eretial near, a Cave exists. but there is no Work, as Mr. Pope says,
without some Blemish, Whoever thinks a faultless Piece to see
Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be.
it is therefore excuseable if in a Poem, like this, so crammed with Beauties,
there should he found one Fault.

Line 39. The torpid Wretch] The Reader, to taste the Beauty of this Picture,
and come to a right Understanding of our Author, must turn to the Frontispiece
of the Old Woman's Magazine,(a Work of which Notice has been taken in our
Preface) where he will find the Pictures of Dullness and Poverty represented
under the Characters of Mrs. Mary Midnight and her Consederate Succubus Canidia
-- See Front to Old Wom. Mag. and Page 97. No. III.



With Succubus Canidia, by that Name
If rightly she be called, sit hovering. So
In culmiferous Fields or frondose Woods,
With all their Opulence and native Worth,
The Egyptian Tribe itinerant repose
At prandial Noon, and dire mundungus Fume: Line 40. By that Name, etc.] It is
a Matter of no little Dispute whether the Consederate of Dullness should be
called Succubus Canidia -- the Christian Name, signifying a Devil in the Shape
of an old Woman, and the Surname being taken from that of a Neapolitan Jezebel,
whom Horace calls a Witch -- the Query is (since we know the Figure represented
is Poverty) whether Poverty can be justly called a Witch? Some have asserted,
yes; because Witches are always poor, and old. But this is consuted by the
learned and judicious Author of the Spectator, who says, that though Poverty and
Age make Women suspected of being Witches, it is, nevertheless, no Proof of
their, being so. And as to Shakespeare's representing his Witches in this
Manner, every Body knows his poetical Genius, never consined himself to
historical Truth. It is, in fine, so abstruse and intricate a Point, that though
I have consulted Glanville, Moreton and others, I must leave it to the Decision
of abler Critics.

Line 42. In culmiferous, etc] The Propriety of these Epithets are admirable,
and particularly consonant to Horace's Rule -- they seem to be borrowed from
Cambria, and are not a little akin to the Author of this Line And tamed the
rough Ferocity of Men.
ROSCIAD. here we see the Beauty of the latinized English, since it would else
have been the rough Roughness, which would have been a very rough Expression
indeed. Martina Scribelinda Macularia.



So they the loved Nicotian masticate,
Or through Shiptonian Syrinx it inhale,
Fumifical: while in her better Hand
The Goddess a Pyxidicule sustains,
And Autographs and Schedals grace her Right.
Her daily Lucubrations! Thoughts prelaute!
Thoughts which her meditative Owl inspires. Line 48. In her better Hand.]
Doubtless many People will wonder why the Left Hand should be here expressed by
the better, and will dispute why one Hand is better than the other, but Mrs.
Midnight has not wrote this without a Precedent, the Reader will find this same
Epithet in the Rosciad, Ver. 69, to specify the Right Hand, which she has here
given to the Left; admirably intimating that Dullness is Left Handed; or in
other Terms, unlucky. Martina Scribelinda Macularia.

Line 51. Daily Lucubrations!] The Reader will do well to consider, that as
Dullness lives in a Cellar, it is no Wonder she burns Candle in the
Day-Time-beside the Text says they are Thoughts her Owl inspires: And who knows
but her Owl may be in as bad a Situation as Mr. Smart, who wanted Light to see
that it was dark, as a late Epigram intimates. -- See Kapelion, No. 4. It is
however, certain that all Authors have not the clearest Ideas of Day and Night
-- You will find in the Rosciad that at Night -- The lunar Queen
Shines forth with Splendour round the dimmer Day.


Line 51. -- Thoughts prelaute] Doubtless the Critics, of a fine Ear for the
Flow of Verse, will be as much offended at the disagreeable Sound (I might have
said Cacophony) of these two open Words coming together, as were the fine
tympanum'd Gentry, in the Court of Angustus, against a certain Line in Virgil
(which as I don't remember I must pass over) but Mrs. Midnight has in this
shown her Respect for the Modernizes of Poetry -- I will give you an Instance
-- A certain Writer, who stands much on his Merit in this Point, has used often
these two Words together, natal Land. Now there is a surprising Harshness in
the two Else, and almost an Impossibility of pronouncing them both, without
making a Stop between the Words -- It is true, Mr. Row, with wonderful
Sweetness, has used the Word native here More than myself I prize my native
Land.

Here now is a softening Syllable to harmonize the Strength of the preceding
and following ones -- but what of this? Native is a vulgar Word, and every
Consideration should be given up for an Epithet obsolete or uncommon, as the
abovementioned Refiner of plain English has shown us, such as, Patriotic Worth
-- Treaty of Pacification, and numberless others -- it must be owned -- Patriot
worth -- Treaty of Peace, would be equally expressive, and a thousand Times
more elegant and beautiful; but, as that would be a common Way of Speech, the
Dignity of the Language would have been degraded.



For he, the Sodale of her studious Hours,
Sung ululatious; contemplating deep.
Bright Contemplation! dignate of himself!
Illustrious Son of Hebetudo's Race!
O all ye numerous Tribe, who in her Cave
Delight to dwell; of you the Muse shall sing.
The Verse as a Mnemosynum accept,
And erst with poplicolal Hand repay.
Within this sacred Cave where Hebes dwells,
In this her sluggish Pomp, her Sons attend;
Each to the nodding Head and beck'ning Eye
Obsequious. Chief, sapient Bubo first
Stands pendent; in his mounted Carcer held
Restrictive. Here he genders Thought on Thought,
As 'tween his Nods meditabundate, Want
And Hunger gaunt awake his bardate Soul.
Line 65. Steed pendent.] It is probable some of the witty Gentlemen, of the
present Age, may laugh here, and accuse the Author of Hibernianism and say it
is only a mean Imitation of a Saying of the celebrated Barnaby Buxtm, who told
an Acquaintance, he steed like a Man hanging in Chains: But, with Submission to
these facetious Critics, if they reflect upon the Situation of a Bird perched
in a hanging Cage, it is possible they may reconcile this Passage to English.

Line 67. As'tween her Nods.] This is a true and lively Image of any Author who
writes for Pay, whose Genius is never awake but when he is hungry.


Ah Miser those who fall in Dullness snare!
More fatal hers than Circe's Charms of Yore,
Which porcufied Ulysses vagrant train!
Say, Muse, how Ebenezer, by her Power,
From human Frame into bubonic Form
Fell metamorphos'd (so Ascalaphus.
Son Acherontic! by raged Proserpine
Was verted hapless) once solertial Smart, Line 72. How Ebenezer] Ebenezer
Pentweazle, of Truro in the County of Cornwall, Esquire a celebrated Epigrammatist.

Line 73. Into bubonic Form.] The Metamorphosis of Pentweazle into an Owl, is
so admirably fancied, that I cannot help preferring it to every thing I have met
with in Ovid. The Similitude of an Author's being confined to Study in his, or
his Bookseller's, Garret, for Means of Livelihood, is prodigiously similar to
an Owl's perching on the Beam of a Barn, meditating on the Mice which she is to
have -- if she can catch them.

Line 76. Solertial, Smart.] This Passage bears some Dispute; as it is
questioned, by many, whether there should be a Comma between these two Words --
Some assert the former to be an Adjective, and the last a Substantive, and
suspect Mrs. Midnight of a Pun in Heroics; others will have the Comma stand,
and assert they are hoth Adjectives. I have considered the Point very seriously
and, finding so many Reasons on both Sides, must leave it to the Decision of
the Grammarians.



He laughed and sung; ever yet Canidia cursed,
Her macerated Corpse in Sacell laid;
Where, in the Form of Vacuum, she dwelt,
And banished every Golden, Rhyming Thought.
Just then, in fatal Hour grave Hebes woke,
And in her leaden Hand a Crustule bore: Line 79. Woere in the Form of Vacuum.]
It is likely many of our Brother Authors, especially those of the mathematical
and philosophical Turn, will very learnedly and wittily ask in what Form is the
Form of nothing; however, I must confess, for my own part, that I think Mrs.
Midnight goes, in this Place, as infinitely beyond herself as all other Authors
have fallen short of her -- this is a very bold and caring Expression, and is
beyond Criticism itself; and whether the Writers of the present Day will allow
the Beauty and Justice of this Passage or not; they have, undoubtedly, often
experienced it: So that, I think, their Disputes of the Existence of a Vacuum
in the Universe, would be better supplied by a Study to destroy the Vacuum they
find in their Pockets.

Line 80. Golden, rhyming Thought.] Notwithstanding Tom Brown has written a
long and learned Dissertation, in Praise of Poverty, and Mr. Moore an admirable
Fable to prove that Want is ths greatest Help to Genius; yet there are few,
even Poets, I believe, but think the jingling of one Guinea against another,
infinitely better Rhyme than Pope, Gay or Moore ever wrote in their Lives, and
would approve a Bank Note of an hundred Pounds, as the best Prose they ever
read. Nay, I believe, with a little Persuasion, Mr. R -- t himself would be
brought to accept it, notwithstanding there should be no hard Word in it.



Charm more coercive to the inedial Gout,
Then noctial Incantation of an Hag,
Than orient Tal'sman or mysterious Cast.
By learned Genethliac made. Ah! luckless! Ah!
He took and eat; and from that Moment sunk
Mancipial Immolation to her Will.
And now, whenever the Coenal Hour is nigh,
Behold her potent Wand, her Paxil, waves
And he, in Cell sublime, a Bird of Night,
Screams hideous, or, in Dormitation mounts
Aquiline Wings, and in Etherial Space
Builds castral Edifices: Or he is pent,
In Shape Mustelar, to the Goddess' Use
Subservient; or, perverted into Form
Anicular, he verrates coenal Trash.
With miscellaneous Art; cracks kernell'd Nuts Line 94. Or he is pent.

Line 95. In Shape mustelar.] This is the second Time, in this Work, where a
Pun may be suspected -- in the former Passage, I forbore to give my Judgment;
but here, I must own, the Words point immediately to the Name Pentweazle; yet
is not this Passage to be degraded, since it is only introducing a new and bold
Figure called the Allus^^^^^la, which I would recommend to all the Refiners of
Language whatever. Margelina Seribelinda Macularia.

Line 98. Cracks kernell'd Nuts] Some of our Readers may perhaps imagine here
are meant Nuts with Kernels in them -- to free them from that Mistake, I beg
Leave to assure them that Mrs. Midnight means Nuts without Kernels; as is
expressed in the Interpretation: To come at the true and full Meaning of the
Text, it is necessary we subjoin the following Advertisement given out by the
fictitious, etc. To make you all merry at Christmas, and to open the New Year
with Pleasure and satisfaction, my Publisher will exhibit on the 26th of this
Instant, to all who are pleased to purchase the same, A most admirable,
learned, and judicious Work entitled,

The NUT-CRACKER. Containing an agreeable Variety of well-seasoned Jests,
Epigrams, Epitaphs, etc. collected from the most Sprightly Wits of the present
Age. Together with such Instructions as will enable any Man to tell a Story
with a good Grace, and crack a Nut without losing the Kernel. With other
Particulars equally useful and entertaining, and for which the gentle, kind,
and courteous Reader, will be pleased to look into the Book itself. Published
with the Approbation of the Learned in all Faculties, by Ferdinando Foot, Esquire

Now, Reader, these Nuts, here so bragged of, have been cracked before by Joe
Miller, and the whole Tribe of Nut-crackers, who have been wise enough to
secure the Kernels.



Or mumbles Grace twice over; and grinning shows
His toothless Gums. Ah void of Power to hurt!
Next him, as next in Erudition taught,
From Oxon's famed Gymnasial lo! he comes;
For whom, on Isis' Banks, first founding Fame
The Student's, Honor, circumclangor'd wide
With Buccination: metamorphos'd now, Line 99. Or mumbles Grace 'twice o'er]
The Reader will find the same Preface to the above Nut-cracker as to the Old
Woman's Magazine: A Sign their own Wit is not very plenty.

Line 99. And grinning Shews] Mrs. Midnight here seems to point at some late
Advertisements, put out in her Name; by the fictitious Attempters to her Humor
and Genius; which, as they are remarkable Instances of the Considence of these
People, we shall give an Instance or two.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS several egregious Idiots have been flinging Dirt at Mrs. Midnight and
her Works. The Public is desired to take Notice, that there is now in the
Press, and speedily will be published, the Old Woman's Dunciad with Notes.

THE Gentleman who sent five Guineas to be excused a Place, or, in other Words,
to be left out of my Dunciad, is desired to call at my Publisher's and receive
his Money; for, upon Enquiry, he appears to be such an egregious Blockhead, and
is in all Respects so fit for Celebration, and so worthy of public Notice,
that I cannot prevail on myself to omit any Character which will afford my
Friends such high Entertainment.

The Reader is here desired to recollect, or: turn back to the Preface.



Behold him into a Monedule turned,
Rostrate the ingenial Cloac: Labor vile!
Or, in Theristral, femininely clad,
Assist the Trump of Fame debilitate
With Garrulations; while sage Bubo dreams
Of Domes Chimaeric; Domes too dearly bought!
For here no stipend Earth, nor Art piles up
The sculptured Stone, nor glow enflaming Kilns. Line 106. Into a Monedule
turn'd] Whoever has the Honor of knowing this learned and ingenious Gentleman
will see a great deal of Prepriety in his being converted to a Jack-daw; as his
natural Gift of chattering might probably inspire Dullness with that Intention.
We are, however, serry this Misfortune should happen to him before the
finishing of the Tragedy he is engaged in as a Work of Nature requires
undoubtedly a great deal of Solidity.

Line 107. Rostrate the ingenial Cloac] This is admirably natural, and
peculiarly adapted to the Nature of a Jackdaw, who is pecking among all the
Filth and Rubbish he comes near.

Line 111. Domes too dearly bought!] The Gentleman, who is the Owner of these
Castles, and employs this mighty Builder, complains very much of the Charges he
is at in erecting them. Margelina, etc.

Line 112, etc.] -- Where Art never pil'd The sculptured Stone, nor glowed
enflaming Kilns To dense the conculcated Clay. CAMBRIA.



To dense the conculated Clay; and yet
For this, he shares the Cibals of the Day.
The next Inhabitant of Hebes Cave!
Third favorite Son! Frigidio calls my Song,
Whose worth through Fame's loud retrovent respires.
Behold, with gloomy Brow, contracted Frown,
In hypocondriac cephalalgiac vexed,
He sits contristate; manducating Thoughts Line 117. Frigidio calls my Song.] A
Personage who needs no Celebration from any other Pen than his own.

Line 118. Feme's loud retrovert.] Many of our Readers will perhaps think this
Sentiment rather ludicrous than momentary; but it is seldom, very seldom that
our Author writes without a Meaning, though it is possible an ordinary Genius
may be at a Loss to find it out, I presume, by Fame's proclaiming the Name of
this Gentleman backwards, is intended the Pains and Trouble he himself takes to
tell People he is a great Man, which is undoubtedly the reverse Way to Fame.

Line 121. Manducating Thoughts.] Here is not a little Beauty in this
Expression, which it is probable the Reader, of little Penetration, will suffer
to escape him -- chewing Thoughts -- intimating hereby that this Author chews
his Sentiments so long that they come from him, with all the Sweetness sucked
out of them like dried Sticks.



In vaccal Rumination; for alas!
Pollution braccial, oviparous Care
Him deep affects. O say, celestial Muse,
From what fell Cause this cacatural Woe
Her darling Child befell. So willed the Fates,
That in accursed Hour, on vile Intent.
Smack'em, a hostile and mischievous Wight,
Entered this Cavern of Cimmerian Gloom, Line 122. In vaccal Rumination]. Here
seems to be a very extraordinary Meaning couched under the Epithet vaccal --
ruminating like a C^w -- It is a Question well wertly the study and Decision of
our candid Disputants and free Enquirers in what Manner Cows may be said to
ruminate; or how for those Ideas may comprehend; or whether they are in a
Capacity of entertaining complex or only simple Ideas -- for my own Part, as I
never imagined a Cow, chewing the Cud, a Picture of Reflection, so I never gave
myself the Trouble to ask any one what she was thinking of. I imagine our
Author, Mrs. Midnight, is indebted for this Thought to a late Work, where is
this Passage. Stretched in the Clover Ditch, saint-lowing Herds
Couch ruminant.
You see, from hence, that the Sentiment is however a very good one: But
perhaps this Gentleman, as well as Mrs. Midnight, might be acquainted with some
Cow of Genius, and therefore have done this Honor to their Species.

Line 129. Smack'em. etc.] The Reader will be better acquainted with this
celebrated Personage by perusing the following Advertisement. The MAGAZINES
blown up; or they are all in the Suds. Being a full, true, and particular
Account of the apprehending, seizing and taking of the notified Pentweazle, an
Oxford Scholar, in the Shape of an Old Woman: With his Examination before the
right worshipful justice Banter, and his Commitment to the New Prison. Together
with an Account of his Impeachment of diverse others, who were concerned in many
late barbarous Attempts on the Senses of his Majesty's liege Subjects. -- With
a right and true List of all their Names, who were taken, last Night, at a
House of ill Fame near St. Paul's -- With their whole Examination and
Commitment by the said Gentleman. To which is added, a Key to the Backdoor.
The whole done in plain English, by Whacum Smack'em, the greatest Satirist now
living; Who can deep Mysteries unriddle,
As easily as thread a Needle.
HUDIBRAS. at so small and easy a Charge as Threepence.



And, with Combustion dire, he mouthed out
Verbose, stentorian Execrations, big
With Fate portentous and terrific Wrath.
Frigidio shivered with gelatic Fear;
And through the intestine Cavern Murmurs roared.
Direful Presage of some descending III!
Which now to fly (but who from Fate can fly?) Line 131. Verbose Stentorian,
etc.] Taken from the Rosciad, Consus'd, Stentorian Execrations big
With Fate portentous and cerrifick Wrath.




He festinates precipitate: but lo!
The Lasanon's no more. Fate inbenign!
In Deflagration blazing! see it sink
In Cinefaction. Dire Amazement! ah!
His Fears irrupt deorsate; while alas!
Distained, he sends Effluvias baleful round:
As when the Son of Excrement and Night,
High on his merdose Vehicle uprear'd,
Attaints the Breeze nocturnal: violent, Line 138. The Lasanon's no more.] The
Reader will easily comprehend this Passage, by turning to the Frontispieces of
the Old Waman's Magazine and the Magazines blown up, in the first of which the
Jakes of Genius is placed near the Goddess Dullness, and in the last it is
blazing on the Fire.

Line 140. Dire Amazement! ab!] Nothing can add more to the Dignity of Verse
then the frequent Use of the Ecphenesis or Exclamation -- it being a Privilege
peculiar to Poetry, which renders ordinary Affairs, or those of no Consequence
at all, Matters of the greatest Moment. Thus, a modern Author, introducing a
Sentiment as common as that of one Day passes away, and another comes,
beautifully exclaims, -- Dire Amazement! ah! Is that small Mart, is Newport all
the Spoil Of glorious Isca?



At first the antiaromatic strikes
The Nose inflating: till by slow Degrees
The ambient Air itself edulcorates,
And in Euthanasy the Stench decays.
O famed Carnan, thou Prototype of Curl,
Be this thy Fate: the superfluent Pan
TO evacuate, or with thy Hands immersed Line 149. And in Euthanasy the Stench
decays.] In the Rosciad, the Author, describing the Decrease of the Wind, says
And in Euthanasy the Breeze decays. It may here be observed how far the Poets
of the present Day exceed, in point of Style, all that ever went before them;
and how ignorant, in the true Beauties of Expression, were the most celebrated
Critics of Yesterday -- Says Mr. Pope, Words are like Leaves, and where they
most abound,
Much Fruit of Sense beneath is rarely found.
Again, Such labored Nothings in so strange a Style,
Amaze the unlearned, and make the learned smile.
And again he says, It Is not enough, no Harshness gives Offense,
The Sound must seem an Echo to the Sense.
Now how foreign is the Sound of the Word Euthanasy to its Meaning, a gentle
dying -- And yet the Beauty and Propriety of this Word, as it derives from the
Greek, is beyond all Doubt. Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.

Line 150. O famed Carnan.] T. Carnan not the true and genuine Theophilus
Carnan, Mrs. Midnight's only Bookseller.



In the lutulent Flood, to pict or gild
Thy rubric Post; till like horreal Valve
It beam refulgent.
But hark! what Clamours strike the Tympanum Line 155. It beam refulgent]
Notwithstanding the numerous Excellencies already exemplified in this Poem, I
cannot help preferring this Passage to any other -- Here, Reader, is the
Elegance and the Art of a Poet; to make a Sentiment which is, in it sels, mean
and despicable equal to the most refined and sublime -- Here is a Specimen of
true Wit, -- Nature to Adventage dressed,
What often was thought but never so well expressed,
I imagine Mrs. Midnight has given this, as an Instance of that Power and
Beauty of Language she is Mistress of; which may not only serve to enlighten
all who may write hereafter; but may also convince them of the ignorance of the
best of our Predecessors in this Point -- says Mr. Pope, A vile Conceit, in
pompous Words expressed, Is like a Clown in regal Purple dressed. An undeniable
Proof of the injudicicus Taste of this Author, in so material a Point! -- and
how widely does he mistake the Truth of the Matter, in saying, -- True
Expression, like the unchanging Sun,
Clears and improves whatever it shines upon,
It gilds all Objects, but it alters none.
Now, who does not see in the above Passage in the Text, that the Sentiment is
so altered, that it is scarce discerned to be the same. Who would imagine that,
like Horreal Valve. It beam refulgent. Signified no more than it shines like a
shitten Born Door: Or, as the Reader may recollect several of the preceding
Passages, that -- Nor glow inflaming Kilus
To dence the CONCULCATED Clay
Intimated nothing else than Nor glow the Brick-kilns piping hot
To lake the Clay TROD UNDER FOOT.
To enumerate these Remarks would here be needless as this whole Work may be
said to be one continual Beauty of this Kind. Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.



Auricular! Remains there ought as yet
Amid this Cave within the Muses' lore!
A calamarian Crowd in Limbo lo!
Like the famed Naiads, rage, with curved Arm,
In monomachial War, and cruel Strife.
Those, chiefly, who by Smack'em's potent Hand
Late fell inglorious. Dunciadus, thou
Thou Entity, of universal Fame, Line 160. Like the famed Naiads] See
Fielding's Tom Jones, where he compares the Oyster-Wenches to the Naiads. An
Instance (as well as Mrs. Midnight's) of fine Writing.

Line 161. In monomachial War] Our Author seems here to have an Eye to a
Passage in the Kapelion -- See Archimagirus's Address to his Customers; where
he challenges his Brother Scribblers to fight them, Pen, Ink, and Paper, upon
any Spot of Ground in England, and sends them the Length of his Quills and the
Price of his Paper, to show he scorns to engage them at unequal Weapons.

Line 163. -- Dunciadus thou] The Reader, for an Information concerning this
Character, may turn to the Magazines blown up -- Whimsey Banter says there, his
Bookseller's Sign is his Emblem, and that he is the Packhorse of Authors.
Another Evidence says, he is a Beast of Prey, and loves Carrion and bad Meat.



Thou greatest Crocodile, and greater yet
Illustrious Woodville! Ha! what do I see?
Our eastern Bramin raise his virile Hoar
Most venerable, with each motley Scribe
Magirist, Student, Disputant, what not? Line 165. Thou greatest Crocodile and
greater yet.] A particular Description of all these Characters may be found in
the above mentioned Pamphlet -- Doubtless the Critics will here fall foul upon
Mrs. Midnight, and desire to know if Crocodile is greatest, how Woodville can
be greater -- but sure, Gentlemen, it is impossible but you must have heard of
the new Degree of Comparison, founded on a bold Figure in Rhetoric and called
the super-superLnive. -- It is by this, that the celebrated Author of the ACTOR
says that the Tragic Player requires fire in the greatest Degree, but the Comic
Player in a much g^^ater. Margelina Scribelinda Macularia.

Line 167. Our castern BRAMIN] -- It is presumed no Body is ignorant of the
celebrated Author of the Economy of Human Life, whose Name, coming from so
great a Distance, has made the World not a little suspicious of an Imposture --
The contest here pointed at, is that between the original Bramin and the
Authors of second Parts, Suppliments, etc. which Gentlemen are a Set of
Writers, who, rather than go without a Dinner at all, are contented to take up
with the Victuals half cold, after others have made a Meal, yet boast much of
their Dining at the same Table. -- It is, however, to be disputed which has the
most Right to the Name of a Professor of Virtue and Philosophy, the Bramin of
Grubstrect or the Bramin of PalMall.

Line 169. Magirist, Student, etc. -- By the former of these is meant,
Archimagirus Metaphoricus, Author of the Kapelion, a Work that requires no
Celebration. By the Student, is hinted the Author of a Six-penny Pamphet, under
that Name, published Monthly by the Assistance and Approbation of the two
famous Universities OXFORD and CAMBRIDGE. A surprising and wonderful Example of
the vast and extensive productions of those two great Seminaries! both of
which, we are told, are employed in the composing of this PAMPHLET of important
Articles. What then may not the World expect from, their joint Assistance in so
great a Work?



Muse shut the Scene, the Soul enslaving Scene
Or Hebetudo's potent Wand will make
Even me to nod.
Now is that Work complete, that mighty Work,
Which dignate in insculptur'd Brass to shine,
Or macrocolum typ'd, so long shall live
As the didascal Sage the virgult Shakes
In Vapulations Let no Censor then
Deem this a Song of Folly, or austere, Line 172. Even me to nod. -- The
Hermistics in this Poem I cannot help imputing to a wilful Neglect, which,
however, would be unpardonable in a Work of less Merit than this Dunciad,
Virgil's Aeneids and some others of equal Worth in this Day.

Line 173. Now is that Work, etc. Mrs. Midnight has closed this Poem with as
much Confidence and as justly as the celebrated Ovid; whose Words are, Jam opus
exegi quod nec jovis ira, nec ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas
The following Lines to the End are borrowed from the most modest Writer of the
present Age



Call it a Cacosyntheton, or me
Stygmatize, with Hyberbation Name.
But if fond Regard fot modern Verse,
Deserve Exsibilation, or the Frown
Of quaint Derision. If it is so let loose,
The Storm of Momus, I can bear it all.
The Reader will no doubt much approve this Design of Printing the
Interpretation to this Work, for the Sake of the Herd of Readers, who are void
of a Taste for the Sublime, though it was for a much greater End, which our
celebrated Author intended it, and this was the extensive Utility it would be
of in our Academies, and in particular to the Students of our two Universities;
as she was very sensible this Work would be, as now being published it is,
esteemed Classical; and as such be put on the same sooting with Hemer, Virgil,
Ovid, etc. and be taught as a Pattern of Language in all the distinguished
Schools in Europe. Martina Scribelinda Macularia.
INTERPRETATION.
O thou, whatever Name sound easy,
Jones, Andrews, or what else may please you;
Do thou look pleasant on my Rhyme.
While Pindus Top, high Top! I climb.
Of Dunces, which the Verse supposes
The Sons of Ink with snotty Noses,
I sing: nor call our Rhyming Domine,
But beg my favorite Wench MELPOMENE
(My surest Friend of all the Nine)
To lend a Hand to this Design.
And leave, thou, Thaly, Avon's Shore
Nor Rosemary cull for Shakespeare more
But help my Trot around Parnassus,
Swift on your ambling Nag Pegasus,
Swifter than scamper Snow or Sleet,
When Seaman's Plague drives on the Fleet,
Or when at Night, by Magic wrought,
Of three times three by Hecate taught,
Witches on Wisps of Straw their Bums stick,
Or ride like Devils astride a Broom-stick.
G-d bless the Muse -- I thank her now
I mount and Dullness' Cellar view.
Look where the Church of great St. Paul
Rears up its losty Head so tall,
Above the Parish Churches all.
So notified Welsh Mountains high,
Rear up their Heads above the Sky.
Alps, Alps, and Pelion Ossa pile,
The Lord knows how many hundred Mile;
But by the nearest; Guess that is given
Within Hop, Step, and Jump of Heaven;
Stand, lost in Clouds and Fogs and Rhyme,
As ancient as the Pen of Time.
Now by this Church there is a Cellar,
Where Goddess Dullness is the Dweller;
So very low, that it may well
Deserve the Title of a Cell.
Its Groundfil a Stone's Throw or more,
From where the rushing common Shore
Runs bubbling down the muddy Place,
Roaring with Dirt and Nastiness,
Within this Cellar, scarce discerned
By Cinders into Embers burned,
There hovering sits the Humdrum Wretch
With Canid; called (if right) a Witch:
As in Corn Fields, or leasy Woods,
With all their Chattles and their Goods,
The wandering Gypsies sit them down,
And smoke their Dinner Pipe at Noon,
So they the dear Tobacco Quid,
Or suck short Pipe, as Shipton did,
While in the Goddess better Hand,
A 'bacco Box is at Command;
And the waste Book of common Place,
And written Sheets her left does grace,
Her daily Works of Candle Light,
Works which her screech Owl does indite:
For he, Companion of their Studies,
Was used to hoot, to please the Goddess:
In a brown Study always gone,
Oh ever worthy Dullness Son!
O you, whoever delight to dwell
Within the Threshold of her Cell;
Of you, the Muse her Song shall tell:
Yet in Remembrance beas the Lay,
And as the Time may serve repay.
Within the Cell where Dullness Lives,
Constant each Son attendance gives;
Let her but nod or wink her Eyes,
Whip, Presto, in a Trice, he flies.
Here, chief, her Owl, sedate and Sage,
Stands hanging, in his mounted Cage:
While Thoughts succeed, in nodding Fits,
As musing in the Dumps he sits,
And Hunger jogs and wakes his Wits.
Unlucky those whom Dullness curses!
Her charms more fatal are than Circe's,
That made, of old, such horrid Work,
And turned Greek Sailors into Pork!
Say Muse, how, 'cause it hap'd to please her,
From human Form poor Ebenezer
(For some vile End which she had purposed)
Into an Owl was metamorphos'd.
As once was served the tatling son,
Ascalaphus, of Acheron.
Late witty, Smart, he laughed and sung;
Ever cursed Conidia on him hung,
Who, meagre, in his Pocket crept
And there in form of nothing slept;
Whence every golden Cross she banished,
And even the Sound of Chinking vanished.
Then Dullness showed, in Hour accursed,
Within her leaden Hand a Crust;
More powerful over the hungry Stomach
Than nightly Charm the Witches do make?
Then eastern Tal'sman or strange Scrawls
On the learned Fortune-teller's Walls!
He took and eat -- Lord bless my Eyes!
And fell her slavish Sacrifice.
And now, whenever he wants a Supper,
She waves her powerful 'Bacco-stopper,
And he, aloft; a screech Owl, screams!
Or gets into his tantrum Dreams;
Fancies himself an Eagle there,
And raises Castles in the Air;
Or else, into a Weazel Pent,
He serves the Goddess's intent.
Or else, in an old Woman seen,
Sweeps Rubbish for a Magazine.
Cracks Nuts that have been cracked before,
Or, toothless, mumbles Grace twice over.
Next him, who next in Point of Knowledge is,
Brought up in one of Oxon's Colleges,
For whom, on Isis' Banks the Strumpet
Fame founded Student through her Trumpet,
Now turned into a Jack-daw chatters.
Or in the Jakes of Genius spatters;
Or, dressed in Female Petticoat,
Helps Fame to sound a louder Note;
While the wise screech Owl, in Chimaera,
Builds mighty Castles; bought too dear, Ah!
For here no Ground-Rent is required,
Nor Carvers Work to be admired,
Nor Glow the Brick-kilns piping hot,
To bake the Clay trod under foot:
And yet by this his Dinner's got.
Next Dullness' third and favorite Son,
Frigidio, bids the Verse go on.
Frigidio famed, whose great Renown
Fame loudly, farts about the Town.
See, down in the Mouth, with Brow contracted,
With Headache and the Hip-distracted,
He sits in the Dumps; so ruminating
As thoughtless Cows do when they are eating.
For ah! and oh! in filthy Breeches,
An Egg; fresh laid, his Bum bewitches.
For what, O heavenly Muse! pray tell,
This shitten Curse her Child befell.
So luck would have't, in evil Hour,
Smack'em, a wicked Son of a Whore,
Entered the darksome Cave, and told 'em,
He Would make the House too hot to hold 'em.
Roared, cursed and swore, and played the Devil,
Still threatn'ing some approaching Evil.
Just then Frigidio's Blood ran cold,
And down his Guts loud Grumbles rolled,
That some descending Evil spoke,
Which now (but who can help ill Luck!)
He runs to avoid. But ah! undone!
He finds the Close-stool Refuge gone.
Amid the Fire behold it blazing,
To Cinders burnt. Ah! most amazing!
Now all his Fears behind burst out,
And he besmeared, stinks all about:
As when Tom Turdman, on his Cart,
Poisons the Night with filthy Art;
At first we find the spicy Scent
Perfumes the Nostrils violent;
Till the Air cleansing by Degrees,
The gently dying Stink decays.
Thou Type of Curl! O famed Carnan!
Be thou the Safeguard of the Pan,
If any future Force attempt it;
And when it is full, take care to empt it,
Or dip thy Fingers in the Flood,
And paint and gild with native Mud.
Until thy rubric Post, so fine,
Shall like a shitten Barn-door shine.
But hark! what Noise is this I hear?
What else remains that is Worth my Care?
A Crowd of Scribblers yon, in Limbo,
Like Oyster Nymphs, with Arms a-kimbo,
Lunge with sharp-pointed Pens, as cruel
As pale-faced Beaux do in a Duel.
Those chiefly who of late, notorious
Knocked under Smack'em's Arm inglorious,
Dunciadus, Entity, whose Name is
So universal, and so famous
Thou Crocodile by Name and Nature,
The greatest, and thou Woodville greater.
But who the Duce! marry and Amen!
Our Eastern venerable Bramin!
Old Father gray Beard's whitened Locks
Among Students, Disputants, and Cooks.
Muse shut the Scene* and drop the Curtain,
Or, even, I shall sleep for certain.
Now is that mighty Work complete,
That should, on Brass, be 'graven neat
Or printed on the Royal Sheet:
Where lasting Worth shall be admired
Till Masters are with Flogging tired,
Then let no snarling Critic dream
A Trump'ry-Ballad is my Theme,
Or call (because they think they are wife)
This Fustian; me, a Fustianizer;
But if a Love for modern Verse
Deserve the unluky Play'rs Curse;
Or to be laughed at be its Merit.
Laugh and be pox'd, for I can bear it.
FINIS.

