blazon or coat of arms DIEU ET MON DROIT


GEORGE R.
GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved BERNARD LINTOT of our City of London,
Bookseller, has humbly represented unto Us that he is now printing a
Translation of the ILIAD of HOMER from the Greek in Six Volumes in Folio by
ALEXANDER POPE Gent. with large Notes upon each Book: And whereas the said
BERNARD LINTOT has informed Us that he has been at a great Expense in carrying
on the said Work: and that the sole Right and Title of the Copy of the said
Work is vested in the said BERNARD LINTOT. He has therefore humbly besought Us
to grant him Our Royal Privilege and License for the sole printing and
publishing thereof for the Term of fourteen Years. WE being graciously pleased
to encourage so Useful a Work, are pleased to condescend to his Request, and do
therefore give and grant unto the said BERNARD LINTOT our Royal License and
Privilege for the sole printing and publishing the said Six Volumes of the said
ILIAD of HOMER translated by the said ALEXANDER POPE, for and during the Term
of fourteen Years, to be computed from the Day of the Date hereof; strictly
charging and prohibiting all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to
reprint or abridge the same either in the like or any other Volume or Volumes
whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies of the same
or any part thereof reprinted beyond the Seas within the said Term of fourteen
Years, without the Consent and Approbation of the said BERNARD LINTOT, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals
first had and obtained, as they and every of them offending herein will answer
the contrary at their Perils, and such other Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm may be inflicted: Whereof the Master, Wardens and
Company of Stationers of Our City of London, Commissioners and other Officers
of Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern,
are to take Notice that due Obedience be given to Our Pleasure herein
signified. Given at Our Court at St. James's the sixth Day of May, 1715. in the
first Year of our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command JAMES STANHOPE.

THE ILIAD OF HOMER.

Translated by Mr. POPE.

VOL. V.

-- Sanctos ausus recludere fontes.
VIRG. LONDON: Printed by W. BOWYER, for BERNARD LINTOT between the
Temple-Gates. 1720.

THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The seventh Battle, for the Body of Patroclus: The Acts of Menelaus.
MEnelaus, upon the Death of Patroclus, defends his Body from the Enemy:
Euphorbus who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus retires, but
soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This Glaucus objects to Hector as a
Flight, who thereupon puts on the Armor he had won from Patroclus, and renews
the Battle. The Greeks give Way, till Ajax rallies them: Aeneas sustains the
Trojans. Aeneas and Hector attempt the Chariot of Achilles, which is borne off
by Automedon. The Horses of Achilles deplore the Loss of Patroclus: Jupiter
covers his Body with a thick Darkness: The noble Prayer of Ajax on that
Occasion. Menelaus sends Antilochus to Achilles, with the News of Patroclus's
Death: Then returns to the Fight, where, though attacked with the utmost Fury,
he, and Meriones assisted by the Ajaxes, bear off the Body to the Ships.

The Time is the Evening of the eight and twentieth Day. The Scene lies in the
Fields before Troy.

THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
ON the cold Earth divine Patroclus spread,
Lies pierced with Wounds among the vulgar Dead.
Great Menelaus, touched with generous Woe,
Springs to the Front, and guards him from the Foe:
Thus round her new fallen Young, the Heifer moves,
Fruit of her Throes, and Firstborn of her Loves,
And anxious, (helpless as he lies, and bare)
Turns, and returns her, with a Mother's Care.
Opposed to each, that near the Carcass came,
His broad Shield glimmers, and his Lances flame.
The Son of Panthus, skilled the Dart to send,
Eyes the dead Hero and insults the Friend.
This Hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal Blow:
To me the Spoils my Prowess won, resign;
Depart with Life, and leave the Glory mine.
The Trojan thus: The Spartan Monarch burned
With generous Anguish, and in scorn returned.
Laugh'st thou not, Jove! from thy superior Throne,
When Mortals boast of Prowess not their own?
Not thus the Lion glories in his Might,
Nor Panther braves his spotted Foe in Fight,
Nor thus the Boar (those Terrors of the Plain)
Man only vaunts his Force, and vaunts in vain.
But far the vainest of the boastful Kind
These Sons of Panthus vent their haughty Mind.
Yet 'twas but late, beneath my conquering Steel
This Boaster's Brother, Hyperenor fell,
Against our Arm which rashly he defied,
Vain was his Vigor, and as vain his Pride.
These Eyes beheld him on the Dust expire,
No more to cheer his Spouse, or glad his Sire.
Presumptuous Youth! like his shall be thy Doom,
To wait thy Brother to the Stygian Gloom;
While yet thou may, avoid the threatened Fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.
Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: That Action known,
Come, for my Brother's Blood repay thy own.
His weeping Father claims thy destined Head,
And Spouse, a Widow in her bridal Bed.
On these thy conquered Spoils I shall bestow,
To sooth a Consort's and a Parent's Woe.
No longer then defer the glorious Strife,
Let Heaven decide our Fortune, Fame, and Life.
Swift as the Word, the missile Lance he flings,
The well-aim'd Weapon on the Buckler rings,
But blunted by the Brass innoxious falls.
On Jove the Father, great Atrides calls,
Nor flies the Javelin from his Arm in vain,
It pierced his Throat, and bent him to the Plain;
Wide through the Neck appears the grizly Wound,
Prone sinks the Warrior, and his Arms resound.
The shining Circlets of his golden Hair,
Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
Instarr'd with Gems and Gold, bestrow the Shore,
With Dust dishonored, and deformed with Gore.
As the young Olive, in some Sylvan Scene,
Crowned by fresh Fountains with eternal Green,
Lifts the gay Head, in snowy Flourets fair,
And plays and dances to the gentle Air;
When lo! a Whirlwind from high Heaven invades
The tender Plant, and withers all its Shades;
It lies uprooted from its genial Bed,
A lovely Ruin, now defaced and dead.
Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
While the fierce Spartan tore his Arms away.
Proud of his Deed, and glorious in the Prize,
Affrighted Troy the towering Victor flies,
Flies, as before some Mountain Lion's Ire
The village Curs, and trembling Swains retire;
When over the slaughtered Bull they hear him roar,
And see his Jaws distill with smoking Gore;
All pale with Fear, at distance scattered round,
They shout incessant, and the Vales resound.
Meanwhile Apollo viewed with envious Eyes,
And urged great Hector to dispute the Prize,
(In Mentes Shape, beneath whose martial Care
The rough Ciconians learned the Trade of War)
Forbear, he cried, with fruitless Speed to chase
Achilles' Coursers of ethereal Race;
They stoop not, these, to mortal man's Command,
Or stoop to none but great Achilles' Hand.
Too long amused with a Pursuit so vain,
Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain!
By Sparta slain! for ever now suppressed
The Fire which burned in that undaunted Breast!
Thus having spoke, Apollo winged his Flight
And mixed with Mortals in the Toils of Fight:
His Words infix'd unutterable Care
Deep in great Hector's Soul: Through all the War
He darts his anxious Eye; and instant, viewed
The breathless Hero in his Blood imbrued,
(Forth welling from the Wound, as prone he lay)
And in the Victor's Hands the shining Prey.
Sheathed in bright Arms, through cleaving Ranks he flies,
And sends his Voice in Thunder to the Skies:
Fierce as a Flood of Flame by Vulcan sent,
It flew, and fired the Nations as it went.
Atrides from the Voice the Storm divined,
And thus explored his own unconquered Mind.
Then shall I quit Patroclus on the Plain,
Slain in my Cause, and for my Honor slain,
Desert the Arms, the Relics of my Friend?
Or singly, Hector and his Troops attend?
Sure where such partial Favor Heaven bestowed,
To brave the Hero were to brave the God:
Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the Field;
It Is not to Hector, but to Heaven I yield.
Yet, nor the God, nor Heaven, should give me Fear,
Did but the Voice of Ajax reach my Ear:
Still would we turn, still battle on the Plains,
And give Achilles all that yet remains
Of his and our Patroclus -- This, no more,
The Time allowed: Troy thickened on the Shore,
A sable Scene! The Terrors Hector led.
Slow he recedes, and sighing, quits the Dead.
So from the Fold the unwilling Lion parts,
Forced by loud Clamours, and a Storm of Darts;
He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,
With Heart indignant and retorted Eyes.
Now entered in the Spartan Ranks, he turned
His manly Breast, and with new Fury burned,
Over all the black Battalions sent his View,
And through the Cloud the god-like Ajax knew;
Where laboring on the left the Warrior stood,
All grim in Arms, and covered over with Blood,
There breathing Courage, where the God of Day
Had sunk each Heart with Terror and Dismay.
To him the King. Oh Ajax, oh my Friend!
Haste, and Patroclus' loved Remains defend:
The Body to Achilles to restore,
Demands our Care; Alas! we can no more!
For naked now, despoiled of Arms he lies;
And Hector glories in the dazzling Prize.
He said, and touched his Heart. The raging Pair
Pierce the thick Battle, and provoke the War.
Already had stern Hector seized his Head,
And doomed to Trojan Dogs the unhappy Dead;
But soon as Ajax reared his tow'rlike Shield,
Sprung to his Car, and measured back the Field.
His Train to Troy the radiant Armor bear,
To stand a Trophy of his Fame in War.
Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad Shield displayed)
Guards the dead Hero with the dreadful Shade;
And now before, and now behind he stood:
Thus in the Center of some gloomy Wood,
With many a Step the Lioness surrounds
Her tawny Young, beset by Men and Hounds;
Elate her Heart, and rowzing all her Powers,
Darko'er the fiery Balls, each hanging Eye-brow lowrs.
Fast by his Side, the generous Spartan glows
With great Revenge, and feeds his inward Woes.
But Glaucus, Leader of the Lycian Aids,
On Hector frowning, thus his Flight upbraids.
Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
A manly Form, without a manly Mind
Is this, O Chief! a Hero's boasted Fame?
How vain, without the Merit is the Name?
Since Battle is renounced, thy Thoughts employ
What other Methods may preserve thy Troy?
It Is time to try if Ilion's State can stand
By thee alone, nor ask a foreign Hand;
Mean, empty Boast! but shall the Lycians stake
Their Lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
What from thy thankless Arms can we expect?
Thy Friend Sarpedon proves thy base Neglect:
Say, shall our slaughtered Bodies guard your Walls
While unrevenged the great Sarpedon falls?
Even where he died for Troy, you left him there,
A Feast for Dogs, and all the Fowls of Air.
On my Command if any Lycian wait,
Hence let him march, and give up Troy to Fate.
Did such a Spirit as the Gods impart
Impel one Trojan Hand, or Trojan Heart;
(Such, as should burn in every Soul, that draws
The Sword for Glory, and his Country's Cause)
Even yet our mutual Arms we might employ,
And drag yon' Carcass to the Walls of Troy.
Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
Sarpedon's Arms and honored Corse again!
Greece with Achilles' Friend should be repaid,
And thus due Honors purchased to his Shade.
But Words are vain -- Let Ajax once appear,
And Hector trembles and recedes with Fear;
Thou dare not meet the Terrors of his Eye;
And lo! already, thou prepar'st to fly.
The Trojan Chief with fixed Resentment eyed
The Lycian Leader, and sedate replied.
Say, is it just (my Friend) that Hector's Ear
From such a Warrior such a Speech should hear?
I deemed thee once the wisest of thy Kind,
But ill this Insult suits a prudent Mind.
I shun great Ajax? I desert my Train?
It Is mine to prove the rash Assertion vain;
I joy to mingle where the Battle bleeds,
And hear the Thunder of the sounding Steeds.
But Jove's high Will is ever uncontrolled,
The Strong he withers, and confounds the Bold,
Now crowns with Fame the mighty Man, and now
Strikes the fresh Garland from the Victor's Brow!
Come, through yon' Squadrons let us hew the Way,
And thou be Witness, if I fear to Day;
If yet a Greek the Sight of Hector dread,
Or yet their Hero dare defend the Dead.
Then turning to the martial Hosts, he cries,
Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and Allies!
Be Men (my Friends) in Action as in Name,
And yet be mindful of your ancient Fame.
Hector in proud Achilles' Arms shall shine,
Torn from his Friend, by right of Conquest mine.
He strode along the Field, as thus he said.
(The sable Plumage nodded over his Head)
Swift through the spacious Plain he sent a Look;
One Instant saw, one Instant overtook
The distant Band, that on the sandy Shore
The radiant Spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
There his own Mail unbrac'd, the Field bestrow'd;
His Train to Troy conveyed the massy Load.
Now blazing in the immortal Arms he stands,
The Work and Present of celestial Hands;
By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
As first to Peleus by the Court of Heaven:
His Father's Arms not long Achilles wears,
Forbid by Fate to reach his Father's Years.
Him, proud in Triumph glittering from afar,
The God, whose Thunder rends the troubled Air,
Beheld with Pity; as apart he sat,
And conscious, looked through all the Scene of Fate.
He shook the sacred Honors of his Head;
Olympus trembled, and the Godhead said.
Ah wretched Man! unmindful of thy End!
A Moment's Glory! and what Fates attend?
In heavenly Panoply divinely bright
Thou stand'st, and Armies tremble at thy Sight
As at Achilles self! Beneath thy Dart
Lies slain the great Achilles' dearer Part:
Thou from the mighty Dead those Arms have torn
Which once the greatest of Mankind had worn.
Yet live! I give thee one illustrious Day,
A Blaze of Glory, ever thou fad'st away.
For ah! no more Andromache shall come,
With joyful Tears to welcome Hector home;
No more officious, with endearing Charms,
From thy tired Limbs unbrace Pelides' Arms!
Then with his sable Brow he gave the Nod,
That seals his Word; the Sanction of the God.
The stubborn Arms (by Jove's Command disposed)
Conformed spontaneous, and around him closed;
Filled with the God, enlarged his Members grew,
Through all his Veins a sudden Vigor flew,
The Blood in brisker Tides began to roll,
And Mars himself came rushing on his Soul.
Exhorting loud through all the Field he strode,
And looked, and moved, Achilles, or a God.
Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon he inspires,
Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
The great Thersilochus like Fury found,
Asteropaeus kindled at the Sound,
And Ennomus, in Augury renowned.
Hear all ye Hosts, and hear, unnumber'd Bands
Of neighboring Nations, or of distant Lands!
'Twas not for State we summoned you so far,
To boast our Numbers, and the Pomp of War;
Ye came to fight; a valiant Foe to chase,
To save our present, and our future Race.
For this, our Wealth, our Products you enjoy,
And glean the Relics of exhausted Troy.
Now then to conquer or to die prepare,
To die, or conquer, are the Terms of War.
Whatever Hand shall win Patroclus slain,
Whoever shall drag him to the Trojan Train,
With Hector's self shall equal Honors claim;
With Hector part the Spoil, and share the Fame.
Fired by his Words, the Troops dismiss their Fears,
They join, they thicken, they protend their Spears;
Full on the Greeks they drive in firm Array,
And each from Ajax hopes the glorious Prey:
Vain hope! what Numbers shall the Field overspread,
What Victims perish round the mighty Dead?
Great Ajax marked the growing Storm from far,
And thus bespoke his Brother of the War.
Our fatal Day alas! is come (my Friend)
And all our Wars and Glories at an end!
It Is not this Corpse alone we guard in vain,
Condemned to Vulturs on the Trojan Plain;
We too must yield: The same sad Fate must fall
On thee, on me, perhaps (my Friend) on all.
See what a Tempest direful Hector spreads,
And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our Heads!
Call on our Greeks, if any hear the Call,
The bravest Greeks: This Hour demands them all.
The Warrior raised his Voice, and wide around
The Field re-echo'd the distressful Sound.
Oh Chiefs! oh Princes! to whose Hand is given
The Rule of Men; whose Glory is from Heaven!
Whom with due Honors both Atrides grace:
Ye Guides and Guardians of our Argive Race!
All, whom this well-known Voice shall reach from far,
All, whom I see not through this Cloud of War,
Come all! Let generous Rage your Arms employ,
And save Patroclus from the Dogs of Troy.
Oilean Ajax first the Voice obeyed,
Swift was his Pace, and ready was his Aid;
Next him Idomeneus, more slow with Age,
And Merion, burning with a Hero's Rage.
The long-succeeding Numbers who can name?
But all were Greeks and eager all for Fame.
Fierce to the Charge great Hector led the Throng;
Whole Troy embodied, rushed with Shouts along.
Thus, when a Mountain-Billow foams and raves,
Where some swollen River disembogues his Waves,
Full in the Mouth is stopped the rushing Tide,
The boiling Ocean works from Side to Side,
The River trembles to his utmost Shore,
And distant Rocks rebellow to the Roar.
Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian Band
With brazen Shields in horrid Circle stand:
Jove, pouring Darkness over the mingled Fight,
Conceals the Warriors' shining Helms in Night:
To him, the Chief for whom the Hosts contend,
Had lived not hateful, for he lived a Friend:
Dead, he protects him with superior Care,
Nor dooms his Carcass to the Birds of Air.
The first Attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain:
Then fierce they rally, to Revenge led on
By the swift Rage of Ajax Telamon.
( Ajax, to Peleus' Son the second Name,
In graceful Stature next, and next in Fame.)
With headlong Force the foremost Ranks he tore;
So through the Thicket bursts the Moutain Boar,
And rudely scatters, far to distance round,
The frighted Hunter, and the baying Hound.
The Son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' Heir,
Hippothous, dragged the Carcass through the War;
The sinewy Ancles bored, the Feet he bound
With Thongs, inserted through the double Wound:
Inevitable Fate o'ertakes the Deed;
Doomed by great Ajax' vengeful Lance to bleed;
It cleft the Helmets brazen Cheeks in twain;
The shattered Crest, and Horse-hair, strew the Plain:
With Nerves relaxed he tumbles to the Ground:
The Brain comes gushing from the ghastly Wound;
He drops Patroclus' Foot, and over him spread
Now lies, a sad Companion of the Dead:
Far from Larissa lies, his native Air,
And ill requites his Parent's tender Care.
Lamented Youth! in Life's first Bloom he fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the Shades of Hell.
Once more at Ajax, Hector's Javelin flies;
The Grecian marking, as it cut the Skies,
Shunned the descending Death; which hissing on,
Stretched in the Dust the great Iphytus' Son,
Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian Kind
The boldest Warrior, and the noblest Mind:
In little Panope for Strength renowned,
He held his Seat, and ruled the Realms around.
Plunged in his Throat, the Weapon drank his Blood,
And deep transpiercing, through the Shoulder stood;
In clanging Arms the Hero fell, and all
The Fields resounded with his weighty Fall.
Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
The Telamonian Lance his Belly rends;
The hollow Armor burst before the Stroke,
And through the Wound the rushing Entrails broke.
In strong Convulsions panting on the Sands
He lies, and grasps the Dust with dying Hands.
Struck at the Sight, recede the Trojan Train:
The shouting Argives strip the Heroes slain.
And now had Troy, by Greece compelled to yield,
Fled to her Ramparts, and resigned the Field;
Greece, in her native Fortitude elate,
With Jove averse, had turned the Scale of Fate:
But Phoebus urged Aeneas to the Fight;
He seemed like aged Periphas to Sight.
(A Herald in Anchises' Love grown old,
Revered for Prudence, and with Prudence, bold.)
Thus He -- what Methods yet, oh Chief! remain,
To save your Troy, though Heaven its Fall ordain?
There have been Heroes, who by virtuous Care,
By Valor, Numbers, and by Arts of War,
Have forced the Powers to spare a sinking State,
And gained at length the glorious Odds of Fate.
But you, when Fortune smiles, when Jove declares
His partial Favor, and assists your Wars,
Your shameful Efforts against your selves employ,
And force the unwilling God to ruin Troy.
Aeneas through the Form assumed descries
The Power concealed, and thus to Hector cries.
Oh lasting Shame! to our own Fears a Prey,
We seek our Ramparts, and desert the Day.
A God (nor is he less) my Bosom warms,
And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan Arms.
He spoke, and foremost to the Combat flew:
The bold Example all his Hosts pursue.
Then first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
Who veiw'd his Fall, and grieving at the Chance,
Swift to revenge it, sent his angry Lance;
The whirling Lance with vigorous Force addressed,
Descends, and pants in Apisaon's Breast:
From rich Paeonias' Vales the Warrior came,
Next thee, Asteropeus! in Place and Fame.
Asteropeus with Grief beheld the Slain,
And rushed to combat, but he rushed in vain:
Indissolubly firm, around the Dead,
Rank within Rank, on Buckler Buckler spread,
And hemmed with bristled Spears, the Grecians stood;
A brazen Bulwark, and an iron Wood.
Great Ajax eyes them with incessant Care,
And in an Orb, contracts the crowded War,
Close in their Ranks commands to fight or fall,
And stands the Center and the Soul of all:
Fixed on the Spot they war; and wounded, wound;
A sanguine Torrent steeps the reeking Ground;
On Heaps the Greeks, on Heaps the Trojans bled,
And thick'ning round 'em, rise the Hills of Dead.
Greece, in close Order and collected Might,
Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering Fight;
Fierce as conflicting Fires, the Combat burns,
And now it rises, now it sinks, by turns.
In one thick Darkness all the Fight was lost;
The Sun, the Moon, and all the Etherial Host
Seemed as extinct: Day ravished from their Eyes,
And all Heaven's Splendors blotted from the Skies.
Such over Patroclus Body hung the Night,
The rest in Sunshine fought, and open Light:
Unclouded there, the Aerial Azure spread,
No Vapor rested on the Mountain's Head,
The golden Sun poured forth a stronger Ray,
And all the broad Expansion flamed with Day.
Dispersed around the Plain, by fits they fight,
And here, and there, their scattered Arrows light:
But Death and Darkness over the Carcass spread,
There burned the War, and there the Mighty bled.
Meanwhile the Sons of Nestor, in the Rear,
Their Fellows routed, toss the distant Spear,
And skirmish wide: So Nestor gave Command,
When from the Ships he sent the Pylian Band.
The youthful Brothers thus for Fame contend,
Nor knew the Fortune of Achilles' Friend;
In thought they viewed him still, with martial Joy,
Glorious in Arms, and dealing Deaths to Troy.
But round the Corpse, the Heroes pant for Breath,
And thick and heavy grows the Work of Death:
O'erlabour'd now, with Dust, and Sweat and Gore,
Their Knees, their Legs, their Feet are covered over,
Drops follow Drops, the Clouds on Clouds arise,
And Carnage clogs their Hands, and Darkness fills their Eyes;
As when a slaughtered Bull's yet reeking Hyde,
Strained with full Force, and tugged from Side to Side,
The brawny Curriers stretch; and labor over
The extended Surface, drunk with Fat and Gore;
So tugging round the Corpse both Armies stood;
The mangled Body bathed in Sweat and Blood:
While Greeks and Ilians equal Strength employ,
Now to the Ships to force it, now to Troy.
Not Pallas' self, her Breast when Fury warms,
Nor He, whose Anger sets the World in Arms,
Could blame this Scene; such Rage, such Horror reigned;
Such, Jove to honor the great Dead ordained.
Achilles in his Ships at distance lay,
Nor knew the fatal Fortune of the Day;
He, yet unconscious of Patroclus' Fall,
In dust extended under Ilion's Wall,
Expects him glorious from the conquered Plain,
And for his wished Return prepares in vain;
Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend,
Was more than Heaven had destined to his Friend,
Perhaps to Him: This Thetis had revealed;
The rest, in pity to her Son, concealed.
Still raged the Conflict round the Hero dead,
And Heaps on Heaps by mutual Wounds they bled.
Cursed be the Man (even private Greeks would say)
Who dares desert this well-disputed Day!
First may the cleaving Earth before our Eyes
Gape wide, and drink our Blood for Sacrifice!
First perish all, ever haughty Troy shall boast
We lost Patroclus, and our Glory lost.
Thus they. While with one Voice the Trojans said,
Grant this Day, Jove! or heap us on the Dead!
Then clash their sounding Arms; the Clangors rise,
And shake the brazen Concave of the Skies.
Meantime, at distance from the Scene of Blood,
The pensive Steeds of great Achilles stood;
Their god-like Master slain before their Eyes,
They wept, and shared in human Miseries.
In vain Automedon now shakes the Rein,
Now plies the Lash, and sooths and threats in vain;
Nor to the Fight, nor Hellespont, they go;
Restive they stood, and obstinate in Woe:
Still as a Tombstone, never to be moved,
On some good Man, or Woman unreprov'd
Lays its eternal Weight; or fixed as stands
A marble Courser by the Sculptor's Hands,
Placed on the Hero's Grave. Along their Face,
The big round Drops cours'd down with silent pace,
Conglobing on the Dust. Their Manes, that late
Circled their arching Necks, and waved in State,
Trail'd on the Dust beneath the Yoke were spread,
And prone to Earth was hung their languid Head:
Nor Jove disdained to cast a pitying Look,
While thus relenting to the Steeds he spoke.
Unhappy Coursers of immortal Strain!
Exempt from Age, and deathless now in vain;
Did we your Race on mortal Man bestow,
Only alas! to share in mortal Woe?
For ah! what is there, of inferior Birth,
That breathes or creeps upon the Dust of Earth;
What wretched Creature of what wretched kind,
Than Man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
A miserable Race! But cease to mourn.
For not by you shall Priam's Son be born
High on the splendid Car: One glorious Prize
He rashly boasts; the rest our Will denies.
Ourself will Swiftness to your Nerves impart,
Ourself with rising Spirits swell your Heart.
Automedon your rapid Flight shall bear
Safe to the Navy through the Storm of War.
For yet it is given to Troy, to ravage over
The Field, and spread her Slaughters to the Shore;
The Sun shall see her conquer, till his Fall
With sacred Darkness shades the Face of all.
He said; and breathing in the immortal Horse
Excessive Spirit, urged 'em to the Course;
From their high Manes they shake the Dust, and bear
The kindling Chariot through the parted War:
So flies a Vulture through the clamorous Train
Of Geese, that scream, and scatter round the Plain.
From Danger now with swiftest Speed they flew,
And now to Conquest with like Speed pursue;
Sole in the Seat the Charioteer remains,
Now plies the Javelin, now directs the Reins:
Him brave Alcimedon beheld distressed,
Approached the Chariot, and the Chief addressed.
What God provokes thee, rashly thus to dare,
Alone, unaided, in the thickest War?
Alas! thy Friend is slain, and Hector wields
Achilles' Arms triumphant in the Fields.
In happy time (the Charioteer replies)
The bold Alcimedon now greets my Eyes;
No Greek like him, the heavenly Steeds restrains,
Or holds their Fury in suspended Reins:
Patroclus, while he lived, their Rage could tame,
But now Patroclus is an empty Name!
To thee I yield the Seat, to thee resign
The ruling Charge: The Task of Fight be mine.
He said. Alcimedon, with active Heat,
Snatches the Reins, and vaults into the Seat.
His Friend descends. The Chief of Troy descried,
And called Aeneas fighting near his Side.
Lo, to my Sight beyond our Hope restored,
Achilles' Car, deserted of its Lord!
The glorious Steeds our ready Arms invite,
Scarce their weak Drivers guide them through the Fight:
Can such Opponents stand, when we assail?
Unite thy Force, my Friend, and we prevail.
The Son of Venus to the Counsel yields;
Then over their Backs they spread their solid Shields;
With Brass refulgent the broad Surface shined,
And thick Bull-hides the Spacious Concave lined.
Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds,
Each hopes the Conquest of the lofty Steeds:
In vain, brave Youths, with glorious Hopes ye burn,
In vain advance! not fated to return.
Unmoved, Automedon attends the Fight,
Implores the Eternal, and collects his Might.
Then turning to his Friend, with dauntless Mind:
Oh keep the foaming Coursers close behind!
Full on my Shoulders let their Nostrils blow,
For hard the Fight, determined is the Foe;
It Is Hector comes; and when he seeks the Prize,
War knows no mean: he wins it, or he dies.
Then through the Field he sends his Voice aloud,
And calls the Ajaces from the warring Crowd,
With great Atrides. Hither turn (he said)
Turn, where Distress demands immediate Aid;
The Dead, incircled by his Friends, forego,
And save the Living from a fiercer Foe.
Unhelp'd we stand, unequal to engage
The Force of Hector, and Aeneas' Rage:
Yet mighty as they are, my Force to prove,
Is only mine: the Event belongs to Jove.
He spoke, and high the sounding Javelin flung,
Which passed the Shield of Aretus the young;
It pierced his Belt, embossed with curious Art;
Then in the lower Belly stuck the Dart.
As when the ponderous Axe descending full,
Cleaves the broad Forehead of some brawny Bull;
Struck 'twixt the Horns, he springs with many a Bound,
Then tumbling rolls enormous on the Ground:
Thus fell the Youth; the Air his Soul received,
And the Spear trembled as his Entrails heaved.
Now at Automedon the Trojan Foe
Discharged his Lance; the meditated Blow
Stooping, he shunned; the Javelin idly fled,
And hissed innoxious over the Hero's Head:
Deep rooted in the Ground, the forceful Spear
In long Vibrations spent its Fury there.
With clashing Falchions now the Chiefs had closed,
But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed;
Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,
But left their slain Companion in his Blood:
His Arms Automedon divests, and cries,
Accept, Patroclus! this mean Sacrifice.
Thus have I soothed my Griefs, and thus have paid
Poor as it is, some Offering to thy Shade.
So looks the Lion over a mangled Boar,
All grim with Rage, and horrible with Gore:
High on the Chariot at one Bound he sprung,
And over his Seat the bloody Trophies hung.
And now Minerva, from the Realms of Air
Descends impetuous, and renews the War;
For, pleased at length the Grecian Arms to aid,
The Lord of Thunders sent the blue-ey'd Maid.
As when high Jove, denouncing future Woe,
Over the dark Clouds extends his Purple Bow,
(In sign of Tempests from the troubled Air,
Or from the Rage of Man, destructive War)
The drooping Cattle dread the impending Skies,
And from his half-till'd Field the Lab'rer flies.
In such a Form the Goddess round her drew
A livid Cloud, and to the Battle flew.
Assuming Phoenix' Shape, on Earth she falls
And in his well-known Voice to Sparta calls.
And lies Achilles' Friend, beloved by all,
A Prey to Dogs beneath the Trojan Wall?
What Shame to Greece for future times to tell,
To thee the greatest, in whose Cause he fell!
O Chief, Oh Father! ( Atreus' Son replies)
O full of Days! by long Experience wise!
What more desires my Soul, than here, unmoved,
To guard the Body of the Man I loved?
Ah would Minerva send me Strength to rear
This wearied Arm, and ward the Storm of War!
But Hector, like the Rage of Fire, we dread,
And Jove's own Glories blaze around his Head.
Pleased to be first of all the Powers addressed,
She breathes new Vigor in her Hero's Breast,
And fills with keen Revenge, with fell Despite,
Desire of Blood, and Rage, and Lust of Fight.
So burns the vengeful Hornet (Soul all over)
Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of Gore;
(Bold Son of Air and Heat) on angry Wings
Untamed, untir'd, he turns, attacks, and stings.:
Fired with like Ardour fierce Atrides flew,
And sent his Soul with every Lance he threw.
There stood a Trojan not unknown to Fame,
Eetion's Son, and Podes was his Name;
With Riches honored, and with Courage blessed,
By Hector loved, his Comrade, and his Guest;
Through his broad Belt the Spear a Passage found,
And ponderous as he falls, his Arms resound.
Sudden at Hector's Side Apollo stood,
Like Phaenops, Asius' Son, appeared the God;
( Asius the Great, who held his wealthy Reign
In fair Abydos by the rolling Main.)
Oh Prince (he cried) oh foremost once in Fame!
What Grecian now shall tremble at thy Name?
Do thou at length to Menelaus yield?
A Chief, once thought no Terror of the Field;
Yet singly, now, the long disputed Prize
He bears victorious, while our Army flies.
By the same Arm illustrious Podes bled,
The Friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead:
This heard, over Hector spreads a Cloud of Woe,
Rage lifts his Lance, and drives him on the Foe.
But now The Eternal shook his sable Shield,
That shaded I Would, and all the subject Field
Beneath its ample Verge. A rolling Cloud
Involved the Mount; the Thunder roared aloud;
The Affrighted Hills from their Foundations nod,
And blaze beneath the Lightnings of the God:
At one Regard of his all-seeing Eye,
The Vanquished triumph, and the Victors fly.
Then trembled Greece: The Flight Peneleus led;
For as the brave Boeotian turned his Head
To face the Foe, Polydamas drew near,
And razed his Shoulder with a shortened Spear:
By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the Plain,
Pierced through the Wrist; and raging with the Pain
Grasps his once formidable Lance in vain.
As Hector followed, Idomen addressed
The flaming Javelin to his manly Breast;
The brittle Point before his Corselet yields;
Exulting Troy with Clamor fills the Fields:
High on his Chariot as the Cretan stood,
The Son of Priam whirled the missive Wood;
But erring from its Aim, the impetuous Spear
Struck to the Dust the Squire, and Charioteer
Of martial Merion: Coeranus his Name,
Who left fair Lyctus for the Fields of Fame.
On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,
Had graced the Triumphs of his Trojan Foe;
But the brave Squire the ready Coursers brought,
And with his Life his Master's Safety bought.
Between his Cheek and Ear the Weapon went,
The Teeth it shattered, and the Tongue it rent.
Prone from the Seat he tumbles to the Plain;
His dying Hand forgets the falling Rein:
This Merion reaches, bending from the Car,
And urges to desert the hopeless War;
Idomeneus consents; the Lash applies;
And the swift Chariot to the Navy flies.
Nor Ajax less the Will of Heaven descried,
And Conquest shifting to the Trojan Side,
Turned by the Hand of Jove. Then thus begun,
To Atreus' Seed, the god-like Telamon.
Alas! who sees not Jove's almighty Hand
Transfers the Glory to the Trojan Band;
Whether the Weak or Strong discharge the Dart,
He guides each Arrow to a Grecian Heart:
Not so our Spears: incessant though they rain,
He suffers every Lance to fall in vain.
Deserted of the God, yet let us try
What human Strength and Prudence can supply;
If yet this honored Corpse, in Triumph born,
May glad the Fleets that hope not our return,
Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their Fates,
And still hear Hector thundering at their Gates.
Some Hero too must be dispatched, to bear
The mournful Message to Pelides' Ear;
For sure he knows not, distant on the Shore,
His Friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
But such a Chief I spy not through the Host:
The Men, the Steeds, the Armies all are lost
In general Darkness -- Lord of Earth and Air!
Oh King! oh Father! hear my humble Prayer:
Dispel this Cloud, the Light of Heaven restore;
Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
If Greece must perish, we thy Will obey,
But let us perish in the Face of Day!
With Tears the Hero spoke, and at his Prayer
The God relenting, cleared the clouded Air;
Forth burst the Sun with all-enlight'ning Ray;
The Blaze of Armor flashed against the Day.
Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy Sight,
If yet Antilochus survives the Fight,
Let him to great Achilles' Ear convey
The fatal News -- Atrides hasts away.
So turns the Lion from the nightly Fold,
Tho high in Courage, and with Hunger bold,
Long galled by Herdsmen, and long vexed by Hounds,
Stiff with Fatigue, and fretted sore with Wounds;
The Darts fly round him from a hundred Hands,
And the red Terrors of the blazing Brands:
Till late, reluctant, at the Dawn of Day
Sow'r he departs, and quits th'untasted Prey.
So moved Atrides from his dangerous Place
With wearied Limbs, but with unwilling Pace:
The Foe, he feared, might yet Patroclus gain,
And much admonished, much adjur'd his Train.
Oh guard these Relics to your Charge consigned,
And bear the Merits of the Dead in Mind;
How skilled he was in each obliging Art;
The mildest Manners, and the gentlest Heart:
He was, alas! But Fate decreed his End;
In Death a Hero, as in Life a Friend!
So parts the Chief; from Rank to Rank he flew,
And round on all sides sent his piercing View.
As the bold Bird, endu'd with sharpest Eye
Of all that wing the mid Aerial Sky,
The sacred Eagle, from his Walks above
Looks down, and sees the distant Thicket move;
Then stoops, and sowsing on the quivering Hare,
Snatches his Life amid the Clouds of Air.
Not with less Quickness, his exerted Sight
Passed this, and that way, through the Ranks of Fight:
Till on the Left the Chief he sought, he found;
Chearing his Men, and spreading Deaths around.
To him the King. Beloved of Jove! draw near,
For sadder Tidings never touched thy Ear;
Thy Eyes have witnessed what a fatal Turn!
How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
This is not all: Patroclus on the Shore,
Now pale and dead, shall succor Greece no more.
Fly to the Fleet, this Instant fly, and tell
The sad Achilles how his loved one fell:
He too may haste the naked Corpse to gain;
The Arms are Hector's, who despoiled the Slain.
The youthful Warrior heard with silent Woe,
From his fair Eyes the Tears began to flow;
Big with the mighty Grief, he strove to say
What Sorrow dictates, but no Word found way.
To brave Laodocus his Arms he flung,
Who near him wheeling, drove his Steeds along;
Then ran, the mournful Message to impart,
With Tear-ful Eyes, and with dejected Heart.
Swift fled the Youth; nor Menelaus stands,
(Though sore distressed) to aid the Pylian Bands;
But bids bold Thrasymede those Troops sustain;
Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
Gone is Antilochus (the Hero said)
But hope not, Warriors! for Achilles' Aid:
Though fierce his Rage, unbounded be his Woe,
Unarmed, he fights not with the Trojan Foe.
It Is in our Hands alone our Hopes remain,
It Is our own Vigor must the Dead regain;
And save our selves, while with impetuous Hate
Troy pours along, and this way rolls our Fate.
It Is well (said Ajax) be it then thy Care
With Merion's Aid, the weighty Corse to rear;
My self, and my bold Brother will sustain
The Shock of Hector and his charging Train:
Nor fear we Armies, fighting Side by Side;
What Troy can dare, we have already tried,
Have tried it, and have stood. The Hero said.
High from the Ground the Warriors heave the Dead;
A general Clamor rises at the Sight:
Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the Fight.
Not fiercer rush along the gloomy Wood,
With Rage insatiate and with Thirst of Blood,
Voracious Hounds, that many a Length before
Their furious Hunters, drive the wounded Boar;
But if the Savage turns his glaring Eye,
They howl aloof, and round the Forest fly.
Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
Wave their thick Falchions, and their Jav'lins shower:
But Ajax turning, to their Fears they yield,
All pale they tremble, and forsake the Field.
While thus aloft the Hero's Corse they bear,
Behind them rages all the Storm of War;
Confusion, Tumult, Horror, over the Throng
Of Men, Steeds, Chariots, urged the Rout along:
Less fierce the Winds with rising Flames conspire,
To whelm some City under Waves of Fire,
Now sink in gloomy Clouds the proud Abodes;
Now crack the blazing Temples of the Gods;
The rumbling Torrent through the Ruin rolls,
And Sheets of Smoke mount heavy to the Poles.
The Heroes sweat beneath their honored Load:
As when two Mules, along the rugged Road,
From the steep Mountain with exerted Strength
Drag some vast Beam, or Mast's unwieldy Length;
Inly they groan, big Drops of Sweat distill,
Th'enormous Timber lumbring down the Hill.
So these -- Behind, the Bulk of Ajax stands,
And breaks the Torrent of the rushing Bands.
Thus when a River swelled with sudden Rains
Spreads his broad Waters over the level Plains,
Some interposing Hill the Stream divides,
And breaks its Force, and turns the winding Tides.
Still close they follow, close the Rear engage;
Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with Rage:
While Greece a heavy, thick Retreat maintains,
Wedged in one Body like a Flight of Cranes,
That shriek incessant, while the Faulcon hung
High on poised Pinions, threats their callow Young.
So from the Trojan Chiefs the Grecians fly;
Such the wild Terror, and the mingled Cry.
Within, without the Trench, and all the way,
Strow'd in bright Heaps, their Arms and Armor lay;
Such Horror Jove impressed! Yet still proceeds
The Work of Death, and still the Battle bleeds.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Seventeenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK.
I.
THIS is the only Book of the Iliad which is a continued Description of a
Battle, without any Digression or Episode, that serves for an Interval to
refresh the Reader. The heavenly Machines too are fewer than in any other.
Homer seems to have trusted wholly to the Force of his own Genius, as
sufficient to support him, whatsoever lengths he was carried by it. But that
Spirit which animates the Original, is what I am sensible evaporates so much in
my Hands; that, though I cannot think my Author tedious, I should have made him
seem so, if I had not translated this Book with all possible Conciseness. I
hope there is nothing material omitted, though the Version consists but of sixty
five Lines more than the Original.

However, one may observe there are more Turns of Fortune, more Defeats, more
Rallyings, more Accidents, in this Battle, than in any other; because it was to
be the last wherein the Greeks and Trojans were upon equal Terms, before the
Return of Achilles: And besides, all this serves to introduce the chief Hero
with the greater Pomp and Dignity.

II.
VERSE 3. Great Menelaus -- ] The Poet here takes occasion to clear Menelaus
from the Imputations of Idle and Effeminate, cast on him in some Parts of the
Poem; he sets him in the Front of the Army, exposing himself to Dangers in
defending the Body of Patroclus, and gives him the Conquest of Euphorbus who
had the first Hand in his Death. He is represented as the foremost who appears
in his Defense, not only as one of a like Disposition of Mind with Patroclus, a
kind and generous Friend; but as being more immediately concerned in Honor to
protect from Injuries the Body of a Hero that fell in his Cause. Eustathius.
See the 29th Note on the 3d Book.

III.
VERSE 5. Thus round her new fallen Young, etc.] In this Comparison, as
Eustathius has very well observed, the Poet accomodating himself to the
Occasion, means only to describe the Affection Menelaus had for Patroclus, and
the Manner in which he presented himself to defend his Body: And this
Comparison is so much the more just and agreeable, as Menelaus was a Prince
full of Goodness and Mildness. He must have little Sense or Knowledge in
Poetry, who thinks that it ought to be suppressed. It is true, we should not
ues it nowadays, by reason of the low Ideas we have of the Animals from which
it is derived; but those not being the Ideas of Homer's Time, they could not
hinder him from making a proper Use of such a Comparison. Dacier.

IV.
VERSE id. Thus round her new fallen Young, etc.] It seems to me remarkable,
that the several Comparisons to illustrate the Concern for Patroclus, are taken
from the most tender Sentiments of Nature. Achilles in the Beginning of the
16th Book, considers him as a Child, and himself as his Mother. The Sorrow of
Menelaus is here described as that of a Heifer for her young one. Perhaps these
are designed to intimate the excellent Temper and Goodness of Patroclus, which
is expressed in that fine Elogy of him in this Book,. 671. (...). He knew how
to be good-natured to all Men. This gave all Mankind these Sentiments for him,
and no doubt the same is strongly pointed at by the uncommon Concern of the
whole Army to rescue his Body.

The Dissimilitude of Manners between these two Friends, Achilles and
Patroclus, is very observable: Such Friendships are not uncommon, and I have
often assigned this Reason for them, that it is natural for Men to seek the
Assistance of those Qualities in others, which they want themselves. That is
still better if applied to Providence, that associates Men of different and
contrary Qualities, in order to make a more perfect System. But, whatever is
customary in Nature, Homer had a good poetical Reason for it; for it affords
many Incidents to illustrate the Manners of them both more strongly; and is
what they call a Contrast in Painting.

V.
VERSE 11. The Son of Panthus.] The Conduct of Homer is admirable in bringing
Euphorbus and Menelaus together upon this Occasion; for hardly any thing but
such a signal Revenge for the Death of his Brother, could have made Euphorbus
stand the Encounter. Menelaus putting him in mind of the Death of his Brother,
gives occasion (I think) to one of the finest Answers in all Homer; in which
the Insolence of Menelaus is retorted in a way to draw Pity from every Reader;
and I believe there is hardly one, after such a Speech, that would not wish
Euphorbus had the better of Menelaus: A Writer of Romances would not have
failed to have given Euphorbus the Victory. But however it was fitter to make
Menelaus, who had received the greatest Injury, do the most revengeful Actions.

VI.
VERSE 55. Instarr'd with Gems and Gold.] We have here a Trojan who uses Gold
and Silver to adorn his Hair; which made Pliny say, that he doubted whether the
Women were the first that used those Ornaments. Est quidem apud eundem
[Homerum] virorum crinibus aurum implexum, ideo nescio an prior usus a foeminis
coeperit. Lib. 33. Chap. 1. He might likewise have strengthened his Doubt by
the Custom of the Athenians, who put into their Hair little Grasshoppers of
Gold. Dacier.

VII.
VERSE 57. As the young Olive, etc.] This exquisite Simile finely illustrates
the Beauty and sudden Fall of Euphorbus, in which the Allusion to that
Circumstance of his comely Hair is peculiarly happy. Porphyry and Jamblicus
acquaints us of the particular Affection Pythagoras had for these Verses, which
he set to the Harp, and used to repeat at his own Epicedion. Perhaps it was his
Fondness of them, which put it into his Head to say, that his Soul
transmigrated to him from this Hero. However it was, this Conceit of Pythagoras
is famous in Antiquity, and has given occasion to a Dialogue in Lucian entitled
The Cock, which is, I think, the finest Piece of that Author.

VIII.
VERSE 65. Thus young, thus beautiful Euphorbus lay.] This is the only Trojan
whose Death the Poet laments, that he might do the more Honor to Patroclus,
his Hero's Friend. The Comparison here used is very proper, for the Olive
always preserves its Beauty. But where the Poet speaks of the Lapithae, a hardy
and warlike People, he compares them to Oaks, that stand unmoved in Storms and
Tempests; and where Hector falls by Ajax, he likens him to an Oak struck down
by Jove's Thunder. Just after this soft Comparison upon the Beauty of
Euphorbus, he passes to another full of Strength and Terror, that of the Lion.
Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 110. Did but the Voice of Ajax reach my Ear.] How observable is Homer's
Art of illustrating the Valor and Glory of his Heroes? Menelaus, who sees
Hector and all the Trojans rushing upon him, would not retire if Apollo did not
support them; and though Apollo does support them, he would oppose even Apollo,
were Ajax but near him. This is glorious for Menelaus, and yet more glorious
for Ajax, and very suitable to his Character; for Ajax was the bravest of the
Greeks, next to Achilles. Dacier. Eustathius.

X.
VERSE 117. So from the Fold the unwilling Lion.] The Beauty of the Retreat of
Menelaus is worthy Notice. Homer is a great Observer of natural Imagery, that
brings the Thing represented before our View. It is indeed true, that Lions,
Tigers, and Beasts of Prey are the only Objects that can properly represent
Warriors; and therefore it is no wonder they are so often introduced: The
inanimate Things, as Floods, Fires, and Storms, are the best, and only Images
of Battles.

XI.
VERSE 137. Already had stern Hector, etc.] Homer takes care, so long
beforehand, to lessen in his Reader's Mind the Horror he may conceive from the
Cruelty that Achilles will exercise upon the Body of Hector. That Cruelty will
be only the Punishment of this which Hector here exercises upon the Body of
Patroclus; he drags him, he designs to cut off his Head, and to leave his Body
upon the Ramparts, exposed to Dogs and Birds of Prey. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 169. You left him there a Prey to Dogs.] It was highly dishonorable in
Hector to forsake the Body of a Friend and Guest, and against the Laws of
Jupiter Xenius, or hospitalis. For Glaucus knew nothing of Sarpedon's being
honored with Burial by the Gods, and sent embalmed into Lycia. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 193. I shun great Ajax?] Hector takes no notice of the Affronts that
Glaucus had thrown upon him, as knowing he had in some Respects a just Cause to
be angry, but he cannot put up what he had said of his fearing Ajax, to which
Part he only replies: This is very agreeable to his heroic Character.
Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 209. Hector in proud Achilles Arms shall shine.] The Ancients have
observed that Homer causes the Arms of Achilles to fall into Hector's Power, to
equal in some sort those two Heroes, in the Battle wherein he is going to
engage them. Otherwise it might be urged, that Achilles could not have killed
Hector without the Advantage of having his Armous made by the Hand of a God,
whereas Hector's was only of the Hand of a Mortal; but since both were clad in
Armor made by Vulcan, Achilles's Victory will be complete, and in its full
Luster. Besides this Reason (which is for Necessity and Probability) there is
also another, for Ornament; for Homer here prepares to introduce that beautiful
Episode of the divine Armor, which Vulcan makes for Achilles. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 216. The radiant Arms to sacred Ilion bore.] A Difficulty may arise
here, and the Question may be asked why Hector sent these Arms to Troy? Why did
not he take them at first? There are three Answers, which I think are all
plausible. The first, that Hector having killed Patroclus, and seeing the Day
very far advanced, had no mind to take those Arms for a Fight almost at an end.
The second, that he was impatient to show to Priam and Andromache those
glorious Spoils. Thirdly, he perhaps at first intended to hang them up in some
Temple: Glaucus's Speech makes him change his Resolution, he runs after those
Arms to fight against Ajax, and to win Patroclus's Body from him. Dacier.

Homer (says Eustathius) does not suffer the Arms to be carried into Troy for
these Reasons. That Hector by wearing them might the more encourage the
Trojans, and be the more formidable to the Greeks: That Achilles may recover
them again when he kills Hector: And that he may conquer him, even when he is
strengthened with that divine Armor.

XVI.
VERSE 231. Jupiter 's Speech to Hector.] The Poet prepares us for the Death of
Hector, perhaps to please the Greek Readers, who might be troubled to see him
shining in their Heroes Arms. Therefore Jupiter expresses his Sorrow at the
approaching Fate of this unfortunate Prince, promises to repay his Loss of Life
with Glory, and nods to give a certain Confirmation to his Words. He says,
Achilles is the bravest Greek, as Glaucus had said just before; the Poet thus
giving him the greatest Commendations, by putting his Praise in the Mouth of a
God, and of an Enemy, who were neither of them like to be prejudiced in his
Favor. Eustathius.

How beautiful is that Sentiment upon the miserable State of Mankind,
introduced here so artfully, and so strongly enforced, by being put into the
Mouth of the supreme Being! And how pathetic the Denunciation of Hector's
Death, by that Circumstance of Andromache's Disappointment, when she shall no
more receive her Hero glorious from the Battle, in the Armor of his conquered
Enemy!

XVII.
VERSE 247. The stubborn Arms etc.] The Words are, (...)
(...)
If we give (...) a passive Signification, it will be, the Arms fitted Hector;
but if an active (as those take it who would put a greater Difference between
Hector and Achilles) then it belongs to Jupiter; and the Sense will be, Jupiter
made the Arms fit for him, which were too large before: I have chosen the last
as the more poetical Sense.

XVIII.
VERSE 260. Unnumber'd Bands of neighboring Nations.] Eustathius has very well
explained the Artifice of this Speech of Hector, who indirectly answers all
Glaucus's Invectives, and humbles his Vanity. Glaucus had just spoken as if the
Lycians were the only Allies of Troy; and Hector here speaks of the numerous
Troops of different Nations, which he expressly designs by calling them
Borderers upon his Kingdom, thereby in some manner to exclude the Lycians, who
were of a Country more remote; as if he did not vouchsafe to reckon them. He
afterward confutes what Glaucus said, "that if the Lycians would take his
Advice they would return home"; for he gives them to understand, that being
hired Troops, they are obliged to perform their Bargain, and to fight till the
War is at an end. Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 290. Call on our Greeks.] Eustathius gives three Reasons why Ajax bids
Menelaus call the Greeks to their Assistance; instead of calling them himself.
He might be shamed to do it, lest it should look like Fear and turn to his
Dishonor: Or the Chiefs were more likely to obey Menelaus: Or he had too much
Business of the War upon his Hands, and wanted Leisure more than the other.

XX.
VERSE 302. Oilean Ajax first.] Ajax Oileus (says Eustathius) is the first that
comes, being brought by his Love to the other Ajax, as it is natural for one
Friend to fly to the Assistance of another: To which we may add, he might very
probably come first, because he was the swiftest of all the Heroes.

XXI.
VERSE 318. Jove pouring Darkness] Homer, who in all his former Descriptions of
Battles is so fond of mentioning the Luster of the Arms, here shades them in
Darkness, perhaps alluding to the Clouds of Dust that were raised; or to the
Throng of Combatants; or else to denote the Loss of Greece in Patroclus; or
lastly, that as the Heavens had mourned Sarpedon in Showers of Blood, so they
might Patroclus in Clouds of Darkness. Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 356. Panope renowned.] Panope was a small Town twenty Stadia from
Chaeronea on the side of Mount Parnassus, and it is hard to know why Homer
gives it the Epithet of renowned, and makes it the Residence of Schedius, King
of the Phocians; when it was but nine hundred Paces in Circuit, and had no
Palace, nor Gymnasium, nor Theater, nor Market, nor Fountain,; nothing in short
that ought to have been in a Town which is the Residence of a King. Pausanias
(in Phocic.) gives the Reason of it; he says, that as Phocis was exposed on
that side to the Inroads of the Boeotians, Schedius made use of Panope as a
sort of Citadel, or Place of Arms. Dacier.

XXIII.
VERSE 375. He seemed like aged Periphas.] The Speech, of Periphas to Aeneas
hints at the double Fate, and the Necessity of Means. It is much like that of
St. Paul after he was promised that no body should perish; he says, except
these abide, ye cannot be saved.

XXIV.
VERSE 422. In one thick Darkness, etc.] The Darkness spread over the Body of
Patroclus is artful upon several Accounts. First, a fine Image of Poetry. Next,
a Token of Jupiter's Love to a righteous Man; but the chief Design is to
portract the Action; which, if the Trojans had seen the Spot, must have been
decided one way or other, in a very short time. Besides, the Trojans having the
better in the Action, must have seized the Body contrary to the Intention of
the Author: There are innumerable Instances of these little Niceties and
Particularities of Conduct in Homer.

XXV.
VERSE 436. Meanwhile the Sons of Nestor, in the Rear, etc.] It is not without
Reason Homer in this Place makes particular mention of the Sons of Nestor. It
is to prepare us against he sends one of them to Achilles, to tell him the
Death of his Friend.

XXVI.
VERSE 450.. As when a slaughtered Bull's yet reeking Hide.] Homer gives us a
most lively Description of their drawing the Body on all sides, and instructs
us in the ancient manner of stretching Hides, being first made soft and supple
with Oil. And though this Comparison be one of those mean and humble ones which
some have objected to, yet it has also its Admirers for being so expressive,
and for representing to the Imagination the most strong and exact Idea of the
Subject in hand. Eustathius.

XXVII.
VERSE 458. Not Pallas self, etc.] Homer says in the Original, " Minerva could
not have found fault, though she were angry." Upon which Eustathius ingeniously
observes, how common and natural it is for Persons in Anger to turn Critics,
and find Faults where there are none.

XXVIII.
VERSE 468. To make proud Ilion bend,
Was more than Heaven had promised to his Friend,
Perhaps to Him:]
In these Words the Poet artfully hints at Achilles's Death; he makes him not
absolutely to flatter himself with the Hopes of ever taking Troy, in his own
Person, however he does not say this expressly, but passes it over as an
ungrateful Subject. Eustathius.

XXIX.
VERSE 471. The rest, in pity to her Son concealed.] Here, (says the same
Author) we have two Rules laid down for common use. One, not to tell our
Friends all their Mischances at once, it being often necessary to hide part of
them, as Thetis does from Achilles: The other, not to push Men of Courage upon
all that is possible for them to do. Thus Achilles, though he thought Patroclus
able to drive the Trojans back to their Gates, yet he does not order him to do
so much, but only to save the Ships, and beat them back into the Field.

Homer's admonishing the Reader that Achilles's Mother had concealed the
Circumstance of the Death of his Friend when she instructed him in his Fate;
and that all he knew, was only that Troy could not be taken at that time; this
is a great Instance of his Care of the Probability, and of his having the whole
Plan of the Poem at once in his Head. For upon the Supposition that Achilles
was instructed in his Fate, it was a natural Objection, how came he to hazard
his Friend? If he was ignorant on the other hand of the Impossibility of Troy's
being taken at that time, he might for all he knew, be robbed by his Friend (of
whose Valor he had so good an Opinion) of that Glory, which he was unwilling
to part with.

XXX.
VERSE 485. The pensive Steeds of great Achilles, etc.] It adds a great Beauty
to a Poem when inanimate Things act like animate. Thus the Heavens tremble at
Jupiter's Nod, the Sea parts it self to receive Neptune, the Groves of Ida
shake beneath Juno's Feet, etc. As also to find animate or brute Creatures
addressed to, as if rational: So Hector encourages his Horses; and one of
Achilles's is endued not only with Speech, but with Foreknowledge of future
Events. Here they weep for Patroclus, and stand fixed and unmovable with
Grief: Thus is this Hero universally mourned, and every thing concurs to lament
his Loss. Eustathius.

As to the particular Fiction of the Horses weeping, it is countenanced both by
Naturalists and Historians. Aristotle and Pliny write, that these Animals often
deplore their Masters lost in Battle, and even shed Tears for them. So Solinus
c. 47. Aelian relates the like of Elephants, when they are carried from their
native Country, De Animal. lib. 10. c. 17. Suetonius in the Life of Caesar,
tells us, that several Horses which at the Passage of the Rubicon had been
consecrated to Mars, and turned loose on the Banks, were observed for some Days
after, to abstain from feeding, and to weep abundantly. Proximis diebus,
equorum greges quos in trajiciendo Rubicone flumine Marti consecrarat, ac sine
custode vagos dimiserat, comperit pabulo pertinacissime abstinere, ubertimque
flere. Cap. 81.

Virgil could not forbear copying this beautiful Circumstance, in those fine
Lines on the Horse of Pallas. Post bellator Equus, positis insignibus, Aethon,
It lacrymans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora.


XXXI.
VERSE 484. At distance from the Scene of Blood.] If the Horses had not gone
aside out of the War, Homer could not have introduced so well what he designed
to their Honor. So he makes them weeping in secret (as their Master Achilles
used to do) and afterward coming into the Battle, where they are taken notice
of and pursued by Hector. Eustathius.

XXXII.
VERSE 495. Or fixed, as stands a marble Courser, etc.] Homer alludes to the
Custom in those Days of placing Columns upon Tombs, on which Columns there were
frequently Chariots with two or four Horses. This furnished Homer with this
beautiful Image, as if these Horses meant to remain there, to serve for an
immortal Monument to Patroclus. Dacier.

I believe M. Dacier refines too much in this Note. Homer says, -- (...), and
seems to turn the Thought only on the Firmness of the Column, and not on the
Imag'ry of it: Which would give it an Air a little too modern, like that of
Shakespeare, She sat like Patience on a Monument Smiling at Grief. -- Be it as
it will, this Conjecture is ingenious; and the whole Comparison is as beautiful
as just. The Horses standing still to mourn for their Master, could not be more
finely represented than by the dumb Sorrow of Images standing over a Tomb.
Perhaps the very Posture in which these Horses are described, their Heads bowed
down, and their Manes falling in the Dust, has an Allusion to the Attitude in
which those Statues on Monuments were usually represented: There are
Bas-Reliefs that favor this Conjecture.

XXXIII.
VERSE 522. The Sun shall see Troy conquer.] It is worth observing with what
Art and Economy Homer conducts his Fable, to bring on the Catastrophe.
Achilles must hear Patroclus's Death; Hector must fall by his Hand: This can
not happen if the Armies continue fighting about the Body of Patroclus under
the Walls of Troy. Therefore, to change the Face of Affairs, Jupiter is going
to raise the Courage of the Trojans, and make them repulse and chase the Greeks
again as far as their Fleet; this obliges Achilles to go forth though without
Arms, and thereby every thing comes to an Issue. Dacier.

XXXIV.
VERSE 555. Scarce their weak Drivers.] There was but one Driver, since
Alcimedon was alone upon the Chariot; and Automedon was got down to fight. But
in Poetry, as well as in Painting, there is often but one Moment to be taken
hold on. Hector sees Alcimedon mount the Chariot, before Automedon was
descended from it; and thereupon judging of their Intention, and seeing them
both as yet upon the Chariot, he calls to Aeneas. He terms them both Drivers in
Mockery, because he saw them take the Reins one after the other; as if he said,
that Chariot had two Drivers, but never a Fighter. It Is one single Moment that
makes this Image. In reading the Poets one often falls into great Perplexities,
for want of rightly distinguishing the Point of Time in which they speak.
Dacier.

The Art of Homer in this whole Passage concerning Automedon, is very
remarkable; in finding out the only proper Occasion, for so renowned a Person
as the Charioteer of Achilles to signalize his Valor.

XXXV.
VERSE 564. In vain brave Youths, with glorious Hopes ye burn,
In vain advance! not fated to return.]
These beautiful Anticipations are frequent in the Poets, who affect to speak
in the Character of Prophets, and Men inspired with the Knowledge of Futurity.
Thus Virgil to Turnus, Nescia men's hominum fati. -- Turno tempus erit, etc.


So Tasso, Cant. 12. when Argante had vowed the Destruction of Tancred. O vani
giuramenti! Ecco contrari
Seguir tosto gli effetti a l' alta speme:
E cader questi in teneon pari estinto
Sotto colui, ch' ei fa gia preso, e vinto.


And Milton makes the like Apostrophe to Eve at her leaving Adam before she met
the Serpent. -- She to him engaged
To be returned by Noon amid the Bower,
And all Things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoon's Repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve!
Thou never from that Hour, in Paradise,
Found'st either sweet Repast, or sound Repose.


XXXVI.
VERSE 642. So burns the vengesul Hornet, etc.] It is literally in the Greek,
she inspired the Hero with the Boldness of a Fly. There is no Impropriety in
the Comparison, this Animal being of all others the most persevering in its
Attacks, and the most difficult to be beaten off: The Occasion also of the
Comparison being the resolute Persistance of Menelaus about the dead Body,
renders it still the more just. But our present Idea of the Fly is indeed very
low, as taken from the Littleness and Insignificancy of this Creature. However,
since there is really no Meanness in it, there ought to be none in expressing
it; and I have done my best in the Translation to keep up the Dignity of my
Author.

XXXVII.
VERSE 651. By Hector loved, his Comrade and his Guest.] Podes the Favorite
and Companion of Hector, being killed on this Occasion, seems a parallel
Circumstance to the Death of Achilles's Favorite and Companion; and was
probably put in here on purpose to engage Hector on a like Occasion with
Achilles.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 721. Some Hero too must be dispatched, etc.] It seems odd that they did
not sooner send this Message to Achilles; but there is some Apology for it from
the Darkness and Difficulty of finding a proper Person. It was not every body
that was proper to send but one who was a particuar Friend to Achilles, who
might condole with him. Such was Antilochus who is sent afterward, and who,
besides, had that necessary Qualification of being (...). Eustathius.

XXXIX.
VERSE 731. If Grecce must perish we thy Will obey;
But let us perish in the Face of Day!]
This Thought has been looked upon as one of the sublimest in Homer: Longinus
represents it in this manner. "The thickest Darkness had on a sudden covered
the Grecian Army, and hindered them from fighting: When Ajax, not knowing what
Course to take, cries out, Oh Jove! disperse this Darkness which covers the
Greeks, and if we must perish, let us perish in the Light! This is a Sentiment
truly worthy of Ajax, he does not pray for Life; that had been unworthy a Hero:
But because in that Darkness he could not employ his Valor to any glorious
Purpose, and vexed to stand idle in the Field of Battle, he only prays that the
Day may appear, as being assured of putting an end to it worthy his great
Heart, though Jupiter himself should happen to oppose his Efforts."

M. l' Abbe Terasson (in his Dissertation on the Iliad) endeavors to prove
that Longinus has misrepresented the whole Context and Sense of this Passage of
Homer. The Fact (says he) is, that Ajax is in a very different Situation in
Homer from that wherein Longinus describes him. He has not the least Intention
of fighting, he thinks only of finding out some fit Person to send to Achilles;
and this Darkness hindering him from seeing such an one, is the occasion of his
Prayer. Accordingly it appears by what follows, that as soon as Jupiter has
dispersed the Cloud, Ajax never falls upon the Enemy, but in consequence of his
former Thought orders Menelaus to look for Antilochus, to dispatch him to
Achilles with the News of the Death of his Friend. Longinus (continues this
Author) had certainly forgot the Place from whence he took this Thought; and it
is not the first Citation from Homer which the Ancients have quoted wrong. Thus
Aristotle attributes to Calypso, the Words of Ulysses in the twelfth Book of
the Odysseis; and confounds together two Passages, one of the second, the other
of the fifteenth Book of the Iliad. [ Ethic. ad Nicom. l. 2. c. 9. and l. 3. c.
11.] And thus Cicero ascribed to Agamemnon a long Discourse of Ulysses in the
second Iliad; [ De divinatione l. 2.] and cited as Ajax's, the Speech of Hector
in the seventh. [See Aul. Gellius l. 15. c. 6.] One has no cause to wonder at
this, since the Ancients having Homer almost by heart, were for that very
Reason the more subject to mistake in citing him by Memory.

To this I think one may answer, that granting it was partly the Occasion of
Ajax's Prayer to obtain Light, in order to send to Achilles (which he
afterward does) yet the Thought which Longinus attributes to him, is very
consistent with it; and the last Line expresses nothing else but an heroic
Desire rather to die in the Light, than escape with Safety in the Darkness.
(...)
But indeed the whole Speech is only meant to paint the Concern and Distress of
a brave General: The Thought of sending a Messenger is only a Result from that
Concern and Distress, and so but a small Circumstance; which cannot be said to
occasion the Prayer.

Mons. Boileau has translated this Passage in two Lines. Grand Dieu! chasse la
nuit qui nous couvre les yeux,
Et combats contre nous a la clarte des Cieux.
And Mr. la Motte yet better in one. Grand Dieu! rends nous le jour, and
combats contre nous!
But both these (as Dacier very justly observes) are contrary to Homer's Sense.
He is far from representing Ajax of such a daring Impiety, as to bid Jupiter
combat against him; but only makes him ask for Light, that if it be his Will
the Greeks shall perish, they may perish in open Day. (...) -- (says he) that
is, abandon us, withdraw from us your Assistance; for those who are deserted by
Jove must perish infallibly: This Decorum of Homer ought to have been preserved.

XL.
VERSE 756. The mildest Manners, and the gentlest Heart.] This is a fine
Elogium of Patroclus: Homer dwells upon it on purpose, lest Achilles's
Character should be mistaken; and shows by the Praises he bestows here upon
Goodness, that Achilles's Character is not commendable for Morality. Achilles's
Manners, entirely opposite to those of Patroclus, are not morally good; they
are only poetically so, that is to say, they are well marked; and discover
beforehand what Resolutions that Hero will take: As has been at large
explained upon Aristotle's Poeticks. Dacier.

XLI.
VERSE 781. The youthful Warrior heard with silent Woe.] Homer ever represents
an Excess of Grief by a deep Horror, Silence, Weeping, and not enquiring into
the manner of the Friend's Death: Nor could Antilochus have expressed his
Sorrow in any manner so moving as Silence. Eustathius.

XLII.
VERSE 785. To brave Laodocus his Arms he flung.] Antilochus leaves his Armor,
not only that he might make the more haste, but (as the Ancients conjecture)
that he might not be thought to be absent by the Enemies; and that seeing his
Armor on some other Person, they might think him still in the Fight.
Eustathius.

XLIII.
VERSE 794. But hope not Warriors for Achilles' Aid:
Unarmed -- ]
This is an ingenious way of making the Valor of Achilles appear the greater;
who, though without Arms, goes forth, in the next Book, contrary to the
Expectation of Ajax and Menelaus. Dacier.

XLIV.
VERSE 825, etc. This Heap of Images which Homer throws together at the End of
this Book, makes the same Action appear with a very beautiful Variety. The
Description of the burning of a City is short but very lively. That of Ajax
alone bringing up the Rear Guard, and shielding those that bore the Body of
Patroclus from the whole Trojan Host, gives a prodigious Idea of Ajax; and as
Homer has often hinted, makes him just second to Achilles. The Image of the
Beam paints the great Stature of Patroclus: That of the Hill dividing the
Stream is noble and natural.

He compares the Ajaxes to a Boar, for their Fierceness and Boldness; to a long
Bank that keeps off the Course of the Waters, for their standing firm and
immovable in the Battle: Those that carry the dead Body, to Mules dragging a
vast Beam through rugged Paths, for their Laboriousness: The Body carried, to a
Beam, for being heavy and inanimate: The Trojans to Dogs, for their Boldness;
and to Water for their Agility and moving backwards and forwards: The Greeks to
a Flight of Starlings and Jays, for their Timorousness, and Swiftness.
Eustathius.

THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Grief of Achilles, and new Armor made him by Vulcan.
THE News of the Death of Patroclus, is brought to Achilles by Antilochus.
Thetis hearing his Lamentations comes with all her Sea-Nymphs to comfort him.
The Speeches of the Mother and Son on this Occasion. Iris appears to Achilles
by the Command of Juno, and orders him to show himself at the Head of the
Intrenchments. The Sight of him turns the Fortune of the Day, and the Body of
Patroclus is carried off by the Greeks. The Trojans call a Council, where
Hector and Polydamas disagree in their Opinions; but the Advice of the former
prevails, to remain encamped in the Field: The Grief of Achilles over the Body
of Patroclus.

Thetis goes to the Palace of Vulcan to obtain new Arms for her Son. The
Description of the wonderful Works of Vulcan, and lastly, that noble one of the
Shield of Achilles.

The latter part of the nine and twentieth Day, and the Night ensuing, take up
this Book. The Scene is at Achilles's Tent on the Seashore, from whence it
changes to the Palace of Vulcan.

THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THUS like the Rage of Fire the Combat burns,
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
Meanwhile, where Hellespont's broad Waters flow
Stood Nestor's Son, the Messenger of Woe:
There sat Achilles, shaded by his Sails,
On hoisted Yards extended to the Gales;
Pensive he sat; for all that Fate designed,
Rose in sad Prospect to his boding Mind.
Thus to his Soul he said. Ah! what constrains
The Greeks, late Victors, now to quit the Plains?
Is this the Day, which Heaven so long ago
Ordained, to sink me with the Weight of Woe?
(So Thetis warned) when by a Trojan Hand,
The bravest of the Myrmidonian Band
Should lose the Light? Fulfilled is that Decree;
Fallen is the Warrior, and Patroclus he!
In vain I charged him soon to quit the Plain,
And warned to shun Hectorean Force in vain!
Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears,
And tells the melancholy Tale with Tears.
Sad Tidings, Son of Peleus! thou must hear;
And wretched I, the unwilling Messenger!
Dead is Patroclus! For his Corpse they fight;
His naked Corpse: His Arm's are Hector's Right.
A sudden Horror shot through all the Chief,
And wrapped his Senses in the Cloud of Grief;
Cast on the Ground, with furious Hands he spread
The scorching Ashes over his graceful Head;
His purple Garments, and his golden Hairs,
Those he deforms with Dust, and these he tears:
On the hard Soil his groaning Breast he threw,
And rolled and grovel'd, as to Earth he grew.
The Virgin Captives, with disordered Charms,
(Won by his own, or by Patroclus' Arms)
Rushed from the Tents with Cries; and gathering round
Beat their white Breasts, and fainted on the Ground:
While Nestor's Son sustains a manlier Part,
And mourns the Warrior with a Warrior's Heart;
Hangs on his Arms, amidst his frantic Woe,
And often prevents the meditated Blow.
Far in the deep Abysses of the Main,
With hoary Nereus, and the watery Train,
The Mother Goddess from her crystal Throne
Heard his loud Cries, and answered Groan for Groan.
The circling Nereids with their Mistress weep,
And all the Seagreen Sisters of the Deep.
Thalia, Glauce, (every watery Name)
Nesaea mild, and Silver Spio came.
Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
And the blue Languish of soft Alia's Eye.
Their Locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear;
Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
Next Callianira, Callianassa show
Their Sister Looks; Dexamene the slow,
And swift Dynamene, now cut the Tides:
Iaera now the verdant Wave divides;
Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the Head:
Bright Galatea quits her pearly Bed:
These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
Maera, Amphinome, the Train extend,
And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
And Amatheia with her amber Hair.
All these, and all that deep in Ocean held
Their sacred Seats, the glimmering Grotto filled;
Each beat her Ivory Breast with silent Woe,
Till Thetis' Sorrows thus began to flow.
Hear me, and judge, ye Sisters of the Main!
How just a Cause has Thetis to complain?
How wretched, were I mortal, were my Fate!
How more than wretched in the immortal State!
Sprung from my Bed a god-like Hero came,
The bravest far that ever bore the Name;
Like some fair Olive, by my careful Hand
He grew, he flourished, and adorned the Land:
To Troy I sent him; but the Fates ordain
He never, never must return again.
So short a space the Light of Heaven to view,
So short alas! and filled with Anguish too?
Hear how his Sorrows echo through the Shore!
I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
I go at least to bear a tender part,
And mourn my loved one with a Mother's Heart.
She said, and left the Caverns of the Main.
All bathed in Tears, the melancholy Train
Attend her Way. Wide-opening part the Tides,
While the long Pomp the silver Wave divides.
Approaching now, they touched the Trojan Land;
Then, two by two, ascended up the Strand.
The Immortal Mother, standing close beside
Her mournful Offspring, to his Sighs replied;
Along the Coast their mingled Clamours ran,
And thus the silver-footed Dame began.
Why mourns my Son? thy late-preferr'd Request
The God has granted, and the Greeks distressed:
Why mourns my Son? thy Anguish let me share,
Reveal the Cause, and trust a Parent's Care.
He, deeply groaning -- To this cureless Grief
Not even the Thund'rers Favor brings Relief.
Patroclus -- Ah! -- Say Goddess can I boast
A Pleasure now? Revenge itself is lost:
Patroclus, loved of all my martial Train,
Beyond Mankind, beyond my self, is slain!
Lost are those Arms the Gods themselves bestowed
On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious Load.
Cursed be that Day, when all the Powers above
Thy Charms submitted to a mortal Love:
Oh had thou still, a Sister of the Main,
Pursued the Pleasures of the watery Reign;
And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
A mortal Beauty to his equal Bed!
Ever the sad Fruit of thy unhappy Womb
Had caused such Sorrows past, and Woes to come.
For soon alas! that wretched Offspring slain,
New Woes, new Sorrows shall create again:
It Is not in Fate th'Alternate now to give;
Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
Let me revenge it on proud Hector's Heart,
Let his last Spirit smoke upon my Dart;
On these Conditions will I breathe: Till then,
I blush to walk among the Race of Men.
A Flood of Tears, at this, the Goddess shed:
Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
When Hector falls, thou dy'st. -- Let Hector die,
And let me fall! ( Achilles made reply)
Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
He fell, and falling wished my Aid in vain.
Ah then, since from this miserable Day
I cast all hope of my Return away,
Since unrevenged, a hundred Ghosts demand
The Fate of Hector from Achilles' hand;
Since here, for brutal Courage far renowned,
I live an idle Burden to the Ground,
(Others in Council famed for nobler Skill,
More useful to preserve, than I to kill)
Let me -- But oh! ye gracious Powers above!
Wrath and Revenge from Men and Gods remove:
Far, far too dear to every mortal Breast,
Sweet to the Soul, as Honey to the Taste;
Gathering like Vapors of a noxious kind
From fiery Blood, and dark'ning all the Mind.
Me Agamemnon urged to deadly Hate;
It Is past -- I quell it; I resign to Fate.
Yes -- I will meet the Murderer of my Friend,
Or (if the Gods ordain it) meet my End.
The Stroke of Fate the bravest cannot shun:
The great Alcides, Jove's unequaled Son,
To Juno's Hate at length resigned his Breath,
And sunk the Victim of all-conqu'ring Death.
So shall Achilles fall! stretched pale and dead,
No more the Grecian Hope, or Trojan Dread!
Let me, this instant, rush into the Fields,
And reap what Glory Life's short Harvest yields.
Shall I not force some widowed Dame to tear
With frantic Hands, her long dishevelled Hair?
Shall I not force her Breast to heave with Sighs,
And the soft Tears to trickle from her Eyes?
Yes, I shall give the Fair those mournful Charms --
In vain you hold me -- Hence! my Arms, my Arms!
Soon shall the sanguine Torrent spread so wide,
That all shall know, Achilles swells the Tide.
My Son (Coerulean Thetis made reply,
To Fate submitting with a secret Sigh)
The Host to succor, and thy Friends to save,
Is worthy thee; the Duty of the Brave.
But can thou, naked, issue to the Plains?
Thy radiant Arms the Trojan Foe detains.
Insulting Hector bears the Spoils on high,
But vainly glories, for his Fate is nigh.
Yet, yet awhile, thy generous Ardor stay;
Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of Day,
Charged with refulgent Arms (a glorious Load)
Vulcanian Arms, the Labor of a God.
Then turning to the Daughters of the Main,
The Goddess thus dismissed her azure Train.
Ye Sister Nereids! to your Deeps descend,
Haste, and our Fathers sacred Seat attend,
I go to find the Architect divine,
Where vast Olympus starry Summits shine:
So tell our hoary Sire -- This Charge she gave:
The Seagreen Sisters plunge beneath the Wave:
Thetis once more ascends the blessed Abodes,
And treads the brazen Threshold of the Gods.
And now the Greeks, from furious Hector's Force,
Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong Course:
Nor yet their Chiefs Patroclus' Body bore
Safe through the Tempest, to the Tented Shore.
The Horse, the FOot, with equal Fury joined,
Poured on the Rear, and thundered close behind;
And like a Flame through Fields of ripened Corn,
The Rage of Hector over the Ranks was born:
Thrice the slain Hero by the Foot he drew;
Thrice to the Skies the Trojan Clamours flew.
As often the Ajaces his Assault sustain;
But checked, he turns; repulsed, attacks again.
With fiercer Shouts his lingering Troops he fires,
Nor yields a Step, nor form his Post retires:
So watchful Sheperds strive to force, in vain,
The hungry Lion from a Carcass slain.
Even yet, Patroclus had he born away,
And all the Glories of th'extended Day;
Had not high Juno, from the Realm of Air,
Secret, dispatched her trusty Messenger.
The various Goddess of the painted Bow,
Shot in a Whirlwind to the Shore below;
To great Achilles at his Ships she came,
And thus began the many-colour'd Dame.
Rise, Son of Peleus! rise divinely brave!
Assist the Combat, and Patroclus save:
For him the Slaughter to the Fleet they spread,
And fall by mutual Wounds around the Dead.
To drag him back to Troy the Foe contends;
Nor with his Death the Rage of Hector ends:
A Prey to Dogs he dooms the Corse to lie,
And marks the Place to fix his Head on high.
Rise, and prevent (if yet thou think of Fame)
Thy Friend's Disgrace, thy own eternal Shame!
Who sends thee, Goddess! from th'Etherial Skies?
Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies.
I come, Pelides! from the Queen of Jove,
The Immortal Empress of the Reamls above;
Unknown to him who sits remote on high,
Unknown to all the Synod of the Sky.
Thou come in vain, he cries (with Fury warmed)
Arms I have none, and can I fight unarmed?
Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,
Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of Day
Vulcanian Arms: What other should I wield?
Except the mighty Telamonian Shield?
That, in my Friends Defense, has Ajax spread,
While his strong Lance around him heaps the Dead:
The gallant Chief defends Menoetius' Son,
And does, what his Achilles should have done.
Thy want of Arms (said Iris) well we know,
But though unarmed, yet clad in Terrors, go!
Let but Achilles over yon' Trench appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;
Greece from one Glance of that tremendous Eye
Shall take new Courage, and disdain to fly.
She spoke, and past in Air. The Hero rose;
Her Aegis, Pallas over his Shoulders throws;
Around his Brows a golden Cloud she spread;
A Stream of Glory flamed above his Head.
As when from some beleagur'd Town arise
The Smokes high-curling to the shaded Skies;
(Seen from some Island over the Main afar,
When Men distressed hang out the Sign of War)
Soon as the Sun in Ocean hides his Rays,
Thick on the Hills the flaming Beacons blaze;
With long-projected Beams the Seas are bright,
And Heavens high Arch reflects the ruddy Light:
So from Achilles' Head the Splendours rise,
Reflecting Blaze on Blaze, against the Skies
Forth marched the Chief, and distant from the Crowd,
High on the Rampart raised his Voice aloud;
With her own Shout Minerva swells the Sound;
Troy starts astonished, and the Shores rebound.
As the loud Trumpet's brazen Mouth from far
With shrilling Clangor sounds the Alarm of War,
Struck from the Walls, the Echoes float on high,
And the round Bulwarks, and thick Towers reply,
So high his brazen Voice the Hero reared,
Hosts drop their Arms, and trembled as they heard;
And back the Chariots roll, and Coursers bound,
And Steeds and Men lie mingled on the Ground.
Aghast they see the living Lightenings play,
And turn their Eye Balls from the flashing Ray.
Thrice from the Trench his dreadful Voice he raised;
And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
Twelve in the Tumult wedged, untimely rushed
On their own Spears, by their own Chariots crushed:
While shielded from the Darts, the Greeks obtain
The long-contended Carcass of the Slain.
A lofty Bier the breathless Warrior bears:
Around, his sad Companions melt in Tears
But chief Achilles, bending down his Head,
Pours unavailing Sorrows over the Dead.
Whom late, triumphant with his Steeds and Car,
He sent refulgent to the Field of War,
(Unhappy Change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
Stretched forth, and gash'd with many a gaping Wound.
Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly Way,
In Ocean's Waves the unwilling Light of Day
Quench his red Orb, at Juno's high Command,
And from their Labors eased the Achaian Band.
The frighted Trojans (panting from the War,
Their Steeds unharness'd from the weary Car)
A sudden Council called: Each Chief appeared
In haste, and standing; for to sit they feared.
'Twas now no Season for prolonged Debate;
They saw Achilles, and in him their Fate.
Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
Skilled to discern the Future by the past,
The Son of Panthus, thus expressed his Fears;
(The Friend of Hector, and of equal Years:
The self same Night to both a Being gave,
One wise in Council, one in Action brave.)
In free Debate, my Friends, your Sentence speak:
For me, I move, before the Morning break
To raise our Camp: Too dangerous here our Post,
Far from Troy Walls, and on a naked Coast.
I deemed not Greece so dreadful, while engaged
In mutual Feuds, her King and Hero raged;
Then, while we hoped our Armies might prevail,
We boldly camp'd beside a thousand Sail.
I dread Pelides now: his Rage of Mind
Not long continues to the Shores confined,
Nor to the Fields, where long in equal Fray
Contending Nations won and lost the Day;
For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the Strife,
And the hard Contest not for Fame, but Life.
Haste then to Ilion, while the favoring Night
Detains those Terrors, keeps that Arm from Fight;
If but the Morrow's Sun behold us here,
That Arm, those Terrors, we shall feel, not fear;
And Hearts that now disdain, shall leap with Joy,
If Heaven permits them then to enter Troy.
Let not my fatal Prophecy be true,
Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
Whatever be our Fate, yet let us try
What Force of Thought and Reason can supply;
Let us on Counsel for our Guard depend;
The Town, her Gates and Bulwarks shall defend:
When Morning dawns, our well-appointed Powers
Arrayed in Arms, shall line the lofty Towers.
Let the fierce Hero then, when Fury calls,
Vent his mad Vengeance on our rocky Walls,
Or fetch a thousand Circles round the Plain,
Till his spent Coursers seek the Fleet again:
So may his Rage be tired, and labored down;
And Dogs shall tear him, ever he sack the Town.
Return? (said Hector, fired with stern Disdain)
What, coop whole Armies in our Walls again?
Was It not enough, ye valiant Warriors say,
Nine Years imprisoned in those Towers ye lay?
Wide over the World was Ilion famed of old
For Brass exhaustless, and for Mines of Gold:
But while inglorious in her Walls we stayed,
Sunk were her Treasures, and her Stores decayed;
The Phrygians now her scattered spoils enjoy,
And proud Maeonia wastes the Fruits of Troy.
Great Jove at length my Arms to Conquest calls,
And shuts the Grecians in their wooden Walls:
Dare thou dispirit whom the Gods incite?
Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his Flight.
To better Counsel then Attention lend,
Take due Refreshment, and the Watch attend.
If there be one whose Riches cost him Care,
Forth let him bring them, for the Troops to share;
It Is better gen'rously bestowed on those,
Than left the Plunder of our Country's Foes.
Soon as the Morn the rosy Welkin warms
Fierce on yon' Navy will we pour our Arms.
If great Achilles rise in all his Might,
His be the Danger: I shall stand the Fight.
Honor, ye Gods! or let me gain, or give;
And live he glorious, whosoe'er shall live!
Mars is our common Lord, alike to all;
And often the Victor triumphs, but to fall.
The shouting Host in loud Applauses joined;
So Pallas robbed the Many of their Mind,
To their own Sense condemned! and left to choose
The worse Advice, the better to refuse.
While the long Night extends her sable Reign,
Around Patroclus mourned the Grecian Train.
Stern in superior Grief Pelides stood;
Those slaught'ring Arms, so used to bathe in Blood,
Now clasp his clay-cold Limbs: Then gushing start
The Tears, and Sighs burst from his swelling Heart.
The Lion thus, with dreadful Anguish stung,
Roars through the Desert, and demands his Young;
When the grim Savage to his rifled Den
Too late returning, snuffs the Track of Men,
And over the Vales, and over the Forest bounds;
His clamorous Grief the bellowing Wood resounds.
So grieves Achilles; and impetuous, vents
To all his Myrmidons, his loud Laments.
In what vain Promise, Gods! did I engage?
When to console Menaetius' feeble Age,
I vowed his much-loved Offspring to restore,
Charged with rich Spoils, to fair Opuntia's Shore!
But mighty Jove cuts short, with just Disdain,
The long, long Views of poor, designing Man!
One Fate the Warrior and the Friend shall strike,
And Troy's black Sands must drink our Blood alike:
Me too, a wretched Mother shall deplore,
An aged Father never see me more!
Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,
Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
Ever thy dear Relics in the Grave are laid,
Shall Hector's Head be offered to thy Shade;
That, with his Arms, shall hang before thy Shrine,
And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan Line,
Slain by this Hand, sad Sacrifice! expire;
Their Lives effus'd around thy flaming Pyre.
Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely pressed,
Bathe thy cold Face, and sob upon thy Breast!
While Trojan Captives here thy Mourners stay,
Weep all the Night, and murmur all the Day:
Spoils of my Arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,
Our Swords kept time, and conquered side by side.
He spoke, and bid the sad Attendants round
Cleanse the pale Corse, and wash each honored Wound.
A massy Caldron of stupendous Frame
They brought, and placed it over the rising Flame:
Then heap the lighted Wood; the Flame divides
Beneath the Vase, and climbs around the Sides:
In its wide Womb they pour the rushing Stream;
The boiling Water bubbles to the Brim:
The Body then they bathe with pious Toil,
Embalm the Wounds, anoint the Limbs with Oil;
High on a Bed of State extended laid,
And decent covered with a linen Shade;
Last over the Dead the milkwhite Linen threw;
That done, their Sorrows and their Sighs renew.
Meanwhile to Juno, in the Realms above,
(His Wife and Sister) spoke almighty Jove.
At last thy Will prevails: Great Peleus' Son
Rises in Arms: Such Grace thy Greeks have won.
Say (for I know not) is their Race divine,
And thou the Mother of that martial Line?
What Words are these (The Imperial Dame replies,
While Anger flashed from her majestic Eyes)
Succor like this a mortal Arm might lend,
And such Success mere human Wit attend:
And shall not I, the second Power above,
Heavens Queen, and Consort of the thundering Jove,
Say, shall not I one Nation's Fate command,
Not wreak my Vengeance on one guilty Land?
So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed Dame
Reached the Vulcanian Dome, Eternal Frame!
High eminent amid the Works divine,
Where Heavens far-beaming, brazen Mansions shine.
There the lame Architect the Goddess found,
Obscure in Smoke, his Forges flaming round,
While bathed in Sweat from Fire to Fire he flew,
And puffing loud, the roaring Bellows blew.
That Day, no common Task his Labor claimed:
Full twenty Tripods for his Hall he framed,
That placed on living Wheels of massy Gold,
(Wondrous to tell) instinct with Spirit rolled
From Place to Place, around the blessed Abodes,
Self-mov'd, obedient to the Beck of Gods:
For their fair Handles now, o'erwrought with Flowers,
In Molds prepared, the glowing Ore he pours.
Just as responsive to his Thought, the Frame
Stood prompt to move, the Azure Goddess came:
Charis, his Spouse, a Grace divinely fair,
(With purple Fillets round her braided Hair)
Observed her entering; her soft Hand she pressed,
And smiling, thus the watery Queen addressed.
What, Goddess! this unusual Favor draws?
All hail, and welcome! whatsoever the Cause:
Till now a Stranger, in a happy Hour
Approach, and taste the Dainties of the Bower.
High on a Throne, with Stars of silver graced
And various Artifice, the Queen she placed;
A Footstool at her Feet: then calling, said,
Vulcan draw near, it is Thetis asks your Aid.
Thetis (replied the God) our Powers may claim,
An ever dear, and ever honored Name!
When my proud Mother hurled me from the Sky,
(My awkward Form, it seems, displeased her Eye)
She, and Eurynome, my Griefs redrest,
Tnd soft received me on their silver Breast.
Even then, these Arts employed my infant Thought;
Chains, Bracelets, Pendants, all their Toys I wrought.
Nine Years kept secret in the dark Abode,
Secure I lay, concealed from Man and God:
Deep in a cavern'd Rock my Days were led;
The rushing Ocean murmured over my Head.
Now since her Presence glads our Mansion, say,
For such Desert what Service can I pay?
Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our Board to share
The genial Rites, and hospitable Fare;
While I my Labors of the Forge forego,
And bid the roaring Bellows cease to blow.
Then from his Anvil the lame Artist rose;
Wide with distorted Legs, oblique he goes,
And stills the Bellows, and (in order laid)
Locks in their Chest his Instruments of Trade.
Then with a Sponge the sooty Workman dressed
His brawny Arms imbrown'd, and hairy Breast.
With his huge Scepter graced, and red Attire,
Came halting forth the Sovereign of the Fire:
The Monarch's Steps two Female Forms uphold,
That moved, and breathed, in animated Gold;
To whom was Voice, and Sense, and Science given
Of Works divine (such Wonders are in Heaven!)
On these supported, with unequal Gait,
He reached the Throne where pensive Thetis sat;
There placed beside her on the shining Frame,
He thus addressed the silver-footed Dame.
Thee, welcome Goddess! what Occasion calls,
(So long a Stranger) to these honored Walls?
It Is thine, fair Thetis, the Command to lay,
And Vulcan's Joy, and Duty, to obey,
To whom the mournful Mother thus replies,
(The crystal Drops stood trembling in her Eyes)
Oh Vulcan! say, was ever Breast divine
So pierced with Sorrows, so overwhelmed as mine?
Of all the Goddesses, did Jove prepare
For Thetis only such a Weight of Care?
I, only I, of all the watery Race,
By Force subjected to a Man's Embrace,
Who, sinking now with Age, and Sorrow, pays
The mighty Fine imposed on length of Days.
Sprung from my Bed a god-like Hero came,
The bravest sure that ever bore the Name;
Like some fair Plant beneath my careful Hand
He grew, he flourished, and he graced the Land:
To Troy I sent him! but his native Shore
Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
(Even while he lives, he wastes with secret Woe)
Nor I, a Goddess, can retard the Blow!
Robbed of the Prize the Grecian Suffrage gave,
The King of Nations forced his royal Slave:
For this he grieved; and till the Greeks oppressed
Required his Arm, he sorrow'd unredrest.
Large Gifts they promise, and their Elders send;
In vain -- He arms not, but permits his Friend
His Arms, his Steeds, his Forces to employ;
He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
Then slain by Phoebus ( Hector had the Name)
At once resigns his Armor, Life, and Fame.
But thou, in Pity, by my Prayer be won;
Grace with immortal Arms this short-lived Son,
And to the Field in martial Pomp restore,
To shine with Glory, till he shines no more!
To her the Artist-God. Thy Griefs resign,
Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
O could I hide him from the Fates as well,
Or with these Hands the cruel Stroke repel,
As I shall forge most envied Arms, the Gaze
Of wondering Ages, and the World's Amaze!
Thus having said, the Father of the Fires
To the black Labors of his Forge retires.
Soon as he bade them blow, the Bellows turned
Their iron Mouths; and where the Furnace burned,
Resounding breathed: At once the Blast expires,
And twenty Forges catch at once the Fires;
Just as the God directs, now loud, now low,
They raise a Tempest, or they gently blow.
In hissing Flames huge silver Bars are rolled,
And stubborn Brass, and Tin, and solid Gold:
Before, deep fixed, the eternal Anvils stand;
The ponderous Hammer loads his better Hand,
His left with Tongs turns the vexed Metal round;
And thick, strong Strokes, the doubling Vaults rebound.
Then first he formed th'immense and solid Shield;
Rich, various Artifice emblaz'd the Field;
Its utmost Verge a threefold Circle bound;
A silver Chain suspends the massy Round,
Five ample Plates the broad Expanse compose,
And god-like Labors on the Surface rose.
There shone the Image of the Master Mind:
There Earth, there Heaven, there Ocean he designed;
Th'unweary'd Sun, the Moon completely round;
The starry Lights that Heavens high Unequal crowned;
The Pleiads, Hyads, with the Northern Team;
And great Orion's more refulgent Beam;
To which, around the Axle of the Sky,
The Bear revolving, points his golden Eye,
Still shines exalted on th'aetherial Plain,
Nor bends his blazing Forehead to the Main.
Two Cities radiant on the Shield appear,
The Image one of Peace, and one of War.
Here sacred Pomp, and genial Feast delight,
And solemn Dance, and Hymenaeal Rite;
Along the Street the new-made Brides are led,
With Torches flaming, to the nuptial Bed;
The youthful Dancers in a Circle bound
To the soft Flute, and Cittern's silver Sound:
Through the fair Streets, the Matrons in a Row,
Stand in their Porches, and enjoy the Show.
There, in the Forum swarm a numerous Train;
The Subject of Debate, a Townsman slain:
One pleads the Fine discharged, which one denied,
And bade the Public and the Laws decide:
The Witness is produced on either Hand;
For this, or that, the partial People stand:
The Appointed Heralds still the noisy Bands,
And form a Ring, with Scepters in their Hands;
On Seats of Stone, within the sacred Place,
The reverend Elders nodded over the Case;
Alternate, each th'attesting Scepter took,
And rising solemn, each his Sentence spoke.
Two golden Talents lay amidst, in sight,
The Prize of him who best adjudg'd the Right.
Another Part (a Prospect differing far)
Glowed with refulgent Arms, and horrid War.
Two mighty Hosts a leaguer'd Town embrace,
And one would pillage, one would burn the Place.
Meantime the Townsmen, armed with silent Care,
A secret Ambush on the Foe prepare:
Their Wives, their Children, and the watchful Band,
Of trembling Parents on the Turrets stand.
They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold;
Gold were the Gods, their radiant Garments Gold,
And Gold their Armor: These the Squadron led,
August, Divine, Superior by the Head!
A Place for Ambush fit, they found, and stood
Covered with Shields, beside a silver Flood.
Two Spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
If Sheep or Oxen seek the winding Stream.
Soon the white Flocks proceeded over the Plains,
And Steers slow-moving, and two Shepherd Swains;
Behind them, piping on their Reeds, they go,
Nor fear an Ambush, nor suspect a Foe.
In Arms the glittering Squadron rising round
Rush sudden; Hills of Slaughter heap the Ground,
Whole Flocks and Herds lie bleeding on the Plains,
And, all amidst them, dead, the Shepherd wains!
The bellowing Oxen the Besiegers hear;
They rise, take Horse, approach, and meet the War;
They fight, they fall, beside the silver Flood;
The waving Silver seemed to blush with Blood.
There Tumult, there Contention stood confessed;
One reared a Dagger at a Captive's Breast,
One held a living Foe, that freshly bled
With new-made Wounds; another dragged a dead;
Now here, now there, the Carcasses they tore:
Fate stalked amidst them, grim with human Gore.
And the whole War came out, and met the Eye;
And each bold Figure seemed to live, or die.
A Field deep furrowed, next the God designed,
The third time labored by the sweating Hind;
The shining Shares full many Plowmen guide,
And turn their crooked Yokes on every side.
Still as at either End they wheel around,
The Master meets 'em with his Goblet crowned;
The hearty Draught rewards, renews their Toil;
Then back the turning Plow-shares cleave the Soil:
The new-ear'd Earth in blacker Ridges rolled;
Sable it looked, tho formed of molten Gold.
Another Field rose high with waving Grain;
With bended Sickles stand the Reaper-Train:
Here stretched in Ranks the levelled Swarths are found,
Sheaves heaped on Sheaves, here thicken up the Ground.
With sweeping Stroke the Mowers strew the Lands;
The Gath'rers follow, and collect in Bands;
And last the Children, in whose Arms are born
(Too short to gripe them) the brown Sheaves of Corn.
The rustic Monarch of the Field descries
With silent Glee, the Heaps around him rise.
A ready Banquet on the Turf is laid,
Beneath an ample Oak's expanded Shade.
The Victim-Ox the sturdy Youth prepare;
The Reaper's due Repast, the Women's Care.
Next, ripe in yellow Gold, a Vineyard shines,
Bent with the ponderous Harvest of its Vines;
A deaper Dye the dangling Clusters show,
And curled on silver Props, in order glow:
A darker Metal mixed, entrenched the Place;
And Pales of glittering Tin th'Enclosure grace.
To this, one Pathway gently winding leads,
Where march a Train with Baskets on their Heads,
(Fair Maids, and blooming Youths) that smiling bear
The purple Product of th'Autumnal Year.
To these a Youth awakes the warbling Strings,
Whose tender Lay the Fate of Linus sings;
In measured Dance behind him move the Train,
Tune soft the Voice, and answer to the Strain.
Here, Herds of Oxen march, erect and bold,
Rear high their Horns, and seem to low in Gold,
And speed to Meadows on whose sounding Shores
A rapid Torrent through the Rushes roars:
Four golden Herdsmen as their Guardians stand,
And nine sour Dogs complete the rustic Band.
Two Lions rushing from the Wood appeared;
And seized a Bull, the Master of the Herd:
He roared: in vain the Dogs, the Men withstood,
They tore his Flesh, and drank the sable Blood.
The Dogs (often cheered in vain) desert the Prey,
Dread the grim Terrors, and at distance bay.
Next this, the Eye the Art of Vulcan leads
Deep through fair Forests, and a Length of Meads;
And Stalls, and Folds, and scattered Cotts between;
And fleecy Flocks, that whiten all the Scene.
A figured Dance succeeds: Such once was seen
In lofty Gnossus, for the Cretan Queen,
Formed by Daedalean Art. A comely Band
Of Youths and Maidens, bounding Hand in Hand;
The Maids in soft Cymarrs of Linen dressed;
The Youths all graceful in the glossy Vest;
Of those the Locks with flowery Wreaths enrolled,
Of these the Sides adorned with Swords of Gold,
That glittering gay, from silver Belts depend.
Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
With well-taught Feet: Now shape, in oblique ways,
Confusedly regular, the moving Maze:
Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
And undistinguished blend the flying Ring:
So whirls a Wheel, in giddy Circle tossed,
And rapid as it runs, the single Spokes are lost.
The gazing Multitudes admire around;
Two active Tumblers in the Center bound;
Now high, now low, their plaint Limbs they bend,
And general Songs the sprightly Revel end.
Thus the broad Shield complete the Artist crowned
With his last Hand, and poured the Ocean round:
In living Silver seemed the Waves to roll,
And beat the Buckler's Verge, and bound the whole.
This done, whatever a Warrior's Use requires
He forged; the Cuirass that outshone the Fires;
The Greaves of ductile Tin, the Helm impressed
With various Sculpture, and the golden Crest.
At Thetis' Feet the finished Labor lay;
She, as a Falcon cuts th'Aerial way,
Swift from Olympus' snowy Summit flies,
And bears the blazing Present through the Skies.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Eighteenth Book.
shield of Achilles The Shield of Achilles as described in Homers 18th. Ilias.
in Twelve Tables. Three of a Town in Peace. 1. a Marriage. 2. an assembly of ye
People. 3. a Senate.

Three of a Town in War. 4. The Besieged making a Sally. 5. Shepherds and their
Flocks falling into an ambuscade. 6. a Combact.

Three of Agriculture. 7. Tillage. 8. Harvest. 9. a Vintage.

Three of a Pastoral Life. 10. Lions and Herds of Cattle. 11. Sheep. 12. the
Dance.



Saml. Gribelin Junr. Sculp.


OBSERVATIONS ON THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK.
I.
VERSE 1. Thus like the Rage of Fire, etc.] This Phrase is usual in our Author,
to signify a sharp Battle fought with Heat and Fury on both parts; such an
Engagement like a Flame, preying upon all sides, and dying the sooner, the
fiercer it burns. Eustathius.

II.
VERSE 6. On hoisted Yards.] The Epithet (...) in this Place has a more than
ordinary Sgnification. It implies that the Sail-yards were hoisted up, and
Achilles's Ships on the point to set sail. This shows that it was purely in
Compliance to his Friend that he permitted him to succor the Greeks; he meant
to leave 'em as soon as Patroclus returned; he still remembered what he told
the Ambassadors in the ninth Book;. 360. To morrow you shall see my Fleet set
sail. Accordingly this is the Day appointed, and he is fixed to his Resolution:
This Circumstance wonderfully strengthens his implacable Character.

III.
VERSE 7. Pensive he sat.] Homer in this artful manner prepares Achilles for
the fatal Message, and gives him these Forebodings of his Misfortunes, that
they might be no less than he expected.

His Expressions are suitable to his Concern, and delivered confusedly. "I bad
him (says he) after he had saved the Ships, and repulsed the Trojans, to return
back, and not engage himself too far." Here he breaks off, when he should have
added; "But he was so unfortunate as to forget my Advice." As he is reasoning
with himself, Antilochus comes in, which makes him leave the Sense imperfect.
Eustathius.

IV.
VERSE 15. Fulfilled is that Decree?
Slain is the Warrior? and Patroclus he!
It may be objected, that Achilles seems to contradict what had been said in the
foregoing Book, that Thetis concealed from her Son the Death of Patroclus in
her Prediction. Whereas here he says, that she had foretold he should lose the
bravest of the Thessalians. There is nothing in this but what is natural and
common among Mankind: And it is still more agreeable to the hasty and
inconsiderate Temper of Achilles, not to have made that Reflection till it was
too late. Prophecies are only Marks of divine Prescience, not Warnings to
prevent human Misfortunes; for if they were, they must hinder their own
Accomplishment.

V.
VERSE 21. Sad Tidings, Son of Peleus!] This Speech of Antilochus ought to
serve as a Model for the Brevity with which so dreadful a piece of News ought
to be delivered; for in two Verses it comprehends the whole Affair, the Death
of Patroclus, the Person that killed him, the Contest for his Body, and his
Arms in the Possession of the Enemy. Besides, it should be observed that Grief
has so crowded his Words, that in these two Verses he leaves the Verb (...),
they fight, without its Nominative, the Greeks or Trojans. Homer observes this
Brevity upon all the like Occasions. The Greek Tragic Poets have not always
imitated this Discretion. In great Distresses there is nothing more ridiculous
than a Messenger who begins a long Story with pathetic Descriptions; he speaks
without being heard; for the Person to whom he addresses himself has no time to
attend him: The first Word, which discovers to him his Misfortune, has made him
deaf to all the rest. Eustathius.

VI.
VERSE 25. A sudden Horror, etc.] A modern French Writer has drawn a Parallel
of the Conduct of Homer and Virgil, in relation to the Deaths of Patroclus and
of Pallas. The latter is killed by Turnus, as the former by Hector; Turnus
triumphs in the Spoils of the one, as Hector is clad in the Arms of the other;
Aeneas revenges the Death of Pallas by that of Turnus, as Achilles the Death of
Patroclus by that of Hector. The Grief of Achilles in Homer on the score of
Patroclus, is much greater than that of Aeneas in Virgil, for the sake of
Pallas. Achilles gives himself up to Despair with a Weakness which Plato could
not pardon in him, and which can only be excused on account of the long and
close Friendship between 'em: That of Aeneas is more discreet, and seems more
worthy of a Hero. It was not possible that Aeneas could be so deeply interested
for any Man, as Achilles was interested for Patroclus: For Virgil had no Color
to kill Ascanius, who was little more than a Child; besides, that his Hero's
Interest in the War of Italy was great enough of itself, not to need to be
animated by so touching a Concern as the fear of losing his Son. On the other
hand, Achilles having but very little personal Concern in the War of Troy (as
he had told Agamemnon in the beginning of the Poem) and knowing, besides, that
he was to perish there, required some very pressing Motive to engage him to
persist in it, after such Disgusts and Insults as he had received. It was this
which made it necessary for these two great Poets to treat a Subject so much in
their own Nature alike, in a manner so different. But as Virgil found it
admirable in Homer, he was willing to approach it, as near as the Economy of
his Work would permit.

VII.
VERSE 27. Cast on the Ground, etc.] This is a fine Picture of the Grief of
Achilles: We see on the one hand, the Posture in which the Hero receives the
News of his Friend's Death; he falls upon the Ground, he rends his Hair, he
snatches the Ashes and casts them on his Head, according to the manner of those
Times; (but what much enlivens it in this place, is his sprinkling Embers
instead of Ashes in the Violence of his Passion.) On the other side, the
Captives are running from their Tents, ranging themselves about him, and
answering to his Groans: Beside him stands Antilochus, fetching deep Sighs, and
hanging on the Arms of the Hero, for fear his Despair and Rage should cause
some desperate Attempt upon his own Life: There is no Painter but will be
touched with this Image.

VIII.
VERSE 33. The Virgin Captives.] The captive Maids lamented either in Pity for
their Lord, or in Gratitude to the Memory of Patroclus, who was remarkable for
his Goodness and Affability; or under these Pretenses mourned for their own
Misfortunes and Slavery. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 75. Like some fair Plant, beneath my careful Hand.] This Passage, where
the Mother compares her Son to a tender Plant, raised and preserved with Care;
has a most remarkable Resemblance to that in the Psalms, Thy Children like
Branches of Olive Trees round thy Table. Psalm. 127.

X.
VERSE 100, 125. The two Speeches of Achilles to Thetis.] It is not possible to
imagine more lively and beautiful Strokes of Nature and Passion, than those
which our Author ascribes to Achilles throughout these admirable Speeches. They
contain all, that the truest Friend, the most tender Son, and the most generous
Hero, could think or express in this delicate and affecting Circumstance. He
shows his Excess of Love to his Mother, by wishing he had never been born or
known to the World, rather than she should have endured so many Sufferings on
his account: He shows no less Love for his Friend, in resolving to revenge his
Death upon Hector, though his own would immediately follow. We see him here ready
to meet his Fate for the sake of his Friend, and in the Odysseis we find him
wishing to live again only to maintain his Father's Honor against his Enemies:
Thus he values neither Life nor Death, but as they conduce to the Good of his
Friend and Parents, or the Increase of his Glory.

After having calmly considered the present State of his Life, he deliberately
embraces his approaching Fate; and comforts himself under it, by a Reflection
on those great Men, whom neither their illustrious Actions, nor their Affinity
to Heaven, could save from the general Doom. A Thought very natural to him,
whose Business it was in Peace to sing their Praises, and in War to imitate
their Actions. Achilles, like a Man passionate of Glory, takes none but the
finest Models; he thinks of Hercules, who was the Son of Jupiter, and who had
filled the Universe with the Noise of his immortal Actions: These are the
Sentiments of a real Hero. Eustathius.

XI.
VERSE 137. Let me -- But oh ye gracious Powers etc.] Achilles's Words are
these; "Now since I am never to return home, and since I lie here an useless
Person, losing my best Friend, and exposing the Greeks to so many Dangers by my
own Folly; I who am superior to them all in Battle -- Here he breaks off, and
says -- May Contention perish everlastingly, etc. Achilles leaves the Sentence
thus suspended, either because in his Heat he had forgot what he was speaking
of, or because he did not know how to end it; for he should have said, --
"Since I have done all this, I Will perish to revenge him:" Nothing can be finer
than this sudden Execration against Discord and Revenge, which breaks from the
Hero in the deep Sense of the Miseries those Passions had occasioned him.

Achilles could not be ignorant that he was superior to others in Battle; and
it was therefore no Fault in him to say so. But he is so ingenuous as to give
himself no farther Commendation than what he undoubtedly merited; confessing at
the same time, that many exceeded him in Speaking: Unless one may take this as
said in contempt of Oratory, not unlike that of Virgil, Orabunt caussas melius
-- etc.


XII.
VERSE 153. Let me this instant.] I shall have time enough for inglorious Rest
when I am in the Grave, but now I must act like a living Hero: I shall indeed
lie down in Death, but at the same time rise higher in Glory. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 162. That all shall know, Achilles.] There is a great Stress on (...)
and (...). They shall soon find that their Victories have been owing to the
long Absence of a Hero, and that Hero Achilles. Upon which the Ancients have
observed, that since Achilles's Anger there past in reality but a few Days: To
which it may be replied, that so short a Time as this might well seem long to
Achilles, who thought all unactive Hours tedious and insupportable; and if the
Poet himself had said that Achilles was long absent, he had not said it because
a great many Days had past, but because so great a Variety of Incidents had
happened in that Time. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 217. -- This Promise of Thetis to present her Son with a new Suit of
Armor, was the most artful Method of hindering him from putting immediately in
practice his Resolutions of fighting, which according to his violent Manners,
he must have done: Therefore the Interposition of Thetis here was absolutely
necessary; it was Dignus vindice nodus.

XV.
VERSE 219. Who sends thee Goddess, etc.] Achilles is amazed, that a Moment
after the Goddess his Mother had forbid him fighting, he should receive a
contrary Order from the Gods: Therefore he asks what God sent her? Dacier.

XVI.
VERSE 226. Arms I have none.] It is here objected against Homer, that since
Patroclus took Achilles' Armor, Achilles could not want Arms while he had
those of Patroclus; but (besides that Patroclus might have given his Armor to
his Squire Automedon, the better to deceive the Trojans by making them take
Automedon for Patroclus, as they took Patroclus for Achilles) this Objection
may be very solidly answered by saying that Homer has prevented it, since he
made Achilles's Armor fit Patroclus's Body not without a Miracle, which the
Gods wrought in his Favor. Furthermore, it does not follow that because the
Armor of a large Man fits one that is smaller, the Armor of a little Man
should fit one that is larger. Eustathius.

XVII.
VERSE 230. Except the mighty Telamonian Shield.] Achilles seems not to have
been of so large a Stature as Ajax: Yet his Shield it is likely might be fit
enough for him, because his great Strength was sufficient to wield it. This
Passage, I think, might have been made use of by the Defenders of the Shield of
Achilles against the Critics, to show that Homer intended the Buckler of his
Hero for a very large one: And one would think he put it into this place, just
a little before the Description of that Shield, on purpose to obviate that
Objection.

XVIII.
VERSE 236. But as thou art, unarm'd] A Hero so violent and so outrageous as
Achilles, and who had just lost the Man he loved best in the World, is not
likely to refuse showing himself to the Enemy, for the single Reason of having
no Armor. Grief and Despair in a great Soul are not so prudent and reserved;
but then on the other side, he is not to throw himself in the midst of so many
Enemies armed and flushed with Victory. Homer gets out of this nice
Circumstance with great Dexterity, and gives to Achilles's Character every
thing he ought to give it, without offending either against Reason or
Probability. He judiciously feigns, that Juno sent this Order to Achilles, for
Juno is the Goddess of Royalty, who has the Care of Princes and Kings; and who
inspires them with the Sense of what they owe to their Dignity and Character.
Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 237. Let but Achilles over yon' Trench appear.] There cannot be a
greater Instance, how constantly Homer carried his whole Design in his Head, as
well as with what admirable Art he raises one great Idea upon another, to the
highest Sublime, than this Passage of Achilles's Appearance to the Army, and
the Preparations by which we are led to it. In the thirteenth Book, when the
Trojans have the Victory, they check their Pursuit of it, in the mere Thought
that Achilles sees them: In the sixteenth, they are put into the utmost
Consternation at the sight of his Armor and Chariot: In the seventeenth,
Menelaus and Ajax are in Despair, on the Consideration that Achilles cannot
succor them for want of Armor: In the present Book, beyond all Expectation he
does but show him unarmed, and the very Sight of him gives the Victory to
Greece: How extremely noble is this Gradation!

XX.
VERSE 245. The Smokes high-curling.] For Fires in the Day appear nothing but
Smoke, and in the Night Flames are visible because of the Darkness. And thus it
is said in Exodus, That God led his People in the Day with a Pillar of Smoke,
and in the Night with a Pillar of Fire. Per Diem in Columna nubis, and per
Noctem in Columna ignis. Dacier.

XXI.
VERSE 247. Seen from some Island.] Homer makes choice of a Town placed in an
Island, because such a Place being besieged has no other Means of making its
Distress known than by Signals of Fire; whereas a Town upon the Continent has
other Means to make known to its Neighbors the Necessity it is in. Dacier.

XXII.
VERSE 259. As the loud Trumpets, etc.] I have already observed, that when the
Poet speaks as from himself, he may be allowed to take his Comparisons from
things which were not known before his Time. Here he borrows a Comparison from
the Trumpet, as he has elsewhere done from Saddle-Horses, though neither one nor
the other were used in Greece at the time of the Trojan War. Virgil was less
exact in this respect, for he describes the Trumpet as used in the sacking of
Troy, Exoritur clamorque virum clangorque tubarum.
And celebrates Misenus as the Trumpeter of Aeneas. But as Virgil wrote at a
time more remote from those heroic Ages, perhaps this Liberty may be excused.
But a Poet had better confine himself to Customs and Manners, like a Painter;
and it is equally a Fault in either of them to ascribe to Times and Nations any
thing with which they were unacquainted.

One may add an Oservation to this Note of M. Dacier, that the Trumpet's not
being in use at that time, makes very much for Homer's Purpose in this Place.
The Terror raised by the Voice of his Hero, is much the more strongly imag'd by
a Sound that was unusual, and capable of striking more from its very Novelty.

XXIII.
VERSE 315. If but the Morrow's Sun, etc.] Polydamas says in the Original, "If
Achilles comes to morrow in his Armor. There seems to lie an Objection against
this Passage, for Polydamas knew that Achilles's Armor was won by Hector, he
must also know that no other Man's Armor would fit him; how then could he know
that new Arms were made for him that very Night? Those who are resolved to
defend Homer, may answer, it was by his Skill in Prophecy; but to me, this
seems to be a Slip of our Author's Memory, and one of those little Nods which
Horace speaks of.

XXIV.
VERSE 333. The Speech of Hector.] Hector in this severe Answer to Polydamas,
takes up several of his Words and turns them another way.

Polydamas had said (...), "To Morrow by break of Day let us put on our Arms,
and defend the Castles and City-Walls," to which Hector replies, (...), "To
Morrow by break of Day let us put on our Arms, not to defend our selves at
home, but to fight the Greeks before their own Ships.

Polydamas, speaking of Achilles, had said (...), etc. "if he comes after we
are within the Walls of our City, 'twill be the worse for him, for he may drive
round the City long enough before he can hurt us." To which, Hector answers;
"If Achilles should come (...), etc. 'Twill be "the worse for him, as you say,
because I Will fight him: (...), says Hector, in reply to Polydamas's Saying,
(...). But Hector is not so far gone in Passion or Pride, as to forget himself;
and accordingly in the next Lines he modestly puts it in doubt, which of them
shall conquer. Eustathius.

XXV.
VERSE 340. Sunk were her Treasures, and her Stores decayed.] As well by reason
of the Convoys, which were necessarily to be sent for with ready Money; as by
reason of the great Allowances which were to be given to the auxiliary Troops,
who came from Phrygia and Maeonia. Hector's Meaning is, that since all the
Riches of Troy are exhausted, it is no longer necessary to spare themselves, or
shut themselves up within their Walls. Dacier.

XXVI.
VERSE 349. If there be one, etc,] This noble and generous Proposal is worthy
of Hector, and at the same time very artful to ingratiate himself with the
Soldiers. Eustathius farther observes that it is said with an Eye to Polydamas,
as accusing him of being rich, and of not opening the Advice he had given, for
any other End than to preserve his great Wealth; for Riches commonly make Men
Cowards, and the Desire of saving them has often occasioned Men to give Advice
very contrary to the public Welfare.

XXVII.
VERSE 379. In what vain Promise.] The Lamentation of Achilles over the Body of
Patroclus is exquisitely touched: It is Sorrow in the extreme, but the Sorrow
of Achilles. It is nobly ushered in by that Simile of the Grief of the Lion: An
Idea which is fully answered in the savage and bloody Conclusion of this
Speech. One would think by the Beginning of it, that Achilles did not know his
Fate, till after his Departure from Opuntium; and yet how does that agree with
what is said of his Choice of the short and active Life, rather than the long
and inglorious one? Or did not he flatter himself sometimes, that his Fate
might be changed? This may be conjectured from several other Passages, and is
indeed the most natural Solution.

XXVIII.
VERSE 404. Cleanse the pale Corse, etc.] This Custom of washing the Dead, is
continued amongst the Greeks to this Day; and it is a pious Duty performed by
the dearest Friend or Relation, to see it washed and anointed with a Perfume,
after which they cover it with Linen exactly in the manner here related.

XXIX.
VERSE 417. Jupiter and Juno.] Virgil has coppy'd the Speech of Juno to
Jupiter. Ast ego quae divum incedo Regina, etc. But it is exceeding remarkable,
that Homer should upon every Occasion make Marriage and Discord inseparable:
It Is an unalterable Rule with him, to introduce the Husband and Wife in a
Quarrel.

XXX.
VERSE 440. Full twenty Tripods.] Tripods were Vessels supported on three Feet,
with Handles on the Sides; they were of several Kinds, and for several Uses;
some were consecrated to Sacrifices, some used as Tables, some as Seats, others
hung up as Ornaments on Walls of Houses or Temples; these of Vulcan have an
Addition of Wheels, which was not usual, which intimates them to be made with
Clockwork. Mons. Dacier has commented very well on this Passage. If Vulcan
(says he) had made ordinary Tripods, they had not answered the Greatness,
Power, and Skill of a God. It was therefore necessary that his Work should be
above that of Men: To effect this, the Tripods were animated, and in this Homer
does not deviate from the Probability; for every one is fully persuaded, that a
God can do things more difficult than these, and that all Matter will obey him.
What has not been said of the Statues of Daedalus? Plato writes, that they
walked alone, and if they had not taken care to tie them, they would have got
loose, and run from their Master. If a Writer in Prose can speak
hyperbollically of a Man, may not Homer do it much more of a God? Nay, this
Circumstance with which Homer has embellished his Poem, would have had nothing
too surprising though these Tripods had been made by a Man; for what may not be
done in Clock-work by an exact Management of Springs? This Criticism is then
ill grounded, and Homer does not deserve the Ridicule they would cast on him.

The same Author applies to this Passage of Homer that Rule of Aristotle,
Poetic. Chap. 26. which deserves to be alleged at large on this Occasion.

"When a Poet is accused of saying any thing that is impossible; we must
examine that Impossibility, either with respect to Poetry, with respect to that
which is best, or with respect to common Fame. First, with regard to Poetry,
The Probable Impossible ought to be preferred to the Possible, which bath no
Verisimilitude, and which would not be believed; and it is thus that Zeuxis
painted his Pieces. Secondly, with respect to that which is best, We see that a
thing is most excellent and more wonderful this way, and that the Originals
ought always to surpass. Lastly, in respect to Fame, It is proved that the Poet
need only follow common Opinion. All that appears absurd may be also justified
by one of these three ways; or else by the Maxim we have already laid down,
that it is probable, that a great many things may happen against Probability."

A late Critic has taken notice of the Conformity of this Passage of Homer
with that in the first Chapter of Ezekiel, The Spirit of the living Creatures
was in the Wheels; when those went, these went, and when those stood, these
stood; and when those were listed up, the Wheels were lifted up over against
them; for the Spirit of the living Creature was in the Wheels.

XXXI.
VERSE 450. A Footstool at her Feet.] It is at this Day the usual Honor paid
amongst the Greeks, to a Visiter of supeperior Quality, to set them higher than
the rest of the Company, and put a Footstool under their Feet. See Note 25. on
Book 14. This, with innumerable other Customs, are still preserved in the
Eastern Nations.

XXXII.
VERSE 460. Vulcan draw near, it is Thetis asks your Aid.] The Story the
Ancients tell, of Plato's Application of this Verse is worth observing. That
great Philosopher had in his Youth a strong Inclination to Poetry, and not
being satisfied to compose little Pieces of Gallantry and Amor, he tried his
Forces in Tragedy and Epic Poetry; but the Success was not answerable to his
Hopes: He compared his Performance with that of Homer, and was very sensible of
the Difference. He therefore abandoned a sort of Writing wherein at best he
could only be the second, and turned his Views to an other, wherein he
despaired not to become the first. His Anger transported him so far, as to cast
all his Verses into the Fire. But while he was burning them, he could not help
citing a Verse of the very Poet who had caused his Chagrin. It was the present
Line, which Homer has put into the Mouth of Charis, when Thetis demands Arms
for Achilles. (...)
Plato only inserted his own Name instead of that of Thetis. Vulcan draw near,
it is Plato asks your Aid.
If we credit the Ancients, it was the Coffeehouse his own Poetry gave him,
that raised in him all the Indignation he afterward expressed against the Art
itself. In which (say they) he behaved like those Lovers, who speak ill of the
Beauties whom they cannot prevail upon. Fraguier, Parall. de Hom. and de Platon.

XXXIII.
VERSE 461. Thetis (replied the God) our Powers may claim, etc. Vulcan throws
by his Work to perform Thetis's Request, who had laid former Obligations upon
him; the Poet in this Example giving us an excellent Precept, that Gratitude
should take place of all other Concerns.

The Motives which should engage a God in a new Travel in the Nightime upon a
Suit of Armor for a Mortal, ought to be strong; and therefore artfully enough
put upon the foot of Gratitude: Besides, they afford at the same time a noble
Occasion for Homer to retail his Theology, which he is always very fond of.

The Allegory of Vulcan, or Fire (according to Heraclides) is this. His Father
is Jupiter, or the Ether, his Mother Juno, or the Air, from whence he fell to
us, whether by Lightning, or otherwise. He is said to be lame, that is, to want
Support, because he cannot subsist without the continual Subsistence of Fuel.
The Aetherial Fire, Homer calls Sol or Jupiter, the inferior Vulcan; the one
wants nothing of Perfection, the other is subject to Decay, and is restored by
Accession of Materials. Vulcan is said to fall from Heaven, because at first,
when the Opportunity of obtaining Fire was not so frequent, Men prepared
Instruments of Brass, by which they collected the Beams of the Sun; or else
they gained it from accidental Lightning, that set fire to some combustible
Matter. Vulcan had perished when he fell from Heaven unless Thetis and Eurynome
had received him; that is, unless he had been preserved by falling into some
convenient Receptacle, or subterranean Place; and so was afterward distributed
for the common Necessities of Mankind. To understand these strange
Explications, it must be known, that Thetis is derived from (...) to lay up,
and Eurynome from (...) and (...), a wide Distribution. They are called
Daughters of the Ocean, because the Vapors and Exhalations of the Sea forming
themselves into Clouds, find Nourishment for Lightnings.

XXXIV.
VERSE 488. Two semale Forms,
That moved and breathed in animated Gold.]
It is very probable, that Homer took the Idea of these from the Statues of
Daedalus, which might be extant in his Time. The Ancients tell us, they were
made to imitate Life, in rolling their Eyes, and in all other Motions. From
whence indeed it should seem, that the Excellency of Daedalus consisted in what
we call Clock-work, or the Management of moving Figures by Springs, rather than
in Sculpture or Imagery: And accordingly, the Fable of his fitting Wings to
himself and his Son, is formed entirely upon the Foundation of the former.

XXXV.
VERSE 518. Robbed of the Prize, etc.] Thetis to compass her Design, recounts
every thing to the Advantage of her Son; she therefore suppresses the Episode
of the Embassy, the Prayers that had been made use of to move him, and all that
the Greeks had suffered after the Return of the Ambassadors; and artfully puts
together two very distant things, as if they had followed each other in the
same Moment. He declined, says she, to succor the Greeks, but he sent
Patroclus. Now between his refusing to help the Greeks, and his sending
Patroclus, terrible things had fallen out; but she suppresses them, for fear of
offending Vulcan with the recital of Achilles's inflexible Obduracy, and
thereby create in that God an Aversion to her Son. Eustathius.

XXXVI.
VERSE 526. Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the Name) It is a Passage worth
taking notice of, that Brutus is said to have consulted the Sorts Homericae,
and to have drawn one of these Lines, wherein the Death of Patroclus is
ascribed to Apollo: After which, unthinkingly, he gave the Name of that God for
the Word of Battle. This is remarked as an unfortunate Omen by some of the
Ancients, though I forget where I met with it.

XXXVII.
VERSE 537. The Father of the Fires, etc.] The Ancients (says Eustathius) have
largely celebrated the philosophical Mysteries which they imagined to be
shadowed under these Descriptions, especially Damo (supposed the Daughter of
Pythagoras) whose Explication is as follows. Thetis, who receives the Arms,
means the apt Order and Disposition of all things in the Creation. By the Fire
and the Wind raised by the Bellows, are meant Air and Fire the most active of
all the Elements. The Emanations of the Fire are those golden Maids, that
waited on Vulcan. The circular Shield is the World, being of a sphaerical
Figure. The Gold, the Brass, the Silver, and the Tin are the Elements: Gold is
Fire, the firm Brass is Earth, the Silver is Air, and the soft Tin, Water. And
thus far (say they) Homer speaks a little obscurely, but afterward he names
'em expressly, (...), to which, for the fourth Element, you must add Vulcan,
who makes the Shield. The extreme Circle that run round the Shield which he
calls splendid and threefold, is the Zodiac; threefold for its Breadth, within
which all the Planets move; splendid, because the Sun passes always through the
midst of it. The silver Handle by which the Shield is fastened at both
Extremities, is the Axis of the World, imagined to pass through it, and upon which
it turns. The five folds are those parallel Circles that divide the World, the
Polar, the Tropicks, and the Equator.

Heraclides Ponticus thus pursues the Allegory. Homer (says he) makes the
working of his Shield, that is the World, to be begun by Night, as indeed all
Matter lay undistinguished in an original and universal Night; which is called
Chaos by the Poets.

To bring the matter of the Shield to Separation and Form, Vulcan presides over
the Work, or as we may say, an essential Warmth: All things, says Heraclitus,
being made by the Operation of Fire.

And because the Architect is at this time to give a Form and Ornament to the
World he is making, it is not rashly that he is said to be married to one of
the Graces. On the broad Shield the Maker's Hand engraves
The Earth and Seas beneath, the Pole above,
The Sun unwearied, and the circled Moon.
Thus in the Beginning of the World, he first lays the Earth as the Foundation
of a Building, whose Vacancies are filled up with the Flowings of the Sea. Then
he spreads out the Sky for a kind of divine Roof over it, and lights the
Elements, now separated from their former Confusion, with the Sun, the Moon,
And all those Stars that crown the Skies with Fire:


Where, by the Word crown, which gives the Idea of Roundness, he again hints at
the Figure of the World; and though he could not particularly name the Stars like
Aratus (who professed to write upon them) yet he has not omitted to mention the
principal. From hence he passes to represent two Allegorical Cities, one of
Peace, the other of War; Empedocles seems to have taken from Homer his
Assertion, that all Things had their Original from Strife and Friendship.

All these Refinements (not to call 'em absolute Whimsies) I leave just as I
found 'em, to the Reader's Judgment or Mercy.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 566. Nor bends his blazing Forehead to the Main.] The Critics have made
use of this Passage, to prove that Homer was ignorant of Astronomy; since he
believed, that the Bear was the only Constellation which never bathed itself in
the Ocean, that is to say that did not set, and was always visible; for say
they, this is common to other Constellations of the Artick Circle, as the
lesser Bear, the Dragon, the greatest part of Cepheus, etc. To salve Homer,
Aristotle answers, That he calls it the only one, to show that it is the only
one of those Constellations he had spoken of, or that he has put the only, for
the principal or the most known. Strabo justifies this after another manner, in
the Beginning of his first Book, "Under the Name of the Bear and the Chariot,
Homer comprehends all the Artick Circle; for there being several other Stars in
that Circle which never set, he could not say, that the Bear was the only one
which did not bath itself in the Ocean; wherefore those are deceived, who
accuse the Poet of Ignorance, as if he knew one Bear only when there are two;
for the lesser was not found out in his Time. The Phoenicians were the first
who observed it and made use of it in their Navigation; and the Figure of that
Sign passed from them to the Greeks: The same thing happened in regard to the
Constellation of Berenice's Hair, and that of Canopus, which received those
Names very lately; and as Aratus says well, there are several other Stars which
have no Names. Crates was then in the wrong to endeavor to correct this
Passage, in putting (...) for (...), for he tries to avoid that which there is
no occasion to avoid. Heraclitus did better, who put the Bear for the Artick
Circle as Homer has done. The Bear (says he) is the Limit of the rising and
setting of the Stars." Now it is the Artic Circle, and not the Bear which is
that Limit. "'It Is therefore evident, that by the Word Bear, which he calls the
Wagon, and which he says observes Orion, he understands the Artick Circle;
that by the Ocean he means the Horizon where the Stars rise and set; and by
those Words, which turns in the same place, and does not bath itself in the
Ocean, he shows that the Artick Circle is the most Northern Part of the
Horizon, etc. Dacier on Arist.

Mons. Terasson combats this Passage with great Warmth. But it will be a
sufficient Vindication of our Author to say, that some other Constellations,
which are likewise perpetually above the Horizon in the Latitude where Homer
writ, were not at that time discovered; and that whether Homer knew that the
Bear's not setting was occasioned by the Latitude, and that in a smaller
Latitude it would set, is of no consequence; for if he had known it, it was
still more poetical not to take notice of it.

XXXIX.
VERSE 467. Two Cities, etc.] In one of these Cities are represented all the
Advantages of Peace: And it was impossible to have chosen two better Emblems of
Peace, than Marriages and Justice. It Is said this City was Athens, for
Marriages were first instituted there by Cecrops; and Judgment upon Murder was
first founded there. The ancient State of Attica seems represented in the
neighboring Fields, where the Ploughers and Reapers are at work, and a King is
overlooking them; for Triptolemus who reigned there, was the first who sowed
Corn: This was the Imagination of Agallias Cercyreus, as we find him cited by
Eustathius.

XL.
VERSE 579. The Fine discharged.] Murder was not always punished with Death, or
so much as Banishment; but when some Fine was paid, the Criminal was suffered
to remain in the City. So Iliad 9. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
-- If a Brother bleed,
On just Atonement, we remit the Deed;
A Sire the Slaughter of his Son forgives,
The Price of Blood discharged, the Murderer lives.


XLI.
VERSE 590. The Prize of him who best adjudg'd the Right.] Eustathius informs
us, that it was anciently the Custom to have a Reward given to that Judge who
pronounced the best Sentence. M. Dacier opposes this Authority, and will have
it, that this Reward was given to the Person who upon the Decision of the Suit
appeared to have the justest Cause. The Difference between these two Customs,
in the Reason of the thing, is very great: For the one must have been an
Encouragement to Justice, the other a Provocation to Dissension. It were to be
wanting in a due Reverence to the Wisdom of the Ancients, and of Homer in
particular, not to choose the former Sense: And I have the Honor to be
confirmed in this Opinion, by the ablest Judge, as well as the best Practiser,
of Equity, my Lord Harcourt, at whose Seat I translated this Book.

XLII.
VERSE 591. Another Part (a Prospect different far, etc.] The same Agallias,
cited above, would have this City in War to be meant of Eleusina, but upon very
slight Reasons. What is wonderful is, that all the Accidents and Events of War
are set before our Eyes in this short Compass. The several Scenes are
excellently disposed to represent the whole Affair. Here is in the space of
thirty Lines a Siege, a Sally, an Ambush, the Surprise of a Convoy, and a
Battle; with scarce a single Circumstance proper to any of these, omitted.

XLIII.
VERSE 627. A Field deep-furrow'd, etc.] Here begin the Descriptions of rural
Life, in which Homer appears as great a Master as in the great and terrible
Parts of Poetry. One would think, he did this on purpose to rival his
Contemporary Hesiod, on those very Subjects to which his Genius was
particularly bent. Upon this Occasion, I must take notice of that Greek Poem,
which is commonly ascribed to Hesiod under the Title of (...). Some of the
Ancients mention such a Work as Hesiod's, but that amounts to no Proof that
this is the same: Which indeed is not an express Poem upon the Shield of
Hercules, but Fragment of the Story of that Hero. What regards the Shield is a
manifest Copy from this of Achilles; and consequently it is not of Hesiod. For
if he was not more Ancient, he was at least Contemporary with Homer: And
neither of them could be supposed to borrow so shamelesly from the other, not
only the Plan of entire Descriptions, (as those of the Marriage, the Harvest,
the Vineyard, the Ocean round the Margin, etc.) but also whole Verses together:
Those of the Parca in the Battle, are repeated Word for Word, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
And indeed half the Poem is but a sort of Cento composed out of Homer's
Verses. The Reader needs only cast an Eye on these two Descriptions, to see the
vast Difference of the Original and the Copy; and I dare say he will readily
agree with the Sentiment of Monsieur Dacier, in applying to them that famous
Verse of Sannazarius, Illum hominem dices, hunc posuisse Deum.


XLIV.
VERSE id.] I ought not to forget the many apparent Allusions to the
Descriptions on this Shield, which are to be found in those Pictures of Peace
and War, the City and Country, in the eleventh Book of Milton: Who was
doubtless fond of any Occasion to show, how much he was charmed with the Beauty
of all these lively Images. He makes his Angel paint those Objects which he
shows to Adam, in the Colors, and almost the very Strokes of Homer. Such is
that Passage of the Harvest-field, His Eye he opened, and beheld a Field
Part Arable and Tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New-reap'd; the other Part Sheep-walks and Folds.
In midst an Altar, as the Landmark, stood,
Rustic, of grassy sord, etc.
That of the Marriages, They light the nuptial Torch, and bid invoke
Hymen (then first to marriage Rites invoked)
With Feast and Music all the Tents resound.
But more particularly, the following Lines are in a manner a Translation of
our Author. One way, a Band select from Forage drives
A Herd of Beeves, fair Oxen, and fair Kine
From a fat Meadow-ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and their bleating Lambs, across the Plain,
Their Booty: Scarce with Life the Shepherds fly,
But call in Aid, which makes a bloody Fray,
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons join
Where Cattle pastur'd late, now scattered lies
With Carcasses and Arms th'ensanguin'd Field
Deserted. -- Others to a City strong
Lay siege, encamped; by Battery, Scale, and Mine
Assaulting; others from the Wall defend
With Dart and Javelin, Stones, and sulfurous Fire:
On each hand Slaughter and gigantic Deeds.
In other part, the sceptered Heralds call
To Council in the City Gates: anon
Grey-headed Men and grave, with Warriors mixed,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard --


XLV.
VERSE 645. The rustic Monarch of the Field.] Dacier takes this to be a piece
of Ground given to a Hero in reward of his Services. It was in no respect
unworthy such a Person, in those Days, to see his Harvest got in, and to
overlook his Reapers: It is very conformable to the Manners of the ancient
Patriarchs, such as they are described to us in the Holy Scriptures.

XLVI.
VERLE 662. The Fate of Linus.] There are two Interpretations of this Verse in
the Original: That which I have chosen is confirmed by the Testimony of
Herodotus lib. 2. and Pausanias, Boeoticis. Linus was the most ancient Name in
Poetry, the first upon Record who invented Verse and Measure among the
Grecians: He past for the Son of Apollo or Mercury, and was Praeceptor to
Hercules, Thamyris, and Orpheus. There was a solemn Custom among the Greeks of
bewailing annually the Death of their first Poet: Pausanias informs us, that
before the yearly Sacrifice to the Muses on Mount Helicon, the Obsequies of
Linus were performed, who had a Statue and Altar erected to him, in that Place.
Homer alludes to that Custom in this Passage, and was doubtless fond of paying
this Respect to the old Father of Poetry. Virgil has done the same in that Fine
Celebration of him, Eclog. 6. Tum canit errantem Permessi ad flumina Gallum,
Utque viro Phoebi chorus assurrexerit omnis;
Ut Linus haec illi, divino carmine, pastor
(Floribus atque apio crines ornatus amaro)
Dixerit -- etc.
And again in the fourth Eclog. Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Orpheus,
Nec Linus; huic Matter, quamvis atque huic Pater adsit,
Orpheo Calliopea, Lino formosus Apollo.


XLVII.
VERSE 681. A figured Dance.] There were two sorts of Dances, the Pyrrhick, and
the common Dance: Homer has joined both in this Description. We see the
Pyrrhick, or Military, is performed by the Youths who have Swords on, the other
by the Virgins crowned with Garlands.

Here the ancient Scholiasts say, that whereas before it was the Custom for Men
and Women to dance separately, the contrary Practice was afterward brought in,
by seven Youths, and as many Virgins, who were saved by Theseus from the
Labyrinth; and that this Dance was taught them by Daedalus: To which Homer here
alludes. See Dion. Halic. Hist. l. 7. c. 68.

It is worth observing that the Grecian Dance is still performed in this manner
in the Oriental Nations: The Youths and Maids dance in a Ring, beginning
slowly; by Degrees the Music plays a quicker time, till at last they dance
with the utmost Swiftness: And toward the Conclusion, they sing (as it is said
here) in a general Chorus.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE SHIELD of ACHILLES.
THE Poet intending to show in its full Luster, his Genius for Description,
makes choice of this Interval from Action and the Leisure of the Night, to
display that Talent at large in the famous Buckler of Achilles. His Intention
was no less, than to draw the Picture of the whole World in the Compass of this
Shield. We first see the Universe in general; the Heavens are spread, the Stars
are hung up, the Earth is stretched forth, the Seas are poured round: We next
see the World in a nearer and more particular view; the Cities, delightful in
Peace, or formidable in War; the Labors of the Country, and the Fruit of
those Labors, in the Harvests and the Vintages; the Pastoral Life in its
Pleasures and its Dangers: In a word, all the Occupations, all the Ambitions,
and all the Diversions of Mankind. This noble and comprehensive Design he has
executed in a manner that challenged the Admiration of all the Ancients: And
how right an Idea they had of this grand Design, may be judged from that Verse
of Ovid, Met. 13. where he calls it -- Clypeus vasti coelatus imagine mundi.
It is indeed astonishing how after this the Arrogance of some Moderns could
unfortunately choose the noblest Part of the noblest Poet for the Object of
their blind Criticisms.

I design to give the Reader the Sum of what has been said on this Subject.
First, a Reply to the loose and scattered Objections of the Critics, by M.
Dacier: Then the regular Plan and Distribution of the Shield, by Mons. Boivin:
And lastly, I shall attempt what has not yet been done, to consider it as a
Work of Painting, and prove it in all respects conformable to the most just
Ideas and established Rules of that Art.

I.
It is the Fate (says M. Dacier) of these Arms of Achilles, to be still the
Occasion of Quarrels and Disputes. Julius Scaliger was the first who appeared
against this Part, and was followed by a whole Herd. These object in the first
place, that it is impossible to represent the Movement of the Figures; and in
condemning the manner, they take the Liberty to condemn also the Subject, which
they say is trivial, and not well understood. It Is certain that Homer speaks of
the Figures on this Buckler, as if they were alive: And some of the Ancients
taking his Expressions to the Strictness of the Letter, did really believe that
they had all sorts of Motion. Eustathius showed the Absurdity of that Sentiment
by a Passage of Homer himself, "That Poet, says he, to show that his Figures
are not animated, as some have pretended by an excessive Affection for the
Prodigious, took care to say that they moved and fought, as if they were living
Men." The Ancients certainly founded this ridiculous Opinion on a Rule of
Aristotle: For they thought the Poet could not make his Description more
admirable and mavelous, than in making his Figures animated, since (as
Aristotle says) the Original should always excel the Copy. That Shield is the
Work of a God: It Is the Original, of which the Engraving and Painting of Men is
but an imperfect Copy; and there is nothing impossible to the Gods. But they
did not perceive, that by this Homer would have fallen into an extravagant
Admirable which would not have been probable. Therefore, it is without any
Necessity Eustathius adds, "That it is possible all those Figures did not stick
close to the Shield, but that they were detached from it, and moved by Springs,
in such a manner that they appeared to have Motion; as Aeschylus has feigned
something like it, in his seven Captains against Thebes." But without having
recourse to that C0onjecture, we can show that there is nothing more simple and
natural than the Description of that Shield, and there is not one Word which
Homer might not have said of it, if it had been the Work of a Man; for there is
a great deal of difference between the Work itself, and the Description of it.

Let us examine the Particulars for which they blame Homer. They say he
describes two Towns on his Shield which speak different Languages. It Is the
Latin Translation, and not Homer, that says so; the Word (...), is a common
Epithet of Men, and which signifies only, that they have an articulate Voice.
These Towns could not speak different Languages, since, as the Ancients have
remarked, they were Athens and Eleusina, both which spoke the same Language.
But though that Epithet should signify, which spoke different Languages, there
would be nothing very surprising; for Virgil said what Homer it seems must not:
Victae longo ordine gentes,
Quam variae linguis. --
Aen. 8. If a Painter should put into a Picture one Town of France and another
of Flanders, might not one say they were two Towns which spoke different
Languages?

Homer (they tell us) says in another place; that we hear the Harangues of two
Pleaders. This is an unfair Exaggeration: He only says, Two Men pleaded, that
is, were represented pleading. Was not the same said by Pliny of Nicomachus,
that he had painted two Greeks, which spoke one after another? Can we express
ourselves otherwise of these two Arts, which though they are mute, yet have a
Language? Or in explaining a Painting of Raphael or Poussin, can we prevent
animating the Figures, in making them speak conformably to the Design of the
Painter? But how could the Engraver represent those young Shepherds and Virgins
that dance first in a Ring, and then in Setts? Or those Troops which were in
Ambuscade? This would be difficult indeed if the Workman had not the Liberty to
make his Persons appear in different Circumstances. All the Objections against
the young Man who sings at the same time that he plays on the Harp, the Bull
that roars whilst he is devoured by a Lion, and against the musical Consorts,
are childish; for we can never speak of Painting if we banish those
Expressions. Pliny says of Apelles, that he painted Clytus on Horseback going
to Battle, and demanding his Helmet of his Squire: Of Aristides, that he drew a
Beggar whom we could almost understand, pene cum voce: Of Ctesilochus, that he
had painted Jupiter bringing forth Bacchus, and crying out like a Woman, and
muliebriter ingemiscentem: And of Nicearchus, that he had drawn a Piece, in
which Hercules was seen very melancholy for having been a Fool, Herculem
tristem, Insaniae poenitentia. No one sure will condemn those ways of
Expression which are so common. The same Author has said much more of Apelles,
he tells us, he painted those things which could not be painted, as Thunder;
Pinxit quae pingi non possunt: And of Timanthus, that in all his Works there
was something more understood than was seen; and though there was all the Art
imaginable, yet there was still more Ingenuity than Art: Atque in omnibus ejus
operibus, intelligitur plus semper quam pingitur; and cum Ars summa sit,
Ingenium tamen ultra Artem est. If we take the pains to compare these
Expressions with those of Homer, we shall find him altogether excusable in his
Manner of describing the Buckler.

We come now to the Matter. If this Shield (says a modern Critic) had been
made in a wiser Age, it would have been more correct and less charged with
Objects. There are two things which cause the Censurers to fall into this false
Criticism: The first is, that they think the Shield was no broader than the
brims of a Hat, whereas it was large enough to cover a whole Man. The other is,
that they did not know the Design of the Poet, and imagined this Description
was only the Whimsy of an irregular Wit, who did it by chance, and not
following Nature; for they never so much as entered into the Intention of the
Poet, nor knew the Shield was designed as a Representation of the Universe.

It Is happy that Virgil has made a Buckler for Aeneas, as well as Homer for
Achilles. The Latin Poet, who imitated the Greek one, always took care to
accommodate those things which Time had changed, so as to render them agreeable
to the Palate of his Readers; yet he has not only charged his Shield with a
great deal more Work, since he paints all the Actions of the Romans from
Ascanius to Augustus; but has not avoided any of those manners of Expression
which offend the Critics. We see there the Wolf of Romulus and Remus, who
gives them her Dugs one after another, Mulcere alternos, and Corpora fingere
Lingua: The Rape of the Sabines and the War which followed it, subitoque novum
consurgere Bellum: Metius torn by four Horses, and Tullus who draws his
Entrails through the Forest: Porsenna commanding the Romans to receive Tarquin,
and besieging Rome: The Geese flying to the Porches of the Capitol, and giving
notice by their Cries of the Attack of the Gauls. Atque hic auratis volitans
argenteus Anser,
Porticibus, Gallos in Limine adesse canebat.
We see the Salian Dance, Hell, and the Pains of the Damned; and farther off,
the Place of the Blessed, where Cato presides: We see the famous Battle of
Actium, where we may distinguish the Captains: Agrippa with the Gods, and the
Winds favorable; and Anthony leading on all the Forces of the East, Egypt, and
the Bactrians: The Fight begins, The Sea is red with Blood, Cleopatra gives the
Signal for a Retreat, and calls her Troops with a Systrum. Patrio vocat agmina
Systro. The Gods, or rather the Monsters of Egypt, fight against Neptune,
Venus, Minerva, Mars and Apollo: We see Anthony's Fleet beaten, and the Nile
sorrowfully opening his Bosom to receive the Conquered: Cleopatra looks pale
and almost dead at the Thought of that Death she had already determined; nay we
see the very Wind Iapis, which hastens her Flight: We see the three Triumphs of
Augustus; that Prince consecrates three hundred Temples, the Altars are filled
with Ladies offering up Sacrifices, Augustus sitting at the Entrance of
Apollo's Temple, receives Presents, and hangs them on the Pillars of the
Temple; while all the conquered Nations pass by, who speak different Languages,
and are differently equipped and armed. -- Incedunt victae longo ordine Gentes,
Quam variae Linguis, habitu tum vestis and armis.
Nothing can better justify Homer, or show the Wisdom and Judgment of Virgil:
He was charmed with Achilles's Shield, and therefore would give the same
Ornament to his Poem. But as Homer had painted the Universe, he was sensible
that nothing remained for him to do; he had no other way to take than that of
Prophecy, and show what the Descendant of his Hero should perform; and he was
not afraid to go beyond Homer, because there is nothing improbable in the Hands
of a God. If the Critics say, that this is justifying one Fault by another; I
desire they would agree among themselves; for Scaliger, who was the first that
condemned Homer's Shield, admires Virgil's; but suppose they should agree,
'twould be foolish to endeavor to persuade us, that what Homer and Virgil have
done by the Approbation of all Ages, is not good; and to make us think that
their particular Taste should prevail over that of all other Men. Nothing is
more ridiculous than to trouble one's self to answer Men, who show so little
Reason in their Criticisms, that we can do them no greater Favor, than to
ascribe it to their Ignorance.

Thus far the Objections are answered by Mons. Dacier. Since when, some others
have been started, as that the Objects represented on the Buckler have no
reference to the Poem, no Agreement with Thetis who procured it, Vuloan who
made it, or Achilles for whom it was made.

To this it is replied, that the Representation of the Sea was agreeable enough
to Thetis; that the Spheres and celestial Fires were so to Vulcan; (though the
truth is, any piece of Workmanship was equally fit to come from the Hands of
this God) and that the Images of a Town besieged, a Battle, and an Ambuscade,
were Objects sufficiently proper for Achilles. But after all, where was the
Necessity that they should be so? They had at least been as fit for one Hero as
for another; and Aeneas, as Virgil tells us, knew not what to make of the
Figures on his Shield. Rerumque Ignarus, imagine gaudet.


II.
But still the main Objection, and that in which the Vanity of the Moderns has
triumphed the most, is, that the Shield is crowded with such a Multiplicity of
Figures, as could not possibly be represented in the Compass of it. The late
Dissertation of Mons. Boivin has put an end to this Cavil, and the Reader will
have the Pleasure to be convinced of it by ocular Demonstration, in the Print
annexed.

This Author supposes the Buckler to have been perfectly round: He divides the
unequal Surface into four concentrick Circles.

The Circle next the Center contains the Globe of the Earth and the Sea, in
miniature; He gives this Circle the Dimension of three Inches.

The second Circle is allotted for the Heavens and the Stars: He allows the
Space of ten Inches between this, and the former Circle.

The third shall be eight Inches distant from the second. The Space between
these two Circles shall be divided into twelve Compartiments, each of which
makes a Picture of ten or eleven Inches deep.

The fourth Circle makes the Margin of the Buckler: And the Interval between
this and the former, being of three Inches, is sufficient to represent the
Waves and Currents of the Ocean.

All these together make but four Foot in the whole in Diameter. The Print of
these Circles and Divisions will serve to prove, that the Figures will neither
be crowded nor confused, if disposed in the proper Place and Order.

As to the Size and Figure of the Shield, it is evident from the Poets, that in
the time of the Trojan War there were Shields of an extraordinary Magnitude.
The Buckler of Ajax is often compared by Homer to a Tower, and in the sixth
Iliad that of Hector is described to cover him from the Shoulders to the
Ankles. (...)
(...)
. 117.

In the second Verse of the Description of this Buckler of Achilles, it is said
that Vulcan cast round it a radiant Circle. (...)
. 479. Which proves the Figure to have been round. But if it be alleged that
(...) as well signifies oval as circular, it may be answered, that the circular
Figure better agrees to the Spheres represented in the Center, and to the
Course of the Ocean at the Circumference.

We may very well allow four Foot Diameter to this Buckler: As one may suppose
a larger Size would have been too unwieldy, so a less would not have been
sufficient to cover the Breast and Arm of a Man of a Stature so large as
Achilles.

In allowing four Foot Diameter to the whole each of the twelve Compartiments
may be of ten or eleven Inches in Depth, which will be enough to contain,
without any Confusion, all the Objects which Homer mentions. Indeed in this
Print, each Compartiment being but of one Inch, the principal Figures only are
represented; but the Reader may easily imagine the Advantage of nine or ten
Inches more. However, if the Critics are not yet satisfied there is room
enough, it is but taking in the literal Sense the Words (...), with which Homer
begins his Description, and the Buckler may be supposed engraven on both Sides,
which Supposition will double the Size of each Piece: The one side may serve
for the general Description of Heaven and Earth, and the other for all the
Particulars.

III.
IT having been now shown, that the Shield of Homer is blameless as to its
Design and Disposition, and that the Subject (so extensive as it is) may be
contracted within the due Limits; not being one vast unproportion'd Heap of
Figures, but divided into twelve regular Compartiments. What remains, is to
consider this Piece as a complete Idea of Painting, and a Sketch for what one
may call an universal Picture. This is certainly the Light in which it is
chiefly to be admired, and in which alone the Critics have neglected to place
it.

There is reason to believe that Homer did in this, as he has done in other
Arts, (even in Mechanics) that is, comprehend whatever was known of it in his
Time; if not (as is highly probable) from thence extend his Ideas yet farther,
and give a more enlarged Notion of it. Accordingly it is very observable, that
there is scarce a Species or Branch of this Art which is not here to be found,
whether History, Battel-Painting, Landscape, Architecture, Fruits, Flowers,
Animals, etc.

I think it possible that Painting was arrived to a greater Degree of
Perfection, even at that early Period, than is generally supposed by those who
have written upon it. Pliny expressly says, that it was not known in the time of
the Trojan War. The same Author, and others, represent it in a very imperfect
State in Greece, in, or near the Days of Homer. They tell us of one Painter,
that he was the first who begun to shadow; and of another, that he filled his
Outlines only with a single Color, and that laid on every where alike: But we
may have a higher Notion of the Art, from those Descriptions of Statues,
Carvings, Tapestrys, Sculptures upon Armor, and Ornaments of all kinds, which
every where occur in our Author; as well as from what he says of their Beauty,
the Relievo, and their Emulation of Life itself. If we consider how much it is
his constant Practice to confine himself to the Custom of the Times whereof he
writ, it will be hard to doubt but that Painting and Sculpture must have been
then in great Practice and Repute.

The Shield is not only described as a Piece of Sculpture but of Painting; the
Outlines may be supposed engraved, and the rest enameled, or inlaid with
various-colour'd Metals. The Variety of Colors is plainly distinguished by
Homer, where he speaks of the Blackness of the new-open'd Earth, of the several
Colors of the Grapes and Vines; and in other Places. The different Metals that
Vulcan is feigned to cast into the Furnace, were sufficient to afford all the
necessary Colors: But if to those which are natural to the Metals, we add also
those which they are capable of receiving from the Operation of Fire, we shall
find, that Vulcan had as great a Variety of Colors to make use of as any
modern Painter. That Enamelling, or fixing Colors by Fire, was practiced very
anciently, may be conjectured from what Diodorus reports of one of the Walls of
Babylon, built by Semiramis, that the Bricks of it were painted before they
were burned, so as to represent all sorts of Animals. lib. 2. chap. 4. Now it
is but natural to infer, that Men had made use of ordinary Colors for the
Representation of Objects, before they learnt to represent them by such as are
given by the Operation of Fire; one being much more easy and obvious than the
other, and that sort of Painting by means of Fire being but an Imitation of the
Painting with a Pencil and Colors. The same Inference will be farther enforced
from the Works of Tapestry, which the Women of those Times interweaved with
many Colors; as appears from the Description of that Veil which Hecuba offers
to Minerva in the sixth Iliad, and from a Passage in the twenty second where
Andromache is represented working Flowers in a Piece of this kind. They must
certainly have known the Use of the Colors themselves for Painting, before
they could think of dying Threads with those Colors, and weaving those Threads
close to one another, in order only to a more laborious Imitation of a thing so
much more easily performed by a Pencil. This Observation I owe to the Abbe
Fraguier.

It may indeed be thought, that a Genius so vast and comprehensive as that of
Homer might carry his Views beyond the rest of Mankind, and that in this
Buckler of Achilles he rather designed to give a Scheme of what might be
performed, than a Description of what really was so: And since he made a God
the Artist, he might excuse himself from a strict Confinement to what was known
and practiced in the Time of the Trojan War. Let this be as it will, it is
certain that he had, whether by Learning, or by Strength of Genius, (though the
latter be more glorious for Homer) a full and exact Idea of Painting in all its
Parts; that is to say, in the Invention, the Composition, the Expression, etc.

The Invention is shown in finding and introducing, in every Subject, the
greatest, the most significant, and most suitable Objects. Accordingly in every
single Picture of the Shield, Homer constantly finds out either those Objects
which are naturally the Principal, those which most conduce to show the
Subject, or those which set it in the liveliest and most agreeable Light: These
he never fails to dispose in the most advantageous Manners, Situations, and
Oppositions.

Next, we find all his Figures differently characterized, in their Expressions
and Attitudes, according to their several Natures: The Gods (for instance) are
distinguished in Air, Habit, and Proportion, from Men, in the fourth Picture;
Masters from Servants, in the eighth; and so of the rest.

Nothing is more wonderful than his exact Observation of the Contrast, not only
between Figure and Figure, but between Subject and Subject. The City in Peace
is a Contrast to the City in War: Between the Siege in the fourth Picture, and
the Battle in the sixth, a piece of Paisage is introduced, and rural Scenes
follow after. The Country too is represented in War in the fifth, as well as in
Peace in the seventh, eighth, and ninth. The very Animals are shown in these
two different States, in the tenth and the eleventh. Where the Subjects appear
the same, he contrastes them some other way: Thus the first Picture of the Town
in Peace having a predominant Air of Gaiety, in the Dances and Pomps of the
Marriage; the second has a Character of Earnestness and Solicitude, in the
Dispute and Pleadings. In the Pieces of rural Life, that of the Plowing is of a
different Character from the Harvest, and that of the Harvest from the Vintage.
In each of these there is a Contrast of the Labor and Mirth of the country
People: In the first, some are plowing, others taking a Cup of good Liquor; in
the next, we see the Reapers working in one part, and the Banquet prepared in
another; in the last, the Labor of the Vineyard is relieved with Music and a
Dance. The Persons are no less varied, Old and Young, Men and Women: There
being Women in two Pictures together, namely the eighth and ninth, it is
remarkable that those in the latter are of a different Character from the
former; they who dress the Supper being ordinary Women, the others who carry
Baskets in the Vineyard, young and beautiful Virgins: And these again are of an
inferior Character to those in the twelfth Piece, who are distinguished as
People of Condition by a more elegant Dress. There are three Dances in the
Buckler; and these too are varied: That at the Wedding is in a circular Figure,
that of the Vineyard in a Row, that in the last Picture, a mingled one. Lastly,
there is a manifest Contrast in the Colors; nay, even in the Back-Grounds of
the several Pieces: For Example, that of the Plowing is of a dark Tinct, that
of the Harvest yellow, that of the Pasture green, and the rest in like manner.

That he was not a Stranger to Aerial Perspective, appears in his expressly
marking the Distance of Object from Object: He tells us, for instance, that the
two Spies lay a little remote from the other Figures; and that the Oak under
which was spread the Banquet of the Reapers, stood apart. What he says of the
Valley sprinkled all over with Cottages and Flocks, appears to be a Description
of a large Country in Perspective. And indeed a general Argument for this may
be drawn from the Number of Figures on the Shield; which could not be all
expressed in their full Magnitude: And this is therefore a sort of Proof that
the Art of lessening them according to Perspective was known at that Time.

What the Critics call the three Unities, ought in reason as much to be
observed in a Picture as in a Play; each should have only one principal Action,
one Instant of Time, and one Point of View. In this Method of Examination also,
the Shield of Homer will bear the Test: He has been more exact than the
greatest Painters, who have often deviated from one or other of these Rules;
whereas (when we examine the detail of each Compartiment) it will appear,

First, that there is but one principal Action in each Picture, and that no
supernumerary Figures or Actions are introduced. This will answer all that has
been said of the Confusion and Crowd of Figures on the Shield, by those who
never comprehended the Plan of it.

Secondly, that no Action is represented in one Piece, which could not happen
in the same Instant of Time. This will overthrow the Objection against so many
different Actions appearing in one Shield; which, in this Case, is much as
absurd as to object against so many of Raphael's Cartons appearing in one
Gallery.

Thirdly, It will be manifest that there are no Objects in any one Picture
which could not be seen in one Point of View. Hereby the Abbe Terasson's whole
Criticism will fall to the Ground, which amounts but to this, that the general
Objects of the Heavens, Stars and Sea, with the particular Prospects of Towns,
Fields, etc. could never be seen all at once. Homer was incapable of so absurd
a Thought, nor could these heavenly Bodies (had he intended them for a Picture)
have ever been seen together from one Point; for the Constellations and the
Full Moon, for example, could never be seen at once with the Sun. But the
celestial Bodies were placed on the Boss, as the Ocean at the Margin of the
Shield: These were no Parts of the Painting, but the former was only an
Ornament to the Projection in the middle, and the latter a Frame round about
it: In the same manner as the Divisions, Projections, or Angles of a Roof are
left to be ornamented at the Discretion of the Painter, with Foliage,
Architecture, Grotesque, or what he pleases: However his Judgment will be still
more commendable, if he contrives to make even these extrinsical Parts, to bear
some Allusion to the main Design: It is this which Homer has done, in placing a
sort of Sphere in the middle, and the Ocean at the Border, of a Work, which was
expressly intended to represent the Universe.

I proceed now to the Detail of the Shield; in which the Words of Homer being
first translated, an Attempt will be made to show with what exact Order all
that he describes may enter into the Composition, according to the Rules of
Painting.

THE SHIELD of ACHILLES Divided into its several Parts.
The BOSS of the SHIELD.
VERSE 483. (...), etc.] Here Vulcan represented the Earth, the Heaven, the
Sea, the indefatigable Course of the Sun, the Moon in her full, all the
celestial Signs that crown Olympus, the Pleiades, the Hyades, the great Orion,
and the Bear, commonly called the Wain, the only Constellation which never
bathing itself in the Ocean, turns about the Pole, and observes the Course of
Orion.

The Sculpture of these resembled somewhat of our terrestrial and celestial
Globes, and took up the Center of the Shield: It Is plain by the huddle in which
Homer expresses this, that he did not describe it as a Picture for a point of
Sight.

The Circumference is divided into twelve Compartiments, each being a separate
Picture: As follow,

First Compartiment A Town in Peace,
(...), etc.] He engraved two Cities; in one of them were represented Nuptials
and Festivals. The Spouses from their bridal Chambers, were conducted through the
Town by the Light of Torches. Every Mouth sung the Hymeneal Song: The Youths
turned rapidly about in a circular Dance: The Flute and the Lyre resounded: The
Women, every one in the Street, standing in the Porches, beheld and admired.

In this Picture, the Brides preceded by Torch-bearers are on the Fore-ground:
The Dance in Circles, and Musicians behind them: The Street in Perspective on
either side, the Women and Spectators, in the Porches, etc. dispersed through all
the Architecture.

Second Compartiment. An Assembly of People.
(...), etc.] There was seen a Number of People in the Marketplace, and two
Men disputing warmly: The Occasion was the Payment of a Fine for a Murder,
which one affirmed before the People he had paid, the other denied to have
received; both demanded, that the Affair should be determined by the Judgment
of an Arbiter: The Acclamations of the Multitude favored sometimes the one
Party, sometimes the other.

Here is a fine Plan for a Masterpiece of Expression; any Judge of Painting
will see our Author has chosen that Cause which of all others, would give
occasion to the greatest Variety of expression: The Father, the Murderer, the
Witnesses, and the different Passions of the Assembly, would afford an ample
Field for this Talent even to Raphael himself.

Third Compartiment. The Senate.
(...), etc.] The Heralds ranged the People in order: The reverend Elders were
seated on Seats of polished Stone, in the sacred Circle; they rose up and
declared their Judgment, each in his Turn, with the Scepter in his Hand: Two
Talents of Gold were laid in the middle of the Circle, to be given to him who
should pronounce the most equitable Judgment.

The Judges are seated in the Center of the Picture; one (who is the principal
Figure) standing up as speaking, another in an Action of rising, as in order to
speak: The Ground about 'em a Prospect of the Forum, filled with Auditors and
Spectators.

Fourth Compartiment. A Town in War.
(...), etc.] The other City was besieged by two glittering Armies: They were
not agreed, whether to sack the Town, or divide all the Booty of it into two
equal Parts, to be shared between them: Meantime the besieged secretly armed
themselves for an Ambuscade. Their Wives, Children, and old Men were posted to
defend the Walls: The Warriors marched from the Town with Pallas and Mars at
their Head: The Deities were of Gold, and had golden Armours, by the Glory of
which they were distinguished above the Men, as well as by their superior
Stature, and more elegant Proportions.

This Subject may be thus disposed: The Town pretty near the Eye, across the
whole Picture, with the old Men on the Walls: The Chiefs of each Army on the
Foreground: Their different Opinions for putting the Town to the Sword, or
sparing it on account of the Booty, may be expressed by some having their Hands
on their Swords, and looking up to the City, others stopping them, or in an
Action of persuading against it. Behind, in Prospect, the Townsmen may be seen
going out from the back Gates, with the two Deities at their Head.

Homer here gives a clear Instance of what the Ancients always practiced; the
distinguishing the Gods and Goddesses by Characters of Majesty or Beauty
somewhat superior to Nature; we constantly find this in their Statues, and to
this the modern Masters owe the grand Taste in the Perfection of their Figures.

Fifth Compartiment. An Ambuscade.
(...), etc.] Being arrived at the River where they designed their Ambush (the
Place where the Cattle were watered) they disposed themselves along the Bank,
covered with their Arms: Two Spies lay at a distance from them, observing when
the Oxen and Sheep should come to drink. They came immediately, followed by two
Shepherds, who were playing on their Pipes, without any Apprehension of their
Danger.

This quiet Picture is a kind of Repose between the last, and the following,
active Pieces. Here is a Scene of a River and Trees, under which lie the
Soldiers, next the Eye of the Spectator; on the farther Bank are placed the two
Spies on one Hand, and the Flocks and Shepherds appear coming at a greater
Distance on the other.

Sixth Compartiment. The Battle.
(...), etc.] The People of the Town rushed upon them, carried off the Oxen and
Sheep, and killed the Shepherds. The Besiegers sitting before the Town, heard
the Outcry, and mounting their Horses, arrived at the Bank of the River; where
they stopped, and encountered each other with their Spears. Discord, Tumult,
and Fate raged in the midst of them. There might you see cruel Destiny dragging
a dead Soldier through the Battle; two others she seized alive; one of which was
mortally wounded; the other not yet hurt: The Garment on her Shoulders was
stained with human Blood: The Figures appeared as if they lived, moved, and
fought, you would think they really dragged off their Dead.

The Sheep and two Shepherds lying dead upon the Foreground. A Battel-piece
fills the Picture. The Allegorical Figure of the Parca or Destiny is the
Principal. This had been a noble Occasion for such a Painter as Rubens, who has
with most Happiness and Learning, imitated the Ancients in these fictitious and
symbolical Persons.

Seventh Compartiment. Tillage.
(...).] The next Piece represented a large Field, a deep and fruitful Soil,
which seemed to have been three times plowed; the Laborers appeared turning
their Plows on every side. As soon as they came to a Land's end, a Man
presented them a Bowl of Wine; cheared with this, they returned, and worked
down a new furrow, desirous to hasten to the next Land's end. The Field was of
Gold, but looked black behind the Plows, as if it had really been turned up;
the surprising Effect of the Art of Vulcan.

The Plowmen must be represented on the Fore-ground, in the Action of turning
at the End of the Furrow. The Invention of Homer is not content with barely
putting down the Figures, but enlivens them prodigiously with some remarkable
Circumstance: The giving a Cup of Wine to the Plowmen must occasion a fine
Expression in the Faces.

Eighth Compartiment. The Harvest.
(...), etc.] Next he represented a Field of Corn, in which the Reapers worked
with sharp Sickles in their Hands; the Corn fell thick along the Furrows in
equal Rows: Three Binders were employed in making up the Sheaves: The Boys
attending them, gathered up the loose Swarths, and carried them in their Arms
to be bound: The Lord of the Field standing in the midst of the Heaps, with a
Scepter in his Hand, rejoices in Silence: His Officers, at a Distance, prepare
a Feast under the Shade of an Oak, and hold an Ox ready to be sacrificed; while
the Women mix the Flower of Wheat for the Reaper's Supper.

The Reapers on the Fore-ground, with their Faces toward the Spectators; the
Gatherers behind, and the Children on the farther Ground. The Master of the
Field, who is the chief Figure, may be set in the middle of the Picture with a
strong Light upon him, in the Action of directing and pointing with his
Scepter: The Oak, with the Servants under it, the Sacrifice, etc. on a distant
Ground, would altogether make a beautiful Grouppe of great Variety.

Ninth Compartiment. The Vintage.
(...), etc.] He then engraved a Vineyard laden with its Grapes: The Vineyard
was Gold, but the Grapes black, and the Props of them Silver. A Trench of a
dark Metal, and a Palisade of Tin encompassed the whole Vineyard. There was one
Path in it, by which the Laborers in the Vineyard passed: Young Men and Maids
carried the Fruit in woven Baskets: In the middle of them a Youth played on the
Lyre and charmed them with his tender Voice, as he sung to the Strings (or as
he sung the Song of Linus:) The rest striking the Ground with their Feet in
exact time, followed him in a Dance, and accompanied his Voice with their own.

The Vintage scarce needs to be painted in any Colors but Homer's. The Youths
and Maids toward the Eye, as coming out of the Vineyard: The Enclosure, Pales,
Gate, etc. on the Fore-ground. There is something inexpressibly riant in this
Piece, above all the rest.

Tenth Compartiment. Animals.
(...), etc.] He graved a Herd of Oxen, marching with their Heads erected;
These Oxen (inlaid with Gold and Tin) seemed to bellow as they quitted their
Stall, and run in haste to the Meadows, through which a rapid River rolled with
resounding Streams amongst the Rushes: Four Herdsmen of Gold attended them,
followed by nine large Dogs: Two terrible Lions seized a Bull by the Throat,
who roared as they dragged him along; the Dogs and the Herdsmen ran to his
Rescue, but the Lions having torn the Bull, devoured his Entrails, and drank
his Blood, the Herdsmen came up with their Dogs and hearten'd them in vain;
they durst not attack the Lions, but standing at some Distance, barked at them
and shunned them.

We have next a fine Piece of Animals, tame and savage: But what is remarkable,
is, that these Animals are not coldly brought in to be gazed upon: The Herds,
Dogs, and Lions are put into Action, enough to exercise the Warmth and Spirit
of Rubens, or the great Taste of Julio Romano.

The Lions may be next the Eye, one holding the Bull by the Throat, the other
tearing out his Entrails: A Herdsman or two heartening the Dogs: All these on
the Fore-ground. On the second Ground another Grouppe of Oxen, that seem to
have been gone before, tossing their Heads and running; other Herdsmen and Dogs
after 'em: And beyond them, a Prospect of the River.

Eleventh Compartiment. Sheep.
(...), etc. The divine Artist then engraved a large Flock of white Sheep,
feeding along a beautiful Valley. Innumerable Folds, Cottages, and enclosed
Shelters, were scattered through the Prospect.

This is an entire Landscape without human Figures, an Image of Nature solitary
and undisturbed: The deepest Repose and Tranquillity is that which
distinguishes it from the others.

Twelfth Compartiment. The Dance.
(...), etc.] The skilful Vulcan then designed the Figure and various Motions
of a Dance, like that which Daedalus of old contrived in Gnossus for the fair
Ariadne. There the young Men and Maidens danced Hand in Hand; the Maids were
dressed in linen Garments, the Men in rich and shining Stuffs: The Maids had
flowery Crowns on their Heads; the Men had Swords of Gold hanging from their
Sides in Belts of Silver. Here they seemed to run in a Ring with active Feet,
as swiftly as a Wheel runs round when tried by the Hand of the Potter. There,
they appeared to move in many Figures, and sometimes to meet, sometimes to wind
from each other. A Multitude of Spectators stood round, delighted with the
Dance. In the middle, two nimble Tumblers exercised themselves in Feats of
Activity, while the Song was carried on by the whole Circle.

This Picture includes the greatest Number of Persons: Homer himself has
group'd them, and marked the manner of the Composition. This Piece would excel
in the different Airs of Beauty which might be given to the young Men and
Women, and the graceful Attitudes in the various manners of Dancing: On which
account the Subject might be fit for Guido, or perhaps could be no where better
executed than in our own Country.

The BORDER of the SHIELD.
(...), etc.] Then laslly, he represented the rapid Course of the great Ocean,
which he made to roll its Waves round the Extremity of the whole Circumference.

This (as has been said before) was only the Frame to the whole Shield; and is
therefore but slightly touched upon, without any mention of particular Objects.

I ought not to end this Essay, without vindicating myself from the Vanity of
treating of an Art, which I love so much better than I understand: But I have
been very careful to consult both the best Performers and Judges in Painting. I
cannot neglect this occasion of saying, how happy I think myself in the Favor
of the most distinguished Masters of that Art. Sir Godsrey Kneller in
particular allows me to tell the World, that he entirely agrees with my
Sentiments on this Subject: And I cannot help wishing, that he who gives this
Testimony to Homer, would ennoble so great a Design by his own Execution of it.
Vulcan never wrought for Thetis with more Readiness and Affection than Sir
Godfrey has done for me: And so admirable a Picture of the whole Universe could
not be a more agreeable Present than he has obliged me with, in the Portraits
of some of those Persons who are to me the dearest Objects in it.

THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Reconciliation of Achilles and Agamemnon.
THETIS brings to her Son the Armor made by Vulcan. She preserves the Body of
his Friend from Corruption, and commands him to assemble the Army, to declare
his Resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are solemnly reconciled: The
Speeches, Presents, and Ceremonies on that Occasion. Achilles is with great
Difficulty persuaded to refrain from the Battle till the Troops have refreshed
themselves, by the Advice of Ulysses. The Presents are conveyed to the Tent of
Achilles; where Briseis laments over the Body of Patroclus. The Hero
obstinately refuses all repast, and gives himself up to Lamentations for his
Friend. Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the Order of Jupiter. He arms
for the Fight; his Appearance described. He addresses himself to his Horses,
and reproaches them with the Death of Patroclus. One of them is miraculously
endued with Voice, and inspired to prophecy his Fate; but the Hero, not
astonished by that Prodigy, rushes with Fury to the Combat.

The thirtieth Day. The Scene is on the Seashore.

THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
SOON as Aurora heaved her orient Head
Above the Waves that blushed with early Red,
(With newborn Day to gladden mortal Sight,
And gild the Courts of Heaven with sacred Light.)
The Immortal Arms the Goddess-Mother bears
Swift to her Son: Her Son she finds in Tears,
Stretched over Patroclus' Corse; while all the rest
Their Sov'reign's Sorrows in their own expressed.
A Ray divine her heavenly Presence shed,
And thus, his Hand soft-touching, Thetis said.
Suppress (my Son) this Rage of Grief, and know
It was not Man, but Heaven that gave the Blow;
Behold what Arms by Vulcan are bestowed,
Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a God.
Then drops the radiant Burden on the Ground;
Clang the strong Arms, and ring the Shores around:
Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread Surprise,
And from the broad Effulgence turn their Eyes.
Unmoved, the Hero kindles at the Show,
And feels with Rage divine his Bosom glow
From his fierce Eye Balls living Flames expire,
And flash incessant like a Stream of Fire:
He turns the radiant Gift; and feeds his Mind
On all the immortal Artist had designed.
Goddess (he cried) these glorious Arms that shine
With matchless Art, confess the Hand divine.
Now to the bloody Battle let me bend:
But ah! the Relics of my slaughtered Friend!
In those wide Wounds through which his Spirit fled,
Shall Flies and Worms obscene, pollute the Dead?
That unavailing Care be laid aside,
(The Azure Goddess to her Son replied)
Whole Years untouched, uninjur'd shall remain
Fresh as in Life, the Carcass of the Slain.
But go, Achilles, (as Affairs require)
Before the Grecian Peers renounce thine Ire:
Then uncontrolled in boundless War engage,
And Heaven with Strength supply the mighty Rage!
Then in the Nostrils of the Slain she poured
Nectareous Drops, and rich Ambrosia showered
Over all the Corse: The Flies forbid their Prey,
Untouched it rests, and sacred from Decay.
Achilles to the Strand obedient went;
The Shores resounded with the Voice he sent.
The Heroes heard, and all the Naval Train
That tend the Ships, or guide them over the Main,
Alarmed, transported, at the well-known Sound,
Frequent and full, the great Assembly crowned;
Studious to see that Terror of the Plain,
Long lost to Battle, shine in Arms again.
Tydides and Ulysses first appear,
Lame with their Wounds, and leaning on the Spear;
These on the sacred Seats of Council placed,
The King of Men, Atrides, came the last:
He too sore wounded by Agenor's Son.
Achilles (rising in the midst) begun.
Oh Monarch! better far had been the Fate
Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian State,
If, (ever the Day when by mad Passion swayed,
Rash we contended for the black-ey'd Maid)
Preventing Dian had dispatched her Dart,
And shot the shining Mischief to the Heart!
Then many a Hero had not pressed the Shore,
Nor Troy's glad Fields been fatten'd with our Gore:
Long, long shall Greece the Woes we caused, bewail,
And sad Posterity repeat the Tale.
But this, no more the Subject of Debate,
Is past, forgotten, and resigned to Fate:
Why should (alas) a mortal Man, as I,
Burn with a Fury that can never die?
Here then my Anger ends: Let War succeed,
And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.
Now call the Hosts, and try, if in our Sight,
Troy yet shall dare to camp a second Night?
I deem, their Mightiest, when this Arm he knows,
Shall 'scape with Transport, and with Joy repose.
He said: His finished Wrath with loud Acclaim
The Greeks accept, and shout Pelides' Name.
When thus, not rising from his lofty Throne,
In State unmoved, the King of Men begun.
Hear me ye Sons of Greece! with Silence hear!
And grant your Monarch an impartial Ear;
Awhile your loud, untimely Joy suspend,
And let your rash, injurious Clamours end:
Unruly Murmurs, or ill-timed Applause,
Wrong the best Speaker, and the justest Cause.
Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire Debate;
Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,
With fell Erynnis, urged my Wrath that Day
When from Achilles' Arms I forced the Prey.
What then could I, against the Will of Heaven?
Not by my self, but vengeful Ate driven;
She, Jove's dread Daughter, fated to infest
The Race of Mortals, entered in my Breast.
Not on the Ground that haughty Fury treads,
But prints her lofty Footsteps on the Heads
Of mighty Men; inflicting as she goes
Long-fest'ring Wounds, inextricable Woes!
Of old, she stalked amid the bright Abodes;
And Jove himself, the Sire of Men and Gods,
The World's great Ruler, felt her venomed Dart;
Deceived by Juno's Wiles, and female Art.
For when Alcmena's nine long Months were run,
And Jove expected his immortal Son;
To Gods and Goddesses the unruly Joy
He showed, and vaunted of his matchless Boy:
From us (he said) this Day an Infant springs,
Fated to rule, and born a King of Kings.
Saturnia asked an Oath, to vouch the Truth,
And fix Dominion on the favored Youth.
The Thund'rer, unsuspicious of the Fraud,
Pronounced those solemn Words that bind a God.
The joyful Goddess, from Olympus' Height,
Swift to Achaian Argos bent her Flight;
Scarce sev'n Moons gone, lay Sthenelus his Wife;
She pushed her lingering Infant into Life:
Her Charms Alcmena's coming Labors stay,
And stop the Babe, just issuing to the Day.
Then bids Saturnius bear his Oath in mind;
A Youth (said she) of Jove's immortal Kind
Is this Day born: From Sthenelus he springs,
And claims thy Promise to be King of Kings.
Grief seized the Thund'rer, by his Oath engaged;
Stung to the Soul, he sorrow'd, and he raged.
From his Ambrosial Head, where perched she sat,
He snatched the Fury-Goddess of Debate,
The dread, th'irrevocable Oath he swore,
The Immortal Seats should never behold her more;
And whirled her headlong down, for ever driven
From bright Olympus and the starry Heaven:
Thence on the nether World the Fury fell;
Ordained with Man's contentious Race to dwell.
Full often the God his Son's hard Toils bemoaned,
Cursed the dire Fury, and in secret groaned.
Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
While raging Hector heaped our Camps with Dead.
What can the Errors of my Rage atone?
My martial Troops, my Treasures, are thy own:
This Instant from the Navy shall be sent
Whatever Ulysses promised at thy Tent:
But thou! appeased, propitious to our Prayer,
Resume thy Arms, and shine again in War.
O King of Nations! whose superior Sway
(Returns Achilles) all our Hosts obey!
To keep, or send the Presents, be thy Care;
To us, it is equal: All we ask is War.
While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
The Fight, our glorious Work remains undone.
Let every Greek who sees my Spear confound
The Trojan Ranks, and deal Destruction round,
With Emulation, what I act, survey,
And learn from thence the Business of the Day.
The Son of Peleus thus: And thus replies
The great in Councils, Ithacus the Wise.
Though god-like Thou art by no Toils oppressed,
At least our Armies claim Repast and Rest:
Long and laborious must the Combat be,
When by the Gods inspired, and led by thee.
Strength is derived from Spirits and from Blood,
And those augment by generous Wine and Food;
What boastful Son of War, without that Stay,
Can last a Hero through a single Day?
Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his Strength,
Mere unsupported Man must yield at length;
Shrunk with dry Famine, and with Toils declined,
The dropping Body will desert the Mind:
But built a new with Strength-conferring Fare,
With Limbs and Soul untamed, he tires a War.
Dismiss the People then, and give command,
With strong Repast to hearten every Band;
But let the Presents, to Achilles made,
In full Assembly of all Greece be laid.
The King of Men shall rise in public Sight,
And solemn swear, (observant of the Rite)
That spotless as she came, the Maid removes,
Pure from his Arms, and guiltless of his Loves.
That done, a sumptuous Banquet shall be made,
And the full Price of injured Honor paid.
Stretch not henceforth, O Prince! thy sovereign Might,
Beyond the Bounds of Reason and of Right;
It Is the chief Praise that ever to Kings belonged,
To right with Justice, whom with Power they wronged.
To him the Monarch. Just is thy Decree,
Thy Words give Joy, and Wisdom breathes in thee.
Each due Atonement gladly I prepare;
And Heaven regard me as I justly swear!
Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,
Nor great Achilles grudge this short Delay;
Till from the Fleet our Presents be conveyed,
And, Jove attesting, the firm Compact made.
A Train of noble Youth the Charge shall bear;
These to select, Ulysses, be thy Care:
In order ranked let all our Gifts appear,
And the fair Train of Captives close the Rear:
Talthybius shall the Victim Boar convey,
Sacred to Jove, and yon' bright Orb of Day.
For this (the stern Aeacides replies)
Some less important Season may suffice,
When the stern Fury of the War is over,
And Wrath extinguished burns my Breast no more.
By Hector slain, their Faces to the Sky,
All grim with gaping Wounds, our Heroes lie:
Those call to War! and might my Voice incite,
Now, now, this Instant, should commence the Fight.
Then, when the Days' complete, let generous Bowls
And copious Banquets, glad your weary Souls.
Let not my Palate know the Taste of Food,
Till my insatiate Rage be cloyed with Blood:
Pale lies my Friend, with Wounds disfigured over,
And his cold Feet are pointed to the Door.
Revenge is all my Soul! no meaner Care,
Interest, or Thought, has room to harbor there;
Destruction be my Feast, and mortal Wounds,
And Scenes of Blood, and agonizing Sounds.
O first of Greeks ( Ulysses thus rejoined)
The best and bravest of the Warrior-Kind!
Thy Praise it is in dreadful Camps to shine,
But old Experience and calm Wisdom, mine.
Then hear my Counsel, and to Reason yield,
The bravest soon are satiate of the Field;
Though vast the Heaps that strew the crimson Plain,
The bloody Harvest brings but little Gain:
The Scale of Conquest ever wavering lies,
Great Jove but turns it, and the Victor dies!
The Great, the Bold, by Thousands daily fall,
And endless were the Grief, to weep for all.
Eternal Sorrows what avails to shed?
Greece honors not with solemn Fasts the Dead:
Enough, when Death demands the Brave, to pay
The Tribute of a melancholy Day.
One Chief with Patience to the Grave resigned,
Our Care devolves on others left behind.
Let generous Food Supplies of Strength produce,
Let rising Spirits flow from sprightly Juice,
Let their warm Heads with Scenes of Battle glow,
And pour new Furies on the feebler Foe.
Yet a short Interval, and none shall dare
Expect a second Summons to the War;
Who waits for that, the dire Effect shall find,
If trembling in the Ships he lags behind.
Embodied, to the Battle let us bend,
And all at once on haughty Troy descend.
And now the Delegates Ulysses sent,
To bear the Presents from the royal Tent.
The Sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant Heir,
Thias and Merion, Thunderbolts of War,
With Lycomedes of Creiontian Strain,
And Melanippus; formed the chosen Train.
Swift as the Word was given, the Youths obeyed;
Twice ten bright Vases in the midst they laid;
A Row of six fair Tripods then succeeds;
And twice the Number of high-bounding Steeds:
Sev'n Captives next a lovely Line compose;
The eighth Briseis, like the blooming Rose,
Closed the bright Band: Great Ithacus, before,
First of the Train, the golden Talents bore:
The rest in public View the Chiefs dispose,
A splendid Scene! Then Agamemnon rose:
The Boar Talthybius held: The Grecian Lord
Drew the broad Cutlace sheathed beside his Sword;
The stubborn Bristles from the Victim's Brow
He crops, and offering meditates his Vow.
His Hands uplifted to th'attesting Skies,
On Heavens broad marble Roof were fixed his Eyes,
The solemn Words a deep Attention draw,
And Greece around sat thrilled with sacred Awe.
Witness thou First! thou greatest Power above!
All good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
And Mother Earth, and Heavens revolving Light,
And ye, fell Furies of the Realms of Night,
Who rule the Dead, and horrid Woes prepare
For perjured Kings, and all who falsely swear!
The black-ey'd Maid inviolate removes,
Pure and unconscious of my manly Loves.
If this be false, Heaven all its Vengeance shed,
And levelled Thunder strike my guilty Head!
With that, his Weapon deep inflicts the Wound;
The bleeding Savage tumbles to the Ground:
The sacred Herald rolls the Victim slain
(A Feast for Fish) into the foaming Main.
Then thus Achilles. Hear, ye Greeks! and know
Whatever we feel, it is Jove inflicts the Woe:
Not else Atrides could our Rage inflame,
Nor from my Arms, unwilling, force the Dame.
'Twas Jove's high Will alone, o'eruling all,
That doomed our Strife, and doomed the Greeks to fall.
Go then ye Chiefs! indulge the genial Rite;
Achilles waits ye, and expects the Fight.
The speedy Council at his Word adjourned;
To their black Vessels all the Greeks returned.
Achilles sought his Tent. His Train before
Marched onward, bending with the Gifts they bore.
Those in the Tents the Squires industrious spread;
The foaming Coursers to the Stalls they led.
To their new Seats the Female Captives move;
Briseis, radiant as the Queen of Love,
Slow as she past, beheld with sad survey
Where gash'd with cruel Wounds, Patroclus lay.
Prone on the Body fell the heavenly Fair,
Beat her sad Breast, and tore her golden Hair;
All-beautiful in Grief, her humid Eyes
Shining with Tears, she lifts, and thus she cries.
Ah Youth! for ever dear, for ever kind,
Once tender Friend of my distracted Mind!
I left thee fresh in Life, in Beauty gay;
Now find thee cold, inanimated Clay!
What Woes my wretched Race of Life attend?
Sorrows on Sorrows, never doomed to end!
The first loved Consort of my virgin Bed
Before these Eyes in fatal Battle bled:
My three brave Brothers in one mournful Day
All trod the dark, irremeable Way:
Thy friendly Hand uprear'd me from the Plain,
And dried my Sorrows for a Husband slain;
Achilles' Care you promised I should prove,
The first, the dearest Partner of his Love,
That Rites divine should ratify the Band,
And make me Empress in his native Land.
Accept these grateful Tears! For thee they flow,
For thee, that ever felt another's Woe!
Her Sister Captives echoed Groan for Groan,
Nor mourned Patroclus' Fortunes, but their own.
The Leaders pressed the Chief on every side;
Unmoved, he heard them, and with Sighs denied
If yet Achilles have a Friend, whose Care
Is bent to please him; this Request forbear:
Till yonder Sun descend, ah let me pay
To Grief and Anguish one abstemious Day.
He spoke, and from the Warriors turned his Face:
Yet still the Brother-Kings of Atreus' Race:
Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
And Phoenix; strive to calm his Grief and Rage
His Rage they calm not, nor his Grief control;
He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his Soul.
Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his Heart he vents)
Have spread th'inviting Banquet in our Tents;
Thy sweet Society, thy winning Care,
Often stayed Achilles, rushing to the War.
But now alas! to Death's cold Arms resigned,
What Banquet but Revenge can glad my Mind?
What greater Sorrow could afflict my Breast,
What more, if hoary Peleus were deceast?
Who now, perhaps, in Pthia dreads to hear
His Son's sad Fate, and drops a tender Tear.)
What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
(My only Offspring) sink into the Grave?
If yet that Offspring lives, (I distant far,
Of all neglectful, wage a hateful War.)
I could not this, this cruel Stroke attend;
Fate claimed Achilles, but might spare his Friend.
I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
My tender Orphan with a Parent's Care,
From Scyros Isle conduct him over the Main,
And glad his Eyes with his paternal Reign,
The lofty Palace, and the large Domain.
For Peleus breaths no more the vital Air;
Or drags a wretched Life of Age and Care,
But till the News of my sad Fate invades
His hastening Soul, and sinks him to the Shades.
Sighing he said: His Grief the Heroes joined,
Each stole a Tear for what he left behind.
Their mingled Grief the Sire of Heaven surveyed,
And thus, with Pity, to his blue-ey'd Maid.
Is then Achilles now no more thy Care,
And do thou thus desert the Great in War?
Lo, where yon' Sails their canvas Wings extend,
All comfortless he sits, and wails his Friend:
Ever Thirst and Want his Forces have oppressed,
Haste and infuse Ambrosia in his Breast.
He spoke, and sudden as the Word of Jove
Shot the descending Goddess from above.
So swift through Ether the shrill Harpye sings,
The wide Air floating to her ample Wings.
To great Achilles she her Flight addressed,
And poured divine Ambrosia in his Breast,
With Nectar sweet, (Refection of the God's!)
Then, swift ascending, sought the bright Abodes.
Now issued from the Ships the warrior Train,
And like a Deluge poured upon the Plain.
As when the piercing Blasts of Boreas blow,
And scatter over the Fields the driving Snow;
From dusky Clouds the fleecy Winter flies,
Whose dazzling Luster whitens all the Skies:
So Helms succeeding Helms, so Shields from Shields
Catch the quick Beams, and brighten all the Fields;
Broad-glitt'ring Breastplates, Spears with pointed Rays
Mix in one Stream, reflecting Blaze on Blaze:
Thick beats the Center as the Coursers bound,
With Splendour flame the Skies, and laugh the Fields around.
Full in the midst, high towering over the rest,
His Limbs in Arms divine Achilles dressed;
Arms which the Father of the Fire bestowed,
Forged on The Eternal Anvils of the God.
Grief and Revenge his furious Heart inspire,
His glowing Eye Balls roll with living Fire,
He grinds his Teeth, and furious with Delay
O'erlooks th'embattled Host, and hopes the bloody Day.
The silver Cuishes first his Thighs infold;
Then over his Breast was braced the hollow Gold:
The brazen Sword a various Baldrick tied,
That, starr'd with Gems, hung glittering at his side;
And like the Moon, the broad refulgent Shield
Blazed with long Rays, and gleam'd athwart the Field.
So to Night-wand'ring Sailors, pale with Fears,
Wide over the watery Waste, a Light appears,
Which on the far-seen Mountain blazing high,
Streams from some lonely Watch-tow'r to the Sky:
With mournful Eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
Loud howls the Storm, and drives them over the Main.
Next, his high Head the Helmet graced; behind
The sweepy Crest hung floating in the Wind:
Like the red Star, that from his flaming Hair
Shakes down Diseases, Pestilence and War;
So streamed the golden Honors from his Head,
Trembled the sparkling Plumes, and the loose Glories shed.
The Chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
His Arms he poises, and his Motions tries;
Buoyed by some inward Force, he seems to swim,
And feels a Pinion lifting every Limb.
And now he shakes his great paternal Spear,
Ponderous and huge! which not a Greek could rear.
From Pelion's cloudy Top an Ash entire
Old Chiron felled, and shaped it for his Sire;
A Spear which stern Achilles only wields,
The Death of Heroes, and the Dread of Fields.
Automedon and Alcimus prepare
The Immortal Coursers, and the radiant Car,
(The silver Traces sweeping at their side)
Their fiery Mouths resplendent Bridles tied,
The Ivory studded Reins, returned behind,
Waved over their Backs, and to the Chariot joined.
The Charioteer then whirled the Lash around,
And swift ascended at one active Bound.
All bright in heavenly Arms, above his Squire
Achilles mounts, and sets the Field on Fire;
Not brighter, Phoebus in th'Aethereal Way,
Flames from his Chariot, and restores the Day.
High over the Host, all terrible he stands,
And thunders to his Steeds these dread Commands.
Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' Strain,
(Unless ye boast that heavenly Race in vain)
Be swift, be mindful of the Load ye bear,
And learn to make your Master more your Care:
Through falling Squadrons bear my slaught'ring Sword,
Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your Lord.
The generous Xanthus, as the Words he said,
Seemed sensible of Woe, and drooped his Head:
Trembling he stood before the golden Wain,
And bowed to Dust the Honors of his Mane,
When strange to tell! (So Juno willed) he broke
Eternal Silence, and portentous spoke.
Achilles! yes! this Day at least we bear
Thy rage in safety through the Files of War:
But come it will, the fatal Time must come,
Nor ours the Fault, but God decrees thy Doom.
Not through our Crime, or Slowness in the Course;
Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly Force.
The bright far-shooting God who gilds the Day,
(Confessed we saw him) tore his Arms away.
No -- could our Swiftness over the Winds prevail,
Or beat the Pinions of the Western Gale,
All were in vain -- The Fates thy Death demand,
Due to a mortal and immortal Hand.
Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
His fate-ful Voice. Th'intrepid Chief replied
With unabated Rage -- So let it be!
Portents and Prodigies are lost on me.
I know my Fates: To die, to see no more
My much loved Parents, and my native Shore --
Enough -- When Heaven ordains, I sink in Night,
Now perish Troy! He said, and rushed to Fight.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Nineteenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE NINETEENTH BOOK.
I.
VERSE 13. BEhold what Arms, etc.] It Is not Poetry only which has had this
Idea, of giving divine Ams to a Hero; we have a very remarkable Example of it
in our holy Books. In the second of Maccabees, chap. 16. Judas sees in a Dream
the Prophet Jeremiah bringing to him a Sword as from God: Though this was only a
Dream, or a Vision, yet still it is the same Idea. This Example is likewise so
much the more worthy of Observation, as it is much later than the Age of Homer;
and as thereby it is seen, that the same way of Thinking continued a long time
amongst the Oriental Nations. Dacier.

II.
VERSE 30. Shall Flies and Worms obscene pollute the Dead?] The Care which
Achilles takes in this place to drive away the Flies from the dead Body of
Patroclus, seems to us a mean Employment, and a Care unworthy of a Hero. But
that Office was regarded by Homer, and by all the Greeks of his time, as a
pious Duty consecrated by Custom and Religion; which obliged the Kindred and
Friends of the Deceased to watch his Corpse, and prevent any Corruption before
the solemn Day of his Funerals. It is plain this Devoir was thought an
indispensable one, since Achilles could not discharge himself of it but by
imposing it upon his Mother. It is also clear, that in those times the
Preservation of a dead Body was accounted a very important Matter, since the
Goddesses themselves, nay the most delicate of the Goddesses, made it the
Subject of their utmost Attention. As Thetis preserves the Body of Patroclus,
and chases from it those Insects that breed in the Wounds and cause
Putrefaction, so Venus is employed Day and Night about that of Hector, in
driving away the Dogs to which Achilles had exposed it. Apollo, on his part,
covers it with a thick Cloud, and preserves its Freshness amidst the greatest
Heats of the Sun: And this Care of the Deities over the Dead was looked upon by
Men as a Fruit of their Piety.

There is an excellent Remark upon this Passage in Bossu's admirable Treatise
of the Epic Poem, lib. 3. c. 10. "To speak (says this Author) of the Arts and
Sciences as a Poet ought, we should veil them under Names and Actions of
Persons fictitious and allegorical. Homer will not plainly say that Salt has
the Virtue to preserve dead Bodies, and prevent the Flies from engendering
Worms in them; he will not say, that the Sea presented Achilles a Remedy to
preserve Patroclus from Putrefaction; but he will make the Sea a Goddess, and
tell us, that Thetis to comfort Achilles, engaged to perfume the Body with an
Ambrosia which should keep it a whole Year from Corruption: It is thus Homer
teaches the Poets to speak of Arts and Sciences. This Example shows the Nature
of the things, that Flies cause Putrefaction, that Salt preserves Bodies from
it; but all this is told us poetically, the whole is reduced into Action, the
Sea is made a Person who speaks and acts, and this Prosopopoeia is accompanied
with Passion, Tenderness and Affection; in a word, there is nothing which is
not (according to Aristotle's Precept) endued with Manners.

III.
VERSE 61. Preventing Dian had dispatched her Dart,
And shot the shining Mischief to the Heart.]
Achilles wishes Briseis had died before she had occasioned so great Calamities
to his Countrymen: I will not say, to excuse him, that his Virtue here
overpowers his Love, but that the Wish is not so very barbarous as it may seem
by the Phrase to a modern Reader. It is not, that Diana had actually killed
her, as by a particular Stroke or Judgment from Heaven; it means no more than a
natural Death, as appears from this Passage in Odyss. 15. When Age or Sickness
have unnerv'd the Strong,
Apollo comes, and Cynthia comes along,
They bend the Silver Bows for sudden Ill,
And every shining Arrow flies to kill.
And he does not wish her Death now, after she had been his Mistress, but only
that she had died, before he knew, or loved her.

IV.
VERSE 93. She, Jove 's dread daughter.] This Speech of Agamemnon, consisting
of little else than the long Story of Jupiter's casting Discord out of Heaven,
seems odd enough at first sight; and does not indeed answer what I believe
every Reader expects, at the Conference of these two Princes. Without excusing
it from the Justness, and proper Application of the Allegory in the present
Case, I think it a piece of Artifice, very agreeable to the Character of
Agamemnon, which is a Mixture of Haughtiness and Cunning! He cannot prevail
with himself any way to lessen the Dignity of the royal Character, of which he
every where appears jealous: Something he is obliged to say in public, and not
brooking directly to own himself in the wrong, he slurs it over with this Tale.
With what Stateliness is it that he yields? "I was misled (says he) but I was
misled like Jupiter. We invest you with our Powers, take our Troops and our
Treasures: Our royal Promise shall be fulfilled, but be you pacified."

V.
VERSE 93. She, Jove 's dread Daughter, fated to infest
The Race of Mortals -- ]
It appears from hence, that the Ancients owned a Demon, created by God
himself, and totally taken up in doing Mischief.

This Fiction is very remarkable, in as much as it proves that the Pagans knew
that a Demon of Discord and Malediction was in Heaven, and afterward
precipitated to Earth, which perfectly agrees with holy History. St. Justin
will have it, that Homer attained to the Knowledge thereof in Egypt, and that
he had even read what Isaiah writes, chap. 14. How art thou fallen from Heaven,
O Lucifer, Son of the Morning, how art thou cut down to the Ground which did
weaken the Nations? But our Poet could not have seen the Prophecy of Isaiah,
because he lived 100, or 150 Years before that Prophet; and this Anteriority of
Time makes this Passage the more observable. Homer therein bears authentic
Witness to the Truth of the Story, of an Angel thrown from Heaven, and gives
this Testimony above an 100 Years before one of the greatest Prophets spoke of
it Dacier.

VI.
VERSE 145. To keep or send the Presents, be thy Care.] Achilles neither
refuses nor demands Agamemnon's Presents: The first would be too contemptuous,
and the other would look too selfish. It would seem as if Achilles fought only
for Pay like a Mercenary, which would be utterly unbecoming a Hero, and
dishonorable to that Character: Homer is wonderful as to the Manners. Spond.
Dac.

VII.
VERSE 197. The stern Aeacides replies.] The Greek Verse is (...)
Which is repeated very frequently throughout the Iliad. It is a very just
Remark of a French Critic, that what makes it so much taken notice of, is the
rumbling Sound and Length of the Word (...): This is so true, that if in a Poem
or Romance of the same Length as the Iliad, we should repeat The Hero answered,
full as often, we should never be sensible of that Repetition. And if we are
not shocked at the like Frequency of those Expressions in the Aeneid, sic ore
refert, talia voce resert, talia dicta dabat, vix ea fatus erat, etc. it is
only because the Sound of the Latin Words does not fill the Ear like that of
the Greek (...).

The Discourse of the same Critic upon these sort of Repetitions in general,
deserves to be transcribed. That useless Nicety (says he) of avoiding every
Repetition which the Delicacy of later Times has introduced, was not known to
the first Ages of Antiquity: The Books of Moses abound with them. Far from
condemning their frequent Use in the most ancient of all the Poets, we should
look upon them as the certain Character of the Age in which he lived: They
spoke so in his Time, and to have spoken otherwise had been a Fault. And indeed
nothing is in itself so contrary to the true Sublime, as that painful and
frivolous Exactness, with which we avoid to make use of a proper Word because
it was used before. It is certain that the Romans were less scrupulous as to
this point: You have often in a single Page of Tully, the same Word five or six
times over. If it were really a Fault, it is not to be conceived how an Author
who so little wanted Variety of Expressions as Homer, could be so very
negligent herein? On the contrary, he seems to have affected to repeat the same
Things in the same Words, on many Occasions.

It was from two Principles equally true, that among several People, and in
several Ages, two Practices entirely different took their Rise. Moses, Homer,
and the Writers of the first Times, had found that Repetitions of the same
Words recalled the Ideas of Things, imprinted them much more strongly, and
rendered the Discourse more intelligible. Upon this Principle, the Custom of
repeating Words, Phrases, and even entire Speeches, insensibly established
itself both in Prose and in Poetry, especially in Narrations.

The Writers who succeeded them observed, even from Homer himself, that the
greatest Beauty of Style consisted in Variety. This they made their Principle:
They therefore avoided Repetitions of Words, and still more of whole Sentences;
they endeavored to vary their Transitions; and found out new Turns and Manners
of expressing the same Things.

Either of these Practices is good, but the Excess of either vicious: We should
neither on the one hand, through a Love of Simplicity and Clearness, continually
repeat the same Words, Phrases, or Discourses; nor on the other, for the
Pleasure of Variety, fall into a childish Affectation of expressing every thing
twenty different Ways, though it be never so natural and common.

Nothing so much cools the Warmth of a Piece or puts out the Fire of Poetry, as
that perpetual Care to vary incessantly even in the smallest Circumstances. In
this, as in many other Points, Homer has despised the ungrateful Labor of too
scrupulous a Nicety. He has done like a great Painter, who does not think
himself obliged to vary all his Pieces to that degree, as not one of 'em shall
have the least Resemblance to another: If the principal Figures are entirely
different, we easily excuse a Resemblance in the Landscapes, the Skies, or the
Draperies. Suppose a Gallery full of Pictures, each of which represents a
particular Subject: In one I see Achilles in Fury, menacing Agamemnon; in
another the same Hero with regret delivers up Briseis to the Heralds; in a
third it is still Achilles, but Achilles overcome with Grief, and lamenting to
his Mother. If the Air, the Gesture, the Countenance, the Character of
Achilles, are the same in each of these three Pieces; if the Ground of one of
these be the same with that of the others in the Composition and general
Design, whether it be Landscape, or Architecture; then indeed one should have
reason to blame the Painter for the Uniformity of his Figures and Grounds. But
if there be no Sameness but in the Folds of a few Draperies, in the Structure
of some part of a Building, or in the Figure of some Tree, Mountain, or Cloud,
it is what no one would regard as a Fault. The Application is obvious: Homer
repeats, but they are not the great Strokes which he repeats, not those which
strike and fix our Attention: They are only the little Parts, the Transitions,
the general Circumstances, or familiar Images, which recur naturally, and upon
which the Reader but casts his Eye carelessly: Such as the Descriptions of
Sacrifices, Repasts, or Embarquements; such in short, as are in their own
Nature much the same, which it is sufficient just to show, and which are in a
manner incapable of different Ornaments.

VIII.
VERSE 159. Strength is derived from Spirits, etc.] This Advice of Ulysses that
the Troops should refresh themselves with Eating and Drinking, was extremely
necessary, after a Battle of so long Continuance as that of the Day before: And
Achilles's Desire that they should charge the Enemy immediately, without any
Reflection on the Necessity of that Refreshment, was also highly natural to his
violent Character. This forces Ulysses to repeat that Advice, and insist upon
it so much: Which these Critics did not see into, who through a false Delicacy
are shocked at his insisting so warmly on Eating and Drinking. Indeed to a
common Reader who is more fond of heroic and romantic, than of just and
natural Images, this at first sight may have an Air of Ridicule; but I Will
venture to say there is nothing ridiculous in the Thing itself, nor mean and
low in Homer's manner of expressing it: And I believe the same of this
Translation, though I have not softened or abated of the Idea they are so
offended with.

IX.
VERSE 209. Pale lies my Friend, etc.] It is in the Greek, lies extended in my
Tent with his Face turned toward the Door, (...), that is to say, as the
Scholiast has explained it, having his Feet turned toward the Door. For it was
thus the Greeks placed their Dead in the Porches of their Houses, as likewise
in Italy, In portam rigidos calces extendit.
Persius. -- Recepitque ad limina gressum
Corpus ubi exanimi positum Pallantis Acetes
Servabat Senior --
Thus we are told by Suetonius, of the Body of Augustus -- Equester ordo
suscepit, urbique intulit, atque in Vestibulo domus collocavit.

X.
VERSE 221. Though vast the Heaps, etc.] Ulysses's Expression in the Original is
very remarkable; he calls (...), Straw or Chaff, such as are killed in the
Battle; and he calls (...), the Crop, such as make their Escape. This is very
conformable to the Language of Holy Scripture, wherein those who perish are
called Chaff, and those who are saved are called Corn. Dacier.

XI.
VERSE 237. -- None shall dare
Expect a second Summons to the War.]
This is very artful; Ulysses, to prevail upon Achilles to let the Troops take
Repast, and yet in some sort to second his impatience, gives with the same
Breath Orders for Battle, by commanding the Troops to march, and expect no
farther Orders. Thus though the Troops go to take Repast, it looks as if they do
not lose a moment's time, but are going to put themselves in Array of Battle.
Dacier.

XII.
VERSE 280. Rolls the Victim into the Main.] For it was not lawful to eat the
Flesh of the Victims, that were sacrificed in Confirmation of Oaths; such were
Victims of Malediction. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 281. Hear ye Greeks, etc.] Achilles, to let them see that he is entirely
appeased, justifies Agamemnon himself, and enters into the Reasons with which
that Prince had colored his Fault. But in that Justification he perfectly well
preserves his Character, and illustrates the Advantage he has over that King
who offended him. Dacier.

XIV.
VERSE 303, etc. The Lamentation of Briseis over Patroclus.] This Speech (says
Dionysius of Halicarnassus) is not without its Artifice: While Briseis seems
only to be deploring Patroclus, she represents to Achilles who stands by, the
Breach of the Promises he had made her, and upbraids him with the Neglect he
had been guilty of in resigning her up to Agamemnon. He adds, that Achilles
hereupon acknowledges the Justice of her Complaint, and makes answer that his
Promises should be performed: It was a slip in that great Critick's Memory, for
the Verse he cites is not in this Part of the Author, [(...), Part 2.]

XV.
VERSE 315. Achilles Care you promised, etc.] In these Days when our Manners
are so different from those of the Ancients, and we see none of those dismal
Catastrophes which laid whole Kingdoms waste and subjected Princesses and
Queens to the Power of the Conqueror; it will perhaps seem astonishing, that a
Princess of Briseis's Birth, the very Day that her Father, Brothers, and
Husband were killed by Achilles, should suffer her self to be comforted and
even flattered with the Hopes of becoming the Spouse of their Murderer. But
such were the Manners of those Times, as ancient History testifies: And a Poet
represents them as they were; But if there was a Necessary for justifying them,
it might be said that Slavery was at that time so terrible, that in truth a
Princess like Briseis was pardonable, to choose rather to become Achilles's Wife
than his Slave. Dacier.

XVI.
VERSE 322. Nor mourned Patroclus Fortunes but their own.] Homer adds this
Touch, to heighten the Character of Briseis, and to show the Difference there
was between her and the other Captives. Briseis, as a well-born Princess,
really bewailed Patroclus out of Gratitude; but the others, by pretending to
bewail him, wept only out of Interest. Dacier.

XVII.
VERSE 335. Thou too Patroclus, etc.] This Lamentation is finely introduced:
While the Generals are persuading him to take some Refreshment, it naturally
awakens in his Mind the Remembrance of Patroclus, who had so often brought him
Food every Morning before they went to Battle: This is very natural, and
admirably well conceals the Art of drawing the Subject of his Discourse from
the things that present themselves. Spondanus.

XVIII.
VERSE 351. I hoped, Patroclus might survive, etc.] Patroclu was young, and
Achilles who had but a short time to lives hoped that after his Death his dear
Friend would be as a Father to his Son, and put him into the Possession of his
Kingdom: Neoptolemus would in Patroclus find Peleus and Achilles; whereas when
Patroclus was dead, he must be an Orphan indeed. Homer is particularly
admirable for the Sentiments, and always follows Nature. Dacier.

XIX.
VERSE 384. So Helms succeeding Helms, so Shields from Shields
Catch the quick Beams, and brighten all the Fields.]
It is probable the Reader may think the Words, shining, splendid, and others
derived from the Luster of Arms, too frequent in these Books. My Author is to
answer for it, but it may be alleged in his Excuse, that when it was the
Custom for every Soldier to serve in Armor, and when those Arms were of Brass
before the Use of Iron became common, these Image of Luster were less
avoidable, and more necessarily frequent in Descriptions of this nature.

XX.
VERSE 398. Achilles arming himself, etc.] There is a wonderful Pomp in this
Description of Achilles's arming himself; every Reader without being pointed to
it, will see the extreme Grandeur of all these Images; But what is particular,
is, in what a noble Scale they rise one above another, and how the Hero is set
still in a stronger Point of Light than before; till he is at last in a manner
covered over with Glories: He is at first likened to the Moonlight, then to the
Flames of a Beacon, then to a Comet, and lastly to the Sun it self.

XXI.
VERSE 450. Then (strange to tell! so Juno willed) he broke
Eternal Silence, and portentous spoke.]
It is remarked, in excuse of this extravagant Fiction of a Horse speaking,
that Homer was authorized herein by Fable, Tradition, and History. Livy makes
mention of two Oxen that spoke on different occasions, and recites the Speech
of one, which was, Roma cave tibi. Pliny tells us, these Animals were
particularly gifted this way, l. 8. c. 45. Est frequens in prodigiis priscorum,
bovem locutum. Besides Homer had prepared us for expecting something miraculous
from these Horses of Achilles, by representing them to be immortal. We have
seen 'em already sensible, and weeping at the Death of Patroclus: And we must
add to all this, that a Goddess is concerned in working this Wonder: It is Juno
that does it. Oppian alludes to this in a beautiful Passage of his first Book:
Not having the Original by me, I shall quote (what I believe is no less
beautiful) Mr. Fenton's Translation of it. Of all the prone Creation, none
display
A friendlier Sense of Man's superior Sway:
Some in the silent Pomp of Grief complain,
For the brave Chief, by doom of Battle slain:
And when young Peleus in his rapid Car
Rushed on, to rouse the Thunder of the War,
With human Voice inspired, his Steed deplored
The Fate impending dreadful over his Lord.
Cyneg. lib. 1.

Spondanus and Dacier fail not to bring up Balaam's Ass on this Occasion. But
methinks the Commentators are at too much pains to discharge the Poet from the
Imputation of extravagant Fiction, by accounting for Wonders of this kind: I am
afraid, that next to the Extravagance of inventing them, is that of
endeavoring to reconcile such Fictions to Probability. Would not one general
Answer do better, to say once for all, that the abovecited Authors lived in the
Age of Wonders: The Taste of the World has been generally turned to the
Miraculous; Wonders were what the People would have, and what not only the
Poets, but the Priests, gave 'em.

XXII.
VERSE 464. Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
His fate-ful Voice --
The Poet had offended against Probability if he had made Juno take away the
Voice, for Juno (which signifies the Air) is the cause of the Voice. Besides,
the Poet was willing to intimate that the Privation of the Voice is a thing so
dismal and melancholy, that none but the Furies can take upon them so cruel an
Employment. Eustathius.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Battle of the Gods, and the Acts of Achilles.
JUPITER upon Achilles's returning to the Battle, calls a Council of the Gods,
and permits them to assist either Party. The Terrors of the Combat described,
when the Deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Aeneas to meet Achilles. After
a long Conversation, these two Heroes encounter; but Aeneas is preserved by the
Assistance of Neptune. Achilles falls upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon
the point of killing Hector, but Apollo conveys him away in a Cloud. Achilles
pursues the Trojans with a great Slaughter.

The same Day continues. The Scene is in the Field before Troy.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THUS round Pelides breathing and Blood,
Greece sheathed in Arms, beside her Vessels stood;
While near impending from a neighboring Height,
Troy's black Battalions wait the Shock of Fight.
Then Jove to Themis gives Command, to call
The Gods to Council in the starry Hall:
Swift over Olympus hundred Hills she flies,
And summons all the Senate of the Skies.
These shining on, in long Procession come
To Joves eternal Adamantine Dome.
Not one was absent; not a Rural Power
That haunts the verdant Gloom, or rosy Bower,
Each fair-hair'd Dryad of the shady Wood,
Each azure Sister of the silver Flood;
All but old Ocean, hoary Sire! who keeps
His ancient Seat beneath the sacred Deeps.
On Marble Thrones with lucid Columns crowned,
(The Work of Vulcan) sat the Gods around.
Even Neptune.
He whose Trident sways the watery Reign,
Heard the loud Summons, and forsook the Main,
Assumed his Throne amid the bright Abodes,
And questioned thus the Sire of Men and Gods.
What moves the God who Heaven and Earth commands,
And grasps the Thunder in his awful Hands,
Thus to convene the whole aetherial State?
Is Greece and Troy the Subject in debate?
Already met, the lowering Hosts appear,
And Death stands ardent on the Edge of War.
It Is true (the Cloud-compelling Power replies)
This Day, we call the Council of the Skies
In Care of human Race; even Jove's own Eye
Sees with Regret unhappy Mortals die.
Far on Olympus' Top in secret State
Ourself will sit, and see the Hand of Fate
Work out our Will. Celestial Powers! descend,
And as your Minds direct, your Succor lend
To either Host. Troy soon must lie overthrown,
If uncontrolled Achilles fights alone:
Their Troops but lately durst not meet his Eyes;
What can they now, if in his Rage he rise?
Assist them Gods! or Ilion's sacred Wall
May fall this Day, though Fate forbids the Fall.
He said, and fired their heavenly Breasts with Rage:
On adverse Parts the warring Gods engage.
Heavens awful Queen; and He whose azure Round
Girds the vast Globe; the Maid in Arms renowned;
Hermes, of profitable Arts the Sire,
And Vulcan, the black Sovereign of the Fire:
These to the Fleet repair with instant Flight,
The Vessels tremble as the Gods alight.
In aid of Troy, Latona, Phoebus came,
Mars fiery-helm'd, the Laughter-loving Dame,
Xanthus whose Streams in golden Currents flow,
And the chaste Huntress of the silver Bow.
Ever yet the Gods their various Aid employ,
Each Argive Bosom swelled with manly Joy,
While great Achilles, (Terror of the Plain)
Long lost to Battle, shone in Arms again.
Dreadful he stood in Front of all his Host;
Pale Troy beheld, and seemed already lost;
Her bravest Heroes pant with inward Fear,
And trembling see another God of War.
But when the Powers descending swelled the Fight,
Then Tumult rose; fierce Rage and pale Affright
Varied each Face; then Discord sounds Alarms,
Earth echoes, and the Nations rush to Arms.
Now through the trembling Shores Minerva calls.
And now she thunders from the Grecian Walls.
Mars hovering over his Troy, his Terror shrouds
In gloomy Tempests, and a Night of Clouds:
Now through each Trojan Heart he Fury pours
With Voice divine from Ilion's topmost Towr's,
Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous * Hill;
The Mountain shook, the rapid Stream stood still.
Above, the Sire of Gods his Thunder rolls,
And Peals on Peals redoubled rend the Poles.
Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid Ground,
The Forests wave, the Mountains nod around;
Through all their Summits tremble Ida's Woods,
And from their Sources boil her hundred Floods.
Troy's Turrets totter on the rocking Plain;
And the tossed Navies beat the heaving Main.
Deep in the dismal Regions of the Dead,
The Infernal Monarch reared his horrid Head,
Leaped from his Throne, lest Neptunes Arm should lay
His dark Dominions open to the Day,
And pour in Light on Pluto's drear Abodes,
Abhorred by Men, and dreadful even to Gods.
Such War The Immortals wage: Such Horrors rend
The World's vast Concave, when the Gods contend.
First silver-shafted Phoebus took the Plain
Against blue Neptune, Monarch of the Main:
The God of Arms his Giant Bulk displayed,
Opposed to Pallas, War's triumphant Maid.
Against Latona marched the Son of May;
The quiver'd Dian, Sister of the Day,
(Her golden Arrows sounding at her side)
Saturnia, Majesty of Heaven, defied.
With fiery Vulcan last in Battle stands
The sacred Flood that rolls on golden Sands;
Xanthus his Name with those of heavenly Birth,
But called Scamander by the Sons of Earth.
While thus the Gods in various League engage,
Achilles glowed with more than mortal Rage:
Hector he sought; in search of Hector turned
His Eyes around, for Hector only burned;
And burst like Lightning through the Ranks, and vowed
To glut the God of Battles with his Blood.
Aeneas was the first who dared to stay;
Apollo wedged him in the Warrior's Way,
But swelled his Bosom with undaunted Might,
Half-forc'd, and half-persuaded to the Fight.
Like young Lycaon, of the Royal Line,
In Voice and Aspect, seemed the Power divine;
And bade the Chief reflect, how late with Scorn
In distant Threats he braved the Goddess-born.
Then thus the Hero of Anchises' Strain.
To meet Pelides you persuade in vain:
Already have I met, nor void of Fear
Observed the Fury of his flying Spear;
From Ida's Woods he chased us to the Field,
Our Force he scattered, and our Herds he killed;
Lyrnessus, Pedasus in Ashes lay;
But ( Jove assisting) I survived the Day.
Else had I sunk oppressed in fatal Fight,
By fierce Achilles and Minerva's Might.
Where'ere he moved, the Goddess shone before,
And bathed his brazen Lance in hostile Gore.
What mortal Man Achilles can sustain?
The Immortals guard him through the dreadful Plain,
And suffer not his Dart to fall in vain.
Were God my Aid, this Arm should check his Power,
Though strong in Battle as a brazen Tower.
To whom the Son of Jove, That God implore,
And be, what great Achilles was before.
From heavenly Venus thou deriv'st thy Strain,
And he, but from a Sister of the Main;
An aged Sea-God, Father of his Line,
But Jove himself the sacred Source of thine.
Then lift thy Weapon for a noble Blow,
Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal Foe.
This said, and Spirit breathed into his Breast,
Through the thick Troops th'embolden'd Hero pressed:
His venurous Act the white-arm'd Queen surveyed,
And thus, assembling all the Powers, she said.
Behold an Action, Gods! that claims your Care,
Lo great Aeneas rushing to the War;
Against Pelides he directs his Course,
Phoebus impells, and Phoebus gives him Force.
Restrain his bold Career; at least, to attend
Our favored Hero, let some Power descend.
To guard his Life, and add to his Renown,
We, the great Armament of Heaven came down.
Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
That spun so short his Life's illustrious Line:
But lest some adverse God now cross his Way,
Give him to know, what Powers assist this Day:
For how shall Mortal stand the dire Alarms,
When Heavens refulgent Host appear in Arms?
Thus she, and thus the God whose Force can make
The solid Globe's eternal Basis shake.
Against the Might of Man, so feeble known,
Why should celestial Powers exert their own?
Suffice, from yonder Mount to view the Scene;
And leave to War the Fates of mortal Men.
But if the Armipotent, or God of Light,
Obstruct Achilles, or commence the Fight,
Thence on the Gods of Troy we swift descend:
Full soon, I doubt not, shall the Conflict end,
And these, in Ruin and Confusion hurled,
Yield to our conquering Arms the lower World.
Thus having said, the Tyrant of the Sea
Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the Way.
Advanced upon the Field there stood a Mound
Of Earth congested, walled, and trench'd around;
In elder Times to guard Alcides made,
(The Work of Trojans, with Minerva's Aid)
What-time, a vengeful Monster of the Main
Swept the wide Shore, and drove him to the Plain.
Here Neptune, and the Gods of Greece repair,
With Clouds encompassed, and a Veil of Air:
The adverse Powers, around Apollo laid,
Crown the fair Hills that silver Simois shade.
In Circle close each heavenly Party sat,
Intent to form the future Scheme of Fate;
But mix not yet in Fight, though Jove on high
Gives the loud signal, and the Heavens reply.
Meanwhile the rushing Armies hide the Ground;
The trampled Center yields a hollow Sound:
Steeds cased in Mail, and Chiefs in Armor bright,
The gleamy Champain glows with brazen Light.
Amid both Hosts (a dreadful Space) appear
There, great Achilles, bold Aeneas here.
With towering Strides Aeneas first advanced;
The nodding Plumage on his Helmet danced,
Spread over his Breast the fencing Shield he bore,
And, as he moved, his Javelin flamed before.
Not so Pelides; furious to engage,
He rushed impetuous. Such the Lion's Rage,
Who viewing first his Foes with scornful Eyes,
Though all in Arms the peopled City rise,
Stalks careless on, with unregarding Pride;
Till at the length, by some brave Youth defied,
To His bold Spear the Savage turns alone,
He murmurs Fury with an hollow Groan;
He grins, he foams, he rolls his Eyes around;
Lashed by his Tail his heaving sides resound;
He calls up all his Rage; he grinds his Teeth,
Resolved on Vengeance, or resolved on Death.
So fierce Achilles on Aeneas flies;
So stands Aeneas, and his Force defies.
Ever yet the stern Encounter joined, begun
The Seed of Thetis thus to Venus' Son.
Why comes Aeneas through the Ranks so far?
Seeks he to meet Achilles' Arm in War,
In hope the Realms of Priam to enjoy,
And prove his Merits to the Throne of Troy?
Grant that beneath thy Lance Achilles dies,
The partial Monarch may refuse the Prize;
Sons he has many, those thy Pride may quell;
And it is his Fault to love those Sons too well.
Or, in reward of thy victorious Hand,
Has Troy proposed some spacious Tract of Land?
An ample Forest, or a fair Domain,
Of Hills for Vines, and Arable for Grain?
Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy Lot:
But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
Once (as I think) you saw this brandished Spear
And then the great Aeneas seemed to fear.
With hearty Haste from Ida's Mount he fled,
Nor, till he reached Lyrnessus, turned his Head.
Her lofty Walls not long our Progress stayed;
Those, Pallas, Jove, and We, in Ruins laid:
In Grecian Chains her captive Race were cast;
It Is true, the great Aeneas fled too fast.
Defrauded of my Conquest once before,
What then I lost, the Gods this Day restore.
Go; while thou may, avoid the threatened Fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.
To this Anchises' Son. Such Words employ
To one that fears thee, some unwarlike Boy:
Such we disdain; the best may be defied
With mean Reproaches, and unmanly Pride:
Unworthy the high Race from which we came,
Proclaimed so loudly by the Voice of Fame,
Each from illustrious Fathers draws his Line;
Each Goddess-born; half human, half divine.
Thetis' this Day, or Venus' Offspring dies,
And Tears shall trickle from celestial Eyes:
For when two Heroes, thus derived, contend,
It Is not in Words the glorious strife can end.
If yet thou farther seek to learn my Birth
(A Tale resounded through the spacious Earth)
Hear how the glorious Origin we prove
From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
Dardania's Walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
(The City since of many-languag'd Men)
Was not. The Natives were content to till
The shady Foot of Ida's Fount-ful Hill.
From Dardanus, great Erichthonius springs,
The richest, once, of Asia's wealthy Kings;
Three thousand Mares his spacious Pastures bred,
Three thousand Foals beside their Mothers fed.
Boreas, enamored of the sprightly Train,
Concealed his Godhead in a flowing Mane,
With Voice dissembled to his Loves he neigh'd,
And cours'd the dappled Beauties over the Mead:
Hence sprung twelve others of unrivaled Kind,
Swift as their Mother Mares, and Father Wind.
These lightly skimming, when they swept the Plain,
Nor plied the Grass, nor bent the tender Grain;
And when along the level Seas they flew,
Scarce on the Surface curled the briny Dew.
Such Erichthonius was: From him there came
The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan Name.
Three Sons renowned adorned his nuptial Bed,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
Whom Heaven enamored snatched to upper Air,
To bear the Cup of Jove (Aetherial Guest)
The Grace and Glory of th'Ambrosial Feast.
The two remaining Sons the Line divide:
First rose Laomedon from Ilus' Side;
From him Tithonus, now in Cares grown old,
And Priam, (blessed with Hector, brave and bold:)
Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour'd Pair;
And Hicetaon, Thunderbolt of War.
From great Assaracus sprung Capys, He
Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
Such is our Race: It Is Fortune gives us Birth,
But Jove alone endues the Soul with Worth:
He, Source of Power and Might! with boundless Sway,
All human Courage, gives, or takes away.
Long in the Field of Words we may contend,
Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
Armed or with Truth or Falsehood, Right or Wrong,
So voluble a Weapon is the Tongue;
Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
For every Man has equal Strength to rail:
Women alone, when in the Streets they jar,
Perhaps excel us in this wordy War;
Like us they stand, encompassed with the Crowd,
And vent their Anger, impotent and loud.
Cease then -- Our Business in the Field of Fight
Is not to question, but to prove our Might.
To all those Insults thou have offered here,
Receive this Answer: It Is my flying Spear.
He spoke. With all his Force the Javelin flung,
Fixed deep, and loudly in the Buckler rung.
Far on his out-stretch'd Arm, Pelides held
(To meet the thundering Lance) his dreadful Shield,
That trembled as it stuck; nor void of Fear
Saw, ever it fell, th'immeasurable Spear.
His Fears were vain; impenetrable Charms
Secured the Temper of th'Aetherial Arms.
Through two strong Plates the Point its Passage held,
But stopped, and rested, by the third repelled;
Five Plates of various Metal, various Mold,
Composed the Shield; of Brass each outward Fold,
Of Tin each inward, and the middle Gold:
There stuck the Lance. Then rising ever he threw,
The forceful Spear of great Achilles flew,
And pierced the Dardan Shield's extremest Bound,
Where the shrill Brass returned a sharper Sound:
Through the thin Verge the Pelian Weapon glides,
And the slight Covering of expanded Hydes.
Aeneas his contracted Body bends,
And over him high the riven Targe extends,
Sees, through its parting Plates, the upper Air,
And at his Back perceives the quivering Spear:
A Fate so near him, chills his Soul with Fright,
And swims before his Eyes the many-colour'd Light.
Achilles, rushing in with dreadful Cries,
Draws his broad Blade, and at Aeneas flies:
Aeneas rouzing as the Foe came on,
(With Force collected) heaves a mighty Stone:
A Mass enormous! which in modern Days
No two of Earth's degenerate Sons could raise
But Ocean's God, whose Earthquakes rock the Ground,
Saw the Distress, and moved the Powers around.
Lo! on the Brink of Fate Aeneas stands,
An instant Victim to Achilles Hands:
By Phoebus urged; but Phoebus has bestowed
His Aid in vain: The Man o'erpow'rs the God.
And can ye see this righteous Chief atone
With guiltless Blood, for Vices not his own?
To all the Gods his constant Vows were paid;
Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our Aid.
Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign
The future Father of the Dardan Line:
The first great Ancestor obtained his Grace,
And still his Love descends on all the Race.
For Priam now, and Priam's faithless Kind,
At length are odious to th'all-seeing Mind;
On great Aeneas shall devolve the Reign,
And Sons succeeding Sons, the lasting Line sustain.
The great Earth-shaker thus: To whom replies
The Imperial Goddess with the radiant Eyes.
Good as he is, to immolate or spare
The Dardan Prince, O Neptune, be thy Care;
Pallas and I, by all that Gods can bind,
Have sworn Destruction to the Trojan Kind;
Not even an Instant to protract their Fate,
Or save one Member of the sinking State;
Till her last Flame be quenched with her last Gore,
And even her crumbling Ruins are no more.
The King of Ocean to the Fight descends,
Through all the whistling Darts his Course he bends,
Swift interposed between the Warriors flies,
And casts thick Darkness over Achilles' Eyes.
From great Aeneas' Shield the Spear he drew,
And at its Master's Feet the Weapon threw.
That done, with Force divine, he snatched on high
The Dardan Prince, and bore him through the Sky,
Smooth-gliding without Step, above the Heads,
Of warring Heroes, and of bounding Steeds.
Till at the Battel's utmost Verge they light,
Where the slow Caucons close the Rear of Fight.
The Godhead there (his heavenly Form confessed)
With Words like these the panting Chief addressed.
What Power, O Prince, with Force inferior far,
Urged thee to meet Achilles' Arm in War?
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy Doom,
Defrauding Fate of all thy Fame to come.
But when the Day decreed (for come it must)
Shall lay this dreadful Hero in the Dust,
Let then the Furies of that Arm be known,
Secure, no Grecian Force transcends thy own.
With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
Then from Achilles chased the Mist away:
Sudden, returning with the Stream of Light,
The Scene of War came rushing on his Sight.
Then thus, amazed: What Wonders strike my Mind!
My Spear, that parted on the Wings of Wind,
Laid here before me! and the Dardan Lord
That fell this instant, vanished from my Sword!
I thought alone with Mortals to contend,
But Powers celestial sure this Foe defend.
Great as he is, our Arm he scarce will try,
Content for once, with all his Gods, to fly.
Now then let others bleed -- This said, aloud
He vents his Fury, and inflames the Crowd.
O Greeks (he cries, and every Rank alarms)
Join Battle, Man to Man, and Arms to Arms!
It Is not in me, though favored by the Sky,
To mow whole Troops, and make whole Armies fly:
No God can singly such a Host engage,
Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva's Rage.
But whatsoever Achilles can inspire,
Whatever of active Force, or acting Fire,
Whatever this Heart can prompt, or Hand obey;
All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to Day.
Through yon wide Host this Arm shall scatter Fear,
And thin the Squadrons with my single Spear.
He said: Nor less elate with martial Joy,
The god-like Hector warmed the Troops of Troy.
Trojans to War! Think Hector leads you on;
Nor dread the Vaunts of Peleus' haughty Son;
Deeds must decide our Fate. Even those with Words
Insult the Brave, who tremble at their Swords:
The weakest Atheist-Wretch all Heaven defies,
But shrinks and shudders, when the Thunder flies.
Nor from yon' Boaster shall your Chief retire,
Not though his Heart were Steel, his Hands were Fire;
That Fire, that Steel, your Hector should withstand,
And brave that vengeful Heart, that dreadful Hand.
Thus, breathing Rage through all the Hero said;
A Wood of Lances rises round his Head,
Clamors on Clamors tempest all the Air,
They join, they throng, they thicken to the War.
But Phoebus warns him from high Heaven, to shun
The single Fight with Thetis' god-like Son;
More safe to combat in the mingled Band,
Nor tempt too near the Terrors of his Hand.
He hears, obedient to the God of Light,
And plunged within the Ranks, awaits the Fight.
Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the Skies,
On Troy's whole Force with boundless Fury flies.
First falls Iphytion, at his Army's Head;
Brave was the Chief, and brave the Host he led;
From great Otrynteus he derived his Blood,
His Mother was a Nais of the Flood;
Beneath the Shades of Tmolus, crowned with Snow,
From Hyde's Walls, he ruled the Lands below.
Fierce as he springs, the Sword his Head divides;
The parted Visage falls on equal Sides:
With loud-resounding Arms he strikes the Plain;
While thus Achilles glories over the Slain.
Lie there Otryntides! the Trojan Earth
Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy Birth;
Those beauteous Fields where Hyllus' Waves are rolled,
And plenteous Hermus swells with Tides of Gold,
Are thine no more -- The Insulting Hero said,
And left him sleeping in Eternal Shade.
The rolling Wheels of Greece the Body tore,
And dashed their Axles with no vulgar Gore.
Demoleon next, Antenor's Offspring, laid
Breathless in Dust, the Price of Rashness paid.
The Impatient Steel with full-descending Sway
Forced through his brazen Helm its furious Way,
Resistless drove the battered Skull before,
And dashed and mingled all the Brains with Gore.
This sees Hippodamas, and seized with Fright,
Deserts his Chariot for a swifter Flight:
The Lance arrests him: an ignoble Wound
The panting Trojan rivets to the Ground.
He groans away his Soul: Not louder roars
At Neptunes Shrine on Helice's high Shores
The Victim Bull; the Rocks rebellow round,
And Ocean listens to the grateful Sound.
Then fell on Polydore his vengeful Rage,
The youngest Hope of Priam's stooping Age:
(Whose Feet for Swiftness in the Race surpast)
Of all his Sons, the dearest, and the last.
To the forbidden Field he takes his Flight
In the first Folly of a youthful Knight,
To vaunt his Swiftness, wheels around the Plain,
But vaunts not long, with all his Swiftness slain.
Struck where the crossing Belts unite behind,
And golden Rings the double Back-plate joined:
Forth through the Navel burst the thrilling Steel;
And on his Knees with piercing Shrieks he fell;
The rushing Entrails poured upon the Ground
His Hands collect; and Darkness wraps him round.
When Hector viewed, all ghastly in his Gore
Thus sadly slain, the unhappy Polydore;
A Cloud of Sorrow overcast his Sight,
His Soul no longer brook'd the distant Fight,
Full in Achilles' dreadful Front he came,
And shook his Javelin like a waving Flame.
The Son of Peleus sees, with Joy possessed,
His Heart high-bounding in his rising Breast:
And, lo! the Man, on whom black Fates attend;
The Man, that slew Achilles, in his Friend!
No more shall Hector's and Pelides' Spear
Turn from each other in the Walks of War --
Then with revengeful Eyes he scanned him over:
Come, and receive thy Fate! He spoke no more.
Hector, undaunted, thus. Such Words employ
To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike Boy:
Such we could give, defying and defied,
Mean Intercourse of Obloquy and Pride!
I know thy Force to mine superior far;
But Heaven alone confers Success in War:
Mean as I am, the Gods may guide my Dart,
And give it Entrance in a braver Heart.
Then parts the Lance: But Pallas' heavenly Breath,
Far from Achilles wafts the winged Death:
The bidden Dart again to Hector flies,
And at the Feet of its great Master lies.
Achilles closes with his hated Foe,
His Heart and Eyes with flaming Fury glow:
But present to his Aid, Apollo shrouds
The favored Hero in a Veil of Clouds.
Thrice struck Pelides with indignant Heart,
Thrice in impassive Air he plunged the Dart:
The Spear a fourth time buried in the Cloud,
He foams with Fury, and exclaims aloud.
Wretch! Thou have escaped again. Once more thy Flight
Has saved thee, and the partial God of Light.
But long thou shall not thy just Fate withstand,
If any Power assist Achilles' Hand.
Fly then inglorious! But thy Flight this Day
Whole Hecatombs of Trojan Ghosts shall pay.
With that, he gluts his Rage on Numbers slain:
Then Dryops tumbled to th'ensanguin'd Plain,
Pierced through the Neck: He left him panting there,
And stopped Demuchus, great Philetor's Heir,
Gigantic Chief! Deep gash'd th'enormous Blade,
And for the Soul an ample Passage made.
Laogonus and Dardanus expire,
The valiant Sons of an unhappy Sire;
Both in one Instant from the Chariot hurled,
Sunk in one Instant to the nether World;
This Difference only their sad Fates afford,
That one the Spear destroyed, and one the Sword.
Nor less unpitied young Alastor bleeds;
In vain his Youth, in vain his Beauty pleads:
In vain he begs thee with a Suppliant's Moan,
To spare a Form, and Age so like thy own!
Unhappy Boy! no Prayer, no moving Art
Ever bent that fierce, inexorable Heart!
While yet he trembled at his Knees, and cried,
The ruthless Falchion opened his tender Side;
The panting Liver pours a Flood of Gore,
That drowns his Bosom, till he pants no more.
Through Mulius' Head then drove the impetuous Spear,
The Warrior falls, transfixed from Ear to Ear.
Thy Life Echeclus! next the Sword bereaves,
Deep through his Front the ponderous Falchion cleaves;
Warmed in the Brain the smoking Weapon lies,
The purple Death comes floating over his Eyes,
Then brave Deucalion died: The Dart was flung
Where the knit Nerves the plaint Elbow strung;
He dropped his Arm, an unassisting Weight,
And stood all impotent, expecting Fate:
Full on his Neck the falling Falchion sped,
From his broad Shoulders hewed his crested Head:
Forth from the Bone the spinal Marrow flies,
And sunk in Dust, the Corpse extended lies.
Rhigmus, whose Race from fruitful Thracia came,
(The Son of Pireus, an illustrious Name,)
Succeeds to Fate: The Spear his Belly rends;
Prone from his Car the thundering Chief descends,
The Squire who saw expiring on the Ground
His prostrate Master, rein'd the Steeds around;
His Back scarce turned, the Pelian Javelin gored;
And stretched the Servant over his dying Lord.
As when a Flame the winding Valley fills,
And runs on crackling Shrubs between the Hills;
Then over the Stubble up the Mountain flies,
Fires the high Woods, and blazes to the Skies,
This way and that, the spreading Torrent roars;
So sweeps the Hero through the wasted Shores;
Around him wide, immense Destruction pours,
And Earth is deluged with the sanguine Showers.
As with Autumnal Harvests covered over,
And thick bestrown, lies Ceres' sacred Floor,
When round and round with never-weary'd Pain,
The trampling Steers beat out th'unnumber'd Grain.
So the fierce Coursers, as the Chariot rolls,
Tread down whole Ranks, and crush out Hero's Souls.
Dashed from their Hoofs while over the Dead they fly,
Black bloody Drops the smoking Chariot die:
The spiky Wheels through Heaps of Carnage tore;
And thick the groaning Axles dropped with Gore.
High over the Scene of Death Achilles stood,
All grim with Dust, all horrible in Blood:
Yet still insatiate, still with Rage on flame;
Such is the Lust of never-dying Fame!
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twentieth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWENTIETH BOOK.
I.
VERSE 5. Then Jove to Themis gives Command, etc.] The Poet is now to bring his
Hero again into Action, and he introduces him with the utmost Pomp and
Grandeur: The Gods are assembled only upon this account, and Jupiter permits
several Deities to join with the Trojans, and hinder Achilles from overruling
Destiny itself.

The Circumstance of sending Themis to assemble the Gods is very beautiful; she
is the Goddess of Justice; the Trojans by the Rape of Helen, and by repeated
Perjuries having broken her Laws, she is the properest Messenger to summon a
Synod to bring them to punishment. Eustathius.

Proclus has given a farther Explanation of this. Themis or Justice (says he)
is made to assemble the Gods round Jupiter, because it is from him that all the
Powers of Nature take their Virtue, and receive their Orders; and Jupiter sends
them to the Relief of both Parties, to show that nothing falls out but by his
Permission, and that neither Angels, nor Men, nor the Elements, act but
according to the Power which is given them.

II.
VERSE 15. All but old Ocean.] Eustathius gives two Reasons why Oceanus was
absent from this Assembly: The one is because he is fabled to be the Original
of all the Gods, and it would have been a piece of Indecency for him to see the
Deities, who were all his Descendents, war upon one another by joining adverse
Parties: The other Reason he draws from the Allegory of Oceanus, which
signifies the Element of Water, and consequently the whole Element could not
ascend into the Ether; But whereas Neptune, the Rivers, and the Fountains are
said to have been present, this is no way impossible, if we consider it in an
allegorical Sense, which implies, that the Rivers, Seas, and Fountains supply
the Air with Vapors, and by that means ascend into the Ether.

III.
VERSE 35. Celestial Powers descend,
And as your Minds direct, your Succor lend To either Host -- ]
Eustathius informs us, that the Ancients were very much divided upon this
Passage of Homer. Some have criticized it, and others have answered their
Criticism; but he reports nothing more than the Objection, without transmitting
the Answer to us. Those who condemned Homer, said Jupiter was for the Trojans;
he saw the Greeks were the strongest, so permitted the Gods to declare
themselves and go to the Battle. But therein that God is deceived, and does not
gain his Point; for the Gods who favor the Greeks being stronger than those
who favor the Trojans, the Greeks will still have the same Advantage. I do not
know what Answer the Partisans of Homer made, but for my part, I think this
Objection is more ingenious than solid. Jupiter does not pretend that the
Trojans should be stronger than the Greeks, he has only a mind that the Decree
of Destiny should be executed. Destiny had refused to Achilles the Glory of
taking Troy, but if Achilles fights singly against the Trojans, he is capable
of forcing Destiny; as Homer has already elsewhere said, that there had been
brave Men who had done so. Whereas if the Gods took part, tho those who
followed the Grecians were stronger than those who were for the Trojans, the
latter would however be strong enough to support Destiny, and to hinder
Achilles from making himself Master of Troy: This was Jupiter's sole View. Thus
is this Passage far from being blameable, it is on the contrary very beautiful,
and infinitely glorious for Achilles. Dacier.

IV.
VERSE 41. -- Or Ilion 's sacred Wall
May fall this Day, though Fate forbid the Fall.]
Mons. de la Motte criticizes on this Passage, as thinking it absurd and
contradictory to Homer's own System, to imagine, that what Fate had ordained
should not come to pass. Jupiter here seems to fear that Troy will be taken
this very Day in spite of Destiny, (...). M. Boivin answers, that the
Explication hereof depends wholly upon the Principles of the ancient Pagan
Theology and their Doctrine concerning Fate. It is certain, according to Homer
and Virgil, that which Destiny had decreed did not constantly happen in the
precise Time marked by Destiny, the fatal Moment was not to be retarded, but
might be hastened: For example, that of the Death of Dido was advanced by the
Blow she gave herself; her Hour was not then come. -- Nec fato, merita nec
morte peribat,
Sed misera ante diem --
Every violent Death was accounted (...), that is, before the fated Time, or
(which is the same thing) against the natural Order, turbato mortalitatis
ordine, as the Romans expressed it. And the same might be said of any
Misfortunes which Men drew upon themselves by their own ill Conduct. (See the
37th Note on lib. 16.) In a word, it must be allowed that it was not easy, in
the Pagan Religion, to form the juses Ideas upon a Doctrine so difficult to be
cleared; and upon which it is no great wonder if a Poet should not always be
perfectly consistent with himself, when it has puzzel'd such a Number of
Divines and Philosophers.

V.
VERSE 44. On adverse Parts the warring Gods engage,
Heavens awful Queen, etc.]
Eusahius has a very curious Remark upon this Division of the Gods in Homer,
which M. Dacier has entirely borrowed (as indeed no Commentator ever borrowed
more, or acknowledged less, than she has every where done from Eustathius.)
This Division, says he, is not made at random, but founded upon very solid
Reasons, drawn from the Nature of those two Nations. He places on the Side of
the Greeks all the Gods who preside over Arts and Sciences, to signify how much
in that Respect the Greeks excelled all other Nations. Juno, Pallas, Neptune,
Mercury and Vulcan are for the Greeks; Juno, not only as the Goddess who
presides over Marriage, and who is concerned to revenge an Injury done to the
nuptial Bed, but likewise as the Goddess who represents Monarchical Government,
which was better established in Greece than any where else; Pallas, because
being the Goddess of War and Wisdom, she ought to assist those who are wronged;
besides the Greeks understood the Art of War better than the Barbarians;
Neptune, because he was an Enemy to the Trojans upon account of Laomedon's
Persidiousness, and because most of the Greeks being come from the Islands or
Peninsula's they were in some sort his Subjects; Mercury, because he is a God
who presides over Stratagems of War, and because Troy was taken by that of the
wooden Horse; and lastly Vulcan, as the declared Enemy of Mars and of all
Adulterers, and as the Father of Arts.

VI.
VERSE 52. Mars, fiery-helm'd, the Laughter loving Dame.] The Reasons why Mars
and Venus engage for the Trojans are very obvious; the Point in hand was to
favor Ravishers and Debauchees. But the same Reason, you will say, does not
serve for Apollo, Diana and Latona. It is urged that Apollo is for the Trojans,
because of the Darts and Arrows which were the principal Strength of the
Barbarians; and Diana, because she presided over Dancing, and those Barbarians
were great Dancers; and Latona, as influenced by her Children. Xanthus being a
Trojan River is interested for his Country. Eustathius.

VII.
VERSE 75. Above the Sire of Gods, etc.] "The Images (says Longinus) which
Homer gives of the Combat of the Gods, have in 'em something prodigiously
great and magnificent. We see in these Verses, the Earth opened to its very
Center, Hell ready to disclose itself, the whole Machine of the World upon the
Point to be destroyed and overturned: To show that in such a Conflict, Heaven
and Hell, all Things mortal and immortal, the whole Creation in short was
engaged in this Battle, and all the Extent of Nature in Danger." Non secus ac
si qua penitus vi terra dehiscens
Infernas reseret Seeds and Regna recludat
Pallida, Diis invisa, superque immane barathrum
Cernatur, trepidentque immisso lumine Manes.
Virgil.

Madam Dacier rightly observes that this Copy is inferior to the Original on
this account, that Virgil has made a Comparison of that which Homer made an
Action. This occasions an infinite Difference, which is easy to be perceived.

One may compare with this noble Passage of Homer, the Battle of the Gods and
Giants in Hesiod's Theogony, which is one of the sublimest Parts of that
Author; and Milton's Battle of the Angels in the sixth Book: The Elevation, and
Enthusiasm of our great Countryman seems owing to this Original.

VIII.
VERSE 91. First silver shafted Phoebus took the Plain, etc.] With what Art
does the Poet engage the Gods in this Conflict! Neptune opposes Apollo, which
implies that Things moist and dry are in continual Discord: Pallas fights with
Mars, which signifies that Rashness and Wisdom always disagree: Juno is against
Diana, that is, nothing more differs from a Marriage State, than Celibacy:
Vulcan engages Xanthus, that is, Fire and Water are in perpetual Variance. Thus
we have a fine Allegory concealed under the Veil of excellent Poetry, and the
Reader receives a double Satisfaction at the same time from beautiful Verses,
and an instructive Moral. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 119. Already have I met, etc.] Eustathius remarks that the Poet lets no
Opportunity pass of inserting into his Poem the Actions that preceded the tenth
Year of the War, especially the Actions of Achilles the Hero of it. In this
place he brings in Aeneas extolling the Bravery of his Enemy and confessing
himself to have formerly been vanquished by him: At the same time he preserves
a piece of ancient History by inserting into the Poem the Hero's Conquest of
Pedasus and Lyrnessus.

X.
VERSE 121. From Ida 's Woods he chased us --
But Jove assisting I survived.]
It is remarkable that Aeneas owed his Safety to his Flight from Achilles, but
it may seem strange that Achilles who was so famed for his Swiftness, should
not be able to overtake him, even with Minerva for his Guide. Eustathius
answers, that this might proceed from the better Knowledge Aeneas might have of
the Ways and Defiles: Achilles being a Stranger, and Aeneas having long kept
his Father's Flocks in those Parts.

He farther observes, that the Word (...) discovers that it was in the Night
that Achilles pursued Aeneas.

XI.
VERSE 174. Advanced upon the Field there stood a Mound, etc.] It may not be
unnecessary to explain this Passage to make it understood by the Reader: The
Poet is very short in the Description, as supposing the Fact already known, and
hastens to the Combat between Achilles and Aeneas. This is very judicious in
Homer not to dwell on a piece of History that had no relation to his Action,
when he has raised the Reader's Expectation by so pompous an Introduction, and
made the Gods themselves his Spectators.

The Story is as follows. Laomedon having defrauded Neptune of the Reward he
promised him for the building the Walls of Troy, Neptune sent a monstrous
Whale, to which Laomedon exposed his Daughter Hesione: But Hercules having
undertaken to destroy the Monster, the Trojans raised an Intrenchment to defend
Hercules from his Pursuit: This being a remarkable piece of Conduct in the
Trojans, it gave occasion to the Poet to adorn a plain Narration with Fiction
by ascribing the Work to Pallas the Goddess of Wisdom. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 180. Here Neptune, and the Gods, etc.] I wonder why Eustathius and all
other Commentators should be silent upon this Recess of the Gods: It seems
strange at the first view, that so many Deities, after having entered the Scene
of Action, should perform so short a Part, and immediately become themselves
Spectators? I conceive the reason of this Conduct in the Poet to be, that
Achilles has been inactive during the greatest part of the Poem; and as he is
the Hero of it, ought to be the chief Character in it: The Poet therefore
withdraws the Gods from the Field that Achilles may have the whole Honor of
the Day, and not act in subordination to the Deities: Besides, the Poem now
draws to a Conclusion, and it is necessary for Homer to enlarge upon the
Exploits of Achilles, that he may leave a noble Idea of his Valor upon the
Mind of the Reader.

XIII.
VERSE 214, etc. The Conversation of Achilles and Aeneas.] I shall lay before
the Reader the Words of Eustathius in defense of this Passage, which I confess
seems to me to be faulty in the Poet. The Reader (says he) would naturally
expect some great and terrible Achievements should ensue from Achilles upon
his first entrance upon Action. The Poet seems to prepare us for it, by his
magnificent Introduction of him into the Field: But instead of a Storm, we have
a Calm; he follows the same Method in this Book as he did in the third, where
when both Armies were ready to engage in a general Conflict, he ends the Day in
a single Combat between two Heroes: Thus he always agreeably surprises his
Readers. Besides the Admirers of Homer reap a farther Advantage from this
Conversation of the Heroes: There is a Chain of ancient History as well as a
Series of poetical Beauties.

Madam Dacier's Excuse is very little better: And to show that this is really a
Fault in the Poet, I believe I may appeal to the Taste of every Reader who
certainly finds himself disappointed: Our Expectation is raised to see Gods and
Heroes engage, when suddenly it all sinks into such a Combat in which neither
Party receive a Wound; and (what is more extraordinary) the Gods are made the
Spectators of so small an Action! What occasion was there for Thunder,
Earthquakes, and descending Deities, to introduce a Matter of so little
Importance? Neither is it any Excuse to say he has given us a piece of ancient
History; We expected to read a Poet, not an Historian. In short, after the
greatest Preparation for Action imaginable, he suspends the whole Narration,
and from the Heat of a Poet, cools at once into the Simplicity of an Historian.

XIV.
VERSE 258. The Natives were content to till
The shady Foot of Ida 's Fount-ful Hill.
(...)
(...)
(...)
Plato and Strabo understand this Passage as favoring the Opinion that the
Mountainous Parts of the World were first inhabited, after the universal
Deluge; and that Mankind by degrees descended to dwell in the lower parts of
the Hills (which they would have the Word (...) signify) and only in greater
process of Time ventured into the Valleys: Virgil however seems to have taken
this Word in a Sense something different where he alludes to this Passage. Aen.
3. 109. -- Nondum Ilium et arces
Pergameae steterant, habitabant vallibus imis.


XV.
VERSE 262. Three thousand Mares, etc.] The Number of the Horses and Mares of
Ericthonius may seem incredible, were we not assured by Herodotus that there
were in the Stud of Cyrus at one time (besides those for the Service of War)
eight hundred Horses and six thousand six hundred Mares. Eustathius.

XVI.
VERSE 264. Boreas, enamored, etc.] Homer has the Happiness of making the
least Circumstance considerable; the Subject grows under his Hands, and the
plainest Matter shines in his Dress of Poetry: Another Poet would have said
these Horses were as swift as the Wind, but Homer tells you that they sprung
from Boreas the God of Wind; and thence drew their Swiftness.

XVII.
VERSE 270. These lightly skimming, as they swept the Plain.] The Poet
illustrates the Swiftness of these Horses by describing them as running over
the standing Corn, and Surface of Waters, without making any Impression. Virgil
has imitated these Lines, and adapts what Homer says of these Horses to the
Swiftness of Camilla. Aen. 7. 809 Illa vel Intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina; nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas:
Vel mare per medium, fluctu supensa tumenti
Ferret iter, celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas.
The Reader will easily perceive that Virgil's is almost a literal Translation:
He has imitated the very run of the Verses, which flow nimbly away in Dactyls,
and as swift as the Wind they describe.

I cannot but observe one thing in favor of Homer, that there can no greater
Commendation be given to him, than by considering the Conduct of Virgil: who,
though undoubtedly the greatest Poet after him, seldom ventures to vary much from
his Original in the Passages he takes from him, as in a Despair of improving,
and contented if he can but equal them.

XVIII.
VERSE 280. To bear the Cup of Jove.] To be a Cup Bearer has in all Ages and
Nations been reckoned an honorable Employment: Sappho mentions it in honor of
her Brother Larichus, that he was Cup Bearer to the Nobles of Mitylene: The Son
of Menelaus executed the same Office, Hebe and Mercury served the Gods in the
same Station.

It was the Custom in the Pagan Worship to employ noble Youths to pour the Wine
upon the Sacrifice: In this Office Ganymede might probably attend upon the
Altar of Jupiter, and from thence was fabled to be his Cup Bearer. Eustath.

XIX.
VERSE 339. But Ocean's God, etc.] The Conduct of the Poet in making Aeneas owe
his Safety to Neptune in this place is remarkable: Neptune is an Enemy to the
Trojans, yet he dares not suffer so pious a Man to fall, lest Jupiter should be
offended: This shows, says Eustathius, that Piety is always under the
Protection of God; and that Favors are sometimes conferred not out of
Kindness, but to prevent a greater Detriment; thus Neptune preserves Aeneas,
lest Jupiter should revenge his Death upon the Grecians.

XX.
VERSE 345. And can ye see this righteous Chief, etc.] Though Aeneas is
represented a Man of great Courage, yet his Piety is his most shining
Character: This is the reason why he is always the Care of the Gods, and they
favor him constantly through the whole Poem with their immediate Protection.

It Is in this Light that Virgil has presented him to the View of the Reader:
His Valor bears but the second Place in the Aeneis. In the Ilias indeed he is
drawn in Miniature, and in the Aeneis in full Length; but there are the same
Features in the Copy, which are in the Original, and he is the same Aeneas in
Rome as he was in Troy.

XXI.
VERSE 355. On great Aeneas shall devolve the Reign,
And Sons succeeding Sons the Line sustain.
The Story of Aeneas his founding the Roman Empire gave Virgil the finest
Occasion of paying a Complement to Augustus, and his Countrymen, who were fond
of being thought the Descendants of Troy. He has translated these two Lines
literally, and put them in the nature of a Prophecy; as the Favorers of the
Opinion of Aeneas's sailing into Italy, imagine Homer's to be. -- (...)
(...)
Hic domus Aeneae cunctis dominabitur oris,
Et nati natorum and qui nascentur ab illis.
There has been a very ancient Alteration made (as Strabo observes) in these
two Lines by substituting (...) in the room of (...). It is not improbable but
Virgil might give occasion for it, by his cunctis dominabitur oris.

Eustathius does not entirely discountenance this Story: If it be understood,
says he, as a Prophecy, the Poet might take it from the Sibylline Oracles. He
farther remarks that the Poet artfully interweaves into his Poem not only the
things which happened before the Commencement, and in the Prosecution of the
Trojan War; but other Matters of Importance which happened even after that War
was brought to a Conclusion. Thus for instance, we have here a piece of History
not extant in any other Author, by which we are informed that the House of
Aeneas succeeded to the Crown of Troas, and to the Kingdom of Priam. Eustathius.

This Passage is very considerable, for it ruins the famous Chimaera of the
Roman Empire, and of the Family of the Caesar's, who both pretended to deduce
their Original from Venus by Aeneas, alleging that after the taking of Troy,
Aeneas came into Italy, and this Pretension is hereby actually destroyed. This
Testimony of Homer ought to be looked upon as an authentic Act, the Fidelity
and Verity whereof cannot be questioned. Neptune, as much an Enemy as he is to
the Trojans, declares that Aeneas, and after him his Posterity, shall reign
over the Trojans. Would Homer have put this Prophecy in Neptune's Mouth, if he
had not known that Aeneas did not leave Troy, that he reigned therein, and if
he had not seen in his Time the Descendants of that Prince reign there
likewise? That Poet wrote 260 Years, or thereabouts, after the taking of Troy,
and what is very remarkable he wrote in some of the Towns of Ionia, that is to
say, in the Neighborhood of Phrygia, so that the Time and Place give such a
Weight to his Deposition that nothing can invalidate it. All that the
Historians have written concerning Aeneas's Voyage into Italy, ought to be
considered as a Romance, made on purpose to destroy all historical Truth, for
the most ancient is posterior to Homer by many Ages. Before Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, some Writers being sensible of the Strength of this Passage of
Homer, undertook to explain it so as to reconcile it with this Fable, and they
said that Aeneas, after having been in Italy, returned to Troy, and left his
Son Ascanius there. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, little satisfied with this
Solution, which did not seem to him to be probable, has taken another Method:
He would have it that by these Words, "He shall reign over the Trojans, Homer
meant, he shall reign over the Trojans whom he shall carry with him into Italy.
"Is it not possible, says he, that Aeneas should reign over the Trojans, whom
he had taken with him, though settled elsewhere?

That Historian, who wrote in Rome itself, and in the very Reign of Augustus,
was willing to make his Court to that Prince, by explaining this Passage of
Homer so as to favor the Chimaera he was possessed with. And this is a
Reproach that may with some Justice be cast on him; for Poets may by their
Fictions flatter Princes and welcome: It Is their Trade. But for Historians to
corrupt the Gravity and Severity of History, to substitute Fable in the place
of Truth, is what ought not to be pardoned. Strabo was much more religious, for
though he wrote his Books of Geography toward the Beginning of Tiberius's
Reign, yet he had the Courage to give a right Explication to this Passage of
Homer, and to aver, that this Poet said, and meant, that Aeneas remained at
Troy, that he reigned therein, Priam's whole Race being extinguished, and that
he left the Kingdom to his Children after him. lib. 13. You may see this whole
Matter discussed in a Letter from the famous M. Bochart to M. de Segrais, who
has prefixed it to his Remarks upon the Translation of Virgil.

XXII.
VERSE 378. Where the slow Caucons close the Rear.] The Caucones (says
Eustathius) were of Paphlagonian Extract: And this Perhaps was the Reason why
they are not distinctly mentioned in the Catalogue, they being included under
the general Name of Paphlagonians: Though two Lines are quoted which are said to
have been left out by some Transcriber, and immediately followed this, (...)
Which Verses are these, (...)
Or as others read it, (...). (...)
Or according to others, (...)
But I believe these are not Homer's Lines, but the Addition of some
Transcriber, and it is evident by consulting the Passage from which they are said
to have been curtailed, that they would be absurd in that place; for the second
Line is actually there already, and as these Caucons are said to live upon the
Banks of the Parthenius, so are the Paphlagonians in the abovementioned
Passage. It is therefore more probable that the Caucons are included in the
Paphlagonians.

XXIII.
VERSE 467. -- Not louder roars
At Neptune 's Shrine on Helice 's high Shores, etc.]
In Helice, a Town of Achaia, three quarters of a League from the Gulf of
Corinth, Neptune had a magnificent Temple where the Ionians offered every Year
to him a Sacrifice of a Bull; and it was with these People an auspicious Sign,
and a certain Mark, that the Sacrifice would be accepted, if the Bull bellowed
as it was led to the Altar. After the Ionic Migration, which happened about 140
Years after the taking of Troy, the Ionians of Asia assembled in the Fields of
Priene to celebrate the same Festival in honor of Heliconian Neptune; and as
those of Priene valued themselves upon being originally of Helice, they chose
for the King of the Sacrifice a young Prienian. It is needless to dispute from
whence the Poet has taken his Comparison; for as he lived a 100, or 120 Years
after the Ionic Migration, it cannot be doubted but he took it in the Asian
Ionia, and at Priene itself; where he had doubtless often assisted at that
Sacrifice, and been Witness of the Ceremonies therein observed. This Poet
always appears strongly addicted to the Customs of the Ionians, which makes
some conjecture that he was an Ionian himself. Eustathius. Dacier.

XXIV.
VERSE 471. Then fell on Polydore his vengeful Rage.] Euripides in his Hecuba
has followed another Tradition when he makes Polydorus the Son of Priam, and of
Hecuba, and makes him slain by Polymnestor King of Thrace, after the taking of
Troy; for according to Homer, he is not the Son of Hecuba, but of Laothoe, as
he says in the following Book, and is slain by Achilles: Virgil too has rather
chosen to follow Euripides than Homer.

XXV.
VERSE 489. Full in Achilles dreadful Front he came.] The great Judgment of the
Poet in keeping the Character of his Hero is in this place very evident: When
Achilles was to engage Aeneas he holds a long Conference with him, and with
Patience bears the Reply of Aeneas: Had he pursued the same Method with Hector,
he had departed from his Character. Anger is the prevailing Passion in
Achilles: He left the Field in a Rage against Agamemnon, and entered it again
to be revenged of Hector: The Poet therefore judiciously makes him take Fire at
the sight of his Enemy: He describes him as impatient to kill him, he gives him
a haughty Challenge, and that Challenge is comprehended in a single Line: His
Impatience to be revenged, would not suffer him to delay it by a Length of
Words.

XXVI.
VERSE 513. But present to his Aid Apollo.] It is a common Observation that a
God should never be introduced into a Poem but where his Presence is necessary.
And it may be asked why the Life of Hector is of such Importance that Apollo
should rescue him from the Hand of Achilles here, and yet suffer him to fall so
soon after? Eustathius answers, that the Poet had not yet sufficiently exalted
the Valor of Achilles, he takes time to enlarge upon his Achievements, and
rises by degrees in his Character, till he completes both his Courage and
Resentment at one Blow in the Death of Hector. And the Poet, adds he, pays a
great Complement to his favorite Countryman, by showing that nothing but the
Intervention of a God could have saved Aeneas and Hector from the Hand of
Achilles.

XXVII.
VERSE 541. -- No Prayer, no moving Art
Ever bent that fierce, inexorable Heart!]
I confess it is a Satisfaction to me, to observe with what Art the Poet
pursues his Subject: The opening of the Poem professes to treat of the Anger of
Achilles; that Anger draws on all the great Events of the Story: And Homer at
every Opportunity awakens the Reader to an Attention to it, by mentioning the
Effects of it: So that when we see in this place the Hero deaf to Youth, and
Compassion, it is what we expect: Mercy in him would offend, because it is
contrary to his Character. Homer proposes him not as a Pattern for Imitation;
but the Moral of the Poem which he designed the Reader should draw from it, is,
that we should avoid Anger, since it is ever pernicious in the Event.

XXIX.
VERSE 580. The trampling Steers beat out the unnumber'd Grain.] In Greece,
instead of threshing the Corn as we do, they caused it to be trod out by Oxen;
this was likewise practiced in Judaea, as is seen by the Law of God, who forbad
the Jews to muzzle the Ox who trod out the Corn, Non ligabis os bovis terentis
in area fruges tuas. Deuteron. 25. Dacier.

The self same Practice is still preserved among the Turks and modern Greeks.

XXX.
The Similes at the End.] It is usual with our Author to heap his Similes very
thick together at the Conclusion of a Book. He has done the same in the
seventeenth: It Is the natural Discharge of a vast Imagination, heated in its
Progress, and giving itself vent in this Crowd of Images.

I cannot close the Notes upon this Book, without observing the dreadful Idea
of Archilles, which the Poet leaves upon the Mind of the Reader. He drives his
Chariot over Shields and mangled Heaps of Slain: The Wheels, the Axle-tree, and
the Horses are stained with Blood, the Hero's Eyes burn with Fury, and his
Hands are red with Slaughter. A Painter might form from this Passage the
Picture of Mars in the Fullness of his Terrors, as well as Phidias is said to
have drawn from another, that of Jupiter in all his Majesty.

THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Battle in the River Scamander.
THE Trojans fly before Achilles, some toward the Town, others to the River
Scamander: He falls upon the latter with great slaughter, takes twelve captives
alive, to sacrifice to the Manes of Patroclus; and kills Lycaon and
Asteropaeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves; Neptune and Pallas
assist the Hero; Simois joins Scamander; at length Vulcan, by the instigation
of Juno, almost dries up the River. This Combat ended, the other Gods engage
each other. Meanwhile Achilles continues the slaughter, drives the rest into
Troy; Agenor only makes a stand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo; who
(to delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor's shape, and while he pursues him in
that disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into their City.

The same Day continues. The Scene is on the Banks, and in the Stream, of
Scamander.

THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
AND now to Xanthus' gliding Stream they drove,
Xanthus, Immortal Progeny of Jove.
The River here divides the flying Train.
Part to the Town fly diverse over the Plain,
Where late their Troops triumphant bore the Fight,
Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
(These with a gathered Mist Saturnia shrouds,
And rolls behind the Rout a Heap of Clouds)
Part plunge into the Stream: Old Xanthus roars,
The flashing Billows beat the whitened Shores:
With Cries promiscuous all the Banks resound,
And here, and there, in Eddies whirling round,
The flouncing Steeds and shrieking Warriors drowned
As the scorched Locusts from their Fields retire,
While fast behind them runs the Blaze of Fire;
Driven from the Land before the smoky Cloud,
The clust'ring Legions rush into the Flood:
So plunged in Xanthus by Achilles' Force,
Roars the resounding Surge with Men and Horse.
His bloody Lance the Hero casts aside,
(Which spreading Tam'risks on the Margin hide)
Then like a God, the rapid Billows braves,
Armed with his Sword, high-brandish'd over the Waves;
Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
Deep groan the Waters with the dying Sound;
Repeated Wounds the red'ning River died,
And the warm Purple circled on the Tide.
Swift through the foamy Flood the Trojans fly,
And close in Rocks or winding Caverns lie.
So the huge Dolphin tempesting the Main,
In Shoals before him fly the scaly Train,
Confusedly heaped, they seek their inmost Caves,
Or pant and heave beneath the floating Waves.
Now tired with Slaughter, from the Trojan Band
Twelve chosen Youths he drags alive to Land;
With their rich Belts their Captive Arms constrains,
(Late their proud Ornaments, but now their Chains.)
These his Attendants to the Ships conveyed,
Sad Victims! destined to Patroclus' Shade.
Then, as once more he plunged amid the Flood,
The young Lycaon in his Passage stood;
The Son of Priam, whom the Hero's Hand
But late made captive in his Father's Land,
(As on a Fig Tree Top, his sounding Steel
Lopped the green Arms to spoke a Chariot Wheel)
To Lemnos' Isle he sold the Royal Slave,
Where Jason's Son the Price demanded gave;
But kind Eetion touching on the Shore,
The ransomed Prince to fair Arisbe bore.
Ten Days were past, since in his Father's Reign
He felt the Sweets of Liberty again;
The next, that God whom Men in vain withstand,
Gives the same Youth to the same conquering Hand;
Now never to return! and doomed to go
A sadder Journey to the Shades below.
His well-known Face when great Achilles eyed,
(The Helm and Vizor he had cast aside
With wild Affright, and dropped upon the Field
His useless Lance and unavailing Shield.)
As trembling, panting, from the Stream he fled,
And knocked his fault'ring Knees, the Hero said.
Ye mighty Gods! what Wonders strike my View:
Is it in vain our conquering Arms subdue?
Sure I shall see yon' Heaps of Trojans killed
Rise from the Shades, and brave me on the Field:
As now the Captive, whom so late I bound
And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan Ground!
Not him the Seas unmeasured Deeps detain,
That bar such numbers from their native Plain:
Lo! he returns! Try then, my flying spear!
Try, if the Grave can hold the Wanderer;
If Earth at length this active Prince can seize,
Earth, whose strong Grasp has held down Hercules.
Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with Fears
Approached, and sought his Knees with suppliant Tears;
Loath as he was to yield his youthful Breath,
And his Soul shivering at the Approach of Death.
Achilles raised the Spear, prepared to wound;
He kissed his Feet, extended on the Ground:
And while above the Spear suspended stood,
Longing to dip its thristy Point in Blood;
One Hand embraced them close, one stopped the Dart;
While thus these melting Words attempt his Heart.
Thy well-known Captive, great Achilles! see,
Once more Lycaon trembling at thy Knee;
Some Pity to a Suppliant's Name afford,
Who shared the Gifts of Ceres at thy Board,
Whom late thy conquering Arm to Lemnos bore,
Far from his Father, Friends, and native Shore;
A hundred Oxen were his Price that Day,
Now Sums immense thy Mercy shall repay.
Scarce respited from Woes I yet appear,
And scarce twelve morning Suns have seen me here;
Lo! Jove again submits me to thy Hands,
Again, her Victim cruel Fate demands!
I sprung from Priam, and Laothoe fair,
(Old Alte's Daughter, and Lelegia's Heir;
Who held in Pedasus his famed Abode,
And ruled the Fields where silver Satnio flowed)
Two Sons (alas, unhappy Sons) she bore,
For ah! one Spear shall drink each Brother's Gore,
And I succeed to slaughtered Polydore.
How from that Arm of Terror shall I fly?
Some Demon urges! it is my Doom to die!
If ever yet soft Pity touched thy mind,
Ah! think not me too much of Hector's Kind:
Not the same Mother gave thy Suppliant Breath,
With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus' Death.
These Words, attended with a Shower of Tears,
The Youth addressed to unrelenting Ears:
Talk not of Life, or Ransom, (he replies)
Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
In vain a single Trojan sues for Grace;
But least, the Sons of Priam's hateful Race.
Die then, my Friend! what boots it to deplore?
The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
He, far thy Better, was fore-doom'd to die,
"And thou, do thou, bewail Mortality?
See thou not me, whom Nature's Gifts adorn,
Sprung from a Hero, from a Goddess born;
The Day shall come (which nothing can avert)
When by the Spear, the Arrow, or the Dart,
By Night, or Day, by Force or by Design,
Impending Death and certain Fate are mine.
Die then -- He said; and as the Word he spoke
The fainting Stripling sunk, before the Stroke;
His Hand forgot its Grasp, and left the Spear;
While all his trembling Frame confessed his Fear.
Sudden, Achilles his broad Sword displayed,
And buried in his Neck the reeking Blade.
Prone fell the Youth; and panting on the Land,
The gushing Purple died the thirsty Sand:
The Victor to the Stream the Carcass gave,
And thus insults him, floating on the Wave
Lie, there, Lycaon! let the Fish surround
Thy bloated Corse, and suck thy goary Wound:
There no sad Mother shall thy Fun'rals weep,
But swift Scamander roll thee to the Deep,
Whose every Wave some watery Monster brings,
To feast unpunished on the Fat of Kings.
So perish Troy, and all the Trojan Line!
Such Ruin theirs, and such Compassion mine.
What boots ye now Scamander's worshipped Stream,
His earthly Honors, and immortal Name;
In vain your immolated Bulls are slain,
Your living Coursers glut his Gulphs in vain:
Thus he rewards you, with this bitter Fate;
Thus, till the Grecian Vengeance is complete;
Thus is atoned Patroclus honored Shade,
And the short Absence of Achilles paid.
These boastful Words provoke the raging God;
With Fury swells the violated Flood.
What Means divine may yet the Power employ,
To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
Meanwhile the Hero springs in Arms, to dare
The great Asteropeus to mortal War;
The Son of Pelagon, whose lofty Line
Flows from the Source of Axius, Stream divine!
(Fair Peribaea's Love the God had crowned,
With all his refluent Waters circled round)
On him Achilles rushed: He fearless stood,
And shook two Spears, advancing from the Flood;
The Flood impelled him, on Pelides' Head
T'avenge his Waters choked with Heaps of Dead.
Near as they drew, Achilles thus began.
What art thou, boldest of the Race of Man?
Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the Sire,
Whose Son encounters our resistless Ire.
O Son of Peleus! what avails to trace
(Replied the Warrior) our illustrious Race?
From rich Paeonia's Valleys I command
Armed with protended Spears, my native Band;
Now shines the tenth bright Morning since I came
In aid of Ilion to the Fields of Fame:
Axius, who swells with all the neighboring Rills,
And wide around the floated Region fills,
Begot my Sire, whose Spear such Glory won:
Now lift thy Arm, and try that Hero's Son!
Threatening he said: The hostile Chiefs advance;
At once Asteropeus discharged each Lance,
(For both his dext'rous Hands the Lance could wield)
One struck, but pierced not the Vulcanian Shield;
One razed Achilles Hand; the spouting Blood
Spun forth, in Earth the fastened Weapon stood.
Like Lightning next the Pelian Javelin flies;
Its erring Fury hissed along the Skies;
Deep in the swelling Bank was driven the Spear,
Even to the middle eathed; and quiver'd there.
Then from his side the Sword Pelides drew,
And on his Foe with doubled Fury flew.
The Foe thrice tugged, and shook the rooted Wood;
Repulsive of his Might the Weapon stood:
The fourth, he tries to break the Spear in vain;
Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the Plain;
His Belly opened with a ghastly Wound,
The reeking Entrails pour upon the Ground.
Beneath the Hero's Feet he panting lies,
And his Eye darkens, and his Spirit flies:
While the proud Victor thus triumphing said,
His radiant Armor tearing from the Dead:
So ends thy Glory! Such the Fate they prove
Who strive presumptuous with the Sons of Jove.
Sprung from a River did thou boast thy Line,
But great Saturnius is the Source of mine.
How durst thou vaunt thy watery Progeny?
Of Peleus, Aeacus, and Jove, am I;
The Race of these superior far to those,
As he that thunders to the Stream that flows.
What Rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his Son.
Even Achelous might contend in vain,
And all the roaring Billows of the Main.
The Eternal Ocean, from whose Fountains flow
The Seas, the Rivers, and the Springs below,
The thundering Voice of Jove abhors to hear,
And in his deep Abysses shakes with Fear.
He said; then from the Bank his Javelin tore,
And left the breathless Warrior in his Gore.
The floating Tides the bloody Carcass lave,
And beat against it, Wave succeeding Wave;
Till rolled between the Banks, it lies the Food
Of curling Eels, and Fishes of the Flood.
All scattered round the Stream (their Mightiest slain)
Th'amaz'd Paeonians scour along the Plain:
He vents his Fury on the flying Crew,
Thrasius, Astypylus, and Mnesus slew;
Mydon, Thersilochus, with Aenius fell;
And Numbers more his Lance had plunged to Hell;
But from the Bottom of his Gulphs profound,
Scamander spoke; the Shores returned the Sound.
O first of Mortals! (for the Gods are thine)
In Valor matchless, and in Force divine!
If Jove have given thee every Trojan Head,
It Is not on me thy Rage should heap the Dead.
See! my choked Streams no more their Course can keep,
Nor roll their wonted Tribute to the Deep.
Turn then, Impetuous! from our injured Flood;
Content, thy Slaughters could amaze a God.
In human Form confessed before his Eyes
The River thus; and thus the Chief replies.
O sacred Stream! thy Word we shall obey;
But not till Troy the destined Vengeance pay,
Not till within her Towers the perjured Train
Shall pant, and tremble at our Arms again;
Not till proud Hector, Guardian of her Wall,
Or stain this Lance, or see Achilles fall.
He said; and drove with Fury on the Foe.
Then to the Godhead of the silver Bow
The yellow Flood began: O Son of Jove!
Was not the Mandate of the Sire above
Full and express? that Phoebus should employ
His sacred Arrows in defense of Troy,
And make her conquer, till Hyperion's Fall
In awful Darkness hide the Face of all?
He spoke in vain -- The Chief without Dismay
Ploughs through the boiling Surge his desperate Way.
Then rising in his Rage above the Shores,
From all his Deeps the bellowing River roars,
Huge Heaps of Slain disgorges on the Coast,
And round the Banks the ghastly Dead are tossed.
While all before, the Billows ranged on high
(A watery Bulwark) screen the Bands who fly.
Now bursting on his Head with thundering Sound,
The falling Deluge whelms the Hero round:
His loaded Shield bends to the rushing Tide;
His Feet, upborn, scarce the strong Flood divide,
Slidd'ring, and stagg'ring. On the Border stood
A spreading Elm, that overhung the Flood;
He seized a bending Bough, his Steps to stay;
The Plant uprooted to his Weight gave way,
Heaving the Bank, and undermining all;
Loud flash the Waters to the rushing Fall
Of the thick Foliage. The large Trunk displayed
Bridg'd the rough Flood across: The Hero stayed
On this his Weight, and raised upon his Hand,
Leaped from the Chanel, and regained the Land.
Then blackened the wild Waves; the Murmur rose;
The God pursues, a huger Billow throws,
And bursts the Bank, ambitious to destroy
The Man whose Fury is the Fate of Troy.
He, like the warlike Eagle speeds his Pace,
(Swiftest and strongest of th'aerial Race)
Far as a Spear can fly, Achilles springs
At every Bound; His clanging Armor rings:
Now here, now there, he turns on every side,
And winds his Course before the following Tide;
The Waves flow after, wheresoe'er he wheels,
And gather fast, and murmur at his Heels.
So when a Peasant to his Garden brings
Soft Rills of Water from the bubbling Springs,
And calls the Floods from high, to bless his Bowers
And feed with pregnant Streams the Plants and Flowers;
Soon as he clears whatever their passage staid,
And marks their future Current with his Spade,
Swift over the rolling Pebbles, down the Hills
Louder and louder purl the falling Rills,
Before him scattering, they prevent his pains,
And shine in mazy Wand'rings over the Plains.
Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes
Still swift Scamander rolls wherever he flies:
Not all his Speed escapes the rapid Floods;
The first of Men, but not a Match for Gods.
Often as he turned the Torrent to oppose,
And bravely try if all the Powers were Foes;
So often the Surge, in watery Mountains spread,
Beats on his Back, or bursts upon his Head.
Yet dauntless still the adverse Flood he braves,
And still indignant bounds above the Waves.
Tired by the Tides, his Knees relax with Toil;
Washed from beneath him, slides the slimy Soil;
When thus (his Eyes on Heavens Expansion thrown)
Forth bursts the Hero with an angry Groan.
Is there no God Achilles to befriend,
No Power t'avert his miserable End?
Prevent, oh Jove! this ignominious Date,
And make my future Life the Sport of Fate.
Of all Heavens Oracles believed in vain,
But most of Thetis, must her Son complain;
By Phoebus' Darts she prophesied my Fall,
In glorious Arms before the Trojan Wall.
Oh! had I died in Fields of Battle warm,
Stretched like a Hero, by a Hero's Arm!
Might Hector's Spear this dauntless Bosom rend,
And my swift Soul overtake my slaughtered Friend!
Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful Fate,
Oh how unworthy of the Brave and Great!
Like some vile Swain, whom, on a rainy Day,
Crossing a Ford, the Torrent sweeps away,
An unregarded Carcass to the Sea.
Neptune and Pallas haste to his Relief,
And thus in human Form address the Chief:
The Power of Ocean first. Forbear thy Fear,
O Son of Peleus! Lo thy Gods appear!
Behold! from Jove descending to thy Aid,
Propitious Neptune, and the blue-ey'd Maid.
Stay, and the furious Flood shall cease to rave;
It Is not thy Fate to glut his angry Wave.
But thou, the Counsel Heaven suggests, attend!
Nor breathe from Combat, nor thy Sword suspend,
Till Troy receive her flying Sons, till all
Her routed Squadrons pant behind their Wall:
Hector alone shall stand his fatal Chance,
And Hector's Blood shall smoke upon thy Lance.
Thine is the Glory doomed. Thus spoke the Gods;
Then swift ascended to the bright Abodes.
Stung with new Ardor, thus by Heaven impelled,
He springs impetuous, and invades the Field:
Over all th'expanded Plain the Waters spread;
Heaved on the bounding Billows, danced the Dead,
Floating midst scattered Arms; while Casques of Gold
And turned up Bucklers glittered as they rolled.
High over the surging Tide, by Leaps and Bounds,
He wades, and mounts; the parted Wave resounds.
Not a whole River stops the Hero's Course,
While Pallas fills him with immortal Force.
With equal Rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
And lifts his Billows, and o'erwhelms his Shores.
Then thus to Simois: Haste, my Brother Flood!
And check this Mortal that controuls a God:
Our bravest Heroes else shall quit the Fight,
And Ilion tumble from her tow'ry Height.
Call then thy subject Streams, and bid them roar,
From all thy Fountains swell thy watery Store,
With broken Rocks, and with a Load of Dead,
Charge the black Surge, and pour it on his Head.
Mark how resistless through the Floods he goes,
And boldly bids the warring Gods be Foes!
But nor that Force, nor Form divine to Sight
Shall ought avail him, if our Rage unite:
Whelmed under our dark Gulphs those Arms shall lie
That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan Eye;
And deep beneath a sandy Mountain hurled
Immersed remain this Terror of the World.
Such ponderous Ruin shall confound the Place,
No Greek shall ever his perished Relics grace,
No Hand his Bones shall gather, or inhume;
These his cold Rites, and this his watery Tomb.
He said; and on the Chief descends amain,
Increased with Gore, and swelling with the Slain.
Then murmuring from his Beds, he boils, he raves,
And a Foam whitens on the purple Waves.
At every Step, before Achilles stood
The crimson Surge, and deluged him with Blood.
Fear touched the Queen of Heaven: She saw dismayed,
She called aloud, and summoned Vulcan's Aid.
Rise to the War! the insulting Flood requires
Thy wasteful Arm: Assemble all thy Fires!
While to their aid, by our Command enjoined,
Rush the swift Eastern and the Western Wind:
These from old Ocean at my Word shall blow,
Pour the red Torrent on the watery Foe,
Corses and Arms to one bright Ruin turn,
And hissing Rivers to their bottoms burn.
Go, mighty in thy Rage! display thy Power,
Drink the whole Flood, the crackling Trees devour,
Scorch all the Banks! and (till our Voice reclaim)
Exert th'unweary'd Furies of the Flame!
The Power Ignipotent her Word obeys:
Wide over the Plain he pours the boundless Blaze;
At once consumes the Dead, and dries the Soil;
And the shrunk Waters in their Chanel boil:
As when Autumnal Boreas sweeps the Sky,
And instant, blows the watered Garden dry:
So looked the Field, so whitened was the Ground,
While Vulcan breathed the fiery Blast around.
Swift on the sedgy Reeds the Ruin preys;
Along the Margin winds the running Blaze:
The Trees in flaming rows to Ashes turn,
The flowery Lotos, and the Tam'risk burn,
Broad Elm, and Cypress rising in a Spire;
The watery Willows hiss before the Fire.
Now glow the Waves, the Fishes pant for Breath,
The Eels lie twisting in the Pangs of Death:
Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly Fry,
Or gasping, turn their Bellies to the Sky.
At length the River reared his languid Head,
And thus short-panting, to the God he said.
O Vulcan, oh! what Power resists thy Might?
I faint, I sink, unequal to the Fight --
I yield -- Let Ilion fall; if Fate decree --
Ah -- bend no more thy fiery Arms on me!
He ceased; wide Conflagration blazing round;
The bubbling Waters yield a hissing Sound.
As when the Flames beneath a Caldron rise,
To melt the Fat of some rich Sacrifice,
Amid the fierce Embrace of circling Fires
The Waters foam, the heavy Smoke aspires:
So boils the imprisoned Flood, forbid to flow,
And choked with Vapors, feels his Bottom glow.
To Juno then, Imperial Queen of Air,
The burning River sends his earnest Prayer.
Ah why, Saturnia! must thy Son engage
Me, only me, with all his wastfull Rage?
On other Gods his dreadful Arm employ,
For mightier Gods assert the Cause of Troy.
Submissive I desist, if thou command,
But ah! withdraw this all-destroying Hand.
Hear then my solemn Oath, to yield to Fate
Unaided Ilion, and her destined State,
Till Greece shall gird her with destructive Flame,
And in one Ruin sink the Trojan Name.
His warm Entreaty touched Saturnia's Ear;
She bade th'Ignipotent his Rage forbear,
Recall the Flame, nor in a mortal cause
Infest a God: Th'obedient Flame withdraws:
Again, the branching Streams begin to spread,
And soft re-murmur in their wonted Bed.
While these by Juno's Will the Strife resign,
The warring Gods in fierce Contention join:
Re-kindling Rage each heavenly Breast alarms;
With horrid Clangor shock th'aetherial Arms:
Heaven in loud Thunder bids the Trumpet sound;
And wide beneath them groans the rending Ground.
Jove, as his Sport, the dreadful Scene descries,
And views contending Gods with careless Eyes.
The Power of Battles lifts his brazen Spear,
And first assaults the radiant Queen of War,
What moved thy Madness, thus to disunite
Ethereal Minds, and mix all Heaven in Fight?
What wonder this, when in thy frantic Mood
Thou drov'st a Mortal to insult a God;
Thy impious Hand Tydides' Javelin bore,
And madly bathed it in celestial Gore.
He spoke, and smote the loud-resounding Shield,
Which bears Jove's Thunder on its dreadful Field;
The Adamantine Aegis of her Sire,
That turns the glancing Bolt, and forked Fire.
Then heaved the Goddess in her mighty Hand
A Stone, the Limit of the neighboring Land,
There fixed from eldest times; black, craggy, vast:
This, at the heavenly Homicide she cast.
Thundering he falls; a Mass of monstrous Size,
And sev'n broad Acres covers as he lies.
The stunning Stroke his stubborn Nerves unbound;
Loud over the Fields his ringing Arms resound:
The scornful Dame her Conquest views with Smiles,
And glorying thus, the prostrate God reviles.
Have thou not yet, insatiate Fury! known,
How far Minerva's Force transcends thy own?
Juno, whom thou rebellious dare withstand,
Corrects thy Folly thus by Pallas' Hand;
Thus meets thy broken Faith with just Disgrace,
And partial Aid to Troy's perfidious Race.
The Goddess spoke, and turned her Eyes away
That beaming round, diffused celestial Day.
Jove's Cyprian Daughter stooping on the Land,
Lent to the wounded God her tender Hand:
Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with Pain,
And propt on her fair Arm, forsakes the Plain.
This the bright Empress of the Heavens surveyed,
And scoffing, thus, to War's victorious Maid.
Lo, what an Aid on Mars's Side is seen!
The Smiles and Love's unconquerable Queen!
Mark with what Insolence, in open view,
She moves: Let Pallas, if she dares, pursue.
Minerva smiling heard, the Pair o'ertook,
And slightly on her Breast the Wanton struck:
She, unresisting, fell; (her Spirits fled)
On Earth together lay the Lovers spread!
And like these Hero's, be the Fate of all
( Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan Wall!
To Grecian Gods such let the Phrygian be,
So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me;
Then from the lowest Stone shall Troy be moved --
Thus she, and Juno with a Smile approved.
Meantime, to mix in more than mortal Fight,
The God of Ocean dares the God of Light.
What Sloth has seized us, when the Fields around
Ring with conflicting Powers, and Heaven returns the Sound?
Shall ignominious We with shame retire,
No Deed performed, to our Olympian Sire?
Come, prove thy Arm! for first the War to wage,
Suits not my Greatness, or superior Age.
Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan Throne,
(Forgetful of my Wrongs, and of thy own)
And guard the Race of proud Laomedon!
Have thou forgot, how at the Monarch's Prayer,
We shared the lengthened Labors of a Year?
Troy Walls I raised (for such were Jove's Commands)
And yon' proud Bulwarks grew beneath my Hands:
Thy Task it was, to feed the bellowing Droves
Along fair Ida's Vales, and pendent Groves.
But when the circling Seasons in their Train
Brought back the grateful Day that crowned our Pain;
With Menace stern the fraudful King defied
Our latent Godhead, and the Prize denied:
Mad as he was, he threatened servile Bands,
And doomed us Exiles far in barbarous Lands.
Incensed, we heav'nward fled with swiftest wing,
And destined Vengeance on the perjured King.
Do thou, for this, afford proud Ilion Grace,
And not like us, infest the faithless Race?
Like us, their present, future Sons destroy,
And from its deep Foundations heave their Troy?
Apollo thus: To combat for Mankind
Ill suits the Wisdom of celestial Mind:
For what is Man? Calamitous by Birth,
They owe their Life and Nourishment to Earth;
Like yearly Leaves, that now, with Beauty crowned,
Smile on the Sun; now, wither on the Ground:
To their own Hands commit the frantic Scene,
Nor mix Immortals in a Cause so mean.
Then turns his Face, far-beaming heavenly Fires,
And from the Senior Power, submiss retires;
Him, thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
The quiver'd Huntress of the Sylvan Shades.
And is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies,
And yields to Ocean's hoary Sire, the Prize?
How vain that martial Pomp, and dreadful Show,
Of pointed Arrows, and the silver Bow!
Now boast no more in yon' celestial Bower,
Thy Force can match the great Earth-shaking Power.
Silent, he heard the Queen of Woods upbraid:
Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting Maid;
But furious thus. What Insolence has driven
Thy Pride to face the Majesty of Heaven?
What though by Jove the female Plague designed,
Fierce to the feeble Race of Womankind,
The wretched Matron feels thy piercing Dart;
Thy Sexe's Tyrant, with a Tyger's Heart?
What though tremendous in the woodland Chase,
Thy certain Arrows pierce the savage Race?
How dares thy Rashness on the Powers divine
Employ those Arms, or match thy Force with mine?
Learn hence, no more unequal War to wage --
She said, and seized her Wrists with eager Rage;
These in her Left Hand locked, her Right untied
The Bow, the Quiver, and its plumy Pride.
About her Temples flies the busy Bow;
Now here, now there, she winds her from the Blow;
The scattering Arrows rattling from the Case,
Drop round, and idly mark the dusty Place.
Swift from the Field the baffled Huntress flies,
And scarce restrains the Torrent in her Eyes:
So, when the Falcon wings her way above,
To the cleft Cavern speeds the gentle Dove,
(Not fated yet to die) There safe retreats,
Yet still her Heart against the Marble beats.
To her, Latona hasts with tender Care;
Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the War.
How shall I face the Dame, who gives Delight
To him whose Thunders blacken Heaven with Night?
Go matchless Goddess! triumph in the Skies,
And boast my Conquest, while I yield the Prize.
He spoke; and past: Latona, stooping low,
Collects the scattered Shafts, and fallen Bow,
That glittering on the Dust, lay here and there;
Dishonored Relics of Diana's War.
Then swift pursued her to the blessed Abode,
Where, all confused, she sought the Sovereign God;
Weeping she grasped his Knees: The Ambrosial Vest
Shook with her Sighs, and panted on her Breast.
The Sire, superior smiled; and bade her show,
What heavenly Hand had caused his Daughter's Woe?
Abashed, she names his own Imperial Spouse;
And the pale Crescent fades upon her Brows.
Thus they above: While swiftly gliding down,
Apollo enters Ilion's sacred Town:
The Guardian God now trembled for her Wall,
And feared the Greeks, though Fate forbade her Fall.
Back to Olympus, from the War's Alarms,
Return the shining Bands of Gods in Arms;
Some proud in Triumph, some with Rage on fire;
And take their Thrones around th'Aethereal Sire.
Through Blood, thro'Death, Achilles still proceeds,
Over slaughtered Heroes, and over rolling Steeds.
As when avenging Flames with Fury driven,
On guilty Towns exert the Wrath of Heaven;
The Pale Inhabitants, some fall, some fly;
And the red Vapors purple all the Sky.
So raged Achilles: Death, and dire Dismay,
And Toils, and Terrors, filled the dreadful Day.
High on a Turret hoary Priam stands,
And marks the Waste of his destructive Hands;
Views, from his Arm, the Trojans scattered Flight,
And the near Hero rising on his Sight!
No Stop, no Check, no Aid! With feeble pace,
And settled Sorrow on his aged Face,
Fast as he could, he sighing quits the Walls;
And thus, descending, on the Guards he calls.
You to whose care our City Gates belong,
Set wide your Portals to the flying Throng.
For lo! he comes, with unresisted Sway;
He comes, and Desolation marks his way!
But when within the Walls our Troops take Breath,
Lock fast the brazen Bars, and shut out Death.
Thus charged the reverend Monarch: Wide were flung
The opening Folds; the sounding Hinges rung.
Phoebus rushed forth, the flying Bands to meet,
Struck Slaughter back, and covered the Retreat.
On Heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the Gate,
And gladsome see their last Escape from Fate:
Thither, all parched with Thirst, a heartless Train,
Hoary with Dust, they beat the hollow Plain;
And gasping, panting, fainting, labor on
With heavier Strides, that lengthen towered the Town.
Enraged Achilles follows with his Spear;
Wild with Revenge, insatiable of War.
Then had the Greeks Eternal Praise acquired,
And Troy inglorious to her Walls retired;
But Apollo
he, the God who darts ethereal Flame,
Shot down to save her, and redeem her Fame.
To young Agenor Force divine he gave,
( Antenor's Offspring, haughty, bold and brave)
In aid of him, beside the Beech he sat,
And wrapped in Clouds, restrained the Hand of Fate.
When now the generous Youth Achilles spies,
Thick beats his Heart, the troubled Motions rise,
(So, e're a Storm, the Waters heave and roll)
He stops, and questions thus his mighty Soul.
What, shall I fly this Terror of the Plain?
Like others fly, and be like others slain?
Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same Road
Yon' Line of slaughtered Trojans lately trod.
No: with the common Heap I scorn to fall --
What if they passed me to the Trojan Wall,
While I decline to yonder Path, that leads
To Ida's Forests and surrounding Shades?
So may I reach, concealed, the cooling Flood,
From my tired Body wash the Dust and Blood,
As soon as Night her dusky Veil extends,
Return in safety to my Trojan Friends.
What if? -- But wherefore all this vain Debate?
Stand I to doubt, within the reach of Fate?
Even now perhaps, ever yet I turn the Wall,
The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall:
Such is his Swiftness, it is in vain to fly,
And such his Valor, that who stands must die.
However, it is better, fighting for the State,
Here, and in public view, to meet my Fate.
Yet sure He too is mortal; He may feel
(Like all the Sons of Earth) the Force of Steel;
One only Soul informs that dreadful Frame;
And Jove's sole Favor gives him all his Fame.
He said, and stood; collected in his Might;
And all his beating Bosom claimed the Fight.
So from some deep-grown Wood a Panther starts,
Roused from his Thicket by a Storm of Darts;
Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the Sounds
Of shouting Hunters, and of clamorous Hounds,
Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the Pain,
And the barb'd Javelin stings his Breast in vain:
On their whole War, untamed the Savage flies;
And tears his Hunter, or beneath him dies.
Not less resolved, Antenor's valiant Heir
Confronts Achilles, and awaits the War,
Disdainful of Retreat: High-held before,
His Shield (a broad Circumference) he bore;
Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
The lifted Javelin, thus bespoke the Foe.
How proud Achilles glories in his Fame!
And hopes this day to sink the Trojan Name
Beneath her Ruins! Know, that Hope is vain;
A thousand Woes, a thousand Toils remain.
Parents and Children our just Arms employ,
And strong, and many, are the Sons of Troy.
Great as thou art, even thou may stain with Gore
These Phrygian Fields, and press a foreign Shore.
He said: With matchless Force the Javelin flung
Smote on his Knee; the hollow Cuishes rung
Beneath the pointed Steel; but safe from Harms
He stands impassive in the Ethereal Arms.
Then fiercely rushing on the daring Foe,
His lifted Arm prepares the fatal Blow;
But jealous of his Fame, Apollo shrouds
The god-like Trojan in a Veil of Clouds;
Safe from Pursuit, and shut from mortal View,
Dismissed with Fame, the favored Youth withdrew.
Meanwhile the God, to cover their Escape,
Assumes Agenor's Habit, Voice, and Shape,
Flies from the furious Chief in this Disguise,
The furious Chief still follows where he flies.
Now over the Fields they stretch with lengthened Strides,
Now urge the Course where swift Scamander glides:
The God now distant scarce a Stride before,
Tempts his Pursuit, and wheels about the Shore.
While all the flying Troops their Speed employ,
And pour on Heaps into the Walls of Troy.
No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
Who escaped by Flight, or who by Battle fell.
'Twas Tumult all, and Violence of Flight;
And sudden Joy confused, and mixed Affright:
Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her Gate;
And Nations breathe, delivered from their Fate.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twenty-First Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK.
I.
THIS Book is entirely different from all the foregoing: Though it be a Battle,
it is entirely of a new and surprising kind, diversified with a vast Variety of
Imagery and Description. The Scene is totally changed, he paints the Combat of
his Hero with the Rivers, and describes a Battle amidst an Inundation. It is
observable that though the whole War of the Iliad was upon the Banks of these
Rivers, Homer has artfully left out the Machinery of River-Gods in all the
other Battles, to aggrandize this of his Hero. There is no Book of the Poem
that has more force of Imagination, or in which the great and inexhausted
Invention of our Author is more powerfully exerted. After this Description of
an Inundation, there follows a very beautiful Contrast in that of the Drought:
The Part of Achilles is admirably sustained, and the new Strokes which Homer
gives to his Picture are such as are derived from the very source of his
Character, and finish the entire Draught of this Hero.

How far all that appears wonderful or extravagant in this Episode, may be
reconciled to Probability, Truth, and natural Reason, will be considered in a
distinct Note on that Head: The Reader may find it on. 447.

II.
VERSE 2. Xanthus, immortal Progeny of Jove.] The River is here said to be the
Son of Jupiter, on account of its being supplied with Waters that fall from
Jupiter, that is, from Heaven. Eustathius.

III.
VERSE 14. As the scorched Locusts, etc.] Eustathius observes that several
Countries have been much infested with Armies of Locusts; and that, to prevent
their destroying the Fruits of the Earth, the Countrymen by kindling large
Fires drove them from their Fields; the Locusts to avoid the intense Heat were
forced to cast themselves into the Water. From this Observation the Poet draws
his Allusion which is very much to the Honor of Achilles, since it represents
the Trojans with respect to him as no more than so many Insects.

The same Commentator takes notice, that because the Island of Cyprus in
particular was used to practice this Method with the Locusts, some Authors have
conjectured that Homer was of that Country; but if this were a sufficient
Reason for such a Supposition, he might be said to be born in almost all the
Countries of the World, since he draws his Observations from the Customs of
them all.

We may hence account for the innumerable Armies of these Locusts, mentioned
among the Plagues of Egypt, without having recourse to an immediate Creation,
as some good Men have imagined, whereas the Miracle indeed consists in the
wonderful manner of bringing them upon the Egyptians: I have often observed
with Pleasure the Similitude which many of Homer's Expressions bear with the
holy Scriptures, and that the oldest Writer in the World except Moses often
speaks in the Idiom of Moses: Thus as the Locusts in Exodus are said to be
driven into the Seas, so in Homer they are forced into a River.

IV.
VERSE 30. So the huge Dolphin, etc.] It is observable with what Justness the
Author diversifies his Comparisons, according to the different Scenes and
Elements he is engaged in: Achilles has been hitherto on the Land, and compared
to Land Animals, a Lion, etc. Now he is in the Water, the Poet derives his
Images from thence, and likens him to a Dolphin. Eustathius.

V.
VERSE 34. Now tired with Slaughter.] This is admirably well suited to the
Character of Achilles, his Rage bears him headlong on the Enemy, he kills all
that oppose him, and stops not till Nature itself could not keep pace with his
Anger; he had determined to reserve twelve noble Youths to sacrifice them to
the Manes of Patroclus, but his Resentment gives him no time to think of them,
till the hurry of his Passion abates, and he is tired with Slaughter: Without
this Circumstance, I think an Objection might naturally be raised, that in the
time of a Pursuit Achilles gave the Enemy too much Leisure to escape, while he
busied himself with tying these Prisoners: Though it is not absolutely necessary
to suppose he did this with his own Hands.

VI.
VERSE 35. Twelve chosen Youths.] This piece of Cruelty in Achilles has
appeared shocking to many, and indeed is what I think can only be excused by
considering the ferocious and vindictive Spirit of this Hero. It Is however
certain that the Cruelties exercised on Enemies in War were authorized by the
military Laws of those Times; nay Religion itself became a Sanction to them. It
is not only the fierce Achilles, but the pious and religious Aeneas, whose very
Character is Virtue and Compassion, that reserves several young unfortunate
Captives taken in Battle, to sacrifice them to the Manes of his favorite Hero.
Aen. 10.. 517. -- Sulmone creatos
Quattuor hic juvenes, totidem quos educat Ufens
Viventes rapit; inferias quos immolet umbris,
Captivoque rogi perfundat sanguine flammas.
And Aen. 11.. 81. Vinxerat and post terga manus, quos mitteret umbris,
Inferias, caeso sparsuros sanguine flammam.
And (what is very particular) the Latin Poet expresses no Disapprobation of
the Action, which the Grecian does in plain terms, speaking of this in Iliad
23.. 176. -- (...)


VII.
VERSE 41. The young Lycaon, etc.] Homer has a wonderful Art and Judgment in
contriving such Incidents as set the characteristick Qualities of his Heroes in
the highest point of Light. There is hardly any in the whole Iliad more proper
to move Pity than this Circumstance of Lycaon, or to raise Terror, than this
View of Achilles. It is also the finest Picture of them both imaginable: We see
the different Attitude of their Persons, and the different Passions which
appeared in their Countenances: At first Achilles stands erect, with Surprise
in his Looks, at the Sight of one whom he thought it impossible to find there;
while Lycaon is in the Posture of a Suppliant, with Looks that plead for
Compassion; with one Hand holding the Hero's Lance, and his Knee with theother:
Afterward, when at his Death he lets go the Spear and places himself on his
Knees, with his Arms extended, to receive the mortal Wound; how lively and how
strongly is this painted? I believe every one perceives the Beauty of this
Passage, and allows that Poetry (at least in Homer) is truly a speaking Picture.

VIII.
VERSE 84, etc. The Speeches of Lycaon and Achilles.] It is impossible for any
thing to be better imagined than these two Speeches; that of Lycaon is moving
and compassionate, that of Achilles haughty and dreadful; the one pleads with
the utmost Tenderness, the other denies with the utmost Sternness: One would
think it impossible to amass so many moving Arguments in so few Words as those
of Lycaon: He forgets no Circumstance to soften his Enemy's Anger, he flatters
the Memory of Patroclus, is afraid of being thought too nearly related to
Hector, and would willingly put himself upon him as a Suppliant, and
consequently as an inviolable person: But Achilles is immovable, his
Resentment makes him deaf to Entreaties, and it must be remembered that Anger,
not Mercy, is his Character.

I must confess I could have wished Achilles had spared him: There are so many
Circumstances that speak in his Favor, that he deserved his Life, had he not
asked it in Terms a little too abject.

There is an Air of Greatness in the Conclusion of the Speech of Achilles,
which strikes me very much: He speaks very unconcernedly of his own Death, and
upbraids his Enemy for asking Life so earnestly, a Life that was of so much
less Importance than his own.

IX.
VERSE 122. The Day shall come --
When by the Spear, the Arrow, or the Dart.
This is not spoken at random, but with an Air of Superiority; when Achilles
says he shall fall by an Arrow, a Dart or a Spear, he insinuates that no Man
will have the Courage to approach him in a close Fight, or engage him Hand to
Hand. Eustathius.

X.
VERSE 147. Your living Coursers glut his Gulphs in vain.] It was an ancient
Custom to cast living Horses into the Sea, and into Rivers, to honor, as it
were, by these Victims, the Rapidity of their Streams. This Practice continued
a long time, and History supplies us with Examples of it: Aurelius Victor says
of Pompey the younger, Cum mari feliciter uteretur, Neptuni se filium confessus
est, eumque bobus auratis and equo placavit. He offered Oxen in Sacrifice, and
threw a living Horse into the Sea, as appears from Dion; which is perfectly
conformable to this of Homer. Eustath. Dacier.

XI.
VERSE 153. With Fury swells the violated Flood.] The Poet has been preparing
us for the Episode of the River Xanthus ever since the Beginning of the last
Book; and here he gives us an account why the River wars upon Achilles: It is
not only because he is a River of Troas, but, as Eustathius remarks, because it
is in defense of a Man that was descended from a Brother-River God: He was
angry too with Achilles on another account, because he had choked up his
Current with the Bodies of his Countrymen, the Trojans.

XII.
VERSE 172. From rich Paeonia 's -- etc.] In the Catalogue Pyraechmes is said
to be Commander of the Paeonians, where they are described as Bow-Men; but here
they are said to be armed with Spears, and to have Asteropaens for their
General. Eustathius tells us, some Critics asserted that this Line in the
Cat.. 355. (...)
followed (...)
but I see no reason for such an Assertion. Homer has expressly told us in this
Speech that it was but ten Days since he came to the Aid of Troy; he might be
made General of the Paeonians upon the Death of Pyraechmes, who was killed in
the sixteenth Book. Why also might not the Paeonians, as well as Teucer, excel
in the Management both of the Bow and the Spear?

XIII.
VERSE 189. Deep in the swelling Bank was driven the Spear,
Even to the middle eathed -- ]
It was impossible for the Poet to give us a greater Idea of the Strength of
Achilles than he has by this Circumstance: His Spear pierced so deep into the
Ground, that another Hero of great Strength could not disengage it by repeated
Efforts; but immediately after, Achilles draws it with the utmost Ease: How
prodigious was the Force of that Arm that could drive at one throw a Spear half
way into the Earth, and then with a touch release it?

XIV.
VERSE 264. Now bursting on his Head, etc.] There is a great Beauty in the
Versification of this whole Passage in Homer: Some of the Verses run hoarse,
full, and sonorous, like the Torrent they describe; others by their broken
Cadences, and sudden Stops, image the Difficulty, Labor, and Interruption of
the Hero's March against it. The fall of the Elm, the tearing up of the Bank,
the rushing of the Branches in the Water, are all put into such Words, that
almost every Letter corresponds in its Sound, and echoes to the Sense of each
particular.

XV.
VERSE 275. Bridg'd the rough Flood across -- ] If we had no other account of
the River Xanthus but this, it were alone sufficient to show that the Current
could not be very wide; for the Poet here says that the Elm stretched from Bank
to Bank, and as it were made a Bridge over it: The Suddenness of this
Inundation perfectly well agrees with a narrow River.

XVI.
VERSE 277. Leaped from the Chanel.] Eustathius recites a Criticism on this
Verse, in the Original the Word (...) signifies Stagnum, Palus, a
standing-Water; now this is certainly contrary to the Idea of a River, which
always implies a Current: To solve this, says that Author, some have supposed
that the Tree which lay across the River stopped the flow of the Waters, and
forced them to spread as it were into a Pool. Others, dissatisfied with this
Solution, think that a Mistake is crept into the Text, and that instead of
(...), should be inserted (...). But I do not see the Necessity of having
recourse to either of these Solutions; for why may not the Word (...) signify
here the Chanel of the River, as it evidently does in the 317th Verse? And
nothing being more common than to substitute a part for the whole, why may not
the Chanel be supposed to imply the whole River?

XVII.
VERSE 290. As when a Peasant to his Garden brings, etc.] This changing of the
Character is very beautiful: No Poet ever knew, like Homer, to pass from the
vehement and the nervous, to the gentle and the agreeable; such Transitions,
when properly made, give a singular Pleasure, as when in Music a Master passes
from the rough to the tender. Demetrius Phalereus, who only praises this
Comparison for its Clearness, has not sufficiently recommended its Beauty and
Value. Virgil has transferred it into his first Book of the Georgicks.. 106.
Deinde satis fluvium inducit, rivosque sequentes:
Et cum exustus ager morientibus aestuat herbis,
Ecce supercilio clivosi tramitis undam
Elicit: Illa cadens raucum per levia murmur
Saxa ciet, scatebrisque arentia temperat arva.
Dacier.

XVIII.
VERSE 322. Oh had I died in Fields of Battle warm! etc.] Nothing is more
agreeable than this Wish to the heroic Character of Achilles: Glory is his
prevailing Passion; he grieves not that he must die, but that he should die
unlike a Man of Honor. Virgil has made use of the same Thought in the same
Circumstance, where Aeneas is in danger of being drowned, Aen. 1.. 98. -- O
terque quaterque beati,
Queis ante ora patrum Trojae sub moenibus altis
Contigit oppetere! O Danaum fortissime gentis
Tydide, mean Iliacis occumbere campis
Non potuisse? tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra!


Lucan, in the fifth Book of his Pharsalia, representing Caesar in the same
Circumstance, has (I think) yet farther the Character of Ambition, and a
boundless Thirst of Glory, in his Hero; when, after he has repined in the same
manner with Achilles, he acquiesces at last in the Reflection of the Glory he
had already acquired, -- Licet ingentes abruperit actus
Festinata dies fatis, sat magna peregi.
Arctoas domui gentes: inimica subegi
Arma manu: vidit Magnum mihi Roma secundum.
And only wishes that his obscure Fate might be concealed, in the view that all
the World might still fear and expect him. -- Lacerum retinete cadaver
Fluctibus in mediis; desint mihi busta, rogusque,
Dum metuar semper, terraque expecter ab omni.


XIX.
VERSE 406. While Vulcan breathed the fiery Blast around.] It is in the
Original,. 355. (...)
The Epithet given to Vulcan in this Verse (as well as in the 367th) (...), has
no sort of Allusion to the Action described: For what has his Wisdom or
Knowledge to do with burning up the River Xanthus? This is usual in our Author,
and much exclaimed against by his modern Antagonists, whom Mr. Boileau very
well answers. "It is not so strange in Homer to give these Epithets to Persons
upon occasions which can have no reference to them; the same is frequent in
modern Languages, in which we call a Man by the Name of Saint, when we speak of
any Action of his that has not the least regard to his Sanctity: As when we
say, for example, that St. Paul held the Garments of those who stoned St.
Stephen.

XX.
VERSE 425. As when the Flames beneath a Caldron rise.] It is impossible to
render literally such Passages with any tolerable Beauty. These Ideas can never
be made to shine in English, some Particularities cannot be preserved; but the
Greek Language gives them Luster, the Words are noble and musical, (...)
(...)
(...)
All therefore that can be expected from a Translator is to preserve the
Meaning of the Simile, and embellish it with some Words of Affinity that carry
nothing low in the Sense or Sound.

XXI.
VERSE 447. And soft re-murmur in their native bed.] Here ends the Episode of
the River-Fight; and I must here lay before the Reader my Thoughts upon the
whole of it: Which appears to be in part an Allegory, and in part a true
History. Nothing can give a better Idea of Homer's manner of enlivening his
inanimate Machines, and of making the plainest and simplest Incidents noble and
poetical, than to consider the whole Passage in the common historical Sense,
which I suppose to be no more than this. There happened a great Overflow of the
River Xanthus during the Seige, which very much incommoded the Assailants: This
gave occasion for the Fiction of an Engagement between Achilles and the
River-God: Xanthus calling Simois to assist him, implies that these two
neighboring Rivers joined in the Inundation: Pallas and Neptune relieve
Achilles; that is, Pallas, or the Wisdom of Achilles, found some means to
divert the Waters, and turn them into the Sea; wherefore Neptune, the God of
it, is feigned to assist him. Jupiter and Juno (by which are understood the
aerial Regions) consent to aid Achilles; this may signify, that after this
great Flood their happened a warm, dry, windy Season, which assuaged the
Waters, and dried the Ground: And what makes this in a manner plain, is, that
Juno (which signifies the Air) promises to send the North and West Winds to
distress the River. Xanthus being consumed by Vulcan, that is dried up with
Heat, prays to Juno to relieve him: What is this, but that the Drought having
almost drunk up his Streams, he has recourse to the Air for Rains to resupply
his Current? Or perhaps the whole may signify no more, than that Achilles being
on the farther side of the River, plunged himself in to pursue the Enemy; that
in this Adventure he run the risk of being drowned; that to save himself he
laid hold on a fallen Tree, which served to keep him afloat; that he was still
carried down the Stream to the Place where was the Confluence of the two
Rivers, which is expressed by the one calling the other to his Aid; and that
when he came nearer the Sea [ Neptune] he found means by his Prudence (Pallas)
to save himself from his Danger.

If the Reader still should think the Fiction of Rivers speaking and fighting
is too bold, the Objection will vanish by considering how much the Heathen
Mythology authorizes the Representation of Rivers as Persons: Nay even in old
Historians nothing is more common than Stories of Rapes committed by
River-Gods: And the Fiction was no way unpresidented, after one of the same
nature so well known, as the Engagement between Hercules and the River Achelous.

XXII.
VERSE 455. Jove as his Sport, the dreadful Scene descries,
And views contending Gods with careless Eyes.]
I was at a loss for the reason why Jupiter is said to smile at the Discord of
the Gods, till I found it in Eustathius; Jupiter, says he, who is the Lord of
Nature, is well pleased with the War of the Gods, that is of Earth, Sea, and
Air, etc. because the Harmony of all Beings arises from that Discord: Thus
Earth is opposite to Water, Air to Earth, and Water to them all; and yet from
this Opposition arises that discordant Concord by which all Nature subsists.
Thus Heat and Cold, moist and dry, are in a continual War, yet upon this
depends the Fertility of the Earth, and the Beauty of the Creation. So that
Jupiter who according to the Greeks is the Soul of all, may well be said to
smile at this Contention.

XXIII.
VERSE 456. The Power of Battles, etc.] The Combat of Mars and Pallas is
plainly allegorical: Justice and Wisdom demanded that an end should be put to
this terrible War: the God of War opposes this, but is worsted. Eustathius says
that this holds forth the Opposition of Rage and Wisdom; and no sooner has our
Reason subdued one Temptation, but another succeeds to reinforce it, thus Venus
succors Mars. The Poet seems farther to insinuate, that Reason when it resists
a Temptation vigorously, easily overcomes it: So it is with the utmost Facility
that Pallas conquers both Mars and Venus. He adds, that Pallas retreated from
Mars in order to conquer him; this shows us that the best way to subdue a
Temptation is to retreat from it.

XXIV.
VERSE 469. Then heaved the Goddess in her mighty Hand
A Stone, etc.]


The Poet has described many of his Heroes in former parts of his Poem, as
throwing Stones of enormous Bulk and Weight; but here he rises in his Image: He
is describing a Goddess, and has found a way to make that Action excel all
human Strength, and be equal to a Deity.

Virgil has imitated this Passage in his twelfth Book, and applied it to
Turnus; but I cannot help thinking that the action in a Mortal is somewhat
extravagantly imagined: What principally renders it so, is an Addition of two
Lines to this Simile which he borrows from another part of Homer, only with
this difference, that whereas Homer says no two Men could raise such a Stone,
Virgil extends it to twelve. -- Saxum circumspicit ingens,
Saxum, antiquum, ingens, campo quod forte jacebat,
Limes agro positus, litem ut discerneret arvis.
(There is a Beauty in the Repetition of Saxum ingens, in the second Line; it
makes us dwell upon the Image, and gives us Leisure to consider the Vastness of
the Stone:) The other two Lines are as follow, Vix illud, lecti bis sex cervice
subirent,
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus.
May I be allowed to think, they are not so well introduced in Virgil? For it
is just after Turnus is described as weakened and oppressed with his Fears and
ill Omens; it exceeds Probability; and Turnus, methinks, looks more like a
Knight Errant in a Romance, than an Hero in an Epick Poem.

XXV.
VERSE 508. The God of Ocean, and the God of Light.] The Interview between
Neptune and Apollo is very judiciously in this place enlarged upon by our
Author. The Poem now draws to a Conclusion, the Trojans are to be punished for
their Perjury and Violence: Homer accordingly with a poetical Justice sums up
the Evidence against them, and represents the very Founder of Troy as an
injurious person. There have been several References to this Story since the
Beginning of the Poem, but he forbore to give it at large till near the end of
it; that it might be fresh upon the Memory, and show, the Trojans deserve the
Punishment they are about to suffer.

Eustathius gives the reason why Apollo assists the Trojans, though he had been
equally with Neptune affronted by Laomedon: This proceeded from the Honors
which Apollo received from the Posterity of Laomedon; Troy paid him no less
Worship than Cilla, or Tenedos; and by these means won him over to a
Forgiveness: But Neptune still was slighted, and consequently continued an
Enemy to the whole Race.

The same Author gives us various Opinions why Neptune is said to have built
the Trojan Wall, and to have been defrauded of his Wages: Some say that
Laomedon sacrilegiously took away the Treasures out of the Temples of Apollo
and Neptune, to carry on the Fortifications: From whence it was fabled that
Neptune and Apollo built the Walls. Others will have it, that two of the
Workmen dedicated their Wages to Apollo and Neptune; and that Laomedon detained
them: So that he might in some sense be said to defraud the Deities themselves,
by withholding what was dedicated to their Temples.

The reason why Apollo is said to have kept the Herds of Laomedon is not so
clear: Eustathius observes that all Plagues first seize upon the four-footed
Creation, and are supposed to arise from this Deity: Thus Apollo in the first
Book sends the Plague into the Grecian Army: The Ancients therefore made him to
preside over Cattle, that by preserving them from the Plague, Mankind might be
safe from infectious Diseases. Others tell us, that this Employment is ascribed
to Apollo, because he signifies the Sun: Now the Sun clothes the Pastures with
Grass and Herbs: So that Apollo may be said himself to feed the Cattle, by
supplying them with Food. Upon either of these accounts Laomedon may be said to
be ungrateful to that Deity, for raising no Temple to his Honor.

It is observable that Homer in this Story ascribes the building of the Wall to
Neptune only: I should conjecture the reason might be, that Troy being a
Seaport Town, the chief Strength of it depended upon its Situation, so that
the Sea was in a manner a Wall to it: Upon this account Neptune may not
improbably be said to have built the Wall.

XXVI.
VERSE 537. For what is Man? etc.] The Poet is very happy in interspersing his
Poem with moral Sentences; in this place he steals away his Reader from War and
Horror, and gives him a beautiful Admonition of his own Frailty. "Shall I (says
Apollo) contend with thee for the sake of Man? Man, who is no more than a Leaf
of a Tree, now green and flourishing, but soon withered away and gone?" The Son
of Sirach has an Expression which very much resembles this, Ecclus. xiv. 18. As
the green Leaves upon a thick Tree some fall, and some grow, so is the
Generation of Flesh and Blood, one comes to an end, and one is born.

XXVII.
VERSE 544. And from the Senior God submiss retires.] Two things hinder Homer
from making Neptune and Apollo fight. First, because having already described
the Fight between Vulcan and Xanthus, he has nothing farther to say here, for
it is the same Conflict between Humidity and Dryness. Secondly, Apollo being
the same with Destiny, and the Ruin of the Trojans being concluded upon and
decided, that God can no longer defer it. Dacier.

XXVIII.
VERSE 557. The female Plague --
Fierce to the feeble Race of Womankind, etc.]
The Words in the Original are, Though Jupiter has made you a Lion to Women. The
meaning of this is, that Diana was terrible to that Sex, as being the same with
the Moon, and bringing on the Pangs of Childbirth: Or else, that the Ancients
attributed all sudden Deaths of Women to the Darts of Diana, as of Men to those
of Apollo: Which Opinion is frequently alluded to in Homer. Eustathius.

XXIX.
VERSE 580. Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the War.] It is impossible that
Mercury should encounter Latona: Such a Fiction would be unnatural, he being a
Planet, and she representing the Night; for the Planets owe all their Luster to
the Shades of the Night, and then only become visible to the World. Eustathius.

XXX.
VERSE 567. She said, and seized her Wrists, etc.] I must confess I am at a
loss how to justify Homer in every point of these Combats of the Gods: When
Diana and Juno are to fight, Juno calls her an impudent Bitch, (...): When they
fight, she boxes her soundly, and sends her crying and trembling to Heaven: As
soon as she comes thither Jupiter falls a laughing at her: Indeed the rest of
the Deities seem to be in a merry Vein during all the Action: Pallas beats
Mars, and laughs at him, Jupiter sees them in the same merry mood: Juno when
she had cuff'd Diana is not more serious: In short, unless there be some Depths
that I am not able to fathom, Homer never better deserved than in this place
the Censure past upon him by the Ancients, that as he raised the Characters of
his Men up to Gods, so he sunk those of Gods down to Men.

Yet I think it but reasonable to conclude, from the very Absurdity of all
this, supposing it had no hidden Meaning or Allegory, that there must therefore
certainly be some. Nor do I think it any Inference to the contrary, that it is
too obscure for us to find out: The Remoteness of our Times must necessarily
darken yet more and more such Things as were Mysteries at first. Not that it is
at all impossible, notwithstanding their present Darkness, but they might then
have been very obvious; as it is certain Allegories ought to be disguised, but
not obscured: An Allegory should be like a Veil over a beautiful Face, so fine
and transparent, as to show the very Charms it covers.

XXXI.
VERSE 608. As when avenging Flames with Fury driven,
On guilty Towns exert the Wrath of Heaven.]
This Passage may be explained two ways, each very remarkable. First, by taking
this Fire for a real Fire, sent from Heaven to punish a criminal City, of which
we have Example in holy Writ. Hence we find that Homer had a Notion of this
great Truth, that God sometimes exerts his Judgments on whole Cities in this
signal and terrible manner. Or if we take it in the other sense, simply as a
Fire thrown into a Town by the Enemies who assault it, (and only expressed thus
by the Author in the same manner as Jeremy makes the City of Jerusalem say,
when the Chaldaeans burnt the Temple, The Lord from above has sent Fire into
my Bones. Lament. i. 13.) Yet still thus much will appear understood by Homer,
that the Fire which is cast into a City comes not properly speaking from Men,
but from God who delivers it up to their Fury. Dacier.

XXXII.
VERSE 614. High on a Turret hoary Priam, etc.] The Poet still raises the Idea
of the Courage and Strength of his Hero, by making Priam in a Terror that he
should enter the Town with the routed Troops: For if he had not surpassed all
Mortals, what could have been more desirable for an Enemy, than to have let
him in, and then destroyed him?

Here again there was need of another Machine to hinder him from entering the
City; for Achilles being vastly speedier than those he pursued, he must
necessarily overtake some of them, and the narrow Gates could not let in a body
of Troops without his mingling with the hindmost. The Story of Agenor is
therefore admirably contrived, and Apollo, (who was to take care that the fatal
Decrees should be punctually executed) interposes both to save Agenor and Troy;
for Achilles might have killed Agenor, and still entered with the Troops, if
Apollo had not diverted him by the Pursuit of that Phantom. Agenor opposed
himself to Achilles only because he could not do better; for he sees himself
reduced to a Dilemma, either ingloriously to perish among the Fugitives, or
hide himself in the Forest; both which were equally unsafe: Therefore he is
purposely inspired with a generous Resolution to try to save his Countrymen,
and as the Reward of that Service, is at last saved himself.

XXXIII.
VERSE 652. What shall I fly? etc.] This is a very beautiful Soliloquy of
Agenor, such a one as would naturally arise in the Soul of a brave Man, going
upon a desperate Enterprise: He weighs every thing in the balance of Reason; he
sets before himself the Baseness of Flight, and the Courage of his Enemy, till
at last the thirst of Glory preponderates all other Considerations. From the
Conclusion of this Speech it is evident, that the Story of Achilles his being
invulnerable except in the Heel, is an Invention of latter Ages; for had he
been so, there had been nothing wonderful in his Character. Eustathius.

XXXIV.
VERSE 705. Meanwhile the God, to cover their Escape, etc.] The Poet makes a
double use of this Fiction of Apollo's deceiving Achilles in the Shape of
Agenor; by these means he draws him from the Pursuit, and gives the Trojans
time to enter the City, and at the same time brings Agenor handsomely off from
the Combat. The Moral of this Fable is, that Destiny would not yet suffer Troy
to fall.

Eustathius fancies that the occasion of the Fiction might be this: Agenor fled
from Achilles to the Banks of Xanthus, and might there conceal himself from the
Pursuer behind some Covert that grew on the Shores; this perhaps might be the
whole of the Story. So plain a Narration would have passed in the Mouth of an
Historian, but the Poet dresses it in Fiction, and tells us that Apollo (or
Destiny) concealed him in a Cloud from the sight of his Enemy.

The same Author farther observes, that Achilles by an unseasonable piece of
Vainglory, in pursuing a single Enemy gives time to a whole Army to escape; he
neither kills Agenor, nor overtakes the Trojans.

FINIS.

