blazon or coat of arms DIEU ET MON DROIT


GEORGE R.
GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved BERNARD LINTOT of our City of London,
Bookseller, has humbly represented unto Us that he is now printing a
Translation of the ILIAD of HOMER from the Greek in Six Volumes in Folio by
ALEXANDER POPE Gent. with large Notes upon each Book: And whereas the said
BERNARD LINTOT has informed Us that he has been at a great Expense in carrying
on the said Work: and that the sole Right and Title of the Copy of the said
Work is vested in the said BERNARD LINTOT. He has therefore humbly besought Us
to grant him Our Royal Privilege and License for the sole printing and
publishing thereof for the Term of fourteen Years. WE being graciously pleased
to encourage so useful a Work, are pleased to condescend to his Request, and do
therefore give and grant unto the said BERNARD LINTOTT our Royal License and
Privilege for the sole printing and publishing the said Six Volumes of the said
ILIAD of HOMER translated by the said ALEXANDER POPE, for, and during the Term
of fourteen Years, to be computed from the Day of the Date hereof; strictly
charging and prohibiting all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to
reprint or abridge the same either in the like or any other Volume or Volumes
whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies of the same
or any part thereof reprinted beyond the Seas within the said Term of fourteen
Years, without the Consent and Approbation of the said BERNARD LINTOT, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals
first had and obtained, as they and every of them offending herein will answer
the contrary at their Perils, and such other Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this our Realm may be inflicted: Whereof the Master, Wardens and
Company of Stationers of our City of London, Commissioners and other Officers
of Our Customs, and all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern,
are to take Notice that due Obedience be given to Our Pleasure herein
signified. Given at Our Court at St. James's the sixth Day of May, 1715. in the
first Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command JAMES STANHOPE.

THE ILIAD OF HOMER.

Translated by Mr. POPE.

VOL. VI.

Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque Puer --
HOR. LONDON: Printed by W. BOWYER, for BERNARD LINTOT between the
Temple-Gates. 1720.

THE TWENTY-SECOND BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Death of Hector.
THE Trojans being safe within the Walls, Hector only stays to oppose Achilles.
Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his Son to re-enter the
Town. Hecuba joins her Entreaties, but in vain. Hector consults within himself
what Measures to take; but at the advance of Achilles, his Resolution fails
him, and he flies; Achilles pursues him thrice round the Walls of Troy. The
Gods debate concerning the Fate of Hector, at length Minerva descends to the
aid of Achilles. She deludes Hector in the Shape of Deiphobus, he stands the
Combat, and is slain. Achilles drags the dead Body at his Chariot, in the
sight of Priam and Hecuba. Their Lamentations, Tears, and Despair. Their Cries
reach the Ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into the inner
part of the Palace: She mounts up to the Walls, and beholds her dead Husband.
She swoons at the Spectacle. Her Excess of Grief, and Lamentation.

The thirtieth Day still continues. The Scene lies under the Walls, and on the
Battlements of Troy.

THE TWENTY-SECOND BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THUS to their Bulwarks, smit with Panick Fear,
The herded Ilians rush like driven Deer;
There safe, they wipe the briny Drops away,
And drown in Bowls the Labors of the Day.
Close to the Walls advancing over the Fields,
Beneath one Roof of well-compacted Shields
March, bending on, the Greeks embodied Powers,
Far-stretching in the Shade of Trojan Towers.
Great Hector singly stayed; chained down by Fate,
There fixed he stood before the Scaean Gate;
Still his bold Arms determined to employ,
The Guardian still of long-defended Troy.
Apollo now to tired Achilles turns;
(The Power confessed in all his Glory burns)
And what (he cries) has Peleus' Son in view,
With mortal Speed a Godhead to pursue?
For not to thee to know the Gods is given,
Unskilled to trace the latent Marks of Heaven.
What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the Plain?
Vain thy past Labor, and thy present vain:
Safe in their Walls are now her Troops bestowed,
While here thy frantic Rage attacks a God.
The Chief incensed -- Too partial God of Day!
To check my Conquests in the middle way:
How few in Ilion else had Refuge found?
What gasping Numbers now had bit the Ground?
Thou robb'st me of a Glory justly mine,
Powerful of Godhead, and of Fraud Divine:
Mean Fame, alas! for one of heavenly Strain,
To cheat a Mortal, who repines in vain.
Then to the City, terrible and strong,
With high and haughty steps he towr'd along.
So the proud Courser, victor of the prize,
To the near Goal with doubled Ardor flies.
Him, as he blazing shot across the Field,
The careful Eyes of Priam first beheld.
Not half so dreadful rises to the Sight
Through the thick Gloom of some tempestuous Night
Orion's Dog (the Year when Autumn weighs)
And over the feebler Stars exerts his Rays;
Terrific Glory! for his burning Breath
Taints the red Air with Fevers, Plagues, and Death.
So flamed his fiery Mail. Then wept the Sage;
He strikes his reverend Head now white with Age:
He lifts his withered Arms; obtests the Skies;
He calls his much loved Son with feeble Cries;
The Son, resolved Achilles' Force to dare,
Full at the Scaean Gates expects the War;
While the sad Father on the Rampart stands,
And thus adjures him, with extended Hands.
Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest Son!
Methinks already I behold thee slain,
And stretched beneath that Fury of the Plain.
Implacable Achilles! might thou be
To all the Immortals hateful as to me!
Thee, Vultures wild should scatter round the Shore
And bloody Dogs grow fiercer from thy Gore.
How many valiant Sons I late enjoyed,
Valiant in vain! by thy cursed Arm destroyed:
Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant Isles
To shameful Bondage and unworthy Toils.
Two, while I speak, my Eyes in vain explore,
Two from one Mother sprung, my Polydore,
And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
Oh if in yonder hostile Camp they live,
What Heaps of Gold, what Treasures would I give?
(Their Grandsire's Wealth, by right of Birth their own,
Consigned his Daughter with Lelegia's Throne)
But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
All pale they wander on the Stygian Coast;
What Sorrows then must their sad Mother know,
What Anguish I? Unutterable Woe!
Yet less that Anguish, less to her, to me,
Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee,
Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the Wall;
And spare thy self, thy Father, spare us all!
Save thy dear Life; or if a Soul so brave
Neglect that Thought, thy dearer Glory save.
Pity, while yet I live, these silver Hairs;
While yet thy Father feels the Woes he bears,
Yet cursed with Sense! a Wretch, whom in his Rage
(All trembling on the Verge of helpless Age)
Great Jove has placed, sad Spectacle of Pain!
The bitter Dregs of Fortune's Cup to drain:
To fill with Scenes of Death his closing Eyes,
And number all his Days by Miseries!
My Heroes slain, my Bridal Bed o'erturn'd,
My Daughters ravished, and my City burned,
My bleeding Infants dashed against the Floor;
These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
Perhaps even I, reserved by angry Fate
The last sad Relick of my ruined State,
(Dire Pomp of sovereign Wretchedness!) must fall,
And stain the Pavement of my regal Hall;
Where famished Dogs, late Guardians of my Door,
Shall lick their mangled Master's spatter'd Gore.
Yet for my Sons I thank ye Gods! 'twas well:
Well have they perished, for in Fight they fell.
Who dies in Youth, and Vigor, dies the best,
Struck through with Wounds, all honest on the Breast.
But when the Fates, in Fullness of their Rage,
Spurn the hoar Head of unresisting Age,
In Dust the reverend Lineaments deform,
And pour to Dogs the Lifeblood scarcely warm;
This, this is Misery! the last, the worst,
That Man can feel; Man, fated to be cursed!
He said, and acting what no Words could say,
Rent from his Head the silver Locks away.
With him the mournful Mother bears a Part;
Yet all their Sorrows turn not Hector's Heart:
The Zone unbrac'd, her Bosom she displayed;
And thus, fast-falling the salt Tears, she said.
Have mercy on me, O my Son! Revere
The Words of Age; attend a Parent's Prayer!
If ever thee in these fond Arms I pressed,
Or stilled thy infant Clamours at this Breast;
Ah do not thus our helpless Years foregoe,
But by our Walls secured, repel the Foe.
Against his Rage if singly thou proceed,
Should thou (but Heaven avert it!) should thou bleed,
Nor must thy Corpse lie honored on the Bier,
Nor Spouse nor Mother grace thee with a Tear;
Far from our pious Rites, those dear Remains
Must feast the Vultures on the naked Plains.
So they, while down their Cheeks the Torrents roll;
But fixed remains the Purpose of his Soul:
Resolved he stands, and with a fiery Glance
Expects the Hero's terrible Advance.
So rolled up in his Den, the swelling Snake
Beholds the Traveller approach the Brake;
When fed with noxious Herbs his turgid Veins
Have gathered half the Poisons of the Plains;
He burns, he stiffens with collected Ire,
And his red Eye Balls glare with living Fire.
Beneath a Turret, on his Shield reclined,
He stood, and questioned thus his mighty Mind.
Where lies my Way? To enter in the Wall?
Honor and Shame the ungen'rous Thought recall:
Shall proud Polydamas before the Gate
Proclaim, his Counsels are obeyed too late,
Which, timely followed but the former Night,
What Numbers had been saved by Hector's Flight?
That wise Advice rejected with Disdain,
I feel my Folly in my People slain.
Methinks my suffering Country's Voice I hear,
But most, her worthless Sons insult my Ear,
On my rash Courage charge the Chance of War,
And blame those Virtues which they cannot share.
No -- If I ever return, return I must
Glorious, my Country's Terror laid in Dust:
Or if I perish, let her see me fall
In Field at least, and fighting for her Wall.
And yet suppose these Measures I forego,
Approach unarmed, and parley with the Foe,
The Warrior-Shield, the Helm, and Lance lay down,
And treat on Terms of Peace to save the Town:
The Wife withheld, the Treasure ill detained,
(Cause of the War, and Grievance of the Land)
With honorable Justice to restore;
And add half Ilion's yet remaining Store,
Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
May share our Wealth, and leave our Walls in Peace.
But why this Thought? Unarmed if I should go,
What hope of Mercy from this vengeful Foe?
But Woman-like to fall, and fall without a Blow.
We greet not here, as Man conversing Man
Met at an Oak, or journeying over a Plain;
No Season now for calm familiar Talk,
Like Youths and Maidens in an Evening Walk:
War is our Business; but to whom is given
To die or triumph, that, determine Heaven!
Thus pond'ring, like a God the Greek drew nigh;
His dreadful Plumage nodded from on high;
The Pelian Javelin, in his better Hand,
Shot trembling Rays that glittered over the Land;
And on his Breast the beamy Splendors shone
Like Jove's own Lightning, or the rising Sun.
As Hector sees, unusual Terrors rise,
Struck by some God, he fears, recedes, and flies.
He leaves the Gates, he leaves the Walls behind;
Achilles follows like the winged Wind.
Thus at the panting Dove a Falcon flies,
(The swiftest Racer of the liquid Skies)
Just when he holds or thinks he holds his Prey,
Obliquely wheeling through the aerial Way;
With open Beak and shrilling Cries he springs,
And aims his Claws, and shoots upon his Wings:
No less fore-right the rapid Chase they held,
One urged by Fury, one by Fear impelled;
Now circling round the Walls their Course maintain,
Where the high Watch-tow'r overlooks the Plain;
Now where the Fig Trees spread their Umbrage broad,
(A wider Compass) smoke along the Road.
Next by Scamander's double Source they bound,
Where two famed Fountains burst the parted Ground;
This hot through scorching Clefts is seen to rise,
With Exhalations steaming to the Skies;
That the green Banks in Summer's Heat overflows,
Like Crystal clear, and cold as Winter-Snows.
Each gushing Fount a marble Cistern fills,
Whose polished Bed receives the falling Rills;
Where Trojan Dames, (ever yet alarmed by Greece,)
Washed their fair Garments in the Days of Peace.
By these they past, one chasing, one in Flight,
(The Mighty fled, pursued by stronger Might)
Swift was the Course; No vulgar Prize they play,
No vulgar Victim must reward the Day,
(Such as in Races crown the speedy Strife)
The Prize contended was great Hector's Life.
As when some Hero's Fun'rals are decreed
In grateful Honor of the mighty Dead;
Where high Rewards the vigorous Youth inflame,
(Some golden Tripod, or some lovely Dame)
The panting Coursers swiftly turn the Goal,
And with them turns the raised Spectator's Soul.
Thus three times round the Trojan Wall they fly;
The gazing Gods lean forward from the Sky:
To whom, while eager on the Chase they look,
The Sire of Mortals and Immortals spoke.
Unworthy Sight! The Man, beloved of Heaven,
Behold, inglorious round yon' City driven!
My Heart partakes the generous Hector's Pain;
Hector, whose Zeal whole Hecatombs has slain,
Whose grateful Fumes the Gods received with Joy,
From Ida's Summits, and the Towers of Troy:
Now see him flying! to his Fears resigned,
And Fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
Consult, ye Powers! ('it is worthy your Debate)
Whether to snatch him from impending Fate,
Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
(Good as he is) the Lot imposed on Man?
Then Pallas thus: Shall he whose Vengeance forms
The forky Bolt, and blackens Heaven with Storms,
Shall he prolong one Trojan's forfeit Breath!
A Man, a Mortal, pre-ordain'd to Death!
And will no Murmurs fill the Courts above,
No Gods indignant blame their partial Jove?
Go then (returned the Sire) without delay,
Exert thy Will: I give the Fates their Way.
Swift at the Mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
And stoops impetuous from the cleaving Skies.
As through the Forest, over the Vale and Lawn,
The well-breathed Beagle drives the flying Fawn;
In vain he tries the Covert of the Brakes,
Or deep beneath the trembling Thicket shakes;
Sure of the Vapor in the tainted Dews,
The certain Hound his various Maze pursues.
Thus step by step, wherever the Trojan wheeled,
There swift Achilles compassed round the Field.
Often as to reach the Dardan Gates he bends,
And hopes the Assistance of his pitying Friends,
(Whose show'ring Arrows, as he cours'd below,
From the high Turrets might oppress the Foe.)
So often Achilles turns him to the Plain:
He eyes the City, but he eyes in vain.
As Men in Slumbers seem with speedy pace,
One to pursue, and one to lead the Chase,
Their sinking Limbs the fancied Course forsake,
Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake.
No less the laboring Heroes pant and strain;
While that but flies, and this pursues, in vain.
What God, O Muse! assisted Hector's Force,
With Fate itself so long to hold the Course?
Phoebus it was; who, in his latest Hour,
Endu'd his Knees with strength, his Nerves with Power:
And great Achilles, lest some Greek's Advance
Should snatch the Glory from his lifted Lance,
Signed to the Troops, to yield his Foe the Way,
And leave untouched the Honors of the Day.
Jove lifts the golden Balances, that show
The Fates of mortal Men, and things below:
Here each contending Hero's Lot he tries,
And weighs, with equal Hand, their Destinies.
Low sinks the Scale surcharged with Hector's Fate;
Heavy with Death it sinks, and Hell receives the Weight.
Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries.
Oh loved of Jove! this Day our Labors cease,
And Conquest blazes with full Beams on Greece.
Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
Drunk with Renown, insatiable of War,
Falls by thy Hand, and mine! Nor Force, nor Flight
Shall more avail him, nor his God of Light.
See, where in vain he supplicates above,
Rolled at the Feet of unrelenting Jove!
Rest here: My self will lead the Trojan on,
And urge to meet the Fate he cannot shun.
Her Voice divine the Chief with joyful Mind
Obeyed; and rested, on his Lance reclined.
While like Deiphobus the martial Dame
(Her Face, her Gesture, and her Arms the same)
In show an Aid, by hapless Hector's Side
Approached, and greets him thus with Voice belied.
Too long, O Hector! have I born the Sight
Of this Distress, and sorrow'd in thy Flight:
It fits us now a noble Stand to make,
And here, as Brothers, equal Fates partake.
Then he. O Prince! allied in Blood and Fame,
Dearer than all that own a Brother's Name;
Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
Long tried, long loved; much loved, but honored more!
Since You of all our numerous Race, alone
Defend my Life regardless of your own.
Again the Goddess. Much my Father's Prayer,
And much my Mother's, pressed me to forbear:
My Friends embraced my Knees, adjur'd my stay,
But stronger Love impelled, and I obey.
Come then, the glorious Conflict let us try,
Let the Steel sparkle, and the Javelin fly:
Or let us stretch Achilles on the Field,
Or to his Arm our bloody Trophies yield.
Fraudful she said; then swiftly marched before;
The Dardan Hero shuns his Foe no more.
Sternly they met. The Silence Hector broke;
His dreadful Plumage nodded as he spoke.
Enough, O Son of Peleus! Troy has viewed
Her Walls thrice circled, and her Chief pursued.
But now some God within me bids me try
Thine, or my Fate: I kill thee, or I die.
Yet on the Verge of Battle let us stay,
And for a Moment's space, suspend the Day:
Let Heavens high Powers be called to arbitrate
The just Conditions of this stern Debate.
(Eternal Witnesses of all below,
And faithful Guardians of the treasured Vow!)
To them I swear; if Victor in the Strife
Jove by these Hands shall shed thy noble Life;
No vile Dishonor shall thy Corse pursue;
Stripped of its Arms alone (the Conqu'rors Due)
The rest to Greece uninjur'd I Will restore:
Now plight thy mutual Oath, I ask no more.
Talk not of Oaths (the dreadful Chief replies,
While Anger flashed from his disdainful Eyes)
Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
Nor Oath nor Pact Achilles plights with thee:
Such Pacts, as Lambs and rabid Wolves combine,
Such Leagues, as Men and furious Lions join,
To such I call the Gods! One constant state
Of lashing Rancour and eternal Hate:
No Thought but Rage, and never-ceasing Strife,
Till Death extinguish Rage, and Thought, and Life.
Rouse then thy Forces this important Hour;
Collect thy Soul, and call forth all thy Power.
No farther Subterfuge, no farther Chance;
It Is Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my Lance.
Each Grecian Ghost by thee deprived of Breath,
Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy Death.
He spoke, and lanch'd his Javelin at the Foe;
But Hector shunned the meditated Blow:
He stooped, while over his Head the flying Spear
Sung innocent, and spent its Force in Air.
Minerva watched it falling on the Land,
Then drew, and gave to great Achilles' Hand,
Unseen of Hector, who, elate with Joy,
Now shakes his Lance, and braves the Dread of Troy.
The Life you boasted to that Javelin given,
Prince! you have mist. My Fate depends on Heaven.
To thee (presumptuous as thou art) unknown,
Or what must prove my Fortune or thy own.
Boasting is but an Art, our Fears to blind,
And with false Terrors sink another's Mind.
But know, whatever Fate I am to try,
By no dishonest Wound shall Hector die;
I shall not fall a Fugitive at least,
My Soul shall bravely issue from my Breast.
But first, try thou my Arm; and may this Dart
End all my Country's Woes, deep buried in thy Heart!
The Weapon flew, its Course unerring held,
Unerring, but the heavenly Shield repelled
The mortal Dart; resulting with a Bound
From off the ringing Orb, it struck the Ground.
Hector beheld his Javelin fall in vain,
Nor other Lance, nor other Hope remain;
He calls Deiphobus, demands a Spear,
In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
All comfortless he stands: Then, with a Sigh,
It Is so -- Heaven wills it, and my Hour is nigh!
I deemed Deiphobus had heard my Call,
But he secure lies guarded in the Wall.
A God deceived me; Pallas, 'twas thy Deed.
Death, and black Fate approach! It Is I must bleed.
No Refuge now, no Succor from above;
Great Jove deserts me, and the Son of Jove,
Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome Fate!
It Is true I perish, yet IN perish great:
Yet in a mighty Deed I shall expire,
Let future Ages hear it, and admire!
Fierce, at the Word, his weighty Sword he drew
And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
So Jove's bold Bird, high-balanc'd in the Air,
Stoops from the Clouds to truss the quivering Hare.
Nor less Achilles his fierce Soul prepares;
Before his Breast his flaming Shield he bears,
Refulgent Orb! Above his fourfold Cone
The gilded Horsehair sparkled in the Sun,
Nodding at every Step: ( Vulcanian Frame!)
And as he moved, his Figure seemed on flame.
As radiant Hesper shines with keener Light,
Far-beaming over the silver Host of Night,
When all the starry Train emblaze the Sphere:
So shone the Point of great Achilles' Spear.
In his right Hand he waves the Weapon round,
Eyes the whole Man, and meditates the Wound;
But the rich Mail Patroclus lately wore,
Securely cased the Warrior's Body over.
One at cealp length he spies, to let in Fate,
Where 'twixt the Neck and Throat the jointed Plate
Gave entrance: Through that penetrable Part
Furious he drove the well-directed Dart:
Nor pierced the Windpipe yet, nor took the Power
Of Speech, Unhappy! from thy dying Hour.
Prone on the Field the bleeding Warrior lies,
While thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries.
At last is Hector stretched upon the Plain,
Who feared no Vengeance for Patroclus slain:
Then Prince! you should have feared, what now you feel;
Achilles absent, was Achilles still.
Yet a short space the great Avenger stayed,
Then low in Dust thy Strength and Glory laid.
Peaceful He sleeps, with all our Rites adorned,
For ever honored, and for ever mourned:
While cast to all the Rage of hostile Power,
Thee, Birds shall mangle, and the Dogs devour.
Then Hector, fainting at the approach of Death.
By thy own Soul! by those who gave thee Breath!
By all the sacred Prevalence of Prayer;
Ah, leave me not for Grecian Dogs to tear!
The common Rites of Sepulture bestow,
To sooth a Father's and a Mother's Woe;
Let their large Gifts procure an Urn at least,
And Hector's Ashes in his Country rest.
No, Wretch accursed! Relentless he replies,
(Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his Eyes)
Not those who gave me Breath should bid me spare,
Nor all the sacred Prevalence of Prayer.
Could I my self the bloody Banquet join!
No -- to the Dogs that Carcass I resign.
Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her Store,
And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
Should Dardan Priam, and the weeping Dame
Drain their whole Realm to buy one funeral Flame;
Their Hector on the Pile they should not see,
Nor rob the Vultures of one Limb of thee.
Then thus the Chief his dying Accents drew;
Thy Rage, Implacable! too well I knew:
The Furies that relentless Breast have steeled,
And cursed thee with a Heart that cannot yield.
Yet think, a Day will come, when Fate's Decree
And angry Gods, shall wreak this Wrong on thee;
Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my Fate,
And stretch thee here, before this Scaean Gate.
He ceased. The Fates suppressed his laboring Breath,
And his Eyes stiffen'd at the Hand of Death;
To the dark Realm the Spirit wings its Way,
(The manly Body left a Load of Clay)
And plaintive glides along the dreary Coast,
A naked, wandering, melancholy Ghost!
Achilles, musing as he rolled his eyes
Over the dead Hero, thus (unheard) replies.
Die thou the first! When Jove and Heaven ordain,
I follow thee -- He said, and stripped the Slain.
Then forcing backward from the gaping Wound
The reeking Javelin, cast it on the Ground.
The thronging Greeks behold with wondering Eyes
His manly Beauty, and superior Size:
While some ignobler, the great Dead deface
With Wounds ungen'rous, or with Taunts disgrace.
"How changed that Hector! who like Jove of late,
"Sent Lightning on our Fleets, and scattered Fate?
High over the Slain the great Achilles stands,
Begirt with Heroes, and surrounding Bands;
And thus aloud, while all the Host attends.
Princes and Leaders! Countrymen and Friends!
Since now at length the powerful Will of Heaven
The dire Destroyer to our Arm has given,
Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye Powers!
See, if already their deserted Towers
Are left unmanned; or if they yet retain
The Souls of Heroes, their great Hector slain?
But what is Troy, or Glory what to me?
Or why reflects my Mind on ought but thee
Divine Patroclus! Death has sealed his Eyes;
Unwept, unhonour'd, uninterr'd he lies!
Can his dear Image from my Soul depart,
Long as the vital Spirit moves my Heart?
If, in the silent Shades of Hell below,
The Flames of Friends and Lovers cease to glow,
Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay'd,
Burn on through Death, and animate my Shade.
Meanwhile ye Sons of Greece! in Triumph bring
The Corpse of Hector, and your Paeans sing.
Be this the Song, slow-moving towered the Shore,
" Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more.
Then his fell Soul a Thought of Vengeance bred,
(Unworthy of himself, and of the Dead)
The nervous Ancles bored, his Feet he bound
With Thongs inserted through the double Wound;
These fixed up high behind the rolling Wain,
His graceful Head was trail'd along the Plain.
Proud on his Car the insulting Victor stood,
And bore aloft his Arms, distilling Blood.
He smites the Steeds; the rapid Chariot flies;
The sudden Clouds of circling Dust arise.
Now lost is all that formidable Air;
The Face divine, and long-descending Hair
Purple the Ground, and streak the sable Sand;
Deformed, dishonored, in his native Land!
Given to the Rage of an insulting Throng!
And, in his Parent's Sight, now dragged along!
The Mother first beheld with sad survey;
She rent her Tresses, venerably gray,
And cast, far off, the regal Veils away.
With piercing Shrieks his bitter Fate she moans,
While the sad Father answers Groans with Groans,
Tears after Tears his mournful Cheeks overflow,
And the whole City wears one Face of Woe.
No less, than if the Rage of hostile Fires
From her Foundations curling to her Spires,
Over the proud Citadel at length should rise,
And the last Blaze send Ilion to the Skies.
The wretched Monarch of the falling State
Distracted, presses to the Dardan Gate.
Scarce the whole People stop his desperate Course,
While strong Affliction gives the Feeble Force:
Grief tears his Heart, and drives him to and fro,
In all the raging Impotence of Woe.
At length he rolled in Dust, and thus begun:
Imploring all, and naming one by one.
Ah! let me, let me go where Sorrow calls;
I, only I, will issue from your Walls,
(Guide or Companion, Friends! I ask ye none)
And bow before the Murderer of my Son.
My Griefs perhaps his Pity may engage;
Perhaps at least he may respect my Age.
He has a Father too; a Man like me,
One, not exempt from Age and Misery,
(Vigorous no more, as when his young Embrace
Begot this Pest of me, and all my Race.)
How many valiant Sons, in early Bloom,
Has that cursed Hand sent headlong to the Tomb?
Thee, Hector! last: Thy Loss (divinely brave)
Sinks my sad Soul with Sorrow to the Grave.
Oh had thy gentle Spirit past in Peace,
The Son expiring in the Sire's Embrace;
While both thy Parents wept thy fatal Hour,
And bending over thee, mixed the tender Shower!
Some Comfort that had been, some sad Relief,
To melt in full Satiety of Grief!
Thus wail'd the Father, groveling on the Ground,
And all the Eyes of Ilion streamed around.
Amidst her Matrons Hecuba appears,
(A mourning Princess, and a Train in Tears)
Ah why has Heaven prolonged this hated Breath,
Patient of Horrors, to behold thy Death?
O Hector, late thy Parents Pride and Joy,
The Boast of Nations! the Defense of Troy!
To whom her Safety and her Fame she owed,
Her Chief, her Hero, and almost her God!
O fatal Change! become in one sad Day
A senseless Corpse! inanimated Clay!
But not as yet the fatal News had spread
To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
As yet no Messenger had told his Fate,
Nor even his Stay without the Scaean Gate.
Far in the close Recesses of the Dome,
Pensive she plied the melancholy Loom;
A growing Work employed her secret Hours,
Confusedly gay with intermingled Flowr's.
Her fair-hair'd Handmaids heat the brazen Urn,
The Bath preparing for her Lord's Return:
In vain: Alas! her Lord returns no more!
Unbath'd he lies, and bleeds along the Shore!
Now from the Walls the Clamours reach her Ear,
And all her Members shake with sudden Fear;
Forth from her Ivory Hand the Shuttle falls,
As thus, astonished, to her Maids she calls.
Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive Noise
Invades my Ear? It Is sure my Mother's Voice.
My falt'ring Knees their trembling Frame desert,
A Pulse unusual flutters at my Heart.
Some strange Disaster, some reverse of Fate
Ye (Gods avert it) threats the Trojan State.
Far be the Omen which my Thoughts suggest!
But much I fear my Hector's dauntless Breast
Confronts Achilles; chased along the Plain,
Shut from our Walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
Safe in the Crowd he ever scorned to wait,
And sought for Glory in the Jaws of Fate:
Perhaps that noble Heat has cost his Breath,
Now quenched for ever in the Arms of Death.
She spoke; and furious, with distracted Pace,
Fears in her Heart, and Anguish in her Face,
Flies through the Dome, (the Maids her Steps pursue)
And mounts the Walls, and sends around her View.
Too soon her Eyes the killing Object found,
The god-like Hector dragged along the Ground.
A sudden Darkness shades her swimming Eyes:
She faints, she falls; her Breath, her Color flies.
Her Hair's fair Ornaments, the Braids that bound,
The Net that held them, and the Wreath that crowned,
The Veil and Diadem, flew far away;
(The Gift of Venus on her bridal Day)
Around, a Train of weeping Sisters stands,
To raise her sinking with assistant Hands.
Scarce from the Verge of Death recalled, again
She faints, or but recovers to complain.
O wretched Husband of a wretched Wife!
Born with one Fate, to one unhappy Life!
For sure one Star its baneful Beam displayed
On Priam's Roof, and Hippoplacia's Shade.
From different Parents, different Climes we came,
At different Periods, yet our Fate the same!
Why was my Birth to great Aetion owed,
And why was all that tender Care bestowed?
Would I had never been! -- O thou, the Ghost
Of my dead Husband! miserably lost!
Thou to the dismal Realms for ever gone!
And I abandoned, desolate, alone!
An only Child, once Comfort of my Pains,
Sad Product now of hapless Love, remains!
No more to smile upon his Sire! no Friend
To help him now! No Father to defend!
For should he 'scape the Sword, the common Doom,
What Wrongs attend him, and what Griefs to come?
Even from his own paternal Roof expelled,
Some Stranger plows his patrimonial Field.
The Day, that to the Shades the Father sends,
Robs the sad Orphan of his Father's Friends:
He, wretched Outcast of Mankind! appears
For ever sad, for ever bathed in Tears;
Amongst the Happy, unregarded he,
Hangs on the Robe, or trembles at the Knee,
While those his Father's former bounty fed,
Nor reach the Goblet, nor divide the Bread:
The Kindest but his present Wants allay,
To leave him wretched the succeeding Day.
Frugal Compassion! Heedless they who boast
Both Parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
Shall cry, "Begone! Thy Father feasts not here:
The Wretch obeys, retiring with a Tear.
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in Tears,
To my sad Soul Astyanax appears!
Forced by repeated Insults to return,
And to his widowed Mother vainly mourn.
He, who with tender Delicacy bred,
With Princes sported, and on Dainties fed,
And when still Evening gave him up to Rest,
Sunk soft in Down upon the Nurse's Breast,
Must -- ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
Astyanax, from her well-guarded Walls,
Is now that Name no more, unhappy Boy!
Since now no more the Father guards his Troy.
But thou my Hector lie exposed in Air,
Far from thy Parent's and thy Consort's Care,
Whose Hand in vain, directed by her Love,
The martial Scarf and Robe of Triumph wove.
Now to devouring Flames be these a Prey,
Useless to thee, from this accursed Day!
Yet let the Sacrifice at least be paid,
An Honor to the Living, not the Dead!
So spoke the mournful Dame: Her Matrons hear,
Sigh back her Sighs, and answer Tear with Tear.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twenty-Second Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWENTY-SECOND BOOK.
I.
IT is impossible but the whole Attention of the Reader must be awakened in
this Book: The Heroes of the two Armies are now to encounter, all the foregoing
Battles have been but so many Preludes and Under-actions, in order to this
great Event: Wherein the whole Fate of Greece and Troy is to be decided by the
Sword of Achilles and Hector.

This is the Book, which of the whole Iliad appears to me the most charming. It
assembles in it all that can be imagined of great and important on the one
hand, and of tender and melancholy on the other. Terror and Pity are here
wrought up in Perfection, and if the Reader is not sensible of both in a high
degree, either he is utterly void of all Taste, or the Translator of all Skill,
in Poetry.

II.
VERSE 37. Not half so dreadful rises, etc.] With how much dreadful Pomp is
Achilles here introduced! How noble, and in what bold Colors has he drawn the
blazing of his Arms, the Rapidity of his Advance, the Terror of his Appearance,
the Desolation around him; but above all, the certain Death attending all his
Motions and his very Looks; what a Crowd of terrible Ideas in this one Simile!

But immediately after this, follows the moving Image of the two aged Parents,
trembling, weeping, and imploring their Son: That is succeeded again by the
dreadful gloomy Picture of Hector, all on fire, obstinately bent on Death, and
expecting Achilles; admirably painted in the Simile of the Snake rolled up in
his Den and collecting his Poisons: And indeed through the whole Book this
wonderful Contrast and Opposition of the Moving and of the Terrible, is
perpetually kept up, each heightening the other: I cannot find Words to express
how so great Beauties affect me.

III.
VERSE 51. The Speech of Priam to Hector.] The Poet has entertained us all
along with various Scenes of Slaughter and Horror: He now changes to the
pathetick, and fills the Mind of the Reader with tender Sorrows. Eustathius
observes that Priam preludes to his Words by Actions expressive of Misery: The
unhappy Orator introduces his Speech to Hector with Groans and Tears, and
rending his hoary Hair. The Father and the King plead with Hector to preserve
his Life and his Country. He represents his own Age, and the Loss of many of
his Children; and adds, that if Hector falls, he should then be inconsolable,
and the Empire of Troy at an end.

It is a piece of great Judgment in Homer to make the Fall of Troy to depend
upon the Death of Hector: The Poet does not openly tell us that Troy was taken
by the Greeks, but that the Reader might not be unacquainted with what happened
after the Period of his Poem, he gives us to understand in this Speech, that
the City was taken, and that Priam, his Wives, his Sons and Daughters, were
either killed or made Slaves.

IV.
VERSE 76. Enter yet the Wall, and save, etc.] The Argument that Priam uses
(says Eustathius) to induce Hector to secure himself in Troy is remarkable; he
draws it not from Hector's Fears, nor does he tell him that he is to save his
own Life; but he insists upon stronger Motives: He tells him he may preserve
his Fellow-Citizens, his Country, and his Father; and farther, persuades him
not to add Glory to his mortal Enemy by his Fall.

V.
VERSE 90. My bleeding Infants dashed against the Floor.] Cruelties which the
Barbarians usually exercised in the sacking of Towns. Thus Isaiah foretells to
Babylon that her Children shall be dashed in pieces before her Eyes by the
Medes. Infantes eorum allidentur in oculis eorum, xii. 16. And David says to
the same City, Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones
against the Stones. Psalm. cxxxvii. 9. And in the Prophet Hosea, xiii. 16. Their
Infants shall be dashed in pieces. Dacier.

VI.
VERSE 102. But when the Fates, etc.] Nothing can be more moving than the Image
which Homer gives here, in comparing the different Effects produced by the View
of a young Man, and that of an old one, both bleeding, and extended on the
Dust. The old Man it is certain touches us most, and several Reasons may be
given for it; the principal is, that the young Man defended himself, and his
Death is glorious; whereas an old Man has no defense but his Weakness, Prayers,
and Tears. They must be very insensible of what is dreadful, and have no Taste
in Poetry, who omit this Passage in a Translation, and substitute things of a
trivial and insipid Nature. Dacier.

VII.
VERSE 114. The Speech of Hecuba,] The Speech of Hecuba opens with as much
Tenderness as that of Priam: The Circumstance in particular of her showing that
Breast to her Son which had sustained his Infancy, is highly moving: It is a
silent kind of Oratory, and prepares the Heart to listen, by prepossessing the
Eye in favor of the Speaker.

Eustathius takes notice of the Difference between the Speeches of Priam and
Hecuba: Priam dissuades him from the Combat by enumerating not only the Loss of
his own Family, but of his whole Country: Hecuba dwells entirely upon his
single Death; this is a great Beauty in the Poet, to make Priam a Father to his
whole Country; but to describe the Fondness of the Mother as prevailing over
all other Considerations, and to mention that only which chiefly affects her.

This puts me in mind of a judicious Stroke in Milton, with regard to the
several Characters of Adam and Eve. When the Angel is driving them both out of
Paradise, Adam grieves that he must leave a place where he had conversed with
God and his Angels; but Eve laments that she shall never more behold the fine
Flowers of Eden: Here Adam mourns like a Man, and Eve like a Woman.

VIII.
VERSE 140. The Soliloquy of Hector.] There is much Greatness in the Sentiments
of this whole Soliloquy. Hector prefers Death to an ignominious Life: He knows
how to die with Glory, but not how to live with Dishonor. The Reproach of
Polydamas affects him; the Scandals of the meanest People have an Influence on
his Thoughts.

It Is remarkable that he does not say, he fears the Insults of the braver
Trojans, but of the most worthless only. Men of Merit are always the most
candid; but others are ever for bringing all Men to a Level with themselves.
They cannot bear that any one should be so bold as to excel, and are ready to
pull him down to them, upon the least Miscarriage. This Sentiment is perfectly
fine, and agreeable to the way of thinking natural to a great and sensible Mind.

There is a very beautiful Break in the middle of this Speech. Hector's Mind
fluctuates every way, he is calling a Council in his own Breast, and consulting
what Method to pursue: He doubts if he should not propose Terms of Peace to
Achilles, and grants him very large Concessions; but of a sudden he checks
himself, and leaves the Sentence unfinished. The Paragraph runs thus, "If, says
Hector, I should offer him the largest Conditions, give all that Troy contains
-- There he stops, and immediately subjoins, "But why do I delude myself, etc.

It Is evident from this Speech that the Power of making Peace was in Hector's
Hands: For unless Priam had transferred it to him he could not have made these
Propositions. So that it was Hector who broke the Treaty in the third Book;
(where the very same Conditions were proposed by Agamemnon.) It Is Hector
therefore that is guilty, he is blameable in continuing the War, and involving
the Greeks and Trojans in Blood. This Conduct in Homer was necessary; he
observes a poetical Justice, and shows us that Hector is a Criminal, before he
brings him to Death. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 141. Shall proud Polydamas, etc.] Hector alludes to the Counsel given
him by Polydamas in the eighteenth Book, which he then neglected to follow: It
was, to withdraw to the City, and fortify themselves there, before Achilles
returned to the Battle.

X.
VERSE 167. We greet not here as Man conversing Man,
Met at an Oak, or journeying over a Plain, etc.]
The Words literally are these, " There is no talking with Achilles, (...),
from an Oak, or from a Rock, [or about an Oak or a Rock] as a young Man and a
Maiden talk together. It is thought an obscure Passage, though I confess I am
either too fond of my own Explication in the above cited Verses, or they make
it a very clear one. "There is no conversing with this implacable Enemy in the
Rage of Battle; as when sauntring People talk at leisure to one another on the
Road, or when young Men and Women meet in a Field." I think the Exposition of
Eustathius more farfetch'd, though it be ingenious; and therefore I must do him
the Justice not to suppress it. It was a common Practice, says he, with the
Heathens, to expose such Children as they either could not, or would not
educate: The Places where they deposited them were usually in the Cavities of
Rocks, or the Hollow of Oaks: These Children being frequently found and
preserved by Strangers, were said to be the Offspring of those Oaks or Rocks
where they were found. This gave occasion to the Poets to feign that Men were
born of Oaks, and there was a famous Fable too of Deucalion and Pyrrha's
repairing Mankind by casting Stones behind them: It grew at last into a
Proverb, to signify idle Tales; so that in the present Passage it imports, that
Achilles will not listen to such idle Tales as may pass with silly Maids and
fond Lovers. For Fables and Stories (and particularly such Stories as the
Preservation, strange Fortune, and Adventures of exposed Children) are the
usual Conversation of young Men and Maidens Eustathius his Explanation may be
corroborated by a Parallel Place in the Odyssey; where the Poet says, (...)
The Meaning of which Passage is plainly this, Tell me of what Race you are,
for undoubtedly you had a Father and Mother; you are not, according to the old
Story, descended from an Oak or a Rock. Where the Word (...) shows that this
was become an ancient Proverb even in Homer's Days.

XI.
VERSE 180. Struck by some God, he fears, recedes, and flies.] I doubt not most
Readers are shocked at the Flight of Hector: It is indeed a high Exaltation of
Achilles (which was the Poets chief Care, as he was his chief Hero) that so
brave a Man as Hector durst not stand him. While Achilles was at a distance he
had fortified his Heart with noble Resolutions, but at his approach they all
vanish, and he flies. This (as exceptionable as some may think it) may yet be
allowed to be a true Portrait of human Nature; for Distance, as it lessens all
Objects, so it does our Fears: But where inevitable Danger approaches, the
stoutest Hearts will feel some Apprehensions at certain Fate. It was the Saying
of one of the bravest Men in this Age, to one who told him he feared nothing,
Show me but a certain Danger, and I shall be as much afraid as any of you. I
don't absolutely pretend to justify this Passage in every point, but only to
have thus much granted me, that Hector was in this desperate Circumstance.

First, It will not be found in the whole Iliad, that Hector ever thought
himself a Match for Achilles. Homer (to keep this in our Minds) had just now
made Priam tell him (as a thing known, for certainly Priam would not insult him
at that time) that there was no Comparison between his own Strength, and that
of his Antagonist. -- (...)


Secondly, we may observe with Dacier, the Degrees by which Homer prepares this
Incident. In the 18th Book the mere Sight and Voice of Achilles, unarmed, has
terrified and put the whole Trojan Army into Disorder. In the 19th, the very
Sound of the celestial Arms given him by Vulcan, has affrighted his own
Myrmidons as they stand about him. In the 20th, he has been upon the point of
killing Aeneas, and Hector himself was not saved from him but by Apollo's
interposing. In that and the following Book, he makes an incredible Slaughter
of all that oppose him; he overtakes most of those that fly from him, and Priam
himself opens the Gates of Troy to receive the rest.

Thirdly, Hector stays, not that he hopes to overcome Achilles, but because
Shame and the dread of Reproach forbid him to re-enter the City; a Shame (says
Eustathius) which was a Fault, that betrayed him out of his Life, and ruined
his Country. Nay, Homer adds farther, that he only stayed by the immediate
Will of Heaven, intoxicated and irresistibly bound down by Fate. (...)


Fourthly, He had just been reflecting on the Injustice of the War he
maintained; his Spirits are deprest by Heaven, he expects certain Death, he
perceives himself abandoned by the Gods; (as he directly says in. 300, etc. of
the Greek, and 385 of the translation) so that he might say to Achilles what
Turnus does to Aeneas, Dii me terrent, and Jupiter hostis.
This indeed is the strongest Reason that can be offered for the Flight of
Hector. He flies not from Achilles as a mortal Hero, but from one whom he sees
clad in impenetrable Armor, seconded by Minerva, and one who had put to flight
the inferior Gods themselves. This is not Cowardice according to the constant
Principles of Homer, who thought it no part of a Hero's Character to be
impious, or to fancy himself independent on the supreme Being.

Indeed it had been a grievous Fault, had our Author suffered the Courage of
Hector entirely to forsake him even in this Extremity: A brave Man's Soul is
still capable of rouzing itself, and acting honorably in the last Struggles.
Accordingly Hector, though delivered over to his Destiny, abandoned by the Gods,
and certain of Death, yet stops and attacks Achilles; When he loses his Spear,
he draws his Sword: it was impossible he should conquer, it was only in his
Power to fall gloriously; this he did, and it was all that Man could do.

If the Reader, after all, cannot bring himself to like this Passage, for his
own particular; yet to induce him to suspend his absolute Censure, he may
consider that Virgil had an uncommon Esteem for it, as he has testified in
transferring it almost entirely to the Death of Turnus; where there was no
necessity of making use of the like Incidents: But doubtless he was touched
with this Episode, as with one of those which interest us most of the whole
Iliad, by a Spectacle at once so terrible, and so deplorable. I must also add
the Suffrage of Aristotle, who was so far from looking upon this Passage as
ridiculous or blameable, that he esteemed it mavelous and admirable. "The
wonderful, says he, ought to have place in Tragedy, but still more in Epic
Poetry, which proceeds in this Point even to the Unreasonable: For as in Epic
Poems one sees not the Persons acting, so whatever passes the Bounds of Reason
is proper to produce the admirable and the mavelous. For example, what Homer
says of Hector pursued by Achilles, would appear ridiculous on the Stage; for
the Spectators could not forbear laughing to see on one side the Greeks
standing without any motion, and on the other; Achilles pursuing Hector, and
making Signs to the Troops not to dart at him. But all this does not appear
when we read the Poem: For what is wonderful is always agreeable, and as a
proof of it, we find that they who relate any thing usually add something to
the Truth, that it may the better please those who hear it.

The same great Critic vindicates this Passage in the Chapter following. "A
Poet, says he, is inexcusable if he introduces such things as are impossible
according to the Rules of Poetry: but this ceases to be a Fault, if by those
means he attains to the End he proposed; for he has then brought about what he
intended: For example, if he renders by it any part of his Poem more
astonishing or admirable. Such is the Place in the Iliad, where Achilles
pursues Hector. Arist. Poet. chap. 25, 26.

XII.
VERSE 197. Where two famed Fountains.] Strabo blames Homer for saying that one
of the Sources of Scamander was a warm Fountain; whereas (says he) there is but
one Spring, and that cold, neither is this in the Place where Homer fixes it,
but in the Mountain. It is observed by Eustathius that though this was not true
in Strabo's Days, yet it might in Homer's, greater Changes having happened in
less time than that which passed between those two Authors. Sandys, who was
both a Geographer and Critic of great Accuracy, as well as a Traveller of
great Veracity, affirms as an Eye witness, that there are yet some Hot-water
Springs in that part of the Country, opposite to Tenedos. I cannot but think
that Gentleman must have been particularly diligent and curious in his
Enquiries into the Remains of a Place so celebrated in Poetry; as he was not
only perhaps the most learned, but one of the best Poets of his Time: I am glad
of this occasion to do his Memory so much Justice as to say, the English
Versification owes much of its Improvement to his Translations, and especially
that admirable one of Job. What chiefly pleases me in this place, is to see the
exact Landscape of old Troy, we have a clear Idea of the Town itself, and of the
Roads and Country about it; the River, the Fig Trees, and every part is set
before our Eyes.

XIII.
VERSE 219. The gazing Gods lean forward from the Skies.] We have here an
Instance of the great Judgment of Homer. The Death of Hector being the chief
Action of the Poem; he assembles the Gods, and calls a Council in Heaven
concerning it: It is for the same Reason that he represents Jupiter with the
greatest Solemnity weighing in his Scales the Fates of the two Heroes: I have
before observed at large upon the last Circumstance in a preceding Note, so
that there is no occasion to repeat it.

I wonder that none of the Commentators have taken notice of this Beauty; in my
Opinion it is a very necessary Observation, and shows the Art and Judgment of
the Poet, in that he has made the greatest and finishing Action of the Poem of
such Importance that it engages the Gods in Debates.

XIV.
VERSE 226. From Ida 's Summits -- ] It was the Custom of the Pagans to
sacrifice to the Gods upon the Hills and Mountains, in Scripture Language upon
the high places, for they were persuaded that the Gods in a particular manner
inhabited such Eminences: Wherefore God ordered his People to destroy all those
high places, which the Nations had profaned by their Idolatry. You shall
utterly destroy all the Places wherein the Nations which you shall possess
served their Gods, upon the high Mountains, and upon the Hills, and under every
green Tree. Deuteronomy. xii. 2. It Is for this Reason that so many Kings are
reproached in Scripture for not taking away the high Places.

XV.
VERSE 249. Thus Step by Step, etc.] There is some Difficulty in this Passage,
and it seems strange that Achilles could not overtake Hector when he is allowed
to excel so much in Swiftness, especially when the Poet describes him as
running in a narrower Circle than Hector: Eustathius gives us many Solutions
from the Ancients: Homer has already told us that they run for the Life of
Hector; and consequently Hector would exert his utmost Speed, whereas Achilles
might only endeavor to keep him from entering the City: Besides, Achilles could
not directly pursue him, because he frequently made Efforts to shelter himself
under the Wall, and he being obliged to turn him from it, he might be forced to
take more Steps than Hector; but the Poet to take away all Grounds of an
Objection, tells us afterward, that Apollo gave him a supernatural Swiftness.

XVI.
VERSE 251. As Men in Slumbers.] This beautiful Comparison has been condemned
by some of the Ancients, even so far as to judge it unworthy of having a Place
in the Iliad: They say the Diction is mean, and the Similitude itself absurd,
because it compares the Swiftness of the Heroes to Men asleep, who are in a
state of Rest and Inactivity; but surely there cannot be a more groundless
Criticism: The Poet is so far from drawing his Comparison from the Repose of
Men asleep, that he alludes only to their Dreams: It is a Race in fancy that he
describes; and surely the Imagination is nimble enough to illustrate the
greatest Degree of Swiftness: Besides the Verses themselves run with the utmost
Rapidity, and imitate the Swiftness they describe. Eustathius.

What sufficiently proves these Verses to be genuine, is, that Virgil has
imitated them, Aen. 12. Ac veluti in somnis --


XVII.
VERSE 270. Signed to the Troops, etc.] The Difference which Homer here makes
between Hector and Achilles deserves to be taken notice of; Hector in running
away toward the Walls, to the end that the Trojans who are upon them may
overwhelm Achilles with their Darts; and Achilles in turning Hector toward the
Plain, makes a Sign to his Troops not to attack him. This shows the great
Courage of Achilles; and yet this Action which appears so generous has been
very much condemned by the Ancients; Plutarch in the Life of Pompey gives us to
understand, that it was looked upon as the Action of a Fool too greedy of
Glory: Indeed this is not a single Combat of Achilles against Hector, (for in
that case Achilles would have done very ill not to hinder his Troops from
assaulting him) this was a Rencounter in a Battle, and so Achilles might, and
ought to take all Advantage to rid himself, the readiest and the surest way, of
an Enemy whose Death would procure an entire Victory to his Party. Wherefore
does he leave this Victory to Chance? Why expose himself to the Hazard of
losing it? Why does he prefer his private Glory to the public Weal, and the
Safety of all the Greeks, which he puts to the venture by delaying to conquer,
and endangering his own Person? I grant it is a Fault, but it must be owned to
be the Fault of a Hero. Eustathius. Dacier.

XVIII.
VERSE 278. Then Phoebus left him -- ] This is a very beautiful and poetical
manner of describing a plain Circumstance: The Hour of Hector's Death was now
come, and the Poet expresses it by saying that Apollo, or Destiny, forsakes
him: That is, the Fates no longer protect him. Eustathius.

XIX.
VERSE id. -- Fierce Minerva flies to stern Pelides, etc.] The Poet may seem to
diminish the Glory of Achilles, by ascribing the Victory over Hector to the
Assistance of Pallas; whereas in truth he fell by the Hand only of Achilles:
But Poetry loves to raise every thing into a Wonder; it steps out of the common
Road of Narration, and aims to surprise; and the Poet would farther insinuate
that it is a greater Glory to Achilles to be beloved by the Gods, than to be
only excellent in Valor: For many Men have Valor, but few the Favor of
Heaven. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 291. Obeyed and rested.] The whole Passage where Pallas deceives Hector
is evidently an Allegory: Achilles perceiving that he cannot overtake Hector,
pretends to be quite spent and wearied in the Pursuit; the Stratagem takes
effect, and recalls his Enemy: This the Poet expresses by saying that Pallas,
or Wisdom, came to assist Achilles. Hector observing his Enemy stay to rest
concludes that he is quite fatigued, and immediately takes Courage and advances
upon him; he thinks he has him at an Advantage, but at last finds himself
deceived: Thus making a wrong Judgment he is betrayed into his Death; so that
his own false Judgment is the treacherous Pallas that deceives him. Eustathius.

XXI.
VERSE 317. The Speeches of Hector, and of Achilles.] There is an Opposition
between these Speeches excellently adapted to the Characters of both the
Heroes: That of Hector is full of Courage, but mixed with Humanity: That of
Achilles, of Resentment and Arrogance: We see the great Hector disposing of his
own Remains, and that Thirst of Glory which has made him live with Honor, now
bids him provide, as Eustathius observes, that what once was Hector may not de
dishonored: Thus we see a sedate, calm courage, with a Contempt of Death, in
the Speeches of Hector. But in that of Achilles there is a Fierte, and an
insolent Air of Superiority; his Magnanimity makes him scorn to steal a
Victory, he bids him prepare to defend himself with all his Forces, and that
Valor and Resentment which made him desirous that he might revenge himself
upon Hector with his own Hand, and forbade the Greeks to interpose, now directs
him not to take any Advantage over a brave Enemy. I think both their Characters
are admirably sustained, and though Achilles be drawn with a great Violence of
Features, yet the Picture is undoubtedly like him; and it had been the utmost
Absurdity to have softened one Line upon this Occasion, when the Soul of
Achilles was all on fire to revenge the Death of his Friend Patroclus. I must
desire the Reader to carry this Observation in his Memory, and particularly in
that place, where Achilles says he could eat the very Flesh of Hector; (though I
have a little softened it in the Translation) V. 438.

XXII.
VERSE 391. So Jove 's bold Bird, etc.] The Poet takes up some time in
describing the two great Heroes before they close in Fight: The Verses are
pompous and magnificent, and he illustrates his Description with two beautiful
Similes: He makes a double use of this Conduct; he not only raises our
Imagination to attend to so momentous an Action, but by lengthening his
Narration he keeps the Mind in a pleasing Suspense, and divides it between
Hopes and Fears for the Fate of Hector or Achilles.

XXIII.
VERSE 409. Through that penetrable Part furious he drove, etc.] It was necessary
that the Poet should be very particular in this Point, because the Arms that
Hector wore, were the Arms of Achilles, taken from Patroclus; and consequently,
as they were the Work of Vulcan, they would preserve Hector from the
Possibility of a Wound: The Poet therefore to give an Air of Probability to his
Story, tells us that they were Patroclus his Arms, and as they were not made
for Hector, they might not exactly fit his Body: So that it is not improbable
but there might be some place about the Neck of Hector so open as to admit the
Spear of Achilles. Eustathius.

XXIV.
VERSE 438. Could I my self the bloody Banquet join!] I have before hinted that
there is something very fierce and violent in this Passage; but I fancy that
what I there observed will justify Homer in his Relation, though not Achilles in
his savage Sentiments: Yet the Poet softens the Expression by saying that
Achilles only wishes that his Heart would permit him to devour him: This is
much more tolerable than a Passage in the Thebais of Statius, where Tydeus in
the very Pangs of Death is represented as knawing the Head of his Enemy.

XXV.
VERSE 440. Should Troy, to bribe me, etc.] Such Resolutions as Achilles here
makes, are very natural to Men in Anger; he tells Hector that no Motives shall
ever prevail with him to suffer his Body to be ransomed; yet when Time had
cooled his Heat, and he had somewhat satisfied his Revenge by insulting his
Remains, he restores them to Priam, this perfectly agrees with his Conduct in
the ninth Book, where at first he gives a rough Denial, and afterward softens
into an easier Temper. And this is very agreeable to the Nature of Achilles;
his Anger abates very slowly; it is stubborn, yet still it remits: Had the Poet
drawn him as never to be pacified, he had outrag'd Nature, and not represented
his Hero as a Man, but as a Monster. Eustathius.

XXVI.
VERSE 450. A Day will come -- ] Hector prophesies at his Death that Achilles
shall fall by the Hand of Paris. This confirms an Observation made in a former
Note, that the Words of dying Men were looked upon as Prophecies; but whether
such Conjectures are true or false, it appears from hence, that such Opinions
have prevailed in the World above three thousand Years.

XXVII.
VERSE 468. The great Dead deface with Wounds, etc.] Eustathius tells us that
Homer introduces the Soldiers wounding the dead Body of Hector, in order to
mitigate the Cruelties which Achilles exercises upon his Body: For if every
common Soldier takes a Pride in giving him a Wound, what Insults may we not
expect from the inexorable, inflamed Achilles? But I must confess myself unable
to vindicate the Poet in giving us such an Idea of his Countrymen. I think the
former Courage of their Enemy should have been so far from moving them to
Revenge, that it should have recommended him to their Esteem: What Achilles
afterward acts is suitable to his Character, and consequently the Poet is
justified; but surely all the Greeks were not of his Temper? Patroclus was not
so dear to them all, as he was to Achilles. It Is true the Poet represents
Achilles, (as Eustathius observes) enumerating the many Ills they had suffered
from Hector; and he seems to endeavor to infect the whole Army with his
Resentment. Had Hector been living, they had been acted by a generous
Indignation against him: But these Men seem as if they only dared approach him
dead; in short, what they say over his Body is a mean Insult, and the Stabs
they give it are cowardly and barbarous.

XXXI.
VERSE 474. The Speech of Achilles.] We have a very fine Observation of
Eustathius on this Place, that the Judgment and Address of Homer here is
extremely worthy of Remark: He knew, and had often said, that the Gods and Fate
had not granted Achilles the Glory of taking Troy: There was then no reason to
make him march against the Town after the Death of Hector, since all his
Efforts must have been ineffectual. What has the Poet done in this Conjuncture?
It was but reasonable that the first Thought of Achilles should be to march
directly to Troy, and to profit himself of the general Consternation into which
the Death of Hector had thrown the Trojans. We here see he knows the Duty, and
does not want the Ability, of a great General; but after this on a sudden he
changes his Design, and derives a plausible Pretense from the Impatience he has
to pay the last Devoirs to his Friend. The Manners of Achilles, and what he has
already done for Patroclus, make this very natural. At the same time, this
turning off to the tender and pathetick has a fine Effect; the Reader in the
very Fury of the Hero's Vengeance, perceives, that Achilles is still a Man, and
capable of softer Passions.

XXXII.
VERSE 494. "Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more.] I have followed the Opinion
of Eustathius, who thought that what Achilles says here was the Chorus or
Burden of a Song of Triumph, in which his Troops bear a part with him, as he
returns from this glorious Combat. Dacier observes that this is very
correspondent to the Manners of those Times; and instances in that Passage of
the Book of Kings, when David returns from the Conquest of Goliath: The Women
there go out to meet him from all the Cities of Israel, and sing a triumphal
Song, the Chorus whereof is, Saul has killed his Thousands, and David his ten
Thousands.

XXXIII.
VERSE 496.] Unworthy of himself, and of the Dead.] This Inhumanity of Achilles
in dragging the dead Body of Hector, has been severely (and I think indeed not
without some Justice) censured by several both Ancients and Moderns. Plato in
his third Book de Republica, speaks of it with Detestation: But methinks it is
a great Injustice to Homer to reflect upon the Morals of the Author himself,
for things which he only paints as the Manners of a vicious Hero.

It may justly be observed in general of all Plato's Objections against Homer,
that they are still in a View to Morality, constantly blaming him for
representing ill and immoral Things as the Opinions or Actions of his Persons.
To every one of these one general Answer will serve, which is, that Homer as
often describes ill things, in order to make us avoid them, as good, to induce
us to follow them (which is the Case with all Writers whatever.) But what is
extremely remarkable, and evidently shows the Injustice of Plato's Censure is,
that many of those very Actions for which he blames him are expressly
characterized and marked by Homer himself as evil and detestable, by previous
Expressions or Cautions. Thus in the present Place, before he describes this
Barbarity of Achilles, he tells us it was a most unworthy Action. -- (...)
When Achilles sacrifices the twelve young Trojans in l. 23. he repeats the
same Words. When Pandarus broke the Truce in l. 4. he told us it was a mad,
unjust Deed, -- (...)
And so of the rest.

XXXIV.
VERSE 506. The Face divine, and long-descending Hair.] It is impossible to
read the Actions of great Men without having our Curiosity raised to know the
least Circumstance that relates to them: Homer to satisfy it, has taken care in
the Process of his Poem to give us the Shape of his Heroes, and the very Color
of their Hair; thus he has told us that Achilles's Locks were yellow, and here
the Epithet (...) shows us that those of Hector were of a darker Color: As to
his Person, he told us a little above that it was so handsome that all the
Greeks were surpised to see it. Plutarch recites a remarkable Story of the
Beauty of Hector: It was reported in Lacedaemon, that a handsome Youth who very
much resembled Hector, was arrived there; immediately the whole City run in
such Numbers to behold him, that he was trampled to Death by the Crowd.
Eustathius.

XXXV.
VERSE 543. Sinks my sad Soul with Sorrow to the Grave.] It is in the Greek
(...)
It is needless to observe to the Reader with what a beautiful Pathos the
wretched Father laments his Son Hector: It is impossible not to join with Priam
in his Sorrows. But what I would chiefly point out to my Reader, is the Beauty
of this Line, which is particularly tender, and almost Word for Word the same
with that of the Patriarch Jacob; who upon a like Occasion breaks out into the
same Complaint, and tells his Children, that if they deprive him of his Son
Benjamin, they will bring down his gray Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave.

XXXVI.
VERSE 563, etc.] The Grief of Andromache, which is painted in the following
Part, is far beyond all the Praises that can be given it; but I must take
notice of one Particular which shows the great Art of the Poet. In order to
make the Wife of Hector appear yet more afflicted than his Parents, he has
taken care to increase her Affliction by Surprise: It is finely prepared by the
Circumstances of her being retired to her innermost Apartment, of her
Employment in weaving a Robe for her Husband (as may be conjectured from what
she says afterward,. 657.) and of her Maids preparing the Bath for his Return:
All which (as the Critics have observed) augment the Surprise, and render this
Reverse of Fortune much more dreadful and afflicting.

XXXVI.
VERSE 600. Her Hair's fair Ornaments.] Eustathius remarks, that in speaking of
Andromache and Hecuba, Homer expatiates upon the Ornaments of Dress in
Andromache, because she was a beautiful young Princess; but is very concise
about that of Hecuba, because she was old, and wore a Dress rather suitable to
her Age and Gravity, than to her State, Birth, and Condition. I cannot pass
over a Matter of such Importance as a young Lady's Dress, without endeavoring
to explain what sort of Heads were worn above three thousand Years ago.

It is difficult to describe particularly every Ornament mentioned by the Poet,
but I shall lay before my female Readers the Bishop's Explanation. The (...)
was used, (...), that is, to tie backwards the Hair that grew on the forepart
of the Head: The (...) was a Veil of Network that covered the Hair when it was
so tied: (...) was an Ornament used (...), to tie backwards the Hair that grew
on the Temples; and the (...) was a Fillet, perhaps embroidered with Gold,
(from the Expression of (...)) that bound the whole, and completed the Dress.

The Ladies cannot but be pleased to see so much Learning and Greek upon this
important Subject.

Homer is in nothing more excellent than in that Distinction of Characters
which he maintains through his whole Poem: What Andromache here says, can be
spoken properly by none but Andromache: There is nothing general in her
Sorrows, nothing that can be transferred to another Character: The Mother
laments the Son, and the Wife weeps over the Husband.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 628. The Day that to the Shades, etc.] The following Verses, which so
finely describe the Condition of an Orphan, have been rejected by some ancient
Critics: It is a Proof there were always Critics of no manner of Taste; it
being impossible any where to meet with a more exquisite Passage. I will
venture to say, there are not in all Homer any Lines more worthy of him: The
Beauty of this tender and Compassionate Image is such, that it even makes
amends for the many cruel ones, with which the Iliad is too much stained. These
Censurers imagined this Description to be of too abject and mean a Nature for
one of the Quality of Astyanax; but had they considered (says Eustathius) that
these are the Words of a fond Mother who feared every thing for her Son, that
Women are by Nature timorous and think all Misfortunes will happen, because
there is a Possibility that they may; that Andromache is in the very height of
her Sorrows, in the Instant she is speaking; I fancy they would have altered
their Opinion.

It is undoubtedly an Aggravation to our Misfortunes when they sink us in a
Moment from the highest flow of Prosperity to the lowest Adversity: The Poet
judiciously makes use of this Circumstance, the more to excite our Pity, and
introduces the Mother with the utmost Tenderness, lamenting this Reverse of
Fortune in her Son; changed all at once into a Slave, a Beggar, an Orphan! Have
we not Examples in our own Times of such unhappy Princes, whose Condition
renders this of Astyanax but too probable?

XXXIX.
VERSE 647. On Dainties fed.] It is in the Greek, "Who upon his Father's Knees
used to eat Marrow and the Fat of Sheep. This would seem gross if it were
literally translated, but it is a figurative Expression; and in the Style of
the Orientals, Marrow and Fatness are taken for whatever is best, tenderest,
and most delicious. Thus in Job xxi. 24. Viscera ejus plena sunt adipe and
medullis ossa ejus ^rigantur. And xxxvi. 16. Requies autem mensae tuae erit
plena pinguedine. In Jer. xxxi. 14. God says, that he will satiate the Soul of
the Priests with Fatness. Inebriabo animam Sacerdotum pinguedine. Dacier.

XL.
VERSE 657. The martial Scarf and Robe of Triumph wove.] This Idea very
naturally offers itself to a Woman, who represents to herself the Body of her
Husband dashed to pieces, and all his Limbs dragged upon the Ground uncovered;
and nothing is more proper to excite Pity. It Is well known that it was
anciently the Custom among Princesses and great Ladies to have large Quantities
of Stuffs and Movables. This Provision was more necessary in those Times than
now, because of the great Consumption made of them on those Occasions of
Mourning.

I am of Opinion that Homer had a farther View in expatiating thus largely upon
the Death of Hector. Every Word that Hecuba, Priam, and Andromache speaks,
shows us the Importance of Hector: Every Word adds a Weight to the concluding
Action of his Poem, and at the same time represents the sad Effects of the
Anger of Achilles, which is the Subject of it.

THE TWENTY-THIRD BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Funeral of Patroclus.
ACHILLES and the Myrmidons do Honors to the Body of Patroclus. After the
funeral Feast he retires to the Seashore, where falling asleep, the Ghost of
his Friend appears to him, and demands the Rites of Burial; the next Morning
the Soldiers are sent with Mules and Wagons to fetch Wood for the Pyre. The
funeral Procession, and the offering of their Hair to the Dead. Achilles
sacrifices several Animals, and lastly, twelve Trojan Captives at the Pile,
then sets fire to it. He pays Libations to the Winds, which (at the instance of
Iris) rise, and raise the Flames. When the Pile has burned all Night, they
gather the Bones, place 'em in an Urn of Gold, and raise the Tomb. Achilles
institutes the funeral Games: The Chariot Race, the Fight of the Caestus, the
Wrestling, the Foot-Race, the single Combat, the Discus, the shooting with
Arrows, the darting the Javelin: The various Descriptions of which, and the
various Success of the several Antagonists, make the greatest part of the Book.

In this Book ends the thirtieth Day: The Night following, the Ghost of
Patroclus appears to Achilles: The one and thirtieth Day is employed in felling
the Timber for the Pile; the two and thirtieth in burning it; and the three and
thirtieth in the Games. The Scene is generally on the Seashore.

THE TWENTY-THIRD BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THUS humbled in the Dust, the pensive Train
Through the sad City mourned her Hero slain.
The Body soiled with Dust, and black with Gore,
Lies on broad Hellespont's resounding Shore:
The Grecians seek their Ships, and clear the Strand,
All, but the martial Myrmidonian Band:
These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
And the stern purpose of his Mind unfolds.
Not yet (my brave Companions of the War)
Release your smoking Coursers from the Car;
But, with his Chariot each in order led,
Perform due Honors to Patroclus dead.
Ever yet from Rest or Food we seek Relief,
Some Rites remain, to glut our Rage of Grief.
The Troops obeyed; and thrice in order led
( Achilles first) their Coursers round the Dead;
And thrice their Sorrows and Laments renew;
Tears drop the Sands, and Tears their Arms bedew.
For such a Warrior Thetis aids their Woe,
Melts their strong Hearts, and bids their Eyes to flow.
But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding Sighs
Burst from his Heart, and Torrents from his Eyes:
His slaught'ring Hands, yet red with Blood, he laid
On his dead Friend's cold Breast, and thus he said.
All hail Patroclus! let thy honored Ghost
Hear, and rejoice on Pluto's dreary Coast;
Behold! Achilles' Promise is complete;
The bloody Hector stretched before thy Feet.
Lo! to the Dogs his Carcass I resign;
And twelve sad Victims of the Trojan Line
Sacred to Vengeance, instant shall expire,
Their Lives effus'd around thy funeral Pyre.
Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
Before the Bier the bleeding Hector threw,
Prone on the Dust. The Myrmidons around
Unbrac'd their Armor, and the Steeds unbound.
All to Achilles' sable Ship repair,
Frequent and full, the genial Feast to share.
Now from the well-fed Swine black Smokes aspire,
The bristly Victims hissing over the Fire;
The huge Ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
Expires the Goat; the Sheep in Silence dies:
Around the Hero's prostrate Body flowed
In one promiscuous Stream, the reeking Blood.
And now a Band of Argive Monarchs brings
The glorious Victor to the King of Kings.
From his dead Friend the pensive Warrior went,
With Steps unwilling, to the regal Tent.
The attending Heralds, as by Office bound,
With kindled Flames the Tripod-Vase surround;
To cleanse his conquering Hands from hostile Gore,
They urged in vain; the Chief refused, and swore.
No Drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
The first and greatest of the Gods above!
Till on the Pyre I place thee; till I rear
The grassy Mound, and clip thy sacred Hair.
Some Ease at least those pious Rites may give,
And sooth my Sorrows, while I bear to live.
However, reluctant as I am, I stay,
And share your Feast; but, with the Dawn of Day,
(O King of Men!) it claims thy royal Care,
That Greece the Warrior's funeral Pile prepare,
And bid the Forests fall: (Such Rites are paid
To Heroes slumbering in Eternal Shade)
Then, when his earthly Part shall mount in Fire,
Let the leagued Squadrons to their Posts retire.
He spoke; they hear him, and the Word obey;
The Rage of Hunger and of Thirst allay,
Then ease in Sleep the Labors of the Day.
But great Pelides, stretched along the Shore
Where dashed on Rocks the broken Billows roar,
Lies inly groaning; while on either Hand
The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand:
Along the Grass his languid Members fall,
Tired with his Chase around the Trojan Wall;
Hushed by the Murmurs of the rolling Deep
At length he sinks in the soft Arms of Sleep.
When lo! the Shade before his closing Eyes
Of sad Patroclus rose, or seemed to rise;
In the same Robe the Living wore, he came,
In Stature, Voice, and pleasing Look, the same.
The Form familiar hovered over his Head,
And sleeps Achilles, (thus the Phantom said)
Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
Living, I seemed his dearest, tenderest Care,
But now forgot, I wander in the Air:
Let my pale Corse the Rites of Burial know,
And give me Entrance in the Realms below:
Till then, the Spirit finds no resting place,
But here and there the unbody'd Specter chase
The vagrant Dead around the dark Abode,
Forbid to cross the irremeable Flood.
Now give thy Hand; for to the farther Shore
When once we pass, the Soul returns no more.
When once the last Funereal Flames ascend,
No more shall meet, Achilles and his Friend,
No more our Thoughts to those we loved make known,
Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
Me Fate has severed from the Sons of Earth,
The Fate fore-doom'd that waited from my Birth:
Thee too it waits; before the Trojan Wall
Even great and god-like Thou art doomed to fall.
Hear then; and as in Fate and Love we join,
Ah suffer that my Bones may rest with thine!
Together have we lived, together bred,
One House received us, and one Table fed;
That golden Urn thy Goddess Mother gave
May mix our Ashes in one common Grave.
And is it thou (he answers) to my Sight
Once more return'st thou from the Realms of Night?
Oh more than Brother! Think each Office paid,
Whatever can rest a discontented Shade;
But grant one last Embrace, unhappy Boy!
Afford at least that melancholy joy.
He said, and with his longing Arms essayed
In vain to grasp the visionary Shade;
Like a thin Smoke he sees the Spirit fly,
And hears a feeble, lamentable Cry.
Confused he wakes; Amazement breaks the Bands
Of golden Sleep, and starting from the Sands,
Pensive he muses with uplifted Hands.
It Is true, it is certain; Man, though dead, retains
Part of himself; the immortal Mind remains:
The Form subsists, without the Body's Aid,
Aerial Semblance, and an empty Shade!
This night my Friend, so late in Battle lost,
Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive Ghost;
Even now familiar, as in Life, he came,
Alas how different! yet how like the same!
Thus while he spoke, each Eye grew big with Tears:
And now the rosy-finger'd Morn appears,
Shows every mournful Face with Tears overspread,
And glares on the pale Visage of the Dead.
But Agamemnon, as the Rites demand,
With Mules and Wagons sends a chosen Band;
To load the Timber and the Pile to rear,
A Charge consigned to Merion's faithful Care.
With proper Instruments they take the Road,
Axes to cut, and Ropes to sling the Load.
First march the heavy Mules, securely slow,
Over Hills, over Dales, over Crags, over Rocks, they go:
Jumping high over the Shrubs of the rough Ground,
Rattle the clatt'ring Cars, and the shockt Axles bound.
But when arrived at Ida's spreading Woods,
(Fair Ida, watered with descending Floods)
Loud sounds the Axe, redoubling Strokes on Strokes;
On all sides round the Forest hurles her Oaks
Headlong. Deep-echoing groan the Thickets brown;
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
The Wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
And the slow Mules the same rough Road return.
The sturdy Woodmen equal Burdens bore
(Such charge was given 'em) to the sandy Shore;
There on the Spot which great Achilles showed,
They eased their Shoulders, and disposed the Load;
Circling around the Place, where Times to come
Shall view Patroclus' and Achilles' Tomb.
The Hero bids his martial Troops appear
High on their Cars, in all the Pomp of War;
Each in refulgent Arms his Limbs attires,
All mount their Chariots, Combatants and Squires.
The Chariots first proceed, a shining Train;
Then Clouds of Foot that smoke along the Plain;
Next these a melancholy Band appear,
Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the Bier:
Over all the Corse their scattered Locks they throw.
Achilles next, oppressed with mighty Woe,
Supporting with his Hands the Hero's Head,
Bends over the extended Body of the Dead.
The Body decent, on the appointed Ground
They place, and heap the Sylvan Pile around.
But great Achilles stands apart in Prayer,
And from his Head divides the yellow Hair;
The curling Locks which from his Youth he vowed,
And sacred grew to Sperchius honored Flood:
Then sighing, to the Deep his Looks he cast,
And rolled his Eyes around the watery Waste.
Sperchius! whose Waves in mazy Errors lost
Delightful roll along my native Coast!
To whom we vainly vowed, at our return,
These Locks to fall, and Hecatombs to burn;
Full fifty Rams to bleed in Sacrifice,
Where to the Day thy silver Fountains rise,
And where in Shade of consecrated Bowers
Thy Altars stand, perfumed with native Flowers!
So vowed my Father, but he vowed in vain;
No more Achilles sees his native Plain;
In that vain Hope these Hairs no longer grow,
Patroclus bears them to the Shades below.
Thus over Patroclus while the Hero prayed,
On his cold Hand the sacred Lock he laid.
Once more afresh the Grecian Sorrows flow:
And now the Sun had set upon their Woe;
But to the King of Men thus spoke the Chief.
Enough, Atrides! give the Troops Relief:
Permit the mourning Legions to retire,
And let the Chiefs alone attend the Pyre;
The pious Care be ours, the Dead to burn --
He said: The People to their Ships return:
While those deputed to inter the Slain
Heap with a rising Pyramid the Plain.
A hundred Foot in length, a hundred wide,
The growing Structure spreads on every Side;
High on the Top the manly Corse they lay,
And well-fed Sheep, and sable Oxen slay:
Achilles covered with their Fat the Dead,
And the pil'd Victims round the Body spread.
Then Jars of Honey, and of fragrant Oil
Suspends around, low-bending over the Pile.
Four sprightly Coursers, with a deadly Groan
Pour forth their Lives, and on the Pyre are thrown.
Of nine large Dogs, domestic at his Board,
Fall two, selected to attend their Lord.
Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
Sad Sacrifice! twelve Trojan Captives fell.
On these the Rage of Fire victorious preys,
Involves, and joins them in one common Blaze.
Smeared with the bloody Rites, he stands on high,
And calls the Spirit with a dreadful Cry.
All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful Ghost
Hear, and exult on Pluto's dreary Coast.
Behold, Achilles' Promise fully paid,
Twelve Trojan Heroes offered to thy Shade;
But heavier Fates on Hector's Corse attend,
Saved from the Flames, for hungry Dogs to rend.
So spoke he, threatening: But the Gods made vain
His Threat, and guard inviolate the Slain:
Celestial Venus hovered over his Head,
And roseate Unguents, heavenly Fragrance! shed:
She watched him all the Night, and all the Day,
And drove the Bloodhounds from their destined Prey.
Nor sacred Phoebus less employed his Care;
He poured around a Veil of gathered Air,
And kept the Nerves undry'd, the Flesh entire,
Against the Solar Beam and Sirian Fire.
Nor yet the Pile where dead Patroclus lies,
Smokes, nor as yet the sullen Flames arise;
But fast beside Achilles stood in Prayer,
Invoked the Gods whose Spirit moves the Air,
And Victims promised, and Libations cast,
To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal Blast:
He called the Aerial Powers, along the Skies
To breathe, and whisper to the Fires to rise.
The winged Iris heard the Hero's Call,
And instant hastened to their airy Hall,
Where, in old Zephyr's open Courts on high,
Sat all the blustering Brethren of the Sky.
She shone amidst them, on her painted Bow;
The rocky Pavement glittered with the Show.
All from the Banquet rise, and each invites
The Various Goddess to partake the Rites.
Not so, (the Dame replied) I haste to go
To sacred Ocean, and the Floods below:
Even now our solemn Hecatombs attend,
And Heaven is feasting on the World's green End,
With righteous Aethiops (uncorrupted Train!)
Far on the extremest Limits of the Main.
But Peleus' Son entreats, with Sacrifice,
The Western Spirit, and the North to rise;
Let on Patroclus' Pile your Blast be driven,
And bear the blazing Honors high to Heaven.
Swift as the Word, she vanished from their View;
Swift as the Word, the Winds tumultuous flew;
Forth burst the stormy Band with thundering Roar,
And Heaps on Heaps the Clouds are tossed before.
To the wide Main then stooping from the Skies,
The heaving Deeps in watery Mountains rise:
Troy feels the Blast along her shaking Walls,
Till on the Pyle the gathered Tempest falls.
The Structure crackles in the roaring Fires,
And all the Night the plenteous Flame aspires.
All Night, Achilles hails Patroclus Soul,
With large Libation from the golden Bowl.
As a poor Father helpless and undone,
Mourns over the Ashes of an only Son,
Takes a sad Pleasure the last Bones to burn,
And pour in Tears, ever yet they close the Urn.
So stayed Achilles, circling round the Shore,
So watched the Flames, till now they flamed no more.
'Twas when, emerging through the Shades of Night,
The Morning Planet told the approach of Light;
And fast behind, Aurora's warmer Ray
Over the broad Ocean poured the golden Day:
Then sunk the Blaze, the Pyle no longer burned,
And to their Caves the whistling Winds returned:
Across the Thracian Seas their Course they bore;
The ruffled Seas beneath their Passage roar.
Then parting from the Pyle he ceased to weep,
And sunk to Quiet in the Embrace of Sleep,
Exhausted with his Grief: Meanwhile the Crowd
Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
The Tumult waked him: From his Eyes he shook
Unwilling Slumber, and the Chiefs bespoke.
Ye Kings and Princes of the Achaian Name!
First let us quench the yet-remaining Flame
With sable Wine; then, (as the Rites direct,)
The Hero's Bones with careful view select:
(Apart, and easy to be known they lie,
Amidst the Heap, and obvious to the Eye;
The rest around the Margins will be seen,
Promiscuous, Steeds, and immolated Men)
These wrapped in double Cauls of Fat, prepare;
And in the golden Vase dispose with Care;
There let them rest, with decent Honor laid,
Till I shall follow to The Infernal Shade.
Meantime erect the Tomb with pious Hands,
A common Structure on the humble Sands;
Hereafter Greece some nobler Work may raise,
And late Posterity record our Praise.
The Greeks obey; where yet the Embers glow,
Wide over the Pyle the sable Wine they throw,
And deep subsides the ashy Heap below.
Next the white Bones his sad Companions place
With Tears collected, in the golden Vase.
The sacred Relics to the Tent they bore;
The Urn a Veil of Linen covered over.
That done, they bid the Sepulcher aspire,
And cast the deep Foundations round the Pyre;
High in the midst they heap the swelling Bed
Of rising Earth, Memorial of the Dead.
The swarming Populace the Chief detains,
And leads amidst a wide Extent of Plains;
There placed 'em round: Then from the Ships proceeds
A Train of Oxen, Mules, and stately Steeds,
Vases and Tripods, for the Funeral Games,
Resplendent Brass, and more resplendent Dames.
First stood the Prizes to reward the Force
Of rapid Racers in the dusty Course.
A Woman for the first, in Beauty's Bloom,
Skilled in the Needle, and the laboring Loom;
And a large Vase, where two bright Handles rise,
Of twenty Measures its capacious Size.
The second Victor claims a Mare unbroke,
Big with a Mule, unknowing of the Yoke:
The third, a Charger yet untouched by Flame;
Four ample Measures held the shining Frame:
Two golden Talents for the fourth were placed;
An ample double Bowl contents the last.
These in fair Order ranged upon the Plain,
The Hero, rising, thus addressed the Train.
Behold the Prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
To the brave Rulers of the racing Steed;
Prizes which none beside our self could gain,
Should our immortal Coursers take the Plain;
(A Race unrivaled, which from Ocean's God
Peleus received, and on his Son bestowed.)
But this no time our Vigor to display,
Nor suit, with them, the Games of this sad Day:
Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
Their flowing Manes, and sleek their glossy Neck.
Sad, as they shared in human Grief, they stand,
And trail those graceful Honors on the Sand!
Let others for the noble Task prepare,
Who trust the Courser, and the flying Car.
Fired at his Word, the Rival Racers rise;
But far the first, Eumelus hopes the Prize,
Famed through Pieria for the fleetest Breed,
And skilled to manage the high-bounding Steed.
With equal Ardor bold Tydides swelled
The Steeds of Tros beneath his Yoke compelled,
(Which late obeyed the Dardan Chief's Command,
When scarce a God redeemed him from his Hand)
Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
And the famed Courser of the King of Kings:
Whom rich Echepolus, (more rich than brave)
To 'scape the Wars, to Agamemnon gave,
( Aethe her Name) at home to end his Days,
Base Wealth preferring to eternal Praise.
Next him Antilochus demands the Course,
With beating Heart, and chears his Pylian Horse.
Experienced Nestor gives the Son the Reins,
Directs his Judgment, and his Heat restrains;
Nor idly warns the hoary Sire, nor hears
The prudent Son with unattending Ears.
My Son! though youthful Ardor fire thy Berast,
The Gods have loved thee, and with Arts have blessed.
Neptune and Jove on thee conferred the Skill,
Swift round the Goal to turn the flying Wheel.
To guide thy Conduct, little Precept needs;
But slow, and past their Vigor, are my Steeds.
Fear not thy Rivals, though for Swiftness known,
Compare those Rivals Judgment, and thy own:
It is not Strength, but Art, obtains the Prize,
And to be swift is less than to be wise:
It Is more by Art, than Force of numerous Strokes,
The dext'rous Woodman shapes the stubborn Oaks;
By Art, the Pilot through the boiling Deep
And howling Tempest, stears the fearless Ship;
And it is the Artist wins the glorious Course,
Not those, who trust in Chariots and in Horse.
In vain unskilful to the Goal they strive,
And short, or wide, th'ungovern'd Courser drive:
While with sure Skill, though with inferior Steeds,
The knowing Racer to his End proceeds;
Fixed on the Goal his Eye fore-runs the Course,
His Hand unerring steers the steady Horse,
And now contracts, or now extends the Rein,
Observing still the foremost on the Plain.
Mark then the Goal, it is easy to be found;
Yon' aged Trunk, a Cubit from the Ground;
Of some once-stately Oak the last Remains,
Or hardy Fir, unperish'd with the Rains.
Enclosed with Stones conspicuous from afar,
And round, a Circle for the wheeling Car.
(Some Tomb perhaps of old, the Dead to grace;
Or then, as now, the Limit of a Race)
Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
A little bending to the left hand Steed;
But urge the Right, and give him all the Reins;
While thy strict Hand his Fellows Head restrains,
And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
The Wheel's round Naves appear to brush the Goal.
Yet (not to break the Car, or lame the Horse)
Clear of the stony Heap direct the Course;
Lest through Incaution failing, thou may be
A Joy to others, a Reproach to me.
So shall thou pass the Goal, secure of Mind,
And leave unskilful Swiftness far behind.
Though thy fierce Rival drove the matchless Steed
Which bore Adrastus, of celestial Breed;
Or the famed Race through all the Regions known,
That whirled the Car of proud Laomedon.
Thus, (naught unsaid) the much-advising Sage
Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy Age.
Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
The last, but not least ardent for the Prize.
They mount their Seats; the Lots their Place dispose;
(Rolled in his Helmet, these Achilles throws.)
Young Nestor leads the Race: Eumelus then;
And next, the Brother of the King of Men:
Thy Lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
They stand in order, an impatient Train;
Pelides points the Barrier on the Plain,
And sends before old Phoenix to the Place,
To mark the Racers, and to judge the Race.
At once the Coursers from the Barrier bound;
The lifted Scourges all at once resound;
Their Heart, their Eyes, their Voice, they send before;
And up the Champain thunder from the Shore:
Thick, where they drive, the dusty Clouds arise,
And the lost Courser in the Whirlwind flies;
Loose on their Shoulders the long Manes reclined,
Float in their Speed, and dance upon the Wind:
The smoking Chariots, rapid as they bound,
Now seem to touch the Sky, and now the Ground.
While hot for Fame, and Conquest all their Care,
(Each over his flying Courser hung in Air)
Erect with Ardour, poised upon the Rein,
They pant, they stretch, they shout along the Plain.
Now, (the last Compass fetched around the Goal)
At the near Prize each gathers all his Soul,
Each burns with double Hope, with double Pain,
Tears up the Shore, and thunders towered the Main.
First flew Eumelus on Pheretian Steeds;
With those of Tros, bold Diomed succeeds:
Close on Eumelus' Back they puff the Wind,
And seem just mounting on his Car behind;
Full on his Neck he feels the sultry Breeze,
And hovering over, their stretching Shadows sees.
Then had he lost, or left a doubtful Prize;
But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
Strikes from his Hand the Scourge, and renders vain
His matchless Horses labor on the Plain.
Rage fills his Eye with Anguish, to survey
Snatched from his Hope, the Glories of the Day.
The Fraud celestial Pallas sees with Pain,
Springs to her Knight, and gives the Scourge again,
And fills his Steeds with Vigor. At a Stroke,
She breaks his Rivals Chariot from the Yoke;
No more their Way the startled Horses held;
The Car reversed came rat'ling on the Field;
Shot headlong from his Seat, beside the Wheel,
Prone on the Dust the unhappy Master fell;
His battered Face and Elbows strike the Ground;
Nose, Mouth and Front, one undistinguished Wound:
Grief stops his Voice, a Torrent drowns his Eyes;
Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
Minerva's Spirit drives his matchless Pace,
And crowns him Victor of the labored Race.
The next, though distant, Menelas succeeds;
While thus young Nestor animates his Steeds.
Now, now, my generous Pair, exert your Force;
Not that we hope to match Tydides' Horse,
Since great Minerva wings their rapid Way,
And gives their Lord the Honors of the Day.
But reach Atrides! Shall his Mare out-go
Your Swiftness? Vanquished by a female Foe?
Through your neglect if lagging on the Plain
The last ignoble Gift be all we gain;
No more shall Nestor's Hand your Food supply,
The old Man's Fury rises, and ye die.
Haste then; yon' narrow Road before our Sight
Presents the occasion, could we use it right.
Thus He. The Coursers at their Master's Threat
With quicker Steps the sounding Champain beat.
And now Antilochus, with nice survey,
Observes the Compass of the hollow way.
'Twas where by Force of wintry Torrents torn,
Fast by the Road a Precipice was worn:
Here, where but one could pass, to shun the Throng
The Spartan Hero's Chariot smoked along.
Close up the venurous Youth resolves to keep,
Still edging near, and bears him towered the Steep.
Atrides, trembling casts his Eye below,
And wonders at the Rashness of his Foe.
Hold, stay your Steeds -- What Madness thus to ride?
This narrow way? Take larger Field (he cried)
Or both mull fall -- Atrides cried in vain;
He flies more fast, and throws up all the Rein.
Far as an able Arm the Disk can send,
When youthful Rivals their full Force extend,
So far Antilochus! thy Chariot flew
Before the King: He, cautious, backward drew
His Horse compelled; foreboding in his Fears
The rattling Ruin of the clashing Cars,
The flound'ring Coursers rolling on the Plain,
And Conquest lost through frantic Haste to gain.
But thus upbraids his Rival as he flies;
Go, furious Youth! ungen'rous and unwise!
Go, but expect not I Will the Prize resign;
Add Perjury to Fraud, and make it thine. --
Then to his Steeds with all his Force he cries;
Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the Prize!
Your Rivals, destitute of youthful Force,
With fainting Knees shall labor in the Course,
And yield the Glory yours -- The Steeds obey;
Already at their Heels they wing their Way,
And seem already to retrieve the Day.
Meantime the Grecians in a Ring beheld
The Coursers bounding over the dusty Field.
The first who markd them was the Cretan King;
High on a rising Ground, above the Ring,
The Monarch sat; from whence with sure survey
He well observed the Chief who led the way,
And heard from far his animating Cries,
And saw the foremost Steed with sharpened Eyes;
On whose broad Front a Blaze of shining white,
Like the full Moon, stood obvious to the Sight.
He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun.
Are yonder Horse discerned by me alone?
Or can ye, all, another Chief survey,
And other Steeds, than lately led the Way?
Those, though the swiftest, by some God withheld,
Lie sure disabled in the middle Field:
For since the Goal they doubled, round the Plain
I search to find them, but I search in vain.
Perchance the Reins forsook the Driver's Hand,
And, turned too short, he tumbled on the Strand,
Shot from the Chariot; while his Coursers stray
With frantic Fury from the destined Way.
Rise then some other, and inform my Sight,
(For these dim Eyes, perhaps, discern not right)
Yet sure he seems, (to judge by Shape and Air,)
The great Aetolian Chief, renowned in War.
Old Man! ( Oileus rashly thus replies)
Thy Tongue too hastily confers the Prize.
Of those who view the Course, not sharpest eyed,
Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
Eumelus' Steeds high-bounding in the Chase,
Still, as at first, unrivaled lead the Race,
I well discern him, as he shakes the Rein,
And hear his Shouts victorious over the Plain.
Thus he. Idomeneus incensed rejoined:
Barbarous of Words! and arrogant of Mind!
Contentious Prince! of all the Greeks beside
The last in Merit, as the first in Pride.
To vile Reproach what Answer can we make?
A Goblet or a Tripod let us stake,
And be the King the Judge. The most unwise
Will learn their Rashness, when they pay the Price.
He said: and Ajax by mad Passion born,
Stern had replied; fierce Scorn inhancing Scorn
To fell extremes. But Thetis' god-like Son,
Awful, amidst them rose; and thus begun.
Forbear ye Chiefs! reproachful to contend;
Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
And lo! the approaching Steeds your Contest end.
No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near
Drives, through a Stream of Dust, the Charioteer;
High over his Head the circling Lash he wields;
His bounding Horses scarcely touch the Fields:
His Car amidst the dusty Whirlwind rolled,
Bright with the mingled Blaze of Tin and Gold,
Refulgent through the Cloud, no Eye could find
The Track his flying Wheels had left behind:
And the fierce Coursers urged their rapid Pace
So swift, it seemed a Flight, and not a Race.
Now Victor at the Goal Tydides stands,
Quits his bright Car, and springs upon the Sands;
From the hot Steeds the sweaty Torrents stream;
The well-ply'd Whip is hung athwart the Beam;
With Joy brave Sthenelus receives the Prize,
The Tripod-Vase, and Dame with radiant Eyes:
These to the Ships his Train triumphant leads,
The Chief himself unyokes the panting Steeds.
Young Nestor follows (who by Art, not Force,
O'er-past Atrides) second in the Course.
Behind, Atrides urged the Race, or more near
Than to the Courser in his swift Career
The following Car, just touching with his Heel
And brushing with his Tail the whirling Wheel.
Such, and so narrow now the Space between
The Rivals, late so distant on the Green.
So soon swift Aethe her lost Ground regained,
One Length, one Moment had the Race obtained.
Merion pursued, at greater Distance still,
With tardier Coursers, and inferior Skill.
Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy Son;
Slow dragged the Steeds his battered Chariot on:
Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun.
Behold! the Man whose matchless Art surpast
The Sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
Fortune denies, but Justice bids us pay
(Since great Tydides bears the first away)
To him the second Honors of the Day.
The Greeks consent with loud applauding Cries,
And then Eumelus had received the Prize,
But youthful Nestor, jealous of his Fame,
The Award opposes, and asserts his Claim.
Think not (he cries) I tamely will resign
O Peleus Son! the Mare so justly mine.
What if the Gods, the Skilful to confound,
Have thrown the Horse and Horseman to the Ground?
Perhaps he sought not Heaven by Sacrifice,
And Vows omitted forfeited the Prize.
If yet (Distinction to thy Friend to show,
And please a Soul, desirous to bestow,)
Some Gift must grace Eumelus; view thy Store
Of beauteous Handmaids, Steeds, and shining Ore,
An ample Present let him thence receive,
And Greece shall praise thy generous Thirst to give.
But this, my Prize, I never shall forego;
This, who but touches, Warriors! is my Foe.
Thus spoke the Youth, nor did his Words offend;
Pleased with the well-turn'd Flattery of a Friend,
Achilles smiled: The Gift proposed (he cried)
Antilochus! we shall our self provide.
With Plates of Brass the Corselet covered over,
(The same renowned Asteropaeus wore)
Whose glittering Margins raised with Silver shine;
No vulgar Gift) Eumelus, shall be thine.
He said: Automedon at his Command
The Corselet brought, and gave it to his Hand.
Distinguished by his Friend, his Bosom glows
With generous Joy: Then Menelaus rose;
The Herald placed the Scepter in his Hands,
And stilled the Clamor of the shouting Bands.
Not without Cause incensed at Nestor's Son,
And inly grieving, thus the King begun:
The Praise of Wisdom, in thy Youth obtained,
An Act so rash ( Antilochus) has stained.
Robbed of my Glory and my just Reward,
To you O Grecians! be my Wrong declared:
So not a Leader shall our Conduct blame,
Or judge me envious of a Rival's Fame.
But shall not we, ourselves, the Truth maintain?
What needs appealing in a Fact so plain?
What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
And vindicate by Oath th'ill-gotten Prize.
Rise if thou dare, before thy Chariot stand,
The driving Scourge high-lifted in thy Hand,
And touch thy Steeds, and swear, thy whole Intent
Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
Swear by that God whose liquid Arms surround
The Globe, and whose dread Earthquakes heave the Ground.
The prudent Chief with calm Attention heard;
Then mildly thus: Excuse, if Youth have erred;
Superior as thou art, forgive The Offense,
Nor I thy Equal, or in Years, or Sense.
Thou know the Errors of unripen'd Age,
Weak are its Counsels, headlong is its Rage.
The Prize I quit, if thou thy Wrath resign;
The Mare, or ought thou ask'st, be freely thine,
Ever I become (from thy dear Friendship torn)
Hateful to thee, and to the Gods forsworn.
So spoke Antilochus; and at the Word
The Mare contested to the King restored.
Joy swells his Soul, as when the vernal Grain
Lifts the green Ear above the springing Plain,
The Fields their Vegetable Life renew,
And laugh and glitter with the Morning Dew:
Such Joy the Spartan's shining Face overspread,
And lifted his gay Heart, while thus he said.
Still may our Souls, O generous Youth! agree,
It Is now Atrides' turn to yield to thee.
Rash Heat perhaps a Moment might control,
Not break, the settled Temper of thy Soul.
Not but (my Friend) it is still the wiser way
To wave Contention with superior Sway;
For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
Like thee, have Talents to regain the Friend?
To plead Indulgence and thy Fault atone,
Suffice thy Father's Merits, and thy own:
Generous alike, for me, the Sire and Son
Have greatly suffered, and have greatly done.
I yield; that all may know, my Soul can bend,
Nor is my Pride preferred before my Friend.
He said; and pleased his Passion to command,
Resigned the Courser to Noemon's Hand,
Friend of the youthful Chief: Himself content,
The shining Charger to his Vessel sent.
The golden Talents Merion next obtained;
The fifth Reward, the double Bowl, remained.
Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears,
And thus the purpose of his Gift declares.
Accept thou this, O sacred Sire! (he said)
In dear Memorial of Patroclus dead;
Dead, and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
For ever snatched from our desiring Eyes!
Take thou this Token of a grateful Heart,
Though it is not thine to hurl the distant Dart,
The Quoit to toss, the ponderous Mace to wield,
Or urge the Race, or wrestle on the Field.
Thy present Vigor Age has overthrown,
But left the Glory of the past thy own.
He said, and placed the Goblet at his side;
With Joy, the venerable King replied.
Wisely and well, my Son, thy Words have proved
A Senior honored, and a Friend beloved!
Too true it is, deserted of my Strength,
These withered Arms and Limbs have failed at length.
Oh! had I now that Force I felt of yore,
Known through Buprasium and the Pylian Shore!
Victorious then in every solemn Game
Ordained to Amarynces' mighty Name;
The brave Epeians gave my Glory way,
Aetolians, Pylians, all resigned the Day.
I quelled Clytomedes in Fights of Hand,
And backward hurled Ancaeus on the Sand,
Surpast Iphyclus in the swift Career,
Phyleus and Polydorus, with the Spear.
The Sons of Actor won the Prize of Horse,
But won by Numbers, not by Art or Force:
For the famed Twins, impatient to survey
Prize after Prize by Nestor born away,
Sprung to their Car; and with united Pains
One lashed the Coursers, while one ruled the Reins.
Such once I was! Now to these Tasks succeeds
A younger Race, that emulate our Deeds:
I yield alas! (to Age who must not yield?)
Though once the foremost Hero of the Field.
Go thou, my Son! by generous Friendship led,
With martial Honors decorate the Dead;
While pleased I take the Gift thy Hands present,
(Pledge of Benevolence, and kind Intent)
Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
Not one but honors sacred Age and me:
Those due distinctions thou so well can pay,
May the just Gods return another Day.
Proud of the Gift, thus spoke the Full of Days:
Achilles heard him, prouder of the Praise.
The Prizes next are ordered to the Field
For the bold Champions who the Caestus wield.
A stately Mule, as yet by Toils unbroke,
Of six years Age, unconscious of the Yoke,
Is to the Circus led, and firmly bound;
Next stands a Goblet, massy, large and round.
Achilles rising, thus: Let Greece excite
Two Heroes equal to this hardy Fight;
Who dares his Foe with lifted Arms provoke,
And rush beneath the long-descending Stroke?
On whom Apollo shall the Palm bestow,
And whom the Greeks supreme by Conquest know,
This Mule his dauntless Labors shall repay;
The Vanquished bear the massy Bowl away.
This dreadful Combat great Epaeus chose,
High over the Crowd, enormous Bulk! he rose,
And seized the Beast, and thus began to say:
Stand forth some Man, to bear the Bowl away!
(Price of his Ruin:) For who dares deny
This Mule my right? th'undoubted Victor I.
Others it is owned, in Fields of Battle shine,
But the first Honors of this Fight are mine;
For who excells in all? Then let my Foe
Draw near, but first his certain Fortune know,
Secure, this Hand shall his whole Frame confound,
Mash all his Bones, and all his Body pound:
So let his Friends be nigh, a needful Train
To heave the battered Carcass off the Plain.
The Giant spoke; and in a stupid Gaze
The Host beheld him, silent with Amaze!
'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
To meet his Might, and emulate thy Sire,
The great Mecistheus; who in Days of yore
In Theban Games the noblest Trophy bore,
(The Games ordained dead Oedipus to grace)
And singly vanquished the Cadmaean Race.
Him great Tydides urges to contend,
Warm with the Hopes of Conquest for his Friend,
Officious with the Cincture girds him round;
And to his Wrists the Gloves of Death are bound.
Amid the Circle now each Champion stands,
And poises high in Air his Iron Hands;
With clashing Gantlets now they fiercely close,
Their crackling Jaws re-echoe to the Blows,
And painful Sweat from all their Members flows.
At length Epaeus dealt a weighty Blow
Full on the Cheek of his unwary Foe;
Beneath that ponderous Arm's resistless Sway
Down dropped he, nerveless, and extended lay.
As a large Fish, when Winds and Waters roar,
By some huge Billow dashed against the Shore,
Lies panting: Not less battered with his Wound,
The bleeding Hero pants upon the Ground.
To rear his fallen Foe, the Victor lends
Scornful, his Hand; and gives him to his Friends;
Whose Arms support him, reeling through the Throng,
And dragging his disabled Legs along;
Nodding, his Head hangs down his Shoulder over;
His Mouth and Nostrils pour the clotted Gore;
Wrapped round in Mists he lies, and lost to Thought:
His Friends receive the Bowl, too dearly bought.
The third bold Game Achilles next demands,
And calls the Wrestlers to the level Sands:
A massy Tripod for the Victor lies,
Of twice six Oxen its reputed Price;
And next, the Losers Spirits to restore,
A female Captive, valued but at four.
Scarce did the Chief the vigorous Strife propose,
When tow'r-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
Amid the Ring each nervous Rival stands,
Embracing rigid with implicit Hands:
Close locked above, their Heads and Arms are mixed;
Below, their planted Feet at distance fixed:
Like two strong Rafters which the Builder forms
Proof to the wintry Winds and howling Storms,
Their Tops connected, but at wider space
Fixed on the Center stands their solid Base.
Now to the Grasp each manly Body bends;
The humid Sweat from every Pore descends;
Their Bones resound with Blows: Sides, Shoulders, Thighs
Swell to each Gripe, and bloody Tumors rise.
Nor could Ulysses, for his Art renowned,
O'erturn the Strength of Ajax on the Ground;
Nor could the Strength of Ajax overthrow
The watchful Caution of his artful Foe.
While the long Strife even tired the Lookers-on,
Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon.
Or let me lift thee, Chief, or lift thou me:
Prove we our Force, and Jove the rest decree.
He said; and straining, heaved him off the Ground
With matchless Strength; that time Ulysses found
The Strength t'evade, and where the Nerves combine,
His Ankle struck: The Giant fell supine:
Ulysses following, on his Bosom lies;
Shouts of Applause run rattling through the Skies.
Ajax to lift, Ulysses next essays,
He barely stirred him, but he could not raise:
His Knee locked fast the Foe's Attempt denied;
And grappling close, they tumble side by side.
Defiled with honorable Dust, they roll,
Still breathing Strife, and unsubdu'd of Soul:
Again they rage, again to Combat rise;
When great Achilles thus divides the Prize.
Your noble Vigor, oh my Friends restrain;
Nor weary out your generous Strength in vain.
Ye both have won: Let others who excel
Now prove that Prowess you have proved so well.
The Hero's Words the willing Chiefs obey,
From their tired Bodies wipe the Dust away,
And, clothed anew, the following Games survey.
And now succeed the Gifts, ordained to grace
The Youths contending in the rapid Race.
A silver Urn; that full six Measures held,
By none in Weight or Workmanship excelled:
Sidonian Artists taught the Frame to shine,
Elaborate, with Artifice divine;
Whence Tyrian Sailors did the Prize transport,
And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian Port:
From him descended good Eunaeus heir'd
The glorious Gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
To brave Patroclus gave the rich Reward.
Now, the same Hero's Funeral Rites to grace,
It stands the Prize of Swiftness in the Race.
A well-fed Ox was for the second placed;
And half a Talent must content the last.
Achilles rising then bespoke the Train:
Who hopes the Palm of Swiftness to obtain,
Stand forth, and bear these Prizes from the Plain.
The Hero said, and starting from his Place
Oilean Ajax rises to the Race;
Ulysses next; and he whose Speed surpast
His youthful Equals, Nestor's Son the last.
Ranged in a Line the ready Racers stand;
Pelides points the Barrier with his Hand;
All start at once; Oileus led the Race;
The next Ulysses, meas'ring Pace with Pace;
Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
As closely following as the running Thread
The Spindle follows, and displays the Charms
Of the fair Spinster's Breast, and moving Arms:
Graceful in Motion thus, his Foe he plies,
And treads each Footstep ever the Dust can rise:
His glowing Breath upon his Shoulders plays;
Th'admiring Greeks loud Acclamations raise,
To him they give their Wishes, Hearts, and Eyes,
And send their Souls before him as he flies.
Now three times turned in prospect of the Goal,
The panting Chief to Pallas lifts his Soul:
Assist O Goddess! (thus in Thought he prayed)
And present at his Thought, defcends the Maid.
Buoyed by her heavenly Force, he seems to swim,
And feels a Pinion lifting every Limb.
All fierce, and ready now the Prize to gain,
Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the Plain;
(O'erturn'd by Pallas) where the slippery Shore
Was clogged with slimy Dung, and mingled Gore.
(The self-same Place beside Patroclus' Pyre,
Where late the slaughtered Victims fed the Fire)
Besmeared with Filth, and blotted over with Clay,
Obscene to sight, the ruefull Racer lay;
The well-fed Bull (the second Prize) he shared,
And left the Urn Ulysses' rich Reward.
Then, grasping by the Horn the mighty Beast,
The baffled Hero thus the Greeks addressed.
Accursed Fate! the Conquest I forego;
A Mortal I, a Goddess was my Foe:
She urged her Favorite on the rapid Way,
And Pallas, not Ulysses won the Day.
Thus fow'rly wail'd he, sputt'ring Dirt and Gore;
A burst of Laughter echoed through the Shore.
Antilochus, more hum'rous than the rest,
Takes the last Prize, and takes it with a Jest.
Why with our wiser Elders should we strive?
The Gods still love them, and they always thrive.
Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the Prize;
He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
(A green old Age unconscious of Decays,
That proves the Hero born in better Days!)
Behold his Vigor in this active Race!
Achilles only boasts a swifter Pace:
For who can match Achilles? He who can,
Must yet be more than Hero, or than Man.
The Effect succeeds the Speech. Pelides cries,
Thy artful Praise deserves a better Prize.
Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy Friend extolled;
Receive a Talent of the purest Gold.
The Youth departs content. The Hosts admire
The Son of Nestor, worthy of his Sire.
Next these a Buckler, Spear and Helm, he brings,
Cast on the Plain the brazen Burden rings:
Arms, which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
And great Patroclus in short Triumph bore.
Stand forth the bravest of our Host! (he cries)
Whoever dares deserve so rich a Prize!
Now grace the Lists before our Army's Sight,
And sheathed in Steel, provoke his Foe to fight.
Who first the jointed Armor shall explore,
And stain his Rival's Mail with issuing Gore;
The Sword, Asteropeus possessed of old,
(A Thracian Blade, distinct with Studs of Gold)
Shall pay the Stroke, and grace the Striker's Side:
These Arms in common let the Chief divide:
For each brave Champion, when the Combat ends,
A sumptuous Banquet at our Tent attends.
Fierce, at the Word, uprose great Tydeus' Son,
And the huge Bulk of Ajax Telamon.
Clad in refulgent Steel on either hand,
The dreadful Chiefs amid the Circle stand:
Lowering they meet, tremendous to the Sight;
Each Argive Bosom beats with fierce Delight.
Opposed in Arms not long they idly stood,
But thrice they closed, and thrice the Charge renewed.
A furious Pass the Spear of Ajax made
Through the broad Shield, but at the Corselet stayed:
Not thus the Foe: His Javelin aimed above
The Buckler's Margin, at the Neck he drove.
But Greece now trembling for her Hero's Life,
Bade share the Honors, and surcease the Strife.
Yet still the Victor's Due Tydides gains,
With him the Sword and studded Belt remains.
Then hurled the Hero, thundering on the Ground
A Mass of Iron, (an enormous Round)
Whose Weight and Size the circling Greeks admire,
Rude from the Furnace, and but shaped by Fire.
This mighty Quoit Aetion wont to rear,
And from his whirling Arm dismiss in Air:
The Giant by Achilles slain, he stowed
Among his Spoils this memorable Load.
For this, he bids those nervous Artists vie,
That teach the Disk to sound along the Sky.
Let him whose Might can hurl this Bowl, arise,
Who farthest hurls it, take it as his Prize:
If he be one, enriched with large Domain
Of Downs for Flocks, and Arable for Grain,
Small Stock of Iron needs that Man provide;
His Hinds and Swains whole years shall be supplied
From hence: Nor ask the neighboring City's Aid,
For Plowshares, Wheels, and all the rural Trade.
Stern Polyphaetes stepped before the Throng,
And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
Whose Force with rival Forces to oppose,
Uprose great Ajax; up Epaeus rose.
Each stood in order: First Epaeus threw;
High over the wondering Crowds the whirling Circle flew.
Leonteus next a little space surpast,
And third, the Strength of god-like Ajax cast.
Over both their Marks it flew; till fiercely flung
From Polypaetes Arm, the Discus sung:
Far, as a Swain his whirling Sheephook throws,
That distant falls among the grazing Cows,
So past them all the rapid Circle flies:
His Friends (while loud Applauses shake the Skies)
With Force conjoined heave off the weighty Prize
Those, who in skilful Archery contend
He next invites the twanging Bow to bend:
And twice ten Axes casts amidst the Round,
(Ten double-edg'd, and ten that singly wound.)
The Mast, which late a first-rate Galley bore,
The Hero fixes in the sandy Shore:
To the tall Top a milk-white Dove they tie,
The trembling Mark at which their Arrows fly.
Whose Weapon strikes yon' fluttering Bird, shall bear
These two-edged Axes, terrible in War;
The single, he, whose Shaft divides the Cord.
He said: Experienced Merion took the Word;
And skilful Teucer: In the Helm they threw
Their Lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
Swift from the String the sounding Arrow flies;
But flies unblest! No grateful Sacrifice,
No firstling Lambs, unheedful! did thou vow,
To Phoebus, Patron of the Shaft and Bow.
For this, thy well-aim'd Arrow, turned aside,
Erred from the Dove, yet cut the Cord that tied:
A-down the Mainmast fell the parted String,
And the free Bird to Heaven displays her Wing:
Seas, Shores, and Skies with loud Applause resound,
And Merion eager meditates the Wound;
He takes the Bow, directs the Shaft above,
And following with his Eye the soaring Dove,
Implores the God to speed it through the Skies,
With Vows of firstling Lambs, and grateful Sacrifice.
The Dove, in airy Circles as she wheels,
Amid the Clouds the piercing Arrow feels;
Quite through and through the Point its Passage found,
And at his Feet fell bloody to the Ground.
The wounded Bird, ever yet she breathed her last,
With flagging Wings alighted on the Mast,
A Moment hung, and spread her Pinions there,
Then sudden dropped, and left her Life in Air.
From the pleased Crowd new Peals of Thunder rise,
And to the Ships brave Merion bears the Prize.
To close the Funeral Games, Achilles last
A massy Spear amid the Circle placed,
And ample Charger of unsullyed Frame,
With Flowers high-wrought, not blackened yet by Flame.
For these he bids the Heroes prove their Art
Whose dext'rous Skill directs the flying Dart.
Here too great Merion hopes the noble Prize;
Nor here disdained the King of Men to rise.
With Joy Pelides saw the Honor paid,
Rose to the Monarch and respectful said.
Thee first in Virtue, as in Power supreme,
O King of Nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
In every martial Game thy Worth attest,
And know thee both their Greatest, and their Best.
Take then the Prize, but let brave Merion bear
This beamy Javelin in thy Brother's War.
Pleased from the Hero's Lips his Praise to hear,
The King to Merion gives the brazen Spear:
But, set apart for sacred Use, commands
The glittering Charger to Talthybius' Hands.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twenty-Third Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWENTY-THIRD BOOK.
I.
THIS, and the following Book, which contain the Description of the Funeral of
Patroclus, and other Matters relating to Hector, are undoubtedly superadded to
the grand Catastrophe of the Poem; for the Story is completely finished with
the Death of that Hero in the 22d Book. Many judicious Critics have been of
opinion that Homer is blameable for protracting it. Virgil closes the whole
Scene of Action with the Death of Turnus, and leaves the rest to be imagined by
the Mind of the Reader: He does not draw the Picture at full Length, but
delineates it so far, that we cannot fail of imagining the whole Draught. There
is however one thing to be said in favor of Homer which may perhaps justify
him in his Method, that what he undertook was to paint the Anger of Achilles:
And as that Anger does not die with Hector, but persecutes his very remains, so
the Poet still keeps up to his Subject; nay it seems to require that he should
carry down the Relation of that Resentment, which is the Foundation of his
Poem, till it is fully satisfied: And as this survives Hector, and gives the
Poet an Opportunity of still showing many sad Effects of Achilles's Anger, the
two following Books may be thought not to be Excrescencies, but essential to
the Poem.

Virgil had been inexcusable had he trod in Homer's Footsteps; for it is
evident that the Fall of Turnus, by giving Aeneas a full Power over Italy,
answers the whole Design and Intention of the Poem; had he gone farther he had
overshot his Mark: And though Homer proceeds after Hector's Death, yet the
Subject is still the Anger of Achilles.

We are now past the War and Violence of the Ilias, the Scenes of Blood are
closed during the rest of the Poem; we may look back with a pleasing kind of
Horror upon the Anger of Achilles, and see what dire Effects it has wrought in
the compass of nineteen Days: Troy and Greece are both in Mourning for it,
Heaven and Earth, Gods and Men, have suffered in the Conflict. The Reader seems
landed upon the Shore after a violent Storm; and has Leisure to survey the
Consequences of the Tempest, and the Wreck occasioned by the former Commotions,
Troy weeping for Hector, and Greece for Patroclus. Our Passions have been in an
Agitation since the opening of the Poem; wherefore the Poet, like some great
Master in Music, softens his Notes, and melts his Readers into Tenderness and
Pity.

II.
VERSE 18. Tears bathe their Arms, and tears the Sands bedew, --
-- Thetis aids their Woe -- ]
It is not easy to give a reason why Thetis should be said to excite the Grief
of the Myrmidons, and of Achilles; it had seemed more natural for the Mother to
have composed the Sorrows of the Son, and restored his troubled Mind to
Tranquillity.

But such a Procedure would have outrag'd the Character of Achilles, who is all
along described to be of such a Violence of Temper, that he is not easy to be
pacified at any time, much less upon so great an Incident as the Death of his
Friend Patroclus. Perhaps the Poet made use of this Fiction in honor of
Achilles; he makes every Passion of his Hero considerable, his Sorrow as well
as Anger is important, and he cannot grieve but a Goddess attends him, and a
whole Army weeps.

Some Commentators fancied that Homer animates the very Sands of the Seas, and
the Arms of the Myrmidons, and makes them sensible of the Loss of Patroclus;
the preceding Words seem to strengthen that Opinion, because the Poet
introduces a Goddess to raise the Sorrow of the Army. But Eustathius seems not
to give into this Conjecture, and I think very judiciously; for what Relation
is there between the Sands of the Shores, and the Arms of the Myrmidons? It
would have been more poetical to have said, the Sands and the Rocks, than the
Sands and the Arms; but it is very natural to say, that the Soldiers wept so
bitterly, that their Armor and the very Sands were wet with their Tears. I
believe this Remark will appear very just by reading the Verse, with a Comma
after (...), thus, (...)
(...)
Then the Construction will be natural and easy, Period will answer Period in
the Greek, and the Sense in English will be, the Sands were wet, and the Arms
were wet, with the Tears of the Mourners.

But however this be, there is a very remarkable Beauty in the run of the Verse
in Homer, every Word has a melancholy Cadence, and the Poet has not only made
the Sands and the Arms, but even his very Verse, to lament with Achilles.

III.
VERSE 23. His slaught'ring Hands yet red with Blood he laid
On his dead Friend's cold Breast -- ]
I could not pass by this Passage without observing to my Reader the great
Beauty of this Epithet, (...). An ordinary Poet would have contented himself
with saying, he laid his Hand upon the Breast of Patroclus, but Homer knows how
to raise the most trivial Circumstance, and by adding this one Word, he laid
his deadly Hands, or his murderous Hands on Patroclus Breast, he fills our
Minds with great Ideas, and by a single Epithet recalls to our Thoughts all the
noble Achievements of Achilles through the Iliad.

IV.
VERSE 25. All hail Patroclus, etc.] There is in this Apostrophe of Achilles to
the Ghost of Patroclus, a sort of Savageness, and a mixture of Softness and
Atrocity, which are highly conformable to his Character. Dacier.

V.
VERSE 51. To cleanse his conquering Hands --
-- The Chief refused -- ]
This is conformable to the Custom of the Orientals: Achilles will not be
induced to wash, and afterward retires to the Seashore, and sleeps on the
Ground. It is just thus that David mourns in the Scriptures; he refuses to
wash, or to take any Repast, but retires from Company, and lies upon the Earth.

VI.
VERSE 78. The Ghost of Patroclus.] Homer has introduced into the former parts
of the Poem the Personages of Gods and Goddesses from Heaven, and of Furies
from Hell: He has embellished it with Ornaments from Earth, Sea, and Air; and
he here opens a new Scene, and brings to the view a Ghost, the Shade of the
departed Friend: By these Methods he diversifies his Poem with new and
surprising Circumstances, and awakens the Attention of the Reader; at the same
time he very poetically adapts his Language to the Circumstances of this
imaginary Patroclus, and teaches us the Opinions that prevailed in his time,
concerning the State of separate Souls.

VII.
VERSE 92. Forbid to pass th'irremeable Flood.] It was the common Opinion of
the Ancients, that the Souls of the Departed were not admitted into the Number
of the Happy till their Bodies had received the funeral Rites; they supposed
those that wanted them wandered an hundred Years before they were wafted over
the infernal River: Virgil perhaps had this Passage of Homer in his view in the
sixth Aeneis, at least he coincides with his Sentiments concerning the State of
the departed Souls. Haec omnis, quam cernis inops inhumataque Turba est:
Nec ripas datur horrendas, nec rauca fluenta
Transportare prius, quam sedibus ossa quierunt;
Centum errant annos volitantque haec littora circum
Tum demum admissi stagna exoptata revisunt.
It was during this Interval, between their Death and the Rites of Funeral,
that they supposed the only Time allowed for separate Spirits to appear to Men;
therefore Patroclus here tells his Friend, -- To the farther Shore
When once we pass, the Soul returns no more.


For the fuller understanding of Homer, it is necessary to be acquainted with
his Notion of the State of the Soul after Death: He followed the Philosophy of
the Egyptians, who supposed Man to be compounded of three Parts, an
intelligent Mind, a Vehicle for that Mind, and a Body; the Mind they called
(...), or (...), the Vehicle (...), Image or Soul, and the gross Body (...).
The Soul, in which the Mind was lodged, was supposed exactly to resemble the
Body in Shape, Magnitude, and Features; for this being in the Body as the
Statue in its Mold, so soon as it goes forth is properly the Image of that Body
in which it was enclosed: This it was that appeared to Achilles, with the full
Resemblance of his Friend Patroclus. Vid. Dacier on the Life of Pythagoras, p.
71.

VIII.
VERSE 108. May mix our Ashes in one common Grave.] There is something very
pathetical in this whole Speech of Patroclus; he begins it with kind
Reproaches, and blames Achilles with a friendly Tenderness; he recounts to him
the inseparable Affection that had been between them in their Lives, and makes
it his last Request, that they may not be parted even in Death, but that their
Bones may rest in the same Urn. The Speech itself is of a due Length, it ought
not to be very short, because this Apparition is an Incident entirely different
from any other in the whole Poem, and consequently the Reader would not have
been satisfied with a cursory mention of it; neither ought it to be long,
because this would have been contrary to the Nature of such Apparitions, whose
Stay upon Earth has ever been described as very short, and consequently they
cannot be supposed to use many Words.

The Circumstance of being buried in the same Urn, is entirely conformable to
the Eastern Custom: There are innumerable Instances in the Scriptures of great
Personages being buried with their Fathers: So Joseph would not suffer his
Bones to rest in Egypt, but commands his Brethren to carry them into Canaan to
the Burying-place of his Father Jacob.

IX.
VERSE 122. The Form subsists without the Body's Aid,
Aerial Semblance, and an empty Shade.]
The Words of Homer are (...)
In which there seems to be a great Difficulty; it being not casy to explain
how Achilles can say that the Ghost of his Friend had no Understanding, when it
had but just made such a rational and moving Speech: Especially when the Poet
introduces the Apparition with the very Shape, Air, and Voice of Patroclus.

But this Passage will be clearly understood, by explaining the Notion which
the Ancients entertained of the Souls of the Departed, according to the
forecited triple Division of Mind, Image, and Body. They imagined that the
Soul was, not only separated from the Body at the Hour of Death, but that there
was a farther Separation of the (...), or Understanding, from its (...), or
Vehicle; so that while the (...), or Image of the Body, was in Hell, the (...),
or Understanding, might be in Heaven: And that this is a true Explication is
evident from a Passage in the Odysseis, Book 11.. 600. (...)
(...)
(...)
Now I the Strength of Hercules behold,
A towering Spectre of gigantick Mold;
A shadowy Form! for high in Heaven's Abodes
Himself resides, a God among the Gods!
There in the bright Assemblies of the Skies
He Nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns with Joys.
By this it appears that Homer was of opinion that Hercules was in Heaven,
while his (...), or Image, was in Hell: So that when this second Separation is
made, the Image or Vehicle becomes a mere thoughtless Form.

We have this whole Doctrine very distinctly delivered by Plutarch in these
Words. "Man is a compound Subject; but not of two Parts, as is commonly
believed, because the Understanding is generally accounted a Part of the Soul;
whereas indeed it as far exceeds the Soul, as the Soul is diviner than the
Body. Now the Soul, when compounded with the Understanding, makes Reason, and
when compounded with the Body, Passion: Whereof the one is the Source or
Principle of Pleasure or Pain, the other of Vice or Virtue. Man therefore
properly dies two Deaths; the first Death makes him two of three, and the
second makes him one of two." [Plutarch of the Face in the Moon.

X.
VERSE 139. Over Hills, over Dales, over Rocks, over Crags they go --
On all sides round the Forest hurls her Oaks
Headlong -- ]
The Numbers in the Original of this whole Passage are admirably adapted to the
Images the Verses convey to us. Every Ear must have felt the Propriety of Sound
in this Line, (...)
That other in its kind is no less exact, (...)
(...) --
Dionysius of Halicarnassus has collected many Instances of these sorts of
Beauties in Homer. This Description of felling the Forests, so excellent as it
is, is comprehended in a few Lines, which has left room for a larger and more
particular one in Statius, one of the best (I think) in that Author. -- Cadit
ardua fagus,
Chaoniumque nemus, brumaeque illaesa cupressus;
Procumbunt piceae, flammis alimenta supremis,
Ornique, iliceaeque trabes, metuendaque sulco
Taxus, and infandos belli potura cruores
Fraxinus, atque situ non expugnabile robur:
Hinc audax abies, and odorae vulnere pinus
Scinditur, acclinant intonsa cacumina terrae
Alnus amica fretis, nec inhospita vitibus ulmus, etc.
I the rather cite this fine Passage, because I find it copied by two of the
greatest Poets of our own Nation, Chaucer and Spencer. The first in the
Assembly of Fowls, the second in his Fairy Queen. lib. 1. The sailing Pine, the
Cedar proud and tall,
The Vine-prop Elm, the Poplar never dry,
The builder Oak, sole King of Forests all,
The Aspine good for Staves, the Cypress Funeral.
The Laurel, Meed of mighty Conquerors,
And Poets sage: The Fir that weepeth still,
The Willow, worn of forlorn Paramours,
The Ewe obedient to the Bender's Will,
The Birch for Shafts, the Sallow for the Mill,
The Myrrh, sweet bleeding in the bitter Wound,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The fruitful Olive, and the Platane round,
The Carver Holme, the Maple seldom inward sound.


XI.
VERSE 158. Each in refulgent Arms, etc -- ] It Is not to be supposed that this
was a general Custom used at all Funerals; but Patroclus being a Warrior he is
buried like a Soldier, with military Honors. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 164. Over all the Corse their scatterd Locks they throw.] The Ceremony
of cutting off the Hair in honor of the Dead was practiced not only among the
Greeks, but also among other Nations; Thus Statius Thebaid. VI. -- Tergoque and
pectore fusam
Caesariem ferro minuit, sectisque jacentis
Obnubit tenuia ora comis.
This Custom is taken notice of in holy Scripture: Ezekiel describing a great
Lamentation, says, They shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, chapter 27..
31. I believe it was done not only in token of Sorrow, but perhaps had a
concealed Meaning, that as the Hair was cut from the Head, and was never more
to be joined to it, so was the Dead for ever cut off from the Living, never
more to return.

I must just observe that this Ceremony of cutting off the Hair was not always
in token of Sorrow; Lycophron in his Cassandra,. 976. describing a general
Lamentation, says (...)
A Length of unshorn Hair adorned their Backs.
And that the Ancients sometimes had their Hair cut off in token of Joy is
evident from Juvenal Sat. 12.. 82. -- Gaudent ibi vertice raso
Garrula securi narrare pericula Nautae.
This seeming Contradiction will be solved by having respect to the different
Practices of different Nations. If it was the general Custom of any Country to
wear long Hair, then the cutting it off was a token of Sorrow; but if it was
the Custom to wear short Hair, then the letting it grow long and neglecting it,
showed that such People were Mourners.

XIII.
VERSE 166. Supporting with his Hands the Hero's Head.] Achilles follows the
Corpse as chief Mourner, and sustains the Head of his Friend: This last
Circumstance seems to be neral; thus Euripides in the Funeral of Rhesus,. 886.
(...)
(...)
(...)
What God, O King, with his Hands supports the Head of the deceased?

XIV.
VERSE 173. And sacred grew to Sperchius honored Flood.] It was the Custom of
the Ancients not only to offer their own Hair, but likewise to consecrate that
of their Children to the River-Gods of their Country. This is what Pausanias
shows in his Attics: Before you pass the Cephisa (says he) you find the Tomb of
Theodorus, who was the most excellent Actor of his Time for Tragedy; and on the
Banks you see two Statues, one of Mnesimachus, and the other of his Son, who
cut off his Hair in honor of the Rivers; for that this was in all Ages the
Custom of the Greeks, may be inferred from Homer 's Poetry, where Peleus
promises by a solemn Vow to consecrate to the River Sperchius the Hair of his
Son, if he returns safe from the Trojan War. This Custom was likewise in
Egypt, where Philostratus tells us, that Memnon consecrated his Hair to the
Nile. This Practice of Achilles was imitated by Alexander at the Funeral of
Hephaestion. Spondanus.

XV.
VERES 226. Celestial Venus, etc.] Homer has here introduced a Series of
Allegories in the Compass of a few Lines: The Body of Hector may be supposed to
have continued beautiful even after he was slain; and Venus being the President
of Beauty, the Poet by a natural Fiction tells us it was preserved by that
Goddess.

Apollo's covering the Body with a Cloud is a very natural Allegory: For the
Sun (says Eustathius) has a double Quality which produces contrary Effects; the
Heat of it causes a Dryness, but at the same time it exhales the Vapors of the
Earth, from whence the Clouds of Heaven are formed. This Allegory may be
founded upon Truth; there might happen to be a cool Season while Hector lay
unburied, and Apollo, or the Sun, raising Clouds which intercept the Heat of
his Beams, by a very easy Fiction in Poetry may be introduced in Person to
preserve the Body of Hector.

XVI.
VERSE 261. The Allegory of the Winds.] A Poet ought to express nothing
vulgarly; and sure no Poet ever trespassed less against this Rule than Homer;
the Fruitfulness of his Invention is continually raising Incidents new and
surprising. Take this Passage out of its poetical Dress, and it will be no more
than this: A strong Gale of Wind blew, and so increased the Flame that it soon
consumed the Pile. But Homer introduces the Gods of the Winds in Person: And
Iris, or the Rainbow, being (as Eustathius observes) a Sign not only of
Showers, but of Winds, he makes them come at her Summons.

Every Circumstance is well adapted: As soon as the Winds see Iris, they rise;
that is, when the Rainbow appears, the the Wind rises: She refuses to sit, and
immediately returns; that is, the Rainbow is never seen long at one time, but
soon appears, and soon vanishes: She returns over the Ocean; that is, the Bow
is composed of Waters, and it would have been an unnatural Fiction to have
described her as passing by Land.

The Winds are all together in the Cave of Zephyrus, which may imply that they
were there as at their general Rendezvous; or that the Nature of all the Winds
is the same; or that the Western Wind is in that Country the most constant,
and consequently it may be said that at such Seasons all the Winds are
assembled in one Corner, or rendezvous with Zephyrus.

Iris will not enter the Cave: It is the Nature of the Rainbow to be stretched
entirely upon the Surface, and therefore this Fiction is agreeable to Reason.

When Iris says that the Gods are partaking Hecatombs in Aethiopia, it is to be
remembered that the Gods are represented there in the first Book, before the
Scenes of War were opened, and now they are closed, they return thither.
Eustathius -- Thus Homer makes the Anger of his Hero so important, that it
roused Heaven to Arms, and now when it is almost appeased, Achilles as it were
gives Peace to the Gods.

XVII.
VERSE 306. Hereafter Greece a nobler Pyle shall raise.] We see how Achilles
consults his own Glory; the desire of it prevails over his Tenderness for
Patroclus, and he will not permit any Man, not even his beloved Patroclus, to
share an equality of Honor with himself, even in the Grave. Eustathius.

XVIII.
VERSE 320. The Games for Patroclus.] The Conduct of Homer in enlarging upon
the Games at the Funeral of Patroclus is very judicious: There had undoubtedly
been such Honors paid to several Heroes during this War, as appears from a
Passage in the ninth Book, where Agamemnon to enhance the Value of the Horses
which he offers Achilles, says, that any Person would be rich that had
Treasures equal to the Value of the Prizes they had won; which Races must have
been run during the Seige: for had they been before it, the Horses would now
have been too old to be of any Value, this being the tenth Year of the War. But
he Poet passes all those Games over in Silence, and reserves them for this
Season; not only in honor of Patroclus, but also of his Hero Achilles; who
exhibits Games to a whole Army; great Generals are Candidates for the Prizes,
and he himself sits the Judge and Arbitrator: Thus in Peace as well as War the
Poet maintains the Superiority of the Character of Achilles.

But there is another Reason why the Poet deferred to relate any Games that
were exhibited at any preceding Funerals: The Death of Patroclus was the most
eminent Period; and consequently the most proper Time for such Games.

It Is farther observable, that he chooses this peculiar Time with great
Judgment. When the Fury of the War raged, the Army could not well have found
Leisure for the Games, and they might have met with Interruption from the
Enemy: But Hector being dead, all Troy is in Confusion: They are in too great a
Consternation to make any Attempts, and therefore the Poet could not possibly
have chosen a more happy Opportunity. Eustathius.

XIX.
VERSE 347. Lost is Patroclus now, etc.] I am not ignorant that Homer has
frequently been blamed for such little Digressions as these; in this Passage he
gives us the Genealogy of his Horses, which he has frequently told us in the
preceding part of the Poem. But Eustathius justifies his Conduct, and says that
it was very proper to commend the Virtue of these Horses upon this Occasion,
when Horses were to contend for Victory: At the same time he takes an
Opportunity to make an honorable Mention of his Friend Patroclus, in whose
Honor these Games were exhibited.

It may be added as a farther Justification of Homer, that this last
Circumstance is very natural: Achilles while he commends his Horses remembers
how careful Patroclus had been of them: His Love for his Friend is so great,
that the minutest Circumstance recalls him to his Mind; and such little
Digressions, such Avocations of Thought as these, very naturally proceed from
the Overflows of Love and Sorrow.

XX.
VERSE 363. Whom rich Echepolus, etc.] One would think that Agamemnon might be
accused of Avarice, in dispensing a Man from going to the War for the sake of a
Horse; but Aristotle very well observes, that this Prince is praiseworthy for
having preferred a Horse to a Person so cowardly, and so incapable of Service.
It may also be conjectured from this Passage, that even in those elder Times it
was the Custom, that those who were willing to be excused from the War, should
give either a Horse or a Man and often both. Thus Scipio going to Africa
ordered the Sicilians either to attend him, or to give him Horses or Men: And
Agesilaus being at Ephesus and wanting Cavalry, made a Proclamation, that the
rich Men who would not serve in the War should be dispensed with, provided they
furnished a Man and a Horse in their stead: In which, says Plutarch, he wisely
followed the Example of King Agamemnon, who excused a very rich Coward from
serving in Person, for a Present of a good Mare. Eustathius. Dacier.

XXI.
VERSE 369. Experienced Nestor, etc.] The Poet omits no Opportunity of paying
Honor to his old favorite Nestor, and I think he is no where more
particularly complemented than in this Book. His Age had disabled him from
bearing any share in the Games; and yet he artfully introduces him not as a
mere Spectator, but as an Actor in the Sports. Thus he as it were wins the
Prize for Antilochus, Antilochus wins not by the Swiftness of his Horses, but
by the Wisdom of Nestor.

This fatherly Tenderness is wonderfully natural: We see him in all imaginable
Inquietude and Concern for his Son; He comes to the Barrier, stands beside the
Chariot, animates his Son by his Praises, and directs him by his Lessons: You
think the old Man's Soul mounts on the Chariot with his Antilochus, to partake
the same Dangers, and run the same Career.

Nothing can be better adapted to the Character than this Speech; he expatiates
upon the Advantages of Wisdom over Strength, which is a tacit Complement to
himself: And had there been a Prize for Wisdom, undoubtedly the old Man would
have claimed it as his Right. Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 426. The Lots their place dispose.] According to these Lots the
Charioteers took their Places; but to know whether they stood all in an equal
Front, or one behind the other, is a Difficulty: Eustathius says the Ancients
were of Opinion that they did not stand in one Front; because it is evident
that he who had the first Lot had a great Advantage of the other Charioteers:
If he had not, why should Achilles cast Lots? Madam Dacier is of Opinion that
they all stood abreast at the Barrier, and that the first would still have a
sufficient Advantage, as he was nearer the Bound, and stood within the rest,
whereas the others must take a larger Circle, and consequently were forced to
run a greater Compass of Ground. Phoenix was placed as an Inspector of the
Race, that is, says Eustathius, he was to make report whether they had observed
the Laws of the Race in their several Turnings.

Sophocles observes the same Method with Homer in relation to the Lots and
Inspectors, in his Electra. -- (...)
(...)
The constituted Judges assigned the Places according to the Lots.
The Ancients say that the Charioteers started at the Sigaeum, where the Ships
of Achilles lay, and ran toward the Rhaeteum, from the Ships toward the
Shores. But Aristarchus affirmed that they run in the Compass of Ground of five
Stadia, which lay between the Wall and the Tents toward the Shore. Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 457. And seem just mounting on his Car behind.] A more natural Image
than this could not be thought of. The Poet makes us Spectators of the Race, we
see Diomed pressing upon Eumelus so closely, that his Chariot seems to climb
the Chariot of Eumelus.

XXIV.
VERSE 464. Rage fills his Eye with Anguish to survey, etc.] We have seen
Diomed surrounded with innumerable Dangers, acting in the most perilous Scenes
of Blood and Death, yet never shed one Tear: And now he weeps on a small
occasion, for a mere Trifle: This must be ascribed to the Nature of Mankind,
who are often transported with Trifles; and there are certain unguarded Moments
in every Man's Life; so that he who could meet the greatest Dangers with
Intrepidity, may through Anger be betrayed into an Indecency. Eustathius.

The reason why Apollo is angry at Diomed, according to Eustathius, is because
he was interested for Eumelus, whose Mares he had fed, when he served Admetus;
but I fancy he is under a Mistake: This indeed is a Reason why he should favor
Eumelus, but not why he should be angry at Diomed. I rather think that the
Quarrel of Apollo with Diomed was personal; because he offered him a Violence
in the first Book, and Apollo still resents it.

The Fiction of Minerva's assisting Diomed is grounded upon his being so wise
as to take a couple of Whips to prevent any Mischance: So that Wisdom, or
Pallas, may be said to lend him one. Eustathius.

XXV.
VERSE 486. The Speech of Antilochus to his Horses.] I fear Antilochus his
Speech to his Horses is blameable; Eustathius himself seems to think it a Fault
that he should speak so much in the very Heat of the Race. He commands and
sooths, counsels and threatens his Horses, as if they were reasonable
Creatures. The subsequent Speech of Menelaus is more excusable as it is more
short, but both of them are spoken in a Passion, and Anger we know makes us
speak to every thing, and we discharge it upon the most senseless Objects.

XXVI.
VERSE 563. The Dispute between Idomeneus and Ajax.] Nothing could be more
naturally imagined than this Contention at a Horse-Race: The Leaders were
divided into Parties, and each was interested for his Friend: The Poet had a
twofold Design, not only to embellish and diversity his Poem by such natural
Circumstances, but also to show us, as Eustathius observes, from the Conduct of
Ajax, that passionate Men betray themselves into Follies, and are themselves
guilty of the Faults of which they accuse others.

It is with a particular Decency that Homer makes Achilles the Arbitrator
between Idomeneus and Ajax: Agamemnon was his Superior in the Army, but as
Achilles exhibited the Shows he was the proper Judge of any Difference that
should arise about them; had the Contest been between Ajax and Idomeneus,
considered as Soldiers, the Cause must have been brought before Agamemnon; but
as they are to be considered as Spectators of the Games, they ought to be
determined by Achilles.

It may not be unnecessary just to observe to the Reader the Judiciousness of
Homer's Conduct in making Achilles exhibit the Games, and not Agamemnon:
Achilles is the Hero of the Poem, and consequently must be the chief Actor in
all the great Scenes of it: He had remained inactive during a great Part of the
Poem, yet the Poet makes his very Inactivity contribute to the carrying on the
Design of his Ilias: And to supply his Absence from many of the busy Scenes of
the preceding Parts of it, he now in the Conclusion makes him almost the sole
Agent: By these means he leaves a noble Idea of his Hero upon the Mind of his
Reader, and as he raised our Expectations when he brought him upon the Stage of
Action, so he makes him go off with the utmost Pomp and Applause.

XXVII.
VERSE 580. High over his Head the circling Lash he wields.] I am persuaded
that the common Translation of the Word (...), in the Original of this Verse,
is faulty: It is rendered, he lashed the Horses continually over the Shoulders;
whereas I fancy it should be translated thus, assidue (Equos) agitabat scutica
ab humero ducta. This naturally expresses the very Action, and whirl of the
Whip over the Driver's Shoulder, in the Act of lashing the Horses, and agrees
with the Use of the same Word in the 431st Line of this Book, where (...) must
be translated Jactus Disci ab humero vibrati.

XXVIII.
VERSE 613. Fortune denies, but Justice, etc.] Achilles here intends to show,
that it is not just Fortune should rule over Virtue, but that a brave Man who
had performed his Duty, and who did not bring upon himself his Misfortune,
ought to have the Recompense he has deserved: And this Principle is just,
provided we do not reward him at the Expense of another's Right: Eumelus is a
Thessalian, and it is probable Achilles has a Partiality to his Countryman.
Dacier.

XXIX.
VERSE 632. But this, my Prize, I never shall forego -- There is an Air of
Bravery in this Discourse of Antilochus: He speaks with the Generosity of a
gallant Soldier, and prefers his Honor to his Interest; he tells Achilles if
he pleases he may make Eumelus a richer Present than his Prize; he is not
concerned for the Value of it, but as it was the Reward of Victory, he would
not resign it, because that would be an Acknowledgment that Eumelus deserved it.

The Character of Antilochus is admirably sustained through this whole Episode;
he is a very sensible Man, but transported with youthful Heat, and ambitious of
Glory: His Rashness in driving so furiously against Menelaus must be imputed to
this; but his Passions being gratified by the Conquest in the Race, his Reason
again returns, he owns his Error, and is full of Resignation to Menelaus.

XXX.
VERSE 662. And touch the Steeds, and swear -- ] It Is evident, says Eustathius,
from hence, that all Fraud was forbid in the Chariot-Race; but it is not very
plain what unlawful Deceit Antilochus used against Menelaus; perhaps Antilochus
in his Haste had declined from the Race-Ground, and avoided some of the uneven
Places of it, and consequently took an unfair Advantage of his Adversary; or
perhaps his driving so furiously against Menelaus as to endanger both their
Chariots and their Lives, might be reckoned foul play; and therefore Antilochus
refuses to take the Oath.

XXXI.
VERSE 678. Joy swells his Soul, as when the vernal Grain, etc.] Eustathius is
very large in the Explication of this Similitude, which at the first view seems
obscure: His Words are these

As the Dew raises the Blades of Corn, that are for want of it weak and
depressed, and by pervading the Pores of the Corn animates and makes it
flourish, so did the Behavior of Antilochus raise the dejected Mind of
Menelaus, exalt his Spirits, and restore him to a full Satisfaction.

I have given the Reader his Interpretation, and translated it with the Liberty
of Poetry: It is very much in the Language of Scripture, and in the Spirit of
the Orientals.

XXXII.
VERSE 706. Accept thou this, O sacred Sire!] The Poet in my Opinion preserves
a great deal of Decency toward this old Hero, and venerable Counselor: He
gives him an honorary Reward for his superior Wisdom, and therefore Achilles
calls it (...), and not (...), a Prize, and not a Present. The Moral of Homer
is, that Princes ought no less to honor and recompense those who excel in
Wisdom and Counsel, than those who are capable of actual Service.

Achilles, perhaps, had a double view in paying him this Respect, not only out
of Deference to his Age, and Wisdom, but also because he had, in a manner, won
the Prize by the Advice he gave his Son: So that Nestor may be said to have
conquered in the Person of Antilochus. Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 718. Nestor 's Speech to Achilles.] This Speech is admirably well
adapted to the Character of Nestor: He aggrandizes, with an Infirmity peculiar
to Age, his own Exploits; and one would think Horace had him in his Eye, --
Laudatur temporis acti
Se puero --
Neither is it any Blemish to the Character of Nestor thus to be a little
talkative about his own Achievements: To have described him otherwise would
have been an Outrage to human Nature, in as much as the wisest Man living is
not free from the Infirmities of Man: and as every Stage of Life has some
Imperfection peculiar to it self. -- (...)
-- (...)
The Reader may observe that the old Man takes abundance of pains to give
Reasons how his Rivals came to be Victors in the Chariot-Race: He is very
solicitous to make it appear that it was not through any want of Skill or Power
in himself: And in my Opinion Nestor is never more vainglorious than in this
recital of his own Disappointment.

It is for the same reason he repeats the Words I have cited above: He obtrudes
(by that Repetition) the Disadvantages under which he labored, upon the
Observation of the Reader, for fear he should impute the Loss of the Victory to
his want of Skill.

Nestor says that these Moliones overpowered him by their Number. The Critics,
as Eustathius remarks, have labored hard to explain this Difficulty; they tell
us a formal Story, that when Nestor was ready to enter the Lists against these
Brothers, he objected against them as unfair Adversaries, (for it must be
remembered that they were Monsters that grew together, and consequently had
four Hands to Nestor's two) but the Judges would not allow his plea, but
determined, that as they grew together so they ought to be considered as one
Man.

Others tell us, that they brought several Chariots into the Lists, whose
Charioteers combined together in favor of Eurytus and Cteatus, these
brother-Monsters.

Others say, that the Multitude of the Spectators conspired to disappoint
Nestor.

I thought it necessary to give my Reader these several Conjectures; that he
might understand why Nestor says he was overpowered by (...), or Numbers; and
also, because it confirms my former Observation, that Nestor is very careful to
draw his own Picture in the strongest Colors, and to show it in the fairest
Light.

XXXIV.
VERSE 820. A female Captive valued but at four.] I cannot in Civility neglect
a Remark made upon this Passage by Madam Dacier, who highly resents the Affront
put upon her Sex by the Ancients, who set (it seems) thrice the Value upon a
Tripod as upon a beautiful female Slave: Nay, she is afraid the Value of Women
is not raised even in our Days; for she says there are curious Persons now
living who had rather have a true antique Kettle, than the finest Woman alive:
I confess I entirely agree with the Lady, and must impute such Opinions of the
fair Sex to want of Taste in both Ancients and Moderns: The Reader may remember
that these Tripods were of no use, but made entirely for Show, and consequently
the most satirical Critic could only say, the Woman and Tripod ought to have
born an equal Value.

XXXV.
VERSE 827. Like two strong Rafters, etc.] I will give the Reader the Words of
Eustathius upon this Similitude, which very happily represents the Wrestlers in
the Posture of Wrestling. Their Heads leaned one against the other, like the
Rafters that support the Roof of a House; at the Foot they are disjoined, and
stand at a greater Distance, which naturally paints the Attitude of Body in
these two Wrestlers, while they contend for Victory.

XXXVI.
VERSE 850. He barely stirred him, but he could not raise.] The Poet by this
Circumstance excellently maintains the Character of Ajax, who has all along
been described as a strong, unweildy Warrior: He is so heavy that Ulysses can
scarce lift him. The Words that follow will bear a different Meaning, either
that Ajax locked his Leg within that of Ulysses, or that Ulysses did it.
Eustathius observes, that if Ajax gave Ulysses this Shock, then he may be
allowed to have some appearance of an Equality in the Contest, but if Ulysses
gave it, then Ajax must be acknowledged to have been foiled: But (continues he)
it appeared to be otherwise to Achilles, who was the Judge of the Field, and
therefore he gives them an equal Prize, because they were equal in the Contest.

Madam Dacier misrepresents Eustathius on this Place, in saying he thinks it
was Ulysses who gave this second Stroke to Ajax, whereas it appears by the
foregoing Note that he rather determines otherwise in consent with the Judgment
given by Achilles.

XXXVII.
VERSE 902. Assist O Goddess! (thus in Thought he prayed)] Nothing could be
better adapted to the present Circumstance of Ulysses than this Prayer: It is
short, and ought to be so, because the Time would not allow him to make a
longer; nay he prefers this Petition mentally, (...); all his Faculties are so
bent upon the Race, that he does not call off his Attention from it, even to
speak so short a Petition as seven Words, which comprehend the whole of it:
Such Passages as these are Instances of great Judgment in the Poet.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 926. And takes it with a Jest.] Antilochus comes off very well, and
wittily prevents Raillery; by attributing the Victory of his Rivals to the
Protection which the Gods gave to Age. By this he insinuates, that he has
something to comfort himself with; (for Youth is better than the Prize) and
that he may pretend hereafter to the same Protection, since it is a Privilege of
Seniority. Dacier.

XXXIX.
VERSE 935. For who can match Achilles?] There is great Art in these transient
Complements to Achilles: That Hero could not possibly show his own Superiority
in these Games by contending for any of the Prizes, because he was the
Exhibiter of the Sports: But Homer has found out a way to give him the Victory
in two of them. In the Chariot-Race Achilles is represented as being able to
conquer every Opponent, and though he speaks it himself, the Poet brings it in so
happily, that he speaks it without any Indecency: And in this place Antilochus
with a very good grace tells Achilles, that in the Foot-Race no one can dispute
the Prize with him. Thus though Diomed and Ulysses conquer in the Chariot and
Foot-Race, it is only because Achilles is not their Antagonist.

XL.
VERSE 951. Who first the jointed Armor shall explore.] Some of the Ancients
have been shocked at this Combat, thinking it a Barbarity that Men in Sport
should thus contend for their Lives; and therefore Aristophanes the Grammarian
made this Alteration in the Verses. (...)
(...), etc.
But it is evident that they entirely mistook the Meaning and Intention of
Achilles; for he that gave the first Wound was to be accounted the Victor. How
could Achilles promise to entertain them both in his Tent after the Combat, if
he intended that one of them should fall in it? This Duel therefore was only a
Trial of Skill, and as such single Combats were frequent in the Wars of those
Ages against Adversaries, so this was proposed only to show the Dexterity of
the Combatants in that Exercise. Eustathius.

XLI.
VERSE 973. Yet still the Victor's Due Tydides gains.] Achilles In this place
acts the part of a very just Arbitrator: Though the Combat did not proceed to a
full issue, yet Diomed had evidently the Advantage, and consequently ought to
be rewarded as Victor, because he would have been victorious, had not the
Greeks interposed.

I could have wished that the Poet had given Ajax the Prize in some of these
Contests. He undoubtedly was a very gallant Soldier, and has been described as
repulsing a whole Army; yet in all these Sports he is foiled. But perhaps the
Poet had a double View in this Representation, not only to show, that Strength
without Conduct is usually unsuccessful, but also his Design might be to
complement the Greeks his Countrymen; by showing that this Ajax, who had
repelled a whole Army of Trojans was not able to conquer any one of the Grecian
Worthies: For we find him overpowered in three of these Exercises.

XLII.
VERSE 987. If he be one, enriched, etc.] The Poet in this place speaks in the
Simplicity of ancient Times: The prodigious Weight and Size of the Quoit is
described with a noble Plainness, peculiar to the oriental way, and agreeable
to the Manners of those heroic Ages. He does not set down the Quantity of this
enormous piece of Iron, neither as to its Bigness nor Weight, but as to the Use
it will be of to him who shall gain it. We see from hence, that the Ancients in
the Prizes they proposed, had in view not only the Honorable, but the Useful;
a Captive for Work, a Bull for Tillage, a Quoit for the Provision of Iron.
Besides it must be remembered, that in those Times Iron was very scarce; and a
sure sign of this Scarcity, is, that their Arms were Brass. Eustath. Dacier.

XLIII.
VERSE 1032. He takes the Bow.] There having been many Editions of Homer, that
of Marseilles represents these two Rivals in Archery as using two Bows in the
Contest; and reads the Verses thus, (...)
(...)
Our common Editions follow the better Alteration of Antimachus, with this only
Difference, that he reads it (...)
And they, (...)
It is evident that these Archers had but one Bow, as they that threw the Quoit
had but one Quoit; by these means the one had no Advantage over the other,
because both of them shot with the same Bow. So that the common Reading is
undoubtedly the best, where the Lines stand thus, (...)
(...)
Eustath. This Teucer is the most eminent Man for Archery of any through the
whole Iliad, yet he is here excelled by Meriones: And the Poet ascribes his
Miscarriage to the neglect of invoking Apollo, the God of Archery; whereas
Meriones, who invokes him, is crowned with Success. There is an excellent Moral
in this Passage, and the Poet would teach us, that without addressing to Heaven
we cannot succeed: Meriones does not conquer because he is the better Archer,
but because he is the better Man.

XLIV.
VERSE 1053. Nor here disdained the King of Men to rise.] There is an admirable
Conduct in this Passage; Agamemnon never contended for any of the former
Prizes, though of much greater Value; so that he is a Candidate for this, only to
honor Patroclus and Achilles. The decency which the Poet uses both in the
choice of the Game, in which Agamemnon is about to contend, and the giving him
the Prize without a Contest, is very remarkable: The Game was a warlike
Exercise, fit for the General of an Army; the giving him the Prize without a
Contest is a Decency judiciously observed, because no one ought to be supposed
to excel the General in any military Art: Agamemnon does Justice to his own
Character, for whereas he had been represented by Achilles in the opening of
the Poem as a covetous Person, he now puts in for the Prize that is of the
least Value, and generously gives even that to Talthybius. Eustathius.

As to this last Particular, of Agamemnon's presenting the Charger to
Talthybius, I cannot but be of a different Opinion. It had been an Affront to
Achilles not to have accepted of his Present on this Occasion, and I believe
the Words of Homer, (...)
mean no more, than that he put it into the Hands of this Herald to carry it to
his Ships; Talthybius being by his Office an Attendant upon Agamemnon.

XLV.
It will be expected I should here say something tending to a Comparison
between the Games of Homer and those of Virgil. If I may own my private
Opinion, there is in general more Variety of natural Incidents, and a more
lively Picture of natural Passions, in the Games and Persons of Homer. On the
other hand, there seems to me more Art, Contrivance, Gradation, and a greater
Pomp of Verse in those of Virgil. The Chariot-Race is that which Homer has most
labored, of which Virgil being sensible, he judiciously avoided the Imitation
of what he could not improve, and substituted in its place the Naval-Course, or
Ship-Race. It is in this the Roman Poet has employed all his Force, as if on
set purpose to rival his great Master; but it is extremely observable how
constantly he keeps Homer in his Eye, and is afraid to depart from his very
Track, even when he had varied the Subject itself. Accordingly the Accidents of
the Naval-Course have a strange Resemblance with those of Homer's Chariot-Race.
He could not forbear at the very Beginning to draw a part of that Description
into a Simile. Do not we see he has Homer's Chariots in his Head, by these
Lines Non tam praecipites bijugo certamine campum
Corripuere, ruuntque effusi carcere currus.
Nec sic immissis aurigae undantia lora
Concussere jugis, pronique in verbera pendent.
Aen. v.. 144. What is the Encounter of Cloanthus and Gyas in the Strait
between the Rocks, but the same with that of Menelaus and Antilochus in the
hollow Way? Had the Galley of Sergestus been broken, if the Chariot of Eumelus
had not been demolished? Or Mnestheus been cast from the Helm, had not the
other been thrown from his Seat? Does not Mnestheus exhort his Rowers in the
very Words Antilochus had used to his Horses? Non jamprima peto Mnestheus,
neque vincere cesto
Quamquam O! sed superent quibus hoc Neptune dedisti;
Extremos pudeat rediisse! hoc vincite, cives,
Etprohibete nefas --
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Upon the whole, the Description of the Sea-Race I think has the more Poetry
and Majesty, that of the Chariots more Nature, and lively Incidents. There is
nothing in Virgil so picturesque, so animated, or which so much marks the
Characters, as the Episodes of Antilochus and Menelaus, Ajax and Idomeneus,
with that beautiful Interposition of old Nestor, (so naturally introduced into
an Affair where one so little expects him.) On the other side, in Virgil the
Description itself is much nobler; it has something more ostentatiously grand,
and seems a Spectacle more worthy the Presence of Princes and great Persons.

In three other Games we find the Roman Poet contending openly with the
Grecian. That of the Caestus is in great part a verbal Translation: But it must
be owned in favor of Virgil, that he has varied from Homer in the Event of the
Combat with admirable Judgment and with an Improvement of the Moral. Epaeus
and Dares are described by both Poets as vain Boasters; but Virgil with more
poetical Justice punishes Dares for his Arrogance, whereas the Presumption and
Pride of Epaeus is rewarded by Homer.

On the contrary, in the Foot-Race, I am of opinion that Homer has shown more
Judgment and Morality than Virgil. Nisus in the latter is unjust to his
Adversary in favor of his Friend Euryalus; so that Euryalus wins the Race by
palpable Fraud, and yet the Poet gives him the first Prize; whereas Homer makes
Ulysses victorious, purely through the Mischance of Ajax, and his own Piety in
invoking Minerva.

The shooting is also a direct Copy, but with the Addition of two Circumstances
which make a beautiful Gradation. In Homer the first Archer cuts the String
that held the Bird, and the other shoots him as he is mounting. In Virgil the
first only hits the Mast which the Bird was fixed upon, the second cuts the
String, the third shoots him, and the fourth to vaunt the Strength of his Arm
directs his Arrow up to Heaven, where it kindles into a Flame, and makes a
Prodigy. This last is certainly superior to Homer in what they call the
Wonderful: but what is the Intent or Effect of this Prodigy, or whether a
Reader is not at least as much surprised at it, as at the most unreasonable
Parts in Homer, I leave to those Critics who are more inclined to find Faults
than I am: Nor shall I observe upon the many literal Imitations in the Roman
Poet, to object against which were to derogate from the Merit of those fine
Passages, which Virgil was so very sensible of, that he was resolved to take
them, at any rate, to himself.

There remain in Homer three Games untouched by Virgil; the Wrestling, the
single Combat, and the Discus. In Virgil there is only the Lusus Trojae added,
which is purely his own, and must be confessed to be inimitable: I don't know
whether I may be allowed to say, it is worth all those three of Homer?

I could not forgive my self if I omitted to mention in this place the Funeral
Games in the sixth Thebaid of Statius; it is by much the most beautiful Book of
that Poem. It Is very remarkable, that he has followed Homer through the whole
Course of his Games: There is the Chariot-Race, the Foot-Race, the Discus, the
Caestus, the Wrestling, the single Combat (which is put off in the same manner
as in Homer) and the Shooting; which last ends (as in Virgil) with a Prodigy:
Yet in the particular Descriptions of each of these Games this Poet has not
borrowed from either of his Predecessors, and his Poem is so much the worse for
it.

THE TWENTY-FOURTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Redemption of the Body of Hector.
THE Gods deliberate about the Redemption of Hector. Jupiter sends Thetis to
Achilles to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to Priam, to encourage
him to go in Person, and treat for it. The old King, notwithstanding the
Remonstrances of his Queen, makes ready for the Journey, to which he is
encouraged by an Omen from Jupiter. He sets forth in his Chariot, with a Wagon
loaded with Presents under the Charge of Idaeus the Herald. Mercury descends in
the Shape of a young Man, and conducts him to the Pavilion of Achilles. Their
Conversation on the way. Priam finds Achilles at his Table, casts himself at
his Feet, and begs for the Body of his Son; Achilles, moved with Compassion,
grants his Request, detains him one Night in his Tent, and the next Morning
sends him home with the Body: The Trojans run out to meet him. The Lamentations
of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the Solemnities of the Funeral.

The Time of twelve Days is employed in this Book, while the Body of Hector
lies in the Tent of Achilles. And as many more are spent in the Truce allowed
for his Interment. The Scene is partly in Achilles's Camp, and partly in Troy.

THE TWENTY-FOURTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
NOW from the finished Games the Grecian Band
Sought their black Ships, and cleared the crowded Strand;
All stretched at ease the genial Banquet share,
And pleasing Slumbers quiet all their Care.
Not so Achilles: He, to Grief resigned,
His Friend's dear Image present to his Mind,
Takes his sad Couch, more unobserved to weep,
Nor tastes the Gifts of all-composing Sleep.
Restless he rolled around his weary Bed,
And all his Soul on his Patroclus fed:
The Form so pleasing, and the Heart so kind,
That youthful Vigor, and that manly Mind,
What Toils they shared, what martial Works they wrought,
What Seas they measured, and what Fields they fought;
All past before him in Remembrance dear,
Thought follows Thought, and Tear succeeds to Tear.
And now supine, now prone, the Hero lay,
Now shifts his Side, impatient for the Day:
Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
Wide on the lonely Beach to vent his Woes.
There as the solitary Mourner raves,
The ruddy Morning rises over the Waves;
Soon as it rose, his furious Steeds he joined;
The Chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
And thrice Patroclus! round thy Monument
Was Hector dragged, then hurried to the Tent.
There Sleep at last o'ercomes the Hero's Eyes;
While foul in Dust th'unhonour'd Carcass lies,
But not deserted by the pitying Skies.
For Phoebus watched it with superior Care,
Preserved from gaping Wounds, and tainting Air;
And ignominious as it swept the Field,
Spread over the sacred Corse his golden Shield.
All Heaven was moved, and Hermes willed to go
By Stealth to snatch him from the insulting Foe:
But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
And th'unrelenting Empress of the Skies:
Ever since that Day implacable to Troy,
What time young Paris, simple Shepherd Boy,
Won by destructive Lust (Reward obscene)
Their Charms rejected for the Cyprian Queen.
But when the tenth celestial Morning broke;
To Heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke.
Unpitying Powers! how often each holy Fane
Has Hector tinged with Blood of Victims slain?
And can ye still his cold Remains pursue?
Still grudge his Body to the Trojans View?
Deny to Consort, Mother, Son, and Sire,
The last sad Honors of the funeral Fire?
Is then the dire Achilles all your Care?
That Iron Heart, inflexibly severe;
A Lion, not a Man, who slaughters wide
In Strength of Rage and Impotence of Pride,
Who hastes to murder with a savage Joy,
Invades around, and breathes but to destroy.
Shame is not of his Soul; nor understood,
The greatest Evil and the greatest Good
Still for one Loss he rages unresign'd,
Repugnant to the Lot of all Mankind;
To lose a Friend, a Brother, or a Son,
Heaven dooms each Mortal, and its Will is done:
A while they sorrow, then dismiss their Care;
Fate gives the Wound, and Man is born to bear.
But this Insatiate the Commission given
By Fate, exceeds; and tempts the Wrath of Heaven:
Lo how his Rage dishonest drags along
Hector's dead Earth insensible of Wrong!
Brave though he be, yet by no Reason awed,
He violates the Laws of Man and God.
If equal Honors by the partial Skies
Are doomed both Heroes, ( Juno thus replies)
If Thetis' Son must no Distinction know,
Then hear, ye Gods! the Patron of the Bow.
But Hector only boasts a mortal Claim,
His Birth deriving from a mortal Dame:
Achilles of your own Aetherial Race
Springs from a Goddess, by a Man's Embrace;
(A Goddess by our self to Peleus given,
A Man divine, and chosen Friend of Heaven.)
To grace those Nuptials, from the bright Abode
Your selves were present; where this Minstrel-God
(Well-pleased to share the Feast,) amid the Quire
Stood proud to Hymn, and tune his youthful Lyre.
Then thus the Thund'rer checks the imperial Dame:
Let not thy Wrath the Court of Heaven inflame;
Their Merits, nor their Honors, are the same.
But mine, and every God's peculiar Grace
Hector deserves, of all the Trojan Race:
Still on our Shrines his grateful Offerings lay,
(The only Honors Men to Gods can pay)
Nor ever from our smoking Altar ceast
The pure Libation, and the holy Feast.
However by Stealth to snatch the Corse away,
We will not: Thetis guards it Night and Day.
But haste, and summon to our Courts above
The Azure Queen; let her Persuasion move
Her furious Son from Priam to receive
The proffered Ransom, and the Corpse to leave.
He added not: And Iris from the Skies
Swift as a Whirlwind, on the Message flies,
Meteorous the Face of Ocean sweeps,
Refulgent gliding over the sable Deeps.
Between where Samos wide his Forests spreads,
And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed Heads,
Down plunged the Maid; (the parted Waves resound)
She plunged, and instant shot the dark Profound.
As bearing Death in the fallacious Bait
From the bent Angle sinks the laden Weight;
So past the Goddess through the closing Wave,
Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret Cave:
There placed amidst her melancholy Train
(The blue-hair'd Sisters of the sacred Main)
Pensive she sat, revolving Fates to come,
And wept her god-like Son's approaching Doom:
Then thus the Goddess of the painted Bow.
Arise! O Thetis, from thy Seats below.
It Is Jove that calls. And why (the Dame replies)
Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated Skies?
Sad Object as I am for heavenly Sight!
Ah! may my Sorrows ever shun the Light!
However be Heavens almighty Sire obeyed --
She spoke, and veiled her Head in sable Shade,
Which, flowing long, her graceful Person clad;
And forth she paced, majestically sad.
Then through the World of Waters, they repair
(The Way fair Iris led) to upper Air.
The Deeps dividing, over the Coast they rise,
And touch with momentary Flight the Skies.
There in the Lightenings Blaze the Sire they found,
And all the Gods in shining Synod round.
Thetis approached with Anguish in her Face,
( Minerva rising, gave the Mourner place)
Even Juno sought her Sorrows to console,
And offered from her Hand the Nectar Bowl:
She tasted, and resigned it: Then began
The sacred Sire of Gods and mortal Man:
Thou come fair Thetis, but with Grief overcast,
Maternal Sorrows, long, ah long to last!
Suffice, we know and we partake thy Cares:
But yield to Fate, and hear what Jove declares.
Nine Days are past, since all the Court above
In Hector's Cause have moved the Ear of Jove;
'Twas voted, Hermes from his god-like Foe
By Stealth should bear him, but we willed not so:
We will, thy Son himself the Corse restore,
And to his Conquest add this Glory more.
Then hye thee to him, and our Mandate bear;
Tell him he tempts the Wrath of Heaven too far:
Nor let him more (our Anger if he dread)
Vent his mad Vengeance on the sacred Dead:
But yield to Ransom and the Father's Prayer.
The mournful Father Iris shall prepare,
With Gifts to sue; and offer to his Hands
Whatever his Honor asks, or Heart demands.
His Word the silver-footed Queen attends,
And from Olympus' snowy Tops descends.
Arrived, she heard the Voice of loud Lament,
And echoing Groans that shook the lofty Tent.
His Friends prepare the Victim, and dispose
Repast unheeded, while he vents his Woes.
The Goddess seats her by her pensive Son,
She pressed his Hand, and tender thus begun.
How long, unhappy! shall thy Sorrows flow,
And thy Heart waste with life-consuming Woe?
Mindless of Food, or Love whose pleasing Reign
Sooths weary Life, and softens human Pain.
O snatch the Moments yet within thy Power,
Nor long to live, indulge the amorous Hour!
Lo! Jove himself (for Jove's Command I bear)
Forbids to tempt the Wrath of Heaven too far,
No longer then (his Fury if thou dread)
Detain the Relics of great Hector dead;
Nor vent on senseless Earth thy Vengeance vain,
But yield to Ransom, and restore the Slain.
To whom Achilles: Be the Ransom given,
And we submit, since such the Will of Heaven.
While thus they commun'd, from the Olympian Bowers
Jove orders Iris to the Trojan Towers.
Haste, winged Goddess! to the sacred Town,
And urge her Monarch to redeem his Son;
Alone, the Ilian Ramparts let him leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
Alone, for so we will: No Trojan near;
Except, to place the Dead with decent Care,
Some aged Herald, who with gentle Hand,
May the slow Mules and funeral Car command.
Nor let him Death, nor let him Danger dread,
Safe through the Foe by our Protection led:
Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
Guard of his Life, and Partner of his Way.
Fierce as he is, Achilles self shall spare
His Age, nor touch one venerable Hair,
Some Thought there must be, in a Soul so brave,
Some Sense of Duty, some Desire to save.
Then down her Bow the winged Iris drives,
And swift at Priam's mournful Court arrives;
Where the sad Sons beside their Father's Throne
Sat bathed in Tears, and answered Groan with Groan.
And all amidst them lay the hoary Sire,
(Sad Scene of Woe!) His Face his wrapped Attire
Concealed from Sight; With frantic Hands he spread
A Shower of Ashes over his Neck and Head.
From Room to Room his pensive Daughters roam;
Whose Shrieks and Clamours fill the vaulted Dome;
Mindful of those, who, late their Pride and Joy,
Lie pale and breathless round the Fields of Troy!
Before the King Jove's Messenger appears,
And thus in Whispers greets his trembling Ears.
Fear not, oh Father! no ill News I bear;
From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his Care:
For Hector's sake these Walls he bids thee leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
Alone, for so he wills: No Trojan near,
Except to place the Dead with decent Care,
Some aged Herald, who with gentle Hand
May the slow Mules and funeral Car command.
Nor shall thou Death, nor shall thou Danger dread;
Safe through the Foe by his Protection led:
Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
Guard of thy Life, and Partner of thy Way.
Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
Thy Age, nor touch one venerable Hair,
Some Thought there must be, in a Soul so brave,
Some Sense of Duty, some Desire to save.
She spoke, and vanished. Priam bids prepare
His gentle Mules, and harness to the Car,
There, for the Gifts, a polished Casket lay:
His pious Sons the King's Command obey.
Then past the Monarch to his Bridal-Room,
Where Cedar-Beams the lofty Roofs perfume,
And where the Treasures of his Empire lay;
Then called his Queen, and thus began to say.
Unhappy Consort of a King distressed!
Partake the Troubles of thy Husband's Breast:
I saw descend the Messenger of Jove,
Who bids me try Achilles' Mind to move,
Forsake these Ramparts, and with Gifts obtain
The Corpse of Hector, at yon' Navy slain.
Tell me thy Thought: My Heart impells to go
Through hostile Camps, and bears me to the Foe.
The hoary Monarch thus. Her piercing Cries
Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies.
Ah! whither wanders thy distempered Mind,
And where the Prudence now that awed Mankind,
Through Phrygia once, and foreign Regions known,
Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
Singly to pass through Hosts of Foes! to face
(Oh Heart of Steel!) the Murderer of thy Race!
To view that deathful Eye, and wander over
Those Hands, yet red with Hector's noble Gore!
Alas! my Lord! he knows not how to spare,
And what his Mercy, thy slain Sons declare;
So brave! so many fallen! To calm his Rage
Vain were thy Dignity, and vain thy Age.
No -- pent in this sad Palace let us give
To Grief the wretched Days we have to live.
Still, still for Hector let our Sorrows flow,
Born to his own, and to his Parents Woe!
Doomed from the Hour his luckless Life begun,
To Dogs, to Vultures, and to Peleus' Son!
Oh! in his dearest Blood might I allay
My Rage, and these Barbarities repay!
For ah! could Hector merit thus? whose Breath
Expired not meanly, in unactive Death:
He poured his latest Blood in manly Fight,
And fell a Hero in his Country's Right.
Seek not to stay me, nor my Soul affright
With Words of Omen like a Bird of Night.
(Replied unmoved the venerable Man)
It Is Heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
Had any mortal Voice the Injunction laid,
Nor Augur, Priest, or Seer had been obeyed.
A present Goddess brought the high Command,
I saw, I heard her, and the Word shall stand.
I go, ye Gods! obedient to your Call:
If in yon' Camp your Powers have doomed my Fall,
Content -- By the same Hand let me expire!
Add to the slaughtered Son the wretched Sire!
One cold Embrace at least may be allowed,
And my last Tears flow mingled with his Blood!
From forth his opened Stores, this said, he drew
Twelve costly Carpets of refulgent Hue,
As many Vests, as many Mantles told,
And twelve fair Veils, and Garments stiff with Gold.
Two Tripods next and twice two Chargers shine,
With ten pure Talents from the richest Mine;
And last a large well-labour'd Bowl had place,
(The Pledge of Treaties once with friendly Thrace)
Seemed all too mean the Stores he could employ,
For one last Look to buy him back to Troy!
Lo! the sad Father, frantic with his Pain,
Around him furious drives his menial Train:
In vain each Slave with duteous Care attends,
Each Office hurts him, and each Face offends.
What make ye here? Officious Crowds? (he cries)
Hence! Nor obtrude your Anguish on my Eyes.
Have ye no Griefs at Home, to fix ye there?
Am I the only Object of Despair?
Am I become my People's common Show,
Set up by Jove your Spectacle of Woe?
No, you must feel him too; your selves must fall;
The same stern God to Ruin gives you all.
Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
Your sole Defense, your guardian Power is gone!
I see your Blood the Fields of Phrygia drown,
I see the Ruins of your smoking Town!
Oh send me, Gods! ever that sad Day shall come,
A willing Ghost to Pluto's dreary Dome!
He said, and feebly drives his Friends away;
The sorrowing Friends his frantic Rage obey.
Next on his Sons his erring Fury falls,
Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls,
His Threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
Hippothous, Pammon, Helenus the Seer,
And generous Antiphon: For yet these nine
Survived, sad Relics of his numerous Line.
Inglorious Sons of an unhappy Sire!
Why did not all in Hector's Cause expire?
Wretch that I am! my bravest Offspring slain,
You, the Disgrace of Priam's House, remain!
Mestor the brave, renowned in Ranks of War,
With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing Car,
And last great Hector, more than Man divine,
For sure he seemed not of terrestial Line!
All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
And left me these, a soft and servile Crew,
Whose Days the Feast and wanton Dance employ,
Gluttons and Flatt'rers, the Contempt of Troy!
Why teach ye not my rapid Wheels to run,
And speed my Journey to redeem my Son?
The Sons their Father's wretched Age revere,
Forgive his Anger, and produce the Car.
High on the Seat the Cabinet they bind:
The new-made Car with solid Beauty shined;
Box was the Yoke, embost with costly Pains,
And hung with Ringlets to receive the Reins;
Nine Cubits long the Traces swept the Ground;
These to the Chariots polished Pole they bound,
Then fixed a Ring the running Reins to guide,
And close beneath the gathered Ends were tied.
Next with the Gifts (the Price of Hector slain)
The sad Attendants load the groaning Wain:
Last to the Yoke the well-match'd Mules they bring,
(The Gift of Mysia to the Trojan King.)
But the fair Horses, long his darling Care,
Himself received and harnessed to his Car:
Grieved as he was, he not this Task denied;
The hoary Herald helped him at his Side.
While careful these the gentle Coursers joined,
Sad Hecuba approached with anxious Mind;
A golden Bowl that foamed with fragrant Wine,
(Libation destined to the Power divine)
Held in her right, before the Steeds she stands,
And thus consigns it to the Monarch's Hands.
Take this, and pour to Jove: that safe from Harms,
His Grace restore thee to our Roof, and Arms;
Since Victor of thy Fears, and slighting mine,
Heaven, or thy Soul, inspire this bold Design:
Pray to that God, who high on Ida's Brow
Surveys thy desolated Realms below,
His winged Messenger to send from high,
And lead thy way with heavenly Augury:
Let the strong Sovereign of the plumy Race
Tower on the right of yon' ethereal Space.
That Sign beheld, and strengthened from above,
Boldly pursue the Journey marked by Jove;
But if the God his Augury denies,
Suppress thy Impulse, nor reject Advice.
It Is just (said Priam) to the Sire above
To raise our Hands, for who so good as Jove?
He spoke, and bad th'attendant Handmaid bring
The purest Water of the living Spring;
(Her ready Hands the Ew'er and Basin held)
Then took the golden Cup his Queen had filled,
On the mid Pavement pours the rosy Wine,
Uplifts his Eyes, and calls the Power divine.
Oh First, and Greatest! Heavens Imperial Lord!
On lofty Ida's holy Hill adored!
To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
And teach him Mercy when a Father prays.
If such thy Will, dispatch from yonder Sky
Thy sacred Bird, celestial Augury!
Let the strong Sovereign of the plumy Race
Tower on the right of you' ethereal Space.
So shall thy Suppliant, strengthened from above,
Fearless pursue the Journey marked by Jove.
Jove heard his Prayer, and from the Throne on high
Dispatched his Bird, celestial Augury!
The swift-wing'd Chaser of the feathered Game,
And known to Gods by Percnos' lofty Name.
Wide as appears some Palace Gate displayed,
So broad, his Pinions stretch their ample Shade,
As stooping dexter with resounding Wings
The Imperial Bird descends in airy Rings.
A Dawn of Joy in every Face appears;
The mourning Matron dries her timorous Tears.
Swift on his Car the impatient Monarch sprung;
The brazen Portal in his Passage rung.
The Mules preceding draw the loaded Wain,
Charged with the Gifts; Idaeus holds the Rein,
The King himself his gentle Steeds controuls,
And through surrounding Friends the Chariot rolls.
On his slow Wheels the following People wait,
Mourn at each Step, and give him up to Fate,
With Hands uplifted, eye him as he past,
And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
Now forward fares the Father on his way,
Through the lone Fields, and back to Ilion they.
Great Jove beheld him as he crossed the Plain,
And felt the Woes of miserable Man.
Then thus to Hermes. Thou whose constant Cares
Still succor Mortals, and attend their Prayers;
Behold an Object to thy Charge consigned,
If ever Pity touched thee for Mankind.
Go, guard the Sire; th'observing Foe prevent,
And safe conduct him to Achilles' Tent.
The God obeys, his golden Pinions binds,
And mounts incumbent on the Wings of Winds,
That high through Fields of Air his Flight sustain,
Over the wide Earth, and over the boundless Main:
Then grasps the Wand that causes Sleep to fly,
Or in soft Slumbers seals the wakeful Eye;
Thus armed, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
And stoops on Hellespont's resounding Sea.
A beauteous Youth, majestic and divine,
He seemed, fair Offspring of some princely Line!
Now Twilight veiled the glaring Face of Day,
And clad the dusky Fields in sober Gray;
What time the Herald and the hoary King
Their Chariots stopping, at the silver Spring
That circling Ilus' ancient Marble flows,
Allowed their Mules and Steeds a short Repose.
Through the dim Shade the Herald first espies
A Man's approach, and thus to Priam cries.
I mark some Foes Advance: O King! beware;
This hard Adventure claims thy utmost Care:
For much I fear, Destruction hovers nigh:
Our State asks Counsel; is it best to fly?
Or, old and helpless, at his Feet to fall,
(Two wretched Suppliants) and for Mercy call?
The afflicted Monarch shivered with Despair;
Pale grew his Face, and upright stood his Hair;
Sunk was his Heart; his Color went and came;
A sudden Trembling shook his aged Frame:
When Hermes greeting, touched his royal Hand,
And gentle, thus accosts with kind Demand.
Say whither, Father! when each mortal Sight
Is sealed in Sleep, thou wander'st through the Night?
Why roam thy Mules and Steeds the Plains along,
Through Grecian Foes, so numerous and so strong?
What could thou hope, should these thy Treasures view,
These, who with endless Hate thy Race pursue?
For what Defense alas! could thou provide?
Thy self not young, a weak old Man thy Guide.
Yet suffer not thy Soul to sink with Dread;
From me, no Harm shall touch thy reverend Head;
From Greece I Will guard thee too; for in those Lines
The living Image of my Father shines.
Thy Words, that speak Benevolence of Mind
Are true, my Son! (the godlike Sire rejoined)
Great are my Hazards; but the Gods survey
My Steps, and send thee, Guardian of my way.
Hail, and be blessed! For scarce of mortal Kind
Appears thy Form, thy Feature, and thy Mind.
Nor true are all thy Words, nor erring wide;
(The sacred Messenger of Heaven replied)
But say, convey'st thou through the lonely Plains
What yet most precious of thy Store remains,
To lodge in safety with some friendly Hand?
Prepared perchance to leave thy native Land.
Or fly'st thou now? What Hopes can Troy retain?
Thy matchless Son, her Guard and Glory, slain!
The King, alarmed. Say what, and whence thou art,
Who search the Sorrows of a Parent's Heart,
And know so well how god-like Hector died?
Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied.
You tempt me, Father, and with Pity touch:
On this sad Subject you enquire too much.
Often have these Eyes that godlike Hector viewed
In glorious Fight with Grecian Blood embru'd:
I saw him, when like Jove, his Flames he tossed
On thousand Ships, and withered half an Host:
I saw, but helped not: Stern Achilles' Ire
Forbad Assistance, and enjoyed the Fire.
For him I serve, of Myrmidonian Race;
One Ship conveyed us from our native Place;
Polyctor is my Sire, an honored Name,
Old like thy self, and not unknown to Fame;
Of sev'n his Sons, by whom the Lot was cast
To serve our Prince, it fell on me, the last.
To watch this Quarter my Adventure falls,
For with the Morn the Greeks attack your Walls;
Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
And scarce their Rulers check the martial Rage.
If then thou art of stern Pelides' Train,
(The mournful Monarch thus rejoined again)
Ah tell me truly, where, oh where are laid
My Son's dear Relics? what befalls him dead?
Have Dogs dismembered on the naked Plains,
Or yet unmangled rest his cold Remains?
O favored of the Skies! (Thus answered then
The Power that mediates between Gods and Men)
Nor Dogs nor Vultures have thy Hector rent,
But whole he lies, neglected in the Tent:
This the twelfth Evening since he rested there,
Untouched by Worms, untainted by the Air.
Still as Aurora's ruddy Beam is spread,
Round his Friend's Tomb Achilles drags the Dead;
Yet undisfigur'd, or in Limb, or Face,
All fresh he lies, with every living Grace,
Majestical in Death! No Stains are found
Over all the Corse, and closed is every Wound,
(Though many a Wound they gave) Some heavenly Care,
Some Hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
Or all the Host of Heaven, to whom he led
A Life so grateful, still regard him dead.
Thus spoke to Priam the celestial Guide,
And joyful thus the royal Sire replied.
Blessed is the Man who pays the Gods above
The constant Tribute of Respect and Love:
Those who inhabit the Olympian Bower
My Son forgot not, in exalted Power;
And Heaven, that every Virtue bears in mind,
Even to the Ashes of the Just, is kind.
But thou, oh generous Youth! this Goblet take,
A Pledge of Gratitude for Hector's sake;
And while the favoring Gods our Steps survey,
Safe to Pelides' Tent conduct my way.
To whom the latent God. O King forbear
To tempt my Youth, for apt is Youth to err:
But can I, absent from my Prince's Sight,
Take Gifts in secret, that must shun the Light?
What from our Master's Interest thus we draw,
Is but a licensed Theft that escapes the Law.
Respecting him, my Soul abjures the Offense;
And as the Crime I dread the Consequence.
Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
Guard of thy Life, and Partner of thy Way.
On thee attend, thy Safety to maintain,
Over pathless Forests, or the roaring Main.
He said, then took the Chariot at a Bound,
And snatched the Reins, and whirled the Lash around:
Before th'inspiring God that urged them on,
The Coursers fly with Spirit not their own.
And now they reached the naval Walls, and found
The Guards repasting, while the Bowls go round;
On these the Virtue of his Wand he tries,
And pours deep Slumber on their watchful Eyes:
Then heaved the massy Gates, removed the Bars,
And over the Trenches led the rolling Cars.
Unseen, through all the hostile Camp they went,
And now approached Pelides' lofty Tent.
Of Fir the Roof was raised, and covered over
With Reeds collected from the marshy Shore;
And, fenced with Palisades, a Hall of State,
(The Work of Soldiers) where the Hero sat.
Large was the Door, whose well-compacted Strength
A solid Pine Tree barred of wondrous Length;
Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty Weight,
But great Achilles singly closed the Gate.
This Hermes (such the Power of Gods) set wide;
Then swift alighted the celestial Guide,
And thus, revealed -- Hear Prince! and understand
Thou ow'st thy Guidance to no mortal Hand:
Hermes I am, descended from above,
The King of Arts, the Messenger of Jove.
Farewell: To shun Achilles' Sight I fly;
Uncommon are such Favors of the Sky,
Nor stand confessed to frail Mortality.
Now fearless enter, and prefer thy Prayers;
Adjure him by his Father's silver Hairs,
His Son, his Mother! urge him to bestow
Whatever Pity that stern Heart can know.
Thus having said, he vanished from his Eyes,
And in a moment shot into the Skies:
The King, confirmed from Heaven, alighted there,
And left his aged Herald on the Car.
With solemn Pace through various Rooms he went,
And found Achilles in his inner Tent:
There sat the Hero; Alcimus the brave,
And great Automedon, Attendance gave:
These served his Person at the royal Feast,
Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.
Unseen by these, the King his Entry made;
And prostrate now before Achilles laid,
Sudden, (a venerable Sight!) appears;
Embraced his Knees, and bathed his Hands in Tears;
Those direful Hands his Kisses pressed, embru'd
Even with the best, the dearest of his Blood!
As when a Wretch, (who conscious of his Crime
Pursued for Murder, flies his native Clime)
Just gains some Frontier, breathless, pale! amazed!
All gaze, all wonder: Thus Achilles gazed:
Thus stood th'Attendants stupid with Surprise;
All mute, yet seemed to question with their Eyes:
Each looked on other, none the Silence broke,
Till thus at last the Kingly Suppliant spoke,
Ah think, thou favored of the Powers Divine!
Think of thy Father's Age, and pity mine!
In me, that Father's reverend Image trace,
Those silver Hairs, that venerable Face;
His trembling Limbs, his helpless Person, see!
In all my Equal, but in Misery!
Yet now perhaps, some Turn of human Fate
Expells him helpless from his peaceful State;
Think from some powerful Foe tho see him fly,
And beg Protection with a feeble Cry,
Yet still one Comfort in his Soul may rise;
He hears his Son still lives to glad his Eyes;
And hearing still may hope, a better Day
May send him thee to chase that Foe away.
No Comfort to my Griefs, no Hopes remain,
The best, the bravest of my Sons are slain!
Yet what a Race? ever Greece to Ilion came,
The Pledge of many a loved, and loving Dame;
Nineteen one Mother bore -- Dead, all are dead!
How often, alas! has wretched Priam bled?
Still One was left, their Loss to recompense;
His Father's Hope, his Country's last Defense.
Him too thy Rage has slain! beneath thy Steel
Unhappy, in his Country's Cause he fell!
For him, through hostile Camps I bent my way,
For him thus prostrate at thy Feet I lay;
Large Gifts, proportioned to thy Wrath, I bear;
Oh hear the Wretched, and the Gods revere!
Think of thy Father, and this Face behold!
See him in me, as helpless and as old!
Though not so wretched: There he yields to me,
The First of Men in sovereign Misery.
Thus forced to kneel, thus groveling to embrace
The Scourage and Ruin of my Realm and Race;
Suppliant my Childrens Murderer to implore,
And kiss those Hands yet reeking with their Gore!
These Words soft Pity in the Chief inspire,
Touched with the dear Remembrance of his Sire.
Then with his Hand (as prostrate still he lay)
The Old Man's Cheek he gently turned away.
Now each by turns indulged the Gush of Woe;
And now the mingled Tides together flow:
This low on Earth, that gently bending over,
A Father one, and one a Son, deplore:
But great Achilles different Passions rend,
And now his Sire he mourns, and now his Friend.
The infectious Softness through the Heroes ran;
One universal, solemn Shower began;
They bore as Heroes, but they felt as Man.
Satiate at length with unavailing Woes,
From the high Throne divine Achilles rose;
The reverend Monarch by the Hand he raised;
On his white Beard and Form majestic gazed,
Not unrelenting: Then serene began
With Words to sooth the miserable Man.
Alas! what Weight of Anguish have thou known?
Unhappy Prince! thus guardless and alone
To pass through Foes, and thus undaunted face
The Man whose Fury has destroyed thy Race?
Heaven sure has armed thee with a Heart of Steel,
A Strength proportioned to the Woes you feel.
Rise then: Let Reason mitigate our Care:
To mourn, avails not: Man is born to bear.
Such is, alas! the Gods severe Decree;
They, only they are blessed, and only free.
Two Urns by Jove's high Throne have ever stood,
The Source of Evil one, and one of Good;
From thence the Cup of mortal Man he fills,
Blessings to these, to those distributes Ills;
To most, he mingles both: The Wretch decreed
To taste the bad, unmixed, is cursed indeed;
Pursued by Wrongs, by meagre Famine driven,
He wanders, Outcast both of Earth and Heaven.
The Happiest taste not Happiness sincere,
But find the cordial Draught is dashed with Care.
Who more than Peleus shone in Wealth and Power?
What Stars concurring blessed his natal Hour?
A Realm, a Goddess, to his Wishes given,
Graced by the Gods with all the Gifts of Heaven!
One Evil yet o'ertakes his latest Day,
No Race succeeding to imperial Sway:
One only Son! and he (alas!) ordained
To fall untimely in a foreign Land!
See him, in Troy, the pious Care decline
Of his weak Age, to live the Curse of thine!
Thou too, Old Man, have happier Days beheld;
In Riches once, in Children once excelled;
Extended Phrygia owned thy ample Reign,
And all fair Lesbos' blissful Seats contain,
And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured Main.
But since the God his Hand has pleased to turn,
And fill thy Measure from his bitter Urn,
What sees the Sun, but hapless Heroes Falls?
War, and the Blood of Men, surround thy Walls!
What must be, must be. Bear thy Lot, nor shed
These unavailing Sorrows over the Dead;
Thou can not call him from the Stygian Shore,
But thou alas! may live, to suffer more!
To whom the King. Oh favored of the Skies!
Here let me grow to Earth! since Hector lies
On the bare Beach, deprived of Obsequies.
Oh give me Hector! to my Eyes restore
His Corse, and take the Gifts: I ask no more.
Thou, as thou may, these boundless Stores enjoy;
Safe may thou sail, and turn thy Wrath from Troy;
So shall thy Pity and Forbearance give
A weak old Man to see the Light and live!
Move me no more ( Achilles thus replies
While kindling Anger sparkled in his Eyes)
Nor seek by Tears my steady Soul to bend;
To yield thy Hector I my self intend:
For know, from Jove my Goddess-Mother came,
(Old Ocean's Daughter, silver-footed Dame)
Nor come thou but by Heaven; nor come alone,
Some God impells with Courage not thy own:
No human Hand the weighty Gates unbarr'd,
Nor could the boldest of our Youth have dared
To pass our Outworks, or elude the Guard.
Cease; lest neglectful of high Jove's Command
I show thee, King! thou tread'st on hostile Land;
Release my Knees, thy suppliant Arts give over,
And shake the Purpose of my Soul no more.
The Sire obeyed him, trembling and o'er-aw'd.
Achilles, like a Lion, rushed abroad:
Automedon and Alcimus attend,
Whom most he honored, since he lost his Friend;
These to unyoke the Mules and Horses went,
And led the hoary Herald to the Tent;
Next heaped on high the numerous Presents bear
(Great Hector's Ransom) from the polished Car.
Two splendid Mantles, and a Carpet spread,
They leave; to cover, and inwrap the Dead.
Then call the Handmaids with assistant Toil
To wash the Body, and anoint with Oil;
Apart from Priam, lest the unhappy Sire
Provoked to Passion, once more rouse to Ire
The stern Pelides; and nor sacred Age
Nor Jove's Command, should check the rising Rage.
This done, the Garments over the Corse they spread;
Achilles lifts it to the funeral Bed:
Then, while the Body on the Car they laid,
He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus' Shade.
If, in that Gloom which never Light must know,
The Deeds of Mortals touch the Ghosts below;
O Friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfill
(Restoring Hector) Heavens unquestioned Will.
The Gifts the Father gave, be ever thine,
To grace thy Manes, and adorn thy Shrine.
He said, and entering, took his Seat of State,
Where full before him reverend Priam sat:
To whom, composed, the god-like Chief begun.
Lo! to thy Prayer restored, thy breathless Son:
Extended on the Funeral Couch he lies;
And soon as Morning paints the Eastern Skies,
The Sight is granted to thy longing Eyes.
But now the peaceful Hours of sacred Night
Demand Refection, and to Rest invite:
Nor thou O Father! thus consumed with Woe,
The common Cares that nourish Life, foregoe.
Not thus did Niobe, of Form divine,
A Parent once, whose Sorrows equaled thine:
Six youthful Sons, as many blooming Maids
In one sad Day beheld the Stygian Shades;
These by Apollo's silver Bow were slain,
Those, Cynthia's Arrows stretched upon the Plain.
So was her Pride chastised by Wrath divine,
Who matched her own with bright Latona's Line;
But two the Goddess, twelve the Queen enjoyed;
Those boasted twelve the avenging two destroyed.
Steeped in their Blood, and in the Dust outspread,
Nine Days neglected lay exposed the Dead;
None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
(For Jove had turned the Nation all to Stone:)
The Gods themselves at length relenting, gave
The Unhappy Race the Honors of a Grave.
Her self a Rock, (for such was Heavens high Will)
Through Deserts wild now pours a weeping Rill;
Where round the Bed whence Achelous springs
The watery Fairies dance in mazy Rings,
There high on Sipylus his shaggy Brow,
She stands her own sad Monument of Woe;
The Rock for ever lasts, the Tears for ever flow!
Such Griefs, O King! have other Parents known;
Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
The Care of Heaven thy Hector has appeared,
Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr'd;
Soon may thy aged Cheeks in Tears be drowned,
And all the Eyes of Ilion stream around.
He said, and rising, chose the Victim Ewe
With silver Fleece, which his Attendants slew.
The Limbs they sever from the reeking Hyde,
With Skill prepare them, and in Parts divide:
Each on the Coals the separate Morsels lays,
And hasty, snatches from the rising Blaze.
With Bread the glittering Canisters they load,
Which round the Board Automedon bestowed:
The Chief himself to each his Portion placed,
And each indulging shared in sweet Repast.
When now the Rage of Hunger was represt,
The wondering Hero eyes his royal Guest;
No less the royal Guest the Hero eyes,
His god-like Aspect and majestic Size;
Here, youthful Grace and noble Fire engage,
And there, the mild Benevolence of Age.
Thus gazing long, the Silence neither broke,
(A solemn Scene!) at length the Father spoke.
Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
My careful Temples in the Dew of Sleep:
For since the Day that numbered with the Dead
My hapless Son, the Dust has been my Bed,
Soft Sleep a Stranger to my weeping Eyes,
My only Food my Sorrows and my Sighs!
Till now, encouraged by the Grace you give,
I share thy Banquet, and consent to live.
With that, Achilles bad prepare the Bed,
With Purple soft, and shaggy Carpets spread;
Forth, by the flaming Lights, they bend their way,
And place the Couches, and the Cov'rings lay.
Then he: Now Father sleep, but sleep not here,
Consult thy Safety, and forgive my Fear,
Lest any Argive, (at this Hour awake,
To ask our Counsel or our Orders take,)
Approaching sudden to our opened Tent,
Perchance behold thee, and our Grace prevent.
Should such report thy honored Person here,
The King of Men the Ransom might defer.
But say with speed, if ought of thy Desire
Remains unasked; what Time the Rites require
TO inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
Our slaught'ring Arm, and bid the Hosts obey.
If then thy Will permit (the Monarch said)
To finish all due Honors to the Dead,
This, of thy Grace, accord: To thee are known
The Fears of Ilion, closed within her Town,
And at what distance from our Walls aspire
The Hills of I Would, and Forests for the Fire.
Nine Days to vent our Sorrows I request,
The tenth shall see the Funeral and the Feast;
The next, to raise his Monument be given;
The twelfth we war, if War be doomed by Heaven!
This thy Request (replied the Chief) enjoy:
Till then, our Arms suspend the Fall of Troy.
Then gave his Hand at parting, to prevent
The Old Man's Fears, and turned within the Tent;
Where fair Briseis bright in blooming Charms
Expects her Hero with desiring Arms.
But in the Porch the King and Herald rest,
Sad Dreams of Care yet wandering in their Breast.
Now Gods and Men the Gifts of Sleep partake;
Industrious Hermes only was awake,
The King's Return revolving in his Mind,
To pass the Ramparts, and the Watch to blind.
The Power descending hovered over his Head:
And sleep'st thou Father! (thus the Vision said)
Now do thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
Nor fear the Grecian Foes, nor Grecian Lord?
Thy Presence here should stern Atrides see,
Thy still-surviving Sons may sue for thee,
May offer all thy Treasures yet contain,
To spare thy Age; and offer all in vain!
Waked with the Word, the trembling Sire arose,
And raised his Friend: The God before him goes,
He joins the Mules, directs them with his Hand,
And moves in Silence through the hostile Land.
When now to Xanthus' yellow Stream they drove,
( Xanthus, immortal Progeny of Jove)
The winged Deity forsook their View,
And in a Moment to Olympus flew.
Now shed Aurora round her Saffron Ray,
Sprung through the Gates of Light, and gave the Day:
Charged with their mournful Load, to Ilion go
The Sage and King, majestically slow.
Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion's Spire,
The sad Procession of her hoary Sire,
Then, as the pensive Pomp advanced more near,
Her breathless Brother stretched upon the Bier:
A Shower of Tears overflows her beauteous Eyes,
Alarming thus all Ilion with her Cries.
Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
Ye wretched Daughters, and ye Sons of Troy!
If ever ye rushed in Crowds, with vast Delight
To hail your Hero glorious from the Fight;
Now meet him dead, and let your Sorrows flow!
Your common Triumph, and your common Woe
In thronging Crowds they issue to the Plains,
Nor Man, nor Woman, in the Walls remains.
In every Face the self-same Grief is shown,
And Troy sends forth one universal Groan.
At Scaea's Gates they meet the mourning Wain,
Hang on the Wheels, and grovel round the Slain.
The Wife and Mother, frantic with Despair,
Kiss his pale Cheek, and rend their scattered Hair:
Thus wildly wailing, at the Gates they lay;
And there had sighed and sorrow'd out the Day;
But god-like Priam from the Chariot rose:
Forbear (he cried) this Violence of Woes,
First to the Palace let the Car proceed,
Then pour your boundless Sorrows over the Dead.
The Waves of People at his Word divide,
Slow rolls the Chariot through the following Tide;
Even to the Palace the sad Pomp they wait:
They weep, and place him on the Bed of State.
A melancholy Choir attend around,
With plaintive Sighs, and Musick's solemn Sound:
Alternately they sing, alternate flow
The obedient Tears, melodious in their Woe.
While deeper Sorrows groan from each full Heart,
And Nature speaks at every Pause of Art.
First to the Corse the weeping Consort flew;
Around his Neck her milk-white Arms she threw,
And oh my Hector! oh my Lord! she cries,
Snatched in thy Bloom from these desiring Eyes!
Thou to the dismal Realms for ever gone!
And I abandoned, desolate, alone!
An only Son, once Comfort of our Pains,
Sad Product now of hapless Love, remains!
Never to manly Age that Son shall rise,
Or with increasing Graces glad my Eyes:
For Ilion now (her great Defender slain)
Shall sink, a smoking Ruin on the Plain.
Who now protects her Wives with guardian Care?
Who saves her Infants from the Rage of War?
Now hostile Fleets must waft those Infants over,
(Those Wives must wait 'em) to a foreign Shore!
Thou too my Son! to barbarous Climes shall go,
The sad Companion of thy Mother's Woe;
Driven hence a Slave before the Victor's Sword;
Condemned to toil for some inhuman Lord.
Or else some Greek whose Father pressed the Plain,
Or Son, or Brother, by great Hector slain;
In Hector's Blood his Vengeance shall enjoy,
And hurl thee headlong from the Towers of Troy.
For thy stern Father never spared a Foe:
Thence all these Tears, and all this Scene of Woe!
Thence, many Evils his sad Parents bore,
His Parents many, but his Consort more.
Why gav'st thou not to me thy dying Hand?
And why received not I thy last Command?
Some Word thou would have spoke, which sadly dear,
My Soul might keep, or utter with a Tear;
Which never, never could be lost in Air,
Fixed in my Heart, and often repeated there!
Thus to her weeping Maids she makes her Moan;
Her weeping Handmaids echo Groan for Groan.
The mournful Mother next sustains her Part.
Oh thou, the best, the dearest to my Heart!
Of all my Race thou most by Heaven approved,
And by The Immortals even in Death beloved!
While all my other Sons in barbarous Bands
Achilles bound, and sold to foreign Lands,
This felt no Chains, but went a glorious Ghost
Free, and a Hero, to the Stygian Coast.
Sentenced, it is true, by his inhuman Doom,
Thy noble Corse was dragged around the Tomb,
(The Tomb of him thy warlike Arm had slain)
Ungen'rous Insult, impotent and vain!
Yet glow'st thou fresh with every living Grace,
No mark of Pain, or Violence of Face;
Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver Bow
Dismissed thee gently to the Shades below.
Thus spoke the Dame, and melted into Tears.
Sad Helen next in Pomp of Grief appears:
Fast from the shining Sluices of her Eyes
Fall the round crystal Drops, while thus she cries.
Ah dearest Friend! in whom the Gods had joined
The mildest Manners with the bravest Mind!
Now twice ten Years (unhappy Years) are over
Since Paris brought me to the Trojan Shore;
(Oh had I perished, ever that Form divine
Seduced this soft, this easy Heart of mine!)
Yet was it never my Fate, from thee to find
A Deed ungentle, or a Word unkind:
When others cursed the Auth'ress of their Woe,
Thy Pity checked my Sorrows in their Flow:
If some proud Brother eyed me with Disdain,
Or scornful Sister with her sweeping Train,
Thy gentle Accents softened all my Pain.
For thee I mourn; and mourn my self in thee,
The wretched Source of all this Misery!
The Fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
Sad Helen has no Friend now thou art gone!
Through Troy's wide Streets abandoned shall I roam,
In Troy deserted, as abhorred at Home!
So spoke the Fair, with Sorrow-streaming Eye:
Distressful Beauty melts each Stander-by;
On all around the infectious Sorrow grows;
But Priam checked the Torrent as it rose.
Perform, ye Trojans! what the Rites require,
And fell the Forests for a funeral Pyre;
Twelve Days, nor Foes, nor secret Ambush dread;
Achilles grants these Honors to the Dead.
He spoke; and at his Word, the Trojan Train
Their Mules and Oxen harness to the Wain,
Pour through the Gates, and, felled from Ida's Crown,
Roll back the gathered Forests to the Town.
These Toils continue nine succeeding Days,
And high in Air a Sylvan Structure raise.
But when the tenth fair Morn began to shine,
Forth to the Pile was born the Man divine,
And placed aloft: while all, with streaming Eyes,
Beheld the Flames and rolling Smokes arise.
Soon as Aurora, Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Luster streaked the dewy Lawn;
Again the mournful Crowds surround the Pyre,
And quench with Wine the yet remaining Fire.
The snowy Bones his Friends and Brothers place
(With Tears collected) in a golden Vase;
The golden Vase in purple Palls they rolled,
Of softest Texture, and inwrought with Gold;
Last over the Urn the sacred Earth they spread,
And raised the Tomb, Memorial of the Dead.
(Strong Guards and Spies, till all the Rites were done,
Watched from the rising to the setting Sun)
All Troy then moves to Priam's Court again,
A solemn, silent, melancholy Train.
Assembled there, from pious Toil they rest,
And sadly shared the last Sepulcral Feast.
Such Honors Ilion to her Hero paid,
And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's Shade.
The End of the ILIAD.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Twenty-Fourth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TWENTY-FOURTH BOOK.
I.
VERSE 14. What Seas they measured, etc.] There is something very noble in
these Sentiments of Achilles: He does not recollect any soft Moments, any
Tendernesses that had passed between him and Patroclus, but he revolves the
many Difficulties, the Toils by Land, and the Dangers by Sea, in which they had
been Companions: Thus the Poet on all Occasions admirably sustains the
Character of Achilles; when he played upon the Harp in the ninth Book, he sung
the Achievements of Kings; and in this place there is an air of Greatness in
his very Sorrows: Achilles is as much a Hero when he weeps, as when he fights.

This Passage in Homer has not escaped the Censure of Plato, who thought it a
Diminution to his Character to be thus transported with Grief; but the
Objection will vanish if we remember that all the Passions of Achilles are in
the extreme; his Nature is violent, and it would have been an Outrage to his
general Character to have represented him as mourning moderately for his
Friend. Plato spoke more like a Philosopher than a Critic when he blamed the
Behavior of Achilles as unmanly: These Tears would have ill-become Plato, but
they are graceful in Achilles.

Besides there is something very instructive in this whole Representation, it
shows us the Power of a sincere Friendship, and softens and recommends the
Character of Achilles; the Violence he used toward his Enemy is alleviated by
the Sincerity he expresses toward his Friend; he is a terrible Enemy, but an
amiable Friend.

II.
VERSE 30. For Phoebus watched it, etc.] Eustathius says, that by this Shield
of Apollo are meant the Clouds that are drawn up by the Beams of the Sun, which
cooling and qualifying the Sultriness of the Air, preserved the Body from
Decay: But perhaps the Poet had something farther in his Eye when he introduced
Apollo upon this Occasion: Apollo is a Physician and the God of Medicaments; if
therefore Achilles used any Arts to preserve Hector from Decay that he might be
able the longer to insult his Remains, Apollo may properly be said to protect
it with his Aegis.

III.
VERSE 36. But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies.] It is with excellent Art
that the Poet carries on this part of his Poem, he shows that he could have
contrived another way to recover the Body of Hector, but as a God is never to
be introduced but when human Means fail, he rejects the Interposition of
Mercury, makes use of ordinary Methods, and Priam redeems his Son: This gives
an Air of Probability to the Relation, at the same time that it advances the
Glory of Achilles; for the greatest of his Enemies labors to purchase his
Favor, the Gods hold a Consultation, and a King becomes his Suppliant.
Eustathius.

Those seven Lines, from (...) to (...), have been thought spurious by some of
the Ancients: They judged it an Indecency that the Goddess of Wisdom and
Achilles should be equally inexorable; and that it was below the Majesty of the
Gods to be said at all to steal. Besides, say they, had Homer been acquainted
with the Judgment of Paris, he would undoubtedly have mentioned it before this
time in his Poem, and consequently that Story was of a later Invention: And
Aristarchus affirms that (...) is a more modern Word, and never known before
the Time of Hesiod, who uses it when he speaks of the Daughters of Praetus; and
adds, that it is appropriated to signify the Incontinence of Women, and cannot
be at all applied to Men: Therefore others read the last Verse, (...)
These Objections are entirely gathered from Eustathius; to which we may add,
that Macrobius seems to have been one of those who rejected these Verses, since
he affirms that our Author never mentions the Judgment of Paris. It may be
answered, that the Silence of Homer in the foregoing part of the Poem, as to
the Judgment of Paris, is no Argument that he was ignorant of that Story:
Perhaps he might think it most proper to unfold the Cause of the Destruction of
Troy in the Conclusion of the Ilias; that the Reader seeing the Wrong done, and
the Punishment of that Wrong immediately following, might acknowledge the
Justice of it.

The same Reason will be an answer to the Objection relating to the Anger of
Pallas: Wisdom cannot be satisfied without Justice, and consequently Pallas
ought not to cease from Resentment, till Troy has suffered the Deserts of her
Crimes.

I cannot think that the Objection about the Word (...) is of any Weight; the
Date of Words is utterly uncertain, and as no one has been able to determine
the Ages of Homer, and Hesiod, so neither can any Person be assured that such
Words were not in use in Homer's Days.

IV.
VERSE 52. A Lion, not a Man, etc.] This is a very formal Condemnation of the
Morals of Achilles, which Homer puts into the Mouth of a God. One may see from
this alone that he was far from designing his Hero a virtuous Character, yet
the Poet artfully introduces Apollo in the midst of his Reproaches,
intermingling the Hero's Praises with his Blemishes: Brave though he be, etc.
Thus what is the real Merit of Achilles is distinguished from what is blameable
in his Character, and we see Apollo, or the God of Wisdom, is no less impartial
than just in his Representation of Achilles.

V.
VERSE 114. And wept her god like Son's approaching Doom.] These words are very
artfully inserted by the Poet. The Poem could not proceed to the Death of
Achilles without breaking the Action; and therefore to satisfy the Curiosity of
the Reader concerning the Fate of this great Man, he takes care to inform us
that his Life draws to a Period, and as it were celebrates his Funeral before
his Death.

Such Circumstances as these greatly raise the Character of Achilles; he is so
truly valiant, that though he knows he must fall before Troy, yet he does not
abstain from the War, but courageously meets his Death: And here I think it
proper to insert an Observation that ought to have been made before, which is,
that Achilles did not know that Hector was to fall by his Hand; if he had known
it, where would have been the mighty Courage in engaging him in a single
Combat, in which he was sure to conquer? The contrary of this is evident from
the Words of Achilles to Hector just before the Combat, (...)
(...), etc. --
I will make no Compacts with thee, says Achilles, but one of us shall fall.

VI.
VERSE 141. Nine Days are past since all the Court above, etc.] It may be
thought that so many Interpositions of the Gods, such Messages from Heaven to
Earth, and down to the Seas, are needless Machines; and it may be imagined that
it is an Offense against Probability that so many Deities should be employed to
pacify Achilles: But I am of Opinion that the Poet conducts this whole Affair
with admirable Judgment. The Poem is now almost at the Conclusion, and Achilles
is to pass from a State of an almost inexorable Resentment to a State of
perfect Tranquillity; such a Change could not be brought about by human Means;
Achilles is too stubborn to obey any thing less than a God: This is evident
from his rejecting the Persuasion of the whole Grecian Army to return to the
Battle: So that it appears that this Machinery was necessary, and consequently
a Beauty to the Poem.

It may be farther added, that these several Incidents proceed from Jupiter: It
is by his Appointment that so many Gods are employed to attend Achilles. By
these means Jupiter fulfills the Promise mentioned in the first Book, of
honoring the Son of Thetis, and the Poet excellently sustains his Character by
representing the inexorable Achilles as not parting with the Body of his mortal
Enemy, but by the immediate Command of Jupiter.

If the Poet had conducted these Incidents merely by human Means, or supposed
Achilles to restore the Body of Hector entirely out of Compassion, the Draught
had been unnatural, because unlike Achilles: Such a Violence of Temper was not
to be pacified by ordinary Methods. Besides, the Poet has made use of the
properest Personages to carry on the Affair; for who could be supposed to have
so great an Influence upon Achilles as his own Mother, who is a Goddess?

VII.
VERSE 164. And thy Heart waste with life-consuming Woe.] This Expression in
the Original is very particular. Were it to be translated literally it must be
rendered, how long will thou eat, or prey upon thy own Heart by these Sorrows?
And it seems that it was a common way of expressing a deep Sorrow; and
Pythagoras uses it in this Sense, (...), that is, grieve not excessively, let
not sorrow make too great an Impression upon thy Heart. Eustathius.

VIII.
VERSE 168. -- Indulge the amorous Hour!] The Ancients (says Eustathius)
rejected these Verses because of the indecent Idea they convey: The Goddess in
plain Terms advises Achilles to go to Bed to his Mistress, and tells him a
Woman will be a Comfort. The good Bishop is of Opinion, that they ought to be
rejected, but the Reason he gives is as extraordinary as that of Thetis:
Soldiers, says he, have more occasion for something to strengthen themselves
with, than for Women: And this is the Reason, continues he, why Wrestlers are
forbid all Commerce with that Sex during the whole Time of their Exercise.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus endeavors to justify Homer by observing, that this
Advice of Thetis was not given him to induce him to any Wantonness, but was
intended to indulge a nobler Passion, his Desire of Glory: She advises him to
go to that Captive who was restored to him in a public manner, to satisfy his
Honor: To that Captive, the Detention of whom had been so great a Punishment
to the whole Grecian Army: And therefore Thetis uses a very proper Motive to
comfort her Son, by advising him to gratify at once both his Love and his Glory.

Plutarch has likewise labored in Homer's Justification; he observes that the
Poet has set the Picture of Achilles in this place in a very fair and strong
point of Light: Though Achilles had so lately received his beloved Briseis from
the Hands of Agamemnon; though he knew that his own Life drew to a sudden Period,
yet the Hero prevails over the Lover, and he does not haste to indulge his
Love: He does not lament Patroclus like a common Man by neglecting the Duties
of Life, but he abstains from all Pleasures by an Excess of Sorrow, and the
Love of his Mistress is lost in that of his Friend.

This Observation excellently justifies Achilles, in not indulging himself with
the Company of his Mistress: The Hero prevails so much over the Lover, that
Thetis thinks her self obliged to recall Briseis to his Memory. Yet still the
Indecency remains. All that can be said in favor of Thetis is, that she was
Mother to Achilles, and consequently might take the greater Freedom with her
Son.

Madam Dacier disapproves of both the former Observations: She has recourse to
the Lawfulness of such a Practice between Achilles and Briseis; and because
such Commerces in those times were reputed honest, therefore she thinks the
Advice was decent: The married Ladies are obliged to her for this Observation,
and I hope all tender Mothers, when their Sons are afflicted, will advise them
to comfort themselves in this manner.

In short, I am of Opinion that this Passage outrages Decency; and it is a sign
of some Weakness to have so much occasion of Justification. Indeed the whole
Passage is capable of a serious Construction, and of such a Sense as a Mother
might express to a Son with Decency: And then it will run thus; "Why art thou,
my Son, thus afflicted? Why thus resigned to Sorrow? Can neither Sleep nor Love
divert you? Short is thy Date of Life, spend it not all in weeping, but allow
some part of it to Love and Pleasure!" But still the Indecency lies in the
manner of the Expression, which must be allowed to be almost obscene, (for such
is the Word (...) misceri) all that can be said in Defense of it is, that as we
are not competent Judges of what Ideas Words might carry in Homer's Time, so we
ought not entirely to condemn him, because it is possible the Expression might
not sound so indecently in ancient as in modern Ears.

IX.
VERSE 189. Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey.] The Intervention of Mercury
was very necessary at this Time, and by it the Poet not only gives an Air of
Probability to the Relation, but also pays a Complement to his Countrymen the
Grecians: They kept so strict a Guard that nothing but a God could pass
unobserved, and this highly recommends their military Discipline; and Priam not
being able to carry the Ransom without a Chariot, it would have been an Offense
against Probability, to have supposed him able to have passed all the Guards of
the Army in his Chariot, without the Assistance of some Deity: Horace had this
Passage in his view, Ode the 10th of the first Book. Iniqua Trojae castra
fefellit.

X.
VERSE 191. -- Achilles self shall spare
His Age, nor touch one venerable Hair, etc.]
It is observable that every Word here is a Negative, (...), (...), (...);
Achilles is still so angry that Jupiter cannot say he is wise, judicious, and
merciful; he only commends him negatively, and barely says he is not a Madman,
nor perversely wicked.

It is the Observation of the Ancients, says Eustathius, that all the Causes of
the Sins of Man are included in those three Words: Man offends either out of
Ignorance, and then he is (...), or through Inadvertency, then he is (...), or
wilfully and maliciously, and then he is (...). So that this Description agrees
very well with the present Disposition of Achilles; he is not (...), because
his Resentment begins to abate; he is not (...), because his Mother has given
him Instructions, nor (...), because he will not offend against the Injunctions
of Jupiter.

XI.
VERSE 195. The winged Iris flies, etc.] Mons. Rapin has been very free upon
this Passage, where so many Machines are made use of to cause Priam to obtain
the Body of Hector from Achilles. "This Father (says he) who has so much
Tenderness for his Son, who is so superstitious in observing the funeral
Ceremonies, and saving those precious Remains from the Dogs and Vultures; ought
not he to have thought of doing this himself, without being thus expressly
commanded by the Gods? Was there need of a Machine to make him remember that he
was a Father?" But this Critic entirely forgets what rendered such a Conduct
of absolute Necessity; namely, the extreme Danger and (in all Probability)
imminent Ruin both of the King and State, upon Priam's putting himself into the
Power of his most inveterate Enemy. There was no other Method of recovering
Hector, and of discharging his funeral Rites (which were looked upon by the
Ancients of so high Importance) and therefore the Message from Jupiter to
encourage Priam, with the Assistance of Mercury to conduct him, and to prepare
Achilles to receive him with Favor, was far from impertinent: It was Dignus
vindice nodus, as Horace expresses it.

XII.
VERSE 200. His Face his wrapped Attire concealed from Sight.] The Poet has
observed a great Decency in this place, he was not able to express the Grief of
this royal Mourner, and so covers what he could not represent. From this
Passage Semanthes the Sicyonian Painter borrowed his Design in the Sacrifice of
Iphigenia, and represents his Agamemnon, as Homer does his Priam: Aeschylus has
likewise imitated this Place, and draws his Niobe exactly after the manner of
Homer. Eustathius.

XIII.
VERSE 265. He poured his latest Blood in manly Fight,
And fell a Hero -- ]
This whole Discourse of Hecuba is exceedingly natural, she aggravates the
Features of Achilles, and softens those of Hector: Her Anger blinds her so much
that she can see nothing great in Achilles, and her Fondness so much, that she
can discern no Defects in Hector: Thus she draws Achilles in the fiercest
Colors, like a Barbarian, and calls him (...): But at the same time forgets
that Hector ever fled from Achilles, and in the Original directly tells us that
he knew not how to fear, or how to fly. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 291. Lo, the sad Father, etc.] This Behavior of Priam is very natural
to a Person in his Circumstances: The Loss of his favorite Son makes so deep
an Impression upon his Spirits, that he is incapable of Consolation; he is
displeased with every body; he is angry he knows not why; the Disorder and
Hurry of his Spirits make him break out into passionate Expressions, and those
Expressions are contained in short Periods, very natural to Men in Anger, who
give not themselves Leisure to express their Sentiments at full length: It is
from the same Passion that Priam, in the second Speech, treats all his Sons
with the utmost Indignity, calls 'em Gluttons, Dancers, and Flatterers.
Eustathius very justly remarks, that he had Paris particularly in his Eye; but
his Anger makes him transfer that Character to the rest of his Children, not
being calm enough to make a Distinction between the Innocent and Guilty.

That Passage where he runs out into the Praises of Hector, is particularly
natural: His Concern and Fondness makes him as extravagant in the Commendation
of him, as in the Disparagement of his other Sons: They are less than Mortals,
he more than Man. Rapin has censured this Anger of Priam as a Breach of the
Manners, and says he might have shown himself a Father, otherwise than by this
Usage of his Children. But whoever considers his Circumstances will judge after
another manner. Priam, after having been the most wealthy, most powerful and
formidable Monarch of Asia, becomes all at once the most miserable of Men; He
loses in less than eight Days the best of his Army, and a great Number of
virtuous Sons; he loses the bravest of 'em all, his Glory and his Defense, the
gallant Hector. This last Blow sinks him quite, and changes him so much, that
he is no longer the same: He becomes impatient, frantic, unreasonable! The
terrible Effect of ill Fortune! Whoever has the least Insight into Nature, must
admire so fine a Picture of the Force of Adversity on an unhappy old Man.

XV.
VERSE 313. Deiphobus and Dius.] It has been a Dispute whether (...) or (...),
in. 251. was a proper Name, but Pherecydes (says Eustathius) determines it, and
assures us that Dios was a spurious Son of Priam.

XVI.
VERSE 342. The sad Attendants load the groaning Wain.] It is necessary to
observe to the Reader, to avoid Confusion, that two Cars are here prepared; the
one drawn by Mules, to carry the Presents, and to bring back the Body of
Hector; the other drawn by Horses, in which the Herald and Priam rode.
Eustathius.

XVII.
VERSE 377. Oh first, and greatest! etc.] Eustathius observes, that there is
not one Instance in the whole Ilias of any Prayer that was justly preferred,
that failed of Success. This Procedure of Homer's is very judicious, and
answers exactly to the true end of Poetry, which is to please and instruct.
Thus Priam prays that Achilles may cease his Wrath, and compassionate his
Miseries; and Jupiter grants his Request: The unfortunate King obtains
Compassion, and in his most inveterate Enemy finds a Friend.

XVIII.
VERSE 416. The Description of Mercury.] A Man must have no Taste for Poetry
that does not admire this sublime Description: Virgil has translated it almost
verbatim in the 4th Book of the Aeneis,. 240. -- Ille patris magni parere
parabat
Imperio, and primum pedibus talaria nectit
Aurea, quae sublimem alis, sive aequora supra,
Seu terram rapido pariter cum flamine portant.
Tum virgam capit, hac animas ille evocat orco
Pallentes, alias sub tristia tartara mittit;
Dat somnos, adimitque, and lumina morte resignat.
It is hard to determine which is more excellent, the Copy, or the Original:
Mercury appears in both Pictures with equal Majesty; and the Roman Dress
becomes him, as well as the Grecian. Virgil has added the latter part of the
fifth, and the whole sixth Line to Homer, which makes it still more full and
majestical.

Give me leave to produce a Passage out of Milton, of near Affinity with the
Lines above, which is not inferior to Homer or Virgil: It is the Description of
the Descent of an Angel, -- Down thither, prone in Flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Sky
Sails between Worlds and Worlds; with steady Wing
Now on the polar Winds: Then with quick Force
Winnows the buxom Air --
Of beaming sunny Rays a golden Tiar
Circled his Head; nor less his Locks behind
Illustrious, on his Shoulders fledged with Wings,
Lay waving round. -- etc.


XIX.
VERSE 427. Now Twilight veiled the glaring Face of Day.] The Poet by such
Intimations as these recalls to our Minds the exact Time which Priam takes up
in this Journey to Achilles: He set out in the Evening; and by the time that he
reached the Tomb of Ilus, it was grown somewhat dark, which shows that this
Tomb stood at some distance from the City: Here Mercury meets him, and when it
was quite dark, guides him into the Presence of Achilles. By these Methods we
may discover how exactly the Poet preserves the Unities of Time and Place, that
he allots Space sufficient for the Actions which he describes, and yet does not
crowd more Incidents into any Interval of Time than may be executed in as much
as he allows: Thus it being improbable that so stubborn a Man as Achilles
should relent in a few Moments, the Poet allows a whole Night for this Affair,
so that Priam has Leisure enough to go and return, and Time enough remaining to
persuade Achilles.

XX.
VERSE 447, etc. The Speech of Mercury to Priam.] I shall not trouble the
Reader with the Dreams of Eustathius, who tells us that this Fiction of Mercury
is partly true, and partly false: It Is true that his Father is old, rich, and
has seven Children; for Jupiter is King of the whole Universe, was from
Eternity, and created both Men and Gods: In like manner, when Mercury says he
is the seventh Child of his Father, Eustathius affirms that he meant that there
were six Planets besides Mercury. Sure it requires great Pains and Thought to
be so learnedly absurd: The Supposition which he makes afterward is far more
natural; Priam, says he, might by chance meet with one of the Myrmidons, who
might conduct him unobserved through the Camp into the Presence of Achilles, and
as the Execution of any wise Design is ascribed to Pallas, so may this
clandestine Enterprise be said to be managed by the Guidance of Mercury.

But perhaps this whole Passage may be better explained by having recourse to
the Pagan Theology: It was an Opinion that obtained in those early Days, that
Jupiter frequently sent some friendly Messengers to protect the Innocent, so
that Homer might intend to give his Readers a Lecture of Morality, by telling
us that this unhappy King was under the Protection of the Gods.

Madam Dacier carries it farther. Homer (says she) instructed by Tradition,
knew that God sends his Angels to the Succor of the afflicted. The Scripture
is full of Examples of this Truth. The Story of Tobit has a wonderful Relation
with this of Homer: Tobit sent his Son to Rages, a City of Media, to receive a
considerable Sum; Tobias did not know the Way; he found at his Door a young Man
clothed with a majestic Glory, which attracted Admiration: It was an Angel
under the Form of a Man. This Angel being asked who he was, answered (as
Mercury does here) by a Fiction: He said that he was of the Children of Israel,
that his Name was Azarias, and that he was Son of Ananias. This Angel conducted
Tobias in Safety; he gave him Instructions; and when he was to receive the
Recompense which the Father and Son offered him, he declared that he was the
Angel of the Lord, took his Flight toward heaven, and disappeared. Here is a
great Conformity in the Ideas and in the Style; and the Example of our Author
so long before Tobit, proves, that this Opinion of God's sending his Angels to
the Aid of Man was very common, and much spread amongst the Pagans in those
former Times. Dacier.

XXI.
VERSE 519. Blessed is the Man, etc.] Homer now begins after a beautiful and long
Fable, to give the Moral of it, and display his poetical Justice in Rewards and
Punishments: Thus Hector fought in a bad Cause, and therefore suffers in the
Defense of it; but because he was a good Man, and obedient to the Gods in other
Respects, his very Remains become the Care of Heaven.

I think it necessary to take notice to the Reader, that nothing is more
admirable than the Conduct of Homer throughout his whole Poem, in respect to
Morality. He justifies the Character of Horace, -- Quid pulchrum, quid turpe,
quid utile, quid non,
Before and melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.


If the Reader does not observe the Morality of the Ilias, he loses half, and
the nobler part of its Beauty: He reads it as a common Romance, and mistakes
the chief Aim of it, which is to instruct.

XXII.
VERSE 531. But can I, absent, etc.] In the Original of this Place (which I
have paraphrased a little) the Word (...) is remarkable. Priam offers Mercury
(whom he looks upon as a Soldier of Achilles) a Present, which he refuses,
because his Prince is ignorant of it: This Present he calls a direct Theft or
Robbery; which may show us how strict the Notions of Justice were in the Days
of Homer, when if a Prince's Servant received any Present without the Knowledge
of his Master, he was esteemed a Thief and a Robber. Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 553. Of Fir the Roof was raised.] I have in the course of these
Observations described the Method of encamping used by the Grecians: The Reader
has here a full and exact Description of the Tent of Achilles: This royal
Pavilion was built with long Palisadoes made of Firr; the Top of it covered
with Reeds, and the Inside was divided into several Apartments: Thus Achilles
had his (...), or large Hall, and behind it were lodging Rooms. So in the ninth
Book Phoenix has a Bed prepared for him in one Apartment, Patroclus has another
for himself and his Captive Iphis, and Achilles has a third for himself and his
Mistress Diomeda.

But we must not imagine that the other Myrmidons had Tents of the like
Dimensions: they were, as Eustathius observes, inferior to this royal one of
Achilles: Which indeed is no better than an Hovel, yet agrees very well with
the Duties of a Soldier, and the Simplicity of those early Times.

I am of Opinion that such fixed Tents were not used by the Grecians in their
common Marches, but only during the time of Sieges, when their long stay in one
Place made it necessary to build such Tents as are here described; at other
times they lay like Diomed in the tenth Book, in the open Air, their Spears
standing upright, to be ready upon any Alarm; and with the Hides of Beasts
spread on the Ground instead of a Bed.

It is worthy Observation that Homer even upon so trivial an Occasion as the
describing the Tent of Achilles, takes an Opportunity to show the superior
Strength of his Hero; and tells us that three Men could scarce open the Door of
his Pavilion, but Achilles could open it alone.

XXIV.
VERSE 569. Nor stand confessed to frail Mortality.] Eustathius thinks it was
from this Maxim, that the Princes of the East assumed that Air of Majesty which
separates them from the Sight of their Subjects; but I should rather believe
that Homer copied this after the Originals from some Kings of his Time: it not
being unlikely that this Policy is very ancient. Dacier.

XXV.
VERSE 571. Adjure him by his Father, etc.] Eustathius observes that Priam does
not entirely follow the Instructions of Mercury, but only calls to his
remembrance his aged Father Peleus: And this was judiciously done by Priam: For
what Motive to Compassion could arise from the mention of Thetis, who was a
Goddess, and incapable of Misfortune? Or how could Neoptolemus be any
Inducement to make Achilles pity Priam, when at the same time he flourished in
the greatest Prosperity? And therefore Priam only mentions his Father Peleus,
who like him, stood upon the very Brink of the Grave, and was liable to the
same Misfortunes he then suffered. These are the Remarks of Eustathius, but how
then shall we justify Mercury, the God of Eloquence, who gave him such improper
Instructions with relation to Thetis? All that can be said in defense of the
Poet is, that Thetis, though a Goddess, has through the whole Course of the Ilias
been described as a Partner in all the Afflictions of Achilles, and
consequently might be made use of as an Inducement to raise the Compassion of
Achilles. Priam might have said, I conjure thee by the Love thou bear to thy
Mother, take pity on me! For if she who is a Goddess would grieve for the Loss
of her beloved Son, how greatly must the Loss of Hector afflict the unfortunate
Hecuba and Priam?

XXVII.
VERSE 586. Sudden, (a venerable Sight!) appears.] I fancy this Interview
between Priam and Achilles would furnish an admirable Subject for a Painter, in
the Surprise of Achilles, and the other Spectators, the Attitude of Priam, and
the Sorrows in the Countenance of this unfortunate King.

That Circumstance of Priam's kissing the Hands of Achilles is inimitably fine;
he kissed, says Homer, the Hands of Achilles, those terrible, murderous Hands
that had robbed him of so many Sons: By these two Words the Poet recalls to our
Mind all the noble Actions performed by Achilles in the whole Ilias; and at the
same time strikes us with the utmost Compassion for this unhappy King, who is
reduced so low as to be obliged to kiss those Hands that had slain his
Subjects, and ruined his Kingdom and Family.

XXVIII.
VERSE 598. The Speech of Priam to Achilles.] The Curiosity of the Reader must
needs be awakened to know how Achilles would behave to this unfortunate King;
it requires all the Art of the Poet to sustain the violent Character of
Achilles, and yet at the same time to soften him into Compassion. To this end
the Poet uses no Preamble, but breaks directly into that Circumstance which is
most likely to mollify him, and the two first Words he utters are, (...), see
thy Father, O Achilles, in me! Nothing could be more happily imagined than this
Entrance into his Speech; Achilles has every where been described as bearing a
great Affection to his Father, and by two Words the Poet recalls all the
Tenderness that Love and Duty can suggest to an affectionate Son.

Priam tells Achilles that Hector fell in the Defense of his Country: I am far
from thinking that this was inserted accidentally; it could not fail of having
a very good Effect upon Achilles, not only as one brave Man naturally loves
another, but as it implies that Hector had no particular Enmity against
Achilles, but that though he fought against him it was in Defense of his Country.

The Reader will observe that Priam repeats the Beginning of his Speech, and
recalls his Father to his Memory in the Conclusion of it. This is done with
great Judgment; the Poet takes care to enforce his Petition with the strongest
Motive, and leaves it fresh upon his Memory; and possibly Priam might perceive
that the mention of his Father had made a deeper Impression upon Achilles than
any other part of his Petition, therefore while the Mind of Achilles dwells
upon it, he again sets him before his Imagination by this Repetition, and
softens him into Compassion.

XXIX.
VERSE 634. These Words soft Pity, etc.] We are now come almost to the end of
the Poem, and consequently to the end of the Anger of Achilles: And Homer has
described the Abatement of it with excellent Judgment. We may here observe how
necessary the Conduct of Homer was, in sending Thetis to prepare her Son to use
Priam with Civility: It would have ill suited with the violent Temper of
Achilles to have used Priam with Tenderness without such Pre-admonition; nay,
the unexpected Sight of his Enemy might probably have carried him into Violence
and Rage: But Homer has avoided these Absurdities; for Achilles being already
prepared for a Reconciliation, the Misery of this venerable Prince naturally
melts him into Compassion.

XXX.
VERSE 653. Achilles 's Speech to Priam.] There is not a more beautiful Passage
in the whole Ilias than this before us: Homer to show that Achilles was not a
mere Soldier, here draws him as a Person of excellent Sense and sound reason:
Plato himself (who condemns this Passage) could not speak more like a true
Philosopher: And it was a piece of great Judgment thus to describe him; for the
Reader would have retained but a very indifferent Opinion of the Hero of a
Poem, that had no Qualification but mere Strength: It also shows the Art of the
Poet thus to defer this part of his Character till the very Conclusion of the
Poem: By these means he fixes an Idea of his Greatness upon our Minds, and
makes his Hero go off the Stage with Applause.

Neither does he here ascribe more Wisdom to Achilles than he might really be
Master of; for as Eustathius observes, he had Chiron and Phoenix for his
Tutors, and a Goddess for his Mother.

XXXI.
VERSE 663. Two Urns by Jove 's high Throne, etc. This is an admirable
Allegory, and very beautifully imagined by the Poet. Plato has accused it as an
Impiety to say that God gives Evil: But it seems borrowed from the Eastern way
of speaking, and bears a great Resemblance to several Expressions in Scripture:
Thus in the Psalms, In the Hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and he pours out
of the same; as for the Dregs thereof, all the Ungodly of the Earth shall drink
them.

It was the Custom of the Jews to give condemned Persons just before Execution,
(...), Wine mixed with Myrrh; to make them less sensible of Pain: Thus Proverbs
xxxi. 6. Give strong Drink to him that is ready to perish. This Custom was so
frequent among the Jews, that the Cup which was given before Execution, came to
denote Death itself, as in that Passage, Father let this Cup pass from me.

Some have supposed that there were three Urns, one of Good, and two of Evil;
thus Pindar, (...)
(...)
But, as Eustathius observes, the Word (...) shows that there were but two, for
that Word is never used when more than two are intended.

XXXII.
VERSE 685. Extended Phrygia, etc.] Homer here gives us a piece of Geography,
and shows the full Extent of Priam's Kingdom. Lesbos bounded it on the South,
Phrygia on the East, and the Hellespont on the North. This Kingdom, according
to Strabo in the 13th Book, was divided into nine Dynasties, who all depended
upon Priam as their King: So that what Homer here relates of Priam's Power is
literally true, and confirmed by History. Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 706. While kindling Anger sparkled in his Eyes.] I believe every Reader
must be surpised, as I confess I was, to see Achilles fly out into so sudden a
Passion, without any apparent Reason for it. It can scarce be imagined that the
Name of Hector (as Eustathius thinks, could throw him into so much Violence,
when he had heard it mentioned with Patience and Calmness by Priam in this very
Conference: Especially if we remember that Achilles had actually determined to
restore the Body of Hector to Priam. I was therefore very well pleased to find
that the Words in the Original would bear another Interpretation, and such a
one as naturally solves the Difficulty. The Meaning of the Passage I fancy may
be this: Priam perceiving that his address had mollify'd the Heart of Achilles,
takes this Opportunity to persuade him to give over the War, and return home;
especially since his Anger was sufficiently satisfied by the Fall of Hector.
Immediately Achilles takes fire at this Proposal, and answers, "Is it not
enough that I have determined to restore thy Son? Ask no more, lest I retract
that Resolution." In this View we see a natural Reason for the sudden Passion
of Achilles.

What may perhaps strengthen this Conjecture is the Word (...); and then the
Sense will run thus; Since I have found so much Favor in thy Sight, as first
to permit me to live, O would thou still enlarge my Happiness, and return
home to thy own Country! etc.

This Opinion may be farther established from what follows in the latter end of
this Interview, where Achilles asks Priam how many Days he would request for
the Interment of Hector? Achilles had refused to give over the war, but yet
consents to intermit it a few Days; and then the Sense will be this, "I will
not consent to return home, but ask a time for a Cessation, and it shall be
granted." And what most strongly speaks for this Interpretation is the Answer
of Priam, I ask, says he, eleven Days to bury my Son, and then let the War
commence again, since it must be so, (...); since you necessitate me to it; or
since you will not be persuaded to leave these Shores.

XXXIV.
VERSE 706. While kindling Anger sparkled in his Eyes.] The Reader may be
pleased to observe that this is the last Sally of the Resentment of Achilles;
and the Poet judiciously describes him moderating it by his own Reflection: So
that his Reason now prevails over his Anger, and the Design of the Poem is
fully executed.

XXXV.
VERSE 708, 709. For know from Jove my Goddess Mother came.] The Injustice of
La Motte's Criticism (who blames Homer for representing Achilles so mercenary,
as to enquire into the Price offered for Hector's Body before he would restore
it) will appear plainly from this Passage, where he makes Achilles expressly
say, it is not for any other Reason that he delivers the Body, but that Heaven
had directly commanded it. The Words are very full, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


XXXVI.
VERSE 757. Not thus did Niobe, etc.] Achilles, to comfort Priam, tells him a
known History; which was very proper to work this Effect. Niobe had lost all
her Children, Priam had some remaining. Niobe's Children had been nine Days
extended on the Earth, drowned in their Blood, in the Sight of their People,
without any one presenting himself to interr them: Hector has likewise been
twelve Days, but in the midst of his Enemies; therefore it is no wonder that no
one has paid him the last Duties. The Gods at last interred Niobe's Children,
and the Gods likewise are concerned to procure honorable Funerals for Hector.
Eustathius.

XXXVII.
VERSE 799. The royal Guest the Hero eyes, etc.] The Poet omits no Opportunity
of praising his Hero Achilles, and it is observable that he now commends him
for his more amiable Qualities: He softens the terrible Idea we have conceived
of him, as a Warrior, with several Virtues of Humanity; and the angry,
vindictive Soldier is become calm and compassionate. In this place he makes his
very Enemy admire his Personage, and be astonished at his manly Beauty. So that
though Courage be his most distinguishing Character, yet Achilles is admirable
both for the Endowments of Mind and Body.

(...). The Sense of this Word differs in this place from that it usually
bears: It does not imply (...), any reproachful Asperity of Language, but
(...), the raising of a false Fear in the old Man, that he might not be
concerned at his being lodged in the outermost part of the Tent; and by this
method he gives Priam an Opportunity of going away in the Morning without
Observation. Eustathius.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 819. To ask our Counsel, or our Orders take.] The Poet here shows the
Importance of Achilles in the Army; though Agamemnon be the General, yet all the
chief Commanders apply to him for Advice; and thus he promises Priam a
Cessation of Arms for several Days, purely by his own Authority. The Method
that Achilles took to confirm the Truth of the Cessation, agrees with the
Custom which we use at this Day, he gave him his Hand upon it. -- (...)
(...) --
Eustathius.

XXXIX.
VERSE 900. A melancholy Choir, etc. This was a Custom generally received, and
which passed from the Hebrews to the Greeks, Romans, and Asiaticks. There were
Weepers by Profession, of both Sexes, who sung doleful Tunes round the Dead.
Ecclesiasticus cap. 12.. 5. When a Man shall go into the House of his Eternity,
there shall encompass him Weepers. It appears from St. Matthew xi. 17. that
Children were likewise employed in this Office. Dacier.

XL.
VERSE 906, etc. The Lamentations over Hector.] The Poet judiciously makes
Priam to be silent in this general Lamentation; he has already born a
sufficient Share in these Sorrows, in the Tent of Achilles, and said what Grief
can dictate to a Father and a King upon such a melancholy Subject. But he
introduces three Women as chief Mourners, and speaks only in general of the
Lamentation of the Men of Troy, an Excess of Sorrow being unmanly: Whereas
these Women might with Decency indulge themselves in all the Lamentation that
Fondness and Grief could suggest. The Wife, the Mother of Hector, and Helen,
are the three Persons introduced; and though they all mourn upon the same
Occasion, yet their Lamentations are so different, that not a Sentence that is
spoken by the one, could be made use of by the other: Andromache speaks like a
tender Wife, Hecuba like a fond Mother, and Helen mourns with a Sorrow rising
from Self-accusation: Andromache commends his Bravery, Hecuba his manly Beauty,
and Helen his Gentleness and Humanity.

Homer is very concise in describing the Funeral of Hector, which was but a
necessary piece of Conduct, after he had been so full in that of Patroclus.

XLI.
VERSE 394. Why gav'st thou not to me thy dying Hand,
And why received not I thy last Command?
I have taken these two Lines from Mr. Congreve, whose Translation of this Part
was one of his first Essays in Poetry. He has very justly rendered the Sense of
(...), dictum prudens, which is meant of the Words of a dying Man, or one in
some dangerous Exigence; at which times what is spoken is usually something of
the utmost Importance, and delivered with the utmost Care: Which is the true
Signification of the Epithet (...) in this place.

XLII.
We have now past through the Iliad, and seen the Anger of Achilles, and the
terrible Effects of it, at an end: As that only was the Subject of the Poem,
and the Nature of Epic Poetry would not permit our Author to proceed to the
Event of the War, it may perhaps be acceptable to the common Reader to give a
short Account of what happened to Troy and the chief Actors in this Poem, after
the Conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the Death of Hector, by the
Stratagem of the wooden Horse, the Particulars of which are described by Virgil
in the second Book of the Aeneis.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the Hand of Paris, by the Shot of an Arrow in
his Heel, as Hector had prophesied at his Death, Lib. 22.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles.

Ajax after the Death of Achilles had a Contest with Ulysses for the Armor of
Vulcan, but being defeated in his Aim, he slew himself through Indignation.

Helen, after the Death of Paris, married Deiphobus his Brother, and at the
taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her
first Husband, who received her again into Favor.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Aegysthus at the
Instigation of Clytaemnestra his Wife, who in his Absence had dishonored his
Bed with Aegysthus.

Diomed after the Fall of Troy was expelled his own Country, and scarce
escaped with Life from his adulterous Wife Aegiale; but at last was received by
Daunus in Apulia, and shared his Kingdom: It Is uncertain how he died.

Nestor lived in Peace, with his Children, in Pylos his native Country.

Ulysses also after innumerable Troubles by Sea and Land, at last returned in
Safety to Ithaca, which is the Subject of Homer's Odysses.

I must end these Notes by discharging my Duty to two of my Friends, which is
the more an indispensable piece of Justice, as the one of them is since dead:
The Merit of their Kindness to me will appear infinitely the greater, as the
Task they undertook was in its own nature of much more Labor, than either
Pleasure or Reputation. The larger part of the Extracts from Eustathius,
together with several excellent Observations were sent me by Mr. Broom: And
the whole Essay upon Homer was written upon such Memoirs as I had collected, by
the late Dr. Parnell, Archdeacon of Clogher in Ireland: How very much that
Gentleman's Friendship prevailed over his Genius, in detaining a Writer of his
Spirit in the Drudgery of removing the Rubbish of past Pedants, will soon
appear to the World, when they shall see those beautiful Pieces of Poetry the
Publication of which he left to my Charge, almost with his dying Breath.

For what remains, I beg to be excused from the Ceremonies of taking leave at
the End of my Work; and from embarassing myself, or others, with any Defenses
or Apologies about it. But instead of endeavoring to raise a vain Monument to
my self, of the Merits or Difficulties of it (which must be left to the World,
to Truth, and to Posterity) let me leave behind me a Memorial of my Friendship,
with one of the most valuable Men as well as finest Writers, of my Age and
Country: One who has tried, and knows by his own Experience, how hard an
Undertaking it is to do Justice to Homer: And one, who (I am sure) sincerely
rejoices with me at the Period of my Labors. To Him therefore, having brought
this long Work to a Conclusion, I desire to Dedicate it; and to have the Honor
and Satisfaction of placing together, in this manner, the Names of Mr.
CONGREVE, and of

A. POPE.
March 25. 1720.
(...) M. AUREL. ANTON. de seipso, L. 1.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF PERSONS and THINGS.
A.
ACAMAS Book 2 Verse 996 he kills Promachus Book 14 Verse 559
ACHILLES prays his Mother to revenge his Injuries on the Greeks Book 1 Verse
460 his Speech to the Greeks Book 1 Verse 79 his Quarrel with Agamemnon Book 1
Verse 155 297 386 entertains Agamemnon 's Ambassadors Book 9 Verse 267 answers
Ulysses Book 9 Verse 406 answers Phoenix Book 9 Verse 713 answers Ajax Book 9
Verse 762 his double Fate Book 9 Verse 532 seeing Machaon wounded sends
Patroclus to him Book 11 Verse 730 enquires of Patroclus the cause of his Grief
Book 16 Verse 9 sends Patroclus to the Battle, and gives him Orders Book 16
Verse 68 arms his Myrmidons Book 16 Verse 190 and animates 'em Book 16 Verse
329 his Bowl Book 16 Verse 273 offers a Libation with Prayers to Jove Book 16
Verse 282 not heard of the Death of of Patroclus Book 17 Verse 462 his Horses
lament the Death of Patroclus Book 17 Verse 486 he grieves for the Death of
Patroclus Book 18 Verse 25 367 tells Thetis his Grief Book 18 Verse 99 a
Description of his Shield Book 18 Verse 551 is concerned lest Patroclus 's Body
should putrify Book 19 Verse 28 calls an Assembly Book 19 Verse 44 makes a
Speech to the Assembly Book 19 Verse 57 refuses to take any Food before the
Battle Book 19 Verse 197 moans exceedingly for the Death of Patroclus Book 19
Verse 335 he is armed Book 19 Verse 398 Agamemnon 's Presents are delivered to
Achilles Book 19 Verse 243 he and Agamemnon reconciled Book 19 Verse 57 his
answer to Agamemnon Book 19 Verse 143 dissuades Aeneas from contending with him
Book 20 Verse 214 contemns Aeneas for flying from him Book 20 Verse 393 he
kills Iphition Book 20 Verse 439 he kills Demoleon Book 20 Verse 457 he kills
Hippodomas Book 20 Verse 463 he kills Polydore Book 20 Verse 471 and many
others Book 20 Verse 525 addresses the Spirit of Patroclus Book 23 Verse 25
kills many Trojans in the River Xanthus Book 21 Verse 25 Denies Lycaon his Life
Book 21 Verse 112 he pursues Hector Book 22 Verse 182 kills him Book 22 Verse
453 declares the Rites to be observed by his Myrmidons Book 23 Verse 8 cuts off
his Hair devoted to the River Sperchius Book 23 Verse 171 he prays to the Winds
Book 23 Verse 237 institutes funeral Games Book 23 Verse 319 gives a Cup to
Nestor Book 23 Verse 704 is deprived of Sleep Book 24 Verse 9 receives the
Petition of Priam Book 24 Verse 652 lays Hector 's Body on Priam 's Chariot
Book 24 Verse 717
ADRESTUS Book 2 Verse 1007 taken by Menelaus Book 6 Verse 45
AENEAS Book 2 Verse 992 seeks Pandarus Book 5 Verse 214 together assault
Diomede Book 5 Verse 298 he kills Crethon and Orsilochus Book 5 Verse 670 he
encounters with Achilles Book 20 Verse 193 answers Achilles Book 20 Verse 240
tells his Lineage Book 20 Verse 252 the Fight of Aeneas and Achilles Book 20
Verse 307
Aetolians Book 2 Verse 694 Book 2 Verse 779 AGAMEMNON Book 3 Verse 220
restores Chryseis to her Father Book 1 Verse 406 takes Briseis from Achilles
Book 1 Verse 423 tells his Dream in Council Book 2 Verse 69 his Speech advising
a return to Greece Book 2 Verse 139 his Prayer to Jupiter Book 2 Verse 489
orders Machaon to be called to assist Menelaus wounded Book 4 Verse 230 exhorts
his Soldiers Book 4 Verse 266 Book 5 Verse 650 blames the Indolent Book 4 Verse
275 speaks to Idomeneus Book 4 Verse 292 goes to the two Ajax 's Book 4 Verse
311 goes to Nestor Book 4 Verse 334 blames Menestheus Book 4 Verse 390 blames
Diomede Book 4 Verse 422 his Words to wounded Menelaus Book 4 Verse 186 kills
Deicoon Book 5 Verse 660 treats the Generals Book 7 Verse 385 his Speech to the
Generals Book 9 Verse 23 swears he has not carnally known Briseis Book 9 Verse
172 acknowledges his Fault, and makes large Offers to satisfy Achilles Book 9
Verse 148 sends Ambassadors to Achilles Book 9 Verse 119
AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS in great Perplexity Book 10 Verse 3 they deliberate
together Book 10 Verse 41 he goes to Nestor Book 10 Verse 81 he arms Book 11
Verse 21 fights bravely Book 11 Verse 127 kills a great Number Book 11 Verse
281 is wounded Book 11 Verse 325 goes out of the Battle Book 11 Verse 360
advises Flight Book 14 Verse 71 for which Ulysses blames him Book 14 Verse 88
is reconciled to Achilles Book 19 he swears he has not enjoyed Briseis Book 19
Verse 267 his Speech concerning the Goddess Discord Book 19 Verse 81
AGENOR deliberates if he shall meet Achilles Book 21 Verse 649 -- meets him
and is saved by Apollo Book 21 Verse 686
The Aegis of Jupiter Book 2 Verse 526 Book 5 Verse 911 Book 15 Verse 350 Book
21 Verse 467 Agapenor Book 2 Verse 741 AJAX Oileus 's Son Book 2 Verse 631
contends with Ulysses in the Foot-race Book 23 Verse 880 quarrels with
Idomeneus Book 23 Verse 555
AJAX TELAMON fights with Hector Book 7 Verse 250 his Speech to Achilles Book 9
Verse 740 his Retreat nobly described Book 11 Verse 672
The two AJAX 's fight together Book 13 Verse 1023 AJAX TELAMON challenges
Hector Book 13 Verse 628 his Fight over the dead Body of Alcathous Book 13
Verse 628 he wounds Hector Book 14 Verse 471 kills Archilocus Book 14 Verse 540
exhorts his Men Book 15 Verse 591 666, 890 defends the Ships Book 15 Verse 814
is hard pressed Book 16 Verse 130 he speaks to Menelaus Book 17 Verse 282 kills
Hippothous Book 17 Verse 338 he is in fear Book 17 Verse 705 advises Menelaus
to send Antilochus to inform Achilles of Patroclus 's Death Book 17 Verse 737
contends with Ulysses in Wrestling Book 23 Verse 820 Fights with Diomed Book 23
Verse 956
Amphimachus Book 2 Verse 755 1060 Amphius Book 2 Verse 1007 Antenor advises to
restore Helen Book 7 Verse 419 ANDROMACHE and Hector Book 6 Verse 490
Andromache ignorant of Hector 's Death runs to the Tumult Book 22 Verse 562 her
Grief for his Death Book 22 Verse 592 her Lamentation Book 24 Verse 906
ANTILOCHUS kills Echepolus Book 4 Verse 522 kills Mydon Book 5 Verse 709 kills
Menalippus Book 15 Verse 692 informs Achilles of Patroclus 's Death Book 18
Verse 21 he chears up his Horses in the Race Book 23 Verse 522 yields the
contested Prize to Menelaus Book 23 Verse 676
Antiphus Book 2 Verse 827 1054 APOLLO sends a Plague among the Greeks Book 1
Verse 61 encourages the Trojans Book 4 Verse 585 reprimands Diomede Book 5
Verse 533 raises the Phantom of Aeneas to deceive his Enemies Book 5 Verse 546
excites Mars Book 5 Verse 553 drives Patroclus from the Walls of Troy Book 16
Verse 863 and overthrows him Book 16 Verse 954 informs Hector of the Death of
Euphorbus Book 17 Verse 84 encourages Aeneas Book 17 Verse 378 and Hector Book
17 Verse 658 incites Aeneas to encounter Achilles Book 20 Verse 110 forbids
Hector to engage Achilles Book 20 Verse 431 saves Hector from Achilles Book 20
Verse 513 refuses to fight with Neptune Book 21 Verse 536 takes Agenor from
Achilles Book 21 Verse 710 discovers the Deceit to Achilles Book 22 Verse 15
complains to the Gods of the Cruelties done to Hector 's Body Book 24 Verse 44
Archilochus Book 2 Verse 996 Ascalaphus and Jalmenus the Sons of Mars Book 2
Verse 612 Ascanius Book 2 Verse 1050 Asius Book 2 Verse 1015 he is angry with
Jupiter Book 12 Verse 184
Aspledon and Orchomenians Book 2 Verse 610 Asteropaeus meets Achilles and is
killed Book 21 Verse 157 Astyanax Book 22 Verse 643 Athenians Book 2 Verse 655
Automedon and Alcimedon rule the Horses of Achilles Book 17 Verse 488 548
B.
Bellerophon Book 6 Verse 194 The Bowl of Achilles Book 16 Verse 273 Briseis
Book 2 Verse 841 she is restored to Achilles Book 19 Verse 254 grieves for
Patroclus Book 19 Verse 303
Buprasians Book 2 Verse 747
C.
Calchas the Prophet Book 1 Verse 91 he is blamed by Agamemnon Book 1 Verse 131
Castor and Pollux Book 3 Verse 302 Cebrion Brother and Charioteer to Hector
Book 16 Verse 895 Chromis Book 2 Verse 1046 Chryses desires his Daughter who
was captive Book 1 Verse 15 his Prayers to Apollo Book 1 Verse 53
Coon Book 13 Verse 590 The Cestus of Venus Book 14 Verse 245 Cretans Book 2
Verse 785
D.
Dardanus Book 20 Verse 255 The Dead are buried Book 7 Verse 495 Deiphobus is
stricken by Merion, but not wounded Book 13 Verse 213 kills Hypsenor Book 13
Verse 509 he asks Aeneas to assist him in attacking Idomeneus Book 13 Verse 575
kills Ascalaphus Book 13 Verse 655
DIOMED Book 2 Verse 683 blames Sthenelus Book 4 Verse 466 is wounded by
Pandarus Book 5 Verse 130 invokes Minerva Book 5 Verse 146 kills Pandarus Book
5 Verse 352 wounds Venus Book 5 Verse 417 is in fear of Hector Book 5 Verse 732
wounds Mars Book 5 Verse 1050 exhorts Ulysses to succor Nestor Book 8 Verse
117 he relieves Nestor Book 8 Verse 129 his Speech to Agamemnon Book 9 Verse 43
going a Spy to the Enemy's Camp, chooses Ulysses for his Companion Book 10 Verse
283 prays to Minerva Book 10 Verse 335
DIOMED and Ulysses surprise Dolon, whom they take and examine Book 10 Verse
455 DIOMED kills Dolon Book 10 Verse 524 kills the Thracians while sleeping
Book 10 Verse 560 returns with Ulysses to the Fleet Book 10 Verse 624 he
strikes Hector Book 11 Verse 452 advises the Wounded to go into the Army to
encourage others Book 14 Verse 121
Dione comforts Venus Book 5 Verse 471 Dius Book 2 Verse 1043 Dolon a Spy,
taken Book 10 Verse 447 is killed Book 10 Verse 524
Dulichians Book 2 Verse 763
E.
Elephenor Book 2 Verse 654 Ennomus the Augur Book 2 Verse 1047 Epistrophus
Book 3 Verse 1043 Erichthonius Book 20 Verse 260 Eumelus 's Mares Book 2 Verse
926 Euphemus Book 2 Verse 1026 Euphorbus wounds Patroclus Book 16 Verse 978
advises Menelaus to yield to him Book 17 Verse 14 is killed by Menelaus Book 17
Verse 50
Euryalus Book 2 Verse 682 Eurypylus Book 2 Verse 893 wounded, is cured by
Patroclus Book 11 Verse 982

G.
Ganymedes Book 20 Verse 278 Glaucus Book 2 Verse 1069 accuses Hector of Flight
Book 17 Verse 153
Glaucus and Diomed in the Battle meet and discourse together Book 6 Verse 150
interchange Armor Book 6 Verse 286 his Prayers to Apollo Book 16 Verse 633
exhorts the Trojans to defend the Corse of Sarpedon Book 16 Verse 654
Gods, an Assembly of 'em Book 4 Verse 2 Gods engage some on one side, and some
on the other Book 20 Verse 91 The Fight of the Gods Book 21 Verse 450 Grecian
Sacrifices Book 1 Verse 599 Book 2 Verse 502 they retreat from Troy Book 2
Verse 173 prepare for War Book 2 Verse 470 go to Battle Book 3 Verse 522 their
Forces march Book 4 Verse 484 their Flight Book 8 Verse 97 their Watch Book 9
Verse 110 nine Grecians are willing to accept Hector 's Challenge Book 7 Verse
196 build a Wall round the Fleet Book 7 Verse 520 buy Wine Book 7 Verse 566 an
assembly of their Generals Book 15 Verse 339 their Ships are burnt Book 16
Verse 140
Guneus Book 2 Verse 906
H.
HECTOR sends out his Forces to Battle Book 2 Verse 988 tells Paris 's
Challenge to the Greeks Book 3 Verse 123 retreats out of the Battle into Troy
Book 6 Verse 296 exhorts the Trojans to supplicate Minerva Book 6 Verse 338
goes to the House of Paris Book 6 Verse 389 to his Wife Andromache Book 6 Verse
463 his Discourse with her Book 6 Verse 510 challenges the Greeks to single
Combat Book 7 Verse 79 exhorts his Men Book 8 Verse 210 encourages his Horses
Book 8 Verse 226 sends Dolon as a Spy Book 10 Verse 376 his Glory Book 11 Verse
83 he exhorts his Forces, and rushes to Battle Book 11 Verse 368 derides
Polydamas his Advice Book 12 Verse 267 forces open a Gate of the Grecian Wall
Book 12 Verse 537 exhorts his Men Book 13 Verse 205 seeks for Aid Book 13 Verse
967 rallies his Forces and attacks the Enemy Book 13 Verse 991 answers Ajax
Book 13 Verse 1041 kills Amphimachus Book 13 Verse 247 wounded, retreats Book
14 Verse 503 is encouraged by Apollo Book 15 Verse 288 goes again to Battle
Book 15 Verse 296 kills Lycophron Book 15 Verse 500 exhorts Menalippus Book 15
Verse 654 kills Peripoetes Book 15 Verse 770 takes a Ship Book 15 Verse 854 is
put to flight Book 16 Verse 440 797 encounters with Patroclus Book 16 Verse 885
and kills him Book 16 Verse 987 excites his Men Book 17 Verse 260 his Speech to
his warlike Friends Book 17 Verse 205 he gives way to Ajax Book 17 Verse 140
answers Glaucus Book 17 Verse 187 puts on Achilles 's Armor Book 17 Verse 219
he pursues Achilles his Horses with the Assistance of Aeneas Book 17 Verse 550
again endeavors to take the Body of Patroclus Book 18 Verse 187 resolves to
combat with Achilles Book 20 Verse 415 assaults Achilles Book 20 Verse 485 his
Wound Book 23 Verse 470 he deliberates with himself Book 22 Verse 138 he fights
with Achilles Book 22 Verse 317 his Death Book 22 Verse 453 his Funeral Book 24
Verse 989
Hecuba desires he would not fight Achilles Book 22 Verse 110 she renews her
Desires he would not fight Achilles Book 22 Verse 552 she mourns his Death Book
24 Verse 942
Helen goes to see the Combat between Paris and Menelaus Book 3 Verse 123 the
Trojans admire her Beauty Book 3 Verse 204 chides Paris Book 3 Verse 553 speaks
to Hector Book 6 Verse 432 laments over Hector 's Body Book 24 Verse 962
Helenus advises Hector and Aeneas Book 7 Verse 48 Book 6 Verse 95 Hippothous
Book 2 Verse 1021
I.
Idaeus carries Paris his Challenge to the Greeks Book 7 Verse 460 Idomeneus
Book 2 Verse 791 Book 3 Verse 295 kills Othryoneus Book 13 Verse 457 kills
Asius Book 13 Verse 483 kills Alcathous Book 13 Verse 537
Iphidamas, his Death finely described Book 11 Verse 283, etc. Iris orders the
Trojans to arm Book 2 Verse 956 tells Helen of the single Combat of Paris and
Menelaus Book 3 Verse 165 is sent to Pallas and Juno with Jove 's Orders Book 8
Verse 488 admonishes Achilles to succor his Friends fighting for the Body of
Patroclus Book 18 Verse 209 summons the Winds to raise the Fire of Patroclus 's
Pile Book 23 Verse 342
Ithacans Book 2 Verse 769 Juno sends Minerva to hinder the Greeks from
retreating Book 2 Verse 191 her Quarrel with Jupiter Book 4 Verse 35 she and
Minerva prepare for Fight Book 5 Verse 883 ask leave of Jupiter to go to Battle
Book 5 Verse 942 her Speech to Neptune Book 8 Verse 242 dresses her self to
deceive Jupiter Book 14 Verse 191 desires of Venus her Girdle to deceive
Jupiter Book 14 Verse 225 goes to the God of Sleep to put Jupiter into a Sleep
Book 14 Verse 266 by large Promises obtains her Requests Book 14 Verse 305 goes
to Jupiter Book 14 Verse 331 denies it was at her Request that Neptune assisted
the Greeks Book 15 Verse 41 goes to the rest of the Gods Book 15 Verse 84 tells
the Order of Jupiter to Apollo and Iris Book 15 Verse 162 she advises with the
Gods concerning Aeneas his fighting with Achilles Book 20 Verse 146 sends
Vulcan to oppose Xanthus Book 21 Verse 386 overcomes Diana Book 21 Verse 564
JUPITER promises Thetis to be revenged on the Greeks Book 1 Verse 672 inspires
Agamemnon with a Dream Book 2 Verse 9 forbids the Gods to assist either part
Book 8 Verse 7 his golden Chain Book 8 Verse 25 descends on Ida Book 8 Verse 57
sends Iris to order Juno and Minerva to retreat from the Battle Book 8 Verse
488 sends Eris amongst the Greeks Book 11 Verse 5 sends Iris to forbid Hector
some time from personally engaging Book 11 Verse 241 inspires Sarpedon to
assault the Greek Wall Book 12 Verse 348 is caused by Juno to sleep, awaking
from Sleep he is angry with Juno Book 15 Verse 5 orders Juno to send Iris and
Apollo to him Book 15 Verse 59 sends Iris to order Neptune to desist from
fighting Book 15 Verse 180 sends Apollo to encourage Hector Book 15 Verse 258
encourages Hector himself Book 15 Verse 722 is grieved for Sarpedon 's Death
Book 16 Verse 530 orders Apollo to take care of Sarpedon 's Funeral Book 16
Verse 811 he examines Juno concerning the exciting Achilles to engage in Battle
Book 18 Verse 417 he gives the Gods leave to assist which Party they please
Book 20 Verse 29 he pities Hector Book 17 Verse 227 sends Minerva to comfort
Achilles Book 19 Verse 364 sends Thetis to Achilles, ordering him to deliver
Hector 's Body to Priam Book 24 Verse 137 sends Iris to advise Priam to go to
Achilles Book 24 Verse 178 orders Mercury to conduct Priam to Achilles Book 24
Verse 411

L.
Lacedaemonians Book 2 Verse 704 Locrians Book 2 Verse 630 Lycaon overcome by
Achilles Book 21 Verse 41 begs his Life in vain Book 21 Verse 111

M.
Machaon Book 2 Verse 889 cures Menelaus Book 4 Verse 250
Magnesians Book 2 Verse 916 Mars is wounded by Diomed Book 5 Verse 1050 on
which account he expostulates with Jupiter Book 5 Verse 1069 for which he is
reprehended by Jupiter Book 5 Verse 1092 hearing of the Death of his Son is
enraged Book 15 Verse 126
Meges Book 2 Verse 761 Meleager the Story of him Book 9 Verse 653 MENELAUS
Book 2 Verse 710 undertakes to fight with Paris Book 3 Verse 137 is
treacherously wounded by Pandarus Book 4 Verse 135 takes Adrestus Book 6 Verse
45 would undertake to fight with Hector, but is hindered by Agamemnon Book 7
Verse 127 he and Ajax assist Ulysses Book 11 Verse 582 wounds Helenus Book 13
Verse 733 kills Pisander Book 13 Verse 753 exhorts Antilochus Book 15 Verse 680
he is despised by Euphorbus Book 17 Verse 18 kills Euphorbus Book 17 Verse 50
yields to Hector Book 17 Verse 101 exhorts the Generals Book 17 Verse 294 is
encouraged by Minerva Book 17 Verse 626 he sends Antilochus to tell Achilles of
the Death of Patroclus Book 17 Verse 775 is angry with Antilochus Book 23 Verse
651
Menestheus Book 2 Verse 665 sends Thoos to the Ajax 's for Aid Book 12 Verse
411
Mercury accompanies Priam Book 24 Verse 447 and conducts him to Achilles Book
24 Verse 541 admonishes Priam in his Sleep Book 24 Verse 780
Merion Book 2 Verse 792 wounds Deiphobus Book 13 Verse 668 kills Harpalion
Book 13 Verse 813
Mestles Book 2 Verse 1054 MINERVA goes to Pandarus to induce him to break the
Truce Book 4 Verse 119 strengthens Diomed Book 5 Verse 109 forces Mars from the
Battle Book 5 Verse 45 derides Venus Book 5 Verse 509 prepares her self for the
War Book 5 Verse 883 908 asks leave of Jupiter to go to the War Book 5 Verse
942 speaks to Diomed Book 5 Verse 998 encourages Diomed to assault Mars Book 5
Verse 1020 her Speech to Jupiter Book 8 Verse 39 restrains Mars his Anger Book
15 Verse 140 knocks down Mars with a mighty Stone Book 21 Verse 469 vanquishes
Venus and her Lover Book 21 Verse 498 in the Shape of Deiphobus persuades
Hector to meet Achilles Book 22 Verse 291
Mycenians Book 2 Verse 686 Myrmidons Book 2 Verse 834 go to the fight Book 16
Verse 312

N.
Nastes Book 2 Verse 1060 Neptune his and Jupiter 's Discourse concerning the
Grecian Wall Book 7 Verse 530 his Discourse with Idomeneus Book 13 Verse 289
brings Help to the Greeks Book 12 Verse 17 encourages the two Ajax 's Book 13
Verse 73 and the Greeks Book 13 Verse 131 is angry with Jupiter Book 15 Verse
206 advises about the Preservation of Aeneas Book 20 Verse 341 preserves Aeneas
from Achilles 's Fury Book 20 Verse 367 comforts Ulysses Book 21 Verse 333
urges Apollo to fight Book 21 Verse 450
Nereids, the Catalogue and Names of them Book 18 Verse 42 etc. NESTOR
endeavors to reconcile Achilles and Agamemnon Book 1 Verse 330 Nestor praised
by Agamemnon Book 2 Verse 440 his Speech to the Soldiers Book 2 Verse 402
NESTOR Book 2 Verse 716 his Speech to Agamemnon Book 4 Verse 370 exhorts the
Soldiers Book 6 Verse 84 his Speech for burying the Dead, and building a Wall
Book 7 Verse 392 blames the Greeks for not daring to encounter Hector Book 7
Verse 145 is in great Danger Book 8 Verse 102 flies with Diomed Book 8 Verse
190 his Advice for Guards and Refreshment Book 9 Verse 86 for pacifying
Achilles Book 9 Verse 141 approves Diomed 's Speech to Agamemnon Book 9 Verse
73 goes by Night to Ulysses Book 10 Verse 157 encourages Diomed Book 10 Verse
180 advises to send Spies into the Enemy's Camp Book 10 Verse 241 recites what
he did in his Youth Book 11 Verse 817 goes on an Uproar to know the cause Book
14 Verse 1 prays to Jupiter Book 15 Verse 428 exhorts the Greeks to oppose the
Enemy Book 15 Verse 796 advises his Son concerning the Race Book 23 Verse 369
Niobe, her Fable Book 24 Verse 757 Nireus the most handsome Greek Book 2 Verse
817
O.
Orcus his Helmet. Book 5 Verse 1037 Odius Book 2 Verse 1043
P.
Pandarus Book 2 Verse 1001 treacherously wounds Menelaus Book 4 Verse 135 is
killed by Diomed Book 5 Verse 352
PARIS boasts at the beginning of the Fight Book 3 Verse 26 cowardly flies Book
3 Verse 44 blamed of Hector Book 3 Verse 55 undertakes a single Combat with
Menelaus Book 3 Verse 101 is armed Book 3 Verse 409 and fights with Menelaus
Book 3 Verse 427 is taken from the Combat by Venus Book 3 Verse 467 blamed by
Helen Book 3 Verse 533 rescued from Fight, is put to bed with Helen Book 3
Verse 555 refuses to restore Helen Book 7 Verse 428 wounds Diomed Book 11 Verse
482 wounds Machaon Book 11 Verse 629 wounds Eurypylus Book 11 Verse 709 kills
Euchenor Book 13 Verse 626
PATROCLUS returns to Achilles Book 15 Verse 462 entreats Achilles to let him
go to aid the Greeks Book 16 Verse 31 is armed Book 16 Verse 162 exhorts the
Myrmidons Book 16 Verse 324 he and his Men kill many of the Trojans Book 16
Verse 448 483 847 exhorts the two Ajax 's Book 16 Verse 681 kills Cebrion Book
16 Verse 895 is struck by Apollo Book 16 Verse 954 a fierce Contest about the
Body of Patroclus Book 17 Verse 324 472 613 appears to Achilles in a Dream Book
23 Verse 78 his funeral Pile Book 23 Verse 198 his Sepulcher Book 23 Verse 305
his funeral Games Book 23 Verse 323
Phidippus Book 2 Verse 827 Phocians Book 2 Verse 620 Phoenix entreats Achilles
to be reconciled with Agamemnon Book 9 Verse 562 sits as one of the Judges of
the Race Book 24 Verse 435
Phorcis Book 2 Verse 1050 Podalirius Book 2 Verse 889 Podarces Book 2 Verse
860 Polydamas advises to force the Greek Lines Book 12 Verse 67 interprets a
Prodigy, and gives his Advice Book 12 Verse 245 blames Hector Book 13 Verse 907
kills Prothenor Book 14 Verse 525
Polypoetes Book 2 Verse 904 and Leontius Book 12 Verse 141
Prayers and Injustice, their influence on the Gods Book 9 Verse 624 PRIAM
enquires of Helen about the Grecians which they saw Book 3 Verse 220 is called
by an Herald to agree to a Treaty Book 3 Verse 319 returns into the City Book 3
Verse 386 speaks to the Trojans Book 7 Verse 444 commands the Soldiers to open
the Gate Book 21 Verse 620 entreats Hector not to meet Achilles Book 22 Verse
51 bemoans the Death of Hector Book 23 Verse 515 tells his Wife the Commands of
Jupiter Book 24 Verse 233 takes the Gifts to carry to Achilles Book 24 Verse
341 rebukes his Sons Book 24 Verse 311 his Council to Hecuba Book 24 Verse 355
he prays to Jupiter Book 24 Verse 377 he meets Achilles Book 24 Verse 579
desires to sleep Book 24 he carries the Body of Hector into the City Book 24
Verse 882
Prodigies Book 11 Verse 70 Book 12 Verse 233 of a Dragon which devoured a Nest
of Birds and the Dam Book 2 Verse 372
Protesilaus Book 2 Verse 853 Prothous Book 2 Verse 916 Pylaemenes Book 2 Verse
1034 is slain Book 5 Verse 705
Pylians Book 2 Verse 715 Pyraechmes Book 2 Verse 1028
R.
Rhesus Book 10 Verse 505 is slain by Diomed Book 10 Verse 576
Rhodians Book 2 Verse 795
S.
Sarpedon Book 2 Verse 1069 wounded by Tlepolemus, desires the assistance of
Hector Book 5 Verse 842 exhorts Glaucus to fight Book 12 Verse 371 breaks down
a Battlement of the Wall Book 12 Verse 483
Soldiers, the good and bad described Book 13 Verse 359 Somnus the God of
Sleep, at the Instance of Juno puts Jupiter into a Sleep Book 14 Verse 266
incites Neptune Book 14 Verse 411
Sthenelus Book 2 Verse 683 Answers Agammenon sharply Book 4 Verse 456

T.
Talthybius Book 1 Verse 421 Teucer from behind the Shield of Ajax, kills many
Trojans Book 8 Verse 320 is wounded by Hector Book 8 Verse 387 kills Imbrius
Book 13 Verse 227 and Clitus Book 15 Verse 522 his Bow is broke by a divine
Power Book 15 Verse 544
Thalpius Book 2 Verse 755 Thamyris his Story Book 2 Verse 721 Themis presents
the Nectar Bowl to Juno Book 15 Verse 96 Thersites his Loquacity Book 2 Verse
255 Thetis her Words to Achilles Book 1 Verse 540 her Petition to Jove for her
Son Book 1 Verse 652 she in great Grief speaks to the Nereids Book 18 Verse 69
enquires of Achilles Book 18 Verse 95 promises Achilles Armor made by Vulcan
Book 18 Verse 172 goes to Vulcan Book 18 Verse 431 beseeches Vulcan to make
Achilles 's Armor Book 18 Verse 529 carries the Armor made by Vulcan to
Achilles Book 19 Verse 13
Thoas Book 2 Verse 775 kills Pirus Book 4 Verse 610
Titaresius a River Book 2 Verse 910 Tlepolemus Book 2 Verse 793 fights with
Sarpedon Book 5 Verse 776
Trojans and Grecians march to Battle Book 3 Verse 1 they sign a Treaty Book 3
Verse 338
Trojans and Greeks in Battle Book 4 Verse 508 many of the Trojan killed Book 6
Verse 5 the Trojan Watch Book 8 Verse 686
Trojans march, attack the Greek Trenches Book 12 Verse 95 295 Trojans fly Book
14 Verse 596 Trojans make a great slaughter Book 15 Verse 372 The Trojans fight
bravely at the Grecian Fleet Book 15 Verse 842 they sly before the Greeks Book
17 Verse 676
An Assembly of the Trojans Book 18 Verse 289
V.
Venus conveys Paris from the Fight Book 3 Verse 467 bespeaks Helen Book 3
Verse 481 is angry with Helen Book 3 Verse 513 carries Helen to Paris Book 3
Verse 533 cenveys Aeneas out of the Battle Book 5 Verse 385 is wounded by
Diomed Book 5 Verse 417 complains of her being wounded to Dione Book 5 Verse
465 is laughed at by Minerva Book 5 Verse 499 with Apollo keeps the Body of
Hector from putrefying Book 23 Verse 226
Ulysses Book 2 Verse 765 Book 3 Verse 254 delivers Chryseis to her Father Book
1 Verse 575 contends with Ajax in the Course Book 23 Verse 828 prevents the
Greeks from retreating Book 2 Verse 225 provokes Thersites Book 2 Verse 305
exhorts the Soldiers to Battle Book 2 Verse 347 answers Agamemnon Book 4 Verse
402 his Speech to Achilles to reconcile him and Agamemnon Book 9 Verse 562
exhorts Diomed to Battle Book 11 Verse 408 is surrounded by the Enemy Book 11
Verse 510 is wounded by Socus Book 11 Verse 547 kills Socus Book 11 Verse 561
advises to give the Soldiers Refreshment before the Battle Book 19 Verse 153
advises Achilles to refresh himself Book 19 Verse 215
Vulcan admonishes Juno Book 1 Verse 746 remembers the Benefits he has received
of Thetis Book 18 Verse 461 enquires of Thetis the cause of her coming Book 18
Verse 496 makes a Suit of Armor for Achilles Book 18 Verse 537 drys up the
River Xanthus Book 21 Verse 400

X.
Xanthus, Achilles 's Horse, foreshews the Destruction of Achilles Book 19
Verse 452 Xanthus, the River, speaks to Achilles Book 21 Verse 232 rises
against Achilles Book 21 Verse 258 invokes Simois against Achilles Book 21
Verse 364 supplicates Vulcan and Juno Book 21 Verse 423

A POETICAL INDEX TO HOMER's ILIAD.
The first Number marks the Book, the second the Verse.

FABLE.
THE great Moral of the Iliad, that Concord, among Governors, is the
preservation of States, and Discord the ruin of them: pursued through the whole
Fable.

The Anger of Achilles breaks this Union in the opening of the Poem, l. 1. He
withdraws from the Body of the Greeks, which first interrupts the Success of
the common Cause, ibid. The Army mutiny, l. 2. The Trojans break the Truce, l.
4. A great number of the Greeks slain, 7. 392. Forced to build Fortifications
to guard their Fleet, ibid. In great Distress from the Enemy, whose Victory is
only stopped by the Night, 8. Ready to quit their Design and return with Infamy,
9. Send to Achilles to persuade him to a Reunion, in vain, ibid. The Distress
continues; the General and all the best Warriors are wounded, 11. The
Fortification overthrown, and the Fleet set on fire, 15. Achilles himself
shares in the Misfortunes he brought upon the Allies, by the loss of his Friend
Patroclus, 16. Hereupon the Hero is reconciled to the General, the Victory over
Troy is complete, and Hector slain by Achilles, 19, 20, 21, 22, etc.
EPISODES or FABLES which are interwoven into the Poem, but foreign to its
Design.
The Fable of the Conspiracy of the Gods against Jupiter, 1. 516. Of Vulcan's
fall from Heaven on the Island of Lemnos, 1. 761. The Imprisonment of Mars by
Otus and Ephialtes, 5. 475. The Story of Thamyris, 2. 721. The Embassy of
Tydeus to Thebes, 4. 430. The Tale of Bellerophon, 6. 195. Of Lycurgus and the
Bacchanals, 6. 161. The War of the Pylians and Arcadians, 6. 165. The Story of
Phoenix, 9. 572. Of Meleager and the Wars of the Curetes and Aetolians, 9. 653.
The Wars of Pyle and Elis, 11. 818. The Birth of Hercules and Labor of
Alemena, 19. 103. The Expulsion of Ate from Heaven, 19. 93. Vulcan's abode with
Thetis, and his Employment there, 18. 463. The Family and History of Troy, 20.
255. The Transformation of Niobe, 24. 757. Building of the Walls of Troy by
Neptune, 21. 518.
ALLEGORICAL FABLES.
Moral.] Prudence restraining Passion, represented in the Machine of Minerva
descending to calm Achilles, 1. 261. Love alluring, and extinguishing Honor,
in Venus bringing Paris from the Combat to the Arms of Helen, 3. 460, etc.
True Courage overcoming Passion in Diomed's Conquest of Mars and Venus, by the
assistance of Pallas, 5. 407, etc. through that whole Book. Prayers the
Daughters of Jupiter, following Justice, and persecuting her at the Throne of
Heaven, 9. 625. The Cestus, or Girdle of Venus, 14. 247. The Allegory of Sleep,
14. 265. The Allegory of Discord cast out of Heaven, to Earth; 19. 93. The
Allegory of the two Urns of Pleasure and Pain, 24. 663. Physical or
Philosophical.] The Combat of the Elements till the Water subsided, in the
Fable of the Wars of Juno or the Air, and Neptune or the Sea, with Jupiter or
the Ether, till Thetis put an end to 'em, 1. 516. Fire derived from Heaven to
Earth, imag'd by the Fall of Vulcan on Lemnos, 1. 761. The Gravitation of the
Planets upon the Sun, in the Allegory of the Golden Chain of Jupiter, 8 25. The
Influence of the Ether upon the Air, in the Allegory of the Congress of
Jupiter and Juno, 14. 395. The Air supplied by the Vapors of the Ocean and
Earth, in the Story of Juno nourished by Oceanus and Tethys, 14. 231. The
Allegory of the Winds, 23. 242. The quality of Salt preserving dead Bodies from
Corruption, in Thetis or the Sea preserving the Body of Patroclus, 19. 40.
For the rest of the Allegories, see the System of the Gods as acting in their
Allegorical Characters, under the Article CHARACTERS.

ALLEGORICAL or FICTITIOUS PERSONS in Homer.
The Lying Dream sent to Agamemnon by Jupiter, 2. 7. Fame the Messenger of
Jove, 2. 121. Furies, punishers of the wicked, 3. 351. Hebe, or Youth,
attending the Banquets of the Gods, 4. 3. Flight and Terror Attendants upon
Mars, 4. 500. Discord described, 4. 502. Bellona Goddess of War, 5. 726. The
Hours, Keepers of the Gates of Heaven, 5. 929. Nymphs of the Mountains, 6. 532.
Night a Goddess, 6. 342. Iris, or the Rainbow, 8. 486. Prayers the Daughters of
Jupiter. 9. 625. Eris, or Discord, 11. 5. Ilythiae, Goddesses presiding in
Women's Labor, 11. 349. Terror the Son of Mars, 13. 386. Sleep, 14. 265. Night,
14. 293. Death and Sleep, two Twins, 16. 831. Nereids, or Nymphs of the Sea, A
Catalogue of them, 18. 45. Ate, or the Goddess of Discord, 19. 93. Scamander
the River-God, 21. 231. Fire and Water made Persons in the Battle of Scamander
and Vulcan, 21. 387. The East and West-Winds, ibid. Iris, or the Rainbow, and
the Winds, 23. 242.
The MAVELOUS, or supernatural FICTIONS in Homer.
Omen of the Birds and Serpent representing the Event of the Trojan War, 2.
370. The miraculous Rivers Titaresius and Styx, 2. 910. The Giant Typhon under
the burning Mountain Typhoeus, 2. 952. Battle of the Cranes and Pygmies, 3. 6.
Prodigy of a Comet, 4. 101. Diomed's Helmet ejecting Fire, 5. 6. Horses of
celestial Breed, 5. 327. Vast Stone heaved by Diomed, 5. 370. And Hector, 12.
537.. And Minerva, 20. 470. The miraculous Chariot and Arms of Pallas, 5. 885,
907, etc. The Gorgon; Hehnet, and Aegis of Jupiter, ibid. The Gates of Heaven,
ibid. The Leap of immortal Horses, 5. 960. Shout of Stentor, 5. 978. Roaring of
Mars, 5. 1054. Helmet of Orcus, which rendered the Wearer invisible, 5 1036.
The Blood of the Gods, 5. 422. The immediate healing of their Wounds, 5. 1116.
The Chimaera, 6. 220. Destruction by Neptune of the Grecian Rampart, 12. 15.
Wall pushed down by Apollo, 15, 415. The golden Chain of Jpiter, 8. 25. Horses
and Chariot of Jupiter, 8. 50. His Balances, weighing the Fates of Men, 8. 88.
22. 271. Jupiter's assisting the Trojans by Thunders and Lightnings, and
visible Declarations of his Favor. 8. 93, 165, etc. 17. 670. Prodigy of an
Eagle and Fawn, 8. 297. Horses of the Gods, Stables and Chariots, pompously
described, 8. 535, etc. Hector's Lance of ten Cubits, 8. 615. Omen of an Heron,
10, 320. The Descent of Eris, 11. 5. A Shower of Blood, 11. 70. -- 16. 560.
Omen of an Eagle and Serpent, 12. 230. The Progress of Neptune through the Seas,
13. 42. The Chain of War and Discord stretched over the Armies, 13. 451. The
loud Voice of Neptune, 14. 173. Solemn Oath of the Gods, 14. 307 -- 15, 41.
Minerva spreads a Light over the Army, 15. 808. Jupiter involves the Combatants
in thick Darkness, 16. 695, 422. Horses begot by the Wind on a Harpye, 16. 183.
A Shower of Blood, 16. 560. Miraculous Transportation and Interment of Sarpedon
by Apollo, Sleep and Death, 16. 810, etc. Prophecy at the Hour of Death, 16.
1026. -- 22. 450. Achilles unarmed puts the whole Trojan Army to flight on his
Appearance, 18. 240, etc. Moving Tripods and living Statues of Vulcan, 18. 440,
488. The Horse of Achilles speaks by a Prodigy, 19. 450. The Battle of the
Gods, 20. 63, etc. Horses of a miraculous Extraction, the Transformation of
Boreas, 20. 264. The wonderful Battle of the Xanthus, 21. 230, etc. Hector's
Body preserved by Apollo and Venus, 23. 226. The Ghost of Patroclus, 23. 77.
The two Urns of Jupiter, 24. 663. The vast Quoit of Ae^tion, 23. 975. The
Transformation of Niobe and her People into Stones, 24. 757.
Under this Head of the Mavelous may also be included all the immediate
Machines and Appearances of the Gods in the Poem, and their Transformations;
the miraculous Birth of Heroes; the Passions in human and visible Forms, and
the rest.

CHARACTERS, OR, MANNERS.
Characters of the GODS of Homer, as acting in the Physical or Moral Capacities
of those Deities.
JUPITER. Acting and governing all, as the supreme Being.] See the Article
Theology in the next Index.
JUNO. As the Element of Air.] Her Congress with Jupiter, or the Ether, and
Production of Vegetables, 14. 390, etc. Her loud Shout, the Air being the cause
of Sound, 5. 978. Nourished by Oceanus and Tethys, 14. 231. As Goddess of
Empire and Honor.] Stops the Greeks from flying ignominiously, 2. 191. and in
many other Places. Incites and commands Achilles to revenge the Death of his
Friend, 18. 203, etc. Inspires into Helen a Contempt of Paris, and sends Iris
to call her to behold the Combat with Menelaus, 3. 185
APOLLO. As the Sun.] Causes the Plague in the Heat of Summer, 1. 61. Raises a
Phantom of Clouds and Vapors, 5. 545 Discovers in the Morning the Slaughter
made the Night before, 10. 606. Recovers Hector from fainting, and opens his
Eyes, 15. 280. Dazzles the Eyes of the Greeks, and shakes his Aegis in their
Faces, 15. 362. Restores Vigor to Glaucus, 16. 647. Preserves the Body of
Sarpedon from Corruption, 16. 830. And that of Hector, 23. 230. Raises a Cloud
to conceal Aeneas, 20. 515. As Destiny.] Saves Aeneas from Death, 5. 441. And
Hector, 20. 513. Saves Agenor, 21. 706. Deserts Hector when his Hour is come,
22. 277. As Wisdom.] He and Minerva inspire Helenus to keep off the general
Engagement by a single Combat, 7. 25. Advises Hector to shun encountering
Achilles, 20. 431.
MARS. As mere martial Courage without Conduct.] Goes to the Fight against the
Orders of Jupiter, 5. 726. Again provoked to rebel against Jupiter by his
Passion, 15. 126. Is vanquished by Minerva, or Conduct, 21. 480.
MINERVA. As martial Courage with Wisdom.] Joins with Juno in restraining the
Greeks from flight, and inspires Ulysses to do it, 2. 210. Animates the Army,
2. 525. Described as leading a Hero safe through a Battle, 4. 632. Assists Diomed
to overcome Mars and Venus, 5. 407. 1042. Overcomes them her self, 21. 480.
Restrains Mars from Rebellion against Jupiter, 5. 45 -- 15. 140. Submits to
Jupiter, 8. 40. Advises Ulysses to retire in time from the Night Expedition,
10. 593. Assists him throughout that Expedition, 10. 350, etc. Discovers the
Ambush said against the Pylians by Night, and causes them to sally, 11. 851.
Assists Achilles to conquer Hector, 22. 277, etc. As Wisdom separately
considered.] Suppresses Achilles's Passion, 1. 261. Suppresses her own Anger
against Jupiter, 4. 31. Brings to pass Jupiter's Will in contriving the Breach
of the Truce, 4. 95. Teaches Diomed to discern Gods from Men, and to conquer
Venus, 5. 155, etc. Called the best beloved of Jupiter, 8. 48. Obtains leave of
Jupiter, that while the other Gods do not assist the Greeks, she may direct 'em
with her Counsels, 8. 45. Is again checked by the command of Jupiter and
submits, 8. 506, 580. Is said to assist, or save any Hero, in general through the
Poem, when any Act of Prudence preserves him.
VENUS. As the Passion of Love.] Brings Paris from the Fight to the Embraces of
Helen, and inflames the Lovers, 3. 460, 530, etc. Is overcome by Minerva, or
Wisdom, 5. 407. And again, 21. 500. Her Cestos or Girdle, and the Effects of
it, 14. 247.
NEPTUNE. As the Sea.] Overturns the Grecian Wall with his Waves, 12. 15.
Assists the Greeks at their Fleet, which was drawn up at the Seaside, 13. 67,
etc. Retreats at the Order of Jupiter, 15. 245. Shakes the whole Field of
Battle and Seashore with Earthquakes, 20. 77.
VULCAN. Or the Element of Fire.] Falls from Heaven to Earth, 1. 761. Received
in Lemnos, a Place of subterraneous Fires, ibid. His Operations of various
kinds, 18. 440, 468, 540. Dries up the River Xanthus, 21. 460. Assisted by the
Winds, 21. 390.

Characters of the HEROES.
N.B. The Speeches which depend upon, and flow from these several Characters,
are distinguished by an S.

ACHILLES. Furious, passionate, disdainful, and reproachful, Lib. 1. 155. 155.
S. 195. S. 295. S -- 9. 405. S. 746. S -- 24. 705. Revengeful and implacable in
the highest degree, 9. 765. 755. -- 16. 68. S. 121. S. -- 19. 211. S -- 22.
333. S. 437. S. Cruel, 16. 122 -- 19. 395 -- 21. 112 -- 22. 437. S. 495. S --
23. 30 -- 24. 51 -- Superior to all Men in Valor, 20. 60. 437, etc. -- l. 21.
22. throughout. Constant and violent in Friendship, 9. 730. 18. 30 -- 371 --
23. 54. 272 -- 24. 5 -- 16. 9. S. 20. 8. S. 18. 100. S. 380. S -- 19. 335. S --
22. 482. S. -- Achilles scarce ever speaks without mention of his Friend
Patroclus.
AENEAS. Pious to the Gods, 5. 226. S -- 20. 132. 290. 345 -- Sensible, and
Moral, 20. 242. 293, etc. S. Valiant, not rash, 20. 130. 240 -- S. Tender to
his Friend, 13. 590.
See this Character in the Notes on l. 5.. 212. and on l. 13.. 578.

AGAMEMNON. Imperious and passionate, 1. 34. 729 -- S -- Sometimes cruel, 6. 80
-- 2. 140. S -- Artful and designing, 2. 68. 95 -- Valiant and an excellent
General, 4. 256. 265, etc. 11. throughout. Eminent for brotherly Affection, 4.
183, etc. S. 7. 120 --
See his Character in the Notes on l. 11.. 1.

AJAX. Of superior strength and size, and fearless on that account, 13. 410 --
7. 227. S. 274. S -- 15. 666. Indefatigable and patient, 11. 683, etc. 13. 877
-- 15. throughout -- 14. 535 -- short in his Speeches, 7. 277 -- 9. 742 -- 15.
666, etc.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 7.. 226.

DIOMED. Daring and intrepid, l. 5. throughout, and 8. 163. 180 S -- 9. 65. 820
-- 10. 260 -- Proud, and boasting, 6. 152 -- 11. 500. Vain of his Birth, 14.
125. Generous, 6. 265 -- Is guided by Pallas or Wisdom, and chooses Ulysses to
direct him, 5. throughout. 10. 287. 335.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 5.. 1.

HECTOR. A true Lover of his Country, 8. 621. S -- 12. 284 -- 15. 582. S.
Valiant in the highest degree, 3. 89 -- 7. 80. 12. 270. S -- 18. 333. S -- etc.
Excellent in Conduct, 8. 610. S. -- 11 663 -- Pious, 6. 140. 335. 605 -- Tender
to his Parents, 6. 315. -- to his Wife, 6. 456. -- to his Child, 6. 606. -- to
his Friends, 20. 485 -- 24. 962 --
See his Character in the Notes on l. 3.. 53.

IDOMENEUS. An old Soldier, 13. 455. 648 -- A lover of his Soldiers, 13. 280 --
Talkative upon Subjects of War, 13. 340 -- 355, etc. 4. 305. S -- Vain of his
Family, 13. 565, etc. Stately and insulting, 13. 472 -- etc.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 13.. 279.

MENELAUS. Valiant, 3. 35 -- 13. 733 -- 17. throughout. Tender of the People,
10. 32 -- Gentle in his Nature, 10. 138 -- 23. 685 -- But fired by a Sense of
his Wrongs, 2. 711 -- 3. 45 -- 7. 109. S -- 13. 780. S -- 17. 640.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 3.. 278.

NESTOR. Wise and experienced in Council, 1. 331. 340 -- 2. 441 -- Skilful in
the Art of War, 2. 432. 670 -- 4. 338, etc. S. 7. 392. S -- Brave, 7. 165 --
11. 817 -- 15. 796. S. Eloquent, 1. 332, etc. Vigilant, 10. 88. 186. 624 --
Pious, 15. 427. Talkative through Old Age, 4. 370 -- 7. 145 -- 11. 800 -- 23 373.
718 -- and in general through the Book.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 1.. 339. on 2. 402, etc.

PRIAM. A tender Father to Hector, 22. 51. S -- 24. 275 -- to Paris, 3. 381 --
to Helen, 3. 212. S. An easy Prince, of too yielding a Temper, 7. 443. Gentle
and compassionate, 3. 211. 382. Pious, 4. 70 -- 24. 520. S.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 3.. 211.

PARIS. Esseminate in Dress and Person, 3. 27. 55. 80. 409. Amorous, 3. 550.
Ingenious in Arts, Music, 3. 80. Building, 6. 390. Patient of Reproof, 3. 86.
Naturally valiant, 6. 669 -- 13. 985.
See his Characters in the Notes on l. 3.. 26. 37. 86.

PATROCLUS. Compassionate of the Sufferings of his Countrymen, 11. 947 -- 16.
5. 31. S. Rash, but Valiant, 16. 709. Of a gentle Nature, 19. 320 -- 17. 755 --
SARPEDON. Valiant, out of Principle and Honor, 5. 575. S -- 12. 371. S.
Eloquent, ibid. Careful only of the common Cause in his Death, 16. 605. S.
See his Character in the Notes on l. 16.. 512.

ULYSSES. Prudent, 3. 261 -- 10. 287 -- 19. 218 -- Eloquent, 3. 283. -- 9. 295.
S. etc. Valiant in the Field with Caution, 4. 566 -- 11. 515, etc. Bold in the
Council with Prudence, 14. 90 --
See his Character in the Notes on l. 2.. 402. and sparsim.


Characters of other HEROES.
Agenor, valiant and considerate, 21. 648. Antenor, a prudent Counselor, 7.
418. Ajax Oileus, famous for swiftness, 2. 631 -- 14. 618. Antilochus,
bold-spirited, but reasonable; and artful, 4. 522 -- 23. 505. 618. 666. S --
23. 920. 930. Euphorbus, beautiful and valiant, 16. 973 -- 17. 11. 57 --
Glaucus, pious to his Friend, 16. 660 -- 17. 165. 180. Helenus, a Prophet and
Hero, 6. 92. Meriones, dauntless and faithful, 13. 325, etc. Machaon, and
excellent Physician, 2. 890 -- 11. 630. Phoenix, his Friendship and Tenderness
for Achilles, 9. 605. Polydamas, Prudent and Eloquent. See his Speeches, 12.
70. 245 -- 13. 907 -- 18. 300 -- Teucer, famous for Archery, 8. 320 -- 15. 510,
etc. Thoas, famous for Eloquence, 15. 322. For other less distinguished
Characters, see the Article, Descriptions of the Passions.
SPEECHES, OR ORATIONS.
A Table of the most considerable in the Iliad.
In the Exhortatory or Deliberative Kind. The Oration of Nestor to Agamemnon
and Achilles, persuading a Reconciliation, 1. 340. The Orations of Nestor,
Ulysses, and Agamemnon, to persuade the Army to stay, 2. 350. 402. 452. Of
Sarpedon to Hector 5. 575. Of Nestor to encourage the Greeks to accept the
Challenge of Hector, 7. 145. Of Hector to the Trojans, 8. 621. Of Nestor to
send to Achilles, 9. 127. Of Ulysses, Phoenix and Ajax, to move Achilles to a
Reconciliation, 9. 295. 562. 742. Achilles's Reply to each, ibid. Sarpedon to
Glaucus, 12. 371. Of Neptune to the Greeks, to defend the Fleet, 13. 131. Of
Ajax to the Greeks, 15. 666. Nestor to the same, 15. 796. Of Ajax again, 15.
890. Scamander to the River Simois, 21. 360. Juno to Vulcan, 21. 387. Achilles
to Patroclus, 16. 70, etc.
In the Vituperative Kind. The Speech of Thersites, 2. 275. That of Ulysses
answering him, 2. 306. Of Hector to Paris, 3. 55. Of Agamemnon to Diomed, 4.
422. Of Hector to Paris, 6. 406. Of Diomed to Agamemnon, 9. 43. Of Ulysses to
the same, 14. 90. Sarpedon to Hector, 5. 575. Glaucus to Hector, 17. 153.
In the Narrative. Achilles to Thetis, 1. 476. Pandarus to Aeneas, 5. 230.
Glaucus to Diomed, 6. 190. Phoenix to Achilles, 9. 562, 652. -- Agamemnon to
the Greeks, 19. 90. Aeneas to Achilles, 20. 240. Of Nestor, 7. 163 -- 11. 800
-- and the Speeches of Nestor in general.
In the Pathetick. Agamemnon on Menelaus wounded, 4. 186. Andromache to Hector,
and his Answer, 6. 510. 570. Patroclus and Achilles, 16. 10, etc. Jupiter on
sight of Hector, 17. 231. Lamentation of Briseis for Patroclus, 19. 303.
Lamentation of Achilles for Patroclus, 19. 335. -- of Priam to Hector, 22. 51.
530. -- of Hecuba to the same, 22. 115. and again, 24. 243, 942. -- of
Andromache at Hector's Death, 22. 608. -- of Andromache at his Funeral, 24.
908. -- of Helena, 24. 962. Lycaon to Achilles, 21, 85. Thetis to the Nereids,
17. 70. The Ghost of Patroclus to Achilles, 23. 83. Priam to Achilles, 24. 600.
In the Irony, or Sarcasm. The Speech of Pallas on Venus being wounded, 5. 509.
Ulysses over Socus, 11. 566. Idomeneus over Othryoneus, 13. 472. Four Sarcastic
Speeches over the Dead, 14. 529. 550. 561. 587. Juno to Mars concerning
Ascalaphus, 15. 120. Aeneas to Meriones, 16. 745. Patroclus on Cebriones, 16.
903. Hector on Patroclus, 16. 1003. Achilles to Otryntides, 20. 450. to Lycaon,
21. 135. to Hector, 22. 415.
Speeches to Horses. Hector to his Horses, 8. 225. Achilles to his Horses, 19.
440. Jove to the Horses of Achilles, 17. 504. Antilochus, 23. 483. Menelaus,
23. 522.

DESCRIPTIONS OR IMAGES.
A Collection of the most remarkable throughout the Poem.
Descriptions of PLACES. Of the Apartment of Juno, 14. 191. Of a Burning
Mountain, 2. 950. City in Flames, 17. 825. Court of Justice, 18. 577. Ends of
the Earth and Sea, the Residence of Saturn and Iapetus, 8. 597. Fountains of
Scamander, 22. 195. Field, plowed, 18. 627. Forest, when Timber is felled, 11.
120. 23. 144. Heaven, the Seat and Pleasures of the Gods, 1. 690. 772. -- 4. 3.
The Gates of Heaven, 5. 928 -- 8. 478. The Gods assembled, 20. 9. Ida, its
Forests, Temple and Prospect, 8. 57 -- 14. 320. Landscapes of a fine Country,
2. 840. 1036. 1040. Of Pasture Grounds and Sheep, 18. 677. Mount of Hercules
near Troy, 20. 174. Palace of Neptune, 13. 35. Palace of Priam described, 6.
304. Of Paris, 6. 59. River Axius described, 2. 1030. River Titaresius and
Peneus, 2. 910. Sea and Islands rising out of it, 2. 770. Tempe described, 2.
918. Tent of Achilles described, 24. 553. Troy, the Country about it and Roads,
22. 191. 13. 20 -- 14. 260. Tomb of Ilus, 11. 477. Of Batiea, 2. 984. Of
Sarpedon, 16. 820. Vulcan, his Palace, Forge, etc. 18. 431. etc. A Vineyard,
18. 651. Wall of the Grecians, 7. 523. Winds, their Court and Mansion
described, 23. 241.
Descriptions of PERSONS. Achilles's dreadful Appearance, 20. 59 -- 22. 31,
etc. 393 -- Apollo's Person, Ensigns, and Descent to Earth, 1. 61. Apollo's
appearance in the War, 15. 348 -- Ajax, his sullen retreat described, 11. 675,
etc. to 696. Brothers, two killed together, 20. 531. A Coward, described in
Thersites, beaten, 2. 326. A Coward described throughout, 13. 359 -- again in
Thestor, 16. 488. A Coward surpised, 10. 443. Diana, cuffed and buffeted, 21.
570. Gods, Homer's great Ideas of them, in the Descriptions of their Armor, 5.
907. Motion, 13. 30 -- 15. 90 -- 5. 960 -- Battles, 15. 252 -- 20. 63, etc. 21.
450, etc. Hours at the Gates of Heaven, 5. 929. Hector's horrible appearance in
Battle. 8. 417 -- 12. 553 -- 13. 1010 -- 15. 730 -- Hector's dead Body dragged
at the Chariot of Achilles, 22. 500. Jupiter in his Glory, 1. 15. 172. -- 8.
550. in his Chariot, 8. 50. 542, etc. in his Terrors, 17. 670. Juno, dressed, 14.
200. Lycaon, his Youth and unhappy Death, 21. 40, etc, Mars and Bellona before
Hector in Battle, 5. 726. Mars in Arms, 7. 252 -- 13. 385 -- 15. 726 -- his
monstrous Size, 21. 473. Mercury described, 24. 417. Neptune, his Chariot and
Progress, 13. 28, etc. Niobe, turned into a Rock, 24. 773. Old Man, a venerable
one, 1. 330. Old Counselors of Troy conversing, 3. 197, etc. A miserable old
Man, in Priam, 22. 80, etc. Priam passing through his People, in Sorrow, to go to
redeem Hector, 24. 402. Priam weeping at the Feet of Achilles, 24. 636. Pallas,
her Descent from Heaven, 4. 99. her Armor, Spear, and Veil, 5. 905 -- 8. 466.
Teucer, behind Ajax's Shield, 8. 321. Youth, a beautiful one, killed, 4. 542 --
17. 55, etc. 20. 537. interceding for Mercy in vain, 21. 75. A young, and old
Man slain in War, their Picture, 22. 100 --
Descriptions of THINGS. Of an Assembly gathering together, 2. 110 -- Battle. [
See the Article Military Descriptions.] Burning up of a Field, 21. 400. A Bow,
4. 137 -- Blood trickling from a Wound, 4. 170, etc. Brightness of a Helmet, 5.
5. Burial of the Dead, 7. 494. A Breach made in an Attack, 12. 485 -- Boiling
Water in a Cauldron, 18. 405 -- 21. 425. Beacon, 19. 405 -- Beasts sacrificed,
23. 41. A Bird shot through 23. 1033. Chariot of Jupiter, 8. 50. 542. Of Neptune,
13. 41 -- Chariot described at large, 24. 335. -- 5. 889, etc. A Chariot Race,
23. 353, etc. Chariot's over-turn'd, 16. 445. Chariots crushing the Bodies, 20.
577. A Child frighted at a Helmet, 6. 595. Golden Chain of Jupiter, 8. 25. A
Conslagration, 21. 387. 400. Cookery described, 9. 277 -- Cestus, the Game
described, 23. 766, etc. Deformity, 2. 263 -- Dancing, 18. 681, etc. Discus,
the Game described, 23. 927, etc. Diving, 24. 105. Driving a Chariot, 11. 363.
655 -- Dreadful Appearance of the Myrmidons, 16. 192 -- of Achilles, 18. 254.
Darkness, 17. 422. Death, 16. 1033. 22. 455 -- The Descriptions of different
sorts of Deaths in Homer, are innumerable, and scattered throughout the
Battles. Aegis, or Shield of Jupiter, 2. 526 -- 5. 909 -- 15. 350 -- 21. 465.
An Entrenchment, 7. 520 -- Eagle stung by a Serpent, 12. 233 -- Eagle soaring,
24. 390. Furnace and Forge described, 18. 540. Fishes, scorched, 21. 413.
Flowers of various kinds, 14. 396 -- Famine, 19. 160, etc. Fall of a Warrior
headlong into the deep Sands, 5. 715. Fatigue in the Day of Battle, 2. 458 --
16. 132 -- 17. 445. Fainting, 5. 856 -- 11. 460 -- 14. 487. 509 -- Fires by
Night described, 8. 685, etc. Recovery from Fainting, 15. 271. Fortification
attacked, 12. 170, etc. 201. 304. 407. Funeral of a Warrior, 23. 156 -- Funeral
Pile described, 23. 200. Gates of a Fortification broken, 12. 545. Goblet
described, 11. 774. Girdle of Venus, 14. 245. Horses, the famous ones of
Eumelus, 2. 924. Of Hector, 8. 226. Of Achilles, 16. 181 -- Of Tros, 5. 327. --
Of Ericthonius. 20. 262. Horse pampered and prancing, 6. 652. Horse killed by a
Dart, 8. 105. Horses afraid of leaping a Ditch, 12. 57. Horses of Achilles
mourning for Patroclus, 17. 490. A Feat of Horsemanship, 15. 822 -- Helmet of
Jupiter, 5. 918. Helmets nodding their Plumes, 13. 945 -- Hospitable Life of a
good Man, 6. 16. Harvest, 18. 637 Herds of Oxen, 18. 665 Inundation, 12 23 --
15. 465. Of Scamander against Achilles, 21. 258, etc. 350 -- etc. Lightnings
and Thunder, 7. 571 -- 8. 93, etc. 161, etc. Light coming over a Plain, 15. 810
-- 17. 430 -- Light streaming from a Beacon by Night, 19. 405. Majesty of a
Prince, 2 564. -- 3. 221. Majestic March of Sarpedon, 12. 356. Of Juno, 14. 26.
Melancholy, 6. 245. Moon and Stars described, 8. 687. Marriage-pomp, 18 570 --
Monument over the Dead, 17. 492. Noise, a loud one, 5. 1054 -- 13. 1055 -- 14.
172. 457 -- 16. 767. Night past in Inquietude by the Soldiers, and their
several Postures of taking rest, 10. 82. 170. Old Age, 3. 150. The Picture of
its Miseries in State of War, 22. 80. Orphan its Misery, 22, 620, etc.
Procession described, 6. 367. Peaceful Life, 9. 520. Posture of a Man receiving
a Dart on his Shield lifted up, 13. 511 -- 20. 325, etc. Panting described, 13
555. 720 -- Perfumes, 14. 198 -- Plume of a Helmet, 19. 410 -- 13. 947.
Plowing, 12. 627. Rainbow, 11. 37 -- 24. 100 -- 17. 616. Reaping, 18. 637.
Running away, 21. 634. Running round Troy, Hector and Achilles, 22. 250, etc.
Seeming to run in a Dream, 22. 257. Rough way described, 23. 139. A Race
described, 23. 881, etc. Shield of Achilles, described at large, 18. 550, etc.
Of Hector, 6. 143. Of Ajax, 7. 265. Scales of Jupiter, 22. 271. Smoke cleared,
and Light returning, 16. 350 -- Sailing of a Ship, 1. 625. Ship anchoring and
coming into Port, 1. 566. The stately Stalk of a Hero, 7. 251 -- 15. 815 -- A
Sacrifice described, 1. 600 -- 7. 380 -- Sleep, 2. init. 14. 265, etc. A
Slaughter by Night, 10. 560. Snow, 12. 331 -- Soldiers, when off from Duty,
their Amusements, 2. 938. Shooting with the Bow, 4. 144 to 156. 23. 10^5 -- 8.
389. Spear of Achilles, 19. 420. A Spear driven deep into the Earth, 21. 188. A
Stone whirling on the Ground with vast force, 14. 474. Stone, thrown by a Hero,
5. 370 -- 7. 320 -- 12. 537 -- 14. 472 -- Swiftness of Horses, 20. 270.
Swooning, 16. 955. Vintage, 18. 651. Wall, overwhelmed by Waters, 7. 550. 12.
23. Woodman 's Dinner, 11. 120. Woods felled down, 23. 144 -- 16. 767. War, its
Miseries, 9. 709. Watch by Night, 10 208. Wrestling described, 23. 821 -- Wound
of Venus described, 5. 417. Diomed wounded, 5. 988. A Wound healing, 5. 1111.
Water, Troops plunging in, 21. 9. A Fight in the Water, 21. A Tree falling in
the Water, 21. 269. Water rolling down a Hill in a Current, 21. 290. Arms
floating upon the Water, 21. 351. Winds rising, 23. 261.
Descriptions of TIMES and SEASONS. Daybreak, 10. 295 -- Morning, 2. 60 -- 7.
515 -- 8. 183 -- 9. 833 -- 11. 1 -- 11. 115 -- 19. 1 -- Sunrising, 11. 871 --
Noon, 16. 938 -- Sunsetting, 1. 716 -- 7. 556 -- 8. 605. Evening, 16. 942 --
Night, 2. init. 10th Book throughout. A starry Night, 8. 687. Spring, 14. 395
-- Summer, 18. 637. Autumn, 18. 651. 5. 1060 -- 22. 40. Winter, 12. 175. 331.
MILITARY Descriptions. An Army descending on the Shore, 2. 117. An Army
marching, 2. 181. 940. The Day of Battle, 2. 458. A vast Army on the Plain,
535, etc. to 563. An Army going forth to Battle, 2. 976 -- 13. 59 -- 16. 255 --
19. 377. A Chariot of War, 5. 890, etc. Confufion and noise of Battle, 16. 921
-- A single Combat, with all the Ceremonial, 3. 123, etc. The Combat between
Paris and Menelaus, 3. 423. -- of Hector and Ajax, 7. 250, to 335. -- of Hector
and Achilles, 22. Squadrons embattled, 4. 322 -- 5. 637 -- 8. 260 -- First
Onset of Battle, 4. 498, to 515. A Circle enclosing the Foe, 5. 712. Stand of
an Army, 7. 75. Joining in Battle, 8. 75, etc. 13, 422 -- A Rout, 11. 193 --
14. 166 -- 16. 440, etc. 21. 720 -- A Fortification attacked, 12. 170, 201.
304. A Breach made, 12. 485. An obstinate close Fight, 12. 510 -- 15. 860. An
Army in close Order, 13. 177, to 185 -- 17. 406. An Attack on the Sea side, 14.
452 -- Levelling and passing a Trench, 15. 408. Attack of the Fleet, 15. 677,
etc. 786. 855, etc. A Hero arming at all Points, Agamemnon, 11. 21. Patroclus,
16. 162. Achilles, 19. 390. Siege of a Town, 18. 591, etc. Surprise of a
Convoy, ibid. Skirmish, ibid. Battle of the Gods, 20. 63, to 90. Two Heroes
meeting in Battle, 20. 192. The Rage, Destruction and Carnage of Battle. 20.
574, etc.
Descriptions of the INTERNAL PASSIONS, or of their visible EFFECTS. Anxiety,
in Agamemnon, 10, 13, etc. 100, etc. Activity, in Achilles, 19. 416.
Admiration, 21, 62 -- 24. 800 -- Affright, 16, 968 -- Amazement, 24. 590.
Ambition, 13. 458. Anger, 1. 252. Awe, 1. 430. Buffoonry in Thersites, 2. 255,
etc. Contentment, 9, 520. Conjugal Love, in Hector and Androm. 6. 510, etc.
Courage, 13. 109. 366 -- 17. 250. Cowardice, 13. 359 -- 16. 488 -- Curiosity,
in old Men, 3. 194, etc. Despair, 22. 377. Diffidence, 3. 280. Distress, 8. 290
-- 9. 12, etc. 10. 96. Doubt, 14. 21, etc. 21. 651, etc. 22. 138 --. Fear, 10.
443 -- 24. 441 -- Fear in Priam, 21. 615. For his Son, 22. 43. 51, etc. Fear of
a Child, 6. 596. Fidelity, in Lycophron, Servant of Ajax, 15. 502 -- Calesius,
Servant of Axylus, 6. 20. Grief in a fine Woman, 1. 150 -- 3. 185 -- 1. 450 --
Grief of a Sister for her dead Brothers, 3. 300, etc. Grief in two Parents in
tenderness for their Child, 6. 504. Grief occasioned by love of our Country, in
Patroclus, 16. init. Grief for a Friend in Achilles for Patroclus, 18. 25 --
100, etc. 19. 335 -- 22. 482 -- 24. 5 -- Furious Grief, 18. 367. Frantic Grief,
24. 291. Grief of a Father for his Son, in Priam, 22. 522, etc. 24. 200. 275.
291. Grief of a Wife for her Husband, 22. 562. to the end, the Episode of
Andromache, and again, 24. 906. Grief out of gratitude, in Briseis, 19. 319. in
Helen, 24. Haste, expressed in Hector, 15. 395. 402, etc. Hate, in Achilles to
Hector, 22. 335. 433, etc. Hardness of Heart, 9. 750 -- Insolence, in
Tlepolemus, 5. 783. in Epeus, 23. 767. Joy, its visible Effects, 23. 678. Love,
in Helen and Paris, 3. 551, etc. in Jupiter and Juno, 14. 332, etc. 357 --
Conjugal Love, in Hector and Androm. 6, etc. Love of a Mother to her Son, in
Thetis to Achilles, 18. 70 -- 24. 117. Brotherly Love, in Agamemnon and
Menelaus, 4. 183. Filial Love, in Harpalion, 13. 805. Lovers Sorrow at parting,
in Achilles and Briseis, 1. 450. In Hector and Andromache, 6. 640 -- Effects of
Beauty on old Men, 3. 203 -- Malice in Thirsites, 2. 255. Pride, in Othryoneus,
13. 457 -- Modesty, 14. 373. Pity, of a People for their Prince in misery, 24.
402. Repentance, in Helen, 3. 230. 493 -- 6. 432. to 450 -- Rashness, in Asius,
12. 125, etc. Resentment, in Achilles, 1. 635 -- 15. 72 -- Revenge, in
Menelaus, 2. 710. In Achilles, for Patroclus, 18. 125, etc. 19. 211 -- 394 --
211 -- Revenge and Glory, 16. 123. Resolution, 19. 466. In Hector, 22. 47. 127.
Shame, in Helen, 3. 185, etc. 521 -- in Juno, 14. 373 -- Spite, in Juno, 15.
110 -- in Menelaus, 17. 640. Tenderness, of Parents for their Child, in in
Hector and Andromache, 6. 504. 598. 616 -- Wish, of Hector, to be Immortal, 13.
1046. -- of Achilles, for a general Destruction, 16. 122. -- of Ajax, to die in
the Daylight, 17. 730.

SIMILES.
From BEASTS. The Stateliness of a Bull, to the Port of Agamemnon, 2. 566. --
Of a Ram stalking before the Flock, to Ulysses, 3. 259. A wanton Stallion
breaking from the Pastures and Mares, to Paris issuing from his Apartment, 6.
652. A Hound following a Lion, to Hector following the Grecians, 8. 407. Dogs
watching the Folds, to the Guards by Night, 10. 211. Hounds chasing a Hare
through thick Woods, to Diomed and Ulysses pursuing an Enemy by Night, 10. 427. A
Hind flying from a Lion, to the Trojans flying from Agamemnon, 11 153. Beasts
flying from a Lion to the same, 10. 227. Hounds cheered by the Hunter, to
Troops encouraged by the General, 11. 378. A hunted Boar to Ajax, 11. 526. A
wounded Deer encompassed with Wolves, to Ulysses surrounded by Enemies, 11.
595. An Ass surrounded by Boys to Ajax, 11. 683. A Fawn carried off by two
Lions, to the Body of Imbrius carried by the Ajaxes, 13. 265. A Boar enraged,
to Idomeneus meeting his Enemy, 13. 595. An Ox rolling in the Pangs of Death,
to a dying Warrior, 13. 721. Beasts retreating from Hunters, to the Greeks
retiring, 15. 303. Oxen flying from Lions, to the Greeks flying from Apollo and
Hector, 15. 366. A Hound fastening on a Roe, to a Hero flying on an Enemy, 15.
697. A wild Beast wounded and retiring from a Multitude, to Antilochus his
Retreat, 15. 702. A hideous Assembly of Wolves, to the fierce Figure of the
Myrmidons, 16. 194. Wolves invading the Flocks, to the Greeks, 16. 420. A Bull
torn by a Lion, to Sarpedon killed by Patroclus, 16. 600. A Bull sacrificed, to
Aretus, 17. 588. Hounds following a Boar, to the Trojans following Ajax, 17.
811. Mules dragging a Beam, to Heroes carrying a dead Body, 17. 832. A Panther
hunted, to Agenor, 21. 978. A Hound pursuing a Fawn, to Achilles pursuing
Hector, 22. 243.

From LIONS. A Lion rowzing at his Prey, to Menelaus at sight of Paris, 3. 37.
A Lion falling on the Flocks, and wounded by a Shepherd, to Diomed wounded, 5.
174. A Lion among Heifers, to the same, 5. 206. Two young Lions killed by
Hunters, to two young Warriors, 5. 681. A Lion destroying the Sheep in their
Folds, to Ulysses slaughtering the Thracians asleep, 10. 564. The sour Retreat
of a Lion, to that of Ajax, 11. 675. Lion, or Boat hunted, to a Hero
distressed, 12. 47. A Lion rushing on the Flocks, to Sarpedon's March, 12. 357.
A Lion killing a Bull, to Hector killing Periphas, 15. 760. A Lion slain, after
he has made a great Slaughter, applied to Patroclus, 16. 909. Two Lions
fighting, to Hector and Patroclus, 16. 915. A Lion and Boar at a Spring, to the
same, 16. 993. A Lion putting a whole Village to Flight, to Menelaus, 17. 70.
Retreat of a Lion, to that of Menelaus, 17. 117. A Lioness defending her young,
to his Defense of Patroclus, 17. 145. Another Retreat of a Lion, to that of
Menelaus, 17. 741. The Rage and Grief of a Lion for his Young, to that of
Achilles for Patroclus, 18. 371. A Lion rushing on his Foe, to Achilles, 20.
200.

From BIRDS. A Flight of Cranes or Swans, to a numerous Army, 2. 540. The Noise
of Cranes, to the Shouts of an Army, 3. 5 -- An Eagle preserving and fighting
for her Young, to Achilles protecting the Grecians, 9. 424. A Falcon flying at
the Quarry, to Neptune's Flight, 13. 91. An Eagle stooping at a Swan, to
Hector's attacking a Ship, 15. 836. Two Vultures fighting, to Sarpedon and
Patroclus, 16. 522. A Vulture driving Geese, to Automedon scattering the
Trojans, 17. 527. An Eagle casting his Eyes on the Quarry, to Menelaus looking
through the Ranks for Antilochus, 17. 761. Cranes afraid of Falcons, to the
Greeks afraid of Hector and Aeneas, 17. 845. A Dove afraid of a Falcon, to
Diana afraid of Juno, 21. 576. A Falcon following a Dove, to Achilles pursuing
Hector, 22. 183. An Eagle at an Hare, to Achilles at Hector, 22. 391. The broad
Wings of an Eagle extended, to Palace-Gates set open, 24. 391.

From SERPENTS. A Traveller retreating from a Serpent, to Paris afraid of
Menelaus, 3. 47. A Snake rolled up in his Den, and collecting his Anger, to
Hector expecting Achilles, 22. 130.

From INSECTS. Bees swarming, to a numerous Army issuing out, 2. 111. Swarms of
Flies, to the same, 2. 552. Grasshoppers chirping in the Sun, to old Men
talking, 3. 201. Wasps defending their Nest, to the Multitude and Violence of
Soldiers defending a Battlement, 12. 190. Wasps provoked by Children flying at
the Traveller, to Troops violent in an Attack, 16. 314. A Hornet angry, to
Menelaus incensed, 17. 642. Locusts driven into a River, to the Trojans in
Scamander, 21. 14.

From FIRES. A Forest in Flames, to the Luster of Armor, 2. 534. The spreading
of a Conslagration, to the March of an Army, 2. 948. Trees sinking in a
Conslagration, to Squadrons falling in Battle, 11. 201. The Noise of Fire in a
Wood, to that of an Army in Confusion, 14. 461. A Conslagration, to Hector, 15.
728. The Rumbling and Rage of a Fire, to the Confusion and Roar of a routed
Army, 17. 825. Fires on the Hills, and Beacons to give Signals of Distress, to
the Blaze of Achilles's Helmet, 18. 245. A Fire running over Fields and Woods,
to the Progress and Devastations made by Achilles, 20, 569. Fire boiling the
Waters, to Vulcan operating on Scamander, 21. 425. A Fire raging in a Town, to
Achilles in the Battle, 21. 608. A Town on fire, 22. 518.

From ARTS. The staining of Ivory, to the Blood running down the Thigh of
Menelaus, 4. 170. An Architect observing the Rule and Line, to Leaders
preserving the Line of Battle, 4. 474. An Artist managing four Horses, and
leaping from one to another, compared to Ajax striding from Ship to Ship, 15.
822. A Builder cementing a Wall, to a Leader embodying his Men, 16. 256.
Curriers straining a Hide, to Soldiers tugging for a dead Body, 17. 450.
Bringing a Current to water a Garden, to the pursuit of Scamander after
Achilles, 21. 290. The placing of Rafters in a Building, to the Posture of two
Wrestlers, 23. 825. The Motions of a Spinster, the Spindle and Thread, to the
Swiftness of a Racer, 23. 889. The sinking of a Plummet, to the Passage of Iris
through the Sea, 24. 107.

From TREES. The Fall of a Poplar, to that of Simoisius, 4. 552. Of a beautiful
Olive, to that of Euphorbus, 17. 57. Two tall Oaks on the Mountains, to two
Heroes, 12. 145. The fall of an Ash, to that of Imbrius, 13. 241. Of a Pine or
Oak stretched on the Ground, to Asius dead, 13. 493. An Oak overturned by a
Thunderbolt, to Hector felled by a Stone, 14. 408. An Oak, Pine or Poplar
falling, to Sarpedon, 16. 591.

From the SEA. Rolling Billows, to an Army in Motion, 2. 175. The Murmurs of
Waves, to the Noise of a Multitude, 2. 249. Succession of Waves, to the moving
of Troops, 4. 478. A fresh Gale to weary Mariners, like the coming of Hector to
his Troops, 7. 5 -- The Seas settling themselves, to thick Troops composed in
Order and Silence, 7. 71. The Sea agitated by different Winds, to the Army in
Doubt and Confusion, 9. 5. The Waves rolling neither way, till one Wind sways
'em, to Nestor's Doubt and sudden Resolution, 14. 21. A Rock breaking the
Billows, to the Body of Greeks resisting the Trojans, 15, 746. The Sea roaring
at its Reception of a River into it, to the meeting of Armies at a Charge, 17.
310. A Beacon to Mariners at Sea, to the Light of Achilles's Shield, 19. 405. A
Dolphin pursuing the lesser Fish, to Achilles in Scamander, 21. 30.

From the SUN, MOON, STARS. The Moon and Stars in Glory, to the Brightness and
Number of the Trojan Fires, 8. 687. A Star sometimes showing and sometimes
hiding itself in Clouds, to Hector seen by Fits through the Battalions, 11. 83.
The Sun in Glory, to Achilles, 19. 436. The Evening Star, to the Point of his
Spear, 22. 399. The Dog Star rising, to Diomed's dreadful Appearance, 5. 8. --
to Achilles, 22. 37. The red Rays of the Dog Star, to Achilles's Helmet, 19.
412. The Morning Star, its Beauty, to young Astyanax, 6. 499.

From TORRENTS, STORMS, WINDS. Tortents rushing to the Valleys, to Armies
meeting in an Engagement, 4. 516. Torrents drowning the Field, to the Rage of a
Hero, 5. 116. A Torrent stopping a Shepherd, to Hector stopping Diomed, 5. 734.
The Violence of a Torrent, to Ajax, 11. 615. A Storm over whelming a Ship at
Sea, to the Trojans mounting a Breach, 15. 440. An Autumnal Storm and a Deluge,
to the ruin of a routed Army, 16. 467. A Storm roaring in a Wood, to Armies
shouting, 16. 923. The Wind tossing the Clouds, to Hector driving the Greeks,
11. 396. Different Winds driving the Dust, to different Passions urging the
Combatants, 13. 425. A Whirlwind on the Waters, to a Hurry of an Army in
Motion, 13. 1000. Winds roaring through Woods, or on the Seas, to the noise of an
Army, 14. 457. A Tempest and Shipwreck, compared to the Rage of Hector and
Terrors of the Greeks, 15. 752. The Northwind drying a Garden, to Vulcan drying
the Field after an Inundation, 21. 403.

From heavenly Appearances, THUNDER and LIGHTNING, COMETS, CLOUDS, etc. A
Mountain shaken by Thunder, to the trampling of an Army, 2. 950. The Blaze of a
Comet, to the Descent of Pallas, 4. 101. The darkness of Troops, to the
gathering of Clouds, 4. 314. The regular appearance of Clouds on the Mountain
Tops, to a Line of Battle, 5. 641. Pestilential Vapors ascending, to Mars
flying to Heaven, 5. 1058. The quick Flashes of Lightning, to the thick Sighs
of Agamemnon, 10. 5. Thick Flakes of Snow, to Showers of Arrows, 12. 175. Snow
covering the Earth, to Heaps of Stones hiding the Fields, 12. 331. The Blaze of
Lightning, to the Arms of Idomeneus, 13. 318. Clouds dispersed and the Prospect
appearing, to the Smokes being cleared from the Ships, and the Navy appearing,
16. 354. A Cloud shading the Fields as it rises, to the Rout of Trojans flying
over the Plain, 16. 434. The Figure of a Rainbow, to the Appearance of Pallas,
17. 616. The luster of Snow, to that of Armor, 19. 380.

From RURAL AFFAIRS. Waving of Corn in the Field, to the Motion of Plumes and
Spears, 2. 179. A Shepherd gathering his Flocks, to a general ranging his Army,
2. 562. A thick Mist on the Mountains, to the Dust raised by an Army, 3. 15.
The bleating of Flocks, to the Noise of Men, 4. 492. Chaff flying from the
Barn-Floor, to the Dust, 5. 611. Corn falling in Ranks, to Men slain in Battle,
10. 90. The Joy of a Shepherd seeing his Flock, to the Joy of a General
surveying his Army, 13. 620. The Corn bounding from the Threshing-Floor, to an
Arrow bounding from Armor, 13. 739. Two Bulls plowing, to two Heroes laboring
in a Battle Side by Side, 13. 879. Felling of Timber, to the Fall of Heroes in
Battle, 16. 767. Oxen trampling out the Corn, to Horses trampling on the Slain,
20. 580. The Morning Dew reviv^ing the Corn, to the exaltation of Joy in a
Man's Mind, 23. 678.

From LOW LIFE. A Mother defending her Child from a Wasp, to Minerva's
sheltering Menelaus from an Arrow, 4. 162. A Heyfer standing over her Young
one, to Menelaus guarding the Body of Patroclus, 17. 5. Two Countrymen
disputing about the Limits of their Land, to two Armies disputing a Post, 12.
511. A poor Woman weighing Wool, the Scales hanging uncertain, to the doubtful
Fates of two Armies, 12. 521. Boys building and destroying Houses of Sand, to
Apollo's overturning the Grecian Wall, 15. 416. A Child weeping to his Mother,
to Patroclus's Supplications to Achilles, 16. 11.

SIMILES exalting the Characters of Men by comparing them to GODS. Agamemnon
compared to Jupiter, Mars, and Neptune, 2. 564. Ajax to Mars, 7. 252. Meriones,
to Mars rushing to the Battle, 13. 384. Hector, to Mars destroying Armies, 15.
726.

SIMILES disadvantagious to the CHARACTERS. Paris running from Menelaus, to a
Traveller frighted by a Snake, 3. 47. A grawdy, foppish Soldier, to a Woman
dressed out, 2. 1063. Teucer skulking behind Ajax's Shield, to a Child, 8. 325.
Thestor pulled from his Chariot, to a Fish drawn by an Angler, 16. 495. Ajax to
an Ass, patient and stubborn, 11. 683. Patroclus weeping, to an Infant, 16. 11.
Cebriones tumbling, to a Diver, 16. 904.

MISCELLANEOUS SIMILES. Soft piercing Words, to Snow, 3. 285. The closing of a
Wound, to Milk turning to Curd, 5. 1114. The Fall of a Hero, to a Tower, 4.
528. Indefatigable Courage, to an Axe, 3. 90. Agamemnon weeping, to a Fountain,
9. 19. Juno flying, to the Mind passing over distant Places, 15. 86. Dancers,
to a Wheel turning round, 18. 695. A Warrior breaking the Squadrons, to a Mound
dividing the Course of a River, 17. 839. Men seeming to run in a Dream, to the
Course of Hector and Achilles, 22. 257. A Father mourning at the Funeral of his
Son, to Achilles for Patroclus, 23. 272. A Fragment of a Rock falling, to the
furious Descent of Hector, 13. 191. A Poppy bending the Head, to Gorgythion
dying, 8. 371. The swift Motion of the Gods, to the Eye passing over a
Prospect, 5. 960. The Smoothness of their Motion, to the Flight of Doves, 5.
971.


VERSIFICATION.
Expressing in the Sound the Thing described.

Made abrupt (and without Conjunctions) in expressing Haste, 7. 282. 15. 402 --
Short, in earnest and vehement Entreaties, 21. 420. -- 23. 506. Full of Breaks,
where Disappointment is imag'd. 18. 101, 144. -- 22. 378. -- where Rage and
Fury is expressed, 18. 137. -- where Grief is scarce able to go on, 18. 101.
22. 616, 650. Broken and disordered in describing a stormy Sea, 13. 1005.
Straining, imag'd in the Sound, 15. 544. Trembling, imag'd in the Sound, 10.
446. Panting, 13. 721. Relaxation of all the Limbs in Death, 7. 18, 22. A
confused Noise, 12, 410. A hard-fought Spot of Ground, 12. 513, etc. Tumbling
of a Wall, 7. 552. Bounding of a Stone from a Rock, 13. 198. A sudden Stop, 13.
199. Stiffness and Slowness of old Age, 13. 649, 653. -- 23. 423. A sudden
Fall, 23. 146. The rustling and crashing of Trees falling, 23. 147. The
rattling and jumping of Carts over rough and rocky Way, 23. 139, 140. A sudden
Shock of Chariots stopped, 16. 445. Leaping over a Ditch, 16. 460. The
quivering of Feathers in the Sun, 19. 415. Supplanted by a Stream, 21. 268,
269. The flashing of Waters, 21. 273. Bounding and heaving on the Waters, 21.
350. Out of Breath. 21. 419, etc. Voice of different Animals expiring, 23. 41,
42, etc.
INDEX OF ARTS and SCIENCES.
The first Number marks the Book, the second the Verse.

ART MILITARY. PRaise of Art Military, 4. 631. Ambush esteemed a venturous
manner of fighting, l. 1.. 299. l. 13.. 355. Ambuscade described, 18. 605.
Attack, 12. 95. etc. ibid. 171. etc. ibid. 305. etc. Arming, the Policy of
giving the best Arms to the strongest, 14. 438. Besieging, 11. 61 -- 12. 170.
303. 534 -- 8. 262. -- 22. 5. Single Combat, 3. 123, etc. -- 7. 80, etc.
Courts of Justice in the Camp, 11. 938. Counoils of War, 7. 415 -- 8. 610 -- 9.
130, etc. 10. 146 -- 232 -- 357 -- 18. 290, -- Military Exercise, 7. 289, etc.
Encamping. The manner of Encampment of the Trojans, 10. 496. Of the Thracians,
in three Lines, their Weapons on the Ground before them, the Chariots as a
Fence, outward, 10. 544. Fortification. Walls with Battlements, in a Line,
Towers upon those Walls, Gates at proper Distances, and Trenches, enclosed with
Palisades, 7. 406, and 523. The strong Gates to a Fortification, how composed,
12. 545. Marshalling of Armies, 2. 667, etc. Cantoning the Troops of each
Nation under their own Leaders, 2. 433. Embodying in an Orb, 4. 312. Disposing
in order of Battle, 4. 342, etc. Lines of Battle in exact order, 5. 641, etc.
Where to place the worst Soldiers, 4. 344. Another Order of Battle, 11. 62. --
In an Orb, 17. 411. Close Fight, 15. 860. -- In the Phalanx, 13. 177, etc. 15.
744. In the Testudo, 22. 6. Armies drawn up in two Wings, will a Center, 13.
396. The Strength of the Army placed in the Center, 13. 401. Marching an Army
in Silence and Discipline, l. 3.. 11 -- l. 4. 487. Method of passing a Trench
and Palisades, 12. 65, etc. Plunder and Pillage forbidden till the Conquest is
complete, 6. 85. Retreat. The manner of Retreat prescribed, 5. 746. That of
Ajax, 11. 675 -- 17. 837. Soldiers taught to row in the Galleys, serving both
as Soldiers and Sailors, 2. 876. Scouts, 10. 43 -- 245. and at large in the
Story of Diomed, Ulysses and Dolon, in that Book. Spies, 18. 605. Watch-towers,
to observe the Motions of the Foe, 2. 261 -- 22. 192. Watch, at set Stations,
7. 455 -- Nightly Watch by Fires, 8. 632. at the Fortifications in regular
Bodies under distinct Captains, 9. 110, etc. Management of the Army by Night
under Fears of Surprise, 10. 63, to 226. The manner of the Warriors sleeping,
10. 170. The posture of the Guards, 10. 210. Better to trust the Guard to
native Troops than to Foreigners, 10. 490, etc.
AGRICULTURE and RURAL ARTS. Tillage. The manner of plowing, 10. 420. 18. 627.
Plowing with Oxen, 13. 880. with Mules, 10. 420. Usual to plow the Field three
times over, 18. 628. Reaping, 11. 89 -- 18. 637. Treading out the Corn by Oxen
instead of Threshing, 20. 580. Fanning the Chaff, 5. 611. 13. 740. Pasturage,
18. 667. Meadow Grounds with running Water, ibid. Vintage, 18. 651. Bringing
Currents to water Gardens, 21. 290. Fishing, by Angling, 24. 107. -- By Diving,
16. 905, Hunting, the Boar, 17. 814 -- 11. 526. Lion, 11. 378. -- 17. 743. The
Deer, 11. 595 -- 15. 697. The Panther, 21. 680. The Hare, 10. 427. Shooting
flying, 23. 1030.
ARCHITECTURE. Architecture, the Gift of Minerva, 5. 80. Architecture of a
Palace upon Arches, with Apartments round a Court, built entirely of Marble, 6.
304. -- Paris skilful in Architecture, brings together Architects to erect his
Palace, 6. 391. Rafters, how placed, 23. 827 -- Building Walls, 16. 256. The
Rule and Line, 15. 477. Architecture of a Tent, with a Suite of Apartments
within one another, 24. 555, etc.
ASTRONOMY. In General, 18. 560, Orion and the Bear, 18, 563. The Rising of the
Dog Star, 5. 10. A Comet described, 4. 101 -- The Rainbow, 11. 36. Power of the
Stars in Nativities, 22. 610.
DIVINATION. Divination by Angury, 2. 375, etc. 8. 297 -- 10. 320 -- 12. 230 --
13. 1039 -- 24. 361, etc. Hector's Opinion of Augury, 12. 277. By Omens,
Thunder and Lightnings, 7. 571 -- 9. 310 -- 11. 58. -- 13. 319. The Rainbow,
11. 38 -- 17. 616. Comets, 4. 101 -- Showers of Blood, 11. 70 -- 16. 560. By
Lots, 7. 215. By Dreams, 1. 81 -- 5. 191. By Oracles, 16. 54 -- 16. 290. that
of Dodona, and the manner of it, etc.
GYMNASTICKS. Dancing, 16. 217. The different kinds for Men and Women, 18. 687
-- The Circular, 18. 573 -- Mixed, 18. 690 -- Dancing practiced by Warriors,
16. 746. -- With Swords, 18. 688 -- Diving, 16. 905. 495. Tumblers, 18, 698 --
Horsemanship.] Manage of the Horse, 5. 280. Precepts of Horsemanship and the
Art of Racing, 23. 391, etc. Four Horses rid by one Man at once, 15. 822. Three
thousand breeding Mares at once in the Stables of Ericthonius, 20. 262. The
Cestus, 23. 753, etc. The Quoit, or Discus, 23. 972, etc. Wrestling, 23. 820,
etc. Racing, 23. 880, etc.
GEOGRAPHY. A TABLE of those Places, whose Situation, Products, People, or
History, etc. are particularized by Homer. Aetolia, and its Royal Family, 2.
780. Arcadia, and the Genius of the Inhabitants, 2. 735. Aulis, its rocky
Situation, 2. 590. Imbrus and Tenedos, Islands near Troy, 13. 50 -- Istiaea,
famous for Vineyards, 2. 645. Ithaca, and the neighboring Islands in Prospect,
2. 769, etc. Lanissa, its Fertility, 2. 1019. Lectos, situate on the Top of
Mount Ida, 14. 320. Lemnos, traded in Wines, 7. 559. Maeander, the River, 2.
1056. Maeonia, under the Mountains of Tmolus, 2. 1052. Mess, a Town of Sparta;
abounding in Doves, 2. 705. Mycalessus, its Plain famous for Pine-Trees, 2.
593. Anthedon, the last Town in Boeotia, 2. 607. Arene, its Plain, watered by
the River Minyas, 11. 860. Arisba, on the River Selleis, 2. 1014. Arne,
celebrated for Vines, 2. 606. Aesepus, a Trojan River of black Water, 2. 1000.
Argos, its Seacoast described with the Products of that part of the Country,
9. 198, etc. Athens, and some Customs of the Athenians, with mention of the
Temple of Minerva, 2. 657. 663. Alybe, famous anciently for Silver Mines, 2.
1045. Axius, the River, described, 2. 1030. Boagrius, the River, and places
adjacent, 2. 638. Boebe, the Lake and Parts adjacent, 2. 865. Calydon, its
rocky Situation, 2. 777 -- 9. 653. Cephissus, the River and Places upon its
Banks, 2. 622. Cerinthus, situate on the Seashore, 2. 648. Cyllene, the
Arcadian Mountain, with the Tomb of Aepytus, 2. 731. Crete, its hundred Cities,
2. 790. Carians, a barbarous mixed People, 2. 1059. Dodona, its Site, Temple,
Grove, etc. 16. 287. 2. 909. Dorion, the Place of Thamyris's Death, the
celebrated Musician, 2. 721. Elis, its exact Boundaries, 2. 747. and the
Islands opposite to that Continent, 760. to 774. Ephyre, the ancient Name of
Corinth, 6. 193. Epidaurus, planted with Vineyards, 2. 679. Eteon, its Hills,
2. 591. Haliartus, Pasture Grounds, 2. 598. Hellespont, 2. 1024, etc. Helos, a
Maritime Town, 2. 708. Henetia, famous for its Breed of Mules, 2. 1035. Hermion
and Asine, seated on the Bay, 2. 680. Hippemolgians, their long Life and
Nutriment, 13. 12. Hippoplacian Woods, 6. 539 -- 22. 611 -- Hylas, watery
Situation and the Genius of the Inhabitants, 5. 872. Hyperia, its Fountains, 2.
895. Mount Ida, its Fountains and Forests, 14. 321. Catalogue of the Rivers
that run from Mount Ida, 12. 17. Jardanus and Celadon, two Rivers, 7. 163.
Mycenae, and its maritime Towns, 2. 686. Onchestus, the Grove of Neptune, 2.
600. Orchomenos, one of the principal Cities for Wealth in Homer's Time, 9.
498. Parthenius, the River, and Places adjacent, 2. 1038. Pedasus, seated on
the River Satnio, 6. 41. Peneus, the River running through Tempe, and Mount
Pelion, described, 2. 918. Phthia, its Situation, 1. 204. Famous for Horses,
203. Phylace and Pyrrhasus, a beautiful Country with Groves and flowery
Meadows, described, 2. 850. Rhodes, its Wealth, its Plantation by Tlepolemus,
and Division into three Dynasties, 2. 808, etc. Samothracia, the View from its
Mountains, 13. 19. Scamander, its two Springs, 22. Its Confluence with Simois,
5. 965. Scyros, the Island, 19. 353. Sidon, famous for Works of Sculpture, 23.
866. and Embroidery, 6. 360. Sipylus, its Mountains, Rocks, and Deserts, 24.
775. Sperchius, a River of Thessaly, 23. 176. Styx, the River described, 2.
915. Thebae, in Egypt, anciently the richest City in the World with a hundred
Gates, described, 9. 506. Thessaly, its ancient Division, and Inhabitants, 2.
833. Thisbe, famous for Doves, 2. 601. Thrace, its Hills and Promontories, 14.
260. etc. Titaresius, the River, 2. 910. Troy, its Situation and remarkable
Places about it, 2. 982 -- 11. 217. Typhoeus, the burning Mountain, 2. 953.
Xanthus, the River of Troy described, its Banks and Plants produced there, 21.
507, etc. Xanthus, the River of Lycia, 2.. ult. Zelia, situate at the foot of
Mount Ida, 2. 998.
HISTORY. History preserved by Homer.] Of the Heroes before the Siege of Troy,
Centaurs, etc. 1. 347. to 358. Of Tlepolemus planting a Colony in Rhodes, 2.
808. Of the Expulsion of the Centaurs from Greece, 2. 902. Of the Wars of the
Phrygians and Amazous, 3. 245. Of the War with Thebes, and Embassy of Tydeus,
4. 430. Of Bellerophon, 6. 194. Of Eruthalion and Lycurgus, 7. 164. Of the
Curetes and Aetolians, 9. 653. Of the Wars of the Pylians and Aetolians, 11.
818. Of the Race of Troy, 20. 255. etc. To this Head may be referred the
numerous Genealogies in our Author.
MUSIC. Music practiced by Princes, the Use of the Harp, in Achilles, 9. 247.
in Paris, 3. 80. The Use of the Pipe, 10. 15 -- 18. 609. Vocal Music
accompanying the Instruments, 1. 775. Chorus's at Intervals, 24. 902. Music
used in the Army, 10. 15. -- at Funerals, 24. 900. -- in the Vintage, 18. 661.
Trumpets in War, 18. 260.
MECHANICS. Archery, Making a Bow, and all its Parts described, 4. 136, etc.
Chariot-making, A Chariot described in all its Parts, 5. 889, etc. 24. 335.
Poplar proper for Wheels, 4. 554. Sycamore fit for Wheels, 21. 44. Clockwork,
18. 441. Enamelling, 18. 635. Ship -- building, 5. 80. -- 15. 475. Pine, a
proper Wood for the Mast of a Ship, 16. 592. Smithery, Iron-work, etc. The
Forge described, 18. 435, 540. Bellows, 435, 482, 540. Hammer, Tongs, Anvil,
547. Mixing of Metals, ibid. Spinning, 23. 890. Weaving, 3. 580. 6. 580.
Embroidery, 6. 361. -- Armoury, and Instruments of War.] A complete Suit, that
of Paris, 3. 410, etc. of Agamemnon, 11. 22, -- etc. Scale-Armour, 15, 629 --
Helmets, with four Plumes, 5. 919 -- -- without any Crests, 10. 303 -- -- lined
with Wool, and ornamented with Boars Teeth, of a particular make, 10. 311. --
lined with Furr, 10. 397 -- Bows, how made, 4. 137 -- Battel-Ax, described, 13.
766. Belts, crossing each other, to hang the Sword and the Shield, 14. 468.
Corselets, ornamented with Sculpture, 11. 33. -- how lined, 4. 165 -- Mace, or
Club, 7. 170 -- 15. 816. Shields, so large as to cover from the Neck to the
Ankles, 6. 145 -- How made and covered, 7. 267. described in every particular,
11. 43, etc. Slings, 13. 899. Spears, with Brass Points, 8. 617. Ash fit to
make them, 16. 143 -- 19. 422. How the Wood was joined to the Point, 18. 618.
Swords, how ornamented, with Ivory, Gems, 19, 400.
ORATORY. See the Article Speeches in the Poetical Index.
POLICY. Kings.] Derive their Honor from God, 2. 233. -- 1. 315. Their Names
to be honored, 2. 313. One sole Monarch, 2. 243. Hereditary Right of Kings
represented by the Scepter of Agamemnon given by Jove, 2. 129. Kings not to be
disobeyed on the one hand, nor to stretch too far their Prerogative on the
other, 1. 365. etc. Kings not absolute in Council, 9. 133. Kings made so, only
for their excelling others in Virtue and Valor, 12. 377. Vigilance continually
necessary in Princes, 2. 27 -- 10. 102. Against Monarchs delighting in War, 9.
82, etc. -- 24. 55. The true Valor, that which preserves, not destroys
Mankind, 6. 196. Kings may do wrong, and are obliged to Reparation, 9. 144.
Character of a great Prince in War and Peace, 3. 236. Councils.] The Danger of
a Subject's too bold Advice, 1. 103. The Advantage of wise Counsels seconded by
a wise Prince, 9. 101. The Use of Advice, 9. 137. The singular Blessing to a
Nation and Prince, in a good and wise Counselor, 13. 918. The Deliberations of
the Council to be free, the Prince only to give a Sanction to the best, 9. 133.
Laws] derived from God, and Legislators his Delegates, 1. 315. Committed to the
Care of Kings, as Guardians of the Laws of God, 9. 129. Tribute paid to Princes
from Towns, 9. 206. Taxes upon Subjects to assist foreign Allies, 17. 266.
Ambassadors, a sacred Character, 1. 435 -- 9. 261. Volunteers, listed into
Service, 11. 904. See the Article Art Military.
PHYSIC. The Praise of a Physician, 11. 637. Chiron learned it from
Aesculapius, 4. 251. Machaon and Podalirius Professors of it, 2. 890. Botany.]
Professed by skilful Women, Agamede famous for it, 11. 877. Anatomy.] Of the
Head, 16. 415, etc. The Eye, 14. 577. Under the Ear, a Wound there mortal, 13.
841. The Juncture of the Head, and its Nerves, 14. 544. The Juncture of the
Neck and Chest, the Collar-Bone and its Insertion, the disjointing of which
renders the Arm useless, 8. 393, etc. The Spinal Marrow expressed by the Vein
that runs along the Chine, a wound there mortal, 13. 692 -- 20. 559 -- The
Elbow, its Tendons and Ligaments, 20. 554. Blood, a great Effusion of it, by
cutting off the Arm, the cause of immediate Death, 5. 105 -- The Heart and its
Fibers, 16, 590. The force of the Muscle of the Heart, 13. 554. A Wound in the
Bladder by piercing the Ischiatic Joint, mortal, 13. 813. The Insertion of the
Thigh Bone, and its Ligaments described, 5. 375. The Wounds of the Abdomen
mortal, and excessively painful, 13. 718. The Tendons of the Ankle, 4. 597.
Surgery.] Extraction of Darts, 4. 228. Sucking the Blood from the Wound, 4.
250. Infusion of Balms into Wounds, 4. 250. 5. 1111. Washing the Wound with
warm Water, and the Use of Lenitives, 11. 965. Stanching the Blood by the
Bitter Root, 11. 983. Ligatures of Wool, 13, 752. Use of Baths for wounded Men,
14. 10. Sprinkling Water to recover from Fainting, 14. 509. Pharmacy and
Diaeteticks. The Use of Wine forbidden, 6. 330. Cordial Potion of Nestor, 11.
782, etc. Infection, seizing first on Animals, then Men, 1. 70. Nine Days the
Crisis of Diseases, 1. 71. Fevers and Plagues from the Dog Star, 5. 1058 -- 19.
412 -- 22. 41.
PAINTING, SCULPTURE, etc. See the whole Shield of Achilles, and the Notes, on
Lib. 18. The CHARACTERS. Homer distinguishes the Character in the Figures of
Gods superior to those of Men, 18. 602. Characters of Majesty.] The Majesty of
Jupiter, from whence Phidias copied his Statue, 1. 683. Of Mars and Neptune, 2.
569. The Majesty of a Prince, in the Figure of Agamemnon, 2. 564, etc. Of a
wise Man, in Ulysses's Aspect, 3. 280. Of an old Man, in Nestor and Priam, 1.
330 -- 24. 600. Of a young Hero, in Achilles, 19. 390, etc. All variously
characterized by Homer. Characters of Beauty] Alluring Beauty in the Goddess
Venus, 14. 250. Majestic Beauty in Juno, 14. 216. Beauty of a Woman in Helen,
3. 205. Beauty of a young Man, in Paris, 3. 26. Euphorbus 17. 53, etc. Beauty
of a fine Insant, in Astyanax, 6. 497. Beauties of the Parts of the Body.]
Largeness and Majesty of the Eyes, in Juno's. Blackness, in those of Chryseis.
Blue, in Minerva's, etc. Eyebrows, black, graceful, 1. 683. The Beauty of the
Cheeks, and the fairness of Hair, in the Epithets of Helen. Whiteness of the
Arms in those of Juno. Fingers rather red than pale, in the Epithet of
Rosie-finger'd to Aurora. Whiteness of the Feet in that of Silverfooted to
Thetis, etc. Color of the Skin to be painted differently according to the
Condition of the Personages, applied to the whiteness of the Thigh of Menelaus,
4. 175. Character of Deformity, the Opposites to Beauty in the several parts,
considered in the Figure of Thersites, 2. 263, etc. For Pictures of particular
things, see the Article Images in the Poetical INDEX. History,
Landscape-Painting, Animals, etc. In the Buckler of Achilles, 18. at large. The
design of a Goblet in Sculpture, 11. 775. Sculpture of a Corslet, 11. 33, etc.
Of a Bowl, 23. Horses carved on Monuments, 17. 495. Enameling, and In-laying,
in the Buckler of Achilles, 18. 635. 655. and Breast Plate of Agamemnon, 11.
35. Tapestry, or weaving Histories, Flowers, etc. 3. 171. -- 6. 580. -- 22. 569
-- Embroidery of Garments, 6. 360.
POETRY. See the entire Index.
THEOLOGY. A view of Homer 's THEOLOGY. JUPITER, or the SUPREME BEING. Superior
to all Powers of Heaven, 7. 244. 8. 10. etc. Enjoying himself in the
Contemplation of his Glory and Power, 11. 107. Self-sufficient, and above all
second Causes, or inferior Deities, 1. 647. The other Deities resort to him as
their Sovereign Appeal, 5. 1065 -- 21. 590. His Will his Fate, 8. 10. His sole
Will the Cause of all humane Events, 1. 8. His Will takes certain and instant
Effect, 1. 685. His Will immutable and always just, 1. 730. All-seeing, 8. 65
-- 2. 4 -- Supreme above all, and sole Sufficient, 11. 107 The sole Governor
and Fate of all Things, 2. 147 -- 16. 845. Disposer of all the Glories and
Success of Men, 17. 198. Foreseeing all Things, 71. 228. The Giver of Victory.
7. 118. Disposer of all human Affairs, 9. 32. His least Regard, or Thought
restores Mankind, 15. 274. or turns the Fate of Armies, 17. 675. Dispenser of
all the Good and Evil that befalls Mankind, 24. 663. His Favor superior to all
human Means, 9. 152. His Counsels unsearchable, 1. 705. Themis or Justice is
his Messenger, 20. 5. God prospers those who worship him, 1. 290. Constantly
punishes the wicked, though late, 4. 194. The Avenger of Injustice, 4. 202.
Nothing so terrible as his Wrath, 5. 227. His divine Justice sometimes punishes
whole Nations by general Calamities, 16. 468. Children punished for the Sins of
their Parents, 11. 166. and 16. 393.
The Inferior DEITIES. Have different Offices under God: Some preside over
Elements, 18. 46 -- 23. 240. Some over Cities and Countries, 4. 75 -- Some over
Woods, Springs, etc. 20. 12. They have a subordinate Power over one another.
Inferior Deities or Angels subject to Pain, Imprisonment, 5. 475. 1090.
Threatened by Jupiter to be cast into Tartarus, 8. 15. Are supposed to converse
in a Language different from that of Mortals, 2. 985 -- Subsist not by material
Food, 5. 4 Compassionate Mankind, 8. 42 -- 24. 412. Able to assist Mortals at
any distance, 16. 633. Regard and take care of those who serve them, even to
their Remains after Death, 24. 520. No resisting heavenly Powers. 5. 495. The
meanness and vileness of all earthly Creatures in comparison of the divine
Natures, 5. 535. Prayer recommended on all Enterprises, throughout the Poem.
Prayers intercede at the Throne of Heaven, 9. 624. Opinions of the Ancients
concerning Hell, the Place of Punishment for the wicked after Death, 8. 15 --
19. 271 -- Opinions of the Ancients concerning the State of separate Spirits,
23. 89, etc. 120, etc.


ERRATA.
PREFACE.] Page 4. line 18. for supply this Characters, read supply his
Characters. Page 8. line 25. for self-considering Valor, read self confiding.
Page 22. line 5. for praise the Superstructure, read raise the Superstructure.
Page 24. line 10. for with read with. Page 18. line 11. after Myrtles
distilling Blood, add, the latter, etc. Essay.] Page 15. line 34. for brings
him, read brings it. Page 17. in the References at the bottom, for (...), read
(...). Page 36. in the Citation from Horace at the bottom, for Argue read
Arguet. Page 51. line 25. for Sheep reed Ewes. Note, Wherever there are
References in the Observations throughout the Book, to any particular Verses
cited from Homer, it is constantly to be understood of the number of that Verse
in the Original, and not in the English. Book 1.] Verse 262. add in the Margin
in reference to the Star, * Juno.. 517. for The undaunted, read The undaunted.
Observations on Book 1.] Obs. 35. line 10. instead of Centaurs fell out fifty
five or sixty Years, read fifty five or fifty six Years. And the third line
after, instead of It was then fifty five or sixty five, read It was then sixty
five or sixty six. This Error totally destroys the Sense. Book 2.] Verse 77.
for Ill suits a Chief, read Ill fits a Chief.. 666. for martial Armies, read
marshal Armies. Observations on Book 2.] Obs. 9. toward the end, for a thousand
funeral Piles, read a thousand Fires. Obs. 23. toward the end, for another
Criticism upon the 290th Verse of this Book, read another Criticism upon the
290th Verse of the Catalogue. Obs. 32. in the last lines, place the Stop thus;
the Description of her Preparation for Death, and her Behavior in it, can
never be enough admired. Book 3.] Verse 43. for high Chariot, read proud
Chariot.. 444. read the whole line thus; Eludes the Death and disappoints his
Foe.. the last but one of the Book, for just Applauses, read loud Applauses.
Observations on Book 3.] Obs. 6. line 21. for the Intemperance of Hector, read
the Temperance of Hector. Obs. 7. at the end, for Nireus's Prophecy, read
Nereus's Prophecy. Observations on Book 4.] Obs. 36. the last line but two, for
Conclusion, read Confusion. Book 5.] Verse 647. for kroken, read broken.. 930.
for to stand, read they stand. Observations on Book 5.] Obs. 10. within four
Lines of the end, for 333, read 343. Book 6.] Verse 451. read the Commas thus,
The Trojan Bands, by Hostile Fury pressed, Demand their Hector -- Observations on
Book 6.] Obs. 3. line ult. for human read humane. Obs. 17. line the last, for
this read his. Observations on Book 7.] Obs. 29. line ult. dele in. Book 8.]
Verse 264. for Bands, read Brands.. 480. for to stand, read they stand.. 688.
for sheds, read spreads. Observations on Book. 8.] Obs. 53. line 5. for
fair-hair'd, read fair-sphear'd. Observations on Book. 9.] Obs. 9. line 7. for
to be, read to me. Obs. 50. line 2. for Heliopolis, read Diospolis. Obs. 52.
line 1, for bled, read fled. Book 10.] Line 116. for agrees, read agree. Book
11.] Verse 702. for drinks the dry Dust, read prints the dry Dust. Observations
on Book 13.] Obs. 51, 52, 53. are referred to wrong Figures. Book 14.] Verse
304 and 312. for Pasithae, read Pasithea. Observations on Book 15.] Obs. 2.
line 19. for wise, read Wise. and two lines after, for Pontius, read Ponticus.
Obs. 6. toward the end, after mark by these Recapitulations, add, and
Anticipations, etc. Book 16.] Verse 199. for rolling, read lolling.. 1010. for
great Achilles, read fierce Achilles. Observations on Book 16.] Obs. 40. line
4. for mortal, read immortal. Observations on Book 17.] Obs. 7. line 6. for at
his own Epicedion, read as his own, etc. Book 18.] Verse 353. for Welkin, read
Orient.. 415. for Milk-white Linen, read Mantle. Observations on Book 18.] Obs.
6. last line but three, for their own Nature, read its own Nature. Obs. 19.
last line but two, for show him, read show himself. Book 19.] Verse 372. for
Harpye sings, read Springs. Book 20.] Verse 1. read breathing War and Blood.
Observations on Book 20.] Obs. 21. at the end of it, add the Name of Dacier,
the latter part of that Note being hers. Book 21.] Verse 3. for flying Train,
read scattering Train. Book 22.] Verse 407. read One place at length.
Observations on Book 22.] at the end of Note 14. add Dacier. And in Note the
last, after the Words Occasions of Mourning, place also the Name of Dacier.
Book 23.] Verse 508. for mull, read must.. 598. dele or. Observations on Book
24.] Note 3. line 15. for that, read thought.
In the Poetical INDEX. Fable.] Under the Article Allegorical Fables, for
Prayers following Justice, read following Injustice. Characters of the Heroes.]
Of Achilles, Revengeful and implacable, add Book 18.. 120, 125 S -- In the same
Article, constant and violent in Friendship, for 20-8, read 208.



