THE ILIAD OF HOMER.

Translated by Mr. POPE.

VOL. IV.

Men' moveat cimex Pantilius? Aut crucier, quod
Vellicat absentem Demetrius? Aut quod ineptus
Fannius Hermogenis laedat conviva Tigelli?
Plotius, and Varius, Maecenas, Virgiliusque,
Valgius, and probet haec Octavius optimus. --
HOR. LONDON: Printed by W. Bowyer, for BERNARD LINTOT between the
Temple-Gates. 1718.

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The fourth Battle continued, in which Neptune assists the Greeks: The Acts of
Idomeneus.
NEptune, concerned for the Loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the Fortification
forced by Hector, (who had entered the Gate near the Station of the Ajaxes)
assumes the Shape of Calchas, and inspires those Heroes to oppose him: Then in
the Form of one of the Generals, encourages the other Greeks who had retired to
their Vessels. The Ajaxes form their Troops in a close Phalanx, and put a stop
to Hector and the Trojans. Several Deeds of Valor are performed; Meriones
losing his Spear in the Encounter, repairs to seek another at the Tent of
Idomeneus. This occasions a Conversation between those two Warriors, who return
together to the Battle. Idomeneus signalizes his Courage above the rest; he
kills Othryoneus, Asius, and Alcathous. Deiphobus and Aeneas march against him,
and at length Idomeneus retires. Menelaus wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander.
The Trojans are repulsed in the Left Wing; Hector still keeps his Ground
against the Ajaxes, till being gaul'd by the Locrian Slingers and Archers,
Polydamas advises to call a Council of War: Hector approves his Advice, but
goes first to rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax
again, and renews the Attack.

The eight and twentieth Day still continues. The Scene is etween the Grecian
Wall and the Seashore.

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
WHEN now the Thund'rer, on the Seabeat Coast,
Had fixed great Hector and his conquering Host;
He left them to the Fates, in bloody Fray,
To toil and struggle through the well-fought Day.
Then turned to Thracia from the Field of Fight
Those Eyes, that shed insufferable Light,
To where the Mysians prove their martial Force,
And hardy Thracians tame the savage Horse;
And where the far-fam'd Hippemolgian strays,
Renowned for Justice and for length of Days,
Thrice happy Race! that, innocent of Blood,
From Milk, innoxious, seek their simple Food:
Jove sees delighted, and avoids the Scene
Of guilty Troy, of Arms, and dying Men:
No Aid, he deems, to either Host is given,
While his high Law suspends the Powers of Heaven.
Meantime the Neptune.
Monarch of the watery Main
Observed the Thund'rer, nor observed in vain.
In Samothracia, on a Mountain's Brow,
Whose waving Woods o'erhung the Deeps below,
He sat; and round him cast his azure Eyes,
Where Ida's misty Tops confusedly rise;
Below, fair Ilion's glittering Spires were seen,
The crowded Ships, and sable Seas between.
There, from the crystal Chambers of the Main
Emerg'd, he sat; and mourned his Argives slain.
At Jove incensed, with Grief and Fury stung,
Prone down the rocky Steep, he rushed along;
Fierce as he past, the lofty Mountains nod,
The Forests shake! Earth trembled as he trod,
And felt the Footsteps of the immortal God.
From Realm to Realm three ample Strides he took,
And, at the fourth, the distant Aegae shook.
Far in the Bay his shining Palace stands,
Eternal Frame! not raised by mortal Hands:
This having reached, his brass-hoof'd Steeds he reins,
Fleet as the Winds, and decked with golden Manes.
Refulgent Arms his mighty Limbs infold,
Immortal Arms, of Adamant and Gold.
He mounts the Car, the golden Scourge applies;
He sits superior, and the Chariot flies.
His whirling Wheels the glassy Surface sweep;
The enormous Monsters, rolling over the Deep,
Gambol around him, on the watery way;
And heavy Whales in awkward Measures play:
The Sea subsiding spreads a level Plain,
Exults, and owns the Monarch of the Main;
The parting Waves before his Coursers fly;
The wondering Waters leave his Axle dry.
Deep in the liquid Regions lies a Cave,
Between where Tenedos the Surges lave,
And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling Wave:
There the great Ruler of the azure Round
Stopped his swift Chariot, and his Steeds unbound,
Fed with ambrosial Herbage from his Hand,
And linked their Fetlocks with a golden Band,
Infrangible, immortal: There they stay:
The Father of the Floods pursues his way;
Where, like a Tempest, dark'ning Heaven around,
Or fiery Deluge that devours the Ground,
The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy Throng,
Embattel'd rolled, as Hector rushed along.
To the loud Tumult, and the barbarous Cry,
The Heavens re-echo, and the Shores reply;
They vow Destruction to the Grecian Name,
And, in their Hopes, the Fleets already flame.
But Neptune, rising from the Seas profound,
The God whose Earthquakes rock the solid Ground,
Now wears a mortal Form; like Calchas seen,
Such his loud Voice, and such his manly Mien;
His Shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
But most the Ajaces, adding Fire to Fire.
It Is yours, O Warriors, all our Hopes to raise;
Oh recollect your ancient Worth and Praise!
It Is yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
On other Works though Troy with Fury fall,
And pour her Armies over our battered Wall;
There, Greece has strength: but this, this Part overthrown,
Her Strength were vain; I dread for you alone.
Here Hector rages like the Force of Fire,
Vaunts of his Gods, and calls high Jove his Sire.
If yet some heavenly Power your Breast excite,
Breathe in your Hearts, and string your Arms to Fight,
Greece yet may live, her threatened Fleet maintain,
And Hector's Force, and Jove's own Aid, be vain.
Then with his Scepter that the Deep controuls,
He touched the Chiefs, and steeled their manly Souls;
Strength, not their own, the Touch divine imparts,
Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
Then, as a Falcon from the rocky Height,
Her Quarry seen, impetuous at the Sight,
Forth-springing instant, darts her self from high,
Shoots on the Wing, and skims along the Sky:
Such, and so swift, the Power of Ocean flew;
The wide Horizon shut him from their View.
The inspiring God, Oileus' active Son
Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon.
Some God, my Friend, some God in human form
Favoring descends, and wills to stand the Storm.
Not Calchas this, the venerable Seer;
Short as he turned, I saw the Power appear:
I marked his parting, and the Steps he trod;
His own bright evidence reveals a God.
Even now some Energy divine I share,
And seem to walk on Wings, and tread in Air.
With equal Ardour ( Telamon returns)
My Soul is kindled, and my Bosom burns;
New rising Spirits all the Man alarm,
Lift each impatient Limb, and brace my Arm;
This ready Arm, unthinking, shakes the Dart;
The Blood pours back, and fortifies my Heart:
Singly methinks, yon' towering Chief I meet,
And stretch the dreadful Hector at my Feet.
Full of the God that urged their burning Breast
The Heroes thus their mutual Warmth expressed.
Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
Who breathless, pale, with length of Labors tired,
Pant in the Ships; while Troy to Conquest calls,
And swarms victorious over their yielding Walls:
Trembling before the impending Storm they lie,
While Tears of Rage stand burning in their Eye.
Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal Hour;
But breathe new Courage as they feel the Power:
Teucer and Leitus first his Words excite;
Then stern Peneleus rises to the Fight;
Thoas, Deipyrus, in Arms renowned,
And Merion next, the impulsive Fury found;
Last Nestor's Son the same bold Ardour takes,
While thus the God the martial Fire awakes.
Oh lasting Infamy, oh dire Disgrace
To Chiefs of vigorous Youth, and manly Race!
I trusted in the Gods and you, to see
Brave Greece victorious, and her Navy free:
Ah no -- the glorious Combat you disclaim,
And one black Day clouds all her former Fame.
Heavens! what a prodigy these Eyes survey,
Unseen, unthought, till this amazing Day!
Fly we at length from Troy's oft-conquer'd Bands,
And falls our Fleet by such inglorious Hands?
A Rout undisciplined, a straggling Train,
Not born to Glories of the dusty Plain;
Like frighted Fawns from Hill to Hill pursued,
A Prey to every Savage of the Wood;
Shall these, so late who trembled at your Name,
Invade your Camps, involve your Ships in Flame?
A Change so shameful, say what Cause has wrought?
The Soldiers Baseness, or the Gen'ral's Fault?
Fools! will ye perish for your Leader's Vice?
The Purchase Infamy, and Life the Price!
It Is not your Cause, Achilles' injured Fame:
Another's is the Crime, but yours the Shame.
Grant that our Chief offend through Rage or Lust,
Must you be Cowards, if your King's unjust?
Prevent this Evil, and your Country save:
Small Thought retrieves the Spirits of the Brave.
Think, and subdue! on Dastards dead to Fame
I waste no Anger, for they feel no Shame:
But you, the Pride, the Flower of all our Host,
My Heart weeps blood to see your Glory lost!
Nor deem this Day, this Battle, all you lose;
A Day more black, a Fate more vile, ensues.
Let each reflect, who prizes Fame or Breath,
On endless Infamy, on instant Death.
For lo! the fated Time, the appointed Shore;
Hark! the Gates burst, the brazen Barriers roar!
Impetuous Hector thunders at the Wall;
The Hour, the Spot, to conquer, or to fall.
These Words the Grecians fainting Hearts inspire,
And listening Armies catch the godlike Fire.
Fixed at his Post was each bold Ajax found,
With well-rang'd Squadrons strongly circled round:
So close their Order, so disposed their Fight,
As Pallas' self might view with fixed Delight;
Or had the God of War inclined his Eyes,
The God of War had owned a just Surprise.
A chosen Phalanx, firm, resolved as Fate,
Descending Hector and his Battle wait;
An Iron Scene gleams dreadful over the Fields,
Armor in Armor locked, and Shields in Shields,
Spears lean on Spears, on Targets Targets throng,
Helms stuck to Helms, and Man drove Man along.
The floating Plumes unnumber'd wave above,
As when an Earthquake stirs the nodding Grove;
And levelled at the Skies with pointing Rays,
Their brandished Lances at each Motion blaze.
Thus breathing Death, in terrible Array,
The close-compacted Legions urged their way:
Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
As from some Mountain's craggy Forehead torn,
A Rock's round Fragment flies, with Fury born,
(Which from the stubborn Stone a Torrent rends)
Precipitate the ponderous Mass descends:
From Steep to Steep the rolling Ruin bounds;
At every Shock the crackling Wood resounds;
Still gathering Force, it smoaks; and, urged amain,
Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the Plain
There stops -- So Hector: Their whole Force he proved:
Resistless when he raged, and when he stopped, unmoved.
On him the War is bent, the Darts are shed,
And all their Faulchions wave around his Head.
Repulsed he stands; nor from his Stand retires;
But with repeated Shouts his Army fires.
Trojans, be firm; this Arm shall make your way
Through yon' square Body, and that black Array:
Stand, and my Spear shall rout their scattering Power,
Strong as they seem, embattel'd like a Tower.
For He that Juno's heavenly Bosom warms,
The first of Gods, this Day inspires our Arms.
He said, and roused the Soul in every Breast;
Urged with Desire of Fame, beyond the rest,
Forth marched Deiphobus; but marching held
Before his wary Steps, his ample Shield.
Bold Merion aimed a Stroke (nor aimed it wide)
The glittering Javelin pierced the tough Bull-hide:
But pierced not through: Unfaithful to his Hand,
The Point broke short, and sparkled in the Sand.
The Trojan Warrior, touched with timely Fear,
On the raised Orb to distance bore the Spear:
The Greek retreating mourned his frustrate Blow,
And cursed the treacherous Lance that spared a Foe;
Then to the Ships with surly Speed he went,
To seek a surer Javelin in his Tent.
Meanwhile with rising Rage the Battle glows,
The Tumult thickens, and the Clamor grows.
By Teucer's Arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
The Son of Mentor, rich in generous Steeds.
E're yet to Troy the Sons of Greece were led,
In fair Pedaeus' verdant Pastures bred,
The Youth had dwelt; remote from War's alarms,
And blessed in bright Medesicaste's Arms:
(This Nymph, the Fruit of Priam's ravished Joy,
Allied the Warrior to the House of Troy.)
To Troy, when Glory called his Arms, he came,
And matched the bravest of her Chiefs in Fame:
With Priam's Sons, a Guardian of the Throne,
He lived, beloved and honored as his own.
Him Teucer pierced between the Throat and Ear;
He groans beneath the Telamonian Spear.
As from some far-seen Mountain's airy Crown,
Subdued by Steel, a tall Ash tumbles down,
And soils its verdant Tresses on the Ground:
So falls the Youth; his Arms the Fall resound.
Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
From Hector's Hand a shining Javelin fled:
He saw, and shunned the Death; the forceful Dart
Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus his Heart,
Cteatus' Son, of Neptune's boasted Line;
Vain was his Courage, and his Race divine!
Prostrate he falls; his clanging Arms resound,
And his broad Buckler thunders on the Ground.
To seize his beamy Helm the Victor flies,
And just had fastened on the dazzling Prize,
When Ajax' manly Arm a Javelin flung;
Full on the Shield's round Boss the Weapon rung;
He felt the Shock, nor more was doomed to feel,
Secure in Mail, and sheathed in shining Steel.
Repulsed he yields; the Victor Greeks obtain
The Spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
Between the Leaders of the Athenian Line,
( Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
Deplored Amphimachus, sad Object! lies;
Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' Prize.
As two grim Lions bear across the Lawn
Snatched from devouring Hounds, a slaughtered Fawn,
In their fell Jaws high-lifted through the Wood,
And sprinkling all the Shrubs with dropping Blood;
So these the Chief: Great Ajax from the dead
Strips his bright Arms, Oileus lops his Head:
Tossed like a Ball, and whirled in Air away,
At Hector's Feet the goary Visage lay.
The God of Ocean, fired with stern Disdain,
And pierced with Sorrow for his Amphimachus.
Grandson slain,
Inspires the Grecian Hearts, confirms their Hands.
And breathes Destruction to the Trojan Bands,
Swift as a Whirlwind rushing to the Fleet,
He finds the Lance-fam'd Idomen of Crete;
His pensive Brow the generous Care expressed
With which a wounded Soldier touched his Breast,
Whom in the Chance of War a Javelin tore,
And his sad Comrades from the Battle bore;
Him to the Surgeons of the Camp he sent;
That Office paid, he issued from his Tent,
Fierce for the Fight: To him the God begun,
In Thoas' Voice, Andraemon's valiant Son,
Who ruled where Calydon's white Rocks arise,
And Pleuron's chalky Cliffs emblaze the Skies.
Where Is now the imperious Vaunt, the daring Boast
Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?
To whom the King. On Greece no blame be thrown,
Arms are her Trade, and War is all her own.
Her hardy Heroes from the well-fought Plains
Nor Fear withholds, nor shameful Sloth detains.
It Is Heaven, alas! and Jove's all-pow'rful Doom,
That far, far distant from our native Home
Wills us to fall, inglorious! Oh my Friend!
Once foremost in the Fight, still prone to lend
Or Arms, or Counsels; now perform thy best,
And what thou can not singly, urge the rest.
Thus he; and thus the God, whose Force can make
The solid Globe's eternal Basis shake.
Ah! never may he see his native Land,
But feed the Vulturs on this hateful Strand,
Who seeks ignobly in his Ships to stay,
Nor dares to combat on this signal Day!
For this, behold! in horrid Arms I shine,
And urge thy Soul to rival Acts with mine:
Together let us battle on the Plain;
Two, not the worst; nor even this Succor vain.
Not vain the weakest, if their Force unite;
But ours, the bravest have confessed in Fight.
This said, he rushes where the Combat burns;
Swift to his Tent the Cretan King returns.
From thence, two Javelins glittering in his Hand,
And clad in Arms that lightened all the Strand,
Fierce on the Foe the impetuous Hero drove;
Like Lightning bursting from the Arm of Jove,
Which to pale Man the Wrath of Heaven declares,
Or terrifies the offending World with Wars:
In streamy Sparkles, kindling all the Skies,
From Pole to Pole the Trail of Glory flies.
Thus his bright Armor over the dazzled Throng
Gleam'd dreadful, as the Monarch flashed along.
Him, near his Tent, Meriones attends;
Whom thus he questions: Ever best of Friends!
O say, in every Art of Battle skilled,
What holds thy Courage from so brave a Field?
On some important Message art thou bound,
Or bleeds my Friend by some unhappy Wound?
Inglorious here, my Soul abhors to stay,
And glows with Prospects of the approaching Day.
O Prince! ( Meriones replies) whose Care
Leads forth the embattel'd Sons of Crete to War;
This speaks my Grief; this headless Lance I wield;
The rest lies rooted in a Trojan Shield.
To whom the Cretan: Enter, and receive
The wanted Weapons; those my Tent can give.
Spears I have store, (and Trojan Lances all)
That shed a Luster round the illumined Wall.
Though I, disdainful of the distant War,
Nor trust the Dart, or aim the uncertain Spear,
Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
And thence these Trophies and these Arms I gain.
Enter, and see on heaps the Helmets rolled,
And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with Gold.
Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial Toils;
We too can boast of no ignoble Spoils.
But those my Ship contains, whence distant far,
I fight conspicuous in the Van of War.
What need I more? If any Greek there be
Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee.
To this, Idomeneus. The Fields of Fight
Have proved thy Valor and unconquered Might;
And were some Ambush for the Foes designed,
Even there, thy Courage would not lag behind.
In that sharp Service, singled from the rest,
The Fear of each, or Valor, stands confessed.
No Force, no Firmness, the pale Coward shows;
He shifts his Place, his Color comes and goes;
A dropping Sweat creeps cold on every Part;
Against his Bosom beats his quivering Heart;
Terror and Death in his wild Eye Balls stare;
With chatt'ring Teeth he stands, and stiff'ning Hair,
And looks a bloodless Image of Despair!
Not so the Brave -- still dauntless, still the same,
Unchanged his Color, and unmoved his Frame;
Composed his Thought, determined is his Eye,
And fixed his Soul, to conquer or to die:
If ought disturb the Tenor of his Breast,
It Is but the Wish to strike before the rest.
In such Assays, thy blameless Worth is known,
And every Art of dangerous War thy own.
By chance of Fight whatever Wounds you bore,
Those Wounds were glorious all, and all before;
Such as may teach, 'twas still thy brave Delight
TO oppose thy Bosom where the foremost fight.
But why, like Infants, cold to Honor's Charms,
Stand we to talk, when Glory calls to Arms?
Go -- from my conquered Spears, the choicest take,
And to their Owners send them nobly back.
Swift as the Word bold Merion snatched a Spear,
And breathing Slaughter, followed to the War.
So Mars Armipotent invades the Plain,
(The wide Destroyer of the Race of Man)
Terror, his best loved Son, attends his Course,
Armed with stern Boldness, and enormous Force;
The Pride of haughty Warriors to confound,
And lay the Strength of Tyrants on the Ground:
From Thrace they fly, called to the dire Alarms
Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian Arms;
Invoked by both, relentless they dispose
To these, glad Conquest, murderous Rout to those.
So marched the Leaders of the Cretan Train,
And their bright Arms shot Horror over the Plain.
Then first spoke Merion: Shall we join the Right,
Or combat in the Center of the Fight?
Or to the Left our wanted Succor lend?
Hazard and Fame all Parts alike attend.
Not in the Center, ( Idomen replied)
Our ablest Chieftains the main Battle guide;
Each godlike Ajax makes that Post his Care,
And gallant Teucer deals Destruction there:
Skilled, or with Shafts to gall the distant Field,
Or bear close Battle on the sounding Shield.
These can the Rage of haughty Hector tame;
Safe in their Arms, the Navy fears no Flame;
Till Jove himself descends, his Bolts to shed,
And hurl the blazing Ruin at our Head.
Great must he be, of more than human Birth,
Nor feed like Mortals on the Fruits of Earth,
Him neither Rocks can crush, nor Steel can wound,
Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguin'd Ground.
In standing Fight he mates Achilles' Force,
Excelled alone in Swiftness in the Course.
Then to the Left our ready Arms apply,
And live with Glory, or with Glory die.
He said; and Merion to the appointed Place,
Fierce as the God of Battles, urged his Pace.
Soon as the Foe the shining Chiefs beheld
Rush like a fiery Torrent over the Field,
Their Force embodied, in a Tide they pour;
The rising Combat sounds along the Shore.
As warring Winds, in Sirius' sultry Reign,
From different Quarters sweep the sandy Plain;
On every side the dusty Whirlwinds rise,
And the dry Fields are lifted to the Skies:
Thus by Despair, Hope, Rage, together driven,
Met the black Hosts, and meeting, darkened Heaven.
All dreadful glar'd the Iron Face of War,
Bristled with upright Spears, that flashed afar;
Dire was the Gleam, of Breastplates, Helms and Shields,
And polished Arms emblaz'd the flaming Fields:
Tremendous Scene, that general Horror gave,
But touched with Joy the Bosoms of the Brave.
Saturn's great Sons in fierce Contention vy'd,
And Crowds of Heroes in their Anger died.
The Sire of Earth and Heaven, by Thetis won
To crown with Glory Peleus' godlike Son,
Willed not Destruction to the Grecian Powers,
But spared a while the destined Trojan Towers:
While Neptune rising from his azure Main,
Warred on the King of Heaven with stern Disdain,
And breathed Revenge, and fired the Grecian Train.
Gods of one Source, of one ethereal Race,
Alike divine, and Heaven their native Place;
But Jove the greater, Firstborn of the Skies,
And more than Men, or Gods, supremely wise.
For this, of Jove's superior Might afraid,
Neptune in human Form concealed his Aid.
These Powers enclose the Greek and Trojan Train
In War and Discord's adamantine Chain;
Indissolubly strong, the fatal Tie
Is stretched on both, and Heaps on Heaps they dye.
Dreadful in Arms, and grown in Combats gray,
The bold Idomeneus controuls the Day.
First by his Hand Othryoneus was slain,
Swelled with false Hopes, with mad Ambition vain!
Called by the Voice of War to martial Fame,
From high Cabesus' distant Walls he came;
Cassandra's Love he sought with Boasts of Power,
And promised Conquest was the proffered Dower.
The King consented, by his Vaunts abused;
The King consented, but the Fates refused.
Proud of himself, and of the imagined Bride,
The Field he measured with a larger Stride.
Him, as he stalked, the Cretan Javelin found;
Vain was his Breastplate to repel the Wound:
His Dream of Glory lost, he plunged to Hell;
The Plains resounded as the Boaster fell.
The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead:
And thus (he cries) behold thy Promise sped!
Such is the Help thy Arms to Ilion bring,
And such the Contract of the Phrygian King!
Our Offers now, illustrious Prince! receive;
For such an Aid what will not Argos give?
To conquer Troy, with ours thy Forces join,
And count Atrides' fairest Daughter thine.
Meantime, on farther Methods to advise,
Come, follow to the Fleet thy new Allies;
There hear what Greece has on her Part to say.
He spoke, and dragged the goary Corse away.
This Asius viewed, unable to contain,
Before his Chariot warring on the Plain;
(His valued Coursers, to his Squire consigned,
Impatient panted on his Neck behind)
To Vengeance rising with a sudden Spring,
He hoped the Conquest of the Cretan King.
The wary Cretan, as his Foe drew near,
Full on his Throat discharged the forceful Spear:
Beneath the Chin the Point was seen to glide,
And glittered, extant at the farther side.
As when the Mountain Oak, or Poplar tall,
Or Pine, fit Mast for some great Admiral,
Groans to the oft-heav'd Axe, with many a Wound,
Then spreads a length of Ruin over the Ground.
So sunk proud Asius in that deathful Day,
And stretched before his much-loved Coursers lay.
He grinds the Dust distained with streaming Gore,
And, fierce in Death, lies foaming on the Shore.
Deprived of Motion, stiff with stupid Fear,
Stands all aghast his trembling Charoteer,
Nor shuns the Foe, nor turns the Steeds away,
But falls transfixed, an unresisting Prey:
Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
The stately Car, and labors out his Breath.
Thus Asius' Steeds (their mighty Master gone)
Remain the Prize of Nestor's youthful Son.
Stabbed at the Sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
And made, with force, the vengeful Weapon fly:
The Cretan saw; and stooping, caused to glance
From his slope Shield, the disappointed Lance.
Beneath the spacious Targe (a blazing Round,
Thick with Bull-hides, with brazen Orbits bound,
On his raised Arm by two strong Braces stayed)
He lay collected, in defensive Shade.
Over his safe Head the Javelin idly sung,
And on the tincling Verge more faintly rung.
Even then, the Spear the vigorous Arm confessed,
And pierced, obliquely, King Hypsenor's Breast:
Warmed in his Liver, to the Ground it bore
The Chief, his People's Guardian now no more!
Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
For thee, though Hell's black Portals stand displayed,
This Mate shall joy thy melancholy Shade.
Heart-piercing Anguish, at this haughty Boast,
Touched every Greek, but Nestor's Son the most.
Grieved as he was, his pious Arms attend
And his broad Buckler shields his slaughtered Friend;
Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
His honored Body to the Tented Shore.
Nor yet from Fight Idomeneus withdraws;
Resolved to perish in his Country's Cause,
Or find some Foe whom Heaven and he shall doom
To wail his Fate in Death's eternal Gloom.
He sees Alcathous in the Front aspire:
Great Aesyetes was the Hero's Sire;
His Spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
Anchises' eldest Hope, and darling Care;
Who charmed her Parent's and her Husband's Heart,
With Beauty, Sense, and every Work of Art:
He once, of Ilion's Youth, the loveliest Boy,
The fairest she, of all the Fair of Troy.
By Neptune now the hapless Hero dies,
Who covers with a Cloud those beauteous Eyes,
And fetters every Limb: yet bent to meet
His Fate, he stands; nor shuns the Lance of Crete.
Fixed as some Column, or deep-rooted Oak,
(While the Winds sleep) his Breast received the Stroke.
Before the ponderous Stroke his Corselet yields,
Long used to ward the Death in fighting Fields:
The riven Armor sends a jarring Sound:
His laboring Heart, heaves, with so strong a bound,
The long Lance shakes, and vibrates in the Wound:
Fast-flowing from its Source, as prone he lay,
Life's purple Tide, impetuous, gushed away.
Then Idomen, insulting over the slain;
Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain.
See! on one Greek three Trojan Ghosts attend,
This, my third Victim, to the Shades I send.
Approaching now, thy boasted Might approve,
And try the Prowess of the Seed of Jove.
From Jove, enamored on a mortal Dame,
Great Minos, Guardian of his Country, came:
Deucalion, blameless Prince! was Minos' Heir;
His Firstborn I, the third from Jupiter:
Over spacious Crete, and her bold Sons I reign,
And thence my Ships transport me through the Main;
Lord of a Host, over all my Host I shine,
A Scourge to thee, thy Father, and thy Line.
The Trojan heard; uncertain, or to meet
Alone, with venurous Arms, the King of Crete;
Or seek auxiliar Force; at length decreed
To call some Hero to partake the Deed.
Forthwith Aeneas rises to his Thought;
For him, in Troy's remotest Lines, he sought,
Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
And sees superior Posts in meaner Hands.
To him, ambitious of so great an Aid,
The bold Deiphobus approached, and said.
Now, Trojan Prince, employ thy pious Arms,
If ever thy Bosom felt fair Honor's Charms.
Alcathous dies, thy Brother and thy Friend!
Come, and the Warrior's loved Remains defend.
Beneath his Cares thy early Youth was trained,
One Table fed you, and one Roof contained.
This Deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
Haste, and revenge it on the insulting Foe.
Aeneas heard, and for a Space resigned
To tender Pity all his manly Mind;
Then rising in his Rage, he burns to fight:
The Greek awaits him, with collected Might.
As the fell Boar on some rough Mountain's Head,
Armed with wild Terrors, and to Slaughter bred,
When the loud Rusticks rise, and shout from far,
Attends the Tumult, and expects the War;
Over his bent Back the bristly Horrors rise,
Fires stream in Lightning from his sanguin Eyes,
His foaming Tusks both Dogs and Men engage,
But most his Hunters rouse his mighty Rage.
So stood Idomeneus, his Javelin shook,
And met the Trojan with a lowering Look.
Antilochus, Deipyrus were near,
The youthful Offspring of the God of War,
Merion, and Aphareus, in Field renowned:
To these the Warrior sent his Voice around.
Fellows in Arms! your timely Aid unite;
Lo, great Aeneas rushes to the Fight:
Sprung from a God, and more than Mortal bold;
He fresh in Youth, and I in Arms grown old.
Else should this Hand, this Hour, decide the Strife,
The great Dispute, of Glory, or of Life.
He spoke, and all as with one Soul obeyed;
Their lifted Bucklers cast a dreadful Shade
Around the Chief. Aeneas too demands
The assisting Forces of his native Bands:
Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor join;
(Co-aids and Captains of the Trojan Line.)
In order follow all the embodied Train;
Like Ida's Flocks proceeding over the Plain;
Before his fleecy Care, erect and bold,
Stalks the proud Ram, the Father of the Fold:
With Joy the Swain surveys them, as he leads
To the cool Fountains, through the well-known Meads.
So joys Aeneas, as his native Band
Moves on in Rank, and stretches over the Land.
Round dead Alcathous now the Battle rose;
On every side the steely Circle grows;
Now battered Breastplates and hacked Helmets ring,
And over their Heads unheeded Javelins sing.
Above the rest, two towering Chiefs appear,
There great Idomeneus, Aeneas here.
Like Gods of War, dispensing Fate, they stood,
And burned to drench the Ground with mutual Blood.
The Trojan Weapon whizz'd along in Air;
The Cretan saw, and shunned the brazen Spear:
Sent from an Arm so strong, the missive Wood
Stuck deep in Earth, and quiver'd where it stood.
But Oenomas received the Cretan's stroke,
The forceful Spear his hollow Corselet broke,
It ripp'd his Belly with a ghastly Wound,
And rolled the smoking Entrails to the Ground.
Stretched on the Plain, he sobs away his Breath,
And furious, grasps the bloody Dust in Death.
The Victor from his Breast the Weapon tears;
His Spoils he could not, for the Shower of Spears.
Though now unfit an active War to wage,
Heavy with cumb'rous Arms, stiff with cold Age,
His listless Limbs unable for the Course;
In standing Fight he yet maintains his Force:
Till faint with Labor, and by Foes repelled,
His tired, slow Steps, he drags from off the Field.
Deiphobus beheld him as he past,
And, fired with Hate, a parting Javelin cast:
The Javelin erred, but held its Course along,
And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:
The Son of Mars fell gasping on the Ground,
And gnash'd the Dust all bloody with his Wound.
Nor knew the furious Father of his Fall;
High-thron'd amidst the great Olympian Hall,
On golden Clouds the immortal Synod sat;
Detained from bloody War by Jove and Fate.
Now, where in Dust the breathless Hero lay,
For slain Ascalaphus commenced the Fray.
Deiphobus to seize his Helmet flies,
And from his Temples rends the glittering Prize;
Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,
And on his loaded Arm discharged his Spear:
He drops the Weight, disabled with the Pain,
The hollow Helmet rings against the Plain.
Swift as a Vultur leaping on his Prey,
From his torn Arm the Grecian rent away
The reeking Javelin, and rejoined his Friends.
His wounded Brother good Polites tends;
Around his Waste his pious Arms he threw,
And from the Rage of Combat gently drew:
Him his swift Coursers, on his splendid Car
Rapt from the lessening Thunder of the War;
To Troy they drove him, groaning from the Shore,
And sprinkling, as he past, the Sands with Gore.
Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguin ground,
Heaps fall on Heaps, and Heaven and Earth resound.
Bold Aphareus by great Aeneas bled;
As towered the Chief he turned his daring Head,
He pierced his Throat; the bending Head deprest
Beneath his Helmet, nods upon his Breast;
His Shield reversed over the fallen Warror lies;
And everlasting Slumber seals his Eyes.
Antilochus, as Thoon turned him round,
Transpierc'd his Back with a dishonest Wound:
The hollow Vein that to the Neck extends
Along the Chine, his eager Javelin rends:
Supine he falls, and to his social Train
Spreads his imploring Arms, but spreads in vain.
The exulting Victor leaping where he lay,
From his broad Shoulders tore the Spoils away;
His Time observed; for closed by Foes around,
On all sides thick, the Peals of Arms resound.
His Shield embossed the ringing Storm sustains,
But he impervious and untouched remains.
(Great Neptune's Care preserved from hostile Rage
This Youth, the Joy of Nestor's glorious Age)
In Arms intrepid, with the first he fought,
Faced every Foe, and every Danger sought;
His winged Lance, resistless as the Wind,
Obeys each Motion of the Master's Mind,
Restless it flies, impatient to be free,
And meditates the distant Enemy.
The Son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,
And struck his Target with the brazen Spear,
Fierce in his Front: but Neptune wards the Blow,
And blunts the Javelin of the eluded Foe.
In the broad Buckler half the Weapon stood;
Splinter'd on Earth flew half the broken Wood.
Disarmed, he mingled in the Trojan Crew;
But Merion's Spear o'ertook him as he flew,
Deep in the Belly's Rim an Entrance found,
Where sharp the Pang, and mortal is the Wound.
Bending he fell, and doubled to the Ground
Lay panting. Thus an Ox, in Fetters tied,
While Death's strong Pangs distend his laboring Side,
His Bulk enormous on the Field displays;
His heaving Heart beats thick, as ebbing Life decays.
The Spear, the Conqu'ror from his Body drew,
And Death's dim Shadows swam before his View.
Next brave Deipyrus in Dust was laid;
King Helenus waved high the Thracian Blade,
And smote his Temples, with an Arm so strong
The Helm fell off, and rolled amid the Throng:
There, for some luckier Greek it rests a Prize,
For dark in Death the godlike Owner lies!
With raging Grief great Menelaus burns,
And fraught with Vengeance, to the Victor turns;
That shook the ponderous Lance, in Act to throw,
And this stood adverse with the bended Bow:
Full on his Breast the Trojan Arrow fell,
But harmless bounded from the plated Steel.
As on some ample Barn's well-harden'd Floor,
(The Winds collected at each open Door)
While the broad Fan with Force is whirled around,
Lightleaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
So from the Steel that guards Atrides' Heart,
Repelled to distance flies the bounding Dart.
Atrides, watchful of the unwary Foe,
Pierced with his Lance the Hand that grasped the Bow,
And nailed it to the Eugh: The wounded Hand
Trail'd the long Lance that marked with Blood the Sand.
But good Agenor gently from the Wound
The Spear sollicites, and the Bandage bound;
A Slings soft Wool, snatched from a Soldier's side,
At once the Tent and Ligature supplied.
Behold! Pisander, urged by Fate's Decree,
Springs through the Ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
Great Menelaus! to enhance thy Fame,
High-tow'ring in the Front, the Warrior came.
First the sharp Lance was by Atrides thrown;
The Lance far distant by the Winds was blown.
Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides' Shield;
Pisander's Spear fell shivered on the Field.
Not so discouraged, to the Future blind,
Vain Dreams of Conquest swell his haughty Mind;
Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan Lord
Like Lightning brandished his far-beaming Sword.
His left Arm high opposed the shining Shield;
His right, beneath, the covered Pole-Axe held;
(An Olive's cloudy Grain the Handle made,
Distinct with Studs; and brazen was the Blade)
This on the Helm discharged a noble Blow;
The Plume dropped nodding to the Plain below,
Shorn from the Crest. Atrides waved his Steel:
Deep through his Front the weighty Faulchion fell.
The crashing Bones before its Force gave way;
In Dust and Blood the groaning Hero lay;
Forced from their ghastly Orbs, and spouting Gore,
The clotted Eye Balls tumble on the Shore.
The fierce Atrides spurned him as he bled,
Tore off his Arms, and loud-exulting said.
Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
O Race perfidious, who delight in War!
Already noble Deeds ye have performed,
A Princess raped transcends a Navy stormed:
In such bold Feats your impious Might approve,
Without The Assistance, or the Fear of Jove.
The violated Rites, the ravished Dame,
Our Heroes slaughtered, and our Ships on flame,
Crimes heaped on Crimes, shall bend your Glory down,
And whelm in Ruins yon' flagitious Town.
O thou, great Father! Lord of Earth and Skies,
Above the Thought of Man, supremely wise!
If from thy Hand the Fates of Mortals flow,
From whence this favor to an impious Foe?
A godless Crew, abandoned and unjust,
Still breathing Rapine, Violence, and Lust!
The best of Things beyond their Measure, cloy;
Sleeps balmy Blessing, Love's endearing Joy;
The Feast, the Dance; whatever Mankind desire,
Even the sweet Charms of sacred Numbers tire.
But Troy for ever reaps a dire Delight
In Thirst of Slaughter, and in Lust of Fight.
This said, he seized (while yet the Carcass heaved)
The bloody Armor, which his Train received:
Then sudden mixed among the warring Crew,
And the bold Son of Pylaemenes slew.
Harpalion had through Asia traveled far,
Following his martial Father to the War;
Through filial Love he left his native Shore,
Never, ah never, to behold it more!
His unsuccessful Spear he chanced to fling
Against the Target of the Spartan King;
Thus of his Lance disarmed, from Death he flies,
And turns around his apprehensive Eyes.
Him, through the Hip transpiercing as he fled,
The Shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
Beneath the Bone the glancing Point descends,
And driving down, the swelling Bladder rends:
Sunk in his sad Companion's Arms he lay,
And in short Pantings sobb'd his Soul away;
(Like some vile Worm extended on the Ground)
While Life's red Torrent gushed from out the Wound.
Him on his Car the Paphlagonian Train
In slow Procession bore from off the Plain.
The pensive Father, Father now no more!
Attends the mournful Pomp along the Shore,
And unavailing Tears profusely shed,
And unrevenged, deplored his Offspring dead.
Paris from far the moving Sight beheld,
With Pity softened, and with Fury swelled:
His honored Host, a Youth of matchless Grace,
And loved of all the Paphlagonian Race!
With his full Strength he bent his angry Bow,
And winged the feathered Vengeance at the Foe.
A Chief there was, the brave Euchenor named,
For Riches much, and more for Virtue famed,
Who held his Seat in Corinth's stately Town;
Polydus' Son, a Seer of old Renown.
Often had the Father told his early Doom,
By Arms abroad, or slow Disease at home:
He climbed his Vessel, prodigal of Breath,
And chose the certain, glorious Path to Death.
Beneath his Ear the pointed Arrow went;
The Soul came issuing at the narrow Vent:
His Limbs, unnerv'd, drop useless on the Ground,
And everlasting Darkness shades him round.
Nor knew great Hector how his Legions yield,
(Wrapped in the Cloud and Tumult of the Field)
Wide on the Left the Force of Greece commands,
And Conquest hovers over the Achaian Bands:
With such a Tide superior Virtue swayed,
And Neptune.
he that shakes the solid Earth, gave Aid.
But in the Center Hector fixed remained,
Where first the Gates were forced, and Bulwarks gained;
There, on the Margin of the hoary Deep,
(Their Naval Station where the Ajaces keep,
And where low Walls confine the beating Tides
Whose humble Barrier scarce the Foes divides,
Where late in Fight, both Foot and Horse engaged,
And all the Thunder of the Battle raged)
There joined, the whole Boeotian Strength remains,
The proud Ionians with their sweeping Trains,
Locrians and Pthians, and the Epaean Force;
But joined, repel not Hector's fiery Course.
The Flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas led,
Bias, and great Menestheus at their Head.
Meges the strong the Epeian Bands controlled,
And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold;
The Pthians Medon, famed for martial Might,
And brave Podarces, active in the Fight.
This drew from Phylacus his noble Line;
Iphyclus' Son: and that (Oileus) thine:
(Young Ajax Brother, by a stolen Embrace;
He dwelt far distant from his native Place,
By his fierce Stepdame from his Father's Reign
Expelled and exiled, for her Brother slain.)
These rule the Pthians, and their Arms employ
Mixed with Boeotians, on the Shores of Troy.
Now side by side, with like unwearied Care,
Each Ajax labored through the Field of War.
So when two lordly Bulls, with equal Toil,
Force the bright Plowshare through the fallow Soil,
Joined to one Yoke, the stubborn Earth they tear,
And trace large Furrows with the shining Share;
Over their huge Limbs the Foam descends in Snow,
And Streams of Sweat down their sow'r Foreheads flow.
A Train of Heroes followed through the Field,
Who bore by turns great Ajax' sev'nfold Shield;
Whenever he breathed, remissive of his Might,
Tired with the incessant Slaughters of the Fight.
His brave Associate had no following Band,
His Troops unpracticed in the Fights of Stand:
For not the Spear the Locrian Squadrons wield,
Nor bear the Helm, nor lift the moony Shield;
But skilled from far the flying Shaft to wing,
Or whirl the sounding Pebble from the Sling,
Dext'rous with these they aim a certain Wound,
Or fell the distant Warrior to the Ground.
Thus in the Van, the Telamonian Train
Thronged in bright Arms, a pressing Fight maintain;
Far in the Rear the Locrian Archers lie,
Thick Stones and Arrows intercept the Sky,
The mingled Tempest on the Foes they pour;
Troy's scattering Orders open to the Shower.
Now had the Greeks eternal Fame acquired,
And the galled Ilians to their Walls retired;
But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
Addressed great Hector, and this Counsel gave.
Though great in all, thou seem averse to lend
Impartial Audience to a faithful Friend:
To Gods and Men thy matchless Worth is known,
And every Art of glorious War thy own;
But in cool Thought and Counsel to excel,
How widely differs this from warring well?
Content with what the bounteous Gods have given,
Seek not alone t'engross the Gifts of Heaven.
To some the Powers of bloody War belong,
To some, sweet Music, and the Charm of Song;
To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assigned
A wise, extensive, all-consid'ring Mind;
Their Guardians these, the Nations round confess,
And Towns and Empires for their Safety bless.
If Heaven have lodged this Virtue in my Breast,
Attend, O Hector, what I judge the best.
See, as thou mov'st, on Dangers Dangers spread,
And Wars whole Fury burns around thy Head.
Behold! distressed within yon' hostile Wall,
How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall?
What Troops, out-number'd, scarce the War maintain?
And what brave Heroes at the Ships lie slain?
Here cease thy Fury; and the Chiefs and Kings
Convok'd to Council, weigh the Sum of things.
Whether (the Gods succeeding our Desires)
To yon' tall Ships to bear the Trojan Fires;
Or quit the Fleet, and pass unhurt away,
Contented with the Conquest of the Day.
I fear, I fear, lest Greece (not yet undone)
Pay the large Debt of last revolving Sun;
Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
On yonder Decks, and yet o'erlooks the Plains!
The Counsel pleased; and Hector, with a Bound,
Leaped from his Chariot on the trembling Ground;
Swift as he leaped, his clanging Arms resound.
To guard this Post (he cried) thy Art employ,
And here detain the scattered Youth of Troy:
Where yonder Heroes faint, I bend my way,
And hasten back to end the doubtful Day.
This said; the towering Chief, prepared to go,
Shakes his white Plumes that to the Breezes flow,
And seems a moving Mountain topt with Snow.
Through all his Host, inspiring Force, he flies,
And bids anew the martial Thunder rise.
To Panthus' Son, at Hector's high Command,
Haste the bold Leaders of the Trojan Band:
But round the Battlements, and round the Plain,
For many a Chief he looked, but looked in vain;
Deiphobus, nor Helenus the Seer,
Nor Asius' Son, nor Asius' self appear.
For these were pierced with many a ghastly Wound,
Some cold in Death, some groaning on the Ground,
Some low in Dust (a mournful Object) lay,
High on the Wall some breathed their Souls away.
Far on the Left amid the Throng he found
(Cheering the Troops, and dealing Deaths around)
The graceful Paris; whom, with Fury moved,
Opprobrious, thus, the impatient Chief reproved.
Ill-fated Paris! Slave to Womankind,
As smooth of Face as fraudulent of Mind!
Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
The godlike Father, and the intrepid Son?
The Force of Helenus, dispensing Fate,
And great Othryoneus, so feared of late?
Black Fate hangs over thee from the avenging Gods,
Imperial Troy from her Foundations nods;
Whelmed in thy Country's Ruins shall thou fall,
And one devouring Vengeance swallow all.
When Paris thus: My Brother and my Friend,
Thy warm Impatience makes thy Tongue offend.
In other Battles I deserved thy Blame,
Though then not deedless, nor unknown to Fame:
But since yon' Rampart by thy Arms lay low,
I scattered Slaughter from my fatal Bow.
The Chiefs you seek on yonder Shore lie slain;
Of all those Heroes, two alone remain;
Deiphobus, and Helenus the Seer:
Each now disabled by a hostile Spear.
Go then, successful, where thy Soul inspires;
This Heart and Hand shall second all thy Fires:
What with this Arm I can, prepare to know,
Till Death for Death be paid, and Blow for Blow.
But it is not ours, with Forces not our own
To combat; Strength is of the Gods alone.
These Words the Hero's angry Mind assuage:
Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
Around Polydamas, distained with Blood,
Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood,
Palmus, with Polypaetes the divine,
And two bold Brothers of Hippotion's Line:
(Who reached fair Ilion, from Ascania far,
The former Day; the next, engaged in War.)
As when from gloomy Clouds a Whirlwind springs,
That bears Jove's Thunder on its dreadful Wings,
Wide over the blasted Fields the Tempest sweeps,
Then, gathered, settles on the hoary Deeps;
The afflicted Deeps, tumultuous, mix and roar;
The Waves behind impel the Waves before,
Wide-rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore.
Thus Rank on Rank the thick Battalions throng,
Chief urged on Chief, and Man drove Man along:
Far over the Plains, in dreadful Order bright,
The brazen Arms reflect a beamy Light.
Full in the blazing Van great Hector shined,
Like Mars commissioned to confound Mankind.
Before him flaming, his enormous Shield
Like the broad Sun, illumined all the Field:
His nodding Helm emits a streamy Ray;
His piercing Eyes through all the Battle stray,
And while beneath his Targe he flashed along,
Shot Terrors round, that withered even the Strong.
Thus stalked he, dreadful; Death was in his Look:
Whole Nations feared: but not an Argive shook.
The towering Ajax, with an ample Stride,
Advanced the first; and thus the Chief defied.
Hector! come on, thy empty Threats forbear:
It Is not thy Arm, it is thundering Jove we fear:
The Skill of War to us not idly given,
Lo! Greece is humbled not by Troy, but Heaven.
Vain are the Hopes that haughty Mind imparts,
To force our Fleet: The Greeks have hands, and hearts.
Long ever in Flames our lofty Navy fall,
Your boasted City and your god-built Wall
Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the Ground;
And spread a long, unmeasured Ruin round.
The time shall come, when chased along the Plain,
Even thou shall call on Jove, and call in vain;
Even thou shall wish, to aid thy desperate Course,
The Wings of Falcons for thy flying Horse;
Shall run, forgetful of a Warrior's Fame,
While Clouds of friendly Dust conceal thy Shame.
As thus he spoke, behold, in open View,
On sounding Wings a dexter Eagle flew.
To Jove's glad Omen all the Grecians rise,
And hail, with Shouts, his Progress through the Skies:
Far-echoing Clamours bound from side to side;
They ceased; and thus the Chief of Troy replied.
From whence this Menace, this insulting Strain,
Enormous Boaster! doomed to vaunt in vain.
So may the Gods on Hector Life bestow,
(Not that short Life which Mortals lead below,
But such as those of Jove's high Lineage born,
The blue-ey'd Maid, or he that gilds the Morn.)
As this decisive Day shall end the Fame
Of Greece, and Argos be no more a Name.
And thou, Imperious! if thy Madness wait
The Lance of Hector, thou shall meet thy Fate:
That Giant-Corse, extended on the Shore,
Shall largely feast the Fowls with Fat and Gore.
He said, and like a Lion stalked along:
With Shouts incessant Earth and Ocean rung,
Sent from his follo'wing Host: The Grecian Train
With answ'ring Thunders filled the echoing Plain;
A Shout, that tore Heavens Concave, and above
Shook the fixed Splendors of the Throne of Jove.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Thirteenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.
I.
VERSE 5. ONE might fancy at the first reading of this Passage, that Homer here
turned aside from the main View of his Poem in a vain Ostentation of Learning,
to amuse himself with a foreign and unnecessary Description of the Manners and
Customs of these Nations. But we shall find, upon better Consideration, that
Jupiter's turning aside his Eyes was necessary to the Conduct of the Work, as
it gives Opportunity to Neptune to assist the Greeks, and thereby causes all
the Adventures of this Book. Madam Dacier is too refining on this occasion;
when she would have it, that Jupiter's averting his Eyes signifies his
abandoning the Trojans; in the same manner, as the Scripture represents the
Almighty turning his Face from those whom he deserts. But at this rate Jupiter
turning his Eyes from the Battle, must desert both the Trojans and the Greeks;
and it is evident from the Context, that Jupiter intended nothing less than to
let the Trojans suffer.

II.
VERSE 9. And where the far-fam'd Hippemolgian strays.] There is much dispute
among the Critics, which are the proper Names, and which the Epithets, in
these Verses: Some making (...) the Epithet to (...), others (...) the Epithet
to (...); and (...), which by the common Interpreters is thought only an
Epithet, is by Strabo and Ammianus Marcellinus made the proper Name of a
People. In this Diversity of Opinions, I have chosen that which I thought would
make the best Figure in Poetry. It is a beautiful and moral Imagination, to
suppose that the long Life of the Hippemolgians was an Effect of their simple
Diet, and a Reward of their Justice: And that the supreme Being, displeased at
the continued Scenes of human Violence and Dissension, as it were recreated his
Eyes in contemplating the Simplicity of these People.

It is observable that the same Custom of living on Milk is preserved to this
Day by the Tartars, who inhabit the same Country.

III.
VERSE 28. At Jove incensed, with Grief and Fury stung,
Prone down the rocky Steep he rushed. -- ]
Mons. de la Motte has played the Critic upon this Passage a little
unadvisedly. " Neptune, says he, is impatient to assist the Greeks. Homer tells
us that this God goes first to seek his Chariot in a certain Place; next he
arrives at another Place nearer the Camp; there he takes off his Horses, and
then he locks them fast to secure them at his Return. The Detail of so many
little Particularities no way suits the Majesty of a God, or the Impatience in
which he is described." Another French Writer makes answer, that however
impatient Neptune is represented to be, none of the Gods ever go to the War
without their Arms; and the Arms, Chariot and Horses of Neptune were at Aegae.
He makes but four Steps to get thither; so that what M. de la Motte calls being
slow, is Swiftness itself. The God puts on his Arms, mounts his Chariot, and
departs: nothing is more rapid than his Course; he flies over the Waters: the
Verses of Homer in that Place run swifter than the God himself. It is
sufficient to have Ears, to perceive the Rapidity of Neptune's Chariot in the
very Sound of those three Lines, each of which is entirely composed of
Dactyles, excepting that one Spondee which must necessarily terminate the
Verse. (...)
(...)
(...)


IV.
VERSE 29. -- The lofty Mountains nod,
The Forests shake! Earth trembled as he trod,
And felt the Footsteps of the immortal God.]
Longinus confesses himself wonderfully struck with the Sublimity of this
Passage. That Critic, after having blamed the Defects with which Homer draws
the Manners of his Gods, adds, that he has much better succeeded in describing
their Figure and Persons. He owns that he often paints a God such as he is, in
all his Majesty and Grandeur, and without any Mixture of mean and terrestrial
Images; of which he produces this Passage as a remarkable Instance, and one
that had challenged the Admiration of all Antiquity.

The Book of Psalms affords us a Description of the like sublime manner of
Imagery, which is parallel to this. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy
People, when thou did march through the Wilderness, the Earth shook, the
Heavens dropped at the Presence of God, even Sinai itself was moved at the
Presence of God, the God of Israel. Ps. 68.

V.
VERSE 32. -- Three ample Strides he took.] This is a very grand Imagination,
and equals, if not transcends, the Sublimity of what he has feigned before of
the Passage of this God. We are told, that at four Steps he reached Aegae,
which (supposing it meant of the Town of that Name in Euboea, which lay the
nighest to Thrace) is hardly less than a Degree at each Step. One may, from a
View of the Map, imagine him striding from Promontory to Promontory, his first
Step on Mount Athos, his second on Pallene, his third upon Pelion, and his
fourth in Euboea. Dacier is not to be forgiven for omitting this miraculous
Circumstance, which so perfectly agrees with the mavelous Air of the whole
Passage, and without which the sublime Image of Homer is not complete.

VI.
VERSE 33. -- The distant Aegae shook.] There were three Places of this Name
which were all sacred to Neptune; an Island in the Aegean Sea mentioned by
Nicostratus, a Town in Peloponnesus, and another in Euboea. Homer is supposed
in this Passage to speak of the last; but the Question is put, why Neptune who
stood upon a Hill in Samothrace, instead of going on the left to Troy, turns to
the right, and takes a way contrary to that which leads to the Army? This
Difficulty is ingeniously solved by the old Scholiast; who says, that Jupiter
being now on Mount Ida, with his Eyes turned toward Thrace, Neptune could not
take the direct way from Samothrace to Troy without being discovered by him;
and therefore fetches this Compass to conceal himself. Eustathius is contented
to say, that the Poet made Neptune go so far about, for the Opportunity of
those fine Descriptions of the Palace, the Chariot, and the Passage of this God.

VII.
VERSE 43. The enormous Monsters rolling over the Deep.] This Description of
Neptune rises upon us; his Passage by Water is yet more pompous than that by
Land. The God driving through the Seas, the Whales acknowledging him, and the
Waves rejoicing and making way for their Monarch, are full of that Mavelous
so natural to the Imagination of our Author. And I cannot but think the Verses
of Virgil in the fifth Aeneid are short of his Original. Coeruleo per summa
levis volat aequora curru:
Subsidunt undae, tumidumque sub axe tonanti
Sternitur aequor aquis: fugiunt vasto aethere nimbi.
Tum variae comitum facies, immania cete, etc.
I fancy Scaliger himself was sensible of this, by his passing in Silence a
Passage which lay so obvious to Comparison.

VIII.
VERSE 79. -- This Part overthrown,
Our Strength were vain: I dread for you alone.]
What Address, and at the same time, what Strength is there in these Words?
Neptune tells the two Ajaces, that he is only afraid for their Post, and that
the Greeks will perish by that Gate, since it is Hector who assaults it; at
every other Quarter, the Trojans will be repulsed: It may therefore be properly
said, that the Ajaces only are vanquished, and that their Defeat draws
Destruction upon all the Greeks. I don't think that any thing better could be
invented to animate courageous Men, and make them attempt even Impossibilities.
Dacier.

IX.
VERSE 83. If yet some heavenly Power, etc.] Here Neptune considering how the
Greeks were discouraged by the Knowledge that Jupiter assisted Hector,
insinuates, that notwithstanding Hector's Confidence in that Assistance, yet
the Power of some other God might countervail it on their part; wherein he
alludes to his own aiding them, and seems not to doubt his Ability of
contesting the Point with Jove himself. It Is with the same Confidence he
afterward speaks to Iris, of himself and his Power, when he refuses to submit
to the Order of Jupiter in the fifteenth Book. Eustathius remarks, what an
Incentive it must be to the Ajaces, to hear those who could stand against
Hector equaled, in this oblique manner, to the Gods themselves.

X.
VERSE 97. The inspiring God Oileus' active Son -- Perceived the first.] The
Reason has been asked, why the lesser Ajax is the first to perceive the
Assistance of the God? And the ancient Solution of this Question was very
ingenious, as we have it from Eustathius. They said that the greater Ajax,
being slow of Apprehension, and naturally valiant, could not be sensible so
soon of this Accession of Strength, as the other, who immediately perceived it
as not owing so much to his natural Courage.

XI.
VERSE 102. Short as he turned, I saw the Power.] This Opinion, that the
Majesty of the Gods was such that they could not be seen Face to Face by Men,
seems to have been generally received in most Nations. Spondanus observes, that
it might be derived from sacred Truth, and founded upon what God says to Moses
in Exodus, Chapter 33.. 20, 23. Man shall not see me and live: Thou shall see my
back Parts, but my Face thou shall not behold. For the farther Particulars of
this Notion among the Heathens, see the 30 th Note on the first, and the 69 th
on the fifth Book.

XII.
VERSE 131. The Speech of Neptune to the Greeks.] After Neptune in his former
Discourse to the Ajaces, who yet maintained a retreating Fight, had encouraged
them to withstand the Attack of the Trojans; he now addresses himself to those,
who having fled out of the Battle, and retired to the Ships, had given up all
for lost. These he endeavors to bring again to the Engagement, by one of the
most noble and spirited Speeches in the whole Iliad. He represents that their
present miserable Condition was not to be imputed to their want of Power, but
to their want of Resolution to withstand the Enemy, whom by Experience they had
often found unable to resist them. But what is particularly artful, while he is
endeavoring to prevail upon them, is that he does not attribute their present
Dejection of Mind to a cowardly Spirit, but to a Resentment and Indignation of
their General's Usage of their favorite Hero Achilles. With the same softning
Art, he tells them, he scorns to speak thus to Cowards, but is only concerned
for their Misbehaviour as they are the bravest of the Army. He then exhorts
them for their own sake to avoid Destruction, which would certainly be
inevitable, if for a Moment longer they delayed to oppose so imminent a Danger.

XIII.
VERSE 141. A Rout undisciplined, etc.] I translate this Line, (...)
with Allusion to the want of military Discipline among the Barbarians, so
often hinted at in Homer. He is always opposing to this the exact and regular
Disposition of his Greeks, and accordingly a few Lines after, we are told that
the Grecian Phalanxes were such, that Mars or Minerva could not have found a
Defect in them.

XIV.
VERSE 155. Prevent this Evil, etc.] The Verse in the Original, (...)
may be capable of receiving another Sense to this Effect. If it be your
Resentment of Agamemnon's Usage of Achilles, that withholds you from the
Battle, that Evil ( viz. the Dissension of those two Chiefs) may soon be
remedied, for the Minds of good Men are easily calmed and composed. I had once
translated it, Their future Strife with Speed we shall redress,
For noble Minds are soon composed to Peace.
But upon considering the whole Context more attentively, the other Explanation
(which is that of Didymus) appeared to me the more natural and unforced, and I
have accordingly followed it.

XV.
VERSE 171. Fixed at his Post was each bold Ajax found, etc.] We must here take
notice of an old Story, which however groundless and idle it seems, is related
by Plutarch, Philostratus and others. Ganictor the Son of Amphidamas King of
Euboea, celebrating with all Solemnity the Funeral of his Father, proclaimed
according to Custom several public Games, among which was the Prize for
Poetry: Homer and Hesiod came to dispute for it. After they had produced
several Pieces on either side, in all which the Audience declared for Homer,
Panides the Brother of the deceased, who sat as one of the Judges, ordered
each of the contending Poets to recite that Part of his Works which he esteemed
the best. Hesiod repeated those Lines which make the beginning of his second
Book, (...)
(...), etc.
Homer answered with the Verses which follow here: But the Prince preferring
the peaceful Subject of Hesiod to the martial one of Homer, contrary to the
Expectation of all, adjudg'd the Prize to Hesiod. The Commentators upon this
occasion are very rhetorical, and universally exclaim against so crying a Piece
of Injustice. All the hardest Names which Learning can furnish, are very
liberally bestowed upon poor Panides. Spondanus is mighty smart, calls him
Midas, takes him by the Ear, and asks the dead Prince as many insulting
Questions, as any of his Author's Heroes could have done. Dacier with all
Gravity tells us, that Posterty proved a more equitable Judge than Panides. And
if I had not told this Tale in my turn, I must have incurred the Censure of all
the Schoolmasters in the Nation.

XVI,
VERSE 173. So close their Order, etc.] When Homer retouches the same Subject,
he has always the Art to rise in his Ideas above what he said before. We shall
find an Instance of it in this Place; if we compare this manner of commending
the exact Discipline of an Army, with what he had made use of on the same
occasion at the end of the fourth Iliad. There it is said, that the most
experienced Warrior could not have reprehended any thing, had he been led by
Pallas through the Battle; but here he carries it farther, in affirming that
Pallas and the God of War themselves must have admired this Disposition of the
Grecian Forces. Eustathius.

XVII.
VERSE 177. A chosen Phalanx, firm, etc.] Homer in these Lines has given us a
Description of the Ancient Phalanx, which consisted of several Ranks of Men
closely ranged in this order. The first Line stood with their Spears levelled
directly forward; the second Rank being armed with Spears two Cubits longer,
levelled them likewise forward through the Interstices of the first; and the
third in the same manner held forth their Spears yet longer, through the two
former Ranks; so that the Points of the Spears of the three Ranks terminated in
one Line. All the other Ranks stood with their Spears erected, in Readiness to
advance, and fill the vacant Places of such as fell. This is the Account
Eustathius gives of the Phalanx, which he observes was only fit for a Body of
Men acting on the Defensive, but improper for the Attack: And accordingly Homer
here only describes the Greeks ordering their Battle in this manner, when they
had no other View but to stand their Ground against the furious Assault of the
Trojans. The same Commentator observes from Hermolytus, an ancient Writer of
Tacticks, that this manner of ordering the Phalanx was afterward introduced
among the Spartans by Lycurgus, among the Argives by Lysander, among the
Thebans by Epaminondas, and among the Macedonians by Charidemus.

XVIII.
VERSE 191. As from some Mountain's craggy Forehead torn, etc.] This is one of
the noblest Simile's in all Homer, and the most justly corresponding in its
Circumstances to the thing described. The furious Descent of Hector from the
Wall represented by a Stone that flies from the top of a Rock, the Hero pushed
on by the superior Force of Jupiter, as the Stone driven by a Torrent, the
Ruins of the Wall falling after him, all things yielding before him, the
Clamor and Tumult around him, all imag'd in the violent bounding and leaping
of the Stone, the crackling of the Woods, the Shock, the Noise, the Rapidity,
the Irresistibility, and the Augmentation of Force in its Progress. All these
Points of Likeness make but the first Part of this admirable Simile. Then the
sudden Stop of the Stone when it comes to the Plain, as of Hector at the
Phalanx of the Ajaces (alluding also to the natural Situation of the Ground,
Hector rushing down the Declivity of the Shore, and being stopped on the Level
of the Sea.) And lastly, the Immobility of both when so stopped, the Enemy
being as unable to move him back, as he to get forward: This last Branch of the
Comparison is the happiest in the World, and though not hitherto observed, is
what methinks makes the principal Beauty and Force of it. The Simile is copied
by Virgil, Aen. 12. Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice praeceps,
Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber
Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas:
Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu
Exultatque solo; sylvas, armenta, virosque
Involvens secum. Disjecta per agmina Turnus
Sic urbis ruit ad muros --
And Tasso has again copied it from Virgil in his 18 th Book. Qual gran sasso
tal hor, che o la vecchiezza
Solve da un monte, o svelle ira de 'venti
Ruinoso dirupa, e porta, e spezza
Le selve, e con le case anco gli armenti
Tal giu trahea de la sublime altezza
L'horribil trave e merli, e arm, e gente,
Die la torre a quel moto uno, o duo crolli;
Tremar le mura, e rimbombaro i colli.
It is but Justice to Homer to take notice how infinitely inferior both these
Similes are to their Original. They have taken the Image without the Likeness,
and lost those corresponding Circumstances which raise the Justness and
Sublimity of Homer's. In Virgil it is only the Violence of Turnus in which the
whole Application consists: And in Tasso it has no farther Allusion than to the
Fall of a Tower in general.

There is yet another Beauty in the Numbers of this Part. As the Verses
themselves make us see, the Sound of them makes us hear what they represent, in
the noble Roughness, Rapidity, and sonorous Cadence that distinguishes them.
(...), etc.
The Translation, however short it falls of these Beauties, may yet serve to
show the Reader, that there was at least an Endeavor to imitate them.

XIX.
VERSE 279. Idomen of Crete.] Idomeneus appears at large in this Book, whose
Character (if I take it right) is such as we see pretty often in common Life: A
Person of the first Rank, sufficient enough of his high Birth, growing into
Years, conscious of his Decline in Strength and active Qualities; and therefore
endeavoring to make it up to himself in Dignity, and to preserve the
Veneration of others. The true Picture of a stiff old Soldier, not willing to
lose any of the Reputation he has acquired; yet not inconsiderate in Danger;
but by the Sense of his Age, and by his Experience in Battle, become too
cautious to engage with any great odds against him: Very careful and tender of
his Soldiers, whom he had commanded so long that they were become old
Acquaintance; (so that it was with great Judgment Homer chose to introduce him
here, in performing a kind Office to one of 'em who was wounded.) Talkative
upon Subjects of War, as afraid that others might lose the Memory of what he
had done in better Days, of which the long Conversation with Meriones, and
Ajax's Reproach to him in Iliad 23.. 478. are sufficient Proofs. One may
observe some Strokes of Lordliness and State in his Character: That Respect
Agamemnon seems careful to treat him with, and the particular Distinctions
shown him at Table, are mentioned in a manner that insinuates they were Points
upon which this Prince not a little insisted. Il. 4.. 257, etc. The vaunting of
his Family in this Book, together with his Sarcasms and contemptuous Railleries
on his dead Enemies, savor of the same Turn of Mind. And it seems there was
among the Ancients a Tradition of Idomeneus which strengthens this Conjecture
of his Pride: For we find in the Heroicks of Philostratus, that before he would
come to the Trojan War, he demanded a Share in the sovereign Command with
Agamemnon himself.

I must, upon this occasion, make an Observation once for all, which will be
applicable to many Passages in Homer, and afford a Solution of many
Difficulties. It is that our Author drew several of his Characters with an Eye
to the Histories then known of famous Persons, or the Traditions that past in
those Times. One cannot believe otherwise of a Poet, who appears so nicely
exact in observing all the Customs of the Age he described; nor can we imagine
the infinite Number of minute Circumstances relating to particular Persons,
which we meet with every where in his Poem, could possibly have been invented
purely as Ornaments to it. This Reflection will account for a hundred seeming
Oddnesses not only in the Characters, but in the Speeches of the Iliad: For as
no Author is more true than Homer to the Character of the Person he introduces
speaking, so no one more often suits his Oratory to the Character of the Person
spoken to. Many of these Beauties must needs be lost to us, yet this
Supposition will give a new Light to several Particulars. For instance, the
Speech I have been mentioning of Agamemnon to Idomeneus in the 4 th Book,
wherein he puts this Hero in mind of the magnificent Entertainments he had
given him, becomes in this View much less odd and surprising. Or who can tell
but it had some Allusion to the Manners of the Cretans whom he commanded, whose
Character was so well known, as to become a Proverb: The Cretans, evil Beasts,
and slow Bellies.

XX.
VERSE 283. The Surgeons of the Camp.] Podalirius and Machaon were not the only
Physicians in the Army; it appears from some Passages in this Poem, that each
Body of Troops had one peculiar to themselves. It may not be improper to
advertise, that the ancient Physicians were all Surgeons. Eustathius.

XXI.
VERSE 325. -- Meriones attends, Whom thus he questions -- ] This Conversation
between Idomeneus and Meriones is generally censured as highly improper and out
of Place, and as such is given up even by M. Dacier, the most zealons of our
Poet's Defenders. However, if we look closely into the Occasion and Drift of
this Discourse, the Accusation will I believe, appear not so well grounded. Two
Persons of Distinction, just when the Enemy is put to a stop by the Ajaces,
meet behind the Army: Having each on important occasions retired out of the
Fight, the one to help a wounded Soldier, the other to seek a new Weapon.
Idomeneus, who is superior in Years as well as Authority, returning to the
Battle, is surprised to meet Meriones out of it, who was one of his own
Officers, ((...), as Homer here calls him) and being jealous of his Soldier's
Honor, demands the Cause of his quitting the Fight? Meriones having told him
it was the want of a Spear, he yet seems unsatisfied with the Excuse; adding,
that he himself did not approve of that distant manner of fighting with a
Spear: Meriones being touched to the quick with this Reproach, replies, that He
of all the Greeks had the least reason to suspect his Courage: Whereupon
Idomeneus perceiving him highly piqued, assures him he entertains no such hard
Thoughts of him, since he had often known his Courage proved on such Occasions,
where the Danger being greater, and the Number smaller, it was impossible for a
Coward to conceal his natural Infirmity: But now recollecting that a malicious
Mind might give a sinister Interpretation to their Inactivity during this
Discourse, he immediately breaks it off upon that Reflection. As therefore this
Conversation has its Rise from a Jealousy in the most tender Point of Honor, I
think the Poet cannot justly be blamed for suffering a Discourse so full of
warm Sentiments to run on for about forty Verses; which after all cannot be
supposed to take up more than two or three Minutes from Action.

XXII.
VERSE 335. This headless Lance, etc.] We have often seen several of Homer's
Combatants lose and break their Spears, yet they do not therefore retire from
the Battle to seek other Weapons, why therefore does Homer here send Meriones
on this Errand? It may be said, that in the kind of Fight which the Greeks now
maintained drawn up into the Phalanx, Meriones was useless without this Weapon.

XXIII.
VERSE 339. Spears I have store, etc.] Idomeneus describes his Tent as a
Magazine, stored with Variety of Arms won from the Enemy, which were not only
laid up as useless Trophies of his Victories, but kept there in order to supply
his own, and his Friends Occasions. And this Consideration shows us one reason
why these Warriors contended with such Eagerness to carry off the Arms of a
vanquished Enemy.

This gives me an occasion to animadvert upon a false Remark of Eustathius,
which is inserted in the 30 th Note on the 11 th Book, "that Homer, to show us
nothing is so unseasonable in a Battle as to stay to despoil the slain, feigns
that most of the Warriors who do it, are killed, wounded, or unsuccessful." I
am astonished how so great a Mistake should fall from any Man who had read
Homer, much more from one who had read him so thoroughly, and even
superstitiously, as the old Archbishop of Thessalonica. There is scarce a Book
in Homer that does not abound with Instances to the contrary, where the
Conquerors strip their Enemies, and bear off their Spoils in Triumph. It was
(as I have already said in the Essay on Homer's Battles) as honorable an
Exploit in those Days to carry off the Arms, as it is now to gain a Standard.
But it is a strange Consequence, that because our Author sometimes represents a
Man unsuccessful in a glorious Attempt, he therefore discommends the Attempt
itself; and is as good an Argument against encountering an Enemy living, as
against spoiling him dead. One ought not to confound this with Plundering,
between which Homer has so well marked the Distinction; when he constantly
speaks of the Spoils as glorious, but makes Nestor in the 6 th Book, and Hector
in the 15 th directly forbid the Pillage, as a Practice that has often proved
fatal in the midst of a Victory, and sometimes even after it.

XXIV.
VERSE 353. To him Idomeneus.] There is a great deal more Dialogue in Homer
than in Virgil. The Roman Poet's are generally set Speeches, those of the Greek
more in Conversation. What Virgil does by two Words of a Narration, Homer
brings about by a Speech; he hardly raises one of his Heroes out of Bed without
some Talk concerning it. There are not only Replies, but Rejoinders in Homer, a
thing scarce ever to be found in Virgil; the Consequence whereof is, that there
must be in the Iliad many continued Conversations (such as this of our two
Heroes) a little resembling common Chit-chat. This renders the Poem more
natural and animated, but less grave and majestic. However, that such was the
way of writing generally practiced in those ancient Times, appears from the
like manner used in most of the Books of the Old Testament; and it particularly
agreed with our Author's warm Imagination, which delighted in perpetual
Imagery, and in painting every Circumstance of what he described.

XXV.
VERSE 355. In that sharp Service, etc.] In a general Battle Cowardice may be
the more easily concealed, by reason of the Number of the Combatants; but in an
Ambuscade, where the Soldiers are few, each must be discovered to be what he
is; this is the reason why the Ancients entertained so great an Idea of this
sort of War; the bravest Men were always chosen to serve upon such Occasions.
Eustathius.

XXVI.
VERSE 384. So Mars Armipotent, etc.] Homer varies his Similitudes with all
imaginable Art, sometimes deriving them from the Properties of Animals,
sometimes from natural Passions, sometimes from the Occurrences of Life, and
sometimes (as in the Simile before us) from History. The Invention of Mars's
Passage from Thrace (which was feigned to be the Country of that God) to the
Phlegyans and Ephyrians, is a very beautiful and poetical manner of celebrating
the martial Genius of that People, who lived in perpetual Wars.

Methinks there is something of a fine Enthusiasm, in Homer's manner of
fetching a Compass, as it were, to draw in new Images besides those in which
the direct Point of Likeness consists. Milton perfectly well understood the
Beauty of these digressive Images, as we may see from the following Simile,
which is in a manner made up of them. Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strew the
Brooks
In Vallombrosa (where the Etrurian Shades
High-overarch'd embow'r.) Or scattered Sedge
Afloat, when with fierce Winds Orion armed
Has vexed the Red Seacoast, (whose Wave o'erthrew
Busiris and his Memphian Chivalry,
While with perfidious Hatred they pursued
The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe Shore their floating Carcasses,
And broken Chariot-Wheels) -- So thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these. --
As for the general Purport of this Comparison of Homer, it gives us a noble
and majestic Idea, at once of Idomeneus and Meriones, represented by Mars and
his Son Terror; in which each of these Heroes is greatly elevated, yet the just
Distinction between them preserved. The beautiful Simile of Virgil in his 12 th
Aeneid is drawn with an Eye to this of our Author. Qualis apud gelidi cum
flumina concitus Hebri
Sanguineus Mavors clypeo increpat, atque furentes
Bella movens immittit equos; illi aequore aperto
Ante Notos Zephyrumque volant: gemit ultima pulsu
Thraca pedum: circumque atrae Formidinis ora,
Iraeque, Insidiaeque, Dei comitatus, aguntur.


XXVII.
VERSE 396. -- Shall we join the Right,
Or combat in the Center of the Fight,
Or to the Left our wanted Succor lend?]
The common Interpreters have to this Question of Meriones given a meaning
which is highly impertinent, if not downright Nonsense; explaining it thus.
Shall we fight on the right, or in the middle, or on the left, for no where
else do the Greeks so much want Assistance; which amounts to this; Shall we
engage where our Assistance is most wanted, or where it is not wanted? The
Context, as well as the Words of the Original, oblige us to understand it in
this obvious meaning; Shall we bring our Assistance to the right, to the left,
or to the Center? Since the Greeks being equally pressed and engaged on all
sides, equally need our Aid in all Parts.

XXVIII.
VERSE 400. Not in the Center, etc.] There is in this Answer of Idomeneus a
small Circumstance which is overlooked by the Commentators, but in which the
whole Spirit and Reason of what is said by him consists. He says he is in no
fear for the Center, since it is defended by Teucer and Ajax: Teucer being not
only most famous for the Use of the Bow, but likewise excellent (...), in a
close standing Fight: And as for Ajax, though not so swift of Foot as Achilles,
yet he was equal to him (...), in the same steadfast manner of fighting; hereby
plainly intimating that he was secure for the Center, because that Post was
defended by two Persons both accomplished in that Part of War, which was most
necessary for the Service they were then engaged in; the two Expressions before
mentioned peculiarly signifying a firm and steady way of fighting, most useful
in maintaining a Post.

XXIX.
VERSE 451. In War and Discord's Adamantine Chain.] This short but
comprehensive Allegory is very proper to give us an Idea of the present
Condition of the two contending Armies, who being both powerfully sustained by
the Assistance of superior Deities, join and mix together in a close and bloody
Engagement, without any remarkable Advantage on either side. To image to us
this State of Things, the Poet represents Jupiter and Neptune holding the two
Armies close bound by a mighty Chain, which he calls the Knot of Contention and
War, and of which the two Gods draw the Extremities, whereby the enclosed
Armies are compelled together, without any Possibility on either side to
separate or to conquer; there is not perhaps in Homer any Image at once so
exact and so bold. Madam Dacier acknowledges, that despairing to make this
Passage shine in her Language, she purposely omitted it in her Translation: But
from what she says in her Annotations, it seems that she did not rightly
apprehend the Propriety and Beauty of it. Hobbes too was not very sensible of
it, when he translated it so oddly. And thus the Saw from Brother unto Brother
Of cruel War was drawn alternately,
And many slain on one side and the other.


XXX.
VERSE 451.] It will be necessary, for the better understanding the Conduct of
Homer in every Battle he describes, to reflect on the particular kind of Fight,
and the Circumstances that distinguish each. In this View therefore we ought to
remember through this whole Book, that the Battle described in it, is a fixed
close Fight, wherein the Armies engage in a gross compact Body, without any of
those Skirmishes or Feats of Activity so often mentioned in the foregoing
Engagements. We see at the beginning of it the Grecians form a Phalanx,. 126.
which continues unbroken at the very end,. 806. The chief Weapon made use of is
a Spear, being most proper for this manner of Combat; nor do we see any other
use of a Chariot, but to carry off the dead or wounded (as in the Instance of
Harpalion and Deiphobus.)

From hence we may observe, with what Judgment and Propriety Homer introduces
Idomeneus as the chief in Action on this occasion: For this Hero being declined
from his Prime, and somewhat stiff with Years, was only fit for this kind of
Engagement, as Homer expressly says in the 512th Verse of the present Book.
(...)
(...)
(...)


XXXI.
VERSE 471. The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead:
And thus (he cries) -- ]
It seems (says Eustathius on this Place) that the Iliad being an heroic Poem,
is of too serious a Nature to admit of Raillery: Yet Homer has found the secret
of joining two things that are in a manner incompatible. For this Piece of
Raillery is so far from raising Laughter, that it becomes a Hero, and is
capable to inflame the Courage of all who hear it. It also elevates the
Character of Idomeneus, who notwithstanding he is in the midst of imminent
Dangers, preserves his usual Gaiety of Temper, which is the greatest Evidence
of an uncommon Courage. Id. p. 935.

I confess I am of an Opinion very different from this of Eustathius, which is
also adopted by M. Dacier. So severe and bloody an Irony to a dying Person is a
fault in Morals, if not in Poetry itself. It should not have place at all, or
if it should, is ill placed here. Idomeneus is represented a brave Man, nay a
Man of a compassionate Nature, in the Circumstance he was introduced in, of
assisting a wounded Soldier. What Provocation could such an one have, to insult
so barbarously an unfortunate Prince, being neither his Rival nor particular
Enemy? True Courage is inseparable from Humanity, and all generous Warriors
regret the very Victories they gain, when they reflect what a Price of Blood
they cost. I know it may be answered, that these were not the Manners of
Homer's Time, a Spirit of Violence and Devastation then reigned, even among the
chosen People of God, as may be seen from the Actions of Joshua, etc. However,
if one would forgive the Cruelty, one cannot forgive the Gaiety on such an
occasion. These inhuman Jests the Poet was so far from being obliged to make,
that he was on the contrary forced to break through the general serious Air of
his Poem to introduce them. Would it not raise a Suspicion, that (whatever we
see of his superior Genius in other respects) his own Views of Morality were
not elevated above the Barbarity of his Age? I think indeed the thing by far
the most shocking in this Author, is that Spirit of Cruelty which appears too
manifestly in the Iliad.

Virgil was too judicious to imitate Homer in these Licenses, and is much more
reserved in his Sarcasms and Insults. There are not above four or five in the
whole Aeneid. That of Pyrrhus to Priam in the second Book, though barbarous in
itself, may be accounted for as intended to raise a Character of Horror, and
render the Action of Pyrrhus odious; whereas Homer stains his most Favorite
Characters with these Barbarities. That of Ascanius over Numanus in the ninth,
was a fair Opportunity where Virgil might have indulged the Humor of a cruel
Raillery, and have been excused by the Youth and Gaiety of the Speaker; yet it
is no more than a very moderate Answer to the Insolences with which he had just
been provoked by his Enemy, only retorting two of his own Words upon him. -- I,
verbis virtutem illude superbis!
Bis capti Phryges haec Rutulis responsa remittunt.
He never suffers his Aeneas to fall into this Practice, but while he is on
fire with Indignation after the Death of his Friend Pallas: That short one to
Mezentius is the least that could be said to such a Tyrant. -- Ubi nunc
Mezentius acer, and illa
Effera vis animi? --
The worst-natur'd one I remember (which yet is more excusable than Homer's) is
that of Turnus to Eumedes in the 12 th Book. En, agros, and quam bello,
Trojane, petisti,
Hesperiam metire jacens: haec praemia, qui me
Ferro ausi tentare, ferunt: sic moenia condunt.


XXXII.
VERSE 474. And such the Contract of the Phrygian King, etc.] It was but
natural to raise a Question, on occasion of these and other Passages in Homer,
how it comes to pass that the Heroes of different Nations are so well
acquainted with the Stories and Circumstances of each other? Eustathius's
Solution is no ill one, that the Warriors on both sides might learn the Story
of their Enemies from the Captives they took, during the Course of so long a
War.

XXXIII.
VERSE 513. The Cretan saw, and stooping, etc.] Nothing could paint in a more
lively manner this whole Action, and every Circumstance of it, than the
following Lines. There is the Posture of Idomeneus upon seeing the Lance flying
toward him; the lifting the Shield obliquely to turn it aside; the Arm
discovered in that Position; the Form, Composition, Materials, and Ornaments of
the Shield distinctly specified; the Flight of the Dart over it, the Sound of
it first as it flew, then as it fell; and the Decay of that Sound on the Edge
of the Buckler, which being thinner than the other Parts rather tinkled than
rung, especially when the first Force of the Stroke was spent on the Orb of it.
All this in the Compass of so few Lines, in which every word is an Image, is
something more beautifully particular, than I remember to have met with in any
Poet.

XXXIV.
VERSE 543. He, once of Ilion 's Youth the loveliest Boy.] Some Manuscripts,
after these Words (...), insert the three following Verses, (...)
(...)
(...)
which I have not translated, as not thinking them genuine. Mr. Barnes is of
the same Opinion.

XXXV.
VERSE 554. His laboring Heart, heaves, with so strong a bound,
The long Lance shakes, and vibrates in the Wound.]
We cannot read Homer without observing a wonderful Variety in the Wounds and
Manner of dying. Some of these Wounds are painted with very singular
Circumstances, and those of uncommon Art and Beauty. This Passage is a
Masterpiece in that way; Alcathous is pierced into the Heart, which throbs with
so strong a Pulse, that the Motion is communicated even to the distant End of
the Spear, which is vibrated thereby. This Circumstance might appear too bold,
and the Effect beyond Nature, were we not informed by the most skilful
Anatomists of the wonderful Force of this Muscle, which some of them have
computed to be equal to the Weight of several thousand Pounds. Lower de Cord.
Borellus.

XXXVI.
VERSE 578. Incensed at partial Priam, etc.] Homer here gives the reason why
Aeneas did not fight in the foremost Ranks. It was against his Inclination that
he served Priam, and he was rather engaged by Honor and Reputation to assist
his Country, than by any Disposition to aid that Prince. This Passage is purely
historical, and the Ancients have preserved to us a Tradition which serves to
explain it. They say, that Aeneas became suspected by Priam, on account of an
Oracle which prophesied he should in Process of Time rule over the Trojans. The
King therefore showed him no great Degree of Esteem or Consideration, with
Design to discredit, and render him despicable to the People. Eustathius. This
Envy of Priam, and this Report of the Oracle, are mentioned by Achilles to
Aeneas in the 20 th Book,. 179. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
And Neptune in the 306th Verse of the same Book,

(...)
(...)
(...)
I shall conclude this Note with the Character of Aeneas, as it is drawn by
Philostratus, wherein he makes mention of the same Tradition. " Aeneas (says
this Author) was inferior to Hector in Battle only, in all else equal, and in
Prudence superior. He was likewise skilful in whatever related to the Gods, and
conscious of what Destiny had reserved for him after the taking of Troy.
Incapable of Fear, never discomposed, and particularly possessing himself in
the Article of Danger. Hector is reported to have been called the Hand, and
Aeneas the Head of the Trojans; and the latter more advantaged their Affairs by
his Caution, than the former by his Fury. These two Heroes were much of the
same Age, and the same Stature: The Air of Aeneas had something in it less bold
and forward, but at the same time more fixed and constant. Philostrat. Heroic.

XXXVII.
VERSE 621. Like Ida 's Flocks, etc.] Homer, whether he treats of the Customs
of Men or Beasts, is always a faithful Interpreter of Nature. When Sheep leave
the Pasture and drink freely, it is a certain Sign, that they have found good
Pasturage, and that they are all sound; it is therefore upon this Account, that
Homer says the Shepherd rejoices. Homer, we find, well understood what
Aristotle many Ages after him remarked, viz. that Sheep grow fat by drinking.
This therefore is the reason, why Shepherds are accustomed to give their Flocks
a certain Quantity of Salt every five Days in the Summer, that they may by this
means drink the more abundantly. Eustathius.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 655. And, fired with Hate.] Homer does not tell us the occasion of this
Hatred; but since his Days, Simonides and Ibycus write, that Idomeneus and
Deiphobus were Rivals, and both in love with Helen. This very well agrees with
the ancient Tradition which Eurypides and Virgil have followed: For after the
Death of Paris, they tell us she was espoused to Deiphobus. Eustathius.

XXXIX.
VERSE 721. Bending he fell, and doubled to the Ground, Lay panting. -- ] The
Original is, -- (...)
(...) --
The Versification represents the short broken Pantings of the dying Warrior,
in the short sudden Break at the second Syllable of the second Line. And this
beauty is, as it happens, precisely copied in the English. It is not often that
a Translator can do this Justice to Homer, but he must be content to imitate
these Graces and Proprieties at more distance, by endeavoring at something
parallel, though not the same.

XL.
VERSE 728. King Helenus.] The Appellation of King was not anciently confined
to those only who bore the sovereign Dignity, but applied also to others. There
was in the Island of Cyprus a whole Order of Officers called Kings, whose
Business it was to receive the Relations of Informers, concerning all that
happened in the Island, and to regulate Affairs accordingly. Eustathius.

XLI.
VERSE 739. As on some ample Barn's well-harden'd Floor.] We ought not to be
shocked at the Frequency of these Similes taken from the Ideas of a rural Life.
In early Times, before Politeness had raised the Esteem of Arts subservient to
Luxury, above those necessary to the Subsistence of Mankind, Agriculture was
the Employment of Persons of the greatest Esteem and Distinction: We see in
sacred History Princes busy at Sheep-shearing; and in the middle Times of the
Roman Commonwealth, a Dictator taken from the Plough. Wherefore it ought not
to be wondered that Allusions and Comparisons of this kind are frequently used
by ancient heroic Writers, as well to raise, as illustrate their Descriptions.
But since these Arts are fallen from their ancient Dignity, and become the
Drudgery of the lowest People, the Images of them are likewise sunk into
Meanness, and without this Consideration, must appear to common Readers
unworthy to have place in Epic Poems. It was perhaps through too much Deference
to such Tastes, that Chapman omitted this Simile in his Translation.

XLII.
VERSE 751. A Sling's soft Wool, snatched from a Soldier's side,
At once the Tent and Ligature supplied.]
The Words of the Original are these, (...)
(...)
This Passage, by the Commentators ancient and modern, seems rightly understood
in the Sense expressed in this Translation: The word (...) properly signifying
a Sling; which (as Eustathius observes from an old Scholiast) was anciently
made of woollen Strings. Chapman alone dissents from the common Interpretation,
boldly pronouncing that Slings are no where mentioned in the Iliad, without
giving any reason for his Opinion. He therefore translates the word (...), a
Skarffe, by no other Authority but that he says, it was a fitter thing to hang
a wounded Arm in, than a Sling; and very prettily wheedles his Reader into this
Opinion by a most gallant Imagination, that his Squire might carry this Skarffe
about him as a Favor of his own or of his Master's Mistress. But for the use
he has found for this Skarffe, there is not any Pretense from the Original;
where it is only said the Wound was bound up, without any mention of hanging
the Arm. After all, he is hard put to it in his Translation; for being resolved
to have a Scarf, and obliged to mention Wool, we are left entirely at a loss to
know from whence he got the latter.

A like Passage recurs near the end of this Book, where the Poet says the
Locrians went to War without Shield or Spear, only armed, (...)
Which last Expression, as all the Commentators agree, signifies a Sling, though
the word (...) is not used. Chapman here likewise, without any Color of
Authority, dissents from the common Opinion; but very inconstant in his Errors,
varies his Mistake, and assures us, this Expression is the true Periphrasis of
a light kind of Armor, called a Jack, by which all our Archers used to serve
in of old, and which were ever quilted with Wool.

XLIII.
VERSE 766. The covered Pole-Axe.] Homer never ascribes this Weapon to any but
the Barbarians, for the Battel-Axe was not used in War by the politer Nations.
It was the favorite Weapon of the Amazons. Eustathius.

XLIV.
VERSE 779. The Speech of Menelaus.] This Speech of Menelaus over his dying
Enemy, is very different from those with which Homer frequently makes his
Heroes insult the vanquished, and answers very well the Character of this
goodnatur'd Prince. Here are no insulting Taunts, no cruel Sarcasms, nor any
sporting with the particular Misfortunes of the dead: The Invectives he makes
are general, arising naturally from a Remembrance of his Wrongs, and being
almost nothing else but a Recapitulation of them. These Reproaches come most
justly from this Prince, as being the only Person among the Greeks who had
received any personal Injury from the Trojans. The Apostrophe he makes to
Jupiter, wherein he complains of his protecting a wicked People, has given
occasion to censure Homer as guilty of Impiety, in making his Heroes tax the
Gods with Injustice: But since, in the former Part of this Speech, it is
expressly said, that Jupiter will certainly punish the Trojans by the
Destruction of their City for violating the Laws of Hospitality, the latter
Part ought only to be considered as a Complaint to Jupiter for delaying that
Vengeance: This Reflection being no more than what a pious suffering Mind,
grieved at the flourishing Condition of prosperous Wickedness, might naturally
fall into. Not unlike this is the Complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter 12..
1. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with
thee of thy Judgments. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore
are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

Nothing can more fully represent the Cruelty and Injustice of the Trojans,
than the Observation with which Menelaus finishes their Character, by saying,
that they have a more strong, constant, and insatiable Appetite after
Bloodshed and Rapine, than others have to satisfy the most agreeable Pleasures
and natural Desires.

XLV.
VERSE 795. The best of things beyond their Measure cloy.] These Words
comprehend a very natural Sentiment, which perfectly shows the wonderful Folly
of Men: They are soon wearied with the most agreeable things, when they are
innocent, but never with the most toilsome things in the World, when injust and
criminal. Eustathius. Dacier.

XLVI.
VERSE 797. The Dance.] In the Original it is called (...), the blameless
Dance; to distinguish (says Eustathius) what sort of Dancing it is that Homer
commends. For there were two kinds of Dancing practiced among the Ancients, the
one reputable, invented by Minerva, or by Castor and Pollux; the other
dishonest, of which Pan, or Bacchus, was the Author. They were distinguished by
the Name of the Tragic, and the Comic or Satyric Dance. But those which
probably our Author commends were certain military Dances used by the greatest
Heroes. One of this sort was known to the Macedonians and Persians, practiced
by Antiochus the Great, and the famous Polyperchon. There was another which was
danced in complete Armor, called the Pyrrhick, from Pyrrhicus the Spartan its
Inventor, which continued in fashion among the Lacedaemonians. Scaliger the
Father remarks, that this Dance was too laborious to remain long in use even
among the Ancients; however it seems that Labor could not discourage this bold
Critic from reviving that laudable kind of Dance in the Presence of the
Emperor Maximilian and his whole Court. It is not to be doubted but the
Performance raised their Admiration; nor much to be wondered at, if they
desired to see more than once so extraordinary a Spectacle, as we have it in
his own Words. Poetices, lib. 1. cap. 18. Hanc saltationem [Pyrrhicam] nos and
saepe, and diu, coram Divo Maximiliano, jussu Bonisacii patrui, non sine
stupore totius Germaniae, repraesentavimus.

XLVII.
VERSE 819. Like some vile Worm extended on the Ground.] I cannot be of
Eustathius's Opinion, that this Simile was designed to debase the Character of
Harpalion, and to represent him in a mean and disgraceful View, as one who had
nothing noble in him. I rather think from the Character he gives of this young
Man, whose Piety carried him to the Wars to attend his Father, and from the Air
of this whole Passage, which is tender and pathetick, that he intended this
humble Comparison only as a mortifying Picture of human Misery and Mortality.
As to the Verses which Eustathius alleges for a Proof of the Cowardice of
Harpalion, (...)
(...) --
The Retreat described in the first Verse is common to the greatest Heroes in
Homer; the same Words are applied to Deiphobus and Meriones in this Book, and
to Patroclus in the 16 th,. 817. The same thing in other Words is said even of
the great Ajax, Il. 15.. 728. And we have Ulysses described in the 4 th,. 497.
with the same Circumspection and Fear of the Darts: though none of those Warriors
have the same reason as Harpalion for their Retreat or Caution, he alone being
unarmed, which Circumstance takes away all Imputation of Cowardice.

XLVIII.
VERSE 823. The pensive Father.] We have seen in the 5 th Iliad the Death of
Pylaemenes General of the Paphlagonians: How comes he then in this Place to be
introduced as following the Funeral of his Son? Eustathius informs us of a most
ridiculous Solution of some Critics, who thought it might be the Ghost of this
unhappy Father, who not being yet interred, according to the Opinion of the
Ancients, wandered upon the Earth. Zenodotus not satisfied with this, (as
indeed he had little reason to be) changed the Name of Pylaemenes into
Kylaemenes. Didymus thinks there were two of the same Name; as there are in
Homer two Schedius's. two Eurymedon's, and three Adrastus's. And others correct
the Verse by adding a Negative, (...); his Father did not follow his Chariot
with his Face bathed in Tears. Which last, if not of more Weight than the rest,
is yet more ingenious. Eustathius. Dacier. Nor did his valiant Father (now no
more)
Pursue the mournful Pomp along the Shore,
No Sire survived, to grace the untimely Bier,
Or sprinkle the cold Ashes with a Tear.


XLIX.
VERSE 840. And chose the certain, glorious Path to Death.] Thus we see
Euchenor is like Achilles, who sailed to Troy, though he knew he should fall
before it: This might somewhat have prejudiced the Character of Achilles, every
Branch of which ought to be single, and superior to all others, as he ought to
be without a Rival in every thing that speaks a Hero: Therefore we find two
essential Differences between Euchenor and Achilles, which preserve the
Superiority of the Hero of the Poem. Achilles, if he had not sailed to Troy,
had enjoyed a long Life; but Euchenor had been soon cut off by some cruel
Disease. Achilles being independent, and as a King, could have lived at ease at
home, without being obnoxious to any Disgrace; but Euchenor being but a private
Man, must either have gone to the War, or been exposed to an ignominious
Penalty. Eustathius. Dacier.

L.
VERSE 845. Nor knew great Hector, etc.] Most part of this Book being employed
to describe the brave Resistance the Greeks made on their left under Idomeneus
and Meriones; the Poet now shifts the Scene, and returns to Hector, whom he
left in the Center of the Army, after he had passed the Wall, endeavoring in
vain to break the Phalanx where Ajax commanded. And that the Reader might take
notice of this Change of Place, and carry distinctly in his Mind each Scene of
Action, Homer is very careful in the following Lines to let us know that Hector
still continues in the Place where he had first passed the Wall, at that part
of it which was lowest, (as appears from Sarpedon's having pulled down one of
its Battlements on foot, lib. 12.) and which was nearest the Station where the
Ships of Ajax were laid, because that Hero was probably thought a sufficient
Guard for that Part. As the Poet is so very exact in describing each Scene as
in a Chart or Plan, the Reader ought to be careful to trace each Action in it;
otherwise he will see nothing but Confusion in things which are in themselves
very regular and distinct. This Observation is the more necessary, because even
in this Place, where the Poet intended to prevent any such Mistake, Dacier and
other Interpreters have applied to the present Action what is only a
Recapitulation of the Time and Place described in the former Book.

LI.
VERSE 858. Pthians.] These Pthians are not the Troops of Achilles, for those
were called Pthiotes; but they were the Troops of Protesilaus and Philoctetes.
Eustathius.

LII.
VERSE 875. So when two lordly Bulls, etc.] The Image here given of the Ajaces
is very lively and exact; there being no Circumstance of their present
Condition that is not to be found in the Comparison, and no Particular in the
Comparison that does not resemble the Action of the Heroes. Their Strength and
Labor, their Unanimity and Nearness to each other, the Difficulties they
struggle against, and the Sweat occasioned by this Struggling, perfectly
corresponding with the Simile.

LIII.
VERSE 933. Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
On yonder Decks, and yet o'erlooks the Plains.]
There never was a nobler Encomium than this of Achilles. It seems enough to so
wise a Counselor as Polydamas, to convince so intrepid a Warrior as Hector, in
how great Danger the Trojans stood, to say, Achilles sees us. "Though he abstains
from the Fight, he still casts his Eye on the Battle; it is true, we are a
brave Army, and yet keep our Ground, but still Achilles sees us, and we are not
safe." This Reflection makes him a God, a single Regard of whom can turn the
Fate of Armies, and determine the Destiny of a whole People. And how nobly is
this Thought extended in the Progress of the Poem, where we shall see in the 16
th Book the Trojans fly at the first Sight of his Armor, worn by Patroclus;
and in the 18 th their Defeat completed by his sole Appearance, unarmed, on
his Ship.

LIVE.
VERSE 939. Hector, with a bound, Leapt from his Chariot.] Hector having in the
last Book alighted, and caused the Trojans to leave their Chariots behind them,
when they passed the Trench, and no mention of any Chariot but that of Asius
since occurring in the Battle; we must necessarily infer, either that Homer has
neglected to mention the Advance of the Chariots, (a Circumstance which should
not have been omitted) or else that he is guilty here of a great Mistake in
making Hector leap from his Chariot. I think it evident, that this is really a
Slip of the Poet's Memory: For in this very Book,. 533. we see Polites leads
off his wounded Brother to the Place where his Chariot remained behind the
Army. And again in the next Book, Hector being wounded, is carried out of the
Battle in his Soldier's Arms to the Place where his Horses and Chariot waited
at a distance from the Battle, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Lib. 14.. 428. But what puts it beyond Dispute, that the Chariots continued
all this time in the Place where they first quitted them, is a Passage in the
beginning of the fifteenth Book, where the Trojans being overpowered by the
Greeks, fly back over the Wall and Trench till they came to the Place where
their Chariots stood, (...)
Lib. 15.. 3. Neither Eustathius nor Dacier have taken any notice of this
Incongruity, which would tempt one to believe they were willing to overlook
what they could not excuse. I must honestly own my Opinion, that there are
several other Negligences of this kind in Homer. I cannot think otherwise of
the Passage in the present Book concerning Pylaemenes; notwithstanding the
Excuses of the Commentators which are there given. The very using the same Name
in different Places for different Persons, confounds the Reader in the Story,
and is what certainly would be better avoided: So that it is to no purpose to
say, there might as well be two Pylaemenes's as two Schedius's, two Eurymedons,
two Ophelestes's, etc. since it is more blameable to be negligent in many
Instances than in one. Virgil is not free from this, as Macrobius has observed.
Sat. l. 5. c. 15. But the abovementioned Names are Proofs of that Critick's
being greatly mistaken in affirming that Homer is not guilty of the same. It is
one of those many Errors he was led into, by his Partiality to Homer above
Virgil.

LV.
VERSE 948. And seemed a moving Mountain topt with Snow.] This Simile is very
short in the Original, and requires to be opened a little to discover its full
Beauty. I am not of Mad. Dacier's Opinion, that the Luster of Hector's Armor
was that which furnished Homer with this Image; it seems rather to allude to
the Plume upon his Helmet, in the Action of shaking which, this Hero is so
frequently painted by our Author, and from thence distinguished by the
remarkable Epithet (...). This is a very pleasing Image, and very much what the
Painters call Picturesque. I fancy it gave the Hint for a very fine one in
Spenser, where he represents the Person of Contemplation in the Figure of a
venerable old Man almost consumed with Study. His snowy Locks adown his
Shoulders spread,
As hoary Frost with Spangles does attire
The mossy Branches of an Oak half dead.


LVI.
VERSE 965. Ill-fated Paris.] The Reproaches which Hector here casts on Paris,
give us the Character of this Hero, who in many things resembles Achilles;
being (like him) injust, violent, and impetuous, and making no Distinction
between the innocent and criminal. It Is he who is obstinate in attacking the
Entrenchments, yet asks an Account of those who were slain in the Attack from
Paris; and though he ought to blame himself for their Deaths, yet he speaks to
Paris, as if through his Cowardice he had suffered these to be slain, whom he
might have preserved if he had fought courageously. Eustathius.

LVII.
VERSE 1005. Wide-rowling, foaming high, and tumbling to the Shore.] I have
endeavored in this Verse to imitate the Confusion, and broken Sound of the
Original, which images the Tumult and roaring of many Waters. (...)
(...) --


LVIII.
VERSE 1037. Clouds of rolling Dust.] A Critic might take occasion from hence,
to speak of the exact time of the Year in which the Actions of the Iliad are
supposed to have happened. And (according to the grave manner of a learned
Dissertator) begin by informing us, that he has found it must be the
Summer-Season, from the frequent mention made of Clouds of Dust: Tho what he
discovers might be full as well inferred from common Sense, the Summer being
the natural Season for a Campaign. However he should quote all those Passages
at large; and adding to the Article of Dust as much as he can find of the Sweat
of the Heroes, it might fill three Pages very much to his own Satisfaction. It
would look well to observe farther, that the Fields are described flowery, Il.
2.. 467. that the Branches of a Tamarisk Tree are flourishing, Il. 10.. 767.
that the Warriors sometimes wash themselves in the Sea, Il. 10.. 572. and
sometimes refresh themselves by cool Breezes from the Sea, Il. 11.. 620. that
Diomed sleeps out of his Tent on the Ground, Il. 10.. 150. that the Flies are
very busy about the dead Body of Patroclus, Il. 19.. 23. that Apollo covers the
Body of Hector with a Cloud to prevent its being scorched, Il. 23.. 190. All
this would prove the very thing which was said at first, that it was Summer. He
might next proceed to enquire, what precise critical Time of Summer? And here
the mention of new-made Honey in Il. 11.. 630. might be of great Service in the
Investigation of this important Matter: He would conjecture from hence, that it
must be near the end of Summer, Honey being seldom taken till that time; to
which having added the Plague which rages in Book 1. and remarked, that
Infections of that kind generally proceed from the extremest Heats, which Heats
are not till near the Autumn; the learned Enquirer might hug himself in this
Discovery, and conclude with Triumph.

If any one think this too ridiculous to have been ever put in Practice, he may
see what Bossu has done to determine the precise Season of the Aeneid, lib. 3.
chapter 12. The Memory of that learned Critic failed him, when he produced as one
of the Proofs that it was Autumn, a Passage in the 6 th Book, where the Fall of
the Leaf is only mentioned in a Simile. He has also found out a Beauty in
Homer, which few even of his greatest Admirers can believe he intended; which
is, that to the Violence and Fury of the Iliad he artfully adapted the Heat of
Summer, but to the Odysseis the cooler and maturer Season of Autumn, to
correspond with the Sedateness and Prudence of Ulysses.

THE FOURTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
Juno deceives Jupiter by the Girdle of Venus.
NEstor sitting at the Table with Machaon, is alarmed with the increasing
Clamor of the War, and hastens to Agamemnon: On his way he meets that Prince
with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the Extremity of the Danger.
Agamemnon proposes to make their Escape by Night, which Ulysses withstands; to
which Diomed adds his Advice, that, wounded as they were, they should go forth
and encourage the Army with their Presence; which Advice is pursued. Juno
seeing the Partiality of Jupiter to the Trojans, forms a Design to overreach
him; she sets off her Charms with the utmost Care, and (the more surely to
enchant him) obtains the Magic Girdle of Venus. She then applies herself to
the God of Sleep, and with some Difficulty, persuades him to seal the Eyes of
Jupiter; this done she goes to Mount Ida, where the God, at first sight, is
ravished with her Beauty, sinks in her Embraces, and is laid asleep. Neptune
takes Advantage of his Slumber, and succors the Greeks: Hector is struck to
the Ground with a prodigious Stone by Ajax, and carried off from the Battle:
Several Actions succeed; till the Trojans much distressed, are obliged to give
way: The lesser Ajax signalizes himself in a particular manner.

THE FOURTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
BUT nor the genial Feast, nor flowing Bowl,
Could charm the Cares of Nestor's watchful Soul;
His startled Ears the increasing Cries attend;
Then thus, impatient, to his wounded Friend.
What new Alarm, divine Machaon say,
What mixed Events attend this mighty Day?
Hark! how the Shouts divide, and how they meet,
And now come full, and thicken to the Fleet!
Here, with the cordial Draught, dispel thy Care,
Let Hecamede the strengthening Bath prepare,
Refresh thy Wound, and cleanse the clotted Gore;
While I th'Adventures of the Day explore.
He said: and seizing Thrasimedes' Shield,
(His valiant Offspring) hastened to the Field;
(That Day, the Son his Father's Buckler bore)
Then snatched a Lance, and issued from the Door.
Soon as the Prospect opened to his View,
His wounded Eyes the Scene of Sorrow knew;
Dire Disarray! the Tumult of the Fight,
The Wall in Ruins, and the Greeks in Flight.
As when old Ocean's silent Surface sleeps,
The Waves just heaving on the purple Deeps;
While yet the expected Tempest hangs on high,
Weighs down the Cloud, and blackens in the Sky,
The Mass of Waters will no Wind obey;
Jove sends one Gust, and bids them roll away.
While wavering Counsels thus his Mind engage,
Fluctuates, in doubtful Thought, the Pylian Sage;
To join the Host, or to the General haste,
Debating long, he fixes on the last:
Yet, as he moves, the Fight his Bosom warms;
The Field rings dreadful with the Clang of Arms;
The gleaming Faulchions flash, the Javelins fly;
Blows echo Blows, and all, or kill, or die.
Him, in his March, the wounded Princes meet,
By tardy Steps ascending from the Fleet.
The King of Men, Ulysses the divine,
And who to Tydeus owes his noble Line.
(Their Ships at distance from the Battle stand,
In Lines advanced along the shelving Strand;
Whose Bay, the Fleet unable to contain
At length, beside the Margin of the Main,
Rank above Rank, the crowded Ships they moor;
Who landed first lay highest on the Shore.)
Supported on their Spears, they took their way,
Unfit to fight, but anxious for the Day.
Nestor's Approach alarmed each Grecian Breast,
Whom thus the General of the Host addressed.
O Grace and Glory of the Achaian Name!
What drives thee, Nestor, from the Field of Fame?
Shall then proud Hector see his Boast fulfilled,
Our Fleets in Ashes, and our Heroes killed?
Such was his Threat, ah now too soon made good,
On many a Grecian Bosom writ in Blood.
Is every Heart inflamed with equal Rage
Against your King, nor will one Chief engage?
And have I lived to see with mournful Eyes
In every Greek a new Achilles rise?
Gerenian Nestor then. So Fate has willed;
And all-confirming Time has Fate fulfilled.
Not he that thunders from the aerial Bower,
Not Jove himself, upon the Past has power.
The Wall, our late inviolable Bound,
And best Defense, lies smoking on the Ground:
Even to the Ships their conquering Arms extend,
And Groans of slaughtered Greeks to Heaven ascend.
On speedy Measures then employ your Thought;
In such Distress if Counsel profit ought;
Arms cannot much: Though Mars our Souls incite,
These gaping Wounds withhold us from the Fight.
To him the Monarch. That our Army bends,
That Troy triumphant our high Fleet ascends,
And that the Rampart, late our surest Trust,
And best Defense, lies smoking in the Dust;
All this from Jove's afflictive Hand we bear:
Who, far from Argos, wills our Ruin here.
Past are the Days when happier Greece was blessed,
And all his Favor, all his Aid confessed;
Now Heaven averse, our Hands from Battle ties,
And lifts the Trojan Glory to the Skies.
Cease we at length to waste our Blood in vain,
And launch what Ships lie nearest to the Main;
Leave these at Anchor till the coming Night:
Then if impetuous Troy forbear the Fight,
Bring all to Sea, and hoist each Sail for flight.
Better from Evils, well foreseen, to run,
Than perish in the Danger we may shun.
Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,
While Anger flashed from his disdainful Eyes.
What shameful Words, (unkingly as thou art)
Fall from that trembling Tongue, and timorous Heart?
Oh were thy Sway the Curse of meaner Powers,
And thou the Shame of any Host but ours!
A Host, by Jove endu'd with martial Might,
And taught to conquer, or to fall in Fight:
Adventurous Combats and bold Wars to wage,
Employed our Youth, and yet employs our Age.
And will thou thus desert the Trojan Plain?
And have whole Streams of Blood been spilt in vain?
In such base Sentence if thou couch thy Fear,
Speak it in Whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
Lives there a Man so dead to Fame, who dares
To think such Meanness, or the Thought declares?
And comes it even from him, whose sovereign Sway
The banded Legions of all Greece obey?
Is this a Gen'ral's Voice, that calls to flight,
While War hangs doubtful, while his Soldiers fight?
What more could Troy? What yet their Fate denies
Thou giv'st the Foe: all Greece becomes their Prize.
No more the Troops, our hoisted Sails in view,
Themselves abandoned, shall the Fight pursue,
Thy Ships first flying with Despair shall see,
And owe Destruction to a Prince like thee.
Thy just Reproofs ( Atrides calm replies)
Like Arrows pierce me, for thy Words are wise.
Unwilling as I am to lose the Host,
I force not Greece to quit this hateful Coast.
Glad I submit, whoever, or young or old,
Ought, more conducive to our Weal, unfold.
Tydides cut him short, and thus began.
Such Counsel if you seek, behold the Man
Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
A Youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
May speak to Councils and assembled Kings.
Hear then in me the great Oenides' Son,
Whose honored Dust (his Race of Glory run)
Lies whelmed in Ruins of the Theban Wall,
Brave in his Life, and glorious in his Fall.
With three bold Sons was generous Prothous blessed,
Who Pleuron's Walls and Calydon possessed;
Melas and Agrius, but (who surpast
The rest in Courage) Oeneus was the last.
From him, my Sire: from Calydon expelled,
He fled to Argos, and in Exile dwell'd;
The Monarch's Daughter there (so Jove ordained)
He won, and flourished where Adrastus reigned:
There rich in Fortune's Gifts, his Acres tilled,
Beheld his Vines their liquid Harvest yield,
And numerous Flocks, that whitened all the Field.
Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in Fame!
Nor lives in Greece a Stranger to his Name.
Then, what for common Good my Thoughts inspire,
Attend, and in the Son, respect the Sire.
Though sore of Battle, though with Wounds oppressed,
Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
Advance the Glory which he cannot share,
Though not Partaker, Witness of the War.
But lest new Wounds on Wounds o'erpower us quite,
Beyond the missile Javelin's sounding Flight,
Safe let us stand; and from the Tumult far,
Inspire the Ranks, and rule the distant War.
He added not: The listening Kings obey,
Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
The God of Ocean (to inflame their Rage)
Appears a Hero furrowed over with Age;
Pressed in his own, the Gen'ral's Hand he took,
And thus the venerable Warrior spoke.
Atrides, lo! with what disdainful Eye
Achilles sees his Country's Forces fly:
Blind impious Man! whose Anger is his Guide,
Who glories in inutterable Pride!
So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
The Wretch relentless, and overwhelm with Shame!
But Heaven forsakes not thee: Over yonder Sands
Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan Bands
Fly diverse; while proud Kings, and Chiefs renowned
Driven Heaps on Heaps, with Clouds involved around
Of rolling Dust, their winged Wheels employ,
To hide their ignominious Heads in Troy.
He spoke, then rushed amid the warring Crew;
And sent his Voice before him as he flew,
Loud, as the Shout encountering Armies yield,
When twice ten thousand shake the laboring Field;
Such was the Voice, and such the thundering Sound
Of him, whose Trident rends the solid Ground.
Each Argive Bosom beats to meet the Fight,
And grizly War appears a pleasing Sight.
Meantime Saturnia from Olympus' Brow,
High-thron'd in Gold, beheld the Fields below;
With Joy the glorious Conflict she surveyed,
Where her great Brother gave the Grecians Aid.
But placed aloft, on Ida's shady Height
She sees her Jove, and trembles at the Sight.
Jove to deceive, what Methods shall she try,
What Arts, to blind his all-beholding Eye?
At length she trusts her Power; resolved to prove
'The old, yet still successful, Cheat of Love;
Against his Wisdom to oppose her Charms,
And lull the Lord of Thunders in her Arms.
Swift to her bright Apartment she repairs,
Sacred to Dress, and Beauty's pleasing Cares:
With Skill divine had Vulcan formed the Bower,
Safe from Access of each intruding Power.
Touched with her secret Key, the Doors unfold;
Self-clos'd behind her shut the Valves of Gold.
Here first she bathes; and round her Body pours
Soft Oils of Fragrance, and ambrosial Showers:
The Winds perfumed, the balmy Gale convey
Through Heaven, through Earth, and all th'aerial Way;
Spirit divine! whose Exhalation greets
The Sense of Gods with more than mortal Sweets.
Thus while she breathed of Heaven, with decent Pride
Her artful Hands the radiant Tresses tied;
Part on her Head in shining Ringlets rolled,
Part over her Shoulders waved like melted Gold.
Around her next a heavenly Mantle flowed,
That rich with Pallas' labored Colors glowed;
Large Clasps of Gold the Foldings gathered round,
A golden Zone her swelling Bosom bound.
Far-beaming Pendants tremble in her Ear,
Each Gemm illumined with a triple Star.
Then over her Head she casts a Veil more white
Than new fallen Snow, and dazzling as the Light.
Last her fair Feet celestial Sandals grace.
Thus issuing radiant, with majestic Pace,
Forth from the Dome The Imperial Goddess moves,
And calls the Mother of the Smiles and Loves.
How long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
Shall human Strifes celestial Minds divide?
Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia's Joy,
And set aside the Cause of Greece and Troy?
Let Heaven's dread Empress ( Cytheraea said)
Speak her Request, and deem her Will obeyed.
Then grant me (said the Queen) those conquering Charms,
That Power, which Mortals and Immortals warms,
That Love, which melts Mankind in fierce Desires,
And burns the Sons of Heaven with sacred Fires!
For lo! I haste to those remote Abodes,
Where the great Parents (sacred Source of Gods!)
Ocean and Tethys their old Empire keep,
On the last Limits of the Land and Deep.
In their kind Arms my tender Years were past;
What-time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
Of upper Heaven to Jove resigned the Reign,
Whelmed under the huge Mass of Earth and Main.
For Strife, I hear, has made the Union cease,
Which held so long that ancient Pair in Peace.
What Honor, and what Love shall I obtain,
If I compose those fatal Feuds again?
Once more their Minds in mutual Ties engage,
And what my Youth has owed, repay their Age.
She said. With Awe divine the Queen of Love
Obeyed the Sister and the Wife of Jove:
And from her fragrant Breast the Zone unbrac'd,
With various Skill and high Embroid'ry graced.
In this was every Art, and every Charm,
To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
Fond Love, the gentle Vow, the gay Desire,
The kind Deceit, the still-reviving Fire,
Persuasive Speech, and more persuasive Sighs,
Silence that spoke, and Eloquence of Eyes.
This on her Hand the Cyprian Goddess laid;
Take this, and with it all thy Wish, she said:
With Smiles she took the Charm; and smiling pressed
The powerful Cestus to her snowy Breast.
Then Venus to the Courts of Jove withdrew;
Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
Over high Pieria thence her Course she bore,
Over fair Emathia's ever pleasing Shore,
Over Haemus' Hills with Snows eternal crowned;
Nor once her flying Foot approached the Ground.
Then taking wing from Athos' lofty Steep,
She speeds to Lemnos over the rolling Deep,
And seeks the Cave of Death's half-Brother, Sleep.
Sweet pleasing Sleep! ( Saturnia thus began)
Who spread'st thy Empire over each God and Man;
If ever obsequious to thy Juno's Will,
O Power of Slumbers! hear, and favor still.
Shed thy soft Dews on Jove's immortal Eyes,
While sunk in Love's entrancing Joys he lies.
A splendid Footstool, and a Throne, that shine
With Gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;
The Work of Vulcan; to indulge thy Ease,
When Wine and Feasts thy golden Humors please.
Imperial Dame (the balmy Power replies)
Great Saturn's Heir, and Empress of the Skies!
Over other Gods I spread my easy Chain;
The Sire of all, old Ocean, owns my Reign,
And his hushed Waves lie silent on the Main.
But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep
Jove's awful Temples in the Dew of Sleep?
Long since too venurous, at thy bold Command,
On those eternal Lids I laid my Hand;
What-time, deserting Ilion's wasted Plain,
His conquering Son, Alcides, plowed the Main:
When lo! the Deeps arise, the Tempests roar,
And drive the Hero to the Coan Shore:
Great Jove awaking, shook the blessed Abodes,
With rising Wrath, and tumbled Gods on Gods;
Me chief he sought, and from the Realms on high
Had hurled indignant to the nether Sky,
But gentle Night, to whom I fled for Aid,
(The Friend of Earth and Heaven) her Wings displayed;
Impow'r'd the Wrath of Gods and Men to tame,
Even Jove revered the Venerable Dame.
Vain are thy Fears (the Queen of Heaven replies,
And speaking rolls her large, majestic Eyes)
Think thou that Troy has Jove's high Favor won,
Like great Alcides, his all-conqu'ring Son?
Hear, and obey the Mistress of the Skies,
Nor for the Deed expect a vulgar Prize;
For know, thy loved one shall be ever thine,
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine.
Swear then (he said) by those tremendous Floods
That roar through Hell, and bind the invoking Gods:
Let the great Parent Earth one Hand sustain,
And stretch the other over the sacred Main.
Call the black Gods that round Saturnus dwell,
To hear, and witness from the Depths of Hell;
That, she, my loved one, shall be ever mine,
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine.
The Queen assents, and from the infernal Bowers
Invokes the sable Subtartarean Powers,
And those who rule the inviolable Floods,
Whom Mortals name the dread Titanian Gods.
Then swift as Wind, over Lemnos smoaky Isle,
They wing their way, and Imbrus' Sea-beat Soil,
Through Air unseen involved in Darkness glide,
And light on Lectos, on the Point of I Would.
(Mother of Savages, whose echoing Hills
Are heard resounding with a hundred Rills)
Fair Ida trembles underneath the God;
Hushed are her Mountains, and her Forests nod.
There on a Fir, whose spiry Branches rise
To join its Summit to the neighboring Skies,
Dark in embow'ring Shade, concealed from Sight,
Sat Sleep, in Likeness of the Bird of Night,
( Chalcis his Name with those of heavenly Birth,
But called Cymindis by the Race of Earth.)
To Ida's Top successful Juno flies:
Great Jove surveys her with desiring Eyes:
The God, whose Lightning sets the Heavens on fire,
Through all his Bosom feels the fierce Desire;
Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her Charms,
Mixed with her Soul, and melted in her Arms.
Fixed on her Eyes he fed his eager Look,
Then pressed her Hand, and thus with Transport spoke.
Why comes my Goddess from the ethereal Sky,
And not her Steeds and flaming Chariot nigh?
Then she -- I haste to those remote Abodes,
Where the great Parents of the deathless Gods,
The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys reign,
On the last Limits of the Land and Main.
I visit these, to whose indulgent Cares
I owe the nursing of my tender Years.
For Strife, I hear, has made that Union cease
Which held so long this ancient Pair in Peace.
The Steeds, prepared my Chariot to convey
Over Earth and Seas, and through the aerial way,
Wait under I Would: Of thy superior Power
To ask Consent, I leave the Olympian Bower;
Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred Cells
Deep under Seas, where hoary Ocean dwells.
For that (said Jove) suffice another Day;
But eager Love denies the least Delay.
Let softer Cares the present Hour employ,
And be these Moments sacred all to Joy.
Never did my Soul so strong a Passion prove,
Or for an earthly, or a heavenly Love:
Not when I pressed Ixion's matchless Dame,
Whence rose Perithous like the Gods in Fame.
Not when fair Danae felt the Shower of Gold
Stream into Life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
Not thus I burned for either Theban Dame,
( Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came)
Not Phoenix' Daughter, beautiful and young,
Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.
Not thus I burned for fair Latona's Face,
Nor comelier Ceres' more majestic Grace.
Not thus even for thy self I felt Desire,
As now my Veins receive the pleasing Fire.
He spoke; the Goddess with the charming Eyes
Glows with celestial Red, and thus replies.
Is this a Scene for Love? On Ida's Height,
Exposed to mortal, and immortal Sight;
Our Joys profaned by each familiar Eye;
The Sport of Heaven, and Fable of the Sky!
How shall I ever review the blessed Abodes,
Or mix among the Senate of the Gods?
Shall I not think, that, with disordered Charms,
All Heaven beholds me recent from thy Arms?
With Skill divine has Vulcan formed thy Bower,
Sacred to Love and to the genial Hour;
If such thy Will, to that Recess retire,
And secret there indulge thy soft Desire.
She ceased, and smiling with superior Love,
Thus answered mild the Cloud-compelling Jove.
Nor God, nor Mortal shall our Joys behold,
Shaded with Clouds, and circumfus'd in Gold,
Not even the Sun, who darts through Heaven his Rays,
And whose broad Eye the extended Earth surveys.
Gazing he spoke, and kindling at the view,
His eager Arms around the Goddess threw.
Glad Earth perceives, and from her Bosom pours
Unbidden Herbs, and voluntary Flowers;
Thick newborn Vi'lets a soft Carpet spread,
And clust'ring Lotos swelled the rising Bed,
And sudden Hyacinths the Turf bestrow,
And flamy Crocus made the Mountain glow.
There golden Clouds conceal the heavenly Pair,
Steeped in soft Joys, and circumfus'd with Air;
Celestial Dews, descending over the Ground,
Perfume the Mount, and breathe Ambrosia round.
At length with Love and Sleep's soft Power oppressed,
The panting Thund'rer nods, and sinks to Rest.
Now to the Navy born on silent Wings,
To Neptune's Ear soft Sleep his Message brings;
Beside him sudden, unperceived he stood,
And thus with gentle Words addressed the God.
Now, Neptune! now, the important Hour employ,
To check a while the haughty Hopes of Troy:
While Jove yet rests, while yet my Vapors shed
The golden Vision round his sacred Head;
For Juno's Love, and Somnus' pleasing Ties,
Have closed those awful and eternal Eyes.
Thus having said, the Power of Slumber flew,
On human Lids to drop the balmy Dew.
Neptune, with Zeal increased, renews his Care,
And towering in the foremost Ranks of War,
Indignant thus -- Oh once of martial Fame!
O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the Name!
This half-recover'd Day shall Troy obtain?
Shall Hector thunder at your Ships again?
Lo still he vaunts, and threats the Fleet with Fires,
While stern Achilles in his Wrath retires.
One Hero's Loss too tamely you deplore,
Be still your selves, and we shall need no more.
Oh yet, if Glory any Bosom warms,
Brace on your firmest Helms, and stand to Arms:
His strongest Spear each valiant Grecian wield,
Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest Shield;
Let, to the weak, the lighter Arms belong,
The ponderous Targe be wielded by the strong.
(Thus armed) not Hector shall our Presence stay;
My self, ye Greeks! my self will lead the way.
The Troops assent; their martial Arms they change,
The busy Chiefs their banded Legions range.
The Kings, though wounded, and oppressed with Pain,
With helpful Hands themselves assist the Train.
The strong and cumb'rous Arms the valiant wield,
The weaker Warrior takes a lighter Shield.
Thus sheathed in shining Brass, in bright Array,
The Legions march, and Neptune leads the way:
His brandished Faulchion flames before their Eyes,
Like Lightning flashing through the frighted Skies.
Clad in his Might the Earth-shaking Power appears;
Pale Mortals tremble, and confess their Fears.
Troy's great Defender stands alone unawed,
Arms his proud Host, and dares oppose a God:
And lo! the God, and wondrous Man appear;
The Sea's great Ruler there, and Hector here.
The roaring Main, at her great Master's Call,
Rose in huge Ranks, and formed a watery Wall
Around the Ships: Seas hanging over the Shores,
Both Armies join: Earth thunders, Ocean roars.
Not half so loud the bellowing Deeps resound,
When stormy Winds disclose the dark Profound;
Less loud the Winds, that from the Aeolian Hall
Roar through the Woods, and make whole Forests fall;
Less loud the Woods, when Flames in Torrents pour,
Catch the dry Mountain, and its Shades devour.
With such a Rage the meeting Hosts are driven,
And such a Clamor shakes the sounding Heaven.
The first bold Javelin urged by Hector's Force,
Direct at Ajax' Bosom winged its Course;
But there no Pass the crossing Belts afford,
(One braced his Shield, and one sustained his Sword.)
Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
And cursed the Lance that unavailing flew:
But 'scap'd not Ajax; his tempestuous Hand
A ponderous Stone up-heaving from the Sand,
(Where Heaps laid loose beneath the Warrior's Feet,
Or served to ballast, or to prop the Fleet)
Tossed round and round, the missive Marble flings;
On the razed Shield the falling Ruin rings:
Full on his Breast and Throat with Force descends;
Nor deaden'd there its giddy Fury spends,
But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
Smoaks in the Dust, and ploughs into the Ground.
As when the Bolt, red-hissing from above,
Darts on the consecrated Plant of Jove,
The Mountain-Oak in flaming Ruin lies,
Black from the Blow, and Smoaks of Sulphur rise;
Stiff with Amaze the pale Beholders stand,
And own the Terrors of the Almighty Hand!
So lies great Hector prostrate on the Shore;
His slackened Hand deserts the Lance it bore;
His following Shield the fallen Chief overspread;
Beneath his Helmet dropped his fainting Head;
His Load of Armor, sinking to the Ground,
Clanks on the Field; a dead, and hollow Sound.
Loud Shouts of Triumph fill the crowded Plain;
Greece sees, in hope, Troy's great Defender slain:
All spring to seize him; Storms of Arrows fly;
And thicker Javelins intercept the Sky.
In vain an Iron Tempest hisses round;
He lies protected, and without a Wound.
Polydamas, Agenor the divine,
The pious Warrior of Anchises' Line,
And each bold Leader of the Lycian Band;
With covering Shields (a friendly Circle) stand.
His mournful Followers with assistant Care,
The groaning Hero to his Chariot bear;
His foaming Coursers, swifter than the Wind,
Speed to the Town, and leave the War behind.
When now they touched the Mead's enameled Side,
Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy Tide,
With watery Drops the Chief they sprinkle round,
Placed on the Margin of the flowery Ground.
Raised on his Knees, he now ejects the Gore;
Now faints anew, low-sinking on the Shore;
By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting Skies,
And seals again, by fits, his swimming Eyes.
Soon as the Greeks the Chief's Retreat beheld,
With double Fury each invades the Field.
Oilean Ajax first his Javelin sped,
Pierced by whose Point, the Son of Enops bled;
( Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore
Amidst her Flocks on Satnio's silver Shore)
Struck through the Belly's Rim, the Warrior lies
Supine, and Shades eternal veil his Eyes.
An arduous Battle rose around the dead;
By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.
Fired with Revenge, Polydamas drew near,
And at Prothoenor shook the trembling Spear;
The driving Javelin through his Shoulder thrust,
He sinks to Earth, and grasps the bloody Dust.
Lo thus (the Victor cries) we rule the Field,
And thus their Arms the Race of Panthus wield:
From this unerring Hand there flies no Dart
But bathes its Point within a Grecian Heart.
Propt on that Spear to which thou ow'st thy Fall,
Go, guide thy darksome Steps, to Pluto's dreary Hall!
He said, and Sorrow touched each Argive Breast:
The Soul of Ajax burned above the rest.
As by his side the groaning Warrior fell,
At the fierce Foe he launched his piercing Steel;
The Foe reclining, shunned the flying Death;
But Fate, Archelochus, demands thy Breath:
Thy lofty Birth no Succor could impart,
The Wings of Death o'ertook thee on the Dart,
Swift to perform Heaven's fatal Will it fled,
Full on the Juncture of the Neck and Head,
And took the Joint, and cut the Nerves in twain:
The dropping Head first tumbled to the Plain.
So just the Stroke, that yet the Body stood
Erect, then rolled along the Sands in Blood.
Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy Eyes!
(The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries)
Say, is this Chief, extended on the Plain,
A worthy Vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
Mark well his Port! his Figure and his Face
Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar Race;
Some Lines, methinks, may make his Lineage known,
Antenor's Brother, or perhaps his Son.
He spoke, and smiled severe, for well he knew
The bleeding Youth: Troy sadden'd at the View.
But furious Acamas avenged his Cause;
As Promachus his slaughtered Brother draws,
He pierced his Heart -- Such Fate attends you all,
Proud Argives! destined by our Arms to fall.
Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece shall share
The Toils, the Sorrows, and the Wounds of War.
Behold your Promachus deprived of Breath,
A Victim owed to my brave Brother's Death.
Not unappeas'd, He enters Pluto's Gate,
Who leaves a Brother to revenge his Fate.
Heart-piercing Anguish struck the Grecian Host,
But touched the Breast of bold Peneleus most:
At the proud Boaster he directs his Course;
The Boaster flies, and shuns superior Force.
But young Ilioneus received the Spear,
Ilioneus, his Father's only Care:
( Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan Train
Whom Hermes loved, and taught the Arts of Gain)
Full in his Eye the Weapon chanced to fall,
And from the Fibers scoop'd the rooted Ball,
Drove through the Neck, and hurled him to the Plain;
He lifts his miserable Arms in vain!
Swift his broad Faulchion fierce Peneleus spread,
And from the spouting Shoulders struck his Head;
To Earth at once the Head and Helmet fly;
The Lance, yet sticking through the bleeding Eye,
The Victor seized; and as aloft he shook
The goary Visage, thus insulting spoke.
Trojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
Haste, to his Father let the Tale be told:
Let his high Roofs resound with frantic Woe,
Such, as the House of Promachus must know;
Let doleful Tidings greet his Mother's Ear,
Such, as to Promachus' sad Spouse we bear;
When we, victorious, shall to Greece return,
And the pale Matron in our Triumphs mourn.
Dreadful he spoke, then tossed the Head on high;
The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly:
Aghast they gaze, around the Fleet and Wall,
And dread the Ruin that impends on all.
Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,
Ye all-beholding, all-recording Nine!
O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield,
What Chief, what Hero first embru'd the Field?
Of all the Grecians, what immortal Name,
And whose blessed Trophies, will ye raise to Fame?
Thou first, great Ajax! on the ensanguin'd Plain
Laid Hyrtius, Leader of the Mysian Train.
Phalces and Mermer, Nestor's Son o'erthrew.
Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,
By Teucer's Arrows mingled with the dead.
Pierced in the Flank by Menelaus' Steel,
His People's Pastor, Hyperenor fell;
Eternal Darkness wrapped the Warrior round,
And the fierce Soul came rushing through the Wound.
But stretched in heaps before Oileus' Son,
Fall mighty Numbers; mighty Numbers run;
Ajax the less, of all the Grecian Race
Skilled in Pursuit, and swiftest in the Chase.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Fourteenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FOURTEENTH BOOK.
I.
THE Poet, to advance the Character of Nestor, and give us a due Esteem for his
Conduct and Circumspection, represents him as deeply sollicitous for the common
Good: In the very Article of Mirth or Relaxation from the Toils of War, he is
all Attention to learn the Fate and Issue of the Battle: And through his long
Use and Skill in martial Events, he judges from the Quality of the Uproar still
increasing, that the Fortune of the Day is held no longer in suspense, but
inclines to one side. Eustathius.

II.
VERSE 1. But nor the Genial Feast.] At the end of the 11 th Book we left
Nestor at the Table with Machaon. The Attack of the Entrenchments, described
through the 12 th and 13 th Books, happened while Nestor and Machaon sat at the
Table; nor is there any Improbability herein, since there is nothing performed
in those two Books, but what might naturally happen in the Space of two Hours.
Homer constantly follows the Thread of his Narration, and never suffers his
Reader to forget the Train of Action, or the time it employs. Dacier.

III.
VERSE 10. Let Hecamede the Bath prepare.] The Custom of Women officiating to
Men in the Bath was usual in ancient Times. Examples are frequent in the
Odysseis. And it is not at all more odd, or to be sneer'd at, than the Custom
now used in France, of Valets de Chambres dressing and undressing Ladies.

IV.
VERSE 21. As when old Ocean's silent Surface sleeps.] There are no where more
finished Pictures of Nature, than those which Homer draws in several of his
Comparisons. The Beauty however of some of these will be lost to many, who
cannot perceive the Resemblance, having never had Opportunity to observe the
things themselves. The Life of this Description will be most sensible to those
who have been at Sea in a Calm: In this Condition the Water is not entirely
motionless, but swells gently in smooth Waves, which fluctuate backwards and
forwards in a kind of balancing Motion: This State continues till a rising Wind
gives a Determination to the Waves, and rolls 'em one certain way. There is
scarce any thing in the whole Compass of Nature that can more exactly represent
the State of an irresolute Mind, wavering between two different Designs,
sometimes inclining to the one, sometimes to the other, and then moving to the
Point to which its Resolution is at last determined. Every Circumstance of this
Comparison is both beautiful and just; and it is the more to be admired,
because it is very difficult to find sensible Images proper to represent the
Motions of the Mind; wherefore we but rarely meet with such Comparisons even in
the best Poets. There is one of great Beauty in Virgil, upon a Subject very
like this, where he compares his Hero's Mind, agitated with a great Variety and
quick Succession of Thoughts, to a dancing Light reflected from a Vessel of
Water in Motion.

Cuncta videns, magno curarum fluctuat aestu,
Atque animum, nunc huc, celerem, nunc dividit illuc,
In partesque rapit varias, perque omnia versat.
Sicut aquae tremulum labris ubi lumen ahenis
Sole repercussum, aut radiantis imagine lunae,
Omnia pervolitat late loca; jamque sub auras
Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti.
Aen. l. 8.. 19. V.
VERSE 30. He fixes on the last.] Nestor appears in this Place a great Friend
to his Prince; for upon deliberating whether he should go through the Body of
the Grecian Host, or else repair to Agamemnon's Tent; he determines at last,
and judges it the best way to go to the latter. Now because it had been ill
concerted to have made a Man of his Age walk a great way round about in quest
of his Commander, Homer has ordered it so that he should meet Agamemnon in his
way thither. And nothing could be better imagined than the reason, why the
wounded Princes left their Tents; they were impatient to behold the Battle,
anxious for its Success, and desirous to inspirit the Soldiers by their
Presence. The Poet was obliged to give a reason; for in Epic Poetry, as well as
in Dramatic, no Person ought to be introduced without some Necessity, or at
least some Probability, for his Appearance. Eustathius.

VI.
VERSE 39. Their Ships at distance, etc.] Homer being always careful to
distinguish each Scene of Action, gives a very particular Description of the
Station of the Ships, showing in what manner they lay drawn up on the Land.
This he had only hinted at before; but here taking occasion on the wounded
Heroes coming from their Ships, which were at a distance from the Fight (while
others were engaged in the Defense of those Ships where the Wall was broke
down) he tells us, that the Shore of the Bay (comprehended between the Rhaetean
and Sigaean Promontories) was not sufficient to contain the Ships in one Line;
which they were therefore obliged to draw up in Ranks, ranged in parallel Lines
along the Shore. How many of these Lines there were, the Poet does not
determine. M. Dacier, without giving any reason for her Opinion, says they were
but two; one advanced near the Wall, the other on the Verge of the Sea. But it
is more than probable, that there were several intermediate Lines; since the
Order in which the Vessels lay is here described by a Metaphor taken from the
Steps of a Scaling-Ladder; which had been no way proper to give an Image only
of two Ranks, but very fit to represent a greater, though undetermined Number.
That there were more than two Lines, may likewise be inferred from what we find
in the beginning of the 11 th Book; where it is said, that the Voice of
Discord, standing on the Ship of Ulysses, in the middle of the Fleet, was heard
as far as the Stations of Achilles and Ajax, whose Ships were drawn up in the
two Extremities: Those of Ajax were nearest the Wall (as is expressly said in
the 68 th Verse of the 13 th Book) and those of Achilles nearest the Sea, as
appears from many Passages scattered through the Iliad.

It must be supposed, that those Ships were drawn highest upon Land, which
first approached the Shore; the first Line therefore consisted of those who
first disembark'd, which were the Ships of Ajax and Protesilaus; the latter of
whom seems mentioned in the Verse above cited of the 13 th Book, only to give
occasion to observe this, for he was slain as he landed first of the Greeks.
And accordingly we shall see in the 15 th Book, it is his Ship that is first
attacked by the Trojans, as it lay the nearest to them.

We may likewise guess how it happens, that the Ships of Achilles were placed
nearest to the Sea; for in the Answer of Achilles to Ulysses in the 9 th Book,.
328. he mentions a Naval Expedition he had made while Agamemnon lay safe in the
Camp: So that his Ships at their Return did naturally lie next the Sea; which,
without this Consideration, might appear a Station not so becoming this Hero's
Courage.

VII.
VERSE 47. Nestor 's Approach alarmed.] That so laborious a Person as Nestor
has been described, so indefatigable, so little indulgent of his extreme Age,
and one that never receded from the Battle, should approach to meet them; this
it was that struck the Princes with Amazement, when they saw he had left the
Field. Eustathius.

VIII.
VERSE 81. Cease we at length, etc.] Agamemnon either does not know what Course
to take in this Distress, or only sounds the Sentiments of his Nobles (as he
did in the second Book of the whole Army.) He delivers himself first after
Nestor's Speech, as it became a Counselor to do. But knowing this Advice to be
dishonorable, and unsuitable to the Character he assumes elsewhere, (...),
etc. and considering that he should do no better than abandon his Post, when
before he had threatened the Deserters with Death; he reduces his Counsel into
the Form of a Proverb, disguising it as handsomely as he can under a Sentence.
It is better to avoid an Evil, etc. It is observable too how he has qualified
the Expression: He does not say, to shun the Battle, for that had been
unsoldierly, but he softens the Phrase, and calls it, to shun Evil: And this
word Evil he applies twice together, in advising them to leave the Engagement.

It is farther remarked, that this was the noblest Opportunity for a General to
try the Temper of his Officers; for he knew that in a Calm of Affairs, it was
common with most People either out of Flattery or Respect to submit to their
Leaders: But in imminent Danger, Fear does not bribe them, but every one
discovers his very Soul, valuing all other Considerations, in regard to his
Safety, but in the second Place. He knew the Men he spoke to were prudent
Persons, and not easy to cast themselves into a precipitate Flight. He might
likewise have a mind to recommend himself to his Army by the means of his
Officers; which he was not very able to do of himself, angry as they were at
him, for the Affront he had offered Achilles, and by Consequence thinking him
the Author of all their present Calamities. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 92. Oh were thy Sway the Curse of meaner Powers,
And thou the Shame of any Host but ours.]
This is a noble Complement to his Country and to the Grecian Army, to show
that it was an Impossibility for them to follow even their General in any thing
that was cowardly, or shameful; though the Lives and Safeties of 'em all were
concerned in it.

X.
VERSE 104. And comes it even from him whose sovereign Sway
The banded Legions of all Greece obey?]
As who should say, that another Man might indeed have uttered the same Advice,
but it could not be a Person of Prudence; or if he had Prudence, he could not
be a Governor, but a private Man; or if a Governor, yet one who had not a
welldisciplin'd and obedient Army; or lastly, if he had an Army so conditioned,
yet it could not be so large and numerous an one as that of Agamemnon. This is
a fine Climax, and of a wonderful Strength. Eustathius.

XI.
VERSE 118. Whoever, or young, or old, etc.] This nearly resembles an ancient
Custom at Athens, where in Times of Trouble and Distress, every one, of what
Age or Quality soever, was invited to give in his Opinion with Freedom by the
public Crier. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 120.] This Speech of Diomed is naturally introduced, beginning with an
Answer, as if he had been called upon to give his Advice. The Counsel he
proposes was that alone which could be of any real Service in their present
Exigency: However since he ventures to advise where Ulysses is at a Loss, and
Nestor himself silent, he thinks it proper to apologize for this Liberty by
reminding them of his Birth and Descent, hoping thence to add to his Counsel a
Weight and Authority which he could not from his Years and Experience. It cannot
indeed be denied that this historical Digression seems more out of Season than
any of the same kind which we so frequently meet with in Homer, since his Birth
and Parentage must have been sufficiently known to all at the Siege, as he here
tells them. This must be owned a Defect not altogether to be excused in the
Poet, but which may receive some Alleviation, if considered as a Fault of
Temperament. For he had certainly a strong Inclination to genealogical Stories,
and too frequently takes occasion to gratify this Humor.

XIII.
VERSE 135. He fled to Argos.] This is a very artful Color: He calls the
Flight of his Father for killing one of his Brothers, traveling and dwelling
at Argos, without mentioning the Cause and Occasion of his Retreat. What
immediately follows (so Jove ordained) does not only contain in it a Disguise
of his Crime, but is a just Motive likewise for our Compassion. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 146. Let each go forth and animate the rest.] It is worth a Remark, with
what Management and Discretion the Poet has brought these four Kings, and no
more, toward the Engagement, since these are sufficient alone to perform all
that he requires. For Nestor proposes to them to enquire, if there be any way
or means which Prudence can direct for their Security. Agamemnon attempts to
discover that Method. Ulysses refutes him as one whose Method was
dishonorable, but proposes no other Project. Diomed supplies that Deficiency,
and shows what must be done: That wounded as they are, they should go forth to
the Battle; for though they were not able to engage, yet their Presence would
re-establish their Affairs by detaining in Arms those who might otherwise quit
the Field. This Counsel is embraced, and readily obeyed by the rest. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 179. The Story of Jupiter and Juno.] I don't know a bolder Fiction in
all Antiquity, than this of Jupiter's being deceived and laid asleep, or that
has a greater Air of Impiety and Absurdity. It Is an Observation of Mons. de St.
Evremond upon the ancient Poets, which every one will agree to; "that it is
surprising enough to find them so scrupulous to preserve Probability, in
Actions purely human; and so ready to violate it, in representing the Actions
of the Gods. Even those who have spoken more sagely than the rest, of their
Nature, could not forbear to speak extravagantly of their Conduct. When they
establish their Being and their Attributes, they make them immortal, infinite,
almighty, perfectly wise, and perfectly good: But the Moment they represent
them acting, there is no Weakness to which they do not make 'em stoop, and no
Folly or Wickedness they do not make 'em commit." The same Author answers this
in another Place by remarking, "that Truth was not the Inclination of the first
Ages: A foolish Lie or a lucky Falsehood gave Reputation to Impostors, and
Pleasure to the credulous. 'Twas the whole Secret of the great and the wise to
govern the simple and ignorant Herd. The vulgar, who pay a profound Reverence
to mysterious Errors, would have despised plain Truth, and it was thought a
piece of Prudence to deceive them. All the Discourses of the Ancients were
fitted to so advantageous a Design. There was nothing to be seen but Fictions,
Allegories, and Similitudes, and nothing was to appear as it was in itself."

I must needs, upon the whole, as far as I can judge, give up the Morality of
this Fable; but what Color of Excuse for it Homer might have from ancient
Tradition, or what mystical or allegorical Sense might atone for the appearing
Impiety, is hard to be ascertained at this distant Period of Time. That there
had been before his Age a Tradition of Jupiter's being laid asleep, appears
from the Story of Hercules at Coos, referred to by our Author,. 285. There is
also a Passage in Diodorus, lib. 1. c. 7. which gives some small Light to this
Fiction. Among other Reasons which that Historian lays down to prove that Homer
traveled into Egypt, he alleges this Passage of the Interview of Jupiter and
Juno, which he says was grounded upon an Egyptian Festival, whereon the nuptial
Ceremonies of these two Deities were celebrated, at which time both their
Tabernacles, adorned with all sorts of Flowers, are carried by the Priests to
the top of a high Mountain. Indeed as the greatest Part of the Ceremonies of
the ancient Religions consisted in some symbolical Representations of certain
Actions of their Gods, or rather deify'd Mortals, so a great part of ancient
Poetry consisted in the Description of the Actions exhibited in these
Ceremonies. The Loves of Venus and Adonis are a remarkable Instance of this
kind, which, though under different Names, were celebrated by annual
Representations, as well in Egypt as in several Nations of Greece and Asia: and
to the Images which were carried in these Festivals, several ancient Poets were
indebted for their most happy Descriptions. If the Truth of this Observation of
Diodorus be admitted, the present Passage will appear with more Dignity, being
grounded on Religion; and the Conduct of the Poet will be more justifiable, if
that, which has been generally accounted an indecent wanton Fiction, should
prove to be the Representation of a religious Solemnity. Considering the great
Ignorance we are in of many ancient superstitious Ceremonies, there may be
probably in Homer many Incidents entirely of this Nature; wherefore we ought to
be reserved in our Censures, lest what we decry as wrong in the Poet, should
prove only a Fault in his Religion. And indeed it would be a very unfair way to
tax any People, or any Age whatever, with Grossness in general, purely from the
gross or absurd Ideas or Practices that are to be found in their Religions.

In the next Place, if we have recourse to Allegory, (which softens and
reconciles every thing) it may be imagined that by the Congress of Jupiter and
Juno, is meant the mingling of the Ether and the Air (which are generally said
to be signified by these two Deities.) The Ancients believed the Ether to be
Igneous, and that by its kind Influence upon the Air it was the Cause of all
Vegetation: To which nothing more exactly corresponds, than the Fiction of the
Earth putting forth her Flowers immediately upon this Congress. Virgil has some
Lines in the second Georgic, that seem a perfect Explanation of the Fable into
this Sense. In describing the Spring, he hints as if something of a vivifying
Influence was at that time spread from the upper Heavens into the Air. He calls
Jupiter expressly Ether, and represents him operating upon his Spouse for the
Production of all things. Tum pater omnipotens foecundis imbribus ether
Conjugis in gremio laetae descendit, and omnes
Magnus alit, magno commixtus corpore, foetus.
Parturit omnis ager, etc.


But, be all this as it will, it is certain, that whatever may be thought of
this Fable in a theological or philosophical View, it is one of the most
beautiful Pieces that ever was produced by Poetry. Neither does it want its
Moral; an ingenious modern Writer (whom I am pleased to take any occasion of
quoting) has given it us in these Words.

"This Passage of Homer may suggest abundance of Instruction to a Woman who has
a mind to preserve or recall the Affection of her Husband. The Care of her
Person and Dress, with the particular Blandishments woven in the Cestus, are so
plainly recommended by this Fable, and so indispensably necessary in every
Female who desires to please, that they need no farther Explanation. The
Discretion likewise in covering all matrimonial Quarrels from the Knowledge of
others, is taught in the pretended Visit to Tethys, in the Speech where Juno
addresses herself to Venus; as the chaste and prudent Management of a Wife's
Charms is intimated by the same Pretense for her appearing before Jupiter, and
by the Concealment of the Cestus in her Bosom. I shall leave this Tale to the
Consideration of such good Houswives who are never well dressed but when they
are abroad, and think it necessary to appear more agreeable to all Men living
than their Husbands: As also to those prudent Ladies, who, to avoid the
Appearance of being over-fond, entertain their Husbands with Indifference,
Aversion, sullen Silence, or exasperating Language."

XVI.
VERSE 191. Swift to her bright Apartment she repairs, etc.] This Passage may
be of Consideration to the Ladies, and, for their sakes, I take a little Pains
to observe upon it. Homer tells us that the very Goddesses, who are all over
Charms, never dress in Sight of any one: The Queen of Heaven adorns herself in
private, and the Doors lock after her. In Homer there are no Dieux des Ruelles,
no Gods are admitted to the Toilette.

I am afraid there are some earthly Goddesses of less Prudence, who have lost
much of the Adoration of Mankind by the contrary Practice. Lucretius (a very
good Judge in Gallantry) prescribes as a Cure to a desperate Lover, the
frequent Sight of his Mistress undressed. Juno herself has suffered a little by
the very Muse's peeping into her Chamber, since some nice Critics are shocked
in this Place of Homer to find that the Goddess washes herself, which presents
some Idea as if she was dirty. Those who have Delicacy will profit by this
Remark.

XVII.
VERSE 198. Soft Oils of Fragrance.] The Practice of Juno in anointing her Body
with perfumed Oils was a remarkable part of ancient Cosmeticks, though entirely
disused in the modern Arts of Dress. It may possibly offend the Niceness of
modern Ladies; but they who paint so artificially ought to consider that this
Practice might, without much greater Difficulty, be reconciled to Cleanliness.
This Passage is a clear Instance of the Antiquity of this Custom, and clearly
determines against Pliny, who is of Opinion that it was not so ancient as those
times, where, speaking of perfumed Unguents, he says, Quis primus invenerit non
traditur; Iliacis temporibus non erant. lib. 13. c. 1. Besides the Custom of
anointing Kings among the Jews, which the Christians have borrowed, there are
several Allusions in the Old Testament which show that this Practice was
thought ornamental among them. The Psalmist, speaking of the Gifts of God,
mentions Wine and Oil, the former to make glad the Heart of Man, and the latter
to give him a cheerful Countenance. It seems most probable that this was an
Eastern Invention, agreeable to the Luxury of the Asiaticks, among whom the
most proper Ingredients for these Unguents were produced; from them this Custom
was propagated among the Romans, by whom it was esteemed a Pleasure of a very
refined Nature. Whoever is curious to see Instances of their Expense and
Delicacy therein, may be satisfied in the three first Chapters of the
thirteenth Book of Pliny's Natural History.

XVIII.
VERSE 203. Thus while she breathed of Heaven, etc.] We have here a complete
Picture from Head to Foot of the Dress of the Fair Sex, and of the Mode between
two and three thousand Years ago. May I have leave to observe the great
Simplicity of Juno's Dress, in Comparison with the innumerable Equipage of a
modern Toilette? The Goddess, even when she is setting herself out on the
greatest Occasion, has only her own Locks to tie, a white Veil to cast over
them, a Mantle to dress her whole Body, her Pendants, and her Sandals. This the
Poet expressly says was all her Dress, [(...);] and one may reasonably conclude
it was all that was used by the greatest Princesses and finest Beauties of
those Times. The good Eustathius is ravished to find, that here are no Washes
for the Face, no Dies for the Hair, and none of those artificial Embellishments
since in Practice; he also rejoices not a little, that Juno has no
Looking-Glass, Tire-Woman, or waiting Maid. One may preach till Doomsday on
this Subject, but all the Commentators in the World will never prevail upon a
Lady to stick one Pin the less in her Gown, except she can be convinced, that
the ancient Dress will better set off her Person.

As the Asiaticks always surpassed the Grecians in whatever regarded
Magnificence and Luxury, so we find their Women far gone in the contrary
Extreme of Dress. There is a Passage in Isaiah, Chapter 3. that gives us a
Particular of their Wardrobe, with the Number and Uselessness of their
Ornaments; and which I think appears very well in Contrast to this of Homer.
The Bravery of their tinkling Ornaments about their Feet, and their Cauls, and
their round Tires like the Moon: The Chains, and the Bracelets, and the
Mufflers, the Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, and the Headbands, and
the Tablets, and the Earrings, the Rings and Nose-jewels, the changeable Suits
of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Wimples, and the Crisping-Pins, the
Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods, and the Veils.

I could be glad to ask the Ladies, which they should like best to imitate, the
Greeks, or the Asiaticks? I would desire those that are handsome and well-made,
to consider, that the Dress of Juno (which is the same they see in Statues) has
manifestly the Advantage of the present, in displaying whatever is beautiful:
That the Charms of the Neck and Breast are not less laid open, than by the
modern Stays; and that those of the Leg are more gracefully discovered, than
even by the Hoop-petticoat: That the fine Turn of the Arms is better observed:
and that several natural Graces of the Shape and Body appear much more
conspicuous. It is not to be denied but the Asiatic and our present Modes were
better contrived to conceal some People's Defects, but I don't speak to such
People: I speak only to Ladies of that Beauty, who can make any Fashion prevail
by their being seen in it; and who put others of their Sex under the wretched
Necessity of being like them in their Habits, or not being like them at all. As
for the rest, let 'em follow the Mode of Judaea, and be content with the Name
of Asiaticks.

XIX.
VERSE 216. Thus issuing radiant, etc.] Thus the Goddess comes from her
Apartment against her Spouse in complete Armor. The Pleasures of Women mostly
prevail upon us by pure cunning, and the artful Management of their Persons;
against which a wise Man ought to be upon his guard: For there is but one way
for the weak to subdue the mighty, and that is by Pleasure. The Poet shows at
the same time, that Men of Understanding are not mastered, without a great deal
of Artifice and Address. There are but three ways, whereby to overcome another,
by Violence, by Persuasion, or by Craft: Jupiter was invincible by main Force;
to think of persuading was as fruitless, after he had passed his Nod to
Achilles; therefore Juno was obliged of necessity to turn her Thoughts entirely
upon Craft; and by the Force of Pleasure it is, that she insnares and manages
the God. Eustathius.

XX.
VERSE 218. And calls the Mother of the Smiles and Loves.] Notwithstanding all
the Pains Juno has been at, to adorn herself, she is still conscious that
neither the natural Beauty of her Person, nor the artificial one of her Dress,
will be sufficient to work upon a Husband. She therefore has Recourse to the
Cestus of Venus, as a kind of Love-charm, not doubting to inflame his Mind by
magical Enchantment; a Folly which in all Ages has possessed her Sex. To procure
this, she applies to the Goddess of Love; from whom hiding her real Design
under a feigned Story, (another Propriety in the Character of the Fair) she
obtains the invaluable Present of this wonder-working Girdle. The Allegory of
the Cestus lies very open, though the Impertinences of Eustathius on this Head
are unspeakable. In it are comprised the most powerful Incentives to Love, as
well as the strongest Effects of the Passion. The just Admiration of this
Passage has been a-lways so great and universal, that the Cestus of Venus is
become proverbial. The Beauty of the Lines which in a few Words comprehend this
agreeable Fiction, can scarce be equaled. So beautiful an Original has
produced very fine Imitations, wherein we may observe a few additional Figures,
expressing some of the Improvements which the Affectation, or Artifice, of the
Fair Sex have introduced into the Art of Love since Homer's Days. Tasso has
finely imitated this Description in the magical Girdle of Armida. Gierusalemme
liberata, Cant. 16. Teneri Sdegni, e placide e tranquille
Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
Sorrisi, parrolette, e dolci stille
Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.
Mons. de la Motte's Imitation of this Fiction is likewise wonderfully
beautiful. Ce tissu, le simbole, and la cause a la sois,
Du pouvoir d'l'Amour, du charm de ses loix.
Elle enflamme les yeux, de cet Ardeur qui touch;
D'un sourire enchanteur, elle anime la bouche;
Passionne la voix, en adoucit les sons,
Prete ces tours heureux, plus forts que les raisons;
Inspire, pour toucher, ces tendres stratagemes,
Ces resus attirans, l'ecueil des sages memes.
Et la nature enfin, y voulut rensermer,
Tout ce qui persuade, and ce qui fait aimer.
En prenant ce tissu, que Venus lui present,
Junon n'etoit que belle, elle devient charmante.
Les graces, and les ris, les plaisirs, and les jeux,
Surpris cherchent Venus, doutent qui l'est des deux.
L'Amour meme trompe, trouve Junon plus belle;
Et son Arc a la main, deja vole apres elle.


Spencer, in his 4 th Book, Canto 5. describes a Girdle of Venus of a very
different Nature; for as this had the Power to raise up loose Desires in
others, that had a more wonderful Faculty to suppress them in the Person that
wore it: But it had a most dreadful Quality, to burst asunder whenever tied
about any but a chaste Bosom. Such a Girdle, it is to be feared, would produce
Essects very different from the other: Homer's Cestus would be a Peacemaker to
reconcile Man and Wife; but Spencer's Cestus would probably destroy the good
Agreement of many a happy Couple.

XXI.
VERSE 255. -- And pressed The powerful Cestus to her snowy Breast.] Eustathius
takes notice, that the word Cestus is not the Name, but Epithet only, of
Venus's Girdle; though the Epithet has prevailed so far as to become the proper
Name in common use. This has happened to others of our Author's Epithets; the
word Pygmy is of the same Nature. Venus wore this Girdle below her Neck, and in
open Sight, but Juno hides it in her Bosom, to show the difference of the two
Characters: It suits well with Venus to make a Show of whatever is engaging in
her; but Juno, who is a Matron of Prudence and Gravity, ought to be more modest.

XXII.
VERSE 263. She speeds to Lemnos over the rolling Deep,
And seeks the Cave of Death's Half-brother, Sleep.]
In this Fiction Homer introduces a new divine Personage: It does not appear
whether this God of Sleep was a God of Homer's Creation, or whether his
Pretensions to Divinity were of more ancient Date. The Poet indeed speaks of
him as of one formerly active in some heavenly Transactions. Be this as it
will, succeeding Poets have always acknowledged his Title. Virgil would not let
his Aeneid be without a Person so proper for poetical Machinery; though he has
employed him with much less Art than his great Master, since he appears in the
5 th Book without Provocation or Commission, only to destroy the Trojan Pilot.
The Critics, who cannot see all the Allegories which the Commentators pretend
to find in Homer's Divinities, must be obliged to acknowledge the Reality and
Propriety of this; since every thing that is here said of this imaginary Deity
is justly applicable to Sleep. He is called the Brother of Death; is said to be
protected by Night; and is employed very naturally to lull a Husband to Rest in
the Embraces of his Wife; which Effect of this Conjugal Opiate even the modest
Virgil has remarked in the Persons of Vulcan and Venus, probably with an Eye to
this Passage of Homer. -- Placidumque petivit
Conjugis infusus gremio per membra soporem.


XXIII.
VERSE 263. To Lemnos.] The Commentators are hard put to it, to give a Reason
why Juno seeks for Sleep in Lemnos. Some finding out that Lemnos anciently
abounded with Wine, inform us that it was a proper Place of Residence for him,
Wine being naturally a great Provoker of Sleep. Others will have it, that this
God being in love with Pasithae, who resided with her Sister the Wife of
Vulcan, in Lemnos, it was very probable he might be found haunting near his
Mistress. Other Commentators perceiving the Weakness of these Conjectures, will
have it that Juno met Sleep here by mere Accident; but this is contradictory to
the whole Thread of the Narration. But who knows whether Homer might not design
this Fiction as a Piece of Raillery upon the Sluggishness of the Lemnians; though
this Character of them does not appear? A kind of Satyr like that of Ariosto,
who makes the Angel find Discord in a Monastery: Or like that of Boileau in his
Lutrin, where he places Mollesse in a Dormitory of the Monks of St. Bernard?

XXIV.
VERSE 266. Sweet-pleasing Sleep, etc.] Virgil has copied some part of this
Conversation between Juno and Sleep, where he introduces the same Goddess
making a Request to Aeolus. Scaliger, who is always eager to depreciate Homer,
and zealous to praise his favorite Author, has highly censured this Passage:
But notwithstanding this Critick's Judgment, an impartial Reader will find, I
don't doubt, much more Art and Beauty in the Original than the Copy. In the
former, Juno endeavors to engage Sleep in her Design by the Promise of a
proper and valuable Present; but having formerly run a great Hazard in a like
Attempt, he is not prevailed upon. Hereupon the Goddess, knowing his Passion
for one of the Graces, engages to give her to his Desires: This Hope brings the
Lover to Consent, but not before he obliges Juno to confirm her Promise by an
Oath in a most solemn manner, the very Words and Ceremony whereof he prescribes
to her. These are all beautiful and poetical Circumstances, most whereof are
untouched by Virgil, and which Scaliger therefore calls low and vulgar. He only
makes Juno demand a Favor from Aeolus, which he had no reason to refuse; and
promise him a Reward, which it does not appear he was fond of. The Latin Poet
has indeed with great Judgment added one Circumstance concerning the Promise of
Children, -- and pulchra faciat te prole parentem.
And this is very conformable to the Religion of the Romans, among whom Juno
was supposed to preside over human Births; but it does not appear she had any
such Office in the Greek Theology.

XXV.
VERSE 272. A splendid Footstool.] Notwithstanding the Cavils of Scaliger, it
may be allowed, that an easy Chair was no improper Present for Sleep. As to the
Footstool, Mad. Dacier's Observation is a very just one; that besides its being
a Convenience, it was a Mark of Honor, and was far from presenting any low or
trivial Idea. It Is upon that Account we find it so frequently mentioned in
Scripture, where the Earth is called the Footstool of the Throne of God. In
Jeremiah, Judaea is called (as a Mark of Distinction) the Footstool of the Feet
of God. Lament. 2.. 1. And he remembered not the Footstool of his Feet, in the
Day of his Wrath. We see here the same Image, founded no doubt upon the same
Customs. Dacier.

XXVI.
VERSE 279. The Sire of all, old Ocean.] " Homer (says Plutarch) calls the Sea
Father of All, with a View to this Doctrine, that all things were generated
from Water. Thales the Milesian, the Head of the Ionick Sect who seems to have
been the first Author of Philosophy, affirmed Water to be the Principle from
whence all things spring, and into which all things are resolved; because the
prolific Seed of all Animals is a Moisture; all Plants are nourished by
Moisture; the very Sun and Stars, which are Fire, are nourished by moist
Vapors and Exhalations; and consequently he thought the World was produced
from this Element." Plut. Opin. of Philos. lib. 1. c. 3.

XXVII.
VERSE 281. But how, unbidden, etc.] This Particularity is worth remarking;
Sleep tells Juno that he dares not approach Jupiter without his own Order;
whereby he seems to intimate, that a Spirit of a superior kind may give itself
up to a voluntary Cessation of Thought and Action, though it does not want this
Relaxation from any Weakness or Necessity of its Nature.

XXVIII.
VERSE 285. What-time deserting Ilion 's wasted Plain, etc.] One may observe
from hence, that to make Falsity in Fables useful and subservient to our
Designs, it is not enough to cause the Story to resemble Truth, but we are to
corroborate it by parallel Places; which Method the Poet uses elsewhere. Thus
many have attempted great Difficulties, and surmounted 'em. So did Hercules, so
did Juno, so did Pluto. Here therefore the Poet feigning that Sleep is going to
practice insidiously upon Jove, prevents the Strangeness and Incredibility of
the Tale, by squaring it to an ancient Story; which ancient Story was, that
Sleep had once before got the mastery of Jove in the case of Hercules.
Eustathius.

XXIX.
VERSE 296. Even Jove revered the venerable Dame.] Jupiter is represented as
unwilling to do any thing that might be offensive or ungrateful to Night; the
Poet (says Eustathius) instructs us by this, that a wise and honest Man will
curb his Wrath before any awful and venerable Person: Such was Night in regard
of Jupiter, feigned as an Ancestor, and honorable on account of her Antiquity
and Power. For the Greek Theology teaches that Night and Chaos were before all
things. Wherefore it was held sacred to obey the Night in the Conflicts of War,
as we find by the Admonitions of the Heralds to Hector and Ajax in the 7 th
Iliad.

Milton has made a fine Use of this ancient Opinion in relation to Chaos and
Night, in the latter Part of his second Book, where he describes the Passage of
Satan through their Empire. He calls them, -- Eldest Night
And Chaos, Ancestors of Nature; --
And alludes to the same, in those noble Verses, -- Behold the Throne
Of Chaos, and his dark Pavillion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep: With him enthroned
Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things
The Consort of his Reign. --
That fine Apostrophe of Spenser has also the same Allusion, Book 1. O thou,
most ancient Grandmother of all,
More old than Jove, whom thou at first did breed,
Or that great House of Gods celestial;
Which was begot in Daemogorgon's Hall,
And saw the Secrets of the World unmade.


XXX.
VERSE 307. Let the great Parent Earth one Hand sustain,
And stretch the other over the sacred Main, etc.]
There is something wonderfully solemn in this manner of Swearing proposed by
Sleep to Juno. How answerable is this Idea to the Dignity of the Queen of the
Goddesses, where Earth, Ocean, and Hell itself, where the whole Creation, all
things visible and invisible, are called to be Witnesses of the Oath of the
Deity.

XXXI.
VERSE 311. That she, my loved one, etc.] Sleep is here made to repeat the
Words of Juno's Promise, than which Repetition nothing, I think, can be more
beautiful or better placed. The Lover fired with these Hopes, insists on the
Promise, dwelling with Pleasure on each Circumstance that relates to his fair
one. The Throne and Footstool, it seems, are quite out of his Head.

XXXII.
VERSE 323. Fair Ida trembles.] It is usually supposed at the Approach or
Presence of any heavenly Being, that upon their Motion, all should shake that
lies beneath 'em. Here the Poet giving a Description of the Descent of these
Deities upon the Ground at Lectos, says that the loftiest of the Wood trembled
under their Feet: Which Expression is to intimate the Lightness and Swiftness
of the Motions of heavenly Beings; the Wood does not shake under their Feet
from any corporeal Weight, but from a certain awful Dread and Horror Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 328. In Likeness of a Bird of Night.] This is a Bird of Night about the
Size of a Hawk, entirely black; and that is the reason why Homer describes
Sleep under its Form. Here (says Eustathius) Homer lets us know, as well as in
many other Places, that he is no Stranger to the Language of the Gods. Hobbes
has taken very much from the Dignity of this Supposition, in translating the
present Lines in this manner. And there sat Sleep in Likeness of a Fowl,
Which Gods do Chalcis call, but Men an Owl.
We find in Plato's Cratylus a Discourse of great Subtility, grounded chiefly
on this Observation of Homer, that the Gods and Men call the same thing by
different Names. The Philosopher supposes that in the original Language every
thing was expressed by a word, whose Sound was naturally apt to mark the Nature
of the thing signified. This great Work he ascribes to the Gods, since it
required more Knowledge both in the Nature of Sounds and Things, than Man had
attained to. This Resemblance he says was almost lost in modern Languages by
the unskilful Alterations Men had made, and the great License they had taken in
compounding of Words. However, he observes there were yet among the Greeks some
Remains of this original Language, of which he gives a few Instances, adding,
that many more were to be found in some of the barbarous Languages, that had
deviated less from the Original, which was still preserved entire among the
Gods. This appears a Notion so uncommon, that I could not forbear to mention it.

XXXIV.
VERSE 345. -- To whose indulgent Cares I owe the Nursing, etc.] The Allegory
of this is very obvious. Juno is constantly understood to be the Air; and we
are here told she was nourished by Oceanus and Tethys: That is to say, the Air
is fed and nourished by the Vapors which rise from the Ocean and the Earth.
For Tethys is the same with Rhea. Eustathius.

XXXV.
VERSE 359.] This Courtship of Jupiter to Juno may possibly be thought pretty
singular. He endeavors to prove the Ardour of his Passion to her, by the
Instances of its Warmth to other Women. A great many People will look upon this
as no very likely Method to recommend himself to Juno's Favor. Yet, after all,
something may be said in Defense of Jupiter's way of thinking, with respect to
the Ladies. Perhaps a Man's Love to the Sex in general may be no ill
Recommendation of him to a Particular. And to be known, or thought, to have
been successful with a good many, is what some Moderns have found no
unfortunate Qualification in gaining a Lady, even a most virtuous one like
Juno, especially one who (like her) has had the Experience of a married State.

XXXVI.
VERSE 395. Glad Earth perceives, etc.] It is an Observation of Aristotle in
the 25 th Chapter of his Poeticks, that when Homer is obliged to describe any
thing of itself absurd or too improbable, he constantly contrives to blind and
dazzle the Judgment of his Readers with some shining Description. This Passage
is a remarkable Instance of that Artifice, for having imagined a Fiction of
very great Absurdity, that the supreme Being should be laid asleep in a female
Embrace, he immediately, as it were to divert his Reader from reflecting on his
Boldness, pours forth a great Variety of poetical Ornaments; by describing the
various Flowers the Earth shoots up to compose their Couch, the golden Clouds
that encompassed them, and the bright heavenly Dews that were shower'd round
them. Eustathius observes it as an Instance of Homer's modest Conduct in so
delicate an Affair, that he has purposely adorned the Bed of Jupiter with such
a Variety of beautiful Flowers, that the Reader's Thoughts being entirely taken
up with these Ornaments, might have no room for loose Imaginations. In the same
manner an ancient Scholiast has observed, that the golden Cloud was contrived
to lock up this Action from any farther Enquiry of the Reader.

XXXVII.
VERSE 395.] I cannot conclude the Notes on this Story of Jupiter and Juno,
without observing with what particular Care Milton has imitated the several
beautiful Parts of this Episode, introducing them upon different Occasions as
the Subjects of his Poem would admit. The Circumstance of Sleep's sitting in
Likeness of a Bird on the Fir Tree upon Mount Ida, is alluded to in his 4 th
Book, where Satan sits in Likeness of a Cormorant on the Tree of Life. The
Creation is made to give the same Tokens of Joy at the Performance of the
nuptial Rites of our first Parents, as she does here at the Congress of Jupiter
and Juno. Lib. 8. -- To the nuptial Bower
I led her blushing like the Morn, all Heaven
And happy Constellations on that Hour
Shed their selectest Influence; the Earth
Gave sign of Gratulation, and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Airs
Whispered it to the Woods, and from their Wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicy Shrub.
Those Lines also in the 4 th Book are manifestly from the same Original. --
Roses and Jessamine
Reared high their flourished Heads between, and wrought
Mosaic, underfoot the Violet,
Crocus and Hyacinth with rich Inlay
Broider'd the Ground. --
Where the very Turn of Homer's Verses is observed, and the Cadence, and almost
the Words, finely translated.

But it is with wonderful Judgment and Decency he has used that exceptionable
Passage of the Dalliance, Ardour, and Enjoyment: That which seems in Homer an
impious Fiction, becomes a moral Lesson in Milton; since he makes that
lascivious Rage of the Passion the immediate Effect of the Sin of our first
Parents after the Fall. Adam expresses it in the Words of Jupiter. For never
did thy Beauty since the Day
I saw thee first, and wedded thee, adorned
With all Perfections, so inflame my Sense,
With Ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever; Bounty of this virtuous Tree!
So said he, and forbore not Glance or Toy
Of amorous Intent, well understood
Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
Her Hand he seized, and to a shady Bank
Thick over-head with verdant Roof embow'r'd,
He led her, nothing loath: Flowers were the Couch,
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
And Hyacinth; Earth's freshest, softest Lap.
There they their Fill of Love and Love's Disport
Took largely, of their mutual Guilt the Seal;
The Solace of their Sin, till dewy Sleep
Oppressed them, weary of their amorous Play.
Milton, l. 9.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 417. The Power of Slumbers flew.] M. Dacier in her Translation of this
Passage has thought fit to dissent from the common Interpretation, as well as
obvious Sense of the Words. She restrains the general Expression (...), the
famous Nations of Men, to signify only the Country of the Lemnians, who, she
says, were much celebrated on account of Vulcan. But this strained
Interpretation cannot be admitted, especially when the obvious Meaning of the
Words express what is very proper and natural. The God of Sleep having hastily
delivered his Message to Neptune, immediately leaves the Hurry of the Battle,
(which was no proper Scene for him) and retires among the Tribes of Mankind.
The word (...), on which M. Dacier grounds her Criticism, is an expletive
Epithet very common in Homer, and no way fit to point out one certain Nation,
especially in an Author one of whose most distinguishing Characters is
Particularity in Description.

XXXIX.
VERSE 444. The Legions march, and Neptune leads the way.] The chief Advantage
the Greeks gain by the Sleep of Jupiter seems to be this: Neptune unwilling to
offend Jupiter, has hitherto concealed himself in disguised Shapes; so that it
does not appear that Jupiter knew of his being among the Greeks, since he takes
no notice of it. This Precaution hinders him from assisting the Greeks
otherwise than by his Advice. But upon the Intelligence received of what Juno
had done, he assumes a Form that manifests his Divinity, inspiring Courage into
the Grecian Chiefs, appearing at the Head of their Army, brandishing a Sword in
his Hand, the Sight of which struck such a Terror into the Trojans that, as
Homer says, none durst approach it. And therefore it is not to be wondered,
that the Trojans who are no longer sustained by Jupiter, immediately give way
to the Enemy.

XL.
VERSE 442. The weaker Warrior takes a lighter Shield.] Plutarch seems to
allude to this Passage in the beginning of the Life of Pelopidas. " Homer, says
he, makes the bravest and stoutest of his Warriors march to Battle in the best
Arms. The Grecian Legislators punished those who cast away their Shields, but
not those who lost their Spears or their Swords, as an Intimation, that the
Care of preserving and defending our selves is preferable to the wounding our
Enemy, especially in those who are Generals of Armies, or Governors of States."
Eustathius has observed, that the Poet here makes the best Warriors take the
largest Shields and longest Spears, that they might be ready prepared, with
proper Arms, both offensive and defensive, for a new kind of Fight, in which
they are soon to be engaged when the Fleet is attacked. Which indeed seems the
most rational Account that can be given for Neptune's Advice in this Exigence.

Mr. Hobbes has committed a great Oversight in this Place; he makes the wounded
Princes (who it is plain were unfit for the Battle, and do not engage in the
ensuing Fight) put on Arms as well as the others; whereas they do no more in
Homer than see their Orders obeyed by the rest as to this Change of Arms.

XLI.
VERSE 452. And lo the God, and wondrous Man appear.] What Magnificence and
Nobleness is there in this Idea? where Homer opposes Hector to Neptune, and
equalizes him in some degree to a God. Eustathius.

XLII.
VERSE 453. The roaring Main, etc.] This swelling and Inundation of the Sea
toward the Grecian Camp, as if it had been agitated by a Storm, is meant for a
Prodigy, intimating that the Waters had the same Resentments with their
Commander Neptune, and seconded him in his Quarrel. Eustathius.

XLIII.
VERSE 457. Not half so loud, etc.] The Poet having ended the Episode of
Jupiter and Juno, returns to the Battle, where the Greeks being animated and
led on by Neptune, renew the Fight with Vigor. The Noise and Outcry of this
fresh Onset, he endeavors to express by these three sounding Comparisons; as
if he thought it necessary to awake the Reader's Attention, which by the
preceding Descriptions might be lulled into a Forgetfulness of the Fight. He
might likewise design to show how soundly Jupiter slept, since he is not awaked
by so terrible an Uproar.

This Passage cannot be thought justly liable to the Objections which have been
made against heaping Comparisons one upon another, whereby the principal Object
is lost amidst too great a Variety of different Images. In this Case the
principal Image is more strongly impressed on the Mind by a Multiplication of
Similes, which are the natural Product of an Imagination laboring to express
something very vast: But finding no single Idea sufficient to answer its
Conceptions, it endeavors by redoubling the Comparisons to supply this Defect:
the different Sounds of Waters, Winds, and Flames being as it were united in
one. We have several Instances of this sort even in so castigated and reserved
a Writer as Virgil, who has joined together the Images of this Passage in the 4
th Georgic,. 261. and applied them, beautifully softened by a kind of Parody,
to the buzzing of a Beehive. Frigidus ut quondam sylvis immurmurat Auster,
Ut mare sollicitum stridet refluentibus undis,
Aestuat ut clausis rapidus fornacibus ignis.
Tasso has not only imitated this particular Passage of Homer, but likewise
added to it. Cant. 9. St. 22. Rapido si che torbida procella
De cavernosi monti esce piu tarda:
Fiume, ch' alberi insieme, e case svella:
Folgore, che le torri abbatta, and arda:
Terremoto, che'l mondo empia d'horrore,
Son picciole sembianze al suo furore.


XLIV.
VERSE 480. Smoaks in the Dust, and ploughs into the Ground.] (...), etc.
These Words are translated by several as if they signified, that Hector was
turned round with the Blow, like a Whirlwind; which would enhance the wonderful
Greatness of Ajax's Strength. Eustathius rather inclines to refer the Words to
the Stone itself, and the Violence of its Motion. Chapman I think is in the
right to prefer the latter, but he should not have taken the Interpretation to
himself. He says, it is above the Wit of Man to give a more fiery Illustration
both of Ajax's Strength and Hector's; of Ajax, for giving such a Force to the
Stone, that it could not spend itself on Hector, but afterward turned upon the
Earth with that Violence; and of Hector, for standing the Blow so solidly; for
without that Consideration, the Stone could never have recoiled so fiercely.
This Image, together with the noble Simile following it, seem to have given
Spencer the Hint of those sublime Verses. As when almighty Jove, in wrathsul
Mood,
To wreak the Guilt of mortal Sins is bent,
Hurls forth his thundering Dart, with deadly Food
Enrolled, of Flames, and smouldring Dreariment
Through riven Clouds, and molten Firmament,
The fierce three-forked Engine making way,
Both lofty Towers and highest Trees has rent,
And all that might his dreadful Passage stay,
And shooting in the Earth, casts up a Mound of Clay.
His boisterous Club so buried in the Ground,
He could not rear again, etc. --


XLV.
VERSE 533. Propt on that Spear, etc.] The occasion of this Sarcasm of
Polydamas seems taken from the Attitude of his falling Enemy, who is transfixed
with a Spear through his right Shoulder. This Posture bearing some Resemblance to
that of a Man leaning on a Staff, might probably suggest this Conceit.

The Speech of Polydamas begins a long String of Sarcastick Raillery, in which
Eustathius pretends to observe very different Characters. This of Polydamas, he
says, is pleasant, that of Ajax, heroic; that of Acamas, plain; and that of
Peneleus, pathetick.

XLVI.
VERSE 599. Daughters of Jove! etc.] Whenever we meet with these fresh
Invocations in the midst of Action, the Poets would seem to give their Readers
to understand, that they are come to a Point where the Description being above
their own Strength, they have occasion for supernatural Assistance; by this
Artifice at once exciting the Reader's Attention, and gracefully varying the
Narration. In the present case Homer seems to triumph in the Advantage the
Greeks had gained in the Flight of the Trojans, by invoking the Muses to snatch
the brave Actions of his Heroes from Oblivion, and set them in the Light of
Eternity. This Power is vindicated to them by the Poets on every occasion, and
it is to this Task they are so solemnly and frequently summoned by our Author.
Tasso has, I think, introduced one of these Invocations in a very noble and
peculiar manner; where, on occasion of a Battle by Night, he calls upon the
Night to allow him to draw forth those mighty Deeds which were performed under
the Concealment of her Shades, and to display their Glories, notwithstanding
that Disadvantage, to all Posterity. Notte, che nel profondo oscuro seno
Chiudesti, e ne l'oblio fatto si grande;
Piacciati, ch'io nel tragga, e'n bell sereno
A la future eta lo spieghi, e mande.
Viva la fame loro, e tra lor gloria
Splenda del fosco tuo l'alta memoria.


THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The fifth Battle, at the Ships; and the Acts of Ajax.
JUpiter awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the Trenches, Hector in a
Swoon, and Neptune at the Head of the Greeks: He is highly incensed at the
Artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her Submissions; she is then sent to Iris
and Apollo. Juno repairing to the Assembly of the Gods, attempts with
extraordinary Address to incense them against Jupiter, in particular she
touches Mars with a violent Resentment: He is ready to take Arms, but is
prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo obey the Orders of Jupiter; Iris commands
Neptune to leave the Battle, to which, after much Reluctance and Passion, he
consents. Apollo re-inspires Hector with Vigor, brings him back to the Battle,
marches before him with his Aegis, and turns the Fortune of the Fight. He
breaks down great part of the Grecian Wall; the Trojans rush in and attempt to
fire the first Line of the Fleet, but are, as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax
with a prodigious Slaughter.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
NOW in swift Flight they past the Trench profound,
And many a Chief lay gasping on the Ground:
Then stopped, and panted, where the Chariots lie;
Fear on their Cheek, and Horror in their Eye.
Meanwhile awakened from his Dream of Love,
On Ida's Summit sat imperial Jove:
Round the wide Fields he cast a careful view,
There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue,
These proud in Arms, those scattered over the Plain;
And, 'midst the War, the Monarch of the Main.
Not far, great Hector on the Dust he spies,
(His sad Associates round with weeping Eyes)
Ejecting Blood, and panting yet for Breath,
His Senses wandering to the Verge of Death.
The God beheld him with a pitying Look,
And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke.
O thou, still adverse to the eternal Will,
For ever studious in promoting Ill!
Thy Arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
And driven his conquering Squadrons from the Field.
Can thou, unhappy in thy Wiles! withstand
Our Power immense, and brave the Almighty Hand?
Have thou forgot, when bound and fixed on high,
From the vast Concave of the spangled Sky,
I hung thee trembling, in a golden Chain;
And all the raging Gods opposed in vain?
Headlong I hurled them from the Olympian Hall,
Stunned in the Whirl, and breathless with the Fall.
For godlike Hercules these Deeds were done,
Nor seemed the Vengeance worthy such a Son;
When by thy Wiles induced, fierce Boreas tossed
The shipwrack'd Hero on the Coan Coast:
Him through a thousand Forms of Death I bore,
And sent to Argos, and his native Shore.
Hear this, remember, and our Fury dread,
Nor pull the unwilling Vengeance on thy Head,
Lest Arts and Blandishments successless prove,
Thy soft Deceits, and well-dissembled Love.
The Thund'rer spoke: Imperial Juno mourned,
And trembling, these submissive Words returned.
By every Oath that Powers immortal ties,
The foodful Earth, and all-infolding Skies,
By thy black Waves, tremendous Styx! that flow
Through the drear Realms of gliding Ghosts below:
By the dread Honors of thy sacred Head,
And that unbroken Vow, our Virgin Bed!
Not by my Arts the Rulet of the Main
Steeps Troy in Blood, and rages round the Plain;
By his own Ardour, his own Pity swayed
To help his Greeks; he fought, and disobeyed:
Else had thy Juno better Counsels given,
And taught Submission to the Sire of Heaven.
Think thou with me? fair Empress of the Skies!
(The immortal Father with a Smile replies!)
Then soon the haughty Sea-God shall obey,
Nor dare to act, but when we point the way.
If Truth inspires thy Tongue, proclaim our Will
To yon' bright Synod on the Olympian Hill;
Our high Decree let various Iris know,
And call the God that bears the silver Bow.
Let her descend, and from the embattel'd Plain
Command the Sea-God to his watery Reign:
While Phoebus hastes, great Hector to prepare
To rise afresh, and once more wake the War,
His laboring Bosom re-inspires with Breath,
And calls his Senses from the Verge of Death.
Greece chased by Troy even to Achilles' Fleet,
Shall fall by thousands at the Hero's Feet.
He, not untouched with Pity, to the Plain
Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
What Youth he slaughters under Ilion's Walls?
Even my loved Son, divine Sarpedon falls!
Vanquished at last by Hector's Lance he lies.
Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
And lo! that Instant, godlike Hector dies.
From that great Hour the War's whole Fortune turns,
Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
Not till that Day shall Jove relax his Rage,
Nor one of all the heavenly Host engage
In aid of Greece. The Promise of a God
I gave, and sealed it with the Almighty Nod,
Achilles' Glory to the Stars to raise;
Such was our Word, and Fate the Word obeys.
The trembling Queen (the Almighty Order given)
Swift from the Idaean Summit shot to Heaven.
As some wayfaring Man, who wanders over
In Thought, a Length of Lands he trod before,
Sends forth his active Mind from Place to Place,
Joins Hill to Dale, and measures Space with Space:
So swift flew Juno to the blessed Abodes,
If Thought of Man can match the Speed of Gods.
There sat the Powers in awful Synod placed;
They bowed, and made Obeisance as she passed,
Through all the brazen Dome: With Goblets crowned
They hail her Queen; the Nectar streams around.
Fair Themis first presents the golden Bowl,
And anxious asks, what Cares disturb her Soul?
To whom the white-arm'd Goddess thus replies:
Enough thou know the Tyrant of the Skies,
Severely bent his Purpose to fulfill,
Unmoved his Mind, and unrestrained his Will.
Go thou, the Feasts of Heaven attend thy Call;
Bid the crowned Nectar circle round the Hall;
But Jove shall thunder through the Ethereal Dome,
Such stern Decrees, such threatened Woes to come,
As soon shall freeze Mankind with dire Surprise,
And damp the eternal Banquets of the Skies.
The Goddess said, and sullen took her Place;
Blank Horror sadden'd each celestial Face.
To see the gathering Grudge in every Breast,
Smiles on her Lips a spleenful Joy expressed,
While on her wrinkled Front, and Eyebrow bent,
Sat steadfast Care, and lowering Discontent.
Thus she proceeds -- Attend ye Powers above!
But know, it is Madness to contest with Jove:
Supreme he sits; and sees, in Pride of Sway,
Your Vassal Godheads grudgingly obey;
Fierce in the Majesty of Power controuls,
Shakes all the Thrones of Heaven, and bends the Poles.
Submiss, Immortals! all he wills, obey;
And thou great Mars, begin and show the way.
Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,
But dare not murmur, dare not vent a Sigh;
Thy own loved boasted Offspring lies overthrown,
If that loved boasted Offspring be thy own.
Stern Mars, with Anguish for his slaughtered Son,
Smote his rebelling Breast, and fierce begun.
Thus then, Immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
Forgive me Gods, and yield my Vengeance way:
Descending first to yon' forbidden Plain,
The God of Battles dares avenge the slain;
Dares, though the Thunder bursting over my Head
Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead.
With that, he gives command to Fear and Flight
To join his rapid Coursers for the Fight:
Then grim in Arms, with hasty Vengeance flies;
Arms, that reflect a Radiance through the Skies.
And now had Jove, by bold Rebellion driven,
Discharged his Wrath on half the Host of Heaven;
But Pallas springing through the bright Abode,
Starts from her azure Throne to calm the God.
Struck, for the immortal Race with timely Fear,
From frantic Mars she snatched the Shield and Spear;
Then the huge Helmet lifting from his Head,
Thus, to the impetuous Homicide she said.
By what wild Passion, Furious! art thou tossed?
Striv'st thou with Jove? Thou art already lost.
Shall not the Thund'rer's dread Command restrain,
And was Imperial Juno heard in vain?
Back to the Skies would thou with Shame be driven,
And in thy Guilt involve the Host of Heaven?
Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage;
The Skies would yield an ampler Scene of Rage,
Guilty and guiltless find an equal Fate,
And one vast Ruin whelm the Olympian State.
Cease then thy Offspring's Death unjust to call;
Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
Why should Heaven's Law with foolish Man comply,
Exempted from the Race ordained to die?
This Menace fixed the Warrior to his Throne;
Sullen he sat, and curbed the rising Groan.
Then Juno called ( Jove's Orders to obey)
The winged Iris, and the God of Day.
Go wait the Thund'rer's Will ( Saturnia cried)
On yon' tall Summit of the fount-ful I Would:
There in the Father's awful Presence stand,
Receive, and execute his dread Command.
She said, and sat: the God that gilds the Day,
And various Iris wing their airy way.
Swift as the Wind, to Ida's Hills they came,
(Fair Nurse of Fountains and of savage Game.)
There sat the Eternal; He, whose Nod controuls
The trembling World, and shakes the steady Poles.
Veiled in a Mist of Fragrance him they found,
With Clouds of Gold and Purple circled round.
Well-pleased the Thund'rer saw their earnest care,
And prompt Obedience to the Queen of Air;
Then (while a Smile serenes his awful Brow)
Commands the Goddess of the show'ry Bow.
Iris! descend, and what we here ordain
Report to yon' mad Tyrant of the Main.
Bid him from Fight to his own Deeps repair,
Or breathe from Slaughter in the Fields of Air.
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh
Our elder Birthright, and superior Sway.
How shall his Rashness stand the dire Alarms,
If Heavens Omnipotence descend in Arms?
Strives he with me, by whom his Power was given,
And is there Equal to the Lord of Heaven?
The Almighty spoke; the Goddess winged her Flight
To sacred Ilion from the Idaean Height.
Swift as the rat'ling Hail, or fleecy Snows
Drive through the Skies, when Boreas fiercely blows;
So from the Clouds descending Iris falls;
And to blue Neptune thus the Goddess calls.
Attend the Mandate of the Sire above,
In me behold the Messenger of Jove:
He bids thee from forbidden Wars repair
To thy own Deeps, or to the Fields of Air.
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh
His elder Birthright, and superior Sway.
How shall thy Rashness stand the dire Alarms,
If Heavens Omnipotence descend in Arms?
Striv'st thou with him, by whom all Power is given?
And art thou Equal to the Lord of Heaven?
What means the haughty Sovereign of the Skies,
(The King of Ocean thus, incensed, replies)
Rule as he will his portion'd Realms on high;
No Vassal God, nor of his Train am I.
Three Brother Deities from Saturn came,
And ancient Rhea, Earth's immortal Dame:
Assigned by Lot, our triple Rule we know;
Infernal Pluto sways the Shades below;
Over the wide Clouds, and over the starry Plain,
Ethereal Jove extends his high Domain;
My Court beneath the hoary Waves I keep,
And hush the Roarings of the sacred Deep:
Olympus, and this Earth, in common lie;
What Claim has here the Tyrant of the Sky?
Far in the distant Clouds let him control,
And awe the younger Brothers of the Pole;
There to his Children his Commands be given,
The trembling, servile, second Race of Heaven.
And must I then (said she) O Sire of Floods!
Bear this fierce Answer to the King of Gods?
Correct it yet, and change thy rash Intent;
A noble Mind disdains not to repent.
To elder Brothers guardian Fiends are given,
To scourage the Wretch insulting them and Heaven.
Great is the Profit (thus the God rejoined)
When Ministers are blessed with prudent Mind:
Warned by thy Words, to powerful Jove I yield,
And quit, though angry, the contended Field.
Not but his Threats with Justice I disclaim,
The same our Honors, and our Birth the same.
If yet, forgetful of his Promise given
To Hermes, Pallas, and the Queen of Heaven;
To favor Ilion, that perfidious Place,
He breaks his Faith with half the ethereal Race;
Give him to know, unless the Grecian Train
Lay yon' proud Structures level with the Plain,
However the Offense by other Gods be past,
The Wrath of Neptune shall for ever last.
Thus speaking, furious from the Field he strode,
And plunged into the Bosom of the Flood.
The Lord of Thunders from his lofty Height
Beheld, and thus bespoke the Source of Light.
Behold! the God whose liquid Arms are hurled
Around the Globe, whose Earthquakes rock the World;
Desists at length his Rebel-war to wage,
Seeks his own Seas, and trembles at our Rage!
Else had my Wrath, Heavens Thronesall shaking round,
Burned to the bottom of his Seas profound;
And all the Gods that round old Saturn dwell,
Had heard the Thunders to the Deeps of Hell.
Well was the Crime, and well the Vengeance spared;
Even Power immense had found such Battle hard.
Go thou my Son! the trembling Greeks alarm,
Shake my broad Aegis on thy active Arm,
Be godlike Hector thy peculiar Care,
Swell his bold Heart, and urge his Strength to War:
Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian Train
Fly to their Ships and Hellespont again:
Then Greece shall breathe from Toils -- The Godhead said;
His Will divine the Son of Jove obeyed.
Not half so swift the sailing Falcon flies,
That drives a Turtle through the liquid Skies;
As Phoebus shooting from the Idaean Brow,
Glides down the Mountain to the Plain below.
There Hector seated by the Stream he sees,
His Sense returning with the coming Breeze;
Again his Pulses beat, his Spirits rise;
Again his loved Companions meet his Eyes;
Jove thinking of his Pains, they past away.
To whom the God who gives the golden Day.
Why sits great Hector from the Field so far,
What grief, what wound, withholds him from the War?
The fainting Hero, as the Vision bright
Stood shining over him, half unsealed his Sight:
What blessed Immortal, with commanding Breath,
Thus wakens Hector from the Sleep of Death?
Has Fame not told, how, while my trusty Sword
Bathed Greece in Slaughter, and her Battle gored,
The mighty Ajax with a deadly Blow
Had almost sunk me to the Shades below?
Even yet, methinks, the gliding Ghosts I spy,
And Hell's black Horrors swim before my Eye.
To him Apollo. Be no more dismayed;
See, and be strong! the Thund'rer sends thee Aid,
Behold! thy Phoebus shall his Arms employ,
Phoebus, propitious still to thee, and Troy.
Inspire thy Warriors then with manly Force,
And to the Ships impell thy rapid Horse:
Even I will make thy fiery Coursers way,
And drive the Grecians headlong to the Sea.
Thus to bold Hector spoke the Son of Jove,
And breathed immortal Ardour from above.
As when the pampered Steed, with Reins unbound,
Breaks from his Stall, and pours along the Ground;
With ample Strokes he rushes to the Flood,
To bathe his Sides and cool his fiery Blood.
His Head now freed, he tosses to the Skies;
His Mane disheveled over his Shoulders flies;
He snuffs the Females in the well known Plain,
And springs, exulting, to his Fields again:
Urged by the Voice divine, thus Hector flew,
Full of the God; and all his Hosts pursue.
As when the Force of Men and Dogs combined
Invade the Mountain Goat, or branching Hind;
They gain th'impervious Rock, and safe retreat
(For Fate preserves them) from the Hunter's Threat.
When lo! a Lion shoots across the way:
They fly; at once the Chasers and the Prey.
So Greece, that late in conquering Troops pursued,
And marked their Progress through the Ranks in Blood,
Soon as they see the furious Chief appear,
Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.
Thoas with Grief observed his dreadful Course,
Thoas, the bravest of the Aetolian Force:
Skilled to direct the Javelin's distant Flight,
And bold to combat in the standing Fight;
Nor more in Councils famed for solid Sense,
Than winning Words and heavenly Eloquence.
Gods! what Portent (he cried) these Eyes invades?
Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian Shades!
We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax killed;
What God restores him to the frighted Field;
And not content that half of Greece lie slain,
Pours new Destruction on her Sons again?
He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful Will;
Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
Yet hear my Counsel, and his worst withstand;
The Greek's main Body to the Fleet command;
But let the few whom brisker Spirits warm,
Stand the first Onset, and provoke the Storm:
Thus point your Arms; and when such Foes appear,
Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear.
The Warrior spoke, the listening Greeks obey,
Thick'ning their Ranks, and form a deep Array.
Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion, gave command,
The valiant Leader of the Cretan Band,
And Mars-like Meges: These the Chiefs excite,
Approach the Foe, and meet the coming Fight.
Behind, unnumber'd Multitudes attend,
To flank the Navy, and the Shores defend.
Full on the Front the pressing Trojans bear,
And Hector first came towering to the War.
Phoebus himself the rushing Battle led;
A Veil of Clouds involved his radiant Head:
High-held before him, Jove's enormous Shield
Portentous shone, and shaded all the Field,
Vulcan to Jove the immortal Gift consigned,
To scatter Hosts, and terrify Mankind.
The Greeks expect the Shock; the Clamours rise
From different parts, and mingle in the Skies.
Dire was the Hiss of Darts, by Heroes flung,
And Arrows leaping from the Bowstring sung;
These drink the Life of generous Warriors slain;
Those guiltless fall, and thirst for Blood in vain.
As long as Phoebus bore unmoved the Shield,
Sat doubtful Conquest hovering over the Field;
But when aloft he shakes it in the Skies,
Shouts in their Ears, and lightens in their Eyes,
Deep Horror seizes every Grecian Breast,
Their Force is humbled, and their Fear confessed.
So flies a Herd of Oxen, scattered wide,
No Swain to guard 'em, and no Day to guide,
When two fell Lions from the Mountain come,
And spread the Carnage through the shady Gloom.
Impending Phoebus pours around 'em Fear,
And Troy and Hector thunder in the Rear.
Heaps fall on Heaps: the Slaughter Hector leads;
First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds;
One to the bold Boeotians ever dear,
And one Menestheus' Friend, and famed Compeer.
Medon and Iasus, Aeneas sped;
This sprung from Phelus, and the Athenians led;
But hapless Medon from Oileus came;
Him Ajax honored with a Brother's Name,
Though born of lawless Love: From home expelled,
A banished Man, in Phylace he dwell'd,
Pressed by the Vengeance of an angry Wife;
Troy ends, at last, his Labors and his Life.
Mecistes next, Polydamas o'erthrew;
And thee, brave Clonius! great Agenor slew.
By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
Pierced through the Shoulder as he basely flies.
Polites' Arm laid Echius on the Plain;
Stretched on one Heap, the Victors spoil the slain.
The Greeks dismayed, confused, disperse or fall,
Some seek the Trench, some skulk behind the Wall,
While these fly trembling, others pant for Breath,
And over the Slaughter stalks gigantic Death.
On rushed bold Hector, gloomy as the Night,
Forbids to plunder, animates the Fight,
Points to the Fleet: For by the Gods, who flies,
Who dares but linger, by this Hand he dies:
No weeping Sister his cold Eye shall close,
No friendly Hand his funeral Pyre compose.
Who stops to plunder, in this signal Hour,
The Birds shall tear him, and the Dogs devour.
Furious he said; the smarting Scourge resounds;
The Coursers fly; the smoking Chariot bounds:
The Hosts rush on; loud Clamours shake the Shore;
The Horses thunder, Earth and Ocean roar!
Apollo, planted at the Trenche's Bound,
Pushed at the Bank: Down sunk the enormous Mound:
Rolled in the Ditch the heapy Ruin lay;
A sudden Road! a long and ample way.
Over the dread Fosse (a late-impervious Space)
Now Steeds, and Men, and Cars, tumultuous pass.
The wondering Crowds the downward Level trod;
Before them flamed the Shield, and marched the God.
Then with his Hand he shook the mighty Wall;
And lo! the Turrets nod, the Bulwarks fall.
Easy, as when ashore an Infant stands,
And draws imagined Houses in the Sands;
The sportive Wanton, pleased with some new Play,
Sweeps the slight Works and fashioned Domes away.
Thus vanish, at thy touch, the Towers and Walls;
The Toil of thousands in a Moment falls.
The Grecians gaze around with wild Despair,
Confused, and weary all the Powers with Prayer;
Exhort their Men, with Praises, Threats, Commands;
And urge the Gods, with Voices, Eyes, and Hands.
Experienced Nestor chief obtests the Skies,
And weeps his Country with a Father's Eyes.
O Jove! if ever, on his native Shore,
One Greek enriched thy Shrine with offered Gore;
If ever, in hope our Country to behold,
We paid the fattest Firstlings of the Fold;
If ever thou sign'st our Wishes with thy Nod;
Perform the Promise of a gracious God!
This Day, preserve our Navies from the Flame,
And save the Relics of the Grecian Name.
Thus prayed the Sage: The Eternal gave consent,
And Peals of Thunder shook the Firmament.
Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting Sign,
And caught new Fury at the Voice divine.
As, when black Tempests mix the Seas and Skies,
The roaring Deeps in watery Mountains rise,
Above the sides of some tall Ship ascend,
Its Womb they deluge, and its Ribs they rend:
Thus loudly roaring, and o'erpow'ring all,
Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian Wall;
Legions on Legions from each side arise;
Thick sound the Keels; the Storm of Arrows flies.
Fierce on the Ships above, the Cars below,
These wield the Mace, and those the Javelin throw.
While thus the Thunder of the Battle raged,
And laboring Armies round the Works engaged;
Still in the Tent Patroclus sat, to tend
The good Eurypylus, his wounded Friend.
He sprinkles healing Balmes, to Anguish kind,
And adds Discourse, the Medicine of the Mind.
But when he saw, ascending up the Fleet,
Victorious Troy: Then, starting from his Seat,
With bitter Groans his Sorrows he expressed,
He wrings his Hands, he beats his manly Breast.
Though yet thy State require Redress (he cries)
Depart I must: What Horrors strike my Eyes?
Charged with Achilles' high Commands I go,
A mournful Witness of this Scene of Woe:
I haste to urge him, by his Country's Care,
To rise in Arms, and shine again in War.
Perhaps some favoring God his Soul may bend;
The Voice is powerful of a faithful Friend.
He spoke; and speaking, swifter than the Wind
Sprung from the Tent, and left the War behind.
The embodied Greeks the fierce Attack sustain,
But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain.
Nor could the Trojans, through that firm Array,
Force, to the Fleet and Tents, the impervious way.
As when a Shipwright, with Palladian Art,
Smooths the rough Wood, and levels every Part;
With equal Hand he guides his whole Design,
By the just Rule, and the directing Line.
The martial Leaders, with like Skill and Care,
Preserved their Line, and equal kept the War.
Brave Deeds of Arms through all the Ranks were tried,
And every Ship sustained an equal Tide.
At one proud Bark, high-tow'ring over the Fleet
Ajax the Great, and Godlike Hector meet:
For one bright Prize the matchless Chiefs contend;
Nor this the Ships can fire, nor that defend;
One kept the Shore, and one the Vessel trod;
That fixed as Fate, this acted by a God.
The Son of Clytius, in his daring Hand,
The Deck approaching, shakes a flaming Brand;
But pierced by Telamon's huge Lance expires;
Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguished Fires.
Great Hector viewed him with a sad Survey,
As stretched in Dust before the Stern he lay.
Oh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian Race!
Stand to your Arms, maintain this arduous Space!
Lo! where the Son of Royal Clytius lies,
Ah save his Arms, secure his Obsequies!
This said, his eager Javelin sought the Foe:
But Ajax shunned the meditated Blow.
Not vainly yet the forceful Lance was thrown;
It stretched in Dust unhappy Lycophron:
An Exile long, sustained at Ajax' Board,
A faithful Servant to a foreign Lord;
In Peace, in War, for ever at his side,
Near his loved Master, as he lived, he died.
From the high Poop he tumbles on the Sand,
And lies, a lifeless Load, along the Land.
With Anguish Ajax views the piercing Sight,
And thus inflames his Brother to the Fight.
Teucer, behold! extended on the Shore
Our Friend, our loved Companion! now no more!
Dear as a Parent, with a Parent's Care,
To fight our Wars, he left his native Air.
This Death deplored to Hector's Rage we owe;
Revenge, revenge it on the cruel Foe.
Where are those Darts on which the Fates attend?
And where the Bow, which Phoebus taught to bend?
Impatient Teucer, hastening to his Aid,
Before the Chief his ample Bow displayed;
The well-stor'd Quiver on his Shoulders hung:
Then hissed his Arrow, and the Bowstring sung.
Clytus, Pisenor's Son, renowned in Fame,
(To thee, Polydamas! an honored Name)
Drove through the thickest of the embattel'd Plains
The startling Steeds, and shook his eager Reins.
As all on Glory ran his ardent Mind,
The pointed Death arrests him from behind:
Through his fair Neck the thrilling Arrow flies;
In Youth's first Bloom reluctantly he dies.
Hurled from the lofty Seat, at distance far,
The headlong Coursers spurn his empty Car;
Till sad Polydamas the Steeds restrained,
And gave, Astynous, to thy careful Hand;
Then, fired to Vengeance, rushed amidst the Foe;
Rage edged his Sword, and strengthened every Blow.
Once more bold Teucer, in his Country's Cause,
At Hector's Breast a chosen Arrow draws;
And had the Weapon found the destined way,
Thy Fall, great Trojan! had renowned that Day.
But Hector was not doomed to perish then:
The all-wise Disposer of the Fates of Men,
(Imperial Jove) his present Death withstands;
Nor was such Glory due to Teucer's Hands.
At his full Stretch, as the tough String he drew,
Struck by an Arm unseen, it burst in two;
Down dropped the Bow: the Shaft with brazen Head
Fell innocent, and on the Dust, lay dead.
The astonished Archer to great Ajax cries;
Some God prevents our destined Enterprise:
Some God, propitious to the Trojan Foe,
Has, from my Arm unfailing, struck the Bow,
And broke the Nerve my Hands had twined with Art,
Strong to impell the Flight of many a Dart.
Since Heaven commands it ( Ajax made reply)
Dismiss the Bow, and lay thy Arrows by;
Thy Arms no less suffice the Lance to wield,
And quit the Quiver for the ponderous Shield.
In the first Ranks indulge thy Thirst of Fame,
Thy brave Example shall the rest inflame.
Fierce as they are, by long Successes vain;
To force our Fleet, or even a Ship to gain,
Asks Toil, and Sweat, and Blood: Their utmost Might
Shall find its Match -- No more: It Is ours to fight.
Then Teucer laid his faithless Bow aside;
The fourfold Buckler over his Shoulder tied;
On his brave Head a crested Helm he placed,
With nodding Horsehair formidably graced;
A Dart, whose Point with Brass refulgent shines,
The Warrior wields; and his great Brother joins.
This Hector saw, and thus expressed his Joy.
Ye Troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
Be mindful of your selves, your ancient Fame,
And spread your Glory with the Navy's Flame.
Jove is with us; I saw his Hand, but now,
From the proud Archer strike his vaunted Bow.
Indulgent Jove! how plain thy Favors shine,
When happy Nations bear the Marks divine!
How easy then, to see the sinking State
Of Realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
Such is the Fate of Greece, and such is ours:
Behold, ye Warriors, and exert your Powers.
Death is the worst; a Fate which all must try;
And, for our Country, it is a Bliss to die.
The gallant Man, though slain in Fight he be,
Yet leaves his Nation safe, his Children free;
Entails a Debt on all the grateful State;
His own brave Friends shall glory in his Fate;
His Wife live honored, all his Race succeed;
And late Posterity enjoy the Deed!
This roused the Soul in every Trojan Breast:
The godlike Ajax next his Greeks addressed.
How long, ye Warriors of the Argive Race,
(To generous Argos what a dire Disgrace!)
How long, on these cursed Confines will ye lie,
Yet undetermined, or to live, or die!
What Hopes remain, what Methods to retire,
If once your Vessels catch the Trojan Fire?
Mark how the Flames approach, how near they fall,
How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his Call!
Not to the Dance that dreadful Voice invites,
It calls to Death, and all the Rage of Fights.
It Is now no time for Wisdom or Debates;
To your own Hands are trusted all your Fates:
And better far, in one decisive Strife,
One Day should end our Labor, or our Life;
Than keep this hard-got Inch of barren Sands,
Still pressed, and pressed by such inglorious Hands.
The listening Grecians feel their Leader's Flame,
And every kindling Bosom pants for Fame.
Then mutual Slaughters spread on either side;
By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
There pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
Chief of the Foot, of old Antenor's Race.
Polydamas laid Otus on the Sand,
The fierce Commander of the Epeian Band.
His Lance bold Meges at the Victor threw;
The Victor stooping, from the Death withdrew:
(That valued Life, O Phoebus! was thy Care)
But Croesmus' Bosom took the flying Spear;
His Corpse fell bleeding on the slippery Shore;
His radiant Arms triumphant Meges bore.
Dolops, the Son of Lampus rushes on,
Sprung from the Race of old Laomedon,
And famed for Prowess in a well-fought Field;
He pierced the Center of his sounding Shield:
But Meges, Phyleus' ample Breastplate wore,
(Well known in Fight on Selles' winding Shore,
For King Euphetes gave the golden Mail,
Compact, and firm with many a jointed Scale)
Which often, in Cities stormed, and Battles won,
Had saved the Father, and now saves the Son.
Full at the Trojan's Head he urged his Lance,
Where the high Plumes above the Helmet dance,
New-ting'd with Tyrian Dye: In Dust below,
Shorn from the Crest, the purple Honors glow.
Meantime their Fight the Spartan King surveyed,
And stood by Meges' side, a sudden Aid,
Through Dolops' Shoulder urged his forceful Dart,
Which held its Passage through the panting Heart,
And issued at his Breast. With thundering Sound
The Warrior falls, extended on the Ground.
In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain;
But Hector's Voice excites his kindred Train;
The Hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
He (ever to Troy the Grecians crossed the Main)
Fed his large Oxen on Percote's Plain;
But when oppressed, his Country claimed his Care,
Returned to Ilion, and excelled in War:
For this, in Priam's Court he held his Place,
Beloved no less than Priam's Royal Race.
Him Hector singled, as his Troops he led,
And thus inflamed him, pointing to the Dead.
Lo Melanippus! lo where Dolops lies;
And is it thus our Royal Kinsman dies?
O'ermatch'd he falls; to two at once a Prey,
And lo! they bear the bloody Arms away!
Come on -- a distant War no longer wage,
But hand to hand thy Country's Foes engage:
Till Greece at once, and all her Glory end;
Or Ilion from her tow'ry Height descend,
Heaved from the lowest Stone; and bury All,
In one sad Sepulcher, one common Fall.
Hector (this said) rushed forward on the Foes:
With equal Ardour Melanippus glows:
Then Ajax thus -- Oh Greeks! respect your Fame,
Respect your selves, and learn an honest Shame:
Let mutual Reverence mutual Warmth inspire,
And catch from Breast to Breast the noble Fire.
On Valor's side the odds of Combat lie,
The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
The Wretch that trembles in the Field of Fame,
Meets Death, and worse than Death, eternal Shame.
His generous Sense he not in vain imparts;
It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian Hearts.
They join, they throng, they thicken at his Call,
And flank the Navy with a brazen Wall;
Shields touching Shields in order blaze above,
And stop the Trojans, though impelled by Jove.
The fiery Spartan first, with loud Applause,
Warms the bold Son of Nestor in his Cause.
Is there (he said) in Arms a Youth like you,
So strong to fight, so active to pursue?
Why stand you distant, nor attempt a Deed?
Lift the bold Lance, and make some Trojan bleed.
He said, and backward to the Lines retired;
Forth rushed the Youth, with martial Fury fired,
Beyond the foremost Ranks; his Lance he threw,
And round the black Battalions cast his View.
The Troops of Troy recede with sudden Fear,
While the swift Javelin hissed along in Air.
Advancing Menalippus met the Dart
With his bold Breast, and felt it in his Heart:
Thundering he falls; his falling Arms resound,
And his broad Buckler rings against the Ground.
The Victor leaps upon his prostrate Prize;
Thus on a Roe the well-breathed Beagle flies,
And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the Dart
The distant Hunter sent into his Heart.
Observing Hector to the Rescue flew;
Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew:
So when a Savage, ranging over the Plain,
Has torn the Shepherd's Dog, or Shepherd Swain;
While conscious of the Deed, he glares around,
And hears the gathering Multitude resound,
Timely he flies the yet-untasted Food,
And gains the friendly Shelter of the Wood.
So fears the Youth; all Troy with Shouts pursue,
While Stones and Darts in mingled Tempest flew;
But entered in the Grecian Ranks, he turns
His manly Breast, and with new Fury burns.
Now on the Fleet the Tides of Trojans drove,
Fierce to fulfill the stern Decrees of Jove:
The Sire of Gods, confirming Thetis' Prayer,
The Grecian Ardour quenched in deep Despair;
But lifts to Glory Troy's prevailing Bands,
Swells all their Hearts, and strengthens all their Hands.
On Ida's Top he waits with longing Eyes,
To view the Navy blazing to the Skies;
Then, nor till then, the Scale of War shall turn,
The Trojans fly, and conquered Ilion burn.
These Fates revolved in his almighty Mind,
He raises Hector to the Work designed,
Bids him with more than mortal Fury glow,
And drives him, like a Lightning, on the Foe.
So Mars, when human Crimes for Vengeance call,
Shakes his huge Javelin, and whole Armies fall.
Not with more Rage a Conflagration rolls,
Wraps the vast Mountains, and involves the Poles.
He foames with Wrath; beneath his gloomy Brow
Like fiery Meteors his red Eyeballs glow:
The radiant Helmet on his Temples burns,
Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
For Jove his Splendor round the Chief had thrown,
And cast the Blaze of both the Hosts on one.
Unhappy Glories! for his Fate was near,
Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides' Spear:
Yet Jove deferred the Death he was to pay,
And gave what Fate allowed, the Honors of a Day!
Now all on fire for Fame; his Breast, his Eyes
Burn at each Foe, and single every Prize;
Still at the closest Ranks, the thickest Fight,
He points his Ardour, and exerts his Might.
The Grecian Phalanx moveless as a Tower,
On all sides battered, yet resists his Power:
So some tall Rock o'erhangs the hoary Main,
By Winds assailed, by Billows beat in vain,
Unmoved it hears, above, the Tempest blow,
And sees the watery Mountains break below.
Girt in surrounding Flames, he seems to fall
Like Fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:
Bursts as a Wave, that from the Clouds impends,
And swelled with Tempests on the Ship descends;
White are the Decks with Foam; the Winds aloud
Howl over the Masts, and sing through every Shroud:
Pale, trembling, tired, the Sailors freeze with Fears;
And instant Death on every Wave appears.
So pale the Greeks the Eyes of Hector meet,
The Chief so thunders, and so shakes the Fleet.
As when a Lion, rushing from his Den,
Amidst the Plain of some wide-water'd Fen,
(Where numerous Oxen, as at ease they feed,
At large expatiate over the ranker Mead;)
Leaps on the Herds before the Herdsman's Eyes;
The trembling Herdsman far to distance flies:
Some lordly Bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
Thus from the Rage of Jove-like Hector, flew
All Greece in Heaps; but one he seized, and slew.
Mycenian Periphes, a mighty Name,
In Wisdom great, in Arms well known to Fame:
The Minister of stern Euristheus' Ire
Against Alcides, Copreus, was his Sire:
The Son redeemed the Honors of the Race,
A Son as generous as his Sire was base;
Over all his Country's Youth conspicuous far,
In every Virtue, or of Peace or War:
But doomed to Hector's stronger Force to yield!
Against the Margin of his ample Shield
He struck his hasty Foot: his Heels up-sprung;
Supine he fell; his brazen Helmet rung.
On the fallen Chief the invading Trojan pressed,
And plunged the pointed Javelin in his Breast.
His circling Friends, who strove to guard too late
The unhappy Hero; fled, or shared his Fate.
Chased from the foremost Line, the Grecian Train
Now man the next, receding towered the Main:
Wedged in one Body at the Tents they stand,
Walled round with Sterns, a gloomy, desperate Band.
Now manly Shame forbids the inglorious Flight;
Now Fear itself confines them to the Fight:
Man Courage breathes in Man; but Nestor most
(The sage Preserver of the Grecian Host)
Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost Shores;
And by their Parents, by themselves, implores.
O Friends! be Men: your generous Breasts inflame
With mutual Honor, and with mutual Shame!
Think of your Hopes, your Fortunes; all the Care
Your Wives, your Infants, and your Parents share:
Think of each living Father's reverend Head;
Think of each Ancestor with Glory dead;
Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue;
They ask their Safety and their Fame from you:
The Gods their Fates on this one Action lay,
And all are lost, if you desert the Day.
He spoke, and round him breathed heroic Fires;
Minerva seconds what the Sage inspires.
The Mist of Darkness Jove around them threw,
She cleared, restoring all the War to view;
A sudden Ray shot beaming over the Plain,
And showed the Shores, the Navy, and the Main:
Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight,
The Scene wide-opening to the Blaze of Light.
First of the Field, great Ajax strikes their Eyes,
His Port majestic, and his ample Size:
A ponderous Mace, with Studs of Iron crowned,
Full twenty Cubits long, he swings around.
Nor fights like others, fixed to certain Stands,
But looks a moving Tower above the Bands;
High on the Decks, with vast gigantic Stride,
The godlike Hero stalks from side to side.
So when a Horseman from the watery Mead
(Skilled in the Manage of the bounding Steed)
Drives four fair Coursers, practiced to obey,
To some great City through the public way;
Safe in his Art, as side by side they run,
He shifts his Seat, and vaults from one to one;
And now to this, and now to that he flies;
Admiring Numbers follow with their Eyes.
From Ship to Ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
No less the Wonder of the warring Crew.
As furious, Hector thundered Threats aloud,
And rushed enraged before the Trojan Crowd:
Then swift invades the Ships, whose beaky Prores
Lay ranked contiguous on the bending Shores.
So the strong Eagle from his airy Height
Who marks the Swan's or Crane's embodied Flight,
Stoops down impetuous, while they light for Food,
And stooping, darkens with his Wings the Flood.
Jove leads him on with his almighty Hand,
And breathes fierce Spirits in his following Band.
The warring Nations meet, the Battle roars,
Thick beats the Combat on the sounding Prores.
Thou would have thought, so furious was their Fire
No Force could tame them, and no Toil could tire;
As if new Vigor from new Fights they won,
And the long Battle was but then begun.
Greece yet unconquered, kept alive the War,
Secure of Death, confiding in Despair;
Troy in proud Hopes already viewed the Main
Bright with the Blaze, and red with Heroes slain:
Like Strength is felt, from Hope, and from Despair,
And each contends, as his were all the War.
'Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless Hand
First seized a Ship on that contested Strand;
The same which dead Protesilaus bore,
The first that touched the unhappy Trojan Shore:
For this in Arms the warring Nations stood,
And bathed their generous Breasts with mutual Blood.
No room to poize the Lance, or bend the Bow;
But hand to hand, and Man to Man they grow.
Wounded, they wound; and seek each others Hearts
With Faulchions, Axes, Swords, and shortened Darts.
The Faulchions ring, Shields rattle, Axes sound,
Swords flash in Air, or glitter on the Ground;
With streaming Blood the slippery Shores are died,
And slaughtered Heroes swell the dreadful Tide.
Still raging Hector with his ample Hand
Grasps the high Stern, and gives this loud Command.
Haste, bring the Flames! the Toil of ten long Years
Is finished; and the Day desired appears!
This happy Day with Acclamations greet,
Bright with Destruction of yon' hostile Fleet.
The Coward-Counsels of a timorous Throng
Of reverend Dotards, checked our Glory long:
Too long Jove lulled us with lethargic Charms,
But now in Peals of Thunder calls to Arms;
In this great Day he crowns our full Desires,
Wakes all our Force, and seconds all our Fires.
He spoke -- The Warriors, at his fierce Command,
Pour a new Deluge on the Grecian Band.
Even Ajax paused (so thick the Javelins fly)
Stepped back, and doubted or to live, or die.
Yet where the Oars are placed, he stands to wait
What Chief approaching dares attempt his Fate;
Even to the last, his Naval Charge defends,
Now shakes his Spear, now lifts, and now protends,
Even yet, the Greeks with piercing Shouts inspires,
Amidst Attacks, and Deaths, and Darts, and Fires.
O Friends! O Heroes! Names for ever dear,
Once Sons of Mars, and Thunderbolts of War!
Ah yet be mindful of your old Renown,
Your great Forefathers Virtues, and your own.
What Aids expect you in this utmost Strait?
What Bulwarks rising between you and Fate?
No Aids, no Bulwarks your Retreat attend,
No Friends to help, no City to defend.
This Spot is all you have, to lose or keep;
There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the Deep.
It Is hostile Ground you tread; your native Lands
Far, far from hence: your Fates are in your Hands.
Raging he spoke; nor farther wastes his Breath,
But turns his Javelin to the Work of Death.
Whatever bold Trojan armed his daring Hands
Against the sable Ships with flaming Brands,
So well the Chief his Naval Weapon sped,
The luckless Warrior at his Stern lay dead:
Full twelve, the boldest, in a Moment fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the Shades of Hell.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Fifteenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FIFTEENTH BOOK.
I.
ADAM, in Paradise lost, awakes from the Embrace of Eve, in much the same
Humor with Jupiter in this Place. Their Circumstance is very parallel; and
each of 'em, as soon as his Passion is over, full of that Resentment natural to
a Superior, who is imposed upon by one of less Worth and Sense than himself,
and imposed upon in the worst manner by Shows of Tenderness and Love.

II.
VERSE 23. Have thou forgot, etc.] It is in the Original to this Effect. Have
you forgot how you swung in the Air when I hung a Load of two Anvils at your
Feet, and a Chain of Gold on your Hands? "Though it is not my Design, says M.
Dacier, to give a Reason for every Story in the Pagan Theology, yet I cannot
prevail upon my self to pass over this in Silence. The physical Allegory seems
very apparent to me: Homer mysteriously in this Place explains the Nature of
the Air, which is Juno; the two Anvils which she had at her Feet are the two
Elements, Earth and Water; and the Chains of Gold about her Hands are the
Ether, or Fire, which fills the superior Region: The two grosser Elements are
called Anvils, to show us, that in these two Elements only, Arts are exercised.
I don't know but that a moral Allegory may here be found, as well as a physical
one; the Poet by these Masses tied to the Feet of Juno, and by the Chain of
Gold with which her Hands were bound, might signify, that on one side domestic
Affairs should like Fetters detain the wise at home; and on the other, that
proper and beautiful Works like Chains of Gold ought to employ her Hands."

The physical part of this Note belongs to Heraclides Pontius, Eustathius, and
the Scholiast: M. Dacier might have been contented with the Credit of the moral
one, as it seems an Observation no less singular in a Lady.

III.
VERSE 23.] Eustathius tells us, that there were in some Manuscripts of Homer
two Verses which are not to be found in any of the printed Editions, (which
Hen. Stephens places here.) (...)
(...)
By these two Verses Homer shows us, that what he says of the Punishment of
Juno was not an Invention of his own, but founded upon an ancient Tradition.
There had probably been some Statue of Juno with Anvils at her Feet, and Chains
on her Hands; and nothing but Chains and Anvils being left by Time,
superstitious People raised this Story; so that Homer only followed common
Report. What farther confirms it, is what Eustathius adds, that there were
shown near Troy certain Ruins, which were said to be the Remains of these
Masses. Dacier.

IV.
VERSE 43. And thy black Waves, tremendous Styx!] The Epithet Homer here gives
to Styx is (...), subterlabens, which I take to refer to its Passage through the
infernal Regions. But there is a Refinement upon it, as if it signified ex alto
stillans, falling drop by drop from on high. Herodotus in his sixth Book,
writes thus. "The Arcadians say, that near the City Nonacris flows the Water of
Styx, and that it is a small Rill, which distilling from an exceeding high
Rock, falls into a little Cavity or Basin, environed with a Hedge." Pausanias,
who had seen the Place, gives Light to this Passage of Herodotus. "Going from
Phereus, says he, in the Country of the Arcadians, and drawing toward the
West, we find on the left the City Clytorus, and on the right that of Nonacris,
and the Fountain of Styx, which from the Height of a shaggy Precipiece falls
drop by drop upon an exceeding high Rock, and before it has traversed this
Rock, flows into the River Crathis; this Water is mortal both to Man and Beast,
and therefore it is said to be an infernal Fountain. Homer gives it a Place in
his Poems, and by the Description which he delivers, one would think he had
seen it." This shows the wonderful Exactness of Homer in the Description of
Places which he mentions. The Gods swore by Styx, and this was the strongest
Oath they could take; but we likewise find that Men too swore by this fatal
Water: for Herodotus tells us, that Cleomenes going to Arcadia to engage the
Arcadians to follow him in a War against Sparta, had a design to assemble at
the City Nonacris, and make them swear by the Water of this Fountain. Dacier.
Eustath. in Odyss.

V.
VERSE 47. Not by my Arts, etc.] This Apology is well contrived; Juno could not
swear that she had not deceived Jupiter, for this had been entirely false, and
Homer would be far from authorizing Perjury by so great an Example. Juno, we
see, throws part of the Fault on Neptune, by showing she had not acted in
concert with him. Eustathius.

VI.
VERSE 67. Greece chased by Troy, etc.] In this Discourse of Jupiter the Poet
opens his Design, by giving his Readers a Sketch of the principal Events he is
to expect. As this Conduct of Homer may to many appear no way artful, and since
it is a principal Article of the Charge brought against him by some late French
Critics, it will not be improper here to look a little into this Dispute. The
Case will be best stated by translating the following Passage from Mr. de la
Motte's Reflections sur la Critique.

"I could not forbear wishing that Homer had an Art, which he seems to have
neglected, that of preparing Events without making them known beforehand, so
that when they happen one might be surprised agreeably. I could not be quite
satisfied to hear Jupiter, in the middle of the Iliad, give an exact Abridgment
of the Remainder of the Action. Mad. Dacier alleges as an Excuse, that this
past only between Jupiter and Juno; as if the Reader was not let into the
Secret, and had not as much share in the Confidence.

She adds, "that as we are capable of a great deal of Pleasure at the
Representation of a Tragedy which we have seen before, so the Surprises which I
require are no way necessary to our Entertainment. This I think a pure Piece of
Sophistry: One may have two sorts of Pleasure at the Representation of a
Tragedy; in the first place, that of taking part in an Action of Importance the
first time it passes before our Eyes, of being agitated by Fear and Hope for
the Persons one is most concerned about, and in fine, of partaking their
Felicity or Misfortune, as they happen to succeed, or be disappointed. "This
therefore is the first Pleasure which the Poet should design to give his
Auditors, to transport them by pathetic Surprises which excite Terror or Pity.
The second Pleasure must proceed from a View of that Art which the Author has
shown in raising the former.

"'It Is true, when we have seen a Piece already, we have no longer that first
Pleasure of the Surprise, at least not in all its Vivacity; but there still
remains the second, which could never have its turn, had not the Poet labored
successfully to excite the first, it being upon that indispensable Obligation
that we judge of his Art.

"The Art therefore consists in telling the Hearer only what is necessary to be
told him, and in telling him only as much as is requisite to the Design of
pleasing him. And although we know this already when we read it a second time, we
yet taste the Pleasure of that Order and Conduct which the Art required.

"From hence it follows, that every Poem ought to be contrived for the first
Impression it is to make. If it be otherwise, it gives us (instead of two
Pleasures which we expected) two sorts of Disgusts; the one, that of being cool
and untouched when we should be moved and transported; the other, that of
perceiving the Defect which caused that Disgust.

"This, in one word, is what I have found in the Iliad. I was not interested or
touched by the Adventures, and I saw it was this cooling Preparation that
prevented my being so."



It appears clearly that M. Dacier's Defense no way excuses the Poet's Conduct;
wherefore I shall add two or three Considerations which may chance to set it in
a better Light. It must be owned that a Surprise artfully managed, which arises
from unexpected Revolutions of great Actions, affects the Mind with a peculiar
Delight: In this consists the principal Pleasure of a Romance and well writ
Tragedy. But besides this, there is in the Relation of great Events a different
kind of Pleasure which arises from the artful unravelling a Knot of Actions,
which we knew before in the gross. This is a Delight peculiar to History and
Epic Poetry, which is founded on History. In these kinds of writing, a
preceding summary Knowledge of the Events described, does no way damp our
Curiosity, but rather makes it more eager for the Detail. This is evident in a
good History, where generally the Reader is affected with a greater Delight, in
proportion to his preceding Knowledge of the Facts described: The Pleasure in
this case is like that of an Architect first viewing some magnificent Building,
who was before well acquainted with the Proportions of it. In an Epic Poem the
case is of a like Nature; where, as if the historical Foreknowledge were not
sufficient, the most judicious Poets never fail to excite their Reader's
Curiosity by some small Sketches of their Design; which like the Outlines of a
fine Picture, will necessarily raise in us a greater desire to see it in its
finished Coloring.

Had our Author been inclined to follow the Method of managing our Passions by
Surprises, he could not well have succeeded by this manner in the Subject he
chose to write upon, which being a Story of great Importance, the principal
Events of which were well known to the Greeks, it was not possible for him to
alter the Groundwork of his Piece; and probably he was willing to mark by
these Recapitulations how much of his Story was founded on historical Truths,
and that what is superadded were the poetical Ornaments.

There is another Consideration worth remembering on this Head, to justify our
Author's Conduct. It seems to have been an Opinion in these early times, deeply
rooted in most Countries and Religions, that the Actions of Men were not only
foreknown, but predestined by a superior Being. This Sentiment is very
frequent in the most ancient Writers both sacred and profane, and seems a
distinguishing Character of the Writings of the greatest Antiquity. The Word of
the Lord was fulfilled, is the principal Observation in the History of the Old
Testament, and (...) is the declared and most obvious Moral of the Iliad. If
this great Moral be fit to be represented in Poetry, what Means so proper to
make it evident, as this introducing Jupiter foretelling the Events which he
had decreed?

VII.
VERSE 86. As some wayfaring Man, etc.] The Discourse of Jupiter to Juno being
ended, she ascends to Heaven with wonderful Celerity, which the Poet explains
by this Comparison. On other Occasions he has illustrated the Action of the
Mind by sensible Images from the Motion of the Bodies; here he inverts the
Case, and shows the great Velocity of Juno's Flight by comparing it to the
Quickness of Thought. No other Comparison could have equaled the Speed of an
heavenly Being. To render this more beautiful and exact, the Poet describes a
Traveller who revolves in his Mind the several Places which he has seen, and in
an Instant passes in Imagination from one distant Part of the Earth to another.
Milton seems to have had it in his Eye in that elevated Passage, -- The Speed
of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest Minutes winged.
As the Sense in which we have explained this Passage is exactly literal, as
well as truly sublime, one cannot but wonder what should induce both Hobbes and
Chapman to ramble so wide from it in their Translations. This said, went Juno
to Olympus high.
As when a Man looks over an ample Plain,
To any distance quickly goes his Eye:
So swiftly Juno went with little Pain.
Chapman's is yet more foreign to the Subject, But as the Mind of such a Man,
that has a great way gone,
And either knowing not his way, or then would let alone
His purposed Journey; is distract, and in his vexed Mind
Resolves now not to go, now goes, still many ways inclined --


VIII.
VERSE 102. Go thou, the Feasts of Heaven attend thy Call.] This is a Passage
worthy our Observation: Homer feigns, that Themis, that is Justice, presides
over the Feasts of the Gods; to let us know, that she ought much more to
preside over the Feasts of Men. Eustathius.

IX.
VERSE 114. Juno 's Speech to the Gods.] It was no sort of Exaggeration what
the Ancients have affirmed of Homer, that the Examples of all kinds of Oratory
are to be found in his Works. The present Speech of Juno is a Masterpiece in
that sort, which seems to say one thing, and persuades another: For while she
is only declaring to the Gods the Orders of Jupiter, at the time that she tells
'em they must obey, she fills them with a Reluctance to do it. By representing
so strongly the Superiority of his Power, she makes them uneasy at it, and by
particularly advising that God to submit, whose Temper could least brook it,
she incites him to downright Rebellion. Nothing can be more sly and artfully
provoking, than that Stroke on the Death of his darling Son. Do thou, O Mars,
teach Obedience to us all, for it is upon thee that Jupiter has put the severest
Trial: Ascalaphus thy Son lies slain by his means: Bear it with so much Temper
and Moderation, that the World may not think he was thy Son.

X.
VERSE 134. To Fear and Flight. -- ] Homer does not say, that Mars commanded
they should join his Horses to his Chariot, which Horses were called Fear and
Flight. Fear and Flight are not the Names of the Horses of Mars, but the Names
of two Furies in the Service of this God: It appears likewise by other
Passages, that they were his Children, Book 13.. 299. This is a very ancient
Mistake; Eustathius mentions it as an Error of Antimachus, yet Hobbes and most
others have fallen into it.

XI.
VERSE 164. Go wait the Thund'rer's Will.] It Is remarkable, that whereas it is
familiar with the Poet to repeat his Errands and Messages, here he introduces
Juno with very few Words, where she carries a Dispatch from Jupiter to Iris and
Apollo. She only says, " Jove commands you to attend him on Mount Ida," and
adds nothing of what had passed between herself and her Consort before. The
reason of this Brevity is not only that she is highly disgusted with Jupiter,
and so unwilling to tell her Tale from the Anguish of her Heart; but also
because Jupiter had given her no Commission to relate fully the Subject of
their Discourse; wherefore she is cautious of declaring what possibly he would
have concealed. Neither does Jupiter himself in what follows reveal his
Decrees: For he lets Apollo only so far into his Will, that he would have him
discover and rout the Greeks: Their good Fortune, and the Success which was to
ensue, he hides from him, as one who favored the Cause of Troy. One may remark
in this Passage Homer's various Conduct and Discretion concerning what ought to
be put in Practice, or left undone; whereby his Reader may be informed how to
regulate his own Affairs. Eustathius.

XII.
VERSE 210. Three Brother Deities, from Saturn came,
And ancient Rhea, Earth's immortal Dame:
Assigned by Lot, our Triple Rule we know, etc.
Some have thought the Platonic Philosophers drew from hence the Notion of
their Triad (which the Christian Platonists since imagined to be an obscure
Hint of the Sacred Trinity.) The Trias of Plato is well known, (...). In his
Gorgias he tells us, (...) (autorem sc. fuisse)(...). See Proclus in Plat.
Theol. lib. 1. c. 5. Lucian Philopatr. Aristotle de coelo, l. 1. c. 1. speaking
of the Ternarian Number from Pythagoras, has these Words; (...). From which
Passage Trapezuntius endeavored very seriously to prove, that Aristotle had a
perfect Knowledge of the Trinity. Duport (who furnished me with this Note, and
who seems to be sensible of the Folly of Trapezuntius) nevertheless in his
Gnomologia Homerica, or Comparison of our Author's Sentences with those of the
Scripture, has placed opposite to this Verse that of St. John. There are three
who give Testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I think
this the strongest Instance I ever met with of the manner of thinking of such
Men, whose too much Learning has made them mad.

Lactantius, de Falls. Relig. lib. 1. cap. 11. takes this Fable to be a Remain
of ancient History, importing, that the Empire of the then known World was
divided among the three Brothers; to Jupiter the Oriental part, which was
called Heaven, as the Region of Light, or the Sun: To Pluto the Occidental, or
darker Regions: And to Neptune the Sovereignty of the Seas.

XIII.
VERSE 228. To elder Brothers.] Iris, that she may not seem to upbraid Neptune
with Weakness of Judgment, out of Regard to the Greatness and Dignity of his
Person, does not say that Jupiter is stronger or braver; but attacking him from
a Motive not in the least invidious, Superiority of Age, she says
sententiously, that the Furies wait upon our Elders. The Furies are said to
wait upon Men in a double Sense: either for Evil, as they did upon Orestes
after he had slain his Mother; or else for their good, as upon Elders when they
are injured, to protect them and avenge their Wrongs. This is an Instance that
the Pagans looked upon Birthright as a Right divine. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 252. Else had our Wrath, etc.] This Representation of the Terrors which
must have attended the Conflict of two such mighty Powers as Jupiter and
Neptune, whereby the Elements had been mixed in Confusion, and the whole Frame
of Nature endangered, is imaged in these few Lines with a Nobleness suitable to
the Occasion. Milton has a Thought very like it in his fourth Book, where he
represents what must have happened if Satan and Gabriel had encountered. -- Not
only Paradise
In this Commotion, but the starry Cope
Of Heaven, perhaps, and all the Elements
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn
With Violence of this Conflict, had not soon
The Almighty, to prevent such horrid Fray, etc.


XV.
VERSE 274. Jove thinking of his Pains, they past away.] Eustathius observes,
that this is a very sublime Representation of the Power of Jupiter, to make
Hector's Pains cease from the Moment wherein Jupiter first turned his Thoughts
toward him. Apollo finds him so far recovered, as to be able to sit up, and
know his Friends. Thus much was the Work of Jupiter; the God of Health perfects
the Cure.

XVI.
VERSE 298. As when the pampered Steed.] This Comparison is repeated from the
sixth Book, and we are told that the ancient Critics retained no more than the
two first Verses and the four last in this Place, and that they gave the Verses
two Marks; by the one (which was the Asterism) they intimated, that the four
Lines were very beautiful; but by the other (which was the Obelus) that they
were ill placed. I believe an impartial Reader who considers the two Places
will be of the same Opinion.

Tasso has improved the Justness of this Simile in his sixteenth Book, where
Rinaldo returning from the Arms of Armida to Battle, is compared to the Steed
that is taken from his Pastures and Mares to the Service of the War: The
Reverse of the Circumstance better agreeing with the Occasion. Qual feroce
destrier, ch'al faticoso
Honor de l'arme vincitor sia tolto,
E lascivo marito in vil riposo
Fra gli armenti, e ne'paschi erri disciolto;
Se'l desta o suon di tromba, o luminoso
Acciar, cola tosto annittendo e volto;
Gia gia brama l'arringo, e l'huom sul dorso
Portando, urtato riurtar nel corso.


XVII.
VERSE 311. For Fate preserves them.] Dacier has a pretty Remark on this
Passage, that Homer extended Destiny (that is, the Care of Providence) even
over the Beasts of the Field; an Opinion that agrees perfectly with true
Theology. In the Book of Jonas, the Regard of the Creator extending to the
meanest Rank of his Creatures, is strongly expressed in those Words of the
Almighty, where he makes his Compassion to the Brute Beasts one of the Reasons
against destroying Nineveh. Shall I not spare the great City, in which there
are more than sixscore thousand Persons, and also much Cattle? And what is
still more parallel to this Passage, in St. Matthew. Chapter 10. Are not two Sparrows
sold for a Farthing? And yet one of them shall not fall to the Ground, without
your Father.

XVIII.
VERSE 363. But when aloft he shakes.] Apollo in this Passage by the mere
shaking his Aegis, without acting offensively, annoys and puts the Greeks into
Disorder. Eustathius thinks that such a Motion might possibly create the same
Confusion, as has been reported by Historians to proceed from Panic Fears: or
that it might intimate some dreadful Confusion in the Air, and a Noise issuing
from thence; a Notion which seems to be warranted by Apollo's Outcry, which
presently follows in the same Verse. But perhaps we need not go so far to
account for this Fiction of Homer: The Sight of a Hero's Armor often has the
like Effect in an Epic Poem: The Shield of Prince Arthur in Spencer works the
same Wonders with this Aegis of Apollo.

XIX.
VERSE 386. By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
Pierced through the Shoulder as he basely flies.]
Here is one that falls under the Spear of Paris, smitten in the Extremity of
his Shoulder, as he was flying. This gives occasion to a pretty Observation in
Eustathius, that this is the only Greek who falls by a Wound in the Back, so
careful is Homer of the Honor of his Countrymen. And this Remark will appear
not ill grounded, if we except the Death of Eioneus in the beginning of Lib. 6.

XX.
VERSE 396. For by the Gods, who slies, etc.] It sometimes happens (says
Longinus) that a Writer in speaking of some Person, all on a sudden puts
himself in that other's Place, and acts his part; a Figure which marks the
Impetuosity and Hurry of Passion. It is this which Homer practices in these
Verses; the Poet stops his Narration, forgets his own Person, and instantly,
without any Notice puts this precipitate Menace into the Mouth of his furious
and transported Hero. How must his Discourse have languish'd, had he stayed to
tell us, Hector then said these, or the like Words. Instead of which by this
unexpected Transition he prevents the Reader, and the Transition is made before
the Poet himself seems sensible he had made it. The true and proper Place for
this Figure is when the Time presses, and when the Occasion will not allow of
any Delay: It is elegant then to pass from one Person to another, as in that of
Hecataeus. The Herald, extremely discontented at the Orders he had received,
gave command to the Heraclidae to withdraw. -- It is no way in my Power to help
you; if therefore you would not perish entirely, and if you would not involve
me too in your Ruin, depart, and seek a Retreat among some other People.
Longinus, chapter 23.

XXI.
VERSE 416. As when ashore an Infant stands.] This Simile of the Sand is
inimitable; it is not easy to imagine any thing more exact and emphatical to
describe the tumbling and confused Heap of a Wall, in a Moment. Moreover the
Comparison here taken from Sand is the juster, as it rises from the very Place
and Scene before us. For the Wall here demolished, as it was founded on the
Coast, must needs border on the Sand; wherefore the Similitude is borrowed
immediately from the Subject Matter under View. Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 427, Oh Jove! if ever, etc.] The Form of Nestor's Prayer in this Place
resembles that of Chryses in the first Book. And it is worth remarking, that
the Poet well knew what Shame and Confusion the reminding one of past Benefits
is apt to produce. From the same Topic Achilles talks with his Mother, and
Thetis herself accosts Jove; and likewise Phoenix where he holds a Parley with
Achilles. This righteous Prayer has its wished Accomplishment. Eustathius.

XXIII.
VERSE 438. Presumptuous Troy mistook the Sign.] The Thunder of Jupiter is
designed as a Mark of his Acceptance of Nestor's Prayers, and a Sign of his
Favor to the Greeks. However, there being nothing in the Prodigy particular to
the Greeks, the Trojans expound it in their own Favor, as they seem warranted
by their present Success. This Selfpartiality of Men in appropriating to
themselves the Protection of Heaven, has always been natural to them. In the
same manner Virgil makes Turnus explain the Transformation of the Trojan Ships
into Nymphs, as an ill Omen to the Trojans. Trojanos haec monstra petunt, his
Jupiter ipse
Auxilium solitum eripuit. --
History furnishes many Instances of Oracles, which by reason of this partial
Interpretation, have proved an occasion to lead Men into great Misfortunes: It
was the Case of Craesus in his Wars with Cyrus; and a like Mistake engaged
Pyrrhus to make War upon the Romans.

XXIV.
VERSE 448. On the Ships above, the Cars below.] This is a new sort of Battle,
which Homer has never before mentioned; the Greeks on their Ships, and the
Trojans in their Chariots, fight as on a Plain. Eustathius.

XXV.
VERSE 472. Nor could the Trojans -- Force to the Fleet and Tents the
impervious way.] Homer always marks distinctly the Place of Battle; he here
shows us clearly, that the Trojans attacked the first Line of the Fleet that
stood next the Wall, or the Vessels which were drawn foremost on the Land:
These Vessels were a strong Rampart to the Tents, which were pitched behind,
and to the other Line of the Navy which stood nearer to the Sea; to penetrate
therefore to the Tents, they must necessarily force the first Line, and defeat
the Troops which defended it. Eustathius.

XXVI.
VERSE 582. Death is the worst, etc.] It Is with very great Address, that to the
Bitterness of Death, he adds the Advantages that were to accrue after it. And
the Ancients are of Opinion, that 'twou'd be as advantageous for young Soldiers
to read this Lesson, concise as it is, as all the Volumes of Tyrtaeus, wherein
he endeavors to raise the Spirits of his Countrymen. Homer makes a noble
Enumeration of the Parts wherein the Happiness of a City consists. For having
told us in another Place, the three great Evils to which a Town, when taken, is
subject; the Slaughter of the Men, the Destruction of the Place by Fire; the
leading of their Wives and Children into Captivity: now he reckons up the
Blessings that are contrary to those Calamities. To the Slaughter of the Men
indeed he makes no Opposition; because it is not necessary to the Well-being of
a City, that every Individual should be saved, and not a Man slain. Eustathius.

XXVII.
VERSE 590. The godlike Ajax next.] The Oration of Hector is more splendid and
shining than that of Ajax, and also more solemn, from his Sentiments concerning
the Favor and Assistance of Jupiter. But that of Ajax is the more politic,
fuller of Management, and apter to persuade: For it abounds with no less than
seven generous Arguments to inspire Resolution. He exhorts his People even to
Death, from the Danger to which their Navy was exposed, which if once consumed,
they were never like to get home. And as the Trojans were bid to die, so he
bids his Men dare to die likewise: and indeed with great Necessity, for the
Trojans may recruit after the Engagement, but for the Greeks, they had no
better way than to hazard their Lives; and if they should gain nothing else by
it, yet at least they would have a speedy Dispatch, not a lingering and dilatory
Destruction. Eustathius.

XXVIII.
VERSE 677. And flank the Navy with a Brazen Wall.] The Poet has built the
Grecians a different sort of Wall from what they had before, out of their Arms;
and perhaps one might say, that 'twas from this Passage Apollo borrowed that
Oracle which he gave to the Athenians about their Wall of Wood; in like manner,
the Spartans were said to have a Wall of Bones: If so, we must allow the God
not a little obliged to the Poet. Eustathius.

XXIX.
VERSE 723. He raises Hector, etc.] This Picture of Hector, impuls'd by
Jupiter, is a very finished Piece, and excels all the Drawings of this Hero
which Homer has given us in so various Attitudes. He is here represented as an
Instrument in the Hand of Jupiter, to bring about those Designs the God had
long projected: And as his fatal Hour now approaches, Jove is willing to
recompense his hasty Death with this short-lived Glory. Accordingly this being
the last Scene of Victory he is to appear in, the Poet introduces him with all
imaginable Pomp, and adorns him with all the Terror of a Conqueror: His Eyes
sparkle with Fire, his Mouth foams with Fury, his Figure is compared to the God
of War, his Rage is equaled to a Conflagration and a Storm, and the
Destruction he causes is resembled to that which a Lion makes among the Herds.
The Poet, by this Heap of Comparisons, raises the Idea of the Hero higher than
any single Description could reach.

XXX.
VERSE 736. -- His Fate was near -- Due to stern Pallas.] It may be asked, what
Pallas has to do with the Fates, or what Power has she over them? Homer speaks
thus, because Minerva has already resolved to succor Achilles, and deceive
Hector in the Combat between these two Heroes, as we find in Book 22. Properly
speaking, Pallas is nothing but the Knowledge and Wisdom of Jove, and it is
Wisdom which presides over the Councels of his Providence; therefore she may be
looked upon as drawing all things to the fatal Term to which they are decreed.
Dacier.

XXXI.
VERSE 752. Bursts as a Wave, etc.] Longinus, observing that oftentimes the
principal Beauty of Writing consists in the judicious assembling together of
the great Circumstances, and the Strength with which they are marked in the
proper Place, chooses this Passage of Homer as a plain Instance of it. "Where
(says that noble Critic) in describing the Terror of a Tempest, he takes care
to express whatever are the Accidents of most Dread and Horror in such a
Situation: He is not content to tell us that the Mariners were in danger, but
he brings them before our Eyes, as in a Picture, upon the Point of being every
Moment overwhelmed by every Wave; nay the very Words and Syllables of the
Description give us an Image of their Peril." He shows, that a Poet of less
Judgment would amuse himself in less important Circumstances, and spoil the
whole Effect of the Image by minute, ill-chosen, or superfluous Particulars.
Thus Aratus endeavoring to refine upon that Line, And instant Death on every
Wave appears!
He turned it thus, A slender Plank preserves them from their Fate.
Which, by flourishing upon the Thought, has lost the Loftiness and Terror of
it, and is so far from improving the Image, that it lessens and vanishes in his
Management. By confining the Danger to a single Line, he has scarce left the
Shadow of it; and indeed the word preserves takes away even that. The same
Critic produces a Fragment of an old Poem on the Arimaspians, written in this
false Taste, whose Author he doubts not imagined he had said something
wonderful in the following affected Verses. I have done my best to give 'em the
same turn, and believe there are those, who will not think 'em bad ones. Ye
Powers! what Madness! How, on Ships so frail,
(Tremendous Thought!) can thoughtless Mortals sail?
For stormy Seas they quit the pleasing Plain,
Plant Woods in Waves, and dwell amidst the Main.
Far over the Deep (a trackless Path) they go,
And wander Oceans, in pursuit of Woe.
No Ease their Hearts, no Rest their Eyes can find,
On Heaven their Looks, and on the Waves their Mind;
Sunk are their Spirits, while their Arms they rear;
And Gods are wearied with their fruitless Prayer.


XXXII.
VERSE 796. Nestor 's Speech.] This popular Harangue of Nestor is justly
extolled as the strongest and most persuasive Piece of Oratory imaginable. It
contains in it every Motive by which Men can be affected; the Preservation of
their Wives and Children, the secure Possession of their Fortunes, the Respect
of their living Parents, and the due Regard for the Memory of those that were
departed: By these he diverts the Grecians from any Thoughts of Flight in the
Article of extreme Peril. Eustathius.

This noble Exhortation is finely imitated by Tasso, Jerusalem. l. 20. -- O
valoroso, hor via con questa
Faccia, a ritor la preda a noi rapita.
L'imagine ad alcuno in mente desta,
Glie la figura quasi, e glie l'addita
De la pregante patria e de la mesta
Supplice famiglivola sbigottita.
Credi (dicea) che la tua patria spieghi
Per la mia lingua in tai parole i preghi.
Guarda tu le mie leggi, e i sacri Tempi
Fa, ch'io del sangue mio non bagni, e lavi,
Assicura le virgini da gli empi,
E i sepolchri, e le cinere de gli avi.
A te piangendo i lor passati tempi
Mostran la bianca chioma i vecchi gravi:
A te la moglie, e le mammelle, e'l petto,
Le cune, e i figli, e'l marital suo letto.


XXXIII.
VERSE 814. First of the Field, great Ajax.] In this very Book, Homer, to raise
the Valor of Hector, gives him Neptune for an Antagonist; and to raise that of
Ajax, he first opposed to him Hector, supported by Apollo, and now the same
Hector impelled and seconded by Jupiter himself. These are Strokes of a
Master-hand. Eustathius.

XXXIV.
VERSE 824. Drives four fair Coursers, etc.] The Comparison which Homer here
introduces, is a Demonstration, that the Art of mounting and managing Horses
was brought to so great a Perfection in these early Times, that one Man could
manage four at once, and leap from one to the other even when they run full
speed. But some object, that the Custom of Riding was not known in Greece at
the time of the Trojan War: Besides, they say the Comparison is not just, for
the Horses are said to run full speed, whereas the Ships stand firm and
unmoved. Had Homer put the Comparison in the Mouth of one of his Heroes, the
Objection had been just, and he guilty of an Inconsistency; but it is he
himself who speaks: Saddle-Horses were in use in his Age, and any Poet may be
allowed to illustrate Pieces of Antiquity by Images familiar to his own Times.
This I hope is sufficient for the first Objection; nor is the second more
reasonable than this; for it is not absolutely necessary that Comparisons
should correspond in every Particular; it suffices if there be a general
Resemblance. This is only introduced to show the Agility of Ajax, who passes
swiftly from one Vessel to another, and is therefore entirely just. Eustathius.

XXXV.
VERSE 856. The same that dead Protesilaus bore.] Homer feigns that Hector laid
hold on the Ship of the dead Protesilaus, rather than that of any other, that
he might not disgrace any of his Grecian Generals. Eustathius.

XXXVI.
VERSE 874. The Coward Counsels of a timorous Throng
Of reverend Dotards. -- ]
Homer adds this with a great deal of Art and Prudence, to answer beforehand
all the Objections which he well foresaw might be made, because Hector never
till now once attacks the Grecians in their Camp, or endeavors to burn their
Navy. He was retained by the Elders of Troy, who frozen with Fear at the Sight
of Achilles, never suffered him to march from the Ramparts. Our Author forgets
nothing that has the Resemblance of Truth; but he had yet a farther Reason for
inserting this, as it exalts the Glory of his principal Hero: These Elders of
Troy thought it less difficult to defeat the Greeks, though defended with strong
Entrenchments, while Achilles was not with them; than to overcome them without
Entrenchments when he assisted them. And this is the reason that they
prohibited Hector before, and permit him now, to sally upon the Enemy. Dacier.

XXXVII.
VERSE 877. But now Jove calls to Arms, etc.] Hector seems to be sensible of an
extraordinary Impulse from Heaven, signified by these Words, the most mighty
Hand of Jove pushing him on. It Is no more than any other Person would be ready
to imagine, who should rise from a State of Distress or Indolence, into one of
good Fortune, Vigor, and Activity. Eustathius.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 890. The Speech of Ajax.] There is great Strength, Closeness, and Spirit
in this Speech, and one might (like many Critics) employ a whole Page in
extolling and admiring it in general Terms. But sure the perpetual Rapture of
such Commentators, who are always giving us Exclamations instead of Criticisms,
may be a Mark of great Admiration, but of little Judgment. Of what Use is this
either to a Reader who has a Taste, or to one who has not? To admire a fine
Passage is what the former will do without us, and what the latter cannot be
taught to do by us. However we ought gratefully to acknowledge the good Nature
of most People, who are not only pleased with this superficial Applause given
to fine Passages, but are likewise inclined to transfer to the Critic, who
only points at these Beauties, part of the Admiration justly due to the Poet.
This is a cheap and easy way to Fame, which many Writers ancient and modern
have pursued with great Success. Formerly indeed this sort of Authors had
Modesty, and were humbly content to call their Performances only Florilegia or
Posies: But some of late have passed such Collections on the World for
Criticisms of great Depth and Learning, and seem to expect the same Flowers
should please us better, in these paltry Nosegays of their own making up, than
in the native Gardens where they grew. As this Practice of extolling without
giving Reasons, is very convenient for most Writers; so it excellently suits
the Ignorance or Laziness of most Readers, who will come into any Sentiment
rather than take the trouble of refuting it. Thus the Complement is mutual: For
as such Critics do not tax their Readers with any thought to understand them,
so their Readers in Return advance nothing in Opposition to such Critics. They
may go roundly on, admiring and exclaiming in this manner; What an exquisite
Spirit of Poetry -- How beautiful a Circumstance -- What Delicacy of Sentiments
-- With what Art has the Poet -- In how sublime and just a manner -- How finely
imagined -- How wonderfully beautiful and poetical -- And so proceed, without
one Reason to interrupt the Course of their Eloquence, most comfortably and
ignorantly Apostrophising to the end of the Chapter.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The sixth Battle: The Acts and Death of Patroclus.
PAtroclus (in Pursuance of the Request of Nestor in the eleventh Book)
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the Assistance of the Greeks with
Achilles's Troops and Armor. He agrees to it, but at the same time charges him
to content himself with rescuing the Fleet, without farther Pursuit of the
Enemy. The Armor, Horses, Soldiers, and Officers of Achilles are described.
Achilles offers a Libation for the Success of his Friend, after which Patroclus
leads the Myrmidons to Battle. The Trojans at the Sight of Patroclus in
Achilles's Armor, taking him for that Hero, are cast into the utmost
Consternation: He beats them off from the Vessels, Hector himself flies,
Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was averse to his Fate. Several other
Particulars of the Battle are described; in the Heat of which, Patroclus,
neglecting the Orders of Achilles, pursues the Foe to the Walls of Troy; where
Apollo repulses and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him,
which concludes the Book.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
SO warred both Armies on the ensanguin'd Shore,
While the black Vessels smoked with human gore.
Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
The streaming Tears fall copious from his Eyes;
Not faster, trickling to the Plains below,
From the tall Rock the sable Waters flow.
Divine Pelides, with Compassion moved,
Thus spoke, indulgent to his best beloved.
Patroclus, say, what Grief thy Bosom bears,
That flows so fast in these unmanly Tears?
No Girl, no Infant whom the Mother keeps
From her loved Breast, with fonder Passion weeps;
Not more the Mother's Soul that Infant warms,
Clung to her Knees, and reaching at her Arms,
Than thou have mine! Oh tell me, to what end
Thy melting Sorrows thus pursue thy Friend?
Griev'st thou for me, or for my martial Band?
Or come sad Tidings from our native Land?
Our Fathers live, (our first, most tender Care)
Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital Air,
And hoary Peleus yet extends his Days;
Pleased in their Age to hear their Children's Praise.
Or may some meaner Cause thy Pity claim?
Perhaps yon' Relics of the Grecian Name,
Doomed in their Ships to sink by Fire and Sword,
And pay the Forfeit of their haughty Lord?
Whatever the Cause, reveal thy secret Care,
And speak those Sorrows which a Friend would share.
A Sigh, that instant, from his Bosom broke,
Another followed, and Patroclus spoke.
Let Greece at length with Pity touch thy Breast,
Thy self a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
Lo! every Chief that might her Fate prevent,
Lies pierced with Wounds, and bleeding in his Tent.
Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' Son,
And wise Ulysses, at the Navy groan
More for their Country's Wounds, than for their own.
Their Pain, soft Arts of Pharmacy can ease,
Thy Breast alone no Lenitives appease.
May never Rage like thine my Soul enslave,
O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
Thy Country slighted in her last Distress,
What Friend, what Man, from thee shall hope redress?
No -- Men unborn, and Ages yet behind,
Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving Mind.
O Man unpitying! if of Man thy Race;
But sure thou spring'st not from a soft Embrace,
Nor ever amorous Hero caused thy Birth,
Nor ever tender Goddess brought thee forth.
Some rugged Rock's hard Entrails gave thee Form,
And raging Seas produced thee in a Storm,
A Soul well-suiting that tempestuous Kind,
So rough thy Manners, so untamed thy Mind.
If some dire Oracle thy Breast alarm,
If ought from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy Arm,
Some Beam of Comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If I but lead the Myrmidonian Line:
Clad in thy dreadful Arms if I appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the War:
Without thy Person Greece shall win the Day,
And thy mere Image chase her Foes away.
Pressed by fresh Forces, her o'erlabour'd Train
Shall quit the Ships, and Greece respire again.
Thus, blind to Fate! with supplicating Breath,
Thou beg'st his Arms, and in his Arms, thy Death.
Unfortunately Good! a boding Sigh
Thy Friend returned; and with it, this Reply.
Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no Fears;
Nor Words from Jove, nor Oracles he hears;
Nor ought a Mother's Caution can suggest;
The Tyrant's Pride lies rooted in my Breast.
My Wrongs, my Wrongs, my constant Thought engage,
Those, my sole Oracles, inspire my Rage:
I made him Tyrant; gave him Power to wrong
Even me: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
The Maid, my black-ey'd Maid, he forced away,
Due to the Toils of many a well-fought Day;
Due to my Conquest of her Father's Reign;
Due to the Votes of all the Grecian Train.
From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave;
Disgraced, dishonored, like the meanest Slave.
But bear we this -- The Wrongs I grieve, are past;
It Is time our Fury should relent at last:
I fixed its Date; the Day I wished appears:
Now Hector to my Ships his Battle bears,
The Flames my Eyes, the Shouts invade my Ears.
Go then Patroclus! court fair Honor's Charms
In Troy's famed Fields, and in Achilles' Arms
Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,
Go save the Fleets, and conquer in my right.
See the thin Relics of their baffled Band,
At the last Edge of yon' deserted Land!
Behold all Ilion on their Ships descends;
How the Cloud blackens, how the Storm impends!
It was not thus, when, at my Sight amazed,
Troy saw and trembled, as this Helmet blazed:
Had not the injurious King our Friendship lost,
Yon' ample Trench had buried half her Host.
No Camps, no Bulwarks now the Trojans fear,
Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there:
No longer flames the Lance of Tydeus' Son;
No more your General calls his Heroes on;
Hector, alone, I hear; His dreadful Breath
Commands your Slaughter, or proclaims your Death.
Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the Plain;
Now save the Ships, the rising Fires restrain,
And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
But heed my Words, and mark a Friend's Command
Who trusts his Fame and Honors in thy Hand,
And from thy Deeds expects, the Achaian Host
Shall render back the beauteous Maid he lost:
Rage uncontrolled through all the hostile Crew,
But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
Though Jove in Thunder should command the War,
Be just, consult my Glory, and forbear.
The Fleet once saved, desist from farther chase,
Nor lead to Ilion's Walls the Grecian Race;
Some adverse God thy Rashness may destroy;
Some God, like Phoebus, ever kind to Troy.
Let Greece, redeemed from this destructive Strait,
Do her own Work, and leave the rest to Fate.
Oh! would to all the immortal Powers above,
Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
That not one Trojan might be left alive,
And not a Greek of all the Race survive;
Might only we the vast Destruction shun,
And only we destroy the accursed Town!
Such Conf'rence held the Chiefs: while on the Strand,
Great Jove with Conquest crowned the Trojan Band.
Ajax no more the sounding Storm sustained,
So thick, the Darts an Iron Tempest rained:
On his tired Arm the weighty Buckler hung;
His hollow Helm with falling Javelins rung;
His Breath, in quick, short Pantings, comes, and goes;
And painful Sweat from all his Members flows.
Spent and o'erpow'r'd, he barely breathes at most;
Yet scarce an Army stirs him from his Post:
Dangers on Dangers all around him grow,
And Toil to Toil, and Woe succeeds to Woe.
Say, Muses, throned above the starry Frame,
How first the Navy blazed with Trojan Flame?
Stern Hector waved his Sword; and standing near
Where furious Ajax plied his Ashen Spear,
Full on the Lance a Stroke so justly sped,
That the broad Faulchion lopped its brazen Head:
His pointless Spear the Warrior shakes in vain;
The brazen Head falls sounding on the Plain.
Great Ajax saw, and owned the Hand divine,
Confessing Jove, and trembling at the Sign;
Warned, he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
The hissing Brands; thick streams the fiery Shower;
Over the high Stern the curling Volumes rise,
And Sheets of rolling Smoke involve the Skies.
Divine Achilles viewed the rising Flames,
And smote his Thigh, and thus aloud exclaims.
Arm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the Blaze aspires!
The glowing Ocean reddens with the Fires.
Arm, ever our Vessels catch the spreading Flame;
Arm, ever the Grecians be no more a Name;
I haste to bring the Troops. -- The Hero said;
The Friend with Ardour and with Joy obeyed.
He cased his Limbs in Brass, and first around,
His manly Legs, with silver Buckles bound
The clasping Greaves; then to his Breast applies
The flamy Cuirass, of a thousand Dies;
Emblaz'd with Studs of Gold, his Faulchion shone,
In the rich Belt, as in a starry Zone.
Achilles' Shield his ample Shoulders spread,
Achilles' Helmet nodded over his Head.
Adorned in all his terrible Array,
He flashed around intolerable Day.
Alone, untouched, Pelides' Javelin stands,
Not to be poised but by Pelides' Hands:
From Pelion's shady Brow the Plant entire
Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his Sire;
Whose Son's great Arm alone the Weapon wields,
The Death of Heroes, and the dread of Fields.
Then brave Automedon (an honored Name,
The second to his Lord in Love and Fame,
In Peace his Friend, and Part'ner of the War)
The winged Coursers harnessed to the Car.
Xanthus and Balius, of immortal Breed,
Sprung from the Wind, and like the Wind in speed;
Whom the winged Harpye, swift Podarge, bore,
By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy Shore.
Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
(Once great Aetion's, now Achilles' Pride)
Who, like in Strength, in Swiftness, and in Grace,
A mortal Courser matched the immortal Race.
Achilles speeds from Tent to Tent, and warms
His hardy Myrmidons to Blood and Arms.
All breathing Death, around their Chief they stand,
A grim, terrific, formidable Band:
Grim as voracious Wolves that seek the Springs
When scalding Thirst their burning Bowels wrings.
(When some tall Stag fresh-slaughter'd in the Wood
Has drenched their wide, insatiate Throats with Blood)
To the black Fount they rush a hideous Throng,
With Paunch distended, and with rolling Tongue,
Fire fills their Eyes, their black Jaws belch the Gore,
And gorged with Slaughter, still they thirst for more.
Like furious, rushed the Myrmidonian Crew,
Such their dread Strength, and such their deathful View.
High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
Directs their Order, and the War commands.
He, loved of Jove, had launched for Ilion's Shores
Full fifty Vessels, manned with fifty Oars:
Five chosen Leaders the fierce Bands obey,
Himself supreme in Valor, as in Sway.
First marched Menestheus, of celestial Birth,
Derived from thee whose Waters wash the Earth,
Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended Flood!
A mortal Mother mixing with a God.
Such was Menestheus, but mis-call'd by Fame
The Son of Borus, that espoused the Dame.
Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
Famed in the graceful Dance, produced to Day.
Her, sly Cyllenius loved; on her would gaze,
As with swift Step she formed the running Maze:
To her high Chamber, from Diana's Quire,
The God pursued her, urged, and crowned his Fire.
The Son confessed his Father's heavenly Race,
And heir'd his Mother's Swiftness, in the Chase.
Strong Echecloeus, blessed in all those Charms
That pleased a God, succeeded to her Arms;
Not conscious of her Love, long hid from Fame,
With Gifts of Price he sought and won the Dame;
Her secret Offspring to her Sire she bare;
Her Sire caressed him with a Parent's Care.
Pisander followed; matchless in his Art
To wing the Spear, or aim the distant Dart;
No Hand so sure of all the Emathian Line,
Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.
The fourth by Phoenix' grave Command was graced;
Laerces' valiant Offspring led the last.
Soon as Achilles, with superior Care,
Had called the Chiefs, and ordered all the War,
This stern Remembrance to his Troops he gave:
Ye far-fam'd Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
Think with what Threats you dared the Trojan Throng,
Think what Reproach these Ears endured so long,
"Stern Son of Peleus (thus ye used to say,
While restless, raging, in your Ships you lay)
"Oh nursed with Gall, unknowing how to yield!
"Whose Rage defrauds us of so famed a Field.
"If that dire Fury must for ever burn,
"What make we here? Return, ye Chiefs, return!
Such were your words -- Now Warriors grieve no more,
Lo there the Trojans! bath your Swords in Gore!
This Day shall give you all your Soul demands;
Glut all your Hearts! and weary all your Hands!
Thus while he rowz'd the Fire in every Breast,
Close, and more close, the listening Cohorts pressed;
Ranks wedged in Ranks; of Arms a steely Ring
Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the King.
As when a circling Wall the Builder forms,
Of Strength defensive against Winds and Storms,
Compacted Stones the thick'ning Work compose,
And round him wide the rising Structure grows.
So Helm to Helm, and Crest to Crest they throng,
Shield urged on Shield, and Man drove Man along:
Thick, undistinguished Plumes, together joined,
Float in one Sea, and wave before the Wind.
Far over the rest, in glittering Pomp appear,
There, bold Automedon; Patroclus here;
Brothers in Arms, with equal Fury fired;
Two Friends, two Bodies with one Soul inspired.
But mindful of the Gods, Achilles went
To the rich Coffer, in his shady Tent:
There lay on Heaps his various Garments rolled,
And costly Furs, and Carpets stiff with Gold.
(The Presents of the silver-footed Dame)
From thence he took a Bowl, of antique Frame,
Which never Man had stained with ruddy Wine,
Nor raised in Offerings to the Powers divine,
But Peleus' Son; and Peleus' Son to none
Had raised in Offerings, but to Jove alone.
This tinged with Sulphur, sacred first to Flame,
He purged; and washed it in the running Stream.
Then cleans'd his Hands; and fixing for a Space
His Eyes on Heaven, his Feet upon the Place
Of Sacrifice, the purple Draught he poured
Forth in the midst; and thus the God implored.
Oh thou Supreme! high-thron'd, all Height above!
Oh Great! Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
Who 'midst surrounding Frosts, and Vapors chill,
Preside on bleak Dodona's vocal Hill:
(Whose Groves, the Selli, Race austere! surround,
Their Feet unwash'd, their Slumbers on the Ground;
Who hear, from rustling Oaks, their dark Decrees;
And catch the Fates, low-whisper'd in the Breeze.)
Hear, as of old! Thou gav'st, at Thetis Prayer,
Glory to me, and to the Greeks Despair:
Lo to the Dangers of the fighting Field
The best, the dearest of my Friends, I yield:
Though still determined, to my Ships confined,
Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
Oh! be his Guard thy providential Care,
Confirm his Heart, and string his Arm to War:
Pressed by his single Force, let Hector see,
His Fame in Arms, not owing all to me.
But when the Fleets are saved from Foes and Fire,
Let him with Conquest and Renown retire;
Preserve his Arms, preserve his social Train,
And safe return him to these Eyes again!
Great Jove consents to half the Chief's Request,
But Heavens eternal Doom denies the rest;
To free the Fleet was granted to his Prayer;
His safe Return, the Winds dispersed in Air.
Back to his Tent the stern Achilles flies,
And waits the Combat with impatient Eyes.
Meanwhile the Troops beneath Patroclus' Care,
Invade the Trojans, and commence the War.
As Wasps, provoked by Children in their Play,
Pour from their Mansions by the broad Highway,
In Swarms the guiltless Traveller engage,
Whet all their Stings, and call forth all their Rage;
All rise in Arms, and with a general Cry
Assert their waxen Domes, and buzzing Progeny.
Thus from the Tents the fervent Legion swarms,
So loud their Clamours, and so keen their Arms.
Their rising Rage Patroclus' Breath inspires,
Who thus inflames them with heroic Fires.
Oh Warriors, Part'ners of Achilles' Praise!
Be mindful of your Deeds in ancient Days:
Your godlike Master let your Acts proclaim,
And add new Glories to his mighty Name.
Think, your Achilles sees you fight: Be brave,
And humble the proud Monarch whom you save.
Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke
Flew to the Fleet, involved in Fire and Smoke.
From Shore to Shore the doubling Shouts resound,
The hollow Ships return a deeper Sound.
The War stood still, and all around them gazed,
When great Achilles' shining Armor blazed:
Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,
At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.
Then first thy Spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
Where the War raged, and where the Tumult grew.
Close to the Stern of that famed Ship, which bore
Unblest Protesilaus to Ilion's Shore,
The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes, stood;
(Who led his Bands from Axius' winding Flood)
His Shoulder Blade receives the fatal Wound;
The groaning Warrior pants upon the Ground.
His Troops, that see their Country's Glory slain,
Fly diverse, scattered over the distant Plain.
Patroclus' Arm forbids the spreading Fires,
And from the half-burn'd Ship proud Troy retires:
Cleared from the Smoke the joyful Navy lies;
In Heaps on Heaps the Foe tumultuous flies,
Triumphant Greece her rescued Decks ascends,
And loud Acclaim the starry Region rends.
So when thick Clouds inwrap the Mountain's Head,
Over Heavens Expanse like one black Cieling spread;
Sudden, the Thund'rer, with a flashing Ray,
Bursts through the Darkness, and lets down the Day:
The Hills shine out, the Rocks in Prospect rise,
And Streams, and Vales, and Forests strike the Eyes,
The smiling Scene wide opens to the Sight,
And all the unmeasured Ether flames with Light.
But Troy repulsed, and scattered over the Plains,
Forced from the Navy, yet the Fight maintains.
Now every Greek some hostile Hero slew,
But still the foremost bold Patroclus flew:
As Areilycus had turned him round,
Sharp in his Thigh he felt the piercing Wound;
The brazen-pointed Spear, with Vigor thrown,
The Thigh transfixed, and broke the brittle Bone:
Headlong he fell. Next Thoas was thy Chance,
Thy Breast, unarmed, received the Spartan Lance.
Phylides' Dart, (as Amphiclus drew nigh)
His Blow prevented, and transpierc'd his Thigh,
Tore all the Brawn, and rent the Nerves away:
In Darkness, and in Death, the Warrior lay.
In equal Arms two Sons of Nestor stand,
And two bold Brothers of the Lycian Band:
By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies,
Pierced in the Flank, lamented Youth! he lies.
Kind Maris, bleeding in his Brother's Wound,
Defends the breathless Carcass on the Ground;
Furious he flies, his Murderer to engage,
But godlike Thrasimed prevents his Rage,
Between his Arm and Shoulder aims a Blow,
His Arm falls spouting on the Dust below:
He sinks, with endless Darkness covered over,
And vents his Soul effus'd with gushing Gore.
Slain by two Brothers, thus two Brothers bleed,
Sarpedon's Friends, Amisodarus' Seed;
Amisodarus, who by Furies led,
The Bane of Men, abhorred Chimaera bred;
Skilled in the Dart in vain, his Sons expire,
And pay the Forfeit of their guilty Sire.
Stopped in the Tumult Cleobulus lies,
Beneath Oileus' Arm, a living Prize;
A living Prize not long the Trojan stood;
The thirsty Faulchion drank his reeking Blood:
Plunged in his Throat the smoking Weapon lies;
Black Death, and Fate unpitying, seal his Eyes.
Amid the Ranks, with mutual Thirst of Fame,
Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;
In vain their Javelins at each other flew,
Now, met in Arms, their eager Swords they drew.
On the plumed Crest of his Boeotian Foe,
The daring Lycon aimed a noble Blow;
The Sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped
Full on the Juncture of the Neck and Head:
The Head, divided by a Stroke so just,
Hung by the Skin: the Body sunk to Dust.
O'ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds;
Pierced through the Shoulder as he mounts his Steeds;
Back from the Car he tumbles to the Ground;
His swimming Eyes eternal Shades surround.
Next Erymas was doomed his Fate to feel,
His opened Mouth received the Cretan Steel:
Beneath the Brain the Point a Passage tore,
Crash'd the thin Bones, and drowned the Teeth in Gore:
His Mouth, his Eyes, his Nostrils pour a Flood;
He sobs his Soul out in the Gush of Blood.
As when the Flocks, neglected by the Swain
(Or Kids, or Lambs) lie scattered over the Plain,
A Troop of Wolves the unguarded Charge survey,
And rend the trembling, unresisting Prey.
Thus on the Foe the Greeks impetuous came;
Troy fled, unmindful of her former Fame.
But still at Hector godlike Ajax aimed,
Still, pointed at his Breast, his Javelin flamed:
The Trojan Chief, experienced in the Field,
Over his broad Shoulders spread the massy Shield;
Observed the Storm of Darts the Grecians pour,
And on his Buckler caught the ringing Shower.
He sees for Greece the Scale of Conquest rise,
Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved Allies.
As when the Hand of Jove a Tempest forms,
And rolls the Cloud to blacken Heaven with Storms,
Dark over the Fields the ascending Vapor flies,
And shades the Sun, and blots the golden Skies:
So from the Ships, along the dusky Plain,
Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan Train.
Even Hector fled; through Heaps of Disarray
The fiery Coursers forced their Lord away:
While far behind, his Trojans fall confused,
Wedged in the Trench, in one vast Carnage bruised.
Chariots on Chariots roll; the clashing Spokes
Shock; while the madding Steeds break short their Yokes:
In vain they labor up the steepy Mound;
Their Charioteers lie foaming on the Ground.
Fierce on the Rear, with Shouts, Patroclus flies;
Tumultuous Clamor fills the Fields and Skies;
Thick Drifts of Dust involve their rapid Flight,
Clouds rise on Clouds, and Heaven is snatched from sight.
The affrighted Steeds, their dying Lords cast down,
Scour over the Fields, and stretch to reach the Town.
Loud over the Rout was heard the Victor's Cry,
Where the War bleeds, and where the thickest die.
Where Horse and Arms, and Chariots lie overthrown,
And bleeding Heroes under Axles groan.
No Stop, no Check, the Steeds of Peleus knew;
From Bank to Bank the immortal Coursers flew,
High-bounding over the Fosse: the whirling Car
Smoaks through the Ranks, o'ertakes the flying War,
And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
Patroclus shakes his Lance; but Fate denies.
Not with less Noise, with less impetuous force,
The Tide of Trojans urge their desperate Course,
Than when in Autumn Jove his Fury pours,
And Earth is laden with incessant Showers,
(When guilty Mortals break the eternal Laws,
And Judges bribed, betray the righteous Cause)
From their deep Beds he bids the Rivers rise,
And opens all the Floodgates of the Skies:
The impetuous Torrents from their Hills obey,
Whole Fields are drowned, and Mountains swept away;
Loud roars the Deluge till it meets the Main;
And trembling Man sees all his Labors vain!
And now the Chief (the foremost Troops repelled)
Back to the Ships his destined Progress held,
Bore down half Troy, in his resistless way,
And forced the routed Ranks to stand the Day.
Between the Space where silver Simois flows,
Where lay the Fleets, and where the Rampires rose,
All grim in Dust and Blood, Patroclus stands,
And turns the Slaughter on the conquering Bands.
First Pronous died beneath his fiery Dart,
Which pierced below the Shield his valiant Heart.
Thestor was next; who saw the Chief appear,
And fell the Victim of his coward Fear;
Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard Eye,
Nor stood to combat, nor had Force to fly:
Patroclus marked him as he shunned the War,
And with unmanly Tremblings shook the Car,
And dropped the flowing Reins. Him 'twixt the Jaws
The Javelin sticks, and from the Chariot draws:
As on a Rock that overhangs the Main,
An Angler, studious of the Line and Cane,
Some mighty Fish draws panting to the Shore;
Not with less ease the barbed Javelin bore
The gaping Dastard: As the Spear was shook;
He fell, and Life his heartless Breast forsook.
Next on Eryalus he flies; a Stone
Large as a Rock, was by his Fury thrown.
Full on his Crown the ponderous Fragment flew,
And burst the Helm, and cleft the Head in two:
Prone to the Ground the breathless Warrior fell,
And Death involved him with the Shades of Hell.
Then low in Dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
Amphoterus, and Erymas succeed,
And last, Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
Wherever he moves, the growing Slaughters spread
In Heaps on Heaps; a Monument of Dead.
When now Sarpedon his brave Friends beheld
Groveling in Dust, and gasping on the Field,
With this Reproach his flying Host he warms,
Oh Stain to Honor! oh Disgrace to Arms!
Forsake, inglorious, the contended Plain;
This Hand, unaided, shall the War sustain:
The Task be mine this Hero's Strength to try,
Who mows whole Troops, and makes an Army fly.
He spoke; and speaking, leaps from off the Car;
Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the War.
As when two Vulturs on the Mountain's Height
Stoop with re-sounding Pinions to the Fight;
They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming Cry;
The Desert echoes, and the Rocks reply:
The Warriors thus opposed in Arms, engage
With equal Clamours, and with equal Rage,
Jove viewed the Combat, whose Event foreseen,
He thus bespoke his Sister and his Queen.
The Hour draws on; the Destinies ordain,
My godlike Son shall press the Phrygian Plain:
Already on the Verge of Death he stands,
His Life is owed to fierce Patroclus' Hands.
What Passions in a Parent's Breast debate!
Say, shall I snatch him from impending Fate,
And send him safe to Lycia, distant far
From all the Dangers and the Toils of War;
Or to his Doom my bravest Offspring yield,
And fatten, with celestial Blood, the Field?
Then thus the Goddess with the radiant Eyes:
What Words are these, O Sovereign of the Skies?
Short is the Date prescribed to mortal Man;
Shall Jove, for one, extend the narrow Span,
Whose Bounds were fixed before his Race began?
How many Sons of Gods, foredoom'd to Death,
Before proud Ilion, must resign their Breath!
Were thine exempt, Debate would rise above,
And murmuring Powers condemn their partial Jove.
Give the bold Chief a glorious Fate in fight;
And when the ascending Soul has winged her flight,
Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy Command,
The breathless Body to his native Land.
His Friends and People, to his future Praise,
A marble Tomb and Pyramid shall raise,
And lasting Honors to his Ashes give;
His Fame ('it is all the Dead can have!) shall live.
She said; the Cloud-compeller overcome,
Assents to Fate, and ratifies the Doom.
Then, touched with Grief, the weeping Heavens distilled
A Shower of Blood over all the fatal Field.
The God, his Eyes averting from the Plain,
Laments his Son, predestined to be slain,
Far from the Lycian Shores, his happy native Reign.
Now met in Arms, the Combatants appear,
Each heaved the Shield, and poised the lifted Spear:
From strong Patroclus' Hand the Javelin fled,
And passed the Groin of valiant Thrasymed,
The Nerves unbrac'd no more his Bulk sustain,
He falls, and falling bites the bloody Plain.
Two sounding Darts the Lycian Leader threw;
The first aloof with erring Fury flew,
The next transpierc'd Achilles' mortal Steed,
The generous Pedasus, of Theban Breed;
Fixed in the Shoulders Joint, he reeled around;
Rolled in the bloody dust, and paw'd the slip'ry ground.
His sudden Fall the entangled Harness broke;
Each Axle crackled, and the Chariot shook:
When bold Automedon, to disengage
The starting Coursers, and restrain their Rage,
Divides the Traces with his Sword, and freed
The encumbered Chariot from the dying Steed:
The rest move on, obedient to the Rein;
The Car rowls slowly over the dusty Plain.
The towering Chiefs to fiercer Fight advance,
And first Sarpedon whirled his weighty Lance,
Which over the Warrior's Shoulder took its course,
And spent in empty Air its dying Force.
Not so Patroclus' never erring Dart;
Aimed at his Breast, it pierced the mortal Part
Where the strong Fibers bind the solid Heart.
Then, as the Mountain Oak, or Poplar tall,
Or Pine (fit Mast for some great Admiral)
Nods to the Axe, till with a groaning Sound
It sinks, and spreads its Honors on the Ground;
Thus fell the King; and laid on Earth supine,
Before his Chariot stretched his Form divine:
He grasped the Dust distained with streaming Gore,
And pale in Death, lay groaning on the Shore.
So lies a Bull beneath the Lion's Paws,
While the grim Savage grinds with foamy Jaws
The trembling Limbs, and sucks the smoking Blood;
Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the Wood.
Then to the Leader of the Lycian Band
The dying Chief addressed his last Command.
Glaucus, be bold; thy Task be first to dare
The glorious Dangers of destructive War,
To lead my Troops, to combat at their Head,
Incite the Living, and supply the Dead.
Tell 'em, I charged them with my latest Breath
Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedon's Death.
What Grief, what Shame must Glaucus undergo,
If these spoiled Arms adorn a Grecian Foe?
Then as a Friend, and as a Warrior, fight;
Defend my Corpse, and conquer in my Right;
That taught by great Examples, all may try
Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die.
He ceased; the Fates suppressed his laboring Breath,
And his Eyes darkened with the Shades of Death:
The insulting Victor with Disdain bestrode
The prostrate Prince, and on his Bosom trod;
Then drew the Weapon from his panting Heart,
The reeking Fibers clinging to the Dart;
From the wide Wound gushed out a Stream of Blood,
And the Soul issued in the purple Flood.
His flying Steeds the Myrmidons detain,
Unguided now, their mighty Master slain.
All-impotent of Aid, transfixed with Grief,
Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying Chief.
His painful Arm, yet useless with the Smart
Inflicted late by Teucer's deadly Dart,
Supported on his better Hand he stayed;
To Phoebus then ('it was all he could) he prayed.
All-seeing Monarch! whether Lycia's Coast
Or sacred Ilion, thy bright Presence boast,
Powerful alike to ease the Wretche's Smart;
Oh hear me! God of every healing Art!
Lo! stiff with clotted Blood, and pierced with Pain,
That thrills my Arm and shoots through every Vein,
I stand unable to sustain the Spear,
And sigh, at distance from the glorious War.
Low in the Dust is great Sarpedon laid,
Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless Offering Aid.
But thou, O God of Health! thy Succor lend,
To guard the Relics of my slaughtered Friend.
For thou, though distant, can restore my Might,
To head my Lycians, and support the Fight.
Apollo heard; and suppliant as he stood,
His heavenly Hand restrained the Flux of Blood;
He drew the Dolours from the wounded Part,
And breathed a Spirit in his rising Heart.
Renewed by Art divine, the Hero stands,
And owns the Assistance of immortal Hands.
First to the Fight his native Troops he warms,
Then loudly calls on Troy's vindictive Arms;
With ample Strides he stalks from Place to Place.
Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas;
Aeneas next, and Hector he accosts;
Inflaming thus the Rage of all their Hosts.
What Thoughts, regardless Chief! thy Breast employ?
Oh too forgetful of the Friends of Troy!
Those generous Friends, who, from their Country far,
Breathe their brave Souls out, in another's War.
See! where in Dust the great Sarpedon lies,
In Action valiant, and in Council wise,
Who guarded Right, and kept his People free;
To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
Stretched by Patroclus' Arm on yonder Plains,
Oh save from hostile Rage his loved Remains:
Ah let not Greece his conquered Trophies boast,
Nor on his Corpse revenge her Heroes lost.
He spoke; each Leader in his Grief partook,
Troy, at the Loss, through all her Legions shook.
Tranfix'd with deep Regret, they viewed overthrown
At once his Country's Pillar, and their own;
A Chief, who led to Troy's beleaguered Wall
A Host of Heroes, and outshin'd them all.
Fired, they rush on; First Hector seeks the Foes,
And with superior Vengeance, greatly glows.
But over the Dead the fierce Patroclus stands,
And rowzing Ajax, rowz'd the listening Bands.
Heroes, be Men! be what you were before;
Or weigh the great Occasion, and be more.
The Chief who taught our lofty Walls to yield,
Lies pale in Death, extended on the Field.
To guard his Body Troy in Numbers flies;
It Is half the Glory to maintain our Prize.
Haste, strip his Arms, the Slaughter round him spread,
And send the living Lycians to the Dead.
The Heroes kindle at his fierce Command;
The martial Squadrons close on either Hand:
Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud Alarms,
Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their Arms.
With horrid Shouts they circle round the Slain;
The Clash of Armor rings over all the Plain.
Great Jove, to swell the Horrors of the Fight,
Over the fierce Armies pours pernicious Night,
And round his Son confounds the warring Hosts,
His Fate ennobling with a Crowd of Ghosts.
Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
Agacleus' Son, from Budium's lofty Walls:
Who chased for Murder thence, a Suppliant came
To Peleus, and the silver-footed Dame;
Now sent to Troy, Achilles' Arms to aid,
He pays due Vengeance to his Kinsman's Shade.
Soon as his luckless Hand had touched the Dead,
A Rock's large Fragment thundered on his Head;
Hurled by Hectorean Force, it cleft in twain
His shattered Helm, and stretched him over the Slain.
Fierce to the Van of Fight Patroclus came;
And, like an Eagle darting at his Game,
Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian Band;
What Grief thy Heart, what Fury urged thy Hand.
Oh generous Greek! when with full Vigor thrown
At Stenelaus flew the weighty Stone,
Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
That Arm, drew back; and Hector learned to fear.
Far as an able Hand a Lance can throw,
Or at the Lists, or at the fighting Foe;
So far the Trojans from their Lines retired;
Till Glaucus' turning, all the rest inspired.
Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his Rage,
The only Hope of Chalcon's trembling Age:
Wide over the Land was stretched his large Domain,
With stately Seats, and Riches, blessed in vain:
Him, bold with Youth, and eager to pursue
The flying Lycians, Glaucus met, and slew;
Pierced through the Bosom with a sudden Wound,
He fell, and falling, made the Fields resound.
The Achaians sorrow for their Hero slain;
With conquering Shouts the Trojans shake the Plain,
And crowd to spoil the Dead: The Greeks oppose:
An Iron Circle round the Carcass grows.
Then brave Laogonus resigned his Breath,
Dispatched by Merion to the Shades of Death:
On Ida's holy Hill he made abode,
The Priest of Jove, and honored like his God.
Between the Jaw and Ear the Javelin went;
The Soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
His Spear Aeneas at the Victor threw,
Who stooping forward from the Death withdrew;
The Lance hissed harmless over his covering Shield,
And trembling struck, and rooted in the Field,
There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the Plain,
Sent by the great Aeneas' Arm in vain.
Swift as thou art (the raging Hero cries)
And skilled in Dancing to dispute the Prize,
My Spear, the destined Passage had it found,
Had fixed thy active Vigor to the Ground.
Oh valiant Leader of the Dardan Host!
(Insulted Merion thus retorts the Boast)
Strong as you are, it is mortal Force you trust,
An Arm as strong may stretch thee in the Dust.
And if to this my Lance thy Fate be given,
Vain are thy Vaunts, Success is still from Heaven;
This Instant sends thee down to Pluto's Coast,
Mine is the Glory, his thy parting Ghost.
O Friend ( Menoetius' Son this Answer gave)
With Words to combat, ill befits the Brave:
Not empty Boasts the Sons of Troy repel,
Your Swords must plunge them to the Shades of Hell.
To speak, beseems the Council; but to dare
In glorious Action, is the Task of War.
This said, Patroclus to the Battle flies;
Great Merion follows, and new Shouts arise:
Shields, Helmets rattle, as the Warriors close;
And thick and heavy sounds the Storm of Blows.
As through the shrilling Vale, or Mountain Ground,
The Labors of the Woodman's Axe resound;
Blows following Blows are heard re-echoing wide,
While crackling Forests fall on every side.
Thus echoed all the Fields with loud Alarms,
So fell the Warriors, and so rung their Arms.
Now great Sarpedon, on the sandy Shore,
His heavenly Form defaced with Dust and Gore,
And stuck with Darts by warring Heroes shed;
Lies undistinguished from the vulgar dead.
His long-disputed Corpse the Chiefs enclose,
On every side the busy Combat grows;
Thick, as beneath some Shepherd's thatched Abode,
The Pails high-foaming with a milky Flood,
The buzzing Flies, a persevering Train,
Incessant swarm, and chased, return again.
Jove viewed the Combat with a stern Survey,
And Eyes that flashed intolerable Day;
Fixed on the Field his Sight, his Breast debates
The Vengeance due, and meditates the Fates;
Whether to urge their prompt Effect, and call
The Force of Hector to Patroclus' Fall,
This Instant see his short-lived Trophies won,
And stretch him breathless on his slaughtered Son;
Or yet, with many a Soul's untimely flight,
Augment the Fame and Horror of the Fight?
To crown Achilles' valiant Friend with Praise
At length he dooms; and that his last of Days
Shall set in Glory; bids him drive the Foe;
Nor unattended, see the Shades below.
Then Hector's Mind he fills with dire Dismay;
He mounts his Car, and calls his Hosts away;
Sunk with Troy's heavy Fates, he sees decline
The Scales of Jove, and pants with Awe divine.
Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,
And left their Monarch with the common dead:
Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful Wall
Of Carnage rises, as the Heroes fall.
(So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain
The Prize contested, and despoil the Slain.
The radiant Arms are by Patroclus born,
Patroclus' Ships the glorious Spoils adorn.
Then thus to Phoebus, in the Realms above,
Spoke from his Throne the Cloud-compelling Jove.
Descend, my Phoebus! on the Phrygian Plain,
And from the Fight convey Sarpedon slain;
Then bathe his Body in the crystal Flood,
With Dust dishonored, and deformed with Blood:
Over all his Limbs Ambrosial Odours shed,
And with celestial Robes adorn the Dead.
Those Rites discharged, his sacred Corpse bequeath
To the soft Arms of silent Sleep and Death;
They to his Friends the mournful Charge shall bear,
His Friends a Tomb and Pyramid shall rear;
What Honors Mortals after Death receive,
Those unavailing Honors we may give!
Apollo bows, and from Mount Ida's Height,
Swift to the Field precipitates his Flight;
Thence from the War the breathless Hero bore,
Veiled in a Cloud, to silver Simois' Shore:
There bathed his honorable Wounds, and dressed
His manly Members in the immortal Vest;
And with Perfumes of sweet Ambrosial Dews,
Restores his Freshness, and his Form renews.
Then Sleep and Death, two Twins of winged Race,
Of matchless Swiftness, but of silent Pace,
Received Sarpedon, at the God's Command,
And in a Moment reached the Lycian Land;
The Corpse amidst his weeping Friends they laid,
Where endless Honors wait the sacred Shade.
Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the Plains,
With foaming Coursers, and with loosened Reins.
Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian Crew,
Ah blind to Fate! thy headlong Fury flew:
Against what Fate and powerful Jove ordain,
Vain was thy Friend's Command, thy Courage vain.
For he, the God, whose Counsels uncontrolled,
Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold:
The God who gives, resumes, and orders all,
He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.
Who first, brave Hero! by that Arm was slain,
Who last, beneath thy Vengeance, pressed the Plain;
When Heaven itself thy fatal Fury led,
And called to fill the Number of the Dead?
Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds,
Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds;
Epistor, Menalippus, bite the Ground;
The Slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crowned:
Then sunk Pylartes to eternal Night;
The rest dispersing, trust their Fates to Flight.
Now Troy had stooped beneath his matchless Power,
But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred Tower.
Thrice at the Battlement Patroclus struck,
His blazing Aegis thrice Apollo shook:
He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the Cloud,
A more than mortal Voice was heard aloud.
Patroclus! cease: This Heav'n-defended Wall
Defies thy Lance; not fated yet to fall;
Thy Friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles' Hand.
So spoke the God who darts celestial Fires:
The Greek obeys him, and with Awe retires.
While Hector checking at the Scaean Gates
His panting Coursers, in his Breast debates,
Or in the Field his Forces to employ,
Or draw the Troops within the Walls of Troy.
Thus while he thought, beside him Phoebus stood,
In Asius' Shape, who reigned by Sangar's Flood;
(Thy Brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung;
A valiant Warrior, haughty, bold, and young.)
Thus he accosts him. What a shameful Sight!
Gods! is it Hector that forbears the Fight?
Were thine my Vigor, this successful Spear
Should soon convince thee of so false a Fear.
Turn then, ah turn thee to the Field of Fame,
And in Patroclus' Blood efface thy Shame.
Perhaps Apollo shall thy Arms succeed,
And Heaven ordains him by thy Lance to bleed.
So spoke the inspiring God; then took his slight,
And plunged amidst the Tumult of the Fight.
He bids Cebrion drive the rapid Car;
The Lash resounds; the Coursers rush to War.
The God the Grecians sinking Souls deprest,
And poured swift Spirits through each Trojan Breast.
Patroclus lights, impatient for the Fight;
A Spear his Left, a Stone employs his Right:
With all his Nerves he drives it at the Foe;
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
The falling Ruin crushed Cebrion's Head,
(The lawless Offspring of King Priam's Bed,)
His Front, Brows, Eyes, one undistinguished Wound,
The bursting Balls drop sightless to the Ground.
The Charioteer, while yet he held the Rein,
Struck from the Car, falls headlong on the Plain.
To the dark Shades the Soul unwilling glides,
While the proud Victor thus his Fall derides,
Good Heavens! what active Feats yon' Artist shows,
What skilful Diverse are our Phrygian Foes!
Mark with what Ease they sink into the Sand!
Pity! that all their Practice is by Land.
Then rushing sudden on his prostrate Prize,
To spoil the Carcass fierce Patroclus flies:
Swift as a Lion, terrible and bold,
That sweeps the Fields, depopulates the Fold;
Pierced through the dauntless Heart, then tumbles slain;
And from his fatal Courage finds his Bane.
At once bold Hector leaping from his Car,
Defends the Body, and provokes the War.
Thus for some slaughtered Hind, with equal Rage,
Two lordly Rulers of the Wood engage;
Stung with fierce Hunger, each the Prey invades,
And echoing Roars rebellow through the Shades.
Stern Hector fastens on the Warrior's Head,
And by the Foot Patroclus drags the Dead.
While all around, Confusion, Rage, and Fright
Mix the contending Hosts in mortal Fight.
So pent by Hills, the wild Winds roar aloud
In the deep Bosom of some gloomy Wood;
Leaves, Arms, and Trees aloft in Air are blown,
The broad Oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;
This way and that, the ratt'ling Thicket bends,
And the whole Forest in one Crash descends.
Not with less Noise, with less tumultuous Rage,
In dreadful Shock the mingled Hosts engage.
Darts show'r'd on Darts, now round the Carcass ring;
Now Flights of Arrows bounding from the String:
Stones follow Stones; some clatter on the Fields,
Some, hard and heavy, shake the sounding Shields.
But where the rising Whirlwind clouds the Plains,
Sunk in soft Dust the mighty Chief remains,
And stretched in Death, forgets the guiding Reins!
Now flaming from the Zenith, Sol had driven
His fervid Orb through half the Vault of Heaven;
While on each Host with equal Tempest fell
The show'ring Darts, and Numbers sunk to Hell.
But when his Evening Wheels o'erhung the Main,
Glad Conquest rested on the Grecian Train.
Then from amidst the Tumult and Alarms,
They draw the conquered Corpse, and radiant Arms.
Then rash Patroclus with new Fury glows,
And breathing Slaughter, pours amid the Foes.
Thrice on the Press like Mars himself he flew,
And thrice three Heroes at each Onset slew.
There ends thy Glory! there the Fates untwine
The last, black Remnant of so bright a Line.
Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;
Death calls, and Heaven allows no longer Day!
For lo! the God, in dusky Clouds enshrined,
Approaching dealt a stagg'ring Blow behind.
The weighty Shock his Neck and Shoulders feel;
His Eyes flash Sparkles, his stunned Senses reel
In giddy Darkness: Far to distance flung,
His bounding Helmet on the Champain rung.
Achilles' Plume is stained with Dust and Gore;
That Plume, which never stooped to Earth before,
Long used, untouched, in fighting Fields to shine,
And shade the Temples of the Man divine.
Jove dooms it now on Hector's Helm to nod;
Not long -- For Fate pursues him, and the God.
His Spear in Shivers falls: His ample Shield
Drops from his Arm: his Baldrick strows the Field:
The Corselet his astonished Breast forsakes:
Loose is each Joint; each Nerve with Horror shakes.
Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
Such is the Force of more than mortal Hands!
A Dardan Youth there was, well-known to Fame,
From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his Name;
Famed for the Manage of the foaming Horse,
Skilled in the Dart, and matchless in the Course:
Full twenty Knights he tumbled from the Car
While yet he learned his Rudiments of War.
His venurous Spear first drew the Hero's Gore;
He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more;
Nor though disarmed, Patroclus' Fury stood:
But swift withdrew the long-protended Wood,
And turned him short, and herded in the Crowd.
Thus, by an Arm divine, and mortal Spear,
Wounded at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
Retires for Succor to his social Train,
And flies the Fate, which Heaven decreed, in vain.
Stern Hector, as the bleeding Chief he views,
Breaks through the Ranks, and his Retreat pursues:
The Lance arrests him with a mortal Wound;
He falls, Earth thunders, and his Arms resound.
With him all Greece was sunk; that Moment all
Her yet-surviving Heroes seemed to fall.
So scorched with Heat along the desert Shore,
The roaming Lion meets a bristly Boar,
Fast by the Spring; they both dispute the Flood,
With flaming Eyes, and Jaws besmeared with Blood;
At length the sovereign Savage wins the Strife,
And the torn Boar resigns his Thirst and Life.
Patroclus thus, so many Chiefs overthrown,
So many Lives effus'd, expires his own.
As dying now at Hector's Feet he lies,
He sternly views him, and triumphing cries.
Lie there Patroclus! and with thee, the Joy
Thy Pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
The fancied Scenes, of Ilion wrapped in Flames,
And thy soft Pleasures served with captive Dames!
Unthinking Man! I fought, those Towers to free,
And guard that beauteous Race from Lords like thee:
But thou a Prey to Vulturs shall be made!
The great Achilles cannot lend thee Aid;
Tho much at parting that great Chief might say,
And much enjoin thee, this important Day.
"Return not, my brave Friend (perhaps he said)
"Without the bloody Arms of Hector dead:
He spoke, Patroclus marched, and thus he sped.
Supine, and wildly gazing on the Skies,
With faint, expiring Breath, the Chief replies.
Vain Boaster! cease, and know the Powers divine;
Jove's and Apollo's is this Deed, not thine;
To Heaven is owed whatever your own you call,
And Heaven itself disarmed me ever my Fall.
Had twenty Mortals, each thy Match in Might,
Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in Fight:
By Fate and Phoebus was I first overthrown,
Euphorbus next; the third mean Part thy own.
But thou Imperious! hear my latest Breath;
The Gods inspire it, and it sounds thy Death.
Insulting Man! thou shall be soon, as I;
Black Fate hangs over thee, and thy Hour draws nigh;
Even now on Life's last Verge I see thee stand,
I see thee fall, and by Achilles' Hand.
He faints; the Soul unwilling wings her way,
(The beauteous Body left a Load of Clay)
Flits to the lone, uncomfortable Coast;
A naked, wandering, melancholy Ghost!
Then Hector pausing, as his Eyes he fed
On the pale Carcass thus addressed the dead.
From whence this boding Speech, the stern Decree
Of Death denounced, or why denounced to me?
Why not as well Achilles' Fate be given
To Hector's Lance? Who knows the Will of Heaven?
Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay
His breathless Bosom, tore the Lance away;
And upwards cast the Corpse: The reeking Spear
He shakes, and charges the bold Charioteer.
But swift Automedon with loosned Reins
Rapt in the Chariot over the distant Plains,
Far from his Rage the immortal Courses drove;
The immortal Coursers were the Gift of Jove.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Sixteenth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SIXTEENTH BOOK.
I.
WE have at the Entrance of this Book one of the most beautiful Parts of the
Iliad. The two different Characters are admirably sustained in the Dialogue of
the two Heroes, wherein there is not a Period but strongly marks not only their
natural Temper, but that particular Disposition of Mind in either, which arises
from the present State of Affairs. We see Patroclus touched with the deepest
Compassion for the Misfortune of the Greeks, (whom the Trojans had forced to
retreat to their Ships, and which Ships were on the Point of burning)
prostrating himself before the Vessel of Achilles, and pouring out his Tears at
his Feet. Achilles, struck with the Grief of his Friend, demands the Cause of
it. Patroclus, pointing to the Ships, where the Flames already began to rise,
tells him he is harder than the Rocks or Sea which lay in prospect before them,
if he is not touched with so moving a Spectacle, and can see in cold Blood his
Friends perishing before his Eyes. As nothing can be more natural and affecting
than the Speech of Patroclus, so nothing is more lively and Picturesque than
the Attitude he is here described in.

The Pathetic of Patroclus's Speech is finely contrasted by the Fierte of that
of Achilles. While the former is melting with Sorrow for his Countrymen, the
utmost he can hope from the latter, is but to borrow his Armor and Troops; to
obtain his personal Assistance he knows is impossible. At the very Instant that
Achilles is moved to ask the Cause of his Friend's Concern, he seems to say
that nothing could deserve it but the Death of their Fathers: and in the same
Breath speaks of the total Destruction of the Greeks as of too slight a Cause
for Tears. Patroclus, at the opening of this Speech, dares not name Agamemnon
even for being wounded; and after he has tried to bend him by all the Arguments
that could affect an human Breast, concludes by supposing that some Oracle or
supernatual Inspiration is the Cause that withholds his Arms. What can match
the Fierceness of his Answer? Which implies, that not the Oracles of Heaven
itself should be regarded, if they stood in Competition with his Resentment:
That if he yields, it must be through his own mere Motive: The only reason he has
ever to yield, is that Nature itself cannot support Anger eternally: And if he
yields now, it is only because he had before determined to do so at a certain
time, ( Il. 9.. 773.) That time was not till the Flames should approach to his
own Ships, till the last Article of Danger, and that not of Danger to Greece,
but to himself. Thus his very Pity has the sternest Qualifications in the
World. After all, what is it he yields to? Only to suffer his Friend to go in
his stead, just to save them from present Ruin, but he expressly forbids him to
proceed any farther in their Assistance, than barely to put out the Fires, and
secure his own and his Friend's Return into their Country: And all this
concludes with a Wish, that (if it were possible) every Greek and every Trojan
might perish except themselves. Such is that Wrath of Achilles, that more than
Wrath, as the Greek(...) implies, which Homer has painted in so strong a
Coloring.

II.
VERSE 8. Indulgent to his best beloved.] The Friendship of Achilles and
Patroclus is celebrated by all Antiquity: And Homer, notwithstanding the Anger
of Achilles was his professed Subject, has found the Secret to discover, through
that very Anger, the softer Parts of his Character. In this View we shall find
him generous in his Temper, despising Gain and Booty, and as far as his Honor
is not concerned, fond of his Mistress, and easy to his Friend: Not proud, but
when injured; and not more revengeful when ill used, than grateful and gentle
when respectfully treated. " Patroclus (says Philostratus, who probably grounds
his Assertion on some ancient Tradition) was not so much elder than Achilles as
to pretend to direct him, but of a tender, modest, and unassuming Nature;
constant and diligent in his Attendance, and seeming to have no Affections but
those of his Friend." The same Author has a very pretty Passage, where Ajax is
introduced enquiring of Achilles, "Which of all his warlike Actions were the
most difficult and dangerous to him? He answers, Those which he undertook for
the sake of his Friends. And which (continues Ajax) were the most pleasing and
easy? The very same, replies Achilles. He then asks him, Which of all the
Wounds he ever bore in Battle was the most painful to him? Achilles answers,
That which he received from Hector. But Hector, says Ajax, never gave you a
Wound. Yes, replies Achilles, a mortal one, when he slew my Friend Patroclus."

It is said in the Life of Alexander the Great, that when that Prince visited
the Monuments of the Heroes at Troy, and placed a Crown upon the Tomb of
Achilles; his Friend Hephaestion placed another on that of Patroclus, as an
Intimation of his being to Alexander what the other was to Achilles. On which
Occasion the Saying of Alexander is recorded; That Achilles was happy indeed,
for having had such a Friend to love him living, and such a Poet to celebrate
him dead.

III.
VERSE 11. No Girl, no Infant, etc.] I know the obvious Translation of this
Passage makes the Comparison consist only in the Tears of the Infant, applied
to those of Patroclus. But certainly the Idea of the Simile will be much finer,
if we comprehend also in it the Mother's Fondness and Concern, awakened by this
Uneasiness of the Child, which no less aptly corresponds with the Tenderness of
Achilles on the Sight of his Friend's Affliction. And there is yet a third
Branch of the Comparison, in the Pursuit, and constant Application the Infant
makes to the Mother, in the same manner as Patroclus follows Achilles with his
Grief, till he forces him to take notice of it. I think (all these
Circumstances laid together) nothing can be more affecting or exact in all its
Views, than this Similitude; which without that Regard, has perhaps seemed but
low and trivial to an unreflecting Reader.

IV.
VERSE 31. Let Greece at length with Pity touch thy Breast.] The Commentators
labor to prove, that the Words in the Original, which begin this Speech,
(...), Be not angry, are not meant to desire Achilles to bear no farther
Resentment against the Greeks, but only not to be displeased at the Tears which
Patroclus sheds for their Misfortune. Patroclus (they say) was not so imprudent
to begin his Intercession in that manner, when there was need of something more
insinuating. I take this to be an Excess of Refinement: The Purpose of every
Period in his Speech is to persuade Achilles to lay aside his Anger; why then
may he not begin by desiring it? The whole Question is, whether he may speak
openly in favor of the Greeks in the first half of the Verse, or in the
latter? For in the same Line he represents their Distress. -- (...)
It Is plain he treats him without much Reserve, calls him implacable,
inexorable, and even mischievous (for (...) implies no less.) I don't see
wherein the Caution of this Speech consists; it is a generous, unartful
Petition, whereof Achilles's Nature would much more approve, than of all the
Artifice of Ulysses (to which he expressed his Hatred in the ninth Book,. 310.)

V.
VERSE 35. Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' Son,
And wise Ulysses. -- ]
Patroclus in mentioning the wounded Princes to Achilles, takes care not to put
Agamemnon first, lest that odious Name striking his Ear on a sudden, should
shut it against the rest of his Discourse: Neither does he name him last, for
fear Achilles dwelling upon it should fall into Passion: But he slides it into
the middle, mixing and confounding it with the rest, that it might not be taken
too much notice of, and that the Names which precede and follow it may diminish
the Hatred it might excite. Wherefore he does not so much as accompany it with
an Epithet.

I think the foregoing Remark of Eustathius is very ingenious, and I have given
into it so far, as to choose rather to make Patroclus call him Atreus' Son than
Agamemnon, which yet farther softens it, since thus it might as well be
imagined he spoke of Menelaus, as of Agamemnon.

VI.
VERSE 61. And thy mere Image chase her Foes away.] It is hard to conceive a
greater Complement, or one that could more touch the warlike Ambition of
Achilles, than this which Homer puts into the Mouth of Patroclus. It was also
an Encomium which he could not suspect of Flattery; since the Person who made
it, desires to hazard his Life upon the Security, that the Enemy could not
support the Sight of the very Armor of Achilles: And indeed Achilles himself
seems to entertain no less a Thought, in the Answer to this Speech, where he
ascribes the Flight of Troy to the blazing of his Helmet: a Circumstance
wonderfully fine, and nobly exalting the Idea of this Hero's terrible
Character. Besides all this, Homer had it in his View to prepare hereby the
wonderful Incident that is to ensue in the eighteenth Book, where the very
Sight of Achilles from his Ship turns the Fortune of the War.

VII.
VERSE 101. No longer flames the Lance of Tydeus' Son.] By what Achilles here
says, joining Diomede to Agamemnon in this taunting Reflection, one may justly
suspect there was some particular Disagreement and Emulation between these two
Heroes. This we may suppose to be the more natural, because Diomede was of all
the Greeks confessedly the nearest in Fame and Courage to Achilles, and
therefore the most likely to move his Envy, as being the most likely to supply
his Place. The same Sentiments are to be observed in Diomede with regard to
Achilles; he is always confident in his own Valor, and therefore in their
greatest Extremities he no where acknowledges the Necessity of appeasing
Achilles, but always in Council appears most forward and resolute to carry on
the War without him. For this reason he was not thought a fit Ambassador to
Achilles; and upon Return from the Embassy, he breaks into a severe Reflection,
not only upon Achilles, but even upon Agamemnon who had sent this Embassy to
him. I wish thou had not sent these Supplications and Gifts to Achilles; his
Insolence was extreme before, but now his Arrogance will be intolerable; let us
not mind whether he goes or stays, but do our Duty and prepare for the Battle.
Eustathius observes, that Achilles uses this particular Expression concerning
Diomede, (...)
(...) --
because it was the same boasting Expression Diomed had applied to himself, Il.
8.. 111. But this having been said only to Nestor in the Heat of Fight, how can
we suppose Achilles had Notice of it? This Observation shows the great
Diligence, if not the Judgment, of the good Archbishop.

VIII.
VERSE 111. Shall render back the beauteous Maid.] But this is what the Greeks
have already offered to do, and which he has refused; this then is an
Inequality in Achilles's Manners. Not at all: Achilles is still ambitious; when
he refused these Presents, the Greeks were not low enough, he would not receive
them till they were reduced to the last Extremity, and till he was sufficiently
revenged by their Losses. Dacier.

IX.
VERSE 113. But touch not Hector.] This Injunction of Achilles is highly
correspondent to his ambitious Character: He is by no means willing that the
Conquest of Hector should be achieved by any Hand but his own: In that Point
of Glory he is jealous even of his dearest Friend. This also wonderfully
strengthens the Idea we have of his Implacability and Resentment; since at the
same time that nothing can move him to assist the Greeks in the Battle, we see
it is the utmost Force upon his Nature to abstain from it, by the fear he
manifests lest any other should subdue this Hero.

The Verse I am speaking of, (...)
is cited by Diogenes Laertius as Homer's, but not to be found in the Editions
before that of Barnes. It is certainly one of the Instructions of Achilles to
Patroclus, and therefore properly placed in this Speech; but I believe better
after -- (...)
than where he has inserted it four Lines above: For Achilles's Instructions
not beginning till. 83. (...)
it is not so proper to divide this material one from the rest. Whereas
(according to the Method I propose) the whole Context will lie in this order.
Obey my Injunctions, as you consult my Interest and Honor. Make as great a
Slaughter of the Trojans as you will, but abstain from Hector. And as soon as
you have repulsed them from the Ships, be satisfied and return: For it may be
fatal to pursue the Victory to the Walls of Troy.

X.
VERSE 115. Consult my Glory, and forbear.] Achilles tells Patroclus, that if
he pursues the Foe too far, whether he shall be Victor or Vanquished, it must
prove either way prejudicial to his Glory. For by the former, the Greeks having
no more need of Achilles's Aid, will not render him his Captive, nor try any
more to appease him by Presents: By the latter, his Arms would be left in the
Enemy's Hands, and he himself upbraided with the Death of Patroclus. Dacier.

XI.
VERSE 122. Oh would to all, etc.] Achilles from his overflowing Gall vents
this Execration: The Trojans he hates as professed Enemies, and he detests the
Grecians as People who had with Calmness overlooked his Wrongs. Some of the
ancient Critics not entering into the Manners of Achilles, would have expunged
this Imprecation, as uttering an universal Malevolence to Mankind. This
Violence agrees perfectly with his implacable Character. But one may observe at
the same time the mighty Force of Friendship, if for the sake of his dear
Patroclus he will protect and secure those Greeks, whose Destruction he wishes.
What a little qualifies this bloody Wish, is that we may suppose it spoken with
great Unreservedness, as in secret, and between Friends.

Mons. de la Motte has a lively Remark upon the Absurdity of this Wish. Upon
the Supposition that Jupiter had granted it, if all the Trojans and Greeks were
destroyed, and only Achilles and Patroclus left to conquer Troy, he asks, what
would be the Victory without any Enemies, and the Triumph without any
Spectators? But the Answer is very obvious; Homer intends to paint a Man in
Passion; the Wishes and Schemes of such an one are seldom conformable to
Reason; and the Manners are preserved the better, the less they are represented
to be so.

This brings into my Mind that Curse in Shakespeare, where that admirable Master
of Nature makes Northumberland, in the Rage of his Passion, wish for an
universal Destruction. -- Now let not Nature's Hand
Keep the wild Flood confined! Let Order die,
And let the World no longer be a Stage
To feed Contention in a lingering Act:
But let one Spirit of the firstborn Cain
Reign in all Bosoms, that each Heart being set
On bloody Courses, the rude Scene may end,
And Darkness be the Burier of the Dead!


XII.
VERSE 130. Ajax no more, etc.] This Description of Ajax wearied out with
Battle, is a Passage of exquisite Life and Beauty: Yet what I think nobler than
the Description itself, is what he says at the end of it, that his Hero even in
this Excess of Fatigue and Languor, could scarce be moved from his Post by the
Efforts of a whole Army. Virgil has copied the Description very exactly, Aen.
9. Ergo nec clypeo juvenis subsistere tantum
Nec dextra valet: injectis sic undique telis
Obruitur. Strepit assiduo cava tempora circum
Tinnitu galea, and saxis solida era fatiscunt:
Discussaeque jubae capiti, nec sufficit umbo
Ictibus: ingeminant hastis and Troes, and ipse
Fulmineus Mnestheus; tum toto corpore sudor
Liquitur, and piceum, nec respirare potestas,
Flumen agit; fessos quatit aeger anhelitus artus.
The Circumstances which I have marked in a different Character are
Improvements upon Homer, and the last Verse excellently expresses, in the short
catching up of the Numbers, the quick, short Panting, represented in the Image.
The Reader may add to the Comparison an Imitation of the same Place in Tasso,
Canto 9. St. 97. Fatto intanto ha il Sultan cio, ch'e concesso
Fare a terrena forza, hor piu non puote:
Tutto e sangue e sudore; un grave, e spesso
Anhelar gli ange il petto, e i fianche scote.
Langue sotto lo scudo il brachio oppresso,
Gira la destra il ferro in pigre rote;
Spessa, e non taglia, e divenendo ottuso
Perduto il brando omai di brando ha l'uso.


XIII.
VERSE 148. Great Ajax saw, and owned the Hand divine,
Confessing Jove, and trembling at the Sign.]
In the Greek there is added an Explication of this Sign, which has no other
Allusion to the Action but a very odd one in a single Phrase, or Metaphor. --
(...)
(...)
Which may be translated, So seemed their Hopes cut off by Heavens high Lord,
So doomed to fall before the Trojan Sword.
Chapman endeavors to account for the Meanness of this Conceit, by the gross
Wit of Ajax; who seeing the Head of his Lance cut off, took it into his Fancy
that Jupiter would in the same manner cut off the Counsels and Schemes of the
Greeks. For to understand this far-fetched Apprehension gravely, as the
Commentators have done, is indeed (to use the Words of Chapman) most dull and
Ajantical. I believe no Man will blame me for leaving these Lines out of the
Text.

XIV.
VERSE 154. Achilles viewed the rising Flames.] This Event is prepared with a
great deal of Art and Probability. That Effect which a Multitude of Speeches
was not able to accomplish, one lamentable Spectacle, the Sight of the Flames,
at length overcomes, and moves Achilles to Compassion. This it was (say the
Ancients) that moved the Tragedians to make visible Representations of Misery;
for the Spectators beholding People in unhappy Circumstances, find their Souls
more deeply touched, than by all the Strains of Rhetoric. Eustathius.

XV.
VERSE 162. He cased his Limbs in Brass, etc.] Homer does not amuse himself
here to describe these Arms of Achilles at length, for besides that the time
permits it not, he reserves this Description for the new Armor which Thetis
shall bring that Hero; a Description which will be placed in a more quiet
Moment, and which will give him all the Leisure of making it, without requiring
any Force to introduce it. Eustathius.

XVI.
VERSE 172. Alone untouched Pelides' Javelin stands.] This Passage affords
another Instance of the Stupidity of the Commentators, who are here most
absurdly inquisitive after the Reasons why Patroclus does not take the Spear,
as well as the other Arms of Achilles? He thought himself a very happy Man, who
first found out, that Homer had certainly given this Spear to Patroclus, if he
had not foreseen that when it should be lost in his future unfortunate
Engagement, Vulcan could not furnish Achilles with another; being no Joiner,
but only a Smith. Virgil, it seems, was not so precisey acquainted with
Vulcan's Disability to profess the two Trades; since he has, without any
scruple, employed him in making a Spear, as well as the other Arms for Aeneas.
Nothing is more obvious than this Thought of Homer, who intended to raise the
Idea of his Hero, by giving him such a Spear as no other could wield: The
Description of it in this Place is wonderfully pompous.

XVII.
VERSE 183. Sprung from the Wind.] It is a beautiful Invention of the Poet to
represent the wonderful Swiftness of the Horses of Achilles, by saying they
were begotten by the western Wind. This Fiction is truly poetical, and very
proper in the way of natural Allegory. However, it is not altogether improbable
our Author might have designed it even in the literal Sense: Nor ought the
Notion to be thought very extravagant in a Poet, since grave Naturalists have
seriously vouched the Truth of this kind of Generation. Some of these relate as
an undoubted Piece of natural History, that there was anciently a Breed of this
kind of Horses in Portugal, whose Damms were impregnated by a western Wind:
Varro, Collumella, and Pliny, are all of this Opinion. I shall only mention the
Words of Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 42. Constat in Lusitania circa
Olyssiponem oppidum, and Tagum amnem, equas Favonio flante obversas animalem
concipere spiritum, idque partum fieri and gigni pernicissimum. See also the
same Author, l. 4. c. 22. l. 16. c. 25. Possibly Homer had this Opinion in
view, which we see has Authority more than sufficient to give it place in
Poetry. Virgil has given us a Description of this manner of Conception, Georgic
3. Continuoque avidis ubi subdita flamma medullis,
Vere magis (quia vere calor redit ossibus) illae
Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum, stant rupibus altis,
Exceptantque leves auras: and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis, vento gravidae (mirabile dictu)
Saxa per and scopulos and depressas convalles
Diffugiunt. --


XVIII.
VERSE 186. Swift Pedasus was added to their side.] Here was a necessity for a
spare Horse (as in another Place Nestor had occasion for the same) that if by
any Misfortune one of the other Horses should fall, there might be a fresh one
ready at hand to supply his Place. This is good Management in the Poet, to
deprive Achilles not only of his Charioteer and his Arms, but of one of his
inestimable Horses. Eustathius.

XIX.
VERSE 194. Grim as voracious Wolves, etc.] There is scarce any Picture in
Homer so much in the savage and terrible way, as this Comparison of the
Myrmidons to Wolves: It puts one in mind of the Pieces of Spagnolett, or
Salvator Rosa: Each Circumstance is made up of Images very strongly colored,
and horridly lively. The principal Design is to represent the stern Looks and
fierce Appearance of the Myrmidons, a gaunt and ghastly Train of raw-bon'd
bloodyminded Fellows. But besides this, the Poet seems to have some farther
Views in so many different Particulars of the Comparison: Their eager desire of
Fight is hinted at by the Wolves thirsting after Water: Their Strength and
Vigor for the Battle is intimated by their being filled with Food: And as
these Beasts are said to have their Thirst sharper after they are gorged with
Prey; so the Myrmidons are strong and vigorous with Ease and Refreshment, and
therefore more ardently desirous of the Combat. This Image of their Strength
is inculcated by several Expressions, both in the Simile and the Application,
and seems designed in contraste to the other Greeks, who are all wasted and
spent with Toil.

We have a Picture much of this kind given us by Milton, lib. 10. where Death
is let loose into the new Creation, to glut his Appetite, and discharge his
Rage upon all Nature. -- As when a Flock
Of ravenous Fowls, though many a League remote,
Against the Day of Battle, to a Field
Where Armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With Scent of living Carcasses, designed
For Death the following Day, in bloody Fight.
So scented the grim Feature, and upturn'd
His Nostril wide into the murky Air,
Sagacious of his Quarry from afar.
And by Tasso, Canto 10. St. 2. of the furious Sultan covered with Blood, and
thirsting for fresh Slaughter. Come dal chiuso ovil cacciato viene
Lupo tal' hor, che fugge, e si nasconde;
Che se ben del gran ventre omai ripiene
Ha l' ingorde voragini profonde.
Avido pur di sangue anco fuor tiene
La lingua, e'l sugge da le labbra immonde;
Tal' ei sen gia dopo il sanguigno stratio
De la sua cupa fame anco non satio.


XX.
VERSE 211. Derived from him whose Waters, etc.] Homer seems resolved that
every thing about Achilles shall be miraculous. We have seen his very Horses
are of celestial Origin; and now his Commanders, though vulgarly reputed the
Sons of Men, are represented as the real Offspring of some Diety. The Poet thus
inhances the Admiration of his chief Hero by every Circumstance with which his
Imagination could furnish him.

XXI.
VERSE 220. To her high Chamber.] It was the Custom of those Times to assign
the uppermost Rooms to the Women, that they might be the farther removed from
Commerce: Wherefore Penelope in the Odysseis mounts up into a Garret, and there
sits to her Business. So Priam, in the 16 th Book,. 248. had Chambers for the
Ladies of his Court, under the Roof of his Palace.

The Lacedaemonians called these high Apartments (...), and as the word also
signifies Eggs, it is probable it was this that gave occasion to the Fable of
Helen's Birth, who is said to be born from an Egg. Eustathius.

XXII.
VERSE 283. And thus the God implored.] Though the Character of Achilles every
where shows a Mind swayed with unbounded Passions, and entirely regardless of
all human Authority and Law; yet he preserves a constant Respect to the Gods,
and appears as zealous in the Sentiments and Actions of Piety as any Hero of
the Iliad; who indeed are all remarkable this way. The present Passage is an
exact Description and perfect Ritual of the Ceremonies on these Occasions.
Achilles, though an urgent Affair called for his Friend's Assistance, would not
yet suffer him to enter the Fight, till in a most solemn manner he had
recommended him to the Protection of Jupiter: And this I think a stronger Proof
of his Tenderness and Affection for Patroclus, than either the Grief he
expressed at his Death, or the Fury he showed to revenge it.

XXIII.
VERSE 285. Dodonaean Jove.] The frequent mention of Oracles in Homer and the
ancient Authors, may make it not improper to give the Reader a general Account
of so considerable a part of the Grecian Superstition; which I cannot do better
than in the Words of my Friend Mr. Stanyan, in his excellent and judicious
Abstract of the Grecian History.

"The Oracles were ranked among the noblest and most religious kinds of
Divination; the Design of them being to settle such an immediate way of
Converse with their Gods, as to be able by them not only to explain things
intricate and obscure, but also to anticipate the Knowledge of future Events;
and that with far greater Certainty than they could hope for from Men, who out
of Ignorance and Prejudice must sometimes either conceal or betray the Truth.
So that this became the only safe way of deliberating upon Affairs of any
Consequence, either public or private. Whether to proclaim War, or conclude a
Peace, to institute a new Form of Government, or enact new Laws, all was to be
done with the Advice and Approbation of the Oracle, whose Determinations were
always held sacred and inviolable. As to the Causes of Oracles, Jupiter was
looked upon as the first Cause of this, and all other sorts of Divination; he
had the Book of Fate before him, and out of that revealed either more or less,
as he pleased, to inferior Demons. But to argue more rationally, this way of
Access to the Gods has been branded as one of the earliest and grossest Pieces
of Priestcraft, that obtained in the World. For the Priests, whose Dependence
was on the Oracles, when they found the Cheat had got sufficient footing,
allowed no Man to consult the Gods without costly Sacrifices and rich Presents
to themselves: And as few could bear this Expense, it served to raise their
Credit among the common People, by keeping them at an awful distance. And to
heighten their Esteem with the better and wealthier sort, even they were only
admitted upon a few stated Days: By which the thing appeared still more
mysterious, and for want of this good Management, must quickly have been seen
through, and fell to the Ground. But whatever juggling there was as to the
religious Part, Oracles had certainly a good Effect as to the Public; being
admirably suited to the Genius of a People, who would join in the most
desperate Expedition, and admit of any Change of Government, when they
understood by the Oracle it was the irresistible Will of the Gods. This was the
Method Minos, Lycurgus, and all the famous Lawgivers took; and indeed they
found the People so entirely devoted to this Part of Religion, that it was
generally the easiest, and sometimes the only way of winning them into a
Compliance. And then they took care to have them delivered in such ambiguous
Terms, as to admit of different Constructions according to the Exigency of the
Times; so that they were generally interpreted to the Advantage of the State,
unless sometimes there happened to be Bribery, or Flattery in the Case; as when
Demosthenes complained that the Pythia spoke as Philip would have her. The most
numerous, and of greatest Repute were the Oracles of Apollo, who in
Subordination to Jupiter, was appointed to preside over, and inspire all sorts
of Prophets and Diviners. And amongst these, the Delphian challenged the first
Place, not so much in respect of its Antiquity, as its Perspicuity and
Certainty; insomuch that the Answers of the Tripos came to be used proverbially
for clear and infallible Truths. Here we must not omit the first Pythia or
Priestess of this famous Oracle in heroic Verse. They found a secret Charm in
Numbers, which made every thing look pompous and weighty. And hence it became
the general Practice of Legislators, and Philosophers, to deliver their Laws
and Maxims in that Dress: And scarce any thing in those Ages was writ of
Excellence or Moment but in Verse. This was the Dawn of Poetry. which soon grew
into Repute; and so long as it served to such noble Purposes as Religion and
Government, Poets were highly honored, and admitted into a Share of the
Administration. But by that time it arrived to any Perfection, they pursued
more mean and servile Ends; and as they prostituted their Muse, and debased the
Subject, they sunk proportionably in their Esteem and Dignity. As to the
History of Oracles, we find them mentioned in the very Infancy of Greece; and
it is as uncertain when they were finally extinct, as when they began. For they
often lost their prophetic Faculty for some time, and recovered it again. I
know it is a common Opinion, that they were universally silenced upon our
Savior's Appearance in the World: And if the Devil had been permitted for so
many Ages to delude Mankind, it might probably have been so. But we are assured
from History, that several of them continued till the Reign of Julian the
Apostate, and were consulted by him: And therefore I look upon the whole
Business as of human Contrivance; an egregious Imposture founded upon
Superstition, and carried on by Policy and Interest, till the brighter Oracles
of the holy Scriptures dispelled these Mists of Error and Enthusiasm."

XXIV.
VERSE 285. Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove.] Achilles invokes Jupiter with these
particular Appellations, and represents to him the Services performed by these
Priests and Prophets, making these Honors paid in his own Country, his Claim
for the Protection of the Deity. Jupiter was looked upon as the first Cause of
all Divination and Oracles, from whence he had the Appellation of (...), Il.
8.. 250. The first Oracle of Dodona was founded by the Pelasgi, the most
ancient of all the Inhabitants of Greece, which is confirmed by this Verse of
Hesiod, preserved by the Scholiast on Sophocles Trachin. (...)
The Oaks of this Place were said to be endu'd with Voice, and prophetic
Spirit; the Priests who gave Answers concealing themselves in these Trees; a
Practice which the pious Frauds of succeeding Ages have rendered not improbable.

XXV.
VERSE 288. Whose Groves the Selli, Race austere! etc.] Homer seems to me to
say clearly enough, that these Priests lay on the Ground and forbore the Bath,
to honor by these Austerities the God they served; for he says, (...) and this
(...) can in my Opinion only signify for you, that is to say, to please you,
and for your Honor. This Example is remarkable, but I do not think it
singular; and the earliest Antiquity may furnish us with the like of Pagans,
who by an austere Life tried to please their Gods. Nevertheless I am obliged to
say, that Strabo, who speaks very much at length of these Selli in his 7 th
Book, has not taken this Austerity of Life for an Effect of their Devotion, but
for a Remain of the Grossness of their Ancestors; who being Barbarians, and
straying from Country to Country, had no Bed but the Earth, and never used a
Bath. But it is no way unlikely that what was in the first Pelasgians (who
founded this Oracle) only Custom and Use, might be continued by these Priests
through Devotion. How many things do we at this Day see, which were in their
Original only ancient Manner, and which are continued through Zeal and a Spirit
of Religion? It is very probable that these Priests by this hard living had a
mind to attract the Admiration and Confidence of a People who loved Luxury and
Delicacy so much. I was willing to search into Antiquity for the Original of
these Selli, Priests of Jupiter, but found nothing so ancient as Homer:
Herodotus writes in his second Book, that the Oracle of Dodona was the
ancientest in Greece, and that it was a long time the only one; but what he
adds, that it was founded by an Egyptian Woman, who was the Priestess of it, is
contradicted by this Passage of Homer, who shows, that in the time of the
Trojan War this Temple was served by Men called Selli, and not by Women. Strabo
informs us of a curious ancient Tradition, importing, that this Temple was at
first built in Thessaly, that from thence it was carried into Dodona, that
several Women who had placed their Devotion there followed it, and that in
Process of Time the Priestesses used to be chosen from among the Descendents of
those Women. To return to these Selli; Sophocles, who of all the Greek Poets is
he who has most imitated Homer, speaks in like manner of these Priests in one
of his Plays, where Hercules says to his Son Hillus; "I will declare to thee a
new Oracle, which perfectly agrees with this ancient one; I my self having
entered into the sacred Wood inhabited by the austere Selli, who lie on the
Ground, writ this Answer of the Oak, which is consecrated to my Father Jupiter,
and which renders his Oracles in all Languages." Dacier.

XXVI.
VERSE 288.] Homer in this Verse uses a word which I think singular and
remarkable, (...) I cannot believe that it was put simply for (...), but am
persuaded that this Term includes some particular Sense, and shows some Custom
but little known, which I would willingly discover. In the Scholia of Didymus
there is this Remark: "They called those who served in the Temple, and who
explained the Oracles rendered by the Priests, Hypothets, or Under-Prophets."
It is certain that there were in the Temples Servitors, or Subaltern Ministers,
who for the sake of Gain, undertook to explain the Oracles which were obscure.
This Custom seems very well established in the Ion of Euripides; where that
young Child (after having said that the Priestess is seated on the Tripod, and
renders the Oracles which Apollo dictates to her) addresses himself to those
who serve in the Temple, and bids them go and wash in the Castalian Fountain,
to come again into the Temple and explain the Oracles to those who should
demand the Explication of them. Homer therefore means to show, that these Selli
were, in the Temple of Dodona, those Subaltern Ministers that interpreted the
Oracles. But this, after all, does not appear to agree with the present
Passage: For, besides that the Custom was not established in Homer's Time, and
that there is no Footstep of it founded in that early Age; these Selli (of whom
Homer speaks) are not here Ministers subordinate to others, they are plainly
the chief Priests. The Explication of this word therefore must be elsewhere
sought, and I shall offer my Conjecture, which I ground upon the very Nature of
this Oracle of Dodona, which was very different from all the other Oracles: In
all other Temples the Priests delivered the Oracle which they had received from
their Gods, immediately: But in the Temple of Dodona, Jupiter did not utter his
Oracles to his Priests, but to his Selli; he rendered them to the Oaks, and the
wonderful Oaks rendered them to the Priests, who declared them to those who
consulted them: So these Priests were not properly (...), Prophets, since they
did not receive those Answers from the Mouth of their God immediately; but they
were (...), Under-Prophets, because they received them from the Mouth of the
Oaks, if I may say so. The Oaks, properly speaking, were the Prophets, the
first Interpreters of Jupiter's Oracles; and the Selli were (...),
Under-Prophets, because they pronounced what the Oaks had said. Thus Homer in
one single word includes a very curious Piece of Antiquity. Dacier.

XXVII.
VERSE 306. Great Jove agrees to half.] Virgil has finely imitated this in his
11 th Aeneid. Audiit, and voti Phoebus succedere partem
Mente dedit; partem volucres dispersit in auras.
Sterneret ut subita turbatam morte Camillam
Annuit oranti; reducem ut patria alta videret
Non dedit, inque notos vocem vertere procellae.


XXVIII.
VERSE 314. As Wasps, provoked, etc.] One may observe, that though Homer
sometimes takes his Similitudes from the meanest and smallest things in Nature,
yet he orders it so as by their Appearance to signalize and give Luster to his
greatest Heroes. Here he likens a Body of Myrmidons to a Nest of Wasps, not on
account of their Strength and Bravery, but of their Heart and Resentment.
Virgil has imitated these humble Comparisons, as when he compares the Builders
of Carthage to Bees. Homer has carried it a little farther in another Place,
where he compares the Soldiers to Flies, for their busy Industry and
Perseverance about a dead Body; not diminishing his Heroes by the Size of these
small Animals, but raising his Comparisons from certain Properties inherent in
them, which deserve our Observation. Eustathius.

This brings into my Mind a pretty rural Simile in Spencer, which is very much
in the Simplicity of the old Father of Poetry. As gentle Shepherd in sweet
Even-tide,
When ruddy Phoebus 'gins to welke in West,
High on a Hill, his Flock to viewen wide,
Marks which do bite their hasty Supper best;
A Cloud of cumb'rous Gnats do him molest,
All striving to infix their feeble Stings,
That from their Noyance he no whit can rest,
But with his clownish Hand their tender Wings
He brusheth often, and often does mar their Murmurings.


XXIX.
VERSE 354. So when thick Clouds, etc.] All the Commentators take this
Comparison in a Sense different from that in which it is here translated. They
suppose Jupiter is here described cleaving the Air with a Flash of Lightning,
and spreading a Gleam of Light over a high Mountain, which a black Cloud held
buried in Darkness. The Application is made to Patroclus falling on the
Trojans, and giving Respite to the Greeks, who were plunged in Obscurity.
Eustathius gives this Interpretation, but at the same time acknowledges it
improper in this Comparison to represent the Extinction of the Flames by the
darting of Lightning. This Explanation is founded solely on the Expression
(...), Fulgurator Jupiter, which Epithet is often applied when no such Action
is supposed. The most obvious Signification of the Words in this Passage, gives
a more natural and agreeable Image, and admits of a juster Application. The
Simile therefore seems to be of Jupiter dispersing a black Cloud which had
covered a high Mountain, whereby a beautiful Prospect, which was before hid in
Darkness, suddenly appears. This is applicable to the present State of the
Greeks, after Patroclus had extinguished the Flames, which began to spread
Clouds of Smoke over the Fleet. It is Homer's Design in his Comparisons to
apply them to the most obvious and sensible Image of the thing to be
illustrated; which his Commentators too frequently endeavor to hide by moral
and allegorical Refinements; and thus injure the Poet more, by attributing to
him what does not belong to him, than by refusing him what is really his own.

It is much the same Image with that of Milton in his second Book, though applied
in a very different way. As when from Mountain tops the dusky Clouds
Ascending, while the North Wind sleeps, over spread
Heavens cheerful Face; the lowering Element
Scowls over the darkened Landscape Snow or Shower;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his Evening Beam, the Fields revive,
The Birds their Notes renew, the bleating Herds
Attest their Joy, that Hill and Valley rings.


XXX.
VERSE 390. Amisodarus, who, etc.] Amisodarus was King of Caria; Bellerophon
married his Daughter. The Ancients guessed from this Passage that the Chimaera
was not a Fiction, since Homer marks the Time wherein she lived, and the Prince
with whom she lived; they thought it was some Beast of that Prince's Herds, who
being grown furious and mad, had done a great deal of Mischief, like the
Calydonian Boar. Eustathius.

XXXI.
VERSE 433. Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved Allies.] Homer represents
Hector, as he retires, making a stand from time to time, to save his Troops:
And he expresses it by this single word (...); for (...) does not only signify
to stay, but likewise in retiring to stop from time to time; for this is the
Power of the Preposition (...), as in the word (...), which signifies to fight
by fits and starts;(...), to wrestle several times, and in many others.
Eustathius.

XXXII.
VERSE 459. From Bank to Bank the immortal Coursers flew, etc.] Homer has made
of Hector's Horses all that Poetry could make of common and mortal Horses; they
stand on the Bank of the Ditch foaming and neighing for Madness that they
cannot leap it. But the immortal Horses of Achilles find no Obstacle; they leap
the Ditch, and fly into the Plain. Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 466. As when in Autumn Jove his Fury pours --
-- When guilty Mortals,, etc.]
The Poet in this Image of an Inundation, takes occasion to mention a Sentiment
of great Piety, that such Calamities were the Effects of divine Justice
punishing the Sins of Mankind. This might probably refer to the Tradition of an
universal Deluge, which was very common among the ancient heathen Writers; most
of them ascribing the Cause of this Deluge to the Wrath of Heaven provoked by
the Wickedness of Men. Diodorus Siculus, l. 15. c. 5. speaking of an Earthquake
and Inundation, which destroyed a great part of Greece in the 101 st Olympiad,
has these Words. There was a great Dispute concerning the Cause of this
Calamity: The Natural Philosophers generally ascribed such Events to necessary
Causes, not to any divine Hand: But they who had more devout Sentiments gave a
more probable Account hereof; asserting, that it was the divine Vengeance alone
that brought this Destruction upon Men who had offended the Gods with their
Impiety. And then proceeds to give an Account of those Crimes which drew down
this Punishment upon them.

This is one, among a thousand Instances, of Homer's indirect and oblique
manner of introducing moral Sentences and Instructions. These agreeably break
in upon his Reader even in Descriptions and poetical Parts, where one naturally
expects only Painting and Amusement. We have Virtue put upon us by Surprise,
and are pleased to find a thing where we should never have looked to meet with
it. I must do a noble English Poet the justice to observe, that it is this
particular Art that is the very distinguishing Excellence of Cooper's-Hill;
throughout which, the Descriptions of Places, and Images raised by the Poet,
are still tending to some Hint, or leading into some Reflection, upon moral
Life or political Institution: Much in the same manner as the real Sight of
such Scenes and Prospects is apt to give the Mind a composed Turn, and incline
it to Thoughts and Contemplations that have a Relation to the Object.

XXXIV.
VERSE 480. Between the Space where silver Simois flows,
Where lay the Ships, and where the Rampires rose.]
It looks at first Sight as if Patroclus was very punctual in obeying the
Orders of Achilles, when he hinders the Trojans from ascending to their Town,
and holds an Engagement with 'em between the Ships, the River, and the Wall.
But he seems afterward from very haste to have slipped his Commands, for his
Orders were that he should drive 'em from the Ships, and then presently return;
but he proceeds farther, and his Death is the Consequence, Eustathius.

XXXV.
VERSE 512. When now Sarpedon, etc.] The Poet preparing to recount the Death of
Sarpedon, it will not be improper to give a Sketch of some Particulars which
constitute a Character the most faultless and amiable in the whole Iliad. This
Hero is by Birth superior to all the Chiefs of either side, being the only Son
of Jupiter engaged in this War. His Qualities are no way unworthy his Descent,
since he every where appears equal in Valor, Prudence, and Eloquence, to the
most admired Heroes: Nor are these Excellences blemished with any of those
Defects with which the most distinguishing Characters of the Poem are stained.
So that the nicest Critics cannot find any thing to offend their Delicacy, but
must be obliged to own the Manners of this Hero perfect. His Valor is neither
rash nor boisterous; his Prudence neither timorous nor tricking; and his
Eloquence neither talkative nor boasting. He never reproaches the living, or
insults the dead: but appears uniform through his Conduct in the War, acted with
the same generous Sentiments that engaged him in it, having no Interest in the
Quarrel but to succor his Allies in Distress. This noble Life is ended with a
Death as glorious; for in his last Moments he has no other Concern, but for the
Honor of his Friends, and the Event of the Day.

Homer justly represents such a Character to be attended with universal Esteem:
As he was greatly honored when living, he is as much lamented when dead, as
the chief Prop of Troy. The Poet by his Death, even before that of Hector,
prepares us to expect the Destruction of that Town, when its two great
Defenders are no more: and in order to make it the more signal and remarkable,
it is the only Death in the Iliad attended with Prodigies: Even his Funeral is
performed by divine Assistance, he being the only Hero whose Body is carried
back to be interred in his native Country, and honored with Monuments erected
to his Fame. These peculiar and distinguishing Honors seem appropriated by our
Author to him alone, as the Reward of a Merit superior to all his other less
perfect Heroes.

XXXVI.
VERSE 522. As when two Vulturs.] Homer compares Patroclus and Sarpedon to two
Vulturs, because they appeared to be of equal Strength and Abilities, when they
had dismounted from their Chariots. For this reason he has chosen to compare
them to Birds of the same kind; as on another occasion, to image the like
Equality of Strength, he resembles both Hector and Patroclus to Lions: But a
little after this Place, diminishing the Force of Sarpedon, he compares him to
a Bull, and Patroclus to a Lion. He has placed these Vulturs upon a high Rock,
because it is their Nature to perch there, rather than in the Boughs of Trees.
Their crooked Talons make them unfit to walk on the Ground, they could not
fight steadily in the Air, and therefore their fittest Place is the Rock.
Eustathius.

XXXVII.
VERSE 535. Say, shall I snatch him from impending Fate.] It appears by this
Passage, that Homer was of Opinion, that the Power of God could overruled Fate
or Destiny. It has puzzled many to distinguish exactly the Notion of the
Heathens as to this Point. Mr. Dryden contends that Jupiter was limited by the
Destinies, or (to use his Expression) was no better than Book-Keeper to them.
He grounds it upon a Passage in the tenth Book of Virgil, where Jupiter
mentions this Instance of Sarpedon as a Proof of his yielding to the Fates. But
both that and his Citation from Ovid, amounts to no more than that Jupiter gave
way to Destiny, not that he could not prevent it; the contrary to which is
plain from his Doubt and Deliberation in this Place. And indeed whatever may be
inferred of other Poets, Homer's Opinion at least, as to the Dispensations of
God to Man, has ever seemed to me very clear, and distinctly agreeable to
Truth. We shall find, if we examine his whole Works with an Eye to this
Doctrine, that he assigns three Causes of all the Good and Evil that happens in
this World, which he takes a particular Care to distinguish. First the Will of
God, superior to all. -- (...) Il. 1.
-- (...) Il. 19.. 90.
(...) -- etc.
Secondly, Destiny or Fate, meaning the Laws and Order of Nature affecting the
Constitutions of Men, and disposing them to Good or Evil, Prosperity or
Misfortune; which the supreme Being, if it be his Pleasure, may overruled (as
he is inclined to do in this Place) but which he generally suffers to take
effect. Thirdly, our own Free Will, which either by Prudence overcomes those
natural Influences and Passions, or by Folly suffers us to fall under them.
Odyss. 1.. 32. (...)
(...)
(...)
Why charge Mankind on Heaven their own Offense,
And call their Woes the Crime of Providence?
Blind! who themselves their Miseries create,
And perish, by their Folly, not their Fate.


XXXVIII.
VERSE 551. Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy Command,
The breathless Body to his native Land.]
The History or Fable received in Homer's Time imported, that Sarpedon was
interred in Lycia, but it said nothing of his Death. This gave the Poet the
Liberty of making him die at Troy, provided that after his Death he was carried
into Lycia, to preserve the Fable. The Expedient proposed by Juno solves all;
Sarpedon dies at Troy, and is interred at Lycia; and what renders this
probable, is, that in those Times, as at this Day, Princes and Persons of
Quality who died in foreign Parts, were carried into their own Country to be
laid in the Tombs of their Fathers. The Antiquity of this Custom cannot be
doubted, since it was practiced in the Patriarch's Times: Jacob dying in Egypt,
orders his Children to carry him into the Land of Canaan, where he desired to
be buried. Genesis 49. 29. Dacier.

XXXIX.
VERSE 560. A Shower of Blood.] As to Showers of a bloody Color, many both
ancient and modern Naturalists agree in asserting the Reality of such
Appearances, though they account for 'em differently. You may see a very odd
Solution of 'em in Eustathius, Note 7 on the 11 th Iliad. What seems the most
probable, is that of Fromondus in his Meteorology, who observed, that a Shower
of this kind, which gave great Cause of Wonder, was nothing but a Quantity of
very small red Insects, beat down to the Earth by a heavy Shower, whereby the
Ground was spotted in several Places, as with Drops of Blood.

XL.
VERSE 572. -- Achilles' mortal Steed,
The generous Pedasus --.]
For the other two Horses of Achilles, Xanthus and Balius, were mortal, as we
have already seen in this Book. It Is a merry Conceit of Eustathius, that
Pedasus is only said to be mortal, because of the three Horses he only was a
Gelding. It Is pity poor Pedasus had not a better Fate, to have recompensed the
Loss of his Immortality.

XLI.
VERSE 605. Glaucus, be bold, etc.] This dying Speech of Sarpedon deserves
particular Notice, being made up of noble Sentiments, and fully answering the
Character of this brave and generous Prince, which he preserves in his last
Moments. Being sensible of approaching Death, without any Transports of Rage,
or Desire of Revenge, he calls to his Friend to take care to preserve his Body
and Arms from becoming a Prey to the Enemy: And this he says without any regard
to himself, but out of the most tender Concern for his Friend's Reputation, who
must for ever become infamous if he fails in this Point of Honor and Duty. If
we conceive this said by the expiring Hero, his dying Looks fixed on his
wounded disconsolate Friend, the Spear remaining in his Body, and the Victor
standing by in a kind of Ecstasy surveying his Conquest; these Circumstances
will form a very moving Picture. Patroclus all this time, either out of
Humanity or Surprise, omits to pull out the Spear, which however he does not
long forbear, but with it drawing forth his Vitals, puts a Period to this
gallant Life.

XLII.
VERSE 637. -- pierced with Pain
That thrils my Arm, and shoots through every Vein.]
There seems to be an Oversight in this Place. Glaucus in the twelfth Book had
been wounded with an Arrow by Teucer at the Attack of the Wall; and here so
long after, we find him still on the Field, in the sharpest Anguish of his
Wound, the Blood not being yet stanch'd, etc. In the Speech that next follows
to Hector, there is also something liable to Censure, when he imputes to the
Negligence of the Trojans the Death of Sarpedon, of which they knew nothing
till that very Speech informed 'em. I beg leave to pass over these things
without exposing or defending them, though such as these may be sufficient
Grounds for a most inveterate War among the Critics.

XLIII.
VERSE 696. Great Jove -- Over the fierce Armies pours pernicious Night.] Homer
calls here by the Name of Night, the Whirlwinds of thick Dust which rise from
beneath the Feet of the Combatants, and which hinders them from knowing one
another. Thus Poetry knows how to convert the most natural things into
Miracles; these two Armies are buried in Dust round Sarpedon's Body, it is
Jupiter who pours upon them an obscure Night, to make the Battle bloodier, and
to honor the Funeral of his Son by a greater Number of Victims. Eustathius.

XLIV.
VERSE 746. And skilled in Dancing.] This Stroke of Raillery upon Meriones is
founded on the Custom of his Country. For the Cretans were peculiarly addicted
to this Exercise, and in particular are said to have invented the Pyrrhic
Dance, which was performed in complete Armor. See the forty sixth Note on the
thirteenth Book.

XLV.
VERSE 831. Then Sleep and Death, etc.] It is the Notion of Eustathius, that by
this Interment of Sarpedon, where Sleep and Death are concerned, Homer seems to
intimate, that there was nothing else but an empty Monument of that Hero in
Lycia, for he delivers him not to any real or solid Persons, but to certain
unsubstantial Phantoms to conduct his Body thither. He was forced (continues my
Author) to make use of these Machines, since there were no other Deities he
could with any likelihood employ about this Work; for the Ancients (as appears
from Euripides, Hippolyto) had a Superstition that all dead Bodies were
offensive to the Gods, they being of a Nature celestial and uncorruptible. But
this last Remark is impertinent, since we see in this very Place Apollo is
employed in adorning and embalming the Body of Sarpedon.

What I think better accounts for the Passage, is what Philostratus in Heroicis
affirms, that this alludes to a Piece of Antiquity. "The Lycians showed the
Body of Sarpedon, strewn over with Aromatical Spices, in such a graceful
Composure, that he seemed to be only asleep: And it was this that gave Rise to
the Fiction of Homer, that his Rites were performed by Sleep and Death."

But after all these refined Observations, it is probable the Poet intended
only to represent the Death of this favorite Son of Jupiter, and one of his
most amiable Characters, in a gentle and agreeable View, without any
Circumstances of Dread or Horror; intimating by this Fiction, that he was
delivered out of all the Tumults and Miseries of Life by two imaginary Deities,
Sleep and Death, who alone can give Mankind Ease and Exemption from their
Misfortunes.

XLVI.
VERSE 847. Who first, brave Hero! etc.] The Poet in a very moving and solemn
way turns his Discourse to Patroclus. He does not accost his Muse, as it is
usual with him to do, but enquires of the Hero himself who was the first, and
who the last, who fell by his Hand? This Address distinguishes and signalizes
Patroclus, (to whom Homer uses it more frequently, than I remember on any other
occasion) as if he was some Genius or divine Being, and at the same time it is
very pathetical and apt to move our Compassion. The same kind of Apostrophe is
used by Virgil to Camilla. Quem telo primum, quem postremum, aspera virgo!
Dejicis? Aut quot humi morientia corpora fundis?


XLVII.
VERSE 904. What skilful Diverse, etc.] The Original is literally thus. It Is
pity he is not nearer the Sea, he would furnish good Quantities of excellent
Oisters, and the Storms would not frighten him; see how he exercises and
plunges from the Top of his Chariot into the Plain! Who would think that there
were such good Diverse at Troy? This seems to be a little too long; and if this
Passage be really Homer's, I could almost swear that he intended to let us
know, that a good Soldier may be an indifferent Jester. But I very much doubt
whether this Passage be his: It is very likely these five last Verses were
added by some of the ancient Critics, whose Caprices Homer has frequently
undergone; or perhaps some of the Rhapsodists, who in reciting his Verses, made
Additions of their own to please their Auditors. And what persuades me of its
being so, is, that it is by no means probable that Patroclus who had lately
blamed Meriones for his little Raillery against Aeneas, and told him; "that
'twas not by Raillery or Invective that they were to repel the Trojans, but by
Dint of Blows; that Council required Words, but War Deeds:" It is by no means
probable, I say, that the same Patroclus should forget that excellent Precept,
and amuse himself with Raillery, especially in the Sight of Hector. I am
therefore of Opinion that Patroclus said no more than this Verse, (...), etc.
Good Gods! what an active Trojan it is, and how cleverly he dives, and that the
five following are Strangers, though very ancient. Dacier.

I must just take notice, that however mean or ill placed these Railleries may
appear, there have not been wanting such fond Lovers of Homer as have admired
and imitated 'em. Milton himself is of this Number, as may be seen from those
very low Jests, which he has put into the Mouth of Satan and his Angels in the
6 th Book. What Aeneas says to Meriones upon his Dancing is nothing so trivial
as those Lines, where after the Displosion of their Diabolical Enginry, Angel
rolling on Archangel, they are thus derided. -- When we propounded Terms
Of Composition, strait they changed their Minds,
Flew off, and into strange Vagaries fell,
As they would dance; yet for a Dance they seemed
Somewhat extravagant and wild, perhaps
For joy of offered Peace -- etc.
-- Terms that amused 'em all,
And stumbled many; who receives them right
Had need from Head to Foot well understand:
Not understood, this Gift they have besides,
They show us when our Foes walk not upright.


XLVIII.
VERSE 952. Apollo, dreadful, etc.] If Homer is resolved to do any thing
extraordinary, or arbitrary, which his Readers may not very well relish, he
takes care however to prepare them by degrees for receiving such Innovations.
He had before given us a Sketch of this Trick of the Gods in the 13 th Book,
where Neptune serves Alcathous much in the same manner. Apollo here carries it
a little farther; and both these are Specimens of what we are to expect from
Minerva at the Death of Hector in Il. 22.

XLIX.
VERSE 1003. Lie there, Patroclus! etc.] There is much Spirit in this Sarcasm
of Hector upon Patroclus: Nor is Achilles exempt from the Severity of the
Reflection, who (as he imagines) had persuaded his dearest Friend to attempt
Exploits that were impracticable. He touches him also, for staying at home in
Security himself, and encouraging Patroclus to undertake this perilous
Adventure, and to seek after Spoils which he was never like to enjoy.
Eustathius.

L.
VERSE 1027. -- Hear my latest Breath,
The Gods inspire in. -- ]
It is an Opinion of great Antiquity, that when the Soul is on the point of
being delivered from the Body, and makes a nearer Approach to the divine
Nature, at such a time its Views are stronger and clearer, and the Mind endowed
with a Spirit of true Prediction. So Artemon of Miletum says in his Book of
Dreams, that when the Soul has collected all its Powers from every Limb and
Part of the Body, and is just ready to be severed from it, at that time it
becomes Prophetical. Socrates also in his Defense to the Athenians, "I am now
arrived at the Verge of Life, wherein it is familiar with People to foretell
what will come to pass." Eustathius.

This Opinion seems alluded to in those admirable Lines of Waller. Leaving the
old, both Worlds at once they view,
Who stand upon the Threshold of the new.


LI.
VERSE 955. The Death of Patroclus.] I sometimes think I am in respect to Homer
much like Sancho Panca with regard to Don Quixote. I believe upon the whole
that no Mortal ever came near him for Wisdom, Learning, and all good Qualities.
But sometimes there are certain Starts which I cannot tell what to make of, and
am forced to own that my Master is a little out of the way, if not quite
besides himself. The present Passage of the Death of Patroclus, attended with
so many odd Circumstances to overthrow this Hero (who might, for all I can see,
as decently have fallen by the Force of Hector) are what I am at a loss to
excuse, and must indeed (in my own Opinion) give them up to the Critics. I
really think almost all those Parts which have been objected against with most
Clamor and Fury, are honestly defensible, and none of 'em (to confess my
private Sentiment) seem to me to be Faults of any Consideration, except this
Conduct in the Death of Patroclus; the Length of Nestor's Discourse in Lib. 11.
the Speech of Achilles's Horse in the 19 th. the Conversation of that Hero with
Aeneas in Lib. 20. the manner of Hector's Flight round the Walls of Troy, and
his Death, in Lib. 22. I hope, after so free a Confession, no reasonable Modern
will think me touched with the (...) of Madam Dacier and others. I am sensible
of the Extremes which Mankind run into, in extolling and depreciating Authors:
We are not more violent and unreasonable in attacking those who are not yet
established into Fame, than in defending those who are, even in every minute
Trifle. Fame is a Debt, which when we have kept from People as long as we can,
we pay with a prodigious Interest, which amounts to twice the Value of the
Principal. Thus it is with ancient Works as with ancient Coins, they pass for a
vast deal more than they were worth at first; and the very Obscurities and
Deformities which Time has thrown upon them, are the sacred Rust, which
enhances their Value with all true Lovers of Antiquity.

But as I have owned what seem my Author's Faults, and subscribed to the
Opinion of Horace, that Homer sometimes nods; I think I ought to add that of
Longinus as to such Negligences. I can no way so well conclude the Notes to
this Book as with the Translation of it.

"It may not be improper to discuss the Question in general, which of the two
is the more estimable, a faulty Sublime, or a faultless Mediocrity? And
consequently, if of two Works, one has the greater Number of Beauties, and the
other attains directly to the Sublime, which of these shall in Equity carry the
Prize? I am really persuaded that the true Sublime is incapable of that Purity
which we find in Compositions of a lower Strain, and in effect that too much
Accuracy sinks the Spirit of an Author; whereas the Case is generally the same
with the Favorites of Nature, and those of Fortune, who with the best Economy
cannot, in the great Abundance they are blessed with, attend to the minuter
Articles of their Expense. Writers of a cool Imagination are cautious in their
Management, and venture nothing, merely to gain the Character of being correct;
but the Sublime is bold and enterprizing, notwithstanding that on every Advance
the Danger increases. Here probably some will say that Men take a malicious
Satisfaction in exposing the Blemishes of an Author; that his Errors are never
forgot, while the most exquisite Beauties leave but very imperfect Traces on
the Memory. To obviate this Objection I will solemnly declare, that in my
Criticisms on Homer and other Authors, who are universally allowed to be
authentic Standards of the Sublime, though I have censured their Failings with as
much Freedom as any one, yet I have not presumed to accuse them of voluntary
Faults, but have gently remarked some little Defects and Negligences, which the
Mind being intent on nobler Ideas did not condescend to regard. And on these
Principles I will venture to lay it down for a Maxim, that the Sublime (purely
on account of its Grandeur) is preferable to all other kinds of Style, however
it may fall into some Inequalities. The Argonauticks of Apollonius are
faultless in their kind; and Theocritus has shown the happiest Vein imaginable
for Pastorals, excepting those in which he has deviated from the Country: And
yet if it were put to your Choice, would you have your Name descend to
Posterity with the Reputation of either of those Poets, rather than with that
of Homer? Nothing can be more correct than the Erigone of Eratosthenes; but is
he therefore a greater Poet than Archilochus, in whose Composures Perspicuity
and Order are often wanting; the divine Fury of his Genius being too impatient
for Restraint, and superior to Law? Again, do you prefer the Odes of
Bacchilides to Pindar's, or the Scenes of Ion of Chios to those of Sophocles?
Their Writings are allowed to be correct, polite, and delicate; whereas, on the
other Hand, Pindar and Sophocles sometimes hurry on with the greatest
Impetuosity, and like a devouring Flame seize and set on Fire whatever comes in
their way; but on a sudden the Conflagration is extinguished, and they most
miserably flag when no body expects it. Yet none have so little Discernment as
not to prefer the single Oedipus of Sophocles to all the Tragedies that Ion
ever brought on the Stage. "In our Decisions therefore on the Characters of
these great Men, who have illustrated what is useful and necessary with all the
Graces and Elevation of Style; we must impartially confess that, with all their
Errors, they have more Perfections than the Nature of Man can almost be
conceived capable of attaining: For it is merely human to excel in other kinds
of Writing, but the Sublime ennobleth our Nature, and makes near Approaches to
Divinity: He who commits no Faults, is barely read without Censure; but a
Genius truly great excites Admiration. In short, the Magnificence of a single
Period in one of these admirable Authors is sufficient to atone for all their
Defects: Nay farther, if any one should collect from Homer, Demosthenes, Plato,
and other celebrated Heroes of Antiquity, the little Errors that have escaped
them; they would not bear the least Proportion to the infinite Beauties to be
met with in every Page of their Writings. It Is on this account that Envy, through
so many Ages, has never been able to wrest from them the Prize of Eloquence
which-their Merits have so justly acquired: An Acquisition which they still
are, and will, in all Probability continue possessed of, As long as Streams in
silver Mazes rove,
Or Spring with annual Green renews the Grove.
Mr. FENTON.



FINIS.

