AN ENGLISH ACCIDENCE; OR, ABSTRACT OF GRAMMAR; For the USE of those who,
Without making GRAMMAR a Study, Wish to Speak and Write correctly. With Rules
for reading Prose and Verse.

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by R. BALDWIN, in Paternoster Row,

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

Dr. TRUSLER begs leave to recommend the following useful books, being
calculated for young people, and may be had of his bookseller, R. Baldwin,
Paternoster Row.

1. A COMPENDIUM of USEFUL KNOWLEDGE, price 3s. a practical book in proper
exercises, for the use of schools; containing a clear and concise explanation
of every thing a young person ought to know.

Such as are acquainted with the contents of this book, will be able to
converse on all the general topics in life.

2. PRINCIPLES of POLITENESS, Parts I. and II. 15th edition, price 3s. half
bound, addressed to both sexes; calculated to form polite manners, teaching a
knowledge of the world, and rendering youth fit to be received into the best
company.

This work has been translated into every European language, and is adopted as
a school-book into the first Academies.

3. The DISTINCTION between WORDS esteemed SYNONIMOUS in the English language;
a new edition, with great additions, price 3s. 6d. Useful to all who would
either write or speak with propriety and elegance.

4. POETIC ENDINGS, or a Dictionary of Rhymes, single and double; comprising
nearly all the words in the English language; price 2s. 6d. Very necessary for
those who are learning to make verses.

5. The FIRST FOUR RULES of ARITHMETIC, p^^^ 1s. adapted to the capacity of
girls, and so clearly a^^ fully explained, as to need no master. Which, (...)

6. FAMILY-TABLES, composed for all purposes life, (price 3s.) render more than
those four rul^^ unnecessary.

7. TRUSLER'S CHRONOLOGY, price 1s. 6d. eleven edition, small enough to lie in
a pocketbook; containing every event in ancient and modern history,
alp^^betically recorded, with the dates affixed. Also,

8. The SAME WORK, more at large; in two volumes, 1210. price 7s. bound.
Calculated for the library and the use of schools.

PREFACE.
ALL Authors of Grammar lay claim to clearness and conciseness, whereas nothing
is more evident than that they have missed of the end proposed; the various
English grammars hitherto published being so complex, and the whole matter made
such a study, that the desideratum sought for is not to be acquired without the
assistance of a master, and the application of years. The design of this
Abstract is to teach a person acquainted with English how to speak and write
correctly, without entering into all the minutiae of Grammar, which serve only
to perplex and confound. The Author aims not at teaching his pupil what words
are particles, what prepositions, and so on; but merely to avoid false concords
and incorrect language; and he flatters himself the few following pages will
answer all the purposes better than more complete or regular systems. He has
also added some few rules for reading, which, if attended to, must lead to
reading well.

ABSTRACT OF ENGLISH GRAMMAR.
Of the denomination of Words.
THE only words necessary to be known grammatically, are Nouns, Pronouns,
Adjectives, Verbs, Adverbs, and Participles.

A Noun is the name of a thing, as Horse, Boat, Knife, etc.

A Pronoun is a substitute for a Noun, as I, he, she, etc.

An Adjective expresses the quality of a Noun, as a sound Horse; an open Boat;
a sharp Knife; here sound, open, and sharp, are Verbs.

A Verb implies the action of the Noun, and an Adverb the action of the Verb,
as the horse gallops, the boat sails, the knife cuts: Here galloping is the
action of the horse; sailing the action of the boat; and cutting the action of
the knife; of course, gallops, sails, and cuts are Verbs.

An Adverb expresses the action of the Verb. Thus the horse gallops quick; the
boat sails briskly; the knife cuts badly. Here quick expresses the action of
galloping; briskly that of sailing, and badly that of cutting; of course quick,
briskly, and badly are Adverbs, that is, addition to Verbs.

A Participle partakes of the qualities of both Noun and Verb, and implies,
acting or being acted on.

These are the different parts of speech, I would wish my pupil to be
acquainted with. I will treat of them in their order.

Of NOUNS.
Nouns Substantives are the general names o^ things, except proper names, which
are particular ones. A horse, for example, is a general name, it may be my
horse or yours, so is a boat, a knife, etc. but proper names are particular
ones, as Thomas, the name of a man: Jolly, the name of a horse, etc. Horse,
boat, knife, etc. then are Nouns.

Nouns have two numbers, the singular and the plural.

The singular number expresses an individual, as a horse, a boat, a knife; the
plural expresses many, as horses, boats, knives, etc.

In other languages Nouns have a variety of cases, that is, vary in their
terminations, but in English there are but two: these correspond with the
genitive and accusative. Thus, instead of the head of a horse, we say, a
horse's head, (not horses, which is the plural number of horse, but horse's,
which we call the genitive case singular); so boat's, knife's, as the boat's
side, the knife's edge.

Plurals ending in s have no genitive cases, we write women's, not women's;
men's, not men's; and so on.

No Nouns have accusative cases, but Pronouns; these vary their terminations
when they follow or are acted upon by verbs.

I preceding a verb, is changed to me when following one.

We to us. Thou to thee or you. Ye to you. He to him. She to her. They to them.
Who to whom.
Thus we say, " I love you." I here precedes the verb love; but I could not
follow the same verb with propriety, it would be rendered me. We should not say
"You love I," but "you love me." So again, " Thou love me;" "I love thee."
Thou before the verb, thee after it. " We love God;" "God loves us;" and so on.

The words who and whom require a little further explanation. We say, "Kings
are personages whom we revere." Here, though, in the present mode of speech,
whom precedes the verb revere, it is nevertheless used in the accusative case,
being the word which the verb revere governs and acts upon, answering to them,
when we say "we revere them." So in the following example: "William was the
person who came to me." Here the pronoun who precedes the verb came, and
governs it. "William was the person to whom I spoke." Here whom, though it
precedes, or is placed, before the verb spoke, (to render it more agreeable to
the ear) is governed or acted on by it.

English Nouns are then thus declined, none having accusative cases but the
Pronouns.

Sing. Horse Genesis Horse's Plur. Horses. Sing. Boat Genesis Boat's Plur. Boats.

Note, The genitive case implies of or belonging to

The word whose is sometimes used as the genitive of which, and chiefly in
poetry.

" -- The fruit
"Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
"Brought death into the world."
MILTON But of which is now most common. "The matters of which I spoke." Though
whose may be used with propriety, when it refers to persons; as "This is the
young woman whose worth I know."

The genitive of the other Pronouns are as follow:

I Genesis mine or my Thou Genesis thine or thy He Genesis his She Genesis hers we Genesis
ours or our ye Genesis yours or your they Genesis theirs or their It Genesis its

Mine, thine, ours, yours or theirs, may be used without a noun annexed, but
my, thy, our, your, their, never. Thus, "Whose book is this?" The answer may be
mine, or thine, or ours, or yours, or theirs, alone; but if we use my, thy,
our, your, or their, we must add the noun book to it, a say, my book, thy book,
our book, your book, or their book.

When the word own is added to the pronouns my, thy, his, hers, our, your, or
their, it is to render the expression more emphatical; as, "I live in my own
house;" "I did it with my own hand." etc.

The plural number is formed, by adding s at the end of the singular number, as
in the following:

Sing. Plur. Sing. Plur. House Houses Table Tables Walk Walks Sister Sisters
Stool Stools Outrage Outrages, etc. Lance Lances

But there are some exceptions to this general rule, as the following irregular
plurals will show.

Sing. Plur. Sing. Plur. Loaf Loaves Foot Feet Calf Calves Church Churches
Shelf Shelves Fish Fishes Half Halves Box Boxes Self Selves Ox Oxen Sheaf
Sheaves Man Men Thief Thieves Sow Swine Wife Wives Child Children Wolf Wolves
Brother Brethren Knife Knives Woman Women Louse Lice Penny Pence Mouse Mice
Body Bodies Die Dice Mercy Mercies Goose Geese Enemy Enemies Tooth Teeth
Witness Witnesses, etc. and This These That Those

The singular and plural of some few words are the same, as sheep, deer, fern,
hose, in which case the singular number is pointed out by a going before them,
as a sheep, a deer.

Some words also have no singular number, as annals, arms, ashes, bellows,
breeches, cresses, entrails, ides, lungs, means, nones, scissars, sheers,
snuffers, thanks, tongs, wages, dregs, news, etc.

Proper names of men, cities, rivers, countries, etc. have no plurals. This
rule, however, is not without some exceptions. We say, "There were ten Williams
in company." And when speaking of families, we say, the Marlboroughs, the
Cavendishes, the Howards, etc.

I can, at no better time, mention the proper use of the pronouns who, which,
and what, as interrogatives or not.

Who is used only when speaking of persons, as, " Who is that man, or that
woman?" Which, when we speak of things, as, " Which is your cane? What, when we
are speaking of the kind, quality, or order of persons or things, as, " What
lady is that?" " What house is this?" " What (or which) place do you choose?"

When who and which are not interrogatives, that is, do not ask a question,
they are used with the same distinction, that is, who for persons, and which
for things. We say, "William was the person who came to me." "This is the horse
which I bought."

Now we are upon the subject of nouns, it is proper to say something of gender.

There are three genders the male, female, and neuter.

The male and female distinguish the two sexes; whereas the neuter is applied
to things without life, as not properly belonging to either of the other, as
table, st^ne, rock, etc.

When we speak of the male gender, we use the pronoun he; when of the female
gender, she; when of the neuter, it. Thus, The bridegroom, he came from the
barn;
The bride, she came in from the field;
The table, it fell on the floor.


We indeed deem most things that contain any thing within them to be of the
female gender, as the earth, a ship, a house, etc. and in poetry, where writers
will frequently give slight to their fancy, and personify inanimate substances,
they are deemed o the male or female gender, according to the idea of the Poet.
Thus Death, Time, the Sun, etc. are generally of the male gender; Faith, Hope,
Charity, etc. of the female, as being of the softer virtues.

But our language, in many instances, save us the necessity of adding pronouns
to express genders, for we often distinguish the different sexes by distinct
words; as for example,

Male. Female. Male. Female. Father Mother Sloven Slut Husband Wife Man Woman
Brother Sister Rake Jilt Uncle Aunt Boar Sow Widower Widow Buck Do Master
Mistress Cock Hen Nephew Niece Dog Bitch Wizzard Witch Drake Duck Bachelor Maid
or Virgin Gander Goose Horse Mare Bridegroom Bride Ram Ewe Whoremonger Whore or
Strumpet. Steer Heifer Boy Girl Bull Cow King Queen Lad Lass Lord Lady Duke
Duchess Milter Spawner etc.

There are also some few words, which distinguish the female sex from the male,
by the ending; Male Female. Male. Female. Abbot Abbess Shepherd Shepherdess
Actor Actress Executor Executrix Baron Baroness Administrator Aministratrix
Heir Heiress Prior Prioress etc. Lion Lioness

Where there are no words to distinguish the sexes, we frequently add one to
answer the purpose. Thus we say, a male-child, a female-child, a he-goat, a
she-goat, a man servant, a maidservant, a cock-sparrow, a hen-sparrow, or the
like.

Of ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives are words which cannot stand alone, but are added to nouns to
express their quality, as black, white, wise, foolish, round, square, etc. Thus
we say, a black dog, a wise man, a round table.

There are three degrees of Adjectives, called degrees of Comparison, the
positive, comparative, and superlative.

1. The positive degree is the quality itself, simply, as black, white, wise,
etc. 2. The comparative expresses more of any one thing than another, and is
formed by adding er to the positive, as blacker, whiter, wiser: sometimes,
instead of saying blacker, we say more black; for white, more white; for wiser,
more wise, etc. 3. The superlative degree implies the highest, and is formed ^y
the termination es^, or the (...) most before the positive. Thus blackest,
(...) black; whitest, or most white; wisest or mo^^ (...)
Some superlatives are formed, by adding (...) most as a termination; thus
nether (...) outer, outermost; under, undermost; upper, uppermost; in, inner,
innermost, etc.

Many Adjectives do not admit of comparison by terminations, but are only
compared by more and most, as benevolent, more benevolent, most benevolent.
Some authors have used shadiest, virtuousest, famousest, mortalest,
naturallest, powerfullest, inventivest, triflingest, etc. but these are
liberties which every one cannot take, and are inelegant after all.

Some again are irregularly compared, as,

Positive. Compar. Superl. Good Better Best Bad Worse Worst Little Less Least
Near Nearer Nearest Much More Most Late Later Last

Indeed, the comparison of Adjectives is very uncertain, and being much
regulated by the ear or agreeableness of sounds, cannot well be reduced to
rules.

When a noun is substituted for an adjective, and added to another noun by
hyphen (-), such two words are called compound words, as Turkey-Leather,
Mountain-wine, manservant, seafish, etc.

Of VERBS.
Verbs, as I observed, express the action of Nouns.

A Verb is said to have several moods and tenses. We shall have occasion only
to name the Infinitive mood, which is known by the word to preceding it, as to
love, to hate, etc. and two of the Tenses, the present, and the past: these two
are expressed by terminations, the other tenses are expressed (...) the
auxiliary verbs shall, will, and have, precedin^ them, of course it is not
necessary to mention ther^ as we have nothing to do but with the right use
words themselves.

The present time or tense is expressed by the ve^^ itself, as burn, love,
hate; the past time by the termination ed, as burned, loved, hated.

A Verb has also three persons, 1st, 2d, and 3^^ and, like Nouns, two numbers,
singular and plur^^.

The three persons in the singular of verbs are thou, and he or she; in the
plural, We, ye, a^^ they. Thus, Persons. Present tense, singular. 1. I love 2.
Thou love 3. He or she loves or love^ Plural. 1. We love 2. Ye love 3. They
love. Past time, singular. 1. I loved 2. Thou lovedst 3. He or she loved.
Plural. 1. We loved 2. Ye loved 3. They loved. Infinitive mood. To love.
Participle present. Loving. -- past. Loved.

There are two sorts of verbs, active and passive. (...) love is a verb active;
to be loved, a verb passive; (...) still, according to my first definition of a
verb, (...) love, or be loved, implies the action of the person ^^ving.

The passive verb is formed by the addition of the ^^xiliary or assisting verb,
to be. Thus, in the pre^^nt tense or time, Sing. I am, thou art, he or she is.
Plur. We are or be, ye are or be, they are or be. Past tense or time. Sing. I
was, thou wast or was, he or she was. Plur. We were, ye were, they were.
Participle present. Being. -- past. Having been. Infinitive mood. To be.

Now, by adding the word love to each, it will (...) thus: I am loved,
Thou wast loved,
He was loved, etc.
And so through the whole.


The other auxiliary verbs are have, shall, will, (...), may, can. Have being
the principal, we will (...) through the tenses of this.

Present tense or time. Sing. I have, thou have, he or she has or has. Plur.
We have, ye have, they have. Past tense. Sing. I had, thou had, he or she
had. Plur. We had, ye had, they had. Participle present. Having. -- past. Had.
Infinitive mood. To have.

There is still another form of English ver^^ in, which the sign of the
Infinitive mood to added to the verb do, which it is necessary to learn.

Present tense. Sing. I do, thou do, he or she does. Plur. We do, ye do, they
do. Past tense. Sing. I did, thou did, he or she did. Plur. We did, ye did,
they did.

In the subsequent tenses, did is changed to do I have done, I had done, etc.

Infinitive mood. To do; or to have done. Participle present. Doing. -- past.
Done.

By rapid utterance, or poetical contraction, love is often used for loved;
snatched for snatch^^ dwelt for dwelled; smelt for smelled; and so on.

But not to multiply rules, and burden the learner's memory with terms, the
following list of regular Verbs in their present and past tenses w^^^ be
sufficient to instruct. These he should well ^^member.

Present time. Past. Participle. Awake awoke awoke Abide abode abode Be been
being, been Bend bent bent Bear bore, bare borne Begin began begun Present
time. Past. Participle. Bereave bereft bereft Beseech besought besought Beat
beat beaten, beat Bind bound bound Bite bit bitten Bleed bled, blooded bled
Blow blew blown Break broke broken Breed bred bred Bring brought brought Buy
bought bought Catch caught, catched caught Chide chid chidden Choose chose
chosen Cleave clave, clove cleft, cloven Come came come Creep crept, creeped
crept Crow crew, crowed crown Dare dared, durst dared Die died dead Do did done
Draw drew drawn Dream dreamed, dreamt dreamt Drank drank drunk Drive drove
driven Dwell dwelled, dwelt dwelt Eat eat, ate eaten, eat Fall fell fallen Feed
fed fed Feel felt felt Fight fought fought Find found found Flee fled fled
Fling flung flung Present time. Past. Participle. Fly flew, fled flown Forsake
forsook forsaken Freight freighted fraught Geld gelded, gelt gelt, gelded Get
got gotten, got Give gave given Gild gilded, gilt gilded, gilt Gird girded,
girt girded, girt Grind ground ground Go went gone Grow grew grown Hang hung,
hanged hung Have had had, having Hear heard heard Help helped, helped helped Hew
hewed hewn Hid hid hidden, hid Hold held holden Keep kept kept Know knew known
Lay laid laid Lead led led Leave left left Leap leaped, leapt leapt Lie lay
lain Lose lost lost Make made made Mean meant meant Mow mowed mown Meet met met
Rend rent rent Ride rode, rid ridden Ring rang rung Rise rose risen Present
time. Past. Participle. Run ran run Say said said See saw seen Seek sought
sought Seethe sod sodden Sell sold sold Send sent sent Shake shook shaken Shear
sheared, shore shorn Show showed shown Shine shined shone Shoot shot shot
Shrunk shrank shrunk Sing sang sung Sink sank, sunk sunk Sit sat sat Slay slew
slain Slide slid slidden Sleep slept slept Sling slang slung Smell smelt smelt
Smite smote smitten Speak spoke spoken Spell spelled, spelt spelt Spill
spilled, spilt spilt Spend spent spent Spin span spun Spit spat spun Spring
sprang sprung Stand stood stood Stick stuck stuck Sting stung stung Steal stole
stolen Stink stank stunk Present time. Past. Participle. Strike struck stricken
Strive strove striven Swear swore sworn Sweep sweeped, swept swept Swell
swelled swollen Swing swang, swung swung Swim swam, swum swum Take took took,
taken Tear tore torn Teach taught taught Tell told told Think thought thought
Thrive throve thriven Throw threw thrown Tread trod trodden Weep wept wept Win
won won Wind wound wound Wear wore worn Weave wove woven Write wrote, writ
written, writ Work worked, wrought wrought Wring wrung wrung

These rules premised, the great art in writing and speaking correctly, is to
avoid false concords; that is, the singular number must never be coupled with
the plural, etc. Also, 1. The noun or pronoun, and the verb following it, must
be of the same number and person. We must not say, I were, I being the first
person, were the second, but I am, both in the first person; neither should we
say, thou were, thou being singular, and were plural, but thou were, both
singular. 2. We must take care to use the proper word to express the right
time, whether it be present or past. In the irregular verbs, the foregoing list
will point out the word, in the regular ones, the termination ed will always
express the past time. Thus, for example, we must not say, "he breaked the
bowl," but broke it; not "he come home," but came. 3. In the use of the words
this and that, which in the plural number are these and those, we must take
care that they agree with the number of he word they refer to. We must not say
this men or that men, the one being singular, the other plural, but this or
that man, these or those men. But where a noun has no singular number, we may
add this or that to the plural of such words: thus we may say with propriety,
"by this or that means." So nouns wanting a singular number are sometimes
joined to a verb singular, but inelegantly, as, "the news is sta^e;" "your
wages is small." 4. Two or more names or things in the singular number, require
the verb to be in the plural. Thus "William and John are (not is) good lads,"
"The sun and wind overcame (not overcome) me." 5. Names of a multitude may have
either a singular or a plural verb. Thus we may say, "The Parliament is or are
sitting." 6. When two or more nouns, of different numbers, follow each other
with the word or or nor between them, and are equally related to a common verb;
the verb should agree with the noun next it. For example, "Either the husband,
the wife, or their children, are in the house", "Neither the husband, the
children, nor the wife, is in the house.". 7. Two negatives make an
affirmative. "I was not good for nothing," implies, "It was good so something."
"I cannot eat no more," means, "can eat more." 8. The participle present is
frequently substituted for the In^initive mood of a verb, and with elegance.
Thus, instead of "I like to work," we may say "I like working." "For he
delights to walk, we may say, "He delights in walking." 9. After the auxiliary
verb have, it would be improper to put the past time; the participle should
always follow. Thus, it would be ingrammatica^ to say, "I have saw, or "I have
wrote;" it should be, "I have seen," or "I have written." 10. When the leading
adverbs are whether o^ either, or must follow in the same sentence; where the
leading adverb is neither, nor must follow Thus, "Whether you or I shall go, is
not yet determined." "Either your or I must ride." "Neither you nor I must
speak." 11. All repetitions of the same word, nay of words which express the
same thing, are carefully to ^voided, except when the sense would be otherwise
obscure, or when it is to excite the attention. For example, a repetition of
the word from in the following sentence is allowable: the passage would not be
clear without it. "It proceeds not from stupidity, or a slothful neglect, but
from a generous liberality of soul. When it is to excite attention, a
repetition is beautiful. "Every action, nay every attention, every design of
man, is known to the Almighty." 12. With respect to Adjectives, none should be
used but such as are necessary to explain the subject more fully. To say
burning or shining fire, is inelegant, because the first idea of fire is, that
it burns and shines; but if necessary, we may employ adjectives to express its
other qualities, as consuming, sparkling, brisk, etc.


In short, the words of a sentence ought generally to be as different from one
another, both in sense and sound, as the nature of the subject and the harmony
of the period will admit. On this the beauty of a sentence depends, the sound
being, as it were, an echo to the sense, and, independent of this, on the
smoothness of the words, the choice of adjectives, and the easy flow of its
diction. And in general, the shorter the period, the more nervous and
emphatical it is.

An OBSERVATION or two on WRITING and READING.
In writing, never use capital letters to begin a word, unless it be a proper
name, or at the beginning of a sentence. Note, A full stop, or note of
admiration (!) or interrogation (?), always ends a sentence.

If you quote an Author in his own words, always begin the quotation with a
capital letter.

The word I or Oh should be always written with a capital. Every word you wish
to mark as emphatic, should begin with a capital, and have a line drawn under
it; thus, Mark.

In order to read well, 1. Every one should read in an easy familiar tone, as
if he were speaking, (expect it be a prayer, in which case, a degree of
solemnity is required) and should adapt his voice to the subject matter he is
reading. 2. When reading, cast your eye forwards to the words following, that
you may have seen them before you are to pronounce them. This will prevent
stammering, or a disagreeable pause. 3. Attend to the stops, and pause at a
comma, (,) whilst you can count one; at a semicolon, (;) two; at a colon, (:)
three; and at a full stop, (.) four, Notes of interrogation (?) and admiration,
(!) are full stops. A line (thus, --) intimates a longer pause than that of
full stop, and at every fresh paragraph we are to pause longer still. 4. Never
fetch or draw the breath, where there is no stop; nor pass a stop without a
pause. Pause proportionably at every stop, utter each word distinctly, sound
the last letter of every word, read slow, and you will read very intelligibly.
5. In reading a sentence, the voice should be gently raised, until you get to
the middle, (and the middle of a sentence is generally marked with a colon) and
then should gradually fall to the end of it: but take care, that at the end of
a sentence, you drop not the voice too low, so as not to be well heard to the
last word. 6. In questions and passages of admiration, the voice should not
fall, as at a full stop, but be kept up higher and higher to the end. 7. To
give spirit and energy to a sentence, the leading or principal word, should be
pronounced emphatically. To find out which is the emphatical word, consider the
chief design of the writer, and that word which shows such design most, is the
word to be uttered emphatically.


When a noun is the emphatical word, and attended with an adjective, the stroke
of the voice should be on the noun, and the adjective be only swelled; unless
it appears that the stress is to be laid on the adjective. The emphatic words
in the following passage are printed in Italics.

Hail, Source of Beings! universal Soul
Of Heaven and Earth, essential Presence, hail!
But where two words are set in opposition to each other, and one is pronounced
emphatically, the other should be so too; as in the sentence. "If they attack,
we will attack; for our cause is as good as theirs."

The emphasis is of such importance in reading and speaking, that wrong placing
it may alter the sense materially. The following line is an old example upon
this subject.

Will you ride to town today?

By laying the emphasis on will, the answer may be yes or no.

By laying it on you, the answer may be, " No, but my son will."

By laying it on ride, the answer may be, "I intend to walk."

By placing it on the word town, the answer may be, "No, I shall ride to my
farm."

And laying it on today, the answer may be, "Not until tomorrow."

Last of all, lay no emphasis on words where there should none be laid; for
this is as great a mark of ignorance, as not laying it where it should be laid.

Rules for reading English verse.

The general rule is to pronounce it, as if it were prose, but with more
deliberation; to observe the stops with great exactness, placing the accent
whe^^ it ought to be placed, (as will be shown hereafter and the emphasis upon
the proper words on each line. Though there should be no stop at the end of the
line, the reader should pause whilst he can count one, merely to give notice to
the hearer that the line is ended; and if the last word will bear two sounds,
(as words ending in y will) give it tha^ which chymes best with its sister
line. I mean that line with which it is designed to rhyme.

For example,

Were I but once from bondage free,
I Would never sell my liberty.
Here ty in liberty, is sounded as tee; but in the following line it should be
sounded as ti.

My soul ascends above the sky,
And triumphs in her liberty.
However, whether pronounced as tee or ti, the last syllable should be so
feebly uttered, as not to fix any stop or accent upon it.

If verse be read with the above attention, and still sound harsh upon the ear;
the fault is not in the reader, but the poet, for those verses are not well
penned, that cannot be read gracefully by the common rules of pronunciation.

In verses of three syllables, the accent is to be placed on the 1st and 3d.
Thus, Here we may
Think and pray,
Ere that Death
Stops our breath.


In verses of four syllables, the accent is to be placed on the 2d and 4th.
Thus, With ravished ears,
The Monarch hears.
DRYDEN.

In verses of six syllables, on every other syllable. Thus, Though in the
utmost peak
Awhile we do remain,
Amongst the mountains bleak,
Exposed to sleet or rain,
No sport nor hours shall break,
To exercise our vein.
DRAYTON.

In verses of seven syllables, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, and 7th. Thus, Fairest
piece of well-form'd earth
Urge not thus your haughty birth.


In those of eight, which is the usual measure of short poems, on the 2d, 4th,
6th, and 8th. Thus, And may at last my weary age
Find out the peaceful Hermitage.
MILTON.

In those of ten, which is heroic or tragic poetry on the 2d, 4th, 6th, 8th,
and 10th. Thus, Confused and chiding, like the hollow roar
Of tides, receding from the insulted shore.
DRYDEN.

In those of twelve syllables, on every other syllable, beginning with the 2d.

Of all the Cambrian shires their heads that bea so high,
And farthst survey their soils with an ambitiou^ eye,
Mervinia for her hills, as for their matchles^ crowds,
The nearest that are said to kiss the wandering clouds,
Especial audience craves, offended with the throng,
That she, of all the rest, neglected was so long
DRAYTON In those of fourteen, as in those of twelve Thus,
And as the mind of such a man that has a long way gone,
And either knows not his way, or else would let alone
His purposed journey, is distract.
CHAPMAN The verse of fourteen syllables is now broken inalternate lines of
eight and six. Thus, When all shall praise, and every lay
Devote a wreath to thee
That day; for come it will, that day
Shall I lament to see.


The Alexandrine verse of twelve syllables is now (...) used to diversify
heroic lines of ten. Thus, Waller was smooth, but Dryden taught to join
The varying verse, the full-resounding line,
The long majestic march -- and energy divine.


In pronouncing this line of twelve syllables, the ^^ce must pause at the end
of the sixth.

In verses of quick measure, the words are ac^^^ted as below.

May I govern my passions with absolute sway,
And grow wiser and better, as lise wears away.
So again, Diogenes surly and proud.
I think not of Iris, nor Iris of me.


So in verses with double rhymes,
They neither added nor confounded;
They neither wanted nor abounded.
'Twas when the seas were roaring
With hollow blasts of wind,
A damsel lay deploring
All on a rock reclined.
When terrible tempests assail us,
And mountainous billows affright,
Nor power nor wealth can avail us,
But skilful Industry steers right.
For resistance I could fear none,
But with twenty ships had done
What thou, brave and happy Vernon,
Have atcchiev'd with six alone.
FINIS.

