AN ESSAY On the POWER of NATURE and ART, IN Curing DISEASES: To which are
annexed Impartial REFLECTIONS ON JAMES's POWDER.

Victus and Natura curant Morbos, Medicus utriasque Minister est, proinde si
Naturam juveris, Medici man^s praestiteris. Id enim solum est Officium Medici.
Si Naturam succumbere permiseris, nihil egeris, and Carnificem magis quam
Medicum repraesentabis.

Damasceni Aphor. Unicum saltem Arcanum est, and quod re vera Arcanum est,
Embiricis sum necessarium, prudens applicandi remediorum ratio.

Hoffman de vera Medic. in morb. virtute. LONDON Printed For W. OWEN, at
Temple Bar. 1753.

[Price One Shilling.]

PREFACE.
THE medical reader will readily discover part of the following Essay, to be
extracted from the works of the celebrated Hoffman, a name well known to the
learned world.

The observations it is apprehended will be supported by the authorities Vid.
Hippocrates, Celsus, Caelius Aurelianus, Lommius, Sydenham, Baglivi, Hoffman,
Friend, Mead, Bacon, Boil, etc. to whom we have not constantly referred, in
order to avoid prolixity, except where the nature of the subject absolutely
require their own words; but the sentiments of these authors, will easily be
discovered in the abstract, by those acquainted with them.
produced, the universal assent of all the rationalists in physic, and indeed
we hope of every rational man.

A plain and perspicuous style is what we have chiefly aimed at, in order to
adapt the subject, to the comprehension of every reader; and we cannot help
wishing this method more frequently pursued by physical writers, that the
medical study might be rendered more entertaining and general: for we are
thoroughly satisfied, the art would be no sufferer thereby, but the imputations
it is charged with, as an obsure, perplexing study, by this means banished, and
itself receive new luster, in proportion to its being more diffused.

The many errors so frequently committed in the administering of Nostrums,
Universal Medicines, and particularly for some time past, of James's powder,
induced us to point out to the favorers of such medicines, the inconveniences
and danger, they sometimes expose themselves too, by their imprudence, and
credulity; in attaching themselves to this, or any other medicine, without
proper restrictions.

To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader
better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own
health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the
influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical
assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.

Should we have set this affair in a clearer light, than it has yet appeared
in, to the generality, our design will be sufficiently answered, and as truth
and impartiality were our chief motives, we shall as little regard censure, as
we court applause;

Content, if hence the unlearned their wants may view, The learned reflect on
what before they knew.

AN ESSAY ON THE Power of NATURE and ART, IN Curing DISEASES, etc.
NOTwithstanding the indefatigable labors of so many able men, for more than
two thousand years past, to bring the art of physic to a degree of perfection
the other sciences have attained; notwithstanding the great progress, that has
been made in many branches of this art; and how enlightened soever we may have
been by the improvements and discoveries of the last century; yet it must be
confessed, that the cure of many diseases, is not yet arrived to a degree of
perfection; or is infallibility ever like to be an attribute of physic. To
free a man from pain, and to save him from destruction, is in itself noble and
god-like, nor is it to be wondered, that the first physicians were deified, or
that those, who have excelled in this art since, have been highly esteemed and
honored; for as in natural things, the sun is the author and fountain of life,
so the physician who preserves life, seems a second origin thereof. Lord
Bacon's doctrine of the human body. Shaw's edit. Sect. 9. vol. 1.
Yet happy would it be for mankind, if a more expeditious method of curing some
fevers could be discovered, consistent with the patients safety? What
emoluments and applauses would that man deserve of his country, whose studies
had been so fortunate to discover a medicine, which had the power of checking
the exorbitance of a fever, eluding its force, and entirely eradicating the
latent cause? How happy, I say, if this could be effected without waiting the
tedious course, nature is sometimes observed to take, in fitting and preparing
the febrile matter for a separation, and expulsion from the blood, in order to
a salutary crisis; or if even those assistances art has hitherto employed, in
accelerating these crises, or rendering them unnecessary, could be effected
with less danger.

Such a pursuit and study is undoubtedly laudable and beneficent, and though the
whole science may be too abstruse, and extensive, for the human mind to
comprehend; Of all the things that nature has created, the human body is most
capable of relief; though this relief be the most liable to error. For as the
subtilty, and variety of the subject affords many opportunities of cure; so
likewise great facility of mistake. And therefore, as this art, especially at
present, stands among the most conjectural ones, so the enquiry into it, is to
be placed among the most subtle and difficult. Lord Bacon, ib.
though, like the philosopher's stone, and longitude, it seems attended with
insuperable difficulties; yet, when discoveries, in particular branches, are
offered to us with modesty, candor, and impartiality, abstracted from
mercenary views, or the arts of designing men; they certainly merit our notice,
and strongly demand our attention: but should we find they want these intrinsic
characters, these genuine marks of truth; that they are supported by the
sophistry of the artful and designing, or protected by the bigottry of
credulous and improper judges; sure it becomes high time to unmask the
impostors, and detect the chicanerie; especially in so important a cause as
that, wherein our healths and lives are so principally concerned: for as all
ages have abounded with false pretenders, who have deluded the unwary, under
the specious appearance of serving the public, so medical impositions have
been more notorious, and successful: nor indeed is it to be wondered at, that
this tribe should be so numerous and prevalent, when such encouragements are
given them; and when we consider how few are qualified to judge properly,
either of diseases, or remedies; or to distinguish between the powers of art,
and the influence of nature.

These are the chief points we shall endeavor to render more obvious and
familiar, for it is neither our design, or intention, to enquire into the
causes, which have retarded this wished for perfection; or to point out the
obstacles, which by some are thought to have impeded the completion of so noble
a fabric, after so fair a foundation laid by our predecessors of old: we shall
therefore first observe, that possibly an invariable method of curing diseases,
can never be laid down, so long as different temperaments of the air, climates,
seasons, and constitutions, are so frequently introducing new and various
diseases; which, though often in many respects similar to others, which have
preceeded them, yet do they differ from them very essentially, and of course
require very different treatment. Without having recourse to the authorities of
such sagacious writers, as Hippocrates, Sydenham, Boerhaave, Hoffman, etc.
whose accurate and faithful observations would be indisputable in such a point;
Who is there capable of making proper remarks in practice, to whom this truth
has not occurred? And who but from hence must have been convinced, that in the
direction of medicine, due attention must be paid to particular symptoms,
without being slavishly attached to particular forms?

But as the diligent observers Vid. Hippocrates, de morb. vulg. Lib. vi. Sect.
v. Celsus lib. 3. chapter 1. Lommii com. de sanit. tuend. Sydenham chap. of the
continued fevers of 1673-4-5. Swan 's edit. p. 197. Hoffman in variis locis.
Baglivi. chapter 1. Boerhaavi orat: de commendando stud. Hippocrates Van Sweiten in
aphorism. Boerhaavi in variis locis.
of nature's laws, ingenuously confess, that in many cases she is her own, and
best physician; and that we often attribute effects to wrong causes, by
charging that to the remedy, which is due only to her own efforts; it may be
necessary to consider how far nature may be said to cure diseases, unassisted
by art; to point out when it is in her power to relieve herself, and when
without the help of art, she would destroy herself; and this will naturally
lead us to the true study of the medical art.

As the word nature is variously defined, we desire to be understood by it, the
laws of motion, originally implanted in the machine, in order to set it in
action, and preserve it so; by this natural mechanism of our bodies, whatever
prove injurious to us is often thrown off some way, or other, provided the
course of nature be not interrupted. This power of nature is so extraordinary
in some constitutions, that in spite of all the blunders that are frequently
committed, men recover even from the most dangerous fevers.

That we may the better judge of the nature of a disease, or fever, it may by
some perhaps be thought no useless digression, to enquire wherein health
consists, that by a proper definition of the term, we may the better
understand, when it is perverted, and by what means, either of nature, or art,
it is again restored.

The health then of every animal body depends on a regular, moderate, and
equable circulation, of a proper conditioned blood, a due secretion, and
execretion, of the juices or humors from it, and a proper degree of elasticity
in the solids. This circulation once disturbed, and these secretions once
perverted, are the cause of almost all diseases. Thus from obstructed
perspiration, or sweats suddenly suppressed, the fluids that should freely flow
off through the pores and glands of the skin, recoil on the blood, increase its
quantity, and pervert its quality: a redundancy of bile, or an undue secretion
of it in the liver, becomes productive of many and various diseases, such as
bilious cholics, jaundices, inflammations of the liver, St. Anthony's fire,
fevers, and many other disorders arising from its acrimony and stimulus. From
this specimen, we may judge of the ill effects, which are the consequence of
the rest; for whenever these secretions are not regularly carried on, the
constitution is sure to be injured; and these humors or juices so amicable
before, by being now depraved, are made capable of producing an infinity of
disorders.

We come now to explain, what we mean by nature curing diseases, and how or by
what ways she effects this purpose and here among many others she takes, to
remove an offending enemy, brought on frequently by a suppression of one, or
other, of the above secretions; if the cause be slight, she frequently throws
off the load of impure serum, by the glands of the nose and fauces, by coughs,
a looseness, urine, and sweats; which if untimely suppressed by art, are sure
to bring life in danger, or at least foretell a future disease. But her most
general method, when the disease is more important, is by raising a fever for
her relief, and increasing the motion of the circulating fluids; Vid. Hale's
Haemastaticks, vol. ii. P. 101.
by this means she removes obstructions, which threaten life; by this the
superfluous, impure, and viscid fluids, which choke up the vessels, are
attenuated, dispersed, and thrown off by urine, stool, or perspiration: in
other cases, when the vessels are too turgid, she often relieves their
distending fullness, by bursting open their mouths, and bringing on a salutary
bleeding, by those of the nase, uterus, and anus; and thus delivers berself
from the oppressive load.

These are some of the ways she takes to relieve herself in acute disorders, as
fevers: nor is she sometimes less successful, in the cure of old, stubborn, and
chronical diseases; Asthma's of long standing have been cured by a St.
Anthony's fire thrown out on the surface; epilepsies by scorbutic eruptions;
and even melancholy and madness by the piles. However it must be confessed that
the power of nature is not so often manifest in the cure of chronic, as acute
disorders, which latter are often effected solely by her own means, as the
former generally are by art.

After having taken notice of the various ways nature takes to relieve herself,
and observed, that the most grievous diseases are sometimes happily terminated
and cured, without medical assistance; few arguments can be thought necessary
to enforce this study of nature and her laws, as preferable to any other; for
if it is most certain, that nature often prevails over art, which should always
be her assistant and imitator, we may justly conclude, that the method by which
nature alone cures diseases should be studied, as worthy our imitation, and
more particular regard.

For whoever does not attend to natures motions in relieving her, will most
certainly do her great injury; which is frequently the case with those, who
before the febrile matter is moveable and dissolved, or prepared for
separation, endeavor to expel it untimely, and by ways neither adapted to that
purpose, or to which she has any tendency herself. Thus as Hoffman observes *
it is to be lamented, that we every day see unskillful physicians, trusting too
much to their NOSTRUMS, without having any regard to indications, method, or
time, with respect to the disease, and thereby often bring the patient into
extreme danger; but if nature be powerful enough to elude the force of the
medicine, and triumph over the disease, they then arrogantly boast of the
importance of the cure, and gain both fame and rewards by their rashness; but
such imprudent men are not to be trusted, for sure it is not the least part of
the physicians art, to know the course, genius, and salutary ways of nature,
that he may not disturb her operations, or assist her improperly.

But notwithstanding this power of nature in curing diseases, it is evident
there are many, where she wants assistance, and would often destroy herself
without timely relief, by the very means she endeavors for her preservation;
the symptoms brought F. Hoffman, opera omnia phisico medica fol. de natura and
art. officac. vol. vi. p. 261.
on by her own efforts, being often more dangerous than the disease itself; so
that in many diseases, a great part of the physicians work, is to appease her
fury, and correct her errors; for being sometimes transported as it were, with
a blind and impetuous passion, she unseasonable produces those dangerous,
disorders in the body, that demand the succor of art. Thus to what salutary
purpose are those violent spasms which arise from some poisons taken
internally, but to retain the enemy, she wants to expel? Of what use to her,
are those various convulsions, which arise from flatulencies and worms in the
bowels? To what purpose those direful pains, those vehement, and acute fevers,
which arise from the slightest injury, or puncture of nerve, or tendon?
Certainly these enormous commotions are worse than the cause, for whose sake
according the Helmontians, they were by provident nature appointed for her
relief; for unless art soon runs to her assistance, they will most inevitably
bring her into great danger, if not destroy her. What succor can nature bring
to fixed inflammations of the head, lungs, uterus, etc. without the help of
art. The venereal lues was never cured by nature. The dry and bilious cholic,
with some others, require the immediate assistance of art: inveterate
schrophulous, scorbutic, and leprous disorders, nature never removed. The gout,
epilepsy, madness, dropsies, gravel and stone, worms, and many other disorders
that might be enumerated, though all of them are strong proofs of the little
power nature has over them, yet many of them are known to be cured by the
efficacy of medicine, and all of them have been alleviated thereby. In short
with Mr. Boil, Free inquiry into the vulgar notion of nature Shaw's edit. p.
143.
we may look on a good physician, not properly as a servant to nature, but a
counselor, and a friendly assistant; who in his patients body furthers those
motions, and other things, that he judges conducive to the welfare and recovery
of it; but as to those he perceives likely to be hurtful, either by increasing
the disease, or otherwise endangering the patient, he thinks it is his part to
oppose or hinder, though nature manifestly seems to endeavor to increase, or
carry on those hurtful motions. Thus many of the miseries, to which human
nature is subject, may be relieved by proper assistances, and with Asclepiades
we may say, naturam et prodesse and nocere.

It may be necessary to observe here, that though art is chiefly instrumental in
the cure of chronical diseases, yet it is under the auspices of nature, and
effected by a proper imitation of her ways. What else is meant by giving warm,
stimulating, pungent, and volatile medicines, with steel and mineral waters,
but to increase the motion of the circulating fluids, and promote a certain
degree of fever. Are not the cures of some rheumatisms, palsys, and many other
disorders, accomplished by these means; by attenuating and melting down the
viscid fluids, and opening their obstructed channels by this accelerated
motion. Thus as a certain degree of fever is necessary to remove acute, so also
chronical disorders; and as a late writer has observed, could a physician
certainly raise a fever, and keep it to what height he pleased, many chronic
disorders might be thus cured; but though this cannot be effected by art, yet
nature may be imitated by directing the above medicines, which by experience
have been found successful for this purpose, so that in many cases, it may be
said, the fever is not the disease, but the remedy, et dolor, est medicina
doloris.

From hence then we learn, that though nature often cures diseases, yet she
often stands in need of medical help; though it is more evidently observed in
chronic, than acute cases; for we speak not of those which come under the
surgeon's cognizance, where she must often be destroyed, without immediate
manual assistance.

Nor is it the least part of the physicians skill to know when to give it, and
to distingush between the force of nature and art, between the effects and
bounds of medicine. Happy is he then, who has made nature his study, who knows
when to restrain her exorbitant, and when to rouse her languid motions; who
foresees when to give her timely succor, and can distinguish when he does her
most service, by attempting to do least for her; for it is a grand mistake to
conclude that nature always wants the assistance of art, it being the best
remedy sometimes to use none at all But according to Lord Bacon, men commonly
take a view of nature, as from a remote eminence; and are too much amused with
generalities: whereas if they would descend and approach nearer to particulars,
and more exactly and considerately examines into things themselves, they might
make more solid and useful discoveries. No doubt therefore, if physicians,
leaving generalities for a while, would advance toward nature; they might be
able to vary their art as distempers vary. Doctrine of the human body. Shaw's
ed. p. 97.


This knowledge however can only be attained by experience, and sedulous
observation, and a perfect acquaintance with those indefatigable guides, who
studied nature carefully, and have left us the fruits of those studies on
record: to this end also a man should be well acquainted with natural
philosophy, the materia medica, and the animal economy; have a genius, and
penetrating sagacity, to be able to distinguish the true causes of disease,
from effects; the certain powers of medicine, with the bounds of nature and
art; for there are in physic, as in the natural and moral world, general laws,
universal propositions, and a perpetual analogy, between art and nature, that
runs through the whole science for that purpose.

Let us therefore, says the great Pitcairn, Orat. on the art of physic.
if we are inclined to deserve well of the republic of physic, that is, of
all mankind, follow this excellent rule; for it is our duty to compare the
observations that have been made by others, and continue to be made every
where, upon diseases and their remedies, without any regard to opinions: which
are nothing in comparison to the certain conviction of our senses.

But how few, as Dr. Friend, has taken notice, are qualified to make judicious
observations on their experience? History of physic, p. 308. vol. 1.
For the word is often made use of, when the effects do not plainly appear. He
farther observes, that a man may practice and practice all the days of his
life, and yet be never the wiser for his experience, if he neglects to make the
proper observations, which that experience might suggest to him; and it is not
very likely, he should be over nice in his observations, who constantly goes on
in his first tract, and has no other scheme, but his own narrow notions in his
view: whereas the searcher of authors, has the benefit of other men's
experience, together with his own, and it is from the joint concurrence, that
we can hope for any considerable advancements of knowledge. Were it not for
this, the oldest physician would always be the best physician; and there would
be little or no difference, even as to the scientific part, between an old
nurse, and the most regular professor.

Thus is it plain that practice alone will not teach a man the art; Barker's
essay on the agreement between ancient and modern physicians, p. 73.
for there are not wanting instances of practitioners, who are grown old in
business, but for want of being early instructed in the principles of the art,
are almost as absolute strangers to it, as they were at first setting out. The
practice of these men has always been, empirical and by receipts, and as their
minds have never been sufficiently enlightened with true science, to pursue it
properly; so they catch at every new medicine, like drowning men at every twig,
in hopes of supporting a little longer a sinking reputation. Such is the
fluctuating state of the mind, unless a man is thoroughly grounded in the
rudiments of his art; for like one perplexed in a labyrinth, unless the right
path is pursued, he is continually erring and mistaking his way; treading again
and again in the same tract, till he is tired; yet is he often deceived in the
mazey round, and frequently flatters himself, with the pursuit of the true path.

This naturally leads us to enquire into the force, and power, of some
favorite medicines, which are given in acute fevers; and are supposed now and
then, to work such speedy recoveries; when the cure in general, rather depends
upon a due regulation in diet, and proper regimen in other respects, than any
peculiar medicine: but our fondness to such remedies, generally rises in
proportion to our credulity, ignorance, or prejudices; for rather than
attribute any good change in the distemper, to the power of such regimen; it
flatters the vanity of some, to ascribe it to a medicine of his own
prescribing, though ever so insignificant. How often have the most simple things,
luckily timed at the crisis of a fever, been applauded for effects, they had no
pretensions to; for nature who often triumphs over slight obstacles, little
cares to whom the honor is attributed, so that she herself comes off
victorious. This might be abundantly exemplified in a great variety of
instances, to the conviction of the most sanguine bigot: and indeed impartial,
and competent judges, will readily confess, that nothing is more difficult to
ascertain, than the true virtue of medicines: for their effects in general
rather take their force, from the judgment of the physician, in their just
application, than from any constant and inherent virtue of their own. The
learned Dr. Friend Friend Emmenologia, de remediorum viribus.
has curiously observed, and shown, that the different operation of remedies,
arises not from any change of virtue in the medicament, which continues always
the same; but from the different state of the body, wherein it is applied.

Thus the bark taken in the fever fit, shall often purge, between it, bind;
Opium instead of controuling watchings, shall frequently increase them; Aloes
whose property is to purge, shall in some cases, though given for that purpose,
not operate at all; while restringents, shall in other constitutions occasion
purging. Steel, Antimony, Mercury, etc. might be brought to elucidate this
truth; and prove their different effects on different constitutions; as well as
when they are injudiciously directed.

But as it may be necessary, to set this affair in a clearer light, to prevent
being misunderstood; and to show, when nature can do without art, and where the
latter is requisite; I must beg leave to explain myself a little farther, on
both these heads. Who then, ever so slightly acquainted with acute disorders,
but must have observed, that fevers in their infancy, are frequently and easily
removed, by very simple means; or rather that the FEVER, which is nature's
instrument, assisted by dilution with small liquors, and abstinence from animal
diet, seldom wants any other helps; but where bleeding and gentle evacuations
are joined to these, the end is generally accomplished in a few days; for by
this; method, the fluids are diluted, the secretions renewed, and the fullness
of the vessels abated: and to speak ingenuously, it is extremely probable, that
fasting, and abstemiousness, would cure many, and prevent most distempers; had
men resolution enough to pursue it for a sufficient length of time, under
proper regulations.

But when this method has been neglected, and repeated colds, or acts of
intemperance, are urged on one another; aggravated by a heating regimen, or
hotter medicines; we must not wonder at the difficulties that often attend the
removal of such a fever; for the blood and other juices, are now become too
viscid or sizey, to circulate in the finer vessels; hence frequently from such
obstructions, arise inflammations in particular parts; which if not soon
removed by art, terminate in matter, or fatal gangrenes. In other fevers, the
blood is in the reverse state, being too rare, thin, and acrimonious; tending
to dissolution, and putrefaction; which by the rapidity of the circulation, is
frequently forced through the extremities of the small arteries, and are the
cause of malignant eruptions, and violent bleedings. Here indeed it is high
time for art to interpose, for nature is no longer her own assistant, but will
soon destroy herself, without timely succor: under these different
circumstances, the skillful physician has sufficient opportunities, of
distinguishing his prudence, and abilities, for the storm is now raised, the
pungent pains are become insupportable; the disturbed functions of the mind,
call aloud to be be-calm'd, that reason may reassume her throne; now is the
time to assist her effectually, either by curbing her inordinate transports, or
succouring her languishing struggles: Here the cautious prescriber, will guard
well against either extreme, least by an injudi cious application, he may
aggravate the cause, by adding fuel to a fire which burns but too intensily
already, or check that vital flame, that is but too nigh extinguished. Here he
who has carefully studied the laws of nature and observed the ways she
sometimes takes to relieve herself, will be best able, to give her that
assistance, she now so much wants; while he, who is only acquainted with her in
speculation, will stand amazed, and affrighted at symptoms he never suspected,
and impotently attack the disease, on the strength of some favorite
hypothesis, or some darling NOSTRUM.

From this portrait, or description of two different kinds of fevers only, one
may reasonable inquire how far any one method, or medicine, is like to answer
both intentions; but before we venture to mention our own thoughts on this
head, let us take the opinion of the immortal Sydenham, that candid, and
judicious observer; who says, Swan's Sydenham, p. 293.
there are various kinds of fevers, most of which require their peculiar method
of cure, different from the rest; and that the same individual fever, of
whatever kind it be, requires one treatment at the first, and another somewhat
different, through all its stages, as long as it continues. Many other similar
passages might be extracted from this great man's works. Let us hear also the
experienced Baglivi, who says, Baglivi's practice of physic, p. 271.
a great many have such an affection to some one remedy, that they think it
alone entitled to a sovereign virtue, and power, of curing almost all diseases;
either by reason of a lucky event, observed now and then to ensue the use of
it, or rather by a certain innate propensity that they have, not only of crying
up some medicines, but ascribing to them fictitious virtues: but I must observe
by the bye, says he, that no physician can cure a fever happily, without he
informs himself of the febrile state of the blood; whether it is too rapid,
thin, or inflammable, etc. or on the other hand, apt to congeal, thick,
malignant, etc. For in such different states of the blood, the indications of
cure must be diversifyed accordingly. The honorable Mr. BOIL in his treatise
on the usefullness of philosophy, observes, that it is much more difficult,
than men can imagine, to make an accurate experiment in physic, for often the
same disease proceeding, in several persons, from quite different causes, will
be increased in one, by the same remedy, which has cured it in an other and not
only the constitutions of patients, may as much alter the effects as the causes
of diseases; but even in the same patient, and in the same disease, the single
circumstance of time, may have almost as great an operation upon the success of
the medicine, as either of the two former particulars. The learned FRIEND
Shaw's edit. vol. 1. p. 176.
on this occasion also observes, that a man who has the least acquaintance with
physic, must be sensible, that a universal medicine must be a cheat; and though
it be ever so good and valuable a medicine itself, yet it is utterly impossible
it can be equally applicable to all persons, in all cases, and at all
junctures; and therefore it must be determined by the skill of some discerning
physician, who is well apprised of the nature and symptoms of the disease,
where History of physic, vol. 1. p. 78.
to give it, and where to forbear. We need not go far for a proof of this: we
have a convincing one in that great, and perhaps the only specific, the bark:
which if used indifferently, and without judgment, even in intermitting cases,
has a chance to do as much hurt as good. But I forbear making further
quotations, from other writers of equal eminence, that the reader, may not be
tired.

If these things be true, if such authorities are to be relied on, how absurd
is it, to suppose any medicine can be possessed of the unerring faculty, of
removing all fevers; and yet this opinion, however dissonant to reason, and
common sense it may be, appears to have it is abettors; and I am sorry to say
it, among some few too, who call themselves physician; contrary indeed to the
ingenuous declaration of the learned publisher of this remedy, who in the
following passages in his dissertation on fevers, as well as in his daily
practice, manifestly disavows such a general power in his preparation. I am
obliged says he, James's dissertation on fevers, p. 40.
to own, that as I esteemed life too sacred to be hazarded, for the sake of an
experiment, I have never neglected to call in all other medicinal aids, to my
assistance, when I thought the case required them, and believed that they would
be of service. Again Ib. p. 46.
as I would be extremely cautious of leading any one into error, in an affair
of so much importance, as is that of life, I must remark, that when violent
inflammations of the vital parts threaten immediate destruction, I should think
it imprudent to neglect repeated bleedings, purges, clysters, and all other
assistances, which the art of medicine can afford.

After such plain and candid concessions, one would think it was impossible,
that any but stupid bigots, or superstitious old women, unacquainted with such
auxiliaries, would solely depend upon this remedy, and in the most desperate
cases. Does it not hence evidently appear that Dr. James himself does not? Do
not some of his cases prove it, where we find Bleeding, Nitre, Musk,
stimulating Cataplasms, Blisters, and Purges, directed as associates with the
medicine. Vid. p. 13.27.33.


And who, among such a group of auxilaries, can pretend to say, what share of
merit, becomes due to the powder? The Dr. himself ingenuously confesses, he
sometimes could not determine how far it was instrumental in the cure; James's
dissertation on fevers, p. 34.-13.
nor indeed how should he.

How absurd then must it appear to every impartial man, who reflects cooly,
that a medicine, which it is acknowledged may demand all these occasional
assistances, should without restrictions, be thus rashly and universally
recommended by some in all fevers; for whatever limitations may be hinted at in
the treatise, can it be supposed, that those unacquainted with the science of
physic, can distinguish, from the rules there laid down, when to employ these
auxilaries? Neither can Dr. James, always be at hand to, direct them, and who
less acquainted with that medicine, would risk their reputations, by being
concerned with it, on such important occasions, where lives are at stake; much
less can it be possible, that the promiscuous administration of this remedy, to
diseases of such general Names, as are mentioned in the advertisement, can be
successful; when the conditions of these diseases, do so perpetually vary.

But if the operation, and effects of this medicine are to be rationally, and
not empirically accounted for; if it is to be examined by the same tests, that
all others are; we shall find, that like them, it must be directed, and given
with prudence, and skill, to render it efficacious, and prevent it is being
injurious. For example if it has been found successful in thinning and
attenuating the viscid, sizy blood and fluids, is it not likely to be
prejudicial in cases, where the fluids are already too thin and rare? If it has
been found useful, in increasing the secretions of the glands of the skin,
intestines, and kidneys, by promoting stools, urine, and sweats, may it not be
injurious, in those cases, where these secretions are but too liberal already?
That this is evidently the case in some colliquative fevers, appears by the
broken texture of the blood; where the particles being too much dissolved, are
daily exhausting the patient, by running off too fast, through the pores, by
melting sweats, or the bowels by watery stools.

How preposterous, how inconsistent then must be the practice of those, who
give it thus indiscriminately; and who thus wantonly trifle with lives, they
are entrusted with? But surely the folly of such proceedure can want no
illustration. Could a man also without horror reflect, on being accessory to
the untimely death of a friend, or neighbor, by the vomiting power of an
antimonial medicine, given without previous, or proper bleedings, in
inflammations of the lungs, or brain, trusting to this medicine solely, in such
important diseases, contrary to the express rules of Dr. James? This though a
real prostitution of it, yet has been done, and by the direction of some, who
ought to know better; for can the most sanguine abettors of this medicine,
pretend to prevent this operation, as it is one of its general effects, Vid.
James's paper of instructions, where he says, this medicine is sometimes found
to operate pretty briskly by way of vomiting, etc.
the continuance of which may depend on the juices it accidentally meets with
in the stomach? Under such threatening cicumstances, with violent pains in the
head, or sides, attended with the utmost difficulty in breathing; what a truly
piteous situation, must be that of the unfortunate patient, under the vomiting
power of this medicine? How must the acute, pungent pangs, be thereby
aggravated? The turgid and distended vessels stretched, even to bursting? Or at
least such a quantity of fluids may thereby be derived on parts, already but
too much loaded, so as to fi^ immovable obstructions, and occasion fatal
gangrenes. These are warnings that should be given by somebody, as they are not
the result of imaginary speculations, but are real facts, which have occurred;
and though the farmers loss may not be greatly increased, by the additional
expense, attending the purchase of Vid. Daily Advertiser.
the medicine, for his cows and oxen; yet his family may sustain an irreparable
one, by an untimely and injudicious taking of it himself.

But if such be the barrenness of the materia medica. or the incapacity of the
physician, in drawing his indications of cure, that this must be the popular,
and fashionable remedy; let us at least have the wisdom and honesty, to treat
it, as we do other medicines; for by these means only, can it obtain a just
reputation: let us then confine it within its proper sphere of action and give
it in such cases only, as it appears, calculated for; which from our
observations, seems chiefly to be in the beginning of slight fevers, which
arise from indigestions, or taking cold; for by its stimulus on the stomach and
bowels, those organs may be thus cleansed of their indigested particles, their,
feculencys thereby removed, and the sweats it generally procures, assisted by
plentiful dilution, may set open the secretions; and thus by removing the
surcharge early, nature is left at more liberty to recover cover herself.
Should it on fair trials be found to suit other indications, let it be given
with discretion; but if our views are not answered soon, let us not, Sangrado
like, obstinately persevere as some do, to the patients destruction; that we
may avoid the just reproaches of an injured family, who may be made sufferers
by our wantonness, and imprudence; and prevent those bitter reflections, that
will recoil onour owm minds, by being thus accessory to them.

Medicines of this kind, as generally given, it is true may save some the trouble
of thinking, and searching for indications; which every prudent man thinks
absolutely necessary, before, he prescribes; but this compendious method
cancels all ties, or duty of this kind; abjures this slavish attachment to the
study of nature, and her laws, as delusive, and desultory; reduces the science
of physic to a narrower compass, and instead of leading, or kindly assisting
nature, forces her to be obedient, and follow the ways they choose to prescribe
her. Such implements however in physic, are like edge tools in the hands of
children, or weapons of destruction in those of madmen; the simplicity of the
one, converting them to their own prejudice, and the insanity of the other, to
the destruction of those about them: and this observation we apprehend will
always hold true, that this or any other valuable medicine, can only be of real
service, when directed with judgment; and that it is the judicious timeing, and
adapting the medicine, to the disease, that makes it either a beneficial
remedy, or a destructive poison.

We desire it may particularly be remarked, that the violent sweats extorted by
sudorisic medicines in fevers, but too often aggravate the disorder, though
they seemingly give present relief; Vid. Sydenham, Boerhaave, in variis locis.
Vid. James's dissertation on fevers, P. 5. where he says that sweats, which are
not spontaneous, but extorted, generally prove symptomatical and noxious,
instead of being critical and salutary.
for unless this evacuation be critical, i. e. by carrying off the cause of the
fever, the blood is thereby defrauded of its thinner, and finer parts, and the
remainder left so thickened, that it is rendered unfit for circulation in the
finer vessels, and often occasions obstructions, that terminate fatally. This
has remarkably been observed to be the case with this medicine, where after
having caused profuse sweats, for several days, the blood on examination for
that purpose, so far from being attenuated by the medicine, (as is the property
generally ascribed to it) has on the contrary, been found more tenacious, and
sizey; and so unfit for circulation, as to occasion constant watchings,
delirium, etc. which in some cases subsisted till blisters, and more powerful
attenuants removed those symptoms; in others till death put an end to them.

Nor is it less necessary, to guard against the promiscuous use of this powder,
in eruptive fevers, particularly those called miliary; as it is evident to the
observing practitioner, that the eruptions once repelled, the patient is
thereby often brought into the most eminent danger of his life: and if this has
often been found to be the case, by a few slight stools, what consequences may
we not apprehend from a medicine, whose known effect is acknowledged, sometimes
to purge pretty briskly. Vid. Dr. James's paper instructions, and cases.


As Dr. James seems so sinngular in his notions concerning miliary fevers, and
suspects them to be entirely the children of art James's dissertat. on fevers,
p. 36.37.
as he has so ludicrously treated this important subject, which has been so
accurately described by Sir David Hamilton, Hoffman, Mead, etc. and probably
too so far, as to lead some of his pupils into fatal errors; I thought it the
more incumbent on me, to give this caution; and the more particularly, as in
his paper instructions, he recommends this powder for miliary fevers, and all
others of the eruptive kind; and says that there is no reason to fear a
moderate number of stools, at the latter end of a fever, or at any other time.
Vid. James's paper instructions.
The latter part of this paragraph, is surely too bold an assertion, especially
if relative to this fever; where a very moderate number of stools, has
frequently precipitated the patients fate, by the sudden repulsion of the
eruptions.

From what then has been advanced in relation to the powers of nature and art;
in regard to the use of medicine in general, and this powder in particular; we
may observe that in many acute disorders, or fevers, nature is often her own,
and best physician; that the assistances from art should in general be
cautiously directed; always drawn, from such indications, as the symptoms point
out, and must be varied in proportion to the nature of the disease: That no one
medicine, can ever answer so many different purposes; more especially one whose
operations are so precarious; and which we are convinced from the process of,
(which is no secret to the world) that though it may be useful in some cases, it
must be prejudicial in others; that a promiscuous, unlimited power of giving
it, according to some, has to our knowledge, been productive of many, and great
miscarriages: How often has nature been disturbed, and a favorable crisis
prevented by this, and other ill-timed medicines? And how easily distempers
slight in themselves, are often converted into important ones, by untimely and
injudicious applications, is well known to the careful observer. Cases of this
kind have occured where nature though feeble, and oppressed, yet laboring hard
to relieve herself, and depurate the blood by critical swellings, has been most
preposterously teized and thwarted with the stools, and sweats, incited by this
medicine, till she had nigh sunk under the oppression; yet has she at last
happily emerged, and accomplished her designs, after having obtained a truce
with it for a few days. So true is that observation of Dr. James* that some few
are so happy in an unextinguishable strength of constitution, that they even at
last miraculously recover, notwithstanding the most absurd treatment. In
colliquative cases, where the secretions were too liberal, it has sunk many
untimely; and in fevers of several days standing, where the vessels are too
turgid, the pulse vehement, the blood so gluey and viscid, that it cannot
freely pass the finer vessels, or so fused, and broken, that it threatens to
escape them; when inflammations are also fixed on the nobler parts, foreboding
inevitable destruction without speedy relief; surely on such emergencies, it
would be madness indeed to trust to this, or any one medicine, without calling
in every other help, that reason, and experience dictate on such occasions; and
this we are justified in asserting, not from the James's Dissert. on fevers, p.
5.
reason of the thing only, but from the authority likewise of Dr. James
himself, in the places above cited.

I cannot conclude without taking notice, of a ridiculous insinuation, advanced
by some, as a reason, why the gentlemen of the faculty do not patronize this
medicine; which is, that it would be destructive of their private interests, by
making such speedy cures. But this objection, the trite, and stale artifice of
every empirick to recommend his NOSTRUM, is as mean, and contemptible, as it is
false; it is an artful lure, thrown out only as a decoy for the public, that
they may the more readily become their dupes.

For are not the physicians of this nation in general, and of London in
particular, men of liberal educations, whose learning, and abilities are equal
to any in Europe? Are not many of them, as conspicuous for their humanity,
benevolence, and tenderness, as they are for their independent fortunes? What
could induce such men, to procrastinate the cures of those committed to their
charge, but a certain conviction of the inefficacy, and incertitude, of general
medicines? Is it not then base, and infamous, to insinuate, that these men
would sacrifice all considerations of honor, justice, and compassion, merely
to oppose such a universal medicine? Is it not notorious, that many of them in
their private practice, as well as by repeated trials in our hospitals, have
found it was by no means to be relied on? or can it deserve credit from any
sensible, and unprejudiced minds, that those few practitioners who do espouse
this medicine, have alone monopolized the amiable qualities of truth,
disinterestedness, and common honesty? Surely it would be more ingenuous, and
candid, to conclude, that nothing but this certain conviction of the
incertitude, and inefficacy, of general medicines, and of this in particular,
(whose virtues like all others, can only arise, by being rationally adapted to
particular circumstances, and states of diseases) could be the true and only
cause of leading physicians, to forbear its general use; whatever bold
assertions, ignorant, and designing men may advance to the contrary.

These are some of the observations, that have occured, and it is to be
apprehended will have some weight with the impartial: for if neither honor,
conscience, humanity, and independance, can be thought to have any influence
over the conduct, of such professors of physic; we must be under a necessity of
condemning, a body of men, as monsters in nature, who have hitherto been
esteemed real ornaments to their country, and respectable, as well as useful
members of society.

POSTCRIPT.
IN order to form a more general, and comprehensive idea of this Powder, we
have thought proper to insert here, its various, and common operations, in
those cases Dr. James himself has published, in his dissertation on fevers. In
his paper instructions, he remarks, that it is found sometimes to operate
pretty briskly, by way of vomiting and purging, as indeed several of his cases
prove; so that the judicious reader may hence observe, as well as from the
uncertainty of its operation; that it ought to be given with great caution, and
circumspection: for though some few constitutions, may be able to support these
operations without injury, while the body is strong, and vigorous; yet under
many circumstances, which we have pointed out, as well as when the patient is
reduced by the disease; how far profuse sweats continued for four and twenty
hours, and renewed; with brisk, and frequent vomiting, and purging, may suit
such, and every other indication, is submitted to the decision of competent and
impartial judges.

The various EFFECTS of the POWDER according to Dr. JAMES.

Page 9. Dissertation on fevers. Mrs. M. on taking one paper, sweated profusely
six hours; on repeating the same, the two subsequent nights, it operated in the
same manner.

10. Mr. W. had a nausea, and inclination to vomit, with some gentle pukes, and
several purging stools, and beside this, a pretty plentiful sweat.

12. Mr. H. sweat very moderately, and had three purging stools.

13. Mr. C. had a gentle sweat and no stools.

14. Mr. J. B. had profuse sweats for four hours, purged considerably.

14. Mr. W. B. sweat pretty much, and purged three times.

15. Mrs: B. sweat a good deal, and purged three or four times.

17. Miss S. vomited once, purged five times, sweat a little, the next day
another dose vomited three or four time, purged four, or five, and sweat a
little.

18. Mr. D. had several pukes, a profuse sweat of many hours continuance.

19. Mr. E. puked gently twice, and had three stools.

20. Mrs. E. a copious sweat.

21. Mrs. F. vomited several times, purged frequently and sweated profusely.

21. Mrs. E. F. operated nearly in the same manner.

22. Mrs. S. took six doses, and had no perceiveable operation.

23. Mrs D. had at first no visible operation, afterward purged gently.

24. Mr. J. D. brought on a great sweat, purged twice.

25. Mr. P. vomited three or four times, and sweated pretty much, for four, or
five hours.

26 Mr. H. vomited several times, purged very often, and sweat plentifully.

26. Mr. N. had three stools, sweat plentifully about three hours.

27. Mr. H. vomited three or four times, purged several times, and sweat
plentifully for about twenty-four hours.

28. Mr. L. vomited two or three times, and purged often.

29. Mrs. B. made very sick, vomited pretty much, purged three or four times,
sweat all night.

30. Mr. J. B. puked once, sweat profusely.

31. Mr. S. vomited gently four or five times, purged several times.

33. Miss. E. had no sensible operation with three doses; was bled, had a
blister put on her head, cataplasms to her feet, a clyster, and Glauber salts,
which purged twice.

38. Mr. D. had a copious sweat, for fourteen hours; and three stools.

Thus we may observe, that in eight cases, the powder both vomited, purged, and
sweat; and these generally profuse sweats; pretty smart, considerable, and
frequent purgings, and vomiting several times.

In seven cases, it operated by sweats, and purging; sometimes moderately, but
in general profusely, and considerably both ways.

In three, it vomited and sweated; and in three more, it sweat only. Three also
it vomited and purged, in one moderately, in the others, it vomited three or
four times, and purged several; in one case it purged only, and in two had no
operation at all.

So that out of twenty seven cases, it operated by stool in nineteen, and in
ten of them smartly, and considerably.

These are the general effects and operations which followed the taking this
medicine, with sometimes a copious sediment in the urine; and may we not from
hence fairly conclude, that in those cases, where vomiting, purging, and
sweating are pernicious, (and many such there are) that the use of this powder
should be suspended? When the constitution also is lowered, or greatly reduced
by the disease, may not the evacuations above mentioned, especially when
profuse, smart, and frequent, in many cases, precipitate the patient's fate?
But if the indication be to sweat, purge, or vomit singly, can we ever be sure
of answering any one of these intentions alone, without promoting others, we do
not want, and which may prove of dangerous consequence? Such seems to be the
uncertainty of this medicine.

When given in small quantities, it possibly may be less hazardous, though
perhaps less efficacious, as some operation seems always expected from it. But
as Dr. James has not yet thought proper, to furnish us with cases of this sort,
we shall for the present decline any further animadversions: nor indeed should
we have troubled the public with these, had we not thought they were become
absolutely necessary, both for the reputation of the medicine, as well as for
the patient's safety.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 18. L. 17. for runs, read run.

P. 25. l. 2. for are, read is.

P. 32. l. 5. for that, read the.

P. 8. l. 6. for execretions read excretions.

P. 13. l. 20. read according to the

P. 29. l. 17. after abettors, add, in regard to James's powder.


