Sir ELDRED of the BOWER, AND THE BLEEDING ROCK: TWO LEGENDARY TALES.

By Miss HANNAH MORE.

Of them who, wrapped in Earth so cold,
No more the smiling day shall view,
Should many a tender tale be told,
For many a tender thought is due.
LANGHORNE. DUBLIN: Printed for W. SLEATER, S. PRICE, W. WHITESTONE, J. POTTS,
R. CROSS, J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLES, T. WALKER, W. WILSON, W* WATSON, S. WATSON,
T. WILKINSON, J. HOEY, R. MONCRIEFFE, J. SHEPPARD, W. HALHEAD, W. SPOTSWOOD, R.
STEWART, T. STEWART, E. CROSS, C. JENKIN, J. HILLARY, T. ARMITAGE, W. GILBERT,
H. BURROWES, M. MILLS, and P. HIGLY.

M DCC.LXXVI.

TO DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
IT is scarcely possible that any one should entertain a more humble opinion of
the following little Production, than she who presents it to you. It is a
trifle which, she confesses, has but a very slender claim to your protection;
but she considers that your Name will be an ornament to her Book, as your
Friendship has been an honor to its Author.

Where merit is incontestible, and characters are decided by the concurring
suffrage of mankind, praise becomes almost impertinent. It is absurd to be
industrious in proving truths so self-evident, that no one ever thought of
controverting them.

I may be accused of advancing a startling proposition, when I declare that you
are an enemy to the Muses; but if it be allowed that description and invention
are the very soul of Poetry, I shall be justified by the world in general, who
constantly behold you displaying talents which cannot be described, and
exhibiting excellencies which leave nothing to be imagined.

Whatever reason I may find to regret my having ventured these little Poems
into the world, I shall at least have no common pleasure in recollecting one
circumstance attending them, since they furnish me with an occasion of assuring
you with what esteem and admiration I am,

SIR, Your most obedient, and very humble Servant, HANNAH MORE.
Bristol, Dec. 14th, 1775.
Sir ELDRED of the BOWER: A Legendary Tale. In Two Parts.

Sir ELDRED of the BOWER: A LEGENDARY TALE.
Part I.
O nostra Vita, ch'e si bella in vista!
Come perde agevolmente in un momento,
Quel, che'n molt' anni a grand pena s'acquista!
Petrarca.
There was a young, and valiant Knight,
SIR ELDRED was his name,
And never did a worthier wight
The rank of knighthood claim.
Where gliding Tay her stream sends forth,
To crown the neighboring wood,
The ancient glory of the North,
SIR ELDRED's castle stood.
The youth was rich as youth might be
In patrimonial dower;
And many a noble feat had he
Achieved, in hall, and bower.
He did not think, as some have thought,
Whom honor never crowned,
The fame a father dearly bought,
Could make the son renowned.
He better thought, a noble sire,
Who gallant deeds had done,
To deeds of hardihood should fire
A brave and gallant son.
The fairest ancestry on earth
Without desert is poor;
And every deed of lofty worth
Is but a tax for more.
SIR ELDRED's heart was good and kind,
Alive to Pity's call;
A crowd of virtues graced his mind,
He loved, and felt for all.
When merit raised the sufrerer's name,
He doubly served him then;
And those who could not prove that claim,
He thought they still were men.
But sacred truth the Muse compels
His errors to impart;
And yet the Muse, reluctant, tells
The fault of ELDRED's heart.
Though kind and gentle as the dove,
As free from guile and art,
And mild, and soft as infant love
The feelings of his heart;
Yet if distrust his thoughts engage,
Or jealousy inspires,
His bosom wild and boundless rage
Inflames with all its fires:
Not Thule's waves so wildly break
To drown the northern shore;
Not Etna's entrails fiercer shake,
Or Scythia's tempests roar.
As when in summer's sweetest day,
To fan the fragrant morn,
The sighing breezes softly stray
Over fields of ripened corn;
Sudden the lightning's blast descends,
Deforms the ravaged fields;
At once the various ruin blends,
And all resistless yields.
But when, to clear his stormy breast,
The sun of reason shone,
And ebbing passions sunk to rest,
And showed what rage had done:
O then what anguish he betrayed!
His shame how deep, how true!
He viewed the waste his rage had made,
And shudder'd at the view.
The meek-ey'd dawn, in saffron robe,
Proclaimed the opening day;
Up rose the sun to gild the globe,
And hail the newborn May;
The birds their amorous notes repeat,
And glad the vernal grove,
Their feathered partners fondly greet
With many a song of love;
When pious ELDRED walked abroad
His morning vows to pay,
And hail the universal Lord
Who gave the goodly day.
That done -- he left his woodland glade,
And journey'd far away;
He loved to court the stranger shade,
And through the lone vale stray.
Within the bosom of a wood,
By circling hills embraced,
A little, modest mansion stood,
Built by the hand of Taste.
While many a prouder castle fell,
This safely did endure;
The house where guardian virtues dwell
Is sacred, and secure.
Of Eglantine an humble fence
Around the mansion stood,
Which charmed at once the ravished sense,
And screen'd an infant wood.
The wood received an added grace,
As pleased it bent to look,
And viewed its ever verdant face
Reflected in a brook.
The smallness of the stream did well
The master's fortunes show;
But little streams may serve to tell
From what a source they flow.
This mansion owned an aged Knight,
And such a man was he,
As Heaven just shows to human sight,
To tell what man should be.
His youth in many a well-fought field
Was trained betimes to war;
His bosom, like a well-worn shield,
Was graced with many a scar.
The vigor of a green old age
His reverend form did bear;
And yet, alas! the warrior-sage
Had drained the dregs of care.
And sorrow more than age can break,
And wound its hapless prey;
'Twas sorrow surrow'd his firm cheek,
And turned his bright locks gray.
One darling daughter soothed his cares,
A young and beauteous dame;
Sole comfort of his failing years,
And BIRTHA was her name.
Her heart a little sacred shrine,
Where all the Virtues meet;
And holy Hope, and Faith divine,
Had claimed it for their seat.
She reared a fair and fragrant bower
Of wild and rustic taste,
And there she screen'd each favorite flower
From every ruder blast.
And not a shrub or plant was there
But did some moral yield;
For wisdom, with a father's care,
Was found in every field.
The trees, whose foliage fell away,
And with the summer died,
He thought an image of decay
Might lecture human pride.
While fair, perennial greens that stood,
And braved the wintry blast,
As types of the fair mind he viewed
Which shall for ever last.
He taught her that the gaudiest: flowers
Were seldom fragrant found,
But wasted soon their little powers,
Lay useless on the ground.
While the sweet pink, and scented rose,
In precious odours last;
And when no more the color glows,
The sweetness is not past.
And here the Virgin loved to lead
Her inoffensive day,
And here she often retired to read,
And often retired to pray.
Embower'd she graced the woodland shades,
From courts and cities far,
The pride of Caledonian maids,
The peerless northern star.
As shines that bright and blazing star,
The glory of the night,
When sailing through the liquid air,
It pours its lambent light:
Such BIRTHA shone! -- But when she spoke
The Muse herself was heard,
As on the ravished air she broke,
And thus her prayer preferred:
"O bless thy BIRTHA, Power Supreme,
"In whom I live and move,
"And bless me most by blessing him
"Whom more than life I love." --
She starts to hear a stranger voice,
And with a modest grace
She lifts her meek eye in surprise,
And sees a stranger face.
The stranger lost in transport stood,
Bereft of voice and power,
While she with equal wonder viewed
SIR ELDRED OF THE BOWER.
The mountain breeze which paints her cheek
With Nature's purest dye,
And all the dazzling fires which break
Illustrious from her eye: --
He viewed them all, and as he viewed
Drank deeply of delight;
And still his ravished eye pursued,
And feasted on the sight.
With silent wonder long they gazed,
And neither silence broke;
At length the smothered passion blazed,
Enamored ELDRED spoke:
"O sacred Virtue, heavenly power!
Thy wondrous force I feel;
"I gaze, I tremble, I adore,
Yet die my love to tell.
Beauty with coldness I Have beheld,
"And 'scap'd the shaft divine;
But what my guardless heart can shield
From piety like thine?"
She cast her mild eyes on the ground,
And raised their beams as fast;
And close her Father dear she found,
Who happily that way past.
Good ARDOLPH's eye his BIRTHA meets
With glances of delight;
And thus with courteous speech he greets
The young and graceful Knight:
O gallant Youth, whoever thou art,
Thou art welcome to this place;
"There Is something rises at my heart
Which says I Have seen that face.
"Thou generous Knight!" the Youth rejoined,
Though little known to same,
"I trust I bear a grateful mind --
SIR ELDRED is my name.
SIR ELDRED?" -- ARDOLPH loud exclaimed,
"Renowned for worth and power?
For valor and for virtue famed,
"SIR ELDRED OF THE BOWER?
"Now make me grateful, righteous Heaven,
As thou art good to me,
Since to my aged eyes it is given
SIR ELDRED's son to see!"
Then ARDOLPH caught him by the hand,
And gazed upon his face,
And to his aged bosom strained,
With many a kind embrace.
Again he viewed him over and over,
And doubted still the truth,
And asked what he had asked before,
Then thus addressed the Youth:
"Come now beneath my roof, I pray,
Some needful rest to take,
"And with us many a cheerful day
Thy friendly sojourn make."
He entered at the gate straightway
Some needful rest to take;
And with them many a cheerful day
Did friendly sojourn make.
END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART II.
ONCE -- 'twas upon a summer's walk,
The gaudy day was fled;
They cheated Time with cheerful talk,
When thus Sir ARDOLPH said:
"Thy father was the firmest friend
"That ever my being blessed;
"And every virtue Heaven could send,
"Fast bound him to my breast.
"Together did we learn to bear
"The targe and ample shield;
"Together learned in many a war,
"The deathful spear to wield.
"To make our union still more dear,
"We both were doomed to prove
"What is most sweet and most severe
"In heart-dissolving love.
"The daughter of a neighboring Knight
"Did my fond heart engage;
"And never did Heaven the virtues write
"Upon a fairer page.
" His bosom felt an equal wound,
"Nor sighed we long in vain;
"One summer's sun beheld us bound
"In Hymen's holy chain.
"Thou wast SIR ELDRED's only child,
"Thy father's darling joy;
"On me a lovely daughter smiled,
"On me a blooming boy.
"But man has woes, has clouds of care,
"That dim his star of life --
"My arms received the little pair,
"The earth's cold breast, my wife.
"Forgive, thou gentle Knight, forgive,
"Fond foolish tears will flow;
"One day like mine thy heart may heave,
"And mourn its lot of woe.
"But grant, kind Heaven! thou never may know
"The pangs I now impart;
"Nor ever feel the deadly blow
"That rives a husband's heart.
"Beside the blooming banks of Tay,
"My angel's ashes sleep;
"And wherefore should her ARDOLPH stay,
"Except to watch and weep?
"I bore my beauteous babes away
"With many a gushing tear,
"I left the blooming banks of Tay,
"And brought my darlings here.
"I watched my little household cares,
"And formed their growing youth;
"And fondly trained their infant years
"To love and cherish truth."
"Thy blooming BIRTHA here I see,"
Sir. ELDRED straight rejoined;
"But why thy son is not with thee,
"Resolve my doubting; mind."
When BIRTHA did the question hear,
She sighed, but could not speak;
And many a soft and silent tear
Strayed down her damask check.
Then passed over good Sir ARDOLPH's face,
A cast of deadly pale;
But soon composed, with manly grace
He thus renewed his tale:
"For him my heart too much has bled,
"For him, my darling son,
"Has sorrow pressed my hoary head;
"But -- Heaven's high will be done!
"Scarce eighteen winters had revolved,
"To crown the circling year,
"Before my valiant boy resolved
"The warrior's lance to bear,
"Too high I prized my native land,
"Too dear his fame I held,
"TO oppose a parent's stern command,
"And keep him from the field.
"He left me -- left his sister too,
"Yet tears bedewed his face --
"What could a feeble old man do? --
"He burst from my embrace.
"O thirst of glory, fatal flame!
"O laurels dearly bought!
"Yet sweet is death when earned with fame --
"So virtuous EDWY thought.
"Full manfully the brave boy strove,
"Though pressing ranks oppose;
"But weak the strongest arm must prove
"Against an host of foes.
"A deadly wound my son receives,
"A spear assails his side.
"Grief does not kill -- for ARDOLPH lives
"To tell that EDWY died.
"His long -- loved Mother died again
"In EDWY's parting groan;
"I wept for her, yet wept in vain --
"I wept for both in one.
"I would have died -- I sought to die;
"But Heaven restrained the thought,
"And to my passion-clouded eye
"My helpless BIRTHA brought.
"When lo! arrayed in robes of light,
"A nymph celestial came;
"She cleared the mists that dimmed my sight --
"RELIGION was her name.
"She proved the chastisement divine,
"And bade me kiss the rod;
"She taught this rebel heart of mine
"Submission to its God.
"RELIGION taught me to sustain
"What nature bade me feel;
"And piety relieved the pain
"Which time can never heal."
He ceased -- With sorrow and delight
The tale Sir ELDRED hears,
Then weeping cries -- "Thou noble Knight,
For thanks accept my tears.
"O ARDOLPH, might I dare aspire
"To claim so bright a boon! --
"Good old Sir ELDRED was my sire --
"And thou have lost a son.
"And though I want a worthier plea
"To urge so dear a cause,
"Yet, let me to thy bosom be
"What once thy EDWY was.
"My trembling tongue its aid denies;
"For thou may disapprove;
"Then read it in my ardent eyes,
"Oh! read the tale of love.
"Thy beauteous BIRTHA '" -- "Gracious Power,
"How could I ever repine,
"Cries ARDOLPH, "since I see this hour?
"Yes -- BIRTHA shall be thine."
A little transient gleam of red
Shot faintly over her face,
And every trembling feature spread
With sweet disordered grace.
The tender father kindly smiled
With fullness of content,
And fondly eyed his darling child,
Who, bashful, blushed consent.
O then to paint the vast delight
That filled Sir ELDRED's heart,
To tell the transports of the Knight,
Would mock the Muse's art.
But every kind and gracious soul,
Where gentle passions dwell,
Will better far conceive the whole,
Than any Muse can tell.
The more the Knight his BIRTHA knew,
The more he prized the Maid;
Some worth each day produced to view,
Some grace each hour betrayed.
The virgin too was fond to charm
The dear, accomplished Youth;
His single breast she strove to warm,
And crowned, with love, his truth.
Unlike the dames of modern days,
Who general homage claim,
Who court the universal gaze,
And pant for public fame.
Then Beauty but on merit smiled,
Nor were her chaste smiles sold;
No venal father gave his child
For grandeur, or for gold.
The ardour of young ELDRED's flame
But ill could brook delay,
And often he pressed the maid to name
A speedy nuptial day.
The fond impatience of his breast
'Twas all in vain to hide,
But she his eager suit represt.
With modest, maiden pride.
When often Sir ELDRED pressed the day
Which was to crown his truth,
The thoughtful Sire would sigh, and say,
"O happy state of youth!
"It little recks the woes which wait
"To scare its dreams of joy,
"Nor thinks tomorrow's altered fate
"May all those dreams destroy.
"And though the flatterer, Hope, deceives,
"And painted prospects shows;
"Yet man, still cheated, still believes,
"Till death the bright scene close.
"So looked my bride, so sweetly mild,
"On me her beauty's slave;
But whilst she looked, and whilst she smiled,
"She sunk into the grave.
"Yet, O forgive an old man's care,
"Forgive a father's zeal;
"Who fondly loves must greatly fear,
"Who fears must greatly feel.
"Once more in soft and sacred bands
"Shall Love and Hymen meet;
"Tomorrow shall unite your hands,
"And -- be your bliss complete!"
The rising sun inflamed the sky,
The golden orient blushed;
But BIRTHA's cheeks a sweeter die,
A brighter crimson flushed.
The Priest, in milk-white vestments clad,
Performed the mystic rite;
Love lit the hallowed torch that led
To Hymen's chaste delight.
How feeble language were to speak
The immeasurable joy
That fired Sir ELDRED's ardent cheek,
And triumphed in his eye!
Sir ARDOLPH's pleasu're stood confessed,
A pleasure all his own;
The guarded rapture of a breast
Which many a grief had known.
'Twas such a sober sense of joy
As Angels well might keep;
A joy chastis'd by piety,
A joy prepared to weep.
To recollect her scattered thought,
And shun the noontide hour,
The lovely bride in secret sought
The coolness of her Bower.
Long she remained -- the enamored Knight,
Impatient at her stay,
And all unfit to taste delight
When BIRTHA was away;
Betakes him to the secret Bower;
His footsteps softly move;
Impelled by every tender power,
He steals upon his love.
O, horror! horror! blasting sight!
He sees his BIRTHA's charms,
Reclined with melting, fond delight,
Within a stranger's arms.
Wild phrenzy fires his frantic hand,
Distracted at the sight,
He flies to where the lovers stand,
And stabs the stranger Knight.
"Die, traitor, die, thy guilty flames
"Demand the avenging steel" --
"It is my brother, she exclaims,
"It Is EDWY -- Oh farewell!"
An aged peasant, EDWY's guide,
The good old ARDOLPH sought;
He told him that his bosom's pride,
His EDWY, he had brought.
O how the father's feelings melt!
How faint, and how revive!
Just so the Hebrew Patriarch felt
To find his son alive.
"Let me behold my darling's face
"And bless him ere I die!
"Then with a swift and vigorous pace
He to the Bower did hie.
O sad reverse! -- Sunk on the ground
His slaughtered son he viewed,
And dying BIRTHA close he found
In brother's blood imbued.
Cold, speechless, senseless, ELDRED near
Gazed on the deed he had done;
Like the blank statue of Despair,
Or Madness engraved in stone.
The father saw -- so Jephthah stood,
So turned his woe-fraught eye,
When the dear, destined child he viewed,
His zeal had doomed to die.
He looked the woe he could not speak,
And on the pale corse pressed
His wan, discolored, dying cheek,
And silent, sunk to rest.
Then BIRTHA faintly raised her eye,
Which long had ceased to stream,
On ELDRED fixed with many a sigh
Its dim, departing beam.
The cold, cold dews of hastening death
Upon her pale face stand;
And quick and short her failing breath,
And tremulous her hand.
The cold, cold dews of hastening death,
The dim, departing eye,
The quivering hand, the short quick breath
He viewed -- and did not die.
He saw her spirit mount in air,
Its kindred skies to seek;
His heart its anguish could not bear,
And yet it would not break.
The mournful Muse forbears to tell
How wretched ELDRED died:
She draws the Grecian In the celebrated Picture of the Sacrifice of Iphigenia,
Timanthes having exhausted every image of grief in the bystanders, threw a Veil
over the face of the father, whose sorrow he was utterly unable to express.
PLIN. Book XXXV.
Painter's veil,
The vast distress to hide.
Yet Heaven's decrees are just, and wise,
And man is born to bear:
Joy is the portion of the skies,
Beneath them, all is care.
THE END.
THE BLEEDING ROCK: A LEGENDARY TALE.
-- The annual wound allured
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate,
In amorous ditties all a summer's day,
While smooth Adonis from his native Rock
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded.
MILTON.
THE BLEEDING ROCK: A LEGENDARY TALE.
WHERE beauteous Belmont rears its modest brow
To view Sabrina's silver waves below,
Lived LINDAMIRA; fair as Beauty's Queen,
The same sweet form, the same enchanting mien;
With all the softer elegance of mind
By genius helghten'd, and by taste refined.
Yet early was she doomed the child of care,
For love, ill-fated love subdued the fair.
Ah! what avails each captivating grace,
The form enchanting, or the finished face?
Or what, each beauty of the heaven born mind,
The soul superior, or the taste refined?
Beauty but serves destruction to insure,
And sense, to feel the pang it cannot cure;
Each neighboring Youth aspired to gain her hand,
And many a suitor came from many a land.
But all in vain each neighboring Youth inspired,
And distant suitors all in vain admired,
Averse to hear, yet fearful to offend,
The lover she refused she made a friend:
Her meek rejection wore so mild a face,
More like acceptance seemed it, than disgrace.
Young POLYDORE, the pride of rural swains,
Was wont to visit Belmont's blooming plains.
Who has not heard how POLYDORE could throw
The unerring dart to wound the flying do?
How leave the swiftest at the race behind,
How mount the courser, and outstrip the wind?
With melting sweetness, or with magic fire,
Breathe the soft flute, or strike the louder lyre?
From that famed lyre no vulgar music sprung,
The Graces tuned it, and Apollo strung.
Apollo too was once a shepherd swain,
And fed the flock, and graced the rustic plain.
He taught what charms to rural life belong,
The social sweetness, and the sylvan song;
He taught, fair Wisdom in her grove to woo,
Her joys how precious, and her wants how few!
The savage herds in mute attention stood,
And ravished Echo filled the vocal wood;
The sacred Sisters, stooping from their sphere,
Forgot their golden Harps, intent to hear.
Till Heaven the scene surveyed with jealous eyes,
And Jove, in envy, called him to the skies.
Young POLYDORE was rich in large domains.
In smiling pastures and in flowery plains:
With these, he boasted each exterior charm,
To win the prudent, and the cold to warm;
To act the tenderness he never felt,
In sorrow soften, and in anguish melt,
The sigh elaborate, the fraudful tear,
The joy dissembled, and the well feigned fear,
All these were his; and his the treacherous art
That steals the guileless and unpracticed heart.
Too soon he heard of LINDAMIRA's fame,
'Twas each enamored Shepherd's favorite theme;
Returned the rising, and the setting sun,
The shepherd's favorite theme was never done.
They praised her wit, her worth, her shape, her air!
And even inferior beauties thought her fair.
Such sweet perfection all his wonder moved;
He saw, admired, nay, fancied that he loved:
But POLYDORE no real passion knew,
Lost to all truth in feigning to be true.
No sense of tenderness could warm a heart
Too proud to feel, too selfish to impart.
Cold as the snows of Rhodope descend,
And with the chilling waves of Hebrus blend;
So cold the breast where Vanity presides,
And mean Self-love the bosom-feelings guides.
Too well, he knew to make his conquest sure,
Win her soft heart, yet keep his own secure.
So often he told the well imagined tale,
So often he swore, -- how should he not prevail?
Too unsuspecting not to be deceived,
The well imagined tale the nymph believed:
She loved the youth, she thought herself beloved,
Nor blushed to praise whom every maid approved,
Alas! that youth, from LINDAMIRA far,
For newer conquests wages cruel war;
With other nymphs on other plains he roams,
Where injured LINDAMIRA never comes;
Laughs at her easy faith, insults her woe,
Nor pities tears himself had taught to flow.
And now her eyes soft radiance seemed to fail,
And now the crimson of her cheek grew pale;
The lily there, in faded beauty, shows
Its sickly empire over the vanquished rose,
Devouring Sorrow marks her for his prey,
And slow and certain mines his silent way,
Yet, as apace her ebbing life declined,
Increasing strength sustained her woman's mind.
O had my heart been hard as his,"she cried,
An hapless victim thus I had not died:
If there be gods, and gods there surely are,
lnsulted virtue doubtless is their care.
Then hasten, righteous Heaven! my tedious fate,
Shorten my woes, and end my mortal date:
Quick let your power transform this failing frame,
Let me be any thing but what I am!
And since the cruel woes I Am doomed to feel,
Proceed, alas! from having loved too well;
Grant me some form where love can have no part,
Nor human weakness reach my guarded heart:
If pity has not left your blessed abodes,
Change me to flinty adamant, ye Gods;
To hardest rock, or monumental stone,
Rather than let me know the pangs I Have known:
So shall I thus no farther torments prove,
Nor taunting rivals say, ' she died for love.
For sure if aught can aggravate our fate,
It Is scorn, or pity from the breast we hate."
She said, -- the Gods accord the sad request;
For when were pious prayers in vain addressed?
Now, strange to tell! if rural folks say true,
To hardened Rock the stiffening damsel grew;
No more her shapeless features can be known,
Stone is her body, and her limbs are stone;
The growing Rock invades her beauteous face,
And quickly petrifies each living grace;
The stone her stature nor her shape retains,
The nymph is vanished, but the Rock remains;
Yet would her heart its vital spirits keep,
And scom'd to mingle with the marble heap.
When babbling Fame the fatal tidings bore,
Grief seized the soul of perjured POLYDORE;
Despair and horror robbed his soul of rest,
And deep compunction wrung his tortured breast.
Then to the fatal spot in haste he hied,
And plunged a deadly poniard in his side;
He bent his dying eyes upon the stone,
And, "Take, sweet maid,"he cried, "my parting groan."
Fainting, the steel he grasped, and as he fell,
The weapon pierced the Rock he loved so well;
The guiltless steel assailed the mortal part,
And stabbed the vital, vulnerable heart.
The lifeblood issuing from the wounded stone,
Blends with the crimson current of his own.
And though revolving ages since have past,
The meeting torrents undiminish'd last;
Still gushes out the sanguine stream amain,
The standing wonder of the stranger swain.
Now once a year, so rustic records tell,
When over the heath resounds the midnight bell;
On eve of Midsummer, that foe to sleep,
What time young maids their annual vigils keep,
The Midsummer-men, consulted as oracular by village maids.
tell-tale shrub fresh gathered to declare
The swains who false, from those who constant are;
When ghosts in clanking chains the churchyard walk,
And to the wondering ear of Fancy talk:
When the scared maid steals trembling through the grove,
To kiss the tomb of him who died for love:
When, with long watchings, Care, at length oppressed,
Steals broken pauses of uncertain rest;
Nay, Grief short snatches of repose can take,
And nothing but Despair is quite awake:
Then, at that hour, so still, so full of fear,
When all things horrible to thought appear,
Is perjured POLYDORE observed to rove
A ghastly spectre through the gloomy grove;
Then to the Rock, the Bleeding Rock repair,
Where, sadly sighing, it dissolves to air.
Still when the hours of solemn rites return,
The village train in sad procession mourn;
Pluck every weed which might the spot disgrace,
And plant the fairest field-flow'rs in their place.
Around no noxious plant, or floweret grows,
But the first daffodil, and earliest rose:
The snow drop spreads its whitest bosom here,
And golden cowslips grace the vernal year:
Here the pale primrose takes a fairer hue,
And every violet boasts a brighter blue.
Here builds the wood lark, here the faithful dove
Laments her lost, or wooes her living love.
Secure from harm is every hallowed nest,
The spot is sacred where true lovers rest.
To guard the Rock from each malignant sprite,
A troop of guardian spirits watch by night;
Aloft in air each takes his little stand,
The neighboring hill is hence called Fairy Land. By contraction Failand, a
hill well known in Somersetshire: not far from this is The Bleeding Rock, from
which constantly issues a crimson current.

THE END.

