LINES WRITTEN IN THE ALBUM, AT COSSEY-HALL, NORFOLK, THE SEAT OF SIR WILLIAM
JERNINGHAM, BART.

AUGUST 4th, 1786.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS a considerable part of the following lines are devoted to the memory of the
late LADY JERNINGHAM; a few copies of them are printed, at the solicitation of
several of her friends, who wish to preserve this imperfect delineation of her
character.

LINES WRITTEN IN THE ALBUM, at COSSEY-HALL, NORFOLK.
I.
THOU, to whose sacred page the parting guest
Confides the workings of his grateful breast,
With awful pleasure over thy form I bend
My gift to bring -- as brother, guest, and friend.
Farewell, ye shades! (ah! not to fame unknown)
Where Elegance has reared her attic throne:
Whose beauties, to the pure of taste addressed,
In Nature's charms munificently dressed;
Whose soft amenity, with grace combined,
Display the emblem of the master's mind:
Farewell! -- Say, shall I not regret the bower
Where social intercourse endeared the hour;
Where she, whose footsteps bless this sylvan seat,
The pride and mistress of this calm retreat,
Her soul illum'd with Wisdom's piercing beam,
Sheds over the converse her enlight'ning gleam?
By native Taste, that sure directress, led,
She stores her talents at the fountainhead.
So the bright Sun-flow'r, on the cultured plain,
Aspires impatient over her sister train,
Unfolds her bosom at the dawn of day
To catch the radiance of the solar ray.
II.
Ye scenes over which I cast a lingering view,
Over which affection breathes a warm adieu,
That hour I now recall with pleasing pain,
Which gave your beauties to my wish again:
Yet then, as I approached your smiling shore,
Prompt expectation gladly flew before:
Winged with gay hope, as nearer still I drew,
Hills, plains, and woods assumed a brighter hue:
Soft-wreath'd in lilac vestment, laughing May
With hailing aspect met me on the way:
The various vale with eager steps I pressed,
Praise on my tongue, and transport in my breast:
Over each loved spot I sent a fond survey,
Where in the morn of life I wont to stray;
The winding walks by memory endeared,
Where with the growing plants my youth was reared,
Embow'ring shades, in whose deep gloom immersed
Reflection fed me, and the muses nursed,
And, screening from my view ambition's sky,
Poured other visions on my raptured eye.
III.
Yet, Album, ere the willing task I leave,
Warm from the heart these closing lines receive.
'Twas at the hour to contemplation due,
When evening meekly from the world withdrew,
Beneath an aged oak, in pensive mood,
I Sorrow's solitary captive stood;
When, from the rifted trunk's obscure recess,
A voice breathed forth in accents of distress;
"Where! where is she of mild and reverend mien,
"Once the loved mistress of this sylvan scene?" --
"Fallen -- fallen -- fallen -- fallen" -- a distant voice replied:
The branches shook, as if to sense allied;
Wild Terror flung his strong enchantment round,
And evening hurried into night profound!
Now fond remembrance turns a willing sight,
To dwell on gayer scenes of past delight,
Pleased to behold her, midst the polished train,
With grace, with dignity, her part sustain.
To mild festivity by nature prone,
With inbred with peculiarly her own,
Prompt every sportive incident to seize,
Diffusing pleasure with a careless ease;
Of power to charm invincibly possessed,
Unfelt she glided into every breast.
There are, who, framed with an enlightened taste,
High on the critic form by judgment placed,
Who (marking well her sense with strength combined,
The scintillations of her playful mind,
An aptitude that never lost its aim)
With brilliant Sevigne inwreathe her name.
To discontent, the vice of age, unknown,
Her cheerfulness maintained its envied throne:
The gay, the old, the learned, and the young,
And they whose heart pure elegance had strung,
By the soft power of her enchantment won,
Would often the glare of thronged assemblies shun,
To court her ready wit's enlivening beam,
And bask beneath its undulating gleam.
Yet often from these unnotic'd would she steal,
To soothe the bedridden stretched on Torture's wheel,
To smoothe the furrow on Misfortune's brow,
To warm the timid and exalt the low,
With lenient hand administer relief,
And close the bleeding artery of grief,
Ah, ever dear! ah, venerable shade!
Indulge this honor by Affection paid.
Enthroned in bliss, ah! yet forbear to shun
This holy tribute from a zealous son.
'Twas mine, attendant on thy evening ray,
To watch the sunset of thy blameless day;
To see thee, weary of the unequal strise,
Shed the faint glimm'rings of exhausted life,
And (heavenly moralist, sublimely great!)
At the dread opening of thy future state,
Teach by example, to thy latest breath,
Meekness in pain, and fortitude in death.

