THE Earl of Warwick, A TRAGEDY, As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for T. DAVIES, Russel Street, Covent Garden; R. BALDWIN,
Paternoster Row; and W. GRIFFIN, Catharine-Street, in the Strand. M.DCC.LXVI.
[Price ONE SHILLING and SIXPENCE.]

Advertisement. To the PUBLIC,
THE author takes this opportunity to acknowledge his obligation to the public,
for their favorable reception of THE EARL OF WARWICK. He flatters himself,
that the license so necessary to his plan, which he has taken in common with
other writers, in deviating from historical truth, especially in a period so
distant and obscure, will meet with indulgence.

For the many faults (...) of this piece, he can only plead that title to (...)
is generally extended in favor of a first essay, and (...) that the same
candor which approved on the stage, will accompany it to the closet.

He cannot, without the most manifest injustice, forbear to add, that the more
than ordinary exertion of dramatic powers, displayed by the principal actors
concerned in it, contributed in a great measure to the success of the
performance.

ERRATA.
For the blush of virgin modesty read the crimson glow of modesty.

PROLOGUE,
Written by GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire Spoken by Mr. BENSLEY.
SEVERE each poet's lot; but sure most hard
Is the condition of the playhouse bard:
Doomed to hear all that wou'd-be critics talk,
And in the go-cart of dull rules to walk!
"Yet authors multiply," you say. It Is true.
But what a numerous crop of critics too!
Scholars alone of old durst judge and write;
But now each journalist turns Stagyrite.
Quintilians in each coffee-house you meet,
And many a Longinus walks the street.
In Shakespeare's days, when his adventurous muse,
A muse of fire! durst each bold license use,
Her noble ardour met no critic's phlegm,
To check wild fancy, or her flights condemn:
Ariels and Calibans unblam'd she drew,
Or goblins, ghosts, and witches, brought to view.
If to historic truth she shaped her verse,
A nation's annals freely she would rehearse;
Bring Rome's or England's story on the stage,
And run, in three short hours, through half an age.
Our bard, all terror-struck, and filled with dread,
In Shakespeare's awful footsteps dares not tread;
Through the wide field of history fears to stray,
And builds upon one narrow spot his play;
Steps not from realm to realm, whole feas between,
But barely changes twice or thrice his scene:
While Shakespeare vaults on the poetic wire,
And pleased spectators fearfully admire,
Our bard, a critic pole between his hands,
On the tight-rope, scarce balanced, trembling stands;
Slowly and cautiously his way he makes,
And fears to fall at every step he takes:
While then fierce Warwick he before you brings,
That setter-up and puller-down of kings,
With British candor dissipate his sear!
An English story fits an English ear.
Though harsh and crude you deem his first essay,
A second may your favors well repay;
Applause may nerve his verse, and cheer his heart,
And teach the practice of this dangerous art.
Dramatis Personae.
KING EDWARD, Mr. POWELL. EARL of WARWICK, Mr. HOLLAND. EARL of PEMBROKE, Mr.
BENSLEY. EARL of SUFFOLK, Mr. PACKER.
MARGARET of ANJOU, Mrs. YATES. LADY ELIZ. GRAY, Mrs. PALMER. LADY CLIFFORD,
Miss PLYM.
OFFICERS GUARDS, etc.
SCENE, The PALACE. THE EARL of WARWICK.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
MARGARET of ANJOU, Lady CLIFFORD. CLIFFORD. THANKS! gracious heaven, my royal
mistress smiles,
Unusual gladness sparkles in her eye,
And bids me welcome in the stranger joy
To his new mansion.

MARGARET. Yes, My faithful Clifford,
Fortune is weary of oppressing me:
Through my dark cloud of grief, a cheerful ray
Of light breaks forth, and gilds the whole horison.

CLIFFORD. Henry in chains, and Edward on the throne
Of Lancaster, thyself a prisoner here,
Thy captive son torn from his mother's arms,
And in the tyrant's power, a kingdom lost:
Amidst so many sorrows, what new hope
Has wrought this wondrous change?

MARGARET. That which alone
In sorrow's bitt'rest hour, can minister
Sweet comfort to the daughters of affliction,
And bid misfortune smile, the hope of vengeance:
Vengeance, benignant patron of distress,
Thee I have often invoked, propitious now
Thou smil'st upon me, if I do not grasp
The glorious opportunity, henceforth
Indignant frown, and leave me to my fate!

CLIFFORD. Unhappy Princess! that deceiver hope
Has often flattered, and as often betrayed thee:
What have thou gained by all its promises?
What Is the reward of all thy toils?

MARGARET. Experience --
Yes, Clifford, I have read the instructive volume
Of human nature, there long since have learned
The way to conquer men is by their passions;
Catch but the ruling foible of their hearts,
And all their boasted virtues shrink before you.
Edward and Warwick, those detested names,
Too well thou know, united to destroy me.

CLIFFORD. That was indeed a fatal league.

MARGARET. But mark me;
If we could break this adamantine chain,
We might again be free: this mighty warrior,
This dread of kings, the unconquerable Warwick,
Is plighted to the fair Elizabeth.

CLIFFORD. The lady Gray, you mean, the beauteous widow,
Whose husband fell in arms for Lancaster.

MARGARET. The same, my Clifford -- Warwick long has loved --

CLIFFORD. And means to wed her.

MARGARET. But if I have art,
Or she ambition, that shall never be.

CLIFFORD. Can thou prevent it?

MARGARET. Yes, my Clifford, Warwick
Were a mean choice for such transcendent beauty;
I shall provide her with a fitter husband,
A nobler far, and worthier of her charms,
Young Edward. --

CLIFFORD. Ha! the king! impossible!
Warwick, even now, commissioned by the state,
To treat with Lewis, offers England's throne
To France's daughter, and ever this, perhaps,
Has signed the solemn contract.

MARGARET. Solemn trifles!
Mere cobweb ties -- Love's a despotic tyrant,
And laughs, like other kings, at public faith,
When it opposes private happiness:
Edward is youthful, gay, and amorous;
His soul is ever open to the lure
Of beauty, and Elizabeth has charms
Might shake a hermit's virtue.

CLIFFORD. Has he seen
This peerless fair one?

MARGARET. Yes, -- by my contrivance,
When last he hunted in the forest, some,
Whom I had planted there, as if by chance
Alone directed, led him cross the lawn
To Grafton, there -- even as my soul had wished,
The dazzling luster of her charms surprised
His unsuspecting heart --

CLIFFORD. What followed?

MARGARET. O!
He gazed and wondered; for a while his pride
Indignant rose, and struggled with his passion,
But love was soon victorious: and last night,
The earl of Suffolk, so my trusty spies
Inform me, was dispatched on wings of love,
To plead his master's cause, and offer her
The throne of England.

CLIFFORD. What if she refuse
The golden bribe?

MARGARET. No matter; all I wish
Is but to make them foes: the generous Warwick
Is fiery, and impatient of reproof,
He will not brook a rival in his love
Though seated on a throne; besides, thou know,
The haughty earl looks down with scorn on Edward,
As the mere work of his all-pow'rful hand,
The baby monarch of his own creation.

CLIFFORD. Believe me, madam, Edward still reveres
And loves him, still as conscious of the debt,
Pays him with trust and confidence; their souls
Are linked together in the strictest bonds
Of sacred friendship.

MARGARET. That but serves my cause:
Where ties are close, and interests united,
The slightest inj'ries are severely felt;
Offended friendship never can forgive.

CLIFFORD. Now the full prospect opens to my view,
I see thy distant aim, and trace the paths
Of vengeance: England soon will be a scene
Of blood and horror, discord's fatal torch
Once lit up it in this devoted land,
What power shall ever extinguish it? alas!
I tremble at the consequence.

MARGARET. And I
Enjoy it: -- O! 'twill be a noble contest
Of pride against pride, oppression against oppression;
Rise but the storm, and let the waves beat high,
The wreck may be our own: in the warm struggle,
Who knows but one or both of them may fall,
And Marg'ret rise triumphant on their ruin!
It must be so; and see the king approaches:
This way he passes from the council -- mark
His down-cast eye, he is a stricken deer,
The arrow's in his side -- he cannot 'scape:
We'll meet and speak to him.

CLIFFORD. What mean you, madam?

MARGARET. To ask him -- what, I know, he will refuse;
That gives me fair pretext to break with him,
And join the man I hate, vindictive Warwick;
But soft, he comes --

SCENE II.
KING EDWARD, MARGARET, CLIFFORD, OFFICER. EDWARD. Is Suffolk yet returned? (to
an Officer.)

OFFICER. No, my good liege.

EDWARD. Go, wait and bring him to me,
[Ex. Of. I Will to my closet.
Pardon me, fair lady,
I saw you not.

MARGARET. Perhaps it is beneath
A conqu'ror to look down upon his slave;
But I Have a boon to ask.

EDWARD. Whatever it is,
Within the limits of fair courtesy,
Which honor can bestow, I Will not refuse thee.

MARGARET. There was a time when Margaret of Anjou
Would not have deigned to ask of Edward ought;
Nor was there ought which Edward dared refuse her;
But that is past, great Warwick's arm prevailed,
And I am now your prisoner.

EDWARD. Since the hour,
When fortune smiled propitious on the cause
Of justice, and gave victory to our arms;
You have been treated with all due respect,
All your condition, or your sex could claim;
Served like a queen, and lodged within our palace:
Is there ought more you can with reason ask,
Or I in prudence grant you.

MARGARET. Give me back
The liberty I lost, restore my son,
And I may then, perhaps, be reconciled
To un usurper, may withold my vengeance,
And let thee fit unpunished on -- my throne.

EDWARD. You talk too proudly, madam; but to show you
I cannot fear, you have your liberty.
Letters this morning I received from France,
Have offered noble ransom for your person;
Without that ransom -- for the soul of Edward
Is far above the sordid lust of gold,
I grant it -- from this moment you are free;
But for your son -- I cannot part with him.

MARGARET. I scorn your bounties, scorn your proffered freedom,
What Is liberty to me without my child?
But fate will place us soon above thy reach,
Thy short-lived tyranny is almost past,
The storm is gathering round thee, and will burst
With ten-fold vengeance on thy guilty head.

EDWARD. I am not to be talked into submission,
Nor dread the menace of a clamorous woman.

MARGARET. Thou may have cause to dread a woman's power:
The time may come -- mark my prophetic word --
When wayward beauty shall repay with scorn
Thy fruitless vows, and vindicate my wrongs:
The friend thou lean'st on, like a broken reed,
Shall pierce thy side, and fill thy soul with anguish,
Keen as the pangs I feel: York's perjured house
Shall sink to rise no more, and Lancaster
With added luster reassume the throne.
Hear this and tremble -- give me back my son --
Or dread the vengeance of a desperate mother.

SCENE III.
EDWARD. Imperious woman! but the voice of woe
Is ever clamorous: it is the privilege,
The charter of affliction to complain. --
This tardy Suffolk! how I long to know
Yet dread to hear my fate! Elizabeth,
On thee the color of my future life
Depends, for thou alone can make me blessed,
Or cursed for ever: -- O! this cruel doubt
Is worse than all my tortures: but he comes,
The ambassador of love.

SCENE IV.
EDWARD, EARL of SUFFOLK. EDWARD. What news, my Suffolk?
Shall I be happy? O! I Am on the rack
Of expectation, did thou tell my tale
As if it were thy own, and may I hope --

SUFFOLK. My royal liege.

EDWARD. Good Suffolk, lay aside
The forms of dull respect, be brief, and tell me,
Speak, have thou seen her, will she be my queen?
Quick, tell me every circumstance, each word,
Each look, each gesture; did thou mark them, Suffolk?

SUFFOLK. I did, and will recount it all; -- last night
By your command, in secret I repaired
To Grafton's tufted bower, the happy seat
Of innocence and beauty, there I found
Thy soul's best hope, the fair Elizabeth,
Never did these eyes behold such sweet perfection:
I found her busied in the pious office
Of filial duty, tending her sick father.

EDWARD. That was a lucky moment, to prefer
My humble suit: touch but the tender string
Of soft compassion in the heart, and love
Will quickly vibrate to its kindred passion;
You urged our royal purpose, then?

SUFFOLK. I did,
With all the warmth of friendship, dwelt with pleasure
On every princely virtue that adorns
Your noble heart; she listened with attention,
And echoed back your praises.

EDWARD. Was not that
A kind propitious omen?

SUFFOLK. Such indeed
Hoping to find it, I called in the powers
Of flattery to my aid, and gazed upon her,
As if confounded by her dazzling beauties --
Conscious she smiled; but when, at length, I spoke
Of England's monarch sighing at her feet --
The blush of virgin modesty overspread
Her cheek, and gave new luster to her charms;
She turned aside, and as she silent bowed
Her doubtful thanks, I marked the pearly tear
Steal down its secret track, and from her breast
Heard a deep sigh, she struggled to conceal;
If I have any judgment, or can trace
The hidden feelings of a woman's heart,
Here Is is already fixed: I fear, my liege,
With all that England, all that thou coud'st give,
The crown would fit but heavy on her brow.

EDWARD. Not heavier, Suffolk, than it sits on mine:
My throne is irksome to me; who would wish
To be a sovereign, when Elizabeth
Presers a subject? -- Then the impetuous Warwick,
His awful virtue will chastise my weakness.
I dread his censure, dread his keen reproaches,
And dread them more because they will be just.
I Have promised Lewis to espouse his daughter,
To strengthen our alliance: would to heaven
I had not! If I seek this coy refuser,
And break with France, Warwick will take the alarm;
If once offended, he is inexorable.

SUFFOLK. I know him well -- Believe me, Sir, the high
And haughty spirit, when it meets rebuke,
Is easiest checked, and sinks into submission.
Let him, my liege, who ventures to arraign
His master's conduct, look into his own:
There ever is a corner in the heart
Open to folly; Warwick is not free
From human frailties.

EDWARD. No: ambition fires
His noble breast, love triumphs over mine:
But well thou know, our eyes are ever open
To other's faults, and shut against our own.
We seldom pity woes we never experienced,
Or pardon weakness which we do not feel:
He is a hero.

SUFFOLK. Hero's are but men;
I have some cause to think so -- but of that
We'll talk another time: mean while my liege,
I think lord Warwick is a useful friend.

EDWARD. Aye, and a dangerous foe; the people love,
To adoration love him; if he falls
From his allegiance, crowds will follow him.
England has long been rent by civil broils,
And fain would rest her in the arms of peace:
Her wounds scarce closed, shall Edward open them,
And bid them bleed a-fresh? believe me, Suffolk,
I would not be the cause of new divisions
Amongst my people, for a thousand kingdoms.

SUFFOLK. It Is nobly said, and may thy grateful subjects,
Revere thy virtues, and reward thy love!

EDWARD. O! Suffolk, did they know but half the cares
That wait on royalty, they would not grudge
Their wretched master a few private hours
Of social happiness. -- If France consents,
I am undone: and Warwick has ever this
Enslaved me: curse on this state policy,
That binds us thus to love at second hand!
Who knows but he may link me to a wretch;
Wed me to folly, ignorance, and pride,
Ill Nature, sickness, or deformity;
And when I Am chained to misery, coldly tell me,
To sooth my griefs, 'twas for the public good.

SUFFOLK. How far you have commissioned him, I know not,
But were I worthy to advise, my liege,
I would not be the dupe of his ambition,
But follow natures dictates, and be happy.
England has charms besides Elizabeth's,
And beauties that --

EDWARD. No more; my heart is fixed
On her alone; find out this powerful rival,
I charge thee, Suffolk: yet why wish to find,
What found will make me wretched? were he bound
In cords of tenderest friendship round my heart,
Dearer than Warwick, dearer than thyself,
Forgive me, but I fear I should abhor him.
O think on something that may yet be done,
To win her to my heart ever Warwick comes.

SUFFOLK. I hear he is expected every hour.

EDWARD. Grant heaven some friendly storm may yet retard him!
I dread his presence here.

SCENE IV.
MESSENGER, EDWARD, SUFFOLK. MESSENGER. My liege, the earl
Of Warwick, is arrived.

EDWARD. Ha! when? how? where?
Would he were buried in the rapid waves
That brought him hither! comes he here to night?

MESSENGER. My liege, ever now he might have reaoh'd the palace,
But that the shouting multitudes press hard
On every side, and seem to worship him.

SCENE V.
SUFFOLK, EDWARD. SUFFOLK. Such adoration
But ill befits the idol, that receives it.

EDWARD. What Is to be done? I cannot, must not see him,
Till all is fixed: once more, my best-lov'd Suffolk;
Try the soft arts of thy persuasive tongue:
What method can thou think on, to evade
This promised marriage with ambitious France?

SUFFOLK. Summon your council, lay your thoughts before them,
Meet Warwick there, and urge a sov'reigns right,
To please himself in that which should concern
Himself alone -- firm Buckingham and I
Will plead your cause against the haughty Warwick,
Whom I would treat with cold civility,
And distant state which ever angers more
Resentful spirits, than the warmth of passion.

EDWARD. It Is well advised: -- mean-time if possible,
I will compose my troubled thoughts to rest:
Suffolk, adieu: if Warwick asks for me,
I am not well, I Am hunting in the forest --
I Am busy -- stay -- remember what I told you,
Touching the earldom which I mean to give
Her father; that may bring her to the court;
You understand me, Suffolk -- fare thee well.

SCENE VI.
EDWARD. Why should I dread to see the man I love --
The man I reverence -- Warwick is not changed,
But Edward is -- Suffolk, I know, abhors him --
A favorite must be hated -- if he urges
This dreadful contract, I shall hate him too:
I cannot live without Elizabeth:
I Will think no more -- if I must sacrifice
My friendship or my love -- the choice is made.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
WARWICK (Speaking to an officer.) WARWICK. IT IS well: I shall attend his
highness' pleasure.
[Comes forward.] Meet me in the council! Warwick might have claimed
A private audience -- After all my toils,
My perils in his service, it is a cold
Unkind reception: some base whisperer,
Some needy sycophant, perhaps, has poisoned
My royal master's ear -- or, do I judge
Too rashly? As my embassy concerns
The public welfare, he would honor me
With public thanks. -- Elizabeth will chide me
For this unkind delay -- but honor calls,
And duty to my king: that task performed,
I haste, my love, to happiness and thee.

SCENE II. the COUNCIL CHAMBER.
King EDWARD, Dukes of CLARENCE, and BUCKINGHAM, Earls of SUFFOLK, PEMBROKE,
etc. EDWARD. Good Buckingham, I thank thee for thy counsel,
Nor blame thy honest warmth; I love this freedom,
(...) is the birthright of an Englishman,
And does become thee: what says noble Suffolk?

SUFFOLK. I would not cross my royal master's will;
But, on my soul, I think, this nuptial league
With France prepost'rous and impolitic!
It cannot last; we are by nature foes,
And naught but mutual poverty and weakness,
Can ever make us friends -- she wants our aid
Against the powerful Burgundy, and therefore,
Throws out this lure of beauty to ensnare you,
That purpose gained, she turns her arms against us.

PEMBROKE. Why, let her: if she comes with hostile arm,
England thank heaven, is ready to receive her:
I love my country, and revere my king,
As much perhaps as honest Buckingham,
Or my good fearful lord of Suffolk here,
Who knows so well, or would be thought to know,
What France will do hereafter: yet I think,
The faith of nations is a thing so sacred,
It ought not to be trifled with. -- I hate
As much as you the unnatural forced alliance,
And yet, my lords, if Warwick is empow'r'd,
For so I hear he is, to treat with Lewis;
I know not how in honor you can swerve
From his conditions.
(shouting.) Hark! the hero comes:
Those shouts proclaim him near: the joyful people
Will usher in their great deliverer
As he deserves.

SCENE III.
KING EDWARD, CLARENCE, SUFFOLK, BUCKINGHAM, PEMBROKE, WARWICK. EDWARD. Thrice
welcome, noble Warwick,
Welcome to all!
[to Clarence, Pembroke, etc.
SUFFOLK. You Have had, my lord, I fear,
An arduous task, which few could execute.
But Warwick, in the council and the field,
A like distinguished, and a like successful.

EDWARD. What says our cousin France?

WARWICK. By me, my liege,
He greets you well, and hopes in closer ties
United soon to wear a dearer name.
At length, thank heaven! the iron gates of war
Are closed, and peace displays her silken banners
Over the contending nations, every doubt
Is now removed, and confidence established,
I hope, to last for ages.

EDWARD. Peace, my lord,
Is ever welcome; it is the gift of heaven,
The nurse of science, art's fair patroness,
And merit's best protector; but if France
Would chain us down to ignominious terms,
Cramp our free commerce, and infringe the rights
Of our liege subjects, England may repent
Too late her rash credulity, and peace
With all her blessings may be bought too dear.

WARWICK. The shame would then be his, who made the purchase.
If any doubt my faith, my honest zeal
For thee and for my country, let him speak,
And I will answer: punish me, just heaven,
If in the task I have consulted ought
But England's honor, and my sov'reign's glory!

EDWARD. Mistake me not, good Warwick, well I know
Thy spotless truth, thy honor, and thy love;
But glory has no further charms for me:
Raised by thy powerful aid to England's throne,
I ask no more: -- already I am great
As fame and fortune with their smiles can make me,
And all I wish for now is -- to be happy.

WARWICK. That too my liege, has been thy Warwick's care;
Happy thou shall be if the fairest form
That ever caught a gazing lover's eye,
Joined to the sweetest most engaging virtues
Can make thee so: -- Bona accepts with joy
Thy proffered hand: she is indeed a gem
Fit to adorn the brightest crown: to see
Is to admire her; trust me, England's self
The seat of beauty, and the throne of love,
Boasts not a fairer.

EDWARD. Beauty, good my lord,
Is all ideal, it is the wayward child
Of fancy, shifting with the changeful wind
Of fond opinion; what to you appears
The model of perfection, may disgust
My strange capricious taste.

WARWICK. Such charms would fix
Inconstancy itself: -- her winning virtues,
Even if her beauty failed, would soon subdue
The rebel heart, and you would learn to love her.

EDWARD. Is passion to be learned then? would thou make
A science of affection, guide the heart,
And teach it where to fix? impossible!
It Is strange philosophy.
(Rises and comes forward.) My lord, of Warwick,
Your zeal in England's, and in Edward's cause
Merits our thanks; but for the intended marriage
With France's daughter -- it may never be.

WARWICK. Not be! it must: your sacred word is passed,
And cannot be recalled: but three days since
I signed the contract, and my honor's pledged
For the performance: heaven's! whilst fickle France
Is branded 'midst the nations of the earth,
For breach of public faith, shall we, my liege,
Practice ourselves the vices we condemn,
Pass over a rival nation's every virtue,
And imitate their persidy alone?

EDWARD. You Will pardon me, my lord, I thought it part
Of a king's power to have a will, to see
With his own eyes, and in life's little feast,
To cater for himself; but it is, it seems,
A privilege his servants can refuse him.

WARWICK. And so they ought -- the king, who cannot conquer
His private interest for the public welfare,
Knows not his duty.

EDWARD. Kings, my lord, are born
With passions, feelings, hearts -- like other men;
Nor see I yet, why Edward's happiness
Must fall a sacrifice to Warwick's honor.

WARWICK. My honor, Sir, is yours; my cause your own:
Who sent me, and whose image did I bear,
The image of a great and glorious king,
Or of a weak and wavering boy? -- henceforth,
Choose from the herd of fawning sycophants,
Some needy slave for your mock ambassys,
To do your work, and stain the name of England
With foul reproach -- Edward, I blush for thee,
And for my country; from this hour, expect
From injured France contempt, with deep resentment
For broken faith, and enmity eternal.

EDWARD. Eternal be it then; for, as I prize
My inward peace, beyond the pomp of state,
And all the tinsel glare of fond ambition,
I will not wed her. Gracious heaven! what am I?
The meanest peasant in my realm may choose
His rustic bride, and share with her the sweets
Of mutual friendship and domestic bliss;
Why should my happier subjects then deny me
The common rights, the privilege of nature,
And in a land of freedom thus conspire
To make their king the only slave amongst 'em?

WARWICK. The worst of slaves is he whom passion rules,
Uncheck'd by reason and the powerful voice
Of friendship, which, I fear, is heard no more
By thoughtless Edward -- it is the curse of kings
To be surrounded by a venal herd
Of flatterers, that sooth his darling vices,
And rob their master of his subjects love.
Nay, frown not, Sirs, supported as ye are,
I fear you not -- which of this noble train,
These well-beloved counselors and friends,
Assembled here to witness my disgrace,
Have urged to this base unmanly falsehood?
Shame on you all! to stain the spotless mind
Of uncorrupted youth, undo the work
Of Warwick's friendly hand, and give him back
A sovereign so unlike the noble Edward.

SUFFOLK. My lord, we thank you for the kind suggestion
However ill-founded, and when next we meet,
To give our voice in ought that may concern
The public weal, no doubt shall ask your leave
Ever we proceed.

PEMBROKE. My lord of Suffolk, speak
But for yourself; Warwick has too much cause
To be offended: in my poor opinion,
Whatever you courtiers think, the best support
Of England's throne are equity and truth;
Nor will I hold that man my sov'reign's friend,
Who shall exhort him to forsake his word,
And play the hypocrite: what tie shall bind
The subject to obedience, when his king,
Bankrupt in honor gives the royal sanction
To perfidy and falsehood?

BUCKINGHAM. It becomes
But ill the earl of Pembroke --

EDWARD. Good my lords --
Let us have no dissentions here; we met
For other purposes -- some few days hence
We shall expect your counsel in affairs
Of moment -- for the present urge no further
This matter -- fare ye well.
[The council break up and disperse.
EDWARD comes up to Warwick. Lord Warwick, keep
In narrower bounds, that proud impetuous temper;
It may be fatal: there are private reasons --
When time befits we shall impart them to you,
Meanwhile -- if you have friendship, love, or duty,
No more of Bona -- I Am determined.

SCENE IV.
WARWICK. So:
It Is well: it is very well: I have deserved it;
I Have borne this callow eagle on my wing,
And now he spurns me from him: it is a change
I little looked for, and sits heavy on me:
Alas! how doubly painful is the wound,
When it is inflicted by the hand we love!
Cruel, ungrateful Edward! --
Ha! who is here?
The captive queen! if she has ought to ask
Of me, she comes in luckless hour, for I
Am pow'rless now.

SCENE V.
MARGARET of ANJOU, WARWICK. WARWICK. Will Margaret of Anjou
Thus deign to visit her acknowledged foe?

MARGARET. Alas! my lord, inured to wretchedness
As I am, and familiar with misfortune,
I harbor no resentment; have long since
Forgot that ever Warwick was my foe,
And only wish to prove myself his friend.

WARWICK. Talk not of friendship, it is an empty name,
And lives but in idea; once indeed
I thought I had a friend. --

MARGARET. Whose name was -- Edward;
Read I aright, my lord, and am I not
A shrewd diviner? yes; that down-cast eye
And gloomy aspect say I am: you look
As if the idol, made by your own hands,
Had fallen upon and crushed you, is it not so?

WARWICK. Amazement! naught escapes thy piercing eye,
And penetrating judgment: it is too true,
I am a poor dishonored slave,
Not worth thy seeking; leave me, for the tide
Of court preferment flows another way.

MARGARET. The feast, perhaps, you have provided, suits not
With Edward's nicer palate; he disdains,
How sweet soever, to taste a foreign banquet,
And relishes no dainties but his own:
Am I again mistaken?

WARWICK. Sure thou deal'st
With some all-knowing spirit, who imparts
Each secret purpose to thee, else how knew'st thou
That Edward refused to wed the princess?

MARGARET. O! it requires no supernatural aid
To trace his actions, nor has Marg'ret trod
The paths of life with unobserving eye;
I could have told you this long since -- for know,
The choice is made, the nuptial rites prepared,
Which, but for your return, as unexpected
As undesired, had been, ever this, complete;
And as in duty bound, you then had paid
Your due obedience to our -- English queen.

WARWICK. Determined, say thou? gracious heaven! it is well
I am returned.

MARGARET. Indeed, my lord, you came
A little out of season, 'twas unkind
To interrupt your master's happiness,
To blast so fair a passion in its bloom,
And check the rising harvest of his love.

WARWICK. Marg'ret, I thank thee -- yes, it must be so:
His blushes, his confusion, all confirm it,
And yet I am amazed, astonished.

MARGARET. Wherefore? --
Is it so strange a youthful prince should love?
Is it so strange, a mind, unfraught with wisdom,
And lifted high with proud prosperity,
Should follow pleasure through the crooked paths
Of falsehood, should forsake a useless friend,
For the warm joys of animating beauty?

WARWICK. No: but it is strange, that he who knows how much
He owed to Warwick, he, who every hour
Tastes the rich stream of bounty, should forget
The fountain whence it flowed.

MARGARET. Alas! my lord,
Had you been chasten'd in affliction's school
As I have been, and taught by sad experience
To know mankind, you had not fallen a prey
To such delusion.

WARWICK. Was it like a friend,
Was it like Edward to conceal his love?
Some base insinuating, artful woman,
With borrowed charms, perhaps. --

MARGARET. Hold, hold, my lord,
Be not too rash: who fights in darkness often
May wound a bosom friend: perhaps you wrong
The best, and most accomplished of her sex.

WARWICK. Know you the lady?

MARGARET. But as fame reports,
Of peerless beauty and transcendent charms,
But for her virtues -- I must ask of -- you --

WARWICK. Of me? what virtues? whose?

MARGARET. Elizabeth's.

WARWICK. Amazement! no: it must not, it cannot be:
Elizabeth! he could not, dare not do it!
Confusion! I shall soon discover all.
(aside.) But what have I to do with Edward's choice,
Whoever she be, if he refuses mine?

MARGARET. Dissimulation sits but ill, my lord,
On minds like yours: I am a poor weak woman,
And so, it seems, you think me; but suppose
That same all-knowing spirit which you raised,
Who condescends so kindly to instruct me,
Should whisper -- Warwick knows the power of love
As well as Edward, that Elizabeth
Was his first wish, the idol of his soul;
What say you? -- might I venture to believe it?

WARWICK. Marg'ret, you might; for it is in vain to hide
A thought from thee; it might have told you too,
If it be so, there is not such a wretch
On earth as Warwick: give me but the proof --

MARGARET. Lord Suffolk was last night dispatched to Grafton,
To offer her a share in Edward's throne.

WARWICK. Which she refused: did she not, Marg'ret? say
She did.

MARGARET. I know not that, my lord, but crowns
Are dazzling meteors in a woman's eye;
Such strong temptations, few of us, I fear,
Have virtue to resist.

WARWICK. Elizabeth
Has every virtue, I Will not doubt her faith.

MARGARET. Edward is young and handsome.

WARWICK. Curses on him!
Think thou he knew my fond attachment there?

MARGARET. O passing well, my lord, and when 'twas urged,
How deeply 'twou'd affect you, swore by heaven,
Imperious Warwick never should be the master
Of charms like hers; 'twas happiness, he said,
Beyond a subject's merit to deserve,
Beyond his hope to wish for or aspire to.

WARWICK. But for that Warwick, Edward's self had been
A subject still -- and -- may be so -- hereafter.
Thou smil'st at my misfortunes.

MARGARET. I must smile
When I behold a subtle statesman thus
Duped and deluded by a shallow boy,
Sent on a fruitless errand to expose
His country and himself -- it was indeed
A master stroke of policy, beyond
One should have thought, the reach of years so green
As Edward's, to dispatch the weeping lover,
And seize the glorious opportunity
Of tamp'ring with his mistress here at home.

WARWICK. Did Nevil, Rutland, Clifford, bleed for this?

MARGARET. For this does Henry languish in a dungeon,
And wretched Marg'ret live a life of woe:
For this you gave the crown to pious Edward,
And thus he thanks you for his kingdom.

WARWICK. Crowns
Are baubles, fit for children like himself
To play with, I have scattered many of them:
But thus to cross me in my dearest hope,
The sweet reward of all my toils for him
And for his country; if I suffer it,
If I forgive him, may I live the scorn
Of men, a branded coward, and old age
Without or love or reverence be my portion!
Henceforth, good Marg'ret, know me for thy friend,
We will have noble vengeance; -- are there not
Still left among'st the lazy sons of peace,
Some busy spirits who wish well to thee
And to thy cause?

MARGARET. There are: resentment sleeps,
But is not dead; beneath the hollow cover
Of loyalty, the slumbering ashes lie
Unheeded, Warwick's animating breath
Will quickly light them into flames again.

WARWICK. Then, Edward, from this moment I abjure thee:
O I will make thee ample recompense
For all the wrongs that I have done the house
Of Lancaster: -- go, summon all thy friends;
Be quick, good Marg'ret, haste ever I repent,
And yield my soul to perjured York again.
The king, I think gives you free liberty,
To range abroad.

MARGARET. He does, and I will use it,
As I would ever use the gift of foes,
To his destruction.

WARWICK. That arch-pandar, Suffolk,
That minister of vice -- but time is precious;
Tomorrow, Marg'ret, we will meet in private,
And have some further conference; mean-time
Devise, consult, use every means against
Our common foe: remember, from this hour,
Warwick's thy friend -- be secret and be happy.

SCENE VI.
MARGARET. What easy fools these cunning statesmen are,
With all their policy, when once they fall
Into a woman's power! This gallant leader,
This blustering Warwick, how the hero shrunk
And lessened to my sight! -- Elizabeth,
I thank thee for thy wonder-working charms;
The time perhaps may come, when I shall stand
Indebted to them for -- the throne of England.
Proud York beware, for Lancaster's great name
Shall rise superior in the lists of fame:
Fortune that long had frowned, shall smile at last,
And make amends for all my sorrows past.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
MARGARET, CLIFFORD, Attendants. MARGARET. [to a gentleman. DISPATCH these
letters strait; to Scotland -- this
To the French envoy -- these to the earl of Pembroke.
[turning to lady Clifford. Thus far, my friend, has fortune favored us
Beyond our hopes: the soul of haughty Warwick
Is all on fire, and puling Edward loves
With most romantic ardour -- O my Clifford,
You would have smiled to see how artfully
I played upon him: flattered, soothed, provoked,
And wrought him to my purpose: we are linked
In firmest bonds of amity and love.

CLIFFORD. Has Warwick then so soon forgot his Edward?
Think thou the frantic earl will ever exert
His ill-directed powers to pull down
The royal structure, which himself had raised?
Never.

MARGARET. What is there disappointed love
And unrestrained ambition will not do?
I tell thee, we are sworn and cordial friends.

CLIFFORD. Thou know he hates the house of Lancaster.

MARGARET. No matter -- he has mavelous good skill
In making kings, and I -- have business for him.

CLIFFORD. And can thou then forget the cruel wrongs,
The deep-felt inj'ries of oppressive Warwick,
To join the hand that forged thy husband's chains
And robbed thee of a crown?

MARGARET. But what -- my Clifford,
If the same hand that ravished should restore it!
It Is a court friendship and may last as long
As interest shall direct: I Have not forgot,
No, nor forgiven; I hate, abhor, detest him,
But I will use him as my instrument;
My necessary tool, I Will make him draw
His traitorous sword, to sheath it in the breast
Of him he loves, then point it to his own:
Yes, Clifford, I have twined me round his heart;
Like the fell serpent crept into his bosom,
That I might sting more surely: he shall perish;
I keep him for the last dear precious morsel,
To crown the glorious banquet of revenge.

CLIFFORD. It Is what he merits from us, yet the attempt
Were dangerous, he is still the people's idol,

MARGARET. And so perhaps shall Marg'ret be; applause
Waits on success; the fickle multitude,
Like the light straw that floats along the stream,
Glide with the current still and follow fortune.
Our prospect brightens every hour: -- the people
Are ripe for a revolt: by civil wars,
Long time inured to savage scenes of plunder
And desolation, they delight in war:
These English heroes, when once fleshed with slaughter,
Like the keen mastiff, lose not soon the track
Of vengeance, nor forget the taste of blood.

CLIFFORD. What further succors have we to depend on,
Beside earl Warwick's?

MARGARET. O his name alone
Will be an army to us.

CLIFFORD. If we have it:
Resentment is a short-lived passion -- what
If Warwick should relent, and turn again
To Edward?

MARGARET. Then I have a bosom friend
That shall be ready to reward him for it; --
But I have better hopes: without his aid;
We are not friendless: Scotland's hardy sons
Who smile at danger, and defy the storm,
Will leave their barren mountains to defend
That liberty they love: add too the aid
Of gallant Pembroke, and the powers which France
Will send to vindicate her injured honor:
Ever Edward can collect his force and take
The field, we shall be thirty thousand strong.

CLIFFORD. But what becomes of the young prince?

MARGARET. Aye; there
I am indeed unhappy, O my child,
How shall I set him free? -- hear nature, hear
A mother's prayer! O guide me with thy counsel,
And teach me how to save my darling boy.
-- Aye, now I have it: monitress divine,
I thank thee: -- yes; I wait but for the means
Of his escape, then fly this hated palace,
Nor will return till I can call it mine.

SCENE II.
EDWARD, SUFFOLK. EDWARD. I fear we have gone too far: the indignant Warwick
Ill brook'd our steady purpose; marked you, Suffolk,
With what an eye of scorn he turned him from us,
And lowr'd defiance -- that prophetic woman!
Half of her curse already is fulfilled,
And I have lost my friend.

SUFFOLK. Some friends, perhaps,
Are better lost: you will pardon me, my liege,
But, were it fitting, I could tell a tale
Would soon convince you -- Warwick is as weak --

EDWARD. As Edward thou would say.

SUFFOLK. But 'twill distress
Thy noble heart too much, I dare not, Sir,
Yet one day you must know it.

EDWARD. Then by thee
Let it be told me, Suffolk, thy kind hand
Will best administer the bitter draught:
Go on, my Suffolk, speak, I charge thee, speak.

SUFFOLK. That rival whom you wished me to discover --

EDWARD. Aye, what of him? quick, tell me, have thou found
The happy traitor? give me but to know
That I may wreak my speedy vengeance on him.

SUFFOLK. Suppose that rival were the man whom most
You loved, the man, perhaps, whom most you feared;
Suppose 'twere -- Warwick.

EDWARD. Ha! it cannot be:
I would not think it for a thousand worlds --
Warwick in love with her, impossible!
Now, Suffolk, do I fear thou speak from envy
And jealous hatred at the noble Warwick,
Not from the love of justice or of Edward;
Where did thou learn this falsehood?

SUFFOLK. From the lips
Of truth, from one whose honor and whose word
You will not question; from -- Elizabeth.

EDWARD. From her! nay, then I fear -- it must be so.

SUFFOLK. When last I saw her, for again I went
By your command, though hopeless of success,
With all the little eloquence that I
Was master of, I urged your ardent passion.
Told her how much, how tenderly you loved her,
And pressed with eagerness to know the cause
Of her unkind refusal, till at length
Reluctantly, with blushes she confessed
There was a cause; -- she thanked you for your goodness,
'Twas more she said, much more than she deserved,
She ever should revere her king: and if
She had a heart to give it should be -- Edward's.

EDWARD. So kind, and yet so cruel: well, go on.

SUFFOLK. Then told me all the story of her love,
That Warwick long had wooed her -- that her hand
Was promised; soon as he returned from France,
Though once her father cruelly opposed it,
They were by his consent to be united.

EDWARD. O never, Suffolk, may I live to see
That dreadful hour! designing hypocrite.
Are these his arts, is this the friend I loved?
By heaven! she shall be mine; I will assert
A sov'reign's right, and tear her from him -- what
If he rebel -- another civil war!
It Is terrible -- O that I could shake off
This cumbrous garb of majesty that clings
So close around me, meet him man to man,
And try who best deserves her! but when kings
Grow mad, their guiltless subjects pay the forfeit.
Horrible thought -- good Suffolk, for a while
I would be private -- therefore wait without,
Let me have no intruders; above all,
Keep Warwick from my sight --

SCENE III.
WARWICK, EDWARD. WARWICK. Behold him here;
No welcome guest it seems, unless I ask
My lord of Suffolk's leave -- there was a time
When Warwick wanted not his aid to gain
Admission here.

EDWARD. There was a time perhaps,
When Warwick more desired and more -- deserved it.

WARWICK. Never; I Have been a foolish faithful slave;
All my best years, the morning of my life,
Has been devoted to your service: what
Are now the fruits? disgrace and infamy;
My spotless name which never yet the breath
Of calumny had tainted, made the mock
For foreign fools to carp at: but it is fit
Who trust in princes, should be thus rewarded.

EDWARD. I thought, my lord, I had full well repaid
Your services with honors, wealth, and power
Unlimited: thy all-directing hand
Guided in secret every latent wheel
Of government, and moved the whole machine:
Warwick was all in all, and pow'rless Edward
Stood like a cipher in the great account.

WARWICK. Who gave that cipher worth, and seated thee
On England's throne? thy undistinguished name
Had rotted in the dust from whence it sprang,
And moulder'd in oblivion, had not Warwick
Dug from its sordid mine the useless ore,
And stamped it with a diadem. Thou know,
This wretched country, doomed, perhaps, like Rome,
To fall by its own self-destroying hand,
Tossed for so many years in the rough sea
Of civil discord, but for me had perished.
In that distressful hour I seized the helm,
Bade the rough waves subside in peace, and steered
Your shattered vessel safe into the harbor.
You may despise, perhaps, that useless aid
Which you no longer want; but know, proud youth,
He who forgets a friend, deserves a foe.

EDWARD. Know too, reproach for benefits received
Pays every debt, and cancels obligation.

WARWICK. Why, that indeed is frugal honesty,
A thrifty saving knowledge, when the debt
Grows burdensome, and cannot be discharged.
A sponge will wipe out all, and cost you nothing.

EDWARD. When you have counted over the numerous train
Of mighty gifts your bounty lavished on me,
You may remember next the inj'ries
Which I have done you; let me know 'em all,
And I will make you ample satisfaction.

WARWICK. Thou can not; thou have robbed me of a jewel
It is not in thy power to restore:
I was the first, shall future annals say,
That broke the sacred bond of public trust
And mutual confidence; ambassadors,
In after times, mere instruments, perhaps,
Of venal statesmen, shall recall my name
To witness, that they want not an example,
And plead my guilt, to sanctify their own.
Amidst the herd of mercenary slaves
That haunt your court, could none be found but Warwick,
To be the shameless herald of a lie?

EDWARD. And would thou turn the vile repoach on me?
If I have broke my faith, and stained the name
Of England, thank thy own pernicious counsels
That urged me to it, and extorted from me
A cold consent to what my heart abhorred.

WARWICK. I Have been abused, insulted, and betrayed;
My injured honor cries aloud for vengeance,
Her wounds will never close!

EDWARD. These gusts of passion,
Will but inflame them; if I have been right
Informed, my lord, besides these dangerous scars
Of bleeding honor, you have other wounds
As deep, though not so fatal: such perhaps
As none but fair Elizabeth can cure.

WARWICK. Elizabeth!

EDWARD. Nay, start not, I have cause
To wonder most: I little thought indeed
When Warwick told me I might learn to love,
He was himself so able to instruct me:
But I Have discovered all. --

WARWICK. And so have I;
Too well I know thy breach of friendship there,
Thy fruitless base endeavors to supplant me,

EDWARD. I scorn it, sir, -- Elizabeth has charms,
And I have equal right with you t'admire them:
Nor see I ought so godlike in the form,
So all-commanding in the name of Warwick,
That he alone should revel in the charms
Of beauty, and monopolize perfection.
I knew not of your love.

WARWICK. By heaven, it is false!
You knew it all, and meanly took occasion,
Whilst I was busied in the noble office,
Your grace thought fit to honor me withal.
To tamper with a weak unguarded woman,
To bribe her passions high, and basely steal
A treasure which your kingdom could not purchase.

EDWARD. How know you that? but be it as it may,
I had a right, nor will I tamely yield
My claim to happiness, the privilege,
To choose the partner of my throne and bed:
It is a branch of my prerogative.

WARWICK. Prerogative! -- what is that? the boast of tyrants:
A borrowed jewel, glittering in the crown
With specious luster, lent but to betray,
You had it, sir, and hold it -- from the people.

EDWARD. And therefore do I prize it; I would guard
Their liberties, and they shall strengthen mine:
But when proud faction and her rebel crew
Insult their sovereign, trample on his laws,
And bid defiance to his power, the people
In justice to themselves, will then defend
His cause, and vindicate the rights they gave.

WARWICK. Go to your darling people then; for soon,
If I mistake not, 'twill be needful; try
Their boasted zeal, and see if one of them
Will dare to lift his arm up in your cause,
If I forbid them.

EDWARD. Is it so, my lord,
Then mark my words: I Have been your slave too long,
And you have ruled me with a rod of iron,
But henceforth know, proud peer, I am thy master,
And will be so: the king, who delegates
His power to other's hands, but ill deserves
The crown he wears.

WARWICK. Look well then to your own;
It sits but loosely on your head, for know,
The man who injured Warwick never passed
Unpunished yet.

EDWARD. Nor he who threatened Edward --
You may repent it, Sir, -- my guards there -- seize
This traitor, and convey him to the tower,
There let him learn obedience.
(Guards enter, seize Warwick, and endeavor to disarm him.
WARWICK. Slaves, stand off:
If I must yield my sword, I Will give it him
Whom it so long has served; there is not a part
In this old faithful steel, that is not stained
With English blood in grateful Edward's cause.
Give me my chains, they are the bands of friendship,
Of a king's friendship, for his sake a while
I Will wear them.

EDWARD. Hence: away with him --

WARWICK. It Is well:
Exert your power, it may not last you long;
For know, though Edward may forget his friend,
That England will not. -- now, sir, I attend you.
[Exit Warwick.
EDWARD. Presumptuous rebel -- ha! who is here?

SCENE IV.
MESSENGER, EDWARD, MESSENGER. My liege;
Queen Marg'ret with the prince her son are fled;
In a few hours she hopes, for so we learn,
From those who have pursued her, to be joined
By the earl of Warwick, in his name it seems
She has already raised three thousand men.

EDWARD. Warwick in league with her! O heaven! it is well
We Have crushed the serpent ever his poison spread
Throughout our kingdom -- guard the palace gates,
Keep double watch; summon my troops together,
Where is my brother Clarence, Buckingham
And Pembroke? we must check this foul rebellion --

SCENE V.
EDWARD SUFFOLK,. SUFFOLK. My liege, the duke of Clarence --

EDWARD. What of him?

SUFFOLK. Has left the court; this moment I beheld him
In conf'rence deep with Pembroke, who, it seems,
Is Marg'ret's firmest friend: it is whispered, both
Will join the queen.

EDWARD. Well: -- it is no matter: I
Have deeper cause for grief, he cannot feel
A brother's falsehood, who has lost a friend,
A friend like Warwick, -- Suffolk, thou behold'st me
Betrayed, deserted by the man I loved;
Treated with cold indifference by her
Whom I adored, forsaken by my brother,
And threatened by the subjects I protect,
Oppressed on every side: but, thou shall see,
I have a soul superior to misfortunes.
Though rebel Clarence wrings my tortured heart,
And faithless Warwick braves me, we will yet
Maintain our right -- come on, my friend, thou know,
Without his boasted aid, I could have gained
The crown, without him now I will preserve it.

END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, THE TOWER.
WARWICK. MISTAKEN mortals plan delusive schemes
Of bliss, and call futurity their own,
Yet are not masters of a moment -- this
Was the appointed time, the very day
Which should have joined me to Elizabeth
In nuptial bonds: -- O cruel memory,
Do not torment me -- if there be a crime
Of deeper dye than all the guilty train
Of human vices, it is -- ingratitude.
It Is now two years since Henry lost the crown,
And here he is, even in this very prison
A fellow captive now: disgraceful thought!
How will he smile to meet his conqu'ror here!
O for that stoic apathy which lulls
The drowsy soul to sweet forgetfulness!
But 'twill not be: -- Elizabeth, where art thou?
Perhaps with Edward -- O that thought distracts me:
It is, I fear, as Marg'ret said; she is false.
But when I look on these, can I expect
To find one virtue left in human kind?
My Pembroke too! am I so soon forgotten?
O no; he comes --

SCENE II.
PEMBROKE, WARWICK. PEMBROKE. My friend!

WARWICK. My Pembroke, welcome:
Thee I have ever found most just and kind;
But, in the darkness of adversity
The jewel friendship shines with double luster.

PEMBROKE. I am not of the infect train that bask
In fortune's sunshine, and when evening damps
Arise, are seen no more: no, Warwick, what
I speak, I mean: you have been hardly treated.

WARWICK. O! Pembroke, did thou know but half the wrongs
That I have suffered, thou would pity me.

PEMBROKE. I would do more, much more, my Warwick: he
Who only pities but insults the wretched;
I come with nobler views, I come to tell thee,
That I have felt thy inj'ries as my own,
And will revenge them too.

WARWICK. How kind thou art
To feel for Warwick!

PEMBROKE. Every honest breast
Must feel the inj'ries that a good man suffers:
Thine is the common cause of all: adieu
To English freedom, when our liberty
Shall be dependent on a sov'reign's nod,
When years of honest service shall be paid
With infamy and chains.

WARWICK. I Have not deserved them.

PEMBROKE. Nor shall thou wear them long: for thou have great
And powerful friends -- the noble duke of Clarence.
Behold his signet -- this, my Warwick, gained me
Admission here -- we must be secret.

WARWICK. Then I am not forsaken: Clarence! -- Ha!

PEMBROKE. Yes:
The gallant youth, with honest zeal, declared
He loved his brother much, but justice more.

WARWICK. Then, Edward, I defy thee: generous Clarence!
Thou know, the man who thus could treat a friend,
Would soon forget a brother -- but say, Pembroke,
How stands the duke of Buckingham?

PEMBROKE. Fast bound
To Edward; he and that smooth courtier Suffolk
Are the two rotten pillars that support
His tottering throne: but Marg'ret --

WARWICK. Aye: how fares
My new ally? has she escaped the tyrant?

PEMBROKE. She has: and by some wondrous means contrived
To free her captive son.

WARWICK. Though I abhor,
I must admire that enterprising woman:
Her active mind is ever on the wing
In search of fresh expedients, to recover
The crown she lost.

PEMBROKE. Already she has raised
A powerful army; all the secret foes
Of York's ambitious line rush forth in crowds,
And join her standard: ever tomorrow's sun
Shall dawn upon us, she will set thee free.

WARWICK. O! Pembroke, nothing wounds the generous mind
So deep as obligations to a foe.
Is there no way to liberty, my friend,
But through the bloody paths of civil war?

PEMBROKE. I fear there is not.

WARWICK. Then it must be so:
I could have wished -- but freedom and revenge
On any terms are welcome.

PEMBROKE. Here then join we
Our hands --

WARWICK. Our hearts.

PEMBROKE. Now, Warwick, be thou firm
In thy resolves; let no unmanly fears,
No foolish fond remembrance of past friendship
Unnerve thy arm, or shake thy steady purpose.

WARWICK. No: by my wrongs it shall not: once, thou know,
I loved him but too well, and these vile chains
Are my reward, -- O give me but the use
Of this once powerful arm, and thou shall see
How it shall punish falsehood. -- are thy forces
Prepared?

PEMBROKE. They are, and wait but for my orders;
Clarence will join us soon: our first great end
Is to secure thy liberty; that done,
We haste to seize the palace and redeem
The fair Elizabeth.

WARWICK. Redeem her, ha!
Is she a captive too?

PEMBROKE. A willing slave;
A gay state prisoner, left to roam at large
Over the young monarch's palace.

WARWICK. Aye, my Pembroke,
That Is more inviting than a prison: -- O
She Is false, she is false -- who sent her there?

PEMBROKE. She came
It seems, to thank him for his royal bounties
To her good father, the new earl of Rivers,
Who will no doubt persuade her to accept --

WARWICK. Of Edward's hand -- distraction! fly, my friend,
Haste thee to Marg'ret, tell her if she hopes
For Warwick's aid, she must release him now,
Ever Edward's ill-timed mercy shall prevent her.

PEMBROKE. I go; my friend, adieu! when next we meet,
I hope to bring thee liberty.

WARWICK. Farewell.
She Is lost: she is gone: that base seducer Edward,
Has wrought on her weak mind, it must be so.

SCENE III.
MESSENGER, WARWICK. MESSENGER. My lord,
The lady Elizabeth.

WARWICK. Amazement! sure
It cannot be! admit her sir -- why, what
[Exit Mess. Could bring her here? Edward has sent her hither,
To see if I will crouch to him for pardon;
Be still, my jealous heart. --

SCENE IV.
ELIZABETH, WARWICK. ELIZABETH. My Warwick!

WARWICK. It Is a grace I looked not for,
That a fair favorite, who so late had tasted
The pleasures of a court, should condescend
To visit thus a poor abandoned captive.

ELIZABETH. I come to take my portion of misfortune,
To pour the balm of comfort in, and heal
If possible, the wounds which I had made.
Too well I know, I was the fatal cause
Of all thy sorrows, -- but the noble Edward,
For so indeed he is --

WARWICK. And art thou come,
To plead the cause of him who sent me hither?

ELIZABETH. I came to be the messenger of peace,
To calm thy troubled soul, and give thee rest,
To teach my Warwick to forget his wrongs.

WARWICK. Forget my wrongs! was that thy errand here,
To teach me low submission to a tyrant;
To ask forgiveness, kneel and deprecate,
The wrath of blustering Edward? If thou come
On terms like these to bring me freedom, know
It will not be accepted: now I see
Through all your arts, by heaven, I Would rather lose
A thousand lives, than owe one to his bounty.

ELIZABETH. Either my Warwick is much changed, and so
I fear he is, or he would never talk
Thus coldly to me, never would despise
A life so precious, if he knew how much
Elizabeth had suffered to preserve it.
The gallant Edward won by my entreaties --

WARWICK. Entreaties! did thou then descend so low,
As to entreat him for me?

ELIZABETH. Had thou seen,
When I implored him to forgive my Warwick,
How kind he looked, how his repenting heart
Heaved with the pangs of agonizing friendship,
Thou wou'd'st have pitied him.

WARWICK. Deceitful woman,
I see thy falsehood now, I am betrayed,
And thou art leagued with Edward to destroy me.
Go to your royal lover and unite
Those only fit companions for each other,
A broken friendship, and a perjured love:
Give up discarded Warwick, and to make
The compact firm, cement it with my blood.

ELIZABETH. I thought the soul of Warwick far above
Such mean suspicions -- shall the man, whose truth,
Whose constancy, and love have been so long
My bright example, shall he stoop so low,
As thus to listen to an idle tale
Told by some prating courtier? if indeed
Thou cou'd'st believe it, I should pity thee.

WARWICK. Where is your father, the new earl of Rivers?
Why sends he not his forces to our aid?

ELIZABETH. He cannot: honor, gratitude, forbid,
That he should lift up his rebellious arm
Against his benefactor! well thou know,
Of late, when civil discord reigned among'st us,
He fought with Henry, and with Henry fell:
When injured Edward gen'rously forgave,
Restored his forfeit lands, and late advanced him
To rank and title.

WARWICK. Infamy and shame;
The common nets which fearful knav'ry spreads
To catch ambition's fools: mean sordid bribes!
We know the treasure they were meant to purchase.

ELIZABETH. Unkind suggestion! how have I deserved it?
Have I for this refused a youthful monarch,
And spurned his offered scepter at my feet,
To be reproached at last by cruel Warwick?
Had I once listened to him! had these eyes
Been dazzled with the splendour of a court,
I need not thus have changed it for a dungeon.
But since I am suspected, witness heaven,
And witness Warwick to my vows! henceforth,
Dear as thou art, I cast thee from my love;
Elizabeth will never wed -- a traitor.

WARWICK. Am I awake, and did Elizabeth
Say she would never wed her faithful Warwick?
Then bear me witness too, all judging heaven!
Here yield I up all visionary dreams
Of future bliss, of liberty, or life,
Even the sweet hope of vengeance that alone
Sustained my spirit, loses all its charms;
I wished for freedom but to purchase thine:
For life, but to enjoy it with my love,
And she disclaims me.

WARWICK. Heaven forbid! O Warwick,
Let not the tide of passion thus overwhelm
Thy reason.

WARWICK. Can thou pardon me? thou know
The unguarded warmth, the weakness of my nature.
I would not wrong thee, but I Have been so often
So cruelly deceived

ELIZABETH. I know thou have;
But never by Elizabeth.

WARWICK. O no!
It is impossible that perfidy
Should wear a form like thine.
(Looking at her.) I wonder not
That Edward loved, no; when I look on thee,
All beauteous, all enchanting as thou art:
By heaven! I think I could almost forgive him.

ELIZABETH. Then wherefore not be reconciled?

WARWICK. To whom?
The author of my wrongs? It cannot be:
Know, I have promised Marg'ret to destroy him.

ELIZABETH. Destroy thy friend! ungen'rous cruel Warwick,
Is It not enough that thou have triumphed here?
Already we have pierced his noble heart
With the keen pangs of disappointed love:
And would thou wound his breast with added sorrows;
Would thou involve a nation in his ruin?

WARWICK. Elizabeth, no more: alas! too well
Thou know, there is a powerful advocate
In Warwick's breast, that pleads for perjured Edward.

ELIZABETH. Cherish the soft emotion: O my Warwick! --

WARWICK. That angel form can never plead in vain;
But then, my friends -- where is my solemn vow
To Marg'ret, and to Pembroke? there is the tie;
My honor's dearer to me --

ELIZABETH. Than thy love;
Dearer, much dearer, than Elizabeth?
But I have done: farewell, my lord, I see
Thy deep resentment is not to be moved
By my weak influence over thee.
(Going.)
WARWICK. Stay, I charge thee.

ELIZABETH. What is this phantom, honor, this proud idol
That tramples thus on every humble virtue?
This cruel bloody Molock, that delights
In human sacrifice? O! would to heaven
I were its only victim! but with me,
You offer up your country and your king.

WARWICK. Think on my vow, think on my promise given.

ELIZABETH. Thy league with Marg'ret must be fatal: grant
We should succeed, and Lancaster once more
Assume the throne; how dear the victory,
That Is purchased with our fellow subjects blood!
Alas! such triumphs make the conqu'ror weep.
But if we fail --

WARWICK. Impossible!

ELIZABETH. O! think
Betimes! what dreadful punishments await
The vanquished rebel: thou, perhaps, my love,
Shall then be doomed on the ignominious block
To fall inglorious; and, when thou art gone,
Who shall defend thy poor Elizabeth?

WARWICK. Alarming thought! It staggers my firm purpose,
And makes me half a villain.

SCENE V.
WARWICK, ELIZABETH, an OFFICER. OFFICER. Madam, the king demands your
presence, I
Have orders to convey you to the palace.

WARWICK. And will thou leave me?

ELIZABETH. This, my Warwick, this
Is the decisive moment, now determine,
Accept of mercy, ever it be too late;
Ever hasty Edward -- Shall, I say, thou will
Return to thy obedience, and receive
Thy pardon? shall I? speak my love.

WARWICK. Perhaps
I may accept it, if it is brought by thee.

ELIZABETH. Then we shall meet in happiness --

WARWICK. Farewell!

SCENE VI.
WARWICK. Now to those worst companions in affliction,
My own sad thoughts again, they are gloomy all,
And like my habitation full of horror.
I like not Edward's message -- if he hears
My league with Margaret, he still has power
To make me feel his rage: I have deserved it --
[a trampling heard without. Methought I heard a noise -- this way they come,
Perhaps it is the messenger of death --

SCENE VII.
PEMBROKE, WARWICK. PEMBROKE. The messenger of vengeance -- see her sword;
Accept it and be free.
(offers the sword)
WARWICK. First let me know
To whom I am indebted for it.

PEMBROKE. To me.
Soon as the rumor of thy foul disgrace
Had reached the public ear, the impatient people
Uncertain of thy fate, tumultuous thronged
Around the palace, and demanded thee;
Give us our Warwick, give us back, they cried
Our hero, our deliv'rer -- I stepped forth
And bade them, instant, if they wished to save
The best of men, from infamy, and death,
To follow me: transported they obeyed:
I led them hither: forced the prison gates,
And brought thee this -- direct it as thou will.
(Gives the sword.)
WARWICK. Welcome once more, thou dearest gift of heaven
Immortal liberty! my friend, I thank thee.
O Pembroke, would thou had been here! my love,
My dear Elizabeth is true.

PEMBROKE. At least
You think so.

WARWICK. She has told me such sweet truths;
Edward repents him sorely, he is grieved
At his ingratitude.

PEMBROKE. And well he may;
I fear thou art betrayed: alas! my Warwick,
Thy open generous unsuspecting virtue
Thinks every heart as honest as thy own.
Thou know not Edward -- nor Elizabeth.
The kingdom is in arms, and every hour,
It is expected France will join the queen:
England will want its great protector's aid.
Edward and Rivers have conspired to cheat
Thy credulous ear, and who so fit to spread
The flimsy web as thy Elizabeth,
Their fair ambassadress? I see you are caught.

WARWICK. By heaven! it may be so: I am the sport
Of fortune and of fraud.

PEMBROKE. Away, my friend:
It is not now a time to think of her:
Marg'ret, supported by thy powerful name,
And joined by Clarence, waits us at the head
Of fifteen thousand men, who, eager all
To crush a tyrant, and pull down oppression,
Attend thy wished for presence; not a soldier
Will act or move till Warwick shall direct them.
Edward and England's fate depend on thee.

WARWICK. Away my friend, I Will follow thee.
[Exit Pembroke. Yet stop
A moment -- let not passion hurry me
To base dishonor -- if my country calls
For Warwick's aid, shall I not hear her voice,
And save her? Pembroke may have private views,
And subtle Marg'ret too -- Elizabeth!
I must not lose thee -- O! direct me heaven!

END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
ELIZABETH. THE royal pardon came too late, and Pembroke
Already has released him; he is gone --
Elizabeth may never see him more.
A thousand terrors haunt me, a fond father,
A guiltless sovereign, a distracted lover,
Fame, fortune, friends, and country, all depend
On one eventful moment -- hark! the sound
Of distant groans! perhaps the king -- perhaps
My Warwick bleeds. O! agonizing thought!
Great God of armies, whose all-guiding hand
Directs the fate of nations, O! look down
On thy own image, let not cruel discord
Divide their kindred souls! in pity hear,
Pour thy benignant spirit over their hearts,
And once more knit them in the bonds of peace!

SCENE II.
ELIZABETH, SUFFOLK. SUFFOLK. The prayer of innocence is always heard.

ELIZABETH. Ha! Suffolk, whither hast'st thou? art thou come --

SUFFOLK. I come to heal thy sorrows, lovely fair one,
To tell thee, Edward, and thy much-loved Warwick,
Once more are friends.

ELIZABETH. Indeed! O welcome news!
My joy's too great for utt'rance: tell me, Suffolk,
How was it? speak, is Warwick safe? O heaven!

SUFFOLK. A moment's patience, and I Will tell thee all.
Marg'ret, thou know, had raised a powerful force,
That doubled Edward's troops: elate with pride,
And almost sure of victory, she urged
The tardy spearmen; on they rushed, as if
Secure of conquest: the unhappy king
Stood nobly firm, and seemed to brave his fate,
When Warwick like a guardian god appeared:
His noble mien and all-commanding look
Struck deep attention; every eye was bent
Upon him, and an awful silence reigned
Over either host, he raised his voice on high,
And stop, he cried, your sacrilegious hands,
Nor touch my friend: who pierces Edward's breast,
Must pass through mine: I raised him to the throne,
And will support him there: to you I gave,
From you my fellow soldiers I expect him:
However his cruel wrongs have wounded me,
He never injured you, and, I -- forgive him.
He spoke, and instant through the gazing crowd
A murmur ran; down dropped their nerveless arms,
As if enchanted by some magic power,
And with one voice they cried, long live king Edward!

ELIZABETH. How powerful is the tongue of eloquence,
When in the cause of virtue! -- well, what sollow'd?

SUFFOLK. Encouraged by the shouting soldiers, Edward
On like a modest virgin wishing came,
Yet fearful, Warwick with a bridegroom's speed
To meet him flew; into each other's arms
They ran with speechless joy: the tender scene
Affected every heart, and the rough soldier,
Unused to melting sympathy, forgot
His ruthless nature, and dissolved in tears.

ELIZABETH. Sweet reconcilement! then, Elizabeth,
Thou did not plead in vain; but, say, how brook'd
The haughty queen this unexpected change?

SUFFOLK. Abashed, confounded, for a while she strove
To stem the torrent, but in vain; then fled
Precipitate.

ELIZABETH. But where, O where is my Warwick?

SUFFOLK. With a few chosen squadrons he pursues
The disappointed Marg'ret.

ELIZABETH. O my fears!
I know not why, but at that hateful name
I tremble ever, my foreboding heart
Presages something dreadful.

SUFFOLK. Do not vex
Thy tender mind with visionary dangers.

ELIZABETH. O! would to heaven that he were sheltered here,
And safe within these arms!

SUFFOLK. Be not alarmed:
He is the care of heaven: all good men love,
All bad ones fear him.

ELIZABETH. Such superior merit
Must have a thousand foes, the constant mark
Of envy's poisoned darts.

SUFFOLK. There Suffolk feels
The keen reproach; with blushes I confess
There was a time, when, urged by fond ambition,
I looked on Warwick with a jealous eye:
But this last noble deed has won my heart,
And I am now a convert to his virtues;
But see, the king approaches.

SCENE III.
EDWARD, ELIZABETH. EDWARD. Health and peace,
And happiness to fair Elizabeth!
Thou art no stranger to the joyful news;
The luster of those speaking eyes declares it.

ELIZABETH. Suffolk, even now, has blessed me with the tidings.

EDWARD. O! it is amazement all: Elizabeth,
When last we met, thou were the suppliant, now
It Is I must ask forgiveness, I who injured
The dearest, best of men; O! thou have said
Edward from shame, and England from destruction.

ELIZABETH. Did I not say my Warwick would be just?

EDWARD. Thou did, and on those beauteous lips fair truth
And soft persuasion dwell; long time he stood
Inflexible, and deaf to friendship's voice,
Listened to naught but all subduing love.
In aftertimes, thy name shall be enrolled
Amongst the great deliv'rer's of their country.

ELIZABETH. I have no title to the lavish praise
Thy generous heart bestows; I only said
What duty prompted, and what love inspired;
Indulgent heaven has crowned it with success.

EDWARD. Thou have done all: I am indebted to thee
For more, much more than I can ever repay.
Long time, with shame, I own, has Warwick soared
Above me, but I will not be outdone
For ever by this proud aspiring rival:
Poor as I am, there yet is one way left
To pay the debt of gratitude I owe him,
One great reward for such exalted virtues,
Thyself, Elizabeth.

ELIZABETH. What means my lord,
My royal master?

EDWARD. Yes; when next we meet
I will bestow it on him, will resign
All my fond claim to happiness and thee;
Though thy dear image never can be effaced
From Edward's breast, though still I dote upon thee,
Though I could hang for ever on thy beauties;
Yet will I yield them to their rightful lord;
Warwick has earned, Warwick alone deserves them.

ELIZABETH. Would he were here to thank thee for thy goodness!
Know, generous prince, Elizabeth has long
Admired thy virtues, and could love admit
Of a divided heart, the noble Edward
Would share it with his friend.

SCENE IV.
MESSENGER, EDWARD. MESSENGER. My royal liege,
The rebels are dispersed, queen Marg'ret's son
Was slain in the pursuit -- and she --

EDWARD. I hope
Secured --

MESSENGER. Is taken prisoner, and will soon
Be here --

EDWARD. But where is lord Warwick?

MESSENGER. Sir -- the queen --

SCENE V.
MARGARET Prisoner. MARGARET. Once more I am your prisoner.

EDWARD. 'Twill be prudent
Henceforth to keep you so.

MARGARET. You dare not!
Thou think, perhaps, that I shall sue to thee
For mercy: no; in Marg'ret of Anjou,
Thou fee'st the wife, and daughter of a king.
A spirit not to be subdued; tho fallen
Triumphant still, and though a prisoner free.
For know, I bear a mind above the reach
Of fortune or of Edward -- I have lost
All I could wish to live for in my child;
And gained what most I wished to gain, revenge!
Or life or death are now indiff'rent to me.

EDWARD. For thy unbounded goodness, power supreme
Accept our praise!

ELIZABETH. (kneeling) Accept our humble prayer!

MARGARET. Insulting piety! the common trick
Of hypocrites and slaves: when ye shall know
What Marg'ret knows, ye may not be so thankful.
Methinks it is pity Warwick is not here
To join in your devotion.

ELIZABETH. Would to heaven
He were!

MARGARET. That monster, that perfidious slave
Who broke his faith to Marg'ret, and to thee;
Thy coward soul, unable to defend
The treasure thou had stolen, could meanly stoop
To court the traitor whom thou dare not punish.
Not so the injured Marg'ret -- she repelled
The wrongs she felt, and the deceiver met
The fate he merited.

EDWARD. What fate? -- even now
Crowned with immortal wreaths, the hero comes
To bless his friends, and punish guilt like thine.

MARGARET. Proud and deluded wretches! I look down
With pity on you: Captive as I am,
It Is mine to judge and punish; be it yours
To hear and tremble.

EDWARD. Ha!

ELIZABETH. What can this mean?

MARGARET. If I mistake not, Warwick is your friend,
Your lover too, I think.

ELIZABETH. My lord, my husband.

MARGARET. Know then, that friend, that lover, perjured Warwick,
Has not an hour to live.

EDWARD. What murderous hand --

MARGARET. Mine, tyrant mine: think not I mean to hide
The noble deed; it is my happiness,
It is my glory: thou will call me base,
Blood-thirsty, cruel, savage, and revengeful.
But here I stand acquitted to myself,
And every feeling heart that knows my wrongs. --
To late posterity dethroned queens,
And weeping mothers shall applaud my justice.

EDWARD. Justice, on whom?

MARGARET. Can Edward ask me? who
Imprisoned Henry, robbed me of a crown,
And placed it on a proud usurper's head?
Who gave his sacred promise to a queen,
And broke it? who, for which indignant heaven
Chastis'd him, basely murdered my sweet boy?
Bereft of honor, fortune, husband, child,
Deprived of every comfort, what remained
For me but vengeance, what for him but death?

EDWARD. What have thou done? when? where? speak, murthress, speak.

MARGARET. Pressed by surrounding multitudes, and made
A slave, they dragged me to the conqu'ror's tent,
There the first horrid object I beheld,
Was the pale corse of my poor bleeding child:
There -- as the insulting Warwick stood, and seemed
To triumph over him -- from my breast I drew
A poniard forth, and plunged it in his heart.
The astonished soldiers thronged around him, seized
And brought me here -- now to your prayers again.

EDWARD. [Elizabeth faints. She faints, good Suffolk, help there, help, support
Assist her. -- lead her in.
[Exit Elizabeth. If it be true,
As much I fear it is, a thousand deaths
Were punishment too little for thy guilt;
Thou shall be tortured.

MARGARET. Tyrant, I defy thee;
Thy threats appall not me: prepare your tortures,
Let them be sharp and cruel as thyself,
All that ingenious malice can suggest,
Or power inflict, 'twill be my comfort still,
They cannot be so great as those you feel.

EDWARD. Guards, take the monster hence, let her be chained
In some deep dungeon, dark as her own thoughts,
There let her perish -- hence, away with her.

MARGARET. Despair, and horror visit thee -- farewell --
He comes, my triumph is complete -- look there!

SCENE VI.
WARWICK, leaning on two soldiers. WARWICK. Where is he? lead me, lead me to my
king.

EDWARD. My Warwick! my preserver! -- she shall bleed
For this in every vein.

WARWICK. Think not of her,
She has no power to hurt thee; and with guilt
Like hers, it is punishment enough to live:
This is no time for vengeance; death comes on
With hasty strides, it is but a little while,
A few short moments, and we part for ever.
My friend --

EDWARD. I am not worthy of the name,
For I disgraced, dishonored, murdered thee;
Edward's unkindness was the cause of all:
Can thou forgive me?

WARWICK. O! may Warwick's crimes
Never meet forgiveness from offended heaven,
If from my soul, I do not pardon, love,
And honor thee!

EDWARD. Away, let me support him;
It Is the last office I shall ever perform
For thee, my Warwick -- will thou lean upon me
And seal my pardon with one kind embrace?

WARWICK. We never hated.

EDWARD. But my love was blind.

WARWICK. And blinder my resentment.

EDWARD. I forgot
Thy services.

WARWICK. And I remembered not
Thou were my king -- my sweet Elizabeth,
Where is she? Edward, do not keep her from me,
We are no rivals now.

EDWARD. Shocked at the news
Of thy untimely fate, she sunk beneath it,
And fainted in these arms; I seized the occasion,
And bade her weeping maidens bear her hence:
This would have been a dreadful sight indeed.

ELIZABETH without. I can, I will, support it.

WARWICK. Ha! that voice --
Sure it is Elizabeth's!

SCENE the last.
ELIZABETH, WARWICK, EDWARD. ELIZABETH. O! give me way,
For I must see him -- O! my Warwick!

WARWICK. O!
This is too much, the bitterness of death
Is to be severed thus from those we love.

EDWARD. Why would you bring her here!
(to the attendants.)
WARWICK. Elizabeth,
Be comforted.

ELIZABETH. O no, it is my doom
Never to taste of joy or comfort more:
No; from this hateful world will I retire,
And mourn my Warwick's fate, imploring heaven
That I may soon wear out my little store
Of hopeless days, and join thee in the tomb.

WARWICK. That must not be: I Have done my friend a wrong,
And only thou can make atonement for it.
Thy hand, Elizabeth, if ever thou love,
Observe me now -- thine, Edward -- for my sake
Cherish this beauteous mourner, take her from me,
As the last present of a dying friend.

EDWARD. If ought could make the precious gift more dear,
It would be Warwick, that it came from thee.
O! I will guard her with a parent's care,
From every ill, watch over and protect her;
And when the memory of thee shall awake,
As often it will, her poignant griefs, repel
The rising sigh, wipe off the flowing tear,
And strive to charm her to forgetfulness.

WARWICK. Will thou indeed? then I shall die in peace.

ELIZABETH. Yet thou may live.

WARWICK. Impossible: -- I feel
The hand of death press cold upon my heart,
And all will soon be over: -- I Have lived to save
My falling country, to repent my crimes,
Redeem my honor, and restore my king.

EDWARD. Alas! my friend, the memory of thee
Will poison every bliss.

WARWICK. All-healing time
That closes every wound, shall pour it is balm
Over thine. -- meanwhile, remember Warwick's fate. --
I gave my word to Margaret, and broke it;
Heaven is not to be mocked, it soon o'ertakes us,
And in our crime we meet our punishment.
O Edward, if thou hop'st that length of days,
And fair prosperity shall crown thy wishes,
Beware of passion, and resentment -- make
Thy people's good and happiness thy own,
Discourage faction, banish flatt'rers, keep
Thy faith inviolate, and reign in peace.
I can no more -- my love! have mercy heaven!
(dies.)
EDWARD. He Is gone! --

ELIZABETH. And with him all my hopes of bliss.

EDWARD. Let every honor to a soldier due,
Attend the hero to his tomb -- meanwhile,
Deep in the living tablet of my heart,
Will I engrave thy words -- illustrious shade!
Living thou were my counselor and friend,
And dead I will remember, and obey thee.

ELIZABETH. Warwick farewell, I shall not long survive thee.

EDWARD. I hope thou will -- Elizabeth, remember
His dying charge, think on thy promise given.
Thou shall remain with me, with me lament
Our common benefactor; we will sit
And talk together of my Warwick's virtues,
For I will try to emulate them all,
And learn, by copying him, to merit thee.
His great example shall inspire my breast
With patriot zeal, shall teach me to subdue
The power of faction, vanquish party rage,
And make me, what alone I wish to be,
The happy king of an united people.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Written by DAVID GARRICK, Esquire Spoken by Mrs. YATES.
EXHAUSTED quite with prisons, racks, and death,
Permit me here to take a little breath!
You who have seen my actions, known their springs,
Say, are we women such insipid things?
Say, lords of the creation, mighty men!
(...) have you surpassed us, where? and when?
I come to know to whom the palm is due,
To us weak vessels, or to stronger you?
Against your conquering swords, I draw -- my fan,
Come on! -- now parry Marg'ret, if you can.
(Sets herself in a posture of defense. Stand up, ye boasters! (to the pit)
don't there sneaking sit;
Are you for Pleasure, Politics, or Wit?
The boxes smile to see me scold the pit.
Their turn is next -- and though I will not wrong 'em,
A woeful havoc there will be among 'em. --
You our best friends, (to the pit) love, cherish, and respect us;
Not take our fortunes, marry, and neglect us.
You think indeed, that as you please, you rule us,
And with a strange importance often school us!
Yet, let each citizen describe a brother,
I Will tell you what you say of one another.
My neighbor leads, poor foul, a woeful life,
A worthy man -- but governed by his wife!
How, say you? what, all silent? -- then, it is true:
We rule the city -- Now, great Sirs; to you. (to the boxes.)
What is your boast? -- Would you, like me, have done,
To free a captive wife, or fare a son?
Rather than run such dangers of your lives,
You Would leave your children, and lock up your wives.
When with your noblest deeds, a nation rings!
You are but puppets, and we play the strings.
We ^an no battles -- true -- but out of fight,
(...) the fun, -- and armies halt or fight!
You have the advantage, Ladies -- wisely reap it,
And let me ^nt the only way to keep it.
(...) men of vain ideas, have their sill,
(...) bounce, stride, strut, -- while you, with happy skill,
(...), use the finest silken thread;
(...) enough -- nor check the tugging head:
The (...) ^ounder -- you with gentle hand,
And (...), must bring the trout to land;
(...) cannot be --
(...) falls with Me.

