THE HIGHLAND REEL, A COMIC OPERA. IN THREE ACTS. As it is Performed at the
THEATRES-ROYAL IN LONDON AND DUBLIN.

BY JOHN O'KEEFFE, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.

M.DCC.XC.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN. LONDON. DUBLIN. Lord of Col, Mr. Aickin. Mr. Duncan. Lord of Rausey,
Mr. Booth. Mr. Barrett. M'Gilpin, Mr. Quick. Mr. O'Reily. Sandy, or Young
Donald, Mr. Johnston. Mr. Duffey. Charley, Mr. Blanchard. Mr. Palmer. Shelty,
Mr. Edwin. Mr. Chetry. Croudy, Mr. Fearon. Mr. M'Crea. Captain Dash, Mr. Davis.
Mr. J. Brown. Sergeant Jack, Mr. Bannister. Mr. Owenson. Servant, Mr. Evat.
Servant to Lord of Rausey, Mr. Rock. Mr. Dowling. Benin, (a Black) Mr. Farley.
Mr. Cooper.

Highlanders, Countrymen, etc.

WOMEN. Miss 'Moggy M'Gilpin, Miss Fontenelle Mrs. Brown. Miss Jenny, Miss
Reynolds. Miss W. Brett.

Several Country Girls.

THE HIGHLAND REEL.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A small Courtyard before M'Gilpin's House, in^^^sed with a low
Paling, and small Gate. Time -- Morning Twilight. (Charley appears at the
Window.) CHARLEY. Day begins to peep -- choke that Cock! he will rouse my old
master; but if I can get his Daughter Moggy to run away with me, let Cocks
crow, Dogs bark, and old Masters grumble, (he stretches out and taps at another
Window.) Moggy! (softly.) Miss Moggy M'Gilpin! -- ha, ha, ha! -- I must Miss
Moggy her!


(Moggy appears at the window where Charley tapp'd.) MOG. (Softly.) Well.
Charley!


CHAR. Here: I Have stole the key of your room out of your father's pocket.

(Reaches a key to fur on a stick.)
MOG. He, he, He! Oh, precious!


CHAR. I Will drop out of the window for sear of making a noise on the stairs;
you have only to unlock your own door, soltly trip down, I Will wait for you below.


MOG. But how am I to get below? have you got the key of the street door?


CHAR. Ecod! I had quite forgot that.


MOG. What a fool! -- If I haven't a mind to go to bed again, and think no more
about you -- but since I did promise to go off with you, as we cannot get out of
the street door, I Will try to get from my window; if you will jump from yours, and
stand below ready to receive me.

She retires.)
CHAR. (coming out of his window.) I Am not the fust clerk that is run away with
his master's daughter, nor shall I be the last -- while clerks are poor,
masters rich, and daughters pretty.

(Gets down.) (Moggy reappears at the window.)
MOG. The duce a thing can I find to -- Oh, Lord! -- stop, I Will cut my bed
cord, tie it to the leg of the table, and slide down by it.

(Retires.)
CHAR. Slide down by her bed-cord! ha, ha, ha! my Moggy's a rare romping Hoyden
-- but she is funny and good-natured, a sweet temper, and a merry heart; so if I
never get a shilling from the old one, I Will have her at a venture.

(Moggy appears again at the window.)
MOG. (Throwing a cord.) There -- I think that is fast -- now I Will -- Lud, I
shall cut my hands through -- take you for not getting the key of the street door.


CHAR. My dear! throw out first what clothes you may want.


MOG. Then you will not take me without clothes, ha, ha, ha!


DUETT
Moggy and Charley. The lamb and the heifer are taking their rest,
The lark and the sparrow lie snug in their nest,
Pussey doses, and so does my doggy,
All are sleeping but Charley and Moggy.
We wake to love before its day,
Come, my dearest, we must be tripping away.
No portion, dear Charley, if I marry thee,
My little old dad will give unto me;
Will love cool if you take me so barely?
Moggy in her sinicket is welcome to Charley.
We wake to love, etc.

End of duett, Moggy retires. CHAR. Master I think will not rise early -- up late
last night, rehearsing his fine speeches against he is a Parliament Man in
London -- Ha! ha! ha! though only now Lord Donald's steward, and collector of
taxes here in one of the remote western islands of Scotland! ha! ha! he
banished a simple old woman for a witch, 'cause she foretold his daughter
should be run away with -- ha! ha! ha! so I Will prove the truth of her
prediction. -- Odso! -- here is the little gate too locked! -- now could Moggy
-- stay -- here is the horse block, and I Will make free with Dick the carpenter's
bench, for her to step on the outside. --

(Springs over the paling.)
Exit. Enter M'Gilpin from the house. M'GIL. I will believe in witcherafts, in
wizards, and warlocks! -- though I did pack Goody Commings out of the island, yet
I Am certain her elves have been about my house t'night -- no noise in Jenny's
room, nor in my daughter Moggy's, nor in Charley's, nor in Benin's -- yet
noises I most assuredly heard. (Moggy from her window lowers a box on
M'Gilpin's head.) -- Eh! --


MOG. Have you got it?


M'GIL. Yes, (feels his head, as if hurt.) I have got it! -- what! -- my
daughter! oh! oh!

(Aside.)
MOG. I thought I heard my father --

(softly.)
M'GIL. So did I!

(in an under tone.)
MOG. Do you think he is get up?


M'GIL. No.


MOG. Now you will catch me!


M'GIL. Yes, I Will catch you, you jade.

(aside.)
MOG. Now for it.


M'GIL. The devil! -- she wont jump out of the window.

(aside.)
MOG. Now. my fine fellow -- here goes --


M'GIL. Oh, Lord! my child will break her bones. (Aside.) -- stop -- cannot you
come out of the street door? It Is open.


MOG. Pshaw! -- why didn't you tell me so before? -- Upon my word, I don't like
such jokes --

(retire and goes down.)
M'GIL. Nor I, upon my soul. (Aside.) -- If I could carry on her mistake, I may
find out who her seducer is -- I think it is scarce light enough for her to
know me now.

(Retires on one side.)
Re-enter Charley with a bench, which he places near the rails. CHAR. There Is a
wooden stepping-stone for you my dear -- Eh! (looking toward the door,) the
door open! we must have roused the old man; he must see me (retiring.) -- Who
comes here? -- Shelty, the piper --


Enter Shelty, singing. SHEL. If Sandy and Jenny are to be married today, it is
time to rouse the boys and girls.


M'GIL. I think I know that voice -- Oh, this is her fine fellow, I suppose.

(aside.) (Enter Moggy from the house.) (Charley steals into the house.)
MOG. Come now, I Am for you, my Dilding.

(Takes M'Gilpin under the arm)
M'GIL. And I Am for you my Dodling.

In his own voice, laying hold of her.
MOG. (Skreams.) M'GIL. And pray, my dear, where were you going so early? Eh!


MOG. Going, Sir, -- I -- I -- was going --


M'GIL. I know you were going, Sir, -- but where, Sir?


MOG. To -- to -- church, Sir.


M'GIL. Jump out of the window to go to church!


Enter Charley from the house, half undressed, pretending to be scarce awake.
CHAR. Aw, aw! -- What Is the matter here? -- Aw -- aw --

(Yawning.)
M'GIL. Where have you been, sirrah?


CHAR. Sir, -- I -- I -- was -- aw -- aw -- fast sleep.


M'GIL. You stupid -- Where Is Jenny?


CHAR. Sir, -- she is -- aw -- aw -- fast asleep.


M'GIL. You lazy lubber! -- Snoring in bed, and robbers and ravishers running
away with my daughter -- (to Shelty.) Sirrah, what do you want with my daughter?


SHEL. I --

(looking simply.)
CHAR. Eh -- Shelty -- Moggy -- ho, ho -- (looking at them) -- Well, hang me if
I didn't long suspect this, -- (apart to Mog.) turn it upon him, and we are
safe.


MOG. Go, my dear Shelty.


SHEL. Eh!


MOG. Don't seduce my innocence any more.


SHEL. I seduce!


MOG. Your wanting me to jump out of the window to you.


SHEL. I -- jump!


M'GIL. To make a girl perhaps break her bones!


MOG. Ay -- my poor little bones! -- cruel lad!


CHAR. Oh, fie, Shelty -- Bless me! how came the horse-block, and the
carpenter's bench here? (affecting surprise.) -- I dare say, to help Miss over.


M'GIL. It was.


MOG. My kind Shelty placed them.


SHEL, Why, is the devil in you all?


M'GIL. Don't name the devil, you profligate! You're as wicked as the witch
your grandmother, and the smuggling thief your father?


SHEL. My granny was an innocent old woman, and so is my daddy. (Enter Croudy)
Here father. I only came to see about Sandy and Jenny's wedding, 'cause I hoped
to sell a drop of liquor, and be employed to play the pipes, and here, he says,
I come to jump out of his window.


M'GIL. A piper! a tapster! -- marry into the ancient family of the M'Gilpins
-- one of the oldest houses in all Scotland!


SHEL. I don't want to come near your old house.


M'GIL. You are a young -- and your father there, is an old rogue --


CROU. What?


M'GIL. You come to steal my daughter, and he to rob the King. -- I see he has
been out, smuggling all night; -- but as I am a collector of his Majesty's
customs, and my Lord Donald's rents, I Will --


CROU. You're a dog in office -- I owe the King his duty; the Lord a quarter's
rent, and you a beating -- all which I will pay, so help me, bonnet, purse, and
cudgel! --


Exit. M'GIL. He threatens my life? -- A conspiracy to run away with my
daughter! -- Charley, I commit her to your care.


MOG. Oh, cruel father!

(Charley takes hold of her.)
M'GIL. Take her, Charley. -- You marry, you jade! you shall not be even present
at a wedding -- I Will have Sandy and Jenny's celebrated today, and, oh, not a
peep at it -- up to your malepardis -- go --!


CHAR. Come, Miss; I Will take care you don't marry any body -- but myself --

(apart.) Takes Moggy into the house.)
M'GIL. That Is right, Charley --


Exit into the house. SHEL. Well, if ever I saw such capers! the older he
grows, the wickeder he is -- ay, that is because every day he gets nearer --
(points downward) -- Yes, he will -- Eh -- (looking out.) -- As well as I can
distinguish, yonder seems a boat put off from that ship that could not get in
last night. -- I may pick up customers among the passengers, they cannot come to
a nearer house than mine. -- People may at their friends be better entertained,
but the surest welcome is at an inn. -- Every body says -- ha! ha! ha! that
Shelty's a queer fellow; I believe I am -- but I don't know how -- how I get on
-- I do -- I will.


AIR.
Shelty. When I Have money I am merry,
When I Have none I Am very sad;
When I Am sober I am civil,
When I Am drunk I Am roaring mad.
With my titol teedle tum,
Likewise fol lol feedle fum,
Not forgetting diderum hi,
And also teedle, tweedle dum.
When disputing with a puppy
I convince him with a rap;
When I Am romping with a girl,
By accident I tear her cap.
Gadzooks, I Will never marry,
I Am a lad that is bold and free;
Yet I love a pretty girl,
A pretty girl is fond of me.
With my, etc.
There Is a maiden in a corner,
Round and sound, and plump and fat;
She and I drank tea together,
But no matter, Sir, for that.
If this maiden be wi' bairn,
As I do suppose she will be;
Like good pappy I must learn
To dandle Jacky on my knee.
With my titol teedle dum. etc.

Exit. (During the whole of this scene, the morning light enereases gradually.)
Enter M'Gilpin and Charley. M'GIL Oh, my daughter is a most degenorate girl! --
Well, you have locked her up?


CHAR. Yes, Sir --

(Shows a key.)
M'GIL. Eh, ay -- boy, listen -- I Am certain from that old smuggling knave
Croudy's being toward the sea side so early, that he is about landing brandy
and tobacco; so if I can but make a seizure, it may be worth ten times the
cargo of tea I seized on him last week; so my good lad, you will be on the
look-out; ay, and on the look- in too; to watch imports, and prevent exports.


CHAR. I warrant, Sir, I Will keep one eye on the sea, and 'tother on Miss
Moggy's room door. -- Oh, Lord, Sir, yonder is Sandy come home.


M'GIL. Ha! ha! ha! Aye, the fool went to Mule to buy wedding clothes for
himself and Jenny -- I gave her an education, and I think that was doing very
handsome by her -- So I make a great compliment in giving her to Sandy, though --
Ha! ha! ha! I Am very glad -- he rids me of a burden -- that is prudence, Charley
-- Ha! ha! ha!


CHAR. It Is, Sir, ha, ha, ha!


M'GIL. You know I taught you some of my tricks, ha, ha, ha!


CHAR. Yes, Sir, and you will find me an apt scholar.


M'GIL. In return, Charley, all I ask is your care of my daughter.


CHAR. I Will take care of her, Sir.


M'GIL. Keep her from Shelty.


CHAR. I Will keep her from Shelty, don't fear, Sir.


M'GIL. My good boy, how much I Am obliged to you. How shall I reward you?


CHAR. I shall want cash for our frolic. A choice opportunity to coax him out
of a little.

Aside.
M'GIL. Only let me know what I should do for you.


CHAR. Why, Sir, last Christmas you promised me a Christmas-box -- now didn't
you, Sir?


M'GIL. I did so, my faithful Charley; keep ^ut a strict watch upon Moggy, and
-- may be you ^ave thoughts of some little blossom yourself; only (...) me know
the girl that can make you happy, and (...) shall have her, by my authority.


CHAR. Ah! Sir, there is a girl. --


DUET. M'Gilpin and Charley.
M'Gil. Thy secrets to thy kind master tell,

Cha. I love a maid --

M'Gil...... Is she full of play;

Cha. No kid more gamesome --

M'Gil........ Where does she dwell?

Char. Twang lango tillo, lang twang dillo day.

M'Gil. If you're in love, boy, you're not to blame;

Char. As ^^ch, kind Sir, I Have heard you say,
I love my charming

M'Gil...... Ah -- what is her name?

Char. Twang lango tillo, lang twango dillo day.

Char. My Christmas-box,

M'Gil....... Oh, I understand,
Thy faithful services I Will repay;
Here Is five bright shillings,

Char......... And here is my hand.

M'Gil. Twang lango tillo, etc.

[ As Charley holds out his hand in expectation, M'Gil^^^ first making a show
as to give him the money, turns and puts it up again -- singing the Burden, in
imitation of Charley's manner in the preceding stanzas.] Exit Char. and
M'Gilpin. Scene -- An open Country, with a view of the Sea -- Sun rising. Enter
M'Gilpin. M'GIL. No, no, my kind Charley -- I Have a great regard for you; but
touch my pocket and our friendship ends; since they have raised me out of my bed,
I Will walk down to the beach, and like another Demosthenes, practice one of my
declamations; a ^ine high wind for it. -- This preverse girl! Oh, yes, with her
beauty and my talents, I must raise a for tune by going to London. (Sandy sings
without.) Ah, Sandy! this poor orphan, Jenny -- he shall have her -- ha, ha,
ha! here comes the simple Sawny, that prefers love to money.


Enter Sandy. Ha, Sandy! welcome home, my boy!

SAN. (Joyful) Here, Sir, I Have got all out wedding geer in the newest Edinbro'
taste.


M'GIL. But when comes the Parson?


SAN. He Is gone over to Raasey! so I desired Jamy M'Kenzie to send us their new
Curate.


M'GIL. Stop, Sandy, I Have one word to say to you. -- Hem!


SAN. Delayed now by his nonsensical oratorical speeches, and my soul on the
wing to love and Jenny!

(aside.)
M'GIL. Sandy, you have, by skill in agriculture, which you acquired, as you
say, in an excursion to England, not only improved your own farm, but diffused
such a spirit of industry, that my master, Lord Donald, if he should deign to
visit us, will find his Isle of Col as finely cultivated, as any patch of land
in all Scotland; therefore to reward you, your Jenny you shall wed this day.


SAN. And yonder she comes, bright as the morn, that gives the flowers their
beauty; welcome as the gale that wafts its sweetness.


AIR.
Sandy. Oh, had I Allan Ramsey's art
To sing my passion tender,
In every verse shall read my heart,
Such soothing strains I Will send her;
Nor his, nor gentle Rizzio's aid
To show, is all a folly,
How much I love the charming maid,
Sweet Jane of Grissipoly.
She makes me know what all desire,
So roguish are her glances,
Her modest air then checks my fire,
And stops my bold advances.
Meek as the lamb, on yonder lawn,
Yet by her conquered wholly;
For sprightly as the bounding fawn,
Sweet Jane of Grissipoly.
My senses she is bewildered quite,
I seem an amorous ninny;
A letter to a friend I write,
For Sandy I sign Jenny.
Last Sunday when from Church I came,
With looks demure and holy,
I cried, when asked the text to name,
'Twas Jane of Grissipoly.
My Jenny is no fortune great,
And I am poor and lowly,
A straw for power and grand estate,
Her person I love solely.
From every sordid selfish view,
So free my heart is wholly,
And she is (...), and I am true,
Sweet Jane of Grissipoly.

Enter Jenny. JEN. Welcome home my Sandy!


SAN. (Embrace.) My love!


M'GIL. Ah, hah! -- Egad my Highland Lad and Lowland Lassie, you will make a neat
couple, ha, ha, ha!


JEN. Dear, Sir, take the only return in my power, my thanks, my gratitude, for
your unmerited goodness.


M'GIL. Ah, Jenny, was I the man that boasted of his goodness. I Would remind you,
that I gave you an Asylum, when you was but a squalling bairn -- though I did not,
nor I suppose I ever shall, know what family you are of; your mother coming
here to Col to lyein, privately, and dying in my house -- yet my astonishing
benevolence, Oh! --


SAN. Your benevolence would be astoni^^^^^ indeed!

(aside.)
M'GIL. I say, my amazing charity, did --


SAN. Well, Sir, we have heard that (...) often --


M'GIL. To be sure; would you have me put a candle under a bushel? Speak,
Jenny, didn't I (...) you up equal to my own daughter, Miss (...) M'Gilpin?
sent you to the tip top boarding-schoo^* Inverness, kept by Miss Carolina
Killcobeiry?


JEN. You did, Sir!


M'GIL. Though your forlorn mother didn't lea^^ you a bawbee, (but 600l. which
you shall never se^ (aside.) so out of pure friendship, Sandy, there tak^ her
-- off my hands

(aside.)
JEN. Dear Sir!


M'GIL. Aye, I Am a kind friend Jenny; ain't a gay old fellow? -- Why I Am a
second Robin Gray!


JEN. Ah, Sir! -- this last proof of your kindness leaves me not a wish but to
know my parents.


SONG.
Jenny. Such pure delight my bosom knows,
My thanks are due to Heaven and thee,
With gratitude my heart overflows.
Kind agent of his clementy.
Humanity, thou good, supreme,
To Chase an orphan's tear away,
Like the bright all cheering beam,
Brings comfort from the God of Day.

M'GIL. Hey! yonder is a boat put in from th^^ ship in the Offing -- some great
strangers landed.


SAN. Red coats.


Enter Shelty with a letter. SHEL. A little drummer boy desired me to give you
this.


M'GIL. You busy -- could not he have found any one else to carry me a message,
than such a -- you are a bad man!


SHEL. The letter, Sir --


M'GIL. Seems a small running hand.


SHEL. Running! then saddle your nose, and run after it.


M'GIL. (Puts on his spectacles and reads) ( Sandy and Jenny retire up.) "Mr.
M'Gilpin, The Gentleman that delivers you this" --


SHEL. Gentleman! that is me.


M'GIL. (Reads) "is a soldier."


SHEL. Not me.


M'GIL. (Reads) "commands a company in my regiment." And who is yourself?

(looks at the bottom and reads.) " Robert Donald". Oh, dear! why Jenny, Sandy!


SHEL. Well, Sir? --

(looks at M'Gilpin officious and inquisitive.)
M'GIL. Get along, you busy impudent -- Why here, young Lord Donald's gone
into the army.


SAN. Indeed! --

looks at the letter.
M'GIL. Stay -- (reads) delivers you this, is a gentleman -- soldier -- company
-- my regiment. -- His name is Captain Dash, I have dispatched him and Sergeant
Jack, to raise recruits in the Isle of Col. which my father has made me a
present of -- So then young Robert is our landlord. (Reads) I desire you will
give him all the assistance in your power, get him as many good men as you can
-- you will go --

(to Shelty.)
SHEL. You know I Am a bad man.


M'GIL. Plague on the hand! (reads) He Is a friend I esteem, therefore every
civility you show him, will oblige yours,


Robert Donald. SAN. This is the first I heard of young Lord Donald's being in
the army.


M'GIL. Oh, I must dress, to meet and welcome this Captain, with one of my most
elegant orations.


Exit. SHEL. (Calling.) Charley! get Mr. M'Gilpin's Sunday coat, brush his
three cocked beaver, and powder his scratch.


SAN. I must gather all the lads, to make a handsome wedding procession to the
kirk, Jenny.


JEN. And I to assemble the lasses. Oh, Sandy! here, as the packer's in, will
you see if there is any letter for me, as I desired the lottery man to send me
notice, if this chance should be drawn a prize.


(gives it him.) SAN. Ha, ha, ha! you never told me you had bought a lottery
chance, but it must, it shall be a prize, I Will keep it safe for you -- this day
proves I Am a favorite of fortune, and she shall smile upon my Jenny.


SHEL. Huzza, for good fortune! now these soldiers are come, I may have the
rendezvous at my house -- so now to singe the sheep's head, bake the bonnocks,
tap a barrel, and tune my chaunter! and then your wedding, Tol, lol, lol! high
doings!


AIR. Trio. Sandy, Jenny, and Shelty.
Jen. Excuse a fond maiden's confession,

Shel. Her blushes exhibit her bliss,

San. My joy is too great for expression,

Shel. Suppose then you speak in a kiss;

Jen. Affections most pure now unite us,

San. Chaste pleasures now wait to delight us;

Shel. The music and bottle I Will bring,

Jen. The finch and the linet invite us,

Shel. Fond turtles should pair in the spring.

Cho. Affections most pure, etc.

San. Let lasses pursue your example,

Jen. The youths may take pattern by thee,

Shel. You give me of love such a sample,
Oh, married I Will certainly be.

Jen. Oh, what is the gay blooming flower,

San. The transient sweets of the hour,

Both. Compared to the charms of the mind;

Shel. Good humor to charm has the power,
To her time leaves no beauties behind.

Cho. Oh what is the gay blooming flower, etc.

Exeunt Jen. San. and Shel. Scene an open Country -- Shelty's House. Captain
Dash and Sergeant Jack discovered. BOTH. Ha, ha, ha!


SERJ. Yes, the letter you sent by little Tom she drummer, has prepared the old
tax-man, ha, ha, ha! he hasn't a doubt but you're a real Captain in the army.
Ha, ha, ha!


CAP. Ha, ha, ha! and my sole commission only the promise of a pair of colors
in the East India service, on condition I can raise an hundred men, ha, ha, ha!


SERJ. Ha, ha, ha! Ay, by this sham of pretending their young Lord is our
Colonel, from the affection of a Scotch Highlander to his Chieftain, I Will
warrant they will flock to our standard -- and yet, now, though it is I that have
brought you here to the field of action, something whispers here, (points to
his heart.) Friend Jack, don't impose upon these honest innocent people.


CAP. Pshaw! nothing's an imposition till found out; and our's cannot before we
have got our number of recruits, and shipped them off -- you know we are certain
their young Lord is in England, learning the newest fashion of sowing oats!
ha, ha, ha! and his father, the old Lord, in London, in full cry after jobs
and places! from neither ever residing here on their estate, our imposition
cannot be easily detected.


SERJ. We know our ground, and the character of old M'Gilpin -- flatter his
eloquence, and promise him an agency, and we have every man in the Island.


CAP. Damme! I Would rather have one pretty woman, I saw just now, than the honor
of planting my standard on the walls of Belgrade.


(A loud laugh of Peasants.) SERJ. Some country gambols going forward.


CAP. The time to recruit -- introduce yourself to them -- set'em on to drink
and play cards.


SERJ. Right -- for when the poor devils senses and money slip off, honor
glitters on a bayonet, and riches jingles in a British shilling.


SHEL. (Without.) Come along, boys!


CAP. To'em, Jack -- coax, wheedle, drink, swear -- zounds! make'em --


SERJ. As wicked as ourselves.


Enter Shelty playing the Pipes before some Country Lads. SHEL. Ay, lads, I
think we'll honor Sandy's wedding; but the lasses mustn't set out for kirk
before us.


SERJ. Ha, my hearties! my honest lad, shake hands

(to Shel.)
SHEL. Every man shake his own hand.


SERJ. Why, you all seem very merry, today.


SHEL. Yes, and we'll be merry tomorrow, ha, ha, ha! and we were merry
yesterday, ha, ha, ha!


SERJ. Ha, ha, ha! why, you're a pleasant fellow!


SHEL. Ha, ha, ha! yes, I am, ha, ha, ha! -- I was born laughing, instead of
crying, my mother laughed out, ha, ha, ha! -- my daddy liked to have dropped me
out of his arms on the floor, laughing at me, ha, ha, ha! What Is the child's
name, said the Parson that christened me, Shelty says my Goddaddy, ha, ha, ha!
then the Parson laughed, ha, ha, ha! Amen, says the Clerk, ha, ha, ha! since
that moment, every body has laughed at me, ha, ha, ha! and I have laughed at
every body, ha, ha, ha!


SERJ. Ha, ha, ha! I should like to enlist such a pleasant fellow -- your good
humor would keep us in such spirits, you would be the drum of the corpse.


SHEL. Yes, and your rattan would be the drumstick of the corpse, to beat the
travally on my back, row die dow! -- a good morning to you.


SERJ. I tell you you would make a develish good soldier.


SHEL. That Is more than my daddy could.


SERJ. Ha, ha, ha! you're an odd fish!


SHEL. Yes, but I will not be a red herring.


SERJ. No, but you're a pickled one though -- but pray what are you?


SHEL. Me! I Am a merchant, and a brogue-maker -- I sells a horn of malt --
moreover, I Am a famous piper. My father. Mr. Croudy, is a necromancer -- he is
the gift of second sight; and Mrs. Cummins, my granny, was banished for a witch
-- and now pray, who are you?


SERJ. I Am Sergeant Jack -- in the company of Captain Dash.


SHEL. Sergeant Jack, you keep company with Captain Dash -- good bye to you
worthy Sir --

(going)
SERJ. But stop, you know your young Lord is our Colonel -- this halbert is
his standard -- do you pay no respect to it?


SHEL. Respect! -- Oh, I beg pardon --

(takes off his hat and makes a low how to the halbert -- and then turns to go
off.)
SERJ. Ha! ha! ha! very polite indeed -- but stop --


SHEL. I must tune my chaunter.


SERJ. Any particular festival today?


SHEL. A wedding and here is the bridegroom.


Enter Sandy and Countrymen. SAN. Come lads, quick! quick! -- Shelty play up --
we must march two an two, till we join my Jenny and the lasses!


SERJ. Ah! I could put you all in the neatest method of marching --


SAN. Yes, Sir, but your marching differs from ours -- you march to face
enemies, we to meet friends -- you to assault a town, we to attack a wedding
dinner.


SERJ. Dinner! ah! my heroes! England's the field for a trencher battle --
there our drum head is an oak table, Sir Loin leads the van, our right and left
wing are a goose and turkey -- our balls are plumpuddings -- our bullets shot
from a damsen-tart; we poise our knives, handle our forks, then smoke slap
dash, cut through thick and thin --


SHEL. But don't you say grace?


SERJ. Yes, my grace is a b^mper of cherry bounce.


SAN. Well, ha! ha! ha! come to dinner with me today -- and though in the
Highlands of Scotland, you shall find we talk like French, eat like English,
and drink like Irish farmers.


SERJ. Ha! well said my lad! you deserve encouragement -- I Have a rough guinea
here, and egad I Will make one at your wedding, to drink my King's health, and
success to the young couple.


SONG.
Sergeant and Chorus. For Soldiers the feast prepare,
Who friends protect, and foes annoy,
What war has won, let us now enjoy,
Good cheer bright mirth bestowing,
Sir Lo^^ first we'll nobly dare,
Our host looks round his table,
His breast with friendship glowing;
We jovial lads whilst able,
Resolved to do all honor to the donor,
With courage charge his boiled and roast,
In goblets large each toast,
With spark'ling bumpers flowing.
Let drums beat, and fifes sound shrill,
Ye Clarions lend your sweetest notes,
Ye trumpets rend your silver throats,
Proclaim in warlike measure,
When the rosy bowl we fill,
The fair shall do their duty,
And sip its b^l^ny treasure,
Touched by the lip of beauty;
It Is now a draught for Hector, it is nector,
The Gods delight, here is wine and love,
Like Mars who fight, should kiss 'like Jove,
By turns the soldiers pleasure.

Exeunt, END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Cut Wood. Jenny and Girls discovered laughing. Enter Captain Dash.
CAPTAIN. EH! faith a buxom group, and the very charmer that pleased me so much.

(Retires.)
JEN. True, but no matter whether you are all in white.


1st GIRL. Ay, but we should for a wedding.


JEN. You, Susan, and Peggy, are to be my bride-maids; I hope soon to do as
much for you.


Enter Moggy. MOG. The sooner the better, ha, ha, ha!


JEN. Why, Moggy, how got you out?


MOG. Ha, ha, ha! Oh, dear! I Have scarce breath to laugh -- ha, ha, ha!


JEN. Nay, but tell us how did you get out?


MOG. Ah, that is it -- he, he, he! Charley so overacted his part, that he
locked me up in earnest -- ha, ha, ha! When Charley misses me, he will act his
surprise so natural, that father will place more confidence in him than ever --
ha, ha, ha!


JEN Ah, Moggy! you set little value upon the ^^essing of a parent, had I one!
-- your father is ^ery good to you, and indeed you shou'dn't vex ^im.


MOG. Ay, but when a husband's in the way -- ^ow if I could but meet Charley!
Come, Jenny, ^here's the bridegroom, and the garland -- the pipes and the
parson?


JEN. Ha, ha, ha! you wild one! -- but love is ^^e theme, and the sweet birds
shall sing a melodious accompanyment.


AIR.
Jenny. What rapture to think on the time I have seen,
On May day I first saw my love on this green,
So charming his face and commanding his mein,
The King was my lover, and Jenny his Queen.
The garland presented by Sandy,
More sweet from the waker, 'twas Sandy.
A side lock I threw on my lover by chance,
Which soon he returned with as tender a glance;
My heart leaped with joy when I seen him advance,
And well did I guess 'twas to lead up the dance;
For none danced so neat as my Sandy,
In all things complete is my Sandy.
Beneath a gay woodbine with myrtles entwin'^,
On cowslips and violets one evening reclined,
So charming a place and a season so kind,
He artfully chose to discover his mind.
So sweet were the vows of my Sandy,
I then exchanged hearts with my Sandy.

MOG. Dear! if here is not the strange officer been listening to our nonsense!
he is come to take (...) men away -- he is the most impudent devil --


CAP. (Advancing.) A sine flock of chickens, upon my honor.


JEN. You're not a fox, Sir?


MOG. No, but he takes you for a lamb, (...) throws such a sheep's eye at you.


ALL. Ha, ha, ha!


CAP. You seem to be all -- ha, ha, ha! pray don't let me spoil the play -- ha,
ha, ha! I Will make one -- what is it? If you would only admit me, you would find me the
merriest play-fellow, ha, ha, ha! (To Moggy.) You are, upon my soul, a
beauteour nosegay -- but here is the rosebud of the boquet, ((...) Jenny) Tell
me sweet, what is your play?

(Take her hand.)
MOG. A rosebud grows in an angry bush, and about fair maids.

(All the girls take hands and danc^ round him, singing, "A rosebud grows in an
angry bush, and about fair maids, and about my merry (...) all.")
Enter M'Gilpin, dressed extravagantly. All the Girls run off opposite side.
M'GIL, Hey! is this the recruiting Captain? 'gad, Sir, I suspect you're come to
beat up among our wives and daughters, for a regiment of infantry, ha, ha, ha!


CAP. Was ever so sweet a rosebud!


M'GIL. Ha, ha, ha! Captain, if your General saw you like a maypole, and the
petticoat regiment frisking round you, ha, ha, ha!


CAP. Who are you?


M'GIL. I Am young Lord Donald your Colonel's Steward, and Collector of his
Majesty's taxes, come to bid you welcome to our Isle of Col.


CAP. Oh, zounds! they have set me all on fire! Your, hand!

(offers his)
M'GIL. Bu', Captain, what think you of the bride?


CAP. Bride! Eh! which? who?


MGIL. She in the white and tartan ribbans.


CAP. The very charmer going to be married -- 'sdeath, that lovely sprig to be
worn by a clown!


M'GIL. Clown! Oh, no, I Will assure you her ^andy is a very clever lad.


CAP. He must not have her.


M'GIL. Hey!


CAP. I Will have her!


M'GIL. You!


CAP. Oh, yes.


M'GIL. Ha, ha, ha! This is recruiting! ha, ha, ha!


CAP. Demn your grinning, Sir! what do you mean? -- Hark'ee, Mr. Steward, put
that treasure in^o my possession, and what is there I will not do for you?


M'GIL. Eh! suppose you tell me what you will do for me --


CAP. Eh -- stay -- true, Jack told me the bait to have him. (Aside.) Ay what
think you of the agency of our regiment?


M'GIL. Good picking in an agency.


CAP. It Is yours -- say no more -- I Will settle that with my Colonel.


M'GIL. Eh -- oh, no, no, no, I promised her to Sandy.


CAP. Come, come, be a wise man, that prefers his own interest to all other
consider^^ions.


M'GIL. I am a wise man; and I -- oh, Lord! -- but the wedding's a thing
settled, clothes bought, Parson bespoke, young folks wishes on tip of
expectation! dear, poor Sandy'd break his heart. -- Eh! the finest thought --
but, I suppose you never saw her, though -- you shall marry my mog!


CAP. Damn your Mog! I don't want to marry any body.


M'GIL. No! why I thought Jenny --


CAP. Zounds! Mr. -- think of your interest.


M'GIL. Oh, Lord! I always do --


CAP. Such talents as yours, hid here in an obscure corner of the world! such
powers of eloquence! -- a seat in Parliament.


M'GIL. Why, our Lord is a bright man there.


CAP. He bright! a Scotch pebble, to you; yo^ eloquence once known, must
command any thing.


M'GIL. Why, yes, I think once they find ho^ I can speak. I shall get paid for
holding my tongu^*


CAP. Boards! Jobs! Committees! The girl.


M'GIL. Jobs!


CAP. A Pension! Place and Peerage! -- Li^^^^ Jenny. --


M'GIL. Pension! Jenny's yours; from a Su^veyor, I Will be a Commissioner; if I
am a Steward it shall be of the Chiltern Hundreds.


Enter Charley. CHAR. (Apart to M'Gil.) Sir, Sir!


M'GIL. Eh! now you puppy, you have let Mogg^ give you the slip.


CHAR. No, Sir, have her safe -- but as you fur posed, Old Croudy has just
landed some run good


M'GIL. But where?


CHAR. With my glass I saw him hide them: the Creek, behind the North Foreland.


M'GIL. From his Boat? was it the Swallow?


CHAR. You know you feiz'd that last week, it the other boat, the Angel.


M'GIL. I Will have her and lading!


CAP. My dear Sir, that is Jenny.


M'GIL. I Will have the Angel condemned.


CAP. My Angel condemnd! for what?


M'GIL. For running brandy and tobacco.


Exit has^^^^ CAP. The old fellow's mad -- but he must p^^vent this marriage --
holloa, Sir! Mr. --


Ex^^ CHAR. Ha, ha, ha! my master goes to seize hi^ own goods that I stole out
of his stores, and hid (...) the rocks for him to seek out, whilst I run off
with his daughter.


Enter Moggy (unperceived.) I must run and let her out.

(going.) MOG. Dear Sir, will not you wait for company


CHAR. Moggy! how the plague did you get out?


MOG. No matter, here I am, and take me while you can.


CHAR. Hey? Ecod, t^is is doing things, ha, ha, ha! -- Charming! I Have cut out
work for your father, on the opposite sides of the Island; so I Will run down to
the pier, and get the boat ready, and off we skim like curlews.


Exit. MOG. Make haste, Charley -- oh! my bonny Charley. --


AIR.
Moggy. My father's house is neat and nice,
My little garden Paradise,
My chamber decked with trinkums fine,
My Windows graced with jessamine;
I have a black bird gay,
Oh he is a pretty fellow,
He whistles sweet and mellow,
The live long Day.
My playful Kid, handsome pets I Have my many,
My wanton bounding wanton frisking Nanny;
Yet I love none half so well
As Charley's gift, my dear Fidell,
My little Fidell, my pretty Fidell,
Bow wow, bow wow, bow wow, bow wow.
Haste gentle lover, now for you;
Papa, kid, dog, and chick, adieu.
In town I Will be, my glass can tell,
A monsterous flaming married belle,
The foremost in all gamesome bouts,
At operas, plays, and balls, and routs*
All in my plumage fine,
Around the smarts shall flutter,
About me what a clutter --
She Is all divine.
There song, they dance, to please me how they caper!
Whilst rivals challenge, huff and vapor;
As birds all welcome here to woo,
For Charley's sake be gone cuckco:
I Will never create my spousey's shame,
To singe my wings about the flame.

Exit after song. Scene -- Shelty's house in view. Re-enter Moggy. MOG. Eh!
yon's a boat put in -- here is some of the passengers -- what a strange looking
-- (looking) -- Ha, ha, ha! by the description, it must be the strange Parson
that is expected from Mull, to marry Jenny and Sandy.

(Retires up.)
Enter Lord of Rausey (as a Parson) a Servant with portmantua following. LD.
RA. That dwelling, (points to Shelty's) looks like a public house.


SER. It is, Sir.


LD. RA. Then engage a room, and leave my baggage there -- my great coat was
comfortable on the water, but on land its cumbr'ous, (takes it off, and gives
it servant;) and lay out my best perriwig, that I may look decent -- I will
inquire for those I want, and you may refresh yourself within.


SER. Yes, Sir.


Exit with things into Shelty's. LD. R. Here, pretty maiden. --


MOG. Sir. -- What a civil gentleman!

(Aside.)
LD. R. Do you know one Sandy Frazer?


MOG. Eh! Sandy --


LD. R. To whom I am to marry one Jenny.


MOG. Yes, Sir. (Courtsy.) I am Jenny, Sir. -- I hope he wont find me out
(aside) (He views her with attention and emotion.) Lord! I believe he suspects
me!

(aside and confused.)
LD. R. Then it is your wish I should marry you to Sandy?


MOG. Yes, Sir; marry us as fast as you can, Sir -- I Am not in a hurry to be
married, Sir.


LD. R. I see you are not.


MOG. Oh, no, Sir, my Sandy wishes it, Sir, and my father, Sir --


LD. R. I did not think you had a father. --


MOG. True, Sir. -- I -- I mean Mr. M'Gilpin; he loves me as if I was his own
daughter.


LD. R. Then he has a daughter of his own.


MOG. Oh, yes, Sir, Moggy -- Miss Moggy M'Gilpin -- a very pretty sort of a
body, I Will assure you, Sir; loves me dearly, Sir, only, Sir, she is given to sib
a little now and then.


LD. R. I could wish to see Mr. M'Gilpin, and --


MOG. Why Sir, I -- I -- don't magine you can see him, 'cause he is gone on
great business, Sir; but, Sir, he left his best compliments for you, Sir, and
requests you would perform the marriage as soon as you could, please your
reverence, (curtsies.) If Charley was but now here, we might put it beyond the
power of father ever to separate us, (aside.) Oh, Sir, here comes my Sandy --
now, Sir, you will -- oh Heavens! my father! (aside.) Good bye, Sir,

(going.)
LD. R. But, lassy, stop --


MOG. Yes, Sir, I Will stop -- when I Am out of your fight.


Exit, running into Shelty's. LD. R. A whimsical sort of a young lady! Oh, here
comes her Sandy --


Enter Charley. CHAR. The boat's ready, and -- hey! where has she scamper'd --
Sir -- did you see a young woman?


LD. R. Yes, your Jenny is gone into that house.


CHAR. Jenny! -- I mean --


LD. R. Then, my good Sandy -- I --


CHAR. Pshaw! I Am not Sandy -- where the plague can Moggy have --


LD. R. Well, I thought she meant -- but I Will see about the marriage, taste
your ale and wedding cheer, and then ferry over to Inchkinneth, where I have
three or four more couple to tack together.


Exit. CHAR. Now this giddy tit, to kick up her heels just at the starting
post! Her father! Zounds, it is well she has missed him.


Enter M'Gilpin, in a rage. M'GIL. Fine police! if the King's Officers are to
be assaulted in the execution of their duty!


CHAR. Ha, ha, ha, aside. Oh, then, Sir, you have beat old ^roudy?


M'GIL. No, damn him, but he has beat me! but I Will let the ruffian know, no
body shall cheat the King in this Istand, but myself -- he is a poacher too,
goes fowling, grousing, and cocking; but I Will grouse and cock him! I Will show
him, that in Col I am grand fowler, prowler, and comptroller. His son Shelty
have a child of mine! -- my dear Charley take care of Moggy.


CHAR. She Is safe, I Will answer, Sir.


M'GIL. Have you seen the Captain? I Will give him Jenny, to secure my preferment
there.


CHAR. I Will set him another hunt, whilst I look for Moggy -- Sir, have an eye
to Jenny, the Parson's come, and if Sandy gets a hint of your intention to give
her to the Captain, they will be coupled unknown to you.


M'GIL. Ods fish! but where is Jenny?


CHAK. This instant gone into Shelty's.


M'GIL. Run you in, boy, and secure her, whilst I raise the possey after Croudy.


CHAR. Lord! Sir, Jenny'd never stay with me, you would best in and secure her
yourself, and I Will bring the constables for Croudy. (Moggy looks out at the
door) Look, there she is -- after her, Sir.


MOG. Its me, you sool!

(apart to him, and retires.)
CHAR., Oh, dear! its Moggy

(Aside.)
M'GIL. (Going.) Stop, you, Jenny! I Will have you!


CHAR. Stay, you, Sir -- I Will have her --


M'GIL. You! Zounds, you know she would never stay for you -- here Jenny --


Exit into Shelty's. CHAR. Sent the Wolf after my Lamb! I could hang myself!
What, what is to be done? Stay, as he will find her in Shelty's, I Will swear it
was he stole her out.


Enter Croudy, and goes into Shelty's. Odfo! there is old Croudy gone into
Shelty's -- I Will setch the constables upon him -- I know, from his wicked
obstinate spirit, it will be a devil of a piece of work to take him; and in the
confusion he will kick up, I may still get Moggy down to the water side -- then
weigh anchor, feather oar, blow kind breezes, and adieu to my old master.

Exit. Scene, Shelty's house. Enter Shelty, with a mug, Apie, with table and
chair -- Lord of Rausey's servant, with a great coat and portmantua, with hat
and wig in it, which servant takes out, and lays on the table, and then exit
with Apie calling behind. SHEL. Yes, Sir, I Am here, Sir -- I Am there, Sir --
coming, Sir. (Drinks.) Lord, what nice ale do I sell -- yes, Sir, my house is
so full -- oh, what a mortal fine chance have I to make money -- but father's
wrangling with M'Gilpin, will kick down all -- here he comes; now if he hasn't
been in some new combustifications.


Enter Croudy. CROU. Ha! (Takes the mug from Shelty and drinks) Ha! a
scoundrel! tell me I rob the King! the Custom-house Officer takes his pay and
smuggle -- and he is a damned bad servant, indeed, that robs his master. Boy,
M'Gilpin would have seized my boat, though 'twas only last week he clawed up my
other. (Drinks.) Lost my poor Swallow!


SHEL. Shoud'nt have thought as much,

(turning to the mug) --
CROU. This tax-man -- Oh, zounds! I Will --


SHEL. Lord, father! how do you put one out of all sorts! here is my house full
-- there is the Sergeant has got Sandy and all the lads at cards; and here is
Sandy's marriage -- and here this new Parson seems a wet clergy -- and then,
now your quarrels with M'Gilpin will --


CROU. Go froth your ale, and score double boy, -- I Have thrash'd M'Gilpin.


SHEL. You have not.


CROU. I Have banged him, sirrah.


Enter Apie. APIE. Oh, mercy, Master Croudy! here is the Constables, and
M'Gilpin in the house!


SHEL. Lord, Lord! you will be taken -- Apie do you go down and let no body come
up -- [Exit Apie.] (Sees clothes.) Eh! this is the luckiest -- here step into
this great coat, hat, and wig, the Parson's servant left here -- no time for
thinking -- do take a fool's advice.


CROU. Eh!


SHEL. If you are taken to jail you go -- do you want to make a riot in my
house, and give him a pretense to take away my license? no, do things easy --
here, quick, quick! (He helps them on with the clothes.) There, the devil a one
of them can know you now -- I Will run and get the boat ready -- you're so nicely
disguised, you may easily get to it -- Huh! oh, dear --


Exit. CROU. Oh, you cowardly cur! you're no son of mine -- my cudgel is but a
-- if I had only -- Zounds! is'nt that my broad sword yonder? I made a present
of it to this pigeon; but he never had spirit to use it, (takes it from over
the chimney;) and shall it be said, that a Highlander sneaked out like a
paltroon, with his broad sword in his hand? no, no! no disguise now. (Flings
off clothes.) All fair and open -- if they take me, they take me -- they must
first take this, (draws it) 'twas once drawn in what I then thought a right
cause, but ready now to defend my King; though I do run a few anchors of brandy
to quaff his health, and brin up my children to fight his battles.


Exit. Enter Moggy, frightened. MOG. Oh, lud! where shall I hide from father If
I could stand behind the door, and slip out as he comes in; but what could
bewitch Charley to send him after me? If I could but get down to the pier --
what is this, ( looks at clothes, etc.) Ha! the Parson's -- Ecod I Have a great
mind to try now if I cannot hide myself in it -- Ha, ha, ha! on they go, ha, ha,
ha! (puts them on) and wig! ha, ha, ha!


M'Gilpin and Shelty without. M'GIL. She is here.


MOG. Oh, Lord! there is father!

(She mu^^les herself, and stands still.)
SHEL. She is not.


M'GIL. Sirrah! Charley told me she came in just now. --


MOG. Did he, indeed!


Enter M'Gilpin and Shelty. SHEL. She is not, I tell you -- you have done like a
wise man

(apart to Moggy, thinking it is Croudy.)
M'GIL. I Will have the house searched!


SHEL. (To Moggy) Don't speak, and I Will get you out.


M'GIL. Where Is Jenny? You're a stamp of your father, the old rascal!


SHEL. Father keep your temper --.


M'GIL. Deliver up Jenny, you scoundrel!


SHEL. Keep your cudgel quiet -- Oh, Jenny! -- You think me a Devil among the
girls -- this morning I was running away with Moggy -- now it is Mr. Shelty,
Sir, you have been kissing Jenny!


M'GIL. What old fellow's that?

(to Moggy.)
SHEL. Over the chimney? Oh, that is Lord Lovat!


M'GIL. Over the chimney, sirrah!


SHEL. Yes, that is poor Simon Frazer

(looking toward a print.)
M'GIL. Simon Frazer! I mean that

(to Moggy.)
SHEL. Oh, against the cupboard? Jenny Camaron. --


M'GIL. Get along, you audacious -- I mean that, that fellow.


SHEL. Fellow! this? Oh, Sir, this gentleman is the Parson from Rausey. --


M'GIL. Oh, I beg his pardon -- How do you do, Doctor? -- Oh, true, you come to
marry Sandy and Jenny -- ah, that is all up, Sir.


SHEL. Don't speak to him, Sir --


M'GIL. Damn your busy -- Sirrah, you are the cause of my child's present
distresses, you miscreant! I Will -- Ecod, I Will revenge all upon the rogue your
father. Doctor -- Oh! here, Charley has brought the Constables.


SHEL. Father, you see you must fight your way.


Enter Charley and two Constables. CHAR. I saw Croudy enter here. --


M'GIL. We'll have him. -- There, Charley, you show the Doctor here to my
house, whilst the Constables and I search this for Croudy!


SHEL. (Apart to Charley) Do, Charley, take the Doctor -- its my father -- get
him off.


CHAR. What! I help the escape of a smuggler! -- Sir, that is Croudy in disguise.


MOG. (Apart to Char.) It Is me, you blockhead!


CHAR. Moggy again! (Aside.) Come along, Doctor --


M'GIL. No, you old rogue, no collusion with my clerk -- I know you -- I see
the tip of his nose -- Constables lay hold of him --


(The Constables lay hold of Moggy -- Shelty takes the staff from one of them,
and beats the other -- Moggy throws off her disguise, and kneels before her
father.) SHEL. Keep off! I Will defend my father with my life.


MOG. Oh, save my dearest father!


M'GIL. My daughter!


SHEL. This my daddy?


M'GIL. My dear child!


CHAR. I Have done this well.

(Aside.)
M'GIL. Before I locked, but now I Will double lock you.


MOG. Don't put me again in Charley's care.


M'GIL. No, I Will take care of you myself, my dutiful, affectionate -- but, you
jade, who got you out?


MOG. Who, but my dear Shelty!


SHEL. I! Me?


M'GIL. Ay, these were all your lies -- your Simon Frazer's and Jenny Cameron's
against the cupboard!


SHEL. But, where the devil can old Croudy be? Egad as I found Miss Moggy under
a great coat, perhaps I may find my daddy under a petticoat.


Exit. M'GIL. However, for your concern for me, just now, you shall see me
reward desert, and --


Enter Jenny and Sandy. Give Jenny to --

SAND. Good Sir --


Enter Captain Dash. M'GIL. To Captain Dash.

(stands her to him.)
CAP. Sir, you shall be a great man, upon in, honor!


SAN. Sir, hav'n't I your promise?


M'GIL. Eh! Egad I believe I Am a great man already, for I totally forget my
promise.


SAN. But, Sir, I hold you to that promise, and with my life I Will justify my
pretensions here.

(Takes her hand.)
JEN. Nay, My Sandy,


CAP. Hark'ee, young bull calf, if you have a life to spare, in my regiment, it
may serve your King and country.


SAN. Sir, the officer that could disgrace his profession, by injuring the
individual, will prove but a poor protector to his country, and is unworthy the
favor of his King.


CAP. A spirited sort of a scoundrel this! -- Old one, I must have him.

(Apart to M'Gil.)
M'GIL. You shall. Apart to him.) Sandy -- remember my agency, though -- I say,
Sandy, upon recollection, I cannot assign over a leafs of the farm I promised
you, unless you immediately pay me down a fine of 50l.


SAN. You know it is impossible for me to raise such a sum.


M'GIL. I do. (Aside.) Oh, Lord! cannot you? I Am so sorry -- but you must quit
the premises.


SAN. No indulgence -- no consideration for the services I have rendered the
estate?


M'GIL. Indulgence! Sandy! -- I thought you was as honest as -- as myself; but
now I see you would have me turn an unfaithful Steward.


SAN. You're a wretch! a little mean petty tyrant! and may every unfaithful
servant, who, like you, uses his delegated power to oppress the poor, and bring
curses on the name of a worthy master, meet the villain's reward -- shame and
punishment!


Exit. M'GIL. Damme, you shall go on the forlorn hope for this! Captain, you
shall have him.

(In a rage.)
JEN. After all his labor and toil to improve this country, is my love to be
driven thus out of it?


M'GIL. Come home, you hussy.


MOG. Ah, do, father, do lock me up, but don't be so cruel to poor Jenny --
don't --


M'GIL. What are locks and brick walls against such an Algerine family as
Shelty's? Even the old water-thief, his father, would rob a Bishop of his
butter boats!


Exeunt M'Gil, Cap. and Mig. JEN. And this the completion of my happiness!


AIR.
Jenny. The bleak wind wistles over the main,
The seaman trolls his jovial song,
He Will see his faithful maid again,
And blithe his tall ship rolls along.
From the mast head the cliff he spies,
His joys in faithful hopes expand,
The tempost roars, the billows rise,
In vain he tacks to make the land.
Relentless breakers guard the coast,
His hope, his ship, himself is lost.
The bleak winds whistles over the main, etc.

Exit. Enter Lord of Col, and Servant. LD. COL. Only enquire if Mr. M'Gilpin
is at home!


SER. Yes, Sir.


Exit. LD. COL. I find my arrival is totally unexpected. -- The moment I set my
foot on my little territo^^ here, I found my heart glow with all the regal
pride of an ancient Scottish Chieftain! but no respect -- no one to -- no
attendance -- Who Is there?

(With authority.)
Enter Shelty. SHEL. Ha, ha, ha! there he has taken her home.


LD. COL. Do you belong to the house?


SHEL. No, but the house belongs to me -- what do you want?


LD. COL. Manners!


SHEL. I thought so, by your making such a noise. -- Do You want any ale?


LD. COL. Do you know who you talk to?


SHEL. Yes -- who are you? Oh, he is one of my father's smuggling customers.
(Aside) You're a pedlar. --


LD. COL. How?


SHEL. Oh, I ask pardon, I did not see your lae'd waistcoat -- you're the
puppet-shew man come to Sandy's wedding?


LD. COL. Sirrah!


Enter Servant. SER. Yes, Mr. M'Gilpin is on the Island, your honor.


SHEL. Honor!

(Looks attentively at Lord.)
LD. COL. Inform him his Lord is here -- and I command his immediate
attendance.


SER. I shall, my Lord.


Exit. SHEL. This Lord Donald?


Enter Lord of Rausey. LD. R. (On entering) Only order my bill.


LD. COL. The Lord of Rausey! Why, my good friend, what brings you to Col? and
in such a --

(surveying his dress.)
LD. R. Hush, my dear Donald? I as little expected to have met with you here.


LD. COL. But how! what?


LD. R. You may remember my sister Evelyn making a stolen match with young
Cameron; the lad went for England to acquire wealth, the only qualification he
wanted; and my sister, poor thing! to avoid my father's anger lying in here in
Col, died in childbirth, leaving a daughter, of whom I am now in search.


LD. COL. But your canonicals!

(His dress.)
LD. R. Why, Sir, meeting on the road with an old domestic of mine, who is now
in the service of a Parson engaged to wed a couple here, I prevailed on him,
for a little cash, to assist me in a plan, I, on the instant conceived, to
personate his master, ha, ha, ha! -- lent me clothes, ha, ha, ha! for I
thought, in a feigned character, if I could discover my niece, I might unknown
myself, have come to her real disposition: If capable of polish, I Would have
snatched her from obscurity -- but I find such a --


LD. COL. Oh, then you have found her.


LD. R. Oh, yes; but my niece, Miss Jenny, as they call her, may make a good
farmer's wise, and in a young fellow, one Sandy, from his character, she is
likely to have a most excellent husband -- Ha, ha, ha! supposing me the Parson,
just now, she would have me marry her to him! Ay, she may grace a dairy, and so
may be much happier than bringing her into a sphere her rustic education has
rendered her unfit for; so I shall give the lad some cash with her; but I
shall not discover myself. -- And now for your affair. --


LD. COL. I Have given this Island to my son Robert -- parted with him last in
London; he had then but just returned from Hampshire, and the shooting season
approaching, told me he would see what game my new gift afforded; but I don't know
how -- I can hear nothing of the boy. -- Fifteen years since I Have been here,
so, during recess of Parliament, I Have taken a trip, to see if Bob has made any
improvements, for his Hampshire journey had made him a skilful farmer, I assure
you; -- besides, I was anxious to know how M'Gilpin, my Steward, has gone on:
but I hear nothing but complaints of him, and yet the Island wears a fine sace.


LD. R. Like me, you should come incog, then you would see the true face of things.


LD. COL. Ay, Sir, but no hiding the native dignity of a M'Donald.


Enter Shelty, very submissively. SHEL. My Lord, forgive me taking you for a
pedlar.

(Bows low.)
LD. R. The dignity of a M'Donald!


SHEL. Pardon me, Sir, for taking you for a shewman!

(Bows low.)
LD. COL. Ha, ha, ha! well, Sir, I shall excuse your apologies -- now for
honest M'Gilpin. --


SHEL. Yes, my Lord, he is as worthy a man --


LD. COL. Worthy! I heard --


SHEL. All truth -- he is as great a rogue as ever stood in the picture frame.


LD. COL. Well, let the gentlemen of the Island attend me. --


SHEL. Gentlemen! Yes, we will all attend your Lordship.

(bows.)
LD. COL. And let every one that has any charge against him appear -- if well
grounded, I shall see him punished. -- My Lord,

(to Lord of Rausey.)
Exeunt Lairds. SHEL. (Aping Ld. of Col.) I shall see him punished! hem! a fine
thing to be a great man -- hem! call the gentlemen to attend me, (mimicking.)
If I was a Lord, what a deal of good I Would do to -- myself -- I Would, if -- that is
supposing I was a very great man, indeed -- I Would be the patron of genius and
talents, I Would reward the -- stone-eater -- I Would attend all sorts of elegant --
cock fights, to show my goodnature, and to show my courage -- I Would go to the
most scientifical academies for -- boxing -- yes, that is it -- the reward of
genius now is given to a black smith, or a coal heaver, for a glorious black
eye, or a noble bloody nose -- and then there is your concerts, public and
private, where some great Lords play the violin, and others play the fiddle;
so, amongst those famous quality hautboys, who knows how far my chaunter might
be esteemed in polite harmonious jollisications!


AIR.
Shelty. Boys, when I play, cry oh, crimini,
Shelty's chaunter squaker imini;
In love tunes I Am so emphatical,
Fingers shaking quivoratical;
With agility,
Grace, gentility,
Girls shake heel and toe,
Pipes I tickle so;
My jiggs still a pate, titilate, pretty mate,
My hop; love mirth, young blood circulate.
Toodle roodle foodle roodle roo, toodle roodle rco.
Oh, my chaunter sounds so prettily,
Sweeter far than pipes from Italy;
Cross the I weed I Will bring my tweedle dum,
Striking foreign flute and fidale dumb;
Modern Rizzios so,
Please Ma'am's Misses though;
Peers can merry strum,
Acts plays very rum,
I Will puff at square Hanover,
Cast over, man over,
All the punny pipes from Italy. Toodle, etc.
I Am in talk a pedant musical,
In fine terms I lug intrusical,
Slap Bravura's alt, the rage about,
Hayd'n, Mara, opera, stage about;
Oratorios,
Cramers Florios;
Things at jubilee,
Neither he nor she,
Die at Syren's note,
Tiny threat, petticoat,
This is amateur high musical. Toodle, etc.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A Wood. Enter Sandy and Jenny. JENNY. MY dear Sandy don't grieve; why
should ill fortune disturb our tranquillity, unless it could lessen our
affections.


SAN. M'Gilpin's design of giving you to Captain Dash distracts me.


JEN. But he shall not; my obligations to him are great, yet this tyrannous
attempt to fetter my inclinations, and a suspicion that his motives were not
quite disinterested, have somewhat abated my debt of gratitude.


SAN. And here will not let me continue in my farm, without this fine of fifty
pounds, so I must give it up -- but he laid it on to ruin me.


JEN. Well, and even so, ain't there other farms, or no farm, could you not be
happy with your poor Jenny?


SAN. My source of happiness! when mine, I shall esteem you as a friend,
respect you as a woman, and adore you as an angel -- be for ever grateful for
your honoring me with your choice, before so many more worthy -- I Will cherish
you in my heart -- love you 'till death, and protect you with my life.


JEN. When you are my dear husband -- if you can have faults, to me they shall
seem failings, but your virtues I shall esteem perfections -- I shall advise
you with candor, obey you with cheerfulness, make your home the seat of
comfort; yet, if you ever should quit your door with a srown, my smiles of
welcome should meet you at the threshold!


SAN. My sweet Jenny! this Captain! -- I cannot think of resigning you to a
Prince; but if I truly love you, should I make you the partner of my miserable
fortunes?


JEN. Were you a Prince, I Am sure you would let me share your splendor --
therefore I Will follow you, my love, the world over, equally prepared to partake
of your good fortune, or comfort you in sorrow -- oh, don't deny me!


SAN. My dear Jenny! --

AIR.
Sandy. At down I rose with jocound glee,
Far joyful was the day
That could this blessing give to me;
Now joy is fled away Jenny.
No flocks, nor herds, nor store of gold,
Nor house, nor home have I;
If beauty must be bought or sold,
Alas! I cannot buy, Jenny.
Yet I am rich, if thou art kind,
So prized a smile from th'e;
True love alone our hearts shall bind,
You Are all the world to me, Jenny.
Sweet gentle maid, though patient meek,
My lily drops a tear,
Ah! raise thy drooping head, and seek
Soft peace and comfort here, Jenny.

This is the first time I ever was convinced money was a blessing.


Enter Benin, with a letter. BEN. Miss Jenny, Miss Jenny, a letter by the boat.


JEN. A letter for me! who can it come from? (Reads) Madam, the ticket, No.
125, of which you purchased one-sixteenth at my office, is drawn a prize of
1000l.

Your humble servant. THOMAS TRUMAN.


Heavens! what good fortune! now Sandy, you may keep the farm!


SAN. Eh!


JEN. My lottery chance -- where is it? -- you know I gave it you --


SAN. Did you?

(with emotion.)
JEN. What Is the matter? -- let us see the paper -- its a sixteenth -- stay --
sixteen fifties -- Lord! you can pay the fine -- and we shall have -- aye -- I
don't know how much in our pockets.


Enter Sergeant Jack, singing. SERJ. Eh! is not this the lad I broke at
cribbage? -- it is -- oh! -- hah, my worthy! I Am ready to give you your revenge
at the broads again -- or any game from lansquennet to tee-totum, ha, ha, ha!


JEN. Why, have you been playing cards, Sandy?


SAN. Eh! -- no -- yes, my love -- I -- I had not the smalleft of -- but --
that is -- distraction -- Oh, my Jenny! the die is cast!


Exit agitated. SERJ. Poor boy! a generous lad too -- spent his money freely on
our recruits -- cards? -- yes, touched him for three pounds at Shelty's,
besides a lottery chance. --


JEN. (with emotion.) Sir, did you win a lottery chance from him?

(agitated.)
SERJ. Yes, my dear, I -- my dear -- and I Will give it you for a kiss -- damme
if I don't!


JEN. Sir! was it that number -- but it must be -- he had no other.

(Aside.)
SERJ. The prettiest girl I ever saw --

(gazing.)
JEN. I say, Sir, was that the number?

(shows letter.)
SERJ. Oh, the number -- the lovliest -- eh -- a thousand! no, no, my dear, I Am
not so lucky as that -- but let us see -- aye, here it is -- ha, ha, ha! -- eh!
125 -- tol lol der lol! -- a lucky dog am I --

(sings.)
JEN. Yes, it is it -- my poor Sandy! --

(bursts into tears.)
SERJ. Eh! is this 'cause the lad has lost? Zounds! this is the girl he was to
have married -- through my whole life I Have been a petty shifting dog, always on
the lurch -- yet, damme if I can enjoy this first visit from good Fortune, as
it brings tears into the eyes of a pretty girl!


JEN. By the loss of this, Sandy loses his farm, and I lose my Sandy!


SERJ. Farm! true, the Captain told me this feat of his separating two lovers,
and get a man turned out of bread! -- Captain! -- if he was a General he is no
soldier.


JEN. I suppose, though it was I bought the chance, they will not pay it me, as I
cannot bring it to them.


SERJ. Aye, the poor fellow was turned out of his farm, because unable to pay
the fifty pounds the old rascal laid on it -- now this would just -- this is
the first time I ever had it in my power to do a generous action, and I Have a
strange curiosity to know how a man feels after one -- a failor would -- and
why not a soldier? (Aside.) Look y'e, my lass -- before I knew this bit of
paper was worth sixty pounds, I offered it you for a kiss -- I Am not quite a
Nabob in point of cash -- but if 'twas worth an 100! I scorn to go back of my
word to one that cannot call me to an account for breaking it -- There Is your
ticket -- a kiss was the price -- but though my mouth waters, pay it to the lad
you love.


Exit. JEN. Can there be so much worth, where so little is expected? now to
impart my joy, and make my Sandy happy as myself!


SCENE II. M'Gilpin' s House. Enter Moggy. MOG. Ha, ha, ha! father thinks he
has me now sure, but I think if our trusty Benin, the black, procures me the
clothes, as he promised -- yes, my kind pappy, I suspect I shall surely slip
off from you again -- ha, ha, ha! Oh, here is poor Jenny -- she is as unfortunate
in her love affairs as myself.


Enter Jenny, much agitated. JEN. Oh, my dear Moggy! for ever I Am undone! --
Sandy is --


MOG. Well, I know father has turned him out of his farm.


JEN. But then he is gone, in a sit of despair, and listed himself among the
soldiers!


MOG. What a fool -- ps'h, make him runaway from them.


JEN. Desert! -- Oh, the punishment, if taken, is terrible! besides, though drove
to it by desperation, I know his noble spirit would scorn to fly from the
standard of his King!


MOG. If you could procure a man in his place.


JEN. The equal of my Sandy! not in Scotland. --


MOG. Oh, yes, my dear, there is another very good man in Scotland!


JEN. I mean no affront to your Charley, my dear -- but I Have sold my lottery
chance, and I Am going to offer the money to the Captain, to see if he will let
him off.


MOG. Money! -- I wish I had a lottery chance, or somewhat -- here am I going
to run into the wide world, and, 'ecod I don't think Charley and I, between us,
can muster up ten shillings for traveling charges.


JEN. My poor friend! -- I wish I could --

(aside.)
MOG. Ha, ha, ha! Jenny, I think you had better offer yourself to the Captain
-- ha, ha, ha! I warrant he takes you in his stead -- if not, you must, as the
song says, "Pack up your tatters and follow the Drum" -- you would make a very
smart little soldier's wife -- with a brace of bairns in your arms, and another
little sqaub fat fellow squalling on the knapsack behind your Caledonian
Alexander.


JEN. Why, my dear Moggy! if it even should come to that, I have a heart
prepared for all weathers -- yet I doubt my fortitude!


AIR.
Jenny. Dearest youth this heart will break,
If cruel soldiers take thee far;
Why peaceful home and me forsake,
To tempt the dangers of the war;
But all is home where thou wilt resort,
My Sandy's smiles such comfort bring,
The humble Village is a Court,
Graced by the presence of a King.
My silken geer I Will leave behind,
Prepare to face the rain and wind,
With him I Will meet the blast so keen,
And smile while on the billows tossed;
The heart where love is warm within,
Enjoys a May in Winter's frost.

Exit. MOG. My sweet gentle Friend! -- my father uses her very unjustly -- I Am
certain her mother, for all he says of her poverty and his charity to her, left
the money behind that has been the making of him -- She must be come of good
people, from her refined sentiments and elegant manners -- she quite eclipses
me; and yet I don't envy, but love her dearly. -- How long Benin stays -- if he
should disappoint -- perhaps betray me to my father! -- no, here he comes, the
faithful fellow -- yes, he has got them -- oh, precious!


Enter Benin, with bundle. Well Benin, have you? -- show, my good --

BEN. Yes, Missy, and I tink dey vil fit you.


MOG. My best creature --


BEN. Ah, Missy! but Massa lick a me, as I was vorse creature -- Missy if you
run away, I run too -- Massa kill a me, if he know I help you.


MOG. Pshaw! you fool, I Am not going to run away.


BEN. Missy, dear Miss Jenny write letter in parlour below -- want me fetch it.
-- Musy, pray don't tell Massa I brought you clothes.


Exit. MOG. Let Us see what you have brought -- jacket, kilt, bonnet, complete
-- I will not even tell Charley of my design 'till I Am equipped -- ha, ha, ha!
I Will surprise him. -- There I Will lay all snug -- (puts the bundle in press in
the flat.) Now if Charley could borrow cash to carry us up to Edinbro', father
could never find us out there -- let us see, lud! I hav'n't above half a guinea
left of my own pocket money -- Oh, poor Charley and I --


Enter Benin, with a letter. BEN. Miss Moggy, Jenny desire me give you dis. --


MOG. Very well.


Exit Benin. What Is this! an Edinbro' bank note for forty pounds -- let us see
-- (reads.) My dear Moggy, for certain the Captain will never part with such a
soldier as my Sandy -- therefore I shall take your hint and 'follow the drum.'
As I shall not want the enclosed, accept it, my dear friend, for traveling
charges -- besides a supply of cash you will find necessary 'till you can
obtain your father's pardon for the steps you are about to take, in which be
happier than your Jenny! -- My generous friend! -- no, I will not enjoy
happiness whilst you feel sorrow! -- With the assistance of my Highland dress,
here in my cuphoard, if I can once more elope, the first use I make of my
liberty is to procure it for your Sandy -- ay -- though father catches me the
next moment.

Enter M'Gilpin. M'GIL. I Will first catch you this moment. (Takes her by the
arm, and takes a key out of his pocket.) Go in there.


MOG. No, Sir!


M'GIL. Go in --


Enter Charley. CHAR. What Is the matter, Sir?


M'GIL. Here Is a young lady will not be locked up.


CHAR. Oh, fie, Miss, refuse to be locked up -- that is so unreasonable of you
--


M'GIL. So it is -- is not it a proof what value I set upon you, hussy! -- don't
I lock up my guineas? you, you -- brazen-face go in there -- (puts her in.) If
I should be obliged to go out, Charley, you will have a watch here

(As M'Gil turns his head to speak to Charley, Moggy, unseen by either, slips
again out of the door; pulls Charley by the ear, and runs into the press.)
CHAR. Now Sir! what is that for?

(putting his hand to his ear.)
M'GIL. Charley, don't say a word against it -- it shall be as I like with my
own family.


CHAR. Yes, Sir, but when you count ears, pray don't consider me as one of the
family.


M'GIL. Ay, true, my lad -- however -- (turning to the door), stay you there,
the plague of my family! (locks the door.) I think I have you fast now, my
deary.


CHAR. My poor girl!

(Aside.)
M'GIL. Charley, boy, though I have the key, yet I scarce think I am sure of her,
even now -- she is full of hocus pocus -- so, do you hear, now and then throw an
eye to her door -- that rogue, Shelty, must have been assisted by his
grandmother, the old witch I banished, to have got her out before.


CHAR. Eh I I Will enourage this thought -- yet not seem to give into it.
(Aside.) No, Sir, no.


M'GIL. Ha, ha, ha! -- well, well, I desy the black art, I depend upon simple
wit --


CHAR. Simple, indeed!

(Aside.)
M'GIL. Charley, I am now going into my study to practice oratory -- don't let
any body interrupt me, boy! hem.


Exit, with much self-sufficiency. CHAR. I find he does'nt know yet that old
Lord Donald is come -- ha, ha, ha! -- his ridiculous idea of Shelty's
grandmother being a witch, shows his poor brain is so weak -- and his
prejudices of witchcraft so very strong, that his credulity may be easily
imposed on -- he is prepared to believe any extravagance that may confirm his
favorite opinion. If I could make it the means to procure my dear Moggy's
release -- to persuade him that -- ha, ha, ha! I Am extremely tickled with the
thought.


SHELTY. (Without.) Suppose he is busy.


BENIN. (Without.) Well, I Will tell my Massa --


CHAR. And here comes Shelty, in the nick of time, to help my project -- ha,
ha, ha! -- I Will try it, however -- ha, ha, ha!


M'GIL. (Without speaking to Benin.) I Will break your bones!


BEN. Me don't care, -- oh --

(crying.)
CHAR. Hey! what now?


M'GIL. An impudent scoundrel! -- I Will --


CHAR. Here he comes, and in a rare humor for my purpose -- If I can but make
him give her up to Shelty! -- once she is out of these doots, I have my dear
girl.


M'GIL. Out with him, my hero -- you're a clever boy, faith. (Charley throws
the stick down, struts about, uses much action, and moves his lips, as it
talking.) 'Gad Charley cannot speak, he is so very angry -- I never saw him in a
passion before -- is he gone? -- Charley moves his lips.) He is the knave, to
let us come to ourselves, and consider -- call Benin. (Charley turns his face to
the door, and moves his lips, as if calling.) Why don't you call him when I bid
you? (Charley seems to call, his mouth wi^e open, but w^^hout speaking.)
Zounds, sir ah, call him. (Charley seems to bawl (Benin) very loud -- M'Gil
^^^ks at Charley, who moves his lips.) Damn the fellow! what is he at -- is
Benin coming? (Charley moves his lips.) Eh -- ain't I worthy of an answer?
(Charley seems to speak with much action) Damme, I shall knock you down if you
stand making mouths at me, you rascal! (Charley pauses, seems to muse --
suddenly starts -- points to Shelty's stick, then to his own arm, intimating he
had been struck with it, and in an agony, bursts into tears.) Eh! -- why, cannot
you speak? -- Eh! aye, indeed, I saw Shelty strike him with that fatal stick;
but it is impossible -- it ca'nt be -- speak -- I will not believe but you can --
eh! -- none of your capers upon me -- come speak this moment -- this instant
say in plain audible English -- how aye do, Mr. M'Gilpin -- or down you are, as
flat as a flounder, (Attempis to strike him.) (Charley kneels and supplicates.)
Eh -- poor Charley! -- faith if he has really lost his voice -- I will not believe
it -- I Am strangely tempted to try it on myself; but then when I get into
Parliament, if I lose my voice, I shall be fit only to be the Speaker -- I Will
venture -- you Charley, sirrah, take up that stick and touch me with it, very
gently, boy. (Charley strikes him hard.) Zounds, that is enough to knock a man
speechless.


CHAR. Oh, if I never recover my voice, I Am a miserable being!


M'GIL. Why you have, you rogue, I heard your speak then very plain.


CHAR. Eh! now my master's lips move, as it he was talking.


M'GIL. Ha, ha, ha! -- why, I am talking, you fool!


CHAR. Yes, they still move, but no sound -- Eh! perhaps I may now have
recovered my voice, by the stick touching my master -- Oh, true, Shelty told me
that the dumbness was transferrable!


M'GIL. Transferrable -- the dumbness -- what is that you say, boy?


CHAR. Eh! -- may be he is not inclined for talking.


M'GIL. Sirrah, I Am always inclined for talking.


CHAR. I Will ask him a question to prove it -- Sir, what shall I do with this
wand of Shelty's?

(pointing to it.)
M'GIL. Burn it.


CHAR. Speak, Sir!


M'GIL. I say to the flames with it; and I believe on a statute of James the
Sixth, I could burn the owner.


CHAR. Dear Sir! speak if you can.


M'GIL. Why, I am speaking, you puppy!


CHAR. Yes, by the motion of his lips, the poor gentleman thinks he is speaking.


M'GIL. Speaking! Zounds, I Am bawling! -- I will not believe but I Am heard,
sirrah, I Will --


Enter Benin. BEN. (Apart to Charley) What humor is he in?


CHAR. Shelty has put him in a passion?


BEN. I taught so by his roaring -- I will not answer whatever he says.


CHAR. Don't


M'GIL. Now I Will see if -- (aside) -- Here, you scoundrel, do you hear me?

(very loud.)
BEN. Tank you, Charley.


Exit, without looking at M'Gil. M'GIL. Aye, it is plain I cannot make myself be
heard -- Oh! I have lost my voice, (bawling;) but zounds, it cannot be! -- This
may be a confederacy -- but hold -- if so, my daughter cannot be in the plot, as
no body could have spoke to her since I locked her up here within. True, and
even the windows are nailed down -- I Will see if she can hear me --

(unlocks the door, and goes in.)
CHAR. Oh, the plague! -- now Moggy'll answer him, and overthrow all my magic.


Moggy peeps out of the Press.] MOG. Charley --


CHAR. You there -- oh, then -- why, I believe the black gentleman has been at
work in earnest -- how the duce got you there? and the key, which locked you
into that room (pointing to the room) in your father's pocket.


MOG. Pshaw! you fool -- Hush! I Am dressing here, ha, ha, ha! -- why, you're
humming him nicely, he, he, he! -- but only get him out of the way, and off we
go.


CHAR. Pop in, here he comes. (Moggy takes in her head.) Now if I can but get
him out --


Re-enter M'Gilpin, in a great rage and astonishment. M'GIL. She Is gone -- I
shall go mad -- he has got her out, but how? no other way but the chimney, or
the key hole -- how the devil! -- bless us -- yes, if Shelty could carry her
off, when here -- I found the door locked. I can no longer doubt his power to
take my speech -- Oh, I Am a most miserable old gentleman! -- I Am in grief, and
no body to pity me -- I complain, and none can hear my lamentations (Weeps.)
Eh! but hold -- as Charley recovered by my getting the dumbness, I can as
eafily transfer it to somebody else, and so recover my own voice, ha, ha, ha!
-- Pshaw! except his taking Moggy -- If this is the worst, a fig for his power,
ha, ha, ha! -- I Have a great mind to return it again to Charley, ha, ha, ha! but
his voice will be necessary to explain my accounts to Lord Donald.


CHAR. Well, Sir, what does Miss Moggy say to her lover's tricks?


M'GIL. Pshaw! this fool tantalizes me with questions, when he knows I cant't
make him hear my answers! -- who shall I confer this favor on? Eh -- ay,
stupid Benin, the blackmamoor, has little occasion for his gutteral sounds --
some revenge too for his interrupting my studies just now.


Enter Benin. BEN. Sir, here is Lord Donald.

(Very submissively)
M'GIL. Oh, dear! I must recover my tongue to talk him over! -- Yes, I Will give
my dumbness to Benin -- damme, I Will bang you into silence, my double died
swarthy acquaintance

(Takes the stock from the ground.)
BEN. Tank y'ee, Charley.


Exit. M'GIL. He has hopp'd off like a blackbird -- would not even wait till I
shake salt upon his tail.


CHAR. I see my only method to get him out of the way, is to bring him into
disgrace with Lord Donald, which, from the complaints of all the tenants, and
the Laird's haughty temper, a little thing will do. (Aside.) Oh, dear sir,
yonder comes the Lord, and I believe the whole clan.


M'GIL. Ecod, then I must touch Charlev, for speak to Lord Donald I must, and
use a good deal of palavar too.


CHAR. Now, Sir, what will you do? stay -- od so -- well remembered; Shelty
told me one virtue of that stick, whilst its held in the lest hand, a person
can be heard by every one but the very person they address.


M'GIL. Eh --

(with joy.)
CHAR. Now Sir, you have an opportunity of doing what no body does -- to speak
your mind to a great man.


M'GIL. I never spoke my mind to any man.


CHAR. And my dear Sir, instead of this fine complimentary speech which you
intended, I would speak boldly to him; by that you may still keep up your own
consequence amongst the tenants, without incurring his displeasure, as he will
be the only person present that cannot here you.


M'GIL. I Will abuse him! -- Zounds! what a great bird they will all think me! for
a Highland Chief is a Demigod amongst his vassals -- ha, ha, ha! -- here he
marches in at their head, like a great turkey.


Enter Lord of Col, Servant, and Highlanders. LD. COL. Well, Mr. M'Gilpin,
with the remembrance of my person, you seem to have lost all duty for your
Lord.


CHAR. Hem! my Lord -- Collect yourself, (apart to M'Gil.) I say, my Lord, I
have the honor to be confidential Secretary to your Lordship's Tax-man; and,
my Lord, in a most respectful speech, the voice of your whole Isle of Col
constitute Mr. M'Gilpin their humble mouth.

(Bows.)
M'GIL. Humble mouth! I didn't think Charley could speak so pretty! -- I Am glad
I did not unvoice him. (They change sticks) Hem! -- As he cannot hear me, I Will
give it him on both sides of his ears -- in what (...) superior light they will
all look upon me in future -- hem -- now for it -- off I go! hem! -- Sir, you
Donald, here -- in the name of the assembly present, and the island in general,
I tell you, you are an oppressive upstart -- in a word, you are a proud old
puppy!

(Smiling, and using the action of servile adulation.)
LD. COL. Hey!


M'GIL. He Is surpis'd I don't speak; and they are all struck with wonder at
what I do -- Ecod I Will at him again, (aside.) Eh! and so you have got into
Parliament? -- a pretty representative of the people, to stand like a puppet,
with your leg out, and turn and twist, just as the minister pulls the wire
fastened to your jaws, you stupid blocked!


LD. COL. How! -- this confirms all I have heard -- but I coud'nt have believed
his insolence rose to such a height of -- lay hold of the ungrateful villain!


M'GIL. Why my Lord, did you hear me? -- Charley! --


LD. COL. Apprehend him! (Servant seizes him) I wish, like the ancient Barons,
I had the power to hang you on the instant.


M'GIL. Oh, my Lord! -- Oh, you rogue Charley!


LD. COL. On my authority take him to prison! 'till he renders an account of
his charge -- away with him!


M'GIL. Oh, that rogue, Charley!


Exeunt Charley into the press. Scene Shelty's House. Enter Captain Dash and
Sergeant Jack. CAP. Ha, ha, ha! -- well Jack, our success is even beyond my
expectation -- I think I shall flap my colors, and you sport your halbert in
Calcutta: but as soon as we have our compliment of men, we must decamp.


SERJ. I Have done my best, because I undertook the thing; but under a false
hope, trepanning the poor fellows from their homes and families. Pressing in
the sea service is a disgrace to the British freedom, and a cruel contradiction
to British humanity! -- but we are worse -- we have made the Highlander's loyal
affection to his Chief the instrument of his slavery!


CAP. Ha, ha, ha -- why Jack, you had none of these fine morals when I found
you a drumm'd out trooper; and on my promise of an halbert, had your consent to
join in any scheme that might better your fortune.


SERJ. Why I was drumm'd out, though saved from lashes by the clemency of my
Royal Master; but my only crime was insolence to my officer; I was saucy, and I
deserved punishment -- yet, when a soldier, I never forget I was a man; and now
blush to think, by an act of dishonor, I have sunk beneath the noble character
of an Englishman!


AIR.
Sergeant. Old England, great in arts and arms,
For manly worth, and female charms,
Renowned has ever been;
And now the care of bounteous Heaven,
Has to happy Allown given
A gracious King and Queen;
In their Royal progeny our blooming prospects smile,
The fair possessed of every grace,
And in the generous sons we trace,
The guardians of our Isle.
On Crassy's plain an Edward fought,
A captive King to London brought,
'Twas there his glories shone;
Though terrible in battle, he
Could show, by God-like clemency,
He graced the wreath he won.
Wherever ambition tempts the war, we are ready for the field,
To find a Cressy still in France,
A Royal Fred rick weilds the lance,
And holds Britauma's shield.
Let fame record Eliza's days,
Her trumpet tune to songs of praise,
The grand Armada see,
The Invincible she overcame,
Spanish pride was turned to shame,
By Britons great and free.
Old Neptune thus exulting, to Royal William spoke:
If woman once could guard my realm,
What triumph now, when at the helm,
I place a heart of oak,
A Royal heart of oak.

CAP. Well, and you shall command men; this Sandy that I Have just now listed, is
very much of a gentleman -- old M'Gilpin shoving him out of his farm, has just
plump'd him into our net.


SERJ. I would certainly fish up men by hook or by crook; but cannot enjoy the
prosperity that is built on the destruction of another!


CAP. Pshaw! damn your nonsense! -- what the Devil is come to you? this Sandy
is -- oh, have you seen his Jenny?


CERJ. Yes, I have seen her, and wish she was his.


CAP. Wish she was his very civil, when you know I love her to distraction --
hey! what is here?


Enter Moggy from top, dressed as a Highlander. MOG. I beg your honor's
pardon, but hasn't your honor listed one Sandy Frazer?


CAP. Yes, my lad, and I Will list you too.


CERJ. Yes, we'll list you, if you're willing.


MOG. It Is for that I Am come, if you will take me in my brother Sandy's place.


SERJ. Why is Sandy your brother?


MOG. Yes, Sir, he is, and the eldest of eight little brothers and sisters, not
one of them but me, able to earn a morsel of bread for themselves; Sandy and I
did tolerably well for them, while he had the farm, as he was able to take care
of them, because he could manage and provide, and knows ten times more about
land not I, from his having been in England -- No, I can never do it; if you
take him away, what will become of my brothers and sisters? -- Yes, they will be
starved -- oh, merciful good Captain! take me, and discharge brother Sandy! --
oh!

(cries.)
CAP. Ha, ha, ha! you young dog, do you bink I Will exchange an effective man for
such a little whipper-snapper as you? -- get along, you little monkey!


MOG. I am a little monkey! -- oh! I shall never be able to maintain the
family! -- oh!

(cries.)
CAP. Why, Jack, (to Serj.) ha, ha, ha! here is another opportunity for your
sentiments! ha, ha, ha!


CERJ. Yes, and for your humanity, if you have any.

(Walks up.)
CAP. Humanity! -- Eh! -- go home, my boy,

(to Moggy.)
MOG. Sir, I have raised a little bit of money here by selling some of our
stock; if this could make up for my deficiency, till I grow bigger?


SERJ. (Advancing) Hey! money!


CAP. Money!

Draws her to him.
MOG. Yes, Sir, if you will accept this forty pounds and me in the place of my
brother Sandy -- Oh, worthy noble gentleman! you will see what a good fine
soldier I Will make in time.


CAP. Eh -- in time -- (looks at her.) Forty pounds --


SERJ. And this yonker will grow taller.


MOG. Oh, yes, Sir, I intend to grow a deal taller.


AIR.
Moggy. Though I'ma very little lad,
If fighting men cannot be had,
For want of better I may do,
To follow the boy with rat tat too;
I may seem tender, yet I Am tough,
And though not much of me, right good stuff,
Of this I Will boast, say more who can,
I never was afraid to meet my man.
I Am a thickabiddy, see take me now now now,
I Am a little merry he, for your row dow (...),
Brown Bess I Will knock about, oh, there is my joy,
At my back a knapsack like a roving boy.
In my Tartan played a young solder view.
My phillibeg and dirk, and my bounet blue,
Give the word, and I Will march where you command,
Noble Serjcant, with a shilling strike my hand.
My Captain, as be takes his glass,
May wish to toy with a pretty lass,
For such a one I Have a roguish eye,
He Will never want a girl when I am by.
I Am a chickabiddy, etc,
Though a barber never yet has mowed my chin,
With my great broad sword I long to begin,
Cut, slash, ram damn -- oh glorious fun,
For a gun, pip, pop, change my little pop-gun.
My foes shall fly like geese in flocks,
Even Turks I Will drive like turkey-cocks,
And where ever quartered I shall be,
Oh, Zounds! how I Will kiss my landlady,
I Am a chickabiddy, etc

CAP. Ha, ha, ha! -- well, my little-tall boy -- (He writes in his pocketbook,
and tears a leaf out, which he gives to Moggy.) Ha, ha, ha! -- there is your
brother Sandy's discharge -- I take your forty pounds -- there, a shilling.


MOG. A shilling! -- generous Captain! thank'ye, Sir -- this paper -- what a
present for my poor Jenny!

(aside, with joy)
SERJ. Sir, we are lucky rogues! this forty pounds comes to us most apropos!

(apart to Captain)
CAP. Us! -- what do you mean, fellow? -- In profit I am solus. (To Moggy,) now
you are the King's man.


SERJ. And Sandy is his own.


Enter Sandy (as a Recruit) and Shelty. MOG. (Giving Sandy the paper she
received from the Captain.) There Is your discharge, Sandy; no more the King's,
you're now only Jenny's man.


Enter Jenny. CEN. Ah, Sandy! how could you forsake me?


CAP. Hey! the Devil! -- what is all this about? -- here, you little busy
rascal, (to Moggy.) True, my lad, (to Sandy) as he says, you're free, but I Will
order your pert young brother here up the halberts --


(points to Moggy.) SAN. My -- I Have no brother!


CAP. Eh! -- why, what the devil is all this you have been telling me, firrah?

(to Moggy.)
MOC. Oh, Lord! Sir, I Am the greatest fibber you ever knew.


CAP. Why, damme, you little son of a gun --


MOG. No, Sir, but I happen to be daughter to an old great gun!


Enter Charley. Here Is my match, (takes his hand) -- and hey! I Am off like a
sky-rocket. (Runs off with Charley.)

JEN. Sandy, didn't you know her?


SAN. But, my dear, what has she been about here?


JEN. Oh, Sandy, she is a worthy girl.


CAP. She! -- a woman! -- Oh, zounds! have I parted with an Alexander, to make
a soldier of --


SHEL. A soldier! -- ha, ha, ha! -- the Captain has been listing Moggy
M'Gilpin, ha, ha, ha!


SAN. Ha, ha, ha!


JEN. My dear whimsical good-natured friend! -- may she be as happy with the
lad of her heart as she has made me with my Sandy!


CAP. Oh, ho -- I see it now -- you have been a confederate in this imposition,

(to Sandy.)
SAN. Totally innocent; and yet Captain, I Am an impostor, as well as yourself.


CAP. How?

(angry.)
LD. COL. (Without.) This way -- come, come.


CAP. Damme, I Will --

(Threatening Sandy.)
SAN. Nay, Sir, no bouncing -- for here comes an old gentleman that will find
us both out.


Enter Lord of Col, and M'Gilpin. LD. COL. (To M'Gilpin) Sir, you stand upon
your own guilt or innocene -- you have turned the sword of justice into a
raping-hook, and her balance to a money scale -- but it is putting a weapon into
the hands of a madman, to give power, where the mind is base and venal; so
expect no favor from me. -- And pray, Sir, (to Cap.) by whose authority do you
list men in this island?


CAP. Our King, and my Colonel.


LD. Col. Who is your Colonel?


CAP. The owner of this island, my friend, young Bob M'Donald.


LD. COL. Well, this is rather odd; my son a Colonel! the first time I ever
heard he was even in the army!


CAP. Son! -- Jack, (to Serj.) Zounds, if -- can this be the old Lai d?


LD. COL. (Seeing Sandy) Eh! is it possible? Bob!


CAP. Why, Sir, do you know this Sandy?


LD. COL. What do you mean by Sandy? This is my son Robert, ha, ha, ha! -- your
friend -- young Bob M'Donald.


M'GIL. What, Sandy our young Lord!


LD. COL. Ha, ha, ha! -- But Bob, if you are a colonel, as this Gentleman says,
I don't admire the mode of your regimentals.


SAN. Why, no, Sir -- but this gentleman dubs himself a Captain, his friend Bob
a Colonel, and then cruelly degrades me to a private in my own regiment, ha,
ha, ha!


CAP. This young Donald? confusion! -- Jack, we are undone -- yes, they will hang
us,

(apart.)
SERJ. (Aloud) Us! -- what do you mean, follow? In hanging you are solus --

(mimicks the Captains former manner.)
SHEL. Yes, the Captain goes up.


LD. COL. Oh, I conceive now -- then Bob, you are the Sandy I Have heard so much
of for improving the land; but why disgrace youself and family, by
turnplough-boy yourself, lad?


SAN. Sir, nothing disgraces any family but a dishonorable action; and of that
I am unconscious. I came hither, as I told you I should on my shooting scheme;
but on the instant of my arrival, a transient sight of this lady inspired me
with the design, which has made me the happiest of men. In this sequestered I
sle I have found this lovely flower, whose difinterested smiles upon the
farmer, have proved she must grace the bosom of the Lord.


LD. COL. But, Bob, still your whole conduct (to me wears a face of mystery,
your turning common soldier -- how? -- Come, Sir, I insist upon a full and
clear explanation.


SAN. Sir, my motives for enlisting were, to secure this gentleman's
conviction, for his very impudent fraud, founded on a forgery of my name -- and
by fabricating imaginary distresses, have proved how far true love would go to
alleviate a real one.


Enter Lord of Rausey. LD. R. Well, I am come to bid you, farewell, Donald.


LD. COL. Going?


LD. R. Yes, when I settle -- but where is this lad? I don't know how to find
this Sandy Frazer out.


LD. COL! Ha, ha, ha! -- Oh, Sir, there stands the gentleman,

points to Sandy.
LD. R. An honest looking youth -- young man, you will marry Jenny?


SAN. If she will honor me.


LD. R. It is an honor, if you knew all. (Aside.) Here Is an hundred pounds
with her; don't ask why I give you this -- she is wild and vulgar, but keep a
tight rein, and you may reclaim her.


SAN. Sir, whosoever you are keep your advice and money for those who want them.


SHEL. Want them! then, Sir, give my father the advice, and me the money.


JEN. Sir, (to Ld. of R.) though I have not the honor of knowing you, and would
wish not to deserve the character you are pleased to give me, yet I humbly
thank you for your generous intention.

(Curtsies with much grace and modesty.)
LD. R. You, madam! -- I mean Jenny!


SAN. Well, Sir, this is she!


LD. R. This! -- why, you are not the young woman was wanting me to marry you
just now?


JEN. Me, Sir, -- to my recollection, I never saw you before.


SHEL. The Doctor has been taking his whiskey.


LD. R. Very odd this; I must have been imposed on.


SHFL. Oh, yes, they forget to mix it for you.


LD. R. Pray, Madam, who are your parents?


JEN. I know not.


LD. R. (Seeing M'Gil.) Oh, Sir, from you I expect, and must exact, a
consirmation of what indeed I scarce entertain a doubt, (looking at Jenny.)
Tell me what you know of this young woman.


M'GIL. First, Sir, tell me am I obliged to tell you?


LD. COL. You are, authoritatively.


M'GIL. Then, Sir, you must know -- upon my word, my memory is so very bad, I
cannot recollect any thing at all of the matter.


LD. R. What, Sir, not recollect the 500l. left her by her mother?


M'GIL. The five pounds! Zounds, I tell you, if I was even on a trial, I never
could remember what I was determined to forget -- however, Sir, if as I now
find, you are the Lord of Rausey, I Will make a free confession, if 'twill do me
any good.


LD. R. Well, Sir --


M'GIL. This is your very neice, the sweet babe that was born in my house.


LD. R. It Is confirmed -- I saw there the features of my beloved unhappy
sister, (to Ld. of Col.) I now, with pride acknowledge her for my neice.


LD. COL. Do you? -- Oh, then I acknowledge her formy daughter-in-law.


SHEL. Hard now that I cannot turn out to be some body else.


M'GIL. (To Sandy) I protest, Sir, had I known you were the Lord, I Would never
have turned you out of your farm.


SAN. Ha, ha, ha! -- Why, I believe you.


M'GIL. So, Sir, I hope you will procure my Laird's pardon for the genteel manner
in which I ha Miss Jenny brought up at Miss Kilcooburry's boardingschool, at
Inverness -- you know, Miss, what a fuss I made about you when a little fat pup
et.


JEN. Indeed, Sir, whatever may have been his other failings, to me he has
proved an affectionate guardian -- permit me, Sir, to recommend to your favor
the worthy sergeant here, to whose unexpected generosity I partly owe my
present happiness.


JACK. Thank'yee, Ma'am -- I own I came here on a very roguish plan, which, if
you can prevail on the young Lord to pardon, (looks at Sandy) let it extend to
my friend, the Captain -- 'twas I that led him here, to help my recruiting
scheme -- we were partners in the guilt.


SAN. Recruiting, call you it -- kidnapping -- a disgrace to your profession --
for in your zeal for the service, remember, that honor is the characteristic
of an English officer.


M'GIL. But now your justice, my Lord, on this cursed, juggling, conjuring
piper, who has, without my consent, run away with, and married my daughter.


Enter Charley, leading Moggy in a Highland dress. CHAR. (To M'Gil.) Sir, give
me leave to introduce Captain M'Gilpin.

(presenting Moggy.)
M'GIL. Moggy! -- Oh! -- you brazen face! -- hey -- turned soldier?


MOG. I am, Sir, and under the command of General Charley -- the real parson,
who is now below at the door, gave the word -- 'twas love, honor, and obey.


LD. R. (Looking at Mog.) Ay, ay, this is the young lady that is so clever at
fibbing -- how do you do, Miss Jenny?

(pleasant.)
MOG. Pretty well, I thank you, master Parson!


LD. COL. My dear son, the noble manner in which you have made your choice,
with all my family pride, gives me infinite pleasure -- Madam, I wish you joy.
(to Jenny) Your affections have been proved, and you must both be happy --
where viriue and innocence reside Heaven is the orphan's friend; and I wish
every fond pair, who marry for love, may thus be agrecably surprised with money.


SHEL. If I was sure of that, I Would marry for love myself; so I Am a conjuror! --
these are comical conjurations -- the tenant is the landlord -- the poor orphan
is the Lady of the land -- the Captain is no soldier -- the soldier is a woman
-- the apprentice is the master -- the master is -- no body -- the poor parson
is a Lord of much land. (Looking at them by turns.) -- and poor Shelty, the
Scotch piper -- Oh, your humbe servant to command. (Bows to them) -- and
whether I tap the barrel, or tune the chaunter -- Hey! neighbors, let us all be
merry --


FINALE.
San. Come sprightly Lowland lass,

Shel. And Highland lad, trip here in jovial glee,

San. Gentle winds from every island,
Waft hearts merry, blyth and free;

Shel. At Shelty's house in gay carouse your hours employ,

M'Gil. O well said boy;

Serj. Lay supper down, and bring the booze,
To wish the young folks love and joy.

Chorus. Whiskey, frisky, prancing, dancing,
Sorrow send to Nick the De'el,
Care or trouble, who can feel,
Lifting up the Highland Reel.

MOG. Mind, dearest lad, I tell you fairly,
Married I must have my way,

Char. I Am sure, dear lass, you will gowern rarcly,
Love and honor I Will obey;

San. Nor marriage chain,

Shel. Nor bit nor rein;

Mog. The Duce a bit,

M'Gil. A gamesome tit,

Shel. Gadzooks poor henpeck'd Charley,

M'Gil. A wise man I, my child's a wit. -- Whiskey, etc.

San. The torch of love by Cupid lighted,
Never shall extinguished lie.

Jen. True vows at Hymen's altar plighted.
Rosy hours the knot shall tie;

San. Earnest this,

Jen. Of Heavenly bliss,

Both. My only love,

M'Gil. Well said, by Jove;

San. Sweet blossom never be blighted,

M'Gil. She Will cooe like any turtle dove. -- Whiskey, etc.

Serj. Old Neptune's arms the globe embracing,
In his grasp can kingdoms hem,
Great Jove upon his fingers placing,
Albion's Isle, a radient gem;
Oh, ever shine with rays divine,
Shed luster round, and thus enthroned,
Roval George with years increasing,
With each blessing ever crowned. -- Whiskey, etc.

FINIS.

