EXTRACTS FROM SEVERAL MERCATORS; BEING CONSIDERATIONS On the State of the
BRITISH TRADE.

DUBLIN: Printed and Sold by Edward Waters at the New Post Office
Printing House in Essex-Street, at the Corner of Sycamore-Ally, 1713.

(Price 6d.)

EXTRACTS From several MERCATORS, etc.
A Comparison of the Duties payable on the Four Species excepted out of the
Rule of the Tariff of 1664* with what they are now liable to, by several
subsequent Tariffs; and how they will stand charged by the Tariff of 1699.

1664 1665 1667 1687 1701 1699 Live Sol. Live. Sol. Live. Sol. Live. Sol. Live. Sol.
Live. Sol. Whale-Bone cut and prepared, 1. C Weight. 2 10 15 00 9 00 Whale ^ins
3 C. Weight. 3 00 30 00 20 00 ^rain Oil 5 C. and 20 l. With. 3 00 12 00 7 10
Broad Cloth 25 Else. 40 00 80 00 120 00 prhb. 55 00 Ratines 25 Else, pay as
Cloth Serge^, 13 to 15 Else. 10 00 15 00 24 00 prhb. 11 00 Sugar refined and in
loaf or otherwise; and Sugar Candy, white or brown, 1 ^. Weight. 15 00 22 10 22
10 22 10

IT will be necessary to enter a little into the History of our Trade with
France, for the last 40 or 45 Years: And because some Period of Time is proper
in all such Cases to take a Rise from, it shall be placed at the Year 1660. If
any think that Time is not sufficiently remote, they shall be fairly followed,
let them go back as far as they please: In the mean while, I must take Notice
to the Reader, that the Particulars are too copious and extensive, and
especially their Numbers so pressing; that no Time or Room can be spared for
Preambles, and Introductions.

About the Year 1660, the general Book of Rates was made in England, according
to an Act of Parliament, whereby a Subsidy of Tonnage was laid on Wines and
Brandies, and a Subsidy of Poundage after the Rate of 5 l. per Cent. upon all
Goods and Merchandises Imported.

In Imitation of this, in the Year 1664, the French made a General Tariff or
Book of Rates, wherein they followed us in Rating all Goods and Merchandises at
a Tax of about 5 l. per Cent. ad Valorem, except that, for the Encouragement of
their own People to improve in Trade and Manufactures, all the Manufactures of
Silk, Gold, Silver, Hair, Thread, and Wool, were Rated at 10 per Cent.
according to their Value. This Tariff was es^eemed by all the Nations in these
parts of Europe, to be very easy, and not the least Interruption to their Trade
with France.

That the Reader may see at once what was paid upon our English Manufactures by
that Tariff, and what has been laid on in France since that time, the foregoing
Table is placed at the beginning of this Paper; and also, as what there will be
Occasion often to mention, and refer to: Out of which the Whale-bone, Fins, and
Oil, might have been omitted; because we have no Share of that Trade: But as it
may be useful for the Information of some People, the whole is above Incerted.

All our Woollen Manufactures Exported from England to France, are reduced to
the old Duties payable by the Tariff of 1664. Except Broad-Cloth and Serges,
which are to pay, (as by the Tariff of 1699) (that also being capable of being
moderated by Commissioners) thus:

Broad-Cloth, which from the Year 1667, paid 80 Livres, will now pay only 55
Livres.

Milled Serges, which paid 15 Livres, now 11 Livres.

All other woollen Goods pay after the Tariff of 1664, (as aforesaid,) when
their Wines paid Duty here but 7 l. 10 s. per Ton, and Brandy but 1 l. 10 s.

This part being thus stated, let us turn the Tables, and view the other side
of the Trade, (viz.) Our Import from France, where the Particulars will be very
surprising; and this following Conclusion is most natural there from, (viz.)
That if we Traded with France to our Advantage before, much more must we do so
now; for the State of the Trade between England and France stands thus.

An Account of the several Duties which were payable upon French Goods Imported
into England from France at the Year 1664, and of the Duties payable upon the
same Goods after ^he Peace.

Payable in 1664 What the same Goods must pay now. l. s. d. l. s. d. A Ton of
Wine paid 1664 7 10 0 A Ton of Wine must pay 1713. 26 15 3 1/4 A Ton of Brandy
- 1 10 0 A Ton of Brandy Custom. L. 005 05 6

Excise. L. 046 04 0

051 09 6 20 Wey of Salt, being 40 Bushels each Wey. 1 00 0 20 Wey of Salt.
Custom. L: 008 09 9

Excise. L. 266 13 4

275 03 1 20l. weight wrought Silks; 3 00 0 20l. Weight Wrought Silks. 12 03 7
20l. weight Alamodes and Lustrings. 6 00 0 20l. Weight Alamodes and Lustrings.
034 00 0 Dowlas 106 Else. 0 07 6 Dowlas 106 Else. 000 12 7

Every True Britain, whose Concern is for his Countries Interest ^ must look
upon this Table of Duties with great Satisfaction.

The setting this Account against the former, clears up the Treaty of Commerce
so effectually, that farther Enlargements must seem unnecessary: Nevertheless,
since, Matters of Fact concur, it shall next be showed what Regard Her Majesty
has had to the other Trading-Interest of Her Subjects: How the Ports of France
are opened to Them upon equal Terms with the French Subjects themselves, and
that even in some things prejudicial so themselves, as in the Levant Trade in
particular.

The Hudsons Bay Company Pray, that the French may surrender all the Forts and
Settlements in Hudsons Bay and Straight, and be obliged to renounce all Right
and Pretensions thereto for the Future.

Granted.

And that they make Restitution of Damages to the Value of 108, 514 l. Sterling.

Granted. The Quantum only being referred to Comm^ssioners.

The Turkey or Levant Company Pray, that They may have the ^ame^i^erty of Trade
in France as the French themselves, and not to pay higher Duties than by the
Tariff of 1664.

Granted.

And that They be allowed to carry Goods to all Parts of France from the Levant
directly, or the Goods of the Levant (viz.) Raw Silks, etc. from Great Britain.

Granted, as in 1664.

The East India Company Pray, that the Prohibitions and high Duties laid in
France on East India Goods sent from England may be taken off, and to be on the
same foot as in the first of King Charle^'s Reign.

Granted. And yet the Prohibition in England of East India Goods from any Place
but the East Indies, continues.

The Virginia Merchants Pray, That the Tobacco of the English Plantations be
Imported into France under a reasonable Duty, and the Importers to sell it
without Subjection to the Farmers.

Granted. Under the same-Duty which other Nations pay, as to the Farm, referred
to the Commissioners.

Lyme Regis Prays, The Prohibition of Woollen Manufactures, and the high Duties
laid in France, may be taken off, and the said Goods be Imported into France,
as formerly,

Granted,

The Merchants of Bristol Pray, The same as above from Lyme; as also that
Tonage of Ships be abolished on both Sides.

Granted,

And that all our Merchants be permitted to Buy and Sell Tobacco in France
under moderate Customs, without being subjected to the Farmers.

Referred to the Commissioners.

That nothing might be wanting to secure to Great Britain a complete Freedom of
their Trade to France; all the Advantages of the Treaties France has made with
other Nations, are contained in this Treaty, and all the Privileges stipulated
for them, are by her Majesty's Care for her Subjects Profit made our own, as by
the Eighth and other Article^; whereby it is stipulated, that her Majesty's
Subjects shall be Treated in France in the same manner as the Nations they most
favored, and even as the French King's own Subjects.

The Ninth Article adds, And all Prohibitions, Tariffs, Edicts, Declarations,
Decrees made in France since the said Tariff, of 1664 contrary thereunto, in
Respect of the Goods and Merchandises of Great Britain, shall be repealed.

As to this it is objected; that it is not said Goods and Merchandises of the
Subjects of Great Britain, but Goods and Merchandises of Great Britain, which
implies (say they) the Manufactures of Great Britain only. But the Absurdity
here is so gross, that it is strange the Wisdom of the Turkey Company should
fall into it: For (1.) if it had been meant of the Manufactures of Great
Britain, only, it would have been said, The GROWTH and PRODUCE, not the Goods
and Merchandises. By Growth and Produce, indeed the Manufactures had been
understood; but by the Goods and Merchandises of Great Britain must be
understood, the Goods and Merchandises, which the Subjects of Great Britain
TRADE IN. But (2.) it is out of Question, That if the taking off the
Prohibitions, etc. of the Goods and Merchandises of Great Britain was meant
only of the Manufactures, then was the whole Levant Trade prohibited still;
which the Gentlemen do not pretend to.

Thus it appears, that the Construction the Company would have put on* the
Words of the 9th. Article, (viz.) Goods and Merchandises of Britain, would be
the Ruin of that very Trade which they Petition to support, and would Prohibit
all their Levant Goods in France. Such People, like Children, must be dealt
with by the Nature of things, and must have given them not always what they DO
ask, but what they WOULD ask.

Some Considerations might be offered here, upon the Turkey Companies desiring
the Liberty to carry their Raw Silk from England to France; and yet at the same
time Petition that the Silk Manuf^ctures here should receive Encouragement, as
if carrying the Silk abroad (which is a means to keep up the Price of Silk)
should at the same time be a means to encourage the Weavers and Manufacturers
of Silk in this Kingdom. This Mystery is referred to them to unfold. Also the
Consistency of their desiring to supply France with Raw Silk, at the same time
that they desire the Silk Manufactures of France should not be encouraged.

In general, all the Memorials, Petitions, and Representations given in, as
well from public Bodies of Men, as from private Merchants, do allow, that if
the Privileges, Advantages, Abatements of Duties, etc. which they request, or
represent as needful* may be obtained, there will be a great and beneficial
Trade driven from England to France.

To make it plain then, that all those Privileges, Advantages, Abatements,
etc. are really obtained by the Treaty; the Contents of those Memorials are
here sum'd up* (the Memorials themselves being too long) and most of them
demanding the same thing with but little Variation.

All they Petition for may be reduced to these Heads.
1. Reduction of Duties in France upon our Goods, especially the Woollen
Manufactures, to the Tariff of 1664. 1. Obtained, with a Reserve only to Cloths
and Cloth-Serges; which is to be debated by Commissioners, and at most to pay
but as in 1699. 2. Liberty of carrying all our Manufactures into France, and
the taking off all Prohibitions. 2. Obtained. 3. Abolishing the 50 Sol^ per
Ton, and the Droit au bein. 3. Obtained generally (though the Dutch pay it
Coastway) as also the Droit au bein, which was a cruel Custom that gave all the
Estates of English Merchants who died in France to the King. 4. Liberty of
Importing Tobacco into France, and of Selling it there free from the Farm. 4.
Obtained; only as to the Farm, referred. 5. Liberty of Importing Levant Goods,
either directly from the Levant, or from England. 5. Obtained. 6. Liberty of
Importing East India Goods into France. 6 Obtained. 7. British Merchants to be
free from the Papier Timbree, or stamped Paper* 7. Obtained; and (which was not
asked) a Freedom of Religion and Christian Burial, things the Petitioners
showed little Concern about. 8. That Ships may Trade Coastways in France,
without double Demands of Customs, etc. Ships may deliver part of the Cargo in
France, and proceed with the rest without paying Duties. 8. Obtained. 9
Surrender of Hudson's- Bay and Straight, Newfoundland and the Fishery,
Annapolis, and Nova Scotia. 9. Obtained; together with the Island of St.
Christophers, which was not asked. 10. Reparation of Damages to Merchants. 10.
Obtained; the Quantum only being referred.

It would be reasonable here to desire those People who insist so much upon
this Reserve of Cloths and Serges out of the Tariff of 1664, to consider what
the exception amounts to, and how far it may hurt the Trade, that they may
Judge whether the Damage is equal to the Complaint: To this purpose the
Difference in the Serges is set down again here; (viz.) That the Serges which
paid 10 Livres in 1664, and were afterward brought to 15, and then to 24, and
after that prohibited, may now be freely Imported into France paying only 11
Livres, that is to say, one Livre advance upon a piece of 15 Else; and the
Difference upon Cloths is, that the Piece which paid 40 Livres before, in 1664,
must pay now 55, being 15 Livres upon about 31 Yards English Measure.

To make this Estimate more plain, it is to be noted, that the Ell^ mentioned
in all these Cases is to be understood the French Ell containing 5 Quarters of
the English Yard, and so the Account of the Exception of Cloths, and Cloth
Serges, may be read thus.

Cloths per piece containing 25 Else, that is, 31 English Yards and a Quarter,
to pay 15 Livres more than by the Tariff of 1664.

Cloth Serges per piece containing 15 Else, that is 18 Yards and 3 Quarters, to
pay 1 Livre more than by the Tariff of 1664.

Considering Men, when they come to weigh this, will be apt to wonder what it
is the Trading part of this Nation have been so much alarmed at in the Treaty
with France, and will hardly be brought to believe that the Complaints which
have been made of ruining our Manufactures and encouraging the French, should
all be raised from these small Differences.

Would these People turn the Tables, and make the Case of France here the^r
own, what loud Complaints would they make in England, if any Manufactures which
our own People were endeavoring to make at home, should have been admitted by
the Treaty from France, with alike small Advance on the French Goods more than
they paid in 1664. Whereas every body is sensible that the French are to pay
here upon all their Goods 2, 3, 4 or 500 l. per Cent higher Duties than they
paid in 1664, and in some Goods much more. Had these advanced Duties been taken
off, how would they allege that Foreigners were encouraged; that the Bread was
taken out of the Mouths of our own People; that the Importing Manufactures from
abroad, which we could make at Home, was taking away the Employment from our
own Poor to give to the French: Yet this is the Case here. The French have
given all the Encouragment they could to their People to fall upon the making
the Woollen Manufactures of Great Britain; it is supposed none can blame them
for that; some steps they have taken in it which promised them Success, while
the Duties of 80 Livres and 120 Livres were laid on English Cloths; and yet
even then, great Quantities of English Cloth were carried into France, which
obliged the King of France at last, to make a Prohibition of English Woollon
Manufactures in general, (viz) in the Year 1701.

But after all these Advances in the Woollen Manufactures, the French King
being obliged by the Necessity of his Affa^rs to make a Peace, has yielded to
such a Peace as opens the Door into France for the Woollen Manufactures of
Great Britain, at the same Rate of Custom and Duties as they paid 49 Years ago,
long before his own People m^de any considerable Attempt that way; having
excepted or reserved but two species of Manufactures, and upon them has only
advanced about 2 or 3 per Cent.

There is ha^dly a Manufacture Erected by us in Britain in the memory of Man,
but that if the high Duties laid upon Foreign Goods of the same kind were
taken off, or within 2 or 3 per Cent. of what they were before, would be
ruined, and the Undertakers thereof must lay them down: If the Manufacturers of
Paper, Linen Cloth, Canvas, or Sail Cloth, and many other things were heard to
this, it is believed they would all acknowledge the Truth of it.

But the French King is obliged by this Treaty, what Discouragement soever it
may be to his own Subjects and their Manufacture^^ to take off all his
Prohibitions and high Duties, and give all the English Manufactures a free
Entrance into his Country, upon the same easy Duties they paid in the Year
1664, except two sorts only, (viz.) Cloth, and Cloth Serges.

That this may admit of no Dispute, the Affirmative leads to the particular
sorts of our Woollen Manufactures, which by this Treaty may be carried into
France by the Rule of the Tariff of 1664, viz.

Spanish Cloths, Serges, not Cloth-Serges, Double Bays, Single Bays, Says,
Perpetuana's, Spanish Draggets, all sorts of Norwich Stuff^, Linsey-Woolseys,
Kiderminster Stuffs, Shalloons, Chenys, Peny^^^^es, half Thicks, Cottons, plain
double and single Dozens, i. e. Yorkshire Cloths, Kersies, Duffels, Tammies,
Plaids, Blankets, Rugs, ^lannels, Worsted Hose, Woollen Hose, Knit-Caps,
Knit-Wa^^c^ats, Knit-Petticoats, Friezes, Camtalogns, and whatever other things
are made of Wool, and wrought in Great Britain, all are reduced by this Tariff
to the Duties payable in 1664.

What has been said of the Liberty of Commerce obtained by the Treaty with
France, the Reduction of the Duties in France to the Tariff of 1664, and the
Reserve or Limitation of two Species of our Manufactures only, (viz) of Broad
Cloths and Serges, to a small Advance of Duty; has been more than sufficient to
explain those things to any Men's Understandings, which are not politically
dull: Unless these People expected that her Majesty should have made a
Condition with the French King, that his Subjects should make no Woollen Cloth,
or that when they had made it, they should not export it to Turkey, for fear of
prejudicing our Levant Trade.

If the French Merchants in Turkey hold their Cloths up to equal Price with the
English, no Buyer will take them, except when a sufficient Quantity of English
Cloth cannot be had to supply the Market.

The French Cloths being inferior to the English in Quality, are for that
Reason, and no other, Sold in Turkey at a lower Price.

It is evident that the French want the Materials, (viz) the Wool, especially
in those parts of France where their Cloths for the Turkey Trade are made; and
whither the English or Irish Wool which they get by Stealth, cannot be carried
without very great Expense; and that the Wool they make use of instead thereof,
and to mix with the Spanish Wool, is of an inferior Quality to the English
Wool, they themselves will not deny. But if these were not so, and they were to
make Cloth wholly of Spanish Wool, or of English and Spanish Wool mixed, yet the
general Way of Workmanship of the French Nation, is known to be slighter and
looser in all their Manufactures, than the Manufactures of the like kind made
here, and that our Workmen perform almost all kinds of Work-firmer and more
sub^^antial, not only than the French, but also than any other People. So that
our Cloths, and even all our Woollen Manufactures, will Sell for a better
Price, than Manufactures of the same Denomination from other Countries.

As to the Silk Manufactures, they have such a sufficient Provision, made for
them, and such Encouragement given them already by the high Duties on Foreign
wrought Silks, as well of France as of any other Country, that as they stood in
no need of Prohibitions during the War, so they stand in need of no farther
Assistance during the Peace.

For this Reason, as they have nothing to ask but that those Duties should
remain; so the Treaty of Commerce has taken none of them away; and if the Silk
Manufacture^ cannot subsist with that Difference upon them which those Duties
have laid, neither would they subsist with a Total Prohibition.

It is observable, that during the said high Duties, particularly upon
Alamodes, and Lustrings, none of them have been Imported here, that is, legally
Imported; as for Clandestine Importation, or Running of Goods, that can be no
Argument, because neither can the Quantity be great, or is it possible entirely
to prevent those things either in this Country or in any other. The Difference
between the Manufactures of Silk at home, and those imported, stands thus:

Foreign wrought Silks of all kinds, pay for every 20 pound Weight, L. 12. 3.
7. Netts Duty.

Alamodes and Lustrings, pay for every 20 pound Weight, L. 31. 17. 3. Nett Duty.

Now if the Foreign wrought Silks pay above 12 Shillings per Pound Weight, Duty
upon Importation, all Discounts taken off; the Disadvantage which they must lie
under, must exceedingly lessen that Importation, and seems sufficient not only
to encourage, but to quicken the Industry of our own Weavers.

But since the Encouragement of the Silk Trade, and Employment of the Weavers
is spoken of as a thing of such extraordinary Weight, it may be very necessary
to state the Case of Manufacturing in general, that our Opinion of things may
be rightly balanced.

It is an undoubted Rule of Trade, that the Employment of our own Poor, and
Consumption of our own Growth, is the first Principal of Commerce, and should
be the last End of all our National Improvement.

As Great Britain is stated in Matters of Trade, this Concern for the General
Interest of that Trade, centers upon our Woollen Manufacture: There is a just
Concern due to every Branch of Trade, but to that most, which most contributes
to, and is most essential, in the two great Ends of Trade abovementioned;
(viz) Employment of the People, and Consumption of the Produce. This the
Woollen Manufacture is so far superior in, to all other Branches of our
Commerce, as admits of no Comparison; and therefore the principal Concern of
the Nation is, and ought to be the Woollen Manufacture.

It is true, Prudence may so guide, as that this Concern for the Woollen
Manufacture, though it be with a Preference to all our other Goods, yet may not
be in Opposition to them; there being a manifest Difference between, showing a
peculiar Regard to one, and injuring the other; as a Man having many Children,
may show a peculiar Affection to his eldest, without injuring the rest: But
then, on the other hand, neither must any of the other Branches of Trade claim
or expect such a Regard or Concern to be shown to them, as should be injurious
to the Woollen Manufactures.

The Silk Trade is useful and advantageous, but Silk is a modern Manufacture,
and is useful and advantageous, as it is a Return for, and encourages the
Exportation of the Woollen Manufactures, and no otherwise: The Woollen
Manufacture is the Eldest Child of the Nation's Commerce: The Silk Trade is a
Foster-Child taken into the Family, made useful and meriting to be encouraged,
but always with a Subserviency to the Good of the Heir.

If the Turkey Merchants drive any considerable Trade to France with raw Silk,
whether from England by Re-Exportations, or from the Levant directly; the Silk
they carry, it is allowed, must be the Product of English Manufactures; so that
by that Method, not only our own Silks, but, even the French Silks also, as to
the Materials they are made of, are the Product and Return of the English
Woollen Manufactures. The next Difference is the Workmanship, which lies thus,
that one is performed by the French, whom we ought to have no Regard to in
Trade; the other is performed by our own People, whom we ought to support.

But granting this; if on the other hand, a Bale of wrought Silks should be
brought from France, bought there with a Bale or Bales of Spanish Cloth, or
other Woollen Goods, it is easy to prove that it is more our Interest to bring
over that Bale of wrought Silk; and that the said wrought Silks are more our
own Manufacture, than if they had been wrought in Spittle-Fields; because the
Woollen Manufactures which were first sent to Turkey to purchase the raw Silk,
which this Bale of Silks was wrought from, and the Spanish Cloths or other
Woollen Goods sent to France to purchase the said Silks, when wrought, not only
consumed the Growth of England, but employed above Sixteen times the Number of
People in their making, etc. more than the Bale of wrought Silks would have
done, if they had been made in Spittle-Fields.

On the other hand, this implies no Danger at all to the English Manufactures
of Silk, because though the Humors and Fancies of some expensive People may run
them upon buying Foreign wrought Silks, yet while the high Duties here remain
as they are to do by the Treaty, the Difference of Price will be always such as
will lessen the Demand of Foreign Silks, restrain the Humor aforesaid to a few
People, and preserve the Bulk of the Manufacture in our hands.

It is objected by some, That the Difference is not sufficient; that
notwithstanding 12 l. 3 s. 7 d. to be paid upon the Importation for every 20
Pound Weight of wrought Silks, yet that the French will bring in their Silks.
But this amounts to no more than this (viz) That they will bring in some few:
Which is what as above, may be to our Advantage. But they will not pretend,
that the Difference of the said Duty shall not lessen that Importation, and
reduce it to a small Quantity, and that the Gross of the Trade shall remain in
our own hands.

The Substance of the Petitions of the Silk Weavers, and of others who pretend
to appear in their Behalf, is in short this, That the Importation of French
wrought Silks may be prevented: The Pretense to make their Petitioning
national, is the Danger, they say appears, that French wrought Silks will now,
by Virtue of the Treaty of Commerce, be imported in great Quantities into
Britain, and the French being able to under-work us, will also Under-sell us,
and the Weavers thereby be ruined.

What Foundation there is to support these Things, will appear, upon making a
few Enquiries into matters of Fact; and some just Calculation of the
Proportions of one to the other.

The Affairs of the high Du^ies upon wrought Silks Imported, is given in Answer
to the Weavers, and seems to make their Apprehensions appear very irrational:
Above 31 s. per Pound Duty on the Importation must be paid upon Alamodes and
Lustrings, and above 12 s. per Pound upon all other wrought Silks; except
Italian Silks Imported in English Ships, which pay Duty 10 s. 6 d.

The Force of Reason prevailed in the first, and the Weavers have given it up,
owning at the Bar of the House of Commons, that the Difference is sufficient in
the Alamodes and Lustrings, and that the French can do them no harm there; but
it seems they think 12 s. or 10 s 6 d. per pound too little upon the other
wrought Silks: But they either did not know, or omitted to take notice, that
the Raw Silk which those French Goods are made of, pays Sixteen Livres per
pound Duty at the first Importation into France; that the wrought Silks, when
shipped again to be brought hither, pay 5 l. per Cent. Custom ad Valorem upon
their Exportation, both by the Tariff of 1664; and that the other Charges, such
as Transportation by Land-Carriage to the Ports they are shipped at, Commission
for Buying, Freight, Risque of the Sea, etc. cannot be so little as 5 per Cent.
more. So that here is about 12 per Cent. more upon the Value of the Goods to be
added to the Difference of 12s. or 10s. 6 d. per pound; all which put together,
makes such a Weight upon the Foreign wrought Silks, and gives such an Advantage
to the English Weavers, that it is wonderful to think they should complain.

To add to the Conviction of these Things, it shall be a little examined, what
effect this Difference has already had upon the Silk Trade; from whence may be
Estimated some thing of what may be expected for the time to come.

The Weavers said Themselves, at the Committee of the House of Commons, that
they make to the Value of Three hundred thousand Pounds every Year, in Black
Silks only; whether it be Truth or not, is not easy to be examined: But in this
Case, if they allow it, we are not to question it, for if it be an Error, it is
against themselves; their Quantity of other Silks they spoke of as prodigiously
great. It cannot be amiss to observe then, what Quantity of Foreign wrought
Silks have been imported here from all parts of Europe, under our high Duties,
and see what Proportion they bear to the Quantity which these People say they
make at Home, whether these Foreign wrought Silks have been French or no, is
not the Case; The Duties are near the same; and as they are Imported from
Countries to which France had an open Trade, it is not improbable many French
Silks have been among them, and if more has not come in, the Difference made by
the Duties have been the apparent and only Reason, and the same Reason must
hold good still, as long as the same Duties remain.

An Account of the Quantities of wrought Silks Imported Annually from all Parts
of Europe, distingushing the Countries, viz.
The several Countries and Species: From Christmas 1707, To Christmas 1708. To
Christmas 1709. To Christmas 1710. Total of the Three years. L. L. L. L.
Germany -- Dutch wrought. 393 393^^ Italian wrought. 1517 1419 551 3487 Holland
-- Dutch wrought. 5884 4483 5885 16252 Italian wrought. 2567 1813 1559 5940
Italy -- Italian wrought. 8453 6084 6372 20909 Spain -- Spanish wrought. 23 16
39 Italian wrought. 299 299 Streights -- Italian wrought. 1357 621 110 2088
Turkey -- Turkey wrought. 14 309 152 475 Venice -- Italian wrought. 6 6 Total of
the Three Years. -- 49892

All that can be alleged against this is, to beg the Question and say, That
There will be more Imported now; but before that can be allowed, they should
show a good Reason why more was not Imported in these Years above-stated, being
the Quantity from Italy was always much greater, before the raising the Duties
here; and that Reason which is good for preventing the Importation from Italy,
will be good for preventing it from any other Country.

What has been said against the Reason of this, is so little to the Purpose,
and with such little Force, that it is worth no Notice, the Facts are so
clearly made out, that they amount even to Demonstration: The high Duties have
effectually checked the importation of wrought Silks, and will do so still. If
the French had their raw Silks cheaper than we have it, how comes it to pass,
that so much weight has been put upon the Levant Company's obtaining a Liberty
of Exporting Raw Silk from England to France? which is obtained for them by the
Treaty, and which the Company are now fully satisfied, is settled to their
advantages. If the French had raw Silks cheaper than the English, it would be
absurd to spoke of our sending raw Silks from England to France. Goods are
shipped from Port to Port, to mend their Market, not to lessen their Value; if
our Merchants did not advance the Price, they would never send their Goods
abroad.

Not only the French have not their raw Silk Cheaper than England; but on the
contrary, England has their raw Silks cheaper than all the World; those
Countries excepted, who have it of their own; and this will appear, by the
great Quantity of raw Silk Exported from England to other Countries; as also of
Mohair Yarn, which is equally concerned in the Argument; and the following
Abstract of One Year may give a specimen.

An Account of Raw Silk and Mohair-Yarn, Exported into Foreign Parts from
Christmas 1709, to Christmas 1710. Viz.
Raw Silk Mohair-Yarn Pounds weight Pounds weight 59,995. 67,769.

It would be an unaccountable Trade, if it should be true, that other Nations
had Raw Silk cheaper than we have it, when at the same time they should buy
such Quantities of it every Year from us.

If any Nation in the World can have Raw Silk cheaper than England, Italy may
be thought to be the Place, because they have great Quantities ( Sicily
included) of Silks of their own Growth. It will be hard to assign a Reason why
Italy, who have Silk of their own, and with whom our Trade has been always
open, should by our high Duties be obstructed from sending their wrought Silks
to England, and France, who buy great Quantities of Silk from us, should not.

As the like Arts have been made use of to possess the People with an Opinion,
that the Interest of Britain has been neglected with respect to the Portugal
Trade, which were before employed in that of the French; so it will easily be
made appear, it has been done with the like Weakness, and it is hoped it shall
be with the like Success.

It is alleged, That the Treaty with France, and the Treaty formerly made with
Portugal, and no^ subsisting, are inconsistent with one another; That the
Effect of the Treaty with France will be the ^ess^^ing the Importation of
Portugal Wines, by Lowering the Duties on the French; that this will lessen the
Consumption of our Woollen Manufactures in Portugal, that our Trade there will
be en^irely lost by a Prohibition of all our Woollen Manufactures in Portugal
as it was before the War: And the like.

It is needful to go back and look into the former State of the Portugal Trade,
before the late Treaty, and enquire into the Nature and Reason of the
Alterations, Additions and Increases, which have been Accidents to that Trade,
and which have brought it from what it was, to what it now is; in which, if the
Causes assigned for it is Increase are mistaken, the Notions we entertain of
such and such things endangering its Decrease, will appear equ^^ly groundless.

Two general and Vulgar Errors, or Mistakes, are entertained among us relating
to the first part of the Portugal Trade; (viz) what it was before the Treaty
with Portugal; and two more relating to what it now is, or will be by reason of
the Peace. The Mistakes about what it was, are (1) That the Portuguese had
prohibited all our Woolllen Manufactures. (2) That the Increase of our Trade or
Export to Portugal, was occasioned by, and depended upon the Increase of our
Demand for Their Wines. Our Mistakes about what the Portugal Trade is now, or
is like to be, are, (1) That upon our reducing the Duties of French Wine by the
Treaty of Commerce with France to an Equality with the Portuguese Wines, the
Wine Trade from Portugal will be ruined, and we shall import no more. (2) That
upon this, the Portuguese will immediately prohibit our Woollen Manufactures;
and so that great Trade which it is alleged, though falsely too, Exports two
Millions Yearly in the Growth and Manufacture of Great Britain, will be lost.

If every one of these may be clearly proved to be Mistakes, and that neither
the things suggested, or the Consequences drawn from them, can be supported by
Truth or Reason, then all our Uneasiness about this Portugal Trade; will appear
causeless and ill grounded. To do this, there needs no more than to state
Matters of Fact; and give such Proofs of every thing as the Case will admit.

1. That all our Woolen Manufactures were Prohibited before the War, is a
Mistake; and truly this is a Mistake of such a Nature, so obvious, and so easy
to be confuted, that it is wonderful it should be expected by any body to do
their Arguments any Service. It is well known upon the Exchange, and no
Portugal Merchants of any long standing, can be ignorant that the Prohibition
was ONLY of our Medley Cloths, which were forbidden not only to be imported
there, but to be worn; the Reasons whereof also were assigned, (viz.) Not that
they set about the making them there, as some alleged, but because they found
their People forward to run into the French way of Clothing and Dressing
themselves, which the Court for many Reasons thought fit to prevent. But no Man
who has any competent Knowledge of the Portugal Trade, will pretend that the
Bays, Says, Perpets, Serges, Stuffs, Stockings, Cotions, Plains, Kerseys, etc.
which were always the Gross of the English Exportations to Portugal, were ever
under any Prohibition there, or any other of our Woollen Manufactures, the
Woollen Cloths as above only excepted.

That what is said here may, as it is Resolved all things in this Paper shall,
carry it is Evidence along with it, the Words of the late Treaty with Portugal
may be produced for Proof: In the Second Articles after the Proportion between
the Customs of Portuguese Wines and the Custom of French Wines is settled,
follow these Words; Butt if this Abatements of Customs as is presumed to be
made, shall be after any manner prejudiced or Abolished, shall be just and
lawful for his Sacred Royal Majesty of Portugal, again to forbid the WOOLLEN
CLOTHS.

From hence may be noted also, that this part of the Agreement was not so
absolutely and (...) laid down, as an Essential of the Treaty between England
and Portugal, without which the Peace of the two Nations could not subsist, but
Provision was expressly made in the very Article, that if it should be
ABOLISHED, yet the Peace should r^main entire; only the King of Portugal would
then be at Liberty if he thought (...) make himself Amend^ upon England, by
prohibiting the English WOOLLEN CLOTHS.

The next vulgar Error, or Mistake, which we are led into about the Portugal
Trade, is, that the Increase of our Exports of the Woollen Manufactures of
Great Britain to Portugal, is occasioned by, and depends upon the Increase of
our Demand for their Wines: This, however absurd, and in its Nature contrary to
the Truth of Fact, is the thing on which the Argument is made to turn; from
which they would infer, that as our Demand for Portugal Wine decreased, so will
their Demand for our Manufactures decline: And in short, that if by the coming
in of French Wines, the Portugal Wine shall be wholly left off, as they vainly
suggest, so will also the Demand for our Woollen Manufactures in Portugal
cease, and that Trade be lost.

The People who argue thus, confute themselves in their own Calculations: For
First to magnify the Portugal Trade, they tell us that we export thither
Annually the Value of Two Millions Sterling, most of it in the Woollen
Manufactures of Great Britain against this, give them leave to make their own
Estimates of the Wine we Import from thence, and take the largest Year and the
highest Price they can reasonably suppose, the Quantity will not amount to
above 8 or 9000 Ton, which Account there will in the pursuit of this Article,
appear Reason to make great Abatement of too; but were it so, and account the
Wines prime Cost one with another, at 15 l. per Ton, or, to please them, at 20
l. per Ton, which is much above the true Cost in in Portugal, they will not
amount to 200,000 l. which by their own Account, is less than one Tenth part of
the Demand for our Manufactures. This will very ill make it out that their
Demand for our Manufactures is occasioned by, and depends upon our Demand for
their Wines; by which they must make it appear, that the Nine parts of the
Trade depend upon the Tenth, and the greater is occasioned by the less, which
is an Absurdity in the very Nature of the thing.

But the matter of Fact is evident, and known to all that have any tolerable
Knowledge of the Portugal Trade, (viz) That the Increase of the Trade to
Portugal, has been occasioned by the Discovery within these few Years of the
Gold Mines of St. Paul in the Brazils, by which an immense Treasure is gained
yearly to the Portugueze Nation, as well as to their King; that by th^s means
the People in Brazil are so increased in Wea^th, and the Trade to Brazil are so
increased as a Consequence, that the ^leets which about twelve Years ago, were
usually Twenty-three to Twenty-Eight Sail of Ships from Lisbon to Brazil, are
now Seventy, Eighty, to a hundred Sail, and the Exports of English Goods to
Portugal are increased in Proportion.

This is the true and the only Reason of the Increase of their Demand for
English Manufactures; and th^s has no more Dependence upon, or is occasioned by
our Demand for their Wines, than it depends upon any thing that has no Relation
at all to it.

It is very strange to find the Opposers of any Argument lay the whole Stress
and Weight of what they have to say upon any thing which they are not very sure
they can support the Truth of. But it is perfectly surprising to see Men value
themselves and their Cause upon Accounts and Calculations which are fraudulent
and erroneous, known by Themselves to be so, and which they might be sure, in
an Age like this, when Men take nothing upon Trust, would by inquiring Heads be
soon detected and exposed.

Nothing of this kind can be more wonderful, than what we see practiced just
now by some People, in handing about a Paper called, A SCHEME of the Trade
between England and France, in order to make the Trade between England and
France look with an Aspect to please them, and to answer all the Romantic
things they have said of it; which Paper or SCHEME, was Printed in 1674, and
said to be Signed by several eminent Merchants of the City of London.

Something might be said to the Design of that Paper, when it was first
published, and to the Persons who Signed it (viz.) That it was Calculated for a
Design then on foot, to expose the Public Management, and divide the People
against the Court.

It may be proper than for the detecting the Fraud of this Scheme, to enter
into an Examination of some of the Particulars wherein it differs from the true
Account of that Year; which shall be done by giving a brief Abstract of the
said Scheme, and likewise of the true Account from the Custom House, as it is
now laid before the Honorable House of Commons by the Commissioners.

By both which it will appear, that the Design of this Paper, called A SCHEME,
was then, and the making it public is now, to lessen in the public Opinion
the Value of our Exp^rtations to France, and to increase or heighten the Value
of our Importations from France; a Design in it self dishonest, but much more
so from the manner of doing it, as will appear by what follows.

Our Exportat^ons to France from Michaelmas to Michaelmas 1668-9, are made by
the Scheme to amount to l. 171, 021. 06. 08, and all the species of Goods are
restrated to these few, (viz.) Woollen Cloths, Dozens, Kerseys, Rashes,
Pennystones, Cott^ns, Flannels, Hose, Bays, Stuffs, Serges, and Perpets, with
some Petties, which are Crowded together at the Value of 20000 l.

Two Observations shall contain what is sufficient to say to this part of it,
and nothing can be desired to expose it more.

1: That here is not half of the species of Goods named which are every Year
Exported to France, and which, as appears by the Custom-house Books were
actually Exported to France that Year.

2. That of the species of Goods which they have named, they have not set down
the true quantities which were really Exported to France that very Year.

These are such Tokens of a designed Collusion and Prevarication, that nothing
of that kind can be more corrupt.

But to descend to a few Particulars of this Fraud, that the People may see in
how gross a manner they are Imposed upon.

1. Take a few of the Articles mentioned by the SCHEME of Goods Exported to
France, 1668-9, as aforesaid, and when Compared with the real Entries of that
Year in the Custom-House Books, from the Port of London, according to the
Account given in by the Commissioners, and now lying before the House of
Commons.

And any one, upon Casting up the following Particulars, will see to what a
Magnitude this Part will amount.

The Difference stands thus:
Exported as by the Scheme. Really Exported as by the Custom-House Books.
Spanish Cloths 829 2049 Long Cloths 112 349 Short Cloths 42 54 Northern Dozens
Double 97 305 Di^to^single 69 192 Devon Dozens and Cloth Rashes 186 339
Pennystones 6 161 Kersies 3585 5607 Norwich Stuffs 344 1701 Serges and Perpets
5564 7581

2. Add to this, That to lessen the Appearance of our Trade to France, they
have wholly omitted all the Fish, such as Herrings, Pilchards, Salmon, and
White Fish; all our Plantation Goods, and all the Goods of other Countries
Re^exported by us to France; of which the Quantities Exported that very Year
were very great and are so every Year: The Particulars are too long to set down
here, but may be guessed at by these few.

Cotton, Wool, and Yarn 67695 l. Goats Hair or Wool 50977 Indico 8481 Sugar
Brown 608000 Pepper 224859 Tobacco 160818 Callicoes 7995 Pieces Oil 203 Ton.
Drugs 68309 l.

Besides prodigious Quantities of other Goods Exported to France that Year; as
may be seen by the said account from the Custom-House, now lying before the
House of Commons.

The remaining Particulars are so many, as makes it plain, that the Value of
our Exportations to France for that Year exceeded the Value of our Importations
from France very considerably, as by the Custom-House Books will appear.

The Errors in the Account of the Importations, are no less unfairly Stated
than these, and the Fraud is extended to a much greater Value; Nay, even the
manner of Stating it, discovers a design of Imposing upon the Public. For
First the Export is confine^ to the Port of London, only with an allowance of
one Third more for the out Ports, whereas the Import is said to be for the
whole Kingdom, let them take it which way they Please.

If their Imports are for the Ports of London only, then they have committed a
Fraud in the Quantities to the Value of above 721,796 Pounds, as will be proved
by the Custom-House Books.

If their Imports take in the whole Kingdom, then they have committed two
Frauds instead of one (1.) In the Quantities: And (2.) In offering to state the
Debtor side of the Account upon the Port of London, with a Guess at one Third
more of the Out-Ports, AGAINST all that they say was Imported in the whole
Kingdom.

If they had designed a fair and just Account, They ought to have stated the
Exports and Imports exactly for the Port of London, and have made the Addition
of one Third for the out Ports equal to both sides; and have stated both sides
upon the Imports and Exports of the whole Kingdom; For if the Exports exceed
the Imports for the Port of London only, as appears by the Custom-House Books:
It would have been much more so for the Out-Ports, because many of our
Out-Ports, which lie in or near those Countries where the Woollen Manufactures
are made, Fish cured, etc. Export much greater Quantities to France, than they
could consume the Value of in French Goods, as Exeter, Colchester, Yarmouth,
and many other Ports.

But the Prevarications are yet more gross, and the Value greater; As one part
makes the Exportations to France seem less; so the other as dexterously makes
the Importations from France seem more: Nor will their making a Guess or
Wholsale Allowance of one Third for the Out-Ports on one side answer for it,
unless they had either made the same allowance serve on both sides, or extended
the Account to the same period of Time on both sides without it; but acting
fairly did not seem to suit the Design.

Those who would support the Paper called A Scheme, produce a Paper, said to be
Signed by the Farmers of the Customs, containing an Account of the Importations
of Wines, Brandies, and Linen from France, from Michaelmas 1667, to Michaelmas
1669, which they make to be very large, and from whence they would argue, that
one half thereof must be the Rule of the Year 1669. Had this been a mere Guess,
or had it been at any other time, the Calculation might have been less
suspected. But there lies so just an Exception against the Year 1667, and it
was so well known to them, that it cannot be any thing but a mere Design.

It is well known, the Plague had in the Year 1665 put an universal stop to all
Trade, except such as Necessity forced the People to, for mere Provisions. The
next Year the Fire of London happened; and as the Fire began near the water
side, and among the Warehouses and Cellars of the Merchants, the Quantities of
Wines as well as of other Goods which were spoiled or destroyed, were very
great. Add to this a War with France and Holland; by which the Trade with both
was stopped, and which War was not ended till the Treaty at Breda in July 1667.

These Things might well suppose England to be so Exhausted of French Goods, as
that the Importation of the next Year, (viz) 1667, must be prodigious great;
and no rational Judgment can be made of the Trade to or from France by the
Accounts of that Year. This is farther demonstrated by the Article of the
Brandies which the Account of the Farmers aforesaid makes for the said Two
Years to be but 3775 Ton. But by an Account of the same Farmers for the last
Five Quarters of the said two Years, (viz.) from Michaelmas 1668, to Michaelmas
1669, the whole Quantity of Brandy Imported, amounts to no more than 680 Ton;
and yet the SCHEME affirms, there was 4000 Ton of Brandy Imported from
Michaelmas 1668, to Michaelmas 1669. And this is offered as one undeniable
Evidence of the Fraud of that SCHEME.

There may be a parallel Case found out to illustrate this, and that is of the
Exportation of Lead from England to France in the Year 1662, which amounts to,
as by the Custom-House Books, a most prodigious and unusual Quantity (viz.)
From Michaelmas 1662, to Michaelmas 1663, there was Exported from England to
France, 21,757 Fodder of Lead, which at 12 l. per Fodder, as the Scheme allows
the Price to be, amounts to 261,084 l. It would be acknowledged very unfair,
that this should be given in as an Article of our usual Export of Lead to
France; for, as an extraordinary Year is no just Rule to take a Medium of
Calculation from, so no more is the Year 1667, to be taken as a proper time to
Calculate our Importation of Wine from France; the preceding Accidents of a
Plague, the Fire, and the War, joining together to make the Demand for Wines
that Year extraordinary great.

Perhaps it is a Fate upon us, that the Inconveniences and Ill-Consequences of
rejecting a Trade so evidently Beneficial to England, must be discovered by our
Experience, and must be felt before they will be known; in which Case this
Paper will have Occasion not only to mention those Inconveniences before hand,
but to remind you of them when they happen.

This Paper shall also, in its Course, be adapted to the several Trading
Counties and Towns of Great Britain, to make appear, that now the War is ended,
all the Goods and Commodities of France may be Imported into this Kingdom,
especially such as are to be Re-exported, as Brandies, Linens, Silks, Paper,
Laces, etc. Since upon such Re-exportation all the additional Duties are drawn
back; when at the same time not one Yard of the Woollen Manufacture of Great
Britain, which are all prohibited in France, nor of our Fish and other material
Commodities, can be Imported into France, the Articles not being made effectual.

The Instances of this, shall be hereafter especially applied to the particular
Trading places of Great Britain, who will thereby be able to judge whether this
is not the true State of their Case, and whether the Dutch or Flemings will now
have the Importation of our Manufactures into France, as they have had for
above 20 Years last past, and reserve to themselves the Dressing, Dying and
Finishing of those Goods; whereby the Manufacturers of Great Britain will
become Slaves to Foreigners, who will either set their own Price upon our
Manufactures, or set up Fabrics of their own in Imitation of them, all which
might have been avoided, by having an open and direct Trade with France.

This Paper shall not suggest so much Unhappiness to Great Britain, whose
general Good it is designed to promote, as to propose that the Articles of
Commerce shall not in time to come be farther considered. The Parliament of
Britain who are the true Judges of their Countries Good, cannot be supposed to
omit any thing that shall be apparently for the public Advantage; and
therefore when it shall appear to them which we will not question, that these
Articles are proper to be Re-consider'd, they will no doubt, act therein, as
Reason and Justice requires.

In the mean time, seeing we are to carry on our Trade without the Advantages
which were expected from the Treaty, let us enquire upon what Terms we are to
carry it on, and how we shall Trade with France for the time coming.

The Tariff of 1664 is now no more to be mentioned in this Affair: The low
Duties which our Goods would have paid in France, are out of the Question. The
Edict of 1701 must now be the Rule of our Trade in France: And that this may be
understood without any Difficulty, and be as little subject to Mistakes as
possible, the Edict it self may be its own Exposi^or; of which the following is
a faithful Abstract.

An Arrest of the King's-Council of State, containing a Rule for the
Importation of Goods and Merchandises of the Manufactures of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging. September 6th, 1701.

HIS Majesty continuing his Application for the Profit and Advantage of his
Subjects in matters of Trade, etc. and being in his Council, has forbidden and
Prohibited, and does hereby Forbid and Prohibit, from the Day of the
publication of these presents, the Importation into this Kingdom of the several
Merchandises hereunder specified, being of the Growth and Manufactures of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. whither coming directly, or from other
Countries, on the Penalty of Confiscation of the Goods and of the Ships
bringing them, of whatever Nation they are, and of 3000 Livres Fine upon the
Merchants who shall Receive or Import them.

All sorts of Stockings, and Caps of Wool, Silk or Thread, whither Knit or
Woven.

All sorts of Woollen Cloths, R^^ines, Bays, Serges, Norwich Stuffs, Camlets,
Mohairs, Tafaties, Plush, or other Stuffs, whither of Wool, Silk or Hair, or
mingled with Wool, Silk, Hair, Thread, or Cotton.

All sorts of Hats, of what sort, or of what Materials soever they are made.

All sorts of Leather, Tanned, Curry'd or Dressed.

All sorts of Gloves. all sorts of Buttons, and Ribbands, whither of Silk,
Gimp, Worsted, Thread, or of any thing else. All sorts of Cutlers, Ironmongers,
or Brasiers Wares;

All Watches, Pendulums, and other kinds of Clockwork.

All sorts of W^^es and Liquors. All sorts of Tin, Wrought or Unwrought.

All sorts of Lead, whither in Pigs or otherwise.

Also His Majesty forbids, and prohibits all Haberdashery, Drugs, and Spices,
to be brought into any part of his Dominions, from England, Scotland, or
Ireland, or the Dominions thereto belonging, or from any other Countries in
English Shipping.

His Majesty Ordains and Appoints also, that the particular Goods hereunder
specified coming from the said Countries of England, Scotland, or Ireland or
the Dominions thereunto belonging, in whatsoever Ships or Vessels they shall
come, upon their Importation into his Majesty's Dominions, shall pay the
following Duties, That is to say,

Live. Sol. Rock Alum, per C. weight. 10. 00 Glass-Bottles, double or single,
per C. 20. 00 English Beer, per Bottle 00. 10 Beeswax, Yellow, per C. 05 00
Ditto, White, per C. 20. 00 Coals from England, per Barrel 01. 10 Flesh Salted,
vocat Beef, per C. 05. 00 Glue, per C. 20. 00 Horses of 90 Live. Value, and
under, each Horse 10. 00 Ditto of 90 Live. Value and upward, each 20. 00 Horns
Round or in Leaves, per C. weight 01. 10 Coppera^, per C. 03. 00 Leather of
England or Ireland per Piece 10. 00 Crystal of all kinds, per C. 60. 00
Elephants Teeth, per C, 06. 00 Sheers for Clothiers, per Pa^r 03. 00 Herrings,
per Last of 12 Barrels 80. 00 Wool, per C. weight 02. 00 Grindstones for
Smiths, per Dozen 15. 00 Dried Cod-fish, per C. weight 08. 00 Ox-Bones, per
Thousand 03. 00 Skins of all sorts not Tanned, per C weight 100. 00 Calf Skins,
per Dozen 12. 00 Raw Hides, per Dozen 30. 00 Cows Hair, per C. weight 02. 00
Salmon Salted from Ireland or Scotland, per 8 Barrels 40. 00 Tallow of all
sorts, per C. Weight 01. 10 Jumps, per C. 06. 00 Tapistry and Turkey Work for
Chairs, etc. 50 per Cent. ad Valorem. Linen Cloth of all sorts, 50 per Cent. ad
Valorem. Drinking-Glass, Decanters, and all other sorts of Glass Wares, p. C.
With. 20^ 00

This is a strict View of the present State of the English Commerce in France,
and these are but part of the Burdens and Encumbrances of our Trade there,
which her Majesty, by the Treaty of Commerce with France, and in her just
Concern for the good of her Kingdoms, had procured to have her Subjects
delivered from; But the Articles being not made Effectual, they are now to
continue, so that our Trade is to remain in general prohibited there, till some
Act shall be passed here, to render Effectual the Provisions made for a Freedom
of Commerce, and till Two Months after, all which time the Profits of an
advantageous Trade are lost to this Nation.

It is also to be observed, that while all these high Duties and Prohibitions
remain upon our Trade into France, most of the French Goods are still at
Liberty to be Imported here, paying the high Duties; the Case of which will be,
that for all of those which may be Re-exported whither to our Plantations, the
Spanish West Indies, or other Parts, those high Duties will be all drawn back,
and the French Goods be so far prejudicial to our Manufactures without our
having any Share of the Advantage from the Trade to France.

In like manner, the Wines and Brandies which may be used at Sea, or in Foreign
Parts, will draw back all the high Duties; and for the other part (viz) the
Home Consumption, they will be brought in as Spanish and Portugal Wines and
Brandies or else smuggled upon the Coast: The Silks, Linen, Paper, etc. will
come in as Dutch and Flemmish; by which means the French will have the Benefit
of the Peace as to their Part of the Trade, and Britain will be entirely shut
out, or be subservient to Foreigners, who shall carry it on for their own
Benefit, as they have done for 20 Years last past. (...) There have been diverse
Representations made to the King of France himself, by his own Subjects, as
well Merchants and Manufacturers as others, all against the Treaty of Commerce
with Great Britain, and especially against the Eighth and Ninth Articles, the
same which our People are offended with; Complaining, and with great
Earnestness too, against admitting the English Woollen Manufactures into France
upon the low Duties of 1664, as what will be ruinous to the Manufactures set up
with so great Success in France; For that the English will now bring in all
their Woollen Manufactures upon them, in such great Quantities, that those made
in Languedoc in Porton, in Picardy, and other Places will be Ruined; That the
English make those Goods so much better than they can be made in France, and
they will be so Cheap, the high Duties which his Majesty had laid on, not so
much to enrich his Treasury, as to encourage the Industry of his own Subjects,
being taken off, even as far back as the Tariff of 1664, that the French Goods
will find no Sale; but that the English Goods will in proportion to their
Goodness, be sold much cheaper than any can be made in France. Farther, these
Representations go on in very pressing, though humble Terms, it being spoken to
their King, to Complain, that an open Trade with England will always be to the
great Damage and Loss of the French; for, say they, the French Nation has very
few Goods to send to the English, but whereof other Nations have the like
kinds, and do also Import the same into England; But the English have diverse
Goods to send to France, of which no other Nation can send the like; That is to
say, Lead, Tin, Leather, Alum, Coal, Pilchards, Salmon, and several other
kinds; whereas the Wines of France are supplied to the English by Portugal, the
Brandy by Spain, the Wrought Silks by Genoa and the Duchy of Milan, the Fruits
and Perfumes by Italy, and the Linen and Paper by Hamburgh and Holland.

For these Reasons they repres^nt, that the Treaty of Commerce with Great
Britain, as it is now fixed, would be Dist^uctive, and an entire Ruin to the
Trade of the French Nation; concluding, that France can never recover it is
Wealth and Greatness, if such a Treaty of Commerce should be permitted to take
place, and unless some way be found out to continue the high Duties, and
thereby to keep out the English Manufactures from being permitted to come into
France.

These Representations seem to rally the English, for what they call a
Stupidity incredible, that they prohibit Trading with France, at the beginning
of the first War, By which ( say they) the Manufactures of France, have arrived
to a great Height, which it was impossible should have been, if the English
Woollen Manufactures had continued to have been sent into France; and
insinuate, that it should have been the Most Christian King, not the late King
William, who should have caused a Prohibition of Trade to have been published;
for that the English Trade was the only Destructive thing to the Industry of
the French Nation.

These Arguments are so pungent, and carry with them so much Weight, that it
makes a most pointed Satyr upon the French King, that he should not comply
with their Desires; but it must be acknowledged, that if their Reasons are just
on the French side, it will be hard to find that our Complaints of this Trade
can be reasonable on the other side; for it is hardly Rational to suggest, that
the Trade between these Two Nations can be to the Disadvantage and Loss on both
sides

Many Delusions have been spread about to amuse and deceive the People in this
Matter of the Treaty of Commerce with France; some of which have been Detected
and duly Exposed, and many who have been Deceived by them begin to recover
their Judgments, and to find that the Treaty which they have been prevailed
upon to Reject and Contemn, is really a Foundation of the most advantageous
Commerce that Britain can be engaged in; That the French must Trade with us
under the most disadvantageous Conditions imaginable; That our Export will be
easy to us, their Imports here hard and Laden with Burdens to them; and we
begin to see these People now repent the Opposition they have all along made to
their Countries Good, and would undo what others have done if it was in their
Power to do so.

But there are still Mistakes behind, which must be removed, and Objections
which however they may be ill-grounded, yet require some Notice of them; as
especially this (viz) That there are but three Ports in France at which our
Manufactures are admitted to be Imported, (viz.) St. Vallery on the Soame,
Roan, and Bourdaux. It is wonderful to reflect how much this prevails in the
Minds of the People, considering it is evident that the limiting the Ports for
Entry, concern only the two Species, (viz.) the Cloths and Cloth-Serges, which
is plain by the Specifications of the Treaty, and not all the rest of our
Woollen Manufactures. But as to all our other Woollen Manufactures, Bays, Says,
Serges, Perpets, Stuffs, Druggets, Dozens, Kersies, Stockings, etc. All our
Re-exported Goods, such as Cottons, Indicoes, Sugars, East India and Turkey
Goods, and all other, they are f^eely allowed by the Treaty to be Imported into
all the Ports of France; and before this Treaty, the said two species of
Manufactures were confined to but Two Ports, (viz.) Calais, and St. Vallery on
the same.

It has been said, that the Reason why the French Confined our said Woollen
Manufactures to certain Ports for their Importations was, that the Land
Carriage and Local Duties of the said Goods should rise so h^gh upon them, that
the Price should thereby be made too great for the Buyer, and give the
advantage to their own Manufactures. Let such People but look Back upon their
Own Arguments, they are not only false in themselves, but inconsistent with one
another; for if this were true, then it must be true also, that their own
Manufactures stood in need of those Helps; that their own Manufactures were so
Inferior to the Eng^ish that if the utmost Discouragements were not put upon
the English Goods, the French Manufactures would not be told, that the English
Manufactures so excelled the French, in the real intrinsic Value, that if
these were admitted, though upon the hardest Terms to be Imported into France,
yet they would gain Ground there; and to be brief, would Sell before the
French, albeit the Difference made by the Burden of Duties there, was at that
time above 40 per Cent. and these things they will not allow, having on many
Occasions published that the French Manufactures are as good as Ours, and if
permitted to come into England, would ruin our own.

But on the other hand, this suggestion cannot in general be True; for had it
been so that the limiting the Importation of the Woollen Manufactures of
Britain to a few certain Ports, was contrived to Load the said Goods with the
farther Burdens of Land-carriage, etc. Why then should the Ports they were
limited to, be chosen out upon the greatest Navigable Rivers in France, nearest
to the Place where the Center of their Trade lay, and where the chief
Consumption of our Manufactures was to be expected. For Example; Roan and
Bourdeaux. The City of Roven lies on the River Sein, and is to Paris as
Gravesend is to London: From thence the Navigation of the Sein conveys every
thing by Water upon Five great Rivers, (viz) by the Oyse and the Aisne into the
Isle of France and the lower Champain to the City of Rhiemes, the Rhetelois and
the Edge of the Duchy of Bar; by the River Maza through the whole Province of
Champain, by the Yonne into Burgundy and Nivernois, and by the River Loyng and
the Canal de Briare into the great River Loyre to the Cities of Orleans,
Nevers, Blais Tours, Angers, etc. even down to the Occean, and through the very
Heart of France: Again the City of Bourdeaux is the Center of the English
Commerce in France, and where the greatest Number of our Ships resort for the
Wine and Brandies which are brought from thence, Therefore appointing Bourdeaux
as one of the Ports for the Import of our Manufactures, was rather making the
Trade easy than difficult to the English, and so far from a design of making
our Goods dear, and increasing the Charges upon them, that it was rather giving
Ease to it by opening that only Port to which the English could bring them upon
the easiest Terms of Freight, and where the greatest Demand for those Goods was
to be found; where the principal Consumption of them might be excepted, and
where the greatest Convenience of Ireland Navigation was to be had, in order to
convey the said Manufactures to all Parts of the Kingdom of France: For the
City of Bourdeaux stands on the Garonne, from whence they have a Navigation by
other Rivers; (viz.) the Dordonne quite through Perigott and Limosin into
Auvergne; by the River Lot through Quercy and Rovergne even to the Sevennes,
and by the Royal Canal from the City of Thoulouse on the Garonne quite through
the Province of Languedoc to Narbonne, and into the mediterranean Sea;
supplying the whole Provinces of Gascoign, Guienne, and Languedock with British
Manufactures by Water Carriage.

This rather seems to intimate to us, that the French King finding it
convenient on other Accounts to limit the Importation of these Goods to certain
Ports, yet appointed those Ports so, as that his Subjects might have the Goods
brought with the greatest Ease and the least Charge that could be to those
Markets, where the greatest Consumption of them was, and where the Principal
Traders in those Goods were settled; who from thence supplied the whole Kingdom
by the Convenience of Water-Carriage: As to the Reason of naming particular
Ports and Places for the Importation of these Goods, it is known to those who
are acquainted with the Affairs of France, That it was occasioned by the
differing Circumstances of the Contracts with the Farmers, and was a thing
practiced in other Cases in France as well as in this of the Woollen
Manufactures, as particularly the Drugs and Spices which are limited in almost
the same manner.

Also this limiting the Importation of Goods to certain Ports, is not a new
Practice or peculiar to France only; the like is done in England, particularly
the Alamodes and Lustrings, are confined to the Port of London; and the
Importation of Wool from Ireland is limited to Three or Four Ports only, but
however is so ordered, not that the Irish Wool should by Reason of
Land-Carriage be made dearer to our Manufactures than the English, in order to
discourage the Importation of it; But for other particular Reasons, drawn from
the Circumstances of the thing it self; and therefore the Towns to which the
Importations of Irish Wool is limited are such, as are not only nearest and
most convenient by their Situation for the coming from Ireland, but nearest and
most convenient to those parts of England where the Manufacturers live, who
make use of Irish Wool, and are the principal Buyers and Consumers thereof; as
Mi^e^ead for the Serge-Makers of Ta^ton; are Biddiford or Ba^^stable for the
Serge-Makers of Exeter, Tiverton, etc. at L^verpool for the Clothiers of
Yorkshire and Lancashire: And the like.

Had not the Convenience of the Manufacturers been consulted in this
Limitation, but on the contrary, had it been contrived or appointed on purpose
to add the Burden and Expense of Land-Carriage to the Price of the Wool,
Bristoll might have been named, Milford-Ha^e^, or any Port in Wales, which though
lying as wel^ for the Navigation of the Irish Vessels, would yet have greatly
increased the Price of the Wool to the Manufacturers, by the Charges of
carrying it on Horseback after it was landed; in like manner had the King of
France limited the Importation of the English* Manufactures with Design, as it
is alleged, to Enhance the Price by Land-Carriage, he would have chosen such
Ports for their Importation as were most remote from those Parts, where the
principal Consumptions of them was known to be, and most remote from the
Conveniences of Water-Carriage: This was very easy for him to have done, had he
^amed the Cities of Rochell and St. Mall^ for Example, instead of Roan and
Bourdeaux, the Case had been qui^e altered, there being no River Navigable near
them; and then it would have been difficult to have assigned any other Reason
for such Limitation, than that of Discouraging and Burthening the Trade: But as
it is now, there is no room for any Supposition of that kind.

Further it might be demanded why the French King should not rather lay still
higher D^ties on the said Woollen Manufactures, than study to raise their Price
by the Difficulties of their Importation; the former being the readiest Method
of Discour^ging their Market, and which would at the same time have brought in
some Gain to the Crown, which is an Article they are far from being forgetful
of in France.

Much has been said in Discoursing on this Subject, about the Balance of the
French Trade being against England: That the Balance formerly against England
has been Disputed, and that with good Reason; the contrary in many Particulars
evidently appearing; But that the Balance will be against England NOW, is too
evident; for it is impossible to be otherwise: the Nature of the Trade will not
permit it to be otherwise; The French will bring in great Quantities of their
Goods here, of which some will always be consumed at home, what Price soever
they cost; and all that we want for Re-Exportation, whether to our own Colonies
or other Parts will go abroad, drawing back the high Duties, which, as it is
alleged, are to hinder our Trading in them. So that still all our Foreign
Commerce, so far as these Kind of Goods are Demanded, will be French.

Against this, it is demanded, how must Payment be made? ^^all our Trade to
France is in some Respect prohibited, as has been shown by the Edict of 1701,
published MERCATOR (No. 13.) and what is not prohibited is loaded with such
high Duties, as are almost equal to a Prohibition: We have been told that we
pay for all the Goods we buy in France with ready Money, whether we did or no
BEFORE may be debated another time, but it is evident that we shall buy NOW;
the Articles not being made Effectual, must be paid for with Money, or not paid
for at all; for the French will take nothing of us. So that they having
formerly shut the Door of Commerce against England, we have bolted it now on
the wrong side, and will not suffer them to open it again, although they are
willing to do it.

If the Balance of Trade by this means runs against Britain, which before
always ran against France, we cannot blame them, but must blame our selves, who
have been willing to have it so, and have so blamed our Party-Interest with our
Trading-Interest, as to ruin the one, in order to carry on the other.

The Objection upon which all this Matter seemed to turn, has been, that the
French have NOW all kinds of Woollen Manufactures of their own making, and have
no need of our Trade; this is carried such a Length by some, that they insist,
that the French make all the sorts of our Woollen Manufactures as good as the
English, and much cheaper than they can be made here; that they are able not
only to supply themselves but other Countries, nay all Countries says one
Author; and Britain too, says another Author: But it would be asked of these
warm People, Why then do they so strictly and carefully Exclude, Prohibit, or
Load with Duties, all the English Woollen Manufactures? If their own are better
and cheaper than the English, their Quality would be a Prohibition as effectual
as an Edict or Arrest du Conseil, and much more, and other Prohibitions would
be needless.

But whatever we are pleased to say, the French know better, and as they have
good Reason to be most sensible of the Defects of their own Manufactures, so
they are very careful to keep the English Goods out, that the Goodness of one
against the Meanness of the other, may not be discovered by the Trade it self:
Nothing can be a more undeniable Proof of the Mistake of those People who talk
so warmly of the Goodness and Cheapness of the French Manufactures, than the
French King laying such repeated Burdens upon the English Goods; and after
this was done, and several times increased, yet, when the Manufacturers there
found, that notwithstanding their high Duties and Burdens, the English Goods
would be bought by their People, whatever they cost, being recommended so
effectually by their own Worth and Goodness, that all the French could do in
the mere way of Trade would be of no Signification to it, They Petitioned the
French King to grant a Total Prohibition of Woollen Manufactures, which he did:
And this was all done during a Time of Peace; so that the War is not the Reason
of this Case, but the mere Nature of the Trade, and it is easy to be discovered
that it had been to small Purpose to go about making Woollen Manufactures in
France, if the English Woollen Manufactures were not effectually Prohibited.

Her Majesty, on the other hand, has so effectually secured to her Subjects all
the Advantages of the French Trade, that she has not only obtained the
Revocation of all that the King of France had been doing for 50 Years, for the
Encouragement of his Subjects in the Woollen Manufactures, by which she gives
her own People a full Opportunity to extend their Trade into all parts of
France with Advantage, but on the contrary, has continued upon the French
Importations hither, all those Inequalities and extraordinary Duties which were
needful to exclude them from any prejudicial Excesses in England to the
Disadvantage of her own People: By both which the Balance of that Trade is
effectually secured to be on the English side, and we are in a fair way to
recover all the Injury done to our Commerce by the last impungent Prohibitions.

Would these People turn the Tables and make this Case their own, what may we
suppose they would say if the Queen of Great Britain had, in Her Majesty's
Treaty of Commerce, Consented to take off the high Duties laid on the
Importation of those French Manufactures, which our People have been Encouraged
by those high Duties to make here, and given Permission by this New Treaty to
the French, to Import the said Goods upon the low Duties, which the same Goods
paid here before the Year, 1664. For Example, Should the Duties on French
Alamodes and Lustrings have been reduced to 6 s. per l. which they paid before
the War, instead of 31 s. 10 d. which they are to pay now; should the Duties on
French Brandy, which by this Treaty is to remain at above 51 l. per Ton, have
been reduced to 30 s. as it was before the Revolution; May we not suppose the
Distiller of Corn and Mollasses, the Weavers of Alamodes and Lustrings, and the
Dealers under them all, would have made Representations and Complaints of their
Trade being ruined and given up to the French, their Families Impoverished,
etc. like as we find the French Merchants and Manufactures in France have done
on their side to their King, and for which we must acknowledge they have very
good Reason.

It is scarcely worth while to mention here, much less to give an Answer to a
Report very Confidently spread about, and which some people are weak enough to
take upon Trust, viz. That by the Treaty of Commerce, leave was to be given to
Export our Wool unwrought into France: But as it is certain, that such a
R^port is industriously spread about, where it is thought there is Ignorance
enough to suffer so great a De^^sion, it is reasonable to observe from it, what
Endeavors are used by some among us, to Impose upon the people of this Nation
in the grossest manner, for the carrying on other Designs, equally Destructive
to the public safety.

But to return to what was mentioned, viz. of the real abatement of Duties,
which is obtained by this Treaty; it may be a profitable Explanation of the
present Treaty of Commerce, and may prevent the prejudices which some Entertain
against this Treaty, should a brief Account be given them of the Difference
between the present State of our Trade with France, and what it has been at
several times; when it has nevertheless been carried on by us to Advantage; and
what it was to have been by the Treaty, or would have been, had the Articles
been made Effectual: And as this shall be done in brief Tables, referring to
the several Heads of our Exportation, as they now lie before us; so they may
afterward be brought down one by one, to the particular Trading Towns and
Counties of Britain, where those Branches of our Manufactures are carried on:

To begin with our Woollen Manufactures, all which now stand Prohibited, and
must do so till the said Articles are made Effectual, the following Table will
show what Duties are taken off by this Treaty, and upon what low Duties they
would have been admitted into France by this Treaty, had it been made
Effectual, as well as what Prohibitions and high Duties the Trade now labors
under.

The following is an Account of several Goods and Woollen Manufactures of Great
Britain, now Prohibited in France, the Time when the high Duties were laid upon
them before the said Prohibition; with what they were to pay by the Tariff of,
1664, which was to take place, if the Eighth and Ninth Articles of the Treaty
had been made Effectual.

Anno 1701. By the Tariff of 1664. Anno 1687. Live. Sol Live. Sol. Bays Double
per Piece of 50 Else Prohibited 15 00 60 00 Single per Piece of Else. 25
Prohibited 4 00 20 00 Minikin, Ditto. Prohibited Ditto. Ditto. Fl^^^el, per
Piece of 26 Prohibited 6 00 24 00 Cottons, per C. Goads Prohibited 12 00 20 per
C. An. 1685. Ker^^es, per Piece of 13 Prohibited 3 12 6 00 Fustians, per Piece
of 12 Prohibited 1 15 4 00 Yorkshire, Single 10 Prohibited 4 10 20 00 Dozens,
Double 10 Prohibited 9 00 40 00 If above 8 Livres per Ell Value, to pay 120 00
Milled Serges per P. of 15 Prohibited 10 00 30 00 Scots Plaiding 25 Prohibited
2 00 8 00 Silk Stocking, per Pair 0 15 2 00 Cloths per Piece of 25 Prohibited
Cloth-Serges, per Piece of 15 Prohibited The Duties of these Stated several
Times before.

They must be no Manufacturers themselves, nor much concerned for those who
are, or for the Woollen Manufactures of Britain in general, who can read this
Table without being sensible of the Disadvantage our Trade lies under in the
present situation of our Commerce with France: When they shall Read the Word
Prohibited continually before every Article of our Woollen Manufacture, and
shall remember, that for Twelve Years past, none of all those Goods have been
admitted into France but by way of Holland; whereas very great Quantities of
Woollen Manufactures were Yearly Exported thither before, besides other Goods
of the Growth and Production of our own Country, or of our Plantations, which
is the same thing, and ought so to be esteemmed.

When the QUEEN, who always had the Good of Her Subjects, and the Prosperity of
their Commerce at Her Heart, found it was in Her Power to open such a Door of
Trade to Her People, on Terms so much to the Loss and Disadvantage of France,
and so evidently to the Advantage of Her own Kingdoms; it could not but be with
great Satisfaction, that Her Majesty gave in Charge to Her Ministers and
Plenipotentiaties, to Conclude a Treaty, which took off all the Burdens and
Prohibitions, which the Mistakes of former Years had brought upon the Trade,
and by which Her Enemies were obliged to make deep Wounds in their own Trade,
to comply with those Demands.

But, it must be very disobliging to the QUEEN, as well as very surprising to
her Faithful Subjects, to see in what manner some People receive, and how
disingeniously they Construe all Her Majesty's Endeavors to show Her
affectionate Concern for the Welfare of Her Subjects, and the Prosperity of
Their Commerce; as if that very Care, which Her Majesty has so Eminently
expressed, for Their Good, was a Contrivance of Her and their Enemies, to
betray us to the French, and to give up the British Interest in Trade, to the
most dangerous Rivals they have in the World.

Certainly Mankind cannot be so far carried away with the stream of their
Passions, as to deny this general Maxim; That nothing ought to be believed in
such public Debates as these, but what is proved. This Paper has from its
beginning, taken this for a Rule, and therefore brings Authentic Proofs with
it, of every Thing it says, yet these Men say it is all Lies; on the contrary,
they bring no Proof at all of what they say, and yet they expect to be believed.

To shorten the Dispute, the MERCATOR shall as modestly as the Case will allow
make a fair Challenge to all Opposers; which if they do not Answer, they can
but ill Justify any of their future Objections against the Truth of what is
alleged in this Paper.

The Challenge is* That whereas they charge this Paper with Lying, they ought
to descend to Particulars; and stating it truly, let the World know what ONE
THING it is the MERCATOR has Affirmed, Asserted, made Public as Truth, which
is not so: If this cannot be done, the charge of Lying will turn back upon
them, with great Disadvantage to themselves.

One Condition only must be desired of them, (viz.) That they will not expect
any thing should be taken upon Trust on one side more than on the other; and
therefore that they will be careful, as the MERCATOR has always done, to quote
their Authorities for all they shall say; the Validity of which, when
Confronted with those of this Paper, may be easily examined, and the Readers
may judge whether are in the Right; if they do not think fit to do this, as the
MERCATOR will not think it worth while to take any Notice of them, so neither
can they expect it of any one else.

That their Scheme of which they ^oasted, is it self one general Complication
of Fraud; and false Representations has been made appear, even to both Houses
of Parliament; The MERCATOR in that, as in every other Case of like Nature,
says nothing from himself, but spakes the Language of the Custom House Books,
gives exact Copies of the Commissioners Reports, signed under their Hands, and
proves every thing in particular by Authentic Papers; if these are false, the
MERCATOR would be very willing to see the Proof of it; if any mistake has
happened, whether wilful or by the negligence of Clerks, the Books are
remaining, and may be referred to: Why do not these People tell us where these
Mistakes lie? why do they not prove that the MERCATORS has made false Draughts
of those Accounts and Reports? omitted any thing or added any thing to make his
Arguments appear the Better; as on the other Hand has been proved to be their
practice, even in a most scandalous manner, in their late SCHEME, under the
hands of the Commissioners of the Customs, and by them Laid before both Houses
of Parliament.

All the use this Paper shall make of this unfair Usage, is only to proceed
with the same Caution in all that it shall make public, still taking care to
offer nothing but what is sufficiently confirmed by such Authorities, as shall
always stand the Test of the strictest Examination; taking no notice of any
thing which shall be said in Opposition to it, unless it comes likewise
supported by such Proofs as may give a due Weight, and make it reasonable to be
Inquired into.

But to return to the Subject of Trade, from which as few Digressions as
possible, shall be made in this Paper.

The last MERCATOR gave a true Prospect of the State of one Branch of our Trade
in France as it now stands, and as it might now have stood, had the Treaty
taken place, that is to say, the Branch of Trade which concerns our Woollen
Manufactures in particular. The Manufacturers of Great Britain may there see
what Circumstances they are now in as to Trade, and what their unnatural Joy is
built upon which they have so publicly shown at the Delay of the Advantages
which they might by this time have rafted of in their Trade.

Next to the said Exportation of our Woollen Manufacture, the Fishing Trade is
our immediate Concern, and that more especially since our Union with Scotland:
The Northern Parts of Britain have a peculiar Interest in the Fishery, and the
securing a Market in France for the great Quantities of Fish that are or may be
Cured in Scotland, and in the North, and West parts of England, is of so great
Consequence to this Nation, that it cannot be omitted in a Treaty of Commerce.

The French had not forgotten this part, or to encourage their own Subjects to
launch into the Fishery as well as into the other Branches of our Trade: The
high Duties in France laid upon Fish from Great Britain, were an effectual
Support to the French Projects of Fishing, and a Bar to the Fishing of Great
Britain: For Scotland by the Union being brought into the same Prohibitions,
and being esteemed as the same Nation, came thereby also under the same
Inconveniences of Trade, and lost the Advantage of their Trade to France,
which before was very considerable, especially in Fish; Scotland having always
before the Union, Exported to France yearly, a very great Quantity of Herring,
Salmon and white Fish.

It cannot but be grateful to all those Parts of Britain which are sensible of
the Benefit of the Fishery, and who depend upon the Exportation of the Fish
when taken, to understand That the Importation of our Fish into France is now,
by this Treaty, left open upon very easy Terms, and particularly, upon the same
Terms with the Dutch; which could never be obtained before.

The just Care and Concern which Her Majesty has shown for the Interest of Her
own Subjects, and the Extent of their Commerce, has been seen in removing that
Inequality, and providing that our Fishery shall now be upon the same Foot with
that of the Dutch, and have the same Encouragement of an open Trade to France;
a thing which however the Dutch have Taught us to reject here, they always took
care to secure for themselves, and found no little advantage in it.

The Merchants and Gentlemen of the North-part of Britain, and of the West
also, have frequently expressed to the Government their great Concern for the
obtaining this Liberty of Commerce; and the great Advantages which it would be
to them, if obtained; as may be seen by the Representation of the Royal
Buroughs in Scotland, formerly sent up to the Lords Commissioners of Trade; and
of others also: And unless we could suppose them to Act in Contradiction to
themselves, it must be a particular Satisfaction to them all, to see what
provision Her Majesty has made for the said Fishing-Trade by this Treaty; and
it must be impossible, without an Infatuation, which it would be rude to
suggest, that the Merchants and Trading People of Scotland, of the North of
England, of the Coasts about Y^^mouth and Loest^ff, or the Counties of Cornwall
and Devon, can be drawn into say, they are pleased that the Articles of this
Treaty remain Ineffectual.

Having thus often mentioned Scotland, and the Fishing-Trade, it is proper also
to take notice how, by the present Treaty, Her Majesty made it Her especial
Care, in behalf of Her Scots Subjects as well as English, to have all those new
Burdens which were laid upon the British Fishing Trade only, and which gave
that Trade away from us to the Dutch, taken away in France; and as it is very
surprising, that the Power of any Party-Influence, should make us in England
insensible of such advantages. So the next Paper shall let you see what those
Advantages are, and that they are not equally disregarded in Scotland, as they
are here.

FINIS.

