THE SHEPHERDS LOTTERY.

A Musical Entertainment.

As it is Performed by His MAJESTY's Company of Comedians AT THE Theater Royal
in Drury Lane.

The MUSIC Composed by Dr. BOYCE.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by M. Cowper in Paternoster Row. M DCC LI.

[Price Six Pence.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
THYRSIS, Master Vernon. COLIN, Mr. Beard. DORYLAS, Mr. Wilder. PHILLIS, Miss
Norris. DAPHNE, Mrs. Clive.
Nymphs, Shepherds, etc.

THE SHEPHERDS LOTTERY. A Musical Entertainment.
PART I.
SCENE I.
THYRSIS. RECITATIVE. THOUGH lawless War has quenched her flaming Brand,
That long, too long, has thinn'd this frighted Land;
Though Ceres' heaps my loaded Gran'ries fill,
And my proud Oxen graze on every Hill;
Yet my fond Heart is filled with deepest Cares,
For Thyrsis loves, and while he dotes, despairs.
AIR.
What Beauties does my Nymph disclose!
Less fair the silver Lilly blows:
Such Blushes glow not on the Rose,
As on the Cheeks of Phillis.
The other Day, upon the Green,
I saw a Nymph of heavenly Mien;
I ran to greet the Cyprian Queen,
But found it was my Phillis.
By mossy Grot with Ivy bound,
Where fragrant Woodbines curl around,
And Daisies dapple over the Ground,
I sit, and murmur Phillis:
And when the Lark with dewy Wings,
To hail the Morn exulting springs,
I rise, and tune the trembling Strings,
To praise my dearest Phillis.
When first I saw the lovely Maid,
I gazed, in-raptur'd and dismayed;
My faltring Tongue was quite afraid
To tell my Pangs to Phillis.
Then Cupid aimed his sharpest Dart;
At once I felt the pleasing Smart,
That very Hour I lost my Heart;
And now it dwells with Phillis. Exit.

SCENE II.
DAPHNE, PHILLIS. DAPHNE. Recit. What, still in Tears? Cast every Fear away,
Tomorrow, Phillis, is the First of May;
Then, as the Custom of the Place demands,
Each vent'ring Shepherd in due Order stands,
And from the Urn draws forth his future Wife;
Phillis no more shall lead a maiden Life.

PHILLIS. Ah Daphne, Daphne! hence my Sorrows rise,
Thyrsis is he whom I alone can prize:
Should any other draw my hapless Name,
My Death shall witness how sincere my Flame.

DAPHNE. Talk not so wild, whatever his Face may be,
Or this, or that, it is all alike to me:
Or grant, One chiefly struck my amorous Eye;
Yet trust me, Phillis, I for none would die.

PHILLIS. Ah! where will gentle Love a Shelter find,
If he forsake the Breast of Womankind?
AIR.
Oh, let me, unreserv'd, declare
The Dictate of my Breast;
My Thyrsis reigns unrivaled there,
An ever-welcome Guest.
No more our spritely Nymphs I meet,
But seek the lonely Grove;
There, sighing to myself, repeat
Some tender Tale of Love.
When absent from my longing Sight,
He is my constant Theme;
His shadowy Form appears by night,
And shapes the morning Dream.
Ye spotless Virgins of the Plain,
Deem not my Words too free,
For ere my Passion you arraign,
You must have loved like me. Exit.

SCENE III.
DAPHNE. Recit. Unhappy Girl! I know the Pangs of Love,
And often sigh when in the silent Grove:
My faithless Traitor from my Passion fled,
And left me weeping in a lonely Bed.
Henceforth my Arts I Will on their Sex employ,
Their Vows my Laughter, and their Pangs my Joy.
AIR.
My Pride is to hold all Mankind in my Chain;
The Conquest I prize, though the Slaves I disdain:
I Will teaze them and vex them,
I Will plague and perplex them:
Since Men try all Arts our weak Sex to betray,
I Will show them a Woman's as cunning as they.
Young Damon adored me, and Lycon the vain,
By turns I encouraged each amorous Swain;
They knelt and they trembled,
I smiled and dissembled.
Since Men try all Arts our weak Sex to betray,
I Will show them a Woman's as cunning as they.
Then hear me, ye Nymphs, and my Counsel believe,
Resist all their Wiles, the Deceivers deceive:
Their Canting and Whining,
Their Sighing and Pining,
Are all meant as Baits our weak Sex to betray;
Then prove there are Women as cunning as they.

Exit. SCENE IV. A GROVE.
COLIN discovered playing on his Pipe. AIR.
The Drum is unbrac'd, and the Trumpet no more
Shall rouse the fierce Soldier to fight;
Our Meads shall no longer be floated with Gore,
Nor Terror disturb the calm Night.
Once more over the Fields golden Harvests shall shine,
The Olive her Flowrets increase;
Again purple Clusters shall blush on the Vine;
These, these are the Blessings of Peace.
The Shepherd securely now roams through the Glade,
Or merrily pipes in the Vale:
The Youth in soft Numbers attempts his coy Maid:
The Virgins dance blithe in the Dale.
The Flowers, with gay Colors, embroider the Ground,
Unpress'd by an Enemy's Feet;
The Bleatings of Sheep from the Hillocks resound,
And the Birds their trim Sonnets repeat.
SCENE V. To him Thyrsis.
THYRSIS. Recit. Thrice happy Colin! you the whole Day long
Teach every Hill to catch your jocund Song:
So the blithe throstle carols through the Grove,
His Breast unwounded by the Thorns of Love.

COLIN. True, Thyrsis, true; I never could sigh and pine,
And call a proud denying Fair divine:
Each Nymph, I see, has got some Charm to strike,
And those who yield the soonest, best I like.

THYRSIS. As verdant Fields the blasted Heath surpass,
As generous Corn exceeds the meaner Grass,
As Palms are nobler than the Shrubs they shade,
So Phillis triumphs over each other Maid.

COLIN. I like young Doris in her russet Gown,
Ripe as the Pear, and as the Berry brown:
Her ruddy Cheeks the Cherry's Hue display,
And warm, and buxom as a Summer's Day.

THYSIS. Tomorrow is the Period of my Fate,
My Hopes, my Fears do on Tomorrow wait;
Then Fortune gives me Phillis for a Wife,
Or ends my every Suffering with my Life.

COLIN. Ye Lovers much profess, and yet I Am told,
Ye seldom long the same Opinion hold:
You knew young Strephon, he who on the Ring --
But hearken, Thyrsis, I Will the Story sing.
AIR.
To dear Amaryllis young Strephon had long
Declared his fixed Passion, and died for in Song;
He went one May-Morning to meet in the Grove,
By her own dear Appointment this Goddess of Love;
Meanwhile in his Mind all her Charms he ran over,
And doted on each; can a Lover do more?
He waited, and waited, then changing his Strain,
'Twas Fury, and Rage, and Despair, and Disdain:
The Sun was commanded to hide his dull Light,
And the whole course of Nature was altered downright.
'Twas his hapless Fortune to die and adore,
But never to change; can a Lover do more?
Cleora, it hap'd, was by Accident there;
No Rose-bud so tempting, no Lilly so fair
He pressed her white Hand, next her Lips he essayed,
Nor would she deny him, so civil the Maid!
Her kindly Compliance his Peace did restore;
And dear Amaryllis was thought of no more.

SCENE VI.
THYRSIS. Recit. Unhappy State of these offending Plains
For Guilt long since the Punishment remains:
Not free to choose, our youngest Virgins stand
The Sport of Chance, for such is Pan's Command.
O Fortune! to my Pangs propitious prove,
And crown with due Success my constant Love. Exit.

SCENE VII.
PHILLIS. AIR.
Ye Nymphs of the Plain who once saw me so gay,
You ask why in Sorrow I spend the whole Day:
It Is Love, cruel Love, that my Peace did betray:
Then crown your poor Phillis with Willow.
The Bloom which once graced, has deserted this Cheek;
My eyes no more sparkle, my Tongue can scarce speak;
My Heart too so flutters I fear it will break:
Then crown your poor Phillis with Willow.
Ye Lovers so true, that attend on my Bier,
And think that my Fortune has proved too severe;
Ah! curb not the Sigh, nor refuse the kind Tear;
Then strew all the Place round with Willow.
Erect me a Tomb, and engrave on its Side,
"Here lies a poor Maiden, whose Love was denied;
"She strove to endure it, but could not, and died:"
Then shade it with Cypress and Willow.

SCENE VIII. To her Thyrsis.
THYRSIS. Recit. O lovely Maiden, dearer to my Sight
Than the gay Fires that gild the Gloom of Night;
Here at your Feet let me transported own,
How much I Phillis love, and her alone.
DUET.
THYRSIS. When Fairies dance round on the Grass,
And revel to Night's awful Noon;
O say, will you meet me, sweet Lass,
All by the clear Light of the Moon?

PHILLIS. My Passion I seek not to screen;
Then can I refuse you your Boon?
I Will meet you at Twelve on the Green,
All by the clear Light of the Moon.
The Nightingale perched on a Thorn,
Then charms all the Plains with her Tune;
And glad of the Absence of Morn,
Salutes the pale Light of the Moon.

THYRSIS. How sweet is the Jessamin Grove!
And sweet are the Roses of June;
But sweeter's the Language of Love,
Breathed forth by the Light of the Moon.
Too slow rolls the Chariot of Day,
Unwilling to grant me my Boon:
Away, envious Sunshine, away,
Give place to the Light of the Moon.

PHYLLIS. But say, will you never deceive
The Lass whom you conquered too soon?
And leave a lost Maiden to grieve
Alone, by the Light of the Moon.

THYRSIS. The Planets shall start from their Spheres,
Ere I prove so fickle a Loon;
Believe me, I Will banish thy Fears,
Dear Maid, by the Light of the Moon.

BOTH. Our Loves when the Shepherds shall view,
To us they their Pipes shall attune;
While we our soft Pleasures renew,
Each Night by the Light of the Moon. Exeunt.


PART II.
SCENE I.
DAPHNE, DORYLAS. DORYLAS. Recit. SWEET Nymph, this Token of my Love receive,
Though mean's the Present that a Swain can give;
Yet should a Smile the trifling Gift repay,
My Heart will dance with Pleasure all the Day.

DAPHNE. I take the Crook in Earnest of your Love;
At Eight, precisely, in the Chestnut Grove;
To Faunus' Spring, good Dorylas, repair,
It Is very likely -- my warm Blushes spare,
It Is very likely -- [Aside.] I shall not be there.

DORYLAS. Thrice happy Dorylas! kind Maid, Adieu;
At Eight, precisely, I Will my Suit renew. Exit.

SCENE II.
DAPHNE. Farewell, deluded Swain, if Smiles can gain
Such pretty Presents, I Will never frown again.
AIR.
As soon hope for Peace 'twixt the Hawk and the Dove,
As to find it with Woman and Man;
Or prompted by Hate, or incited by Love,
They both will deceive when they can.
The Shepherd, forgetful of Oaths and of Vows,
Will run to a Face that is more new;
And often the Women, or Maiden or Spouse,
The very same Method pursue.
The Youth to obtain the dear Nymph he admires,
By Falsehood expresses his Flame:
To gain the loved Boy who her Bosom inspires;
Does not Cloe exactly the same?
How just's the Division? Man's born to persuade;
We listen, and think him sincere:
But then, has not Nature been kind to the Maid?
She gave her the Smile and the Tear.
Intrepid as Heroes, Men snatch at their Joy,
And force us by Storm to comply:
We, helpless poor Creatures, by Fashion made coy,
Consent when we feebly deny.
Like Armies drawn out into martial Array,
The Sexes call forth all their Powers;
And if for the Men goes the Battle today,
Tomorrow the Triumph is ours.
Recit. But see, young Colin casts this way his Look,
Perhaps he means to bring another Crook.
Fain would I force him to receive my Yoke,
And own that Cupid's Laws are more than Joke.

SCENE III. To her Colin.
COLIN. Sweet Lady, tell me: Did you see this way
Two milk-white Lambs with rosy Collars stray?

DAPHNE. No, gentle Youth: But pr'ythee tell me, why
You greet a Village Maid in Terms so high?
I am no Lady, courteous Swain, not I.

COLIN. Since you my loved Companions have not seen,
Perhaps they have wandered to yon distant Green:
I Will see. --

DAPHNE. [Aside.] Stay, Shepherd, stay -- Was ever such a stupid Swain!
He seems to eye me with a cold Disdain.
[To him.] Some time, methinks with Colin I could waste.

COLIN. Dispatch then, quickly; I Am, in truth, in haste.
AIR.
DAPHNE. Has the Arrow of Cupid never lodged in your Breast?
Have you wept for whole Months, nor been able to rest,
'Till the Fair One took pity, and bid you be blessed?
Speak boldly the Truth, my good Shepherd.

COLIN. No, that I cannot brag of; but all the Day long
Some Mistress or other has place in my Song;
My Passion's not lasting, but it is very strong.
I speak the plain Truth, my good Lady.

DAPHNE. I doubt you're a Rover; if so, a young Maid
May fear to be with you, within this thick Shade.

COLIN. Such Beauties as yours need be never afraid.
I speak the plain Truth, my good Lady.

DAPHNE. Suppose a young Shepherdess, just of my Size,
An Air too like mine, and a pair of such Eyes,
Should like you, say, would you your Conquest despise?
Speak boldly the Truth, my good Shepherd.

COLIN. Plain-Dealing's a Jewel, you very well know;
And therefore permit me to own ere I go,
Such a Mistress as you, is at best, but so so.
I speak the plain Truth, my good Lady.

COLIN. Farewell, gentle Maiden.

DAPHNE. Farewell, thou dull Swain.
Go seek thy Companions that brouze on the Plain.

BOTH. And I care not if ever I behold thee again.
I speak the plain Truth, etc. Exeunt severally.


SCENE IV. Discovers a Statue of Pan, near which is placed an Urn. Many
Shepherds are discovered who have drawn, standing with the Women who have
fallen to their Lot.
THYRSIS and PHILLIS. THYRSIS. Recit. Arcadian Pan! whose happy Influence yields
Health to our Flocks, and Plenty to our Fields:
If ere the Thoughts of Syrinx warmed your Soul,
Or when to kinder Dryope you stole,
Suspend your Rage, assist my amorous Prayer,
And to her Thyrsis give the matchless Fair.

Advances to draw. PHILLIS. AIR.
Goddess of the dimp'ling Smile,
Quit, ah! quit thy favorite Isle;
Crowned with Myrtle Wreath, advance;
From the Hand of giddy Chance
Snatch the Power to make me blessed,
Be it thine to ease my Breast.
In her Ivory Car the fair Queen I behold,
Her Cygnets in Trappings of Purple and Gold;
Displaying their Pinions I see the young Loves,
All brighter than Sunshine, all soft as her Doves.
With Raptures, O Venus, I bow at thy Shrine:
She whispers me softly, Young Thyrsis is thine.

THYRSIS. Recit. O happy Thyrsis! let the Hills around,
And every Valley, catch the pleasing Sound:
Waft it, ye Breezes, to the Cyprian Shore;
Thyrsis is blessed, and asks of Fate no more.

Embraces Phillis. SCENE V, and LAST.
To them Colin and Daphne. PHILLIS. You come, my Daphne, in an happy Hour;
Each Cloud's dispelled, and Tempests cease to lour.

DAPHNE. Joy to my dear, but unexperienced Friend!
Who thinks that Love and Raptures know no end.

COLIN. Joy to my Thyrsis! and to thee, my Fair!
The Yoke is lasting that you're doomed to wear.
May Love and Hymen never be at odds!
For both are young, and wondrous testy Gods.

THYRSIS. Haste to the Urn, there, there your Fortune try.

COLIN. I humbly thank you, but indeed, not I;
This kind of Lott'ry does not hit my Taste;
A Wife is no such mighty Prize, at last.
AIR.
How giddy is Youth! yet above all Advice:
You counsel, and counsel in vain:
I Have tried what is Wedlock, and like it so well
That I Will never be married again.
The Spouse that I pitched on was comely and young,
And sweet as the Flowers of the Plain:
She was wise, as they tell me; perhaps it might be;
But I Will never be married again.
I saw the poor Creature laid deep in the Grave;
My Tears they came pouring like Rain:
But as Sunshine, you know, will foul Weather succeed,
I quickly recovered again.
Like the Castles of Fairies, it seems to the Sight;
And Fancy indulges the Rein:
But alas! when you try it, it is all a mere Cheat,
And the same dull Tale over again.

DAPHNE. Recit. Once more, well met, polite engaging Swain;
What Maid but must adore thy soothing Strain!

DUET. O say! must I sigh and pine, my Love?
O say, must I sigh, and pine?
You're cruel, I swear,
As a Tiger, or Bear,
If you don't to my Wish incline, my Love;
If you don't to my Wish incline.

COLIN. So much I delight in thee, my Dear;
So much I delight in thee;
Thou may sigh, pine, and moan,
Or may let it alone;
It Is all the same to me, my Dear;
It Is all the same to me.

DAPHNE. But say, should I break my Heart, my Love?
But say, should I break my Heart?
Would you not be dismayed
To have murdered a Maid
With Cupid's keenest Dart, my Love?
With Cupid's keenest Dart.

COLIN. I should not be much dismayed, my Dear;
I should not be much dismayed:
If you think that I lie,
You had better go try,
I am not much afraid, my Dear;
I am not much afraid.

DAPHNE. Since nothing, I find, will do, my Love;
Since nothing I find will do;
My Heart I Will break --
No, I Will live for your sake;
And I Will live to laugh at you, my Love;
And live to laugh at you.

THYRSIS. Recit. Cease all your Jars, while we, my gentle Maid,
Pursue true Pleasure in the rosy Shade:
But hasten, Swains, your annual Homage pay,
And hail with jolly Sounds the youthful May.
AIR.
THYRSIS. Now the Snow-drop lifts her Head;
Cowflips rise from golden Bed;
Silver Lillies paint the Grove:
Welcome May, and welcome Love.

PHILLIS. Hark! the merry Finches sing,
Heralds of the blooming Spring;
And the artless Turtle-dove
Coes at once to May and Love.

THYRSIS. Long the clay-cold Maid denies,
Nor regards her Shepherd's Sighs:
Now your fond Petitions move,
May's the Season formed for Love.

PHILLIS. While adown the slopy Hill
Tinkles soft the gushing Rill,
Balmy Scents perfume the Grove,
May unbends the Soul to Love.

DAPHNE. Now the Be, on silv'ry Wings,
Flowery Spoils unwearied brings;
Spoils that Nymphs and Swains approve,
Soft as May, and sweet as Love.
And the Swallow's chirping Brood,
Skim around the crystal Flood:
Then in wanton Circlets rove,
Playful as the God of Love.

COLIN. On the Fair that deck our Isle,
May each Grace and Virtue smile!
And our happy Shepherds prove
Days of Ease, and Nights of Love.

Exeunt omnes.
A Dance of Shepherds, etc. This Song is sung by Dorylas, in the First Scene of
the Second Part, after the Words -- At Eight, precisely, I Will my Suit renew;
and was by mistake omitted.
AIR.
How happy's the Lover whose Cares are no more;
Who bids an Adieu to all Sorrow!
My Griefs are all hushed, and my Torments are over,
For I shall be happy tomorrow.
Each flow'ret of Spring that enamels the Ground,
From you every Charm seems to borrow;
Then who will so blessed or so happy be found,
As I with my Daphne tomorrow.
I never am happy but when in your Sight;
Your Smiles are the Cure of all Sorrow:
Remember, dear Daphne, your Promise tonight;
And I shall be happy tomorrow.
FINIS.

