MORE WAYS THAN ONE, A COMEDY, AS ACTED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN.
By MRS. COWLEY.

LONDON: PRINTED BY J. DAVIES, CHANCERY LANE, FOR T. EVANS, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
MDCCLXXXIV.

DEDICATION.
FLY, comic scenes! where distant Ganges laves
Hindostan's golden shores, with hallowed waves;
Where palms gigantic rear their tufted heads,
And nature in colossal vegetation spreads,
Where rich ananas court the Indian's eye,
And groves of citrons fan the fev'rish sky,
Where rattling canes around the riv'lets play,
And the centennial aloe drinks the day!
In their deep shades bid Lucidorus smile,
His heavy sense of distant hours beguile.
Bid him not think, because I gaily write,
That heavy hours to him, to me, are light;
My native spirits, bounding from repose,
Bear me, unwilling, where Castalia flows.
I love to weep, love the soft feast of grief,
Court mournful thoughts, nor ever wish relief; --
Sadness I woo, yet still the phantom flies,
And joy seduces, whilst I ask for sighs.
But Hymen frowns, and joy no longer cheers,
Weeping, I sink -- Thalia drinks my tears:
He tears my heart; she my rapt soul inspires;
He chills with grief; she fills me with her fires.
Thus, Lucidorus! pass my distant hours --
By turns subdued, the slave of rival powers;
And thus has nature in my little frame
Still various been, and variously the same.
My heart so keenly feels, 'twere death to live,
Did not bright spirits its strong sense relieve.
Through THESE capricious, desultory, gay,
As though I felt not, glides the unconscious day;
Through THIS I droop, I sadden, and complain,
Dragging, with pensive steps, life's lengthening chain.
In blithesome mood "More Ways than One" had birth,
Offspring of brilliant morns, and eves of mirth;
The laughing muse in sprightliest vein was by,
And "quips, and cranks," lay lurking in her eye.
O! may her spirit from its pages dart,
Dance over your nerves, and live within your heart!
H. C.

PROLOGUE.
BY A CLERGYMAN.
SPOKEN BY MR. BONNER, IN THE CHARACTER OF MERCURY. Enter hastily from the
upper end of the stage, as if just alighted. SOME eau de luce! Your fans, dear
ladies, pray!
Strait from Parnassus -- it is a devilish way!
I might have strode our Pegasus's back,
But the poor devil's grown so mere a hack;
So often called upon -- taught such strange paces,
That altered woefully, alack, his case is!
In former times, but once or twice a year
The fiery steed was summoned to appear;
Then in elegiac pas grave seen dancing,
Or in a comedy-curvet came prancing:
A tragedy each spring, a birthday ode,
Was all his business on the Muse's road:
But now, such hurrying, helter-skelter work --
Each cart-horse moves with a genteeler jirk;
So -- in a word, your patience not to abuse,
We Have sent our Pegasus to learn of Hughes.
My business here? -- Plainly and flatly this --
To beg your Honors not to frown or hiss.
Thalia sent me, and it makes me sad,
For "enter nous, (says I) the thing is bad."
"Tut, fool!" the Muse replies -- "this powder take,
"Long I Have reserved it for a last dear stake --
"This powder take -- dear Mercury, be quick" --
Here it is -- a mighty spell, in this slim stick.
Scarce had she left me, when Melpome came --
"Jove's Messenger, (says she) I Am in a flame!
"I know where Thal' has sent you -- never sham it,
"But bribe 'em, God of Thieves! bribe 'em to damn it!"
"No, Madam, damn me, if I do!" I cried --
She aimed a blow, I bowed, and hither hied.
Now for my spell --
[Blows some powder out of his caduceus. There it is -- I see it spread!
It Is felt in every heart -- in every head!
Now shall you fancy character and wit;
Taste in the boxes, humor in the pit.
You Will fancy, friends, that it is so droll and funny --
[To the upper gallery. And you, that you have some substance for your money:
[To the gallery. But should the charm dissolve ever the play ends,
Oh! for Thalia's sake, be yet its friends!
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
BELLAIR, MR. LEWIS. CARLTON, MR. WROUGHTON. SIR MARVEL MUSHROOM, MR. EDWIN.
EVERGREEN, MR. WILSON. DOCTOR FEELOVE, MR. QUICK. LE GOUT, MR. WEWITZER. DAVID,
MR. FEARON. DOCTOR'S SERVANT, MR. STEVENS. LAWYER'S CLERK, MR. THOMPSON.
STRANGER, MR. JONES. MISS ARCHER, MISS YOUNG. ARABELLA, MRS. KEMBLE. MISS
JUVENILE, MRS. WILSON. LODGING MISTRESS, MISS PLATT.


MORE WAYS THAN ONE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Mr. EVERGREEN's Enter DAVID, preceded by a Lawyer' Clerk. CLERK. HAS your
master breakfasted?


DAVID. Preakfasted? -- Yes, Sir! Though we live at the court end of the town,
we have prought up all our Welsh customs. Our master hates Lonton manners, and
Lonton laties. What is your pusiness, goot Sir!


CLERK. A business he will probably like, though it may concern a London lady.
Acquaint him that the writings are engrossed, and that I have brought them, to
fill up the blanks, and sign.


DAVID. Yes, Sir; -- please to sit, Sir [going]. The writings imposs'd, and the
planks to -- What was it, Sir? I must have it wort for wort, for my master is
as exact as Shrewspury clock.


CLERK. Acquaint him, friend, that the writings -- the marriage articles, are
ready. I have brought them from Counselor Bouquet's, to insert the names, and
sign and seal.


[Exit DAVID, repeating the message. CLERK. Now, in the fashionable course of
things, how long may it be before I shall draw up the articles of separation
for this young couple? It sometimes falls out for the good of the profession,
that the happy pair see but one Christmas together. Nay, I have more than once
in my time, engrossed the articles of marriage and separation with the same
goose quill.

So, here comes the father of the bridegroom, to pore over the writings, I
suppose. Come, good, wary Sir; if you don't quicken your motions, the young
gentleman will excuse your cares; -- every movement of that cane speaks a
week's delay.


Enter Mr. EVERGREEN. EVERG. Tell Miss Archer to come to me by-and-by. So, Mr.
Goose-quill -- what -- a -- are they quite ready?


CLERK. Quite ready, Sir; -- the names only are wanting.


EVERG. Well, you may add the names in the next room; but I shall not sign 'till I
have looked your parchments cantiously over. No loop-holes for cavils -- no
expressions that will bear ingenious explanations. Defend me from the ingenuity
of lawyers!


CLERK. You will find all clear, Sir. What are the names?


EVERG. That of the lady is Arabella Melville; -- mine you know.


CLERK. Yes, Sir; it is Evergreen; but the gentleman's --


EVERG. The gentleman's!


CLERK. Yes, Sir -- your son's --


EVERG. My son's!! -- my son's!!


CLERK. Yes, Sir, I know it is Evergreen, junior; but the Christian name. I am
sorry to be troublesome; John, Charles -- Sir? Henry? George?


EVERG. Why, thou pen-cutter! art thou come to insult me? My son! Evergreen,
junior! Why, Sir, I am Evergreen, junior, minor, and major; there is but one
Evergreen in the world, and I am he.


CLERK. Sir, I humbly crave pardon. Are you then the bridegroom?


EVERG. Yes, Sir. Timothy Evergreen, Esquire, of Rook Hall, in the County of
Salop. The bridegroom -- aye, to be sure I am. Go, Mr. Feathertip, and leave
the blanks as they are -- I can fill them up. -- [Exit Clerk.] Did ever see
such a puppy, David?


DAVID. Never, Sir; -- not to know that your Honor was the pride! I am sure
one shall not see a livelier, puxomer pride in all --


EVERG. Pride! Bridegroom -- Taffy!


DAVID. Got a mercy, Sir! Well, then, the pridegroom; and as for the
pridegroomess, she is the sweetest, most innocent, modestest --


EVERG. Aye, aye, I know how to choose. -- Did you tell my young plague, Miss
Archer, to come to me?


DAVID. I tit inteet, Sir; and she bit me carry my Welsh face town stairs again
in a minute; for that it always made her preakfast sit uneasy.


EVERG. Aye, those women who have fine fortunes, and fine lovers, think they
have a right to insult all the world. -- She cannot spare even me -- me, who am
her natural guardian, and fifteenth cousin.


DAVID. Laws, Sir, she makes no more of you than if you were an olt woman,
insteat of an ancient shentleman.


EVERG. An ancient gent -- Oh! in point of family, you mean. Yes, yes, -- but
this is the last day of her triumph here; I would'nt have her another week in
my house, if --


DAVID. Hush, Sir! here she comes; -- and her eyes full of mischief.


[Miss ARCHER entering.] Miss ARCHER. Where is my guardian -- Oh, my sweet
guardian!


EVERG. Sweet me, no sweets! I have sent five messages to your Ladyship this
morning, ere I could have the honor of an interview.


Miss ARCHER. My wise Guardian, then: it was to prepare you a present, my wise
guardian, that I staid -- a marriage present!


EVERG. A present, hey! What is it? what is it?


Miss ARCHER. You are to be married in a day or two, I find, to a young and
beautiful girl -- it is a present suited to such a bridegroom.


EVERG. Let me see it!


Miss ARCHER. Shut your eyes then.


[She goes behind him, and puts on a fool's cap with bells.] EVERG. What the
devil is it? a wedding nightcap?


Miss ARCHER. Yes, a night and day cap -- it is yours for ever.


[Holding his hands, whilst he shakes his head to get rid of it.] EVERG. I Will
teach thee to laugh, Taffy, in a moment. Let go my hands. Take it off, Taf! or
I Will make thy sides shake to another tune.


[David snatches the cap, and runs off. Miss ARCHER. Now, are you not a most
ungrateful guardian, to slight my gifts?


EVERG. Miss Archer!

[sternly.]
Miss ARCHER. Mr. Evergreen!

[gruffly.]
EVERG. Young woman, you must attend to me.


Miss ARCHER. Young man, I will.


EVERG. I am, as you say, to be married in a day or two.


Miss ARCHER. David! bring back the cap.


EVERG. I have told you these six months to provide yourself with another home;
-- you now have but six hours to do it in.


Miss ARCHER. Why?


EVERG. Because I would not have my young innocent wife infected by your
manners.


Miss ARCHER. My manners, Sir -- What better fate could happen to her? Is she
pretty?


EVERG. As a young cherub.


Miss ARCHER. Then I Will teach her to captivate the whole town. Why, I, Sir -- I
am not so handsome -- that is, not so extremely handsome; yet, with my manners,
I am every where the object.


EVERG. But she shall be an object no where.


Miss ARCH. But she shall; I Will carry her with me all over the world; I Will
teach her the equestrian bow in Hyde Park, and how to dart through the crowd in
the coffee-room at the Opera. She shall learn --


EVERG. She shall learn, that, of all her mischievous hoity-toity sex, you are
the last she is to know; and I Will dismiss every servant, that she may never
hear your name.


Miss ARCHER. I Will be her bridemaid, and, before she has been your wife six
hours, give her more longings for laces, diamonds, feathers, and fops, than can
be gratified in six years.


EVERG. Huh! -- h! Why the devil do you not marry yourself, and plague some
other man. You have fools enough to choose from -- Marry! you have my consent.


Miss ARCHER. But I want that of a much more important personage.


EVERG. Whose?


Miss ARCHER. My own. I shall not give up the right of making conquests yet; --
when my time comes to retire from the scene of action, I Will pick out the most
constant of my adorers, go gravely with him to church, drive soberly to the
seat of his ancestors, grow a dutiful wise, study family receipts and made
wines; and when I have the honor of seeing your young widow with her new
husband, we'll drink to your memory in a cup of cowslip of my own brewing

[court' seying].
EVERG. Seek new lodgings, Madam.


Miss ARCHER. I shall not, indeed, Sir!


EVERG. My house is my own, Madam!

[ferociously.]
Miss ARCHER. And my guardian is my own, Sir! [imitating.] Are you not my own
dear, sweet guardian, and are you not going to have a sweet wife, and to be a
sweet simpleton, at the sweet age of sixty? Oh, my sweet, poor -- poor, dear
guardian! ha, ha, ha!


[Exit. EVERG. Drink to my memory in wine of her own brewing! -- I Will bribe
some disbanded Ensign to carry her off, and make her glad to drink small beer
of her own brewing.


[Exit. SCENE, Doctor FEELOVE's. Enter SERVANT, looking at a list. SERVE. Let me
see -- one, two, three, four. Well, four new ones every morning, considering
the season has unhappily proved so healthy, would do pretty well. I must call
the doctor -- it is time he was out of his study, -- oh, here he comes, --
seemingly in a passion.


Enter FEELOVE from the Flat, with several printed Bills in his Hand. FEELOVE.
What are the nation about? What are the parliament about? Is this to be borne?
-- Here Is a collection! -- Every morning an inundation of new quacks. Here Is a
fellow cures the gout by injecting volatiles through your ear; -- here is another
freezes a fever by artificial snow, which he produces from the congealed
perspiration of the patient; -- and this, purifies the blood from all
disorders, by the smell of mushroom juice, philosophically prepared. Why, what
is to become of the regular practitioner, if these fellows are suffered to go
on? What, I say, are the parliament about?


SERVE. Considering, Sir.


FEELOVE. Considering! tax 'em! tax 'em! -- The quacks shall be taxed. Have I
been sent for to any new patients today?


SERVE. Yes, Sir; lady Juniper's dropsy has become troublesome again -- she
expects you at eleven. Mr. Calipash has a surfeit fever, and Mrs. Langrish
hopes you will call in the course of the morning.


FEELOVE. Mr. Calipash a surfeit fever -- hum! with the help of bark and
aromatics, it may be prolonged three weeks, without injury to the patient. --
As to old lady Juniper, frequent visits will be useful, -- for in one tapping
more she will come to the dregs; and for my friend, Mrs. Langrish, if I cannot
prevail on her to prate less, she will not last me another spring. -- That woman
will talk two hours without breathing, to describe the effects of an emetic;
and, if I did not lower her now and then by a gentle cathartic, she would evaporate
through the lingual organs, like air through a cracked bladder.


SERVE. I had like to have forgot -- Mr. Bellair is coming, Sir!


FEELOVE. Coming! No, poor young fellow, he is going -- he is going! there!
there is the end of the life of a man of pleasure -- it must be very unpleasant
to be a man of pleasure. Nothing could ever prevail on me to be a man of
pleasure. -- Oh the temptations that I have withstood, from black eyes and
gray, from tall and short!


SERVE. I have often thought, Sir, -- with submission -- that the gentlemen of
the wig go through more temptations than people are aware of.


FEELOVE. Aye, aye, -- there are Joseph's in the faculty, I can promise ye. Oh!
the white hands that I have seen put out between the sarcenet curtains, with
pulse disordered only by too much health! Oh the bright eyes that I have seen
on snowy pillows! Oh the -- but come, the faculty's great faculty is that of
keeping secrets -- I say no more. Did Mr. Bellair crawl up stairs last night?


SERVE. No, Sir; I could not persuade him, when he found Miss Arabella was alone.


FEELOVE. Aye, he abhors women now -- the sight of a young woman throws him
into a catalepsy. I have seen him faint only at the touch of Arabella's hand,
when she has been chaffing his temples with spirits of hartshorn.


SERVE. Yes, Sir. I have sometimes thought he had been bit by some mad woman,
and so had a sort of hydrophobia toward the sex. Here Is somebody coming.

[looking through the wing.]
FEELOVE. Ah! I see who it is -- you may go.


[Exit Servant. Enter EVERGREEN. EVERG. Good morning to ye Doctor! Doctor
Feelove, good morning! How are your pulse to day?


FEELOVE. Pho! a physician never thinks about his pulse, any more than a lawyer
about his conscience; the pocket of the one, and the constitution of the other,
both improve by the neglect.


EVERG. Then why do you feel your patient's pulse?


FEELOVE. One cannot do less for a guinea.


EVERG. Well, here are the parchments, [taking them from his bosom] here they
are! Nothing but names wanting, and sums.


FEELOVE. Names, and sums, why are they wanting?


EVERG. Why, that one may be clear. Your niece has thirty thousand pounds; and
you agree that she shall be mine on paying you one-third for your consent.


FEELOVE. One half.


EVERG. No, -- one-third. I am sure ten thousand pounds for a simple aye is
very well; we know a place, where they would say aye for half the money.


FEELOVE. Come, don't libel your betters, till you are poor, and want a
pension. As to our affair, consider every thing. You know I boarded Arabella,
with two sisters, at a village in Cornwall, who could teach her nothing but her
sampler; the sole employment of her life, for sixteen years, has been her
needle, with the occasional reliefs of making seed-cake, and stewing codlings.


EVERG. I know all that -- I know all that.


FEELOVE. Yes, you know, but you don't draw the inference. Let me tell you that
a girl who cannot write, who never heard of Point or Brussels; whose only game
at cards is beggar my neighbor; and who thinks the Playhouse, Ranelagh, and
Vauxhall, the three great turnpikes to the devil, is a better fortune with
fifteen, than a town bred miss with thirty thousand pounds.


EVERG. Well, well, it is in vain to argue. Here take the parchments, -- fill up
the blanks, and write your name. Shall I see my little Bell?


FEELOVE. To be sure. Call down my Niece. Tell her my Lord Penmanmeaur is here.


EVERG. How shall we manage when she finds that I am not a lord, and that she
will not be a ladyship.


FEELOVE. Pho! that is easily managed with such a novice. Tell her that a
peerage, like the parliament, lasts but seven years, and that your time is up.
Here she comes! so, Arabella, here is his lordship.


ARABELLA Enters. EVERG. My pretty Bell, my pretty Bell! why so sad? -- on the
verge of riding under your own coronet, -- why so sad?


ARAB. I am always sad, I think. They told me, when I left Cornwall, I was
coming to London to be very happy, but indeed I was happier there. In the
mornings I rambled in the woods, and used to listen to the sweet birds till
they made me weep; -- in the evenings I walked by moonlight. -- Oh! how I love
moonlight walks! with the distant village sounds dying on the ear, till, like
the soft shades of the flowers, they could hardly be distinguished.


EVERG. Why, you may have moonlight in London, when it is not foggy; and
sounds of all sorts.


ARAB. But my uncle never suffers me to stir.


FEELOVE. No, to be sure -- not till you are married.


EVERG. No, nor then neither, without your husband.


ARAB. Nor then neither! why they tell me, but I don't care about it, that when
I am married I must pay visits, and receive company, and ride in Hyde Park, and
be always in public, without once thinking of my husband.


EVERG. [apart Doctor! five thousand must be added for that.


FEELOVE. Why, how now, hussy! -- who has been putting these wicked notions
into your head?


ARAB. Why, sure they cannot be wicked, for the Rector's wife and daughters over
the way do so; and go out in fine carriages, and have cards on Sundays.


FEELOVE. Hussy! hussy! that is a Bishop's family -- a parish priest dared not
be so wicked for his ears.


EVERG. Come, doctor, don't be so harsh -- my little pet will be a good girl. I
have convinced her that she was made on purpose to be my wife; and that it will
be the duty of my wife to hate gadding, and particularly to hate all young
fellows.


ARAB. No -- you said particularly those with cockades and gorgets.


EVERG. Did I? -- then I was too slack. They are all the same -- the gorgeted,
the scarf'd, the broad bands, and the narrow bands; if they are young, you must
hate them all -- and if they presume to talk nonsense to you, make me your
secret keeper, and then I shall be able to hold you up, as the exact model of a
perfect wife.


FEELOVE. Yes, and, like other models, it will be very badly copied. But pray,
mistress, in this pretty lesson of yours, where do you find any thing about
your visitings, and gadding about, in the libertine style you were just now
speaking of?


EVERG. No, no; -- no modest woman receives visits from any but relations; nor,
amongst those, from none of a remoter degree than uncles and aunts.


ARAB. What, not a Cousin?


EVERG. Not if it is a male cousin. -- Oh horrid! a male cousin in the family of
a young married woman is a worse monster than a man-tiger.


ARAB. But Mr. Bellair is not my Cousin, -- so I may let him come without any
harm: -- Oh! how I shall like to support his poor aching head on my bosom; and,
when he is fainting, to give him cordials, and weep over him till he recovers.

[aside.
FEELOVE. What are you saying, Arabella?


ARAB. I was only conning my lesson, Sir; that part of it is so pretty, that,
whenever I think on it, I sigh, and feel so melancholy! -- and yet it is a
melancholy sweeter than all the pleasure I have ever tasted.


[Exit. EVERG. Aye, go, go! that is my pretty Bell; get it all into your head,
and never fear but it will influence your actions.


FEELOVE. I must leave ye, or my patients will be impatient.


EVERG. Well, I shall see you again in the evening; meantime look over the
parchments.


[Exit. FEELOVE. I will. Why, now I have been a fool; I have made the bargain
more favorable on his side than I needed. I really believe he would have taken
her with the ten thousand only. I Will try to start some difficulty in the
business. -- I hate to be over-reached.


[Exit with the parchments. SCENE, CARLTON's CARLTON and BELLAIR at Breakfast.
CARL. More Ways than One indeed! and your way is most singular! imported with
you, I suppose, from Leyden. -- Assume sickness to captivate a blooming girl!
such a way of love-making could never have occurred but in a college.


BELL. My sickness was assumed not to captivate, but to get introduced to her.
You have often heard that pity is sister to love, and I have proved it so, in
the heart of the gentle Arabella.


Enter a Servant, speaking to BELLAIR. SERVE. Your servant has been here, Sir,
to say that Doctor Feelove requests you not to call till one, as he is obliged
to make a wide circuit this morning.


BELL. Very well. Bid him let my wrapping gown be ready, with my pale
complexion, and all other necessaries. [Exit servant] I must have a wider gown;
in that I am not sufficiently screen'd; who, but a Doctor, could believe that
these limbs belong to a fellow in the last stage of an atrophy.


CARL. Oh, they are so used to wonders, you may make them believe any thing;
but have you never yet found a moment to convince the Lady, that you have as
much health and assurance as any man in town?


BELL. Never, -- nor do I know that I yet wish it, for I should then lose the
luxury of her tender assistances, the soft pressure of her hand, and the tear
dropping from her blue eye on my cheek, whilst she believes me in a state of
insensibility -- How can I bear to give up all that?


CARL. Faith, I don't know.


BELL. Then to hear her sigh, and ask her uncle, in the teaderest accents, "if
nothing can be done for me?" I swear, a direct avowal of her passion would not
give me such transport. How charming! to witness nature's genuine feelings in a
beautiful girl, instead of those factitious ones imposed by education.


CARL. Her mode of education has been strange, sure! do you find nothing
repulsive in it?


BELL. Repulsive! quite the reverse -- it has a thousand charms for me. Her mind
is naturally so elegant and ingenuous, that the task of polishing it can be but
slight, and that charming task will be mine! I shall be her enamored Abelard!


CARL. Is it so very charming to be a schoolmaster?


BELL. What a phrase! [impatiently] To unite the characters of lover and
instructor, seems to me the most interesting of human situations.

"What joy to wind along the cool retreat,
"To stop, and gaze on Delia as I go;
"To mingle sweet discourse with kisses sweet,
"And teach my lovely scholar all I know!"
So sung, you know, one of our first poets.


CARL. One of our first poets is very welcome to have sung, or said it. But
give me a woman whose soul is all informed, and alive to every enjoyment of
taste and feeling! I would rather my wife should join in conversation with
grace, than shrink from it, overpowered by her blushes; and that she should
make the men afraid of her wit, rather than allure them by her simplicity.


BELL. You speak as though you knew such a woman?


CARL. Perhaps I may -- but of that hereafter.


BELL. Hereafter be it then, for now I am impatient to be gone. I must practice
an hour, before I shall reduce my pipe to the shrill tone suited to my
appearance; -- you would not insure my life three days, if you should see me
when metamorphosed.


CARL. Nor your understanding for three hours, now that I know the cause of it
-- but adieu! in a week you will be recovered.


[Exeunt at opposite doors. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE Doctor FEELOVE's. ARABELLA sitting at a Table, with Paper and Pencil.
ARABELLA. No, that will not do [taking up a slip of paper] -- Yes it will -- no!
it is not half so soft and pretty. [retouches it] There now! that little touch
at the corner of the mouth has made it clear another thing. Oh, how happy those
ladies are that can draw! -- if I could draw, I Would make his sweet face so white;
and his eye should be just lifted up to me, as it is sometimes; and between his
lips I would see a little bit of his white teeth, and --


Enter FEELOVE. FEELOVE. Heyday! what is she about! [peeping] What now,
Arabella! writing?


ARAB. Oh, no; you know I cannot write -- I wish I could.


FEELOVE. Wish you could! why? to enlarge your sphere of mischief? pity there is
a goose-quill in the kingdom, except those in the hands of the faculty, the
clergy, and the law; -- though, as to the law, I believe, there would be no
great harm, if their's were taken away too. But what use, pray, would you make
of a pen?


ARAB. Oh, I Would write -- I Would write down a song that I have been making out of my
own head, but I cannot finish it, because I cannot write. It begins --

Soft are my gentle Jockey's looks,
And lily pale his face. --

FEELOVE. "Lily pale his face." -- Aye, that most young men can boast of --
rosy cheeks are as scarce now in England, as rose bushes in Scotland. Let me
see that paper -- what is this? a flower pot?


ARAB. No, it is Jockey. [very artlesly.]


FEELOVE. Jockey! why thou have a good pretty notion, girl, enough! -- some
fancy there -- it might take a man a good while to explain it. But come,
[throwing down the paper, which she picks up, and puts in her bosom.] I want to
talk to you a little. Here will be the poor young man presently -- Mr. Bellair.


ARAB. Oh dear, will be? [joyfully.


FEELOVE. Now you know he is dying.


ARAB. Is he. [sadly.


FEELOVE. Therefore we must make hay while the sun shines.


ARAB. The sun will not shine, when he dies. [aside.


FEELOVE. He has a good fortune, and neither chick nor child. He must leave it
to somebody you know, and most likely it will be to those who are most kind to
him; now I would have you show every kind of decent civility to him, that a
modest young woman may show.


ARAB. I am sure I always do. I would lay down my life to bate his pains;
sometimes they are very bad, and then he grasps my hand so hard! -- but I am
not angry with him.


FEELOVE. No, to be sure; he is sick, poor man -- if he was well 'twould be
quite another thing -- never let a man in health press your hand. But, as I was
saying, I have no doubt but his gratitude will secure us some acknowledgement
at his death.


ARAB. Oh, dear uncle! you had better secure an acknowledgement for saving his
life.


FEELOVE. Yes, but when people's lives are saved, they seldom think of an
acknowledgement; -- if you can get into a sick man's will, it is safer to let
him go.


Enter SERVANT. SERVE. Mr. Bellair is coming up, Sir.


FEELOVE. Oh, let me assist him. [runs out] Stay, good Sir!


ARAB. Dear, dear, how weak he is! [looking through the wing.] But I declare he
is not so pale -- no not half so pale as he was. Oh! how I should love my uncle
if he would recover him -- I Would give all I have in the world!


Enter BELLAIR, supported by FEELOVE, and the SERVANT. FEELOVE. Lean on me,
good Mr. Bellair, lean harder! come, think me your nurse, as well as your
Doctor -- you know we rank with old women.


BELL. [Panting] You, are kind -- hooh! very kind. Your stairs -- hooh! have
exhausted too much of my wasting breath.


FEELOVE. Ay, ay, all our breaths are wasting; but come, take courage -- you
may have more years before ye, than I have yet, perhaps.


BELL. Yes, I guess I may; or Nature will play me a slippery trick. [aside.]
Pray support me to that sopha. [advances a step or two, then stops short.] That
young woman there again! Oh, Doctor! do you not know how baneful to me, is the
sight of a young woman?


ARAB. Dear, how can he hate me so? it will break my heart. [aside.]


FEELOVE. Sir, my niece is useful in the room; you are sometimes apt to be
faintish, and maidservants are so unhandy -- But if she offends you, she shall
go. -- Go, Arabella.


ARAB. Well, I can stay at the door, and see him through the crevice -- Sure
that cannot offend him! -- [pensively.]


BELL. No, let her stay -- let her stay! Going out of the world, as I am, it is
my duty to conquer aversions. I will even let her sit by me -- Sit down, young
lady!


[They both sit on the sopha.] FEELOVE. Where are your drops, Arry?


ARAB. Here they be.


[She takes them from her pocket; he seizes the bottle and her hand together.]
FEELOVE. Don't take too much of 'em, Sir -- don't keep them too long at your
nose.


BELL. Oh, they revive me beyond expression!


ARAB. Yes, Sir, they are very good drops. Dear, how tight he holds my hand!
[aside.]


BELL. My spirits are very low; and I have odd fancies, Doctor -- very odd
fancies!


FEELOVE. Aye, Sir, but you should always oppose odd fancies. I knew an old
lady, who fancied herself pursued by Death -- She swore he should not have her,
and actually contended with the phantasm so long, that she vanquished him. That
very obstinacy which sent three husbands out of the world, kept her in it,
contrary to the predictions of the wisest heads in Warwicklane.


BELL. But I have a stranger fancy than that, Doctor. -- I have a fancy that I
shall live, and be some day or other a hale, stout young fellow.


FEELOVE. [aside.] That Is a strange fancy, indeed!


BELL. And that many beings may yet owe life to me.


FEELOVE. I have no doubt of it, Sir..... Beings of the reptile kind.

[aside.]
Enter SERVANT. SERVE. Sir, here is a gentlewoman, very earnest to consult you.


FEELOVE. I Will be with her in a moment. Will you give me leave?


BELL. Go, go, good Doctor, I will try to recover myself, to tell you my new
symptoms, when you return. -- But pray don't hurry the gentlewoman.


[Exit FEELOVE. BELLAIR turns and gazes on ARABELLA.] BELL. Oh, angel!


ARAB. Is he going to pray? how fiery his eyes look! [aside.]...... Pray, Sir,
quiet yourself; rest your head a little on me -- I fancy it is in pain.


[He rests his head on her shoulder, with his arm round her.] BELL. Oh, Epicures
and voluptuaries!


ARAB. He talks Latin! they say people do so, when they are possessed.

[aside.]
BELL. No, this is too much! [lifting his head.] I will declare myself at once.


ARAB. Dear Sir, if you have any sins upon your mind, the sooner you declare
them the better -- it may make your conscience easy.


BELL. Yes, I will declare -- Oh, most enchanting --


[drops on one knee; Feelove enters, and he lets himself fall on the floor.]
ARAB. Oh!


FEELOVE. Bless me, he is fainting! -- aye, he is far gone indeed, poor man! --
Very odd! [taking his hand.] His pulse is good, though he is so bad.


ARAB. When he fell he was going to declare some crime to me --


FEELOVE. Some crime!


ARAB. Yes, and it seemed to overpower his conscience so, the moment he began
to speak, that he could not bear it.


FEELOVE. Aye, he has been but bad, I doubt, but now he pays for all. Come,
Sir, cheer ye, cheer ye! [helping him up.] I will not leave ye again; I Will sit by
ye, if its an hour; -- the very sight of a Doctor is better, sometimes, than
physic.


BELL. Oh, Sir, you are very kind! but I believe I shall not be the better for
you now. In the afternoon, if you will permit me, I shall call again.


FEELOVE. I Will go to you.


BELL. Not for the world! -- I give you too much trouble. The air of this part
of the town, so near the Park, revives me -- Permit me to come as often as I
can; I hope I shall not be long in this sad way. Pray, Doctor!


[putting a bank note in his hand.] FEELOVE. Sir, it is needless.


[putting it in his pocket.] BELL. The young lady's drops are very good. About
six I Will be here again -- you will let her be in the way.


FEELOVE. That she shall. Come, Sir, lean on me.


Exeunt. Bellair gazing on Arabella.] ARAB. Dear, how he looks at me! it
thrills my bosom through and through! Sure he can have no very great crime on
his mind -- I am sure he never can have been wicked -- I Will endeavor to
comfort him when he comes again. Meantime, I Will go into my own room, and try to
finish this. [taking the paper from her bosom.] I think I can make it look a
little as he did just now, -- and then -- then, if he dies -- [dropping a
tear.] I can look at this, and think of him!


[Exit. SCENE, the Horse Guards. Enter CARLTON, followed by BELLAIR in a Chair.
BELL. [to the Chairman.] Stop -- stop! Carlton! -- [gets out of the chair, and
throws in his gown.] There! carry it home, and call for me at six.


CARL. Oh, oh! what returned from the Doctor's?


BELL. This moment left the house; -- this moment left -- Oh, Carlton! -- I
shall be there again at six -- My time will hang on my hands till then -- how
shall I kill the heavy hours?


CARL. If you really want to murder them, go home, and send for a dozen of the
reforming reports: if you want only to forget them, go with me.


BELL. Where?


CARL. To call on Sir Marvel Mushroom. I pay him a visit once in six months,
stay six minutes; and laugh, after I have left him, six hours.


BELL. Who the devil is this Sir Marvel, who is such a specific for ennui?


CARL. Been in London a month, and not know Sir Marvel! Why, Sir Marvel was the
other day a grocer, or an ironmonger, or a cheesemonger, I don't remember which
-- near one of the city gates, I don't remember where.


BELL. What is he now?


CARL. Now! a man of figure, Sir -- a man of expense. To be seen every morning
in Hyde Park, on a little Galloway, followed by two servants on a brace of
hunters. Every noon in a phaeton, making the circuit of St. James's-street,
Pall Mall, and the Hay Market; and every night, in every place where a ticket
or effrontery can admit him.


BELL. Well, but where is the peculiarity of all this?


CARL. Oh, all that is nothing -- the captivating part of the Knight is to come.
At the youthful age of forty some relation left him a large estate: -- He threw
off his apron, drove to his domains in a post chaise and six, roasted bullocks,
broached hogsheads, etc. etc. was next year sheriff for the county, and carried
up an address -- This accounts for his title.


BELL. Ha, ha, ha! Well!


CARL. His Honor now found it necessary to read, on the penalty of being
silent wherever he went -- to which his loquacity could not submit. He
accordingly buys every author on every subject; peruses poetry, tactics,
philosophy, botany, cookery, agriculture; and, to show that he can read, is for
ever quoting.


BELL. Tiresome enough!


CARL. Not at all -- as he manages, it is most pleasant; for beginning to read
so late in life, with the advantage of a very bad memory, he makes the happiest
mistakes imaginable. His head contains an olio of arts and sciences, so mingled
and confused that he constantly speaks of one thing for another; and if Boil
or Clarendon are mentioned, ten to one but he will give ye an old catch as a
specimen of their talents.


BELL. Ha, ha, ha!


CARL. His French valet assists in furnishing the inside of his head, as well
as to frize the out, and always gives his master the theme for the day.


BELL. Precious! this fellow must be excellent to kill time with -- let us go
directly.


CARL. With all my heart -- he receives a new acquaintance as eagerly as a new
book; and whether you are in calf-skin or morocco, it will make no difference
to Sir Marvel.


[Exeunt. SCENE, a Dressing Room. [SIR MARVEL at his toilet, attended by LE
GOUT, who is powdering his hair with a puff.] MARV. Depechez, monsieur --
depechez! I am impatient.


LE GOUT. Ah, monsieur! de Inglis be tous jours so, and for dat reason dey will
never do credit to dear valets. A French general spend as much time in taking
de powder in his hair, as in direction de powder to his enemy; and would rader
live, dan be found dead in the field of battle ill dress.


MARV. Aye, but now, you know, monsieur, the French are going to follow us --
we are all the go in Paris. Next war I dare say your generals will head their
armies in buckskin, and bobwigs; and if they are found dead on the field of
battle, it will be with British balls in their bodies. (starting up) Have done!
you have been as long raising the siege of that curl, as the Goths were in
taking Cuba.


LE GOUT. Nay den, monsieur, I will ave done; but pardon me, monsieur! it does
use me very ill; I will live vid no master who so disgrace me.


MARV. Disgrace you!


LE GOUT. Oui, sans doubt, de disgrace be mine. De quality will not say of you
-- "Oh, what Burgeois be dat! ah, mon Dieu, quelle beat!" dey will say who
dressed dat man? he be as mal adroit as a Flemish boor -- send him a new valet,
he be dress by a Dutch barber." My reputation be concerned, monsieur.


MARV. Why now you know, Le Gout, I take great care of your reputation, and
form myself entirely on your documents. You have lived so long with dukes and
lords, and noble cricketers, and gentlemen chessplayers, that you know the dash
of high life exactly; and if I had a son, I would prefer you to any French
governor in London.


LE GOUT. Oh, as to dat, monsieur, I would not be French governor to any ting.
Running about after little master -- sitting behind him at de play, and vid my
back to de horses in de vis-a-vis, and be at de bottom of de table when de
chaplain ave leave of absence; -- no, no, some French governors dat I know ave
taken up de powder puff again, and prefer dear original occupation of valet, to
de pleasure of whipping master for von hundred a year, and being tied to his
jacket, like de keys to de housekeeper's girdle.


MARV. Well but, monsieur, have you thought of a subject for me to day -- You
cannot conceive how brilliant I was at Mrs. Flanconade's yesterday. She thought
to pose me once, and interrupted me with (speaking in a thick voice.) "Pray,
Sir Marvel Mushroom, at what time was the Roman republic in it is glory?" Very
good, ma'am, says I -- very good! as though all the world did not know the
republic was in it is greatest luster when Alexander the Great was king at Rome
-- ha, ha, ha! No conceiving how it was enjoyed -- ha, ha, ha!


LE GOUT. Dear monsieur! dear! I be disgrace again. Why Alexander was never
king at Rome, he was king of de Turcs.


MARV. You are right, you are right, Monsieur. The dog is clearly wrong, but I
dare not contradict him.

[aside.
Enter a SERVANT. SERVE. A gentleman, whose name is Pearlash, is below, Sir.


MARV. Pearlash -- Pearlash! oh, I remember; I knew him last year at Brighton.
The son of a soap boiler, Le Gout. What the devil does he want?


SERVE. He only sent up his name, Sir.


MARV. His name! why surely he does not put himself on a visiting foot. Tell
him, I am engaged at present -- some other time --


LE GOUT. Oh, wrong, Monsieur! -- pardon me, quite wrong!


MARV. Why! should I receive him?


LE GOUT. Sans doubt -- receive every body. De great people make all dear power
dat way. In Grosvenor-square, a citizen fend his name to a lord; -- de lord
shrug his shoulders -- "damn de greasy soap boiler -- send him up!" He fly to
receive him, catches his hand -- "My dear Mr. Pearlash, how I am oblige for dis
honeur! -- where have you been dis age? can I do any ting for you? -- make use
of me -- give me de happiness to serve you!"


MARV. Do they condescend so much?


LE GOUT. Condescend! -- pshaw! dat idea is banish de world -- dear is no
condescension. De canaille is de fountain of riches, derefore de lords treat
them vid respect, and tell them of dear majesty: in return, de Canaille, bursting
vid vanity and gratitude, let de Lords drain dear purses, and so bote sides
rest satisfy.


MARV. Enough! Lead the way. [to the Servant.] Le Gout, follow. I Will snatch his
hand, and outdo a duke in the warmth of my embraces.


[Exeunt. Enter CARLTON and BELLAIR, with another Servant. SERVE. Sir Marvel is
just gone down to some company, Sir. -- I Will inform him that you are here.


[Exit. CARL. Was not that the lovely Bab Archer, you bowed to, as we came in?


BELL. It was Miss Archer; but you don't think her handsome?


CARL. Critically so -- perhaps not; but she is more -- she is captivating! Her
voice is melody; and there is elegant mind in every motion.


BELL. Elegant mind, do you call it? I am sure here is is a most insolent one. --
I knew her abroad; and this woman, who in your opinion is made up of melody,
sweetness, and witchery, is the most perverse, the most capricious, the most
proud, the --


CARL. Tut! tut! that is to say, you have been her slave, and a neglected one.


BELL. Faith, there is hardly a man of your acquaintance who will not subscribe
to my opinion of her.


CARL. The strongest proof of her charms, and of her power. I adore her for
being hated by all the men who have had the presumption to sigh for her. There
is a degree of impurity in a woman who smiles on, and listens to, all who
choose to make love to her. When I marry, my wife must bring me an ear as
unessayed as her heart; and the first whispers of love that reach her, must be
from my lips.


BELL. Well, carry your whispers to Miss Archer, kneel, sigh, weep, and -- be
despised!


CARL. Ha, ha, ha!


BELL. What do you laugh at?


CARL. At your conceiving that, with a woman of her character, I should pursue
so beaten a track. No, no; I have resolved to woo her, but it shall be by an
appearance of indifference. I Will set her heart in a blaze by my coldness, and
conquer her with slights.


BELL. Why your way of love making is more singular than mine; but as to its
success, I should as soon believe the floating batteries had more effectually
been attacked by snow balls, than Elliot's red hot bullets.


CARL. A flaming allusion! -- But here comes our Knight. [Enter MARVEL and LE
GOUT.] My dear Sir Marvel, Mr. Bellair begs to be known to you.


MARV. My dear Sir, I do not deserve so great an honor. [Embracing Bellair]
Can I do any thing for you? -- make use of me -- give me the happiness to serve
you.


LE GOUT. Monsieur -- Monsieur! dis is not de way to treat gentlemen. You must
embrace, and make offers of service, only to de canaille.

[apart.]
MARV. Enough! did you come from the country, Mr. Bellair?


BELL. From Leyden.


MARV. Leyden! you came from Leyden -- ah! I remember, that is the place where
they are so famous for lead mines.


BELL. There is no standing this. [to Carlton.] You have good paintings, Sir
Marvel.

[looking round.]
MARV. Yes, I flatter myself I have taste that way. We have moderns who pretend
to paint -- ha, ha! -- save us from modern painters! -- the antique is the
thing! Now, for a portrait painter, there is nobody like that little droll
fellow, Erasmus; he gave us flesh and blood to the life! -- But for a cabinet
piece, give me a Dutch Fair by Scipio Africanus. What is he laughing at? he
behaves very oddly!

[to Carlton.]
CARL. You must excuse him -- unhappily ignorant -- has read nothing.


MARV. Indeed! I Will offer him my library. My dear Sir, you will pardon me; but
one can make no figure without reading. In such a place as Leyden, you can have
had no opportunities -- My library is at your service.


BELL. You do me a most particular favor, Sir Marvel. Well chosen, I am sure it
must be.


MARV. Oh, as to that -- yes, yes, Sir -- aye, Mr. Carlton, you have seen my
library. All the poets from Mecaenas to Shaftsbury. All the dramatic writers of
name -- including Shakespeare, Lycurgus, and Pliny. -- Read well, Sir; and after
you have read, begin to write.


BELL. Write!


MARV. Oh, yes; one is not finished without it -- every body writes. One cannot
put one's head into company without meeting half a dozen ode-writing misses,
and matrons who compose essays -- but satire is my forte.


CARL. What then you write, Sir Marvel.


MARV. Trifles! trifles! There is a thing of mine in the papers today. You
know, for every body knows, Miss Archer?


CARL. Doubtless.


MARV. You know she is the most haughty, affected creature living; and today I
gave her in doggerel -- mark that -- in doggerel; heroic verse would have been
too dignified for the subject. There she is, in the poet's corner, at full
length.


CARL. Satirize Miss Archer! -- surely you have not dared.


MARV. Yes I have. Why not satirize Miss Archer? I satirize myself sometimes,
and answer it again the next day.


CARL. By Heaven! on reflection, it pleases me.


MARV. Besides, to tell you the truth, there is another reason -- Now I shall
surprise ye, I know; -- I hardly expect ye to believe me -- but -- in short,
she has actually refused me!


BELL. Refused you! Nay then, Carlton, you may as well give it up -- You Will
hardly expect to succeed where Sir Marvel has failed.


MARV. Oh, I don't know that -- I don't know that; those capricious women
generally choose the worst -- You know the proverb -- dainty dogs.


CARL. Delicate! So it is revenge, then --


MARV. Yes, revenge -- But I still continue to visit her in a friendly way; for
she is fashionable, and one finds the first dash there: Besides, I have such
goodnature and generosity about me, that I never can be out of humor with
people to their faces.


CARL. In course, you don't mean to acknowledge your satire. But is it very
severe?


MARV. Oh, tears her like a bramble bush.


CARL. Then do me the favor to give me for the author.


MARV. Are you serious?


CARL. Most particularly so: -- In short, I want to be introduced to her, and I
know no better way.


BELL. Tell her he is dying for her -- that is a better way.


CARL. Yes, to be made a fool. Will you oblige me?


MARV. To be sure -- Gad, I shall like such a screen! for I have had the terror
of her fingers before my eyes.


CARL. Go, then, this instant, my dear Sir Marvel; not a moment is to be lost!
Come, Bellair. Let nothing tempt you betray that you are the poet.


[Exeunt. MARV. Never fear! I am not a goose, to betray the Capitol.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III. An Apartment at EVERGREEN's.
Enter Miss JUVENILE, and a SERVANT. Miss JUVENILE. TELL Miss Archer I cannot
stay a minute, I have only brought a newspaper to show her. [exit Serve.] Lud!
lud! how this will gall her! I never read such a piece of abuse in my life. --
I wonder how the author got it in! I have wrote twenty pretty things of this
sort myself; but some wise, grave editor or other, always cropped my laurels. The
next morning the answers to correspondents never failed to inform them that,
"The lines of L. S. were inadmissible;" or, "The Epigram signed Laura wont do
for our Paper;" or "we must desire our fair correspondent Clarissa to learn to
spell, before she pretends to write heroic verse." I wonder really at their
impertinence; -- that a young lady of fashion cannot amuse herself in rhyming a
little about her friends, but they must pretend to judge of the matter!

Miss ARCHER enters. Oh, my dear Miss Archer! do you know that some cruel
wretch here --


Miss ARCHER. Oh, yes, my dear, I know it all; you are the fifteenth lady who
has been here this morning, to inform me of it. Upon my word a newspaper
pasquinade is a mighty good thing -- it makes one's friends remember one.


JUV. [aside,] Deuce take 'em! I thought to have been the first, -- now I don't
know how it touched her.


Miss ARCHER. Why do you muse, my dear?


JUV. Oh, muse -- why I am musing upon the wickedness of people -- to dare --
to be able --


Miss ARCHER. Oh, never think about it. I tell you such things are rather a
distinction -- to be abused in a newspaper is to be ranked with half the
amiable and great characters in existence. Hah! here is another visitant, with
another newspaper! Why my friends are so numerous, they will be obliged to put
forth another impression before noon. Good morning, Sir Marvel Mushroom!


Enter Sir MARVEL. MARV. Dear ma'am, your most devoted! Have you heard of this
scurrilous abuse? -- Oh, yes, you have heard, I see; -- Miss Juvenile is here.


Miss ARCHER. You might have met half your acquaintance here twenty minutes
ago, they are kindly gone to disperse the papers.


Miss JUV. Pray, Sir Marvel, can you guess at the writer?


MARV. Oh, that is not a fair question. What do you think of the lines?


Miss JUV. Pointed to the last degree! witty and severe!


MARV. A'n't they? -- this couplet


[They each read alternately, Miss ARCHER standing between them.] MARVEL.
"Vainly does Molly break six laces,
"Some forms will not yield to leathern traces."

Miss JUV. And this --
"The blushes formed with so much art,"

MARVEL. "The easy swim, the studied start,"

Miss JUV. "The affected --


Miss ARCHER. Nay, pray, good people! have a little compassion!


[She claps a hand before each mouth; they struggle to speak, with their eyes
fixed on the papers; as she removes her hands, they each speak.] MARVEL. --
"Clear starcher!"


Miss JUVENILE. -- "Miss Archer!


MARV. What do you think of it, ma'am?


Miss ARCHER. What is your motive for reading it to me?


MARV. Motive -- motive -- why it is fit every body should know what is said of
them. That great philosopher, Heliogabalus, said the abuses of his enemies were
more serviceable to him than the praises of his friends.


Miss ARCHER. I am quite of that opinion, and wish therefore, to know whom I
have to thank for this service.


MARV. Do you? would you really wish to know him?


Miss ARCHER. Yes, really.


MARV. Shall I bring him to you?


Miss ARCHER. Then you know him?


MARV. Perfectly well. I will not give his name, but if you have any curiosity,
he shall receive your thanks in person this evening.


Miss ARCHER. I should like it above all things. I have spent a life in hearing
flatteries and falsehoods -- let me for once see a man who has the courage to
speak what he thinks. Pardon me for leaving you -- I shall expect you and my
panegyrist at seven.


[Exit. Miss JUV. You see she cannot stand it -- she is finely nettled.


MARV. Yes, yes, she feels it. -- I am not surprised at it.


Miss JUV. I wonder what blockhead wrote it! for, between ourselves, I never
read more wretched stuff.


MARV. Wretched stuff!


Miss JUV. Oh, vile! though I made her believe I thought it all wit and poignancy.


MARV. Why really, Miss Juvenile, I am surprised that people will give opinions
so rashly. Miss, the person who wrote this little morceau is remarkable for his
skill in belles lettres.


Miss JUV. Belles lettres! -- skill in bell metal might do for such lines as
these -- they might be hammered out of any thing.


MARV. Very well, ma'am! very well! I must beg leave to say, that it is not so
agreeable to hear the talents of one's friends slighted.


Miss JUV. Indeed! you are mighty liberal; -- in general it is the most
agreeable treat a friend can have. I wish you would let me know who this friend
is, for whose reputation you are in such pain.


MARV. What do you think of Mr. Carlton?


Miss JUV. What do I think? ha, ha, ha! -- My dear Sir Marvel!


MARV. Nay, if you wont believe me, come this evening and see him here.


Miss JUV. Well, really now, it is surprising! -- I did not think he had
possessed so much ill nature.


MARV. Ill Nature! Let me tell you, Miss Juvenile, private ill nature may be a
public good. To make people's time pass happily is very benevolent, and if it
was not for a little pleasant thing of this sort, now and then in a morning,
people's chocolate would be as dull and infipid as the Ve -- Venetian black
broth.


Miss JUV. Spartan, I fancy you mean.


MARV. Spart -- gad! that is very true; what a ridiculous mistake! -- ha, ha,
ha! Thank ye, Miss -- thank ye. Yes, I remember now, the Venetians were those
who joined the Macedonians in the war against Philip; -- how could I make such
a mistake! -- ha, ha, ha!


Miss JUV. One may as well be quiet -- in trying to help the poor man out, he
gets but the deeper in. (aside). Pray, Sir Marvel, order my chair.


MARV. Yes, ma'am, yes. Venetian! -- how could I make such a mistake?


[Exeunt. SCENE, BELLAIR's Lodgings. Carlton and Bellair arise from a table
with glasses, etc. CARL. And so you really mean to persuade the innocent thing,
that running away with Harry Bellair is the most honorable step she can take?


BELL. At least the happiest; for does she not love me? What is her fate if she
stays? She will be huddled, in less than three days, into a marriage, with a
passion in her heart, adding bitterness to disgust and mortification.


CARL. Where would you place her to be in safety?


BELL. I have a friend in town, the gravity of whose character will be a shield
to here is. I have neglected him since I came from Leyden, but I Will go and make
it up with him this very day. Let that pass -- now to my question; will you
assist in the enlevement?


CARL. If I am not summoned to the adorable Archer. If my scheme there takes
place --


BELL. That Is really too absurd! If she believes you to be the author of that
vile abuse, and invites you, it must be to poison you.


CARL. I don't care with what view it is, if I am but invited; -- I shall be
sure, at least, not to rank with the brilliant captains, the Sir Tommys, and
Sir Neddys, who are received, court'sey'd to, and forgot.


BELL. No, you will certainly be remembered.


CARL. I am convinced that a woman who has been admired all over Europe, and
returns with an untouched heart, is not to be won by flattery, or by stooping
to her power. It Is pride secures her, and her pride must be taken down, before
Love can find a vulnerable place for his darts.


BELL. That will do for a figure --


CARL. Aye, and for a reason too; -- I shall govern myself by it, however.


Enter a Servant to BELLAIR. SERVE. The person you sent for, Sir, is in the
parlour.


BELL. I Will attend him -- excuse me half a moment.


[Exit. Enter a Servant. SERVE. Sir Marvel Mushroom enquires for you, Sir, he
has been at your lodgings, and was directed hither.


CARL. Admit him! admit him! [he enters] My dear Sir Marvel, what news from the
lady?


MARV. Oh, I found her as inflammable as one of Montgolfier's balloons. The
whole town had been with her -- the whole town is mad about my satire!


CARL. Then it is in vain for me to hope for the credit of being it is author --
it is not in mortal wight to lend so much reputation, for half an hour.


MARV. Oh, but you are mistaken -- I disclaimed it -- disclaimed all the glory
-- and she desires this evening to see the incomparable author. -- So you will,
Pyramus like, drive, for one day, the chariot of the Sun.


CARL. Shall I? -- will she see me?


MARV. She pants for an interview: the beauteous Helen was not more desirous of
receiving Leander, when he swam every night-across the Mediterranean. I have
promised to carry you this evening. But be sure you don't give me as the poet,
'till I give the word.


CARL. Nothing can be farther from my design -- You shall gather your laurels
when you please. I prize this mode of introduction so highly, that I know not
how to return the favor.


MARV. Oh, Lord, nothing can be so easy. I hear you have a pretty poetical
quill, and that you sometimes write Latin verses; -- publish a volume, and call
it mine.


CARL. I Will consider it.


MARV. You may throw in a touch of Greek, too. I should learn Greek, for the
pleasure of reading Ovid, but their d -- d crooked characters are so alike,
that one may as well attempt to learn Spanish, of Dutch mackerel.


CARL. My dear friend, I am too impatient to give the time I ought to your
erudition; -- I had rather hold a convention with my tailor and valet than with
Ovid and Horace; and had rather this night be as well dressed as Count Grammont,
than as well read as Doctor Johnson.


[Exit. [Enter BELLAIR and a STRANGER. MARV. Hah, my dear Mr. Bellair! Will you
excuse me; I cannot stay -- I came to call on Mr. Carlton. I have done his
business for him -- He Is going to visit the lady, and he swears he will be as
well dressed as Doctor Johnson.


[Exit. BELL. Then, Sir, you know your business. You are to go to Mr. Feelove's,
and tell him -- But stay, can you weep on occasion?


STRANGE. Oh, yes, Sir, I don't doubt but I can squeeze a tear, upon a pinch.


BELL. Well, squeeze as many as you can; and tell him that your wife is in
extremity at Hampstead, and desires his immediate assistance.


STRANGE. My wife! -- then I Would better not cry, Sir; it will not seem so natural.


BELL. Ha, ha! Well, manage that as you will. -- Here is something for your
ingenuity -- Be sure, at all events you see the Doctor into his chariot, and
give him a direction to some house in Hampstead.


STRANGE. Never fear me -- I humbly thank ye, Sir.


[Exit. BELL. So! having made a clear road for the Doctor, I can fearlesly
pursue my own. My sweet Arabella! in ten minutes I Will be at thy feet.


[Exit. SCENE changes to FEELOVE'S. [EVERGREEN asleep on a sopha, ARABELLA
sitting at work, on a chair. After looking on him, she rises.] ARAB. Oh, how
different it seems when Mr. Bellair is on that sopha! I could sit and look at
him for ever. If he was asleep, I Would take such care that nothing should disturb
him; -- but I don't look at him with any pleasure -- I don't care whether he
wakes or no.


EVERG. [beginning to wake.] Never fear, Doctor, she will be -- [yawning] --
she will be a very good girl.


ARAB. To be sure, I must try to be good; but I shall never be happy, though!

[pensively.]
EVERG. Mind what I say, my pretty Bell -- The young fellows -- the young
fellows are all rogues, villains, and -- heydey! where is the Doctor?


ARAB. He Is gone to Hampstead.


EVERG. Hampstead! Why, how long have I been asleep? Bless me! [looking at his
watch.] It Is six o'clock. -- I must go -- A'n't you sorry, my pretty Bell?


ARAB. No.


EVERG. Not sorry!


ARAB. Why must I be sorry?


EVERG. Because I am going to leave you. When you are my wife you must be sorry
always in my absence, and glad in my presence.


ARAB. Why must I be glad?


EVERG. Why! -- why because I am with you, to talk to you, and to warn you
against the ensnaring devices of young men, who, like spiders, spread their
cobwebs every where, to catch such silly flies as you.


ARAB. Dear me, how can you think so? Spiders are frightful creatures, but
young men are not frightful. When my uncle took me out in his chariot, they
looked at me so kindly! If I had been their sister, they could not have seemed
to like me better.


EVERG. No, they would not then have liked you so well. But you are very
ignorant, Bell; very ignorant, indeed! However, you have time enough to
improve. -- When you are Lady Penmanmaure, you will be quite a different thing.
Good by'e, pretty Bell! you shall see me again tonight.


[Exit. ARAB. I don't care whether I ever see you again or not. It Is very odd
now -- every time I see him, I like him worse and worse; and every time I see
Mr. Bellair I like him better and better. [Enter SERVANT] Thomas, if Mr.
Bellair should come, don't say my uncle is out, then perhaps he will go away, and
will not come up.


THOMAS. He is here now, Miss. He seemed very sorry that my master was absent;
but said he would wait to have some of your sal volatile, when his Lordship was
gone -- and he sent me now to ask if you would admit him.


ARAB. Oh, yes, yes! -- How glad I am my Lord is gone. Dear me, now, I am all
in a flutter! What can make me tremble so?


Enter BELLAIR, leaning on a Servant. BELL. Gently! gently! Support me to the
sopha. -- There! now you may go. [Exit SERVANT.] Your drops, sweet young lady!


ARAB. Here they are, Sir; -- I hope they will do you good.


BELL. Do you hope so! [holding both her hands.] -- Do you wish me to recover?


ARAB. There is nothing in the world I wish for so much.


BELL. Who knows but it may be in your power?


ARAB. Oh, dear Sir! you cannot recover. My uncle says -- and you know he is a
great Doctor -- that you must dye.


BELL. [still holding her hands.] And can you bear to see me dye?


ARAB. No, I shall not see you die; and I hope I never shall hear of it. But I
shall know it; for I shall then see you no more.

[mournfully.]
BELL. Oh!

[in extacy.]
ARAB. I am sorry you are in such pain -- you see how bad you are; you will
hardly be able to come any more -- But I have something to comfort me.


BELL. What! -- what!

[alarmed.]
ARAB. I have your picture -- I drew it myself -- Nobody would know it to be
you but me; -- but I can make out all your face.


BELL. Oh, God of Love! thou can have no happiness in store for me after this!


ARAB. Oh, don't fear, Sir! -- you will be very happy.


BELL. Yes! -- yes, most adorable! I shall indeed be happy, for thou have
pronounced it. See at your feet the most faithful and passionate of lovers. You
have been deceived in me; I am not dying -- except I dye now, through excess of
bliss.

[kissing her hand, and rising.
ARAB. Gracious!


BELL. It will take too long to explain now, how first I saw, how first I loved
you.


ARAB. What do you love me?


BELL. More than my life! and I come to save you from misery. You are on the
brink of marriage with a man you must hate.


ARAB. How can you save me from that?


BELL. By marrying you myself.


ARAB. What may you marry me?


BELL. Yes, sweet innocence!


ARAB. I thought I could marry nobody but that old Lord?


BELL. No, you shall never marry him, unless you choose it.


ARAB. Choose it!


BELL. There is but one way to prevent it; -- you must leave your uncle's house,
put yourself under my protection, and then become the mistress of my fate.


ARAB. And when must I do this?


BELL. Tonight.


ARAB. Goodness! and is it really in my power not to marry him, and to marry
you? and will it be my duty to love you, and to sit by you, and to watch your
slumbers?


BELL. Oh, my angel! whilst it continues to be your choice, never think about
the duty. Will you be ready to go with me tonight?


ARAB. Go with you! Yes, indeed -- But where?


BELL. I am now going to prevail on a friend of mine to honor his house, by
making it your asylum 'till you remove to your own. I will be in the street at
ten; a dark lanthorn shall be my signal -- The moment you perceive it, leave
the roof under which your ruin has been planned.


ARAB. I will, indeed.


BELL. Let nothing stop you.


ARAB. No -- not if my uncle was to beg ever so much.


BELL. One kiss from each dear hand -- it is all I will ask 'till you are my own.
Adieu! Remember ten.


[Exit. ARAB. Can it be all true? Mr. Bellair not dying, and loves me, and I to
be his wife! It is -- it is! these dear marks on my hands are real -- [kissing
them.] Oh, happy, happy Arabella!


[Exit. SCENE, EVERGREEN's. Enter EVERGREEN, and DAVID. DAVID. Sir, a
shentleman is without, and has creat occasions to speak to you.


EVERG. Did I not say --

[angrily.]
DAVID. Cot a mercy! I tolt him you sait so; and he sait you would see him --
He is your cotson from Leyton.


EVERG. Godson! What, Harry Bellair? Hah! [looking through the wing.] it is
him, sure enough. -- Harry! come in, Harry! [Enter BELLAIR.] Why, you rogue
you, how long have you been returned from Leyden? and how can you have the
impudence to be grown thus tall and big? Hark ye! take care you forget that I
was a greybeard at your christening, you young dog you!


BELL. At least I shall not be so malicious as to remember it on your
wedding day, which I am told is very near.

[smiling.]
EVERG. Hah! have you heard that? The devil's in this town for gossiping.
Formerly a man could do a snug thing in London, and the business as little
known as though it were transacted on Penmanmaure -- But now one's most private
concerns are as public as the secrets of a prime minister.


BELL. Why should so splendid an event as your marriage --


EVERG. None of your jeers! What, I suppose, you expect to be introduced to my
bride -- I shall not do it. I shall not do it, godson -- There Is your answer.


BELL. Then I shall be kinder than you; for I Will introduce you to mine -- Nay,
before she is my bride; I Will entrust her to your care in all her virgin charms.


EVERG. No great compliment in that, perhaps. But are you going to be married
then?


BELL. I hope so; but, to confess -- it is a kind of a runaway business. I am
this very night to carry off the lady, and I come now to solicit your
permission to bring her here.


EVERG. With all my heart -- with all my heart, Harry. But who is she? -- what
is she? -- whence is she?


BELL. She is a blooming girl, on the point of being decoyed into marriage with
a man old enough to be her grandfather, and dotard enough to believe that the
enchanted circle of a wedding ring will conjure in her a blindness to his
defects, and a passion for his wrinkles.


EVERG. Hay! [dryly] Why there are some prudent girls, Mr. Bellair, who have no
objection to a husband a little on the down-hill of life.


BELL. Oh, I beg your pardon! I am sure I did not mean to infinuate that -- that
-- What is he going to marry a prudent girl?

[aside.]
EVERG. Well but -- gad, it is laughable too. Ha, ha! How old is the little tit?


BELL. Of that delightful age which women term childish, and which girls think
womanish; -- she is the niece of an eminent physician; and the man, to whom he
is going to marry her, is a superannuated peer.


EVERG. [aside.] Hell and devils! But stay -- there are more old fools than I.
-- The name, Sir; -- the Doctor's name?


BELL. Feelove; -- and his lovely niece is Arabella Melville.


[Evergreen strides about, whistling.] EVERG. I have a red hot iron in my liver.

[Aside.
BELL. Why do you whistle, Sir?


EVERG. Oh, nothing, nothing. It Is a droll story you tell me -- that is all. And
pray how did you get acquainted with the young woman?


BELL. I saw her with her uncle in Hyde Park -- was struck with the air of
innocence, and enquiry that distinguished her -- followed the carriage --
learnt that she was just brought from Cornwall, to be married to a gouty Lord
-- introduced myself as a patient -- robbed the niece of her heart, and let the
uncle rob me of my guineas.


EVERG. Well done, uncle Toby! -- wise uncle Toby! Gad, there is something very
odd in all this! And you are going to carry her off tonight?


BELL. Certainly.


EVERG. And you wish to bring her here?


BELL. Ardently.


EVERG. Well, I shall take it d -- d ill, if you carry her any where else.


BELL. There is not another house in London I would trust her in.


EVERG. Bring her! bring her away! I Will take as much care of the little rogue,
as though it was my own affair.


BELL. How shall I thank --


EVERG. Oh, you will know what thanks to pay me in a day or two. -- Go, my dear
Harry!


BELL. Your cagerness charms me.

[Going.
EVERG. Go -- go -- go! [pushing him out.] -- Ha, ha, ha! -- Oh! oh! oh! I
could cry heartily on one side, but the other will not let me for laughing. Now,
which shall I do? Oh, a sly gypsey! Oh, a d -- d old fool of a Doctor! That he
should bring her a gallant! -- that she should consent to run off with him! --
and that he should humbly solicit to put her under my wing!!! -- Well, it shall
all work together for good. Instead of the Lord, may I be Goat of Penmanmoure,
if this shall not be a means of squeezing me another five thousand out of Feelove.
I have it working here -- it is working here. David! David!


[Exit, calling his man. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
[Miss ARCHER discovered with a Harp, on which she strikes a few notes. A
rapping is heard -- she rises with precipitation.] Miss ARCHER. MY sweet harp,
I must abandon thee! That rap announces my satyrist. Ha, ha! Now, I really
wonder, though I wish to see him, how he can look me in the face: -- he must be
most ridiculously confused -- trying at fifty awkward apologies. Oh, it is Miss
Juvenile -- impatient, I suppose, to see the bard.


Enter Miss JUVENILE, speaking eagerly. Miss JUV. Bless me, is he gone! I run
away the moment we rose from table. I would not have missed him for the world.
-- Who would have expected him to be gone so soon? Not eight yet.

[Looking at her watch.
Miss ARCHER. Who, indeed? But people's fears, when they dread great
misfortunes, are generally unruly. Why, my dear Ma'am, you will be happy yet --
The charming man who lashed me has not been here.


Miss JUV. Oh, that is lucky! I do want much to see what sort of a man he is. --
She shall not know that I could tell her.

[Aside.
Miss ARCHER. Oh, I can draw his picture, I am sure, exactly. A great fat man,
in a black coat, with twinkling eyes, and a prodigious length of profile -- he
makes amazing low bows -- sits down, with his hat resting on his knees; and
after wiping his face, stuffs his red and white pocket handkerchief in the
crown of it.


Enter Servant. SERVE. Sir Marvel Mushroom, and another Gentleman.


[Exit. They enter -- CARLTON speaking without. CARL. Ha, ha, ha! my dear Sir
Marvel, that was in the very first style. Do you know -- Ladies, your most
obedient! [passing them with a sliding bow] -- Do you know the very thing
happened to me at Padua! Miss Archer, I am happy to wait on you. -- We were all
in the Marchezza's box that night, when her husband came from Paris -- she is
extremely handsome; he toute au contrary! but, notwithstanding --


MARV. Bless me, cannot you tell your story afterward? Let me introduce you to
Miss Archer. This, Madam, is the gentleman who had honor to day to entertain
the town with -- with that little --


CARL. Oh, a mere trifle! not worth mentioning, Sir Marvel. Miss Archer, I hear
you have been a traveller; and that, when in Italy, they persuaded you to visit
some of the Levant Islands. I wonder, when so far, your taste did not carry you
to Greece! You can conceive nothing so charming as the Grecian women! --
nothing so interesting as their style of living! -- you would have found all
Arcadia realiz'd.


Miss ARCHER. Greece and Arcadia! -- are these his apologies! -- his awkward
embarrassments!

[Aside.
CARL. I endeavored to persuade a fair Greek, that the fate of my countrywomen
was happier than their's. -- "Oh, it is impossible," said she; "their liberty
makes them capricious, and their power over the men assuming; they grow old in
planning new conquests, and, alive only to the pleasure of admiration, seldom
taste the exquisite bliss of true passion." I felt the force of her
observation, and could not help confessing that it was possible for a handsome
English woman to border on the ridiculous.


Miss JUV. [Aside] So! that is tolerably home.


Miss ARCHER. [Aside] I am petrified! he talks with as much self-possession as
he would to a maiden aunt -- no bearing this!


Miss JUV. So you will not know me, Mr. Carlton?


CARL. Miss Juvenile! -- it is no wonder I did not immediately recollect you in
that dress, when I left you in a white frock. I saw your brother well at
Vienna. You play, Miss Archer. I am charmed that you prefer the harp -- it is so
graceful for the lady -- so advantageous for the voice.


MARV. [In a pet] Why it is downright jingle! -- a wooden cimbal is a better
thing! I thought to have heard nothing but what concerned my ver -- I mean your
verses; and here you have whisk'd us to Padua, then to Greece, then we had a
swing to Vienna in Turkey, and now we must have a Canterbury tale about the
merits of the Welsh harp. Why, I tell you, Miss Archer, this is the gentleman.


Miss JUV. Yes, Miss Archer, this is the gentleman, who traveled all over
Europe, to qualify himself to write an epigram on you; -- I think he might have
managed the matter without going so far for his wit.


MARV. If he got his wit far off, you must allow it touches home.


Miss JUV. Yes; -- I allow it is homely wit.


Miss ARCHER. Heavens! how could this man! [aside] Miss Juvenile means to be
severe upon you, Sir, but don't be disheartened. When you have done with me,
you will find a number of innocent, unprotected characters, who, at no other
expense than a private heart-ache, may be securely offered up victims to your
muse.


CARL. Oh, Madam, I disclaim all connection with the muses -- nothing inspires
me but the subject.


Miss JUV. You were happy in the choice of a subject to day; was he not, my
dear? Have you the paper about you, Sir Marvel?


MARV. Yes, to be sure -- here it is.

[Offering it to Miss Juvenile.
CARL. Pardon me! I am not yet so hardened a writer, as to stand the reading of
my own works.

[Snatches the paper with anger, and puts it in his pocket.
Miss ARCHER. [Aside] Now, would I give the world to know, if that is in
compassion to his own feelings, or to mine.


Miss JUV. Bless me, Sir! not hear your own works! Why, it is what every body
does, and read 'em too.


MARV. Aye, to be sure -- the ladies carry their's about in their netting
cases, and the men in their toothpick cases.


Miss JUV. Yes, indeed; -- we learn those kind of works now, like every other,
at boarding school. I, myself, have written five odes, seven epigrams, and an
elegy on an old turkey cock. Come, read, Mr. Carlton -- you will give your satire
new points.


CARL. These wretches will force me to spoil my plan, by their cruelty to the
lovely sufferer.

[Aside.
Miss ARCHER. May I be permitted to ask, how I came to have the honor of your
poetical notice? -- Did I ever offend you?


CARL. Never, Madam! with respect to me, you have been perfectly harmless.


Miss ARCHER. Would I had not! for the first time in my life I wish to do
mischief.

[Aside.
CARL. I never had the honor of your acquaintance; and have seen you but
seldom in public; but last spring I particularly remember, at the Pantheon.


Miss ARCHER. That Is well! particularly remember!

[Aside.
CARL. It was impossible to forget it; -- you had in your party so lovely a
girl! Bright blue eyes, flaxen tresses, elegant shape, modest --


Miss ARCHER. [Impatiently] What has all this to do with your satire on me,
Sir? Why have you taken pains to represent me to the world in so odious a light?


CARL. Faith, Madam, one does many things without reflection. I happened to be
in the humor to write -- Your name occurred -- The thing was done -- My
friends liked it -- They would have it appear. I Will give you leave to abuse me
with fifty times the wit.


MARV. Fifty times as much wit! gad! I don't know where she would find it.


Miss ARCHER. Then you do not think me, Sir, so very -- I understand, you do
not think me so extremely odious and frightful!

[In great confusion.
CARL. Oh, that submissive look! such another will bring me at her feet, and
then I am undone.

[Aside.
Miss JUV. Do you hear, Mr. Carlton? is the lady so very odious, and frightful?


CARL. Frightful! Oh, no, Madam. The lady is very well -- I wish I had abated a
point or two in my epigram. She is tolerably fair, not a very bad shape, and,
upon the whole, a -- a most bewitching creature.

[Aside.
Miss ARCHER. Bless me, Sir, do you think I can stand here to be analyzed in
this manner? Pardon me, if I say you scarcely keep within the line of good
manners. I did not expect -- not that I care. -- I would not have you think
that -- that -- I can bear it no longer.

[Bursts into tears and exits.
CARL. Oh, those tears! that I could catch them, and bury them in my heart!

[Aside, looking after her.
Miss JUV. Ha, ha, ha! -- well, she is finely mortified. My dear Mr. Carlton, I
have the most extreme favor to beg of you.


CARL. Madam.

[Bowing.
Miss JUV. You have interest with the newspapers -- I have some very elegant,
spirited things, and shall be prodigously obliged, if you will get 'em in for me.


CARL. My dear Ma'am, I really --


Miss JUV. Nay, I will not be denied.


MARV. No, no, -- don't deny the lady.


Miss JUV. A word! [Takes him aside.] I have one thing that would cut Sir
Marvel to shivers. -- If you will but get that one thing published.

[Aloud.
MARV. Yes, yes, get that one thing published, by all means.


CARL. To oblige you, Sir Marvel.


Miss JUV. Oh, charming! -- I Will bring it to you myself tomorrow. Now I Will go
to Miss Archer, and tell her you are going home to compose another satire on
her.


[Exit. CARL. Go, thou thing! and prosecute my heart's dearest interests,
whilst you believe yourself only gratifying your girlish spite!


MARV. In the midst of all Miss Archer's anger, she does not pretend to despise
the verses.


CARL. Despise them! I design to make her acknowledge that they are the
happiest verses that ever were written; -- you have really very extraordinary
talents.


MARV. Talents! -- aye, but every body thinks he has talents nowadays! as
Homer says in the Rape of the Lock,

To wit each blockhead makes pretense;
Give me a little common sense.

[Exit. CARL. Amen, Sir Marvel!


[Exit. Enter EVERGREEN and DAVID. EVERG. Mighty pretty! mighty pretty! I can
never come in to my house, but I am jostled by two or three young fellows going
out of it. Hark ye, Sir! In future when any body, male or female, asks for Miss
Archer, say she is not at home. If I cannot get her out of the house, she shall
see nobody in it -- that will surely do in the long run. She may live without a
husband, but to live without gossiping, without flatterers, without all the he
and she family of nonsense, that I take to be impossible. Do You mind me?


DAVID. Yes sure I to, Sir.


EVERG. Well then, mind me again. Mr. Bellair will bring a lady here presently
-- tell him I am out -- sent for by the Welsh Committee, about the new linen
manufactory; -- but say I left strict orders with the housekeeper to take care
of the lady.


DAVID. Yes, I shall, Sir.


[Exit. EVERG. Aye, aye -- they are together by this time, driving to me, their
only friend and guardian! ha, ha, ha! I saw the dog watching the door, and I
saw him hold up a lantern -- that was the signal, I suppose, ha, ha, ha! --
Pretty creatures! Oh, I have them fast -- they have made a noose for their own
necks. Of an unfortunate man, I am surely the most fortunate that ever.


BELLAIR, speaking at the Door. At the committee, do you say?


[EVERGREEN runs off without speaking.] BELLAIR enters, leading ARABELLA. BELL.
My dearest angel it is unfortunate; but you are now in the house of Mr.
Evergreen, and his protection will be of the most conclusive sort, with respect
to your reputation; and your reputation is now mine. Why do you sigh?


ARAB. I don't know -- but I am afraid they will take me from you again.


BELL. Never; I swear by every thing sacred, that I Will hold you to me as I would
my life. I Will go directly down to the house to bring home my friend; I cannot
bear that you should be in this unguarded slate, and for many reasons I ought
not to remain with you.


ARAB. Not remain with me! why are we not to be married?


ARAB. Doubtless! and then we shall be inseparable; but custom says we must not
be so 'till we are married.


ARAB. Why, how will custom know any thing about us?


BELL. Oh, there are a thousand eyes upon us. Of what a nature is innocence! it
invites its ruin; and the more pure it is, the nearer to destruction. [Aside.


ARAB. Well, if you must leave me, make haste to return. How shall I amuse
myself in your absence? Oh, here are some paintings. I love paintings dearly --
I can look at them and make out whole conversations, between unhappy girls, and
their cross uncles, and fathers.


BELL. But look now, my angel, for another subject -- search for the portrait of
a lover; fancy him telling the beauty he adores, that his whole life is devoted
to her felicity; -- fancy that I am that lover, and yourself the charming girl.
[kissing her hand] Heaven guard thee!


[Exit. ARAB. The happy girl, he should have said. Oh, I shall find no portrait
here so charming as he is.


[As she is looking at the paintings, EVERGREEN enters, and stands in her way;
-- she turns, and seeing him, shrieks.] EVERG. How now, young woman! why so
frightened?


ARAB. Oh dear! oh dear!


EVERG. How came you here, child -- hey?


ARAB. How -- Oh goodness! how came you here?


EVERG. Oh, I am intimate here -- I make as free as though I were at home.


ARAB. Indeed! -- Oh, he will go and tell my uncle where to find me. What shall I
do? [Aside.


EVERG. Oh, Bell! Bell! have I not always told you to beware of young men? have
I not told you that they are all made up of deceit and lies?


ARAB. Yes, you have told me so, but I don't believe you. And you told me that
I was made on purpose to be your wife, and that I don't believe neither.


EVERG. Indeed! why, who then are you made for?


ARAB. Somebody.


EVERG. Yes, but not for the body you think of, my pretty Bell. Oh, you little
goose you! why this was a scheme plan'd between Bellair and me. This is my
house; and he has brought you here, to deliver you solely into my power.


ARAB. Oh, what a story! how can you say such false things? he would die before
he would put me in your power.


EVERG. Would he so? why I have been in his secret the whole time. I know of
his sham sickness to impose on your wise uncle, and of his persuading you that
he had a godfather, under whose care he would place you. I know of the signal
of the dark lantern, and every particular about ye -- Now what do you think of
young men?


ARAB. Think! oh merciful! I could not have believed that in all the world
there had been such --


EVERG. Aye, now, are they not deceitful monsters? and Bellair in particular,
is he not -- tell me? [snatching her hand] is he not the worst of men? -- a
most cruel villain?


ARAB. What for putting me in your power?


EVERG. No, no, no, -- I mean for -- 'Gad she had me!


ARAB. Yes, it is very cruel indeed. I think now I could hate him. Oh, I wish
he would come, that I might tell him how I hate him!


EVERG. Aye, but he will not come -- or, if he does, it will be to no purpose; he
shall never see you more, my pretty Bell, 'till you are my wife.


ARAB. If I was sure it would make him miserable, I could almost determine to
be your wife -- and yet I would rather die.


EVERG. Oh, you ungrateful baggage! so much love, so much tenderness as I have
thrown away upon you!


ARAB. Its very strange! I would help it if I could, but indeed I cannot. He
who has been so cruel, I cannot hate; and you, who have been so kind, I cannot
love.


EVERG. I am much obliged to ye, Ma'am, for your confidence.


ARAB. Why should I deceive you? -- you think Mr. Bellair very wicked in
deceiving me, and pretending to love me, when he did not. I will not pretend to
love you; if I did, you ought to think me a very wicked girl.


EVERG. So, so, so. Well, Ma'am, with regard to the matter of love, we'll
settle that hereafter; -- perhaps we are more even there than you think for --
but, at present, I have other business in hand. Here, Mrs. Jones, [Enter
Housekeeper] take care of this young lady; -- tempt her to eat if you can, and
if you cannot, put her to bed supperless.


ARAB. Must I go to bed without seeing Mr. Bellair, to reproach him.


EVERG. I Will reproach, when the time comes, never fear; but he shall not enter
these doors to night. Go, Mrs. Jones -- go! [Exeunt.] Now will I to my Doctor;
by this time he is apprized of his loss; and I Will see him poisoned before I Will
tell him where she is. Oh, Doctor! Doctor!


[Exit with an air of enjoyment. Enter Miss ARCHER, leading ARABELLA. Miss
ARCHER. Go down, Mrs. Jones, I Will comfort the young lady. My sweet girl, who
are ye? what is the occasion of this extreme distress.


ARAB. Oh, Ma'am, you seem good-natured, and I Will tell ye. Mr. Bellair has
betrayed me, and Lord Penmanmawr is determined to marry me.


Miss ARCHER. Who are these people? -- I never heard their names.


ARAB. Dear! -- why this must be a very large house then, for Lord Penmanmawr
lives in it; and Mr. Bellair I run away with, to marry -- but I don't know
where he lives.


Miss ARCHER. Heavens! run away with a man to marry him, and not know where he
lives! why, my dear, he may be a deceiver.


ARAB. Yes, so he is, a very great deceiver; for he brought me here to Lord
Panmanmawr, and called him Mr. Evergreen; -- and now he will not marry me himself,
and wants to force me to marry the old lord. [Weeping.


Miss ARCHER. Lord Penmanmawr, and called him Evergreen! I don't know what to
understand. But come, my love, you shall go with me to my dressing room, and
we'll talk it over; -- if you want an adviser, you shall find a sincere one in
me. Her heart has an attachment, and it seems an unfortunate one -- I know too
well, now, how to pity her.


[Exeunt. SCENE changes to FEELOVE's. He enters in great agitation. FEELOVE,
speaking to a Servant without. Gone! gone! gone off! I cannot believe it -- it is
impossible. She knows nobody -- speaks to nobody. In all this vast town there
cannot be a house open to her. And here have I been sent on a fool's errand to
Hampstead, where every body is in health -- not a soul sick from the top of the
Heath, to Mother Red Caps. But she cannot be gone off!


Enter EVERGREEN. EVERG. Aye, here is a fine pill for ye, Doctor! -- here is a
bitter potion! Whilst you have been running after an old woman's sciatica at
Hampstead, your niece has been running away with a young man.


FEELOVE. What are we to do? Why do we stand here? Why don't we go in search of
her?

[Running about.
EVERG. Search of her! -- where? where are we to go? And if we find her, what
then? who do you think is to take your tarnish'd plate off your hands? We,
indeed! it is all your affair, now Doctor; I wash my hands on it entirely.


FEELOVE. What do you mean? Why, is she not contracted to you?


EVERG. Contracted to me -- yes, in a state of unblemished reputation.


FEELOVE. Her reputation is yet unblemished, Sir.


EVERG. Yes, but it will not be so tomorrow morning -- the first sun beams will
see the flies upon it, and by noon it will be stale -- stale, Doctor!


FEELOVE. Come, come, Sir! this is going too far; -- you are too violent in
your conjectures; -- after all it may be but a girl's frolic -- strayed to some
toyshop, or confectioner's, perhaps.


EVERG. Toyshop! or confectioner's! [contemptuously] What, then, you have not
found out, all this time, that she is really run off with a young fellow, and
who her gallant is! whu! have I that news to tell you? come, Doctor, prepare
for a surprise -- loosen your neckcloth, take off your wig, slacken all your
ligatures, and sit down for a fit.


FEELOVE. [Angrily] Slacken your wit, Sir! you are too jocose on the subject of
a young lady's reputation.


EVERG. Young lady's repution! there are more reputations than here is at stake,
I promise ye; -- the reputation of a wise man -- a Doctor's reputation, will
become the tennis ball of all the wits in town in a few hours. Oh, Doctor,
Doctor! where did you take up your diploma for discretion?


FEELOVE. Sir! there is no bearing --


EVERG. Yes, but there is -- Hark ye! I shall make ye, in one minute, as mute
as the bust of old Galen in your study. This great, impudent, roaring,
debauched fellow, who has carried off your niece without let or hindrance, is
the poor puling patient, who was brought to your house every day for the
benefit of the park air; and whom you have pronounced to be beyond the skill of
all the physicians in Europe, to keep out of a winding sheet. -- Now, Doctor,
you find there are more reputations than your niece's at stake.


FEELOVE. A malicious invention of your own -- sheer malice! -- That poor young
gentleman is in a state, and I will prove it, to make it impossible for him to
recover. The morbid matter (speaking very eagerly) hourly increases; the
viscera do not perform their functions -- secretion is destroyed -- the thorax
inflamed, the --


EVERG. I tell you he is run away with your niece.


(FEELOVE continues to speak without regarding the other's interruptions.) I
tell you, Sir, that such an attack on my character


(I tell you he is run away with your niece)


-- a man of my experience, Mr. Evergreen


-- (I tell you he is run away with your niece)


-- I who am acknowledged by every apothecary within the bills of mortality


-- (I tell you is run away with your niece)


-- [Going off, the other following] -- I who am called to every capital
consultation


-- (I tell you he is run away with your niece)


-- I whose practice has been so singularly successful --


[Exeunt. SCENE changes to BELLAIR 's Lodgings. Enter BELLAIR and CARLTON.
BELLAIR. My dear Carlton, congratulate me!


CARL. Congratulate me!


BELL. I have carried off my prize.


CARL. I have been with Miss Archer.


BELL. I have safely lodged her in the house of a friend.


CARL. I have seen the most tender melancholy in her air.


BELL. I have seen love light up all her features; and have pressed my Arabella
to my heart.


CARL. I have pressed Miss Archer to mine too, in idea; and my hopes tell me,
that it will not be only in idea. I am now convinced of her sensibility, and
adore her. But where is your Arabella?


BELL. At the friends I mentioned. Not being able to find him at Westminster, I
called at his house in my return, and have been assured that the dear girl
herself, Mr. Evergreen, and all the family are retired to rest.


CARL. Evergreen! he is Miss Archer's guardian -- she lives in his house.


BELL. Then our Mistresses are under the same roof -- that is most fortunate!


CARL. It is indeed; for two girls talking to each other of the men they love,
will do more for us in a day, than we could for ourselves in a week.


Enter a Servant. SERVE. Doctor Feelove.


[Exit. BELL. Doctor Feelove! Oh, all the demons of mischance!


CARL. Can he have made the discovery so soon?


Enter FEELOVE. FEELOVE. [Speaking as he enters.] A villain! to attempt thus to
undermine my reputation. Gentlemen, -- I have been insulted so grossly, that I
can hardly compose myself, to tell you the cause of my unseasonable visit --
but -- if -- in one word, how is my poor patient -- how is Mr. Bellair?


BELL. Sir! Mr. Bellair -- Sir! --


CARL. He does not know ye -- fear nothing.


BELL. Are you sure of that?


FEELOVE. My patient, Sir -- good gentlemen speak! how is my patient?


BELL. Your patient, Sir, is as well as a patient can be, who is out of the
reach of his d -- d Doctor. No further occasion for asses milk, stimulatives,
balsamics, or coolers.


CARL. Alas, poor Doctor! -- no more fees -- he has given you the go-by fairly.
Is it not a shame that a man of your prowess in the fields of Galen, should not
be able to conquer such a pitiful hectic as drove him him out of the world?
why, a physician ought to have the diseases at his call, and whistle them on
and off, as a huntsman does his hounds.


BELL. Aye, 'twas a crying sin, to let such a spirited fine young fellow be
kicked out of life by a rascally little feveret! An old woman would have cured
him; but such an obstinate confidence in the skill of the renowned Doctor
Feelove! He died full of resentment, and his last words were -- "Toss the
Doctor in a blanket."


FEELOVE. I can forgive that -- I can forgive that -- but I cannot forgive your
illiberality, Sir. An old woman cure him! It was not in the power of all the
physicians between London and the Alps to cure him; -- not an herb, gum, wood,
or fungus in the whole medicopeia, that could have given him breath two days
longer.


BELL. It Is false, Sir -- Bring the blanket!


FEELOVE. I could not bear this treatment, Sir, but that the extreme
satisfaction I have in Mr. Bellair's death.


BELL. Satisfaction!


FEELOVE. Yes, Sir. My reputation, my character, demanded that he should die.
-- I would not have had him alive tomorrow morning for a thousand pound fee.


BELL. This is amazing!


FEELOVE. Why, Sir, there is a vile story in circulation, which, if true, would
sink me beneath the lowest medicine grinder -- beneath a mixer of eggs and
turpentine -- beneath the cork in a julep bottle; nothing less than that
Bellair is in perfect health, and so alive to youth and beauty, as to have run
away with my niece -- they say that!


CARL. What is there this world will not say! By all the honor of physic, he
has a dose in his pocket to have secured his reputation, had he found thee
alive!


BELL. [Apart] We'll search him, and make him swallow it. But have you then lost
the young lady? -- is she gone?


FEELOVE. Gone, Sir -- absolutely gone; but as my poor patient is gone too, I
am in some measure reconciled to that event. But, bless me, Sir, you are vastly
like him -- a man more liable to be imposed on, might take ye both for the same
person; -- the same voice, and the same features, only fresher and plumper.


BELL. Oh, oh -- What you have found me out, Doctor? Why, I am his brother --
your poor patient's younger brother, -- and I should break my heart for his
death, only the dog has left me a clear estate of two thousand a year, to buy
weepers. In short, Doctor, I greatly feared your skill would preserve him, and
if it had! --


FEELOVE. Preserve him! you might as well have expected my skill in physic to
have preserved the French bank from breaking.


BELL. Well, notwithstanding my affected petulance at your entrance, I am highly
gratified that Bellair is where he is -- and I Will recommend you to all my
friends and acquaintance. But I wonder the loss of your niece sits so lightly,
my little Hippocrates.


FEELOVE. Oh, Sir, I have a great heart -- a prodigious great heart! its
feelings are for the faculty. A girl may run away from an uncle without
reproach to him; but when a patient runs away from the sentence of his
physician, the reputation of the doctor must soon run after him.


CARL. Happily our patient knew his duty better; -- and so, as we are now three
very happy fellows, let us even adjourn to the Star and Garter, and live the
evening like bon vivants.


FEELOVE. With all my heart; -- and egad, gentlemen, I am so offended with the
insolence of a certain person, whom I will not name, that if you will discover my
niece, I Will give her to ye, with a fortune of twenty thousand pounds. The odd
ten I Will stick to.

[Aside.
BELL. Hah! say ye so? If I discover her, shall she be my reward?


FEELOVE. That she shall.


BELL. May I rely on your promise.


FEELOVE. With as much confidence, as on the symptoma of a fever. I would give
her to a rincer of gallipots, rather than the person I had engaged her to; --
to a pill vender -- to a mountebank.


BELL. Bravo, Doctor! keep to that, and we'll discover her enchanted castle,
never fear!


CARL. That we will. Allons! let us sacrifice to Bacchus tonight, and
tomorrow to Esculapius, and Fortune!


[Exeunt. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, FEELOVE's. Enter FEELOVE, followed by a Servant. FEELOVE. NOTHING of my
niece this morning! Oh, may that rascal, who cheated me yesterday to Hampstead,
never get rid of his wife till he is seventy-six; and then, for his farther
punishment, may he grow rich, and fall in love!


SERVE. May I be so bold, Sir -- is that a curse?


FEELOVE. A curse! why, can there be greater, than for a man to fall into
riches, when he has neither time nor faculties to enjoy them; and to fall in
love, whilst he is falling into his grave? If they are blessings, may they be
the lot of knaves, and cowards, and quacks! Bring me the slate, that I may see
where I am to go.


Enter EVERGREEN. EVERG. Go! why go to find your niece, to be sure. Have you
heard nothing from her yet?


FEELOVE. No.

[Surlily.
EVERG. Come, how much will you add now to the fifteen thousand, if I should
discover, and bring her to ye?


FEELOVE. Nothing.


EVERG. What! consider what you say!


FEELOVE. I do consider what I say!


EVERG. How! if I discover your niece, drag her from her seducer, and in that
state of her reputation take her off your hands, and make her Mistress
Evergreen -- what will you not throw in five thousand for that?


FEELOVE. No, Mister Evergreen -- not five guineas -- not five shillings -- not
a single half-crown. Oh, how I could mortify him now, by telling him Bellair is
dead!


EVERG. Here! here is an unreasonable man! So then, if I discover, and marry
her, I am to have only fifteen thousand pounds! -- Oh Lord! oh Lord!


FEELOVE. Fifteen thousand pounds! why you shall not have her at all. Fifteen
thousand pounds! If I thought my niece would ever look upon thee, or ever think
of thee as a husband, I Would put fifteen thousand pounds in each pocket, drive to
Gravesend, and leap into the sea, to disappoint thee.


EVERG. Why, we'd have you up again, if you did -- we'd empty your pockets, I
warrant you. Riches are no more safe now in the bottom of the sea, than a
rainbow is in the clouds. Neither earth, sea, or air, in this happy age, can
keep their secrets from us; and I have no doubt but some bold adventurer in the
next, will find out a way to live in fire; or dart from continent to continent,
like Milton's angels, on a condensed sunbeam.


FEELOVE. That may be possible; but for you to marry my niece, with my consent,
is impossible.


EVERG. What, are you in earnest?


FEELOVE. In earnest -- aye, as earnest as you was in your abuse of me last
night. Smoke the Doctor, I suppose, was the word. You love a joke, old friend;
so do I; and mine shall cost less than yours -- so good morning to ye! I shall
prescribe another husband for my niece, depend on it.


[Exit. EVERG. Say you so, my old boy? Why then I must play a game I did not
think of -- I must secure the young woman 'till you can be brought to alter
your prescription. I have made a pretty mess here! 'Gad, though I love a joke,
I did not think I was buying mine at the dear rate of fifteen thousand pounds
-- Dangerous joking with doctors I find. Well, well, a wise man may fall into
mistakes as well as a fool; but a wise man will find a way to remedy them.


[Exit. SCENE, EVERGREEN's. Miss ARCHER enters with ARABELLA. Miss ARCHER. I am
charmed to see you so well this morning. Has Lord Penmanmawr visited you?


ARAB. Oh, yes; and he left me to go to my uncle's; but I made him promise not
to tell that I am here.


Miss ARCHER. You did not hint that you knew him to be Mr. Evergreen?


ARAB. Oh, no -- I will do nothing but what you bid me. I should be easy now,
could I but see Mr. Bellair, to vent my anger, and to tell him how I hate him.


Miss ARCHER. Have a care, my dear girl! you wish to see him, I have no doubt;
but should he appear, you would forget your motives for that wish.


ARAB. Oh, never! was there ever so base -- so --


Miss ARCHER. Never, I acknowledge it; yet, should he invent any plausible
excuse, your greedy ear would swallow it all. May I not judge her from myself?
Should Mr. Carlton form excuses, where would my resentments be?

[Aside.
Enter EVERGREEN, speaking at the Wing. EVERGREEN. So! there is Satan at the ear
of Eve [Aside]. Did I not desire, Miss Archer, that you would hold no
correspondence with this young Lady?


Miss ARCHER. Yes, my dear Guardian, and therefore I made a point of seeing
her, and giving her a little sisterly advice. She knows by this time how to
deceive your vigilance on common occasions, and on uncommon ones I have
promised to assist her.


EVERG. Assist her! (contemptuously) Well, Miss Melville, are you prepared to
meet your uncle?


ARAB. Oh dear! is he coming!


EVERG. How he gained knowledge of your being here, I know not, unless it is
from your false Bellair; but he swears vengeance -- a garret and water gruel
are the least of his threats.


ARAB. Oh, Miss Archer! what will become of me?


EVERG. What signifies appealing to her? Miss Archer, indeed! I have contrived
what is to become of you; for I would not deliver my little Bell up to her
uncle in his present fury for a dukedom, and to conceal you from him here will
be impossible; I have therefore a chaise ready at the door, to carry you a few
miles out of town.


Miss ARCHER. Out of town!


EVERG. Yes, Madam -- or in town, or where I please -- you will not presume to
interfere, I hope.


Miss ARCHER. I hope Miss Melville will refuse to go.


EVERG. Let her at her peril! she is my affianc'd wife; my wife betrothed -- I
have perfect right over her. Go you, Madam, to your apartment, and leave her to
my care.


[Exit. Miss ARCHER. My dear Girl, never go with him; who knows where he may
carry you!


ARAB. What can I do? I fear to go with him, and I am terrified to death at the
thoughts of seeing my uncle.


Enter EVERGREEN, with a long white stuff Cloak, and large Hood. EVERG. Here,
here is a Welsh riding-cloak, that belonged to a tall, meagre aunt of mine; it is
a little too long, I believe; but it will conceal you the better. Put it on,
and pull the hood over, that your face may not be seen. Nay, don't be restive,
Miss (throwing it loosely over her): put it on, whilst I replenish my purse.


[Exit. ARAB. Oh, my dear Lady, what shall I do?


Miss ARCHER. My sweet Girl, how can I assist you? What an arbitrary wretch! I
am full of grief for you -- What has not this Bellair to answer for?


[They weep over each other, retiring back. Enter Sir MARVEL. MARV. I must give
up Hyde Park this morning -- I Would be sworn Carlton will be here, and I am
determined to make one in their tete-a-tete. Hey, hey! why, Ladies!


Miss ARCHER. [turning] Oh, Sir Marvel!


MARV. And weeping too! Dionysius-like -- no, Niobe-like, all tears.


Miss ARCHER. A thought strikes me -- you can assist us. My guardian is going
to hurry this young lady out of town, we know not where.


MARV. Aye, I saw the chaise at the door -- shall I go and break the axle, or
shoot the horses?


Miss ARCHER. No, no -- put on this cloak [taking it from the ground] -- ride
with him a few miles, then turn upon him, and terrify him to death. I suppose
your vis-a-vis is waiting; I Will use it, to convey her out of his reach --
instantly -- instantly!


MARV. Stop! [when the cloak is half on] Hold! I will not be envelop'd in this
new-fashion'd chemise -- how could I be such a good-natured fool? Have you not
repulsed me, Madam -- disdained me?


Miss ARCHER. Oh, my dear Sir Marvel! consider, it is for this young lady -- she
has not repulsed you.


MARV. I Am at one word -- off it goes, unless you will promise to receive me on
terms.


Miss ARCHER. Oh heavens! I -- I -- I Will do better; I Will introduce you on terms
to the pretty widow, Lady Beauville -- she is just becoming the rage -- 'twill
be infinite eclat -- she had all the men in the pit about her the other night at
the opera.


MARV. On with it! we are upon honor -- you shall carry me there tomorrow.


Miss ARCHER. Tonight -- any time. Come, Miss Melville!

[Snatching her hand.
[Exeunt. MARV. So, here am I going, Jupiter knows where, cased up like the
Trojans in a wooden horse, or like -- but here comes my ravisher.


Enter EVERGREEN, tying up his purse. EVERG. Oh, what Madam has left you! Aye,
she is a bad girl, Bell -- a bad girl! never heed her! Come, don't cry, that is a
good girl! -- Devil take the string! Hide your face though as much as you will
-- that is right, pull the hood closer, for who knows but the Doctor may come
athwart us, to some Hampstead patient or other? Come, now I am ready. Come, I
say! [Takes Sir Marvel's hand, who goes a step or two, and then stops.] Why
do you stop, child -- go you must and shall, so loitering will have no effect,
but to make me angry. Come, I say -- nay, if you will be pulled, you shall be
pulled [Pulls and pushes him]. Zounds! you are strong, Bell; I have heard that
the Cornish girls can wrestle, and I fancy you have practiced the sport. Nay,
if you are for that, Miss -- here, David, come and help pull this young lady
into the chaise.


Enter DAVID. DAVID. [Pulling] Cot a mercy, Sir! I cannot make hur stir a
petty-toe.


EVERG. Give her a pinch on the arm.

[David pinches.
MARV. Zounds! let me alone -- I will not go, by Jupiter!


DAVID. [Flying off] What is it, Sir -- it must be the tevil in a planket.


EVERG. [surpris'd.] What is it? why, a great country hoyden -- they will swear
and romp at home, like fifty grenadiers, and when they come to town, they mince
their words, and mince their steps, as though they could utter nothing but
monosyllables, or step above two inches. Come, we'll have the other tug, Miss --


MARV. Will you? [Raises the hood, and looks, first at one, then at the other].
Now, Mr. Evergreen, we'll have a tug, or a wrestle, or what you please.


EVERG. Oh, that devil Miss Archer! this must be her contrivance -- Where are
they, where are they?


[Runs toward the door. MARV. Where? why, they are in the mode, that is all --
emigrating. No, you don't pass this straight -- you don't indeed; I Will defend
it as the Africans did Thermopylae.


EVERG. You, Sir! how dare you take this liberty in my house?


MARV. Come, Sir, don't be obstreperous: if you are, I Will clothe you in the
riding-hood, and cram you into the post-chaise, as you would have done me; you
will not play the Cornish romp as manfully as I did.


EVERG. Sir, this insolence --

[Endeavouring to pass.
MARV. Nay, if you will have a tug, you shall have a tug -- [Scuffle to get on
the cloak, Evergreen gets off at last]. Here, then, I remain conqueror; but
whether the game is Olympic, Isthmian, or Irish, I know not. But Lady
Beauville! -- to be enrolled in her suit, and in the Mennil hunt, is all that
remains to establish me -- fate can do no more! Miss Archer will now be a
friend indeed! Oh, Pylades, as Juvenal says, what is life without a friend? --
its a dumpling without egg.


[Exit. SCENE, CARLTON's Lodgings. Enter MISS ARCHER and ARABELLA, followed by
a Maid. Miss ARCHER. Tell Mrs. Tomson, pray, that I am here. Come, cheer up my
love; now we are safe; -- that dear Sir Marvel has obliged me for ever.


Enter Mrs. TOMSON. Mrs. TOMSON. My dear young lady! --


Miss ARCHER. My good Mrs. Tomson, this lady wishes to have an apartment here
for a few days -- Can you accommodate her?


Mrs. TOMSON. Oh, yes, Ma'am.


Miss ARCHER. I congratulate you, Miss Melville; you will be here perfectly at
ease.


ARAB. Not unless you give some charge about Mr. Evergreen. The dread of seeing
him will keep me in perpetual disquiet.


Miss ARCHER. You know my Guardian -- On no pretense admit him, whilst Miss
Melville is in your house.


Mrs. TOMSON. I shall take care, Madam.


Miss ARCHER. Then adieu! I must hurry back instantly, lest he should send to
watch the carriage; -- but you shall see me again in half an hour.


ARAB. Oh dear! I am so sorry that you must leave me! I love you already better
than any body, except -- I mean, I love you better than every body.


Miss ARCHER. I comprehend ye, my Love -- adieu!


[Goes with her to the wing. CARLTON enters.] CARL. Angels! and ministers of
grace! Miss Archer!


Miss ARCHER. Mr. Carlton!


CARL. [Aside.] Come to seek me in my lodgings! By Heaven, this is too much!
Oh, oh, now then one knows how to catch a coquette. How charmed I am to see you.


Miss ARCHER. How could you think of following me here, Sir?


CARL. [Aside.] That Is well put. Follow you here! I Would follow ye all over the
globe. Now don't put on that cold look -- It neither becomes the face nor the
occasion.


Miss ARCHER. [Aside.] His familiarity mortifies me even more than his satire.
How can you have the presumption, Sir --


CARL. My dear Madam, on some occasions not to have presumption would be
ungrateful. -- I should really be ashamed if at this moment I did not give you
reason to believe that I have as much presumption as any unmarried gentleman in
town.


Miss ARCHER. Intolerable! Why do you take such liberties with me, Sir?


CARL. Why do you take such liberties with me? You have taken the liberty to
intrude yourself into my thoughts without my desiring it; you have taken the
liberty to obtrude yourself on my dreams -- sleeping or waking, I am never free
from you. If I mean to be civil to another woman, your image pops itself before
me, and steals the compliment for which she was preparing her smiles -- Talk of
liberties, indeed!


Miss ARCHER. How dares he treat me thus? The object of his satire in public,
and of his jests in private! -- I cannot bear it.

[Aside.
CARL. Bend your eyes on me, sweet creature, that I may interpret them.


Miss ARCHER. If by bending them on you, I could convey to you the sentiments
with which you have inspired me, you should have their most pointed glances.


CARL. [Aside.] "The sentiments I have inspired!" Now, that, spoken in this
apartment, must be taken as the beginning of a declaration -- and it would be
scandalous to be behind-hand. I assure you, Madam, I am extremely grateful to
those sentiments, and beg to assure you, that mine for you are exactly what the
most charming woman in the world ought to suppose them.


Miss ARCHER. I don't know what I ought to suppose, Sir.


CARL. You ought to suppose that you are lovely, and that I have eyes: -- you
ought to suppose that you have a charming spirit, and that I have a heart: --
you ought to suppose that you are captivating, and that I am your slave. Now
how the devil have I been drawn in to make this ruinous confession?

[Aside.
Miss ARCHER. There is an air of sincerity about you at this moment, that
almost convinces me you do not deceive me; and I rejoice in it. I would have
you love me, I would have you adore me -- that your punishment may be severe;
for if I could think on you with any sentiments but those of contempt, I should
despise myself.


[Rushes off, CARLTON staring after her. CARL. I congratulate ye, Mr. Carlton
-- I congratulate ye! Fallen into the very snare that, with all thy boasted
knowledge of the sex, thou have labored to avoid -- trusted a coquette with
thy passion, without first being assured that thou had touched her heart. But
who could have doubted, after a visit at my lodgings? -- Pshaw! [striking his
forehead] 'twas clearly to draw me in; -- she penetrated my design, and
determined to show me a poor, ridiculous, miserable plotter. Well, I love her
the better for that! Now will it be impossible for that Hyaena to do any one
thing, for me or against me, but I shall love her the better for it. And how
shall I be used? -- worse than a dog! But I Will have thee -- Yes, by Heaven!
thou dear, proud, bewitching slut, I Will have thee, spite of every artifice that
coquetry and female sweetness can devise* -- 'Faith, I Will go and tell her so
now, in the very teeth of her malice.


[Exit. SCENE, EVERGREEN's. Enter EVERGREEN, followed by BELLAIR. EVERG. Don't
make me mad -- don't make me mad! I tell you I know no more where the girl is
than you do.


BELL. Not know where she is? Heaven! what can this mean? Did not I leave her
under your protecting roof? Did not you assure me --


EVERG. [Interrupting] Assure ye! what the devil signifies assurances, when the
will of a woman is concerned? How could I guess that she would run away from my
protecting roof?


BELL. This cannot satisfy me, Sir; you have an air of being angry at my
enquiries, rather than sorry for the occasion of them.


EVERG. Angry! so I am; d -- d angry. Why, she has run from me not from you.
Who cares about your concern? -- What business have you with her?


BELL. Mr. Evergreen!

[In extreme astonishment.
EVERG. Aye; now here he is staring -- now we must have explanations. Why,
then, in three words, your Bell is my Bell; -- you carried her off to prevent
her marriage with Lord Penmanmawr, and brought her to the house of Mr.
Evergreen, who is Lord Penmanmawr.


BELL. Sir!


EVERG. Aye -- what you cannot comprehend yet? -- all stare and wonder!


BELL. You that old Lord to whom my Arabella was to have been sacrificed!


EVERG. Aye -- and you, to expedite the sacrifice, brought her to the altar.


BELL. Is it possible? What, throw my dove into the talons of the hawk! -- bring
the lovely creature to the very house she meant to fly from! -- Oh, fool, fool!
[Traversing the stage impatiently.] Now then, old gentleman, I am to consider
you as my rival -- every other tie is dissolved; and as my rival, I insist on
your revealing where you have hid the lady?


EVERG. Don't challenge me -- don't think of challenging me, you blood-thirsty
wretch -- I will not be challenged. It Is time some scheme were hit upon to save
men of fortune from you duelling blades -- We ought to be allowed to fight by
proxy, as the militia do -- I Would subscribe an hundred guineas toward the corpse,
with all my heart.


BELL. I don't wish to challenge you, Sir; I am no duelist, but I must know
where my Arabella is -- I will kneel at your feet if -- --


EVERG. Tell you where she is? I swear by the honor of an ancient Briton I do
not know; and if I did know, I would not inform you -- Tell you where my
Arabella is!


BELL. I am frozen -- Why did she fly? Did she not know that -- But why do I
stay questioning, when I ought to seek her?

[Rushes out.
EVERG. Nay, if you are for that, I Will seek her too -- perhaps luck may for
once favor sixty, instead of six and twenty; and if I catch her, youngster, I
shall mind your ohs and ahs no more than the winds upon Snowdon -- He will not
challenge me, I believe.


[Exit. BELLAIR reenters, stealing in, as though fearful of being seen by
EVERGREEN. BELL. I cannot believe but that she is yet in this house -- She could
not surely fly from it; for, with her extreme inexperience, this town must
appear a great gulf to her, in which her innocence would every moment be in
danger of being lost. [Looking about.] Carlton's Miss Archer lives here -- if I
could find her she might give me some insight. None of the servants about?
[Looking through the wing.] -- No one of whom I can enquire? -- Shall I venture
to look into the apartments?


Enter FEELOVE, speaking, followed by a Servant. FEELOVE. Just gone out! Well,
when he returns give him these parchments -- they may do for his tailor -- it
is the only way to make them useful now.


BELL. Doctor Feelove!


FEELOVE. Hah! Mr. Bellair -- where have you been all the morning? Have you
found my niece? The vile story I told you of, has got air -- Have you heard of
my niece, I say?


BELL. Heard of her! why, Sir, she was in this house -- she slept here last
night.


FEELOVE. In this house! -- slept in the house of Mr. Evergreen!


BELL. Assuredly; and has been spirited away this morning.


FEELOVE. You should as soon make me believe she slept in the palace of the
Grand Turk. -- She in this house! -- You may as well say she is gone to
breakfast in the moon, and turned lunatic.


BELL. [Warmly] What obstinacy! Why, Sir, I tell you that I myself -- I say,
Sir, that I -- I have inquired, and I have been assured --


FEELOVE. Aye, poor young gentleman! say no more -- say no more. Perverseness
and folly came in with the frost, I believe, and pinches both old and young.


BELL. What steps can we take? -- My anxiety for the sweet young creature you
have described to me -- Pho! what does this trifling fellow do here?


Enter Sir MARVEL. MARV. Hah, Mr. Bellair! they told me you were above, so I
would come up. Very unlucky Miss Archer is not at home! she promised to
introduce me to Lady Beauville -- I hear she has a grand route tomorrow, and I
want to know her before, that I may be invited -- But I guess where Miss Archer
is, so I Will fly after her.

[Going.
BELL. Stay, Sir Marvel, -- do you know where Miss Archer is?


MARV. I guess -- I guess. She used my carriage this morning, to run away with
one Miss Melville, whom Mr. Evergreen was going to carry into the country.

[Going.
BELL. Heavens! my dear Sir Marvel, you give us life -- Now, Doctor, what think
ye of her breakfast in the moon?


FEELOVE. Faith, I begin to suspect that I may have breakfasted there -- I Am
sure my brain seems very cloudy. But where are they, Sir -- where are they?


MARV. I cannot tell, 'till I ask my servants; but they can certainly tell where
they carried them, -- and that puts me in mind of a fine anecdote. About four
centuries ago --

[with the air of beginning a long story.
BELL. Zounds! Sir Marvel, don't keep us here whole centuries -- we must know
instantly where those ladies are.


MARV. Well, well, you shall; -- I was only going to tell you, for you know you
are not well read, Mr. Bellair, that Queen Dido of Carthagena --


BELL. Pray, Doctor, prescribe for him; he is moonstruck too, depend on it. Sir,
you must take us directly to the house where your carriage left the ladies.


FEELOVE. Pray do, good Sir, and then if you want blistering, or bleeding --


MARV. I want blistering! no, I am never ill, unless I Am near a physician.
Well, come, I will take you, if you will promise to have Queen Dido afterward.


BELL. Oh, every Queen in the Aeneid, with all my soul. Come along!


FEELOVE. Pray take me too, and then I Will take the Princesses, and their maids
of honor into the bargain.


MARV. Yes, yes; I Will take ye both -- I Will take ye both. [Going out last.] What
a happy thing it is to be of consequence!


[Exeunt. SCENE, CARLTON's Lodgings. Enter Miss ARCHER, followed by Mrs.
TOMSON. Miss ARCHER. I am much concerned that Miss Melville has been
indisposed. Do you think she is now asleep?


Mrs. TOMSON. I fancy so, Ma'am, for I left her on the sopha -- but I Will tell
her --


Miss ARCHER. Oh, on no account! let the sweet girl repose a little; -- her
spirits, I am sure, are much fatigued. If you will give me that pamphlet I Will
amuse myself with it 'till she wakes.


[Mrs. TOMSON presents a pamphlet and goes out. Miss ARCHER tumbles over the
leaves a short time.] Miss ARCHER. Well, now, what signifies my attempting to
read? my thoughts are so deranged, that Greek would be as pleasant to me as Don
Quixote. What a peculiar fate is mine! to receive a declaration of love from
the only man whose lips I ever wished to hear it from, and yet, to be conveyed
in such a way, as to give me more pain than pleasure. The air of sincerity with
which he made it, would have transported me, had it not been poisoned by an
unaccountable boldness and freedom.


[Walks toward the book-case, and takes a book -- CARLTON enters without
seeing her -- Throws himself on a chair, and his hat on a table -- sees her
suddenly.] CARL. Zounds! Miss Archer here again! Nay, then she is my own -- it
would be ridiculous to affect displeasure now. [Goes toward her, then stops.]
No, faith -- she shall speak first; -- I Will be courted this time.

[Sits down again; Miss ARCHER not observing him, he begins to sing, to catch
her attention.] "I Have kissed and I Have prattled

"With fifty fair maids" --


Miss ARCHER. [Screams.] This is beyond all bearing!

[Rushing out.
CARL. It would, indeed, if I suffered you to go; -- No, no, dear creature! we
shall not part now as we did in the morning: -- I have just been at your
guardian's, to tell you that I forgive all your ill behavior today.


Miss ARCHER. Forgive! --


CARL. Aye, you may well wonder -- it is more than one in ten would do. Come,
come -- lower the scorn of that brow, and hear reason.


Miss ARCHER. I Will hear nothing, Sir, and I insist on your leaving this house
instantly.


CARL. Ha, ha, ha! -- that is unreasonable, considering where you are. But,
come! I Will allow you half a dozen ill-humoured things, and then you shall
attend to me.


Miss ARCHER. [Seeming to bite her tongue with vexation.] I will have my my own
way in something -- I will not say one ill-humour'd thing, though I feel a
thousand.


CARL. A thousand! Well, we have time before us, charmer; you shall have
opportunities enough -- every morning at breafast -- every day at dinner --
every --

[With affected melancholy.
Miss ARCHER. What can the monster mean?


CARL. Mean! why to marry you, Petulance! to give you a right to plague me for
ever. What an acquisition, for a woman of spirit! Oh, I feel already the
horrors of my future fate, but I am resolved to go through it -- I will go
through it!


Miss ARCHER. You imagine that the whimsicalness of this must excuse its
freedom, Mr. Carlton, but be assured --


CARL. Pho, pho, don't let us waste time; -- the plain English of our situation
is this; -- you are a coquette, and I am a man of the world; you would like to
make me act like a fool, and I am determined to make you act like a woman of
sense -- a proof that I am the best Christian.


Miss ARCHER. Very well, Sir -- very well!


CARL. I admired you, the first moment I beheld you, but resolved not to be
made a dangler -- which, if I had approached you in the common modes of
courtship, would have inevitably followed. -- I, therefore, took the road you
have seen, and in consequence you will condescend to be happy, and make happy, a
year or two sooner than your coquetry would have allowed.


Miss ARCHER. To be happy, and make happy!

[Smiling and tossing her head.
CARL. Yes; and that in spite of all those pretty affected airs -- they are but
affected, charmer, you know, for, at this moment, you feel that I have a kind
of resistless impudence about me, which you love for its novelty.


Miss ARCHER. If I thought it possible, Sir -- The wretch reads my very heart.

[Aside.
CARL. Nay, nothing but a wish to convince me of it, could bring you to my
lodgings; you see the effects of carrying airs too far. You used me in the
morning with such barbarity, that your heart, hard as it is, was smote with the
reflection, and then you run after me again to make it up. Oh, you dear
commiserating --

[Attempting to snatch her hand.
Miss ARCHER. How dare you, Sir, insinuate such horrid things? Run after you!
-- seek you in your lodgings!


CARL. Oh dear! how a coquette may carry things!


Enter hastily Sir MARVEL, BELLAIR, and FEELOVE. MARV. Oh, oh, here they are! I
am come to claim your promise -- you must introduce me to Lady Beauville before
tomorrow. Not to be at her route, would be to be and not to be -- as Kemble
says. Pray Ma'am have you seen Kemble?


BELL. Where, Madam -- where is Miss Melville?


FEELOVE. Where is my niece? -- where is Arabella Melville?


CARL. Heyday! What is all this?


BELL. Oh, Carlton! how little did I suspect that your lodgings -- but there she
is! --

[Darting through the wing, followed by FEELOVE.
Miss ARCHER. Are these Mr. Carlton's lodgings, then? It Is well his boldness
has such an excuse.

[Aside.
CARL. Is it possible that you did not know it?


Miss ARCHER. Know it! Heaven and earth! how can you dare think that I did? I
came to visit Miss Melville, whom I attended here this morning, without the
most distant idea, that -- Bless me! what an imputation has the interest I took
in her welfare, subjected me to? I shall never cease to regret the occasion.


CARL. Nor I to bless it. How many tedious long months of hopes and fears,
caprices and coquetry, have I been saved by it?


MARV. Oh, oh, you are agreed! see the effect of a few good stanzas -- 'twas my
poetry, Madam, not his, upon my honor.


Miss ARCHER. What poetry?


MARV. Why, that little jeu d' esprit, you know, which was published yesterday,
about you.


Miss ARCHER. What! was not that Mr. Carlton's.


MARV. No; he begged to pass for the author, but it was my own composition
entirely; without the assistance of any mortal man, whatever -- deny it, Mr.
Carlton, if you can.


Miss ARCHER. So those wretched lines were yours? It was you who chose to
represent me to the public in so odious and hateful a light! --


CARL. You had better have been quiet, Sir Marvel.


MARV. Why, this is devilish odd! when they passed for yours, she never said
one word against them; and now they are mine, they are wretched, and odious,
and hateful!

Enter Miss JUVENILE. Heyday! Miss Archer in Mr. Carlton's lodgings! what, my
dear creature, you are afraid of another fatire, and so are come to deprecate
his wrath?


Miss ARCHER. No, indeed, my dear creature, -- but pray what brought you to Mr.
Carlton's lodgings?


Miss JUV. Business, Ma'am, I assure you. Pray, Sir, step this way, [to
CARLTON.] Here are the verses which you promised to get into the news-paper for
me. -- I have spent this whole day in polishing them.


CARL. My dear Madam, Sir Marvel has much more interest that way than I have.


MARV. Oh, I Will get 'em in -- I Will get 'em in, never fear. Let me see. [She
endeavors to snatch them.] "Description of Sir Marvel Mushroom, or the
Cripplegate Knight." What, Madam, me! -- me! -- am I a subject for a news-paper?


Miss JUV. Yes; -- or for a comedy, if I could write one. You are rich in
folly, Sir Marvel, and would be a treasure to the public.


MARV. Why, Madam, you will not dare -- you will not dare. Oh, the license
given to these d -- d newspapers! I Will get a seat in parliament, in order to
vote against the freedom of the press.


Miss ARCHER. So would all those wretches feel, who tear the minds of the
inoffensive or the worthy -- were they to be stretched on the rack, to which
they so unfeelingly devote others.


CARL. My charming creature, you must forgive Sir Marvel -- I promised him that
you should.


Miss ARCHER [smiling]. Secure first your own forgiveness.


CARL. That sweet smile secures it to me.


Miss ARCHER. No; you must earn it by long and faithful services. I will be a
tyrant for two whole years, and you shall be the most humble and devoted of my
slaves: -- My caprice you shall allow to be reason, and my whims shall be your
law.


CARL. [kissing her hand] For two months agreed! but not one hour longer.
[Enter BELLAIR and ARABELLA.] -- My dear Bellair, is this angel yours?


BELL. Mine; and by a whimsical concurrence concealed in your lodgings. How
much, Miss Archer, am I indebted to you!


MARV. Indebted to her! No, it is to me. I wore the cloak, and I was pinched and
pulled whilst she escaped. One can neither have credit from one's verses or
one's good nature.


Miss ARCHER. So you really have forgiven him -- Did I not foretell?

[Archly.
ARAB. Oh, goodness! there was nothing to forgive -- You cannot think how
innocent he is.


Enter EVERGREEN. EVERG. The devil! What, Bellair found her first! Come, Sir,
give up my Bell!

[Attempting to take her.
Enter FEELOVE. FEELOVE. Your Bell! No, no, you must go for your bell to
another steeple, my old friend -- This little silver-toned thing would never be
heard on the Welsh mountains; and so I have given it to him.


EVERG. To him! You must joke, Doctor. You cannot mean to bestow your niece on
a poor wretch, the victim, as you have often called him, of atrophy and disease.


FEELOVE. There, do you see! -- again! -- again! Sir, you libel me, and, Sir --

[Strutting up to him.
EVERG. Libel ye! Why you libel yourself. -- That Is your poor invalid -- the
dying man. You Will never be able to stand the laugh, if you give your niece to
him. Come, come, Doctor, give me the --


BELL. Sir I have received Miss Melville from this gentleman, who will be so
generous as to pardon the innocent stratagems of love.


FEELOVE. Stratagems! What then -- what then, are you the -- the --

[trembling.]
BELL. You know I told you, Doctor, that I had an irresistible fancy, that I
should live and become a stout, hale young fellow. I determined not to oppose
my odd fancy, as the old lady did here is.


FEELOVE [in extreme anger]. Ho -- h! So, Sir, you had the -- the impudence --


BELL. Yes, Sir, I had the impudence to live -- But pray pardon it! I will do
any thing but die -- I Will swallow all the gums, woods, herbs, and funguses, in
your medicopeia, to make it up.


FEELOVE. You had better, Sir -- I say, you had better -- Oh!

[Going hastily off.
CARL. Stay, good Sir! you must be reconciled.


BELL. Dear Doctor, be but reconciled, I Will advertise my death, change my name,
and fight every man who dares tell me I am alive.


EVERG. He must not be reconciled.


Miss ARCHER. He cannot resist us. -- I Will make love to him. Dear Doctor!


MARV. And I Will let him prescribe for me -- Dear Doctor!


Miss JUV. And I Will write the epithalamium -- Dear Doctor!


EVERG. He shall resist you -- He shall not be reconciled.


FEELOVE. Say you so? Here, Mr. Bellair [giving his hand] I will be reconciled,
though -- excuse me! -- I should rather you were dead. -- However, I will be
reconciled.


EVEGR. Oh, oh, you will, will ye? You shall repent it. Bellair, though I shall
never speak to you more, I Will tell you at parting that her fortune is thirty
thousand pounds -- Remember, thirty. There, Doctor, that has cut you short of
ten or fifteen thousand, I know; so your joke has cost as much as mine.


FEELOVE. Sir, you are -- Sir, my resentment for this usage --


CARL. Oh, gentlemen, you must not -- you must not quarrel.


MARV. Oh, yes, let 'em quarrel, pray, if they have a fancy for it. Doctor,
I Will carry your challenge -- What are your weapons?


EVERG. His prescriptions -- He can kill with nothing else; he is harmless in
all other respects.


FEELOVE. And you are harmless in nothing but your wit; -- the point of that is
never felt.


Miss ARCHER. Come, come, since your anger expends itself in words, there are
hopes of its subsiding; and that the happiness we are preparing to enjoy, will
neither be clouded by your displeasure; nor by that of our best friends.

To them we bend, submissive to their laws,
Yield, if it is censure -- blessed, if it is applause!

THE END.
EPILOGUE.
BY A GENTLEMAN.
(SPEAKING WITHIN.) I SPEAK the Epilogue! Lud, how they teaze one!
They write so dull -- so -- seldom they can please one:
I never read 'em -- Well -- I Will trust to chance,
And now before 'em, frightened, I Will advance.
(ENTERS.) Ladies and Gents -- behold -- that is -- our play
We hope will -- Lud, I don't know what to say!
To entertain the cit, the belle, the beau,
With India -- Stamps -- or, Race at Fontainbleau.
In days of yore -- bright days, with conquest crowned!
The French we beat, and beat on their own ground;
We conquer still by valor or by cunning,
On their own ground we beat'em now -- in running.
I Will try, as Mercury did, a small deception,
It may secure, at least, a good reception. --
How do I look? If I can trust my glass,
I think for Venus I may safely pass;
(I Am sure found out to say I Am any other;)
No more Miss Archer now -- the archer's mother!
Nay, never wonder, doubt, nor start, nor stare,
Don't you perceive the Goddess in my air?
Yon lowering brow says, No -- Well! -- if you doubt me,
I Will drop the Goddess, -- here is enough without me:
Each scarlet Mars above, though ever so dainty,
May leer around -- there is Venus's in plenty;
Or aim his glass beneath, upon the pit,
He Will see his Venus by her Vulcan sit:
There Bacchus woos his Venus all divine!
He nectar asks -- but she -- a pint of wine!
And you can never want the Queen of Love,
I speak to you, ye roaring Gods above; --
Momus is surely there, from all this racket,
Yonder he sits -- he is in a sailor's jacket;
Thrice happy God, who lives but in a joke!
His Venus laughs, too -- in her hat and cloak.
Where have I got to? -- Lud, how glib my tongue!
Am I Miss Archer, Venus, or Miss Young?
Be what I will, among my friends I rank ye,
Applaud Miss Archer, and Miss Young shall thank ye.
FINIS.
Of the PUBLISHER may be had, By the same AUTHOR,
The BELLE's STRATAGEM, a Comedy. The RUNAWAY, a Comedy. WHICH IS THE MAN? a
Comedy. A BOLD STROKE FOR A HUSBAND, a Comedy. ALBINA, a Tragedy. Who Is THE
DUPE? a Farce. THE MAID OF ARRAGON, a Poem.

