

THE DESERT ISLAND, A DRAMATIC POEM, IN THREE ACTS.

As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Te, dulcis conjux, te solo in littore secum
Te veniente die, te decedente canebat.
VIRG. LONDON, Printed for PAUL VAILLANT, facing Southampton-street, in the
Strand. MDCCLX.

[Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Piece is founded on the Isola Disabitata of the celebrated ABBE
METASTASIO: In reading the Performance of that great Genius, the present Writer
received so exquisite a Pleasure, that he contracted a Passion for the Subject,
and could not refrain from exercising his Pen upon it. In the Prosecution of
his Plan, he knew enough of the modern Theater, to perceive that it was thin of
what our Play-followers call Business; and he was aware that on the Stage it
might prove (to use Milton's Words) very different from what among us passes
for Best. The same Remark was made by a Friend of the Author's, who thought it
hazardous to offer to a popular Assembly a Piece, in which there were none of
those Strokes that generally succeed with the Multitude. "Cannot you," said he,
throw in something here and there to season it more to the public Appetite? --
Suppose you were to change the Title, and fix the Scene among the
Anthropophagi, or among the Men, whose Heads do grow beneath their Shoulders --
a few of those extraordinary Personages exhibited on the Stage, will prove very
acceptable: -- What think you of an Irish Servant in it? -- That certainly will
insure Success, the more especially if you add some aerial Beings, and conclude
the Whole with a drunken Song by the Tars of Old England. -- The Author was
sensible of the Force of these Observations; but the GREAT MILTON (mentioned
above) stared him in the Face, with his Reflections on the Error of introducing
trivial and vulgar Persons, which, by all Judicious, has been counted absurd,
and brought in without Discretion, CORRUPTLY to gratify the People. Vide,
Preface to Samson Agonistes.
-- He therefore determined to preserve the Integrity of his original Design,
and to try what would be the Effect of a simple Fable, with, but few Incidents,
supported entirely by the Spirit of Poetry, Sentiment, and Passion. To combine
these there Qualities is indeed an arduous Task; and the Author, therefore,
does not flatter himself that he has entirely succeeded in so difficult an
Attempt.

In Justice to METASTASIO, he thinks proper to inform the mere English Reader,
that he has not been a Translator on this Occasion, but has followed the
Impulse of his own Imagination, excepting in a few Passages. The ITALIAN POET
gave the Fable; the present Writer made his own Use of it; or in other Words,
the Groundwork, or Canevas, (as the French call it) is METASTASIO'S; for the
Coloring Mr. Murphy is answerable.

He could not but be surprised to find that, on the first Night, the Scene in
the third Act, between Sylvia and Henrico, was deemed equivocal. There is
always a sufficient Number ready to ascribe to an Author various Meanings,
which he never had, "and see at Cannon's what was never there." -- To these
Gentlemen he returns his Thanks; but the Species of Wit, which they are willing
to allow him, he begs leave publicly to disclaim. The Character of a Girl, who
has never seen a Man, and who has been taught to think of such a Being with
Horror, is merely imaginary; but the possible, or Poetical Existence of such a
Girl being once established, it is to be wished that the Critics would agree
what Questions it is natural for her to ask on her first Interview with a Man,
METASTASIO makes her say,

Che vuoi da me?
Un Uom Sei dunque!
Andiamo Insieme.
Ah! troppo ron trattenerli, etc.
And these little Touches, (so differently do we judge in England) were thought
abroad to be delicate Strokes of the most elegant Simplicity.

He could wish it had been universally understood that it was not a TRAGEDY he
offered to the Public, but a DRAMATIC POEM; that is to say, a Piece with some
interesting Situations to engage the Affections, but which affords more Room
for a Picturesque Imagination to display itself, than is generally allowed to
the more important Concerns of real Tragedy, where the Distress should be
always increasing, where the Passions should be always rising to fuller and
stronger Emotions, and where of Course the Poet ought not to find Leisure for
Imagery and Description. Had this been felt and acknowledged, no Body would
have looked for another Kind of Entertainment than was promised, and the Smiles
arising from SYLVIA'S Dread of a Man (on the first Discovery of him), and her
gradual Attachment to him in Compliance with natural Instinct, would never have
been judged inconsistent with the Color of the Whole. But if the Author of the
Desert Island has erred in this, he has the Consolation of having erred with
the greatest Poet now in Europe.

As many of the malevolent Writers of the Age have heretofore honored the
Author with their Abuse, and as he was apprehensive that they still remained
under the Oppression of their Dullness and Obscurity, it was deemed proper to
call them forth into Daylight, by exhibiting one general Representative of them
all on the Stage. For this he returns his Thanks to the Author of the Prologue;
and if any needy Booksellers, or unhappy Authors, can find their Account in
taking further Liberties with him, he hereby declares, he should be sorry not
to have Merit enough to provoke some of them, and for their Encouragement, he
adds in the Words of the noble Author of the Characteristics, that He will
never reply, unless he should hear of them or their Works in any good Company a
Twelvemonth after.

Lincoln's Inn, Jan. 26, 1760. The AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE, Written and Spoken by Mr. GARRICK, In the Character of a DRUNKEN
POET.
ALL, all shall out -- all that I know and feel;
I will by Heaven -- to higher Powers appeal! --
Behold a Bard! -- no Author of tonight --
No, no, -- they cannot say that, with all their spite:
Ay, you may frown (looking behind the scenes) I Am at you, great and small --
Your Poet, Players, Managers and all! --
These Fools within here, swear that I Am in liquor --
My passion warms me -- makes my utt'rance thicker; --
I totter too -- but that is the Gout and Pain, --
French Wines, and living high, have been my bane. --
From all temptations now, I wisely steer me;
Nor will I suffer one fine Woman near me.
And this I sacrifice, to give you pleasure --
For you I Have coined my brains, -- and here is the treasure!
Pulls out a Manuscript. A treasure this, of profit and delight!
And all thrown by for this damned stuff tonight: --
This is a play would water every eye! --
If I but look upon it, it makes me cry:
This Play would tears from blood-stained Soldiers draw, --
And melt the bowels of hard-hearted Law!
Would fore end aft the storm-proof Sailor rake; --
Keep turtle-eating Aldermen awake!
Would the cold blood of ancient Maidens thrill,
And make even pretty younger tongues lie still.
This Play not even Managers would refuse, --
Had Heaven but given 'em any brains, to choose! --
Puts up his Manuscript. Your Bard tonight, bred in the ancient school,
Designs and measures all by critic rule;
Amongst Friends -- it goes no farther -- He Is a Fool.
So very classic, and so very dull --
His Desert Island is his own dear Skull:
No Soul to make the Playhouse ring, and rattle,
No Trumpets, Thunder, Ranting, Storms, or Battle!
But all your fine poetic Prittle-prattle.
The Plot is this -- A Lady's cast away --
"Long before the beginning of the Play;"
And they are taken by a Fisherman,
The Lady and the Child -- it is Bays's plan --
So on he blunders -- He Is an Irishman. --
It Is all alike -- his comic stuff I mean --
I hate all humor -- it gives me the Spleen;
So damn 'em both, with all my heart, unsight, unseen.
But should you ruin him, still I Am undone --
I Have tried all ways to bring my Phoenix on --
Showing his Play again. Flatter I can with any of our Tribe --
Can cut and slash -- indeed I cannot bribe;
What must I do then? -- beg you to subscribe.
Be kind ye Boxes, Galleries, and Pit --
It Is but a Crown a piece, for-all this Wit:
All Sterling Wit -- to puff myself I hate --
You Will never supply your wants at such a rate!
It Is worth your money, I would scorn to wrong ye, --
You smile consent -- I Will send my hat among ye.
Going, he returns. So much beyond all praise your bounties swell!
Not my own Tongue, my Gra-ti-tude can tell --
"A little Flattery sometimes does well."

Staggers off. Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
FERDINAND, Husband to Constantia, Mr. HOLLAND. HENRICO, Friend to Ferdinand,
Mr. FLEETWOOD.
WOMEN.
CONSTANTIA, Mrs. PRITCHARD. SYLVIA, her Daughter, Miss PRITCHARD.
SCENE, A DESERT ISLAND.

THE DESERT ISLAND.
ACT I.
The scene represents a vale in the Desert Island, surrounded by rocks,
caverns, grottos, flowering shrubs, exotic trees, and plants growing wild. On
one side is a cavern in a rock, over the entrance of which appears, in large
characters, an unfinished inscription. CONSTANTIA is discovered at work at the
inscription, in a romantic habit of skins, leaves, and flowers; in her hand she
holds a broken sword, and stands in act to finish the imperfect inscription.

After a short pause, she begins. REST, rest my arm -- ye weary sinews, rest --
Awhile forget your office -- On this rock
Here sit thee down, and think thy-self to stone.
Sits down. -- Would heaven I could! -- [rises.] Ye shrubs, ye nameless plants,
That wildly-gadding 'midst the rifted rocks
Wreathe your fantastic shoots; -- ye darksome trees
That weave yon verdant arch above my head,
Shad'wing this solemn scene; -- ye moss-grown caves,
Romantic grottos, -- all ye objects drear, --
Tell me, in pity tell me, have ye seen,
Through the long series of revolving time,
In which you have enclosed this lonely mansion,
Say, have ye seen another wretch like me? --
No, never! -- You, in tenderest sympathy,
Have joined my plaints -- you, at the midnight hour,
When with uprooted hair I Have strewn the earth,
And called my husband gone; -- have called in vain
Perfidious Ferdinand! -- you, at that hour,
Have wakened echo in each vocal cell,
Till every grove, and every mountain hoar,
Mourned to my griefs responsive -- Well you know
The story of my woes -- Even yonder marble
Relenting feels the touch; receives each trace
That forms the melancholy tale. -- Though rude,
And inexpert my hand; -- though all uncouth
The instrument, -- yet there behold my work
Well nigh complete -- let me about it straight.
She advances toward the rock. Ye deep engraven letters, there remain;
And if in future time resistless fate
Should throw some Briton on this dismal shore;
Then speak aloud; -- to his astonished sense
Relate my sad, my memorable case --
Alarm his soul, call out --

STOP TRAVELLER. HERE CONSTANTIA, WITH HER LITTLE INFANT, SYLVIA, WAS DESERTED
BY HER HUSBAND, THE PERFIDIOUS FERDINAND; WHO PRETENDING TO LAND HER FOR
REFRESHMENT FROM THE DANGERS OF A STORMY SEA, BARBAROUSLY LEFT HER ON THIS
UNHOSPITABLE ISLAND, WHERE SHE ENDED HER DEPLORABLE LIFE. FRIEND! WHOEVER THOU
ART, PITY MY WRONGS, BUT AGAINST MY HUSBAND, (FOR LOVE LIKE MINE CANNOT FORGET
WHERE ONCE WITH DELIGHT IT FIXED) I CHARGE YOU NEVER MEDITATE R -- Revenge! --
the word Revenge is wanting still.
Ye holy powers! if with one pitying look
You Will deign to view me, grant my earnest prayer!
Let me but finish this my sad inscription,
Then let this busy, this afflicted heart
Be still at once, and beat my breast no more,
She goes on with her work.
Enter SYLVIA. SYLVIA. My dearest mother -- oh! quite out of breath.

CONSTANTIA. What is the matter, child?


SYLVIA. Why, ma'am, my heart,
Beats wild with joy -- oh! such an incident! --

CONSTANTIA. What incident, my sweet?


SYLVIA. My little fawn,
My dear, my loveliest fawn, -- for many days
Whose loss I Have mourned; for whose dear sake I Have left
No corner of the isle unsearch'd; -- this moment
Over the dew-spangled lawn, with printless feet,
Came bounding to me; playful frisk'd about
With inexpressive airs of glad surprise,
With eager signs of transport -- Big round tears
Stood trembling in his eye, and seemed to speak
His fond regret still mingling with his joy.

CONSTANTIA. And is it that, my love, delights thee so? --


SYLVIA. And can you wonder, ma'am? -- yes, that delights me,
Transports me, charms me; -- he is my darling care,
My dear companion, my sweet little friend,
That loves me, gambols round me, watches still
With anxious tenderness my every motion,
Pants on my bosom, leaps into my arms,
And wanders over me with a thousand kisses.
Before this time, he never once strayed from me;
-- I thought I lost him; -- but he is found again!
And can you wonder I Am transported thus!

CONSTANTIA. Oh! happy state of innocence! -- how sweet
Thy joys, simplicity, ever yet the mind
With artificial passions learns to glow;
Ere taste has taken our senses to her school,
Has given each well-bred appetite her laws,
Taught us to feel imaginary bliss,
Or elss expire in elegance of pain.

SYLVIA. Nay, now, again, you're growing grave -- it is you
Give laws to appetite; -- forbid each sense
To minister delight; your eyes are dimmed
With constant tears; -- the roses on your cheek
Fade like yon violets, when excessive dews
Have bent their drooping melancholy heads;
Soon they repair their graces; soon recall
Their aromatic lives, and smiling yield
To sighing Zephyr all their balmy sweets.
To grief you're still a prey; still wan despair
Sits withering at your heart, and every feature
Has your directions to be fixed in woe.
Nay, pr'ythee now clear up -- you make me sad --
-- Will you, Mama, forget your cares? --

CONSTANTIA. Forget! --
Oh! sweet oblivion, thy all-healing balm
To wretches you refuse! -- can I forget
Perfidious Ferdinand? -- His tyrant form
Is ever present -- The deluding looks,
Endearing accents, and the soft regards
With which he led me to yon moss-clad cave,
There to repose awhile -- oh! cruel man!
And you, ye conscious wilds, I call you false!
Accomplices in guilt! -- The Zephyrs bland
That pant upon each leaf; -- the melody
That warbles through your groves; the falling fountains
That at each deep'ning cadence lull the mind,
Were all suborned against me; all conspired
To wrap me in the silken folds of sleep.
Sudden I wake -- where, where is Ferdinand?
I rave, I shriek, -- no Ferdinand replies; --
Frantic I rove through all your winding glades, --
I seek the shore; -- no Ferdinand appears --
I climb yon craggy steeps; I see the ship
Unfurling all her sails -- I call aloud,
I stamp, cry out; -- deaf as the roaring sea
He catches every gale that blows from heaven,
And cleaves his liquid way. --

SYLVIA. Why will you thus
Recall your past afflictions? --

CONSTANTIA. Ah! what then,
Thou wretched Constance, what were then thy feelings
I rend my tresses, -- beat my breast in vain,
In vain stretch out these ineffectual arms,
Pierce with my frantic cries the wounded air,
Dash my bare bosom on the flinty rock,
Then rise again, and strain my aching sight,
To see the ship still lessening to my view,
And take the last, last glimpse, as far, far off
In the horizon's verge she dwindles still,
Grows a dim speck, and mixes with the clouds
Just vanishing, -- just lost, -- ah! seen no more.

SYLVIA. I pr'ythee don't talk so -- my heart dies in me --
Why will not you strive a little to forget
This melancholy theme? -- the twilight gray
Of morn but faintly streaks the east; the stars
Still glimmer through the whit'ning air; the groves
Are mute; yon all-devouring deep lies hushed;
The tuneful birds, and the whole brute creation
Still sink in soft oblivious slumber wrapped,
Forgetful of their cares; -- all, -- all but you
Know some repose; -- you pass the dreary night
In tears and ceaseless grief; then rising wild
Anticipate the dawn, and here resume
Your doleful task, or else ascend the height
Of yonder promontory; there forlorn
You sit, and hear the brawling waves beneath
Lash the resounding shore; your brimful eye
Still fixed on that sad quarter of the heavens
Where my hard father disappeared.

CONSTANTIA. Yes, there
My melancholy loves to dwell; there loves
To sit, and pine over its hoard of grief;
To roll these eyes over all the sullen main,
In hopes some sail may this way shape its course,
With tidings of the human race -- Oh! heavens!
Could I behold that dear, that wished for sight,
Could I but see some vestiges of man,
Some mark of social life, even though the ship
Should shun this isle, and court propitious gales
Beneath some happier clime; yet still the view
Would cheer my soul, and my heart bound with joy
At that faint prospect of my fellow creatures.
But not for me, such transport; -- not for me --
Dear native land, I now no more must see thee,
Condemned in ever-during solitude to mourn,
From thy sweet joys, society, debarred!

SYLVIA. But to your happiness what is wanting here?
Full many a time I Have heard you praise the arts,
The polished manners, and gay scenes of bliss
Which Europe yields -- yet ever and anon
I from your own discourse can gather too
That happiness is all unknown to Europe;
That envy there can dwell, and discontent;
The smile, that wakens at another's woe;
The heart, that sickens at another's praise;
The tongue, that carries the malignant tale;
The little spirit, that subverts a friend;
Fraud, perfidy, ingratitude, and murder.
Now sure with reason I prefer these scenes
Of innocence, tranquillity, and joy!

CONSTANTIA. Alas! my child, it is easy to forego
Unknown delights -- pleasures we have never felt. --

SYLVIA. Are we not here what you yourself have told me
In Europe sovereigns are? -- here we have fixed
Our little sylvan reign. -- The guileless race
Of animals, that roam the lawns and woods,
Are tractable and willing subjects; -- pay
Passive obedience to us -- and yon sea
Becomes our tributary; hither rolls
In each hoarse-murm'ring tide his various stores
Of daintiest shellfish -- the unbidden earth,
Of human toil all ignorant, pours forth
Whatever to the eye, or taste, can prove
Rare, exquisite, and good -- at once the spring
Calls forth its green delights, and summer's blush
Glows on each purple branch. The seasons here
On the same tree, with glad surprise,
Behold each other's gifts arise;
Spontaneous fruits around us grow;
For ever here the Zephyrs blow:
Shrubs ever flow'ring,
Shades embow'ring;
Heavenly spots,
Cooling grots,
Verdant mountains,
Falling fountains;
Pure limpid rills,
Adown the hills,
That wind their way
And over the meadows play,
Enamored of the enchanted ground.

CONSTANTIA. What is this waste of beauty, all these charms
Of cold, inanimate, unconscious nature,
Without the social sense? those joys, my Sylvia,
Thou can not miss; for thou have never known 'em.

SYLVIA. But still, those beauteous tracts of Europe,
Which you so much regret, are full of men;
And men, you know, are animals of prey:
I Am sure that you yourself have told me so
A thousand times. --

CONSTANTIA. And if I have, my child,
I told a dismal truth. -- Oh! they are false,
Inexorable, cruel, fell deceivers;
Their unrelenting hearts no harbor know
For honor, truth, humanity, or love.

SYLVIA. Well then, in this lone isle, this dear retreat
From them at least we are free. --

CONSTANTIA. Poor innocent!
I cannot but grieve for her --
Bursts into tears, aside.
SYLVIA. Why fall afresh
Those drops of sorrow? -- pray you, now give over. --

CONSTANTIA. My heart will break -- I do not grieve, my child --
I cannot conceal my tears -- they must have way --

SYLVIA. Nay, if you love me, sure you will not thus
Make my heart ache within me! --

CONSTANTIA. No, my sweet --
I will not weep -- all will be well, my love --
Oh! misery! -- I cannot, -- I cannot contain --
The black ingratitude! --
Weeps.
SYLVIA. Say, is there aught
That I can do, Mama, to give you comfort? --
If there is, tell me -- shall I fetch my fawn?
Dry up your tears, and he is yours this moment,
-- I Will run and bring him to you. --

CONSTANTIA. Sylvia, no! --

SYLVIA. Nay do, Mama -- I beg you will -- you shall.
Exit.
CONSTANTIA alone. Alas! I fear my brain will turn -- the sun
Full sixteen times has made his annual course,
Since here I Have dragged a miserable being,
The victim of despair; which long ever now,
To phrenzy kindling, must have forced me dash
My brain in madness on yon flinty rocks,
And end my pangs at once; if the keen instinct
Of strong maternal love had not restrained
My wild disordered soul, and bade me live
To watch her tender infancy; to rear
Her blooming years; with fond delighted care
To tend each blossom of her growing mind,
And see light gradual dawning on her soul.
And yet to see her thus, -- to see her here,
Cut off from every social bliss; condemned
Like some fair flower that in a desert grows,
To breathe its sweets into the passing wind,
And waste its bloom all unperceived away!
It is enough to break a mother's heart.
Let me not think on it -- let me shun that thought.
Sits down and sings.
I. What though his guilt my heart has torn,
Yet lovely is his mien,
His eyes mild-op'ning as the morn,
Round him each grace is seen.
But oh! ye nymphs, your loves never let him win,
For oh! deceit and falsehood dwell within.

II. From his red lip his accents stole,
Soft as kind vernal snows;
Melting they came, and in the soul
Desire and joy arose.
But oh! ye nymphs, never listen to his art,
For oh! base falsehood rankles in his heart.

III. He left me in this lonely state!
He fled, and left me here,
Another Ariadne's fate,
To mourn the live-long year.
He fled -- but oh! what pains the heart must prove,
When we reveal the crimes of him we love!

Re-enter SYLVIA. SYLVIA. I cannot bring him now -- in yonder stream
That through its pebbled channel glides along
Soft-murm'ring to the sea, he stands to cool
His beauteous form in the pure limpid rill.
But still he shall be yours --

CONSTANTIA. To thee, my child,
To thee he causes joy -- but joy to me
There Is nothing now can bring -- left by my husband!
By the false barbarous man! --

SYLVIA. And yet this man
You still regret mdash; you must excuse me now --
I vow, I cannot but think, 'midst all your grief,
All your reproaches, your complaints against him,
That still this man, this cruel fell deceiver,
Has found, -- I know not why -- within your breast
Some tender advocate, to plead his cause.

CONSTANTIA. No, Sylvia, no; my love is turned to hate! --

SYLVIA. Then dry your sorrows and this day begin
A happier train of years -- and lo! the sun
Emerges from the sea -- He lists his orb
Above the purpled main, and streams abroad
His golden fluid over the world -- the birds
Exulting wake their notes -- all things rejoice,
And hills, and groves, and rocks, and valleys smile.
Let me entreat you then forget your cares,
And share the general bliss. --
The sun is seen to rise at a distance, as it were out of the sea.
CONSTANTIA. Once more all hail,
Thou radiant power, who in your bright career
Or rising or descending, have beheld
My never-ceasing woe! -- again thou climb'st
In orient glory, and recall'st the cares
And toils of man and beast -- but oh! in all
Your flaming course, your beams will never light
Upon a wretch so lost, so cursed as I am.

SYLVIA. And yet, my mother --


CONSTANTIA. Mine are pangs, my child,
Strokes of adversity no time can cure,
No lenient arts can soften or assuage.
But I Will not grieve thee, Sylvia -- I Will retire
To some sequestered haunt -- There, all forlorn,
I Will sit, and wear myself away in thought.

Exit. SYLVIA, alone. Alas! how obstinately bent on grief
Is her whole mind! -- the votarist of care!
In vain I try to soften her afflictions,
And with each art beguile her from her woe.
I chide, entreat, caress, and all in vain.
And what to me seems strange, perverse, and wondrous,
The more I strive, the more her sorrows swell;
Her tears the faster fall, fall down her cheek
In streams so copious, and such bitter anguish,
That I myself at length, I know not how,
Catch the soft weakness, and o'erpow'r'd with grief,
Flow all dissolving in unbidden tears.
Assist her heaven. -- Her heart will break at last --
I tremble at the thought -- I Will follow straight
And still implore, beseech, try evr'y way
To reconcile her to herself and me.
But see, look yonder! what a sight is there!
What can it mean, that huge enormous mass
That moves upon the bosom of the deep!
-- A floating mountain! -- no -- a mountain never
Could change its place -- for such a monstrous bulk
How light it urges on its way -- how quick,
How rapid in its course! -- What can it be --
-- I Will towered the shore, and from the pointed rock
That juts into the waves, at leisure view
This wondrous sight, and what it is explore.

END of the first ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, Another view of the island, with an opening to the sea between several
hills and rocks.

Enter SYLVIA. SYLVIA. STILL I behold it -- still it glides along
Through the tumultuous sea -- and lo! before it
The waves divide! and now they close again,
Leaving a tract of angry foam behind.
It must be, sure, some monster of the deep;
For see! -- upon its huge broad back it bears
Expanded wings, that, spreading to the wind,
Lie broad incumbent over the surge beneath --
-- Ah! save me, save me! -- what new forms appear!
What shapes of unknown being rise before me!
From yon huge monster"s side they issue forth,
And bolt upon the shore! -- behold, they stop,
And now with eager disconcerted pace
Precipitate rush forward on the Isle, --
Now amongst the rocks they wind their silent way,
FERDINAND and HENRICO appear. Protect me, heaven! defend me! shield me! -- ah!
Hide me, ye woods, within your deep recess;
Never may these monsters penetrate your haunts;
Never trace my footsteps through your darksome ways.
Behind the covert of this woodbine bower
Oh! let me rest concealed! --
She retires.
FERDINAND and HENRICO come forward. HENRICO. No trace appears,
No vestige here is seen of human kind.
It Is drear, it is waste, and unfrequented all.
And hark! -- what noise? -- from yonder toiling deep
How dreadful sounds the pealing roar! -- my friend,
My valued Ferdinand, 'twere best retire.
This cannot be the place. --

FERDINAND. Oh! my Henrico,
This is the fatal shore -- the well-known scene,
Yon bay, yon rocks, yon mountains, from whose brows
The imbow'ring forest over-hangs the deep,
Each well-remember'd object strikes my view,
Answers the image in my mind preserved,
Engraven there by love's recording-hand,
And never, but with life, to fade from thence.

HENRICO. And yet thy love-enfeebled soul may form
Imaginary tokens of resemblance.
This soil unbeaten seems by mortal step.

FERDINAND. No, my Henrico, no -- this is the spot --
My heart in every pulse confirms it to me.
This is the place, the very place, where fate
Began to weave the tissue of my woes.
Oh! I was cursed, abhorred of heaven, or else
I never had trusted the contentious waves,
But kept my store of happiness at home.

HENRICO Repine not for an action that arose
From filial piety, -- a father's mandate
Required obedience from you. --

FERDINAND. To his summons
I paid a glad attention -- yet, good heaven!
Why in that early era of my bliss
Should then his orders come, to dash my joys? --
Oh! I was blessed with all that rarest beauty,
With all that every Venus of the mind,
The tender heart, and the enlivened wit
Could pour delightful on the raptured sense
Of the young bridegroom, whose admiring eyes
Still hung enamored on her every charm,
And thence drank long inspiring draughts of love,
Unsated still, -- still kindling at the view.

HENRICO. Thy fate indeed was hard --

FERDINAND. Heaven knows it was --
Each soft desire, each joy refined was mine --
The hours soft glided by, and as they passed
Scattered new blessings from their balmy wings;
They saw our ever new delight; they saw
A blooming offspring crown our mutual loves;
The mother's features, and her every grace
In this our daughter exquisitely traced.
But to be torn from that supreme of bliss, --
My wife, -- Constantia, -- and my beauteous babe,
Here to be left on this untravell'd isle,
To pine in bitterness of want! -- their bed
The cold bare earth, while the inclement winds
From yonder main came howling round their heads,
Until at length the friendly hand of death
In pity threw his shroud upon their woes.

HENRICO. Too sure, I fear, they are lost. --

FERDINAND. Perhaps, my friend,
Perhaps when gasping in the pangs of death, --
-- When every beauty faded from her cheek,
-- And her eye languish'd motionless and dim,
Perhaps even then, in that sad dismal hour,
My name still hovered on her quivering lips,
And naught but death could tear me from her heart.

HENRICO. Her tenderest thoughts no doubt were fixed on thee.

FERDINAND. Her tenderest thoughts! oh! no -- her utmost rage --
Who knows, Henrico, but she deemed me false;
Deemed me a vile deserter from her arms?
She did, -- she must -- each strong appearance joined
To mark me guilty -- Oh! that thought strikes deep
It Is scorpion stings into my very heart.
Could she but think me so refined in guilt,
So exquisite a villain, as to cause
A moment's anguish in that tender breast,
Where all the loves, where all the virtues dwelt,
-- 'Twere misery, -- 'twere torture in the extreme --
And yet she thought me such -- by heaven she did --
Accused me of the worst, the blackest treason,
Of treason to my love -- stung with the idea
She roam'd this isle, and to these desert wilds
Poured forth her lamentable tale; -- who knows
But on some craggy cliff whole nights she sat
Raving in madness to the moon's pale gleam;
Until at length all kindling into phrenzy,
Clasping her infant closer to her breast,
With desperation wild from off the rock
Headlong she plunged into the roaring waves,
While her last accents murmured faithless Ferdinand.

HENRICO. Distract not thus your soul with fancied woes.
She could not think thee faithless; thee, whose mind,
Whose every virtue were so well approved.

FERDINAND. Still will I hope she did not. -- Oh! she knew
I made that voyage in duty to a father.
A while we steered a happy course, until
Beneath the burning line, from whence the sun
In straight direction pours his ardent blaze
On every fever'd sense, a storm arose,
Sudden and wild; as if a war of nature
Were thundering over our heads -- full twenty days
It drove us headlong on the dashing surge
Far from our destined way, until at length
In evil hour we landed on this isle.

SYLVIA returns, and peeps from behind a hedge. SYLVIA. Methought I heard a
sound, as if they both
Held mutual converse -- yonder lo! they stand --
They do not follow me -- what can they be! --

FERDINAND. There is the spot, just where yon aged tree
Imbrowns the plain beneath, on which the villains,
The unrelenting band of pirates, seized me --
There I received my wound, and there I fought
Till my sword shivered in my hand -- worn out,
Oppressed by numbers, pow'rless, and disarmed,
They bore me headlong to the beach; in vain
Piercing the air with horrid cries; in vain
Back towr'd the cave, where poor Constantia slept,
With her loved infant daughter in her arms,
Straining my ardent eyes -- my eyes alone!
For oh! their cruelty had bound my arms,
And tears and looks were all I then could use.

SYLVIA. The voice but indistinctly strikes my ear,
Would they would turn this way. --

FERDINAND. Fettered, tied down,
They dragged me to the vessel -- bore me hence --
In vain our ship pursued -- In vain gave chase --
Formed with detested skill the guilty bark
In which they plunged me, gliding oe'r the main
Outstripp'd their tardy course -- they steered away
Far to their regions of accursed bondage,
Far from Constantia, far from every joy
A doting husband, and delighted father
Feels in mixed rapture with his wife and child.
Oh! I could pour my plaints -- but I Will not wound
Thy ear, my friend, with further lamentation.

HENRICO. Would Heaven I could remove the cause --

FERDINAND. Alas!
That cannot be -- Thou can not bid return
The irrevocable flight of time; recall
The moments of our young delight; annul
And render void, what once the hand of fate
Has from it is stores of woe, poured down upon me.

SYLVIA (half concealed.) Why will they stand with looks averted thus?
I long to see their countenance and mein.

FERDINAND. But yet, thou best of friends, yet grant me this;
Assist my search; -- oh! let me roam around
This fatal shore -- the isle's circumference
Circles a scanty space -- we cannot lose
Each other here -- do thou pursue that path
That leads due east -- this way I Will bend my course.

HENRICO. By heaven there is no task of hardihood
Of toil, or danger but I Will try for thee;
For thee, my friend; -- to thee I owe my life,
And that more precious boon, my liberty:
Thou have released me from the galling chain,
From slav'ry's bitter pressure -- 'twas thy skill,
That formed the plan of freedom, seized the vessel,
And made your friends the partners of your flight.
-- For thee I Will roam around -- but oh! I fear
Our search will prove in vain --

FERDINAND. Too sure it will --
And yet it is the doom of love like mine
To dwell for ever on the sad idea
Of the dear object lost; to visit often
A lonely pilgrim every well known scene,
Each haunted glade, where the loved object strayed;
To call each circumstance of passed delight
Back to the soul; in fond excursions seek
The dear lamented shade -- Then, oh! my friend,
Then let me taste that sad, that pensive comfort,
Range through these wilds; ascend each craggy steep,
Try in each grotto, in each gloomy cave
If happily there remain some vestige of Constantia,
Exit.
HENRICO. On yonder beach we'll meet again -- farewell! --

SYLVIA. Conceal thee Sylvia; -- ah! -- it comes this way! --
Then let me seek the covert of the woods,
Where nods the brownest horror; there lie safe
From the unusual sight of these strange beings.
Exit.
HENRICO, solus. How cruel is my friend's condition! -- doomed
For ever to regret, yet never find
The object of his soul -- his early love
He lavished all on her -- with her it goes
To the dank grave, and leaves him hapless here
To die a lingering death. -- Yet still I Will try
Bv every office friendship can perform
To heal the wound that preys upon his life.
Exit.
The back scene closes, and presents a thick wood; then enter SYLVIA. SYLVIA.
What have my eyes beheld? -- my fluttering heart
Beats quick in stange emotions -- from yon grove
Of tufted trees, I saw this nameless being
Walk over, the russet heath -- it is face appeared
Confessed to view -- It cannot be a man --
No lines of cruelty deformed his visage. --
Were it a man, his untamed savage soul
Would strongly speak in each distorted feature --
This was all pleasing, amiable and mild:
A gentle sorrow, bright'ning into smiles,
Such as bespoke a calm, yet feeling spirit,
Sat on its' peaceful brow, and oe'r it threw
A gentle gleam of sweetness and of pain.
-- It cannot be a woman neither -- no --
The dress accords not with that mode, which often
My mother has described -- Whatever it be
Attraction dwells about it; winning smiles;
Assuasive airs of tenderness and joy.
I Will seek my mother -- she perhaps may know
These forms, to me unusual -- By this row
Of darksome pines, my steps all unperceived
May gain the place where with assiduous hand
She works, and teaches the rude rocks to tell
Her mournful elegy -- what mean my feet?
-- Why stand they thus forgetful of their office?
-- Why heaves the involuntary sigh! -- and why
Thus in quick pulses beats my heart? -- my eyes
A misty dimness covers -- In my ears
Strange murmurs sound -- my very breath is lost --
What can it be? -- I know thee fear! -- it is thou
That causest this! -- and yet it cannot be fear --
Fear cannot thrill with pleasure through the veins;
Knows not this dubious joy -- these grateful tremblings --
I cannot guess what these emotions mean,
Nor what this busy thing my heart would want!
Let me seek shelter in my mother's arms.
Exit.
Scene changes to the first view of the island where CONSTANTIA'S inscription
is seen. Enter FERDINAND FERDINAND No -- never more shall these fond eyes
behold her.
Lost, lost, my poor Constantia lost! -- In vain
I search these gloomy woods -- In vain call out
Her honored name to every hill and dale.
My eyes are false, or on the craggy base
Of yonder rock some instrument appears,
The mark of human kind --
Takes it up. A broken sword!
Oh! all ye heavenly powers! -- the very same --
This once was mine -- unfaithful to it is trust
It failed me at my utmost need -- I see
The well known characters; the very words
That formed it is motto -- it is, it is the same --
Oh! were Constantia found! -- what do I see?
All over with hair the flinty rock bestrew'd! --
These were her decent tresses -- these in anguish
She tore relentless from her beauteous head,
Up by the roots she tore, and scattered wild
To all the passing winds -- she still may live! --
Constantia? -- my beloved, -- my life, return! --
Constantia! -- ha! -- what mystic characters
Are hewn into the rock? -- my name appears --
He reads. STOP TRAVELLER. HERE CONSTANTIA, WITH HER LITTLE INFANT, SYLVIA, WAS
DESERTED BY HER HUSBAND, THE PERFIDIOUS FERDINAND; WHO PRETENDING TO LAND HER
FOR REFRESHMENT FROM THE DANGERS OF A STORMY SEA, BARBAROUSLY LEFT HER ON THIS
UNHOSPITABLE ISLAND, WHERE SHE ENDED HER DEPLORABLE LIFE. Support me, heaven!
-- ah! no -- withold your aid,
Ye unrelenting powers, and let me thus,
Each vital spark subsiding, thus expire.
Leans against the rock.
Enter HENRICO. HENRICO. What hoa! -- my Ferdinand! -- this way the sound
Struck on my listening ear -- what means my friend
Thus growing to the rock, transformed to stone,
A breathing statue, 'midst these shapeless piles? --

FERDINAND. Henrico there! -- read there! --

HENRICO. Letters engraved! --
He reads to himself as far as SHE ENDED HER DEPLORABLE LIFE. Alas! my friend
--
They gaze speechless at each other for some time, then Ferdinand falls. The
storm of grief o'erpow'rs his feeble spirits.
Now rouse thy strength, my Ferdinand, and bear
This load of sorrow like a man. --

FERDINAND. I do --
Thou see I do -- I do not weep, my friend --
These eyes are dry -- their very source is dry --
-- I am her cruel husband to the last. --

HENRICO. Oh! thou were ever kind and tender to her.

FERDINAND. Tender and kind! -- look there! -- there stands the black,
The horrid roll of guilt denounced against me.
Lo! the dread characters! -- let me peruse
The whole sad record; of this bitter woe
Still deeper drink, and gorge me with affliction.
He reads. FRIEND! WHOEVER THOU ART, PITY MY WRONGS, BUT AGAINST MY HUSBAND,
(FOR LOVE LIKE MINE CANNOT FORGET WHERE ONCE WITH DELIGHT IT FIXED) I CHARGE
YOU NEVER MEDITATE R -- Revenge, she meant to say -- the word's begun --
But death untimely stopped her hand -- oh! misery!
She thought me false, and yet could love still --
The wound now pierces deeper -- had she loathed me,
Abhorred me, cursed me, 'twere not half the torture
This angel-goodness causes -- and to lose her!
To lose a mind like here is, that thus could pour
Such unexampled tenderness and love,
Amidst the keenest anguish -- on the earth
Measure thy length, thou wretch accursed! -- there lie,
For ever lie, and to these woods and wilds
Howl out thy griefs in madness and despair.

HENRICO. I feel, I feel thy sorrows -- oh! my friend, --
Cruel event! -- your tears, alas! are just --
Then let them flow, and let me mingle mine --
Your gushing sorrows may assuage your grief,
This storm of rage attemp'ring into peace.

FERDINAND. Who talks of peace? -- let phrenzy seize my brain --
Come, moon-struck madness, with thy glaring eye,
And clanking chain; come, shoot thy kindling fires
Into my inmost soul; -- blast every thinking power;
Raze each idea out; -- tear up at once
The seat of memory -- no -- leave me that --
Still leave me memory, to picture forth
Constantia's lovely form, that I may sit
With unclad sides, upon some blasted heath
And gloat upon her image; -- see her still,
See her whole days with fancy's gushing eye,
And gaze on that alone --

HENRICO. Arise, my friend,
And quit this fatal shore --

FERDINAND. And quit this shore!
But whither turn? -- ah! whither shall I go? --
Where shelter me from misery? -- this isle
Shall be my journey's bound. --

HENRICO. What can thou mean?

FERDINAND. Never again to draw the vital air
But where my love expired -- to feed my soul
With these sad objects, this sepulchral tale,
Even to the height of yet unheard of anguish:
To print my pious kisses on the rocks;
To bathe the ground, which her dear footsteps pressed,
With the incessant tears of burning anguish;
To make these wilds all vocal with her name,
Till this cold lifeless tongue shall move no more.

HENRICO. By heaven, you must not think --

FERDINAND. Farewell! -- farewell! --
Consult thy happiness! -- for ever here
By fate I Am doomed to stay -- alas! Constantia! --
To perish with thy infant here! -- no friend
To close thy ghastly orbs! -- thy pale remains
On the bare earth exposed, without the tribute
Of a fond husband's tears over thy dead corse; --
Without the last sad obsequies -- yet here,
I still will raise an empty sepulcher.
There shall no cold unconscious marble form
In mockery of imitated woe
Bend oe'r the fancied urn: myself will be
The sad, the pensive, monumental figure,
Distilling real anguish over the tomb;
Till wasting by degrees I moulder down,
And sink to silent durst. --

HENRICO. What man could do,
Already youv'e performed --

FERDINAND. Prithee, no more --
I will about it straight -- this place affords
Materials for the work -- Thither I Will bring
Whatever can deck the scene -- Constantia, yes;
I will appease thy discontented shade,
Then follow thee to yonder realms of bliss.
Exit.
HENRICO solus. His vehemence of grief bears down his reason.
He must not linger here -- his stay were fatal --
Force will be necessary -- to our boat.
I Will hasten back and call some trusty friends
To drag him from this melancholy shore.

END of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
The same scene continues. Enter SYLVIA. THROUGH the befriending gloom os arching
bowers,
Through walks, where never sunbeam pierced, at length
I Have gained this deep-encircled vale -- ah! me!
I feel strange tremors still -- she is not here --
Mama! -- where can she be? -- her mournful task
Waits for her lingering hand -- my dearest mother --
She answers not -- what noise is that? -- methought
I heard some steps advancing -- it is my fawn
That rustles through the forest glade -- he stops
And looks, then runs, and stops again to take
A fearful gaze -- he too perhaps has seen
These unknown beings -- yonder lo! he stands
In mute expressive wonder -- heaven protect me!
-- Through this close path, that gradual winding
Leads on to plains, to woods, and verdant lawns
Embosom'd in the rock, I Will journey up --
The day now glows intense, but by the rills,
That through embow'ring groves come purling down,
I often can lay me, and enjoy each breeze
That plays amid those craggy scenes -- a noise
From yonder interwoven branches -- ha! --
Ye guardian angels, save me! -- see, see there --
That thing again! --

Enter HENRICO. HENRICO What beauteous form in these forlorn abodes
Attracts my wondering eyes? --

SYLVIA. Ye heavenly powers!
Retiring from him.
HENRICO. It swims before my fight -- whatever thou art,
Virgin, or goddess -- oh! a goddess sure! --
Thou goddess of these mansions! -- for thy looks
Beam heavenly radiance, with propitious ears
Accept my supplication --

SYLVIA. Ha! -- it speaks --
It speaks -- what do thou mean! --

HENRICO. Oh! say what place,
What clime is this? -- and what art thou that thus
Adorn'st this lonely mansion? --

SYLVIA. Will you first
Promise to come no nearer?

HENRICO. With devotion
As true as ever pilgrim offered up
In holy fervor to his, saint, -- I promise.

SYLVIA. How gentle it is demeanor! -- tell me now
What thing thou art?

HENRICO. One born to misery; --
A man, whom fate --

SYLVIA. A man! -- art thou a man?

HENRICO. I am. --

SYLVIA. Oh! heavens! -- a man! -- protect me -- save me --
Runs away,
HENRICO. Nay, fly me not -- a sudden impulse here
Bids me pursue -- forgive, thou unknown fair,
That with soft violence I thus presume
To force thee measure back thy steps again.
He brings her back.
SYLVIA. Force me not thus, inhuman, barbarous man --
What have I said -- Oh! worthy generous man,
Thus on my knees I beg, -- have mercy on me --
-- I never did you harm -- indeed I did not. --

HENRICO. Arise, [raises her] thou lovely tenant of these woods,
And let me thus, -- thus as befits the man
Whose mind runs over with rapture and surprise,
Whose heart throbs wild with mingled doubt and joy,
Thus let me worship this celestal form,
This heavenly brightness, to my wondering eyes
That sheds such influence, as when an angel
Breaks through a flood of glory to the sight,
Of some expiring saint, and cheers his soul
With visions of disclosing heaven.

SYLVIA. He kneels! --
He kneels to me! -- how mild his very look --
How soft each word! -- are you indeed a man? --

HENRICO. I am, sweet saint -- and one whose heart is prone
To melt at each idea beauty prints
On his delighted sense; and sure such beauty,
Touched by the hand of harmony, adorned
With inexpresive graces, well may claim
My lowliest adoration and my love.

SYLVIA. This language all is new; -- but still it has
I know not what of charming in it, that gains
Upon die listening ear, -- If this be falsehood; --
Then falsehood can assume a pleasing look.

HENRICO Why those averted eyes?

SYLVIA. What would you have?

HENRICO. Oh! if thou art as gracious, as you are fair,
Say have you seen Constantia? when and where,
And how did she expire? --

SYLVIA. Constantia lives --
Why did thou say expire? -- my mother lives,
Lives in these blessed abodes --

HENRICO. Ah! gentle Sylvia, --
So I will call thee, -- daughter of Constantia,
Oh! fly and find her out -- mean time I Will seek
The Afflicted Ferdinand. --

SYLVIA. What do thou say? --
Can he, can Ferdinand be here? -- that false,
Perfidious, barbarous man, -- can he be here?

HENRICO. He is, my fair; nor barbarous nor false.
Fortune that made him wretched, could no more.
Anon you will know the whole; to waste a moment
In conf'rence now, and longer to suspend
The meeting of this pair, who now in agony
Bemoan their lot, were barbarous indeed.

SYLVIA. But may I trust him? will not he do her harm?

HENRICO. He will not, my beauteous fair. --

SYLVIA. Is he like you? --

HENRICO. His goodness far transcends me --

SYLVIA. Then I think
I Will venture to comply -- let us go together. --

HENRICO. Oh! I could tend thy steps for ever; hear
Soft accents warbling from thy vermeil lip,
Watch thy mild-glancing eye; behold how grace,
Whatever you do, which ever way you bend,
Guides each harmonious movement; but this hour
Is friendship's due; then let us instant fly
Through different paths -- thou to seek out Constantia,
And I to find her husband -- happily so
Their meeting will be speedier -- farewell!
I Will bring him to this very spot -- adieu!
For a short interval adieu, my love!

SYLVIA. Farewell! -- another word -- pray what is your name?

HENRICO. Fair excellence, Henrico I am called.

SYLVIA. Pray do not tarry long, Henrico --

HENRICO. Why
That pleasing charge, my sweet?

SYLVIA. I cannot tell;
But as you're leaving me, each step you move,
My spirits sink, a melancholy gloom
Darkens the scene around, and I methinks
Helpless in solitude am left again
To wander all alone a dreary way.

HENRICO. Oh! I will come again, thou angel sweetness!
Yes, I will come, and at that lovely shrine
Pour out my adoration and my vows.
Yes, I will come, to part from thee no more;
A moment now farewell! --
Exit.
SYLVIA alone. Farewell! -- be sure you keep your word -- He Is gone,
And yet is with me still -- absent I hear
And see him in his absence -- still his looks
Beam with mild dignity, and still his voice
Sounds in my ear delightful -- what it means,
This newborn sense, this wonderful emotion,
Unfelt till now, and mixed of pain and joy,
I cannot guess -- how my heart flutters in me!
I Will not perplex myself with vain conjecture;
Whatever the cause, the effect, I feel, is pleasing.
Constantia is heard singing within the scenes. Oh! heavens! what noise! -- it
is my mother's Voice
Again she pours her melancholy forth,
As sweetly plaintive as when sad Philomel,
Beneath some poplar shade, bemoans her young,
And sitting pensive on the lonely bough,
Her eye with sorrow dimmed, she tunes her dirge,
Warbling the night away, while all around
The vocal woodland, and each hill and dale
Ring with her griefs harmonious -- hark! -- that way
It sounds -- all gracious powr's direct me to her.
Exit.
A short song is heard within the scenes, then enter CONSTANTIA. CONSTANTIA.
From walk to walk, from glade to glade, over all
The sea-girt isle, over every mountain's top,
I roam from place to place; but oh; no place
Affords relief to me -- the sun now leads
The sultry hours, and from his burning ray
Each living thing retires; yet I endure
His fiercest rage. The fever in my mind
Heeds not external circumstance, and time
Witholds his medicinal aid -- the trees,
And rocks themselves his powerful influence own;
-- All but my grief -- that, each succeeding day
Sees in my heart fresh bleeding as at first.
Delay not thus, ye cruel fates, but come
And wrap me in eternal rest. -- Till then
Let me pursue my melancholy task.
Works at the inscription.
Enter FERDINAND. FERDINAND. Away with their ill-timed, officious care.
I Will none of it -- it is cruelty, not friendship --
It Is misery protracted, it is with art,
Inhuman art, to lengthen out the life
Of him who groans in torment -- no -- they never shall
Compel me back to a base world again! -- --
I Have lived enough -- my course is ended here --
For here Constantia lies -- ye heavenly powers!
What means upon yon consecrated ground
That visionary form, with lifted arm
And gleaming steel, that seems in act to carve
The ragged stone? --

CONSTANTIA. What is it I hear! -- a voice!
A groan! -- from whence -- ha!
Seeing Ferdinand,
FERDINAND. It Is, it is her ghost,
Her discontented sade that hovers still
About this place.

CONSTANTIA. Avaunt, thou air-drawn shape
Of that perfidious -- ah!
She faints away.
FERDINAND. Leave me not thus --
Oh! ever gracious, ever gentle, say --
It Is gone -- in sullen silence gone!
Enter HENRICO.
HENRICO. Quick let me find him, to' his raptured ear
Laying hold of Ferdinand. Give the delightful tidings -- ha!

FERDINAND. And thus
I sink at once and follow my beloved,
Falls into Henrico's arms.
HENRICO. He faints -- He faints -- the chilling dews of death
Distill through every pore -- my Ferdinand,
Awake, arise, and hear the joyful sounds
Of happiness restored -- His eyes unfold
To seek fair day light, and now close again
As if they sicken'd at the view --

FERDINAND, Forbear, And let me die! --

HENRICO. Constantia lives -- she lives
Once more to fold thee in her warm embrace.

FERDINAND. I saw her fleeting ghost -- sullen and pale
It vanished from my sight --

CONSTANTIA. Haunt me not thus
Thou cruel tyrant form! --
Coming to herself.
HENRICO. Whence is that voice?
Oh heavens -- Constantia there! -- she too entranced
Lies stretched upon the ground --

FERDINAND. Where is Constantia?
Oh! let me fly to her embrace -- it is she --
It is my wife! -- it is Constantia! -- still,
-- Oh! ecstasy of bliss? -- she still survives --

CONSTANTIA. It Is mere illusion all; -- the false creation Of some deceitful
dream --

FERDINAND. It Is real all --
Again I fold her thus -- the known embrace
Has thrilled it is wonted transport to my heart.
My life, my soul, thy Ferdinand is come,

CONSTANTIA. And come thou then, inhuman as thou art,
Come thou again to wreak thy falsehood on me?

FERDINAND. By heaven I never was false -- dash not my joys
With thy unkind suspicion of my love,
While thus transported far above the lot
Of human bliss, I press my lips to thine,
Inhaling balmy sweets, and all my soul
Runs over with joy, with wonder, and delight.

CONSTANTIA. Did thou not meanly leave me here a prey?

FERDINAND. And can Constantia deem me then so base?
Can she believe me such a vile betrayer?
-- Can thou? --

CONSTANTIA. On this unhospitable shore
Left as I was --

FERDINAND Oh! misery! -- thou we'rt
While I was dragged by an insidious band
Of pirates, savage bloodhounds! into bondage
But witness heaven! -- witness ye midnight hours
That heard my ceaseless groans, how her dear image
Grew to my very heart!

CONSTANTIA. And have thou then
Been doomed to slavery?

FERDINAND. I have.

CONSTANTIA. And groaned
This long, long time beneath oppression's hand?

FERDINAND Ever since these eyes have gazed delighted on thee,
The bitter draught of misery was mine.

CONSTANTIA. And were thou true indeed?

FERDINAND. By heaven I was.

CONSTANTIA. And have I then accused thee? -- have I poured
A thousand strong complaints against thee? -- called
High judging heaven to witness to my wrongs,
Told all these wilds, these rocks, these woodcrown'd hills
Of injured truth and violated love?
Falsely I talked, unjustly I complained
Of injured truth and violated love.
My Ferdinand was true -- again it is given
With his loved form to glad these eyes, to rush
With eager transport to his fond embrace,
To cling around his neck, and growing to him
Pour the warm tears of rapture and of love.
They embrace.
Enter SYLVIA. SYLVIA. I heard my mother's voice -- what do I see?
In a man's arms! -- embracing and embraced!

FERDINAND. Is that my Sylvia? -- oh! it must be so --
My child, my child survives! -- survives to take
A raptured father's blessing, and o'erpay
His sufferings past by his excess of joy,
This interview of mingled tears and kisses.
Embraces her,
SYLVIA. How gentle his deportment too! -- I feel
A soft attraction bind my soul to his.
-- Mama, are these the men, whom you described
Inexorable, cruel, sell deceivers? --

CONSTANTIA. I was deceived myself, my child; for truth,
Honor, and love, and constancy are theirs,
I now have proof of unexampled goodness.

SYLVIA. Indeed I strongly thought you wronged 'em much,
When first Henrico met my wondering eyes.

FERDINAND. Henrico is my friend, my best, Constantia,
And thou hereafter shall know all his virtues.

SYLVIA. And shall I know him too? --

HENRICO. Thou shall; -- and I
Will live thy slave, if thou will deign to love me,

SYLVIA. Love you! -- I know not what you mean by love;
But if with pleasure to behold thee; if
To hang upon thy words; to mourn thy absence;
With joy to meet again, and feel my heart
Form new desires, and wish it knows not what
If that be love -- I do already love you. --
I love you better than my fawn.

HENRICO. How sweet
The voice of innocence -- oh! thou shall be, --
-- My friend will smile consent, -- yes, thou fair nymph,
Shall be my bride --

SYLVIA. Your bride! -- what is that?

HENRICO. My wife. --

SYLVIA. No, sir, not that. -- I crave your pardon there --
-- I beg to be excused -- I do not choose
To be left helpless on a desert island.

CONSTANTIA. Thy father did not leave me, Sylvia; -- no; --
He could not prove deliberately false.
His heart was unsusceptible of fraud. --
-- Anon you will know it all. --

HENRICO. Mean time, my fair,
Banish thy fears; and let me with this kiss
On the white softness of this lovely hand,
For ever dedicate my heart.

SYLVIA. Oh! heavens!
What must I do, Mama? --

CONSTANTIA. Requite his love
With fair return of thine, --

SYLVIA. Must I do so!
The task appears not undelightful -- yes;
To thee I can resign myself -- but tell me;
Will thou never leave me? will thou ever here
Fix thy abode?

HENRICO. No; -- we'll convey thee hence,
To the soft insluence of a milder clime:
There, like a flower transplanted, thou shall flourish,
And never regret this warmer, southern sky,
But thrive and ripen, to the wondering world,
Unfolding all thy sweets to higher bloom

SYLVIA. What place is that? -- and whither will ye bear me?

FERDINAND. To thy dear native soil -- to England, love. --

SYLVIA. To England!

HENRICO. Yes! the land of beauteous dames;
Amongst whom thy matchless excellence shall shine
With undiminish'd radiance, and exert
It Is gentle power, by innocence endeared,
By virtue heightened, and by modest truth
Attemper'd to such sweetness, that each fair
With unrepining heart, and glad consent
Shall own thy rival claim; and every youth
Touched by the graces of thy native beauty,
Shall join to make thy form the public care.

SYLVIA. I cannot quit this island; -- cannot leave
These woods, these lawns, these hills and deepning vales,
These streams oft-visited, each well known haunt
Where hand in hand with innocence I Have strayed,
And tasted joys serene as in the air,
That pants upon yon trembling leaves. --

FERDINAND. Such joys
For thee shall blossom in thy native land,
And new delights arise. There cultured fields
Wave with the golden harvest; commerce pours
Each delicacy forth; there stately domes
Attract the wondering eye; there cities swarm
With busy throngs intense, and smiles around
A scene of active, cheerful, social life.
Thither I Will lead thee, sweet --

SYLVIA. And yet my heart
Misgives me much: -- does not contention there,
And civil discord render life a scene
Of care, and toil, and struggle? -- does not war
From foreign nations often invade the land,
With all his train of misery and death?

FERDINAND. Thy lovely fears are groundless -- ours the land
Where inward peace diffuses smiles around,
And scatters wide her blessings -- there a king, --
(My friend comes later thence, and tells me all)
There reigns a happy venerable king
Dispensing justice and maintaining laws
That bind alike his people and himself.
From that scource liberty and every claim
A freeborn people boast, flow equal on
And harmonize the state; while in the eve
And calm decline of life our monarch sees
A royal grandson still to higher luster
Each day expanding; emulous to trace
His grandsire's steps, to copy out his actions;
And bid the ray of freedom onward stretch
To ages yet unborn.

SYLVIA. And do the people
Know their own happiness?

FERDINAND They do, my sweet:
Pleased they behold their native rights secured;
Their commerce guarded, and the useful arts,
That raise, that soften, and embellish life,
All to perfection rising. With a sense
Of their own blessing touched, with one consent
They pour their treasures, and exhaust their blood
In their king's righteous cause; and Albion thus
Raises her envied head; thus every threat
Of foreign force, each menace of invasion
From a vain, vanquished, disappointed foe,
Like broken billows on her craggy cliffs,
Shall murmur at her feet in vain. --

SYLVIA. Methinks
I long to see this place --

FERDINAND. My Sylvia, yes,
Thou shall return -- propitious gales invite --
Come then, Constantia -- oh! what mixed emotions
Heave in this bosom at the sight of thee? --

CONSTANTIA. I too run over with ecstacy of joy,
And tears must speak my happiness -- I long
To utter all my fond, fond thoughts; -- to tell
The story of my woes, and hear of thine;
While at each word our hearts shall melt within us,
And thrill with gries, with tenderness, and love.

FERDINAND. The tale shall serve us in our future hours
Of tender intercourse, to sweeten pain,
To calm adversity, and teach our souls
To bend in love, in gratitude, and praise
To the All-good on high, who thus befriends
The cause of innocence; who thus rewards
Our suffering constancy; whose hand, though slow,
Thus leads to rapture through a train of woe.

FINIS.

