THE COQUETTE; OR, THE MISTAKES of the HEART.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

THE COQUETTE; OR, THE MISTAKES of the HEART: A COMEDY. As performed at the
THEATRES-ROYAL IN YORK and HULL.

BATH: PRINTED BY R. CRUTTWELL.

MDCCLXXVII.

Dramatis Personae.
Sedley, Mr. Raymur. Captain Helm, Mr. Eyles. Woodford, Mr Hudson. Sir Whifling
Triflle, Mr. Robertson. Flamwell, Mr. Death. Spangle, Mr. Pain. Finesse, Mr.
Buck. Swab, Mr. Suett. Ty'em, Miss Bloomer, Mrs. Hudson. Lady Younglove, Mrs.
Collins. Flora, Mrs. Hitchcock. Miss Belgrove, Miss Waudby. Frippery, Mrs.
Eyles. Fontange, Mrs. Pain. Constable, Servants, etc.
SCENE, LONDON.

TIME, that of Representation.

TO Mrs. NEWTON, OF KING's-BROMLEY, STAFFORDSHIRE.
MADAM,
WITH the greatest respect, I beg leave to lay the following scenes at your
feet -- My sole aim in writing them, was to blend Instruction with Amusement.

TRULY sensible that Example operates much more powerfully than Precept,
forgive my vanity in pointing out so perfect a character as yours for
imitation.

WHERE Youth, Beauty, and Virtue unite to -- Your delicacy has snatched the pen
from my unwilling hand -- I must obey -- Suffer me only to add, that I am,
MADAM,

With the greatest truth, Your most obedient Very humble servant, The AUTHOR.
BATH, May 26, 1777.
THE moment that a Reader takes up a Book with a Design to peruse it, he
naturally wishes for all the Information possible, relative to the Writer and
Writing of it --

WILLING, in every reasonable Degree, to satisfy the Curiosity of my good
Friends and Purchasers, I shall heartily answer their following Questions:

Pray, who is the Author of this Comedy?

A man in Obscurity, unnoticed, and content to remain so.

Has it ever been performed in London?

No.

Was it ever offered to the Managers of either Theater there?

No.

For what reason?

Because the Author was truly sensible that it had not Merit sufficient to
recommend it to their Notice.

What are his Motives for publishing it now?

Necessity, not Inclination.

Is it worth purchasing?

An odd Question -- He is afraid not -- But, good bye, Read on and judge for
yourself.

SUBSCRIBERS.
A
LUKE Annington, Esquire Fiby Mr. Austin, comedian, 12 copies Mr. Aud^^^iev Mr.
Joseph Atkinson Anonymous, 4 copies
B
Capt. Barker, York Mr. Buck, Theater Royal, ditto Mr. Bagley, ditto J. Bell,
Esquire Hull, 2 copies Mr. Bowers, ditto Mr. Brown, books. ditto. 6 cop. Mr.
Batchellor, ditto Mr. Bentley, ditto Edward Barker, Esquire Leeds Mr. Lewis
Bastide, ditto Mr. Barstow, jun. ditto Mr. Binns, bookseller, ditto, 4 co. Dr.
Bullough, ditto, 3 copies Mrs. Bradshaw, Exeter Mr. Butler, comedian Mr.
William Bell, Horneastle Mr. Matthew Brigs, ditto Mr. Thomas Bavington, ditto
Mr. Charles Bonner, ditto Miss Baker, Bath Mr. Blisset, Theater Royal, ditto
Mr. Brett, ditto Mrs. Brett, ditto Mr. Brooks, ditto Mr. Brunsdon, ditto Mr.
Brooks, musician, ditto Mr. James By -- r, Bustol, 2 cop. Mrs. Brooks,
Theatre-R. Norwich.
C
Mayor Cole, Leads Mr. Crowthea, ditto Mr. William Cookson, ditto Mr. Catareo,
ditto Mr. R. Corfitt, York Mrs. Collins, Theater Royal, ditto Mrs. C^^^p, ditto
Mr. Colby, ditto Mr. Cornchys, Theater Royal, Norwich Mr. Chalmers, comedian,
Exeter Mr. Cresswick, ditto Mr. Clare, comedian Mr. Cawdell, ditto Miss (...),
Hull Mr. N. Cartwright, Horncastle Mr. Robert Cole, ditto John Charnock, Esquire
Bath Mrs. Charnock, ditto Mrs. Crespigny, ditto Mr. R. Cruttwell, printer,
ditto, 6 copies
D
Jeremiah Dixon, Esquire Leeds Mr. De Comey, ditto Mrs. Dennison, ditto Master
Dennison, ditto Mr. Wm. Davy, Horncastle Mr. Richard Dung, ditto Mr. Dunning,
Hull Mr. Death, London Mr. T. Death, comedian Mrs. Death Mrs. Death Mr. Charles
Davis, Bath Mr. Dimond, Theater Royal, Bath Mr. Didier, ditto Mrs. Didier,
ditto Mr. Dove, Norwich
E
Mr. Eyles, Theater Royal, York Mrs. Eyles, ditto Mr. Earby, ditto Mr. Ellard,
Exeter Mr. Edwin, Theater Royal, Bath Mr. Egan, ditto
F
James Fenton, Esquire Leads Mrs M. Fenton, ditto Mr. R. Fenton, ditto Benj.
Fanand, Esquire Bingley Mr. Flower, York Mr. Flower, ditto Mrs. Fredlham,
Theatre-R. ditto Mr. Foot, Theater, Exeter Mr. George Fe^^aby, Hull Mr. Robert
Fisher, Horncastle Mr. John Fisher, ditto
G
MR. Wm. Giesswell, Horncastle Mr. John Gunnifs, ditto Mr. Richard Gunnifs,
ditto Mr. Edward Gunnifs, ditto Mr. Goforth, Hull Mr. Garvey, Bath Mr.
Geamester, ditto Mr. Guffith, Theatre-R. Norwich
H
Dr. Hunter, F. R. S. York, 2 cop. Mr. Hudson, ditto Mr. Haxby, jun. ditto Mr.
Hudson, Theater Royal, ditto -- Hake, Esquire Lisbon Mrs. Hake, ditto John Halsey,
Esquire Doncaster John Hutchinson, Esquire Horncastle Richard Heald, Esquire ditto Mr.
Joseph Hamerton, ditto Mr. Hudson, comedian Mr. Huilding, Leeds Mr. Hairison,
ditto Mr. Hick, ditto Mr. Hudson, Hull Mr. Joseph Hankes, Bath Mr. Thomas
Horton, ditto Mrs. Hutchinson, ditto Mr. Henderson, Theatre-R. ditto Mr.
Hinghton, ditto Mr. Hopley, ditto Mr. Herbert, comedian Mr. Holland, Theatre-R.
Norwich
I
Sir James Ibhetion, Denton Henry Ibbetson, Esquire Leeds Mr. Jones, ditto Mr.
Inchbald, comedian Mr. Jones, Hull Mrs. Jones, Bath Mrs. Johnson, ditto Mr.
Johnson, ditto
K
Dr. Kenen, Leeds Dr. King, Bath Mr. Keasberry, jun. ditto Capt. King, Hull Mr.
Richard Keys, ditto Mr. George Kitson, York Mr. King, Theater Royal, Edinburgh
Mrs. King, ditto
L
Philip Lampture, Esquire Bath, 14 co. Mrs. Lucas, ditto Mr. Lloyd, ditto Mr.
Loder, ditto J. O. Luke, Esquire Norwich, 6 cop. Richard Lee, Esquire Leeds Mrs. Lee
ditto Mr. Lloyd, ditto Mr. Luntley, York Mr. Leng, Theater Royal, ditto Mr.
L^^^^^^, ^^gan^^t, Hull Miss Le Gay, ditto
M
John Mester, Esquire Leeds Mr. Man, ditto Mrs. Mann, Leeds Gam. Milner, Esquire Burton
Abbey Christopher Morrit, Esquire York Mr. Manning, Wakefield Dr. Melling, Hull
Mrs. Melling, ditto Miss Melling, ditto Miss Mason, ditto Mrs. Marley, ditto
Mrs. Arthur Matsters, ditto Mr. Moore, ditto Miss Merrick, Bath Mr. Marrett,
ditto Mr. Moor, ditto Mr. Markordt, ditto Miss Mansell, Theatre-R. ditto
N
-- Newton, Esquire King's-Bromley, 6 copies Mrs. Newton, 6 copies Jer. Nor^^^, Esquire
Norwich, 6 cop.
O
Sir John O'Carrol, Bart. York Lady O'Carrol, ditto Mr. Oram, Theater Royal,
ditto Mr. Owenson, Theatre-R. Dublin Michael Ornuby, Esquire Bath Mr. Samuel Oats,
jun. Leeds Mr. Oats, Wakefield Mr. Owen, comedian Mr. Edward Overton,
Horncastle
P
Wm. Pennel, Esquire Horncastle Miss Firestley, York Mr. Porter, ditto Mr. Pain,
Theater Royal, Bath Mr. T. Powell, Theater Royal, Man^hester, 2 copies Mr.
Palmer, ditto, Exeter Miss Prole, Bristol -- Patry, Esquire
Q
Mr. Quarman, Enstol
R
W. Radcliffe, Esquire Milne Birdge Miss Reed, Leeds Miss Anne Robinson, York Mr.
Robertson, Theatre-R. ditto Mr. Raymur, ditto Mr. Shaftoc Robertson, comedian,
2 copies Mr. Richards, ditto, 2 copies Mr. Robinson, Hull Mr. Roach, Bath Mr.
Rufiel, ditto Mr. Rowbottom, Theatre-R. ditto Mrs. Robinson, ditto Mr. J. C.
Redford, Bath Mr. Wm. Richardson, Ho^castle
S
Richard Start, Esquire Lisbon Mr. Statt, ditto G. C. Swan, Esquire York Mr. Sotheren,
bookseller, ditto, 3 copies Mr. Suct, Theater Royal, ditto William Scott, Esquire
Leeds Mr. William Smithson, ditto Miss Smithson, ditto Mr. Simpson, ditto
George Swinny, Esquire Pontefract Tho. Stephernon, Esquire Wakefield Miss Sherry,
Drany-Lane Theater Mr. Shield, musician Mr. Shadforth, Newcastle John
S^^p^^^^on, Esquire Horncastle Mr. John Smith, ditto Wither shield, Esquire Hull Mr.
Sothe^an, ditto Dr. Sch^mberg, Bath, 2 copies -- Seymour, Esquire ditto Miss
Scrace, ditto Mr. Scrace, ditto Mrs. Shertirse, Theatre-R. ditto Miss Summers,
ditto Mr. Summers, ditto Mr. Stevens, Bath Mr. John Shepherd, ditto Mr.
Sherleck, ditto Mr. Sherborne, London Mr. Stuart, comedian
T
John Tailor, Esquire Bath, 5 copies Miss Tyler, Bath Capt. Thickness, ditto Mr.
Townsend, ditto Mr. Tessyman, bookseller, York, 2 copies Mr. Todd, ditto,
ditto, 3 copies Mr. Thackray, ditto Mr. Tailor, ditto Mr. Tayleure, comedian
Mr. Samuel Trevor, Horncastle
V
Mr. Venables, Exeter
W
Tate Wilkinson, Esquire Theatre-R. York, 14 copies Mr. Charles Wood, ditto Mr.
George Wallis, ditto, 2 cop. Mr. Wilton, bookseller, ditto, 4 copies (...)
Watson, ditto (...) Hull, 2 cop. (...), ditto (...), ditto Mr. Wilson, ditto
Miss Waudby, ditto Mr. West, Sadler's-Wells Miss West, ditto Mr. Weston,
comedian Mr. Webb, ditto, 2 copies Mr. Woolfe, ditto, Exeter Mr. G. Wright,
printer, Leeds Miss Waugh, ditto Mr. Woods, ditto Mr. Walker, London Mr.
Wilson, Whitby Mr. Womersley, Brigg Wm. Wayet, Esquire Horncastle Mr. Richard Webb,
ditto Mr. J. Wightman, ditto Mr. Richard Watson, ditto, 2 cop. Mr. Whitaker,
bookseller, Beverley, 2 copies -- Wickham, Esquire Bath Mrs. Welsh, ditto Miss
Wheeler, Theatre-R* ditto Mr. Whitehead, ditto Mr. W^ighten, Drury Lane
Theater, 2 copies
The following Names came too late to be inserted in their proper place.

Mr. Collins, Theater, Winchester Mrs. Raworth, ditto Mrs. Harrison, ditto Mrs.
Gaudry, ditto Mr. Davis, ditto Mr. Stictton, ditto Mr. Waylet, ditto Mr.
Connor, ditto Mr. Sadler, ditto etc. etc.
THE COQUETTE; OR, THE MISTAKES of the HEART.
ACT I.
SCENE, the PARK. Enter SEDLEY and WOODFORD, Woodf. SO, Sedley, you really have
been three weeks without seeing Miss Bloomer?


Sedl. True, I assure you, Woodford, and intend, if my resolution holds, never
to see her again.


Woodf. But I understood every thing was settled between you both, and that
nothing remained but to name the happy day.


Sedl. Prithee, Woodford, no more. -- It adds to my uneasiness to hear her
mentioned.


Woodf. Why so?


Sedl. Because I find, this too susceptible heart of mine cannot so readily
erase the impressions her youth, beauty, and innocence have made upon it.


Woodf. Indeed! But what reason can you have for wishing it?


Sedl. The greatest in the world, Woodford.


Woodf. I cannot think so, -- explain, or I shall certainly imagine you
whimsical and capricious.


Sedl. When I first paid my addresses to Miss Bloomer, such were the beauties
of her mind as well as person, that I fancied I had found one, all perfect as
the first, before she fell.


Woodf. Then were you in an Adamitical paradise.


Sedl. A fool's one, rather, -- she received me with such a flattering
distinction that I thought myself the happiest of mortals, when unluckily, her
guardian's dying put her into the immediate possession of a large fortune.


Woodf. Now I should have thought that the luckiest circumstance that could
have happened.


Sedl. Quite the contrary, -- thus freed from restraint, at the age of
eighteen, she emerged into all the fashionable follies of the great world,
without a real friend to advise, or direct her.


Woodf. Why did not you undertake that office?


Sedl. I did, but soon found it was an ungrateful one -- so fine a girl,
independent of interested motives, could not fail of attracting a crowd of
admirers; and --


Woodf. You, naturally grew jealous.


Sedl. Jealous! My heart was torn in pieces. -- 'Twas then I discovered a
levity of temper, a thoughtlessness, a love of pleasure, that destroyed my
hopes.


Woodf. Psha! trifles. -- Foibles like these are as specks upon the sun.


Sedl. Ay, but in time they threaten a total eclipse. -- No character, however
contemptible, but was encouraged as a lover. -- No scene of gaiety, however
censurable, but was pursued with avidity. -- A thousand instances did I
patiently bear with, in hopes of amendment. -- Often in the gentlest terms, did I
convey advice, and represent the hazards she ran; as often was I forbad her
presence.


Woodf. Ha! ha! ha! upon my word, you took an excellent method of rendering
yourself agreeable to a girl of her age and spirit.


Sedl. But when I intended that girl as a partner for life, could you blame my
cautious conduct? No, Woodford; though never man was more sensible of beauty's
charms than I, yet unless those charms are adorned with virtue, they make not
half the impression.


Woodf. That Is a little romantic; but pray go on.


Sedl. Many times did I rescue her from the most imminent dangers which her
indiscretions plunged her into, yet still she persevered. -- At length, --


Woodf. Hold, who comes here?


Sedl. Oh, it is Monsieur Finesse, -- one of my rivals, -- a fellow, whose
impudence can only be equaled by his ignorance.


Enter FINESSE. Fin. Ah, gentlement! -- Votre tres humble serviteur! -- I be
most glad to see you both, -- Monsieur Sedley, I beg a to speak von word or two
wid you.


Sedl. Any thing particular, Finesse?


Fin. Oh, oui, ver particular -- for your own ear.


Sedl. You may speak out before Woodford, I have just been acquainting him with
the whole affair.


Fin. Qu' avez vous fair? -- Ma foy, dat be wrong done. -- You should say
noting to hurt de fine Lady's reputation.


Sedl. He is my particular friend, and I can answer for his discretion.


Fin. Parbleu! particular friend sometime do de mosht mischief.


Woodf. That will not be the case with me, I promise you.


Sedl. Come, what news of Miss Bloomer?


Fin. Ah, pauvre Lady! she had de grand escape yesterday.


Sedl. Escape? how?


Fin. Why, she be taking de innocent diversion at Vauxhall, wid de bon
company, as she suppose, and engage in de party wid tree gentlemen, and deux
lady, to be entertain in a boat on de Thames.


Sedl. In a boat on the Thames? -- Well! -- Go on.


Fin. Dey be all stranger to her, but vat of dat? She not tink any harm. -- So
dey row, row along, have de music, sing de petite chanson, and be all so
merry and gay, till dey land at de Cousin, as dey call her, but begar she be --
Vat you call Fille de joie?


Sedl. Woman of the town.


Fin. Oui, -- she be woman of de town, -- den Miss Bloomer find her mistake,
and vant to return home again. -- Dey say, no, no, and grow hardis, -- at last,
when she be almost excedee, etrois gentlemen by accident hear her cries, and
tout a fait, rescue her.


Sedl. Would I had been there! -- Villains!


Fin. Oh, oui! -- Villains indeed.


Sedl. You see, Woodford, there is another instance of her conduct. -- Do you
think it possible for me to be happy with such a woman?


Woodf. I tell you, man, you are too delicate. -- Though appearances are against
her, yet, I dare affirm, that these are all mistakes of the heart, which in
time her better judgment will rectify.


Fin. True, dey be all in de heart, -- all vivacite, noting else. -- I must
find some oder opportunity, when I shall have him to himself. (aside) Well,
Monsieur Sedley, I will bid you de good morn, -- I am going to visit de Lady, I
shall hear someting more dear, and den I will call on you at home, in private.
-- Gentlemen, sans compliment, I have de honneur to be your very humble servant.

[Exit.
Woodf. Hearky', Sedley, do you build anything upon this fellow's intelligence?
-- A wretch! that is an outcast, and disgrace to his nation.


Sedl. Yet this very outcast, as he really is, does she treat in the most
encouraging manner; and, without the least enquiry into his fortune or
character, admit amongst the number of her admirers. -- But let us change the
subject. -- So then it seems your Uncle has civilly dismissed you his house?


Woodf. Not so civilly, I assure you.


Sedl. Don't you think you deserved it? Captain Helm, you know, has spent the
greater part of his life in ploughing the tempestuous ocean, and though possessed
of an excellent heart, has not the least idea of the refined sentiments
inspired by a liberal education. -- You were certain that your whole dependence
was upon him, yet refused flattering the harmless foibles which peculiarly mark
his character.


Woodf. You mistake me, Sedley, I often did, till this last affair. -- But,
when he commenced my rival, my happiness was too much concerned to trifle any
longer.


Sedl. Well, and has he declared his passion?


Woodf. No, but as a preparatory step, he has given Lady Younglove (who is just
returned to town with her daughter) to understand, that for the future, she
must not encourage my pretensions, as I have nothing to expect from him.


Sedl. So! your hopes are all over in that quarter?


Woodf. Entirely! I called yesterday, to welcome my dear girl, my beauteous
Flora, to London, and was refused admittance.


Sedl. Indeed!


Woodf. True, and I am now reduced to such distress, that, unless you can
assist me with your advice, and --


Sedl. Here Is my hand, -- Depend upon my utmost, I feel too much myself, though
from a different cause, not to compassionate you.


Woodf. I expected no less from your generous friendship, but how shall we act?
-- What can I do?


Sedl. Upon my word, I don't know. -- I own yours is a critical case. -- But,
we must not despair, -- I believe as matters stand, we had best work by
stratagem. Luckily, I stand high in the estimation of your Uncle, as well as
Lady Younglove.


Woodf. You Will find him inexorable, and her --


Sedl. Not proof against flattery, -- all mankind have their weak side,
Woodford, and much may be done by taking a proper advantage of their follies.


Woodf. I wish you may not be mistaken in the present case.


Sedl. Never fear. -- Let me see, (Panses) No, that will not do. -- Stay, I
believe I have it. -- Suppose, I attack Lady Younglove myself, and persuade
her, that I am dying for love of her.


Woodf. No, no, that is impossible, -- 'twould be too ridiculous.


Sedl. Ha! ha! ha! I Will lay my life there is nothing easier. -- Attack Widows by
storm, and they cannot resist you. -- Besides, her time grows short, and as she
was in such a violent hurry to get a second husband, there is all the reason in
the world to imagine her still more impatient for a third.


Woodf. But what end do you propose by this scheme?


Sedl. To serve you, but in what manner I have not yet determined. -- Come,
let us home to my house and consider farther. -- Nay, nay, no excuses. -- I see
you are unfit to be left to yourself. -- And the heart which does not feel the
distress of a friend, is not worthy of existence.

[Exeunt.
SCENE Miss BLOOMER'S. Enter FONTANGE and FINESSE. Font. Ha! ha! -- And so,
Monsieur Sedley believe all de Mensonge, all de story you tell him of my Lady.


Fin. Oui, he tink it all verite.


Font. Bon! -- And I so speak in your praise, dat she love you more dan all her
oder admirers.


Fin. Brave, ma petite mignonne! -- And, she be assuree, dat I be von man of
grand qualite?


Font. Sans doubt! -- she no suspect any ting -- But, you remember -- If I help
you to marry de Lady, I am to have de five hundred pound.


Fin. Oh! -- Faites fond sur moi -- Depend upon me.


Font. Vera well -- Je suis content! -- I am satisfied, -- She be now alone,
stay you dear, and I will say you are waiting for her.

Exit.
Fin. Allons, Mademoiselle. -- Begar! I will put de von little sheat upon you
too, for all dat. -- Love own country vera well, but love own self mush better.


Enter SPANGLE. Span. Ha! my dear Monsieur Finesse -- I am extravagantly glad
to see you. -- I wish he was at the Devil with all my heart.

( aside)
Fin. You make me quite happy. -- If your neck was broke.

(aside)
Span. What, I find you still dance attendance at Miss Bloomer's levee.


Fin. Il est vrai, Monsieur Ogle -- It is true, -- When a young Lady like Miss
Bloomer distinguish de gentilhomme, de gentilhomme do all in his power to
return de compliment.


Span. You are right, Monsieur, -- Just my case to a hair. -- If a foolish girl
takes it into her head, to fall desperately in love with me, -- though upon my
soul, I cannot see for what -- Can I be so barbarous as to slight her? -- Oh,
no, it is not in my nature to be so inhuman. [Miss Bloomer sings without.] Hark!
-- Here she comes, and as lively as ever.


Enter Miss BLOOMER singing. Miss Bloom. Gentlemen, your most obedient, -- Hey
day! Only you two! -- Why I am quite deserted this morning. -- Oh, Mr. Spangle!
what not drowned yet? -- Psha! you are not half the despairing lover you ought
to be.


Fin. Oh, fie for shame, Monsieur Spangle, not drown yourself to please de Lady.


Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! -- I dare say, Monsieur Finesse, you would readily oblige
me with such a proof of your gallantry, and respect.


Fin. Oh, madam, I beg to be excuse -- De hang, and de drowned be so barbare,
so truly Englis, dat it shock a me quite -- No, rader let me live to adore you,
ma belle ange.


Span. Then is there no possibility of inspiring that obdurate bosom of yours?


Miss Bloom. Oh! I am in love!


Span. Indeed!


Miss Bloom. Yes, violently, to distraction.


Span. And may I ask, who is the happy object of your passion?


Miss Bloom. The monkey you gave me -- He is so much the image of yourself,
that I have doted on him this week past.


Fin. Ha! ha! ha! De monkey -- Ha! ha! ha! le drole, serviteur, Monsieur Monkey.


Miss Bloom. I assure you I intend to dress the dear creature up in a
fashionable suit, have him frizz'd, powdered, and painted alamode, and have not
the least doubt but he will acquit himself as well as most of the fine gentlemen
about town.


Span. You know the power you have over me, and love to tyrannize.


Miss Bloom. Poor gentleman! -- how pathetically that was spoken! Pray go on.


Span. I assure you, madam, little as you may think of --


Miss Bloom. That pretty, delicate, enameled face of yours; yet, it has made
many a Lady's heart go pit-a-pat.


Fin. Admirable! -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Ah! pauvre diable, ha! ha!


Miss Bloom. As for Monsieur Finesse here, there is not the least fear of the
weather's injuring his complexion.


Fin. No, madam, mine be de true bronze.


Miss Bloom. Well, gentlemen, I suppose you are both come upon the old subject
-- To show how impartial partial I am, both shall have fair play, and each
declare his passion in turn. You, Mr. Spangle, being my humble servant the
longest, shall begin first. -- Come, make haste, you have no time to lose -- I
expect twenty more, every moment, on the same errand.


Span. Hearky', you soft bewitching little gypsy.


Miss Bloom. Bravo! go on.


Span. Do you think I am always to be treated in this unmerciful manner?


Miss Bloom. Or thus --
With mercy treat your humble slave,
And as your you're beautiful be brave.

Span. Curse catch me! if I am not revenged on you for this cruelty.


Miss Bloom. What, you will break my chain? -- Do, if you can -- If my glass is
to be believed, that is out of your power. -- Well, since I find you have
nothing more to say, now, to you -- "Though last not least in my esteem."


Fin. Den, madam, sans compliment, ou flattery, you be de sweetest and most
lovely creature I ever saw -- And if I be so happy as to --


Miss Bloom. Have it in your power to make me unhappy --


Fin. O, permettez moi, madam, you not hear me out.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Mrs. Fashion, your Ladyship's milliner, to wait on you.


Miss Bloom. Show her up. -- I am very sorry, gentlemen, to be deprived of the
pleasure of your company, but business you know --


Span. O, dear ma'am, no excuse --


Miss Bloom. I shall be glad to see you again, this afternoon.


Fin. Je m'en vais, madam, I shall be here when you no tink.

( aside)
Miss Bloom. Hold, come back -- I Have a thought which may be of infinite service
to you and me.


Fin. Pray, madam, -- Que dites vous? Vat you say?


Miss Bloom. Why, as you are both rivals, and men of such undoubted courage,
what think you of a rencontre tomorrow morning?


Span. O, dear ma'am, we are infinitely obliged to you.


Fin. Oui, too much oblige, indeed, madam.


Miss Bloom. I would not propose this to every hotheaded spark, but I have such
a reliance upon your prudence and discretion, that I am not the least
apprehensive of ill consequences.


Span. You pay us a great compliment, really, madam.


Miss Bloom. No more than you deserve, -- By this, you will acquire a reputation
in the world, and add to my fame. -- Go, go, and let me hear that you have done
something to be talked of before I see you again.


Fin. Madam, I shall have de glory of obeying your commands. -- Monsieur
Spangle, since noting else will satisfy de lady, I beg you to witdraw, and let
me have de honneur to cut your troat a la Francoise.


Span. O, I Will withdraw with all my heart. -- But, the Devil fetch me, if I
have my throat cut, a la Francoise, or a la Anglois.

[Exeunt.
Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! thus do I sport with fools.


Enter Mrs. FASHION. Miss Bloom. Well, Mrs. Fashion, sure something very
particular brings you here.


Mrs. Fash. Very particular indeed, your Ladyship, -- And yet, it is not
particular to you neither, for, heaven bless you! it happens every day.


Miss Bloom. Well, what is it?


Mrs. Fash. Ah, that sweet sace! -- No wonder it turns every body's brain.


Miss Bloom. What is all this about?


Mrs. Fash. I assure you, I have so much work in hand, that I could hardly
spare the time to --


Miss Bloom. I wish you would waste a little less of it now.


Mrs. Fash. Some of my best customers too. -- I shall be obliged to sit up all
night. -- But poor gentleman, he is in such a bitter taking --


Miss Bloom. What gentleman?


Mrs. Fash. Ah! that sweet shape and air. -- Well, if it be your lot to come
together, you will make a lovely couple.


Miss Bloom. Was ever any thing so provoking! -- I protest, I shall be quite
angry, if you keep me any longer in suspense.


Mrs. Fash. Angry! no, no, that face of yours was never made for frowning. --
What say you to a new admirer, now?


Miss Bloom. Psha! was this the mighty matter, -- I don't want admirers, I
promise you.


Mrs. Fash. No, by my faith, don't you, but this is one out of the common road.


Miss Bloom. Then, he had better turn into the common road again, or he may
chance to go astray.


Mrs. Fash. Ah! you are always witty. -- Oh, he is one of the cleverest,
properest, best-bred gentlemen, -- I Am sure he brings tears into my eyes, to
hear all the fine things he says of you.


Miss Bloom. You are very tender, indeed, Mrs. Fashion.


Mrs. Fash. As a chicken. -- And then for quality, he tops them all.


Miss Bloom. Does he?


Mrs. Fash. Oh, yes, Miss -- You must know that his father's a Lord, he is the
eldest son, but upon some little disagreement -- A love affair -- A Lady of
vast fortune his father wanted him to marry. -- He took lodgings in my house,
in order to be private, till matters are made up.


Miss Bloom. Then he is your lodger at present?


Mrs. Fash. And the best lodger I ever had -- Money is no more to him than pins
are to me. -- Then for company, my house is hardly ever empty of Lords, Dukes,
and Baronets.


Miss Bloom. Oh! he lives quite private, I find. -- But, pray, what may be the
name of this extraordinary person?


Mrs. Fash. Why that is a secret -- But between ourselves, I have found out from
his servants, that he is the young Lord Flamwell.


Miss Bloom. Flamwell! -- I never heard of the name before -- But that is no
wonder, for of late, nobility spring up like mushrooms. --


Mrs. Fash. He has seen you at some of the public places, and has been dying
for you ever since.


Miss Bloom. So, you are come Embassadress from him?


Mrs Fash. Me, Miss! -- Lord, what could put such a thing into your head? -- He
does not even know that I ever saw you -- And yet, he is in such distress, that
if you would condescend to come to my house this afternoon --


Miss Bloom. To your house? -- Surely, Mrs. Fashion, you don't imagine, that --


Mrs. Fash. Nay, only for a quarter of an hour, or so, by way of amusement.


Miss Bloom. I thank you, but I don't want amusement.


Mrs. Fash. But, I have some of newest fashions come over from Paris -- Not a
creature in London has seen them, but myself -- O, they would become your Ladyship
admirably -- So elegant, so pretty -- If you choose, you may have the honor of
leading the taste for the next three months.


Miss Bloom. My dear Mrs. Fashion, you are very good.


Mrs. Fash. Ay, I thought I should please you.


Miss Bloom. Then, I Will order my chair, and give you a call before dinner.


Mrs. Fash. I never saw any thing in my life so becoming.


Miss Bloom. Be sure, you don't let them be seen by any body before I come.


Mrs. Fash. Seen! no, not if a Duchess was to bribe me. -- Then, I Will expect
your Ladyship. -- Lord, what time I have spent, prattle, prattle, never think,
and yet, so much work! -- Hurry, hurry, not a minute to lose -- Your Ladyship's
most obedient, humble servant.

[Exit Fashion.
Miss Bloom. This intelligence has given me new spirits -- I protest, I began
to be apprehensive that my charms were on the fade -- A whole week passed, and
not one new admirer.


Enter Miss BELGROVE. Miss Bloom. My dear Belgrove, you are come most
opportunely -- Do you know, that since I saw you last, I have made a fresh
conquest?


Miss Belg. I don't find any thing so surprising in that.


Miss Bloom. Why no, that is true, but I have now rose a step higher, and
captivated a Lord.


Miss Belg. Lord, or commoner, I suppose he will share the same fate with the
rest.


Miss Bloom. Certainly, my dear, you would not have me be unjust.


Miss Belg. No, really, I would not, therefore entirely disapprove of your
making such fools of them.


Miss Bloom. You mistake, child, the generality of them were fools ready made
to my hand.


Miss Belg. Some of them might be so, but I don't find you are in the least
more favorable to men of sense.


Miss Bloom. Oh! I hate your sensible men, and take a particular pleasure in
tormenting them.


Miss Belg. That Is very extraordinary. -- But why so?


Miss Bloom. Because it adds more to my reputation, to lead in chains one of
those wise Lords of the creation, who has sense enough to know I use him ill,
yet not power sufficient to break his fetters, than a thousand of those
mincing, whiffling, trifling, good-for-nothing, pretty, Master Jessamys.


Miss Belg. Well! though I shall never approve of your scheme, I almost wish for
your spirits.


Miss Bloom. Spirits, my dear! -- Lord, what should put me out of spirits? --
Time enough for me to pine and languish, when the Hey-day of my charms are over
-- Mine, I Am afraid, will be but a short reign, so am determined to make the
most of it.


Miss Belg. Then I find you do intend to marry.


Miss Bloom. Yes, yes, some time or other. --. It would mortify me
prodigiously, to die an old maid. -- No, no, I assure you, I have not the least
ambition to lead apes, no more than I have at present to be led by one myself.
-- I would only play with the male creatures, as a skilful angler does with his
fish. -- Amuse myself the sportive summer's day, bait my hook well for
gudgeons, see the pretty innocents, nibble, nibble, nibble, as fast as I could
cast in -- Draw them out when I pleased -- Stroke the delicate things, and then
throw them in again -- till evening sun having disagreeably lengthened my
shadow, pick out the hero of the stream, and retire to my rustic cottage,
content with the pleasures of the day.


Miss Belg. But, pray, in the midst of this round of amusements, do you never
feel a pang for the loss of Sedley?


Miss Bloom. If I really thought I had lost him for ever, I should be heartily
mortified.


Miss Belg. Don't you think it begins to look like it?


Miss Bloom. Why, I am a little alarmed, -- for to confess the truth sincerely,
which in those cases I very seldom do -- Of all the men that ever addressed me,
he is the only one who has made an imprestion on my heart.


Miss Belg. Why did not you use him better?


Miss Bloom. It Is not in my nature to be serious long together, therefore why
should he expect it?


Miss Belg. Consider the many obligations you are under to him. -- The many
dangers he rescued you from, which your innocent levity exposed you to.


Miss Bloom. That Is true; but then he should not have taken so ungenerous an
advantage of them, as to tell me, that I did wrong, and prescribe rules for my
future conduct.


Miss Belg. Were not those rules for your good?


Miss Bloom. Yes, but we are not always disposed to relish advice.


Miss Belg. I really think, if you lose him, you will never meet with such
another.


Miss Bloom. If I am disappointed of him, I shall never have any other, that is
past a doubt -- And as a proof, were he now to return, I would frankly own,
that, though I am innocent, even in intention of acting wrong, yet, my
thoughtlessness, many times, leads me into great errors, which nothing but the
sincerity of my heart can excuse.


Miss Belg. It Is great pity you did not make this declaration before.


Miss Bloom. Psha! he must take me, as he finds me. -- Can he be so
unconscionable as to expect, that I should draw up my head, hold down my eyes,
put my hands together, drop him a low curtesy, and say, -- I have been a
naughty girl to be sure, but, pray forgive me this time, and indeed, and double
deed, I Will do so no more?


Miss Belg. No, but he might reasonably expect, that you would dismiss your
numerous train of followers; -- and, as you have often sacrificed men of worth
at the shrine of folly, so in return, to make a general oblation -- Offer up a
hecatomb of fools, at the altar of discretion.


Miss Bloom. Do I bid the creatures follow me?


Miss Belg. Nor don't you encourage them, when they do?


Miss Bloom. Ay, that is, because I hate ill nature.


Miss Belg. But are not you afraid your reputation should suffer?


Miss Bloom. Oh, my dear, not in the least -- Every thing we do becomes us, --
Our very frailties are pleasing.


Miss Belg. Consider, the --


Miss Bloom. Positively, I will not consider about the matter -- So, come along,
and always remember these never-failing lines --

If to her share, some female errors fall,
Look on her face, and you will forget them all.

End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE, CAPTAIN HELM'S. CAPTAIN HELM discovered lying on a Couch, SWAB waiting.
Helm. SWAB!


Swab. Here, your Honor.


Helm. What sort of weather abroad?


Swab. A little hazey, your Honor; the wind S. S-E.


Helm. Do You think you could take me under convoy as far as Lady Younglove's?


Swab. I warrant I Will tow you along, if so be as how you will keep above water.


Helm. Say you so? -- Then on with your best jacket and trowsers, and help me
to rig myself out.


Enter SEDLEY. Ha! Sedley! -- What cheer, boy? -- How goes it?

Sedley. Very well, I thank you, Captain.


Helm. Give me your hand -- here, Swab, help to heave me up -- so, so -- now,
turn out, and keep a strict watch.


Swab. If Bet Mainsail, my mess-mate's widow, hails me again, what answer shall
I give her?


Helm. Stow her hold well with right Nantz -- Give her five guineas to buy new
rigging, and tell her, if she will hoist the sign of Admiral Boseawen on
Portsmouth Common, I Will take care to keep her off a lee shore.


Swab. Bless your Honor's glory! -- She shall have as much of the good
creature as she can carry; -- and, snatch my bowlings, if I don't tip her half
a piece myself, for old acquaintance sake.

[Exit.
Helm. You see I am laid upon the stocks a little, but no matter for that --
Though my outworks are something damaged, yet my inside is heart of oak.


Sedley. I am glad to hear it -- Presuming, Captain, on the regard you always
professed for me, I am now come to intercede in behalf of your nephew.


Helm. Avast, avast, tack about, and pay away no more of that cable -- My
nephew, do you see, is a lazy land-lubber -- If he had taken my advice, I would
have made a man of him, and taught him to hand, reef, and steer, with ever a
seaman in the navy.


Sedley. These are accomplishments, Captain, not suitable to every man's taste
and genius.


Helm. Then their taste is not worth a rope's end -- I myself, though a younger
brother, made my own fortune while his father was squandering away his -- I was
twice round the globe, before I was forty -- In every birth, from cabbin-boy,
up to Captain of the Terrible -- And now, having sufficient to lie by, I am
resolved to enjoy it, and ride in a smooth harbor all the rest of my days.


Sedley. But, Captain, though you was so fond of the ocean, and had such success,
your nephew may not have the same inclinations, and you should make some
allowance.


Helm. No, that is not my way -- So, if he has a mind to gain the wind of my
affection, he must sheer off from the little frigate he has so long kept in
chase, and let me fit him out for a vovage in the Tempest, which sails in a few
weeks for the East Indies.


Sedley. Then your resolution is fixed --


Helm. As the Poles.


Sedley. And in his absence, I suppose, you intend attacking Miss Flora
yourself.


Helm. Right, I have some thoughts of bearing down that way.


Sedley. But, Captain, don't the great disparity of years between you and her,
deter you?


Helm. No, the more danger, the more honor -- Mayhap, you may think it
strange, that after steering so long clear of a wife, I should, all of a
sudden, veer about, and clap the matrimonial tack aboard.


Helm. He that is long at sea, will find the wind blow from every point of the
compass -- I have seldom been six months ashore at one time, since I was a
boy, so never had opportunity of coming a-long-side any but such as your
Portsmouth or Plymouth fireships, who damage every vessel they grapple with.


Sedley. And them, I suppose, you avoided.


Helm. Why, ay -- So, do you see, being lately weather-bound in a trip I made to
take observation of some land that lay ahead of Lady Younglove's, I was forced
to put into port at her house.


Sedley. Where you saw her beautiful daughter.


Helm. I did, and in the three glasses we staid there, she drew my heart with
as strong an attraction, as ever the loadstone did the needle.


Sedley. Have you communicated your sentiments to the mother?


Helm. No, not yet, but I intend shaping my course that way directly.


Sedley. I believe, Captain, I can be of service to you in this affair.


Helm. As how, pray?


Sedley. I am this moment going to pay my addresses to the mother.


Helm. What, the old hulk? -- Ah, my boy, I Am afraid you are out of your
reckoning there -- You don't know the trim of her -- She Will not be brought to
obey either the helm, or the sheet, and if you will take my advice, you will even
let her drop to pieces where she lies at anchor.


Sedley. I Will venture, however -- The more danger, the more honor, as you say;
and if you will assist me, I don't doubt of succeeding.


Helm. Well, well, since the current of your inclination sets that way, I
shall not attempt to stem it -- thof, let me tell you, she saw her two former
consorts go to the bottom, and if you don't take care, you will share the same
fate.


Sedley. I confess, I have a terrible prospect, but nothing shall deter me --
If you will suspend your visit, I Will return as soon as our interview is over, and
in form you of my success.


Helm. Ay, ay, I shall lie by 'till then -- But, harkye, Sedley! may I never
strike an enemy's flag again, if I would not rather be raked fore and aft by a
whole French squadron, than stand one broadside from such a Turkish pirate.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, Miss BLOOMER'S. Enter FONTANGE and FINESSE. Fin. So, den, de milliner
introduce your Lady to de Lord Flamwell?


Font. Oui, I overhear all, and my Lady be just gone to her house.


Fin. Diable! I am almost distract! -- I no sooner get rid of von rival den
anoder start up.


Font. Patience, Monsieur, we go on ver well -- So long as we keep Sedley away,
we no fear de rest, but I expect Sir Whifling Trifle, Lady Younglove's brother,
tout a l'heure, presently.


Fin. O dat is true, let him come so soon as he will; I am prepare for him.


Font. Hush! here he be.


Enter Sir WHIFFLING TRIFLF. Sir Whif. Now, my pretty Mademoiselle, have I the
happiness of finding your Lady at home?


Font. No, Monsieur, my Lady be just gone out, but here be a Gentleman who has
been waiting for you wid de greatest impatience.


Sir Whif. For me! who is he, pray?


Font. Monsieur le Marquis de Finesse, un grand voyageur, who be just arrive in
England -- He hear, par accident, of your visiting my Lady, so --


Sir Whif. Sir, you do me honor.


Font. So, now I have introduce him; I Will leave you togeder, and go wait for my
Lady.

[Exit.
Sir Whif. Pray, Sir, may I without offense know the motive of this Interview?


Fin. Curiosity, Monsieur, to see so great a man, whose actions Fame's brazen
trompete has blazoned to every distant part of de world.


Sir Whif. Oh, dear Sir! this is too much -- To be sure, for these thirty years
past, I Have spent my whole time in the pursuit of objects disregarded by the
generality of the world; and, I think, I may without vanity say, that my
labors have been successful.


Fin. Je le sais bien, Monsieur, I know it, and from a similarity of
disposition beg leave to court your acquaintance.


Sir Whif. I shall be proud of the favor, Sir.


Fin. I have myself, Monsieur, for dese many years past, been a traveller, and
collector of de raritie.


Sir Whif. Sir, you please me very much -- may I take the liberty to ask, where
you have been, and what curiosities you have collected?


Fin. De tout mon coeur, Monsieur, wid all my heart -- I have travelle over
mosht parts of de globe, sometime I ride, sometime I valk, sometime dey carry
me against my will -- Sometime at my own sharge, and sometime at de public
expense.


Sir Whif. The public expense?


Fin. Oh, Oui, for de good of de nation -- Dat is when I be transporte.

(aside)
Sir Whif. Ah, that is an honor I am afraid I shall never arrive at -- But pray
let us hear.


Fin. In Italy, Prince Palivicini present me wid a piece of de Vesuvian
eruption dat choaka Pliny vid its smoke.


Sir Whif. Wonderful! -- But how are you certain of that?


Fin. Oh, from a worm-eaten manuscript preserve wid it, whereon a P for Pliny,
and V for Vesuvio, still visible.


Sir Whif. Proof, proof enough.


Fin. Oh, certainement -- proof enough.


Sir Whif. Had the whole manuscript been preserved it would not have been worth
sixpence, but the obscurity always enhances the value.


Fin. I see you be de true Antiquarian, Monsieur.


Sir Whif. Yes, yes, nobody understands these things better than I do -- I have
been in Italy myself, and visited the ruins of Herculaneum.


Fin. Well! dear you had ample store.


Sir Whif. Ample indeed -- They were guarded with the utmost strictness;
nevertheless, by liberally bribing the several persons appointed to watch them,
I found means, at different times, to bring away almost a cart-load of legs,
arms, and noses belonging to the mutilated statues.


Fin. Eft il bien possible? -- What a treasure!


Sir Whif. Yes, and I intend shortly publishing a dozen volumes folio, proving
to demonstration, the figures they belonged to.


Fin. Oh, it will be of vast import to de public.


Sir Whif. Very great, I shall immortalize my name by it -- Travels are so much
the ton at present, that many go abroad on purpose to oblige the public at
their return, with a relation of their wonderful adventures.


Fin. And you be as well qualified as de best of them.


Sir Whif. I afterward made some important discoveries in the North Sea.


Fin. You did!


Sir Whif. Yes, and actually brought away a large piece of ice from thence.


Fin. Et bien! Monsieur -- Well, and have you it now?


Sir Whif. No, the heat of the sun dissolved it in our voyage home.


Fin. Unfortunate!


Sir Whif. Very unfortunate, but travelers are subject to disappointments.


Fin. A la verite, it is true, indeed, Monsieur -- I have often myself
experience de same -- Une autre fois, an oder time I will give you de whole
account of all my voyage, but now let a me beg leave to make you de von little
present.


Sir Whif. Present!


Fin. Oui, Monsieur, and such a von as I do flatter myself you will not despise
-- In my last voyage wid Mons. Bourgainville, touching on de coast of
Patagonia, I purchase from von of deir sages an ines;timable jewel.


Sir Whif. A jewel!


Fin. Not one of dose so called by de Canaille, but an invaluable antique.


Sir Whif. Is it possible! -- I am all impatience -- What can it be!


Fin. Le Voici, see here! -- (taking on oyster-shell with great form out of a
box) -- Behold, an Antideluvian cockle shell!


Sir Whif. I am struck dumb with admiration!


Fin. And well you may -- You see, Monsieur, by de size of it, an undoubted
proof of de giantism of old.


Sir Whif. (examining it) Bless me! -- It Is as large as a modern oyster, and I
protest, seems very like one too.


Fin. Right, Monsicur, so it do -- You have de great discernment -- who knows,
indeed noting so probable, dan dat de very cockle shut up in dis, was Manger,
eaten by our grand'mere Eve.


Sir Whif. A happy thought, my friend -- Eve's cockle-shell! I am ravished at
the idea! -- But, what return, what recompense can I make for a gem of such --


Fin. O, noting at all, but de pleasure of your acquaintance -- I shall beg
leave to see you again, in de evening, at Lady Younglove's.


Sir Whif. Dear Sir! you do me too much honor.


Fin. C'est Assez, Monsieur, enough -- But as it is of such consequence, Sir
Whifling, I must request you will immediately go and deposit it in your cabinet
wid your oder curiosities, for fear of accidents.


Sir Whif. That I will, I assure you, Sir -- I came purposely to pay my devoirs
to the Goddess of this Mansion, but now beg you will make my excuses to her -- I
have now something of more importance to attend to -- Yes, yes, I think no one
can blame my taste, in preferring an Antideluvian cockle-shell to the finest
woman in the creation.

[Exit.
Fin. Ha! ha! ha! well said, Old Antiquity -- Begar, I believe I shall put de
little sheat upon him too -- Now, to find Sedley again -- I have business
enough upon my hand -- So much de better -- -- Frenchmen have no occasion to be
idle, when Englishmen have so many follies and vices to work upon.

[Exit.
SCENE, Lady YOUNGLOVE'S. ( Lady YOUNGLOVE discovered dressing.) Lady Young.
Where can this creature be! -- Let me see -- (Looking in the glass) -- I think
this complexion is the most agreeable to black -- One cannot be too nice in
suiting the complexion to the dress.

Where have you been, Frippery?


Frip. Ordering a fresh quantity of your Ladyship's cordial, as you complained
that the last was not strong enough.


Lady Young. You are a good girl -- Has that impudent fellow, Woodford, been
here today?


Frip. No, Madam; the answer your Ladyship gave him yesterday, will refer him
from coming any more.


Lady Young. I am very glad of it -- An unmannerly rake-hell, not worth a
shilling, to have the asfurance to make love to a child before my face.


Frip. 'Twas monstraceous rude, indeed, Madam -- Had he the sense to have paid
his congratulations to your Ladyship, he might have been forgiven.


Lady Young. True, Frippery; I could much sooner pass over an affront of that
sort offered to myself, than her.


Frip. That I am sure of -- (aside) -- Really, Madam, the exquisitive charms of
your Ladyship would be a sufficient excuse for such an act of insensibility.


Lady Young. O, fie, girl! how can you talk in such a manner? -- What charms
can a woman of forty be supposed to have?


Frip. Fifty, would be nearer the mark. (aside.) -- Your Ladyship certainly
mistakes your age.


Lady Young. How! mistake my age -- Surely, hussy, you don't mean --


Frip. Yes, Madam; for by your looks, I should take my book oath, that you were
not above fiveand-twenty.


Lady Young. Oh! -- Why, I believe I do look very well for my years.


Frip. Years! -- Lud, Ma'am, how can you talk so abruptly? -- As I am a woman
of veracity, your Ladyship only looks like Miss Flora's eldest sister, and are
young enough to have half a dozen husbands yet.


Lady Young. You are a merry girl, and always striving to divert your poor
disconsolate mistress -- Alas! my sweet, dear man has been dead above three
months, and no one has said a civil thing to me yet.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Mr. Sedley, to wait upon your Ladyship.


Lady Young. Show him up -- Bless me! what can he want with me?


Enter SEDLEY. Sedley. (bowing) Your Ladyship's most obedient -- How shall I
apologize for this rudeness, Madam?


Lady Young. O, dear Sir! there is not the least occasion -- I think you are
very kind thus to visit a poor, distressed, afflicted widow.


Sedley. You are goodness itself, Madam -- I have waited on you now, my Lady,
upon a very particular affair, which demands a few moments privacy.


Lady Young. Frippery, you may retire.


Frip. Yes, my Lady -- Hem! -- but by virtue of my office, I Will make bold to
listen; so, wise Sir, you might as well have let me staid.

(Retires to the side, and listens.)
Sedley. Now, Madam, that we are alone, can you forgive the folly, the
presumption, the -- call it what you please -- which urged me on to this rash
attempt?


Lady Young. Upon my word, Sir, I cannot comprehend you.


Sedley. And yet, when you shall know how long I have sighed in secret, how
long been tortured with despair, before I dare pronounce the sacred name of
love --


Lady Young. Love, Sir!


Sedley. Yes, Madam; who could behold such beauty, and not adore?


Lady Young. So! Miss has got another lover, I find, but I Will soon silence him.
(aside) Really, Sir, this is a language I must not suffer -- It Is highly
improper for a child like mine to hear, these many years to come.


Sedley. Child, Madam! -- Is it possible you can mistake my meaning?


Lady Young. Why, Sir, was not all this designed for my daughter?


Sedley. For Miss Flora, Madam! -- No, as your Ladyship's daughter, she could
not but have some charms; but I must be blind indeed, to offer up my vows to
such a baby -- You Will excuse my freedom, Madam.


Lady Young. Oh, readily, Sir.


Sedley. It Is you, my Lady, who are the blooming Goddess of my adoration -- Oh,
how can I express the inconceivable torments of my breast, for those many years
past! -- During Sir Solomon's life, fear of offending tied up my tongue to a
painful silence, and I was obliged to --


Lady Young. I assure you, Sir, I pity you, and had I known your sufferings,
would have contrived some method of softening them.


Sedley. I am transported to hear it -- After his death, respect still sealed
up my lips, 'till I found -- for love, Madam, is Argus-eyed -- that Mr.
Woodford frequented this house, and was, without doubt, a favored lover --
This made me resolve to discover my hopeless passion, wait his arrival here,
and through a happy rival's bosom, force my way to that heart which kings might
be proud to call their own!


Lady Young. Hold, Sir, you are in an error -- 'Twas not to me, but my
daughter, his devoirs were paid.


Sedley. Pardon me, Madam, I cannot suppose Mr. Woodford so insensible, as to
think of any other object, when you are present.


Lady Young. O, dear Sir, he has not half the complaisance you have! -- What a
charming man he is!

(aside.)
Sedley. My character, and family, Madam, you are no stranger to -- My estate
is considerable, and, if it is not too great a presumption, give me leave to
cast both it, and a heart unalterably devoted to you, at your feet.

(kneeling.)
Lady Young. O, rise, dear Sir -- You overwhelm me with confusion! -- Sure, you
cannot possibly find any thing so attracting in a face, which constant grief
has made such an impression on.


Sedley Hem! Now for a little more nonsense. (aside) Come, my beauteous widow,
cast aside these weeds of sorrow, and be arrayed in robes more splendid, and
more becoming such a divinity.


Lady Young. Impossible -- I fear, Sir!


Sedley. Impossble!


Lady Young. Almost, Sir -- What will the world say of so hasty, so precipitate
an act?


Sedley. Umph! I find her coming. (aside) Love, Madam, will plead for all --
It Is a crime against his power to resist -- Besides, enough you have sacrificed
to sorrow -- Three months at least.


Lady Young. Oh, Sir, more -- Sixteen weeks tomorrow -- But, what are sixteen
weeks, sixteen months, or sixteen years, to mourn the loss of so good a man.


Sedley. Come, Madam, no more of these melancholy reflections -- The only
remedy in the world for a lady's immoderate grief on the loss of a favorite,
be it monkey, lap-dog, or husband, is to get another.


Lady Young. Indeed, Sir, I believe you are perfectly right -- I remember, some
years ago, I was utterly inconsolable on the death of a beautiful parrot, 'till
the loss was supplied by an enchanting owl, which was presented me.


Sedley. Then let me, Madam, by the warmth of my passion, dry up your tears for
Sir Solomon Younglove.


Lady Young. Surely, Sir, you are uncommonly persuading -- Well! to try your
constancy, if you persevere in your intention, till my year of widowhood be
expired, I don't know but I may be tempted to reward it.


Sedley. A year, Madam! -- An age! -- For heaven's sake, my dear Lady, have
some compassion.


Lady Young. Believe me, Sir, I am very compassionate.


Sedley. Would you have me die at your feet?


Lady Young. No, not for the world -- Rather than you should do that, I will
shorten it -- to -- to half the time.


Sedley. She soon drops. (aside) Still, madam, I find you are cruelly resolved
not to make me happy, therefore hopeless, and despairing, let me bid you
eternally, eternally, adieu!

[Going.
Lady Young. Stay, sir, stay -- Must not I pay my last husband the same
compliment I did my first?


Sedley. What was that madam?


Lady Young. Wait five short, short months.


Sedley. Look you, my Lady, I would do as I would be done by -- If you survive
me, you have my consent to marry again the next day.


Lady Young. I confess, sir, you are the most reasonable man I ever met with.


Sedley. But, I see, madam, you are inexorable, so must retire, and in secret,
lament my adverse fortune.


Lady Young. Dear sir, stay -- What can I say? I vow you are quite irresistible
-- Well, then, -- though overwhelmed with blushes -- Tomorrow, I consent to be
yours.


Sedley. Retard not my joy so long, but let this night crown my happiness -- I
see a kind consenting smile sparkle in your eye, and thus, I thank you (Kisses
her) Oh, zounds! that was too much!

(aside.
Lady Young. Who can withstand such rhetoric! -- You have conquered, sir, and I
surrender at discretion.


Sedley. And now, my dear Lady, as our interests are to be one -- If you give
me leave, I can assist you in disposing of Miss Flora.


Lady Young. You could not oblige me more, sir, for, poor child! she seems in
great haste to be married.


Sedley. Not so much as her mother, I Will be sworn. ( aside) I think, my Lady, I
could recommend one you can have no objection to -- Captain Helm, your
neighbor.


Lady Young. Captain Helm -- Do you think that possible?


Sedley. Nothing easier, if your Ladyship does not choose to prevent it.


Lady Young. I prevent it; heavens forbid! -- Poor dear child, it would be a
happy day for her.


Sedley. Happy, indeed, madam. -- He has been raving about Miss, ever since his
accidentally seeing her in the country, and longing for an opportunity of
declaring himself -- Nay, more -- he knows of my visit to you, and hopes this
evening will unite both parties.


Lady Young. I Am sure I would do any thing in reason to secure her felicity.


Sedley. Captain Helm, madam, is prodigiously in love, vet has many odd whims,
and like the element he belongs to, is very subject to change.


Lady Young. Oh, if he was once bound, we'd give him leave to change.


Sedl. True, madam, therefore we had better make short work of it, and take him
while he is in the humor.


Lady Young. Well! do just as you please, dear Mr. Seley -- I am now your
property, so dispose of me and mine, as you like.


Sedley. I Will step directly to my lawyer's to prepare the deeds, then return
with Captain Helm -- Meantime, my lovely charmer! divest yourself of those
beauty-veiling weeds, relumine the circle you were wont to shine in, and
prepare to bless the happiest mortal in the world!

[Exit.
Lady Young. What a bewitching man! -- But, there is not a moment to lose, I
must set about making the necessary preparations immediately -- Well, who could
have thought when I got up this morning, that I should be a bride before night.
-- O, lud! a third husband is a happiness I never expected.

[Exit.
FRIPPERY coming forward. Frip. So! Upon my word, a tender scene, and quite
curry-curristical -- When Miss and her old seamonster join them, they will make a
nice trio -- But, it is unpossible all this can be real on his side; and if my
old Lady was not so tosticated with her good fortune, she might easily find it
out -- Oh, here comes Miss, now we shall hear her sentances of the matter.


Enter FLORA. Flora. Frippery, what is the matter with my mama? I met her this
moment in unusual spirits, and she ordered me to follow her into her
dressing room.


Frip. Spirits! -- A third husband is enough to put any woman turned of sifty
into spirits -- Heaven help me! though I am half that age, I have not got one
yet.


Flora. What do you mean, Frippery?


Frip. I mean, that your mama's going to be married, tonight.


Flora. Tonight!


Frip. Yes, tonight.


Flora. More shame for her.


Frip. Ay, so say I.


Flora. I Am sure it would be fitter for her to get me a husband first.


Frip. Oh! you are to be married at the same time.


Flora. Am I? -- I Am afraid that is too good news to be true. -- But tell me
sincerely, are not you joking now?


Frip. Not I, upon my word.


Flora. Well, that is charming! -- Only feel what a palpitation it has caused
here, -- for all the world like the fluttering of my little Robin Red-breast.


Frip. Ay, my dear, I have often had such flustrations.


Flora. And does Mr. Woodford know it?


Frip. Mr. Woodford, Lord, Miss, he is not to be the man.


Flora. No! -- Who then?


Frip. Why, his uncle, Captain Helm, who you remember visited us some time ago
in the country.


Flora. What, that ugly old fright, who I compared to King Priam in the
puppet-shew?


Frip. The very idential man, Miss.


Flora. Was there ever anything so ridiculous! -- A husband, Ha! ha! ha! -- O
yes, to be sure he is a very proper husband for a girl of my age and spirit. --
It is a wonder, Frippery, she did not think of a dancing bear for me -- I Am
sure, he is much the more agreeable and polished animal of the two.


Frip. Indeed, Miss, I must say, that he is the most oddest, damphibious looking
creature I ever saw -- But your mama intends to make you have him, or not a
penny of fortune.


Flora. A fig for fortune, say I. -- Before she should sacrafice me to such a
compound of age and infirmity, I Would bid adieu to all ideas of future grandeur,
and boldly fly, with the man of my heart, to those regions of love and
happiness, where true content is only to be found.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. My Lady desires you, Mrs. Frippery, to go directly for
her diamond earrings, that are mending at the jeweller's, and not to stay a
moment, for she wants you in all haste to help her to dress.


Frip. So! she is in a hurry, I find.


Serve. Hurry! ecod, I believe she is possessed -- she has ordered us all to get on
our state liveries, that were made in her first husband's time, and the
housekeeper is to provide such a supper, that, lud have mercy upon me! -- Hark!
her bell rings. -- [Exit; returns.] Oh, I had forgot -- Miss Flora, you are to
go to your mama directly.


Flora. Tell her, I will not, John.


Frip. No, John, tell her she is coming.


Serve. Well, do just as you please for that. -- Coming, my Lady, coming --
Zounds! I wish the bell was tied about your neck.

[Exit.
Frip. My dear, you must go -- endeavor to humor your mama now. -- Only seem
to be agreeable to her marriage, and perhaps she may not insist on yours.


Flora. Nay, I did not care if she married a new husband every month, so she would
only let me have Mr. Woodford; and I Am sure that is not unreasonable. -- But
will you, my dear Frippery, in the mean time, endeavor to find him out, and
let him know my distress?


Frip. That I will, I Will ensure you. -- Do you think I could refuse any thing
in my power, to help such a couple of true lovyers? -- No, no, Frippery always
does as she would be done by -- and, I Am sure all I wait for myself is, -- the man
to ask me the question.

[Exit.
Flora. Well! -- Some girls now, in my situation, would, in despair of relief,
hang or drown themselves, and so put an end to their adventures at once. To be
sure, my situation is very critical -- Solely dependant on a mother -- Denied
the man I love, and obliged to receive the odious addresses of one I hate, are
difficulties not easily surmounted -- Yet, a good heart, and a fertile head,
may do much -- And if I do surmount them, I think I shall deserve a statue
raising to my constancy and fidelity.

[Exit.
End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE, Mrs. FASHION'S. Enter FLAMWELL, and Mrs. FASHION. Flam. Well, my good
mother, what success? -- I have been upon the rack ever since you went -- Come,
tell me -- Any hopes?


Fash. Hopes! -- When did you know me undertake any thing that failed?


Flam. But, have you mentioned me?


Fash. Yes, yes, I have done more for you than ever your own mother did -- Look
you, I expect no less than a thousand pounds for my share -- Ay, all signed and
sealed before consummation.


Flam. You shall have it without the least scruple.


Fash. Scruple, indeed! -- A hundred a year for life.


Flam. Certainly.


Fash. An elegant house, ready furnished.


Flam. All very reasonable.


Fash. Ay, I was always remarked for my reason and moderation. -- Well! after
this affair is over, I shall have nothing to do, but to live with credit and
character, the rest of my days.


Flam. Then you think we shall succeed?


Fash. Quite certain of it.


Flam. You transport me!


Fash. Such a lovely, tender, sweet chicken! -- Ah, rogue, if you should not
behave well to her, you will break my heart.


Flam. Oh, never fear that -- You know I am a man of the strictest honor.


Fash. Yes, I have had many proofs of your honor. (aside.) Ay, it is that
consideration alone which urges me on -- I would not have helped her to every
body, for heaven knows, it is not the little trash I am to get by it, that --


Flam. No, to be sure.


Fash. I say, it is not the trifle I am to get by it, but the surety of
providing her with a good husband.


Flam. But all this while you keep me in suspense -- What said she? -- When may
I hope to see her?


Fash. Said! no bird ever fell into a fowler's snare so readily -- She believes
every syllable about your title and fortune, is as impatient as you are for an
interview, and promised to be here directly.


Flam. Egad, you have made quick work of it -- Be here directly -- Zounds! I am
afraid I shall want assurance to go through with it.


Fash. After what you have gone through already, I think there can be no great
danger now.


Flam. You must introduce me properly, else, as I have never seen her, I may
make some mistake.


Fash. I must own your head is not the best in the world, but here you cannot
readily go wrong -- Be fure you keep up to your part -- Talk of the years you
have been dying for her in secret -- Flatter her charms to the utmost -- Speak
highly of your family and connections -- If you should make some trifling
blunders, I Will place them to the excess of your passion -- The most pleasing
excuse which can be given to a woman fond of adoration.


Flam. As for that matter, you know I am seldom at a loss for words.


Fash. Yes, I know the height of your oratory, but let me tell you, she must be
attacked in a very different manner from the nymphs you have been used to.


Flam. Well, well, I Will take care now to be on the other side, and be as
high-flown as possible -- I have been studying hard words for that purpose.


[Knocking at the door. Fash. As I live, that is her rap -- She Is impatient
indeed!


Flam. Zounds! I am quite unprepared -- What shall I do?


Fash. Receive her as if by accident -- She Will pretend she is come to me, but
I Will not appear till the first ceremonies are over.


Flam. Hold -- Don't leave us together.


Fash. Not another word, but make good use of your time.

[Exit.
Flam. I wish with all my soul, it was over -- Hem! hem!


Enter Miss BELGROVE. He bows aukwardly, she curtsies. Flam. (In confusion)
Ma'am -- your -- your -- most unlimitedly -- obedient -- I, I am -- that is to
say -- extravagantly happy -- in -- in -- in --


Miss Belg. I was told, sir, that Mrs. Fashion was here.


Flam. Ay, that is right. (aside) Hem! hem! -- She only gave place, illustrious
Lady, to let the resplendency of your charms shine in their meridian luster! --
Hem! hem!


Miss Belg. Sir! -- Is it to me you address this discourse?


Flam. Who else, thou sovereign object of my wishes! -- I have languish'd whole
years for the happiness of this interview, and now, I --


Miss Belg. Hold, sir, -- I am not to be treated in this ludicrous manner -- Do
you know who I am?


Flam. Do the inhabitants of this nether world know the radiant sun that daily
illumines them? -- You, my angelic Miss Bloomer, are my sun, my moon, my stars,
my whole planetary system! -- Pretty well that, I think.

[aside.
Miss Belg. Miss Bloomer! -- Ha! there must be some trick in this -- Some
design on my fair friend -- I Will fathom it.

[aside.
Flam. She hesitates -- I believe I have done it -- Bravo, my boy, I never knew
your eloquence fail.

[aside.
Miss Belg. Pray, sir, who are you?


Flam. Ah, madam! I am the unhappy Lord Flamwell, heir to one of the most noble
families in England, with an independent fortune in my own possession, which,
with the most glowing heart that ever was offered up to Cytherea's goddess, I
now present to you, my Cyprian Venus.

[Kneeling.
Miss Belg. And all this is designed for me?


Flam. Alas! where is the merit in paying worship to the queen of beauty? -- No,
my adorable Miss Bloomer, I long have loved, but till this happy moment, never
had courage to tell you so.


Miss Belg. And I am to believe all this real?


Flam. Every syllable of it true, by those bright eyes!


Mrs. FASHION speaks entering. My dear Miss Bloomer! this is so kind of you to
call on -- Ah! what do I see! -- Miss Belgrove! -- My Lord, what are you about?

Flam. Curse me if I know! -- (Rises, looks confusedly, first at Miss Belgrove,
then at Mrs. Fashion) -- Oh, my evil stars! what have I done now?


Miss Belg. Upon my word, Mrs. Fashion, I am very glad you are come -- You,
perhaps, can explain this gentleman's meaning, which, I confess, is above my
comprehension.


Mrs. Fash. My dear, sweet Miss Belgrove -- This gentleman -- is a -- a Lord --
that -- that -- a -- his friends have confined in my house for lunacy.


Miss Belg. I beg your pardon, Mrs. Fashion, I did not know till now, that you
kept a private madhouse.


Mrs. Fash. Ah, poor nobleman! he is greatly to be pitied -- All this is a love
affair, Miss -- Gone quite distracted for love.


Miss Belg. For love! -- And are you so famous for curing mad people? -- Now, I
think I could recommend a magistrate for his doctor, who could much sooner
restore him to his senses.


Fash. Oh, your Ladyship mistakes him quite -- As innocent as a newborn babe
-- But, pray let me attend you into another room.


Miss Belg. I shall not stop -- I only wanted to consult you about the choice of
some Brussells lace.


Fash. I Will wait on your Ladyship, at your own house directly.


Miss Belg. Whenever you are at leisure. -- Mean time, let me advise that
gentleman, not to be so violent in his raptures, before he is certain of the
person he addresses them to.


Fash. Ah, you are a witty Lady -- Nay, by my says, I Will wait on you to the
door -- This is so great an honor to call (Turns and looks back at Flamwell)
Ah! conjuror.

[Exit with Miss Belgrove.
FLAMWELL stands musing. Flam. Tol, lol, lol. (singing) I believe it is all
over -- Ay, ay, my old luck pursues me still, and if ever I do cut a
distinguisning figure in the world, I Am afraid it will be when I make my exit.


Mrs. Fashion returns and curtsies. Mrs. Fash. Your humble servant, good Mr.
Blunder -- You have made a notable piece of work here.


Flam. What shall I do?


Fash. Hang, or drown yourself -- it is all over now.


Flam. Was there ever so unlucky a dog!


Fash. Never -- that I Will answer for -- Nothing prospers you undertake -- What
the deuce could possess you to make so egregious a mistake?


Flam. Zounds! you -- You knew I had never seen Miss Bloomer, and your
declaring it was her, left me not the least room to doubt.


Fash. Nothing could be more unfortunate! -- The two ladies are intimate, and
if a discovery should ensue, I am entirely ruined.


Flam. Can you think of nothing to prevent it?


Fash. I expect the real Miss Bloomer every minute -- When she is gone, I Will
wait upon Miss Belgrove, and endeavor to persuade her, that you really are a
lunatic -- And faith, if this affair fails, I shall be little better myself.
(Knocking) Hark! I believe this is she, in reality -- Away, and be in
readiness, if I should want you.


Flam. Hearky'! -- Take care how you introduce me to the next Miss Bloomer.

[Exit.
Enter Miss BLOOMER. Miss Bloom. Now, Fashion, I am as good as my word, you see.


Fash. Heaven bless you! that you always are.


Miss Bloom. But come, I have not a moment to lose.


Fash. Ah, that sweet countenance! -- I don't wonder so many gentlemen despair
of obtaining so great a prize.


Miss Bloom. What do you mean?


Fash. I am sure I cannot blame the extravagance of Lord Flamwell's passion --
And, by my faith, he swears he cannot live without you.


Miss Bloom. Lord Flamwell! -- Who is he, pray?


Fash. The young nobleman, I told your Ladyship about this morning -- Well, a
sweeter, better humored, or more generous man, was never seen -- Had you
beheld with what transports he received the news of your coming hither.


Miss Bloom. Why, surely, you did not tell him any such thing?


Fash. Really, Miss, he looked so piteously, I could not help it -- Oh, Mrs.
Fashion, says he, if my beauteous angel will but consent to be mine, how happy
shall I be! -- My whole fortune shall be at her command -- What pleasure shall
I take in introducing her to my Sisters, Lady Lucy, Lady Sophia, and Lady
Harriet.


Miss Bloom. Bless me! the Gentleman seems to have a number of relations -- But
I have not time to lose about such trifles.


Fash. Do you call breaking a nobleman's heart, a trifle?


Miss Bloom. Yes -- to me the greatest trifle in the world.


Fash. Ah, you will pay for all, one day or other -- But, do now, give me leave
to introduce him to you.


Miss Bloom. Who, me? -- Not I, I positively assure you -- It Is your own house,
you know, and if you choose to do it -- I cannot help you.


Fash. Well, I Will venture your displeasure -- I Am sure you would not be the
death of any person, nor discompose that sweet face of yours with a frown, for
the world.

[Exit.
Miss Bloom. What a fool am I, to be flattered by such a fulsome old woman -- I
am certainly an odd composition -- to be pleased with what at the same time I
so much despise -- Now, for my Lord -- If his heart does not speedily go
pit-a-pit, and I don't make him as great a rool as I have dome the rest of my
admirers, why I Will contess, I Have lost the art of tormenting.


Enter FLAMWELL and Mrs. FASHION. Fash. Miss Bloomer, Lord Flamwell, who has
long wished to pay his respects to you.


[He offers to salute her. Miss Bloom. Hold, my Lord, we must be upon a more
intimate footing, before I allow liberties of that sort.


Flam. I stand justly reproved, Madam, for my presumption, and own I merit the
fate of -- of -- Icarus, who drove the Chariot of Apollo -- Yet, if you will but
--


Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! -- Your Lordship must pardon this emotion, which the
profundity of your learning has involuntarily extorted from me -- Ha! ha! ha!
If I don't mistake, Icarus was a near relation of yours.


Flam. Of mine, Madam, -- Yes -- No, no, he has been dead, for ought I can
tell, these -- these hundred years past.


Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! I know it, my Lord, but you certainly are of the same
family, and endeavor to imitate him, in soaring so high.


Flam. If I have committed any error, your charms, Madam, are a sufficient
excuse.


Miss Bloom. True, my Lord, my charms have led many people into very great
errors, and if you don't take care, you will stand in the same predicament.


Flam. I wish it, Madam. -- If I am so conspicuously happy, as to possess you,
I shall be the envy of the gaping world -- Adorable creature! behold, thus
prostrate at your feet, the unhappy Lord Flamwell, who vows never more to rise,
till you have put a period to his sufferings.

(Kneeling.)
Miss Bloom. And that, I vow, my Lord, will never be.


Fash. Ah, the sweet youth! it brings tears into my eyes, to see what a
condition love has reduced him to.


Miss Bloom. Pray, my Lord, let us have that speech over again -- Stay, you
shall see how gracefully it comes from me in heroics.

(Mimicking.) Thus at your feet, Pomposo Flamwell lies,
There vows to stay, until you bid him -- rise.

Flam. I find she is an overmatch for me, every way.

(aside)
Fash. Come, Miss Bloomer, let me put in a word for his Lordship -- As I can
answer for the sincerity and honourableness of his intentions, I hope you will
not stand on unnecessary punctilio -- You see he cannot live without you --
Reward his passion with your hand, and let me this evening, salute you Lady
Flamwell.


Flam. Thou, more than Goddess! if you judge my fortune, title, or family, not
beneath your acceptance, bless me with your love, and crown my wishes.


Fash. Ay, I see a kind consenting look in these pretty tell-tale sparklers --
Just so, I looked myself, on such an occasion -- By my faith, we'll have a
wedding directly -- Let your Lordship's Chaplain be called in, and the ceremony
immediately performed.


Miss Bloom. Hold, hold, pray let me get in a word with you -- Look you, my
Lord, I have not been used to such treatment, nor do I understand your meaning
-- As to you, Mrs. Fashion, I am surprised you don't know me better -- But, be
assured, as this is the first time I Have been in your house, so it shall be the
last.

[Going.
Flam. (Kneeling.) Stay, charming, cruel tyrant, and take my life before you go.


Miss Bloom. What use shall I make of it, my Lord? -- You had better make a
present of it to some other person, who prefers a title before understanding,
and wealth beyond happiness.


Fash. My dear Miss Bloomer, how can you be angry with me? -- If my Lord loves
you to distraction, am I to blame, in endeavoring to promote your future
felicity?


Flam. Then will you not give me leave to hope? -- And must those charms, which
like the sun dispense their refreshing beams around the celestial hemisphere,
be only withheld from me?


Miss Bloom. My Lord, though I believe nobility and common sense very compatible,
yet, as you are not happily possessed of both, forgive me if I decline your
very generous offer -- And, be certain, if ever I do resign my freedom, it
shall be to a man who knows how to set a proper value on it.

[Exit.
Flam. And, curse catch me! if ever I am master of (...), if I don't make you
heartily repent this treatment.


Fash. Go, you deserve it all, for being so great an idiot.


Flam. Zounds! woman, what would you have me do? -- I spoke better than ever I
did in my life before, but the Devil is not a match for such a tongue.


Fash. No, not such an ignorant Devil as you -- But, she shall not escape so --
Ill after her, and endeavor to repair your mistakes, then make my last bold
effort -- So, prepare yourself -- the conclusion of this business will
certainly be a wife, or -- a halter!

[Exit.
Flam. A wife, by all means -- Of Two Evils, I always choose the least.

[Exit.
SCENE, LADY YOUNGLOVE'S. Enter Lady YOUNGLOVE, dressed, and FLORA, Lady Young.
How can you, Child, make all this noise about One Husband, when you see, I have
been obliged to have Two already, and am now under the cruel necessity of
preparing for a Third.


Flora. Yes, and that same cruel necessity would oblige you to marry a score,
if you could.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Mr. Sedley, and Capt. Helm, to wait upon your Ladyship.


Lady Young. Admit them.


Enter SEDLEY, Capt. HELM, and SWAB. Gentlemen, you are very welcome.

Helm. So, Widow! I understand you are hound for another voyage -- Lookee, if
the wind sits fair, belike I shall bear you company.


Lady Young. I am much obliged to you, Captain, for your good wishes, and hope
my daughter may entertain a proper sense of them.


Flora. O, yes, he may be assured, that I entertain a very proper sense of them.


Helm. Thank you, thank you, Widow -- Suppose I haul a chair, and sound the
coast, to see how the land lies.


Sedley. Do, Captain -- meantime, my fair widow and I have some private affairs
to settle, that will require our absence for a few minutes -- Madam, will you
indulge me so far --


Lady Young. Dear Sir, I cannot deny you any thing you ask --

[Sedley hands her out with great ceremony.
Flora. So, so! -- they have left me to the mercy of this frightful Man of War
-- Now, for a love-scene of the tenderest kind.


Helm. Swab! go below -- And, do you see, look out for a snug birth, call for a
can of flip, and keep a tight reckoning, till I pipe you up again.


Swab. I will, your honor, and drink success to the chase.

[Exit.
Helm. Now we are alone, I don't know what to say to her -- By the mess, I
begin to find I Have got out of my element.


Flora. Well, I really think he is ten times uglier than when I saw him last.


Helm. Hem? -- If I was but once afloat, should do well enough.


Flora. What a pretty lover he makes -- Poor wretch! -- I think I must plague
him a little -- Yes, yes, I must have some sport with him.


Helm. That it should ever come to this! -- I who have attacked so many
first-rate men of war, now to be afraid of a little cock-boat.


Flora. Pray, Captain, what makes you look so very grum? -- If you are not
well. I Will go and fetch some of my Mama's stomachic cordial for you.


Helm. Hold, Miss, I am pretty well, thank you -- Hem! -- (After some
preparation) Pray, Miss, were you ever at sea?


Flora. A good beginning -- O, yes, Captain, very often -- Why, I once went
with my mama as far as Greenwich.


Helm. Well, Miss, what think you now, of a voyage to the Land of Matrimony?


Flora. Voyage! -- Why, I always thought that people went by land to be married
-- Now, I should like to be married very well, -- but not to you.


Helm. All above board, I find -- Mayhap, Miss, you may think my timbers are
not sound, and that I want to be hove down -- But, let me tell you, I am
heartier than many, whose gingerbread rigging fly full in the wind's eye.


Flora. Gingerbread rigging! -- I Am sure, I Would rather have a gingerbread
husband, than you.


Helm. Ay, why so?


Flora. Because, when I was tired of playing with it, I could eat it.


Helm. Nay, if you be like the cannibals, Miss, I had best sheer off -- though, I
believe you would find me very hard of digestion.


Flora. Very likely, but I shall not try.


Helm. However, Miss, all this is little to the purpose.


Flora. Ay, indeed, and so it is sure enough -- So, as you have nothing more to
say, I think I had best leave you to yourself.


Helm. Avast, avast! -- If you are for running ahead so, I must bring you to
your bearings.


Flora. Ah, but you cannot though, for I never will bear you.


Helm. Lookee, do you see, Miss, I came hither to have some serious discourse
with you, because as how I intended to have mess'd with you for life, but if so
be you cannot steer a steady course without all this tacking, why, it will be a
thing impossible to grapple with you for half a glass together.


Flora. Well, then, I will speak my mind, though Mama should lock me up for it --
I detest the sight of you -- if you were as handsome as you are ugly, and as
young as you are old, yet still I should hate you -- My heart is set upon Mr.
Woodford, and have him I will, though I creep through an iron grate, or jump out
of a garret window to him.

[Exit.
Helm. So! she has slipped her anchor, and run out to sea; while I am all aground
here, and must wait for a spring tide to set me afloat again.


Enter Lady YOUNGLOVE and SEDLEY. Lady Young. Well, Mr. Sedley, your arguments
are so persuasive, there is no resisting them -- I consent then, that both
marriages be celebrated this evening.


Sedley. And, to free you from any jealousy of Miss Bloomer, I request, Madam,
that she may be invited as a witness, on this joyful occasion.


Lady Young. I vow, that is cruel in you, besides, poor Lady! it will look like
insult in me -- But, bless me, Captain, where is the child gone to?


Helm. Right a head, yonder, sailing in the wind's eye.


Sedley. Well, Captain, what success?


Helm. Success! -- Why, do you see, I believe I have steered by a wrong chart,
and mayhap, if I don't tack about, I may chance to be wrecked upon the shallows.


Lady Young. Oh, dear Captain, von must not mind her -- She Is young and
ignorant of her good -- I was just so (...) her age, but she will know better
before long.


Helm. Why, to be sure, Widow, I do think she (...) a little teaching, and will
lay a wager, she does not know a cat from a capstan -- But, no matter for that,
-- all in good time -- patience is a good stream anchor -- If I thought I stood
fair for the harbor of her good will, why, it is not a little squally weather,
or variation of the wind, should hinder (...) from venturing.


Sedley. I Will ensure your successing -- My Lady and I have entirely settled
matters -- At our return in the evening, every thing is to be finally concluded
-- You Will have your writings ready.


Helm. Ay, ay, I can produce the log-book of my estate at a minute's warning.


Sedley. And, Captain, I think the greatest punishment you can inflict on your
nephew for his disobedience, will be to oblige him to be a spectator of the
ceremony.


Helm. Right, my Boy, so it will.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. A letter for Mr. Sedley.

[Exit.
Sedley. For me! -- With your leave, my Lady. --

( Reads.) Sir,
-- If there remains the least spark of tenderness in your bosom for Miss
Bloomer, fly to extricate her from an affair that threatens the destruction of
her peace and happiness -- There is no time to be loss -- Come to my House
directly, and I Will inform you of particulars.

F. BELGROVE.



Sedley. Miss Bloomer! -- Her very name has raised a tumult in my soul!

( aside.)
Lady Young. Dear Mr. Sedley, you seem discomposed --


Sedley. No, Madam, perfectly easy.


Lady Young. Sure no unlucky accident has happened to disturb our happiness?


Sedley. No, Madam, none.


Lady Young. I Am afraid there has, -- You had better stay here till every thing
is over.


[Taking him by the hold. Sedley. Fulsome old Witch! (aside) Importance, Madam,
some urgent business demands me for a little time -- I shall not stav long.

[Going.
Lady Young. Mr. Sedley -- And may I depend upon you?


Sedley. Undoubtedly, Madam.

[Still Going.
Lady Young. Stay, Mr. Sealey -- Perhaps, this is some affair with a lady, and
--


Sedley. Don't be uneasy, Madam, -- Was there ever an (...) so provoking
(aside.) Captain, you will excuse me, I Will send up your servant.


Lady Young. (...) stay, another word -- Had not I better (...) then --


Sedley. Pray, Madam, stay till I come back, and then -- your may go to
Jamaica, if you please.

( aside.
[Exit. Lady Young. Oh, the sweet creature! -- I wish this affair was over --
If I should be disappointed now -- Well, I shall not have a moment's comfort, till
I have absolutely secured him mine.

[Exit.
Helm. And, anoint my block, if ever you will let him have a moment's comfort
afterward.


Enter SWAB, drunk, singing. Steady, boys, steady!

Helm. Hey! -- Avast! -- What Is here?


Swab. All Is safe -- all is safe, your honor -- ( hiccups)steady, steady's the
word -- No ^ear of b^^ging, (...) Swab keeps a dead reckoning.


Helm. You lubberly dog! how came you in this trim?


Swab. No matter -- All Is safe -- I Have been tossing the Can to Mrs. Erippery's
health -- And now, if your worship's gl^^y vill turn out, we will scud
homewards with a (...) gale.


Helm. You deserve to be lashed to the gangway, you drunken water-spout, and if
I come along side of you, I Will be soon foul of your forelights.


Swab. Bless you precious limbs, no, no, noble Captain, safe's the word, safe's
the word -- I Am the man will stand by you, while I have a stick standing, or
can carry a rag of canvass -- So, follow in my wake, as soon as you please.

[Exit singing.
Helm. Sheer off -- do -- The dog knows I regard him for old acquantance sake,
-- To be sure, a better sailor never stepped upon forecastle -- He has worked
many a hard gale, and never flinched -- ah! it is such brave fellows as he, that
man our fleets, and show our topsails to the enemy -- Ay, ay, Old England may
well say, that a British seaman, is one of the nobiest characters, the word can
boast of.

[Exit.
End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Miss BELGROVE'S. Enter Miss BELGROVE and SEDLEY. Sedley. I Own to you,
Miss Belgrove, that, so far from being indifferent about Miss Bloomer, my heart
never was more devoted to her, than at present -- In vain, my reason shows the
folly of my conduct, love has got possession of my soul with such absolute
dominion, that every other passion bows to its resistless sway.


Miss Belg. Certainly, you Lovers, are the most inconsistent set of beings in
the world -- Absolute contradictions -- You love and hate, swear and forswear,
whine and rage; -- Resolve one moment, and break it the next -- Tear the false
image from your hearts this hour, and worship it with the grossest adulation
the following one.


Sedley. I confess it, Madam, yet in me you will not behold such a Proteus -- I
can love, without being blind.


Miss Belg. Impossible, for all lovers are blind, at least to the faults of
their mistresses -- But, no more of this -- Take my word for it, Miss Bloomer
is deserving of your best wishes, and, though I cannot entirely defend the
sprightly, though sometimes, imprudent sallies of my fair friend; yet, I think
them so venially agreeable, that they almost carry their excuse in the
commission.


Sedley. And, yet, in the present case, it is certain she encourages the
addresses of some designing rascal, who, probably wants to make a prey of her
person and fortune.


Miss Belg. I own it looks like it -- When I saw her this morning, she hinted a
new conquest of a Lord, and by the circumstances, I suspect Mrs. Fashion of
being the contriver of the whole design.


Sedley. Have you seen Miss Bloomer since you left Mrs. Fashion's?


Miss Belg. No, I called at her house directly after, but she was not at home,
upon which, apprehending some bad consequences, I thought the best thing I
could do, would be to acquaint you, and request your assistance.


Sedley. You oblige me infinitely, Madam -- I Will unravel this villainy, or --


Miss Belg. Stay, do nothing unadvisedly -- Let me go again to Miss Bloomer's,
and endeavor to learn whether she has seen this impostor.


Sedley. You are right, Madam -- But, pray, don't drop a hint of your
suspicions -- Conviction will come stronger, when attended with danger, and
open detection -- Meanwhile, I Will just step home, and be back time enought for
your return.

[Exit.
Miss Belg. Poor Gentleman! -- Oh, Lud! what fools this Love makes of the
wisest of us -- I swear, if the whimsical, inconsistent urchin, dare have the
assurance to attack me, I Would muster up all my courage, and -- and -- run away
from him, as fast as I could.


[Exit. SCENE, Miss BLOOMER'S. Enter Miss BLOOMER, and Mrs. FASHION. Mrs. Fash.
Oh, my dear Lady! what an unfortunate woman am I?


Miss Bloom. Bless me! what new matter for wonder? -- Have you made another
mistake?


Fash. Surely, I was born to be unhappy!


Miss Bloom. I cannot help saying, you deserve it -- The next time I call at
your house, you shall suffer me to be affronted in the manner I was last.


Fash. You have ample revenge, I can assure you -- Oh, I shall never forgive
myself, no, not if I was to live a thousand years, for being accessory to the
death of so sweet, so lovely, so good-natured a gentleman.


Miss Bloom. Death! whose death?


Fash. And yet, alas! I am innocent -- It Is those bright eyes alone, that have
done all this mischief.


Miss Bloom. Oh, if that be all, I Will readily undertake to cure all the evil
done by them.


Fash. No, no, he is too far gone to cure -- He Is a dying man.


Miss Bloom. Dying! -- Who in the name of wonder is dying?


Fash. Lord Flamwell -- No sooner had you left the house, than, seized with a
fit of despair, he shut himself up in his chamber, and --


Miss Bloom. Rayed like a madman, then, when he was tired -- let himself out
again.


Fash. How can you be so barbarous! -- But mark the consequences -- He had
searce been a quarter of an hour there, when we were alarmed with the groans of
a dying person, and forcing the door open, found him weltring in his blood.


Miss Bloom. Oh, heavens! is it true?


Fash. A surgeon was immediately sent for, but on examination, he declared the
wound mortal, and that nothing could save his life.


Miss Bloom. I am petrified with horror!


Fash. Oh! oh! oh! (crying) that ever I should live to see this day! -- The
sweet youth! -- I loved him, as if he had been my own son! -- What will his
family say to me? -- Oh! oh! oh! oh!


Miss Bloom. But, are there no hopes of his recovery?


Fash. No, not the least -- He cannot live two hours!


Miss Bloom. Poor gentleman! -- I sincerely pity him.


Fash. Ah! what signifies pity -- If you would make him some amends for your
cruelty, and condescend to visit him directly --


Miss Bloom. I visit him!


Fash. Yes -- consider can you be so hard-hearted as refuse him the only
consolation he can receive in his last moments?


Miss Bloom. You do not surely advise me to it.


Fash. From my soul I do -- Dear Mrs. Fashion, said he, in faltering accents --
Go to the unrelenting fair one, tell her, I die the victim of her obduracy --
True, I was not worthy of aspiring to such excellence -- But, if she will deign
once more to look upon me, I Will implore her forgiveness, and, as a small
atonement for my folly and presumption, request her acceptance of my fortune --
That, though she could not love me living, she may compassionate my memory.


Miss Bloom. His generosity affects me -- I heartily with he may recover, but
beg leave to decline his offer.


Fash. Really, Miss, I did not think you could have been so ungratesul -- What
harm can there be in visiting a dying man?


Miss Bloom. I am abore suspecting any harm, but scorn to take advantage of his
weakness for me.


Fash. It Is no advantage -- What do his friends value the few thousands he can
bestow? -- Come, I must persuade you to accept them.


Miss Bloom. Indeed, Mrs. Fashion, though I am far from being void of humanity,
yet upon this occasion you must excuse me; you may assure him, that, if wisnes
--


Fash. No, no, -- In all probability, he will not be alive in an hour's time --
The very sight of you would satisfy him, and then he would die contented.


Miss Bloom. What shall I do? --


Fash. Nay, don't hesitate at performing a charitable action.


Miss Bloom. Well, well -- You have persuaded me.


Fash. Ah, you are a sweet, good Lady, and I hope will be rewarded for your
tenderness -- Then, you promise to come immediately?


Miss Bloom. I do.


Fash. Blessings on that complying countenance! -- Could I but live to see you
married to my wish, I should then be a happy woman!

[Exit.
Miss Bloom. So! so! -- These eyes of mine will be brought in guilty of murder!
-- Well! I am certainly an unaccountable mortal -- Though my heart feels the
most delicate touches of sensibility, yet, this love of admiration hurries me,
unthinkingly, into a thousand errors -- Positively, I will reform -- Ay, but
how? -- Why, marry -- Oh, lud, the cure would be worse than the disease -- And
yet, was Sedley my doctor, I think he could qualify the bitter portion -- In
(...), I Am absolutely determined -- on -- what? To be as good as I can.

[Exit.
SCENE, Lady YOUNGLOVE'S. Enter FLORA, WOODFORD, and FRIPPERY. Woodf. Talk not
of danger, my sweet girl! who could be separated from you so long, and not
purchase such precious moments at any risque?


Flora. O dear! what a bounce my heart gave when I saw you -- I Am frightened
out of my wits at your rashness -- If my Mamma catches us, we are undone for
ever.


Frip. You need not fear, Miss, your Mamma's in too great a concatenation
herself, tomind you; and she has sent all the servants out, about one fribalous
thing, or other -- However, to make sure, I Will stand centry myself for you, so
make good use of your time, you young rogues.

[Exit.
Woodf. My impatience would not let me wait the success of a scheme I had
concerted with Sedley, this morning; I was resolved to see you, so made use of
my key of the gate at the end of the lane, to let myself into the garden, from
whence I slipped up the back stairs.


Flora. You are too venturesome, yet, I Am glad you are come to my relief -- My
Mamma insists positively upon my marrying your Uncle tonight.


Woodf. I know it, my angel, but we will disappoint her, if you will consent to
let me convey you to a place where we may be united beyond the power of
separation.


Flora. I would run any hazard to avoid so hateful a union -- And, yet,
Woodford, should you behave unkindly to me, when I Am under your protection, it
would break my heart.


Woodf. He must be a villain indeed, who could wrong such innocence -- No, rely
upon my truth and honor -- Let me but lead you from hence, now we have this
favorable opportunity, and before we are missed, I hope we shall be far enough
out of the reach of a pursuit.


Flora. With all my heart -- For, to confess the truth, I should like to be run
away with into Scotland above all things -- O lud! it will be so pleasant, so
spirited, so fashionable, and make such a noise in the world! -- Why, it is the
very thing I have been wishing for, ever since I thought of marriage.


Woodf. I am happy to find you so readily approve of it.


Flora. O dear! there is nothing gives a girl the air of consequence an
elopement does -- To have one's name bandied about in all the newspapers in the
kingdom, with "We hear, that yesterday morning, the only daughter of Lady
Younglove eloped with a young gentleman of family, and great expectations --
They were immediately pursued by the young Lady's relations, out in vain -- The
guardian powers of love and beauty had taken them under their protection --
Phaeton lent them his chariot, Cupid was the winged Charioteer, and Hymen on
the opposite banks of the Tweed, with open arms, welcomed them into the
dominions of joy and happiness!"


Woodf. My charming girl! -- How your words animate me -- I hope the event will
prove equal to our most sanguine expectations -- But, let us not waste the
precious moments -- Come, and --


Flora. Stay, stay, not so hasty -- Let me descend a little from my heroics to
the level of common sense -- Stop here a few moments, while I just step up
stairs for some of my best clothes.


Woodf. No, no, my dear, we shall have no occasion for them.


Flora. Ah, but I Am afraid we shall though -- And if I can slip into my mamma's
closet, I Will steal some of her jewels out.


Woodf. Not for the world -- You are the only jewel I wish to possess -- Let us
deal honorably, and trust to her generosity for the future.


Flora. Then I Am afraid you will trust to a broken reed.


Woodf. No matter, my love, we will put it to the test -- I am sensible of the
great hazard we both run by this precipitate step, which nothing, but the fear
of losing you for ever, could urge me to -- You, perhaps, have not considered
it so seriously.


Flora. Why no, truly, I seldom consider about the matter -- Reflection I know,
will come time enough afterward.


Woodf. Then can you, my rose-bud, in case your mamma is not reconciled to us,
relinquish all hopes of a coach, with every other attendant on polite life, and
be content to live in a cottage with love and me?


Flora. I must own, that I should like a coach prodigiously, but then I like
you better -- And if grandeur is only to be purchased at the expense of
happiness, a sig for it, and every other fine thing -- Do you continue but to
love me, and I shall be as happy as the day is long.


Woodf. My generous girl! whilst I have life, it shall be my study to repay
such obligations -- Come, let us go down the back stairs, and proceed to
Sedley's, where I have a chaise waiting for us.


Enter FRIPPERY. Frip. Oh, undone! undone! -- Here Is your uncle, Sir Whiffling
Trifle, and a French gentleman along with him, coming up stairs.


Woodf. Zounds! how unfortunate!


Frip. Oh, quite misfortunate indeed!


Flora. O, dear! what will become of us?


Woodf. Is there no place to hide me in?


Frip. O none, Sir, except you creep up the chimney, and so on to the top of
the next house.


Woodf. Well, I am resolved -- Frippery, leave the room directly.


Frip. Yes, Sir, O lud, O lud!

[Exit.
Woodf. (taking hold of Flora) Don't be alarmed, my dear, -- follow me, and
fear nothing.


Enter Sir WHIFFLING, speaking to FINESSE. So, Monsieur Finesse, you really
think my Museum contains more curiosities than -- Hey, Mr. Woodford! in the
name of all that is wonderful, what brought you here?

Woodf. A design, Sir Whiffling, which your coming has unluckily interrupted,
though not prevented -- Let me beg of you therefore, to entertain Monsieur
Finesse with the remainder of your invaluable curiosities, while I attend your
niece down stairs.


Sir Whif. I am astonished! -- Hold, hold, Sir! you may go when, and where you
please, but my niece shall not stir.


Woodf. (pulling out a pistol) You see, Sir Whiffling, all resistance is in
vain.


Sir Whif. Help! murder! help!


Woodf. Not so loud, as you value your life.


Sir Whif. For pity's sake, Monsieur, draw and assist me.


Fin. Pardonnez moy, Monsieur, I beg to be excuse.


Woodf. (Drawing toward the door with Flora) Lookee, Sir Whiffling, if you
offer to molest me before I Am down stairs, and out of doors, the consequences
may be fatal -- Remember that caution as you regard your safety.

[Exit with Flora.
After they have stood some time looking at each other. Sir Whif. Do you think
they are down stairs yet?


Fin. No, Monsieur, wait a leatle bit longer.


Sir Whif. Draw your sword, and see if they be gone.


Fin. To oblige you, I will draw my sword, but, je vous demand pardon, I have
more politesse dan to go before in your own house.


Sir Whif. Hush! -- I believe we may venture now -- Come, follow me then.


Fin. Oui, Monsieur, I shall take de great care not to go first.

[Exeunt, crying help! murder! help!
SCENE Mrs. FASHION'S. Enter Miss BLOOMER, and Mrs. FASHION. Fash. My dear
Lady, I have impatiently expected you.


Miss Bloom. How does his Lordship?


Fash. Just alive, that is all.


Miss Bloom. Then there is no occasion for my disturbing him.


Fash. The greatest in the world -- He cannot die in peace till he has seen you.


Miss Bloom. I wish our interview was over -- You Will be sure to stay all the
time in the room with me.


Fash. Certainly -- Nay, don't hesitate but let me lead you to him.

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes, discovers a room darkened. FLAMWELL lying on a couch. Enter
Mrs. FASHION, and Miss BLOOMER. Fash (softly) My Lord! -- My Lord! -- It Is all
over -- My Lord!


Flam. Oh! -- disturb me not -- let me expire in quiet -- It Is not my charmer's
voice.


Fash. Still raving on you. -- My sweet Lord, compose yourself -- I have
brought Miss Bloomer to take a last farewell.


Flam. (a little raising himself) I am very faint -- Ah, Madam, would I had
strength to thank you for this favor!


Miss Bloom. Be composed, my Lord -- I am heartily sorry for your misfortune,
and that I was the innocent occasion of it.


Flam. I bless the hour, since it has procured me this satisfaction -- I am
weak with the loss of blood -- Might I entreat you to come a little nearer --


Fash. Do, my dear Miss Bloomer, sit down here -- His Lordship cannot speak
loud.

(She sits nigh the couch)
Flam. I have but few moments to spare -- On that table, Madam, lies my will,
properly attested -- In it you will find the respect I have entertained for you.


Miss Bloom. Pray, my Lord, excuse me, and give it to those who better deserve
it.


Fash. By my faith, he will not, so no more words.


Flam. I have but one request to make, and then -- I die composed.


Miss Bloom. Name it, my Lord,


Flam. That you might be legally mine, and --


Miss Bloom. My lord!


Flam. And after my death, without interruption, quietly to enjoy my title as
well as fortune.


Miss Bloom. I am greatly obliged to your Lordship, but give me leave
positively, to decline both.


Fash. Nay, now, Miss Bloomer, I really think you are very wrong -- Consider,
what an advantage it will be to you.


Miss Bloom. I despise advantages obtained in such a manner.


Fash. Indeed, you are too delicate -- It will be a public and honorable
testimony of his love and gratitude.


Miss Bloom. I desire no such testimonies, and, if that was your design, you will
find you have lost your aim.

[Going.
Fash. (Stopping her) Can you refuse such a trifling, momentary satisfaction to
a man who is just leaving the world?


Miss Bloom. Can you be so inhuman, to load a man just leaving the world, with
such a weight as matrimony?


Fash. Come, all this is feigned -- You must and shall be Lady Flamwell -- the
Chaplain is waiting without -- I Will call him in, and he will soon run over the
words -- Here, Mr. Ty'em, -- walk in, walk in!


[Exit. Miss Bloom. Mrs. Fashion! -- Stay! -- What do you mean by using me
thus? -- I Will leave your house instantly.


Enter TY'EM. Ty'em. Are the parties ready?


Miss Bloom. No, Sir -- Have a care what you are about -- If you dare proceed a
step further in this affair, you shall be made a public example of.


Flam. My gentle Lady, can you suffer me to die in despair?


Miss Bloom. My ungentle Lord! I am not to be tricked in this manner -- Cease
your idle solicitations.


Flam. Not but with my life -- Your cruelty has given me new vigor (Rising from
his couch) And thus I seize my happiness.


Miss Bloom. Hold off! -- What! have I been deceived! -- ensnared! -- It Is
plain -- Villain! -- who are you?


Flam. A man, Madam, who is resolved to make a proper use of this advantage --
Come, Madam, you have no time for deliberation -- Either this moment let me
make you honorably mine, or -- necessity will compel me to make use of force
to oblige you.


Miss Bloom. Monster! I detest you, and despise your threats! -- Dare not for
your life, Sir, to bar my way.

(To Ty'em.)
Ty'em. Verily, you are righteously joined together, and I am ready to affirm,
that the ceremony is performed.


Miss Bloom. How am I beset!


Flam. (taking hold of her) You must comply -- There is no possibility of
escaping.


Miss Bloom. Help! murder! help!


Flam. It Is all in vain.

(Struggling with her)
Miss Bloom. Help! help! for heaven's sake!


Door broke open -- Enter SEDLEY, WOODFORD, CONSTABLE, and SERVANTS. They
secure FLAMWELL and TY'EM. Sedley. Hold, miscreants! or this moment is your
last.


Woodf. Look to the Lady, she faints --


Confr. Look to the gentleman here, first -- He seems to be in the worst
condition.


Sedley. What a scene of horror! -- Dear Woodford, do you secure that wicked
woman without, while I assist Miss Bloomer.


Woodf. I will, and as I shall take your advice in restoring Flora to her
mother, will leave Mrs. Fashion in the hands of these worthy gentlemen, and
wait at your house for your return.

[Exit.
Miss Bloom. O, Sedley! is it to you that I am indebted for this providential
rescue? -- It Is doubly, doubly welcome.


Sedley. I am sorry, Madam, that I cannot return the compliment -- Mr.
Constable, conduct these villains to your own house, till they are properly
examined.


Con. Yes, Sir -- Come along, my lads, don't be so down-hearted -- You are not
so bad now as you will be, that is some comfort -- The gallows, you know, never
can come out of season to you, and so, better late than never.


Flam. O, my cursed fortune! -- Yes, now I see I shall cut a distinguishing
figure in the world!


[Exeunt Constable, Flamwell, and Servants. Sedley. When we last parted, Miss
Bloomer, little did I expect we should have met in such a manner -- Give me
leave to ask, what am I to judge from your appearance here?


Miss Bloom. The truth -- that I was innocently decoyed here, by the wicked
woman who keeps this house.


Sedley. Fain, fain would I believe so, did not other parts of your conduct
contradict it.


Miss Bloom. My conduct, Sir, though faulty in this particular, is in every
other respect irreproachable.


Sedley. I should be happy indeed, Madam, if you could prove it.


Miss Bloom. Surprising! -- What right have you, Sir, to call my actions in
question?


Sedley. None, Madam, none -- The busy world has done it for you.


Miss Bloom. Know, Sir, I rely on my own integrity, and despise what you or the
world can say of me.


Sedley. It too plainly appears, Madam, that you have not the least regard for
either.


Miss Bloom. Good heavens! but I will be calm -- I see your artifice, you
poorly seek an excuse for your own inconstancy -- The oaths, the vows, the
sighs you so long offered up to me, are now transferred to a more amiable, and
deserving object -- Lady Younglove, Sir, has sent me an invitation of the
kindest nature --


Sedley. I know it, Madam -- Too long have I dangled in the train of a
Coquette, but I am at last convinced, that the levity of your conduct, forbids
me ever to hope the least happiness, with a woman of your gaiety.


Miss Bloom. Burst, burst, swelling bosom, ere I give you vent. (aside) O, Sir,
you are convinced at last -- It Is very well, Sir, -- I am satisfied --
perfectly satisfied -- Then you give me up for ever.


Sedley. For ever, Madam, by heaven!


Miss Bloom. Cruel, ungenerous, Sedley! -- What have I done to deserve this
insult? -- especially from you, who of all men, I am least able to bear it from.

[Weeps.
Sedley. Tears! my heart can hold no longer -- Madam, Miss Bloomer! -- Heaven
is my witness, I bleed to wound you thus -- I love you! I adore you! -- Had I
millions they should be yours -- But, what can I say? -- Thus circumstanced, I
am compelled, dear as I love, to bid you eternally farewell -- Yet, though I am
wretched, completely wretched, may the guardian powers of love and innocence,
wait on your footsteps, shadow you with their wings, and conduct you to that
happiness you have deprived me of.

[Going.
Miss Bloom. Stay, rash man, stay -- My pride forbids me to stoop to a
vindication -- Yet, my weakness confesses, that had it not been for your
present behavior, I should have preferred you before all the men I ever saw --
'Till this moment I knew not half the power you had over me -- Yes, cruel
Sedley, enjoy that triumph, but at the same time know, I will, if possible,
tear your image from my breast, and bury myself where I may never hear your
name mentioned.

[Going.
Sedley. Hold, my charming angel! -- By heaven you shall not go -- Thus on my
knees (Kneeling) let me entreat for pardon -- Forgive the man, who doats on you
to distraction, who lives but in your smiles -- Abhorred be my tongue for thus
wantonly wounding your sensibility, and uttering what my heart disclaims.


Miss Bloom. I am astonished! -- And, are you really not engaged to Lady
Younglove?


Sedley. By all the powers of love, I am not, nor ever will be -- 'Twas all an
artifice, to serve my friend, and try the strength of your affection -- If you
refuse my hand, never shall it be the lifeless property of another.


Miss Bloom. Generous man! I am not worthy of you! -- No, Sedley, virtues like
yours deserve infinitely more than I am able to bestow.


Sedley. Say not so, my beauteous girl! -- You must, you shall be mine -- My
happiness is centered in you -- Blessed be the fortunate accident that thus
luckily revealed I was not indifferent to you.


Miss Bloom. And doubly blessed let it be, since it has opened my eyes, and shown
me the glaring impropriety of my former conduct -- What a dreadful precipice
have I escaped! -- How have I -- But, my future life best shall speak my sense
of the past -- Here let me seriously renounce all former follies -- Never from
this hour, will I be guilty of them -- You have at last effectually completed
the arduous task you so long pursued -- REFORMED A COQUETTE -- And now, if you
dare -- take her for your pains.


Sedley. (Embracing her) O transport inexprssible! -- Am I at last rewarded!


Enter Miss BELGROVE. Miss Belg. Hey-day! may I believe my eyes! -- Here Is a
change indeed! -- Embraching!


Miss Bloom. O, my dear girl! I am glad you are come.


Miss Belg. Really, so am I. -- Your humble servant, Mr. Proteus, I am pleased
to find you in such spirits -- Not an hour ago, you was the resolute determined
hero -- No, no, Madam, I can love without being blind.


Sedley. True, Madam, and without being entirely so; where could I six, but on
so deserving an object? You seem surprised: let us adjourn to Lady Younglove's,
and in our way thither, I Will let you into my whole design.


Miss Bloom. Here, take my hand -- My heart has not been so much at ease a long
time -- And, if girls were but wise enough to consult their own happiness,
instead of their trisling with fools and coxcombs, they would seek for it where
it can only be found -- In the arms of men of sense, and virtue.

[Exeunt.
End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE, Lady YOUNGLOVE'S. Enter FLORA, and FRIPPERY. Frip. UPON my word, Miss,
this is the most oddest affair I was ever extricated in during the whole
current of my life -- After getting so artificially off as you did, for Mr.
Sedley to dissuade your lovyer to return you to your mamma again, instead of
flourishing away to Scotland without redemption -- Well! I own its above my
compacity to find out.


Flora. Ay, or mine either -- I Am sure, I never looked so foolish in all my
life, as when I found we were not to be married.


Frip. And well you might, Miss, to have all your schemes confisticated in such
a manner.


Flora. And then, Frippery, to be disappointed of such a delightful jaunt, and
exposed to the ridicule of all one's acquaintance -- It Is, enough to make me
cry my eyes out.


Frip. Ay, my dear, so it is -- And, pray, what end did he impose by this wise
scheme?


Flora. Why, as by such a precipitate step we should entirely forfeit the
favor of his uncle, and my mamma, without the least chance of recovery, he
persuaded Woodford to wait the issue of a scheme which he is going to execute
immediately -- For my part, if it does succeed, I shall lose half the pleasure
I expected in being married in Scotland.


Frip. You are right, Miss, and speak the sensations of most of the girls who
go there -- Why, I might have been married three years ago to Mr. Scraper, Lord
Supple's footman, but that we could not raise money enough between us to get
there, and I was determined never to follow the vulgar fashion, of being asked
in church.


Enter Lady YOUNGLOVE. Lady Young. So, my pretty runaway Miss! I have you safe
once more, thanks to Mr. Sedley, and shall take care to keep you so.


Flora. Perhaps you may be mistaken (aside) It is mighty well, mamma, but you
would not like to be served so yourself.


Lady Young. Go, hussy, you are a pert spoiled girl -- Now, Frippery, after
this last generous act of Mr. Sedley's, I think, I cannot have the least doubt
of his sincerity, truth, and tenderness.


Frip. Doubt, Madam! it would be downright fidelity even to inspect him of such
a thing.


Lady Young. How tediously the lazy minutes drawl, to a heart impatient of its
bliss like mine! -- Frippery, do you think I am elegantly enough dressed for my
bridal day?


Frip. Elegant, my Lady! -- Why, you are the very moral of gentility -- Your
new cork-rump becomes you mightily -- And Mr. Friz, the hair-dresser, (...)
your head is now at least half a foot higher (...) the handsome Duchess's.


Lady Young. I am glad of it -- O, the dear, sweet (...)! -- He promised to be
here about this time -- I (...) he was come -- My patience is almost exhausted,
(...) I tremble left any accident should rob me of my expected happiness.


Flora. If she should be disappointed now.

(aside)
Frip. I warrant your Ladyship need not fear -- No, no, Mr. Sedley is too much
of a gentleman to refuse you any thing.


Enter SEDLEY, Captain HELM, Miss BLOOMER, WOODFORD, and SWAB. Sedley. My
beauteous widow!

(Embracing)
Lady Young. My long expected love!


Flora. I wish my mamma would not be quite so fond before company.

[aside
Sedley. My dear Lady, I have been obliged to trespass on your patience, in
order to bring these witnesses of my happiness.


Helm. Ay, ay, widow, we have crowded all the sail we could to be in at the
first broadside, and now, as we all seem in the line, suppose we hoist the
signal for engaging?


Lady Young. With all my heart, Captain, the sooner, the better.


Helm. Bravely spoken, and I Will answer, that you will not be the first to cry out
quarter.


Lady Young. Oh, Miss Bloomer! I am happy to see you -- My dear, this is an
unexpected favor -- Well, now, after your known partiality for Sedley, can you
forgive his infidelity to you? -- I protest it gives me pain to rob you of such
a sweet man.


Miss Bloom. Your Ladyship is too good -- I should be vain indeed, were I to
pretend to dispute a heart with one of your Ladyship's age and experience.


Lady Young. Ha! ha! ha! very pleasant -- And yet, I really wonder, what the
men can see in me so to follow and admire -- Especially, when they sacrifice
such youth and beauty -- But, I hope no bad consequences will follow your
disappointment -- No hanging, or drowning -- O lud! I positively will give up
all thoughts of him, sooner than be the death of any person.


Sedley. What a malicious devil. (aside) I hope, Madam, I have now removed
every shadow of doubt which your Ladyship might have entertained of my
sincerity.


Lady Young. Entirely, Sir, entirely -- And, in order to convince the world of
my disinterested love for so deserving an object -- Previous to the ceremony,
which is to make me happy for ever -- there is a deed of gift -- (Presenting it
to Sedley) -- properly attested, of half my fortune at present, and, the other
half at my death.


Sedley. My dear Lady, what can I say to such unbounded, such unmerited proofs
of your goodness?


Helm. Say! zounds, man, say nothing -- The widow had rather be thanked in deed
than in word.


Sedley. I am afraid, Captain, it is not in my power to please the Lady either
way.


Lady Young. O fie, Mr. Sedley, don't think so -- I assure you I am not the
unreasonable woman you take me for.


Sedley. I am glad of it, Madam, as I must speedily put you to the trial.


Lady Young. I think, Sir, I can stand any trial you will please to make.


Sedley. I wish we may find it so, Madam -- By your misplaced, and with justice
I may say, ridiculous inclination, my Lady, for I cannot call it love, you have
been so far blindly infatuated, as to make me sole master of your fortune
without reserve --


Lady Young. How! -- Am I awake?


Helm. Faith, I believe not -- But, there seems a storm rising that will
quickly call all hands to work.


Flora. Well! I declare this is charming!


Sedley. I am above making an improper use of such an advantage -- I designed
at first, but to serve my friend, and now my end is fully answered -- Give me
leave therefore, in the presence of this good company, to restore these
writings to their just owner.


[ Delivers them to FLORA. Lady Young. Oh, I shall faint! this is too much, too
much to bear!

[Sits.
Flora. Poor mamma! So, it is indeed, to lose both money and husband -- Sir, I
have not words to thank you as I ought.

[ To SEDLEY.
Lady Young. Am I betrayed then! -- You base deluder! villain!


Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! I hope your Ladyship will forgive his infidelity to
you -- I protest it gives me pain to rob you of such a sweet man.


Lady Young. Confusion! are all my ravishing dreams of happiness come to this!
-- Oh, the inconstancy of mankind! there is neither love, faith, truth, or
honor amongst them.


Miss Bloom. But, I hope, no bad consquences will follow your disappointment --
No hanging, or drowning -- O lud! I positively will give up all thoughts of
him, sooner than be the death of any person.


Sedley. Come, my Lady, forgive this innocent artifice, and look upon me as
your best friend -- You might have fallen a dupe to some designing villain --
who, taking advantage of your weakness, would have ruined your family, and
entailed perpetual misery on yourself.


Helm. So! we are all run on a lee shore, here! -- Why, widow, you have kept a
devilish bad reckoning -- But I thought how it would be -- As for your
generosity, Mr. Sedley, in favor of my little cockboat, why, I heartily thank
you -- And, as soon as the parson can tip us a cocket, we'll steer away for
matrimony harbor, directly.


Flora. I Am afraid, Captain, wind and tide are so much against you, that you will
hardly be able to reach the port this trip.


Helm. How Is this! -- Do you refuse to take convoy too?


Flora. No, provided I choose my confort -- I Am sure, if I kept company with
you, I should soon be obliged to take you in tow.


Helm. Whew! (whistling) Here Is a fresh gale sprung up!


Lady Young. I think, Captain, you have kept a bad reckoning.


Flora. And now, Woodford, thanks to Mr. Sedley's generosity, I have it in my
power to manifest my love -- Here, take my hand, my fortune's more than
sufficient to enable us to live happily, though not splendidly -- But, were it
not, be assured, I would cheerfully prefer poverty and a cottage, with the
object of my choice, before riches and the most splendid palace with the man I
dislike.


Sedley. Right, Madam, the temple of Hymen was reared by virtue, and only
occasionally embellished by Plutus. -- Captain, I am sure, if you seriously
consider every thing, you will soon be of the young Lady's mind.


Helm. May-hap not, for when I am resolved on doing any thing, I never think
about the matter.


Woodf. Dear uncle, make my happiness complete by restoring me to your favor
-- Recollect what a cruel constraint you were putting upon both our
inclinations.


Helm. And, you young dog, do you recollect what a cruel constraint you are
putting upon mine?


Sedley. I know, Captain, you are a noble-spirited, worthy-hearted Briton --
Only reflect, with such a great disparity of years and temper, what a
ridiculous figure you must make united to so blooming a girl.


Flora. Ay, for all the world, like David and Abishag, in our old tapestry
hangings.


Sedley. Come, be generous, and act like yourself -- Fill up the marriage
settlements with your nephew's name, instead of your own, and receive the
thanks, nay, the blessings of the young couple, for so laudable an act.


Woodf. Upon my knees, uncle, let me beg --


Helm. Rise, you land spaniel -- When did you ever see a seaman in such a
posture? -- Had it been for a brother tar, why, I should not have held council
about it.


Lady Young. Well! it is some comfort, to find others in the same situation
with myself.


Helm. So! after rigging myself out for a cruize to the unknown islands, my
orders are countermanded, I am to be dock'd, and laid up for life, as unfit for
service.


Swab. Why, an please your honor, I do think your works are too much damaged,
to venture out to sea again -- You Would certainly founder in the first storm.


Helm. Do you think so, Swab? -- Then let us tack about, and alter our course
-- Come hither, nephew, I forgive you what is past -- You shall go master in my
stead, and here are bills of freight and lading for the voyage -- But, harkee,
as you are a young seaman, take my advice -- Don't crowd too much sail, or
you will be apt to overset.


Woodf. Never fear, uncle, I Will steer by your direction -- your goodness to me
on this occasion --


Helm. No fair-weather speeches, but mind your business -- And, do you hear, boy,
by way of encouragement to serve his Majesty, you shall have a thousand pounds
bounty money for every young volunteer you produce, as soon as ever they are
able to cry, Huzza! King George and his navy for ever -- Ay, damme! though you
should have above the royal dozen!


Sedley. There spoke the true spirit of a British seaman.


Helm. What say you. Widow? -- As we both have been a couple of ridiculous old
fools, to make amends, will you join with me, and do the same?


Lady Young. Do the same, Captain? -- I did not rightly understand you -- You
have not, surely, any notion of paying your addresses to me?

(Crosses over to him)
Helm. To you! -- Avast there, sheer off -- -- No, sooner than be tacked to
such a spit-fire, I Would turn a gun into my powder-room, and blow myself up.


Lady Young. A monster! -- A savage bear! -- Fit only for Greenland!


Helm. Well! a Greenland bear is better than a Lapland witch, at any time.


Lady Young. Come along, Frippery -- The men have neither eyes, ears, or
understanding!


[Exeunt Lady Young. and Frip. Helm. Ay, ay, let her have sea-room enough, or
she will run foul of some of you.


Swab. Please your honor, since you are sharing the prize-money, I hope you will
not be angry if I put in my claim?


Helm. What wind blows now?


Swab. A fair gale, your honor; if I can but press yon painter tender into
service.


Helm. Oh, are you in that quarter? -- Have you a mind to desert your commander
in distress?


Swab. No, your honor, never while I have life --, she seems a neat
tight-sailing thing, and her upper works are in such nice order, that I should
like, of all things, to go master.


Helm. But, hearkee, have you hailed her yet, to know whether she would choose to
take you on board?


Swab. Why, no, your honor; I Am too good a seaman to launch out on so long a
cruize without my commander's leave.


Helm. Well, then, Swab, if that is the case, after her directly, and bring her
too as soon as possible.


Swab. I warrant your honor; to give a good account of her -- He must stand
many a hard broadside that takes her from me.

[Exit.
Enter Miss BELCROVE, Sir WHIFLING, and SPANGLE. Helm. Hey day! here is a
Venetian galley, and a whole squadron of Turkish cruizers in full chase of her.


Miss Bell. True, Captain, I have been obliged to ran for it, and glad to find
this harbor open.


Helm. Say you so, then let me stand in -- I Will soon make them tack about, and
sheer off.


Miss Bell. No occasion, Captain, I Will stand my ground now, and face them --
Well, good folks, I see by those smiles that are seated on your countenances,
that every thing is happily settled -- I give you joy -- I met these gentlemen
in my way hither, they would not believe me, so are come to receive their
dismission from your own lips.


Span. Is this true, my dear girl, that you have the inhumanity to be the death
of all my hopes?


Sir Whif. And can you, Miss Bloomer, behold my sufferings without a touch of
pity?


Miss Bloom. The time has been, gentlemen, when I could have played on your
follies, and encouraged them with the highest pleasure -- At present, I am
disposed to be more serious -- Therefore, in a word, I beg I may not be
honored with your addresses more, as you may rest assured, that I never will
give you, or any others, the least encouragement.


Span. And this, my dear, is your positive resolution?


Miss Bloom. Positive.


Span. Upon my soul, my dear, I am sorry for your taste -- But to show you how
fashionably easy I am, under my disappointment -- May elegance renounce me, if
I ever ask you again -- So, ladies and gentlement, wishing you all happiness, I
have the honor, sans ceremony, to remain, till my latest moments, your most
devoted humble servant.


[Exit, humming a tune. Miss Bloom. Ha! ha! ha! -- As to you, Sir Whifling, I
hope your philosophy will teach you to bear this event with equal resignation.


Flora. O, I Will answer for my uncle -- -- Give him another antedeluvian
cockle-shell, and he will renounce the sex for ever.


Sir Whif. Not so pert, Miss -- Madam, your frankness charms me -- I begin to
perceive that I deserve ridicule for the folly of my pursuits -- But, to show
you, that, though I am old, I am not incorrigible, I Will from this moment bid
adieu to all thoughts of love, and devote the remainder of my life to more
noble studies than either brickbats, cinders, or mutilated statues.

[Exit.
Miss Bloom. Now, Belgrove, are not these genuine fruits of reformation?


Enter FINESSE. [ On seeing Sedley and Miss Bloomer, attempts to retire]
Sedley. Ha! Monsieur Finesse, come back -- Why in such a hurry?


Fin. Je demand pardon for my intrusion -- You be upon de private business --
Je revendrai demain, I Will come again tomorrow.

(Going)
Sedley. (stopping him) No, Sir, the present time will do better -- Hearkee,
villain! what motive could induce you to destroy my peace, by your infamous
misrepresentations of Miss Bloomer? -- No evasion, wretch! (drawing) or this
moment shall be your last.


Fin. (kneeling) O dear Sir! prenez guard! -- Consider how soon you may
frighten a pauvre Frenchman out of his wits.


Miss Bloom. What, my admirer, Monsieur Finesse, is it to you I am so much
indebted?


Fin. Ah, Madame! have pity! -- I confess, I have been von grand rogue --
But, je vous en supply -- I beseech you to forgive me.


Sedley. Rise! -- A moment's reflection shows me that you are a wretch beneath
my resentment.


Fin. I Will est vrai -- It is true. indeed, Sir.


Helm. Hearkee, suppose we tar and feather him, and then send him home to his
own country, to parlez vous with his relations.


Sedley. By no means, Captain -- But, hence from my sight, let me never see you
more.


Fin. Vous me faites trop d' honneur -- You do me too much honor.

[Exit.
Sedley. The Frenchman, of character and probity, I admire and esteem -- Virtue
is not confined to clime or complexion, its radient emanations illumine every
nation -- Yet still, I would not fashionably encourage the resuse of foreign
countries, while native merit lies buried in oblivion.


Miss Bell. So, Captain, you and I seem the only disconsolate, unprovided
creatures in the whole group -- We certainly should make a match of it, to
complete the evening's entertainment.


Helm. No, no, fair Lady, you have some other land in view -- As for me -- But,
no more of what is past -- Let us enjoy the present moments.


Woodf. And look forward, uncle, to those scenes of bliss which open to our
view.


Helm. True, Boy, and as this seems but a bad harbor to anchor long in, let us
all steer away for my cabin, where you shall have the best cheer an old
bachelor can give, and as hearty a welcome as the bravest sailor in the navy.


Sedley. We accept your offer, Captain, happy in having our adventures brought
to so agreeable a conclusion -- I only beg leave to remark -- That though our
follies and vices justly deserve the comic lash -- Yet, when, instead of
persevering, we nobly acknowledge our errors, and amend -- Satire then loses
her sting, our foibles turn to virtues, and, the most permanent felicity arises
from THE MISTAKES OF THE HEART.


FINIS.

