THE MACARONI. A COMEDY. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN YORK.

YORK: Printed by A. WARD, in CONEY-STREET. M.DCC.LXXIII.

WITH THE GREATEST RESPECT THIS TRIFLE IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED TO JEREMIAH NORRIS,
ESQUIRE. OF THE CITY OF NORWICH, BY THE AUTHOR.

YORK, April 12, 1773.
THE Author thinks he should be deficient in duty, if he did not thus warmly
express his gratitude to his friends for their kind patronage, and to the
public, for the very favorable reception the piece met with in representation.
Relying upon a continuation of their goodnature, he now ventures to submit it
to their perusal; humbly hoping they will consider it as the first essay of one
whose utmost ambition was to amuse without offending.

THE NAMES of the SUBSCRIBERS.
A
SIR William Anderson, Kildwick, Bart. Miss Anderson, York Jonathan Acklom, Esquire
ditto Mrs Acklom, ditto Duke Adams, Esquire ditto Mr Adcock, Lynn Rev. Mr.
Allanson, Ripon Mrs Athorpe, Howden Mr Charles Atkinson, York Mr Atkinson,
Howden Mr Austin, Comedian, 6 Copies
B
Rev. Mr Baynes, York Mr Barrow, ditto Mr Barker, ditto Miss Barry, Hull Mr
Baxter, Norwich Mr Bates, Comedian, 2 Copies Mr Barwick, Durham Mr Baynes,
Middleham, 2 Cop. Mr B --, 12 Copies Mr Barstow, jun. Leeds Mr Baker, Lynn Mr
Barber, Otley Mr Banks, Howden Mr Bailiff, ditto Mrs Beaumont, York Capt.
Betts, Beverley Richard Bell, Esquire Hull, 2 Cop. Mr Beauchamp, Norwich Rev. Mr
Blake, York Mr Bland, Beverley Benjamin Blaydes, Esquire Hull Mrs Boynton, York Mr
Boyer, jun. Hull Mr Boville, ditto Mr Bowls, Norwich Capt. Brown, Hull Mr
Brown, Bookseller, ditto, 12 Copies Mrs Brooks, Norwich Mr Brown, Durham Mrs
Brimyard, ditto Mrs Breeze, ditto William Burgh, Esquire York Capt. Buller, ditto
Mrs Bunting, ditto Mr Buck, ditto Mr Bunn, Norwich John Buck, Esquire Halifax Mr
Butler, Comedian
C
Right Hon. Lady Conyngham, York Hon. General Carey, ditto Mr Camidge, ditto
Dr. Carter, Beccles, 18 Copies Miss Carver, Norwich Mr Castor, Howden Miss
Carter, Hull Rev. Mr Cayley, Brompton Edward Chapeau, Esquire York Mrs Chapeau,
ditto Mr Champney, ditto Mr Thomas Champney, ditto Mr Child, ditto Mr Chambers,
Norwich, 2 Cop. Mr Chase, ditto, 3 Copies Mrs Chalmers, ditto Mr John Clough,
York Mr Edward Clough, ditto Mr Clank, Norwich Mr Clements, ditto Mr Clifton,
Durham Rev. Dr. Cooper, Manfield Mrs Cordley, York Mr Coupland, ditto Mr Colby,
ditto Mr Cornelius, Norwich Mrs Cornelius, ditto Mr Cook, Lynn Mrs Cooper,
ditto Samuel Crompton, Esquire York Mr Crowder, ditto Mr Cresswick, ditto Mr
Crowshaw, Howden Mr Cunningham, Durham
D
William Danby, Esquire York William Danby, jun. Esquire ditto Capt. Dawson, ditto Mr
Dawson, ditto, 2 Copies Patrick Darcy, Esquire ditto S. Dairy, Esquire Mr Dancer,
Norwich Mr Dale, ditto Mr Davis, Comedian, Durham Mr Delacourt, Beverley Mrs
Dealtry, York Mr Dixon, Hull Edward Donner, Esquire Scarbro' Mr Dove, Norwich Mr
Dowson, ditto Jer. Dring, Esquire York Capt. Draper, Hull Henry Duncombe, Esquire York
E
Rev. Mr H. Egerton, York Mr Earby, York Capt. Eliott Mr Elwood, Howden Mr E.
R. Elsden, Lynn Miss Emmet, York Rev. Mr Ewbank, ditto Mr Eyles, ditto Miss E
--, ditto
F
James Fermor, Esquire York Mrs Fermor, ditto Joshua Field, Esquire Bradford Mr Field,
Howden Mr Fisher, ditto Mr Flower, York Miss Flower, ditto Mrs Fothergill,
ditto Barn. Foord, Esquire West-Heslerton, 2 Copies Mrs Frodsham, York Mr F --,
ditto
G
Mr Garrat, Bookseller, Lynn, 3 Copies Mr Garencieres, York Mr Garland, ditto
Miss Gibson, ditto Mr Gilbank, ditto Wilmer Gossip, Esquire ditto Rev. Mr
Goodricke, ditto Miss Goddard, ditto Miss Goddard, ditto Mr Goullet, ditto Mr
Goforth, Hull Miss Goforth, ditto Rev. Mr Graham, York Mrs Graham, ditto Mrs
Grimstone, ditto Richard Griffith, Esquire Norwich
H
Mr Haxby, York Mr Harrison, ditto Mr Hail, ditto Mr Harnies, Hull Mr Hamilton,
Comedian -- Hake, Esquire Lisbon Mrs Hake, ditto Mr Harrop, Manchester, 12 Copies
Mr Hawksworth James Heblethwaite, Esquire York Wm. Heblethwaite, Esquire ditto Mr
Hopwood, jun. ditto Mr Hollingworth and Son, Lynn, 7 Copies. Mr Holland,
Norwich Mrs Holland, ditto Rev. Mr Holmes, Howden Francis Hurt, Esquire York Dr
Hunter, ditto Mr Hudson, ditto Mr Hull, Covent Garden Mrs Hull, ditto Mr
Hubbard, Hull Mr Hudson, ditto Mr Hitchinson, Norwich Mr Hunt, ditto Mr
Herbert, Lynn Mr Hyde, Howden
I
Mrs Iveson, Norwich Miss Iveson, ditto Mrs Ibbott
J
Right Hon. Henry Jubb, Esquire Lord Mayor of York Robert Jubb, Esquire York Mrs
Jenkins, ditto Mr Jewit, Howden Mr Jevison, ditto Peter Johnson; Esquire York Mrs
Johnson, ditto Mr Richard Jones, Hull Mr Johnson, ditto Mr Josquin, London
K
Capt. King, Hull Mr Kitson, York Mr G. Kitson, ditto Mr Kitton, ditto Mr
Kniveton, Covent Garden Mr Knowsley, Hull
L
Capt. Langley, York Mr Lazenby, Hull Mr Larrod, Norwich Mr Leng, York Mr Lee,
ditto Mr Jews, Durham Mr Legate, Howden Mr Lighton, ditto Mrs Lister, York Mr
Light, Lynn, 2 Copies Jer. Lloyd, Esquire York Rev. Mr Lumley, ditto
M
Lady Milner, Nun-Appleton Capt. Milner Rev. Mr Marsden, York Arthur Masters,
Esquire Hull Mrs Masters, ditto Miss, Mason, ditto Mr Marley, ditto Mr Marshall,
Durham Mr M'George, York Mrs Meynell, ditto Mr Melon, Hull Mr Meggot, ditto Mr
Miel, Norwich Mrs Miel, ditto Mr Mirfin, Lynn Mr Miller, Howden Mrs Morritt,
York Mrs A. Morritt, ditto Mrs Morritt, ditto Miss B. Morritt, ditto Rev. Mr T.
Mosley, ditto Mr Morris, jun. Lynn Miss Money, Norwich Mr Murden, Durham, 2
Copies
N
Jeremiah Norris, Esquire Norwich 6 Copies John Nicoll, Esquire Brayton
O
Sir John O'Carrol, Bart. York Mr Officer, ditto Mr Oram, ditto
P
Sir Alex. Purvis, Bart. York Mr Palgrave, Norwich J. Palmer, Esquire Bath, 14 Cop.
Mr Page, Durham Mr Pearson, Hull Mr Pearson, Norwich Mrs Pearson, ditto Rev. Mr
Peirson, Coxwold Francis Pierson, Esquire York Roger Pickering, Esquire Ripon Miss
Pickering, ditto Mr L. Pickard, York, 2 Copies Mr Place, ditto Mr Powell,
Comedian, ditto 2 Copies Mr W. Powell, ditto Charles Poole, Esquire Hull Mrs Poole,
ditto Mr Popple, jun. ditto Col. Prescot, York Miss Priestley, ditto Rev. Mr
Preston, Askham Mr Price, Comedian, Durham, 2 Copies Mrs Pulleyn, York
R
Mr Raworth, York Mr Rawson, Hull William Read, Esquire York George Robinson, Esquire
ditto Miss Robinson, ditto Miss A. Robinson, ditto Mr J. Robertson, Comedian,
ditto, 2 Copies Mr Shastoe Robertson, Lynn, 2 Copies Miss Robinson, Norwich
Miss Baker Robinson, ditto Miss Robinson, Hull Mr George Robinson, ditto Mrs
Roberts, Durham Mr Roberts, Beverley Mr Root, Howden Mr Russell, Norwich
S
Sir Wm. St. Quintin, Bt. York Sir. F. Standish, Bart. ditto, 2 Copies Mrs
Saunders, ditto Mr Schofield, Howden Mr Seavers, York James Shuttleworth, Esquire
ditto Mrs Shuttleworth, ditto Miss Shuttleworth, ditto Mr Shaw, ditto William
Shields, Esquire Hull Mr Shiels, Durham Mr Sherborne, Lynn, 2 Copies Mr
Silverfides, Hull Mr Sincock, Durham Mr Smith, Norwich Mr Smith, Preston Miss
Snow, York Miss Snow, Norwich Mr Sowerby, York Mr Sotheran, Hull, 6 Copies Mrs
Spencer, York Mr Squires, ditto William Stables, Esquire ditto Jar. Strickland, Esquire
ditto Capt. Straubenzee, ditto Mr Stuart, Comedian Mr Stouit, Durham Richard
Stert, Esquire Lisbon Mrs Stert, ditto Mr Suett, York Mr Sutton, Howden G. C. Swan,
Esquire York Dr Swainston, ditto Mr John Swann, ditto Mr Thomas Swann, ditto Miss
Swallow, Hull Mr Sweaton, Howden Richard Sykes, Esquire Hull 3 Copies Master Sykes,
ditto
T
Charles Turner, Esquire York Mrs Turner, ditto Charles Tancred, Esquire ditto Mr
Tasker, ditto Mr Tankerville, Lynn, 2 Cop. Mr Tayleure, Comedian Mr Tailor,
Hull Mr Tesseyman, York, 12 Cop. Henry Thompson, Esquire ditto William Thompson,
Esquire ditto Mrs Thornhaugh, ditto Mrs S. Thornhaugh, ditto Mrs Thornton, ditto
Miss Thornton, ditto Mr Thackray, ditto Mr Thienot, ditto Mr Thompson, ditto Mr
Christopher Thurlow, Hull, 2 Copies Mr Thompson, ditto Mr Thornton, Lynn Edward
Topham, Esquire York Mess. Todd and Sotheran, ditto, 25 Copies Mr Tossed, Howden
V
Mr Velasco, York Mr Vincent, Norwich
W
George Watson, Esquire York Mrs Wanley, ditto Mr George Wallis, ditto, 2 Copies Mr
Watson, ditto Mr Walker, ditto Mr Francis Wardale, ditto Baldwin Wake, Esquire
Norwich Mr Waller, ditto Mr Waudby, Hull Miss Waudby, ditto Mr Walton, ditto Mr
Walker, London Mr Wallace, Comedian, 2 Cop. Mr Wayre, York Peregrine Wentworth,
Esquire Tho. Weddell, Esquire Waddow Mr Wesf, York Master West, ditto Mr Whitefield,
Norwich Mrs Whitefield, ditto Mr Whitaker, Howden Mr Whitaker, Beverley, 3 Cop.
Mr Whitley, Comedian Col. Wilson, York Mrs Wilson, ditto Miss Wilson, ditto Mr
Williams, Lynn, 2 Copies Mr Whittingham, ditto, 12 Copies Tate Wilkinson, Esquire
York, 14 Copies Henry Willoughby, Esquire ditto Mrs Witham, ditto Miss Witham,
ditto Mr Willey, ditto Mrs Willey, ditto Mrs Wilson, ditto Mr Tho. Willans,
ditto Mr Tho. Williamson, ditto Rev. Mr Willis, Norwich Mr Wilkinson, Hull Mr
Williamson, ditto, 12 Cop. Mr Willie, Snaith Capt. Wiggins, Leeds Mr Williams,
Lynn, 2 Copies Miss Worsley, York Mr Wood, ditto Mr Womerfley, Hull Mr Wright,
Printer, Leeds Mrs Wright, Norwich Mr Wright, Hull, 2 Copies
Y
Mr Yarker, York Miss Yeoman, ditto Mr Younger, Covent Garden Mr Young, Norwich
PROLOGUE.
Written and spoken by Mr. CRESSWICK.
Enters speaking to the AUTHOR as behind the Scenes. DON'T be alarmed my
friend! you need not be in fear,
None but good-natured folks I Am positive are here.
[Coming forward to the audience.] To plead a brother's cause, who trembling
stands behind,
A volunteer I come -- and beg you will be kind
To this his first begotten -- show your fost'ring care,
And let his tender bantling in your favors share.
"In art's perfection is the growth of years,
"The bud must open, ere the flower appears."
Each litele fault or blemish pass regardless by,
But mark each glimpse of merit with approving eye.
Though yet a raw unpracticed novice he appear,
Let but your generous plaudits dissipate his fear,
To bolder heigths hereafter he may wing his flight,
And give you then much greater pleasure and delight:
For applause you all know's the life of endeavor,
Without it in vain is our study and labor.
To each critic I sue -- on each fair one rely,
Many looks of indulgence methinks I espy.
As a sketch of his plan -- his attempt is to show
The nice Fop of the age, and the Libertine too,
Their vices and follies hold up to derision,
That feeling its force they may show their contrition.
Virtue and beauty's charms he likewise sets to view,
All-powerful charms, such as should every heart subdue.
From nature's wide and ample field his plan he draws,
And hopes to please you all by her unerring laws.
Then with candor attend -- let no prejudice rise,
But show yourselves pleased both with hands and with eyes,

The Writers of the two following PROLOGUES, it is hoped, will excuse their not
being spoken, as the foregoing one was written, for that purpose, prior to
their being received.

PROLOGUE I.
WHEN Folly, with dame Fashion's forces joined,
Usurped inglorious empire over mankind;
When Virtue sunk beneath the iron-band
Of Vice, who stalked gigantic through the land,
Often has Thalia, fired with generous rage,
Lashed the proud tyrants on the instructive Stage,
Unmasked their every art, then headlong hurled
From their high thrones those sovereigns of our world;
Bid injured Reason her lost rights again
Resume, and of the passions take the rein;
Whilst fickle Fashion owned her ruling hand,
And fixed the mode, or altered, at her dread command.
'Twas she who bid our trembling bard engage
To lash the folly of this fribbling age:
"H********," she cried, "often has a fluttering train
"Of empty beings, scarce the shades of men!
"Provoked my laughter as they moved along,
" Each to the music of his own soft tongue;
"The task be thine to seize the motly crew,
"And drag them forth, exposed to public view:
"Haste -- can thy eye mistake'em? -- No -- on high
"Their fronts arise, and seem to prop the sky:
"Whilst all their wit, and sense, and judgment joined,
"In one large roll, bangs pendant from behind:
"Like the sweet warblers of Italian strains,
"Unknown to Love'ssoft pleasures and his pains;
"When Beauty courts them with alluring eye,
"Fleet as the slag before the hounds they fly;
"When Britain calls her valiant sons to arms,
"Their milky souls no martial ardour warms,
"For all their courage lodges in the heel,
"And fear's the only passion they can feel;
"Save that, in which they every hour employ,
"(Narcissus-like) -- the self-admiring joy.
"Haste -- seize the dear insipids -- bravely dare
"To wage with Folly and with Fashion war:
"These, these are comic satyr's noblest game."
She ceased -- and sought fair Aganippes'stream.
Our Bard, obedient to the high command,
The feeble effort of his trembling hand
This night presents. O deign, ye generous fair,
With smiles propitious to reward his care;
Ye that reside in our theatric skies,
Higher than ever adventurous muse durst rise;
Ye in the clouds -- and ye who lowly sit,
Judges supreme of poetry and wit,
Kindly receive't -- He asks no deathless name,
Bright in the annals of eternal fame;
Kindly receiv't -- nor to the infernal gloom
Of Pluto's realms his infant offspring doom:
But judge with candor each observing friend,
"And spare your censure, where you cannot commend!"

W. P.

PROLOGUE II.
Enters drunk, and speaking to the Author. H******** -- no more -- I Will do it --
this once I Will strive
T'obtain your pardon -- or obtain -- reprieve;
That done -- I Will never -- (trust me when I swear) --
Prove dupe to you -- or any other play'r.
[Comes forward] Bold was the man that first engaged in fight;
Far bolder he -- that durst engage -- to write;
The Merchant bold, that first launched out to sea;
But which of these was half so bold as me,
That dared to preface such an unfledged COMEDY?
An Act like this might teach Hibernian brow
With shame to sicken, or with blushes glow.
My dauntless soul -- even mine -- began to quake
When firstwas told -- "This Prologue you must speak."
My friend, quoth I, would you persuade the town
To let this thing(you call a play) go down,
First braze my front -- or double braze your own.
Lord, Sir, saidhe, [mimicking the author's manner] I Am clearly out of the case,
No Dublin mark appears upon my face,
While yours rejoices in a case of brass
Another brush -- (your phiz perhaps would take it)
(The ironic scoundrel simper'd as he spoke it)
A blush might cover -- or conceal your fear,
But -- faith -- I Have got no brazing Metals here --
Unless you will try this honest batch of claret --
The best of varnish! -- zounds man! -- let us share it.
"Thus armed, behold! intrepidly I go
"To plead your cause -- and with a suppl' ant bow
"Implore the gods above -- (galleries) -- the goddesses below -- (boxes)
"Their smiles secured -- the critic -- ( pit) -- I defy,
"'Twere mad to damn a favorite of the sky -- (galleries)
"Or should their rabid rage, misplaced, light here -- ( on himself)
"I value nor Parthian quiver of spear." -- ( singing the tune)
"Choice nonpareils" -- ( in the tune) -- "in vain shall whiz around my ear,
"We tipsy fellows -- ( staggers) -- claim some aid divine,
"And if not me -- they will reverence the wine." -- ( staggers)
But hold -- my memory -- have NOT I forgotten, though --
What I Would to ask? -- Why curse it -- let it go --
You Will guess, perhaps, what I would wish to say --
Pity the poet -- and permit his play
To live -- like other maggots -- for a single day.
Thus far indulged -- we'll shun all future evil,
He hates damnation -- as he hates the devil.

M -- m. ^ --

Dramatis Personae.
Epicene,Mr. Cresswick. Lord Promise,Mr. Powell. Mr. Lambton,Mr. Oram. Major
Standfield,Mr. Leng. Sir Harry Temple,Mr. Eyles. Wilville,Mr. Wood. Clement,Mr.
Raworth. Varnish,Mr. Gay. Fourbe,Mr. Buck. RalphMr. Robertson. Lady Fanny
Promise,Mrs. M'George. Miss Lambton,Mrs. Saunders. MariaMrs. Hitchcock. Miss
Clement,Mrs. Eyles. Miss Spence,Mrs. Raworth. Miss Standfield,Mrs. Child. A
Child, Servants, etc.
SCENE, LONDON.

TIME, that of Representation.

THE MACARON I.
ACT I.
SCENE, a DRESSING ROOM in EPICENE'S House. EPICENE discovered sitting before a
Glass, FOURBE attending. Epicene. WHAT, will you never have done? -- Here have
I been three hours under your hands, and am scarce fit to be seen yet.


Fourbe. Oh, non, begar, you be ver fit to be seen -- Me chalange all de
friseur in Angleterre to show so complete, so degagee a gentilhomme as you --
Mafoy, you seem de finished marqui -- So gentilesse, von would swear dear was
not von drop of de Englise blood in you.


Epi. You are a flattering rascal -- But I like you the better for it -- How do
my clothes become me?


Four. Oh, admirable!


Epi. Do they sit easy?


Four. Impossible to be better.


Epi. I think this suit will gain me credit in the world -- A happy fancy,
something of the true ton, without the least tincture of barbarism -- What a
great pity it is, Fourbe, we cannot entirely introduce the Italian manners and
customs here?


Four. Ah, it is great pity indeed -- de nation never will do any good till den.


Epi. Never -- When do you expect the cargo from Venice?


Four. Every day, Sir.


Epi. Is it consigned to the Ambassador?


Four. Ouy, Monsieur -- all ver safe.


Epi. Or else those harpies, the custom-house officers, would be sure to seize
it.


Four. Ah, unconscionable! -- to force de fine polishe gentilhomme, to take up
wid de Englise manufacture.


Epi. Fourbe, you are a sensible fellow.


Four. Dat is by following your instructions, Sir.


Epi. You may take the suit I had made up, at landing here, by that ignorant
English tailor.


Four. Je vous suis oblige -- I am sure dey are not fit to be seen.


Epi. Are the pictures sent home I bought yesterday?


Four. Ouy, Monsieur -- and de ver fine collection dey be.


Epi. Do you think so? -- I never examined them.


Four. No, Sir!


Epi. No -- they bore a great price, and were sold for originals of Corregio
and Titian; that was sufficient.


Four. O l'ame genereuse! -- How few have de generosity and taste like you.


Epi. Well, leave me, and give orders to admit visitors now. [ Exit Fourbe. Let
me see -- I was cursedly taken in last Night -- Four hundred pieces -- Umph! --
Rather too dear for my experience. I shall be obliged, in my own defense, to be
initiated into the mysteries of the family -- I must, by all that is needful,
else my venerable oaks that so long have reared their stately heads, will
speedily tumble -- Yet these are trifling vexations compared to that unlucky
contract with Promise's Sister.


Enter FOURBE. Four. My Lord Promise, to wait upon your Honor.


Epi. Show him up -- Enter Lord PROMISE. What, Promise! -- where the deuce have
you hid yourself for the last fortnight?


Lord Promise. Though buried in obscurity, yet busily employed, I assure you --
But, hey day! -- What can you be possibly dressed for now? -- You are not going
to a masquerade?


Epi. No.


L. Pro. You don't intend this for a wedding suit, I hope?


Epi. No -- Strike me into a non entity, if I do.


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! -- Come, what is the real occasion?


Epi. To display my taste and elegance, and I think this will give a convincing
proof of both.


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! -- Upon my soul you make such large advances to the
feminine gender, that in a little time 'twill be difficult to tell to which sex
you belong.


Epi. I would have it so -- I do it to be distinguished from the Tramontane --
but I want to know where you have been? -- I have hunted all the public places
in London for you, without success; and I thought, if alive, I must have met
you at one of them.


L. Pro. You find you are mistaken then -- I can readily live without a
continual round of dissipation, though to you it may be impossible -- Your
existence depends upon dress and fashion -- I despise both -- Even my pleasures
are different from yours -- I am wholly devoted to the charms of beauty, you,
to those hourly discovered by your looking-glass.


Epi. And, pray, which are most harmless to mankind? I who am amused by dress,
and a passion for myself, or you, who, for a trifling gratification, are
continually studying the ruin of every girl handsome enough to attract your
Notice?


L. Pro. Why, Jack, you have not spirit enough to make an attack upon any
female, either in an honorable, or any other manner -- Now, the warmth of my
constitution hurries me on to pleasures which you, tasteless mortals, never
dream of.


Epi. And often exposes you to very disagreeable consequences -- Witness Miss
Standfield.


L. Pro. True, it sometimes happens so -- but then I have courage to support
myself under those difficulties -- And now you mention her, I own she was a
girl I loved more than I thought the levity of my nature could admit of.


Epi. Yes, you gave a conspicuous proof of that.


L. Pro. I did -- Her father, Major Standfield, was my particular friend; a man
I had an uncommon regard for -- therefore I avoided meeting him afterward,
lest some unlucky chance should lodge my sword in his bosom -- That you will
allow was honorable.


Epi. Oh! humane and honorable to the highest degree.


L. Pro. Yes, after the many proofs of my skill in the sword, I could have no
reason to doubt its success with an old man, so, to be entirely out of harm's
way, I took that opportunity of gratifying my desire in visiting the principal
courts of Europe.


Epi. To which accident I was indebted for the pleasure of your company home
from Naples.


L. Pro. You was -- During near five years residence abroad, I have never even
heard from the poor girl, though, upon my soul, I have often severely felt for
the unhappy situation I left her in -- which plainly proves that I am not
destitute of compassion.


Epi. Oh! a miracle of tenderness!


L. Pro. In foreign climes, as well as at home, I was confirmed in my favorite
principle, that Women, if rightly attacked, are sure to yield -- I found you
indeed an altered fellow, without either life or soul, nor could my utmost
endeavors arouse you -- I wanted you to be a man of spirit; your ambition was
to appear a first-rate Macaroni; you are returned fully qualified, and
determined, I see, to show the world what a contemptible creature an Englishman
dwindles into, when he adopts the follies and vices of other nations.


Epi. Strike me speechless, George! if you are not devilish severe -- but, par
late liber amente -- I cannot take any thing ill you say -- May ill-breeding be
my portion, if I don't pity your want of taste! -- Let me tell you, my Lord,
it is we who enjoy all the real pleasures of life, without any of its
inconveniences -- Love, I grant you, is not admitted into our system. We look
upon it, at best, as a passion attended with so many disagreeable sensations,
that it is not worth the pursuit.


L. Pro. What a fellow, for a girl of my sister's sense, to be united to!


Epi. It Is true we do amuse ourselves sometimes with the ladies -- imitate
their manners -- but carefully avoid all serious connection with them -- Oh.
Lord! what a horrid thing love must be! -- To take off all attention from
ourselves, and study to be what you call manly, brave, noble, and generous, in
order to appear amiable in the eyes of the fair -- Ha! ha! ha! -- No, no, by
all that is ridiculous, it will never do.


L. Pro. Then has a pretty girl no influence on thee?


Epi. Not in the least -- May the sun freckle me if she has! but as she regards
my dress and conversation.


L. Pro. No you do not wish to make a conquest of one?


Epi. Not I, by all that is fashionable! Hearkee, Promise, do you think if I
loved a girl, that I could devote the time I do to the more essential business
of decorating my person? -- Look at me well, and answer truly.


L. Pro. No -- that would then be one of your least cares.


Epi. Then, may my clothes mis-fit me! if I would forego that happiness to
possess all the graces the poets ever assembled in women!


L. Pro. You Will except my sister -- How do you intend to manage in that affair?


Epi. Now you puzzle me -- but, when I know myself, I Will tell you.


L. Pro. Have you seen her since you came home?


Epi. No, but I design it.


L. Pro. Take care, or you will lose her -- She Is followed now by a brisker lover
-- But that I find would be no misfortune to you -- Don't you think our old
dads were rather foolish when they signed that contract, which obliges you to
marry each other, or forfeit thirty thousand pounds?


Epi. I am afraid I shall suffer by their folly -- But who is the happy man?


L. Pro. Tom Clement, a worthy young fellow of family and fortune.


Epi. I don't know him.


L. Pro. I suppose not -- Come, I Will introduce you to two of the loveliest
angelic creatures the sun ever shone upon.


Epi. If you can convince me the sun shines upon any one I love better than
myself, you may; if not, excuse me -- Pray, who are these lovely angelic
creatures?


L. Pro. They are two of the fairest of Eve's daughters, whom I have just
decoyed up to town, upon the old scheme.


Epi. Then I may conclude it was about them you were so busily employed during
your late invisibility?


L. Pro. Right -- Not having visited my father's eslate in the wilds of
Yorkshire since my return from travel, I resolved upon an excursion thither --
The romantic beauty of the country pleased me much, presenting an agreeable
contrast to the place I had just left -- On Sunday, knowing the church to be
the only spot where I might pick and choose the rustics to advantage, I resolved
not to miss the opportunity.


Epi. For shame, my Lord, have you so little religion in you?


L. Pro. Much the same as yourself in that respect, my boy -- There is only
this difference, you cannot think, I will not -- But how shall I express the
astonishment which seized me upon beholding, amongst many of homely garb and
feature, two of the sweetest girls nature ever formed.


Epi. So, so! -- Fresh Game.


L. Pro. On enquiry, I found they were daughters to an old gentleman, whom a
variety of misfortunes had drove to this part of the world as an asylum -- The
eldest was handsome enough to justify the disguises of Jove had he been on
earth -- But never was modesty, beauty, and native elegance so happily united
as in the youngest -- I am not adamant at any time, here I took fire in an
instant -- As soon as service was over, which I thought the longest ever
performed, I introduced myself to the father and his two sylvan deities.


Epi. You have a laconic method, by all that is modest! -- Well, what success?


L. Pro. I think you need not ask that at any time -- I seldom fail, even when
circumstances are against me, much less when considered as the only son of the
Earl of Witton, and heir to the estate many miles round about me -- The father
received me with the greatest respect; the daughters with a bewitching innocent
diffidence, which gave fresh luster to their increasing charms.


Epi. And yet those very charms you are laboring to destroy.


L. Pro. Don't interrupt me -- I soon found that nothing was to be done amongst
those peaceful wilds -- London was the only place where I could manage them to
my wish -- They never had been there, and I gloried in being their introducer.


Epi. I should have thought it a hard matter to have enticed them hither.


L. Pro. No, quite easy to me -- A few days ingratiated me into the old
gentleman's favor -- Replete with every virtue which can warm the human heart,
his honest unsuspecting mind has not an idea of deceit -- Indeed, if he had, my
plan was laid so well, he could hardly have suspected it -- Many years had he
passed in this unfrequented vale, where he entombed one of the best of wives --
Since her decease, his chief care has been the education of these two darling
daughters --


Epi. Which for the future you are willing to ease him the trouble of -- Very
charitable, upon my word, my Lord.


L. Pro. To own a truth to you, Epicene, I often know I am acting wrong, though I
have not courage enough to set myself right -- Even in this case -- Such is Mr.
Lambton's character, so revered his goodness, that I will freely confess, I
never undertook any project of the like nature with half the remorse or
compunction I did this.


Epi. You are an original, by all that is whimsical! -- How can you be so
deliberately wicked?


L. Pro. I am not -- Youth and the impetuous dictates of nature impel me -- I
dread to look back -- Yet, could I find but one of the sex above temptation,
perhaps, I might be reclaimed -- But, no more, I want your immediate assistance
in this affair.


Epi. Mine!


L. Pro. Yes, yours -- don't be amazed -- That was my errand hither.


Epi. The deuce it was! -- to what end?


L. Pro. Why, as you are a particular friend, I Will spare you one of the girls.


Epi. I am much obliged to you, George, but I beg to be excused.


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! -- Are you afraid of venturing yourself with her? This is
my business -- Your House is very large, commodious, and retired.


Epi. Well, what of that?


L. Pro. Cannot you spare me half of it, to remain entirely at my disposal
during this affair?


Epi. Why, my House?


L. Pro. As this is a particular case, I could not so well manage every thing
at one of those common receptacles -- Besides, if there should be any noise, it
cannot so easily be heard there.


Epi. Pray, let us hear your scheme?


L. Pro. I found that my father knew Mr. Lambton, and intended, had he not been
called abroad so suddenly, to have drawn him from obscurity; I, like a dutiful
son, was resolved to fulfill his desires, therefore counterfeiced a letter from
him, inviting Mr. Lambton up to town, promising to provide handsomely for him
-- Full of primitive simplicity, he immediately swallowed the bait, the family
are just arrived in London, and I am about to consummate my project.


Epi. A hopeful one, I perceive.


L. Pro. Only to separate the daughters from the father, and, under pretense of
visiting my sister, bring them hither.


Epi. How will you manage for a lady to represent her?


L. Pro. Suppose I dress you up? They are ignorant of the world, and the deceit
will easily pass upon them.


Epi. No, that I think would be carrying the joke too far --


L. Pro. I did but jest, I have already provided one for the character --
You Will have no objection though, I hope, to lend me a helping hand upon the
occasion?


Epi. Why, if you will free me from any danger which may ensue on a discovery, I
confess I should like the frolic well enough.


L. Pro. Never fear -- Yours will be an agreeable task, to entertain the eldest
-- She Is wild and flighty, owing to the solitude she was educated in, yet
fraught with such Innocence and simplicity, that had I not beheld her sister,
every wish would have been gratified in her.


Epi. So you want me to amuse her, while you besiege your favorite object?


L. Pro. I do; who in such a situation, I think, cannot fail to surrender.


Epi. What do you imagine the father will be doing in the mean time?


L. Pro. I have taken care the shall not interrupt me, and now that matters are
settled with you, I Will step and see how they do after their journey.


Epi. Do you hear, George, come back directly that I may know how to proceed.


L. Pro. As soon as possible -- Not a minute is now to be lost, till that
arrives which crowns my bliss in the enjoyment of love and beauty.


Exit. Epi. How these foolish passions transport the man! What are his raptures
of love and beauty to the superior delights of a grand coup d'eclat at the
dear, dear masquerade!


Exit. SCENE, Varnish's House. Mr. LAMBTON, Miss LAMBTON, MARIA. Mr. Lambton.
Thank heaven! we are safe arrived -- 'Twas a fatiguing journey for one of my
years, and nothing could have induced me to revisit the world, but the hopes of
you, my children, reaping some future advantage from it -- As for myself,
declined in the vale of life, I was content with my situation -- I thankfully
enjoyed the blessings of providence, nor envied the ideal happiness of those
above me.


Maria. Indeed, papa, I think you were much in the right -- For my part, I
prefer a cottage with virtue, to a palace with guilt.


Miss Lambton. So do I, yet I think it possible to gain the palace without
partaking of the guilt.


Mar. I Am afraid you will find yourself mistaken, sister.


Miss Lamb. Perhaps not -- Every Thing at present seems fair for it -- Under
the protection of so great a man as the Earl of Witton, what have we to fear?
-- Are not we to be introduced to Lord Promise's sister? -- What may not she do
for us? -- I Am sure if I enjoyed her fortune my heart would delight in finding
out proper objects to make happy.


Mr. Lamb. True, child, it should be the province of those whom providence has
thus distinguished, and I acknowledge I Have heard the best of characters of both
-- I am not apt lightly to distrust, yet when I reflect on our situation, it
makes me dread a disappointment -- Above two hundred miles from home -- Our
money almost exhausted in coming hither -- Not even an acquaintance in London
to apply to -- And two daughters, in some degree objects of temptation, exposed
to the snares of such a town as this, with only an aged father to protect them
-- In such --


Miss Lamb. I can assure you, papa, you torment yourself with groundless
chimeras -- Could any one behave more politely than Lord Promise? -- Did not he
say you might depend upon his father's friendship for you -- Is not his letter
the greatest security -- Surely then you cannot hesitate a moment, in
preferring affluence, to the indigence we have just quitted.


Mr. Lamb. Daughter, he that possesses content is richer than a sceptered
monarch -- What cares had I to disturb me at Monktown? -- My honest friends and
neighbors, during the many years I passed amongst them, regarded me as a
father, friend, and Instructor. Poor people! my heart is with you still -- But
I must now go see that Ralph has got our little baggage sage, we need not
expect to meet here with that fidelity and simplicity which characterizes our
untaught villagers.


Exit. Miss Lamb. Still, sister, I find you have not a very favorable opinion
of the cause which brought us hither.


Mar. I own I have not -- Ever since leaving our peaceful dwelling, I know not
why, but an unusual sadness has taken possession of me.


Miss Lamb. Oh, that is easily accounted for -- It is because you left that
dear, sweet, sighing swain of yours, Mr. Wilville, behind -- Though Sir Harry
Temple was with him, yet I was not sad -- Our journey, to me, seemed
enchantingly pleasant -- Oh, Lud! -- The swiftness of our expedition -- the
variety of objects -- the uncommon politeness we were treated with on the road
-- the amazing noise, hurry, and bustle we saw in coming hither, has filled my
mind with images I never had the least Idea of before -- Oh! happy, happy
creatures, who continually enjoy such blessings without interruption.


Mar. Perhaps, not so happy as you imagine, sister -- There may be real
enjoyments here as well as in retirement, but I am apt to think true content is
easier to be found in the moss-grown cot, than the cloud-aspiring dome.


Miss Lamb. There again we differ -- I am heartily weary of solitude, and leave
to you the undisturbed enjoyment of going to rest with the sun, that, like him,
you may be the harbinger of morn -- treading the cowslip bending green, to
visit your lowing herds, who constantly welcome and reward you with overflowing
bowls of nectar -- at noon, feasting on patriarchal luxuries -- toward eve --
but let that suffice. Contrast it with what Lord Promise told us of a sine
lady's life -- Rising at noon -- paying morning visits -- dining at six --
dressing -- then whirling away to routs, balls, assemblies, masquerades, where
brilliant company, music, dancing, and card parties make the time glide
insensibly away, till blushing morn unfolds the fringed curtains of the gilded
east, and tears them unwillingly from their half enjoyed pleasures -- If such a
description be true, who, in their senses, would have a doubt which to prefer?


Mar. Sister, we had better not entirely depend upon all Lord Promise told us
-- A little time, I am afraid, will dispel the mist which overshadows your
reason?


Miss Lamb. Then if it be a mist, sister, I never desire it to be removed --
Adieu, I hope for ever, to those purling rills, deep embower'd shades, and
fleecy nibblers of the plain, that hitherto have been our companions; a
brighter scene now opens to my view, and if Sir Harry Temple knew but where to
trace us, my joys then would be complete.


Mar. Flatter not yourself so much, Charlotte, as to imagine we have such power
over them -- To accident only are we indebted for their acquaintance -- nor
have we a right to expect it to continue -- It Is true, they did us a signal
piece of service in rescuing us from such a crew of gypsies, who, meeting us
where they did, would probably have robbed, perhaps murdered us.


Miss Lamb. I shall ever remember their heroic behavior -- How soon they
dispersed and put to flight those dastardly wretches -- Your fright gave you
additional charms, and, notwithstanding your timidity and delicacy, you gave
sufficient testimonies that your deliverer was not indifferent to you.


Mar. Too much otherwise, I fear, for my future peace.


Miss Lamb, The adventure was so much to my taste, that I enjoyed it -- My
champion, I thought, received my acknowledgments with surprise -- Perhaps, he
did not expect such language from the rusticity of our appearance.


Mar. Why, really, it was something uncommon.


Miss Lamb. We have often seen them since, and they as often offered up their
vows -- Our father seemed pleased with their visits, knows both their families,
and acknowledges them accomplished gentlemen.


Mar. It Is true, he does, but appearances are often deceitful -- I confess
Wilville raised emotions in my breast, I had till then been a stranger to --
The confusion I was in, the danger he rescued me from, attended with such a
tender, respectful behavior, beyond what I had ever seen or imagined, made too
deep an impression on me ever to be erased.


Miss Lamb. I shall keep you in countenance, for my heart, I believe, is in
pretty near the same condition.


Mar. I left the country with regret, as I had not an opportunity of
acquainting him with our sudden departure -- I wish, yet fear, to see him again
-- Pray heaven he be sincere in his professions! for I find the future
happiness of my life depends upon it.


Miss Lamb. That you need not have the least doubt of -- I dare say they were
distracted on missing us, and have dispatched emissaries around the country in
quest of us.


Mar. Hush, we are interrupted.


Enter Lord PROMISE, and Mr. LAMBTON. L. Pro. Mr. Lambton, I am heartily glad
to see you -- Welcome to London.


Mr. Lamb. My Lord, I am much obliged to you for this favor.


L. Pro. Not in the least -- Ladies, I am happy in seeing you look so well
after your journey -- I thought it impossible your charms could have received
addition, yet I find change of air, and extraordinary exercise, have given
increasing luster to the vermeil tincture of your cheeks.


Mr. Lamb. My Lord, your politeness makes my girls blush.


L. Pro. There is no occasion for that, Sir, they were sufficiently captivating
before -- I rode post to town, Mr. Lambton, to apprise my father of your
coming, but unluckily found him laid up in a fit of the gout.


Mr. Lamb. I am sorry for it, my Lord.


L. Pro. Why, so am I, especially as it deprives him of the pleasure of
welcoming you as he intended -- But, I hope, a few days will set him on his
legs again, and then -- not that he has been idle, there is something in view,
which, in all probability, will, in a very short time, make you ample amends
for the injuries of fortune.


Mr. Lamb. My Lord, you overwhelm me with kindness -- I know not how to --


L. Pro. Not a word more -- But, Mr. Lambton, my father has a particular
request to make you.


Mr. Lamb. I beg, my Lord, you will let me know it.


L. Pro. That you will accept of this -- [gives him a paper] -- Nay, I must beg
of you not to examine it till you are more at leisure


Mr. Lamb. I fear, my Lord, it is some fresh obligation, and I have already
received more than I can ever hope to return.


L. Pro. Do not mention it -- Let me insist on your putting it up -- You have
it in your power amply to repay me.


Mr. Lamb. My Lord!


L. Pro. Come, let us change the subject -- My sister, Lady Fanny Promise,
having heard of your arrival, sends her compliments to the ladies, and if not
too much fatigued, hopes for the pleasure of seeing them directly.


Mr. Lamb. A^* my Lord, I wish you would excuse them -- Girls, like mine, bred up
in retirement, have not sufficient knowledge of the world, to render themselves
agreeable to a lady of her rank and quality.


L. Pro. They have those native graces of the mind and person, which are
infinitely preferable -- Where nature has been so lavish, her handmaid art, at
distance waits behind, conscious of her inability to add to their charms --
What say you, ladies, will you favor me so far?


Miss Lamb. Just as my papa pleases, my Lord.


Mr. Lamb. Well, my Lord, since you will take the trouble of conducting them,
though I am sure you do them too much honor.


L. Pro. Rather give myself too much pleasure, Sir.


Miss Lamb. My Lord, since you have my papa's permission, we'll beg a little
time to adjust our dress.


L. Pro. Name it, ladies, and my chariot shall attend you.


Miss Lamb. About an hour, my Lord.


L. Pro. Very well, I shall in the mean while inform my sister, that she may
prepare for your reception -- Ladies, your most obedient -- Nay, no ceremony,
Mr. Lambton.


Mr. Lamb. Give me leave, my Lord, to wait upon you down stairs.


[Exeunt. L. Pro. and Mr. Lamb. Miss Lamb. Now, sister, don't you think my
presages will prove true? You see fortune already smiles upon us -- I hope Lady
Fanny will invite us to reside with her for the future.


Mar. How can you be so flighty? -- Young as I am, every thing to me seems to
wear a differe^^ aspect -- I do not like Lord Promiso, nor this visit, and wish
you had not so readily engaged yourself.


Miss Lamb. You never will have spirit enough to make a figure in the world --
However, do not let us waste the time which should be employed in dressing.


Mar. If you recollect, we need no great preparation -- our wardrobe is soon
looked over.


Miss Lamb. Too true, and a mortifying recollection it is.


Mar. Not in the least -- Let not that disturb you, Charlotte -- Happier far
our humble state, clothed in spotless innocence, and heaven-approving poverty,
than if arrayed in all the splendid honors, and gilded trappings, of specious
guilt and infamy.


Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, LADY FANNY PROMISE'S House. Enter Lady FANNY and Miss CLEMENT. Miss
Cle. THEN you are certain Epicene is returned?


L. Fan. Oh, very certain -- I had it from my brother, whom I saw this morning,
en passant -- He has been at home above three weeks, and poor neglected I never
once enquired after.


Miss Cle. I find he is not one of your most passionate lovers.


L. Fan. Why no -- not quite so violent inh is transports as your brother -- In
short, I Am informed that he is now a finished petite maitre.


Miss Cle. Then I Will answer that he is not a favorite of our sex.


L. Fan. Quite the contrary to a woman of spirit -- Oh, I have not patience
every day to see such crowds of mincing, whissling, powdered Master Jemmys sill
our public places, who only want to assume the petticoat, to render them
complete Misses.


Miss Cle. Ha! ha! ha! really they seem determined to rob us of that
distinction.


L. Fan. Don't you think it would be a just retaliation in us to claim the
sword and breeches? I Am sure we should become them as well as the best coxcomb
of them all.


Miss Cle. Suppose you try the experiment?


L. Fan. No, there I beg to be excused -- At present I have other matters in my
head -- You must know that I have been meditating a pleasant revenge on Epicene
for his contemptuous coldness.


Miss Cle. He richly deserves it, and could not have fallen into better hands,
for you always discovered an excellent head for contriving mischief.


L. Fan. I do love a little of it in my heart, and if you will aid me on this
occasion, I don't doubt but he will prove a charming subject to work upon.


Miss Cle. Oh, you cannot oblige me more than by employing me.


L. Fan. Nay, I never doubted you, but here you will have a difficult part to
sustain.


Mifs Cle. So much the better, the more glory if I succeed -- Come, let us hear.


L. Fan. You are entirely unknown to him, have been abroad, and are well
acquainted with many of the places he traveled through.


Miss Cle. I am.


L. Fan. Cannot you pretend that you are a relation of some noble family whom
you are intimate with?


Miss Cle. Readily -- I correspond with several he visited, who often mentioned
him.


L. Fan. Very well then, you can easily frame a story of your falling in love
with him there, and following him over to England.


Miss Cle. What good will that do?


L. Fan. A great deal -- We must let your brother into the secret, as his
assistance will be necessary -- and, a propos, here he comes.


Enter CLEMENT. Clement. Madam, I received your orders, and flew upon the wings
of --


L. Fan. Love to be sure -- I thought so -- Now for rhapsody of flames, darts,
hearts, and eyes, all jumbled together to form a passionate declaration.


Cle. Charming, cruel girl! how can you thus --


L. Fan. I told you he was beginning -- Very pretty though -- Pray let us have it
again -- Charmingly cruel, or cruelly charming -- it will do either way, and
may serve now or any other time.


Cle. How can you take such pleasure in tormenting a man who loves to the
degree that I do?


L. Fan. Because the greatest pleasure our sex can enjoy is to torment -- I Will
not hear a word in answer -- I have many times told you that nothing in nature
can be more ridiculous than the enraptured effusions of two love-stricken
creatures to a third person -- There is now more interesting Business for you
-- Your rival is in London.


Cle. Who, Epicene?


L. Fan. Even he -- Don't put on a serious face till you have more reason --
You have often heard of the contract executed between Epicene's father and
mine, by which they were mutually bound, that we, when of age, should marry
each other, or forfeit thirty thousand pounds.


Cle. I have.


L. Fan. His father is dead, and mine has long since repented the warmth of
friendship which hurried him on to so inconsiderate an act, and, as an
atonement, often declared, could I free myself from the obligation, his consent
should await the choice of my heart -- In this situation, you shall win and
wear me.


Cle. I accept the conditions, Madam -- With so glorious a reward in view, I
will either deliver you or perish in the attempt.


L. Fan. Heroically spoken -- "None but the brave deserve the fair" -- Ha! ha!
ha! -- No great danger at present I believe -- Come, follow me, and if I don't
put you into a method of obtaining Epicene's part of the bond, and amply
revenging yourself on him at the same time, then say, for once, a woman failed
in plotting and contriving.


Enter SERVANT. Ser. A Gentleman to wait on you, my Lady.


L. Fan. Conduct him up stairs -- [Exit. Ser.] -- Let me beg of you to retire
for a few moments -- As soon as the Gentleman is gone, I Will inform you of my
whole design. Exit. Mr. and Miss Clement. Enter MAJOR STANDFIELD. Major
Standfield! -- Is it possible I see you again! -- Where, in the name of wonder,
have you buried yourself these four years past?


Major. Oh, Lady Fanny! would to heaven I had been buried, and mixed my
mouldering ashes with my ancestors, before I reached these years of sorrow!


L. Fan. Bless me, Major! what is the matter?


Maj. Nothing, Madam -- I beg your pardon -- Pray, where is your brother? -- I
learn he is returned from travel.


L. Fan. Upon my honor I don't know -- Have you any particular business with
him?


Maj. A little, Madam, but it will soon be settled.


L. Fan. I hope nothing disagreeable has happened? How does Miss Standfield? --
What could be her reason for withdrawing so suddenly from town, and living ever
since in such impenetrable obscurity?


Maj. Oh, Lady Fanny! you once professed a friendship for her -- But it is no
matter -- nothing can now atone for injuries like mine! --


L. Fan. For the love of heaven, Major, explain yourself.


Maj. I cannot, Madam, 'till I see Lord Promise.


L. Fan. Nay, pray; I conjure you, tell me -- Can I serve you? If I can, my
friendship and fortune are both at your service.


Maj. Your worth, Madam, would, if possible, atone for your brother's villainy.


L. Fan. Villainy!


Maj. Yes, Lady Fanny, the worst of villainy -- The wretch who wantonly deprives
the credulous virgin of her innocence and peace of mind, deserves an epithet
much worse than that.


L. Fan. Has my brother been such a wretch?


Maj. He has, Madam -- Pardon my thus disturbing you with a repetition of my
wrongs, I thought to have concealed them 'till I had found their author -- But
griefs like mine will force their way -- After six-and-twenty years spent in
the service of my country, I vainly hoped to pass my latter days in ease and
tranquillity, blessed, as I thought myself, in a daughter, where grace and
modesty united to adorn the curious workmanship of heaven.


L. Fan. Pray go on, I am all attention.


Maj. Lord Promise, Madam, whom unsuspectingly I admitted to my inmost
friendship, in an evil hour, gained on the fond affection of an artless girl,
and, for a few moments unworthy gratification, plunged a dagger in a father's
breast, and entailed eternal infamy, shame, and sorrow on the very creature,
whom honor should have obliged him to protect


L. Fan. Merciful powers! -- Can I be related to fuch a monster -- Now do I
readily account for the fettled melancholy which preyed upon the lovely girl
before she quitted London, and which I in vain urged her to disclose -- But why
did you not inform me of this before?


Maj. An indignant shame tied up my tongue -- My hand, though old, I hoped was
not quite unnerved, on that alone I relied for satisfaction -- Yet there I was
disappointed, to avoid my resentment he quitted the kingdom -- Defeated of my
revenge, I retired to a little retreat in the farthest part of Devonshire,
taking with me the tear-concealing, yet almost grief-consumed object of his
loose desires.


L. Fan. Poor Eugenia! -- Little did I suspect the cause of your retreat, if I
had, you should not have gone without a partner in your sorrows.


Maj. How can souls so nearly allied by nature, differ so much in sentiment! --
There, a few months after, I was presented with a grandson -- An event which
almost deprived the wretched mother of life, in giving birth to the innocent
fruit of their guilty commerce.


L. Fan. What an affecting story!


Maj. We have lived ever since in the utmost privacy, waiting an opportunity
for revenge or justice. Last week I received intelligence from a friend, whom I
entrusted with the secret, that he was returned; this hastened me up to town
with my little family -- Hitherto he has evaded my search -- This house I
thought the most likely place to find him, and --


L. Fan. Dear Major, I am happy in meeting with you -- For the love of mercy
suspend your anger -- Perhaps I may procure you reparation, at least, as far as
it is in his power to make it.


Maj. Believe me, Madam, I had much rather have redress from equity than the
sword -- else should I now have concealed my purpose -- But, if the first fail,
I am determined to have recourse to the latter -- If I fall, my sorrows fall
with me, and he will have the glory of completely finishing the misfortunes of
an unhappy family.


L. Fan. I hope there will be no fear of that -- Pray is Miss Standfield still
in town?


Maj. She is, Madam.


L. Fan. Might I hope for the pleasure of seeing her here?


Maj. I am afraid, my Lady, that will be impossible -- There is a conscious
inferiority attending fallen innocence, which dreads to look up at the
unblemished front of virtue.


L. Fan. To me, that should not be -- From our earliest acquaintance I always
esteemed her as a friend, but now, I love her as a sister -- Let me entreat you
to conduct her hither.


Maj. I will try, Madam, if I can persuade her to it.


L. Fan. Nay, but immediately -- You must not attempt to meet Lord Promise
first.


Maj. I shall not, Madam.


L. Fan. Depend upon my utmost endeavors to re-establish your peace and
honor, upon the most permanent basis.


Maj. Your good wishes, Lady Fanny, I am afraid exceed your abilities to
perform -- Nevertheless, we are equally obliged to you -- My daughter shall
wait upon you -- Take her under your protection, Madam, and ease a father of
some part of his vital-preying cares.


L. Fan. Most gladly -- Haste her hither without the least delay.


Maj. As soon as possible, Madam.

[going]
L. Fan. Oh, and I must insist on seeing my little nephew at the same time --
He shall be part of my charge.


Maj. Your Ladyship shall be obliged.


Exit. L. Fan. Poor Man! his story has raised a powerful advocate in my breast
-- What a libertine is my brother! -- I am shocked at his wickedness, and
tremble for the consequences -- Yet, how to reform him? -- A task, I am afraid,
beyond my abilities, though still, I think, nature's seeds, however ill the
cultivation, were designed to raise the noblest fruits -- I will attempt it,
and may some power benignant inspire me with the means to reclaim a brother,
and relieve a friend!


Exit. SCENE, Chamber in Varnish's House. Enter MISS LAMBTON and RALPH CLUMSEY.
Miss Lamb. Now, my good Ralph, I begin to have some hopes of you.


Ra. Efaith, Miss, it is more than I have of myself. Wounds and heart! -- I
think I look more like a hog in armor, than any thing of christian flesh and
blood.


Miss Lamb. I own you have not all the ease and elegance I could wish, but it
cannot be helped, and you must do your best


Ra. And bad enough, I am afraid, that will be -- You would make me be thrust
up in this manner -- I Am sure I was easier and better in my own shapes -- Now,
pray may I ask, what is all this mighty rout about?


Miss Lamb. I am going to visit a lady of quality, and you must attend me --
Put on your best behavior, for very likely there will be some grand company
there


Ra. Then, I think, Miss, you had better leave me behind.


Miss Lamb. Why so?


Ra. Because I am sure I shall be dashed -- For though I am reckoned as tight a
lad, and as feat a dancer as any at our maying, yet, if you will believe me, I
can scarce pull up courage enough to show my shapes amongst the lasses, and you
know we have some prime ones.


Miss Lamb. I must encourage him a little -- (aside) But you cannot imagine
what an alteration there is in you now -- That dress becomes you wonderfully,
and you look quite graceful.


Ra. Yes, I always was said to have grace -- Master himself often told me that
I was a gracious lad.


Miss Lamb. No, but I mean that you are genteel.


Ra. Oh -- Why, for certain, all the lasses used to prefer me for my gentility.


Miss Lamb. Very well then -- be ruled by me, Ralph, and I don't doubt but
every thing will succeed to my wish.


Ra. Mayhap they may -- I Am sure, Miss, I will do all in my power to serve you,
for never from me if I don't love you heartily.


Miss Lamb. Love me!


Ra. Ay, may I be shot if I don't, as well as if you were my own sister -- Nay,
why shou'dn't I? -- I must be very ungrateful indeed, if I did not -- I Am sure
master has been more than a father to me.


Miss Lamb. I believe you are gratitude itself -- When my fortunes are
accomplished you shall not go unrewarded.


Ra. Well, well, don't let that concern you -- Be sure now, when we are abroad,
you ask me to talk as little as possible.


Miss Lamb. Yes, yes, the less you speak the better.


Ra. Adad, I believe it will -- You may tell them I am dumb, if you please.


Miss Lamb. No, that will not do neither -- All I want of you is to behave very
mannerly, and avoid telling any stories about our mode of living in the country.


Ra. Oh, let me alone, I Will be bound to be cunning enough for the best of them
-- Not but, if they are fond of stories, I can match them there too, for I can
tell plenty.


Miss Lamb. Stories?


Ra. Ay, I can tell them the story of St. George and the Dragon, or Valentine
and Orson, or twenty as good -- I am very famous for them, and have told them
an hundred times over -- You shall hear me -- hem! hem! -- There was a certain
valiant knight who -- who -- [repeating, she stops him] -- Nay, nay, hear me
out.


Miss Lamb. No, no, Ralph -- be but silent, and do as well as you can.


Enter MARIA. Mar. Not ready yet, sister?


Miss Lamb. Yes, I Have been only giving a few instructions to my servant here.


Mar. Pray, sister, what occasion for him to attend us?


Miss Lamb. Oh, very great -- Consider the figure we should make without one
servant to wait upon us.


Mar. Better none than him -- Has my father seen him thus?


Miss Lamb. No, my dear, I don't intend he shall till I return.


Mar. Well, I think you are very wrong -- but you must have your way -- Come,
the coach has been waiting some time.


Ra. Pray, Miss, am I to go within side the coach or without?


Miss Lamb. O, without side, by all means.


Ra. An't I to hold up your tail as you go in and out?


Mar. No, fool; come along.


Exeunt. SCENE, Another Apartment in Varnish's House. Enter Mr. LAMBTON and
WARNISH. Mr. Lamb. Mr. Varnish, your servant -- I was told you went out, Sir,
and have waited impatiently for your return.


Var. I am sorry I should make you wait -- Pray, Sir, what are your commands
with me?


Mr. Lamb. This house, I suppose, is yours, Sir?


Var. It is, Sir, at your service.


Mr. Lamb. Lord Promise, I presume, hired these lodgings for us?


Var. His Lordship informed me you was a particular friend of his, and
requested, as a favor, that I would accommodate you, to prevent the
inconveniences attending common lodgings.


Mr. Lamb. His Lordship was very good -- I imagine, Sir, you are well
acquainted with him?


Var. I have had the honor of knowing his Lordship these several years past.


Mr. Lamb. I beg your pardon, Sir, for being so inquisitive -- My reason was,
an ambiguous note his Lordship put into my hand at leaving this, which you are
to explain.


Var. What was it, pray, Sir?


Mr. Lamb. A draft for an hundred pounds, with these words -- I hope Mr.
Lambton will accept of this triste as an earnest of my wishes to serve him. I
dare not be more explicit at present, but Mr. Varnish can fully inform him of
particulars. PROMISE


Var. True, Sir, his Lordship has reposed that confidence in me.


Mr. Lamb. Well, Sir, I shall take it as a favor if you will explain his meaning.


Var. With all my heart, Sir -- Lord Promise is a Nobleman of the strictest
honor and greatest generosity.


Mr. Lamb. I don't doubt it, Sir.


Var. I assure you his generosity is unbounded -- I have seen such instances of
it as would amaze you.


Mr. Lamb. Indeed, I have, since my short knowledge of him, experienced many
proofs of his benevolence.


Var. Oh, dear Sir, nothing to his desires or intentions -- The moment he saw
you and your family, he was resolved to serve you.


Mr. Lamb. How few Noblemen have such greatness of soul!


Var. Very few indeed, Sir -- He observed, with concern, that you had lived
many years in the world to little purpose.


Mr. Lamb. How, Sir? I hope not -- I endeavored to fulfill the will of him who
placed me in such a situation, and that I thought the principal end of my
creation -- If I have erred, I trust he will forgive me.


Var. Dear Sir, you mistake my meaning -- He found you grown gray in obscurity,
without the least reward for such merit.


Mr. Lamb. Yes, Sir, I Have had the greatest reward that could possibly have been
bestowed upon me here.


Var. Really, Sir! -- What was it, pray?


Mr. Lamb. The testimony of a good conscience.


Var. I am glad to find it so, Sir -- though it is more than I can say for myself
(aside) -- But Lord Promise wishes to reward such goodness in this world -- He
has many relations of great dignity in the world -- They have heard your
character from the Earl, and you may depend upon being speedily provided for.


Mr. Lamb. How shall I acknowledge so many unmerited obligations?


Var. Very easily -- I hope, Mr. Lambton, your long retirement from the world
has not contracted your notions of life?


Mr. Lamb. I believe not, Sir -- On the contrary, the long heartfelt serenity
I Have enjoyed, has expanded every grateful and noble thought within me.


Var. Nay, I should not wonder at it -- Persons long buried in solitude, are
apt to look with a gloomy aspect on the harmless amusements of the world -- And
those things, in their nature perfectly innocent, they, with a cynic severity,
condemn as absolutely criminal.


Mr. Lamb. Far otherwise with me, I assure you, Sir -- I look on all mankind as
my brethren, as such I love, and would, if possible, serve them -- For surely
that wretch must be dead to all feelings, whose bosom admits not that
heaven-born child of mercy, sweet charity.


Var. I am very glad, Sir, to find you have such enlarged notions -- Can you
then be so chimerical as to prefer an empty name, a few imaginary virtues, to
solid substantial happiness?


Mr. Lamb. I don't comprehend you.


Var. In a word then, Lord Promise is captivated with the beauty of your
youngest daughter, and it will be your own fault if you do not pass the
remainder of your days in ease and tranquillity.


Mr. Lamb. Lord Promise in love with my daughter? -- it cannot be.


Var. Truth, every syllable, Sir.


Mr. Lamb. Good heaven! can he -- but I will not disturb myself -- He has not sure
any dishonorable designs on my poor child?


Var. Lord Promise, Sir, is all honor and generosity.


Mr. Lamb. I hope so -- Gracious powers! how I tremble -- Where are my
children? -- I Will stop their going till I have an explanation of this affair.


Var. I met the young ladies going out, Sir, just as I came in hither.


Mr. Lamb. Going, where?


Var. To visit my Lady Fanny Promise.


Mr. Lamb. Are you sure of that?


Var. Quite certain, Sir, I knew the carriage and livery -- I must keep him in
suspense till the business is over.

(aside)
Mr. Lamb. I am something easier -- They Will certainly be safe with her -- When
do they return?


Var. In about two hours.


Mr. Lamb. Well! -- Is Ralph, my servant, in the house?


Var. No, Sir, he attended the ladies.


Mr. Lamb. I am glad of it -- I can rely upon his honesty and fidelity.


Var. Dear Sir, let me beg of you to calm your emotion -- Your apprehensions
are groundless, I can assure you.


Mr. Lamb. They may be so -- In the mean time I request you will return this note
to his lordship -- I must first know the nature of the obligations he would
confer upon me -- Perhaps they may be such as an honest, though poor man, would
be above receiving. --

Offers the note.
Var. Upon my word, Sir, you must excuse me -- I dare not accept it without my
Lord's knowledge -- I shall wait upon him directly, and on my return hope fully
to satisfy all your scruples -- In the mean time make yourself perfectly easy
-- You have only to rely on Lord Promise, and rest contented


Exit. Mr. Lamb. I am not much read or skilled in the ways of mankind, yet I do
not like this man's words or looks -- Both seem to bear a double meaning -- I
am far from being easy in my mind! -- Would I had never come hither! -- My poor
unfledged young ones! I am afraid your father, in his latter days, has, by one
imprudent action, involved you both in ruin! but I must now make the best of it
-- Thou never failing refuge of confiding innocence, guard and direct our
trembling footsteps through this mazy labyrinth of darkness and uncertainty!


Exit. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, An Inn. Sir HARRY TEMPLE and WILVILLE meeting. Temple. WELL, Tom, have
you heard anything of the girls yet?


Wilville. No -- I Have searched every place where there was the least likelihood
of intelligence, but all to no purpose -- Have you done any good?


Tem. Not I, by Gad! -- All my efforts have been fruitless -- I am almost
distracted! -- What unlucky dogs we were to leave them just at that critical
juncture! -- Or who could imagine they would have taken flight during the
little time we were absent?


Will. Nothing could equal my astonishment on misfing them -- Unkind Maria, not
even to leave a line behind to account for this sudden revolution --


Tem. Wilville, it must certainly be some unforeseen accident which could drive
them up so unexpectedly.


Will. Some fatal one, I fear -- it is a mystery I am wretched till I unravel --
I Am sure we lost no time in the pursuit -- and all along I flattered myself
with the hopes of overtaking them on the road.


Tem. Ay, so did I -- We drove jehu like for it -- and yet the cursed post-boys
could not get on fast enough to satisfy my impatience -- Zounds! I would have
outstript the wind, and surpassed all the fables of antiquity to have caught
them -- the last stage I was almost sure of it -- they were not above half an
hour before -- Such a disappointment is enough to turn the brain of a
philosopher!


Will. Really, Temple, I did not think you were so desperately entangled before.


Tem. Nor I, by my soul -- I did not know half the power the wild baggage had
over me 'till I missed her. Who the devil could suppose I should be taken with
so romantic an oddity? -- And yet, may I perish if I was not struck with her
more than any woman I ever saw before.


Will. That is to me amazing -- I think there is as great a difference between
her and her sister as possible.


Tem. True, there is a great difference indeed.


Will. Maria possesses that sweetness, that affability, that gentleness of
manners which must --


Tem. O damn it, Tom! let us have no more of that sickening stuff -- I hate such
sft killing creatures who lull me to sleep with their insipidity -- Not but
sometimes I like a scene of the pathetic, by way of contrast -- but, in
general, they have too much opiate to suit my constitution -- No, give me the
girl of fancy, who soars above the region of vulgar mortals, and scorns to
tread the beaten paths of dull discretion -- Such a charmer is always new --
each day discovers fresh incentives to love, and we are lost in the pleasing
charms of dear variety.


Will. O brave! you improve in soridity -- But this is a subject we shall never
fall out about -- Do you take your mistress and her dear variety, leave to me
the enjoyment of endless, undescribable happiness in the possession of her
sister.


Tem. Egad, I wish I could --


Will. Alas! these are lovers rhapsodies, and do not in the least contribute to
the recovery of them.


Will. Do you know that Lord Promise they came up to town with?


Will. Only by sight.


Tem. What Is his character?


Will. That of a professed rake -- He is the only son of the Earl of Witton, a
nobleman, who is now abroad, as much respected for his virtue as his dignity --
Was he at home, my first application should be to him, as I am certain he has
too much honor to countenance his son in any base ungenerous action.


Tem. Hearkee, Tom -- I Will go directly and call him to an account, and if he
does not give me a satisfactory answer to my enquiries about the girls,
sacrifice him to my vengeance.

[going]
Will. Hold, hold, be not so rash -- You have not the least chance to gain any
intelligence that way -- I am equally interested with you, and as firmly
determined to use my endeavors to find them -- I believe they were invited up
to town by him, on some infamous design, and tremble lest he should succeed in
his attempts.


Tem. And yet you have the patience coolly to talk in this manner -- By heaven,
I Will find him out, though surrounded by a thousand imps of darkriess, and force
him to give me satisfaction.


Will. Believe me, Temple, I have as much courage as you, though not of that
flaming kind -- I wish for an opportunity of rescuing these victims from his
infernal clutches, not of signalizing my valor -- He has too much spirit for
so bad a heart -- What would be the consequence of such a meeting? Perhaps the
sending one of us totally unprepared to that judgment seat, where justice must
be heard, though it wounds the breast of soft-eyed mercy.


Tem. I own, Wilville, you are in the right -- My heart is always open to
conviction -- We will go calmly to work; I will be guided by you -- Can you
point out any feasible method?


Will. Let Us try every means probable -- I know his llow traveller, Jack Epicene
-- I cannot say that he is ^ favorite of mine, yet on this occasion he may be
useful -- It Is very likely he is in his confidence, perhaps an assistant in
this affair -- Our best way will be to sound him first -- We'll thither
directly, probably we may learn something which will give us light to proceed
further.


Tem. With all my heart -- Let Us about it immediately, for never shall I have a
moment's ease while the girl I adore is in danger.


Exeunt. SCENE, Epicene's House. Lord PROMISE, and Miss SPENCE as Lady FANNY.
L. Pro. Now, Polly, quite in readiness I see -- Is Epicene at hand to assist
you?


Miss Spen. He is, my Lord; but pray don't you think it must be a great
mortification to one, who loves as I do, to become the instrument of your
designs upon others?


L. Pro. I confess it is disagreeable, but you shall not lose by your compliance.


Miss Spen. Unhappy minute, which put it in your power thus to command me! --


L. Pro. My pretty fair moralist, I have more agreeable business on my hands
now than reasoning with you -- Only manage this affair with dexterity, and
leave reflections to follow -- They Will come fast enough of themselves.


Miss Spen. It Is a wicked office I have undertaken; my heart goes against it.


L. Pro. No qualms now, Polly -- I thought I had removed these scruples?


Miss Spen. The stings of conscience, my Lord, are not so easily quieted --
Necessity, not inclination, obliges me to join with you.


L. Pro. Then I am the more obliged to your necessity.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. My Lord, the ladies are just arrived.


Exit. L. Pro. Away to the drawing room to receive them -- I Will retire for a
few moments -- On my entrance, remember to call Miss Lambton out, and take care
that we are not interrupted.


Exeunt. SCENE, A Hall in the same House. Servants introducing Miss LAMBTONS
and RALPH. John. This way, Ladies; if you please, I Will conduct you to my Lady's
apartment.


Miss Lamb. Very well, friend, we follow you.


Exeunt. Servant and Ladies. Ralph, following, is stopped by the other Servant.
Tom. Hold, my honest lad; suppose you and I go into the kitchen to take a
little refreshment, and leave the ladies to themselyes; don't you think it will
be as well?


Ra. As well! Ecod, a great deal better -- I thought as how Miss was a fool, to
dizen me out in this manner for folks to laugh and shout at me -- but if ever
they catch me behind a coach again in this trim, why my name is not Ralph
Clumsey.


Tom. Oh, you must not mind such trifling accidents -- You Will be used to them
soon.


Ra. Shall I? -- By the Lord Harry, but I will not though -- for if Master will stay
here, he shall stay by himself, and so I Will tell him -- But, young man, for the
love of charity, give me a drink, for I have not breath to talk.


Tom. Come, my boy, follow me, and I will soon make you forget all your
distresses in a jug of right old stingo.


Ra. Mercy be praised! there are some honest people in this town.


Exeunt. SCENE, MARIA and Lord PROMISE discovered. L. Pro. How happy am I, my
dear Maria, in entertaining you in this manner -- I have longed to give vent to
the effusions of my heart, and own to you how much I loved.


Mar. My Lord!


L. Pro. Yes, Maria, I loved from the first moment I saw you, with an
irresistible impulse.


Mar. Is it possible, my Lord?


L. Pro. As true as that you are beautiful -- Love prompted me to this
contrivance, and it has succeeded to my wishes -- I have now the idol of my
soul in my possession, and nothing but death shall ever separate us.


Mar. Good heavens! am I betrayed then?


L. Pro. Betrayed, my charmer! no, far from it -- Can you call it betraying to
live in endless felicity with him who adores you? -- To be sole disposer of my
life, my fortune, my happiness? -- Come, thou tempting love-inviting fair one,
let us not waste the precious moments which may be better spent in dissolving
transports!


Mar. Away, my Lord, you cannot surely mean to use me thus!


L. Pro. Fear nothing, my beauteous angel! -- No earthly power shall now
disturb our joys -- Do you but smile, and kindly bless me with your endless
charms, malicious deities may look with envy down on our superior bliss --
Come, come to my arms, let me gently, tenderly press you to comply --


Mar. Hold, for pity's sake! -- (kneels) -- In the name of all that is good, all
that is powerful, I conjure you to hear me! -- for a few moments hear me.


L. Pro. Now for a stroke of the pathetic -- What a pleasure to have the tender
supplicating creatures on their knees to one -- (aside) -- Rise first -- Do not
alarm yourself, my sweet girl! -- You have every thing to hope for, nothing to
be apprehensive of.


Mar. Whose house are we in at present, my Lord?


L. Pro. A person^ entirely devoted to me.


Mar. Oh, my fluttering heart! -- And is not that lady who received us your
sister?


L. Pro. As opposite to her as vice is to virtue.


Mar. Ye high-protecting powers who behold my distress, relieve me now, or I am
lost for ever!


L. Pro. My lovely innocent, you torment yourself with groundless apprehensions
-- You are with a man who adores you, who would lacrifice his life to convince
you of his truth and constancy.


Mar. Give me a proof of it, my Lord, by restoring me to my liberty.


L. Pro. Demand any other proof but that, and I will satisfy you -- Make me
happy, and possess every thing I can bestow -- It Is not in my power to marry
you or I would, but I can make you an offering of what few wives enjoy, an
undivided heart -- Your father shall be made easy for life -- Your sister shall
partake of our felicity -- All will owe their happiness to you, and my
behavior must oblige you to confess that my love and generosity shall deserve
the surrender you make -- The devil's in it if this will not do -- I Am sure l've
almost talked myself into a behef of the truth of it --

(aside)
Mar. And do you think it possible, my Lord, that all the riches of the East
could tempt me a moment to deviate from the paths of virtue? -- No, destitute
as I am at this instant of a friend, except in heaven -- conscious of being
entirely in your power, without the least human means to escape -- yet, such is
my reliance on providence, that I am regardless of the consequences -- You may
kill me, if you please, but you cannot triumph over my innocence -- and I have
this consolation in the midst of my distress, that there is a being will amply
revenge my cause, and reward my trivial sufferings.


L. Pro. What the devil's the matter with me, that I am affected thus?


Mar. You hesitate, my Lord -- If your breast be susceptible of pity or manly
sentiment, do not take an ungenerous advantage of the helpless condition you
have reduced me to, nor give me cause to look upon you as the destroyer of my
peace and tranquillity.


L. Pro. Surely persuasive force dwells on her heavenly accents! -- There must
be some magic power in virtue, when it can charm even such a son of vice as I
am!


Mar. A mighty conquest you have gained, indeed, my Lord! -- Deceived a poor
old man, who near had reached his journey's end, without this fatal stroke to
help it, and thus betrayed to ruin his two unsuspecting daughters! -- Oh, my
father! little did your fond honest heart imagine the reward preparing for your
toilsome journey hither.


L. Pro. Certainly I have been long deceived! -- Virtue is more than a name, or
I could never feel these heart-rending compunctions -- I must retire, or she will
make a complete proseylite of me --

(aside)
Mar. You have a sister, my Lord, whom you dearly love, an honored parent,
whose life, perhaps, depends on her prosperity, what must you think of that man
who wantonly endeavors to destroy so fair a prospect? -- How much nobler he,
who, commanding his passions, gives proof of his greatness of soul, by
acknowledging his errors and making every atonement in his power?


L. Pro. Why thus agitated, Maria? -- By heaven you have no cause -- I love you
to distraction, and cannot live without you -- Yet I will not force your
inclinations -- I am not that monster neither -- My tenderness, my generosity,
my respect shall rather gain you.


Mar. My Lord, if you have the least tenderness, the least humanity in your
nature, restore me to those, I am united to by duty and inclination.


L. Pro. And lose my hopes for ever -- it cannot be, it is too great a sacrifice.


Mar. Leave me then but for a few minutes, till I try to recollect my scattered
spirits.


L. Pro. Say you will think kindly of me.


Mar. How can I so far contradict my heart?


L. Pro. Will you endeavor it?


Mar. I will -- if possible.


L. Pro. How like a scoundrel I look now, defeated of my purpose! (aside) Be
composed, Madam, I leave you in perfect security, and hope my excess of passion
will, in some measure, plead my excuse for what is past.


Mar. That, my Lord, I must judge of from your future conduct.


L. Pro. Sure, if the sex but knew how amiably commanding a virtuous woman
appears, even in the eyes of an abandoned libertine, the most thoughtless would
shun the paths of vice.


Exit. Mar. What a precipice am I on! -- It Is dreadful to look around -- yet I
trust that power which hitherto has saved, will still preserve me! -- My
father! where are now thy silver locks! -- destitute of succor, thy hapless
child cannot comfort thee! -- Oh, Wilville! thou once rescued me -- now indeed
I want thy relieving hand -- My sister too! -- perhaps at this instant
struggling in the toils of infamy! -- Dreadful thought! -- I will seek her out,
offer my feeble aid, and either escape or perish together!


Exit. SCENE, another Apartment in the same House. Miss LAMBTON, Miss SPENCE,
and EPICENE. Epi. Ha! ha! ha! -- Oh, Miss Lambton, fie upon such rusticated
notions -- I find, my Lady, we shall have a great deal of trouble before we can
give her the true ton.


Miss Lamb. I hope your Ladyship will pity the severity of my fortune -- Though
buried in solitude, my heart has long wished to move in the circle of highlife,
and it now expands at the approaching prospect which you have assured me of.


Miss Spen. You may depend upon it -- under my protection you shall be
introduced into the politest assemblies.


Epi. If Miss will entrust herself to my care, I will gladly join in the charge
with your Ladyship, and answer for her improvement.


Miss Spen. Directed by so professed a master, I Am sure she cannot fail.


Epi. I do think I am tolerably well qualified -- Suppose us now, Miss, in the
Pantheon, or any other fashionable place -- instead of standing with a modest
country diffidence, and a confusion which increases the unfaded roses of your
cheeks -- sweep along the room with all the becoming ease and assurance of a
true-bred woman of fashion -- pull out your glass, survey the objects round
with a contemptuous disdain -- Oh, my dear Lady Squander -- (curtsies) -- I am
immensely glad to see you -- Have you heard the news? -- Oh, I am ready to die
at the thoughts of it -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Only the grave Mrs. Scruple detected
last night with a captain of the guards -- Mrs. Trifle -- (curtsying another
way) -- I am happy in seeing you abroad -- I was informed you intended retiring
into the country on the death of your monkey -- (turning another way) -- No,
Madam, but I design tomorrow night seeing Garrick's alteration of Hamlet. Oh,
pray do bring Pompey along with you, it is a creature of infinite humor, and
will relieve my too great attention to the play -- Ha! ha! ha!


Miss Lamb. I own, Sir, I have very little idea of the description you have
been giving me, and hope you will forgive my simplicity in asking whether modesty
and innocence are fashionable qualities at these assemblies?


Epi. Umph! -- why faith I cannot say that they are -- They indeed attract the
notice of the first couple in the kingdom, otherwise names of no great
consequence now in the world.


Miss Lamb. I am very sorry for it.


Epi. Sorry, why so?


Miss Lamb. Because, charmed as I am with the brilliant scenes before me, I
would not purchase them with the loss of either.


Epi. May I renounce the pleasures of Italy, if the girls brain is not turned!


Enter RALPH. Ra. I beg pardon for my company; but Miss, if you please, I want
to speak a few words to you.


Miss Lamb. Speak to me?


Ra. Yes, Miss, if you will go down stairs I Will tell it you.


Epi. You had better spare her that trouble, friend, by telling it here.


Ra. May hap I will not, though --


Epi. You may let it alone then; but the lady shall not stir, so get along
about your business, fellow.


Ra. But I say she shall, and let me see who will hinder her.


Epi. Who Will hinder her? -- I, you scoundrel --

(draws)
Ra. Will you? -- We'll try that --

(brandishes his cudgel)
Miss Lamb. Hold, Ralph -- for heaven's sake, what is the matter?


Ra. Oh, Miss, I have found it all out! -- I overheard the whole story in the
kitchen -- they are all in a plot to murder and ravish you and I and Miss
Maria, and keep us here for ever, so come along and let us find out master.


Miss Lamb Impossible!


Epi. Impossible, indeed, Miss, the fool's drunk.


Ra. Drunk! no, nor mad neither, and I will have you out, Miss, or die for it.


Epi. That you shall, villain! --

(pushes at him)
Ra. Nay, you have mistaken your man, I believe --

(disarms Epicene, and knocks him down)
Epi. Help! murder! help!


Ra. Get up again, you shall have fair play.


Epi. -- (on the ground) -- Curse your play -- help! murder! help!


Ra. I fancy you will not be in a hurry to meddle with a bit of Yorkshire stuff
again.


Enter Lord PROMISE and Servants. L. Pro. What Is the meaning of all this noise
and violence?


Ra. Ask him there, he has more reason to tell you than I.


Epi. By all that is devilish, Promise, that barbarian had nigh put an end to my
being -- Keep him off till I get away -- I thought him a tool, but if ever I am
again deceived, may I suffer tenfold what I have done now!


Exit. Miss Lamb. Oh, my Lord, I beg of you to unfold this mystery, my servant
says there is a plot formed to detain us here.


L. Pro. There is, Madam -- Nay, start not -- it is time to undeceive you -- I
have now no interest in letting you continue longer in your error -- Thererfore
view every object in its proper light --


Miss Lamb. Gracious goodness! where will this end!


L. Pro. This house you are close confined in, without a possibility of escape
-- As a confirmation, advance, Madam, no longer Lady Fanny Promise, but Miss
Spence for the future.


Ra. Ay, I thought what it would all come to -- I Will be hanged if I did not.


Miss Lamb. I am so overwhelmed with surprise and astonishment, that I know not
what to say.


L. Pro. Miss Lambton, you are safe for the present, that lady will attend you
into another room -- As for this champion who signalised himself so valiantly
in your defense, he may be troublesome -- convey him into the street, he will
improve his talent, and meet with plenty of adventures there.


Ra. Ay, but two words to that bargain -- you must have my leave first.


Miss Lamb. Stop, Ralph -- Surely, my Lord, my servant's fidelity ought not to
subject him to ill usage. I will rely upon your honor for my safety here, and
hope you will extend it to him.


L. Pro. Miss Lambton, I pity your confusion, and will not stay to increase it
-- Dismiss your fears -- Let your servant retire -- he shall not be molested --
and you have my honor for your protection.


Exit. Ra. Bye, Miss, if there be law or justice in England, you shall not stay
long here.


Exeunt Ralph and Servants. Miss Lamb. For heaven's sake tell me, is my sister
in this house?


Miss Spen. She is, Madam.


Miss Lamb. May I not see her, pray?


Miss Spen. Not at present, Madam; but don't let that disturb you -- I can
assure you she is well and safe.


Miss Lamb. Does my father know where we are?


Miss Spen. I am sorry, Madam, I am not permitted to answer your questions to
your satisfaction.


Miss Lamb. What will become of us! -- Thus are my dreams of happiness vanished
-- The enraptured scenes my fancy drew existed but in imagination -- now in
their stead, each way I turn around, naught present themselves but shame,
despair, and infamy!


Exeunt. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Epicene's House. EPICENE, WILVILLE, and Sir HARRY TEMPLE. Epi. MY dear
Wilville, I am very much obliged to you for this visit, I intended calling on
you in a few days.


Will. On me; for what, pray?


Epi. Psha! a trisle -- There Is a subscription amongst a few of us men of taste
to raise ten thousand pounds, to divide between three Italian singers and two
capital French dancers, to be invited over for that purpose next winter. That
sum, with what the managers can give, benefits, and a few tristing presents,
will enable them to live tolerably genteel, and oblige foreigners to confess
that no nation out-does us in generosity to strangers -- Will you make one?


Will. I cannot say that I have the least inclination, and must think half that
sum bestowed on natives of merit and character, would be infinitely more
laudable.


Epi. May I renounce every thing that is foreign if I think so -- for in my
opinion, a man cannot give a greater proof of the remains of old English
barbarism, than by encouraging natives, let their merit be ever so deserving --
it is as great a vulgarism, and as much out of fashion, as relieving the poor of
the parish one lives in.


Will. I shall not dispute the matter with you now, having business, to us, or much
greater moment -- You know Lord Promise?


Epi. Who, George? -- perfectly, few know him better -- He just parted from me
--


Will. As I guessed -- (to Temple) -- Did he mention what occasioned his return
to town so soon?


Epi. Oh, now I suspect what you are about -- You want to share the spoil --
Ay, I know the whole story -- Two damned fine girls he brought up with him.
When he is tired, I suppose, he intends introducing them on the town.


Tem. The town, Sir! -- That the villain dares not.


Epi. Sir!


Will. Hold, Temple, restrain the impetuosity of your temper.


Epi. Confound my intellects! if there is not some mystery in this affair!


Tem. Yes, Sir, there is a mystery which you must unravel, or I shall have
recourse to disagreeable methods to oblige you.


Epi. Tom, is your friend apt to be lunatic? -- For bubble me at Arthur's, if I
undersrand a syllable he says.


Tem. No trifling, Sir; inform me where the ladies are this instant, or give me
immediate satisfaction.

(draws)
Epi. Upon my soul, Sir! I Will give you every reasonable satisfaction you can
desire -- But for fighting you must excuse me, as I think it damned
unreasonable!


Will. Put up! here comes Promise in right time to answer for himself.


Enter Lord PROMISE. L. Pro. Epicene! I want to -- Who the devil are these!

(aside)
Tem. I suppose you are Lord Promise?


L. Pro. I am, Sir -- Give me leave to demand your ^^me?


Tem. Temple.


L. Pro. I have not the honor of knowing you.


Tem. I believe we shall be better acquainted before we part.


L. Pro. Very possible.


Tem. Give me leave to ask, my Lord, what you have done with the Lambton Family?


L. Pro. The Lambton Family!


Tem. Yes, my Lord, it is a plain question, and requires an immediate answer.


L. Pro. First, Sir, let me know who you are, that in this peremptory manner
demands it?


Tem. One that is determined to make you render a strict account of them.


L. Pro. Indeed! -- I will then -- They are under my protection.


Tem. Restore them directly to their liberty.


L. Pro. I will not.


Tem. You shall.


L. Pro. Who dares attempt to make me!


Tem. I! --

(drawing)
Will. And I!


L. Pro. What! do you intend to assassinate me? But were you armed an hundred
fold, thus I defy you --

(draws)
Will. No, my Lord, I scorn the thought.


Epi. Gentlemen! for heaven's sake be calm! -- What the devil's the matter? --
Will nothing content ye but cutting one another's throats? -- I Am sure if you
had the aversion to blood I have, you would be peaceable enough.


Will. Give up the ladies, my Lord.


L. Pro. You shall have my life first.


Will. You must defend it well, or I will -- Meet me tomorrow morning at six in
the park, there to decide our differences.


L. Pro. Depend upon me.


Tem. No, it is I who have most reason, and mush insist on satisfaction first.


L. Pro. Patience, Gentlemen! -- One at a time -- Let me dispatch one first,
and then I shall chastize the insolence of the other at my leisure.


Will. Be not too sure -- Meet me with a second at the time appointed.


L. Pro. May an eternal stigma brand my name if I disappoint you!


Tem. Till then farewell!


Exeunt Tem. and Will. Epi. By all that is terrible! I am glad they are gone, for
I was cursedly afraid they would have turned their fury upon me.


L. Pro. Who are these mettlesome sparks?


Epi. I know but one of them, Wilville -- The other fiery one, I believe, is
Sir Harry Temple.


L. Pro. I have heard of them both, but cannot imagine by what unlucky accident
they came to the knowledge of these girls -- Epicene, I am going to do you
great honor.


Epi. Well, let us hear.


L. Pro. You shall be my second in this affair.


Epi. Sink me into everlasting oblivion, if I will!


L. Pro. You cannot be in earnest?


Epi. I am, by all that is serious!


L. Pro. What Is your reason?


Epi. George, you are a man of courage, and these affairs may be an amusement
to you -- I, on the contrary, have an aversion to a sword out of its scabbard,
much more to its being lodged in my body.


L. Pro. Then you positively refuse?


Epi. If ever I draw a sword again, after my late disaster, except it be to
break a lamp, frighten a waiter, or pink an old woman, where I am sure my
courage will not be put to the trial, may I never retaste the life-giving air
of the continent.


L. Pro. You are a contemptible fellow, below my anger --

(going)
Epi. Hearkee, Promise, another word of comfort, Major Standfield is in town --
What, fight him too?


L. Pro. Very possible -- I confess I have work enough upon my hands at present
-- But there is no ^etreating, and I dare do any thing but think.


Exit. L. Pro. Epi. May I be despised by every person of fashion if this
fighting, even when there is a reasonable occasion, is not the most ridiculous
thing in nature!


Enter SERVANT. Ser. A lady below stairs, Sir, desires to see you.


Epi. A lady to see me! -- Who is she?


Ser. I cannot tell, Sir.


Epi. Qu'elle enter -- Show her up -- Exit. Ser. What business can a lady
possibly have with me! -- Here she comes -- Umph! -- Veiled! -- a foreigner by
her air.


Enter Miss CLEMENT. [She curtsies low, he bows obsequiously.] Epi. Vous plait
il de vous assoir -- Madam, your most obedient -- Please to be seated -- I
think myself greatly honored by this visit -- Pray, may I have the favor of
knowing what has occasioned it.


Miss Cle. Oh! Sir!


Epi. Madam!


Miss Cle. Pity my confusion -- and -- and --


Epi. And what, Madam?


Miss Cle. Spare the blushes which force themselves even through this veil of
shame!


Epi. Ah Bella Donzella -- Heyday! -- A fine girl by all that is delicate, and
confoundedly in love with me, or I am greatly mistaken! -- (aside) -- Compose
yourself, my dear, you have nothing to be alarmed at -- May I be electrified by
your charms, if I am not a man of the nicest honor -- Withdraw that cloud, and
throw yourself wholly on my protection.


Miss Cle. O! these well-known sounds! -- But I will rely on your generosity,
and reveal my hapless story -- Behold this face -- (unveiling) -- then judge of
my unhappy destiny!


Epi. Whither does all this tend to!


Miss Cle. Think how severe must be my reflections, when, impelled by love, I
forsake relations, friends, country, every tender tie of nature and affection,
and sacrifice them all for your dear, dear sake!


Epi. For mine, Madam? -- May I be offered up a victim on the altar of Venus,
if I can comprehend the meaning of all this!


Miss Cle. Do you not know me then?


Epi. Never saw you before, to my knowledge -- Strike me blind if I did!


Miss Cle. Then I am irremediably undone! -- Unkind Epicene! thus to slight a
maid who adores you.


Epi. Pray, Madam, where do you say I have had that pleasure?


Miss Cle. Have not you been in Italy?


Epi. I have.


Miss Cle. Were you not intimate at Pisa with the noble family of Bentivolio?


Epi. I was, Madam.


Miss Cle. Do you not remember they were once visited by their neice, Julia? --
I am that unhappy maid -- At first sight I loved, and time has only served to
confirm me in my hopelss flame -- I wrote, but virgin-modesty forbad my sending
it -- At last, hearing of your return to England, the long-suppress'd passion
grew too violent to be concealed -- I resolved to follow you -- escaped from my
friends -- braved all the perils of so long a voyage, and am now come to cast
myself at your feet, there to receive the reward of my constancy, or, at once,
put an end to my sufferings --

(kneels)
Epi I am petrified with astonishment! -- Rise, Madam --


Miss Cle. Not till your cruel heart is softened! -- By letters from a friend,
who was privy to my flight, I am informed my brother, to whose care I was
entrusted on my parents death, has traced my steps to England, nay, is this
very moment in London, in search of me, perhaps entering this house, when, such
is ^is impetuous temper, and refined notions of honor, that your life will be
in danger from his resentment, and immediate death must be my portion.


Epi. What an unlucky affair this is! -- Rise, for heaven's sake, Madam!


Miss Cle. Never -- here will I cling 'till I Have won you to pity me!


Clement. -- (within) -- It Is false! -- I know she is here, and will have
vengeance!


Miss Cle. Oh gracious! -- my brother's voice! -- What will be the consequence!


Epi. The devil it is! -- Let me entreat you to rise.


Miss Cle. No, cruel, obdurate man!


Enter CLEMENT. Cle. Confusion! -- then my fears are true! -- Have I at last
found thee, thou shame to thy sex? -- As for you, villain, draw, and desend
your unworthy life.

(draws)
Epi. Hold, Sir, I beseech you hold! -- May I be condemned to everlasting
infamy, if I am not entirely innocent in this affair!


Cle. Innocent! -- but I waste time in parlying with such a wretch -- draw, or
this instant is your last.


Epl. Help! murder! help!


Cle. -- (presenting a pistol) -- Another such word and you are a dead man.


Epi. I Am afraid I am a dead man indeed -- For pity's sake, Madam, convince
your brother of his mistake.


Miss Cle. Alas, Sir! what can I say? -- He will believe nothing from me; you
had best own the truth.


Cle. I see your guilt confounds you -- Is this the grateful return you make to
such unmerited acts of hospitality and kindness? -- to seduce the niece of so
noble a house -- a house that prides itself on the purity of its blood, and the
number of princes allied to it. Could not the largeness of her fortune tempt
you to demand her honorably in marriage, without having recourse to such base
methods?


Epi. Eternal stupefaction seize me, if I am not so surpised at this whole
affair, that I have not power to answer.


Miss Cle. Hard-hearted Epicene, so long to resist the entreaties of one that
loves as I do -- Accept my hand and fortune -- perhaps my brother kindly will
forgive all errors past.


Cle. Well, Sir, what say you to that? -- now I Will put your honor to the
utmost proof -- If I oblivionize all former failings, are you willing to do her
justice?


Epi. Really, Sir, if you will allow me to speak without offending you, I must
say that this whole transaction is a perfect riddle to me -- for if I knew any
thing of you, her, or her honor, 'till this instant, may I be confined and
embalmed alive!


Cle. Then since you trifle, your doom is sealed.


Epi. -- Aspettate un momento! -- Will nothing else content you but my marrying
this lady?


Cle. Nothing.


Epi. You are sure you have an unconquerable affection for me? --

(to Miss Clement)
Miss Cle. I think I have given sufficient proofs of it.


Epi. Curse your proofs and you too, my dear -- (aside) -- You promise, if I
marry this lady, I shall possess her fortune, which you say is ample? --

(to the brother)
Cle. Without doubt.


Epi. And you, Madam, promise, that immediately after marriage you will,
according to the present fashionable mode, provide yourself with a Cicesbeo?


Miss Cle. you may depend upon it.


Epi. Some comfort that -- (aside) -- I shall be permitted to reside in any
part of Italy I please, no matter how far distant from my lady here --

(to the brother)
Cle. Nothing more reasonable.


Epi. As I shall give you an unlimited liberty, Ma^^m, to have what friends you
please at your petite ^uppers, or elsewhere, you, on your part, promise not to
take it ill if in public or private I always treat you with the polite coldness
and indifference of a husband?


Miss Cle. O, by no means, I do not wish to appear particular, and I am
sensible that hardly any thing but the name of marriage exists now.


Epi. Nor you, Sir, when the harmless frolic takes you, be for cutting my
throat again?


Cle. Umph! -- Why, on my sister's account, I shall forego that pleasure,


Epi. Since the devil will have me married, I think I could not have had more
reasonable terms.


Cle. Give me your hand, now I find you are a man of honor.


Epi. Oh, zounds! I had forgot -- I am engaged already.


Cle. How, Sir?


Epi. I am, by all that is miserable!


Cle. Very well, Sir -- you know the consequence.

(laying his hand on his sword)
Epi. What an unfortunate creature am I! -- But hear me -- I am already engaged
to marry another lady, or forfeit thirty thousand pounds.


Cle. A trifle! -- forfeit it.


Epi. My fortune will not enable me.


Cle. My sister's shall -- Come, since I find words will not bind you, stronger
ties shall -- sit down, write your consent to marry my sister, under penalty of
losing your whole estate.


Epi. Dear Sir, this is superlatively cruel!


Cle. No alternative -- this or that --


Epi. O that I durst fight! -- Well, I must submit -- (sits down to write) --
Your name, Madam.


Cle. What, don't you know that already?


Epi. No, curse me if I do!


Miss Cle. Julia Bentivolio.


Epi. Julia Bentivolio -- (writes) -- Umph -- umph -- there, Sir -- will that
satisfy you?


Cle. -- (reads) -- I promise -- umph -- marry -- Julia Bentivolio --
forteiture whole fortune -- John Epicene -- ay, ay, this will do -- Now,
sister, I give you leave to embrace your husband.


Epi. Husband! -- What harmony in the name!

(aside)
Miss Cle. -- (embracing Epicene) -- With rapture do I fold the darling of my
wishes!


Epi. Zounds! my dear, not so violent in your embraces! -- it is the most
unfashionable thing in nature.


Cle. I am sorry to interrupt your bliss, but, Julia, you must retire with me,
if the ardency of your passion will allow you to live a few hours without her.

(to Epicene)
Epi. Would I had never seen her! --

(aside)
Cle. I expect, Sir, you will give immediate orders for the solemnization of your
nuptials -- and not to delay your happiness by unnecessary preparations, I
kindly intend to celebrate them this evening.


Miss Cle. Now, brother, you are kind indeed! -- Adieu, my best beloved!


Exeunt. Epi. Adieu, my future torment! -- Married! -- no, I Will hang myself out
of the way, and at once prevent my troubles! -- And yet I have not the heart to
deprive the world of such a pattern of elegance and dress -- What, if I dispute
this consent at law, as forced and illegal? -- yes, and perhaps have myself run
through the body before its determined -- No, I must be married -- devilish hard
luck! -- Oh, my unfortunate stars! -- to what a dilemma am I reduced -- either
to fight or marry.


Exit. SCENE, another Apartment in Epicene's House. Enter Lord PROMISE, and
Miss SPENCE. L. Pro. Come, no more whining -- have not I agreed to the sisters
being together at your request? what would you be at? -- is there any harm done
to them?


Miss Spen. No, but how long will they remain so?


L. Pro. As long as I am master of my passions, not a bit longer -- I think I
have had an uncommon share of patience in this affair -- for such a perverse
obstinate baggage I never before met with.


Miss Spen. Happy would our sex be, if all, like her. were proof against the
false attacks of perjured, faithless men.


L. Pro. Better as it is, child -- You would then be too near perfection for us
mere frail mortals to approach -- Go, go, imitate your betters, think of
repentance when you past the power of sinning. Exit. Miss Spence. Enter
VARNISH. Well, Varnish, our schemes hitherto have proved abortive -- You are
almost preached into a reformee by a grey-headed old man -- and I have been
fairly foiled by a green girl -- What a couple of cursed fools! -- This
conscience is a plaguey troublesome companion.


Var. Ah, my Lord, we never can do any good while we listen to it.


L. Pro. You must to Mr. Lambton again -- tempt him once more -- offer any
terms you please -- tell him the deed is done -- try, if possible, to persuade
him to write to his daughter that he approves of it -- that may go a great way
with her -- about it directly. I shall wait your return before I attempt any
thing further.


Var. How if I don't succeed?


L. Pro. Ask me no questions, Varnish -- I am almost distracted -- Sure never
was so strange a compound of love, libertinism, generosity, and honor!


Exeunt. SCENE, Another Apartment in the same House. Enter Miss LAMBTON and
MARIA. Mar. I am, however, glad, Charlotte, that your eyes are at last opened
to see the fallacy of your wild ideas.


Miss Lamb. Say no more, sister, I am heartily ashamed and mortified already --
I begin to see things in a new light, but my experience had like to have cost
me dear.


Mar. Enough, my dear, to be sensible of having acted wrong, is pain sufficient
to the ingenious mind, therefore I have done -- What do you think of our
present situation? -- for my part -- but we are interrupted --


Enter Miss SPENCE. Miss Spen. Ladies, if you will please to walk into the next
room tea is ready.


Mar. Excuse us, Madam; in the present perturbation of our minds, refreshment
is not worth a thought.


Miss Spen. I am sensible, ladies, the part I have acted in this affair must
make me appear odious in your eyes, as it has contemptible in my own, yet, if
you will but hear me --


Miss Lamb. Too much have we heard already, to be any longer imposed upon.


Miss Spen. Believe me, I do not mean it.


Mar. Oh, vice! what power has thou attained, when thou wear'st the semblance
that virtue used to pride in! -- A form like yours, surely, never was designed
to be an instrument in a scheme so detestable.


Miss Spen. Abhorred be the hour I ever was!


Mar. If I can read aright, you are not one of those who are hardened in the
ways of guilt -- Your appearance speaks you sprung from parents who would hide
their heads in shame at your unhappy conduct -- Have you unwarily deviated from
the paths of virtue? add not to your crimes by endeavoring to make others
equally wretched.


Miss Spen. What shall I say to gain belief? -- Appearances, I own, are strong
against me -- but black as I may seem, hear but my melancholy story, and then
refuse me pity if you can.


Miss Lamb. Proceed, and be assured we wish to find it so.


Miss Spen. Behold before you the only, and once prided daughter, of an ancient
happy couple, as Love and Hymen ever yet united -- to myself alone I owe my
ruin -- unmindful of their precepts, and trusting in the force of my imaginary
charms, I fell unthinkingly in the fatal snare laid by the most artful of men
-- Lord Promise triumphed over my innocence -- To conceal my shame, I left my
tender parents, and ventured into the world destitute of fortune, friends, or
virtue!


Mar. Unhappy consequences of one false step!


Miss Spen. Fatally so, indeed! -- Deserted, despised, and hateful to myself, I
could only have recourse to the author of my ruin -- for a while he behaved
with tenderness, cool indifference succeeded, and I was soon obliged to give
place to newer objects -- What could I do? my dependence was solely upon him --
I bore my fate with resignation, conscious of having deserved it, but when he
obliged me to act a part in your deception, my remorse grew too violent to be
stifled -- Thank heaven he has hitherto failed in his designs -- and I am now
come with a determined resolution either to effect your deliverance, or share
your fate while you remain here.


Mar. Then we have still some hopes, and providence has not yet deserted us! --
But what is to be done? how get from these unhallowed walls?


Miss Spen. That will be a difficult task* I am afraid, guarded as you are by
his watchful emissaries.


Miss Lamb. Pray, do you know Sir Harry Temple?


Miss Spen. Not in the least, Madam.


Mar. Nor a Mr. Wilville?


Miss Spen. I cannot recollect that I do.


Mar. Nay, if you did, 'twou'd be to no purpose, they, alas! are many miles
from hence -- all hopes of relief from them are vain -- But do you know Lord
Promise's Sister?


Miss Spen. I have slight knowledge of her.


Mar. I believe she will be the only probable means of our delivery -- Suppose
you throw yourself upon her generosity -- confess your whole affecting story,
and relate our cruel detention -- I think, if her breast be not totally void of
every feminine virtue, she will pity you, and protect us.


Miss Spen. Alas, Madam, Iscarce can gather courage to approach her; yet to
release you, and in some measure atone for past offenses, I would submit to any
thing, however humiliating.


Mar. Then let me persuade you to go thither.


Miss Spen. Well, Madam, I will.


Mar. But this instant -- consider our situation -- a moment's delay may put it
out of her power to relieve us.


Miss Spen. I Will go directly -- in the mean time pray take a dish of tea, and
recruit your exhausted spirits.


Mar. You Will return as soon as possible.


Miss Spen. Depend upon it.


Mar. Come, sister, let us endeavor to compose ourselves, and call to mind
that from adversity often spring our choicest blessings.


Exeunt. SCENE, Varnish's House. Enter Mr. LAMBTON. Mr. Lamb. My daughters not
yet returned, nor any news of Lord Promise! -- I am almost distracted! Enter
VARNISH. Oh, Sir, you are come -- well -- now I hope my fears are over -- Where
are my children?


Var. Safe, Sir; very safe, I assure you.


Mr. Lamb. My blessing on you for the news! -- May I not expect them home soon?


Var. Why, Sir, they have been so agreeably entertained since they went abroad,
that you must not (...) impatient if they don't return quite so soon as you
expected.


Mr. Lamb. My poor girls! -- they have indeed seen very little of the world,
nor have they any thing to recommend them to the company they are in, except it
be their innocence and virtue.


Var. Really, Mr. Lambton, you have reason to be proud of them -- they charm
every one with their behavior -- Lady Fanny loves them already like sisters,
nay, she says it will be their own faults, if they do not always rank so in her
esteem, as her happiness is wound up in theirs.


Mr. Lamb. Her goodness is too much, too much for such unworthy objects -- for
how is it possible they can contribute to her happiness?


Var. I have told you, Sir, how violently fond my Lord is of Miss Maria --
every minute increases his passion, and it is now arrived at such a pitch, that
he cannot live an hour without her.


Mr. Lamb. Live an hour without her! -- You cannot mean it, sure?


Var. Upon my word, Sir, I do -- You are a happy man, Mr. Lambton, to be father
to so beautiful a daughter! -- make yourself perfectly easy -- your fortune is
made for ever.


Mr. Lamb. Oh, would to heaven I could! -- For goodness sake, Sir, explain your
dark ambiguous meaning.


Var. I am come, Sir, to congratulate you on the happy change of your affairs
-- Lord Promise has already obtained a vacant place of two hundred pounds a
year for you; Miss Maria has five hundred pounds yearly settled upon her during
life, besides house, equipage, servants, and --


Mr. Lamb. How! -- hold, for the love of charity! On what conditions were all
these things obtained?


Var. Conditions! none, Sir -- Lord Promise is too generous to exact any -- all
he desires in return, is to be assured of Miss Maria's unalterable love and
constancy.


Mr. Lamb. Merciful powers! how is my old agonizing heart torn by a thousand
different emotions! If you have any humanity in you, answer me truly -- Are my
Lord's designs upon my daughter honorable, or not?


Var. Entirely, Sir, upon my credit.


Mr. Lamb. I wish I may find them so.


Var. It Is true, it is not in his power to marry her; what of that, you cannot
surely be so weak and blind to your own interest, as to stand on mere
punctilio? In every other respect she will be more than his wife -- and as to
--


Mr. Lamb. Stop your licentious tongue! nor dare to insult the virtuous poverty
of my white hairs!


Var. Insult, Sir! the farthest thing in the world from my thoughts -- Can you
term it insult to be at once seated above the --


Mr. Lamb. Thou pander -- look on me well -- consider whom you tempt -- a
father -- Then think, whether worlds ought to bribe me to deviate a moment from
my duty.


Var. But, allowing your sentiments their utmost weight, will you not patiently
bear an evil which cannot be removed?


Mr. Lamb. What, more mystery! -- Pray, pray explain yourself, and let me know
the worst of my unhappy fate.


Var. Miss Maria, Sir, not so insensible of my Lord's favors, has kindly
rewarded him with every return in her power to bestow.


Mr. Lamb. Then all is over! -- break heart strings, break at once, and end
this miserable being! -- (walking about disordered) -- Yet, it is, it must be
false! -- Her mind, pure and spotless as new-drifted snow, could not so soon be
tainted -- No, my child you could not, would not sell your innocence, nor part
with that jewel of inestimable price!


Var. To what end, Sir, should I now impose on you? -- Your daughter has
accepted of my Lord's love and tenderness -- she now has sent me to request
you would make yourself easy at what has happened, and, as soon as your first
emotions are over, will be glad to see you; in the mean time, if you will write
her word that you are satisfied with her conduct, and happy, she will be
completely so.


Mr. Lamb. Tantalize not such a wretch as me with the name of happiness! -- Oh,
cruel, cruel girl, thus to pierce the bosom of a tender, doting father! May
every -- no, I will not curse her -- curse, where I so many thousand times have
blessed -- 'twou'd be unnatural -- Let then the never-ceasing sting of
conscience at last work her to repentance -- Where is she? lead me to her, that
if she has any spark of virtue yet remaining in her, I may awaken it --

(going)
Var. Hold, Sir -- that at present is impossible.


Mr. Lamb. Impossible, Sir! -- What power shall hinder me?


Var. I must, Sir -- in compassion to your mind thus agitated, I must.


Mr. Lamb. Compassion, said thou? -- if thou have the least tincture of it
in thy composition, have pity on a wretched father, born down with age and
sorrows -- torture me not in this manner, it is too much for my feeble nature
long to support -- let me but see my children, and I shall be easier.


Var. Tomorrow you shall.


Mr. Lamb. Tomorrow's an age to one in doubt like me -- Stranger as I am, I Will
find my way to Lady Fanny's.


Var. Your efforts are vain -- this house you are confined in, till you have a
proper sense of my Lord's kindness, and agree to his proposals -- Your
daughters, though very safe, are not at his sister's, nor can your utmost
diligence find them out -- I Will leave you an hour to consider of this affair --
Either accept the offers to make you and your children happy for life, or be
obliged to return into the country tomorrow morning without them --

(going)
Mr. Lamb. -- (holding Varnish) -- Stay! for mercy's sake stay! -- Kill me, but
do not ask me to be accessory to my children's dishonor! Exit. Var. He Is gone
-- O, Charlotte! -- Maria! -- The comforts of my declining years at once torn
from me! -- and in such a manner -- condemned to everlasting infamy -- it is too
much! -- Unhappy, poor old man! who now will close thy eyes, and receive thy
dying blessing? O, where are all my dreams of felicity! -- those days I hoped
to spend amongst the prattling lispers of my daughters! -- all vanished, and
real anguish now succeeds -- I dare not think -- it may be dangerous -- (going)
-- Yet, something whispers comfort to my wounded soul -- I will, if possible,
be patient, and put my confidence in that being who never fails to succor the
afflicted heart in the hour of calamity!


Exit END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, LADY FANNY PROMISE'S. Enter Lady FANNY and Miss CLEMENT. Lady Fan. HA!
ha! ha! -- Upon my word, Lucy, you have managed this affair admirably, beyond
my expectations -- We shall now proceed to the second part of the scene, and if
we don't torment him to some purpose, why I am greatly deceived.


Miss Cle. Never fear, I Will second you -- But you cannot imagine how I Am
affected with Miss Spence's relation of the Miss Lambtons confinement.


L. Fan. Not more than I am, I assure you -- poor girls! I am impatient 'till
we go to their relief.


Enter SERVANT. Ser. Two Gentlemen, my Lady, Sir Harry Temple and Mr. Wilville,
desire to speak with you.


L. Fan. Hey-day! more adventures! -- Wait on them up -- Exit. Ser. What can
they want with me? something relating to my righteous brother, I suppose -- I
must beg of you, my dear, to retire for a minute or two, and as soon as these
gentlemen are gone, we'll proceed to Epicene's together.


Exit Miss Cle. Enter TEMPLE and WILVILLE. Tem. Pardon this intrusion, my Lady,
which no thing but the nature of our business could excuse.


L. Fan. There needs none, Sir.


Will. Necessity, Madam, obliges us, after every other method has failed, to
trouble you -- We are in search of two ladies, whom your brother has decoyed up
to twon, and by force secrets, spite of our utmost endeavors to sind out and
release them.


L. Fan. I was right I find -- (aside) -- Your search is at an end, Gentlemen,
if you mean Mr. Lambton's family, who came to town this morning.


Will. We do -- Is it possible you can have heard of them?


L. Fan. I have, and was contriving means for their deliverance when you came
in.


Tem. How fortunate! -- Dear Lady, let us fly to give them liberty, and prevent
the evils they are threatened with.


L. Fan. Hold, Sir; not so fast -- trust all to my management, and I Will ensure
you success.


Tem. You shall be our tutelar deity on this occasion, only consider our
impatience.


L. Fan. I do, therefore will not waste time in useless ceremonies -- do you
know Epicene?


Will. Perfectly well.


L. Fan. You must accompany me thither directly, on our way I Will explain every
thing, and give you proper instructions how to behave.


Tem. Lead on, Madam, and may our success exceed our wishes.


Exeunt. SCENE, Epicene's House. Enter EPICENE and Lord PROMISE. Epi. Strike me
deaf at an opera, Promise, if ever I was in such a dilemma before! -- No, not
even in Naples, when that cursed affair happened which forced me to live a
month with Squalitini the burletta singer.


L. Pro. And so the brother absolutely obliged you to sign a contract.


Epi. Absolutely; for, when his sword was drawn, had he insisted on my binding
myself to a tobacco planter, to work in his plantations the remainder of my
life, I could not have refused him.


L. Pro. What a spiritless dog! -- Well, but was the Signiora handsome?


Epi. Devilishly so -- But what was that to me? -- Had she the beauty of Venus,
the chastity of Diana, and the wisdom of Minerva -- all these joined together
could not have gained her admission into the Coterie, or let me into the secret
at the next Newmarket meeting.


L. Pro. Quite the contrary, I believe.


Epi. Of what use are a woman's good qualities then? -- If my destiny will have
me yoked, give me a fashionable wife, who will raise a man's reputation in the
world.


L. Pro. Pray, how is that to be done?


Epi. Only by following the example of every day -- eloping before the
honey-moon is over -- obtaining a divorce -- and exalting the happy man to a
level with the greatest names of the present age.


L. Pro. Very clever indeed.


Epi. Oh, almost as certain a road to fame as modern patriotism -- But I have
not told you all my misfortunes -- This visit has destroyed an immense deal of
happiness I had in petto.


L. Pro. Ay! How so?


Epi. I intended to have cut a distinguishing figure at the next masquerade, in
the character of a French milliner.


L. Pro. Which this accident has prevented?


Epi. It has by all that is cruel! -- For what Gusto could I have, or how could
I possibly display my talents under such an embarrassment?


L. Pro. True -- The world will sustain an irreparable loss -- But what do you
think my sister will say to you upon this occasion?


Epi. May I be annihilated! if that does not giv^ me the greatest concern --
She Is a lady of the nicest discernment, and if she has unalterably fixed her
affections on me, so as to drive her to some act of desperation, I should never
forgive myself.


Enter SERVANT. Ser. Lady Fanny Promise desires to speak with you, my Lord.


L. Pro. Show her up.


Exit. Ser. Epi. Your sister! -- Zounds, what shall I do? -- I am quite
unprepared for this rencontre.


L. Pro. Faith, so am I; her coming, I am afraid, bodes no good to either of us
-- retire you, and leave me to manage her.


Epi. My dear boy, help me out of this difficulty, and command me to eternity.


Exit. L. Pro. She has not sure got a hint of what I am about, if she has, I
must shift ground directly.


Enter Lady FANNY and Miss CLEMENT. L. Fan. Brother, I am glad to see you.


L. Pro. That Is more than I can say by you -- (aside) Sister, your servant --
What, my little rogue Clement! -- I Will lay my life some mischief's on foot now,
for no other cause could have brought you both hither.


L. Fan. You are a prophet, brother -- Come, tell us now whether we shall
succeed or no?


L. Pro. Where two women join their heads together, I think they are a match
for the grand mischief maker.


L. Fan. Thank you! -- You had best take care of yourself -- (aside) -- Pray,
where is that pretty gentleman, your traveling companion?


L. Pro. Who, Epicene?


L. Fan. The fame.


L. Pro. Somewhere in the house, I suppose -- Is your business with him?


Miss Cle. It is, and we are come to beg your assist^nce.


L. Pro. In what?


Miss Cle. Only to plague him a little.


L. Pro. Poor devil! he is pretty well prepared to your hand, I assure you.


L. Fan. How! has he told you of his whimsical situation?


L. Pro. We were just talking of it when you interrupted us -- but, how the
deuce came you to know it?


L. Fan. Because I contrived it.


L. Pro. You contrived it!


L. Fan. Yes -- behold the distressed Lady Julia Bentivolio.


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! -- Upon my soul a glorious joke! ha! ha! ha! -- Is it
possible he can be so duped? -- Well, what am I to do?


L. Fan. Withdraw 'till a convenient time, then appear, and add to his
distress, by insisting on the performance of his contract with me.


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! excellent! -- I understand you -- you could not have
obliged me more highly than by letting me into the secret -- ha! ha! ha! -- If
I don't mortify him --


Miss Cle. Away then, and send him up -- but not the least hint of what we are
about.


L. Pro. No, not for the world.


Exit. L. Fan. And when that is over, my good brother, I shall take you to task
in a manner you little suspect. I think my plans are pretty well laid now, and
can hardly fail of success -- This confiding in him, lulls him to perfect
security.


Miss Cle. Well, what am I to do?


L. Fan. Retire to your brother, but place yourselves within hearing, and when
you think your presence necessary, both second me, and join in the attack --
Stay, take my last orders -- when I have done with Epicene, and begun upon my
brother, do you march off unperceived, and lead up the reinforcements in
regular order.


Miss Cle. Never fear me -- this will be a curious piece of generalship.


L. Fan. Ay, girl; and, if we succeed, we shall deserve statues raising to our
memories -- march.


Miss Cle. Row, dow! dow! dow! row! dow!


Exit. marching. L. Fan. Bravo! -- mum! --


Enter EPICENE. Epi. Dear Lady Fanny, this is so great an honor --


L. Fan. And, I am afraid, so unwish'd for --


Epi. Wrong not your own charms so far as to imagine I wish not to devote my
whole life to their contemplation.


L. Fan. But it must be at a distance though, I find -- Come, come, Mr. Epicene,
it is in vain to disguise my unhappy fate, though your politeness won'd gloss it
over -- be ingenuous, and confess you have not a heart to bestow.


Epi. Alas, Lady Fanny, our affections are not to be commanded -- if they were,
I swear by all that is beautiful, I know not a more deserving object.


L. Fan. O feeble, weak attractions! -- they cannot hold in chains the only man
I ever wished to conquer!


Epi. Upon my soul, this is very distressing!


L. Fan. Yet, who can behold that assemblage of every thing noble and manly,
without pitying, rather than condemning the violence of my unreturn'd affection!


Epi. Far gone, by all that is affecting! -- And yet what a proper sense she
entertains of my merit!

(aside)
L. Fan. Not a word to give me hopes! -- Sure if I lay aside the native modefty
of my sex, the object before me will sufficiently justify me to the world --
You must, nay, you shall comply.


Epi. Egad, if I don't take care, she may go greater lengths than I desire --
(aside) -- Believe me, Lady Fanny, an unlucky accident has rendered it utterly
impossible for me to do you the justice you deserve -- notwithstanding I love,
nay, adore you more than any of your sex. --

[During this speech Miss Clement steals softly in, and at the end takes one of
his hands, Lady Fanny the other.]
Miss Cle. Except me, Mr. Epicene!


Epi. Confusion! -- what will become of me!


Miss Cle. Why does my love turn away? -- What woman's this, who seems to take
an interest in you?


L. Fan. One, Madam, that has a prior claim to you, and is resolved to assert
it.


Miss Cle. Indeed! -- this is some artifice -- I see through the weak device, and
will soon defeat it -- brother!


Enter CLEMENT. Epi. The brother! -- this is too much!


Cle. Mr. Epicene, I am very glad to see you.


Epi. I wish with all my heart I could return the compliment.


Cle. I am come rather sooner than I at first intended; but when I considered
the violence of your passion for my sister, I could no longer retard your
happiness.


Epi. You are too good! -- too good, upon my soul!


Cle. Well, Sir, shall the ceremony be immediately per^orm'd?


Epi. If the ceremony at tyburn was performed, I should have a happy riddance
from my plagues!


L. Fan. I know not what right, Sir, you, or that lady has to my husband.


Cle. Your husband! -- How, Sir, are you married to that lady?


Epi. No, Sir -- not that I know of.


Cle. Oh, well -- are you ready and willing to marry my sister?

[laying his hand on his sword]
Epi. Very ready, Sir -- but cursedly unwilling!

(aside)
L. Fan. Nay, then, I must have recourse to other means -- O brother! brother!
come and right an injured sister!


Enter Lord PROMISE. L. Pro. My sister! why do you call in this alarming manner?


L. Fan. I Am wronged, basely wronged, and have not the least hopes of redress,
except from you.


Epi. For the love of charity, Promi^e, come and right me -- it is I have most
need of it.


L. Pro. What Is the reason of this confusion? -- Who are you, Sir?


Cle. Carlino Bentivolio -- brother to this lady.


Epi. Ay, George, this is the damned fierce Italian who bully'd me so today --
I wished for you then.


L. Pro. Well, sister -- to you --


L. Fan. I claim my contract.


L. Pro. You are determined to urge your claim?


L. Fan. I am.


L. Pro. Lookee, Epicene, I profess myself your friend --


Epi. A thousand thanks, my dear boy?


L. Pro. And as a proof of my friendship, I will this instant --


Epi. What? what?


L. Pro. Sacrifice you, unless you do my sister justice.

(draws)
Epi. Oh, mercy on me!


L. Pro. This moment agree to marry her, or immediate death's your portion.


Epi. I will -- I will!


Cle. -- (drawing) -- How, Sir? have not you promised this lady that
satisfaction?


Epi. Yes, I have -- I am distracted between them! Really, gentlemen, I am but
a man, if you expect to find me more, you will be devilishly mistaken -- If I can
oblige the ladies, I will -- only determine between yourselves whether I must
marry one or both of them, and I shall obey you.


Cle. I see you are almost below my notice.


Epi. I wish I was entirely so.


L. Pro. I find I must be an umpire in this affair -- Come, Epicene, if you
wish to be delivered from your thraldom, you must make some humiliating
concessions.


Epi. Heaven knows, any thing that is in my power, I will.


L. Pro. In the first place, you must ask pardon of these ladies, and, through
them, of the whole sex, for the cold unanimated, unworthy ideas, you always
entertain's of those masterpieces of nature.


Epi. I do.


L. Pro. Next, you must acknowledge you have not courage enough to attempt, nor
sense sufficient to prize, the least of their favors.


Epi. I acknowledge.


L. Pro. You must now say after me --


Epi. Well!


L. Pro. (Epicene repeating after him) I confess, that a Macaroni is the most
insignificant -- insipid -- useless -- contemptible being -- in the whole
creation -- Very well, you are docile, I find -- Lastly, you must entirely quit
the appearance of such a despicable species, and endeavor to assume the Man.


Epi. That Is hard, nay, I am afraid impossible -- You may as well bid me shake
off my existence.


L. Pro. For shame! -- Think who you sprung from, a race of hardy, virtuous,
conquering Britons, and blush at your own degenerate exotic effeminancy -- But
I have done, and be assured, my sole motive was to set you up a glass, wherein
you might behold a faithful image -- As to my sister, I can prevail on her to
resign her right in you -- here, exchange bonds, and never presume to trouble
her more.


[They exchange papers] Epi. If I do, may the combined plagues of Egypt be my
portion!


L. Pro. It now only remains to satisfy that lady.


Miss Cle. Which will be easily done, my Lord, here, Sir, is your contract, nor
should any consideration unite me to so reprehensible a character.


[Gives him the paper] L. Pro. L. Fan. Cle. Ha! ha! ha!


Epi. Strike me to the antipodes, Madam, if I am not heartily obliged to you!


L. Pro. Ha! ha! ha! -- Come, it is time to drop the mask -- Sister, I wish you
joy of your deliverance! If I divine aright, you can now bestow your hand upon
a more worthy object -- Clement, take her, take what that foolish puppy had not
understanding enough to value.


L. Fan. You are very obliging, brother -- and since it is so, I own he has
deserved me -- Here, accept my hand; but, have a care, if you repent, I shall
not so easily forego my claim as I did to that gentleman.


Cle. When I do, may I, like him, be the deserving object of ridicule!


Epi. I am thunderstruck! -- what is all this? -- is not your name Carlino
Bentivolio?


Cle. No, Sir, my name's Clement, at your service -- Ha! ha! ha!


L. Pro. L. Fan. Mis Cle. Ha! ha! ha!


Epi. Nor yours, Madam Julia Bentivolio?


Miss Cle. Lucy Clement, if you please, Sir -- Ha! ha! ha!


Epi. I perceive I have been most egregiously bubbled here! -- Ladies and
Gentlemen, you have been highly diverted at my expense -- I own I deserve it,
and begin to see my folly -- As a proof, give me leave to withdraw for the
present, and get perfect in the catechism you was pleased to teach me.


L. Fan. Stay, Mr. Epicene -- after your confession, it would be ungenerous to
torment you farther -- What a great pity it is my brother cannot be made as
sensible of his errors, and reform too.


Miss Clement goes out. L. Pro. Pray, my good sister, what errors would your
great wisdom correct?


L. Fan. Only a few trisling ones, brother -- such as that humane delight you
take in suducing the innocent and unwary of our sex, and those harmless
consequences generally attending --


L. Pro. Stop, child, this is no time for such lectures.


L. Fan. The best time in the world, brother, our auditors are friends, and
they, I am sure, will excuse my inability.


Epi. Ay, ay, Madam, go on -- he never spared me.


L. Fan. In short, your licentiousness is grown to such a pitch, that unless
providence, out of its great goodness, timely interposes and awakens in you a
sense of your guilt, you must tremble at its just punishments.


L. Pro. Pshaw! stuff! -- have done with this sermonizing.


L. Fan. Patience, brother, I am only beginning.


Epi. Bravo! Lady Fanny! -- to him, he begins to flinch already.


L. Fan. But as example enforces precept, give me leave to illustrate my
argument.


[Goes to the side, and returns with Miss Spence] L. Pro. What can she mean?


L. Fan. Behold, here is one of the many objects whom you have wantonly plunged
into endless misery.


L. Pro. Miss Spence! then I am betrayed, and all is over.


L. Fan. What, confused! -- cheer up, here are more friends -- Enter the two
Miss LAMBTONS. These are the two ladies you entrusted to my care -- you see I
can give a very good account of them -- they are come to return you thanks for
your friendly invitation up to town -- you may expect the father soon on the
same errand.


Epi. Ha! ha! ha! -- I believe it is my turn to catechize now -- Come, ask
pardon of these ladies, and of the whole sex, for the loose, profligate ideas
you always entertained of their virtue.


L. Pro. Epicene, you grow troublesome.


Epi. Ha! ha! ha! -- Nay, Promise -- [pulling him by the sleeve] -- you was
always an apt scholar -- say after me -- I confess -- that a libertine -- is
the most wicked -- dangerous -- remorseless -- lawless -- abandoned being -- in
the whole creation.


L. Fan. What, brother -- not a word?


L. Pro. Yes, sister, many -- it is past -- the struggle's over, and I will give
way to conscience -- That I have been a professed libertine I own -- before you
all I own it, but'tis with the sincerest regret -- To atone for past mischiefs
is impossible -- a patriarchal life would be too short -- I have followed an
ignis fatuus, and am bewildered in inextricable paths of error -- too late the
delusion vanished -- not even an herculean arm can save me now from sinking.


L. Fan. Courage, brother -- we must not presume to set bounds to infinite
mercy.


L. Pro. Of you, ladies, who happily fell not in my snares, I entreat
forgiveness -- I beseech you pardon each offense against you and virtue -- To
Miss Spence, it is not in my power to make atonement in any measure adequate to
the wrongs I have done her -- What can, shall be done -- I know her
circumstances, and she may depend upon being provided for in such a manner, as,
for the future, to set her above temptation.


Cle. Why, Promise, this is noble -- these are genuine fruits of reformation.


L. Fan. -- (Temple and Wilville entering) Now, gentlemen, you may appear, and
I hope all animosity between you will be no more remembered.


L. Pro. More witnesses of my shame! -- they are welcome -- I designed,
gentlemen, to have injured you in the tenderest point, but heaven
providentially interposed, and turned, what I intended as the blackest crime,
into the means of future blessings.


Will. Mention it not, my Lord -- the original generous, though misled heart, when
awaked from its lethargy of vice, oft-times arises more bright and active from
its late obscurity.


Mr. Lamb. -- (entering) Where are my children? give me room -- I must -- I
will embrace them! -- do I once more fold you in my arms! -- no force or fraud
shall ever separate us more!


L. Pro. You need not fear it, Sir -- I, who alone was author of your ills,
shall study to make your life to come one series of continued happiness -- Thou
good old man, can thou forgive the wrongs I Have done thee?


Mr. Lamb. My Lord, I should ill deserve the name you honor me with, if I
could not only forgive, but bless, the worst of enemies, even as I hope myself
to be forgiven -- and may that power who delights in acts of mercy, further
every good and noble thought!


Epi. May I forfeit all pretensions to reformation, if the old gentleman's
benignity will not make me, unfashionable as it may appear, visit the inside of a
church oftener than I have done.


Mr. Lamb. -- (to Temple and Wilville) -- Gentlemen, I am happy in seeing you
here so unexpectedly -- to what fortunate accident do I owe this pleasure?


Tem. To the desire alone, Sir, of serving you and these ladies -- and lucky as
we are in meeting with you, give us leave to hope we may participate in the
general joy.


Mr. Lamb. If it is in my power you may be assured of it.


Tem. We both have loved your daughters some time -- you must have observed the
particularity of our behavior, as we wished not to conceal it -- our families
and fortunes are well known to you -- since we came hither, they have owned we
were not indifferent to them -- perhaps a father's authority might --


Mr. Lamb. No, Gentlemen, my children shall never be commanded into marriage --
it is my duty to advise, but not compel them.


L. Fan. No great compulsion, I Will answer, Mr. Lambton -- they would cry their eyes
out to be refused.


Mr. Lamb. What say you, girls?


Mar. I own, Sir, Mr. Wilville's good qualities have made an impression on me
never to be erased, and, authorized by you, I will readily give my hand where
my heart is irrevocably engaged.


L. Fan. That Is a good girl -- Come, Miss Lambton, don't let your younger
sister outdo you.


Miss Lamb. The dread that my past behavior is inexcusable, has hitherto kept
me silent -- I am conscious of its impropriety, and have nothing to offer in
defense, but my simplicity and ignorance of the world.


Tem. You cannot offer a better plea to the thinking heart.


Mr. Lamb. Well, gentlemen, if you can descend to match with girls whose virtue
is all their portion --


Will. Name it not, Sir -- As the beginning of our love was disinterested, so
shall be the completion -- They want no addition of fortune, and are in
themselves treasures beyond what imperial greatness could bestow.


L. Pro. Nobly spoken -- and now, Mr. Lambton, give me leave to make such a
provision for you, as shall testify a proper sense of my past conduct, and in
which I am certain my father on his return will readily concur.


Epi. How devilish generous this love and honor makes people.


Mr. Lamb. But yet I miss a faithful servant, who ought to share his master's
joy.


L. Pro. He well deserves it -- be it my business to reward him, and for ever
discard those minions of vice, who too long have preyed upon me.


L. Fan. Now, brother, you have with a truly noble Spirit acknowledged every
failing you have been charged with -- can you have constancy to persevere?


L. Pro. I think so


L. Fan. Nay, I have a severe trial yet to come -- a fiery ordeal -- but you
must endure it before you can be perfect.


L. Pro. That I can never be -- but in the name of wonder, what new mystery
have you yet to unravel?


L. Fan. Turn your eyes this way, and view the man who once was proud to call
you friend.


Enter Major STANDFIELD. L. Pro. Major Standfield! -- it is too much! -- I
cannot, dare not stand his presence.


L. Fan. You can, and must, brother -- he is not come to hurt your mind with
keen reproaches, but rather to pour the healing balm of peace into the
corroding wounds of vice, which long have rankled in your breast.


L. Pro. No, no, it cannot be -- I do not hope forgiveness -- Major, I bare my
breast -- there is no way but this to expiate guilt like mine.


Maj. There is, my Lord, a nobler way -- a way which earth and heaven must both
approve -- prepare yourself for more wonder.

[Goes out, and returns with his daughter leading her little boy]
L. Pro. O, all ye powers! what is it I behold? -- Can it be real, or is it the
phantom of my Eugenia, risen from the dead, to set my crimes in full array
before me? -- I must, I will embrace it! -- Ha! it sinks! -- help to support
her -- look down ye bright celestial inhabitants of glory, and restore this
injured saint to life!


Miss Stand. -- (recovering) -- Oh, my Lord, these wild effusions of a heart
overpowered with love and tenderness speak well the unrestrained dictates of
its owner -- but I must curb its transports -- Look here, another object
demands your fondest care.


L. Pro. Can it be possible such happiness is in store for me! am I father too?


Maj. You are, my Lord, if you will own the obligation.


L. Pro. Own it! ay, prouder of that title than to be hailed an Indian monarch!
-- My cherub! my little cherub! receive a father's first embraces! -- Now, my
Eugenia, we are met, never to be separated more.


Miss Stand. Hear me, my Lord -- That I have loved you, nay, that I shall
continue to do so while life keeps her seat, is the only excuse I can offer for
my frailty -- I have hitherto obeyed my father's will, permit me now to follow
the dictates of my own -- Had I my innocence, and was mistress of the untold
treasures of the east -- all that the sun surveys in his diurnal round, you
should be master of it -- but covered with infamy as I am, though you could raise
me to the utmost pinnacle where star-crown'd virtue ought to sit -- a conscious
pride would forbid the exaltation.


Epi. Zounds! a charming girl! what a pity it is she should be lost to the world.


L. Pro. Is then my dream of bliss destroyed? -- my newfound blessing, turn
that way, and intercede with your inexorable mother -- tell her my peace here
and hereafter depends upon her receiving my penitential vows.


Miss Stand. My Lord, the honey-dropping tongue of seraphic eloquence cannot
move me to change my purpose -- I have now attained my utmost wishes, to see
you thoroughly sensible of your failings, and would fain retire to that
peaceful cottage which this event has drawn me from, there, with my little
roselipp'd comforter, pass my future hours in undisturbed solitude.


L. Fan. Press her no farther, brother -- leave it to time -- when she is
sufficiently assured of your steady perseverance in the paths of rectitude, the
love she acknowledges for you may probably induce her at last to reward your
constancy.


Mr. Lamb. Now, Lady Fanny, with your leave, we'll retire and celebrate the
surprising events of this happy day, events which must fully manifest to every
boholder, that however virtue may for a time be oppressed and held in durance,
yet is it always the peculiar, and never-deserted favorite, of rewarding
Providence.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Written by a FRIEND,
And spoke by Mr. CRESSWICK, in the Character of the MACARONI. It matters not,
good solks, say what you will,
Approve, or disapprove our author's skill,
It Is sure there must be Macaronies still.
For phantom-fashion leads us by the nose,
And makes us die for every whim she shows.
A coat, a club, a feather, will engage
A genius of the Bon Ton for an age;
Like Newton's system, bear the inventor's name,
And rank him higher in the lists of fame.
In English garb, we know, plain common-sense
To modish understanding gives offense;
And modest merit, if perchance one meets,
How awkward creeps the stranger through, the streets!
Whilst fan-tail'd folly, with Parisian air,
Commands that homage sense alone should share,
The world's so macaronied grown of late,
That common mortals now are out of date;
No single class of men this merit claim,
Or high, or low, in faith it is all the same;
For see the Doctor, who, with sapient, wig,
Gold cane, grave phiz, ere while looked more than big,
With France's foretop decorates his face,
Prescribes and dresses with macaronied grace;
Then swears he hates all formal stuff,
For gravity in practice is a puff.
The Soldier, once that hardy son of arms,
Whose soul was roused, was fired with war's alarms,
Forgets the eminence on which he stood,
Whenever his country called, how boiled his blood!
Resigns the glory his forefathers won,
And lives Britannia's alienated son.
Still lower let us fall for once, and pop
Our heads into a moders Barber's shop;
What the result? or what behold we there?
A set of Macaronies weaving hair.
Such general folly your attention claims,
And satire here at reformation aims;
On me this night exerts its utmost sskill,
Corrects, reforms, and moulds me to its will.
Ye gentle fair, would but such triflers view
(...) pretty s^lves, much more in you;
Would they to sense and virtue bend the knee,
Leave to its native soil all foppery,
Nature would cease to weep -- The godlike plan
Would elevate, in time, un-monkey man,
With hospitable smiles old british truth
Would warm your beauty, and adorn our youth.


