CUPID's REVENGE: AN ARCADIAN PASTORAL.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, HAY-MARKET.

THE MUSIC BY MR. HOOK.

LONDON: Printed for J. BELL, near Exeter-Change, in the Strand. M,DCC,LXXII.

From VENERATION Of an INNATE GOOD HEART, Ornamented with POLISHED LIBERALITY
of MIND, The AUTHOR of this LITTLE PIECE, Most Respectfully Inscribes it TO THE
HON. ARTHUR DUFF, ESQUIRE. Of ROTHMAY, NORTH-BRITAIN.

London, July 1772.
ADVERTISEMENT.
In the hurry of printing, some few verbal variations from the prompt-book have
been made, but none material.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Sir GREGORY GREYBEARD, Mr. PARSONS. AMARANTHUS, Mr. ROBSON. DORILAS, Mr.
FEARON. CUPID, Master -- NINNY, Mr. WESTON.
WOMEN.
TULIPPA, Mrs. JEWEL. HYEMA, Mrs. PARSONS. CULINA, Mrs. WHITE. FRISKETTA, M.
WENTWORTH.
SCENE, ARCADIA. CUPID'S REVENGE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Rural SCENE. CUPID discovered asleep on a flowery bank. Enter AMARANTHUS. HOW
anxious are the creeping hours till fair Tulippa's mine; yet let me not
complain since her kind, though delicate reception of my vows, raises me above a
monarch's fortune -- My artless muse having tacked together some feeble rhimes,
expressive of my heart, I'^ hang them on this friendly bough [Hangs up a
paper.] where they may speak more plainly to her sight, than my diffident,
unpractic'd tongue can to her ear.

SONG.
To those who never tasted love,
How simple seem our pains;
Yet even Philosophy may prove
The force of Cupid's chains.
I hug their weight, and smile to think
The stubborn stoic's heart,
May soon, like mine, sweet poison drink,
From Cupid's golden dart.
[Exit.


CUPID advances. Not even slumber's leaden mace can remove from my distracted
mind, the severe treatment of scornful, cruel Psyche; -- shall I, who dispense
love or hate upon the points of leaden or golden darts, be made her sport?
Shall rural nymphs and swains enjoy a happiness unknown to Cupid? It must not
be; -- no! I Will exert myself to work confusion amongst them.

SONG.
My power shall produce such a jumble
Of love, misapplied and absurd,
The aged and youthful shall grumble,
While jealousy reigns in each word.
Threescore quite enamored of twenty,
For beauty shall make a sad moan,
While the young having quarrels in plenty,
Their likings their wishes disown.
Thus mischief shall soften our sorrow,
By others my pangs I Will relieve,
We all may be happy tomorrow,
Nor have more occasion to grieve.


This paper opportunely I have found,
With this at first resentment shall be crowned.
To breed contention 'twixt this pair.
And fill their hearts with mutual care,
Vanish hence Tulippa's name, [Strikes the paper.
Let Verna's take its place -- whom fame
Pronounces fairest of the plain;
Hence shall the Nymph suspect her swain,
And treat his tenderest vows with rough disdain.
Exit.
Enter TULIPPA. How pleasingly those spray-perch'd warblers chaunt throughout
the grove; how sweetly rising flowrets scent the vernal Air, these few selected
with a careful hand, and pearl'd with honey'd dew, shall adorn the faithful
bosom of my Amaranthus. -- Where can he be wandering? Time stands still when he
is absent, but imps his wings with double speed, when the dear object of my
doting eyes is near.

SONG.
Gentle child of smiling spring,
Blooming fragrant nosegay haste,
Let affection lend a wing,
Bearing to my lover's breast:
There a soft reception find,
From his gentle generous mind.
[Sees the paper.

What Is here -- one of love's packets -- The explanation of some timorous swain
or bashful maid who, fearing speech, has given thought to paper. -- Ha! the
character of Amaranthus; quick let my eager sight devour the sweet contents.
[Takes down the paper and reads.] What do I read? Love's warmest effusion
poured forth to Verna -- The milky softness leaves my breast, and gall of
jealousy flows in -- Ah, foolish eyes, indulge not idle tears! -- Ah, simple
heart, thy fruitless throbbing cease -- it will not be; how nature's beauties
wither in my sight, false, false Amaranthus!

But see he comes, perhaps to meet with Verna -- his new mistress -- If so --
long as I can bear, behind this arbor, I Will see the painful interview.

[Retires.
Re-enter AMARANTHUS. To search so long, and not to find her.


TULIPPA. Oh, Sir, your new fangled passion's impatient.


AMARANTHUS. The paper gone! Sure it has reached the beauteous hand I wish.


TULIPPA. Perhaps not.


AMARANTHUS. Having conveyed this faint, but honest picture of my heart --


TULIPPA. And a pretty one it is, truly.


AMARANTHUS. I shall henceforth be able to address her with more confidence.


TULIPPA. Confidence enough, no doubt. -- I must indulge my swelling spleen,
and show myself. -- So thoughtful, swain.


AMARANTHUS. Ha! my Tulippa here!


TULIPPA. Your Tulippa!


AMARANTHUS. Yes! my Tulippa, that is to be -- I hope.


TULIPPA. Flattering hope, like flattering swains, carries much deceit with it.


AMARANTHUS. What agitates my lovely fair? Why swim her eyes with tears? Why
flies the bloom from off those cheeks, where dimpled beauty always fits.


TULIPPA. Because my heart so much detests falsehood, that even my features
must speak truth.


AMARANTHUS. You speak in riddles, and cloud me with astonishment.


TULIPPA. Haste from these honest plains, to cities haste, where double-fac'd
hypocrisy is found in every class; where virtue and constancy are laughed out
of countenance, and love is nothing but a name.


AMARANTHUS. These plains indeed I Will fly, if my Tulippa proves unkind; but why
should I be exiled from that rural simplicity, and all my soul admires.


TULIPPA. False swain, think on the bitter fruit I plucked from yonder bough,
and repeat that question if you can.


AMARANTHUS. Fruit! if the produce of my poor brain deserves that name, I hope,
though it cannot boast the richness of genius, it may claim the flavor of
sincerity.


TULIPPA. Sincerity! -- Verna! --


AMARANTHUS. What of her! -- Verna! -- I know she is esteemed fair, but --


TULIPPA. I know thee false, without a but -- so traitor, farewell forever.

SONG.
Forever farewell,
Love hears its own knell,
Your falsehood has tolled it aloud;
Yet why should I grieve,
At what may relieve,
To be free from a traitor I Am proud.
[Exit.


AMARANTHUS. Falsehood! Traitor! Verna! What a game of confusion! what cross
purposes -- That falsehood which, I suppose, has waver'd her own heart, she
would artfully charge upon mine.

SONG.
That women will change, I Have been told,
But never experienced before;
What glitters is not always gold,
I Have loved but I Will do so no more.
Tulippa has met with some swain,
Of carriage more pleasing than me;
To lose her must furnish some pain,
Yet, perhaps, it is as well I am free.



Enter HYEMA. A fine young fellow, I protest -- and wonderfully good, they say
-- How active and firm he treads -- Such a husband would be charmingly
comfortable to a person of my years and circumstances -- But I suppose he is for
some flirting young minx -- Who knows, all youth are not fools, and properly
talked to, he may comply; -- I Will try however, for as they say, "a faint heart
never won a fair lady," so a bashful face can never gain a brisk husband. --
Fair smile the spring upon you, master Amaranthus.


AMARANTHUS. Good morrow, mother.


HYEMA. Mother! Nay, young swain, though daylight and I have been long
acquainted, not long enough for that, neither; but you are a handsome, sensible
young man, and should have all imaginable liberty -- I protest I speak as I
think -- I need not tell you, that Autumn is a much richer and kindlier season
than spring.


AMARANTHUS. It may be so.


HYEMA. May be! it so, I have passed the flirting, and am just entering into
the sober, sensible time of life. -- Do you never think of matrimony, master
Amaranthus.


AMARANTHUS. Truly, I have thought of it till I began to fear entering upon so
dangerous a connection.


HYEMA. Very true, it is a dangerous state, indeed, but not with a prudent
partner. -- Lack-a-day, you seem mighty uneasy -- a good wife would certainly
comfort you -- methinks you and I would make a very happy couple.


AMARANTHUS. How, match with you!


HYEMA. Me! why not, shepherd -- You Will be safe from any dishonor to your
family; my virtue will guard against that -- Then I Will be as loving and
constant as a turtle dove.


AMARANTHUS. Ay, stick like a blister, no doubt.


HYEMA. Then I Will be as merry as a Jay, and make life one entire holiday --
Difference of a few years is an idle, a very idle distinction.


AMARANTHUS. How this beldam increases my perplexity.


SONG.
HYEMA. You might marry a girl in the bloom of her youth,
Not more frolic and frisky than I;
And then for my person, I think it, forsooth,
Not unworthy a young shepherd's eye.
Allow me the hearing to tell a plain truth,
Though not quite so young, I have got a colt's tooth.
Those who boast of the roses which bloom in each cheek,
And skin often liken'd to snow,
In virtue and housewifery often are to seek,
A terrible matter you know.
Then object not to years, you may trust me insooth,
No female ever dies without a colt's tooth.




AMARANTHUS. Sure nothing can be more painful, especially in my state of mind,
than a forward, fulsome, amorous old woman.


HYEMA. Well, young swain, and what say you? Good offers don't come often; when
they do, to refuse them is standing in one's own light. -- Sir Gregory
Greybeard, examiner and licencer of marriages for this district, sits today, so
we may be settled for life -- and I love to follow that excellent maxim,
"strike while the Iron is hot."


AMARANTHUS. Well, Well, give me half an hour to think, and you shall have my
determination.

SONG.
Revenge and despair may inspire my heart,
With feelings unknown, till this hour;
Since beauty and youth have played the false part,
Kind age may with reason have power.
[Exit.


HYEMA. So far so good -- Well, I vow he is a sweet creature -- ay, and sensible
too -- When I have him all to myself, the gilflirts of the plain will so envy
me -- But I must stick close, fools only are mealy-mouthed.

[Exit.
Enter NINNY, followed by CULINA. NINNY. I will sing for all you, and all day
too, if I like.

SONG, burlesque.
When all the antic fire was dead,
And all the Romish virtue fled,
Poor freedom lost her feet;
The goatish mantle spread a light.
Which damned fair Virtue's fading night,
The muses lost a sheet.



CULINA. Ay, ay, you make a noise like a false fellow, as you are, to stop my
mouth; but if you call it singing, screech-owls shall turn teachers of music,
and ravens vocal performers.


NINNY. My bad singing, is better than your loud scolding.


CULINA. Have I not reason?


NINNY. Nimble tongues find ready excuse for wagging.


CULINA. And fickle hearts prove false without any excuse at all -- did not you
promise to marry me, varlet?


NINNY. What then? Greater folks than I make promises they never mean to keep
-- Moreover, than that, I loved you then, but I don't now.


CULINA. You don't! And why not, scape-grace?


NINNY. Why! because my mind's changed.


CULINA. Mighty well, fashionable Sir, I suppose, since you have got that
mon'strous fine tail to your crow's-nest hair, your large tossel'd cane, and
that carving knife, to apologize for a sword, at your side, you are setting up
for some flauntier body, than a plain, honest, industrious cook-maid.


NINNY. You have hit it.


CULINA. I have -- then, sirrah, henceforth I banish you the kitchen -- Never
shall your hungry jaws be liquor'd with sops in the pan.


NINNY. If you sop yourself there, Mrs. Culina, I shall not burn my fingers to
take you out.


CULINA. Provoking knave, I have much ado to keep my hands off your ugly face.


NINNY. Ugly face, thank you for that; you would give all the shoes in your shop to
be half so handsome; then, as to fistycuffs, I Am as pretty a bit of flesh as in
all Arcadia, so if I should draw a tooth, or paint an eye, blame yourself.


CULINA. Our master, Sir Gregory, shall know what a knave you are -- If I had
believed all you said, I might have lost all my vartue; but I Will put a spoke in
your wheel -- and since you will not have me, you shall have nobody else.


NINNY. Why, the woman chatters worse than ten couple of magpies in pairing
time, or two score gossips half seas over at a christening -- Are you any thing
the worse of my wear.


CULINA. Sirrah, sirrah, I Would have you to know I can get a better husband than
ever stood on your shanks for holding up a finger; but to be slighted by such a
pitiful sapskull'd fellow -- Sir Gregory, Sir Gregory, sirrah, shall bring you
to your marrow-bones.

[Exit.
NINNY. I Am glad she is gone -- If I had not spoke a little stoutly of tooth
drawing, she would have clawed me. -- I Am not the first brave fellow who has
saved broken bones by big words -- Boh -- and arms a kimbo, have often passed
for courage -- When she talked of the dripping-pan, the basting ladle could not
be far off -- Oh! here comes Mrs. Tulippa, the very sight of her has turned my
heart upside down, like a Shrove-tide pancake, and made it jump, for all the
world, like a new caught squirrel in a bell-cage. -- Shall I speak to her, or
do the business with ogling -- both's best, I believe -- ut IN l listen to find
what humor she is in.


Enter TULIPPA. SONG.
TULIPPA. To every passing gale I Will tell,
To every murmuring stream relate,
The fickle swain I loved so well,
Has left me for another mate.
Not so when doves in friendship pair,
Do they a tender trust deceive?
Of love they grant a mutual share,
And only for each other live.




NINNY. A fine day, fair mistress.


TULIPPA. Agreeable enough to those who can enjoy it.


NINNY. But I believe there is going to be a change, for last night the man in
the moon had got his beard on -- Old Mother Grazy complained of the rheumatice,
our cat washed her face over the left ear, and I have a corn that shoots like
any thing.


TULIPPA. Heigho!


NINNY. Nay, you need not be sorry for the corn -- I have a worser pain than
that.


TULIPPA. It may be so.


NINNY. Ay, a pain in the heart.


TULIPPA. If so, indeed I pity you.


NINNY. Then you know what makes it.


TULIPPA. Not I, indeed.


NINNY. But you can guess.


TULIPPA. No, truly.


NINNY. Was you -- cannot you see something in in my eyes -- was you ever in
love, Mrs. Tulippa?


TULIPPA. Why do you ask?


NINNY. Because, because I want to know what it feels like.


TULIPPA. That you had better never know.


NINNY. Ay, but what if I know against my will? I dreamed such a dream last
night about bride-cake drawn through a gold ring, throwing the stocking, whip
sullabbubs, sweethearts, and pin-cushions, that I thinks, as how, I am in love
with you.


TULIPPA. Have you any other reason to think so?


NINNY. Oh, yes, for my eyes have glisten'd ever fince I saw you, like dry
whitings in a dark night; and when you turned the corner just now, my heart
began to dance a horn-pipe without music.


TULIPPA. Yonder I see Amaranthus coming -- Listening to, and giving this
simpleton encouragement, will at least show how light he is in my esteem, and
if he has any spirit, mortify him.


NINNY. May I hope.


Enter AMARANTHUS. [ Aside.] TULIPPA. Did you ever make love to any body before?


AMARANTHUS. What, this wretch her gallant.


NINNY. Oh, yes, to one -- but lack-a-day, she is no more to be compared to
you, than a cowslip to a cabbage, or a pancake to a plumb-pudding.


TULIPPA. If I was sure you did not flatter --


AMARANTHUS. This is too much to bear.


NINNY. Flatter! no, no, I Am not scholar enough for that.


TULIPPA. Then here is my hand.


NINNY. You have made my heart as light as a merry duckling in a fish pond.


TULIPPA. Oh, Mr. Amaranthus, you are luckily come to witness our bargain.


AMARANTHUS. Mrs. Tulippa, any bargain you think proper to make, I shall
readily agree to.


TULIPPA. No doubt -- you are a most condescending creature.


NINNY. Very good-natured and descending, indeed, Mr. Amaranthus.


AMARANTHUS. I find no great pleasure in the praise of a fool.


TULIPPA. Oh, sweet Sir, an honest fool is much better than a sensible knave.


NINNY. If so be I am a fool, my family is very old and numerous, with many
near relations among people of fashion.


AMARANTHUS. I hope when this charming match takes place, you will now and then
lend that gingling cap to your lady, it will add much to her charms.


TULIPPA. Wonderfully smart.


NINNY. She Is handsome enough without -- but now you talk of that, master
Amaranthus, if every fool was to wear such a cap, would not it cause rare trade
for bellmakers -- I cannot help laughing to think how many great folks, who
seldom say more than aye, or no, would then make a very considerable noise --
How many pulpits would then ring almost as loud as the church steeple, and how
many physicians would toll the knell of those patients they had killed.


Enter HYEMA. HYEMA. So, so, I have overtaken you at last; its almost Sir
Gregory's sitting time, and I would not miss the day for any thing, because it
would delay us a whole month.


AMARANTHUS. Well, I am ready to attend you there; I have now no further
occasion for liberty; marriage and the grave are equally indifferent.


HYEMA. The grave! good lack, I would not think of such a place for ever so
much -- I Will soon put better thoughts in your head young swain.


TULIPPA. And is that the Lady of your choice?


AMARANTHUS. Prudent age is better than deceitful youth.


NINNY. Master Amaranthus, shall I lend you my cap, or get a new one made for
you?


QUARTETTO.
AMA. I care not how mad or how foolish I seem,
Life henceforth to me shall be only a dream.

TUL. With resentment to urge let me rush on my fate,
A false one I found him, but found it too late.

HY. I Will make a fond wife,

NIN. I Will love you for life.

ALL. Then away to Sir Greg's, to Sir Greg's let us haste,
The time for revenge it too precious to waste.
The time for our passion's too precious to waste.

[HYEMA and NINNY sing the last line.]


End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, Sir GREGORY GREYBEARD'S House. Enter Sir GREGORY and REGISTER. Sir
GREGORY. HOW goes the day, Register?


REGISTER. Both sun and clocks agree, that it approaches the mid hour, Sir.


Sir GREGORY. Register, though you have been my clerk some time, yet I don't
recollect ever telling you how I came to the dignity of marriage-licencer for
this district.


REGISTER. Your Worship never did.


Sir GREGORY. Because I traveled much -- not like many modern travelers to go
out a fool, and return a coxcomb -- not to discover useless countries, or pick
up unintelligible curiosities, but to study mankind east, west, north, and
south.


REGISTER. Then no doubt your Worship has seen wonderful strange things.


Sir GREGORY. Ay, strange enough -- in France I found light hearts with empty
pockets -- in Italy much religion, with little morality -- in Spain indolent
pride, with wretched poverty -- in Germany great courage, small sobriety -- and
in Holland strict economy, with pitiful spirit -- but of all places, Great
Britain produces the most singular and extensive variety.


REGISTER. And what may that be, your Worship?


Sir GREGORY. Why a wonderful mixture of good sense and folly; industry, and
extravagance; discontent and negligence; place-hunting and patriotism; elegance
and frippery; plenty and want; selfishness and humanity.


REGISTER. Surprising mixtures in truth, Sir Gregory.


Sir GREGORY. And then, Register, they have a favorite amongst them, called
fashion, almost as changeable as their climate -- One month their men stride
forth with such closs trimmed skirts, that they resemble so many curlews, all
legs and no bodies; the next they are so lengthened, that petit maitres waddle
forth like ducks, all bodies and no legs.


REGISTER. At that rate, Sir Gregory, one cannot be sure of knowing an
acquaintance three months together -- Do they marry there?


Sir GREGORY. Yes, yes, they have the word, marriage, and a ceremony amongst
them; but mutual inclination is seldom consulted -- This makes a place, they
call Doctors Commons, thrive vastly.


REGISTER. And what do they do there, Sir?


Sir GREGORY. Divorce -- that is, unmarry those couples who are tired of one
another.


REGISTER. I don't know, your Worship, whether such a shop would not have
pretty business here.


Sir GREGORY. Here! simpleton -- to be sure we have some jarring -- but all
Arcadia would not supply one English proctor with beef and pudding, exclusive
of claret and a carriage -- No, no, we have not quality enough among us for
that.


REGISTER. I see a young shepherdess approaching.


Sir GREGORY. Then I Will proceed to business, which magistrates should never
delay when it can be attended to.

Enter FRISKETTA. Now, fair maid, what have you to propose?


FRISKETTA. Not much, an please your Worship -- Only a young shepherd made love
to me --


Sir GREGORY. And you liked that he should do so -- I could almost make love to
her myself. [Aside.


FRISKETTA. Why, it was pleasant enough among the rest.


Sir GREGORY. What roguish eyes she has! [Aside.] Among the rest! So then you
have had variety of sweet-hearts?


FRISKETTA. As many as most of my neighbors -- Not less than twenty or so.


Sir GREGORY. And I could make one more. [Aside.] But how can you manage so
many?


FRISKETTA. So many! Oh la, your Worship, I could manage as many more.

SONG.
My spirits are good, and my person's not bad,
There Is sweethearts enough for young girls to be had;
I dance and I sing,
I take my full swing,
To mirth and good humor I grant a free scope,
And all my admirers I smile into hope.



Sir GREGORY. That voice; those lips; those eyes; -- in short, the young jade
has scorched me to a cinder! [Aside.] -- Well, but as to the young shepherd you
mentioned -- what of him?


FRISKETTA. So please your Worship, he courted me full three months; and
because, as how, I would not have him, he first threatened to put himself away
with a pistol, then with a rope, then with a razor, and last of all in the
mill-pond: he frightened me, that is for sure, as thinking how his ghost might
haunt me; but all would not do, till he proved first of all my sweethearts that
came into my father's house last May Day morning -- besides, that very self
same night, a snail wrote the first letters of his name on our pantry-wall; so,
your Worship, thinking, as how, he was fated for me, I consented.


Sir GREGORY. And what followed? [Aside.] I hope he likes somebody else hetter.


FRISKETTA. Why, after all was settled, and we were setting out this morning to
ask your Worship's consent, he turned his back upon me.


Sir GREGORY. Ay!


FRISKETTA. True, as your Worship is a wise man -- So I hopes your Worship
will not let him have any body else -- and I Will take care he shall never have me;
-- between ourselves, I valued him no more than an old slipper -- but to be
affronted so! I want to be revenged of his falseness.


Sir GREGORY. And thou shall to thy wish -- I am glad she don't like him.
[Aside.] Ay, ay, let me alone, I Will trim the young rogue, I warrant you -- Give
my clerk the particulars, and he will minute them down -- Upon my word, Sir Greg.
thou have made a fine kettle of fish on it at sixty-three, to fall plump in love
with twenty-three. -- Hark ye, fair maid -- what is your name?


FRISKETTA. Frisketta, Sir.


Sir GREGORY. Frisketta! truly a merry name for a gamesome lass -- What think
you, as there is no dependence on young, could you like a little advance of age?

SONG.
Suppose a man of sixty-three,
But sound of constitution,
Should offer his hand,
For you to command,
Could you make retribution?
If Frisky thinks me not amiss,
Confirm my rapture with a kiss.



FKISKETTA. Oh, dear, your Worship -- sixty-three has a very whimsical sound in
my ears -- and I -- but here comes my false swain.


Sir GREGORY. Well, you little leering rogue, we'll talk more of this matter
presently -- Now, must I show authority; but I hope it will not frighten him.

Enter DORILAS. So, young shepherd, here is a fair maid complains that you are
false to her.


DORILAS. Why, an I be, I cannot help it, your Worship.


FRISKETTA. Lo, you there now, he dare not deny it.


Sir GREGORY. Not help it! why so?


DORILAS. Why so! your Worship does not like one thing always -- Why may not
minds change, as well as the weather? I could not help loving her once, and now
I cannot help loving another.


FRISKETTA. Mighty modest!


Sir GREGORY. Another! who is that?


DORILAS. Tulippa, an like your Worship.


FRISKETTA. Ha, ha, ha, ha!


DORILAS. Ya, ya, ya! and what do you laugh at, Mistress?


FRISKETTA. To think how Amaranthus would baste your bones, if he heard you say
so.


DORILAS. He baste my bones! no, nor your lubberly brother to help him --
whey-face.


FRISKETTA. My lubberly brother -- butter-chops.


DORILAS. I snap my fingers at your tongue, and his fists, though he is so fine,
and thinks himself cock of the game -- I Have escaped your mouse-trap -- so you
may bait it for some other fool.


Sir GREGORY. Have done both -- None of your mouse-traps, sirrah, as you fear my
cane.


FRISKETTA. I Have done, your Worship.


DORILAS. And I too, Sir.


Sir GREGORY. You confess deceiving this shepherdess?


DORILAS. May hap I might.


Sir GREGORY. Might you so! Register put down this Varlet in the list of
batchelors for life.


DORILAS. With all my heart, I can take care of one, so a fig for matrimony.

SONG.
I Am a jolly young lad,
And never quite sad,
It Is a folly to whimper and whine;
My flute shall be
A wife for me,
At my fate I shall never repine
[Exit.


Sir GREGORY. A light-hearted fellow that -- Well, little Frisketta, and where
do you dwell.


FRISKETTA. Your Worship knows the silver current, which purling over
glistening pebbles, winds along the bottom of the vale, and skirts the grove of
poplars: -- upon its flowery bank, beneath their shade, I dwell.


Sir GREGORY. I know the place -- ah, many a time have I fished there for
trouts with burnished scales -- perhaps I may soon angle near it for something
else -- Well, my pretty dear, I Will call to see you, and provide a good husband
some way.


FRISKETTA. I thank your Worship heartily, but I would rather provide one
myself.

[Exit.
Sir GREGORY. Adad, she is as harmonious as a nightingale, as beautiful as a
flower-garden, and luscious as a rich grape ripened by the sun's kindliest
beams -- I must have her -- and to countenance my own o^^ match, I Will give
consent to all who come before me this day, however ill coupled they may be.


Enter AMARANTHUS and HYEMA. HYEMA. An please your Worship, Sir Gregory, this
young shepherd -- I may say this handsome young shepherd, fearing a girlish
marriage, has prudently made choice of me, and we are come to ask your
Worship's approbation.


Sir GREGORY. That shall not be wanting, if you are both agreed -- What says the
young man?


AMARANTHUS. Now stand I on the brink, yet dare not leap in -- What an
extensive gloom hangs over the prospect -- Why, Sir, I must confess I came here
for the purpose she mentions; and as I never was, so I never will be false to
my word, but --

SONG.
One moment allow me to weigh in my mind,
The step I am going to take;
Yet why should I think, since Tulippa's unkind,
My heart will more easily break.



Sir GREGORY. Well, well, you seem an honest lad; step aside with the
good-woman, and settle the matter perfectly.

Enter NINNY and TULIPPA. How, my man Ninny! What are you upon?


NINNY. Why, an like your Worship, this young shepherdess having taken a great
liking to my parts, and I to here is -- We want to make a match -- that is all.


Sir GREGORY. That Is all! Has the fair maid agreed?


TULIPPA. I cannot say, your Worship, but I have -- There was a swain I loved
most dearly, but he proved false -- and once I t hought it would have broke my
heart; now my minds quite changed, and I fully agree to this sweetheart's
proposal.


SONG.
I find it a folly, ^
To nurse melancholy,
Indiff'rence will prove my best plan;
If this one proves right,
'Twill atone for the flight
Of a lovely, a flattering salse man.



HYEMA. We have quite agreed, so please your Worship.


AMARANTHUS. Ha, Tulippa here! so disengaged! so fond! every negligent feature
speaks her falsehood, and confirms the contempt of my resentment -- Yes, Sir
Gregory, I am, I am most thoroughly determined.


Sir GREGORY. It Is well -- But stay till all parties who come are settled, and
then my approbation shall ensue.


TULIPPA. Oh, Mr. Amaranthus, you have for once kept your word.


AMARANTHUS. That Is once more than you would wish to do.


NINNY. So, Aunt Silver-locks, though you have lost all the test, I see the
colt's tooth stands fast yet.


HYEMA. Ah, ungracious, you want no other proof of folly, but your impertinent
tongue.


Sir GREGORY. Come, come, no wrangling in my presence. -- Register, enter these
two ^ouple, paying proper fees, for marriage, and when the day's business is
done, I Will ratify the whole.


Enter CUPID. CUPID. Hey day, old Blunderbuss, what are you about here? joining
winter and summer, frost and fire together -- You are a hopeful judge indeed.


Sir GREGORY. How now, jackanapes, dare you impeach my authority -- a gosling
face an eagle.


CUPID. A buzzard, an owl you mean, that cannot face the light.


Sir GREGORY. Light! I Will light you -- here -- where are my fellows -- secure
that urchin, and give him the correction of an impudent schoolboy.


CUPID. Ay, ay, you may strive, but it is all in vain -- Think not, foolish
mortals, of withstanding the god of Love.


NINNY. What, are you the little great blind boy, that shoots arrows about, and
makes riddles of folks hearts.


CUPID. Yes; but not so great a boy, nor so blind as you.


NINNY. Mayhap not -- your eyes look well enough -- but what then? Though my
grandmother was as blind as a beetle, you might see your face in her dark
peepers -- But, master Cupid, suppose you was to lend me your bow and arrows, I
could knock down half a dozen yellow hammers in a trice -- and that would be
rare sport, I can tell you.


CUPID. My shafts are of more importance and danger than to be trusted in such
hands as yours -- Look not all so amazed, nor wonder that you have been turned
topsyturvy -- Psyche's cruelty forced me to throw this confusion among ye; but
a dispatch by one of my mother Venus's doves having brought me favorable
advices, you shall all come right at last.


SONG.
Love is blamed on each occasion,
For every strange and foolish whim;
Folly often is the persuasion,
Censure her and pardon him.
Be wise if you can, and true happiness catch,
By each seeking out a proportionate match.
[Goes round and touches each character with a golden arrow.]

Say every one what feelings guide ye now,
And at the shrine of true affection bow.

AMARANTHUS. What mists have vanished from my eyes? Methinks Tulippa is more
fair and kind than ever.


TULIPPA. And to my restored senses, Amaranthus appears more engaging, more
constant than ever.


NINNY. For my part I begin to think my kitchen companion fitter for me than
this fair weather nosegay -- So an you please, Sir Greg. I Will have my old
sweetheart again.


Sir GREGORY. What a wonderful change I feel in myself too! all of a sudden I
find that Hyema is more suitable to me, than Frisketta; as the young one has
left you, what say you, old Dame, to me?


HYEMA. Say! why, I say if we cannot get what we would, we must take what we
can; and though I would rather have a husband twenty or thirty years younger, yet
to be Lady Greybeard is something.


Enter DORILAS and FRISKETTA. FRISKETTA. An please your Worship, the strangest
thing -- as Dorilas and I were scolding tooth and nail, and ready to claw one
another, something gave me a flap of the heart, and then gave him a flap of the
heart -- so we made all up, and with your Worship's leave we would --


DORILAS. As the wind's changed into the warm corner, come to a close bargain,
Sir Gregory.


Sir GREGORY. With all my heart; well, I believe by every one's looks matters
are better settled than if we had been left to ourselves -- So by way of merry
example, I Will chaunt a stave of rejoicing, and let those who are pleased follow
me.


SONG.
Sir GREGORY. How nearly had I played the fool.
But now my hasty passion's cool,
Of equal age I take a wife,
And hope, though short, a happy life.

HYEMA. Since you a lady make of me,
I Will prove as kind, as kind can be;
I Will make so soft a loving mate,
That both shall bless the married state.

DORILAS. Frisketta I love,
And I swear it, by Jove,
No female but her shall attract me;
And she, in return,
For no other will burn,
Or should she -- oh! la -- 'twould distract me.

FRISKETTA. Nay, fear not, young swain,
I Will never give you pain,
But lovingly stick to my duty;
Old dad often has said,
With a gray and wise head,
Good conduct is better than beauty.

NINNY. To my cook-maid returning,
For I too am burning,
I Will make her a monst'rous good man;
We'll toy, and we'll kiss,
In return for which bliss,
I shall never want a sop in the pan.

AMARANTHUS. From jealous pangs set free, my mind
Exults to see Tulippa kind;
No discord ever again shall teize,
The care of life will be to please.

TULIPPA. On a precipice of woe,
By resentment placed, I stood;
Hence due confidence I Will show,
Nor seek through life a greater good.

CHORUS. Let each happy couple to Cupid then sing,
Who sways at his pleasure both peasant and king;
And hence let no marriages shamefully prove,
That gold can prevail unassisted by love.




FINIS.
BOOKS published by JOHN BELL.

Two volumes. Price. 6s. GENUINE LETTERS FROM A GENTLEMAN TO A YOUNG LADY HIS
PUPIL. CALCULATED To form the TASTE, regulate the JUDGMENT, and improve the
MORALS. Written some Years since. Now first published with Notes and
Illustrations, BY THOMAS HULL, Of the Theater Royal, Covent Garden.

Price 1s. The TOBACCONIST, A Farce, as it is acting with universal Applause.

Price 1s. 6d. The SULTAN; or, LOVE and FAME. A new Tragedy.

Price 6d. A SERMON IN VERSE, Occasioned by a Disappointment in Love.


