THE RIGHTS OF INFANTS; OR, THE Imprescriptable RIGHT of MOTHERS to such a
Share of the Elements as is sufficient to enable them to suckle and bring up
their Young.

In a DIALOGUE between the ARISTOCRACY and a MOTHER of CHILDREN.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, BY WAY OF PREFACE AND APPENDIX, STRICTURES ON PAINE'S
AGRARIAN JUSTICE.

You must not heed your hunger'd children's cry,
Nor once upon their little sorrows sigh --
In tears their blubbered faces let them sleep,
And howl their hunger and their grief to sleep.
It Is impudence in Babes to cry for bread --
Lol GRANDEUR'S favorite Dogs must first be fed!
PETER PINDAR 's Ode to the Shoemakers. Moloch, horrid fiend, besmeared with
blood
Of human sacrifice, and parent's tears,
Though for the noise of drums and timbrels loud,
Their children's cries unheard, they passed through fire,
To his grim idol.
MILTON 's Par. Lost. BY T. SPENCE, Author of the Real Rights of Man, End of
Oppression, Reign of Felicity, Pigs' Meat, etc.

LONDON; Printed for the AUTHOR, at No. 9, OXFORD-STREET, lately removed from
No. 8, Little Turnstile. 1797.

[Price -- TWO-PENCE]

PREFACE The Rights of Infants was wrote in the latter end of the year 1796,
but Paine's Agrarian Justice coming to hand before it was published, the
following Strictures, by way of Preface and Appendix, were added.

AT last Mr. Pain has thought fit to own, with the Psalmist, and with Mr.
Lock, that God has given the earth to the children of men, given it to
mankind in common

This is a truth so indisputable, and which I always thought of such vast
importance for mankind universally to understand and acknowledge, that I have
indefatigably embraced every opportunity, from my youth up, to publish it,
together with the most consistent plan that I could form thereon.

I am glad that Mr. Pain has, even though late, made this acknowledgement,
because his celebrity will procure him many readers, and greatly add both to
the investigation of this great fundamental truth, and of such philosophical
superstructures as may be built on the same. But as to the plan that lie has
laid down in his AGRARIAN JUSTICE (where he first acknowledges this principle)
it does not appear to me to be in any measure just or satisfactory. The
principle is without doubt incomparably grand, and the very first maxim in the
law of nature, and in the science of right and wrong, and is fraught with all
the blessings that can render mankind happy on earth. But, O dire
disappointment! Behold! Mr. Pain, instead of erecting on this rock of ages an
everlasting Temple of Justice, has erected an execrable fabric of compromissory
expediency, as if in good earnest intended for a Swinish Multitude.

The poor, beggarly slipends which he would have us to accept of in lieu of our
lordly and just pretensions to the soil of our birth, are so contemptible and
insulting, that I shall leave them to the scorn of every person conscious of
the dignity of his nature, not detaining the reader from the perusal of the
following little tract on the Rights of Infants, where men who dare contemplate
their rights, may see them pourtrayed boldly at full length.

The more I contemplate human affairs, the more I am convinced that a landed
interest is incompatible with the happiness and independence of the world. For
as all the rivers run into the sea, and yet the sea is not full, so let there
be ever so many sources of wealth, let trade, foreign and domestic, open all
their fluices, yet will no other but the landed interest he ultimately the
better.

In whatever line of business, or in whatever situation the public observe men
thrive, thither every one presses, and in competition bid over each other's
head for the houses and shops on the lucky spo^, thereby raising the rents till
the landlord gets the whole fat of their labors. It is the same in respect to
the farms; for if a profitable market, foreign or domestic, spring up for the
produce of the earth, then farming will be the rage, and every one will over
bid another for farms, till they can hardly live by them. Nay, even abolish the
tithes, and the rents of the farms will immediately so advance that the whole
advantage shall center in the landlords.

Thus all things work togethe^ for good to those who love God, which seems to
be fully accomplished in the landed interest, who are the visible elect. Yes,
for theirs are all things whether the sta^^, the government or the dignities;
the principalities, or the powers. All dominion is rooted and grounded in land,
and thence spring every kind of lordship which overtops and choaks all the
shrubs and flowers of the forest. But take away those tall, those overbearing
ariflocratic trees, and then the lowly plants of the soil will have air, will
thrive and grow robust. Nevertheless, take care you leave not any roots of
those lordly plants in the earth, for though cut down to the slump like
Nebuchaduezzar, yet if any vestage of the system remain, any fiber of the
accursed roots, though ever so small lie concealed in the soil, they would
sprout again and soon recover their pristine vigor, to the overshadowing and
destruction of all the undergrowth. Thus do philosophy and the purest
philanthropy compel us to cradicate this baneful order from human society.

Whether my plan of enjoying man's rights, which I have been publishing in
different ways for more than twenty years, be objectionable or no, it is
certain it has never been answered; neither have I seen or heard of any
arguments on the subject, but what have only more effectually convinced me that
no system can be more universally just even to those it seems most to militate
against; more easily established, because it is the interest of every one not
to oppose it; nor of course more likely afterward to be more peaceful and
permanent.

If I am wrong, let me be confuted; and if I am not, let mankind for their own
sakes, pay attention to what I say. They ought at least to give me credit for
my disinterestedness in this scheme, for according to it I can have no private
landed estate, no tenants to work for me, nor claim any privilege above my
fellow-citizens. Wherefore, before any be so ungenerous as to condemn me as
presumptuous, I hope they will heartily weigh my several arguments which they
will find in the various little things I have published, which are neither many
nor dear, and in the following Rights of Infants.

THO. SPENCE.
LONDON, March 19th, 1797.
THE RIGHTS OF INFANTS. Written in the latter End of the Year 1796.
Open thy mouth for the dumb. Prove. xxxi. 8.
"AND pray what are the Rights of Infants?" cry the haughty Aristocracy,
sneering and tossing up their noses.

Woman. Ask the she-bears, and every she-monster, and they will tell you what
the rights of every species of young are. -- They will tell you, in resolute
language and actions too, that their rights extend to a full participation of
the fruits of the earth. They will tell you, and vindicate it likewise by
deeds, that mothers have a right, at the peril of all opposers, to provide from
the elements the proper nourishments of their young. And seeing this, shall we
be asked what the Rights of Infants are? As if they had no rights? As if they
were excrescences and abortions of nature? As if they had not a right to the
milk of our breasts? Nor we a right to any food to make milk of? As if they had
not a right to good nursing, to cleanliness, to comfortable clothing and
lodging? Villains! Why do you ask that aggravating question? Have not the soxes
holes, and the birds of the air nests, and shall the children of men have not
where to lay their heads? Have brute-mothers a right to eat grass, and the food
they like best, to engender milk in their dugs, for the nourishment of their
young, and shall the mothers of infants be denied such a right? Is not this
earth our common also, as well as it is the common of brutes? May we not eat
herbs, berries, or nuts as well as other creatures? Have we not a right to hunt
and prowl for prey with she-wolves? And have we not a right to fish with
she-otters? Or may we not dig coals or cut wood for fuel? Nay, does nature
provide a luxuriant and abundant feast for all her numerous tribes of animals
except us? As if sorrow were our portion alone, and as if we and our helpless
babes came into this world only to weep over each other?


Aristocracy (sneering). And is your sex also set up for pleaders of rights?


Woman. Yes, Molochs! Our sex were defenders of rights from the beginning. And
though men, like other he-brutes, sink calmly into apathy respecting their
offspring, you shall find nature, as it never was, so it never shall be
extinguished in us. You shall find that we not only know our rights, but have
spirit to assert them, to the downfall of you and all tyrants. And since it is
so that the men, like he-asses, suffer themselves to be laden with as many pair
of panyers of rents, tithes, etc. as your tender consciences please to lay upon
them, we, even we, the females, will vindicate the rights of the species, and
throw you and all your panyers in the dirt.


Aristocracy. So you wish to turn the cultivated world into a wilderness, that
you may eat wild fruits and game like Indians?


Woman. No, Sophists, we do not want to be as Indians. But the natural fruits
of the earth being the fruits of our undoubted common, we have an indefensible
right to, and we will no longer be deprived of them, without an equivalent.


Aristocracy. Do you not, in lieu of those wild productions, get bread, and
mutton, and beef, and garden stuff, and all the refined productions and
luxuries of art and labor; what reason then have you to complain?


Woman. Are you serious? Would you really persuade us that we have no reason to
complain? Would you make us believe that we receive these productions of art
and culture as a fair compensation for the natural produce of our common, which
you deprive us of? Have we not to purchase these things before we enjoy them?


Aristocracy. Sure, woman, you do not expect the fruits of men's labors and
ingenuity for nothing! Do not the farmers, in the first place, pay very high
rents for their farms; and, in the next place, are they not at great trouble
and expense in tilling and manuring the ground, and in breeding cattle; and
surely you cannot expect that there men will work and toil, and lay out their
money for you, for nothing.


Woman. And pray, ladies and gentlemen, who ever dreamt of hurting the farmers,
or taking their provisions for nothing, except yourselves? It is only the
privileged orders, and their humble imitators on the highway, who have the
impudence to deprive men of their labors for nothing. No; if it please your
noblenesses and gentlenesses, it is you, and not the farmers, that we have to
reckon with. And pray now, your highnesses, who is it that receive those rents
which you speak of from the farmers?


Arist. We, to be sure; we receive the rents.


Woman. You, to be sure! Who the D-v-l are you? Who gave you a right to receive
the rents of our common?


Arist. Woman! Our fathers either sought for or purchased our estates.


Woman. Well confessed, villains! Now out of your own mouths will I condemn
you, you wicked Molocks! And so you have the impudence to own yourselves the
cursed brood of russians, who by slaughter and oppression, usurped the lordship
and dominion of the earth, to the exclusion and starvation of weeping infants
and their poor mothers? Or, at the best, the purchasers of those ill-got
domains? O worse than Molochs! now let the blood of the millions of innocent
babes who have perished through your vile usurpations be upon your murderous
heads! You have deprived the mothers of nature's gifts, and farmed them out to
farmers, and pocketied the money, as you audaciously confess. Yes, villains!
you have treasured up the tears and groans of dumb, helpless, perishing, dying
infants. O, you bloody landed interest! you band of robbers! Why do you call
yourselves ladies and gentlemen? Why do you assume soft names, you beasts of
prey? Too well do your emblazoned arms and escutcheons witness the ferocity of
your bloody and barbarous origin! But soon shall those audacious Gothic emblems
of rapine cease to offend the eyes of an enlightened people, and no more make
an odious distinction between the spoilers and the spoiled. But, ladies and
gentlemen, is it necessary, in order that we eat bread and mutton; that the
rents should be received by you? Might not the farmers as well pay their rents
to us, who are the natural and rightful proprietors? If, for the sake of
cultivation, we are content to give up to farmers our wild fruits, our hunting
grounds, our fish and game; our coal-mines, and our forests, is it not
equitable that we should have the rents in lieu thereof? If not, how can the
farmers have the face to sell us again the produce of our own land?

Hear me! ye oppressors! ye who live sumptuously every day! ye, for whom the
sun seems to shine, and the seasons change, ye for whom alone all human and
brute creatures toil, sighing, but in vain, for the crumbs which fall from your
overcharged tables; ye, for whom alone the heavens drop fatness, and the earth
yields her increase; hearken to me, I say, ye who are not satisfied with
usurping all that nature can yield; ye, who are insatiable as the grave; ye who
would deprive every heart of joy but your own, I say hearken to me! Your horrid
tyranny, your infanticide is at an end! Your grinding the faces of the poor,
and your drinking the blood of infants, is at an end! The groans of the
prisons, the groans of the camp, and the groans of the cottage, excited by your
infernal policy, are at an end! And behold the whole earth breaks forth into
singing at the new creation, at the breaking of the iron rod of aristocratic
sway, and at the rising of the everlasting sun of righteousness!

And did you really think, my good gentlefolk, that you were the pillars that
upheld the universe? Did you think that we would never have the wit to do
without you? Did you conceive that we should never be able to procure bread and
beef, and fuel, without your agency? Ah! my dear creatures, the magic spell is
broke. Your sorceries, your witchcrafts, your priestcrafts, and all your
juggling crafts, are at an end; and the Meridian Sun of Liberty bursts forth
upon the astonished world, dispelling the accumulated mists of dreary ages, and
leaves us the glorious blue expanse, of serene unclouded reason.

Well then, since you have compelled, since you have driven us, through your
cruel bondage, to emancipate ourselves, we will even try to do without you, and
deal with the honest farmers ourselves, who will find no difference, unless for
the better, between paying their rents to us and to you.

And whereas we have found our husbands, to their indelible shame, woefully
negligent and deficient about their own rights, as well as those of their wives
and infants, we women, mean to take up the business ourselves, and let us see
if any of our husbands dare hinder us. Wherefore, you will find the business
much more seriously and effectually managed in our hands than over it has been
yet. You may smile, tyrants, but you have juster cause to weep. For, as nature
has implanted into the breasts of all mothers the most pure and unequivocal
concern for their young, which no bribes can buy, nor threats annihilate, be
assured we will stand true to the interest of our babes, and shame, woe, and
destruction be to the pitiful varlet that dare obstruct us. For their sakes we
will no longer make brick without straw, but will draw the produce of our
estate. If we deprive ourselves of our common, in order that it may be
cultivated, we ourselves will have the price thereof, that we may buy
therewith, as far as it will go, the farmer's produce. And so far as our
respective shares of the rent may be inadequate to the comfortable and elegant
support of ourselves and infants, so far will we cheerfully, by our honest
endeavors, in our several callings, make up the deficiency, and tender life
worth enjoying. To labor for ourselves and infants we do not decline; but we
are sick of laboring for an insatiable aristocracy.

To convince your highnesses that our plan is well digested, I will lay it
before you. You will find it very simple, but that is the sign of the greater
perfection. As I said before, we women (because the men are not to be depended
on) will appoint, in every parish, a committee of our own sex, (which we
presume our gallant lock-jawed spouses and paramours will at least, for their
own interest, not oppose,) to receive the rents of the houses and lands already
tenanted, and also to let, to the best bidders, on seven years leases, such
farms and tenements as may, from time to time, become vacant. Out of those
rents we can remit to government so much per pound, according to the exigencies
of the state, in lieu of all taxes; so that we may no longer have taxes nor
tax-gatherers. Out of these rents we shall rent pay all our builders and
workmen that build or repair our houses; pave, cleanse, or light our streets;
pay the salaries of our magistrates an^ other public officers. And all this we
women shall do quarterly, without a bank or bank-noter, in ready money, when
the rents are (...) in; that suffering neither state nor parish to run in debt.
And (...) to the overplus, after ^ll public expenses are defrayed, we shall
(...) it farly and equally among all the living souls in the parish, whether
male or female; married or single; legitimate or ill^^^t^mate; from a day old
to the extremest age; making no distinc^^on between the families of rich
farmers and merchants, who pay much rent for their extensive farms or premises,
and the families of poor laborers and mechanics, who pay but little for their
small apartments, cottages and gardens, but giving to the head of every family
a full and equal share for every name under his roof.

And whereas births and funerals, and consequent sicknesses, are attended with
expense, it seems requisite to allow, at quarter-day, to the head of every
family, a full share for every child that may have been born in his house since
the former quarter-day, though the infant may be then but a day old; and also,
for every person who may have died since the former quarter-day, though the
death should have happened but a day after it.

This surplus, which is to be dealt out again among the living souls in a
parish every quarter-day, may be reasonably supposed to amount to full
two-thirds of the whole sum of rents collected. But whatever it may amount to,
such share of the surplus rents is the imprescriptible right of every human
being in civilized society, as an equivalent for the natural materials of their
common estate, which by letting to rent, for the sake of cultivation and
improvement, they are deprived of.

Wherefore, now ladies and gentlemen, you see the glorious work is done! and
the rights of the human species built on so broad and solid a basis, that all
your malice will not be able to prevail against them! Moreover, when we begin
with you, we will make a full end of your power at once. We will not
impoliticly tamper with the lion, and pluck out a ^ooth now and then, as some
propose to melt down your strength by degrees, which would only irritate you to
oppose us with all the power you had remaining. No; we will begin where we mean
to end, by depriving you instantaneously, as by an elective shock, of every
species of revenue from lands, which will universally and at once, be given to
the parishes, to be disposed of by and for the use of the inhabitants, as said
before.

But yet be not cast down, my good ladies and gentlemen, all this is done for
the sake of system, not revenge or retaliation; for we wish not to reduce you
to beggary, as you do us, for we will leave you all your moveable riches and
wealth, all your gold and silver, your rich clothes and furniture; your corn
and cattle, and every thing that does not appertain to the land as a fixture,
for these, you know, must come to the parish with our estates. So that you see
you will still be the richest part of the community, and may, by your cheerful
acquiescence, be much more happy then you are now under the existing unjust
system of things. But if, by foolish and ^^cked opposition, you should compel
us, in our own defense, to confiscate even your movables, and perhaps also to
cut you off, then let your blood be upon your own heads, for we shall he
guiltless. It will therefore be your interest and wisdom to submit peaceably,
and fraternize cheerfully with us as fellow (...). For, instead of you then
having the revenues of the counrty to carry on war against us, as you have now,
the parishes will then have these revenues to carry on the war against you. And
as to your moveable property, we are not afraid of it, for it would soon melt
away in supporting you in a state of hostility against the strength and
standing revenues of the country, unburthened with debis and pensions. So
prepare yourselves peaceably to acquiesce in the new system of things, which is
fast approaching. And when you shall hear of the blessed decree being passed by
the people, that the laud is from that day forth parochial property, join
chorus with your glad fellow creatures, and joyfully partake in the universal
happiness.


The Golden Age, so famed by men of yore,
Shall now be counted fabulous no more.
The tyrant lion like an ox shall feed,
And lisping Infants shall tamed tigers lead:
With deadly asps shall sportive sucklings play,
Nor ought obnoxious blight the blithesome day.
Yes, all that prophets ever of bliss foretold,
And all that poets ever feigned of old,
As yielding joy to man, shall now be seen,
And ever flourish like an evergreen.
Then, Mortals, join to hail great Nature's plan,
That fully gives to Babes those Rights it gives to Man,
CHORUS. -- To the Tune of "Sally in our Alley."
Then let as all join heart in hand,
Through country, town, and city;
Of every sex and every age,
Young men and maidens pretty.
To baste this Golden Age's reign,
On every hill and valley,
Then Paradise shall greet our eyes,
Through every street and alley.
APPENDIX.
A CONTRAST Between PAINE's AGRANIAN JUSTICE, and SPENCE's END OF OPPRESSION,
Both being built on the same indisputable Principle, viz. That the Land is the
common Property of Mankind.
Under the system of Agraian Justice, THE people will, as it were, sell their
birthright for a mess of porridge, by accepting of a paltry consideration in
lien of their rights. Under the system of the End of Oppression, THE people
will receive, without deduction, the whole produce of their common inheritance.
Under the first, The people will become supine and careless in respect of
public affairs, knowing the utmost they can receive of the public money. Under
the second, The people will be vigilant and watchful over the public
expenditure, knowing that the more there is saved their dividends will be the
larger. Under the first, The people will be more like pensioned emigrants and
French priests than interested natives. Under the second, The people will be
all intent upon the improvement of their respective parishes, for the sake of
the increased shares of the revenues, which on that account they will receive.
Under the first, The people cannot derive right of suffrage in national
affairs, from their compromisory stipends. Under the second, Universal suffrage
will be inseparably attached to the people both in parochial and national
affairs, because the revenues, both parochial and national, will be derived
immediately from their common landed property. Under the first, The government
may be either absolute monarchy, ariftocracy, democracy, or mixed. Under the
second, The government must of necessity be democratic. Under the first, All
the complexities of the present public establishments, which support such hosts
of placemen, will not only still continue, but also the evils of them will be
greatly enhanced by the very system of Agrarian Justice. Under the second,
There can be but two descriptions of public officers, parochial and national,
and those but few in number, and on moderate salaries. Under the first, There
will exist two spirits, incompatible in a free state, the insolent and
overbearing spirit of aristocracy, and the sneaking unmanly spirit of conscious
dependence. Under the second, There will exist only the robust spirit of
independence, mellowed and tempered by the presence and checks of equally
independent fellow-citizens. Under the first, The destructive profligacy of the
great, and the wretched degencracy of the poor, will still continue, and will
increase, to the pitiable unhappiness of both parties. Under the second, All
the virtues being the natural offspring of a general and happy mediocrity, will
at once step forth into use, and progressively increase their blessed influence
among men. Under the first, Taxes, both directly and indirectly, will not only
be demanded, but will be increased to the utmost the people can possibly bear,
let trade and seasons be ever so prosperous. Under the second, There can be no
taxes, nor expenses of collecting them, because the government would be
supported by a poundage from the rents which each parish would send quarterly
to the national treasury, free of all expense; thus leaving the price of all
commodities unencumbered with any addition but the price of labor. Under the
first, The poor would ^^ill continue, through des^^^r, unambitious Under the
second, The lowest and most prostigate having such frequent opportunities, to
arise out of their hopeless state of abject wretchedness and vulgarity. by the
aid of their quarterly dividends, of starting into industrious and decent modes
of life, could not always resist the influence of the general virtue every
where displayed, without some time or other following the example. Under the
first, Children will still be considered as grievous burdens in poor families.
Under the second, As both young and old share equally alike of the parish
revenues, children and aged relations living in a family will, especially in
rich parishes, where the dividends are large, through high rents or the
productions of mines, etc. be accounted as blessings. Under the first, If the
aristocratic assistance afforded by charity-schools, in the education of poor
children, be withdrawn, the laboring classes must inevitably degenerate into
barbarous ignorance. Under the second, If the people are not generally learned
it must be their own fault, as their inexhaustible means of comfortable
subsistence must furnish also the means of education. Under the first, The poor
must still look up for aristocratic benefactions of rotten potatoes and spoiled
rice, and other substitutes for bread in the times of scarcity, to preserve
their wretched existence. Under the second, What with the annihilation of taxes
and the dividends of the parochial rents, together with the honest guardianship
of their popular government, we may reasonably suppose that the people will
rarely be driven to the dire necessity of using a substitute for bread. Under
the first. After admitting that the earth belongs to the people, the people
must nevertherless compromise the matter with their conquerors and oppressors,
and still suffer them to remain as a distinct and separate body Under the
second, After insisting that the land is public property, the people's
oppressors must either submit to become undistinguishable in the general mass
of citizens of fly the country. among them, in full possession of their
country. Under the first, In foreign or domestic trade increase, the
productions of the land will increase in price, of which the landed interest
will reap the advantage, by raising the rents in due proportion until the whole
benefit thereof centers in them. Under the second, If foreign or domestic trade
increase, the price of commodities will in proportion also increase, and the
ren's of course will rise, but this increase will revert back to the body of
the people, by increasing their quarterly dividends. Under the first, All the
aristocratic monopolies in ^^ade, in privileges, and government, will continue.
Under the second, There can be ^o monopolies; but a fair, salutary, and
democratic competition will pervade every thing. Under the first, A timid and
acquiescing spirit must be promoted among the people as now, lest they should
discover the disumularity between their natural rights and enjoyments. Under
the second, The justness and consistency of affairs will invite, nay,
challenge, the most rigorous and logical enquiries, and will draw forth,
uncramped, the utmost powers of the mind. Under the first, Domestic trade will
be far from its natural height, because multitudes of the people will be poor
and beggarly* ^^d unable to purchase numberless articles of use and luxury that
their wants and inclinations would prompt them to wish for. Under the second,
Domestic trade would be at an amazing pitch, because there would be no poor;
none but would be well clothed, lodged, and sed: and the whole mass of rents,
except a triste to the government, being circulated at home, in every parish,
every quarter, would cause such universal prosperity as would enable every body
to purchase not only the necessaries of life, but many elegancies and luxuries.
Under the first, The fund proposed by Palne will require a great number of
placemen of various descriptions to manage it, and who being chosen, as they
must Under the second, The government can have very little influence by places,
because the parish officers will be chosen by the parishioners; and all the
complex machinery be, by the ministry and their friends, will very much
increase the already enormous influence of governments. of financiering and
stock-jobbing; all the privileged trading companies and corporate towns, which
are the nests of influence and corruption, would be abolished. Under the first,
The rich would abolish all hospitals, charitable funds, and parochial provision
for the poor, telling them, that they now have all that their great advocate,
Pain, demands, as their rights, and what he exultingly deems as amply
sufficient to ameliorate their condition, and render them happy, by which the
latter end of our reformation will be worse than the beginning. Under the
second, The quarterly dividends, together with the abolishment of all taxes,
would destroy the necessity of public charities; but if any should be thought
necessary, whether to promote learning, or for any other purpose, the parochial
and national funds would be found at all times more than sufficient.

CONCLUSION.
BUT stop, don't let us reckon without our host; for Mr. Pain will object to
such and equal distribution of the rents. For says he, in his Agrarian Justice,
the public can claim but a Tentk Part of the value of the landed property as it
now exists, with its vast improvements of cultivation and building. But why are
we to be put off now with but a Tenth Share? Because, says Mr. Pain, it has so
improved in the hands of private proprietors as to be of ten times the value it
was of in its natural state. But may we not ask who improved the land? Did the
proprietors alone work and toll at this improvement? And did we laborers and
our forefathers stand, like Indians and Hottentots, idle, spectators of so much
public-spirited industry? I suppose not. Nay, on the contrary, it is evident to
the most superficial enquirer that the laboring classes ought principally to
be thanked for every improvement.

Indeed, if there had never any slave, any vassals, or any daylabourers
employed in building and tillage, then the proprietors might have boasted of
having themselves created all this gay scene of things. But the case alters
amazingly, when we consider that the earth has been cultivated either by
slaves, compelled, like beasts, to labor, of by the indigent objects whom they
first exclude from a share in the soil, that want may compel them to sell their
labor for daily bread. In short, the great may as well boast of fighting their
battles as of cultivating the earth.

The toil of the laboring classes first produces provisions, and they the
demand of their families creates a market for them. Therefore it will be found
that it is the markets made by the laboring and mechanical tribes that have
improved the earth. And once take away these markets, order all the laboring
people, like the Israelites, leave the country in a body, and you would
immediately see from what cause the country had been cultivated, and so many
goodly towns and villages built.

You may suppose that after the emigration of all these beggarly people, every
thing would go on as well as before: that the farmer would continue to plough,
and the town landlord to build as formerly. I tell you nay; for the farmer
could neither proceed without laborers ^or ^^^d purchasers for his corn and
cattle. It would be just the same with the building landlord, for he could
neither procure workmen to build, nor tenants to pay him rent.

Behold then your grand, voluptuous nobility and gentry, the arch cultivators
of the earth, obliged, for lack of servants, again to turn Gothic hunters, like
their lavage forefathers. Behold their palaces. temples, and towns, mouldering
into dust, and affording shelter only to wild beasts; and their boasted,
cultivated fields and garden, degenerated into a howling wilderness.

Thus we see that the consumption created by the mouths, and the backs, of the
poor despised multitude, contributes to the cultivation of the earth, as well
as their hands. And it is also the rents that they pay that builds the towns,
and not the racking building landlord. Therefore, let us not in weak
commiseration be biassed by the pretended philanthropy of the great, to the
resignation of our dearest rights. And if our estates have improved in their
hands, during their ^fficious guardianship, the D -- v -- I thank them; for it
was done for their own sakes, not for cuts, and can be no just bar against us
recovering our rights.

FINIS.

