Augusta Triumphans: OR, THE WAY TO MAKE LONDON The most flourishing City in
the Universe.

FIRST, By establishing an University where Gentlemen may have Academical
Education under the Eye of their Friends. II. To prevent much Murder, etc. by
an Hospital for Foundlings. III. By suppressing pretended Mad-Houses, where
many of the fair Sex are unjustly confined, while their Husbands keep
Mistresses, etc. and many Widows are locked up for the Sake of their Jointure.
IV. To save our Youth from Destruction, by clearing the Streets of impudent
Strumpets, Suppressing Gaming-Tables, and Sunday Debauches. V. To avoid the
expensive Importation of Foreign Musicians, by forming an Academy of our own.
VI. To save our lower Class of People from utter Ruin, and render them useful,
by preventing the immoderate Use of Geneva: With a frank Explosion of many
other common Abuses, and incontestable Rules for Amendment.


CONCLUDING WITH An effectual Method to prevent STREET ROBBERIES;

AND A LETTER to Coll. ROBINSON, on account of the ORPHAN's TAX.

LONDON: Printed for J. Roberts in Warwick Lane, and Sold by E. Nutt at the
Royal Exchange, A. Dodd without Temple Bar, N. Blandford at Charing Cross, and
J. Stagg in Westminster Hall. 1728. [Price One Shilling.]

Augusta Triumphans: OR, THE WAY TO MAKE LONDON The most Flourishing CITY in
the Universe.
A Man who has the Public Good in View, ought not in the least to be alarmed
at the tribute of Ridicule which Scoffers constantly pay to projecting Heads:
It is the Business of a Writer, who means well, to go directly forward, without
regard to Criticism, but to offer his Thoughts as they occur; and if in twenty
Schemes, he hits but on one to the Purpose, he ought to be excused failing in
the Nineteen for the Twentieth Sake. It Is a kind of good Action to mean well,
and the Intention ought to palliate the Failure, but the English, of all People
in the World, show least Mercy to Schemists, for they treat them in the vilest
manner; whereas other Nations give them fair Play for their Lives, which is the
reason why we are esteemed so bad at Invention.

I have but a short Time to live, nor would I waste my remaining Thread of Life
in Vain, but having often lamented sundry Public Abuses, and many Schemes
having occurred to my Fancy, which to me carried an Air of Benefit; I was
resolved to commit them to Paper before my Departure, and leave, at least, a
Testimony of my good Will to my Fellow Creatures.

But of all my Reflections, none was more constantly my Companion than a deep
Sorrow for the present decay of Learning among us, and the manifest Corruption
of Education; we have been a brave and learned People, and are insensibly
dwindling into an Effeminate, Superficial Race: Our young Gentlemen are sent to
the Universities it is true, but not under Restraint or Correction as formerly;
not to study, but to drink; not for Furniture for the Head, but a Feather for
the Cap, merely to say they have been at Oxford or Cambridge, as if the Air of
those Places inspired Knowledge without Application. It Is true, we ought to
have those Places in Reverence for the many learned Men they have sent us; but
why must we go so far for Knowledge? why should a young Gentleman be sent raw
from the Nursery to live on his own Hands, to be liable to a thousand
Temptations, and run the Risque of being snapt up by sharping Jilts, with which
both Universities abound, who make our Youth of Fortune their Prey, and have
brought Misery into too many good Families? Not only the Hazard of their
Healths from Debauches of both Kinds, but the waste of their precious Time
renders the sending them so far off very hazardous. Why should such a
Metropolis as London be without an University? Would it not save considerably
the Expense we are at in sending our young Gentlemen so far from London? Would
it not add to the Luster of our State, and cultivate Politeness among us? What
Benefits may we not in time expect from so glorious a Design? Will not London
become the Scene of Science? And what reason have we but to hope we may vye
with any Neighboring Nations? Not that I would have Oxford or Cambridge
neglected, for the Good they have done: Besides, there are too many fine
Endowments to be sunk, we may have Universities at those Places, and at London
too, without Prejudice. Knowledge will never hurt us, and whoever lives to see
an University here, will find it give quite another turn to the Genius and
Spirit of our Youth in general.

How many Gentlemen pass their Lives in a shameful Indolence, who might employ
themselves to the purpose, were such a Design set on foot? Learning would
flourish, Art revive, and not only those who studied would benefit by it; but
the Blessing would be conveyed to others by Conversation.

And in order to this so laudable design, small Expense is required: The sole
Charge being the hire of a convenient Hall or House, which if they please, they
may call a College. But I see no necessity the Pupils have to lie or diet
there; that may be done more reasonably and conveniently at home, under the Eye
of their Friends: Their only necessary Business at College being to attend
their Tutors at stated Hours, and (Bed and Board excepted) to conform
themselves to College Laws, and perform the same Exercises as if they were
actually at Oxford or Cambridge.

Let the best of Tutors be provided, and Professors in all Faculties
encouraged, this will do a double good, not only to the Instructed, but to the
Instructors. What a fine Provision may here be made for Numbers of ingenious
Gentlemen, now unpreferr'd? And to what a height may even a small Beginning
grow in time?

As London is so extensive, so its University may be composed of many Colleges,
quartered at convenient Distances; for Example, one at Westminster, one at St.
James's, one near Ormond Street; (that part of the Town abounding in Gentry)
one in the Center of the Inns of Court; another near the Royal Exchange; and
more if Occasion and Encouragement permit.

The same Offices and Regulations may be constituted, Cooks, Butlers,
Bed-makers, etc. excepted, as at other Universities. As for Endowment, there is
no need, the whole may be done by Subscription; and that an easy one;
considering nothing but Instructions are paid for.

In a Word, an Academical Education is so much wanted in London, that every
Body of Ability and Figure, will readily come into it; and I dare engage the
Place need but be chosen, and Tutors approved of, to complete the Design at
once.

It may be objected that there is a kind of University at Gresham-College,
where Professors in all Sciences are maintained and obliged to read Lectures
every Day, or at least as often as demanded. The Design is most laudable, but
it smells too much of the Sine Cure; they only read in Term-Time, and then
their Lectures are so hurried over, the Audience is little the better. They
cannot be turned out; it is a good Settlement for Life, and they are very easy
in their Studies when once fixed. Whereas were the Professorship, during good
Behavior, there would be a Study to maintain their Posts, and their Pupils
would reap the Benefit.

Upon second Thought, I think Colleges for University Education, might be
formed at Westminster, Eaton, the Charter House, St. Paul's, Merchant-Taylors,
and other Public Schools, where Youth might begin and end their Studies; but
this may be farther considered of.

I had almost forgot the most material Point, which is, that his Majesty's
Sanction must first be obtained, and the University proposed have Power to
confer Degrees, etc. and other Academical Privileges.

As I am quick to conceive, I am eager to have done, unwilling to overwork a
Subject; I had rather leave part to the Conception of the Readers, than to tire
them or my Self with protracting a Theme; as if like a Chancery Man, or a
Hackney Author, I wrote by the Sheet for hire: So let us have done with this
Topic, and proceed to another; which is,

A Proposal to prevent Murder, Dishonor, and other Abuses, by erecting an
Hospital for Foundlings.
IT is needless to run into a Declamation on this Head, since not a Sessions
passes, but we see one or more merciless Mothers tried for the Murder of their
Bastard-Children; and to the Shame of good Government, generally escape the
Vengeance due to shedders of Innocent Blood: For it is a common Practice now
among them, to hire a set of Old-Bedlams, or pretended Midwives, who make it
their Trade to bring them off for three or four Guineas, having got the ready
rote of swearing the Child was not at its full Growth, for which they have a
hidden Reserve, that is to say, the Child was not at Man's or Woman's Growth.
Thus do these impious Wretches cheat the World, and damn their own Souls by a
double Meaning, which too often imposes on a cautious, merciful and credulous
Jury, and gives wicked Murderers means to escape and commit fresh Sins, to
which their Acquitters no doubt are accessory.

I wonder so many Men of Sense, as have been on the Jury, have been so often
imposed upon by the stale Pretense of a Scrap or two of Childbed Linen being
found in the Murderer's Box, etc. when alas! perhaps it was never put there
till after the Murder was committed; or if it was, but with a view of saving
themselves by that devilish Precaution; for so many have been acquitted on that
Pretense, that it is but too common a Thing to provide Child-Bed-Linnen
beforehand for a poor Innocent Babe they are determined to murder.

But alas! What are the exploded Murders to those which escape the Eye of the
Magistrate, and dye in Silence? Add to this procured Abortions, and other
indirect means, which wicked Wretchesmake use off to screen themselves from the
Censure of the World, which they dread more than the Displeasure of their Maker.

Those who cannot be so hard-hearted to murder their own Offspring themselves,
take a slower, though as sure a way, and get it done by others, by dropping their
Children, and leaving them to be starved by Parish-Nurses.

Thus is God robbed of a Creature, in whom he had breathed the Breath of Life,
and on whom he had stamped his Image; the World of an Inhabitant, who might
have been of use; the King of a Subject; and future Generations of an Issue not
to be accounted for, had this Infant lived to have been a Parent.

It is therefore the height of Charity and Humanity, to provide against this
Barbarity, to prevent this crying Sin, and extract Good, even out of Evil, by
saving these Innocent Babes from Slaughter, and bringing them up in the Nurture
and Fear of the Lord; to be of Benefit to themselves and Mankind in General.

And what nearer, what better way can we have, than to erect and endow a
proper. Hospital or House to receive them, where we may see them tenderly
brought up, as so many living Monuments of our Charity; every one of them being
a convincing Proof of a Christian saved, and a Murder prevented?

Nor will this be attended with so much Charge as is imagined, for we find in
many Parishes, that Parents have re-demanded their Children, on increase of
Circumstances, and paid all Costs with a handsome Present in the Bargain; and
many Times when a Clandestine Marriage is cleared up, and openly avowed, they
would purchase the First Fruits of their Loves at any Rate: Oftentimes a Couple
may have no more Children, and an Infant thus saved, may arrive to inherit a
good Estate, and become a Benefactor, where it was once an Object of Charity.

But let us suppose the worst, and imagine the Infant begot in Sin and without
the Sanction of Wedlock; is it therefore to be murdered, starved or neglected,
because its Parents were wicked? hard Fate of innocent Children, to suffer for
their Parents Faults! Where God has thought fit to give his Image and Life,
there is Nourishment demanded; that calls aloud for our Christian and Human
Assistance, and best shows our Nobleness of Soul, when we generously assist
those who cannot help themselves.

If the Fault devolved on the Children, our Church would deny them Baptism,
Burial, and other Christian Rites; but our Religion carries more Charity with
it, they are not denied even to partake of our Blessed Sacraments, and are
excluded no one Branch or Benefit accruing from Christianity; if so, how unjust
are those who arraign 'em for their Parents Faults, and how barbarous are those
Parents, who, though able, make no Provision for them, because they are not
Legitimate: My Child, is my Child, let it be begot in Sin or Wedlock, and all
the Duties of a Parent are incumbent on me so long as it lives; if it survives
me, I ought to make a Provision for it, according to my Ability; and though I do
not set it on a Footing with my Legitimate Children, I ought in Conscience, to
provide against Want and Shame, or I am answerable for every Sin or
Extravagance my Child is forced or led into, for want of my giving an Allowance
to prevent it.

We have an Instance very fresh, in every ones Memory, of an ingenious, nay, a
sober young Nobleman, for such I must call him, whose either Father was a Peer,
and his Mother a Peeress: This unhappy Gentleman tossed from Father to Father,
at last found none, and himself a Vagabond, forced to every Shift; he in a
manner starved for many Years, yet was guilty of no Capital Crime, till that
unhappy Accident occurred, which God has given him Grace, and Sense enough-to
repent: However, I cannot but think his hard-hearted Mother will bear her
Portion of the Guilt, till washed away by a severe Repentance.

What a Figure might this Man have made in Life, had due Care been taken? If
his Peerage had not been adjusted, he might at least have been a fine
Gentleman; nay probably, have filled some handsome Post in the Government with
Applause, and called as much for Respect, as he does now for Pity.

Nor is this Gentleman the only Person begot, and neglected by Noble, or rather
Ignoble Parents; we have but too many now living, who owe their Birth to the
best of our Peerage, and yet know not where to eat. Hard Fate, when the Child
would be glad the Scraps, which the Servants throw away! but Heaven generally
rewards them accordingly, for many Noble Families are become Extinct, and large
Estates alienated into other Houses, while their own Issue want Bread.

And now, methinks, I hear some oversqueamish Ladies cry, what would this
Fellow be at? would not he set up a Nursery for Lewdness, and encourage
Fornication? who would be afraid of sinning, if they can so easily get rid of
their Bastards? we shall soon be overrun with Foundlings when there is such
Encouragement given to Whoredom: To which I answer, that I am as much against
Bastards being begot, as I am for their being murdered; but when a Child is
once begot, it cannot be unbegotten; and when once born it must be kept; the
Fault, as I said before, is in the Parents, not the Child; and we ought to show
our Charity toward it as a Fellow Creature and Christian, without any regard
to its Legitimacy or otherwise.

The only way to put a stop to this growing Evil, would be to oblige all
Housekeepers, not to admit a Man and Woman as Lodgers, till they were certify'd
of their being lawfully married; for Nowadays nothing is more common than for
a Whore-monger and a Strumpet to pretend Marriage, till they have left a Child
or two on the Parish, and then shift to another end of the Town.

If there were no Receivers there would be no Thieves: If there were no
Bawdy-Houses there would be no Whores; and though Persons letting Lodgings be
not actual Procurers, yet, if they connive at the Embraces of a Couple, whose
Marriage is doubtful, they are no better than Bawds, and their Houses no more
than Brothels.

Now should any Body ask, how shall this Hospital be Built? how endowed? to
which I answer, follow the Steps of the Venetians, the Hamburgers, and other
foreign States, etc. who have for Ages past prosecuted this glorious Design,
and found their Account therein: As for building a House I am utterly against
it, especially in the Infancy of the Affair: Let a Place convenient be hired:
Why should such a considerable Sum be sunk in building as has in late public
Structures, which have swallowed up part of the Profits and Dividend, if not
the Capital, of unwary Stock-mongers?

To my great Joy I find my Project already anticipated, and a noble
Subscription carrying on for this purpose; to promote which, I exhort all
Persons of Compassion and Generosity, and shall think my self happy, if what I
have said on this Head, may any ways contribute to further the same.

Having said all I think material on this Subject, I beg pardon for leaving my
Reader so abrubtly, and crave Leave to proceed to another Article. viz.

A Proposal to prevent the expensive Importation of Foreign Musicians, etc. by
forming an Academy of our own.
IT will no doubt be asked, what have I to do with Music? to which I answer, I
have been a Lover of the Science from my Infancy, and in my younger Days was
accounted no despicable Performer on the Viol and Lute, then much in Vogue. I
esteem it the most innocent Amusement in Life; it gently relaxes, after too
great a hurry of Spirits, and composes the Mind into a Sedateness, prone to
every thing that is generous and good; and when the more necessary parts of
Education are finished, it is a most genteel and commendable Accomplishment; it
saves a great deal of Drinking and Debauchery in our Sex, and helps the Ladies
off with many an idle Hour, which sometimes might probably be worse employed
otherwise.

Our Quality, Gentry, and better sort of Traders must have Diversions; and if
those that are commendable be denied, they will take to worse: Now what can be
more commendable than Music, one of the seven liberal Sciences, and no mean
Branch of the Mathematics?

Were it for no other Reason I should esteem it, because it was the favorite
Diversion of his late Majesty, of glorious Memory; who was as wife a Prince as
ever filled the British Throne. Nor is it less esteemed by their present
Majesty's, whose Souls are formed for Harmony, and who have not disdained to
make it a part in the Education of their sacred Race.

Our Nobility and Gentry have shown their Love to the Science, by supporting at
such prodigious Expense, the Italian Opera improperly called an Academy; but
they have at the same time shown no small Partiality in discouraging any thing
English, and over-loading the Town with such heaps of Foreign Musicians.

An Academy, rightly understood, is a Place for the Propagation of Science, by
training up Persons thereto from younger to riper Years, under the Instruction
and Inspection of proper Artists: How then can the Italian Opera properly be
called an Academy, when none are admitted but such as are, at least are
thought, or ought to be, adepts in Music? If that be an Academy, so are the
Theaters of Drury Lane, and Lincolns-Inn-Fields: Nay, Punch's Opera may pass
for a lower kind of Academy. Would it not be a glorious thing to have an Opera
of our own, in our own most noble Tongue, in which the Composer, Singers, and
Orchestre, should be of our own Growth? Not that we ought to disclaim all
Obligations to Italy, the Mother of Music, the Nurse of Corelli, Handel,
Bononcini, and Geminiani; but then we ought not to be so stupidly partial, to
imagine our Selves too Brutal a part of Mankind, to make any Progress in the
Science: By the same reason that we love it, we may excel in it; Love begets
Application, and Application Perfection. We have already had a Purcel, and no
doubt, there are now many latent Genius's, who only want proper Instruction,
Application, and ENCOURAGEMENT, to become great Ornaments of the Science, and
make England emulate even Rome it self.

What a number of excellent Performers on all Instruments, have sprung up in
England within these few Years? that this is owing to the Opera, I will not
deny, and so far the Opera is an Academy, as it refines the Taste, and inspires
Emulation.

But though we are happy in Instrumental Performers, we frequently send to Italy
for Singers, and that at no small Expense: To remedy which, I humbly propose,
that the Governors of Christ's-Hospital will show their public Spirit, by
forming an Academy of Music on their Foundation, after this or the like manner.

That out of their great number of Children, thirty Boys be selected, of good
Ears and Propensity to Music.

That these Boys be divided into three Classes, viz. Six for Wind-Instruments,
such as the Hautboy, Bassoon, and German-Flute.

That sixteen others be selected for String-Instruments, or at least the most
useful, viz. the Violin and Bass-Violin.

That the remaining eight be particularly chosen for Voice, and Organ, or
Harpsichord. That all in due time, be taught Composition. The Boys thus chosen,
three Masters should be elected, each most excellent in his Way; that is to
say, one for the Wind-Instrument, another for the String'd, and a third for the
Voice and Organ, etc.

Handsome Salaries should be allowed these Masters, to engage their constant
Attendance every Day, from eight till twelve in the Morning; and I think a 100
l. per Annum for each, would be sufficient, which will be a Trifle to so
wealthy a Body. The multiplicity of Holidays should be abridg'd, and only a few
kept; there cannot be too few, considering what a hinderance they are to
juvenile Studies. It is a vulgar Error that has too long prevailed all over
England, to the great Detriment of Learning, and many Boys have been made
Blockheads, in Complaisance to Kings and Saints, dead for many Ages past.

The Morning employed in Music, the Boys should go in the Afternoon, or so
many Hours, to the Reading and Writing-School, and in the Evening should
practice, at least two Hours before Bedtime, and two before the Master comes in
the Morning. This Course held for seven or eight Years, will make them fine
Proficients; but that they should not go too raw, or young, out of the Academy,
it is proper, that at the stated Age of Apprenticeship, they be bound to the
Hospital to engage their greater Application, and make them thorough Masters,
before they launch out into the World; for one great hinderance to many
Performers is, that they begin to teach too soon, and obstruct their Genius.

What will not such a Design produce in a few Years? will they not be able to
perform a Consort, Choir, or Opera, or all three among themselves, and over-pay
the Charge, as shall hereafter be specified?

For Example, we will suppose such a Design to be continued for ten Years, we
shall find an Orchestre of forty Hands, and a Choir or Opera of twenty Voices,
or admitting that of those twenty, only five prove Capital Singers, 'twill
answer the Intent.

For the greater Variety they may, if they think fit, take in two or more of
their Girls where they find a promising Genius, but this may be further
considered of.

Now, when they are enabled to exhibit an Opera, Will they not gain
considerably, when their Voices and Hands, cost them only a College
Subsistence? And it is but reasonable the Profits accruing from Operas,
Consorts, or otherwise, should go to the Hospital to make good all former and
future Expenses, and enable them to extend the Design to a greater Length and
Grandeur; so than instead of 1500 l. per Ann. the price of one Italian Singer,
we shall for 300 l. once in ten Years, have sixty English Musicians regularly
educated, and enabled to live by their Science.

There ought moreover to be annual Probations, and proper Prizes or Premiums
alloted, to excite Emulation in the Youths, and give Life to their Studies.

They have already a Musick-School, as they call it, but the Allowance is too
poor for this Design, and the Attendance too small; it must be every Day, or
not at all.

This will be an Academy indeed, and in Process of Time, they will have even
their Masters among themselves; and what is the Charge, compared with the
Profits or their Abilities?

One thing I had like to have forgot, which is, that with Permission of the
Right Reverend the Lords Spiritual, some Performance in Music, suitable to the
Solemnity of the Day, be exhibited every Sunday after Divine Service: Sacred
Poesy and Rhetoric, may be likewise introduced to make it an Entertainment
suitable to a Christian and Polite Audience; and indeed, we seem to want some
such commendable Employment for the better Sort: For we see the public Walks
and Taverns crowded, and rather than be idle, they will go to Newport- Market.

That such an Entertainment would be much preferable to Drinking, Gaming, or
profane Discourse, none can deny, and till it is proved to be prejudicial, I
shall always imagine it necessary. The Hall at the Hospital, will contain few
less than seven hundred People, conveniently seated, which at so small a Price
as one Shilling per Head, will amount to 35 l. per Week; and if the Performance
deserve it, as no doubt it will in time, they may make it half a Crown or more,
which must considerably increase the Income of the Hospital.

When they are able to make an Opera, the Profits will be yet more
considerable, nor will they reap much less from what the Youths bring in during
their Apprenticeship, when employed at Consorts, Theaters, or other public
Entertainments.

Having advanced what I think proper on this Head, or at least enough for a
Hint, I proceed to offer,

That many Youths and Servants may be saved from Destruction, were the Streets
cleared of shameless and impudent Strumpets; Gaming-Tables totally suppressed,
and a stop put to Sabbath Debauches.
THE Corruption of our Children and Servants, is of Importance sufficient to
require our utmost Precaution; and moreover, Women Servants (commonly called
Maidservants) are such necessary Creatures, that it is by no means below us to
make them beneficial rather than prejudicial to us.

I shall not run into a Description of their Abuses; we know enough of those
already. Our Business now is to make them useful, First, by ascertaining their
Wages at a proper Standard.

Secondly, by obliging them to continue longer in Service, not to stroll about
from Place to Place, and throw themselves on the Town on every Dislike.

Thirdly, To prevent their being harbored by wicked Persons, when out of
Place; or living too long on their own Hands.

As for their Wages, they have topp'd upon us already, and doubled 'em in
spite of our Teeth; but as they have had Wit enough to get 'em, so will they,
I doubt not, have the same Sense to keep 'em: and much Good may it do those
indolent oversecure Persons, who have given 'em this Advantage. However, if
they are honest and diligent, I would have them encouraged, and handsome Wages
allowed 'em; because, by this Means, we provide for the Children of the
inferior Class of People, who otherwise could not maintain themselves; nay,
sometimes Tradesmen, etc. reduced, are glad when their Children cease to hang
upon them, by getting into Service, and by that Means, not only maintaining
themselves, but being of Use in other Families. But then there ought to be some
Medium some Limitation to their Wages, or they may extort more than can well be
afforded.

Nothing calls more for Redress than their quitting Service for every idle
Disgust, leaving a Master or Mistress at a Nonplus; and all under Plea of a
foolish old Custom, called Warning; no where practiced but in London: For in
other Places they are hired by the Year, or by the Statute, as they call it,
which settles them in a Place, at least for some Time; whereas, when they are
not limited, it encourages a roving Temper, and makes them never easy.

If you turn them away without Warning, they will make you pay a Month's Wages,
be the Provocation or Offense never so great; but if they leave you, though never
so abruptly, or unprovided, help yourselves how you can, there is no Redress:
Though I think there ought, in all Conscience, to be as much Law for the Master
as for the Servant.

No Servant should quit a Place, where they are well fed and paid, without
assigning a good Reason before a Magistrate. On the other Hand, they should
receive no Abuse which should not be redressed: For we ought to treat 'em as
Servants, not Slaves; and a Medium ought to be observed on both Sides. But if
they are not restrained from quitting Service on every Vagary, they will throw
themselves on the Town, and not only ruin themselves, but others: For Example,
a Girl quits a Place, and turns Whore; if there is not a Bastard to be
murdered, or left to the Parish, there is One or more unwary Youths drawn in to
support her in Lewdness and Idleness; in order to which, they rob their Parents
and Masters, nay, sometimes any Body else, to support their Strumpets; so that
many Thieves owe their Ruin and shameful Deaths to Harlots. Not to mention the
Communication of loathsome Distempers, and innumerable other Evils, to which
they give Birth.

How many Youths, of all Ranks, are daily ruined? And how justly may be dreaded
the Loss of as many more, if a speedy Stop be not put to this growing Evil?
Generations to come will curse the Neglect of the present, and every Sin
committed for the future may be passed to our Account, if we do not use our
Endeavors to the contrary.

And unless we prevent our Maidservants from being harbored by wicked Persons
when out of Place, or living too long on their own Hands, our Streets will
swarm with impudent shameless Strumpets; the Good will be molested; those,
prone to Evil, will be made yet more wicked, by having Temptations thrown in
their Way: And to crown all, we shall have scarce a Servant left, but our
Wives, etc. must do the Houshold-work themselves.

If this be not worthy the Consideration of a Legislature, I would fain know
what is. Is it not Time to limit their Wages, when they are grown so wanton
they know not what to ask? Is it not Time to fix 'em, when they stroll from
Place to Place, and we are hardly sure of a Servant a Month together? Is it not
Time to prevent the Increase of Harlots, by making it penal for Servants to be
harbored in Idleness, and tempted to Theft, Whoredom, Murder, etc. by living
too long out of Place? And I am sure it is high Time to begin the Work, by
clearing the public Streets of Nightwalkers, who are grown to such a Pitch of
Impudence, that Peace and common Decency are manifestly broken in our public
Streets. I wonder this has so long escaped the Eye of the Magistrate,
especially when there are already in force Laws sufficient to restrain this
Tide of Uncleanness, which will one Day overflow us.

The lewdest People upon Earth, ourselves excepted, are not guilty of such open
Violations of the Laws of Decency. Go all the World over, and you will see no
such Impudence as in the Streets of London, which makes many Foreigners give
our Women in general a bad Character, from the vile Specimens they meet with
from one End of the Town to the other. Our Sessions-Papers are full of the
Triais of impudent Sluts, who first decoy Men, and then rob 'em: A Meanness the
Courtesans of Rome and Venice abhor.

How many honest Women, those of the Inferior Sort especially, get loathsome
Distempers from their Husband's Commerce with these Creatures, which Distempers
are often entailed on Posterity; nor have we an Hospital separated for that
Purpose, which does not contain too many Instances of honest poor Wretches made
miserable by Villains of Husbands.

And now I have mentioned the Villainy of some Husbands in the lower State of
Life, give me leave to propose, or at least to wish, that they were restrained
from abusing their Wives at that barbarous Rate, which is now practiced by
Butchers, Carmen, and such inferior Sort of Fellows, who are public Nusances
to civil Neighbourhoods, and yet no Body cares to interpose, because the Riot
is between a Man and his Wife.

I see no Reason why every profligate Fellow shall have the Liberty to disturb
a whole Neighborhood, and abuse a poor honest Creature at a most inhuman Rate,
and is not to be called to Account because it is his Wife; this sort of
Barbarity was never so notorious and so much encouraged as at present, for
every Vagabond thinks he may cripple his Wife at pleasure, and it is enough to
pierce a Heart of Stone to see how barbarously some poor Creatures are beaten
and abused by merciless Dogs of Husbands.

It gives an ill Example to the growing Generation, and this Evil will gain
Ground on us if not prevented: It may be answered, the Law has already provided
Redress, and a Woman abused may swear the Peace against her Husband, but what
Woman cares to do that? It is revenging herself on herself, and not without
considerable Charge and Trouble.

There ought to be a shorter way, and when a Man has beaten his Wife (which by
the Bye is a most unmanly Action, and great Sign of Cowardice) it behooves every
Neighbor who has the least humanity or Compassion, to complain to the next
Justice of the Peace, who should be empowered to set him in the Stocks for the
first Offense; to have him well scourged at the Whipping-Post for the second;
and if he persisted in his barbarous Abuse of the holy Marriage State, to send
him to the House of Correction 'till he should learn to use more Mercy to his
Yoke Fellow.

How hard is it for a poor industrious Woman to be up early and late, to sit in
a cold Shop, Stall, or Market, all Weathers, to carry heavy Loads from one End
of the Town to the other, or to work from Morning till Night, and even then
dread going Home for fear of being murdered? Some may think this too low a
Topic for me to expatiate upon, to which I answer, that it is a Charitable and
a Christian one, and therefore not in the least beneath the Consideration of
any Man who had a Woman for his Mother.

The Mention of this leads me to exclaim against the vile Practice now so much
in vogue among the better Sort, as they are called, but the worst sort in fact,
namely, the sending their Wives to Mad-Houses at every Whim or Dislike, that
they may be more secure and undisturbed in their Debaucheries: Which wicked
Custom is got to such a Head, that the Number of private Mad-Houses in and
about London, are considerably increased within these few Years.

This is the height of Barbarity and Injustice in a Christian Country, it is a
clandestine Inquisition, nay worse.

How many Ladies and Gentlewomen are hurried away to these Houses, which ought
to be suppressed, or at least subject to daily Examination, as hereafter shall
be proposed?

How many, I say, of Beauty, Virtue, and Fortune, are suddenly torn from their
dear innocent Babes, from the Arms of an unworthy Man, who they love (perhaps
but too well) and who in Return for that Love, nay probably an ample Fortune,
and a lovely Offspring besides; grows weary of the pure Streams of chaste
Love, and thirsting after the Puddles of lawless Lust, buries his virtuous Wife
alive, that he may have the greater Freedom with his Mistresses?

If they are not mad when they go into these cursed Houses, they are soon made
so by the barbarous Usage they there suffer, and any Woman of Spirit who has
the least Love for her Husband, or Concern for her Family, cannot sit down
tamely under a Confinement and Separation the most unaccountable and
unreasonable.

Is it not enough to make any one mad to be suddenly clapped up, stripped,
whipped, ill fed, and worse used? To have no Reason assigned for such
Treatment, no Crime alleged, or Accusers to confront? And what is worse, no
Soul to appeal to but merciless Creatures, who answer but in Laughter,
Surliness, Contradiction, and too often Stripes?

All Conveniences for Writing are denied, no Messenger to be had to carry a
Letter to any Relation or Friend; and if this tyrannical Inquisition, joined
with the reasonable Reflections, a Woman of any common Understanding must
necessarily make, be not sufficient to drive any Soul stark staring mad, though
before they were never so much in their right Senses, I have no more to say.

When by this Means a wicked Husband has driven a poor Creature mad, and robbed
an injured Wife of her Reason, for it is much easier to create than to cure
Madness, then has the Villain a handle for his Roguery, then perhaps he will
admit her distressed Relations to see her, when it is too late to cure the
Madness he so artfully and barbarously has procured.

But this is not all, something more dismal Effects attend this Inquisition,
for Death is but too often the Cure of their Madness and End of their Sorrows;
some with ill Usage, some with Grief, and many with both are barbarously cut
off in the Prime of their Years and Flower of their Health, who otherwise might
have been Mothers of a numerous Issue, and survived many Years. This is Murder
in the deepest Sense, and much more cruel than Dagger or Poison, because more
lingering; they die by Peacemeal, and in all the Agonies and Terrors of a
distracted Mind.

Nay it is Murder upon Murder, for the Issue that might have been begot, is to
be accounted for to God and the Public. Now if this kind of Murder is connived
at, we shall no doubt have enough, nay too much of it; for if a Man is weary of
his Wife, has spent her Fortune, and wants another, it is but sending her to a
Mad-House and the Business is done at once.

How many have already been murdered after this manner is best known to just
Heaven, and those unjust Husbands and their damned Accomplices, who, though now
secure in their Guilt, will one Day find it is Murder of the blackest Dye; has
the least claim for Mercy, and calls aloud for the severest Vengeance.

How many are yet to be sacrificed, unless a speedy Stop be put to this most
accursed Practice I tremble to think; our Legislature cannot take this Cause
too soon in hand: This surely cannot be below their Notice, and 'twill be an
easy matter at once to suppress all these pretended Mad-Houses. Indulge, gentle
Reader, for once the doting of an old Man, and give him leave to lay down his
little System without arraigning him of Arrogance or Ambition to a be
Lawgiver. In my humble Opinion all private Mad-Houses should be suppressed at
once, and it should be no less than Felony to confine any Person under pretense
of Madness without due Authority.

For the cure of those who are really Lunatic, licensed Mad-Houses should be
constituted in convenient Parts of the Town, which Houses should be subject to
proper Visitation and Inspection, nor should any Person be sent to a Mad-House
without due Reason, Inquiry and Authority.

It may be objected, by Persons determined to contradict every thing and
approve nothing, that the Abuses complained of are not so numerous or heinous
as I would insinuate: Why are not Facts advanced, they will be apt say, to give
a Face of Truth to these Assertions? but I have two Reasons to the contrary;
the first is, the more you convince them the more angry you make 'em, for they
are never better pleased than when they have an Opportunity of finding Fault:
Therefore to curry Favor with the Fault-finders, I have left 'em a loop Hole:
the second and real is, because I don't care to bring an old House over my Head
by mentioning particular Names or special Cases, thereby drawing my self into
vexatious Prosecutions and Suits at Law, from litigious Wretches, who would be
galled to find their Villainies made public; and stick at no Expense or foul
Play to revenge themselves. Not but I could bring many Instances, particularly
of an unhappy Widow, put in by a Villain of a Husband, and now continued in for
the sake of her Jointure by her unnatural Son, FAR from common Honesty or
Humanity. Of another whose Husband keeps his Mistress in black Velvet, and is
seen with her every Night at the Opera or Play, while his poor Wife, (by much
the finer Woman) and of an Understanding far superior to her thick Skull'd
Tyrant, is kept mean in Diet and Apparel, nay ill used into the Bargain;
notwithstanding her Fortune supplies all the Villain's Extravagancies, and he
has not a Shilling but what came from her: but a Beggar when once set on
Horseback proves always the most unmerciful RIDER.

I cannot leave this Subject without inserting one particular Case.

A Lady of known Beauty, Virtue, and Fortune, nay more, of Wisdom, not flashy
Wit, was, in the Prime of her Youth and Beauty, and when her Senses were
perfectly sound, carried by her Husband in his Coach as to the Opera; but the
Coachman had other Instructions, and drove directly to a Mad-House, where the
poor innocent Lady was no sooner introduced, under pretense of calling by the
way to see some Pictures he had a mind to buy, but the Key was turned upon her,
and she left a Prisoner by her faithless Husband; who while his injured Wife
was confined and used with the utmost Barbarity, He like a profligate Wretch
ran through her Fortune with Strumpets, and then, basely, under Pretense of
giving her Liberty, extorted her to make over her Jointure: which she had no
sooner done but he laughed in her Face, and left her to be as ill used as ever.
This he soon ran through, and (happily for the Lady) died by the Justice of
Heaven in a Salivation his Debauches had obliged him to undergo.

During her Confinement, the Villain of the Mad-House frequently attempted her
Chastity; and the more she repulsed him, the worse he treated her: till at last
he drove her mad in good earnest. Her distressed Brother, who is fond of her to
the last Degree, now confines her in part of his own House, treating her with
great Tenderness; but has the Mortification to be assured by the ablest
Physicians, that his poor Sister is irrecoverably distracted.

Numberless are the Instances I could produce, but they would be accounted
fictitious, because I don't name the particular Persons, for the Reasons before
assigned; but the Sufferings of these poor Ladies are not fictitious, nor are
the Villainy of these Mad-Houses, or the unnatural, though fashionable
Barbarity of Husbands Chimira's, but too solid Grievances and manifest
Violations of the Laws of God and Man.

Most Gracious and August Queen Caroline! Ornament of your Sex, and Pride of
the British Nation! the best of Mothers, the best of Wives, the best of Women!
Begin this Auspicious Reign with an Action worthy your illustrious Self, rescue
your injured Sex from this Tyranny, nor let it be in the Power of every brutal
Husband to Cage and confine his Wife at pleasure: A Practice scarce heard of
'till of late Years. Nip it in the Bud most gracious Queen, and draw on your
self the Blessings of numberless of the fair Sex; now groaning under the
severest and most unjust Bondage. Restore 'em to their Families, let 'em by
your Means enjoy Light and Liberty: That while they fondly embrace, and with
Tears of Joy weep over their dear Children, so long witheld from them, they may
invoke accumulated Blessings from Heaven upon your Royal Head!

And you ye fair illustrious Circle! who adorn the British Court! and every Day
surround our gracious Queen: Let generous Pity inspire your Souls, and move you
to intercede with your noble Consorts for Redress in this injurious Affair. Who
can deny when you become Suitors? and who knows but at your Request a Bill may
be brought into the House to regulate these Abuses? The Cause is a Noble and a
Common one, and ought to be espoused by every Lady who would claim the least
(...) to Virtue or Compassion. I am sure no (...) Member in either honorable
House will (...) so reasonable a Bill; the Business is for some public
Spirited Patriot to break the Ice, by bringing it into the House, and I dare
lay my Life it passes.

I must beg my Reader's Indulgence, being the most immethodical Writer
imaginable; it is true, I lay down a Scheme, but Fancy is so fertile I often
start fresh Hints, and cannot but pursue 'em; pardon therefore kind Reader my
digressive way of Writing, and let the Subject, not the Style or Method engage
thy Attention.

Return we therefore to complain of destructive Gaming-Houses, the Bane of our
Youth, and Ruin of our Children and Servants.

This is the most unprofitable Evil upon Earth, for it only tends to alienate
the proper Current of Specie, to maintain a pack of idle sharping Rascals, and
beggar unwary Gentlemen and Traders.

I take the Itch of gaming to be the most pernicious of Vices, it is a kind of
avaritious Madness; and if People have not Sense to command themselves by
Reason, they ought to be restrained by Law: Nor suffered to ruin themselves and
Families, to enrich a Crew of Sharpers.

There is no playing on the Square with these Villains; they are sure to cheat
you, either by slight of Hand, Confederacy, or false Dice, etc. they have so
much the Odds of their infatuated Bubbles, that they might safely play a Guinea
to a Shilling, and yet be sure of winning. This is but genteel Pocket-picking,
or Felony with another Name, and yet, so fond are we of it, that from the
Footboy to the Lord, all must have a touch of gaming; and there are Sharpers
of different Stations and Denominations, from Southwark Fair to the Groom
Porters. Shame, that Gentlemen should suffer every Scoundrel to mix with them
for Gaming sake! And equal Shame, that honest laborious Tradesmen should be
obstructed in crossing the public Streets, by the gilt Chariots of Vagabond
Gamesters; who now infest the Land, and brave even our Nobility and Gentry with
their own Money!

But the most barbarous Part of this hellish Trade, is what they call setting
of young Gentlemen, Apprentices, and others; this ought to be deemed Felony,
without Benefit of Clergy; for it is the worst of Thievery. Under Pretense of
taking a Bottle, or spending an Evening gayly, they draw their Cull to the
Tavern, where they sit not long before the Devil's Bones or Books are found
accidentally on purpose, by the Help of which they strip my Gentleman in an
Instant, and then generously lend him his own Money, to lose a fresh, and
create a Debt, which is but too often more justly paid than those more justly
due.

If we look into some late Bankrupcies, we shall find some noted Gamesters the
principal Creditors; I think, in such Cases, 'twould be but Justice to make
void the Gamester's Debt, and subject his Estate to make good the Deficiencies
of the Bankrupt's Effects. If Traders have no more Wit, the Public should have
Pity on 'em; and make it as penal to lose as to win: And, in Truth, if Cards,
Dice, etc. were totally suppressed, Industry and Arts would increase the more;
Gaming may make a Man crafty, but not polite; one may understand Cards and Dice
perfectly well, and be a Blockhead in every Thing else.

I am sorry to see it so prevalent in the City, among the trading Part of
Mankind, who have introduced it into their Clubs, and Play so high of late,
that many Bankrupts have been made by this pernicious Practice.

It is the Bane of all Conversation: And those who cannot sit an Hour without
Gaming, should never go into a Club to spoil Company. In a Word, it is mere
Madness, and a most stupid Thing to hazard ones Fortune, and perplex ones Mind;
nay, to sit up whole Nights, poring over Toys of pipt Ivory and painted
Pasteboard, making our selves worse than little Children, whose innocent Sports
we so much ridicule.

To sum up all, I think 'twould be a noble Retribution, to subject Gamester's
Estates to the Use and Support of the poor Widows and Orphans of their
unfortunate Bubbles.

Sunday Debauches are Abuses that call loud for Amendment: It Is in this
pernicious Soil the Seeds of Ruin are first sown. Instead of a Day of Rest, we
make it a Day of Labor, by toiling in the Devil's Vineyard; and but too many
surfeit themselves with the Fruits of Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Uncleanness.

Not that I am so superciliously strict, to have the Sabbath kept as rigidly
here as in Scotland, but then there ought to be a Medium between the Severity
of a Fast, and the Riot of Saturnalia. Instead of a decent and cheerful
Solemnity, our Taverns and Publick-Houses have more Business that Day than all
the Week beside. Our Apprentices plume themselves; nay, some scruple not to put
on their Swords and Tie Wigs, or Toupees; and the loose End of the Town is
their Rendezvous, Sunday being Market Day all round the Hundreds of Drury.

While we want Servants to do our Work, those Hundreds, as they call 'em, are
crowded with Numbers of idle impudent Sluts, who love Sporting more than
Spinning, and inveigle our Youth to their Ruin: Nay, many old Lechers (Beasts
as they are) steal from their Families, and seek these Harlot's lurking Holes,
to practice their unaccountable Schemes of new invented Lewdnesses: Some half
hang themselves, others are whipped, some lie under a Table and gnaw the Bones
that are thrown 'em, while others stand slaving among a Parcel of Drabs at a
Washing-Tub. Strange that the Inclination should not die with the Power, but
that old Fools should make themselves the Prey and Ridicule of a Pack of
Strumpets!

Some heedless Youths are wheedled into Marriage, which makes them and their
unhappy Parents miserable all their Lives; others are drawn into
Extravagancies, and but too often run into their Master's Cash, and for fear of
a Discovery, make away with themselves; or at least run away and leave their
distracted Parents in a Thousand Fears: Not to mention the Frustration of their
Fortune, and the Miseries that attend a Vagabond Life. Thus honest Parents lose
their Children, and Traders their Apprentices, and all from a Liberty we have
of late given our Youth of rambling Abroad on Sundays: For many, now adays,
will lie out all Night, or stay out so late to give no small Disturbance in
sober Families. It therefore behooves every Master of a Family to have his
Servants under his Eye: And if the going to Church, Meeting, or whatever Place
of Worship suited their Religion, were more enforced, it would be so much the
better.

In short, the Luxury of the Age will be the Ruin of the Nation, if not
prevented. We leave Trade to game in Stocks: We live above ourselves, and
barter our Ready-money for Trifles; Tea and Wine are all we seem anxious for,
and God has given the Blessings of Life to an ungrateful People, who despise
their own Productions. Our very Plough-Fellows drink Wine now adays: Our
Farmers, Grasiers, and Butchers, are above Malt-Liquors; and the wholesome
Breakfast of Water Gruel and Milk-pottage is changed for Coffee and Tea. This
is the Reason Provisions and Corn, etc. are so dear; we all work for Vintners,
and raise our Prices one upon another to such a Degree, 'twill be an
Impossibility to live, and we shall, of Course, become our own Devourers.

We strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel: And, in this Instance, the Public
Houses are kept open to furnish our Luxury, while we deny ourselves other
Necessaries of Life, out of a Scruple of Conscience. For Example; in extreme
hot Weather, when Meat will not keep from Saturday to Sunday, we throw, or
cause to be thrown away, vast Quantities of tainted Meat, and have generally
stinking Dinners, because the Butchers dare not sell a Joint of Meat on a
Sunday Morning. Now, though I would not have the Sabbath so far violated as to
have it Market Day, yet, rather than abuse God's Mercies by throwing away
Creatures given for our Use, nay, for our own Healths and Cleanliness Sake, I
would have the same Indulgence in extreme hot Weather, as there is for Milk and
Mackrell; that is to say, that Meat might be killed in the cool of the Morning,
viz. One or Two of the Clock, and sold 'till Nine, and no longer: Nor should
villainous Informers have Power to molest them in this innocent and reasonable
Amendment of a ridiculous vulgar Error.

I cannot forbear taking Notice of the extravagant Use, or rather Abuse of that
nauseous Liquor, called GENEVA, among our lower sort. Those who deny, that an
inferior Class of People are most necessary in a Body Politic, contradict
Reason and Experience itself, since they are most useful when Industrious, and
as pernicious when lazy. By their Industry our Manufactures, Trade, and
Commerce are carried on: The Merchant in his Compting House, and the Captain in
his Cabin would find but little Employment were it not that many Hands carried
on the different Branches of the Concern they superintended.

But now so far are our common People infatuated with Geneva, that Half the
Work is not done now as formerly. It debilitates and enervates them, and they
are not near so strong and healthy as formerly. This accursed Liquor is in
itself so diuretic, it over-strains the Parts of Generation, and makes our
common People incapable of getting such lusty Children as they used to do. Add
to this, that the Women, by drinking it, spoil their Milk, and by giving it to
young Children, as they foolishly do, spoil the Stomach, and hinder Digestion;
so that in less than an Age, we may expect a fine Spindle-shank'd Generation.

There is not in Nature so unhealthy a Liquor as Geneva, especially as commonly
sold: It curdles the Blood, it stupifies the Senses, it weakens the Nerves, it
spoils the Eyesight, and entirely ruins the Stomach; nay, some Stomachs have
been rendered so cold by the Use of Geneva, that Lamp-Spirits have not been a
Dram warm enough for 'em. Surely they will come to drink Aquafortis at last!

On the contrary, our own Malt Liquors, especially common Draught Beer, is most
wholesome and nourishing, and has brought up better Generations than the
present: It is strengthening, cooling, and balsamic: It helps Digestion, and
carries Nourishment with it. And, in spite of the Whims of some Physicians, is
most pertinent to a humane, especially a good wholesome English Constitution.
Nay, the honest Part of the Faculty deny not the Use of Small-Beer well brewed,
even in Fevers. I my self have found great Benefit by it; and if it be good in
its Kind it is the finest Julap upon Earth.

If this Abuse of Geneva be not stopped, we may go whoop for Husbandmen,
Laborers, etc. Trade must consequently stand still, and the Credit of the
Nation sink: Nor is the Abatement of the Excise, though very considerable, and
most worthy Notice, any ways comparable to the Corruption of Manners, the
Destruction of Healt^ (...) all the Train of Evils we are threatened with from
pernicious Geneva.

An effectual Method to prevent Street-Robberies.
THE principal Encouragements, and Opportunity given to Street-Robbers is, that
our Streets are so poorly watched; the Watchmen, for the most Part, being
decrepid, superannuated Wretches, with one Foot in the Grave, and the the other
ready to follow; so feeble, that a Puff of Breath can blow 'em down: Poor crazy
Mortals! Much fitter for an Almshouse than a Watch-house. A City watched and
guarded by such Animals, is wretchedly watched indeed.

Nay, so little Terror do our Watchmen carry with them, that hardy Thieves make
a mere Jest of 'em, and sometimes (...) even the very Watchmen, who should
apprehend 'em, to light 'em in their Roguery: And what can a poor Creature do,
in Terror of his Life, surrounded by a Pack of Ruffians, and no Assistance near.

Add to this, that our Rogues are grown more wicked than ever, and Vice in all
Kinds is so much winked at, that Robbery is accounted a petty Crime. We take
pains to puff 'em up in their Villainy, and Thieves are set out in so amiable a
Light in the Beggar's Opera, that it has taught them to value themselves on
their Profession, rather than be ashamed of it.

There was some Cessation of Street-Robberies, from the Time of Bunworth and
Blewitt's Execution, 'till the Introduction of this pious Opera. Now we find
the Cartouchian Villainies revived, and London, that used to be the most safe
and peaceful City in the Universe, is now a Scene of Rapine and Danger. If some
of Cartouch's Gang be not come over to instruct our Thieves, and propagate
their Schemes, we have, doubtless, a Cartouch of our own, and a Gang, which, if
not suppressed, may be full as pernicious as ever Cartouch's was, and London
will be as dangerous as Paris, if due Care be not taken.

We ought to begin our Endeavors to suppress these Villainies; first by
Heavenly, and then by Earthly Means.

By Heavenly Means, in enforcing and encouraging a Reformation of Manners, by
suppressing of Vice and Immorality, and punishing Profaneness and
Licentiousness. Our Youth are corrupted by filthy, lewd Ballads, sung and sold
publicly in our Streets: Nay, unlicens'd and ^^stamp'd, notwithstanding Acts
of Parliament to the contrary.

Coachmen, Carmen, etc. are indulged in Swearing after the most blasphemous,
shocking, and unaccountable Rate that ever was known. New Oaths and Blasphemies
are daily uttered and invented, and rather than not exercise this hellish
Tallent, they will vent their Curses on their very Horses; and, Oh stupid! Damn
the Blood of a Post, rather than want something to curse.

Our common Women too have learned this Vice; and not only Strumpets, but
laboring Women, who keep our Markets, and vend Things about Street, swear and
curse at a most hideous Rate. Their Children learn it from the Parents, and
those of the middle, or even the better Sort of People, if they pass through
the Streets to School, or to play, catch the Infection, and carry home such
Words as must consequently be very shocking to sober Parents.

Our Youth, in general, have too much Liberty; the Sabbath is not kept with due
Solemnity; Masters and Mistresses of Families are too remiss in the Care of the
Souls committed to their Charge. Family Prayer is neglected; and, to the Shame
of Scoffers be it spoken, too much ridiculed. All Ages and Sexes, if in Health,
should be obliged to attend public Worship, according to their respective
Opinions.

Were it only to keep Youth out of Harm's Way, it would do well. But it is to
be hoped, if their Parents, Masters, or Mistresses should oblige their
Attendance at public Devotion, they would edify by what they should hear, and
many wicked Acts would be stifled in their Infancy, and checked even in the
Intention, by good and useful Doctrine.

Our common People make it a Day of Debauch, and get so drunk on a Sunday, they
cannot work for a Day or two following. Nay, since the Use of Geneva has become
so common, many get so often drunk they cannot work at all, but run from one
Irregularity to another, 'till at last they become arrant Rogues. And this is
the Foundation of all our present Complaints.

We will suppose a Man able to maintain himself and Family by his Trade, and at
the same Time to be a Geneva-drinker: This Fellow first makes himself incapable
of working, by being continually drunk; this runs him behind-hand, and he
either pawns or neglects his Work, for which Reason no Body will employ him. At
last, Fear of Arrests, his own Hunger, the Cries of his Family for Bread, his
natural Desire to support an irregular Life, and a propense Hatred to Labor,
turn but too many an honest Tradesman into an arrant desperate Rogue: And these
are commonly the Means that furnish us with Thieves and Villains in general.

Thus is a Man, that might be useful in a Body politic, rendered obnoxious to
the same: And if this Trade of Wickedness goes on, they will grow and increase
upon us, insomuch, that we shall not dare to stir out of our Habitations; nay,
it will be well if they arrive not to the Impudence of plundering our Houses at
Noon day.

Where is the Courage of the English Nation, that a Gentleman, with Six or
Seven Servants, shall be robbed by one single Highwayman? Yet we have lately
had Instances of this; and for this we may thank our Effeminacy, our Toupee
Wigs, and powdered Pates, our Tea, and other scandalous Fopperies; and above
all, the Disuse of noble and manly Sports, so necessary to a brave People, once
in Vogue, but now totally lost among us.

Let not the Reader think I run from my Subject, if I search the Bottom of the
Distemper before I propose a Cure, which having done, though indeed but slightly,
for this is an Argument could be carried to a much greater Length, I proceed
next to propose Earthly Means in the Manner following.

Let the Watch be composed of stout able bodied Men, and of those at least
treble the Number now subsisting, that is to say, a Watchman to every Forty
Houses, Twenty on one Side of the Way, and Twenty on the other; for it is
observable, that a Man cannot well see distinctly beyond the Extent of Twenty
Houses in a Row; if it is a single Row, and no opposite Houses, the Charge must
be greater, and their Safety less. This Man should be elected, and paid by the
Housekeepers themselves, to prevent Misapplication and Abuse, so much
complained of, in the Distribution of Public Money.

He should be allowed 10 s. per Annum, by each Housekeeper, which at Forty
Houses, as above specified, amounts to 20 l. per Annum, almost treble to what
is at present allowed; and yet most Housekeepers are charged at least 2 s. 6 d.
a Quarter to the Watch, whose beat is, generally speaking, little less than the
Compass of half a Mile.

This Salary is something of Encouragement, and a pretty Settlement to a poor
Man, who, with Frugality, may live decently thereon, and, by due Rest, be
enabled to give vigilant Attendance.

If a Housekeeper break, or a House is empty, the poor Watchman ought not to
suffer, the Deficiency should be made up by the Housekeepers remaining.

Or, indeed, all Housekeepers might be excused, if a Tax of only 1 s. per Annum
were levied on every Bachelor within the Bills of Mortality, and above the Age
of One and Twenty, who is not a Housekeeper; for these young Sparks are a Kind
of unprofitable Gentry to the State; they claim public Safety and Advantages,
and yet pay nothing to the Public, nay indeed, they, in a Manner, live upon
the Public, for (on a Sunday especially) at least a Million of these Gentlemen
quarter themselves upon the married Men, and rob many Families of part of a
Week's Provision, more particularly when they play a good Knife and Fork, and
are of the Family of the Tuckers.

I beg Pardon for this whimsical Proposal, which, ludicrous as it seems, has
something in it; and may be improved. Return we, in the mean Time, to our
Subject.

The Watch thus station'd, strengthened, and encouraged, let every Watchman be
armed with Firearms and Sword; and let no Watchman stand above Twenty Doors
distant from his Fellow.

Let each Watchman be provided with a Bugle-Horn, to sound on Alarm, or in Time
of Danger; and let it be made penal, if not Felony, for any but a Watchman to
sound a Horn in and about the City, from the Time of their going on, to that of
their going off.

An Objection will be here made on Account of the Post-Boys, to obviate which,
I had Thoughts of a Bell, but that would be too ponderous and troublesome for a
Watchman to carry, besides his Arms and Lanthorn. As to a fixed Bell, if the
Watchman is at another Part of his Walk, how can he give Notice? Besides,
Rogues may play Tricks with the Bell; whereas a Horn is portable, always ready,
and most alarming.

Let the Post-Boys, therefore, use some other Signal, since this is most
convenient to this more material Purpose. They may carry a Bell in a Holster,
with Ease, and give Notice by that, as well as those who collect the Letters.

That the Watchmen may see from one End of their Walks to the other, let a
convenient Number of Lamps be set up, and those not of the Unequal Kind, which
blind the Eyes, and are of no manner of Use; they dazzle, but give no distinct
Light: And farther, rather than prevent Robberies. Many, deceived and blinded
by these Ignes fatui, have been run over by Coaches, Carts, etc. People stumble
more upon one another, even under these very Lamps, than in the Dark. In short,
they are most unprofitable Lights, and, in my Opinion, rather Abuses than
Benefits.

Besides, I see no Reason why every Ten Housekeepers cannot find a Lamp among
themselves, and let their Watchman dress it, rather than fatten a crew of
Directors: But we are so fond of Companies, it is a Wonder we have not our
Shoes black'd by one, and a Set of Directors made rich at the Expense of our
very Black-guards. Convenient Turn-pikes and Stoppages may be made to prevent
Escapes, and it will be proper for a Watchman to be placed at one of these,
fixed at the End of a Lane, Court, Alley, or other Thoroughfare, which may
happen in any Part of his Beat, and so as not to obstruct his View to both Ends
thereof, or being able to give Notice, as aforesaid; for the Watch ought to be
in View, as well as in the Hearing of each other, or they may be overpowered,
and much Danger may happen.

The Streets thus guarded and illuminated, what remains, but that the Money
allotted by the Government be instantly paid on Conviction of every Offender;
for Delays in this Case are of dangerous Consequence, and no Body will venture
their Lives in Hopes of a Reward, if it be not duly and timely paid. If there
is Reason of Complaint on this Head, it ought to be looked into by those at the
Helm; for nothing can be more vile than for Underlings to abuse the Benevolence
of the Public, or their Superiors, by sinking, abridging, or delaying public
or private Benefits. And it is by no Means below the Dignity, or Care, even of
the greatest, to see the Disposal of their own Bounty and Charity; for it loses
but too often by the Carriage: And where a Nobleman, or other generous Person,
has ordered Five Guineas to be given, it is well if the proper Object has had
even One.

Something allowed by the Chamber of London, to every Person apprehending a
Robber, would have a good Effect, especially if it be not told over a Gridiron,
but paid without Delay, or Abatement. And what if the fewer Custards are eat,
so it augment the Public Safety.

Some of our common Soldiery are (and I hope unjustly) suspected. This may be
easily confuted, if strict Orders are enforced, that none but Commission, or
Warrant Officers shall be out of their Quarters after Ten at Night. But if we
consider, that neither Blewit, Bunworth, or their Gangs, were Soldiers, and
that of those who have been executed for Ten Years past, not One in Ten were
Soldiers, but, on the contrary, Seamen discharged, and thrown on the Public,
without present Subsistence, which made them desperate: But I hope the Act now
depending for the Encouragement of Seamen, etc. will sufficiently remove that
Obstacle also. This, I hope, will stop the Mouths of censorious Persons, who
unjustly arraign our Soldiery for the Vices of others: However, to make all
easy, I believe the Generality of them will gladly submit to the Restraint
proposed, merely to show their Innocence.

Mean Time, would his most sacred Majesty let them partake of his Bounty, as
the Officers, etc. have done, and raise their Pay, were it but One Penny per
Diem, it would be a most Royal Bounty, would considerably contribute to their
Support, and put them above any sordid Views: And there was never more Occasion
than now, when Provisions of all Kinds are so excessive dear.

Having offered my little Mite to the Public, I beg they will excuse the
Deficiency of my Style, and Multitude of my Errors, for my Intention's Sake. I
write without Prospect of Gain: If I am censured, it is what I can but expect;
but if, among all my Schemes, One proves of Service, my Desires and Labors are
amply answered.

OMISSIONS.
IN my Scheme for an University in London, I proposed only a Hall or public
Room; on Recollection I find it should be a large House or Inn, in the Nature
of a College, with store of convenient Rooms for Gentlemen, not only to study
separately, but wherein to lodge their Books, for 'twould be most inconvenient
to lug them backwards and forwards: They may indeed Breakfast, Sup, and Sleep
at Home, but 'twill be highly necessary they should dine in Commons, or at
least near the College; not that I would have Cooks, Butlers, Caterers,
Manciples, and the whole Train of College Cannibals retained; but for fear they
should stay too long at Home, or be hindered from returning to Study in due
time, some proper Place or Person might be pitched upon to keep an Ordinary at
a prefixed Price and Hour, and for the Students only.

My Reasons are these: First, A young Gentleman may live too far from College.
Second, The College Hours for Dinner, may not agree with those of the Family.
Third, Company may drop in and detain him.
These being, I think, the only material Objections could be offered, I hope I
have amply provided against them, and rendered my Project more perfect and
unexceptionable.

One Omission I made in the Discourse on Mad-Houses, etc. is, that Maiden
Ladies as well as Widows and Wives, are liable to the Inquisition there
complained of, and I am informed a good Estate is lately come to a worthless
Family, by the Death, or rather Murder of an innocent young Creature, who being
left very rich, chose to live with her Friends; but well had it been for her,
had she taken up her Abode among Strangers, for they stayed off all Proposals
for Marriage a considerable time, and when at last they found the Lady would
not be hindered from altering her Condition, she was hurried away to a
Mad-House, where she miserably ended her Days, while they rioted in the Pillage
of her Fortune. Thus neither Maid, Wife or Widow, are safe, while these
accursed Mad-Houses are suffered: Nay, I see no Reason, (if the Age improves in
Wickedness, as in all Probability it may) but the Men, per Contra, may take
their Turns. Younger Brothers, etc. may clap up their Elders and jump into
their Estates, for there are no Questions asked at these Mad-Houses, but who is
the Play Master, and how much; give them but their Price, mad or not mad it is no
matter whom they confine; so that if any Person lives longer than his Relations
think convenient, they know their Remedy, it is but sending them to a Mad-House
and the Estate's their own.

Having answered all that I think liable to Objection, and recollected what I
had omitted, I desire to stand or fall by the Judgment of the serious Part of
Mankind; wherein they shall correct me I will kiss the Rod and suffer with
Patience; but if a pack of Hackney Scriblers shall attack me only by way of a
get-Penny, I shall not be provoked to answer them be they never so scurrilous,
lest I be accounted as one of them.

TO Lieutenant Colonel Samuel Robinson.
SIR,
I Shall congratulate you on your Election into the Chamberlainship of the City
of London, or otherwise, as you shall acquit your self in answering heartily
and impartially to the following Queries.

I. Whether there is not Money sufficient in the Chamber of London to pay off
the Orphan's Fund? Or if not a sufficient Sum, What Sum it is, and what is the
Deficiency? How long it has lain there, and what Interest has been made upon
it? II. If there are not considerable Arrears due from many Wards, and what
those Arrears are? III. Who are these poor Orphans we pay so much Money to? And
whether they are not some of the richest Men in the City of London, who have
got the Stock into their own Hands, and find it so snug a Fund, they do not
care to get out of it? IV. If it would not be much better to gather in the
Arrears, join 'em to the Money in the Office, and collect the Overplus at once,
rather than suffer the Tax to become eternal, and to pay so much Interest?
This is but a reasonable Request; and if Col. Robinson is the honest Gentleman
Fame reports him to be, he will make no Scruple to give a ready Answer. And
indeed it will be but a handsome Return made to his Fellow Citizens, for their
Choice of him, to begin his Office with such an Act of Justice, Honesty, and
public Satisfaction. For many People don't know what is meant by the Orphan's
Tax: They pay it with Remorse, and think themselves aggrieved. Even those who
know the Reason of the Fund think it has been continued long enough, wish it
were once paid off, suspect some Secret in the Affair, and give their Tongues
the Liberty all Losers claim: Our Fathers, say they, have eaten four Grapes,
and our Teeth are set on Edge, we are visited for their Transgressions, and may
be to the World's End, unless we find an honest Chamberlain who will unveil
this cloudy Affair, and give us a Prospect of Relief.

Thus, Sir, it lies at your Door to gain the Applause of the whole City (a few
Misers excepted) by a generous and Gentleman-like Discovery of this Affair. And
you are thus publicly called upon, that your Discovery may be as public and
beneficial to all. If you comply, I shall think you an honest Man, above a
Fellow-feeling, or being biased, and most worthy your Office: If not, give me
Leave to think, the Citizens of London have made but an indifferent Choice. I
am,

SIR, Yours, as you prove yourself.
February 28, 1727-8.
FINIS.

