A Farther ARGUMENT AGAINST Ennobling Foreigners, IN ANSWER To the Two Parts of
the State Anatomy: With a Short Account of the Anatomizer.

T -- l -- nd Blasphemes the Holy Ghost,
The Bribed of Bribes Accuses;
Of Foreign Rogues the Traitor Boasts,
The King, who was Your Lord of Hosts,
That Ra -- l How Abuses.
A Letter to a Member of Parliament. LONDON: Printed for E. Moore near St.
Paul's, 1717. Price 6 d. Where may be had the first Part, Price 1 s.

A Farther Argument, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
SUCH is the Pride and invincible Obstinacy of Mankind, that nothing is more
against Nature than to acknowledge their mistakes: Not the power of their
Reason, not the sense of Modesty, no not the influence of secret Convictions
can prevail with them ever to own themselves in the wrong: No, although they know
it, and discover to every own they converse with that they do so. Hence the
innumerable Writings of Men obstinate in error, have in a great measure
proceeded, and the World has been filled with the labors of Heretics, who
have in all Ages broached false Doctrines, and infamous Opinions, even so
gross, as Satan himself never had the front to suggest; and yet rather than be
thought to recant what they had once advanced, they have thought fit to
maintain those false Doctrines and infamous Opinions, at the expense of
Religion, Conscience, and all manner of Reputation.

This I take to be the Case, in due proportion to Circumstances, of the Author
of the late Libel, entitled, the State Anatomy; such I must call it, because
it Libels and Slanders Persons, Governments, and Nations. And as this has long
been his practice in other things, for which a certain Author of Note said of
him, That he had made the World believe him a worse Heretic than he is: So I
see a great deal of ground to think he has gone upon the same foundation in
bringing forth now a second part of his Libel in vindication of the first;
notwithstanding it is manifest that he was so convinced of the Error of the
first, that the very nature of the thing now, extorts a Confession, That he had
been justly reproved. An example of this (to make things clear as I go) is in
nothing more evident than in the great bustle he makes in his second Libel, to
clear himself of his having most scandalously forespoken the House of Lords,
telling us positively, before their Lordships had so much as debated it, that
they really would receive more Foreigners into their Body, and pointing out to
them who should be the Men. This he will not have called leading or dictating
to the House, though there are innumerable precedents when the House have thought
otherwise, and resented it accordingly, as well from greater as smaller Persons
than this Author.

This hard task however he undertakes, though most People think he will as ill
come off, as he did from endeavoring to prove himself no Heretic, when yet he
owns himself to be of some Opinions contrary to Orthodox Christians.

It is nevertheless to be acknowledged to him (for I shall do him justice, though
he does no justice to others) I say, it is to be acknowledged to him, that he
grants leading and dictating to so illustrious a Body as the House of Lords, is
an unjustifyable practice; but when he comes to wash his hands of the Fact, Hoc
opus, Hic labor est: I shall examine it by it self presently; but before I
enter upon that part, it is meet to attack his detached Parties, which he has
prepared to Satyrize those he intends to fight with; for it is to be observed,
that he takes a new method with Mankind, scarce ever practiced by any Man
before; and this is, to find out an Author who he thinks fit for his encounter,
and call him the Writer of the Book which he contends with, (it matters not
with him whether he is the Man or no) and thus having dressed up this Man of
Straw, he begins the fight. This he has done in the Case before me, where
finding it greatly for his purpose, that De Foe, Author of the True born
Englishman, should pass for the Author of the Argument against enabling
Foreigners, etc. he has singled him out, and fallen upon him in a most
merciless manner; for he has recommended him to the Revenge of his Foreigners,
(what mercy he will find there may be guessd at.) He has also, as far as his
good Wishes may have effect, recommended him to the Resentment of the
Government. He has exposed, ridiculed, banter'd, and in a word, as far as in
him lies, murdered the Man; and yet all this while, this Man, as I find, was
no more Author of this Book than the Man in the Moon: Nay, as I hear, for I
have no Knowledge of the Man, he has been sick in his Bed all the while. In
carrying on this Tragi comedy, he takes care to summon for Evidence, all that
this D. F. has said upon the same subject in his Pamphlets and Poems formerly
written; and to confront this with what I have said now; whereas if it were
true that the said D. F. had been Author of all those things, and those too, it
had amounted to no more than this; either that he had been wrong before, and
was now better informed; or second, that he had contradicted himself, and wrote
one time one thing, and one time another, a fault which Modesty should have
taught Toland to have passed over in silence, that it might not be retorted
upon himself; and after all, neither of these things would prove at all that
what Mr. Toland had said was right, or would have made his Libel one jot better
than it was before, besides the Scandal of having taken a wrong aim, and
charging a Man falsely with writing this Book, who really has no manner of
concern in it or about it. In the next place, I observe Mr. Toland is of
Opinion that I should not have published his Name when I answered his Libel:
The Truth is, he should have taken care to have had the Secret better kept,
knowing how ill his Name recommends any Cause he embarks in the defense of, and
how much disadvantage it is to those he serves, to have him known to be their
Advocate; upon these Considerations I should have forborne his Name, had it not
been made public before by his Echo, Mr. Boyer, who in his Monthly Fables,
called falsely the Political State, harang'd for him, thinking ( by mistake) to
make his Book sell. This Man openly told his Name, for which, I hear, the
Bookseller owed him no thanks. Since then his own Friend did him that injury,
for I hear it gave a great check to the sale of his Book; why should he blame
the Author of the Answer, who only named him at second Hand, after it was no
more a Secret, and who, even then, did it with caution too, knowing how
scandalous a sorger of Names to Books that same Boyer was, and how little was
to be built for truth upon what he had published, who is the easiest Man to be
imposed upon, the most unconcerned at doing any innocent Man an Injury, and the
backwardest to do Justice when he was convinced of it, of any Man alive; which
I shall prove in a part by it self.

CHAP. I.
A farther Confirmation of the visible Design there has been for some time
carried on among a Party to propose the Introducing FOREIGNERS among the
Nobility; and a little of the Liberty Mr. TOLAND takes with Truth.

MR. Toland begins this Subject for me with two notable Falsities; first he
says boldly, Page 30. (these are his words) I never knew or heard of any such
Design, as he affirms there was to introduce these two Noblemen or any other
Foreigners into the House of Peers. Stop there, and go back to Page 26. see his
words again, My proposal, says he, contains nothing new or strange, with
respect either to the Dispensation or the Persons. How can this be if such a
Design was never heard of before, Oportet Mendacem. The next Falsity is as
evident as the former, and is taken from his own words also, Page 25. ( viz.)
As to the two foreign Noblemen, in consideration of whose service, I proposed a
legal Dispensation with the fifth limitation of the Act of Succession, an
outcry was immediately raised, as if all the Foreigners in Christendom were to
be preferred here; whereas I expressly confined my Proposal to those two Persons:
Here again Mr. Toland lets us see that great Wits have short Memories; for
either he did not write the Memorial called the Anatomy, or else he had forgot
himself strangely; for look into his said Anatomy, Page 57, he expressly
recommends Monsieur Robethon by Name thus, ( viz.) nor can it enter into my
Thoughts, but that a way will be found out to recompense the Merit of the no
less able and indefatigable Mr. Robethon; there is one more plainly proposed by
Name: And to let us see that even this is not all that is desired, he modestly
adds, Page 58, I am far from extending this to many others, pray observe, not
to many others; this, I think, strongly acknowledges he is for extending it to
some few others: And yet this Man has the Front to say in his Second Part, Page
25. that he expressly confined his Proposals to two Persons. Is this the Man
that charges D. F. with falsehood, and gives him the Lie in public Print! was
ever any thing more notorious! and is this the Man that disowns their being a
Design laid to propose the bringing in Foreigners! and more Foreigners than he
names into the Peerage! whereas he here acknowledges there is a Design to bring
in some, but not many: Thus he confesses in one Book, and denies in the other;
talks honestly per accident, and knavishly per incident: But this is not the
first time Mr. Toland has discovered himself to be Ambo dexter in his
Arguments, as well as in other things; and though I will have nothing to do with
the quarrel between D. F. and him, (for by his treating D. F. there must be
some Malice among them) yet when I am observing the Liberty Mr. Toland takes
with Truth, I cannot pass by one of the Coursest Shuffles that I have
ordinarily met with in the World. It is in his fighting with his Man of Straw
aforesaid. After he has played the Buffoon with him a great while, as if he was
bringing him instantly to the Old Bailey or Westminster to be Arraigned, and
that he was to be the Informer against him, he then falls to down right giving
him the Lie, as a Man who there was no measures to be used with, and he proves
D. F. a Liar in this quaint method.

He complains that D. F. had said in some of his writings, that he had seen the
original Letter which he (Toland) had sent to the Dissenters; this is a Lie
says Toland, for it was only written by an Amanuensis, I kept the original by
me.

Now would one not think that Toland might have learnt, ever since he was
expelled the University, a little more justice in Dispute than this? Let his
Enemy be who he will, real, or imaginary, I shall only ask him in a few Words,
whether, let it be written by a Servant or not by a Servant, was not the Letter
which he actually sent to the Dissenting Ministers, properly the Original? I Will
give him a particular Case, ( viz.) as in drawing Writings. The rough Draught
of a Lease or Indenture is drawn by the Attorney or Scrivener, and it is
afterward written over fair or engrossed by a Clerk or Amanuensis, yet that
Ingrossment being executed, is called the Original Deed, and it would be looked
upon a most egregious Shuffle, for any Man who had seen the said Writing, to
say, if he was legally asked, that he had not seen the Original because he had
not seen the Draught. If Mr. Toland drew a Draught of a Letter to the
Dissenters, and then caused his Servant or Amanuensis to draw it out fair, The
first perhaps having alterations, interpolations, etc. in it, and on viewing
the fair Copy, caused his Name to be set to it, which is Executing it, and then
sent away; I desire to know which is the Original, That which is first finished
and executed, or that which is Drawn out rough, to be redrawn out for such
finishing?

But this is by the by: I Note it as a Specimen of his sincere way of Arguing,
and his bold giving the LIE on such Grounds as these: And I have remarked this,
that the World may see what Advocates such a Cause as this has singled out
among Mankind to defend it.

Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis.
Tempus eget --
However I shall say the less of this here, because I may yet give a Compleater
History of the Character of this Mr. Toland, to undeceive the World about him,
and also of his fellow Labourer in this Drudgery; That French Papist in
disguise, who flattering every Side in his turn, Writes now for a Tory
Ministry, now for a Whig, and under the pretense of serving the Whigs, has
always been the first to Publish the Manifestos of Rebels, Declarations of the
Pretender, and such like stuff, of whom I say, together with an Account of Mr.
Toland, the Public, not the Secret History, is as ready for the Press as
needful for the Public; and to which I shall refer for the most Execrable
Practices that any have been suffered to be guilty of unpunished in a Christian
Government.

CHAP. II.
Of Leading, Dictating or Prescribing to the House of Lords, by the Pamphlet
called The State Anatomy.

FOR the Reasons already Given, I leave for a while talking any more of the
Person of this Author, and come back to his Discourse; I find him very much
concerned to wash off what sticks to him in this Article of Dictating to the
House of Lords, it will soon appear whether he does this to purpose, or not to
purpose: I need spend no time to prove that Leading and Dictating to the House
of Lords, is a Scandalous, Insolent and Offensive Practice, and what the House
has always thought fit to resent; Toland has given me up that Point in his
Second Libel, which therefore according to my Title I must Anatomise here. Page
5. his Words aae these: They must be mad themselves, who can think any Man else
mad enough to prescribe to any Public Assembly, much less to the Legislative
Body of the Nation? Thus the Point is Granted, and there needs no more dispute
about that: It lies then before us to enquire whether what Mr. Toland in his
Lybel has offered to the House of Lords, can be called Dictating to them, and
Leading them, or no.

I will abate him all he says, to recommend the Gentlemen; This I will call
only Proposing to the Lords, which he says any Man may do. But when he comes to
say, there is no need to fear but that the Lords will do it, p. 57. and again,
that it would savor of Ingratitude and Partiallity not to do it, p. ibid. What
shall we say to that modest Part! Is this Prescribing to and Leading the House
of Peers, or is it not?

Let me be allowed to make a short Comment upon this worthy Text, The House of
Lords will Consent to make Baron Bothmar and Count Bernsdorf Peers, they cannot
Honorably refuse it, and they would be ungrateful and unjust, for to be
Partial is to be Unjust, if they should not. These are Words well deserving to
be Remarked: I would be very glad to hear when ever such Words were spoken of
the House of Lords and not resented; and yet this Man is not so mad as to
Dedicate to the Parliament* as if telling them they must do a Certain thing, or
be Ungrateful and Partial, was not Dictating: For the farther asscertaining
then what is, or is not Dictating to the House, I appeal to that Illustrious
and most Honorable Assembly, whose Journals are full of Eminent Precedents, as
well in Cases where Men have Offended in the Point of Dictating, etc. as also
of the constant resentment of the House in such Cases.

Has this most Venerable Body been so Jealous of their Privileges, and so Nice,
as to forbid any Lybeller or Author, so much as to Print the Name of a Peer,
and to make the Offender Liable to an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, though he
said nothing offensive; nay, though he spoke in the praise of the Person named:
And shall it not be an Offense against the Privileges of the House, to reproach
them in Print with Ingratitude and Partiality, if they do not do this or that
which the Libeller says is fit to be done!

Shall the House be so Jealous of their Privileges, as to make a Fence round
their Actions (like the Rails in ancient Times to keep off the People from
approaching Mount Sinai) so that Authors are forbid to Print and Write any
thing that is said or done within their Walls at their Peril; and shall it be
no Subject of Resentment to pretend, in Print, that they will certainly do this
or that, before they have so much as Debated it or spoken a Word about it? Is
not Mr. Redpath and Mr. Walker, and others, now in Custody of the Black Rod,
for but an unwary Trespass of this kind; and shall Toland publicly say they
shall or will do this or that, and cannot omit to do it without Ingratitude and
Partiallity? and yet wipe his Mouth and say, He has given their Lordships no
Offense.

I will not say the House cannot omit taking him up without Partiallity; but I
may say, that if it were any body but Mr. Toland I should wonder at his
Impudence, and should say that if he escaped he would have very good Luck.

CHAP. III.
Of the great Succcess of the PROPOSAL; The great Service done by the
ANATOMIZER to the Interest which he pretends to assist; And an Enquiry into the
real Advance of their Cause by it.

WERE the People who they Write for, and those who both of them think they
please, made but once sensible of the just Characters of the Persons who have,
whether Mercenarily or Officiously undertaken their Cause: Were they made
sensible how they Perform, and how they Expose, rather than Assist the Cause
they undertake, they would be ashamed of them, and say to them, as was lately
said by a Noble Lord to a certain Author who claimed some Reward for his great
Services in vindicating his Lordship, You will extremely oblige me, Sir, if you
will be pleased to say no more about me. Let a Judgment be made only by the
Success of the present Undertaking; and let Mr. Toland ask himself sedately,
Whether he thinks that the Cause he has espoused has gained or lost by him? Let
him go to the Baron Bothmar and Count Bernsdorff, and ask of those Noble
Persons, Whether they think he has served them or not; and whether they think
themselves nearer or farther off from a Peerage by his Argument?

It cannot be true that he himself believes he has bettered their Cause; it
appears that he thinks otherwise, by his shifting off from them the Scandal of
Employing him; taking the Blame of it all upon himself; declaring they know
nothing of it, and that they are so far from desiring him to do it, that they
do not so much as Court or Desire the Honor of being Peers, or to that
purpose. Now if he found, upon his starting the Proposal, that the Nation came
generally and readily into it, he would never strive with so much Earnestness
to conceal the Design; endeavor to bring in the Proposal as a Brat of his own
private Conjectures, hatched for not bodies particular Interest, directed by no
body, and only offered by a fortuitous Efflux of Thought, without the
Assistance, or so much as the Approbation, of the Persons named or pointed at.

If this were the Truth of the Story, he must acknowledge himself mighty
Officious, and that he has Run before he was Sent. I doubt he will find as few
People to believe this Part, as he has found to approve the Proposal it self:
But be that as it will, if his projected Scheme of Enobling these two
Foreigners, with his Suggestion of one afterward, which he names, and his not
many others, which he slily insinuates are to follow; I say, if the Method he
has taken to introduce these, has effected the Thing; if the Generality of the
Nation approve the Proposal, and he sees the Game sure before them; Why should
they oblige him to acknowledge thus, that they disown him and his Schemes? Why
is he not rather publicly Caressed, and his Book acknowledged? But on the
contrary, the Heads are pulled back, no body cares to own him, and he himself
applies diligently to clear those Noble Persons of having any hand in the
Conspiracy with him, as indeed I believe he has reason to do.

No body cares to own a Plot when it has miscarried; and if Toland designed to
do his Principals a Service by the Proposal, if it had succeeded; he is the
Honester, and cannot be blamed to do them a Service by keeping them out of it
now it proves Abortive.

Perhaps he will say I triumph without a Victory, very like so; but let him
speak for himself, whether it be a Victory or no; if he has the Victory, if he
is as sure of the Success as he thought himself at first, why is he so
concerned, and why does he keep such a Bustle to wash the Dirt off of any; and
why so apprehensive least the World should think they were in the Conspiracy?
Why so forward to take all upon himself? I think I may, without any boasting,
say, he has not so good an Opinion of his Cause as he had when he began it; let
him deny it if he can.

Nor will the fulsome Encomiums of a Vain French Scribbler assist him in this
Point at all, I think I may venture to say, That all Mr. Toland has said in
this Case, has but served to make it more difficult than he found it; and the
Gentlemen who he has named, if it is, as he says, without their Consent, no
question if they know what a Champion they have that has espoused, in mere
Knight Errantry, their Cause, would civilly desire him to say no more about
them.

Now having brought it to the Question of his Success, he joins Issue with him
on his own Merit also; and then the remaining Question in Debate is, Whether
has the Design miscarried by the scandalous Nature of the Proposal, or by the
scandalous Name of the Proposer? Would ever Men of any Forecast have singled
out a Man scandalous among Christians, to have started their Friends Cause into
the World! He says he is not a Socinian, and perhaps he may not be to now; but
let him tell them what he was Expelled the University of -- for, and how he
comes to obtain the general Title of a Heretic in Principles, if he had given
no occasion for it? Not that Reproach always argues Guilt, but let him tell the
World himself the occasion if he thinks fit; I forbear it, because it is not
the present Business; I shall find another Time for it.

As to the present Case, I cannot but observe how I have heard many People who
were not much concerned to enquire about it before, start at the Proposal now,
because it is handed into the World by such an Agent; and I leave it to
universal Judgment, whether the Manner, the arrogant Manner of proposing it,
has not justly shocked the Nobility and Gentry of England, as to the Proposal
it self; to have them told they will do it before they were ever so much as
asked! To have them told it will savor of Ingratitude and Partiallity not to
do it, before ever they so much as denied! Is not this Bullying the Peers into
it? Is it not a Bussoonry upon the Nation? If this has made the Case better
than it was, or has not rather justly filled many Minds with Resentment, who
were neither prepossessed one way or other, let any reasonable Person determine.

In the mean time I can assure him, it is a very great Satisfaction to many
good and impartial Men, that this Design of proposing the breaking down the
Pale of our Nobility, is thus Detected and Exposed: But I must confess, that
when some Gentlemen came to me the other Day, and gave me thanks for the
Service I had done, in setting it out in so clear a Light as is done in the
Argument, etc. I told them frankly the Thanks were all due to Mr. Toland, who
by so insolent an Attempt, had justly alarmed and opened the Eyes of almost as
many as had read his Libel; and had even in denying, proved effectually that
this Proposal of his was no new Thing

No indeed, it has been no new Thing either, that some Persons aimed at being
so Enobled, or that a Party aimed at complying, and getting those who alone
could do it, to comply with their Desire; and this is a sufficient Reason to be
given for what I owned in the Argument, namely, That it had been Digested for
some time, viz. as long as I had understood from good Hands that there was such
a thing intended, and which I thought it my indispensible Duty to Oppose and
Expose.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Nature of Malice, and of the unjust Suggestions of Mr. TOLAND in his
Second ANATOMY, in order to Expose the Author of the Argument to the Resentment
of the Government.

I Despise all the sly and knavish insinuations of this Malicious, Envenomed
Lybeller, in order, if he could, to expose me as a Jacobite; I wish all that
are blindly and ignorantly Jacobites, may in Heavens due time be better
informed; and all that are Maliciously so, and from principles of Hatred to the
Protestant Succession, and the Person of King George, were as Toland is, viz.
Contemned, and Exposed: I wish them, like him, Expelled from the Society of the
best of Men, and made to know their Crime by their Punishment. There is not one
Sentence or Syllable in the Book entiuled An Argument, etc. which is intended
as a Reflection or Disrespect to the Person, or Government, or Conduct of King
George; and of that Sentence which he maliciously wrests, P. 28. viz. Till at
length Posterity may be offered two Turks, I say to him Honi soit qui Mal y
Pense, I know no Venom in it, nor can he without infinite Sarcasm, and
Lybelling the most Innocent Actions of the King, say, or suggest that there is
any room for a Satyr in them.

All his boasted Advantage, and the Triumph he makes upon Quotations out of De
Foes Pamphlet, Require no other Answer than has been given already, viz. That
De Foe has no Concern one way or other in that Book; and if Mr. Baker the
Publisher were not just at the point of Death while this is at the Press, a
particular Account of that Part would be given: But it is none of my business
to vindicate De Foe however injuriously he may be treated; all I have to say
is, That if Mr. Toland is disposed to make Honorable Amends for the insolent
Language which he gives ME, under the Cover of Charging the Work upon a Fellow
that neither He nor I know any thing of, he shall at any time have the Occasion
to know who is not Concerned in this Work, by knowing Face to Face who is
Concerned in it: And I say the same to that Cowardly Frenchman Boyer also.

I repeat again what I have said, That there is not the least Design or
Intention of Disrespect to the Person or Government of King George in all my
Answer to Toland's Lybel, but a single and disinterested Zeal for the Liberties
of my Country: I Honor with the profoundest Duty, not the King only as on the
Throne, but all his Royal Posterity, and Raee, as Capable of, and Designed by
Heaven to Reign in their Courses of time; and yet it is no impeachment of this
Duty and Zeal, to say, that from the best of Kings have proceeded the worst of
Tyrants: Our Laws are made as Fences and Securities, not against good, but bad
Kings. Were the Divine Genius to be Immortal, as I said in the Argument, were
all the Kings who shall proceed from the Loins of His present Majesty, to
Inherit King George's Principles, his Justice, Moderation, Love to his People,
and Knowledge as well as Desire of their Welfare and Prosperity; I would be as
Easy to give up all our Constitution to him, and to be Governed by his mere
Will and Discretion, as I would be to any Man that ever wore a Crown.

But as Virtue, Honor, Probity, Wisdom, Judgment, do not descend by
Inheritance, and are no Entail with the Crown, but Kings may hereafter arise
that knew not Joseph; it is a Duty to our Posterity, that we endeavor to
preserve the Fences of our Liberties unbroken, and hand forward those
invaluable Rights to our Children, Entire as we Receive them.

But this Mercenary, this bringer of a Railing Accusation, he is for breaking
down this Fence, and dispensing with this Law, making a precedent to serve a
present Turn, and Party, which may hereafter be an Argument to bring in all the
Instruments of Tyranny, which an Arbitrary unguided Prince may stand in need
of, for the Destruction of the Kingdom; and this, though, as I said before,
without the least designed Reflection, they were of any Nation or Religion,
even Turks, and Mahometans; whether those who are for thus breaking in upon our
Constitution to gratify Foreigners, or they who are for preserving our
Constitution whole and unbroken, are the best Patriots, let impartial Posterity
inquire.

Nor am I in this, offering in the least to derogate from the just Esteem due
to the Honorable Persons who he mentions; but I ask him this Question, Is
there no Reward can be suitable to the Character and Merit of those Gentlemen,
but that of being made Lords? Can the King be at a loss, and is the Kingdom of
Great Britain empty of means to Reward these Persons however great their Merit?
Is there no way to make them amends but this one Method? Will nothing else
satisfy them, or be suitable to their Deservings, that this Libeller should
say, not to do it, would be to be Ungrateful and Partial? I remember when the
Glorious King William intending to Reward the late E. of Portland with a vast
Grant, no less than the Revenue of the Principality of Wales; and the House of
Commons applied to His Majesty not to do it, the King readily acquiesc'd, and
expressing his Royal Gratitude to the E. of Portland for his many signal
Services, His Majesty said, He would think of Rewarding those Services some
other way. I shall make no Comparisons, but believe the Libeller himself will
not pretend, that any Man can have deserved better of his Present Majesty, than
the late E. of Portland had deserved of King William; yet when he found the way
he had designed to Reward him gave any uneasiness to his People, His Majesty
Resolved to Reward those Eminent Services some other way; and I dare say, the
Posterity of that Noble Person do not Complain of the King's being unkind to
them.

I am ready to grant that the Services of these Noble Persons now Proposed, are
as great as my Opposer pleases to suppose them; yet I say, without lessening
those Suppositions, That Great Britain is able to Reward them fully, though they
are not received into our Peerage, and yet not merit to be Libelled by Toland
as partial and ungrateful.

But be that as it will, Let His Majesty propose to his Parliament what he
thinks fit, the Parliament will always act as becomes them; the House of Peers
will never act undutifully to the King, no, not in those things which they
cannot Grant; nor will they act unfaithfully to their Country, no, not in those
things which they cannot Refuse: But this is not to the Case in hand; for it
does not appear that the King has any desire to have this thing done; nay, Mr.
Toland does not pretend to it: But let us see here how the vain Man exposes
himself; for while he acknowleges no body to be privy to the Proposal but
himself, he Contradicts and Confounds himself most pitiously; He protests, pa.
30. That he never knew or heard of any Design to introduce those two Noble Men,
or any other Foreigners into the House of Peers, Exore tuo: Call Mr. Toland to
detect Mr. Toland, pa. 26. My Proposal Contained nothing NEW with Respect
either to the Thing, or to the Persons; these are the Words quoted before, but
are absolutely necessary to be brought in again here, because this Man can have
the Assurance to pretend after this, to be believed upon his Word, That no body
ever heard of this before.

But suppose we should believe him for once, and imagine that neither the King
intended to Enoble these Persons, that these two Persons did not desire to be
Enobled, or that the House of Peers ever intended to Repeal or Dispense with
the Act for this End; How then can he have the Front to tell the House of Peers
to their Faces, that if they do not do it, it savours of Ingratitude and
Partiality? He may be defied to show an Impudence like this, since the Liberty
of the Press, which we now groan under, has Plagued us: I am sorry to use such
Words in Print, but when we are talking to such Men, such Language is forced
out of our Mouths as only proper to People of such Flagrant Merit.

Again, If neither the King, the House of Lords, or the two foreign Noblemen
themselves, have so much as had any Thoughts of this matter, how will this
false Accuser make good his Charge, that the opposing it, is pointed at the
Government, or the Ministry? The Charge is pointed at those Conspirators who
are in the Design, and as he declares, neither the King, the Ministry, or the
Parliament are acquainted with it, then they are not pointed at: But we know
who are in it perhaps better than he pretends to know, and as they are not too
big to be charged, so I must ^ell him it is not his Raillery, and pretending it
Points at the Government, who are not concerned in it, that will wipe it off.

The Case is in short this, the Design is blown, the Plot is discovered, and
thereby defeated; he thought it was Ripe before it was so, and brought it out
too soon: He knows it well enough, for his own Friends blame him for it, and
now he has no Remedy, but to cry out Jacobitism and Treason in his opposers, as
if all the Men who are not for recommending Foreigners to the Nobility must be
Jacobites; or that all those who were not for a Standing-Army in time of Peace
were for the Pretender; and yet he confesses that I declared I was for an Army
when there was any Danger of the Pretender, and while either a foreign Enemy or
private Disturbance threatened the Country.

But the Man is enraged because he is frustrated: He had said the House of
Lords will open the Door to Foreigners, and now he is assured they wont; nay,
he knows he may with much more title to modesty say they will not, than he
could before say they will; and this makes him raving at every body that comes
in his way.

But let him Rave, the Nation is awake. Britains may be surpised into such
things as may be dangerous in their Examples like this, but in vain is the Net
spread in the sight of any Bird; while they are awake, and there Eyes are open,
they are in no Danger.

I observe that this Toland makes himself merry with De Foe's Verses from The
True born Englishman: I have only this to say in that Case, that if that Satyr
was Just upon our Country and Nobility, it certainly infers, that as we are now
arrived to an Excellence which we believe is not outdone by other Nations,
either in Science or Religion, and moral Virtue, we should keep were we are,
and mix no farther if we can help it, unless we are sure to improve; but to let
that go for a jest, as it was intended, our business is not now so much about
mixing of Blood, though that is not insignificant, but about mixing our
Politics: The Argument which I brought from the Treatment we gave to the
Scots, Nobility at the late Treaty of Union, is good Sense, and to the present
purpose, and the Scots Nobility are not now insensible of the weight of it,
though this unfair Cavilling Libeller Bustoons it, and pretends that I allege
they were kept out as Foreigners. Had he been in Temper to understand common
Sense, he would have seen the contrary. He absurdly suggests, that I hint they
were kept out as Foreigners; No, no, he cannot but allow that I and every one
else knows, that after the Union they were no more Foreigners but united; but
the Argument is just, nevertheless, a fortiori, if these, though our own
Brethren, were not allowed to sit in the House of Lords, but with such nicety
restrained to a Representative, and this in especial manner, because of our
Judicature being reposited with the Peers; how much more then should we be
backward to bring Strangers and real Foreigners to partake of that supreme
Authority which the Scottish Nobility were denied.

Let any Man but observe the wretched Temper of this slanderous Libeller: The
Author of Mercurius Politicus, has called this a new Argument. This Book, he
says, De Foe has the chief hand in also, which upon good enquiry, and good
evidence, I am assured is false too; but let the Author be who he will, I say
he has called this a new Argument, which forsooth Toland will not only not
allow, but says it is nonsense. Let us see the nonsense of it, and if it be not
a new Argument, let him tell us when it was made use of before. Be it new or
old, the force of it is full against him.

The Scots Nobility, ancient beyond History, and illustrious beyond Objection,
yet was denied upon the late Coalition of natural Privileges, were denied, I
say, to be admitted into the English Peerage other than by a Representative;
because it was not thought that the supreme Judicature of England could be
communicated with justice, to those who had not an equal concern in the
Interest of the People of the Nation.

Now to add a Word or two to that Part: Would it not appear Partial against our
Brethren of Scotland, especially now, after they are our Brethren, that while
they are excluded, Foreigners shall be admitted? Let him give a just Reason for
this if he can.

But to carry this a little farther, because his Ignorance suffers him to
pretend, that the Reasons for admitting the Scots Nobility only by a
Representative number was, to Assert the proportion only to the value of
Estates. He shows by this, that he has Folly and gross Ignorance equal to his
Dishonesty; for though it is true, that the proportioning the value, etc. was
regarded in the asserting the Number of the Scots Representitives in the House
of Commons, yet this was the least Consideration, if any at all, in fixing the
Number of the Peers, for the limiting of which there were Reasons not proper to
recite here; and had he not been perfectly void of any Notion of what was then
doing, he would have known something of those Reasons.

But not to resume the Debates of those Days, seeing he puts me to it, I shall
start another Case as new as the former, and yet as pungent as can be desired
to the present point of admitting Foreigners: At the time of the Treaty of
Union, notwithstanding the whole Scots Nation was to be incorporated into one
body with the English, and that the Subjects of both were to enjoy equal
Privileges, yet so resolutely did our English Nobility insist upon not
encorporating the Peerage of Scotland with themselves, so jealous were they of
pulling down the Fence about their own incommunicable Judicature, that the
Union is said, not to allow even the Crown it self to create a Scots Peer,
already a Peer, a Lord by an English Title, so as to make him an Hereditary
Lord of Parliament. This is eminent in the Case of the late Duke Hamilton, as
Duke of Brandon; and albeit the Scots do dispute this Point, we do not find the
House of Lords take yet any notice of that Dispute.

And shall this Libeller tell us, the House of Peers will be Partial and
Ungrateful if they admit not Germans and Strangers into their Body; while at
the same time they have barred the Door against their own encorporated Brethren
of Scotland? Let Toland or any of the Conspirators tell us what was the Reason
of this nicety, if it was not that the English Nobility had seen Reason to
think they ought to be exceeding cautious of ever making more mixtures, by
Creation at least, with the Blood of their Nobility: Rather let him prove that
it would not be Partial and Ungrateful to the Scots Nobility, if Foreigners
should be received, while the Scots are excluded; and where is the general
kindness which was promised, and exhorted to from the Throne to be preserved
and cultivated between the two united Kingdoms; I say, where is this mutual
kindness, if such Partiality should be practiced on our Side?

If indeed an encorporate Union shall come to be treated between his Majesty's
Foreign Dominions and the Island of Great Britain, then the Case will be
altered, and we should be all willing and ready, no doubt, to receive a
Representative of the Hanover Nobility into the Body of ours, such as to the
King and Parliament shall seem convenient: But as to the Ennobling Foreigners,
it is firmly Provided against by the Constitution, and our Libel-maker
Prosesses that neither does he know that his Majesty intends it, or these
Foreign Noble Persons, who he has presumed to Name, desire it; I am sure the
House of Peers have not Debated it. What Assurance then must He, and the Party
who Dictate to him, who for that Reason I justly call Conspirators, I say, what
assurance must they have, to be Officious in a thing of this Consequence to
their Country!

It has been suggested, and I have Reason to believe it is so far true, that
the thing is in its Embrio, that the Scheme is young, and that the People
concerned were willing to let the Proposal take wind, this way, to see how it
would Relish with the British Gentry, and it was no imprudent step I
acknowledge to do so; for had they made the attempt at once, before they had
made a judgment of things, they would have run the hazard of a Miscarriage much
more to their Disadvantage.

Be it as it will, they have now made the Experiment, and I dare say they will
not find, upon telling Noses, that they have made one Convert by Mr. Toland's
Anatomy; on the contrary, there are some testimony of many Eyes being opened,
by the Detecting and justly Exposing the Traitorous Contrivance; and I leave
them to the Trial, when they will find the Persons Concerned in another
Condition to Repel them than perhaps they expected.

It might be worth while to note here, how Quaintly he would make it Criminal
in me, to speak of SOME Honest and Loyal Patriots REMAINING in the
Administration, as if I thereby insinuated that some there were otherwise, and
that there were misunderstandings amongst the Ministry; That I would have it
thought they were not all of a Piece, and he would have this be thought
Malicious. Now, by what has since happened in the Ministry, it may be asked
without any Reflection, whether, if I had looked that way, though that is not
granted, I were in the Right or not? But it has been this Man's Talent many
Years, to be an Accuser of the Brethren, and if it be true, that he was
Expelled a University for Faction and Error, if it be true as I have heard,
that he once impiously attempted to draw up a new Gospel, no wonder he would
now frame a new Constitution; but this I shall have a farther occasion to talk
with him about.

All the residue of his Book, viz. His Answer to the Clergyman, his Letters to
the Archbishop, and to the Dissenters, and his wrangling and unseemly Language
upon De Foe, are worth no Notice at all, either by me, or any one else: Perhaps
such Language may be suitable to the Foreign Noble Lord without a Name, who he
pretends to write to, and who, if he be any body, it is like is one of the not
many more, who he pretends to solicit for after these are got in, and who are
all to be British Peers, ad Graecos Calendas.

FINIS.

