THE CATECHISM OF THE AUTHOR OF THE MINUTE PHILOSOPHER FULLY ANSWERED.

By J. WALTON.

-- Neque enim lex aequior ulla
Quam necis Artifices Art perire sua. Ovid.
DVBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, For WILLIAM SMITH at the Hercules, Bookseller,
in Dame-street, 1735.

THE CATECHISM, etc.
I. IN the Appendix of the Defense of Free-thinking in Mathematics, the Author,
out of his greatly benevolent and truly Christian Spirit, has composed a
CATECHISM which he recommends to my Scholars: This CATECHISM with its
Introduction I shall transcribe in his own Words, and fully and distinctly
answer the several Questions contained therein.

The INTRODUCTION.
II. "THIS Vindicator, indeed, by his dissembling nine Parts in ten of the
Difficulties proposed in the Analyst, shows no Inclination to be CATECHIZED
by me. But his Scholars have a Right to be informed. I therefore, recommend it
to them, not to be imposed on by hard Words and magisterial Assertions, but
carefully to pry into his Sense, and sist his Meaning, and particularly to
insist on a distinct Answer to the following Questions."

The CATECHISM.
"LET them ask him, whether he can conceive Velocity without Motion, or Motion
without Extension, or Extension without Magnitude? If he answers that he can,
let him teach them to do the same. If he cannot, let him be asked, how he
reconciles the Idea of a Fluxion which he gives (P. 13.) with common Sense?
Again, let him be asked, whether nothing be not the Product of nothing
multiplied by something? And if so, when the Difference between the Gnomon and
the Sum of the Rectangles vanishes, whether the Rectangles themselves do not
also vanish? that is, when ab is nothing, whether A b + B a be not also
nothing? that is, whether the Momentum of AB be not nothing? Let him then be
asked, what his Momentums are good for, when they are thus brought to nothing?
Again, I wish he were asked to explain the Difference between a Magnitude
infinitely small and a Magnitude infinitely diminished? If he faith there is no
Difference, then let him be asked, how he DARES to explain the Method of
Fluxions by the Ratio of Magnitudes infinitely diminished (P.9.) when Sir Isaac
Newton has expressly excluded all Consideration of Quantities infinitely small?
If this able Vindicator should say that Quantities infinitely diminished are
nothing at all, and consequently that, according to him, the first and last
Ratios are Proportions between nothings, let him be desired to make Sense of
this or explain what he means by ' Proportion between nothings. If he should
say the ultimate Proportions are the Ratios of mere Limits, then let him be
asked how the Limits of Lines can be proportioned or divided? After all, who
knows but this Gentleman, who has already complained of me for an uncommon Way
of treating Mathematics and Mathematicians, may (as well as the Cantabrigian)
cry out Spain and the Inquisition when he finds himself thus closely pursued
and beset with Interrogatories? That we may not therefore seem too hard on an
innocent Man, who probably meant nothing, but was betrayed by following another
into Difficulties and Straits that he was not aware of, I shall propose one
single Expedient, by which his Disciples (whom it most concerns) may soon
satisfy themselves, whether this Vindicator really understands what he takes
upon him to vindicate. It is in short, that they would ask him to explain the
second, third or fourth Fluxions upon his Principles. Be this the Touchstone of
his Vindication. If he can do it, I shall own my self much mistaken: If he
cannot, it will be evident that he was much mistaken in himself, when he
presumed to defend Fluxions without so much as knowing what they are. So having
put the Merits of the Cause on this Issue, I leave him to be tried by his
Scholars."

III. In this CATECHISM I am first to be: asked, "Whether I can conceive
Velocity without Motion, or Motion without Extension, or Extension without
Magnitude?" These Questions are more clearly expressed in the 29th and 30th
Queries of his Analyst, where he asks, "Whether we can form an Idea or Notion
of Velocity distinct from and exclusive of its Measures? Whether Motion can be
conceived in a Point of Space? And if Motion cannot, whether Velocity can? And
if not, whether a first or last Velocity can be conceived in a mere Limit,
either initial or final, of the described Space?" I answer, I can conceive
Velocity and Motion in a Point of Space; that is without any assignable Length
or Extension described by it, and so might he too if he had understood and
considered the Nature of Motion. For Motion is an Effect of some Cause acting
on the Thing moved; which Effect setting aside all Resistance, will ever be
proportional to the whole Action of the generating Cause: And therefore if a
Cause acts continually upon a given Thing without any Interruption, there must
be a continual Increase of its Velocity. The Velocity cannot be the same in any
two different Points of the Space described, however near those Points may be
to each other. For if it was, there must: be a Cessation of the Action of the
moving Cause during the Passage of the Thing through the Space comprehended
between the two Points; which is contrary to the Supposition.

If the Thing moved be a Point, and the Space described by this Point setting
out from a State of Rest at A, be AD; and if the Point be acted upon
continually by a moving Cause during the Time of its going from A to D, and the
Cause act continually with the same Degree of Strength during that Time; the
Velocity will continually increase with the Time of the Motion, or with the
Square Root of the Space described; that is, the Velocities in the Points C and
D, will be in the same Proportion as the Times of describing AC and AD, or as
the Square Roots of AC and AD. These are the Laws of Motion observed by Bodies
falling from small Heights to the Surface of the Earth, setting aside the
Resistance of the Air, and supposing the Bodies to have exactly the same
Weights during the Times of their Fall.

If the Cause acts continually upon the moving Point, but with different
Degrees of Strength during the Time of the Motion; the Velocity will not
increase with the Time, nor with the Square Root of the Space described; but
will still increase from the Beginning to the End of the Motion, and not be the
same in any two different Points of the Space described, however near to each
other. Let the Velocity increase with the n Power of the Time, that is, let V
be as T n; and then V will be as ^ or as ^, putting S for the Space described:
Whence it appears that the Velocity will not be the same in any two different
Points of the Space described: For it must vary upon the least Change of the
Space S, and consequently be different in every different Point of AD; which
shows that this Author has been greatly mistaken in imagining that there can be
no Motion, no Velocity, in a Point of Space.

IV. The next Questions in the CATECHISM, depending upon each other, run thus.
"Let him be asked, whether nothing be not the Product of nothing multiplied by
something? And if so, when the Difference between the Gnomon and Sum of the two
Rectangles vanishes, whether the Rectangles themselves do not also vanish?
that is when a b is nothing, whether A b + B a be not also nothing? that is,
whether the Momentum of AB be not nothing? And let him be asked what his
Momentums are good for when thus they are reduced to nothing?" As to the first
of these Questions I agree with him that nothing is the Product of nothing
multiplied by something; but must know what he means by the vanishing of the
Gnomon and Sum of the two Rectangles in the second, before I give him a direct
Answer. If by vanishing he means that they vanish and become nothing as Areas,
I grant they do; but absolutely deny, upon such an Evanescence of the Gnomon
and Sum of the two Rectangles by the moving back of the Sides of the Gnomon
till they come to coincide with those of the Rectangle, that nothing remains.
For there still remain the moving Sides, which are now become the Sides of the
Rectangle; into which Sides both the Gnomon and the Sum of the two Rectangles
are now turned by this retroverted Motion. And as the Gnomon and Sum of the two
Rectangles, upon the Evanescence of their Areas by this retroverted Motion, are
both converted into the two Sides of the Rectangle AB, so in the Instant of
that Conversion, their Motions are exactly the same; or the Motion of the
Gnomon is the same with the Sum of the Motions of the two Rectangles, when they
evanesce, and are converted into the two Sides of the Rectangle AB.

If a Point moves forward to generate a Line, and afterward the same Point
moves back again to destroy the Line with the very same Degrees of Velocity, in
all Parts of the Line which it had in those Parts when moving forward to
generate it; in the Instant the Line vanishes as a Length, nothing of a Line
will remain; but still the generating Point will remain, together with the
Velocity it had at the very Beginning of its Motion. And the Case is the very
same with respect to a Rectangle increasing by the Motion of its Sides: For
upon the Evanescence of a generated Gnomon, there still remain the Sides of the
Rectangle into which the Gnomon by its Evanescence is converted, together with
the Velocities of those Sides that is, when the Gnomon evanesces there still
remains A b + B a.

To make this more evident to Sense; let the Point which generated the Line AD,
move back again from D to C with the very same Degrees of Velocity in every
Part of the Increment CD which it had in that part in moving forward from C to
D; and when the Increment CD evanesces and becomes nothing as a Line by being
converted into the moving Point in C; there will remain that that Point
together with its Motion in C; for neither the Point nor its Motion in C is
destroyed by the Evanescence of the Line CD.

If the Rectangle CDK be generated by the Motions of two indefinite right Lines
IB and IA, of IB down IA and of IA along IB, and from a Continuance of the
Motions of these Lines, be increased by the Gnomon CGK; and if the generating
Lines return from L and E to K and C, with the very same Degrees of Velocity in
the several Points of LK and EC which they had in those Points in moving from K
and C to L and E; it is evident, when the Gnomon CGK or the Increment of the
Rectangle CDK evanesces and becomes nothing as an Area, by being converted into
the Sides DK and DC; that there will remain those Sides and their Velocities in
D; neither the Sides nor the Velocities of those Sides being destroyed by the
Evanescence of the Area of the Gnomon. But perhaps he will say, that when the
Gnomon evanesces it turns into something more than the Sum of the Sides DK and
DC: For the Rectangles LD and FC turn into those Sides, and the Rectangle FH
turns into a Point at D; and therefore the Motion of the Gnomon in the Instant
it evanesces, will become the Sum of the Motions of the Sides DK and DC, and of
the Point in D; that is, putting A and B for DK and DC, and a and b for the
Velocities in D toward F and H, and p for a Point; it will be equal to A b + B
a + ap + bp: Let it be so, and yet a+ b x p will be nothing when compared with
A b + B a, nor make the least Augmentation to that Sum when added to it. For
let a be to b as 3 to 2, and A b + B a + ap + bp will be 2A + 3B + 5 p: But 5 p
or five Points added to a Line, make nothing but the Line itself; a Point being
no Part of a Line; and consequently not in the least increasing its Length when
added to it: And therefore the Motion of the Gnomon when it evanesces and turns
into the Sides of the Rectangle CDK, will be A b + B a, as Sir Isaac Newton
makes it.

If the Curvilineal Area ABD be generated by the Motion of any indefinite Line
AH down AG, While a Point setting out from A moves in the Line AH from A
toward H; and if from a Continuance of these two Motions that Area be
increased by the Augment BDFE, consisting of the Rectangle BC and of the
Triangle CFD; the Motion with which the Increment BDFE begins to be generated,
is the Sum of the two Motions toward C and H in the Point D; which Sum,
putting b for the Velocity toward C, a for the Velocity toward H and p for a
Point, will be BDx b + ap. Now suppose the Ordinate OF to move back to BD, and
the Point F to move back in the Line HE to C, and that in moving back they have
the same Degrees of Velocity in every Point of EB and EH, which they had before
in moving forward; it is manifest, that when the Augment BDFE vanishes and
becomes nothing as an Area, by being converted into the Ordinate BD, and into a
Point at the Extremity of that Ordinate; there will remain BD and the Point in
D, together with their Velocities in that Point; for the Motions of that Line
and Point, are not destroyed by the Evanescence of the Area BDFE, In the
Instant OF coincides with BD, and the Point F with D, the Area BDFE will be
converted into BD + p, and its Motion will become BD x b + pa, as before. But
pa, being only so many Points as a contains Units, is really and truly nothing
with respect to BD x b; and consequently does not at all increase it when added
to it. And therefore the Fluxion of the curvilineal Area ABD, will be BD x b;
or as BD if b be given, or the Line AH move down AG with a Velocity which is
exactly the same in every Part of GA.

Hence it appears, that if mathematical Quantities be increased in equal Times
by Motion, their isochronal Increments must be made to vanish by a Retroversion
of the Motion, before we can obtain the Motions with which they vanish, or
begin to be generated; that is, before we can obtain the Fluxions of the
Quantities, the Name given by Sir Isaac Newton to those Motions. So then, this
Author has been much out in supposing that upon the Evanescence of the Gnomon
CGK, or of the curvilineal Figure BDFE, the Momentum or Fluxion of the
Rectangle CDK, or of the Area ABD, vanishes. Consequently, he has been greatly
mistaken in every one of these Questions.

V. But he goes on. "I wish he were asked to explain the Difference between a
Magnitude infinitely small and a Magnitude infinitely diminished. If he says
there is no Difference: Then let him, be further asked, how he DARES to explain
the Method of Fluxions by the Ratio of Magnitudes infinitely diminished, when
Sir Isaac Newton has expressly excluded all Consideration of Quantities
infinitely small? If this able Vindicator should say that Quantities infinitely
diminished are nothing at all, and consequently that, according to him, the
first and last Ratios are Proportions between nothings, let him be desired to
make Sense of this, or explain what he means by Proportion between nothings. If
he should say the ultimate Proportions are the Ratios of mere Limits, then let
him be asked how the Limits of Lines can be proportioned or divided?"

As all this Part of the CATECHISM relates to the Measures of Fluxions by the
first and last Ratios of isochronal Increments generated and destroyed by
Motion, so I have taken it together, and shall answer the whole in one Section.

Neither Sir Isaac Newton nor I have said, that Fluxions are measured by the
Proportions of Magnitudes infinitely small, nor by the Proportions of any
Magnitudes whatever generated in equal Times; but that they are measured by the
first or last Proportions of isochronal Increments generated or destroyed by
Motion; which Proportions are the Ratios with which such Increments begin to
exist before they have acquired any Magnitude, or with which they cease to
exist and vanish after they have lost all Magnitude. These Ratios subsist when
the isochronal Increments have no Magnitude, for as much as the Motions subsist
with which those Increments, just now, in this very Instant, begin or cease to
exist; to which Motions these Ratios are proportional.

For Example, the first or last Ratio of the Increments CD and OF generated in
equal Times, has a real Existence; for as much as it is equal to the Ratio of
the Motions in C and E, which are the Motions subsisting in those Points when
the ischronal Increments just begin or cease to exist. The Existence of the
Motions preserves the Existence of these Ratios of the Increments CD and OF. If
the Ratio of the Motions in C and E, be that of 4 to 3; the first or last Ratio
of the isochronal Increments CD and OF, will likewise be that of 4 to 3, even
though no Part of those Increments has any Existence.

The Motions in C and E, are as the moving Quantities and Velocities taken
together; or as two Points and their Velocities, taken together; or as the
Velocities, all Points being equal. And the first or last Ratio of the
isochronal Increments CD and OF, is compounded of the first or last Ratio of
these Spaces, and of the Ratio of the moving Quantities. For the Velocities in
C and E being in the first or last Ratios of these isochronal Spaces, the
Motions, which are as the moving Quantities and Velocities taken together, will
be as the same moving Quantities and the first or last Ratio of the isochronal
Spaces taken together. If Q and q denote the moving Quantities in C and E, V
and v their Velocities, S and s the isochronal Spaces CD and OF, and S and s
the first or last Ratio of those isochronal Spaces; then QV will be to qv, as
QS to qs; and in this case V will be to v, as S to s, because Q and q are equal.

Again, the first or last Ratio of the isochronal Spaces FD and DH in the
augmented Rectangle EGL (See the Figure in Page 14.) has a real Existence; for
as much as it is equal to the Ratio of the two Motions of two Points in D, of
one toward F, and the other toward H; which Motions, subsisting when the
isochronal Spaces FD and DH are nothing, preserve the Existence of the first or
last Ratio of these Spaces, or keep it from being a Ratio of nothings. If V and
v, denote the Velocities in D toward F and H, Q and q the Sides of the
Rectangle DK and DC, and S and s the first or last Ratio of the isochronal
Spaces FD and DH; then Q v will be to qV, as Q s to qS; but Q v + qV is the
Fluxion or Motion of the Rectangle CDK, as I have shown before; and therefore
the Moment or Measure of the Fluxion of the Rectangle will be Q s + qS. This is
a full and clear Answer to this Part of the CATECHISM, and shows that its
Author has been greatly mistaken in supposing that I explained the Doctrine of
Fluxions by the Ratio of Magnitudes infinitely deminish'd, or by Proportions
between nothings.

VI. I come now to the last Part of the CATECHISM, which stands thus. "I shall
propose one single Expedient, by which his Disciples (whom it most concerns)
may soon satisfy themselves, whether this Vindicator really understands what he
takes upon him to vindicate. It is in short, that they would ask him to explain
the second, third, or fourth Fluxions upon his Principles. Be this the
Touchstone of his Vindication: If he can do it, I shall own my self much
mistaken: If he cannot it will be evident that he was much mistaken in himself,
when he presumed to desend Fluxions without so much as knowing what they are.
So having put the Merits of the Cause on this Issue, I leave him to be tried by
his Scholars."

I do not wonder that this Author should have no clear Ideas or Conceptions of
second, third or fourth Fluxions, when he has no clear Conceptions of the
common Principles of Motion, nor of the first and last Ratios of the isochronal
Increments of Quantities generated and destroyed by Motion. For Fluxions,
according to Sir Isaac Newton, are the Motions with which the isochronal
Increments of Quantities begin or cease to exist, or the Motions of the
generating Quantities in the very Limits or Extremities of the Fluents: Thus
the Fluxions of Solids are the Motions of Surfaces; the Fluxions of Surfaces,
the Motions of Lines; the Fluxions of Lines, the Motions of Points; and the
Fluxions of Points are nothing, for Points in their own Nature are invariable,
and therefore incapable of being generated or increased by Motion: And if the
first Fluxions of Quantities be Motions, it follows, that the Mutations of
these Motions and the Mutations of those Mutations, which are the second and
third Fluxions of the Quantities, must likewise be Motions.

First, second and third Fluxions do really exist, and may be clearly and
distinctly conceived by attending to the Motions of the several Parts of a
Cube, namely, of its Surfaces of their Lines and Points, in the Instant it
begins to be increased by Motion. For if A denotes the Side of a Cube generated
by an uniform Motion, whose Velocity is expressed by a; the first Fluxion of
the Cube, according to these Principles, will be expressed by 3 aA2; its second
Fluxion, which is the Fluxion of 3 aA2, will be expressed by 6 a2A, or by 6 aA
x a; its third Fluxion, which is the first Fluxion on of 6 a2A, will be
expressed by 6 a3 or by 6 a2 x a; and its fourth Fluxion will be nothing: But
all these Fluxions or Motions do exist, and may be clearly and distinctly
conceived in the Motion of a Cube, at the very End of its Generation, or at the
very Beginning of its Augmentation, by Motion; for it begins to be augmented by
the Sum of the Motions of three of its Squares comprehending any one of its
solid Angles, each of which Squares being denoted by A2 and their Velocity
outward by a, the Fluxion of the Cube or the Motion with which it begins to
increase or to be enlarged, will be 3 aA2; and this is the first Fluxion of the
Cube; and the three moving Squares begin to be augmented, in the very same
Instant wherein the Cube begins to enlarge, each by the Sum of the Motions of
its two adjoining Sides, and consequently the Motions of those Sides to augment
the cubic Surface, will be expressed by 6 aA, but that Surface at the same
Instant of Time moves outward to augment the Solid with a Velocity which is
also denoted by a, and therefore the whole Motion of the fix moving Sides of
the three Squares for increasing or enlarging the Cube, will be expressed by 6
aA x a or by 6 a2A; and this is the second Fluxion of the Cube; and when the
three moving Squares begin thus to increase, sideways and outward, for the
Enlargement of the Cube, their six moving Sides begin to be augmented by the
Motion of six Points; and the common Velocity of those Points in order to
increase the Sides of the Squares, being the same with the Velocity of those
Sides to increase the Cubic Surface, and with the Velocity of that Surface to
augment the Solid; the whole Motion with which those Points begin to enlarge
the Cube, will be expressed by 6 a3 or by 6 a3 p; and this is the third Fluxion
of the Cube: These three Kinds of Motion do all necessarily exist and may be
clearly and distinctly conceived in the System of Motion whereby a Cube begins
to be augmented: And therefore the first, second and third Fluxions of
Quantities may be distinctly conceived, and fully explained upon the Principles
of Sir Isaac Newton.

As first, second and third Fluxions are explained by the several Motions
necessarily existing in the very Instant a Cube begins to be augmented, so they
may likewise be explained and distinctly comprehended, by considering the
nascent or evanescent Increments of the several Parts of a Cube, generated by
Motion; provided always that by nascent or evanescent Increments be understood
not generated Increments of any Magnitude whatever, but only such Quantities or
Magnitudes as are proportional to and Consequently Measures of the Motions with
which those isochronal Increments begin or cease to exist. For if a, which
before denoted Velocity, be now put for the first or last Ratio of the Space
described by that Velocity in a given Time; 3 aA2 will denote the nascent
Increment of the Cube generated by the Motion of three of its Squares
comprehending any one of its solid Angles; and 6 aA will express the Sum of the
nascent Increments of the three moving Squares, which Sum multiplied into a
will be the Increment of the nascent Solid 3 aA2; consequently 6 a2A will be
the second nascent Increment of the Cube; and the nascent Increment of 6A a, or
of six Rectangles each denoted by A a, will be 6 a2, which multiplied into a
gives 6 a3 for the nascent Increment of 6 a2A, and therefore 6 a3 is the third
nascent Increment of the Cube: All this may be clearly conceived and made
evident to Sense by the Figure in Page 14. For let CDK represent one of the
three moving Squares comprehending any of the solid Angles of a Cube increasing
by Motion, and then three times CDK multiplied into a, or 3 aA2, will expound
the first nascent Increment of the Cube; and 3FC + 3LD or 6A a (which is the
nascent Increment of the three moving Squares) multiplied into a, will be the
second nascent Increment of the Cube; and, the Rectangle FH or a2 being the
nascent Increment of the Rectangle FC or LD, and 2FH or 2 a2 the nascent
Increment of FC + LD or of 2A a, and 6 a2 the nascent Increment of 6A a, it
follows that 6 a2 multiplied into a, or that 6 a3, will be the nascent
Increment of 6A a2 and consequently the third nascent Increment of the Cube.
And these three distinct Orders of Increments, all begin to exist together, in
the very Instant the Cube begins to be augmented by Motion.

This may serve as an Answer to the last Part of the CATECHISM, concerning the
Author's Touchstone of my Vindication: Whether he will own himself mistaken I
know not; but I think he ought after his unjust and shameful Treatment of Sir
Isaac Newton; who in the Introduction to his Quadrature of Curves, in the
second Lemma of the second Book, and in the Scholium to the first Section of
the first Book of his Principles of Philosophy, has delivered his Doctrine of
Fluxions in so clear and distinct a Manner, without the least Inconsistency in
Terms or Arguments, that one would have thought it impossible for any Person
not to have understood him, particularly for this Author, who says, he had long
and maturely considered those Principles, and taken as much pains as any Man
living to understand and make Sense of them.

I have now done with the CATECHISM; but beg leave before I conclude this
Paper, in order to prevent my being CATECHIZED any more by this Author, to give
the World a short Account of some Part of my Faith in Religion. I believe that
there is one supreme, incorporeal, everliving, intelligent and omnipresent
Being, called GOD, who made and governs the World. I believe that GOD is endued
with infinite Power, Knowledge, Wisdom and Goodness; and that to deny or limit
any one of these Attributes, is in Effect to deny a GOD. I believe, that to say
GOD cannot create Spirits with a Power, inherent in themselves and resulting
from their own Frame and Make, of perceiving and knowing. Things of a quite
different Nature from their own, by Ideas and Sensations; is in Effect to deny
a GOD; for as much as by this Principle his Almighty Power is denied. And
lastly, I believe that this Supreme Being has revealed his Will to Mankind by
Moses, the Prophets, Jesus Christ and the Apostles; and that the Doctrine by
them delivered is therefore divine, and cannot be altered by any Power or
Authority upon Earth, nor even by an Angel from Heaven, who is pronounced
accursed should he preach any other Gospel than what is delivered.

FINIS.

