THE ANATOMY OF Exchange-Alley: OR, A System of STOCK-JOBBING.

Proving that Scandalous Trade, as it is now carried on, to be Knavish in its
Private Practice, and Treason in its Public:

Being a clear Detection I. Of the Private Cheats used to Deceive one another.
II. Of their Arts to draw Innocent Families into their Snares, understood by
their New Term of Art ( viz.) ( being let into the Secret.) III. Of their
Raising and Spreading False News to Ground the Rise or Fall of Stocks upon. IV.
Of their Joining with Traitors in Raising and Propagating Treasonable Rumors
to Terrify and Discourage the People with Apprehensions of the Enemies to the
Government. V. Of their Improving those Rumors, to make a Run upon the Bank,
and Ruin public Credit. VI. Of the dangerous Consequences of their Practices
to the Government, and the Necessity there is to Regulate or Suppress them.


To which is added, Some Characters of the most Eminent Persons concerned now,
and for some Years past, in Carrying on this Pernicious Trade.

By a JOBBER.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for E. Smith near Exchange-Alley. 1719. Price One Shilling.

THE ANATOMY OF Exchange-Alley, etc.
THE General Cry against Stock-Jobbing has been such, and People have been so
long, and so justly Complaining of it as a public Nuisance; and which is still
worse, have complained so long without a Remedy, that the Jobbers, hardened in
Crime, are at last come to exceed all bounds, and now, if ever, sleeping
Justice will awake, and take some Notice of them, and if it should not now, yet
the diligem Creatures are so steady to themselves, that they will some time or
other, make it absolutely necessary to the Government to demolish them.

I know they upon all Occasions laugh at the Suggestion, and have the Pride to
think it impracticable to restrain them; and one of the top of the Function the
other Day, when I casually told him, That if they went on, they would make it
absolutely necessary to the Legislature, to suppress them, returned, That he
believed it was as absolutely necessary for 'em to do it now, as ever it could
be; But how will they do it? It Is impossible, said he, but if the Government
takes Credit, their Funds should come to Market; and while there is a Market we
will buy and sell; there is no effectual way in the World, says he, to suppress
us but this, viz. That the Government should first pay all the public Debts,
redeem all the Funds, and dissolve all the Charters, viz. Bank, South Sea, and
East India, and buy nothing upon Trust, and then, indeed, says he, they need
not hang the Stock-Jobbers, for they will be apt to hang them selves.

I must confess, I in part agree that this is an effectual way, but I am far
from thinking it the only way to deal with a Confederation of Usurers, who
having sold the whole Nation to Usury, keep the Purse-Strings of Poor and Rich
in their Hands, which they open and shut as they please.

But before I come to the needful ways for restraining those People, I think
'twill be of some Service to expose their Practices to common view, that the
People may see a little what kind of Dealers they are.

And first, they have this peculiar to 'em, and in which they outdo all the
particular pieces of public Knavery that ever I met with in the World, viz.
That they have nothing to say for it themselves; they have, indeed a particular
Stock of hard Ware, as the Braziers call it, in their Faces, to bear them out
in it; but if you talk to them of their Occupation, there is not a Man but will
own, it is a complete System of Knavery; that it is a Trade founded in Fraud,
born of Deceit, and nourished by Trick, Cheat, Wheedle, Forgeries, Falsehoods,
and all sorts of Delusions; Coining false News, this way good, that way bad;
whispering imaginary Terrors, Frights, Hopes, Expectations, and then preying
upon the Weakness of those, whose Imaginations they have wrought upon, whom
they have either elevated or depressed. If they meet with a Cull, a young
Dealer that has Money to lay out, they catch him at the Door, whisper to him,
Sir, here is a great piece of News, it is not yet public, it is worth a
Thousand Guineas but to mention it: I am heartily glad I met you, but it must
be as secret as the black side of your Soul, for they know nothing of it yet in
the Coffee-House, if they should, Stock would rise 10 per Cent. in a moment,
and I warrant you South Sea will be 130 in a Week's Time, after it is known.
Well, says the weak Creature, prithee dear Tom what is it? Why really Sir I
will let you into the Secret, upon your Honor to keep it till you hear it from
other Hands; why it is this, The Pretender is certainly taken and is carried
Prisoner to the Castle of Millan, there they have him fast; I assure you, the
Government had an Express of it from my Lord St -- -- s within this Hour. Are
you sure of it, says the Fish, who jumps eagerly into the Net? Sure of it! why
if you will take your Coach and go up to the Secretaries-Office, you may be
satisfied of it your self, and be down again in Two Hours, and in the mean time
I will be doing something, though it is but little, till you return.

Away goes the Gudgeon with his Head full of Wildfire, and a Squib in his
Brain, and coming to the Place, meets a Croney at the Door, who ignorantly
confirms the Report, and so sets fire to the Mine; for indeed the Cheat came
too far to be baulkt at home: So that without giving himself Time to consider,
he hurries back full of the Delusions, dreaming of nothing but of getting a
Hundred Thousand Pounds, or purchase Two; and even this Money was to be gotten
only upon the Views of his being beforehand with other People.

In this Elevation, he meets his Broker, who throws more Fireworks into the
Mine, and blows him up to so fierce an Inflammation, that he employs him
instantly to take Guineas to accept Stock of any Kind, and almost at any Price;
for the News being now public, the Artist made their Price upon him. In a
Word, having accepted them for Fifty Thousand Pounds more than he is able to
pay, the Jobber has got an Estate, the Broker 2 or 300 Guineas, and the Esquire
remains at Leisure to sell his Coach and Horses, his fine Seat and rich
Furniture, to make good the Deficiency of his Bear-Skins, and at last, when all
will not go through it, he must give them a Brush for the rest.

There are who tell us, that the Exchange-Alley Improvements made upon the News
of the Pretender's being taken, were part of the Plot, that the late Earl of
Mar having concerted the Voyage of Voghera, and how and in what Manner the
Report of the Pretender's being there should spread, who it should amuse, and
how at one Blow it should spread East to Vienna, and North-West to Paris, and
so on; forgot not to contrive it, as at once should serve Political Ends in
Italy and at Vienna: So on the other hand, it should not fail to serve a
private View in Exchange-Alley, and at the same time that he deceived some of
the Whiggs who he owed a large Grudge to for shrewd Turns at Preston and
Dumblain, he might also raise a Tax upon them toward the incident Charges of
his wandering Circumstances.

I do not averr this Story to be true, but the Concert is so exact, and the
Nature of it so agreeable to the Stock-jobbing Art, nay and to the Artists
also, whose Correspondents are very punctual, especially since it is said, that
Mr. T -- s chief Agent was formerly my Lord M -- r's Broker; that I wont affirm
it may be true; but this I will venture to say of it, That if we are often
served thus, the Pretender may very easily raise a Hundred Thousand Pounds a
Year in Exchange-Alley, for the carrying on an Invasion, and lay the Tax wholly
upon his Enemies the Whigs, which, by the way, I leave them to consider of.

But now that I may make good the Charge ( viz.) that the whole Art and Mystery
is a mere Original System of Cheat and Delusion; I must let you see too, that
this Part of the Comedy may be very well called, A Bite for the Biter; for
which I must go back to the Broker and his Gudgeon. The Moneyed Gentleman
finding himself let into the Secret indeed, and that he was bitten to the Tune
of 30000 l. worse than nothing. After he had unhappily paid as far as his ready
Money would go, of which Piece of Honesty they say he has heartily repented,
and is in Hopes all that come after him will forgive him for the sake of what
followed, stopped short, as he might well, you will say, when his Money was all
gone, and bethinks himself, What am la doing! I have paid away all this Money
like a Fool, I was drawn in like an Ass, by the eager Desire of Biting my
Neighbors to a vast Sum, and I have been Fool enough in that, but I have been
ten Thousand times a worse Fool, to pay a Groat of the Money, especially since
I knew I could not pay it all: Besides, who but I would have forgot the Nature
of the Thing I was dealing in, and of the People I was dealing with; why, is it
not all a mere Body of Knavery? Is not the whole Doctrine of Stock-Jobbing a
Science of Fraud? And are not all the Dealers, mere Original Thieves and
Pick-Pockets? Nay, do they not own it themselves? Have not I heard T. W. B. O.
and J. S. a thousand times say they know their Employment was a Branch of
Highway Robbing, and only differed in two things, First in Degree, ( viz.) that
it was ten Thousand times worse, more remorseless, more void of Humanity, done
without Necessity, and committed upon Fathers, Brothers, Widows, Orphans, and
intimate Friends; in all which Cases, Highwaymen, generally touched with
Remorse, and affected with Principles of Humanity and Generosity, stopped short
and choose to prey upon Strangers only. Secondly in Danger, ( viz.) that these
rob securely; the other, with the utmost Risque that the Highwaymen run, at the
Hazard of their Lives, being sure to be hanged first or last, whereas these rob
only at the Hazard of their Reputation which is generally lost before they
begin, and of their Souls, which Trifle is not worth the mentioning. Have not
I, I say, heard my Broker Mr......... say all this, and much more? And have not
I also heard him say, 'That no Man was obliged to make good any of their
Exchange-Alley Bargains, unless he pleased, and unless he was in haste to part
with his Money, which indeed I am not: And has not all the Brokers and Jobbers,
when they have been bitten too hard, said the same thing, and refused to pay'?
'Pray, how much did Old Cudworth, Ph. C....p....m, and Mr. Goo......g Eminent
Jobbers, Monarchs in their Days of Exchange-Alley, break for? And how much did
they ever pay? One, if I mistake not, compounded at last for one Penny per
Pound, and the other Two for something less'.

'In a Word, they are all a Gang of Rogues and Cheats, and I Will pay none of
them: Besides, my Lawyer, Sir Thomas Subtle, tells me, there is not a Man of
them dares sue me; No, though I had no Protection to fly to, and he states the
Case thus:'

'You have Sir ( says Subtle) contracted to accept of Stock at a high Price;
East India at 220, Bank at 160, South Sea 120, and the like. Very well, they
come to put it upon you, the Stock being since fallen; tell them you cannot
take it yet: If they urge your Contract, and demand when you will take it, tell
them, you will take it when you think fit.'

'If they swagger, call Names, as Rogue, Cheat, and the like, tell them, as to
that, you are all of a Fraternity; there is no great Matter in it, whether you
Cheat them, or they Cheat you; it is as it happens in the Way of Trade, that it
all belongs to the Craft; and as the Devil's Broker, Whiston, said to Parson
Giffard, tell them you are all of a Trade: If they Rage, and tell you the Devil
will have you, and such as that; tell them, they should let the Devil and you
alone to agree about that, it is none of their Business: But when he comes for
you, tell them you would advise them to keep out of the Way, or get a
Protection, as you have against them.'

'After this, it is supposed they will sue you at Law, then leave it to me,
I Will hang them up for a Year or Two in our Courts; and if ever in that time the
Stock comes up to the Price, we will tender the Money in Court, demand the
Stock, and Saddle the Charges of the Suit upon them; let them avoid it if they
can.'

'This is my Lawyer's Opinion, says he to himself, and I Will follow it to a
Tittle, and so we are told he has, and I do not hear that one Stock-Jobber has
begun to sue him yet, or intends it, nor indeed dare they do it.'



This Experiment indeed may teach Understanding to every honest Man that falls
into the Clutches of these merciless Men, called Stock-Jobbers; and I give the
World this Notice, that in short, not one of their Exchange-Alley Bargains,
need be otherwise than thus complied with; and let these Buyers of Bearskins
remember it; not a Man of them dare go to Common Law to recover the Conditions;
nor is any Man obliged, further then he thinks himself obliged in Principle, to
make good one of his Bargains with them; how far Principle will carry any Man
to be just to a common Cheat, that has drawn him into a Snare, I do not indeed
know; but I cannot suppose 'twill go a very great Length, where there is so
clear, so plain, and so legal a Door to get out at.

It must be confessed, that if the projected Story of the taking the Pretender
was acted in Concert between Rome and Exchange-Alley, between my Lord Mar, and
a certain Broker as Fame reports, either the Broker is the Devil of a Jacobite,
or my Lord the Devil of a Broker; it must be acknowledged 'twas a far fetched
Trick, and answered the End in Exchange most admirably.

Nor can all the World tell us any other End that it could answer, for as to
the Pretenses of deluding the Imperialists on Shore, or the British Men of War
at Sea, and so the better to facilitate the Escape of the Pretender to Spain, I
undertake to prove, that this is absurd and ridiculous, for the Pretender was
Embarked at Netunna, and gone away to Sea thirteen Days at least, before this
Whim of People taken at Voghera was talked of.

As to the Amusements among the Courtsa^ Vienna, Paris and London, they
amounted to nothing at all, answered no End, neither prompted any Design on one
hand, or hindered any Thing on the other: In a Word, we may challenge the World,
to tell us any one Turn that was served by it, or End answered by it* but this
in Exchange-Alley.

Nor was this so inconsiderable a Design, as not to be worth while to form such
a Juggle, though a great way off; and as far off as it is, if we may believe the
Report of those who remember the Machines and Contrivances of that Original of
Stock-Jobbing, Sir J -- - C -- -- There are those who tell us, Letters have
been ordered, by private Management, to be written from the East Indies, with
an Account of the Loss of Ships which have been arrived there, and the Arrival
of Ships lost; of War which the Great Mogul, when they have been in perfect
Tranquillity, and of Peace with the Great Mogul, when he was come down against
the Factory of Bengale with One Hundred Thousand Men, just as it was, thought
proper to calculate those Rumors for the Raising and Falling of the Stock, and
when it was for his Purpose to but cheap, or sell dear.

It would be endless to give an Account of the Subtiltics of that Capital
Che....t, when he had a Design to Bite the whole Exchange: As he was the
leading Hand to the Market, so he kept it in his Power to set the Price to all
the Dealers. The Subject then was clrie fly the East India Stock, though there
were other Stocks on foot too, though since sunk to nothing; such as the
Hudson's-Bay Company, the Linen Manufacture Stock, Paper Stock, Saltpeter
Stock and others, all at this Day worse than nothing, though some of them then
Jobb'd up to 350 per Cent. as the two first in particular.

But the East India Stock was the main Point, every Man's Eye, when he came to
Market, was upon the Broker's, who acted for Sir J -- Does Sir J -- Sell or
Buy? If Sir J -- had a Mind to buy, the first thing he did was to Commission
his Brokers to look sower, shake their Heads, suggest bad News from India; and
at the Bottom it followed, I have Commission from Sir J -- to sell out whatever
I can, and perhaps they would actually sell Ten, perhaps Twenty Thousand Pound;
immediately the Exchange (for they were not then come to the Alley) was full of
Sellers; no Body would buy a Shilling, till perhaps the Stock would fall Six,
Seven, Eight, Ten per Cent. sometimes more; then the Cunning Jobber had another
Set of Men employed on purpose to buy, but with Privacy and Caution, all the
Stock they could lay their Hands on, 'till by selling Ten Thousand Pound, at 4
or 5 per Cent. lost, he would buy a Hundred Thousand Pound Stock, at 10 or 12
per Cent. under Price; and in a few Weeks by just the contrary Method, set them
all a buying, and then sell them their own Stock again at ten or twelve per
Cent. Profit.

These honest Methods laid the Foundation, we will not say of a fine great
Stone House, on a certain Forest, but it certainly laid the Foundation of an
Opulent Family, and iniutiated the Crowd of Jobbers on that dexterity in
tricking and cheating one another, which to this Day they are the greatest
Proficients, that this part of the World ever saw.

To come a little nearer home, We had another Gentleman, who, from a small
Beginning, came to leave, as they say who speak of the least, 250000 l. behind
him, and yet did not die an old Man neither. This Knight, to avoid as much as
possible, Reflections upon the Ashes of the Dead, added to the former Craft,
that of bringing sudden News into Exchange-Alley, calculated to the Wagers he
had to lay, or to any he had to hedge off, and by this gained immense Sums of
Money (where he living I should give it an harder Name.) Why should it be
thought so strange, that my Lord Mar and his Broker should trump up a Story
from Italy, send a Set of Post-Chaises with Gentlemen in Disguise, out of the
way of all Road, to be taken up in the Milanese, and sent to the Castle, and
then sent word to a Great Man in England, who is a BELIEVER, that it was the
Pretender, and all this to raise the Price of Stocks, and put it upon the
Whiggs. I say, Why should this be more strange than that Sir H -- F -- se, in
the late King William's Reign, was able to maintain such a constant
Intelligence in Holland, Flanders, Germany, Ireland, etc. that he several times
brought the King Accounts of Battles fought, Victories won, Towns taken, etc.
before the swiftest Expresses of the King's own Servants and Generals could
arrive; and had once a Diamond Ring of 500 l. given him by the King for his
early News.

By this exactly concerted Intelligence, he then knew how to turn the Wagers (a
sort of Jobbing then in Mode, and which grew so infamous that they were at
length obliged to suppress it by Act of Parliament) which way he pleased; and
by which he got an immense Sum of Money. How often did the Gentleman run down
true News as if it had been false, and run up false News as if it had been
true, by the Force of his Foreign Intelligeneers, how often coin Reports of
great Actions to serve a Turn; it is too late a Trick to be forgot, by many
that were hit by it to the Bone.

In a word, they putting false News upon us is nothing but an old Trade
revived, though it must be confessed, this of the Pretender has been a
Masterpiece, and the worthy Projector who has the Credit of it, must pass for
a dextrous Manager as any the University of Exchange-Alley, has bred up for 30
Years past.

It had also one Particular in it, for which it was very remarkable; Sham
Reports, False News, Foreign Letters, etc. are Things that have been often
trumpt upon us, as above, and the Town have been not long ago cheated to a good
round Sum that Way: But then they have been soon detected, the Morning News has
been set to rights in the Afternoon, or the Evening's Heat has cooled by
Morning: But this Trick had a fatal Duration, for it held us near a Fortnight
in a firm Persuasion of the Thing; and even then it continued, but suspected
only for some time longer, and was yet longer before it was fully detected, and
even at last it was hardly conquered till the Jacobites laugh us out of it, and
the Pretender was looked for nearer Home.

The Assurance with which it was carried about, the several Places from whence
it was written, made it so effectually be swallowed down, that really People
saw no room to question the Truth of it for a great while. 'Twas written from
Rome, from Leghorn, from Genoa, from Turin, and from Paris: Nay, 'twas even
believed at Court, and almost every where else.

Exquisite Fraud! who could have believed this had been born in Exchange-Alley,
sent over to Rome, agreed to there and executed in such a Manner as to cheat
not the Town only, but all Europe.

The Authority that every one found attemded the Report, supported it so that
it possessed us all, even those whose Concern for the Fact extorted Tears from
them were not undeceiv 'd. Thus the Hucksters had Time to play their Game, and
they made Hay while the Sun shone; for if we may believe Common Fame, Bargains,
Contracts and Agreements for Stocks, Bear-Skins included, amounted in that time
to some Hundred Thousands of Pounds, nay, some say to Two Millions and better,
most of which was to the Loss of the Believing Party.

But what Tricking, what Fraud, what laying Plots as deep as Hell, and as far
as the ends of the Earth is here? What Cheating of Fathers, and Mothers, and
Brothers, gulling Widows, Orphans, couzening the most Wary, and plundering the
Unwary? And how much meaner Roberies than these bring the Friendless even to
the Gallows every Sessions?

But I must not stop here, the Story of the Pretender is over, that Trump is
played, and the artful Gamester's wanting a new Trick, after having played so
many already, that one would think Invention was at an end, yet they have found
it out, and we are just led into the Secret.

Hitherto Craft and Knavery appears to be their Method, but we shall trace them
now a little further, and like true Hassars that plunder not the Enemy only,
but their own Army, as the Opportunity presents; so these Men are now come to
prey upon the Government it self.

Let us look into the late Lotteries, had not a piercing Eye detected the
Rognery, and not the fall of other things taken off the Edge of the Peoples
Fancy for venturing, these Artists had brought up the Tickets to 16 s. a-piece
advance, even before the Act was passed. That this could not be but by securing
the Possession of all the Tickets in their own hands, except such select
Tickets as were not to come to Market. I say, that this could not be but by
Connivance, and this every one knows; and that this Connivance again could not
be but by some higher People than those that were named to it; this also every
one may know, who they were is none of my Business to enquire, though it is easy
to guess. It Is very hard when our Statesmen come into a Confederacy to bite the
People, and when Dukes turn Stock-Jobbers: Yet that this was done is most
certain, and what was this but making a Property of the Power that might be in
their Hands, the better to bite the People: For if the Parliament appointed
500,000 l. in Tickets to be given out at a certain Rate that was low and
reasonable, was it not to encourage the People on whom the rest of the National
Burden lies? And if by the Craft and Knavery of Jobbers the People are made to
pay 600,000 l. for them, which is much about the Case, pray why not pay the
Hundred Thousand Pounds to the Public, either to pay off a Hundred Thousand
Pounds of Debt, or to make the Burden of the current Year a Hundred Thousand
Pounds lighter, of which I am sure there is need enough.

It has been indeed our Happiness, that a worthy Member being informed of this
abominable Cheat, detected it, and laid it before the House; upon which a Vote
was past to make void all Bargains made for Tickets before the Act was past; so
the Biters were Bitten; and a certain Sir George -- -- - was obliged to refund;
but the Roguery of the Design was never a Jot the less for that.

But the fatal Influences of this growing Evil does not end here, and I must
trace Stock-jobbing now to its new acquired Capacity of intermeddling with the
Public, assisting Rebellion, encouraging Invasion; and if I do not bring the
Stock-jobbers, even the Whigs among them, to be guilty of Treason against their
King and Country, and that of the worst Kind too, then I do nothing.

Had the Stock-jobbers been all Jacobites by Profession, or had the Employment
led them, by the Necessity of their Business to put King and Nation, and
particularly their own, to Bargain and Sale; and had the selling of News ^een
their Property, and they had an Act of Parliament, or Patent, to entitle them
to the sole Privilege of imposing what false Things they pleased on the People,
I should have had much the less Reason to have complained of their Roguery, and
have rather turned my self to the rest of them People, who are the Subject they
work upon, and only have stood at Exchange-Alley End, and cried out, Gentlemen,
have a care of your Pockets.

Again, had it been a private Club, or Suciety of Men, acting one among
another, had the Cheats, the Frauds, and the Tricks they daily make use of, in
which the English Rogue was a Fool to them, been practiced upon themselves
only; and like Gamesters at a public Board, they had only played with those
that came there to play with them; in this Case also I should have held my
Tongue, and only put them in mind of an old Song; every Stanza of which chim'd
in with Tantararand, Rogues all, Rogues all.

But when we find this Trade become a Political Vice, a public Crime, and that
as it is now carried on, it appears dangerous to the Public, that whenever any
Wickedness is it Hand, any Mischief by the worst of the Nations Enemies upon
the Wheel, the Stock Jobbers are naturally made assistant to it, that they
become Abettors of Treason, assistant to Rebellion and Invasion, then it is
certainly time to speak, for the very Employment becomes a Crime, and we are
obliged to expose a Sort of Men, who are more dangerous than a whole Nation of
Enemies Abroad, an Evil more formidable then the Pestilence, and in their
Practice more fatal to the Public than an Invasion of Spaniards.

It is said by some, that the principal Leaders in the Jobbing Trade at that
Time, and at whom most part of the Satyr in this Work ought to be pointed, are
Whigs, Members of Parliament, and Friends to the Government; and that the
refore I had best have a Care of what I say of them.

My first Answer is, So I will. I will have a Care of them, and in the next
Place let them have a Care of me; for if I should speak the whole Truth of some
of them, they might be Whigs; but I dare say, they would be neither
P.......men, or Friends to the Government very long, and it is very hard his
Majesty should not be told what kind of Friends to him such Men are.

Besides, I deny the Fact; these Men Friends to the Government! Jesu Maria! The
Government may be friendly to them in a manner they do not deserve; but as to
their being Friends to the Government, that is no more possible than the
Cardinal Alberoni, or the Chevalier de St. George are Friends to the
Government; and therefore without reflecting upon Persons, naming Names, or the
like; there will be no need of Names, the Dress will describe them, I lay down
this new fashioned Proposition, or Postulatum, take it which way you please,
that I will make it out by the Consequences of what I am going to say. 1. That
Stock-jobbing, as it is now practiced, and as is generally understood by the
Word Stock-jobbing, is neither less or more than High Treason in its very
Nature, and in its Consequences. 2. That the Stock-jobbers, who are guilty of
the Practices I am going to detect, are eventually Traitors to King George, and
to his Government, Family and Interest, and to their Country, and deserve to be
used at least as Confederates with Traitors, when ever there are any alarms of
Invasions, Rebellions, or any secret Practices against the Government, of what
Kind soever.


This is a black Charge, and boldly laid, and ought therefore to be effectually
made out, which shall be the Work of a few Pages in the following Sheets.

First, I lay down this as a Rule, which I appeal to the Laws of Reason to
support, that all those People, who at a Time of public Danger, whether of
treasonable Invasion from Abroad, or traiterous Attempts to raise Insurrections
at Home, shall willingly and wittingly abett, assist, or encourage the
Traitors, Invading or Rebelling, are equally guilty of Treason.

Secondly, All those who shall endeavor to weaken, disappoint and disable the
Government in their Preparations, or discourage the People in their assisting
the Government to oppose the Rebels or Invadors, are guilty of Treason.

All that can be alleged in Contradiction to this, and perhaps that could not
be made our neither, is, That they are not Traitors within the Letter of the
Law; to which I answer if they were, I should not Satyrize them, but Impeach
them. But if it appears that they are as effectually destructive to the Peace
and Safety of the Government, and of the King's Person and Family, as if they
were in open War with his Power, I do the same Thing, and fully answer the End
proposed.

As there are many Thieves besides House-Breakers, Highway-Men, Lifters and
Pickpockets, so there are many Traitors, besides Rebels and Invaders, and
perhaps of a much worse Kind; for as in a Dispute between a certain Lord, and a
Woman of Pleasure in the Town, about the different Virtue of the Sexes, the
Lady insisted that the Men were Agressors in the Vice, and that in plain
English, if there were no Whore-Masters, there would be no Whores: So, in a
Word, if there were no Parties at Home, no Disaffection, no Traitors among our
selves, there would be no Invasions from Abroad.

Now I will suppose for the Purpose only, that the People I am speaking of were
not disaffected to the Government; I mean, not originally, and intentionally
pointing their Design at the Government; nay, that they are hearty Whigs, call
them as we please; yet if it appear they are hearty Knaves too, will do any
thing for Money, and are, by the Necessity of their Business obliged, or by the
vehement Pursuit of their Interest, that is to say, of their Profits, pushed
upon Things as effectually ruinous and destructive to the Government, as the
very buying Arms and Ammunition by a professed Jacobite, in order to Rebellion
could be, are they not Traitors even in spite of Principle, in spite of the
Name of Whig; nay, in spite of a thousand meritorious things that might
otherwise be said of them, or done by them?

A Gun-Smith makes ten Thousand Firelocks in the Minories, the honest Man may
be a Whig, he designs to sell them to the Government to lay up in the Tower, or
to kill Spaniards, or any of the rest of the King's Enemies; a Merchant comes
and buys some of them, and says they are for the West Indies, or to sell into
France: But upon Enquiry it appears they are bought for Rebellion; the unde
signing Gun-Smith comes into Trouble of course, and it will be very hard for
him to prove the Negative ( viz.) That when he has furnished the Rebels with
Arms, he had no Share in the Rebellion.

To bring this home to the Case in view, who were the Men, who in the late
Hurry of an expected Invasion, sunk the Price of Stocks 14 to 15 per Cent? Who
were the Men that made a run upon the Bank of England, and pusht at them with
some particular Pique too, if possible, to have run them down, and brought 'em
to a Stop of Payment? And what was the Consequences of these Things? Will they
tell us that running upon the Bank, and lowering the Stocks, was no Treason? We
know, that literally speaking, those things are no Treason: But is there not a
plain constructive Treason in the Consequences of it? Is not a wilful running
down the public Credit, at a Time when the Nation is threatened with an
Invasion from Abroad, and Rebellion at Home? Is not this adding to the Teror of
the People? Is not this disabling the Government, discouraging the King's
Friends, and a visible Encouragement of the King's Enemies? Is not all that is
taken from the Credit of the Public, on such an Occasion, added to the Credit
of the Invasion? Does not every thing that weakens the Government, strengthen
its Enemies? And is not every Step that is taken in Prejudice of the King's
Interest a Step taken in Aid of the designed Rebellion? The kindest thing that
can be said of a certain Triumvirate of Jobbers, whose Hands have been deepest
in this Part of the Work, and who indeed had more Obligations upon them than
any other Men in the Town, to have assisted the Public Interest, and advanced
the Credit of the Nation is, that they did not think what they did, and that
this Excuse may not serve them another Time, I may soon furnish them with an
Anatomy of some of the Conduct of that little Body of Number Three, that when
they see their Mistakes with the Eyes that other Men see them, they may at
their Leisure give a better Turn to the Measures of Unbounded Avarice.

And now that I may not be said to speak without a Precedent, I humbly refer to
those moneyed Gentlemen to a Case recent in Memory, and even in their own,
which though indeed they may think fit to have forgotten for a time, they will
all call to mind when they hear of it again; and this was the Case of two
Goldsmiths (Knights also, and one of them Member of Parliament too) in
Fleetstreet, who pushed at the Bank of England at the Time that the Pretender's
Invasion from France was in its Preparation: One of them, it was said, had
gathered a quantity of Bank-Bills to the value of near 100,000 l. and the
other, a great Sum, though not so many, and it was said, resolved to demand them
all at once.

Let the Gentlement I point at look back to the printed Papers that Year, let
them enquire what Construction was put upon it; let them enquire how the
Government resented it, how my Lord Treasurer Godolphin looked upon it as a
Mine formed to blow up the Queen's Affairs, and how, in a Word, all the Friends
of the Government took it to be such a Step in favor of the Pretender, as was
impossible to consist with Duty to the Queen.

Let them enquire further, with what Difficulty Sir R -- H -- wiped off the
Imputation of being a Favourer of the Rebellion, and how often, in vain, he
protested, he did it with no such View, and how hard the Whiggs were to believe
him. Sir F -- C -- d indeed carried it with a higher Hand, and afterward
pretended to refuse the Bills of the Bank; but still declared he did it as a
Goldsmith, and as a piece of Justice to himself, in some Points in which the
Bank had, as he alleged, used him ill. But in general, it was looked upon as
an open Affront to the Government, and an abetting and countenancing the
Invasion of the Pretender from Abroad, and the Rebellion intended at Home: Nor
was the Government, much less were the Authors of private Papers and Prints,
wanting, in letting them know it; nay, if I am not misinform 'd, they were
threatened with being treated as Enemies to the Government, and if Things had
gone on to Extremities, they had doubtless been marked out as Persons the
Government were to take care of.

Now I only speak in plainer Words; It was said then, that such Men as
endeavored to run down the Public Credit, were Enemies to the Government. I
know no Distinction in the Case, that should require so much Tenderness; every
Subject of King George, who is at the same time an Enemy to King George, is a
Traitor, and every Overt Act of that Enmity it being his Duty to his utmost to
favor, aid and support the Government, is an Overt Act of Treason, let it be
gilded over with what fine Words the Persons please, it is the same thing, if it
is not literal Treason, and within reach of the Statute, yet the Crime is in it
self of the same Nature.

And let any one tell me, what is the Difference between two Dealers in Paper
Credit in the time of a French Invasion, and three Dealers in Paper-Credit in
the time of a Spanish Invasion, or what Sanctity in Birchin-Lane more than in
Fleet Street, that one should be a Protection for the same Practice that was
resented so justly in another.

Were those Stock-jobbers sincerely and heartily in the Interest of King George
and his Government, as they pretend loudly, what Run could there be upon the
Bank, what Ebb of Credit, what sinking of Stock: The honest Whiggs who were
Friends to the Government at that Time mentioned above, who not only knew their
Duty, but how to make it seasonable and useful, acted after another Manner,
when others run upon the Bank with all the Fury possible, they carried all the
Money thither they could gather up: Nay, I could name a Man in this City, who
having but 500 in the World, carried it all into the Bank to support the Credit
of the Public; and the Story being told to her Majesty by the late Lord
Treasurer Godolphin: The Sense of such Fidelity so moved the Queen, that she
sent him a Hundred Pounds as a Gift, a Royal Token of her accepting such an Act
of Loyalty; and caused my Lord to give him an Obligation from the Treasury to
repay him the whole 500 l. if any Disaster to the Bank should have made it
doubtful.

Where Is the like Courage and Conduct to be found now? Is it in Being? Are the
Gentlemen less able? Or is it that they have not the same Zeal for King George
as that honest Citizen had for the Queen? Or do they doubt the King being as
sensible of the Service? Or what is the matter that the Public Credit had
rather met with injurious Juggling and Jobbing upon it, than real Support,
either from Exchange-Alley, Birchin Lane, or some other Places less noted.

Let those Men reflect a little upon the Circumstances the Public Credit must
have been in by such Management, if the Spanish Attempt had been made, and if
these Easterly Protestant Winds had not chopped in, by which Providence has given
the Government Time to put it self into a Posture of Defense, so as now not to
be afraid of them; and if the Capital Stock of the Persons interested in the
Funds, is now sunk a Million in the real Value of them as they stood before
even at the Market, which is nothing but what the Matter of Fact will justify,
to what Degree would the same Current, if it had gone on, have sunk the Estates
of all the Moneyed Men in England?

In what Manner would Money have been raised upon a new Credit for any
immediate Exigencies that might have happened? And should the Government have
been supported, nay though the Parliament had granted Funds, while these Men
had made all Credit ebb, perhaps, to 25 or 30 per Cent. Discount; and is not
this then a Species of Treason and Rebellion.

It was very remarkable, that in the Juncture of those Things the Jacobites
could not refrain taking notice how easy it was to set the Citizens a
plundering the Bank, and even the Exchequer too; for had this gone on, the
Funds which are in effect the Exchequer it self, would have gone down Hill,
Hand in Hand with the Bank; Credit would have borne equal Pace in one as well
as in the other, and the Government would no more have been able to borrow than
the Bank would have been able to pay.

It is scarce fit to enter into a Description of all the mischievous
Consequences which necessary follow running down the Public Credit, in case of
such Dangers as I have mention 'd above; if I should fully describe them, it
would appear incredible. Every one will allow that this Practice of the
Jobbers, carry 'd on a little further, would indeed appear to be the worst Kind
of Treason.

But it is needful, after having said thus much of the Crime, to say something
of the Place, and then a little of the Persons too; The Center of the Jobbing
is in the Kingdom of Exchange-Alley, and its Adjacencies; the Limits, are
easily surrounded in about a Minute and a half ( viz.) stepping out of
Jonathan's into the Alley, you turn your Face full South, moving on a few
Paces, and then turning Due East, you advance to Garraway's; from thence going
out at the other Door, you go on still East into Birchin-Lane, and then halting
a little at the Sword-Blade Bank to do much Mischief in fewest Words, you
immediately face to the North, enter Cornhill, visit two or three petty
Provinces there in your way West: And thus having Box'd your Compass, and
sailed round the whole Stock-jobbing Globe, you turn into Jonathan's again; and
so, as most of the great Follies of Life oblige as to do, you end just where
you began.

But this is by way of Digression; and even still, before I come to the main
Case, I am obliged to tell you; That though this is the Sphere of the Jobbers
Motion, the Orb to which they are confined, and out of which they cannot well
act in their Way; yet it does not follow, but that Men of Foreign Situation (I
mean Foreign as to them, I do not meak Foreign by Nation) and of different
Figure are seen among them; nay, some whose Luster is said to be too bright for
the Hemisphere of a Coffee-House, have yet their Influence there, and act by
Substitutes and Representatives: But first I must speak to Originals.

C --, a Man of Brass sufficient for much more Businets than he can be trusted
which, is (...) to manage for three blue Ribbonds, and for four or five
Cath^^^epers, who tell more Money than their own: He fetches and carries with
such indefatigable Application, that he is said never to sail his Appointments
to a Minute, however remote from one another: Wherever he appears, he makes
an Exchange-Alley in his Person, and a Court in his Audience: He is himself a
Jonathans-Cossee-house in little; Though he be at a Cockpit, he reallizes
Exchange-Alley in every Place; and yet he rather is directed than directs, and
like a certain great General, famed for more Fire than Phlegm, is fitter to
drive than to lead.

S -- has twice the Head, but not half the Business as C -- is said to have,
yet he gets more Money for himself, and C -- gets more for other Folks. S -- is
as cunning as C -- is bold, and the Reserve of one with the Openness of the
other, makes a complete Exchange-Alley Man. C -- jumps at every thing, and as
he got the start of the World at his Beginning, by venturing more than he was
worth, so he deals now with all Men as if they ventured more than they are
worth. Originally he was a BITE, which, in Modern Language, is a Sharper, or,
being fully interpreted, may signify the head Class of the Fraternity called
Pick pockets.

T --, a Gamester of the same Board, acts in Concert with C -- and S --, and
makes together a true Triumverate of modern Thieving; He inherits the Face of C
--, with the Crafr of S --, but seems to take State upon him, and acts the
reserved Part more than either; yet even this too is all Grimace, for where
ever he can be sure to kill, he an't fawn like an Irishman.

They are all Three of yesterday in their Characters, yet they are old in the
Cr^^e, ( viz.) of resolving to be rich at the Price of every Man they can
bubble: Their first Blow was aimed at the BANK, but there they were outwitted;
and the Great Lord-Treasurer Godolphin, in the late Reign, gave them their just
Characters from that Action. The Defeat they met with there, sticks so close to
them, that they reserve the Measures of their Revenge, nor to cool, no not till
the Charter of the Bank shall expire.

However, their Wings being clipped by the Clause then obtained in an Act of
Parliament, ( viz.) That no Society, Corporation, etc. should issue out Bills
of Credit as a Bank, but the Bank of England only; they were obliged ever since
to turn Stock-Jobbers, or if we may speak properly of them, they are the
Stock-Jobbers Masters; for they have so many Bear-Skins pawned to them at a
time, so much Stock deposited with them upon Bottomree, as it might be called;
that indeed they may he called the City Pawn-Brokers: And I have been cold,
that they have had fifty Stock-Jobbers and Brokers bound Hand and Foot, and
laid in Heaps at their Doors at a time.

The next Trick they tried, and which was indeed the Masterpiece of their
Knavery, was the getting an Assignment of the Forfeited Estates in Ireland into
their Hands: Indeed they began the World upon this Prospect, and expected to
have had the whole Kingdom of Ireland mortgaged to them: But here too they were
disappointed, and had they not found a Man that had as much Money as
themselves, and more Honesty, that Bargain of the Forfeited Estates had been
the last they had made in the World.

The Endeavors they use to cheat that Gentleman, after he had delivered them
from a Blow that would have blown them up (is another black Part of their Story
that remains to be told for the Illustration of their Characters at another
time:) But in the Interm it is enough to say, that he who deliver^d them as
Fools, knew how to deliver himself from them as Knaves; and so they were dropped
out of the Irish Bargain to their great Mortification.

Now they stand ready, as Occasion offers, and Profit presents, to Stock-jobb
the Nation, ^ouzen the Parliament, ruffle the Bank, run up and run down Stocks,
and put the Dice upon the whole Town.

They had another Flap with a Fox-Tail, to the Scandal of their Politics in
the late Vote about the Tickets of the Lottery which I mentioned above; what
Market they will make of it is well enough known: But the Plot was never the
less Cunning, and it is certain the Knavery is not the less visible for the
Miscarriage. I come next to their more modern Management.

Whenever they call in their Money the Stock-Jobbers must sell; the Bear-skin
Men must commute, and pay Difference money; then down come the Stocks, tumbling
Two or Three per Cent. then the Tools must sell, and then Masters buy; the next
Week they take in Stocks again, then the Jobbers buy, and the Managers sell.
Thus the Jobbers bite their Friends, and these Men bite the Jobbers, qui Sarpat
Sharpabitur, Exchange-Alley Latin; they that are let into the Secret will
understand it.

The Truth is, it has been foretold by cunning Men, who often see what cannot be
hid* that these Men, by a Mass of Money which they command of other Peoples, as
well as their own, will, in Time, ruin the Jobbing Trade. But 'twill be only
like a general Visitation, where all Distempers are swallowed up in the Plague,
like a common Calamity, that makes Enemies turn Friends, and drowns lesser
Grievances in the general Deluge. For if the Reprisal Trade should adjourn from
Exchange-Alley to Birchin-Lane, it may seem to be like the banishing Usury from
the City of Rome, which transferred it to a Jew at Genoa, a Monk at Naples, and
a Banker at Venice, who, it was said, had no less than seven and twenty
Principalities in Italy mortgaged to them at a Time, besides two Kingdoms,
seven Dutchies, and the Jewels of the Crown of France.

Having thus given the blazing Characters of three Capital Sharpers of
Great Britain, Knaves of lesser Magnitude can have no room to shine; the Alley
throngs with Jews, Jobbers and Brokers, their Names are needle ss, their
Characters dirty as their Employment, and the best thing that I can yet find
out to say of them, is, that there happens to be two honest. Men among them,
Heavens preserve their Integrity; for the Place is a Snare, the Employment it
self fatal to Principle, and hitherto the same Observation which I think was
very aptly made upon the Mint, will justly turn upon them, ( viz.) That many an
honest Man has gone in to them, but cannot say that I ever knew One come an
honest Man out from them.

But to leave them a little, and turn our Eyes another way; Is it not
surprising to find new Faces among these scandalous People, and Persons even
too big for our Reproof. Is it possible that Stars of another Latitude should
appear in our Hemisphere? Had it been Sims or Bowcher, or Gamesters of the
Drawing Room or Masquerades, there had been little to be said; or had the
Groom-Porter's been transposed to Garraway's and Jonathan's, it had been
nothing new; true Gamesters being always ready to turn their Hand to any Play.
But to see Statesmen turn Dealers, and Men of Honor stoop to the Chicanry of
Jobbing; to see Men at the Orfices in the Morning, at the P -- House about
Noon, at the Cabinet at Night, and at Exchange-Alley in the proper Intervals,
What new Phoenomina are these? What fatal Things may these shining Planets
(like the late Great Light) foretell to the State, and to the Public; for
when Statesmen turn Jobbers, the State may be Jobb'd.

It may be true, that a Treasurer or Cashkeeper may be trusted with more Money
than he is worth, and many times it is so; and if the Man be honest, there may
be no harm in it: But when a Treasurer plays for more Money than he is worth,
they that trust him run a Risque of their Money, because, though he may be an
honest Man he may be undone. I speak of private, not public Treasurers.

Indeed it requires some Apology to say such a One may be an honest Man; it
would be hard to call him an honest Man who plays away any Man's Money that is
not his own, or more than he is able to pay again out of his own. But if it be
dishonest to play it away, that is, lose it at Play, it is equally dishonest to
play with it, whether it be lost or no, because in such a Case, he that plays
for more than he can pay, his Master runs the Hazard more than himself; nay,
his Master runs an unequal Hazard, for if the Money be lost, it is the Masters,
if there is Gain, it is the Servants.

Stock-Jobbing is Play; a Box and Dice may be less dangerous, the Nature of
them are alike, a Hazard; and if they venture at either what is not their own,
the Knavery is the same. It is not necessary, any more than it is safe, to
mention the Persons I may think of in this Remark; they who are the Men will
easily understand me.

In a Word, I appeal to all the World, whether a Man that is entrusted with
other Men's Money, (whether Public or Private, is not the Question) ought to be
seen in Exchange-Alley. Would it not be a sufficient Objection to any Gentleman
or Merchant, not to employ any Man to keep his Cash, or look after his Estate,
to say of him he plays, he is a Gamester, or he is given to Gaming and
Stock-Jobbing, which is still worse, gives the same, or a stronger Ground of
Objection in the like Cases.

Again, are there fewer Sharpers and Setters in Exchange-Alley than at the
Groom-Porters? Is there less Cheating in Stock-Jobbing than at Play? Or rather
is there not fifty times more? An un-enter'd Youth coming to deal in
Exchange-Alley, is immediately surrounded with Bites, Setters, Pointers, and
the worst sort of Cheats, just as a young Country Gentleman is with Bauds,
Pimps, and Spungers, when he first comes to Town. It is ten Thousand to one,
when a forward young Tradesman steps out of his Shop into Exchange-Alley, I say
it is ten Thousand to one but he is undone, if you see him once but enter the
fatal Door, never discount his Bills afterward, never trust him with Goods at
six Months Pay any more.

If it be thus dangerous to the Mean, what is it to the Great? I see only this
difference, that in the first the Danger is Private, in the latter Public.

It has not been many Years since Elections for Members of -- came to Market in
Exchange-Alley, as current as Lottery Tickets now, and at a Price like these,
much above what any Parliament allowed them to go at; While this was carried
on, a great many honest Men exclaimed against it, and exposed it; nay, several
Acts of Parliament were proposed for regulating Elections, and preventing
Bribery and Corruption: But all this would not do, and this indeed was one of
the happy Consequences of that otherwise necessary Act for Triennial
Parliaments; and I firmly believe that it is oweing very much to the late
suspending that Act for a Time, that these Things are not come to Market again.

It may easily be remembered, that the first Occasion of the Exchange-Alley Men
engaging in the Case of Elections of Members, was in King William's Time, on
the famous Disputes which happened between the Old East India Company and the
New; which having held a great while, and having embarrass'd not the City only,
but the whole Nation, and even made it self dangerous to the Public Business,
it was expected it should be fully decided by the House of Commons: To this End
the Members of both Companies, with all the Trick, Artifice, Cunning and
Corruption, that Money and Interest could arm them with, bestirred themselves
to be chosen Members.

Brokers rid Night and Day from one End of the Kingdom to the other, to engage
Gentlemen to bribe Corporations, to buy off Competitors, and to manage the
Elections. You will see the State of Things at that Time, and the Danger this
Stock jobbing Wickedness had brought the Public to, if you please to read the
following Exclamation of the honest Freeholders at that Time, which was
presented to the Public by way of Complaint: The Thing was laid before the
King first, and before the Parliament afterward; and it was his Majesty's
Sense of the Consequence, that made him resolve to bring the two East India
Companies to unite their Stocks, for in a word, the Stock-Jobbers embroiled the
whole Nation.

'The grand Work which the whole Nation is now intent upon, is choosing their
Representatives in Parliament, choosing Men to meet, and advise with the King
about the most important Affairs of the Kingdom.'

'And while all Men ought to be fixing their Eyes upon such Men as are best
qualified to sit in that Place of Honor, and to examine who are fittest to be
entrusted with the Religion and Peace of England, and perhaps of all Europe.'

'Here we are plagued with the Impertinence of two East India Companies, as if
the Interest of either Company were to be named in the Day with the Protestant
Religion, and the public Peace, or as if they, who are fit to be
Representatives of the People in the great Matters of Peace and War, Leagues
and Alliances of Neighbors, Succession of Crowns, and Protection of the
Protestant Religion, should not be capable of deciding the petty Controversy in
Trade, between two Rival, Companies.'

'The Grand Question asked now, when your Vote is required for a
Parliament Man, is not as it ought to be; Is he a Man of Sense, of Religion, of
Honesty and Estate?'

'But, What Company is he for, the New, or the Old?'

'As this Stock-Jobbing in its own Nature, is only a new Invented sort of
Deceptio Visus, a Legerdemain in Trade; so mixed with Trick and Cheat, that
'twould puzzle a good Logician to make it out by Syllogism: So nothing can be
more Fatal in England to our present Constitution, and which in time may be so
to our Liberty and Religion, than to have the Interests of Elections Jobb'd
upon Exchange for Money, and Transferred like East India Stock, for those who
bid most.'

'By this Method, the Country Gentlemen may sit at home; and only Corresponding
with the Brokers at Jonathan's and Garway's as the Prizes Rise or Fall, may
dispose of their Interests in the Towns they can Govern, at as good a rate as
they can.'

'The Citizens, or such who have their several Companies and Interest to Serve,
will ease themselves of the Expense of Traveling, with the fine borrowed
Equipages before mentioned, and only go to Market in Exchange-Alley, and Buy an
Election, as the Stock-Jobber and they shall agree, which Election shall be
managed by the Country Gentleman, who is to have his Bargain, no Purchase no
Pay, and is to go through with it, or else he gets none of the Money.'

'Elections of Parliament Men are in a hopeful way; and Parliaments themselves
are in a hopeful way by this concise Method of Practice, to come under the
absolute manages meant of a few Hands, and no doubt things will go on
accordingly.'

'Banks and Stocks may be laid up, and employed in a short time, for the
purchasing the Interest of Gentlemen, and our Gentry being willing to get a
Penny in an Honest-way, as we say, will but too often sell their Interests, and
their Country too, especially such Gentlemen, whose Estates are reduced to an
occasion for it.'

'The Stock-Jobbers, who care not a Farthing which Side gets the better, but
make a Prey of them both, have set up this new Trade of Jobbing for Elections:
And that the way of their Proceeding may be a little plainer understood, We
desire you to read the Copy of a Letter come down last Post, to a worthy
Gentleman in our Country, from a Friend of his plying in or near
Exchange-Alley, concerning this Matter.'



SIR,
THE Elections for a New Parliament being begun almost every where, I doubt not
but the Time is fixed at your Town of -- -- -- -- I know you have the Absolute
Power of the Inhabitants there, and can put in whom you please; and finding by
your last you purpose to Decline it your Self, I am to inform you, that a very
Honest Gentleman of my Acquaintance, being an Eminent Merchant here, would
think himself very much Obliged, if you would use your Interest in his behalf,
upon your Grant whereof, I have an Order to Present you with a Thousand
Guineas, to buy my Lady --

He is ready to come down at your first Summons in a very good Equipage, Pray
dispatch your Mind per the Bearer to

Your humble Servant
To the Honorable Sir, A, B, C, D, Bar.

Postcript. ' IF Sir E, F, G, H, will dispose of his Interest in the Town of --
I can help him to very good Terms.'

'Now though the worthy Gentleman to whom this Proposal was made, rejected it
with Disdain yet the Attempt is made very Plain in the Case.'

'And we are informed that the Number of Members come down into the Countries,
on such Accounts, are incredible.'

'Wherefore we think it very needful to publish our Resentments at such a
Practice, and to protest against it in this our Honest Plea, as an indirect,
wicked and pernicious Practice, and which may be of very ill consequence to the
Nation.'

'If Stock-Jobbing of Elections be the first step, in all probability
Stock-Jobbing of Votes will be the second; for he that will give a Thousand
Pounds, or more, only for a power to Vote, expects to get something by Voting,
or gives away his Money for nothing.'

'What shall we say then, if a League of Confederacy should be made between our
Parliament-Solicitors, and our Stock-Jobbing Brokers, two sort of People
equally mercenary and Deceitful.'

'We desire to know, whether 'twould not be more fatal to England than the New
War with Spain, which all Europe seems to be so much disturbed at.'

'To all Men whose Eyes are to be opened with Reason and Argument, it should be
enough to fill them with abhorrence to think that the Scandalous Mechanic,
Upstart Mystery of Job-broking should thus grow upon the Nation; that ever the
English Nation should suffer themselves to be Imposed on by the New invented
ways of a few Needy Mercinaries, who can turn all Trade into a Lottery, and
make the Exchange a Gaming Table: A thing, which like the Imaginary Coins of
Foreign Nations, have no reality in themselves; but are placed as things which
stand to be Calculated, and reduced into Value, a Trade, made up of Sharp and
Trick, and Managed with Impudence and Banter.'

'That Six or Eight Men shall Combine together, and by pretended Buying or
Selling among themselves, raise or sink the Stock of the E. India Company, to
what extravagant pitch of Price they will; so to wheedle others sometimes to
Buy, sometimes to Sell, as their occasions require; and with so little regard
to Intrinsic Value, or the Circumstances of the Company, that when the Company
has a Loss, Stock shall Rise; when a great Sale, or a Rich Ship arrived, it
shall Fall: Sometimes run the Stock down to 35 l. other times up to 150 l. and
by this Method Buy and Sell so much, that it is thought there are few of the
Noted Stock-Jobbers, but what have bought and sold more Stock than both the
Companies possess.'

'Thus let them Jobb, Trick, and Cheat one another; and let them be bubbl'd by
them that knows no better; but for God's sake Gentlemen don't let the Important
Affairs of the State come under their wicked clutches.'

'Don't let them prepare our Acts of Parliament and then choose Members to Vote
for them. If Fate and Popish Confederacies, and Union of Popish Powers abroad
threaten us, let us alone to struggle with them, and have Fair Law, and
Honorable Conditions for it; but to be Bought and Sold, to have our Elections
of Members, and our Laws, Liberties and Estates Stock-jobb'd away, is
intolerable.'



I said above, that the Parliament put a Check to this Practice afterward by
several Acts; and the late Act for suspending the Triennial Bill has at present
laid it a ssep; but how far the Practice may revive when a new Election shall
come on, who knows? Never was more Knaves or more Money in Exchange-Alley, and
never more needy Gentlemen to assist the Purchasers. How necessary it is to
prevent them, let any one judge.

Besides, what shall we say to the encroaching Nature of Immortal Avarice? Has
not that eminent C --, of whom at large above Stock-jobb'd the very Public it
self, as I may say, and the very House of Commons; for jobbing their Funds
before they are laid; Stock-jobbing their Tickets before the Lottery was found,
may in some Sense be called Stock-jobbing the House: If then they will even
before the Members Faces, jobb their depending Acts, and that too before they
are passed; shall we doubt but they will Stock-jobb the Elections of another
Parliament when this is gone Home?

It is evident, that at present, not being able to avoid preying upon their
Country, they have been tampering Abroad; Foreign Alarms is the present
Commodity at Market; Choice of Members may be the next; till in time, by
Strength of Money, they may Stock-jobb Religion, Property, Constitution and
Succession; for nothing can come amiss to them, if they can but get Money by
it; for if the same Avarice reigns among them that it is evident is their Guide
now, they would with the same Facility jobb for the Nation, and without any
Scruple, make a Transfer of King George and his Crown for a half per Cent. upon
the Value, to whoever bids the Money.

There was a Book published some Years ago, and when the Stock-jobbing People
were thought as willing, yet not quite so daring or so cunning as they are now;
it was Entitled, The Villainy of the Stock-jobbers. Indeed it set them out in
their true Colors, and for some time gave them a little Shock; for the Truth
was, they jobb'd King William and the Government at that Time at such a Rate,
that in spite of the Invincible Valor and Resolution of the Soldiery, in
spite of the most Glorious Prince and most Vigilant General the World had ever
seen; yet the Enemy gained upon us every Year; the Funds were run down, the
Credit jobb'd away in Exchange-Alley, the King and his Troops devoured by
Mechanics, and sold to Usury, Tallies lay bundled up like Bath Faggots in the
Hands of Brokers and Stock-jobbers; the Parliament gave Taxes, laid Funds, but
the Loans were at the Mercy of those Men; and they showed their Mercy indeed,
by devouring the King and the Army, the Parliament, and indeed the whole
Nation, bringing that Great Prince sometimes to that Exigence, through
unexpressible Extortions that were put upon him, that he has even gone into the
Field without his Equipage, nay, even without his Army; the Regiments have been
uncloathed when the King has been in the Field, and the willing brave English
Spirits, eager to honor their Country, and follow such a King, have marched
even to Battle, without either Stockings or Shoes, while his Servants have been
every Day working in Exchange-Alley to get his own Money of the Stock-Jobbers,
even after all the horrible Demands of Discount have been allowed; and at last,
scarce 50 per Cent. of the Money granted by Parliament has come into the
Exchequer, and that late, too late for that Service, and by Driblets, till the
King has been tired with the Delay, and been even ready to give up the Cause.

We have just now had a Test of their Cunning on the Subject of the Invasion:
These were the Men that made the first Advantage of the News; immediately those
that were to put Stock upon any Man at a high Price, tender 'd it, the
Accepters, forced by the Demand, call in their Money on every Hand, pay the
Difference, the Price falls, a general Run upon the Bank follows, and
Stock-jobbing began it.

Say this was no Design, yet if every Alarm of the Foolish or the Timorous, or
the False, is capable to set the Humor afloat by the Agency of Exchange-Alley,
then Exchange-Alley is as dangerous to the Public Safety, as a Magazine of
Gunpowder is to a populous City.

But if it be by Design, then, whenever the Pretender is to be pawned upon us
by any Foreign Power that can but talk of lending 5 or 6000 Men, our Public
Credit is at his Mercy, by the Agency of Exchange-Alley and the Brokers.

The Story of the Invasion from Spain, we hope, is now over: Indeed at the
Worst, I saw no such Reason to be surprised to that Degree, as was the Case
here. Let us look back and see what Injury to the Public has the very Rumor
been? What Damage to Credit! What Stop to Trade! What Interruption to our
General Commerce! besides sinking above a Million Sterling upon our Estates;
and every Farthing of this is occasioned by the Stock-jobbers, and in the
Consequences of their Contrivances, and by no other Means; for as to the Design
of an Invasion, or that they resolved to come hither at all, though we have
evident Proofs of that, because some of them have been actually landed; yet we
cannot yet resolve the Question positively, whether it was ever worth our being
so much alarmed as we have been in Exchange-Alley.

Even this Way it appears, that these Stock-Jobbers are dangerous to the Peace,
since it is in their Power to set a Rate whenever they please, not only upon
private Estates, but even upon the whole Nation, and in that Capacity it is to
be hoped, the Parliament, who have hitherto redressed the Public Grievances,
will take care of these People in particular, and deliver the Public from such
a Set of Men as are more fatal to them, than a Midnight Fire, more dangerous
than an Enemy Embarked, nay, I had almost said, than an Enemy Landed.

For, in a word, these Men take upon them to put a Standard upon our Fears; and
we are to ask them, when Intelligence comes from Abroad, whether any thing be
to be slighted or apprehended; every public Piece of News, every Menace of the
Nation's Enemies is to receive its Weight from them; and the Price of Stocks is
the Rule by which we are to guide our Judgment in Public Affairs, by which we
are either to hope or to fear when any thing amiss present it self to our View.

Is this an Advantage fit to be put into the Hand of a Subject? Are the King's
Affairs to go up and down as they please, and the Credit of his Majesty's
Councils rise and fall as these Men shall please to value them? This would be
making them Kings, and making the King Subject to the Caprice of their private
Interst, his Affairs be liable to be rated in Exchange-Alley, and to be run
down as they pleased; an Article, which as the Roman Pontiff, in the first
Politics of the Church, made all the Kings of the Earth become Pensioners to
the Priests, so it would make all the Kings of Britain Pensioners to
Exchange-Alley.

It must be confessed, it looks as if this were the present View in the Manner
which Stock-Jobbing now goes on; and there are more Mischiefs in it than
perhaps we are aware of, the Extremes either way seem dangerous enough, for
Example,

If one way the Stock-Jobbers manage the Public, they scandalously subject the
Government, the Ministers of State, the Public Credit, nay, even the Elections
of Parliament to their Orders: So if a Government should come absolutely to get
the Management of the Stock-Jobbers, it might be many Ways fatal to the Peoples
Interest, and indeed put the Purse-Strings of the Nation so much into the Hands
of a Ministry, that if they did not at any time command the general Treasure,
and be able to raise what Money they pleased without a Parliament, they would
be able to add what Value they pleased to the Funds given, raise them when they
pleased to draw Money in, and sink them when they pleased to issue Money out:
That in a word, the Rate of Stocks should be settled every Day in the
Exchequer; and though they might not be said to stand no more in need of
Parliaments, it would be most certain, that they would not stand in so much
need of Parliaments as they used to do, and as it is convenient for us they
should do.

I must run out a great Length in the Enumeration of the Mischief to the
Liberty of Great Britain, which might attend such a Thing as this; and though at
present it may be objected, that it is unreasonable, and entirely needless,
because we are under a King that stands in need of no Artifices, and is too
just to attempt any Encroachment on the Liberties of his People, and a
Ministry, who we have reason to hope are above taking any such mean Steps; yet
if ever a Time shall come again, when every Politic Step shall be enquired
after to bring Grist to the Public Mill, and every way that can be found
practicable, shall be thought justifiable; then let you Citizens of London have
a care of a Bear-skin-Court, and a Stock-Jobbing Ministry, when Exchange-Alley
shall be transposed to the Exchequer, and Statesmen shall make a Property of
the Brokers.

This is indeed a Thing remote, and as I say above, there is no Danger of its
happening in this Reign, so it may never happen at all: But as I also say,
without the least Reflection upon our present Government, that such a Time may
come, and such a Thing may happen; so I affirm, the State of Things ought
forthwith to be annihilated if possible, which is but in its Nature capable of
being thus perverted, and we ought not to leave our Posterity in a Condition to
be devoured by such Caterpillars, if it be in our Power to prevent it.

Why may not any collected Stock of Money, such as that we have mentioned
before, to be in the Management of the Birchin-Lane Company, be managed in the
Hands of Courtiers, as well as of Citizens; Ministers of State, as well as
Inhabitants of Hackney; and to how many more unlucky Purposes may such Men
apply that Power? These Men indeed proceed, with Trick and Cunning, to amass
great Estates, and to enrich themselves and their Families out of the Spoils of
the People, their Neighbors, etc. and in this we think they cannot have too
much of our just Satyr bestowed upon them; but if this Engine of Jobbing should
once come into the Hands of Ministers of State; if a degenerated Government
should come to use it, as such a Government may be supposed to be able to do,
what Mischiefs may they not bring upon the Nation? And what may they not be
able to do, if their Designs are but wicked enough to push them on?

It would be hard to say to what Length this Jobbing Trade might be extended,
especially whereby the Advantage of a punctual Management, the public Credit
has so far gained upon the People, as to bring the Rate of Funds and Stocks to
exceed the Intrinsic Value, and to keep upon an Advance: What may not a
Government, who has the Command of Money, do in the particular Art of Screwing
up, or Screwing down the public Interests and Securities?

It Is a copious Subject, our Exchange-Alley Men understand it well enough; and
if they were put to give their Opinions, and had Honesty enough to speak the
Truth against their Interest, they would acknowledge their Trade is capable of
ruining ten Nations, if it was carried on to the full Extent of it.

While these Sheets were at the Press, we had another little Test of their
Knavery to the Public; and it is not at all owing to them, that the Thing run
no further; the contrary Winds and Storms, etc. had disappointed the King's
Enemies, and the Spanish Fleet was driven back to Spain in a shattered and
defeated Condition, as appears by the Public Account of those Things: But in
the Interval of this News, came an Account on the other Hand, that some of the
Party were arrived in Scotland, that they had beat it up, notwithstanding all
the Opposition of Nature, the Hindrances of Winds and Seas; immediately Stocks
fell Two per Cent. nor did the good News of the Defeated return of the rest
animate these Men to keep up the Interest, by which it appears, that they are
acted more by the bad Principle than by the good; that they choose rather to do
Evil than to do Good: that they sink faster than they rise, and are willinger
to do Harm than Good to the Government.

From whence I infer, that the Government, looking upon them as they really
are, rather Enemies than Friends to the General Interest, should rather incline
to root them out, than preserve them. AMEN.

FINIS.

