A Fifth ESSAY, At Removing National Prejudices; WITH A REPLY TO Some AUTHORS,
Who have Printed their Objections against An Union with England.

Printed in the Year M.DC.VII.

The PREFACE.
I Confess, the Occasions of my appearing in Print again upon this Subject, are
unexpected; and as the writing a Fifth Essay is Contrary to my real Design, and
more so to my Inclination, I cannot but say something by way of Introduction to
it.

The Management of this present Treaty, I mean, without Doors, has something in
it peculiarly odd, and to me very surprising; Reason and Argument, nay even
Demonstration cannot reach it; Men will argue against, nay Banter, and be Witty
upon the several Branches, and yet at the end of the Discourse profess, They do
not Understand them -- They will be silenc't, and yet not at all Convinced;
they wont believe, when they cannot reply; when they own, they gain by it, they
are not pleased; when they fancy, they are Losers, they are fond of
Complaining; and when they cannot make it out, rail on those that Endeavor to
Confute them.

Words can have no Effect on such Persons, no Argument can touch them; either
they Cannot, or Will Not, Understand any thing but what they like. Bitterness
possesses their Souls, and breaks out too much at their Tongues: and I must
tell them, I think, I bear more than my Share of this from them too, and that
without Cause.

It Is hard, Gentlemen, that an Attempt calmly to remove Prejudices (and I am
sure, I have done it both Calmly and Cautiously) should fill any Body with
Prejudices at the Author. Scotland has been in some Reputation for Courtesy to
Strangers, and I should be very sorry, you should break in upon that part of
your Character, only with a Reconciler. An Attempt to remove Prejudices, can
have nothing in it; unless that the Truths spoken, move the Spleen of some, who
would not be reconciled, and therefore cannot bear the Demonstration.

Nor would I be mistaken here, I am far from being Concerned at the Ribauldry
of the Street, calling my Name about to every Ballad, making me the Author of
Papers I never saw; when Gentlemen lampoon one another, calling it mine, and
the like, this is an old Method taken with me, and I am used to it. -- My Muse
must be the Whore of Poetry,
And all Apollo's Bastards laid to me.


The Gentlemen are welcome, and the Mob of Writers by all their Witticisms,
shall only provoke me to Silence. I remember, and I wish, some other Gentlemen
here would take the hint as I do -- My Lord Rochester advising My Lord -- not
to reply to Satyr and Lampoon, has these two Merry Lines. Fellows that never
were Heard or read of,
If thou writ'st on, will write thy head off.


Others, I am told, are furnishing themselves with Scandal, and Design to
answer my Arguments with Personal Reflection.

I thank GOD, my Life, however mixed with Misfortunes, has not been such, that I
am ashamed to see it in Print. Nor shall I offer any Capitulations with such
Gentlemen, only entreat them for their own Sakes, to say nothing but what is
true: -- and then to add at the Bottom of their Story, what mighty
Signification it has to the Argument in hand.

When our Savior had healed the Man born blind, and he, appearing before the
Elders, answered them with a Testimony to the Divinity of the Healer, which
they could not reply to, viz. That he must be GOD, since nothing of a Man could
have wrought such a Cure -- To answer the Conviction of his Reasoning, they fall
upon the Poor Man, Thou were altogether born in sin and do thon teach us --
and they Cast him Out -- and yet after all what the Poor Man said, was very
true --

Now Gentlemen, if what I say be true, why will you not hear it? if not true,
why will ye not answer it? -- Let the Author be never so Despicable or Mean in
your Eyes, he is in no Man's meaner than in his Own: but Truth in the meanest
Hand, deserves your Regard; Accept the Truth, and use the Author as you like,
he is perfectly unconcerned about that.

But all this does not yet reach the Matter which I Complain of: But I think it
hardest, when Gentlemen, who pretend to answer what pinches them in Fact,
Charge me with Falsities, wrong representing things and the like, and to make
it out, give their own Assertions only, without the least Proof either to make
Good their own, or Detect mine.

When Gentlemen reflect on what I have wrote, as not true, and use me ill on
that head, at the same time contradicting it, with nothing but what is
manifestly false, imposing upon the World their own Affirmative without Proof
against Arguments, which are, and can be proved by Undoubted and undeniable
Authority; this, I must own, is using a Stranger very ill.

I shall give but two or three Instances of this here, and shall meet with the
rest as I go.

1 st. Here Is a Gentleman tells me in Print, That the small Beer in England
does pay more than 1 sh. 3. d. per Barrel if sold for above 6 sh: per Barrel;
that the Foreign Salt pays 10 sh: per Busbel Custom, that there are Duties and
Restrictions on the Export of the English Woollen Manufacture and the like. And
this the Gentleman calls a Confuting my Fourth Essay.

Now as this wants but a short Answer, so that Answer will detect the
Gentleman's Ignorance first, and then his forwardness of Charging me without
Proof.

It Is true, the Act of Parliament in England, prescribes the Excise to only
two Denominations of Beer, Small and Strong, and that the Small Beer is
strictly called 6 sh: Beer: and I suppose in Charity to him, that he looked no
further than the Letter of the Act.

But if he thinks fit to examine the Practice in England, and the Nature of the
thing, he will find three things.

1. That there is no Small Beer sold in England at 6 Shillings per Barrel. 2.
That the Household Beer sold in London, and Parts adjacent at 10 sh. per Barrel,
and some at 12 sh. per Barrel, pays no more Excise than as Small Beer, viz. 1
sh. 3 d. per Barrel; and of this I can bring him several Witnesses of People of
both Nations now here. 3. That by the Nature of the Act, it can be no
otherwise, since the Act does not say, all Beer above 6 ss. shall pay as Strong
Beer, but the word, Strong Beer, is governed by the Usage of Excise, and is all
sold as Ale from 18 sh. per Barrel to above 40 sh.
If it is asked me, Why the Act calls it 6 sh. Beer? I answer, Because, that
Act having been made above 30 Year ago, the Small Beer in those days, was sold
at that price; and this Excise being but in two Heads or Denominations as
before, the Term needed no Alteration, though the price of Sale was risen: since
it followed by the Name of Small Beer, that nothing could pay as Strong, that
had not the first Runnings of the Malt.

I need enlarge no further, to prove the justice of my Calculation, or the
unfairness of being Charged here with Imposing on the World.

The second Case is in the same Gentleman's Paper, who tells me, the Duty on
Foreign Salt is 10 ss. per Bushel; and to insult me the more, adds, That it is
by them that know it as well as I.

Now as this shows the Gentleman's Heat to run before his Discretion, I must
tell him, there can be no just Comparison between any Man's Knowledge here,
since the Acts of Parl. are plain, in which the Taxes upon Salt are settled,
and that there may be no Dispute on the Difference of Measure, the Bushel is
Determined to weigh 84 l: weight Avoir du pois, and if he pleases to search the
said Acts, and the English Book of Rates, he will find the Duty stands thus. By
the Act. 5. and 6. Will. and Mary. Cap. 7. 3 d. per Gallon on Foreign Salt. 7.
and 8. William III. Cap. 31. the Duty Continued. 9. and 10. William III. Cap.
44. 7 d. per Gallon, Added, 10 d. per Gallon 10 d. per Gallon -- 8 Gallon to
the Bushel is 80 d. or 6. sh. 8. per Bushel. The Subsidies and Impost formerly
laid amount to -- 2 d. per Bushel -- 2 6. 10 or thereabout.

Either I am Right or wrong: if wrong, let the Acts of Parliament decide that
Controversy; if I am Right, -- then this Gentleman and his Author, who, he
says, knows it as well as I, have something more to account for to the world,
than an homest Man cares to be charged with: and if I had used him so, I would
frankly ask his Pardon.

As to the Duties and Restrictions on the Woollen Manufacture in England on
Export, the 36 Minute of Parliament has answered and confuted it for me, -- I
need say nothing in my own Vindication after such an Authority, only recommend
it to the Gentleman himself to consider, whether he has used either me or his
Country honestly.

A Fifth ESSAY, etc.
IN the last Essay, I went through a great many Branches of the Popular
Objections raised in Scotland, against the Union. -- I wish I could exactly
distinguish between those that Men raise only to oppose the Thing in General,
and prevent the Uniting the Nations on any Terms whatever, and those which are
really offered from honest Scruple at the Particulars.

However, whether I can distinguish them in their Arguments, or no; I shall
distinguish them as well as I can in the following Discourse, in which I shall
have all due regard to honest Reasoning and fair Argument, but not so much to
Cavil and Frivolous or Malicious Opposition.

I little thought it had been possible that any Scots-man, at least such as
understand the Affairs here, could say, That Scotland does not gain by England
in Trade, much less that you do, or can Trade abroad with equal Advantages to
other Nations.

I could not imagine any Man would offer that it is your Advantage to Trade
with France, where you bring back nothing but what drains you of Money, and
send little thither but what you ought to keep at Home.

Less was it to be expected, that Men should publish in Print, that your Trade
will be ruined by an Union with England.

Wherefore to all these Heads, I shall say something as plain and Concise as I
can, if possible, to remove the Prejudices which are formed in the Heads of the
Ignorant, as if on Purpose to set them in the light of your future Advantages.

But before I come to this, I must say a Word or two to a mighty Champion, that
has undertaken from my own Writing in another Case, to overthrow the very
Foundation of the present Treaty, and setting D. F. against D. F. Demonstrates,
as he thinks, that the Parliament of Scotland has no Power to enter upon this
Treaty, nor go on with it without the Consent of their Constituents that Choose
them.

And to do this, he Quotes a long Part of a Book wrote some time since in
England, Entitled, The Original Right of the Collective Body of the People of
England Vindicated and Asserted, in Answer to Sir Humphra Mackworth's Book,
Called, A Vindication of the Commons of England, etc.

In this Book I lay down Four Maxims of Government, which this Gentleman
Quotes, at large.

Now it is so strange a thing, notwithstanding all this, That these Gentlemen
should bring this Quotation to prove the want of Power in the present
Parliament of Scotland, to enter upon the Union, that I must own I never saw
any thing fetched so remote in Argument in my Life.

If any Man therefore please but to Examine two things, he will see through all
this Cloud of Cavil, and soon distinguish the Case.

All that this long Quotation amounts to, is sum'd up in this, That ail
Government being constituted for the Public Good, all the Parts of Government
Ceasing to Act for the Public Good, cease from the same Public Capacity in
which they were Constituted, the end of their Authority being Destroyed.

This only then leads us to Examine, whether the present Parliament of Scotland
are Acting for the Public Good, or no, and I shall be very glad to join Issue
with any Body on that Head.

The other Case quoted, refers to Parliaments making Laws against Reason,
Nature, or the Divine Law. -- And had the Author here quoted me fairly, he
would have gone on and showed an Instance I gave to explain the rest,

Viz. If the People of England find their Representatives going about to betray
the Religion and Liberties of their Country, what the said People by the Laws
of Reason, Nature and Religion ought to do? And to Illustrate this, I gave
Instances of the Parliament in England alternately Re-establishing to Day
Popery, to Morrow the Protestant Religion; to Day one King, to Morrow another;
to Day declaring Queen Mary Legitimate, and Queen Elisabeth a Bastard; to
Morrow Queen Elisabeth a Legitimate, and Queen Mary a Bastard; and from thence
I argued to the Subversion of Justice and Corruption of the Laws in these
Cases; I think all I have advanced there very Just and Plain, and I never yet
heard it objected against.

But with Submission to this Gentleman's Understanding, all this proves nothing
in the Case before us, unless it be also made appear, That the Parliament of
Scotland is acting something against the Laws of God, Nature or Reason,
subverting the Laws, Corrupting Justice, Oppressing the People whom they should
protect, and betraying the Trust reposed in them by their Country, and thus we
are just where we were before.

Indeed the Drift of my Author, appearing plainly at last, to Declare it self
for a League with France, and consequently a Restoring some body, who this
Nation, I believe, had much better be without, it requires no further Reply
than this, and therefore I leave it.

I frankly own the Positions, this Person Quotes, (viz.) Of the People
collectively considered, having a Right to oppose any constituted Body of
Government, Suppressing and Betraying their Fundamental Right.

But I do not see any thing inferred from hence, unless it be first proved, That
the Treaty now on foot, is a Betraying the Fundamentals of their Country,
Overthrowing and Subverting the Laws, Perverting and Corrupting Justice, and a
General Enslaving the People.

Much I know has been Talked of, to prove these things, but with so little
Reason, and on such Weak Fundations, that I think, I need say no more to it,
till Mr. H -- s or some Body for him, Refutes The Scheme of the National Right
of Parliament asserted in the last Tract. -- Wherein I have, to the best of my
Judgment, Described it; and shall willingly Recant it, when I find it not able
to consist with Justice and Reason.

But before I dismiss this Article, and that I may give this Gentleman full
scope for his Argument, I offer to prove, That though the Fundation he lays down
were Just, which it is plain is otherwise, yet the Inference would not hold in
this Case.

For Example, suppose (which yet I by no means grant) That the People who are
the Constituents of Parliament, were so far Judges of the actions of
Parliament, as to have a Right to give them Instructions; and as a Worthy
Author has it among the rest of his wise Sayings, to Address the Parliament
COMMANDING them not to proceed, etc.

Two things must necessarily follow upon this most Important Supposition.

1. That these People so Limiting the Parliament, must be such, and only such,
as have a Right of Election, for they only can Direct their Representatives who
have a Right to be Represented, and they only have a Right to be Represented,
who have a Voice in the Election of a Representative.
Thus, there are all your Glasgow Armies Disbanded, and turned Rebels at once,
and all your Dumfries Protestors with their Troops of Horse and Armies of Foot,
such only excepted as have a Right to Vote in an Election.

2. Of those who have a Right of Voting in Election, the Right of Contraveening
the Actions of the Members, must depend at least on the Majority of them; some
are of the Opinion, it must have every Individual in an Action of such moment:
But this is certain, it must have a Majority, and this Majority must include
the Nobility too, who are not Represented, but sit in Person; and how shall it
appear, that this Majority are in the Persons now Addressing?
Let us Examine the Probability of it, for a certain Examination I believe
impracticable now; but as to Probability when shall we see it.

Some of the Addresses have been Signed by 6, some 7, 10. 12 hands, only to
assist in the Clamor. Are these the Majority of the Electors in the Shires or
Towns? some have more, but it is where the Proportion is much greater.

Let us take it in the Address of the Burghs, which has been often calculated,
and take the Burghs that refused to Address, and these that did not think it
worth while to appear, and the Majority against the Addressers, is by the
Proportion of their Cess as 86 to 14. Nay, suppose all those that did not
appear to be Affirmatives, though that be altogether improbable, and that they
would have been for the Address, yet the Proportion had been as 31 to 69. --

But if the Rate of the Cess be not a just Estimate of the Value of the Burghs,
tho I can prove it was the Original of their Right of being Burghs; then I
refer to any Man to calculate the Inhabitants and Number of Freemen in each
Burgh, and he will find the 20 Burghs that refused to address, have more
Inhabitants in them than both the 24 that addressed, and the 22 that were
absent, the City of Edinburgh excepted.

And where now is the Majority? and how shall a Parliament regulate themselves
by this Method? For here a Majority of the Shires (suppose it was so) addressed
against the Union, and a Majority of the Burghs are for it; now take the Minor
Part of the Freeholders, and the Major Part of the Buroughs, and draw a just
Proportion of Members in the House, I mean of Representatives, and add these to
the great Number of the Lords who are for the Union, and who are not
represented at all, and I dare say, the Majority would appear for the Union.

To take it another way, divide the Freeholders in Scotland, and place the
Numbers of either the Representing or the Represented by the Value of their
Estates, for the Original of all depends upon the Freehold; I dare say,
including the Nobility, two Thirds of the Freehold of Scotland belong to such
as are for the Union.

I care not to enter into Inviduous Comparisons, as the more exact Calculating
such things as these must necessarily come to; I leave it to those that please
to examine further into the Majority: I am persuaded, if these People will have
the Majority of the Freeholders of Scotland be against the Union, they must, as
Mr. Hodges does, draw the Ladies into the Party; and if they are against it, as
some say, the Reasons they give are too light for this Discourse.

I think this Estimate of probable Majorities as just as may support my
Arguments; I Will submit them to any Man that can confute them.

As to all the rest of the People of Scotland, who have no Right to elect
Representatives, I affirm, and think the nature of the thing demonstrates it,
They can have no Right to direct those who they have no part in constituting.

And here all the People drawn in to sign Addresses to the Parliament against
the Union, so far as the Members are to be bound by these Addresses, are
meddling with what they have no Right to be meddling with, nor are any way
concerned in.

But besides all this, suppose SOME RIGHT of limiting the Proceedings of
Parliament by their Constituents, and the Majority in one Place addresses them
against an Union, and the Majority of other Places addressed for it or
acquiesced, which is the same thing, What Confusions, what intolerable
Exigencies and Labyrinths must this run the Parliament into? and when should
any thing be resolved, which tho of never so great Concern, had so much
Difficulty in it?

I leave this here, with this short Remark on it, That I do not see, tho the
Constituent had Power to restrain the House, that by any Estimate which can be
yet made, a Majority has yet appeared willing to do so; if there was a
Majority, it does not appear they had a Right to do it, unless what the
Parliament was doing, was in it self destructive of the Laws, Liberties,
Religion or Property of the People, or subverting their Essential Privileges;
and therefore hitherto the Parliament have been Regular in their Proceedings,
and Wiser than to regard the Clamours of Tumultuous People, not qualified to
interrupt them.

The further Designs of this Author discovers the more naked part of the
Design, viz. Uniting, or at least Confederating with Popish and French Tyranny
-- And I cannot but observe here, how those People are pleasing themselves with
that small Advantage of Trade to France, and magnifying them to unusual Hights,
tho it is plain the Returns from thence are all to your Damage in general, and
at the same time the Trade to England, the Returns of which now are chiefly in
Money, and after the Union must be more so, are disparaged, lessened and
reduced to nothing.

The Author of this Book is honest in this, whatever he is in other things, and
owns his Drift is a Treaty not with England, but with France.

I should have entered further into his Disputes of the much better Treaty with
France than England, if I had not been happily prevented by a Book, which
appears just while I am writing this, entitled, The Advantages of Scotland by
an Incorporate Union, etc. In which he is so fairly confuted, and the Argument
handled so clearly, that it would be an Injustice to the Gentleman that wrote
it, tho I know not who he is, not to acknowledge that he has done his Country
Justice, and the Argument too; and I believe will not be replied to in haste.

After what has been there said, I shall not so much as think my self able to
say any thing fit to be added; and shall always let the World see, that whether
I know when to speak or no, I always know when to hold my Tongue.

But I cannot quit this Discourse, without drawing one Inference from all these
things. viz. That in all these Debates, and however different the Opinions of
some People are from others in that matter of the Union, -- I know not by what
concurrence of Causes it happens, but this seems to be the general Concession
of all the contending Parties, viz. That Scotland is not in a condition to
Subsist, or at least to Flourish by Her self. -- That She seems under some
necessity to Unite or Confederate some where. -- And so the Debate, is not
whether She shall Unite with some body or no, but whether She shall Unite with
this or that, with England, France, Holland, or who?

If I were a Scots Man, or if you could bear with Plainness and Truth from a
Stranger, that strives to speak impartial Truth, and has not one Shilling to
gain or lose, let it go which way it will -- I would ask some of these
Gentlemen, Whether they have considered their National Circumstances as to
England, and examined not how they could break with England? For I am not a
going to insult Scotland -- But in what Posture, as to Trade, Scotland would be
upon an universal Prohibition between England, Ireland and Scotland.

It Is true, there is a kind of Prohibition already as to England: You have
prohibited almost all the Manufactures, and take nothing from them you can well
be without -- But they have not yet treated you so; they have not returned you
in kind. I would ask these Gentlemen, How they would look, and in what
Condition, as to Trade and ready Money, Scotland would be, if there were equal
Prohibitions and an universal Stop of Trade between the Nations, that neither
your Cattle nor Linen was admitted there; the Return of which is now wholly in
Cash.

Some Gentlemen have said, You can do without it, and perhaps you may: Come,
Gentlemen, let us examine how.

Why first these Gentlemen say, France will take off your Wool, Lead, Salmond
and Herring -- Well, Gentlemen, and what will they give you for it? -- Wine,
Brandy, Fruit, Silk, Toys and Trinkets. I will not engage here with the Gentlemen,
and disoblige the Men of the Bottle so far, as to make a Calculation of the
wondrous Advantages of Wine and Brandy, and how much they contribute to the
Wealth of the Nation; and therefore I leave that Debate, only this I must say,
That your Import every Year exceeds your Export; and if this Trade is to
increase your Wealth and People, it will still increase your Consumption; and
you must pay France the Overplus in specie, and so promote the Manufacture of
Drunkenness at the Price of the Consumption of your Bullion.

But then as to Wool, it is owned France will take little Wool, if any of your
own Growth, at least not without English Wool with it -- And if effectual Care
is taken to prevent the Export of that Wool from England, I suppose you will
find a Decay there -- And if you oblige France to take your Fish, and cannot
supply them with Wool, you must make them Amends some other way; as perhaps by
filling their Armies with Scots Troops, and sending your Gentlemen into their
Service. So exporting your Scots Blood by their Gallantry and Courage, help
France to pull down the Protestant Religion, and enslave Europe, of which
Bondage you must at last come in for a share.

But next to this says another Gentleman, we may export our Linen to Spain,
and our Beef to the Canaries and Madera.

For the first, so you may, if you please, with an Union as well as now: So
that whatever you gain of Export to England, is all as clear as it was before;
for you may make enough for both Trades, if you please, and consequently employ
more People in the Work, more Land in the Planting, and so the Trade to Spain
is just as it was, and receives no manner of Alteration.

For the sending Beef to the Canaries, etc. I suppose the Gentlemen that have
been so forward in that Argument, have never been at, or have never Traded to
those Islands, otherwise they would not offer such odd kind of Proposals: And
to shorten them, I discreetly would revise their Calculations, and compare them
with the following Circumstances, and then I persuade my self they will have
Honor enough to change their Sentiments.

1st. England in the Year 1699 took from Scotland in Trade, and for which they
paid ready Money, 31608 Head of Black Cattle. 25470 Sheep.
Over and besides the Number of both sorts, which are secretly convoyed over
the Borders, and which is impossible, the Tract of Land being so great, can by
any Vigilance of Officers be prevented; which some say amounts to as many more,
but all agree, are a very great Quantity.

Now I would be glad to know, where the Gentlemen would export this Quantity of
Cattle.

1. As to the Canaries and Madera, the Inhabitants are few, the Flesh they eat
little; and if they were to have all the Beef they buy from Scotland, they
would not take off 5000 Bullocks or Beeves a year.

2. They have New England and New York, from whence they are supplied with
Pipe-staves, which ly so much nearer to them; and from whom they are supplied
with Beef and Pork, so cheap, that I wonder how these Gentlemen could think of
those Places to sell thirty thousand Black Cattle a year in.

If they could sell those Cattle, where would they sell the Returns? Madera
Wine they could not dispose of any where, and of Canary but a small Quantity,
without Help of England; and Silver is not to be had in those Islands: Which
way they would either make their Returns, or get Loading back for their Ships,
is a Mystery past any Man's Understanding.

4. But were all these Difficulties over, had those Islands no Flesh from the
Continent of America, had Scotland a vent at home for 20 Ships Load of Canary
and Modera Wine to secure their Ships a back Freight. -- Yet at last, I say,
they could not Sell ten Barrels of Beef a year, in either Canaries or Madera,
-- And I think the Reason is plain.

The Irish Beef is so much Better, so much Cheaper, and their Shipping and
Sailing so much Easier, that they would be able to out-sell them there,
reckoning Value and Price above a hundred per Cent: -- Now to make this out, I
shall not give the Reader the trouble of Calculations, only let him know, that
the best Irish Beef, Large and Fat, not to make Comparison, has been to be had
at Kinsale, Cork or Galloway, for under 6 sh. per Hundred weight, for some
years past, that is to say, for very little more than half penny Sterling per
lib. and I leave the Calcule to any Body that please to make it.

While this is so, I must take leave to say, neither England or Scotland, nay,
nor New England, or New York, can come into that Trade.

Then the Irish Selling their Beef to English Merchants, and sending it in
English Bottoms, can carry the Madera Wines to the Islands, or bring the
Canarie Wines to England in the same Ship; this the Scots can never come up to
without an Union: and I appeal to all the World, for the Truth of Fact in this
particular.

Where the Gentlemen then will dispose of 30000 to 50000 of Black Cattle to
Balance the English Trade, I know not.

I Recommend this Thought, to those Gentlemen who are so very warm for
Draw-backs upon Beef Exported for Sale; and I would be glad, they would tell
us, to what place of the World the whole Island of Britain, sends 10 Last of
Beef in Seven Year for Sale; and if so, why they will Clog the Treaty with such
Demands. --

I come next to the Linen, You have in the Public account of the Exports of
Linen, to England and other parts, above 1800000 Else of Linen carried out of
Scotland, in one year.

This may be all sent to Spain, they say; suppose that were true, though as to
quantity I question it, yet since the English, as every body knows, have sent
none of this to Spain, the War having Stopped that Trade; then if the Scots can
send so much to Spain, they yet lose the Sale of so much more in England.

So that here is above 800000 Else of Linen, 31608 Black Cattle, and 25240
Sheep, left on your hands, by rejecting the English Trade; and all the ready
Money they bring with them now, kept out of the Kingdom, upon a breach with
England.

I would be glad to see these Gentlemen, offer some of their Equivalents for
this, for an Equivalent, as much as they banter that poor Word, must be had
some where, or else it will be worse. -- Above all, I wait for their French
Equivalent, and the account of the Return they would make from France, for
their Fish, Lead and Wool. -- I suppose, they will not expect to send Linen to
France. --

While I am Writing this, I am presented with a Book Entitled, A Letter
concerning the Consequences of an Incorporating Union, in relation to Trade.

I confess it is a wonderful Book, and partakes of the rest of the Miracles of
this Age, wherein Arguments are raised out of contradicting Systems, to Prove
and Disprove what Men please. I must own, I think the Author of this Book,
seems to be in a Plot for the Union, and that by laying down Arguments, that
even the Gentlemen, who have Declared against the Union, have too much Sense
than to make use of, he would confound the Debate with Absurdities and
Contradictions, and argue People into it by showing them a heap of Ridiculous
Arguments against it.

I can not satisfy my self, to waste either my own time or the Reader's, with
entering into his manifold weighty Reasons, but I Will repeat a few of them.

1. He tells us, That all Trade is Exchanging one Commodity for another, for
the Convenience of Life and the supplying Nations with what their Neighbors
have, which they want.

In prosecuting this, he is merry on the English Trade, and thinks he banters
those who say it is Advantageous to Scotland, since, says he, we shall only get
one Commodity for another.

Without running his length, I shall bring it to a short head. His notion of
Trade by Exchanges is Right enough, only that he forgot to say, That where any
Nation has more want of Foreign Goods, than She has Goods of her own to
purchase them with, She must make up the Value in Money.

On this turns the whole State of the Question, and the Gentleman was in the
right to forget it, for it would have overthrown all his System.

Money is an Intrinsic, placed as a Medium in the Center of Trade, to supply
the differences in Value, between the Export and Import of one Nation to and
from another.

This is what we call Balance of Trade, a thing many People talk of, though few
understand.

That Nation only can be said to Gain by another, who send more Value in its
own Product to that other Nation, than is received from it, because the
Balance must be made good in this Intrinsic, called Specie.

From hence it is a certain Maxim in Trade, That what ever any Country can part
with of its own Growth and Product, is so much clear Gain to the public Stock
of that Nation.

Whatever any Nation wants of the Growth and Product of another Nation, is so
much Dead Loss to the Public Stock of that Nation.

And the Consequence is Natural, that which a Nation partswith, or wants most
in those Terms, Gains or Loses just so much in the General Balance of Trade.

These are things too plain to need Repetition, and had not this Gentleman
forgot this, whether wilfully or no, I do not determine, he would have never
said at first, That Scotland does not want the English Money, etc. I say every
Nation wants to Export all the Product of their Country they can spare, and all
the Product of their Peoples Labor they can spare; and every Nation wants
their Neighbors Money for their Product, because every Nation wants in the
Language of Trade to be Gainers.

And therefore to Export the People, instead of the Labor of the People is by
the way, letting out the Lifeblood of a Nation: but of that by it self.

It remains therefore for this Gentleman, to tell us on a fair Examination, not
whether you want the English Trade, or no, now, or after the Union; but whether
you gain Money by it or no, let any one tell me, whether you Gain by it or no?
I Will tell him whether you want it or no. --

To find out this I shall come to his own worthy Argument Page 6 --

'We shall Import into England (says he) all our Commodities; as to the Word
free of Duttes, I ll speak to it by it self. -- But he goes on, We send Linen
Cloth into England: What shall we get in return? Why Woollen Cloth, or what
else the Persons that sell the Linen think they can get most by at Home. --
And from hence this worthy Gentleman concludes, Here can be no Gain to Scotland.

Now I Will only state the Case on a Supposition, which I think no Man can deny
me.

Suppose Scotland sends Linen Cloth to England, to the Vaue of 200000 per
Annum, and the Persons that sell it there, can sell but 100000 l. in the
Woollen return. -- What must the Merchant bring Home? And how must England pay
for the Linen? -- Must it not be in Money, and Who is the Gainer?

From hence I leave it to the Reader to Calculate, Scotland has sent 1828415
Else of Linen to England 31608 Black Cattle, 25420 Sheep in one Year, Pray
what returns have they fetched for this Trade? not VVoollen Goods, I believe any
Body will grant. Who then has been the Gainer in that Year of Trade, Scotland
or England?

The Objection that this is before the Union, is not to the Purpose for after
the Union, your Export may be Double in Coal, Salt, Corn and Wool, your Linen
double, and the like.

Then it will remain to ask, How is it possible Scotland should consume a
Quantity of Woollen Goods from England equal to this, you having both Wool and
Manufactures of your own proportioned? it is impracticable, and where then all
the rest of your Export must be supplied, is another of this Author's
Vnaccountables.

But says he, It is pretended Scotland must Export the English Goods again to
the Plantations: This makes Good what I said before, That he offers this to
Banter the Opposers of the Union, and bring them in talking ridiculously, on
purpose to expose them.

For no Body ever but himself, pretended that Scotland should Trade to the
Colonies with English Goods; that were to make it a Trade and no Trade to them,
turn them into mere Pedlars, or Second-hand Chap-men, and to put a Banter upon
the Colonies, to think they should send to Scotland for English Manufacture,
when at the same time, they Trade to England directly.

And why pray cannot Scotland Trade to the Colonies with her own Product, and
the Labor of her own People? Her Linnens, her low prized Woollens are as
vendible, and as much wanted there, as any English Goods what ever, and she
wants no quantity.

Her Returns for these are, First, The employment of her Shipping and Seamen.
Secondly, The Product of the Plantations, which she now buys in England, and
bringing which from the Colonies, will increase the Balance between England
and Scotland still higher.

But says the Author, You cannot dispose of the Sugars and Tobacco; and if you
send them Abroad, you get nothing but Linen from Holland, or Lace from
Flanders, or Naval Stores from the East. -- Very good. Do you want these things
or no? If you do not, you wont Import them; if you do, you will Import them,
and unless you can pay for them in Goods, you must in Money: So that still the
Advantage of Exporting your Tobacco and Sugar is equal to Exporting your own
Product; because it either returns you directly in Money, or saves you sending
your own Money abroad, which is letting the Nation blood in the Vitals.

Thus, with Submission to this Gentleman, bringing things back to first
Principles, will unravel all this Clue of Knotty Argument, and if I Mistake
not, will discover the Nakedness of it more than sufficiently to the World.

The same Author, to Answer an Objection of the Scots Working Cheaper than the
English, has this further Deep Consideration, That either the English must come
down to our low Wages, or the Scots must come up to their high Wages; and
therefore the Scots Manufactures cannot be Cheaper than the English.

Now to make this out, I desire, he would be pleased then to reconcile the
following Heads to his Maxim, That Scotland shall not get by the Trade.

First, He says, The Workmen will certainly Live where they can get most for
their Labor, That I grant him readily.

Now, If the English should be forced to be brought down to the low Wages in
Scotland, it must be, that they see the Scots fall so heartily into their
Manufactures, Vndersel and and Underwork them, that if they do not sink the
Price too, they shall lose their Trade. Or,

Secondly, If the Scots come up to the high Wages of England, the poor People
will live here, as well as they do in England, and the Trade will be in
Proportion Greater; and I will be Content to hear, which of these Consequences
will be a Damnage to Scotland.

But now, Gentlemen, more Wonders are arrived, and the Strangeness to me is
very Great, I Confess, except that it is true that Miracles are not Ceased, and
this is very Particular.

First, He says, and introduces it with an I AFFIRM the Scots can be no Gainers
by the Freedom of their Trade to the Plantations; Nay, if the English would
give the Scots all their Plantations, they would be no Advantage to them.
Secondly, The English gain nothing by the Plantations themselves, nor have they
been ever any Gain to them.
This wretched Stuff is followed by another, That bringing home Naval Stores,
can be no Advantage to you; because building or employing Ships, will be no
Advantage, only Dispeopleing your Country.

I need but name these things to the World, they are certainly done to Banter
the Case; the Man is certainly pleading for the Union, it cannot be otherwise:

But mark the Foundation on which all this is Built, is, England gains by no
Foreign Trade, only gains by her Manufactures.

And how could we Gain by our Manufactures, if there was not a Foreign Trade to
Vent them?

But we Gain nothing, but what is returned in unperishable Commodities, --
Allow that now, -- Why then, we have Gained all the ready Money in England, all
the Plate, all the Bullion, all the Iron, Brass, Steel, or Metals imported.

All the Moveable Stock of the Nation, is clear Gain to it, be it in Ships
Buildings, Furniture, Stores, Wares, etc. How have they Gained all this? it
must be by Trade, and the Personal Estates in England, such as Houses, Ships,
Goods, Cattle, Plate, Jewels, Money, etc. are computed at much more than the
Value of the Fee simple of all the Land at 100 Years Purchase.

But I Will tire you no more with this Miserable Stuff, pray, Gentlemen, pardon
me the Freedom I take with this Author, and do not think I imagine Scotland can
be capable of such Nonsense; I am very well assured, this is another English
Author, and that this Book came from England, it tastes both of the Spirit, the
Temper and Understanding of some Gentlemen there, who set up to Instruct you
here, in what you know better than they.

But now, Gentlemen, to come Home to your own Trade with England, either as it
is, or as it may be with or without an Union.

If an Union go on, it is alleged you shall have higher Customs than you have
now. -- To this the Resolution of your Committee is a full Reply, in which they
tell you, how all the Customs of England which shall expire at 1710, being
deducted, your Customs Rated on the present Export and Import of Scotland shall
be less than they are now, by 150000 l. Scots per Annum, besides upwards of
220000 l. Scots taken off from your Manufactures when Exported to England.

This, I think, has in a manner silenced the Gentlemen, that thronged the Town
with their Calculs of Customs rising upon you, as something else has done about
the Re-payment of the Equivalent.

The Trade lying thus, let me state it two ways.

It Is evident by the Report of the Persons employed by the Government to
calculate this, that your Exports to England now without an Union, amount to
200000 lib. Sterling per Annum.

No Man has yet ventured to say, That you make any Returns from thence that
bear a Proportion to this, -- all their Manufactures being prohibit. But
because I would give all reasonable Allowance, I am content to suppose, that
you receive from England in Goods 50000 li^ per Annum. I Will suppose, that the
Noblemen and Gentlemen of Scotland in their Expenses, and the Fine Things they
buy there, spend 50000 lib. more, tho both these Sums exceedingly outdo the
Probability of the thing.

But this being allowed, then it is yet true, that Scotland gets 100000 lib. per
Annum in Money from England by Trade; how she would make her self Amends for
that Loss by a Trade to France, I can see no room to find out: And for a Trade
to Spain, She has it with the Trade to England, and may enlarge it as she
thinks fit; and England will help, not hinder Her to enlarge it.

If then you get 100000 lib. per Annum by England, it is a good Trade without an
Union: Let Us now examine if the Union will make it greater or less; and upon
this the whole State of the Case will turn.

First, We are told here, that after the Union, the English Woollen
Manufactures will throng in upon Scotland -- And though I think it is your own
Fault, if you do not make all the same you do now, and both better and cheaper:
yet for discourse sake, suppose you to buy the English Woollen Goods; pray what
Goods shall you send to England then, more than you do now?

If then after the Union, you shall send more Goods to England, over and above
the Quantity you now send, than you shall receive from thence, over and above
what you now receive, you are still more Gainers than you were before.

And first, I am to suppose, that all the Import of Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, Dye
stuffs, etc. which come from the West Indies, shall be taken off from the Debit
of your Import from England, since either you will have them directly from
thence, and in return for your own Manufactures and Money to boot, or you must
be much weaker in your pursuing your own Advantages, than I take ye to he.

If you imported 50000 lib. per Annum in Goods from England, I believe, a full
half of that Sum is made up by those kinds of Goods, with which we are supplied
from England.

To increase this Trade to England, I come to ask a few Questions, which I
would be glad to hear any Body answer.

1. How many Coals shall go away yearly from the Firth of Edinburgh to England,
when 7 sh. and 6 d. Duty is taken off by the Union, and they as cheap here as
at New Castle; and 5 sh. per Chalder always above them at London? I assure you,
when I have said, it shall amount to 100000 Chalder, I have been blamed, as not
guessing above half the Quantity. 2. How many Weigh of Salt, of which some say
20000 Wey? I am content to say half that Quantity, and I dare say, it shall not
fall short of that. 3. What Quantity of Corn shall go to England yearly,
especially that we call Horse-Corn, such as Oats, Beans and Pease, which always
yield a good Price at London, and much more than in Scotland? If this Article
does not amount to 100000 l: per Annum more, then I have no guess at what
Scotland can part with of those Sorts; for I am free to say, If they will send
them to England, they will always buy them there, and at a good Price. 4. The
Wool, and now we come to a great Question, What Amends will be made to Scotland
for the loss of the Wool Trade, and the difference of Price, between the Wool
after the Prohibition, and what it is now, when we Export it Abroad?
To this I Answer, Sinking the Price indeed is the Immediate Consequence, but
the present Exporting it has several attending Circumstances, which I conceive
are not sufficiently considered, by those who are so angry at this head.

1. The present Price of Wool, for which the Sheep-Masters claim a
Satisfaction, is not an Original; the first Exporting the Wool Raised it, and
stopping that Export, is only Checking the Exorbitant Gain they make now, at
the Price of their Country's Ruin, and bringing them back where they were
before.

2. It Is a Trade Destructive to Industry, Ruinous to Manufactures, and tends to
Robbing the Poor of their Employment; as is evident in your Exporting it to the
Baltic, and the North; where, if they had not your Wool, they must Buy your
course Manufactures, and certainly Buy the less of the one, by how much the
more they get of the other.

3. If you will not work your Wool at home, though that is certainly your
Advantage, especially, when you may then have English Wool freely to mix with
it. -- Still you may send it all to England, who opens their Doors to all the
Wool, the whole World thinks fit to send them.

If it be Objected, they will not give the Price you get for it Abroad? I
Answer, They will give, what you had better take than the Foreign Price, and
what you shall get as much by.

Suppose I have 100 Packs of Wool at Edinburgh, 50 Packs I Will send to France,
or to Sweden, or where you like, and for that I Will get 10 s: per Stone; 50 I
send to England, and for that I get but 5 s: per Stone; yet I say, I had better
send to England than Abroad. For Example,

First, I run the Risque of the Sea On-ward bound, next the Risque of Factors
and Buyers Abroad. 2. I pay Freight and Commission Abroad. 3. The Risque is
Repeated back again on the Sea. -- And lastly, All this, at least, Imploys the
Stock six Months in time.

If I think fit to Trade to England for Wool, I can always Sell it, and always
Sell it for Ready Money, and may if I please, make 12 Returns of my Money, in
that 6 Months time which I take in one Voyage the other way; and in doing this,
I run no Risque at all, and have my Money in my hand every time.

If it be Objected, The price to the Wool-Master is low. I Answer, England will
give as much for yours, as for their own in proportion to its Goodness. -- If
yours is not so good as some of theirs, it is better than others, and still you
have Neighbors Fair and Right Dealing.

I could run out here, and not Unprofitably perhaps tell you, That the Badness
of your Wool in Scotland, is not owing either to the Climate, the Soil, the
Nature of the Grass, or any of those Circumstances the Phlegmatic Fancies of
some People Suggest, which some, though they care not to hear other Folks
Mention, are forward enough to mention themselves.

I could take the liberty to tell these Gentlemen, and perhaps make it out too,
That the Courseness of the Wool here, is owing to the ill Husbandry of the
People, not the Inclemencies of Nature; and that they are too forward to Injure
their own Country, and load her with the Effects of their own Inexcusable
Negligence; and this both in the Miss-using the Sheep that breed this Wool, and
spoiling the Wool with Tar, Grease, and horrible foolish Applications to it,
when it is on the Sheeps back.

Indeed I avoid entering on this Matter here, because I am preparing an Essay
upon the Improvement of Scotland by it self, which I design for the Public
Service in this very case; but this I undertake to say before hand, with
respect to the Wool, That whether by better Management, your Wool might be
made as Good as English, I do not affirm, though I believe it. -- But certainly
by your Management there, the English Wool might be brought to be every whit
as bad as yours.

Negligence and ill Husbandry, will Spoil the best Country in the World, and
the best Product in the World; and though I am not for finding Fault, yet I must
own the Conduct of the Gentlemen in Scotland with their Sheep, and not a little
with their Land too, is one of the most Unaccountable things in the World. --
And if I have the Honor to Dictate some Methods of Rectification in these
cases, to their Advantage, whether they make the Experiment or no, I hope no
Man will be angry with me, or count me an Enemy to Scotland, for showing the
way to its Improvement.

But I proceed to the Trade of Scotland, and I cannot but enter a little here
into a short Trifle of Trade, called The Trade to America or the West Indies,
and it is very Remarkable and well worth Observation; what pains has been taken
to render this as the most Contemptible thing in the World, a thing not worth
England's granting or Scotland's accepting, much less a thing that England
ought to Value her self upon, or so much as suggest that Scotland is beholding
to her for.

One Author has the face to say, England never got any thing by the Trade of
the Colonies her self, and if she would give them to Scotland, it was not a
Gift worth Receiving, nor could Scotland be ever the better for it.

I confess these are strange things, and it is hard to have to do with some kind
of Gentlemen in Trade, who give themselves a liberty to say what they please,
without being Encumbred with, or any way Subjecting themselves to the Bondage
of speaking Truth.

And yet this Monstrous Story, as I am told, comes from England, from whence I
only draw one Inference, (viz.) That this Ignorance is not for want of an
Opportunity of knowing better. -- But there are some Gentlemen there, who have
all along carefully furnished the Town here, with something which no Man durst
say, but such as are out of Sight as to Blushing, and out of Hearing as to
Reproach.

The short Scale of the Trade from Scotland to the West Indies, consists in
these Heads, which when they are right stated, I shall think it is easy for any
body to Determine whether that Trade is to be carried on to the Advantage of
Scotland, yea or no?

First, What you carry out is entirely, if you please, the Product of your own
Land, and the Labor of your own People. 2. What you bring home, may, at least
parts of it, be again Exported by you to Foreign parts, and the Product by
consequence return to you in Money; and if the remaining part is expended at
home, it is expended in the room of those Goods of the same kind, which you now
buy with your Money in England, or with your Goods at a short Advance, and
which would otherwise return you Money. 3. What Goods you carry out to the
Colonies, are generally Sold there, at the extravagant Advance of 100 per Cent:
Profit on the Continent, and if for Loss on the Islands, then great quantities
of Bullion are returned home for them, in the return of which, the Loss is less
in Proportion. 4. All this Trade shall be carried on in your own Ships,
furnished with your own Provisions, Built if you please in your own Ports, and
Manned with your own Seamen.
Here is Published, A Letter from some Merchants of the Scots Nation Residing
at London, where this Trade is Estimated to 400000 per Annum, Profit to the
Traders of Scotland; and the Guinea Trade to 50000 l. per Annum. I confess in
the length of the particulars they Outdo me, and it must be some time before
Scotland can carry it on to that hight. -- Indeed, I forbear Compting the
Advantages of these things, because I do not affect talking of Millions and
great Sums. -- But look into these things, Gentlemen, you that are to be
convinced by Demonstrations, take them to pieces your selves, see if you can
avoid Confessing the Advantages; see if such a Trade can be driven without a
prodigious Gain, without incredible Fluxes of Wealth to the Nation in General,
as well as to the Merchants in particular.

To say, you have no Manufactures fit for the Colonies, or that you must Buy
them from England, is to say, you have no (...), no Wool, no Flax. -- Or to
say, you will not make use of them; and certainly if you will not stir, you
shall always be poor. He that will not Eat, must be Starved, there is no Remedy.

But why should the Gentlemen, that talk you up so high on one hand, and
threaten the great Things you can do another way, talk you down so low in this,
as if you were a Nation that had netheir Hands to Work, Heads to Direct, or
Understandings to close with Advantages of Commerce and Improvement, when they
were put into your Hands.

I allow Scotland is, and has been, under Discouragement both as to Foreign
Trade and Manufactures. I allow your Poor are very low, and your Rich Men
backward to Launch out. -- And any Man, that takes me in the general scope,
will easily see, this was the Intent and Meaning of my Arguing in England, when
I wrote the second of these Essays, and Argued, that you should be Exempted for
some years from the Taxes on Malt and Salt.

And I cannot but think, that Noble Lord, asking his Lord ship's Pardon for
this Freedom, who quoted my Arguments on this head in Parliament, will do me
that Justice, that they were all concluded in this very thing; and had his
Lordship thought fit to have quoted but one Paragraph further, it would have
appeared, Essay II. P. 29. That Scotland being very low, and the Poor Unable to
pay Taxes at all, should be Exempted from the Taxes of Malt and Salt, for a
certain term of years.

Now, If I first concluded the Poor unable to bear the Burden of the Salt and
Malt Tax at all, why should I argue for Limited Exemption?

But on this Supposition, That by the Increase of Trade, Shipping, Manufactures
and Labor, the Increase of Wages, and bettering the way of the Poor's Living,
would be the Consequence, and then the Taxes would not be equally Burdensome
as now.

In this, if I may be allowed to plead any Merit with Scotland, who am a
Stranger, was then in England, and yet moved earnestly for Ease and Exemption
for the Poor of this Kingdom, till they should be enabled to pay Taxes, I think
I acted a part no Man here ought to blame me for; and it is a little hard to
draw an Argument from thence, that therefore they must never be charged at all.

Without doubt, if Trade in Scotland increases, Labor will increase; if Labor
increases, Wages will increase; for a Demand of Work makes a Demand of Wages of
Course.

So that I think, there remains only to prove, that there will be an Increase
of Trade: I think I have performed that in part; I shall be glad to see some
other more able Hand perfect my Generals into Particulars by Schemes of Profit
and Advantage on the Returns to Scotland, on the Advantages of building Ships,
and consequently a great Norway and Baltic Trade for Fish out, and Naval
Stores home; again, on the Number of Families employed at home in Building,
Fitting and Furnishing Ships; and lastly, the Nursery of Sea men, and employing
them in your own Ships, with the Consequences of such a Trade.

Were due and just Schemes of these things laid down, I cannot but believe the
mouths of those People would for ever be stopped, who lessen and misrepresent the
Advantages of Trade which Scotland shall obtain.

It is enough however to my purpose, having not room here for Particulars to
have laid down this general Scheme of a profitable Trade --

That Trade only can be profitable, which employing their own People, carries
out their own Growth or Product, and does not consume all the Returns, but
draws in the Surplus to it self in Bullion, and this you do here exactly. To
explain this,

I would be glad any Man would state me the following Voyage, suppose a
thousand Pound Sterling in Scots Linen, and in Woollen Goods sent to
New England, New York, or Virginia, in a Scots Ship, and is there vested in
Sugars, Mellasses or Tobacco, at the usual Rate of Advance in those Places,
which is too per Cent, sometimes much more.

If these Returns come safe home to Scotland, and being not consumed here, are
again exported to Amsterdam in a Scots Vessel also, and at last the Effects
produce 1250 lib. Sterling clear of all Charges, which is no unusual nor
extraordinary thing.

What Profit does Scotland gain by this Voyage? I say, Scotland, because we are
to examine the Increase to the Public Stock, as well as to the private
Merchant, in the Discourse we are now upon.

First, Scotland gains all the Profit of the Labor of the People in the
Manufactures that were exported, for all the Wages any Person earns in Scotland
by his Labor, over and above what his Subsistence cost him during his Labor,
is clear gain to the general Stock.

Secondly, Scotland gains all the Profit of the Labor of every Person employed
on Board the Ship for that Voyage, and of the Labor of all the Artificers,
Laborers, etc. employed in furnishing that Ship for that Voyage.

Thirdly, All the Provisions expended in the Voyage, and all the Stores carried
out, and not brought home, are clear Gain to the Stock of the Nation.

Fourthly, Scotland gains all the Particulars of the same kinds again, on the
Ship that carries the Goods away to Holland.

Lastly, Scotland gains the Profit on the foot of the Voyage to the Merchant
and Owners.

So that, if the Merchant here clears but 250 lib. by his Voyage, the National
Public Advantage may be 1500 lib. more, in the Freights and Furniture of the
Ship and Cargo.

From hence it is also worth note, That if 20 such Ships a Year went out from
Scotland, it might very well be possible, that the Merchant should not get a
Farthing, nay might lose by the Voyage, and yet the Public National Stock be
Gainer at least 25000 lib. Sterling. per Annum.

If any Man will after this tell me, That Scotland shall get nothing by the
Plantation Trade, -- I must own he is no Man for me to talk with, I must leave
him to his own Delusions.

I shall conclude this Essay with only one Note about the Popular Objection,
That after the Union all your Places, Preferments and Offices in the Customs,
Excises, Taxes, Army and Navy, will be at the Disposal of the English, and
Englishmen will be put upon you in all those Cases.

It is not for me to determine, who shall or shall not be put into Places of
Trust in this Nation; I make no question the Government will regard the
Recommendation of the Council and of Honest Men here, as it does now in England.

But I would have these Gentlemen consider two or three things.

1. Why should the Government be more partial to England as to Places here,
than at home in their own Country, where a Scots-man, notwithstanding the
separate Posture of the Nations, is as capable of Preferment as an Englishman,
and promiscously preferred on all Occasions? 2. Would these Gentlemen be
content to retain that Mark of Distinction between the Nations, that Scots-men
only should be preferred in Scotland, and Englishmen in England? And would not
Scotland be vastly a Loser by it, while many of Her Nation are now in Places of
the greatest Honor and Trust in England? 3. Is it any Mark of England's
Partiality to Scotland, much less of any Distrust of the Nation, That the only
three strong Places in England, the Keys of Her Wealth, of Her Trade, and of
Her Navy, have for above 17 years past been committed to three Natives of
Scotland, viz. Tilbury Fort, the Guard of the River Thames and City of London,
to Colonel Saint Clare; Sheerness Fort, the Key of Chatam River and Guard of
the Royal Navy, to Colonel Crawford; and Portsmouth, the greatest Fortification
and Magazin on the South of Britain, to Sir John Gibson.
Besides, innumerable Gentlemen of the Scots Nation, now in Trust in the
Service, Admiral Mitchel, Wishart, and Comodore Ker in the Navy, with 6 or 7
Captains in the Fleet, besides Lieutenant General Steuart, Murray and Collier
the Lord Portmore, his Grace the Duke of Argyle, and several others I willingly
omit in the Army.

These trusts, Gentlemen, do not favor of Partiality, and are as good
Arguments to Ward against the Suggestion, as I think need to be made use of. On
the other hand, there is no Question but the Merit of the Scots Gentlemen will
alwise render them valuable and useful to Britain; and as they have alwise had
their share of Advancement in all Public Business, so there is no Question
they will be more likely to obtain it now.

I foresee the Debate in the Parliament will have run its length, before the
Printer will be pleased to let these Sheets come into the World, which makes me
lay by what I had prepared to say about the keeping up, or dissolving the Scots
Caledonia Company.

I Confess, it is my Opinion, as I have said already, that your Company, as it
was at first Established, could never have been of any Use to Scotland, unless
by Force you had been able to have reduced Spain to a Necessity of establishing
a Trade with your Colony in America, and all the Prospect of a Trade to India
by the South-Seas, or any other way, without the Help of England, could never
have Answered for want of a Market for Goods, the Dutch and French being
otherwise supplied.

But I wave entering on those things here, the present Enquiry is, Why must we
lose our Company? Why must we give up all the Privileges of the Company?

If I may be allowed, without Offense, to speak a little plainly here, perhaps
it may touch the Point nearly enough.

First, Who is this WE, for it is necessary to distinguish who speaks; if it be
We the Company, or We the Nation.

If you mean We the Company, the Reason is Direct, you ought to part with your
Company and be thankful, and take your Money, and say you have made a good
Voyage, since you recover what you had lost. -- You get Principal and Interest,
in a Case where I know several of the Members would have been content to have
lost all they had paid in, to have been secured against paying in any more.

Of all People in the World these are the most Unacountable, who have Stocks
there, and can give very little Account what other things they could ever
expect, but the loss of these Stocks, and yet are not for parting with their
Company.

All such People can say, is, That if an Union was to come on, and the Company
to stand, they might fill it with English Subscriptions, and make it a Rival
Company in the Trade with the English -- And what would Scotland Gain by that?
the Trade would be entirely in England, the whole Returns there, and all the
Consequence would be the pleasure of ruining both Companies, as would have been
the certain Case with the two Companies in England, if the plain prospect of it
had not made them both Wise enough to Unite.

But 2 dly. Let us come to the other Case, We the People of Scotland, why
should We part with the Company?

First, Gentlemen, any wise People will part with what would be their
Destruction to keep. Secondly, You cannot Unite with England, without parting
with it, two Companies being Intolerable in Britain.
As to the first, -- an East India Company abstracted from your Trade to
England, would be the Destruction of all your Commerce, for two Reasons.

1. You could export nothing but your ready Money. 2. You would import what you
could neither sell in Scotland, nor carry Abroad to any Advantage.
The First of these needs no Explication, it is the Complaint in England, and a
Complaint not very easily answered, and from whence some pretend to say, The
East India Trade is a Grievance to England, tho I do not say I am of that Mind
neither: But I am certain of this, that Scotland could not bear the Export of
their Bullion, at least not now.

As to the Second, it is evident the Import could not be vended here: And as for
Foreign Markets, the Dutch are the great Staple -- and what can be imagined you
can get by them? Some Particulars indeed might be sold in Spain, and a little
at Hamburgh, but far short of enough to support the Trade. The English uphold
their Trade by the Strength of their Home Consumpt, which is a vast Gulf of
Trade; and the Export again is but upon Circumstances and Trifles compared to
the Gross; and Scotland having no Home Consumpt, an East India Trade would be
ruinous to them; a West India Trade would involve them in a War, and a War,
which I think, without reflecting at all upon Scotland, She is very unfit to
carry on, having no Naval Force to cope with the Spaniards.

Thus either way She is in no National Capacity to carry on the Trade, or to
keep up the Company; why then should She not part with it, when good Conditions
are to be had for the Exchange, and all her Merchants are at liberty to Trade
in the general Stock in England, as much as any Merchant there?

2. You cannot Unite with England without parting with this Company.

The Reason for this is very plain; Two Companies in England had not only
almost destroyed one another, but they bid fair for ruining the whole Nation,
by dividing all the Parties to one side or other; and influencing all Public
Affairs to their Favor, they became the very Center of all the National
Divisions, and all the Factions seemed to be Incorporated into the two
Companies.

Thus the Nation began to be Stock jobb'd into Bargain and Sale; and the Power
of two such Rivals made even the King himself concern himself to bring them to
Conditions: and the whole Nation was made uneasy by the Agreement, which by
this time, had the Breach continued, might have embroiled us all. This is a
Reason sufficient why England cannot Unite, while two East India Companies
subsist.

Well, say some Gentlemen, with all our Hearts we don't desire they should let
them let it alone.

Why? truly there I believe much of the Case lies; they that Argue for the
having the African Company kept up, do it chiefly, that if possible, it might
be a Cheque to the Union; and so it is the Union, not the Company they are
Debating.

As to the Union, Gentlemen, I avoid mentioning it as much as I can, because
some People are so Chary, they will not bear to have it mentioned, and I am
loath to give any Body Offense.

But in this Case it cannot be helped, England cannot Unite with an open Trade
to India; She cannot come into the same Confusion as she was in, under two
Companies before, it is Inconsistent with her Peace, and with her Trade, and in
the End would be so to yours too.

As to them that would not have her Unite, and therefore Argues about keeping
the Company, I have nothing to say to their Uniting, but never let them bring
this as a Difficulty; for let it go what way it will, the Company can never be
of any Benefit to Scotland; nor shall it be ever true, that by the Union
Scotland shall not be vastly Gainer.

Well, but says another Gentleman, What if all this be true? must we needs
Unite with you, if we do get 300000 per Annum, and all the things you talk of?
-- We have not a mind to Unite: And what then? Why should we be forced to it?

No, by no means, say I, I abhor Force; I am laying out the Advantages to
Persuade; if Force was to be used, there could be no need of Persuading. -- God
forbid I should think, much less talk of Englands Forcing Scotland to Unite. --
And I have said my mind on that Head to your Advantage long before I thought of
coming to these Parts. -- Nor should I expect any Good from such a Compulsion.

But it is a Compulsion of Reasoning, Argument Constrains; and such a Force
there will be indeed; and you will notwithstanding all this Struggle, whether
you Unite or no, come to stoop your Reason to the Force of the Thing, and
hereafter, not too late, I hope, own your selves Mistaken.

If you wont Unite, Gentlemen, I cannot help that: but in the mean time do not
pretend to Reason it out of your sight, for all manner of Argument is against
you; And you can reject an Union upon no Foot, but that of Acting against your
own Light, and the Invincible Power of your own Reason.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
These are to give Notice, That the fourth Essay is to be had at the Caledonia
Coffee-House, over against the Cross in Edinburgh; where also, will be had, the
First and Second Essays of the London Impression.


